



IT is no lesse benefite that wee haue knowledge of our creation, redemption, preseruatiō, eternall saluatiō, how to beleue, loue, wor∣ship, honor, and shewe our selues thankefull vnto our creator, re∣demer, preseruer, &c. than that he hath besto∣wed these great and inestimable giftes vpon vs, of his mercie and free goodnesse. Neither auay∣leth it vs to bee borne and made men and not brute beastes, and that Christ hath died, risen again, and ascended into heauen, if we know not the ende of our creation and redemption, to be to glorifie god, to set forth his prayse, and to tell of his wonderfull works. This is eternall life, saith Christ, to know thee the only and true God, and him whom thou hast sent Iesus Christ. We had neuer knowne God, we had neuer knowē Christ, except he had inspired his holye ones with hys

spirit, and enforced them to write the holy scrip∣tures, wherein he hath reueled himselfe, and ma∣nifested his will in all things necessarie towardes vs. Wherefore we ought first of all to bee moste thankefull to God, and in all things to blesse his name, both for his fatherly fauor, which he bea∣reth towards vs, and also for reueling the same by his worde. Secondly, they be also worthie of their due cōmendatiō, which as Gods instrumēts and workemen of God, haue laboured with him to set forth the same worde of the knowledge of saluation.
There are great and weightie causes which haue moued God to vtter himselfe in his worde. First, that he might set forth his loue, wisedome, omnipotencie, goodness & fidelitie to the world, which we had neuer knowne without his word. God who is faythful (sayth August. Psa. 110.) hath made him selfe our debtor, not in taking any thing of vs, but in promising vs so great things. It seemed but a small thing to promise, but hee hath also bounde himselfe with scripture as it were making with vs a handwriting of his pro∣mises. He hath not onely made a writing with men that they might beleue, but he hath further appoynted his only sonne to be a mediatour of his

fidelitie and truth. Wherefore all the worlde is of dutie bounde to giue most heartie and immor∣tall thankes to God the onely authour and reue∣ler of so great benefites, howsoeuer otherwise the world do contemne, neglect and abuse this know∣ledge. Secondly, that the remembrance of this most holy couenant betwene God & his church, might bee more durable, & the promise might be more certainly set forth to all posteritie. And therefore he hath charged the things to be writ∣ten, taught, and learned of them that were pre∣sent at the promulgation of his worde, and of them that should come after. &c. Psal. 102. Let these thinges be written in another generation, that the people whiche shall bee borne hereafter may prayse the Lord. Adam (as Iosephus testi∣fieth in the first booke of his antiquities) set vp two tables or pillers of stone, and wrote in them the beginning of the creation, the fal of man, and the promise of Messias. After the floud wrote Moses, and the rest of the Prophets inspired and led by the spirit of God. After the Apostles and Euangelists by the same spirit, whose bookes the deuill and all his angels (though they great∣ly despited and impugned them) were neuer able either vtterly to destroy or cast them out of the

hands of the people of God, bycause God woulde haue his couenant to remain in his Church, and so will haue them to the worldes ende, Rumpan∣tur ilia Codro, though the deuyll do burste his guttes. &c. Thirdly, that God will haue hys Church which is the piller and stay of the truth 1. Tim. 3. as in many other things to differ from sectes, factions, vaine opinions and superstitious of other Gentiles, so in this poynt chiefly to bee a keeper and as it were a librarie of the bookes of his Prophets and Apostles, wherein he hath de∣clared himselfe to the worlde. Wherefore all men are bounde that will bee of the true Church of God, to keepe, reade and exercise them selues in the true vnderstanding & practising of these bookes. Fourthly, that the keeping and profes∣sion of these bookes, may be a notable and certain testimonie of the truth, and of the will of God, in all matters of Religion, and a strong fortresse both agaynst all superstitious, mans feigninges and deuises, and also agaynst al vaine & phan∣tasticall spirites preferring their owne dreames and fonde imaginations before the certaintie of Gods scriptures. Our gracious God therefore knowing the necessitie, and the inestimable pro∣fite of the scriptures, will haue them sette forth,

kept and exercised of his Church for euer. The scripture is the worde of truth, of life, the gospell of health, the power of God to saluation. &c. the foode of the soule, the light to our feete, the sword of the spirite, the breath of Gods mouth, which who so wanteth runneth into errour, into death, and destruction, is without all comfort of helpe, perisheth for foode, wandreth in darkenesse, stan∣deth naked agaynst his armed aduersaries, de∣stitute of Gods grace and spirite, which who so wanteth, is none of Gods people. Rom. 8.
The holy mē of god ought to haue their iust cō¦mendation which were the iust instruments of gods spirit, in writing these scripturs, not to take any glorie from God and ascribe it vnto men (which were meere Jdolatrie, and woulde make men arrogant and glorye in them selues) but to encourage men to laboure with the Lord, and to knowe that their laboure in him is, to set foorthe his glorie, to profite his Churche, and that they them selues shal be pertakers of eternall felicitie. Dani. 12. They that be learned shall shine as the sunne &, they that haue instructed many in wis∣dom shal be as the stars for euermore: these haue not spoken of them selues nor the wisdome of mā, but of God, He. 1. God hath spoken in alder time

many and sundrie wayes to our fathers by his Prophetes. &c. He sayth not they spake of them selues, but God by thē, they came not with their owne worde, nor their owne authoritie, but euer they sayde, Haec dicit dominus, Thus saith the Lord. Paule saith  all the scripture is inspired by the holy ghost. &c. & 2. Pet. 1. We haue a sure & certain worde of the Prophets which (saith he) was not brought in by the will of man, but the holy men of God haue spoken being cōpelled by the spirite of God. Therefore for their obedience to Gods spirite, for their diligence in trauell and paines, for their fi∣delitie in true handling and vttering their Em∣bassage, they bee well to bee thought of and wor∣thy of their iust cōmendation, by whose meanes we haue receyued the will of God, the worde of eternall life. But some thinke the Prophetes and the Bokes of the old Testamēt pertayned to the Iewes only, and are now abolished and permine nothing to vs, to what purpose should wee keepe thē, or labor to vnderstand them? Cōcerning the ceremonies of the olde Law, we know that lite∣rally they be fulfilled by Christ, and in him fini∣shed and vtterly abolyshed, yet spiritually we are bound to obserue them still, as the spirituall cir∣cumcision,

spirituall sacrifices, spirituall sabboth or rest from sinne and such like: the Moral law is the lawe of nature and the eternall lawe of God, and therefore for euer to be kept of vs vn∣der the new Testament: the Prophecie of Christ and his Churche, &c. as they were promised in the olde Testament, so are they truely per∣formed in the newe. Therefore the olde Testa∣ment and the newe containe both one thing, the times are changed, he shall come, and he is come, the matter is one in this word come: as the olde Testament is the fountaine where out of the new doth issue as the same liuely water of the spring: so is the newe Testament the lighte and brighte shine of the olde. What is the newe Testament but a plaine exposition of the olde? we may not so expound the newe scripture that we take awaye the olde whereon the newe is grounded. If the old scriptures are abolished, why doe the Apostles apply them to the Gentiles, whom they laboure by the scriptures to make the people of God? why are the noble men of Thessalonica cōmen∣ded. Act. 17. for searching the olde scriptures, & thereby proued Paules doctrine to be true? If the olde scripture be abrogate, why did Paule af∣firme before king Agrippa. Act. 26. that he prea∣ched

to serue their owne deuises, and woulde seeme to see something that neuer man saw before them. Concerning them that cauill the scriptures to be hard and obscure and therfore not to be studied, the plaine contrarie is true. For if a thing neces∣sarie be difficult, the more paine is to be taken for the obtaining of the same. The scriptures are like vnto the sea whiche hath a shallowe shore, where the lambe may drynke and refreshe him selfe: and a bottomlesse depth, where the Ele∣phant and other great beastes may swimme and feele no bottome: so hath the scriptures plaine lessons to nourish all men though they be but ba∣bes, and deeper mysteries wherin greater learned men may bee occupied still, and yet not in thys life come to the fulnesse of knowledge: but euery one according to the measure that God hath gi∣uen. Euery art and science is hard to him that neuer studied for it. No man is borne an arti∣ficer, but by studie he commeth to knowledge of artes, some difficultie there is in scriptures to thē which bee not conuersaunt therein, by reason of straunge phrases, figures, tropes, and vnacquain∣tance with the tongue wherin they were written. And as Gregorie sayth, the obscuritie of scrip∣ures bring vtilitie, that a mans witte may bee

exercised, and being weried with labour may bee enlarged. And he that so is exercised may per∣ceyue and vnderstand that which an ydle man cannot vnderstande. Yea and this difficultie hath yet a greater thing. For if the vnderstan∣ding of the scriptures in all things were plaine, it woulde waxe vile and of no estimation, but when the sense is founde in certaine obscure pla∣ces, it so much delighteth more with a greater sweetnesse, as the seeking thereof did wearye the mynde wyth paynefull labour.
Christ therefore willeth (as well for the know∣ledge of the worde as other necessaries) aske and ye shal receiue, seeke and ye shal find, knock. &c. Aske by prayer, seke by reding and studie, knock by perseuerance and it shall be opened. Psal. 119. Maruellous are thy testimonies O Lorde, and therefore my soule searcheth them exceedingly. Againe, blessed are they that searche his testi∣monies and seeke him with their whole hearte. Iohn. 5. Searche the scriptures for in them. &c. He sayth not reade them, or say them, with lip labour, or for a custome, or negligently, but search and seeke out the true vnderstanding of them. Christ opened the scriptures to the two disciples whiche went to Emaus, bycause they were tal∣king,

conferring and searching the scripture. Phillip was commaunded to teach the Chamber∣laine by the spirite, the true meaning of the Pro∣phete Esay, bycause he was diligēt in reading & searching that which as yet then he vnderstode not: wherefore the scriptures are not difficulte to the Children of God, which praye, laboure, seeke and knock to God for the opening of them, but to the wicked, as Peter writeth that in Paules epistles some things are hard to be vnderstand, but he sheweth to whome they be so, for he ad∣deth, whiche they that be vnlearned and vn∣steadfast do wreast as the other Scriptures to their owne destruction, so that, to the vnlear∣ned, the vnexercised, the malicious, the corrup∣ted, the slothfull and sluggish, they be only harde and difficult, and to such as loue not the truth, for he that doth euill hateth the light, and this is condemnation, that lighte is come into the world and men loued darkenesse more thā light 2. Corinth. 1. Jf our Gospell be hid yet. &c. loke the place, the scriptures are not darknesse but light. Psalm. 119. 2. Peter. 1. therefore they are not to be lightned of darknesse, but to lighten the darkenesse. Therefore the holy ghost that gaue the scriptures, hathe his working in hys

Church to open and make playne the same to his, that in sinceritie search them. But (to come to the second sorte) although the scriptures be playne vnto the elect, yet are they so by laboure and studie and not by idlenesse and negligence. Gregory compareth them to a stone in whiche there lyeth fire hid, for the stone being holden in the hand is colde, but being striken with i∣ron it glistereth with fire which will burne the hand: so the scriptures caried only in the hands or in the tong, are but colde, but beaten with ex∣ercise, they kindle the harte and set it on fier with true loue. Luke. 24. did not our hart burne within vs while he talked with vs? sayde the two disciples. They are also like a treasure hid in the field, as one said to his sonnes on his death bed, my children there is a great treasure hid in this litle close, if ye cā find it. After his death they did plough vp the grounde, thinking there to finde golde, but when they found none, they sewe the ground with wheat, it yelded great in∣crease, and so continued from yeare to yeare till in deede they had thereout of greate treasure. So the scriptures being trimmed, bring greate frute, which being neglected, they will not doe. There is fine flower in the corne, but it must be

thresht and groūd before we come to the meale. There is a swete cornell in the nutte, but wee must break the shell before we come to the meat. Men are not nowe called and taught immedi∣atly from God as the olde prophets were, but by meanes of praying, reading, meditating, and conferring with others: euery man is not a de∣uine, which can say the letter without the booke and rehearse the words of the texte: let euery man measure him selfe with his owne fote, and be not ashamed to confesse his ignoraunce, con∣ferre with others, and learne that he knew not before, and giue God thankes for reuealing his word, and thinke well of them by whose meanes he is made better learned. When Moyses had giuen a lawe from God to the Jsraelites, he made a commentarie or exposition of the same called Deutronomie, for their easier vnderstanding. Were not the writings and sermons of the pro∣phets, expositions and applications of Moyses lawe vnto the times and persons, as occasion ser∣ued, and to reproue wicked men to their faces for disobedience to the same? Although some to flatter their feygned friends, do lay pillowes vn∣der mens elbowes and as false prophets do, dare vndertake that it is not lawful to reproue o∣penly

euill men, the word of God and examples of true embassadours of God is to the contrarie. Did not Esdras reade the lawe, and the Leuites expound it? did not Christ expound many pla∣ces of the olde testament which else we had not rightly vnderstand, as in the .12. of Mathew cōcerning Ionas. Jn the .4. of Luke the place of Esay, and in the .24. of Luke. Who could haue gathered out of this place of Math. 22. the re∣surrection, J am the God of Abraham, Jsaac &c. if Christ had not expounded it? did not Peter Acts. 2. expound the .16. Psalme, and the Psalme. 110. of Christes resurrectiō, and made a large and a learned sermon? Did not Philippe preach and make exposition of the place of E∣say to the chamberlayne Acts. 8. be not Pau∣les epistles full of expositions and openings of the olde prophets? It may be obiected that all these are scripture, and now it is made so plaine one with another, that there nedeth no further ope∣ning. God hath lefte in his Churche prophetes, such as do expound the old prophets. 1 Cor. 14. pastours, builders, and suche like, therefore the olde bishops and fathers of the Church haue al∣wayes taught and defended the Churche by in∣terpreting these scriptures: some haue written

Apologies and defences of Christes religion, some exhortations to constancie and martyrdome, some haue confuted heresies whiche alwayes do growe when men are asleepe, some wrote home∣lies for the people, some made commentaries and expositions of one or moe of the bookes of the olde or newe testament. I speake not of Papists and schole men whiche were all corruptours of the texte, and that thorough ignorance, but of the auncient fathers within foure or fiue hun∣dreth yeares after Christes ascention, though J must leaue vnto them their faults, golde is to be digged out of rotten earth. As Tertullian, Ieremie, Iustinus martyr, Origene, Hilarius, Hipolitus, Arnobius, Lactantius, Didimus, Ci∣prian, Ambrose, Hierome, Augustine, Basill, Gregorie Nazianzene, and Gregorie Nycen. &c. all these and suche like were learned men, and such as defended the Churche of God, and refelled false and erronius opinions by declaring and expounding the word of God. How naked and bare were many places of the old testament if some further sense were not rightly gathered of them than the bare letter? J do not meane to bring all the scriptures to Allegories, for that were to destroy the texte and to open a win∣dowe

for euery wandring spirite to flye out at, and to range where he list without grounde, as some of olde haue done, and popish friers with their dreames haue folowed after, that neyther they nor any man else wist whether. But J meane, beside the historie, there may be other sense well gathered, as of old fathers haue bene. If a man did aske of him that doth superficial∣lie reade, what is the meaning in the .10. of Eze∣chiel, of this saying, that one whele did roll and moue within an other, the literall sense is bare. Gregorie saithe that the newe testamente rol∣leth in the olde, for that which the olde did sig∣nifie, the newe doth exhibite. As for example, out of Adam sleeping Eue was formed: so out of Christ dying the Church was formed. As I∣saac caried wood to the altar wher he should be sacrifised and yet escaped: so Christ caried the wood of the crosse to be crucified in body, and yet remayned immortall in diuinitie. What meaneth it that the murtherer after the death of the high priest should be absolued and let go home? but that after the death of our high priest Christ, mankinde should be losed from their sinnes, and sent into paradise againe. What meaneth it that in the tabernacle was made a

mercy stole, ouer whiche were two cherubins of gold. &c. The mercie seate, to be short, is Christ, the two cherubines be the two testamentes: of golde, for their purenesse: they haue wings for that they flye swiftlie: they loke each towardes the other, for that they set forth both one thing: with their faces towardes the mercie seate, for they both haue respect to Christ. A great num∣ber of such misteries may be gathered withoute absurditie or superstition out of the olde testa∣ment, and referred to the newe. Wherefore let vs be thankefull to God for his word, and for those that haue set it forth or by any meanes opened the true sense vnto vs. Amongst others for this sound expositiō of these two Prophets Ab∣dias and Ionas, let vs commēd that worthy and learned man and chiefe writer of these dayes one of the chiefe preachers at Zurich or Tigu∣ry, master Gualter, who both by his continuall preaching and dayly writing, hath much profi∣ted Christes Church. It was translated by ma∣ster Ro. Norton, a godly and learned preaching minister in Suff. not to be published in print as you knowe best, but only a thing of priuate ex∣ercise, and giuen to you as a token of that good will which I haue herd him ofte testifie that he

bare you, not without your great desert towards him. But comming to the hands of one my good friend, and whom you seeme to loue well inough, he desired me very earnestly and vrged me with most friendly request to set some Preface to it, lest cōming barefaced, it might seme somewhat defaced, whiche yet it needeth not, considering the good face it hath of it selfe, the which he shal see and delight in, who beholdeth it more nerely and narrowly. But I coulde not denie his re∣quest, bycause it was reasonable, I would not for that it was friendly: Nay I did it most gladly, taking no small pleasure by this occasion in the sweete remembraunce of the godly and reformed housholds of good master Drue Druries and yours, wherein your selues and your rightly and truely worshipfull Ladies, do by your owne god∣ly lyues, and framing your childrē & families to liue according to the word of God, shewe your selues to be no vayne hearers of sermons and le∣ctures at Norwich & elsewhere, neither to haue bene louers of learning and learned men, for a∣ny other cause, but only for that you would con∣forme your deedes to that they saide. Rare exā∣ples must haue rare praise, whiche yet I will take vp in time, lest through my true good will

towards you, and your religious honestie, which is the greatest dignitie and best worship, I forget how ill you loue to heare your own prayses. The Lord God encrease vs with his true knowledge, that we may day by day amende our liues and growe to more perfection in knowledge and do∣ing. So shall we glorifye our God, and stoppe the mouthes of the deuill, Papistes, Atheists, and whosoeuer be ennimies to God, and vs, for Gods cause. This he graunt, who only doth all that is good, and to whome only the glory thereof is due. So be it. From Laighton.

