


SIR: When the Tabernacle was builded by Moses for the wor∣ship and seruice of God, Euery one brought such as they Exod. 25. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. had, some more, some lesse; some better, some worse; and all was necessarie for the Worke: Euen so, for the building of Gods Church, euery one should bring such as they haue, according to the abilitie which the Lord of the House hath giuen vnto them, to profit with∣all; and therefore I (though the least of the Apo∣stles children) doe hold my selfe bound to dooe something; for Pauls Woe will light vpon mee, If I preach not the Ghospell; assuring my 1. Cor. 9. 16.
 selfe, that the Maister of the Worke will accept of my poore seruice, as our Sauiour Christ did of the Widdows Mite cast into the treasury. Luk. 21. 2. 3.
I know very well (right Worshipfull) that some are so puffed vp, that they scorne, so much as to 1. Cor. 4. 18. 19. affoord their eyes to read, or their eares to heare the writings or words of any, but onely such as are excellent, and eminent for Learning and Elo∣quence: notwithstanding experience teacheth, that men of meaner Giftes, and (for their Lear∣ning) not worthy to carry the Bookes of the Lear∣ned after them, doe sometimes speake as effectu∣ally to the Consciences of the Country people, as those whom the Lord hath graced and intrusted with many Talents: Neither doe I doubt, but as the Apostle speakes of Almes, so in this action. If first there be a willing minde, it is accep∣ted 2. Cor. 8. 1. according to that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not. Now the speciall cause of my presuming to present this poore Paper-gift into your hands, arising not one∣ly out of that christian and reciprocall loue that I beare to your person, because you fauour Lear∣ning & loue them that are Learned (so that, as it was once truly said of the house of that renow∣ned and blessed Saint of God Henrie late Earle of Huntington I President of Yorke, that it was in his time a Sanctuarie for the Cleargie) so
 it may as truly be reported, and passe for currant, that your House (most noble Knight) I speake be∣fore God, without flatterie, is not onely a Nursery for poore Schollers, but also a refuge and recep∣tacle for all faythfull, painefull, and godly Mi∣nisters, and your selfe a Sword and Shield, to your posse, for them: But also for the many and vn∣deserued kindnesses and fauours, which (by the blessing of God) I haue found flowing from you vpon so small acquaintance; and that your meere bountie, without the least desert of mine: which if I should burie in obliuion, or drowne in the riuer Lethe, I might iustly be condemned of ingrati∣tude with the nine Leapers, and accounted (as Luk 17. 17. Ouid speakes) Telluris inutile pondus, not worthy to inioy the common ayre, because, In∣gratum si dixeris, omnia dixisti. When I was driuen to a non plus what course to take for the preferring of that young Impe, my Sonne, to the Vniuersitie, it pleased God (who worketh all for the best to those that are his) to make you the blessed instrument of no lesse comfort vnto mee, then the Angel was to Hagar in the Wildernesse. Gen. 21. 15. 16.
And when I heard that it pleased you to take a good liking of him, being a Scholler neere to your house in Nottingham, and vpon my first acquaintance with you, commended him, not only to mee, but also to that good Knight S. William
 Skip with, who was his Godfather, and of whom the Country hath now a great losse, I was raui∣shed with no lesse ioy, then was old Iacob, when Gen. 45, 27 he saw the Chariots which his Sonne Ioseph had sent to carry him into Egipt. For what greater earthly comfort to a Father, then to see and heare his Child accepted of, and commended, by those that are wise, learned, and in place of go∣uernment, and authoritie. To knit vp all in a word, my especiall desire is, that it may please you to accept of my simple seruice herein, and to take this poore offering with like affection as that fa∣mous Artaxerxes did the Water which a poore man brought him in the hollow of his hand: which fauour, if I may find at your Worships hands (as I cannot doubt but it will easily be found) then shall I account my selfe thrice happy. Thus, be∣seeching the Almighty to multiply his blessinges vpon you, and yours, with increase of Worship in this life, & perfection of Honour and Glory in the life to come, I commit you to the protectiō of him, who neuer leaueth his.
Prestwold. Iune. 20. 1612.

