



WHen wee see one goe or
doe amisse, though his
feete or hands bee the
next actors and instru∣ments
of his errour: yet
wee say not, Are you lame? but, Haue
you no eyes? or Can you not see? What
euer sweruings or stumblings any part of
the holy politique maks, the blame lights
not vpon the Gentry or Comminalty, the
immediate delinquents, but on the prin∣cipall
lights in Magistracy or Ministry,

which being as Guardiants and Tutors of
the rest, should either preuent or reforme
their aberrations. And herein miserable
is the condition of these two opticke pee∣ces,
that they are more subiect, and that
to more distempers then other inferiour
parts: yet heerein more, that being hurt,
they are more impatient of cure; not only
of searching acrimonous waters (which
yet oft are needefull) but shie of the most
soft and lawny touches: but most of all in
this, that being once extinct, they leaue a
voyd darkenesse to the whole body, expo∣sing
it to the pits of destruction. As ex∣ceeding
great on the other hand, is the
happines, honor & vse of them, if cleere
and single. For this our Nationall body,
it will little boot either to applaude the
one, or to bewaile the other: I rather wish
nd looke about mee for some eye-salue,
which may helpe to descry and redresse, if
any thing be amisse. And behold heere
(Right Honourable) a confection promi∣sing
something thereto: It was prescribed
first by Iethro, whom Moses calls the

eyes of Israel, Num. 10. 31. And newly
compounded by an Oculist, of whom as I
may not, so I need not say any thing at all.
Next vnder the sacred Fountaine of
light (the light of our Israel) I worthily
accompt your Lordship most sufficient in
law to accept, to make vse, to iudge, to pa∣tronize
it. The subiect of the book is the
principall obiect of your Office, to elect,
direct and correct inferiour Magistracy.
To which purposes, Nature, Literature
and Grace haue inabled you, that if you
should faile the worlds expectation, they
will hardly trust any other in hast. Many
in rising haue followed the stirrop, pam∣pered
and letting honor not standing the
ground, but once seated haue done re∣nownedly.
But your Lordship had neuer
any other graces them your birth and de∣sert;
to which, hereditary dignity hath
so gently tendred it selfe, that you haue
not let fal your name of religion in getting
vp. Therefore now you are in the top of
honour, all that know you looke you will
be exactly honourable. For my part,

bounden to your Lordship for a fauour
formerly receiued, greater then your Ho∣nour
knowes of, or I can expresse: I shall
leaue Iethro to be your Montoir, and my
self remaine euer an humble suitor to God,
who hath made you a Iudge of conscience,
that he would make you continue a con∣scionable
Iudge, improouing your place
& abilities to the best aduantage belong∣ing
to it, the furtherance of your recko∣ning
at the last day.

