


AS ofte as I call to minde our olde friendship and familiaritie (right noble Eberhard) whiche first springing vp at Marpurge within a while after grew more strong at Regentspurge in the assembly of the states of the Empire there, which was holden in the yeere of Christes incarnation 1541. I feele my selfe delighted with a sin∣guler pleasure. You were at that time conuer∣sant amōg the noble yong Gentlemen, which were of the chāber to the most famous prince of the Hessians, and I (for my part) by the li∣beralitie of your prince, had an honest place of allowance with those excellent learned, D. Pistorius, Draconite, Melander, and Cor∣inus. All good men loued you for your free-hearted
curtesie, and cheerefulnes and for the excellent qualities that were in you, But I aboue the rest deemed that very noble to∣wardnes of your minde worthy especially of prayse and commēdation, whereby you were prouoked euen amiddest the noyse and shuf∣flings of the court, and during those affaires and dealings which were furthest off from the studies and exercises of good letters, to giue your selfe oftentimes both to reading and writing: yea, and you proceeded euen then so farrefoorth in the knowledge of the Latine tongue, that you might seeme to be brought vp, not in the court, but in some famous schole of learning. And further if at any time we commoned more familiarly togither, I re∣member you would reason many things ve∣ry grauely as touching the exercises of good learning, and complaine not seldome times that the same were neglected of those, whom the nobilitie of their stocke had accustomed in princes courtes to aduance to the highest places of dignitie and honour. Wherfore at your request I wrote an Elegie [or lamētable Posie] touching the studies of our Germaine nobilitie, which not long after, was put forth in print, together with our bookes of the or∣der
of Syllables and verses. That was then ve∣ry acceptable vnto you, and the same signifi∣cation of loue which you shewed me at that time, hath euen now also moued me to pre∣sume to publish these mine homilies vpō Ioel vnder the authoritie of your name. For I thought it an vnlawfull thing, if there should be no other testimony of our friendship pub∣likely extant, then that which is contey∣ned in a fewe verses, & the same poured forth at auenture rather then written among the thronges of the assemblie & concourse of the courte. Again the state & conditiō of vs both seemed to require, that this our anciēt frend∣ship & familiarity should be notified & made knowne as wel vnto others, as also to our po∣steritie (whome I greatly desire to become heirs therof) by some monumēt of grauer ar∣gumēt & not strāge frō either of our callings. For you from the time, wherin we liued to∣gither, had not the lowest place in the court of your prince, & that your industrie & diligēce did notably wel like the prince & doth euen stil like him, I oftetimes perceiue by my frēds: & as for me, the lord called me to the ministe¦ry of his church the selfesāe yere, that I depar∣ted frō you frō Regētspurge wherin according to the grace geuē vnto me) I hitherto serue
I supposed therefore that I should do neither vnaptly not vnsittingly, if so be I dedicated this our Ioel especially vnto you. Neither in deede doe I weigh their iudgements, who as they thinke the state and condition of those men that are conuersant in princes courtes, to be very farre disagreeing from the mini∣stery of the church: so are they of opiniō, that nothing can be done more absurdly or incōue¦niently, thē if any thing be offred vnto head men in the common weale, that sauoureth of diuinitie, & of the word of God. For mine o∣pinion is farre otherwise, who do iudge the states of men to be esteemed & accounted of rather according to the end, wherunto they aime & leuel, then after the outward pompe & shew: when as no wise man wil deny that among those that tend to one & the selfesame end, there ought to be a most neere bond and coniunction both of minds & studies. But the very same end is propounded as well to those that are conuersant in the common weale, as also in the ministerie of the church, namely, the safetie and preseruation of their common countrie & church: which the one sort ought diligently to promote & defend by their coū∣sell and authoritie, and the other by doctrine
and exhortations. There ought therefore to be a most sure knot and coniunction betwixt these two orders: such as wee reade was in times past betweene Moses and Aaron, also the Prophets and most holy kinges Dauid, Iosaphat, Ezechias, Iosias, and others lyke vnto these. But for so much as God is the on∣ly author of the publike welfare, as also of all other good giftes beside, it behoueth either of them (as wel magistrates as ministers) to loke into his worde, & out of it to deriue the fountains both of their counsels & doctrine, and al to this end and purpose, that the peo∣ple committed to their charge may haue God fauourable vnto them, and in him enioy true peace & felicitie. In which behalfe the mini∣sters forsooth ought to be present & at hand with the Princes and magistrates to teach & admonish them: and these agayne ought to defend their authoritie. For so commeth that thing to passe, that Plato long agoe iudged to be very necessary in a common weale, namely that both Philosophers should haue the chief rule of thinges, & they that haue the chiefe rule should play the Philosophers in deede. For why? that the true philosophie cannot be fetched from any other where, then out of
the word of God, it appeareth abūdantly, whē as this alone containeth the mysteries of the heauenly wisdome, & teacheth men to iudge rightly of things as wel humaine as diuine. In consideration wherof God in times past said: that the Israelites only were a wise & vnder∣stāding people, because that vnto thē alone he had committed his lawes & the oracles of his word. But with how great care and indu∣stry the wil of God ought in these dayes to be sought after, I suppose no man to be igno∣rant, that doth not ydlely marke and obserue the tokens of Gods wrath now euery where imminent & at hand. Doubtlesse al sorts & degrees of men complaine very much of the perils of our time, & there is also great con∣sultatiō euery where, how & by what means both the church & common weale may best be prouided for. And we see no small nūber vtterly to despaire of the successe of things, & to cast of al care & consideration of the pub∣like safetie, when as they perceiue abrode opē enemies to be at hand, and at home al things to be out of order through discords & de∣bates: & again publike discipline through the
vnbrideled libertie of many miserably broken and pluckt in pieces. But if so be they would hearken to the scriptures, they would by and by euen in the most perillous times of al, mi∣nister most certaine and assured perswasions of health and preseruation. And that we may omit al other writers of Gods misteries, one∣ly Ioel may suffice vs in this behalfe. He pro∣phesied vnder the reigne of Ezechias, what time the church was assaulted with the pow∣er of the Assyrians, and nowe brought into extreme hazzard: neither wanted there such as by blowing the bellowes of newe sinnes dayly kindled the burning wrath of GOD more and more. Neuerthelesse Ioel wil∣leth the people not to dispayre, neyther doeth hee forsake the office of teaching committed vnto him: But perceiueth that hee hath with so muche more diligence to apply himselfe, if by anye meanes hee might finde a remedye for the afflicted state. And this remedye hee sheweth to consist onelye in repentance and in the true conuersion vnto GOD, whereunto he exciteth and prouoketh al men, but espe∣cially hee exhorteth the Priestes, and with
these the other states also of the kingdōe, that they would become the leaders of the people hereunto. To whom being conuerted vnto God, he promiseth a ioyfull change and altera∣tion of thinges, and sheweth them that the wrath of God shall be turned vpon the wic∣ked enemies themselues, and finally prophe∣sieth of the blessed instauration of Christes kingdome. Neither in deede wanted his holy counsell happy successe. For by the fearefull iudgement of God the hoast of the Assyrians was ouerthrowne by an Angel, and the grand captayne thereof Sennacharib (that the vn∣worthines of the fact might increase the sor∣row of his death) cruelly thrust through and slayne of his owne sonnes, being in the tem∣ple of his God, and there busie in offring of sacrifice. And from that time sprang vp amōg the continuall afflictions of Gods people, the kingdome of Christ, which being long agoe by the Apostles happily spread abrod through the whole world, and afterwarde agayne op∣pressed with the darknes of Antichrist, God hath in these last times restored with mightie successe, and dayly amongst the most cruell ragings and deuises of the enemies, still won∣derfully preserueth it. Seeing therefore euen
amidst the extreame corruptions of maners and horrible idolatries, we may see so notable tokens of Gods grace and fauour: shall wee doubt of his goodnes, if so be that imbracing the counsell of Ioel, we turne vnto him with our whole heart, and casting farre away al su∣perstitions and alurements of sinne followe the puritie of fayth and innocencie of life? These thinges therefore ought the ministers of the word and Sacramentes to vrge, these thinges should be handled in the counsels of princes, yea these things are oftentimes to be propoūded of those, that wish wel to the pub∣like welfare & would haue things restored to a better state. You see therfore (worthy Eber∣hard) that the argument of the Prophet a∣greeth very well to vs both. And albeeit I doubt not, but that the matters by him hand∣led are especially well liked of you, yet haue I thought good somewhat more largely to de∣bate of the same with you, to the intent that the Gentlemen of your place and calling, be∣ing stirred vp by your example may doe the like, and so endeuour to procure a remedie to the desperate and almost forlorne estate of thinges in our time. And I beseeche you by our ancient friendship, right worshipful syr,
that you would vouchsafe with your accusto∣med fauour to accept this slender significatiō of my good wil and affection towarde you: wherin if any thing be amisse, you shal attri∣bute al that to the loue that I beare you, & to the remembrance of our ancient familiaritie. Farewell. Yeouen at Tigury, the xvii. of Au∣gust in the yeere of the incarnation of the sonne of God Iesus Christ. 1560. At what time two thousand two hundred nienty and one yeeres past, Ioel executed the office of teaching, & God miraculously deliuered his church out of the iawes of the Assyrian ty∣rant. He graunt that the same also amongest vs in Germany maye bee preserued safe and sound. Amen.
