



RIght Honourable, That which vnwilling I was to offer vnto the view of the world, vntill it was wrested from mee, by the earnest desires of my good friends, am I now willing to send forth as a remembrance of my dutifull affection to you. Thus I satisfie their desires in publishing this Sermon: and mine owne, in dedicating the same vnto your Lordship. For howsoeuer distance of place is large betweene vs, yet neither is my affection to your Lordship, so long since begun, now diminished: neither
haue I found your Lordship vnmindefull of mee, whom you haue prosecuted with good fa∣uours. It may be I shall bee condemned for sending to one in the prime of his age, a dis∣course of death. But this well perused will make you die not the sooner, but the happier. Olde age is already come to death: this Ser∣mon teacheth how to meete with death before it commeth. The same spirit of God which saide,
Eccles. 12.1. Remember thy Creator in the daies of thy youth: doth knowe that it is fit in young yeares also to remember our end. Oh that they were wise,
Deut. 32.29 then they would vnderstand this, they would consider their latter end: was the wish of God for the Israelites. It is the way to bee wise, to number our dayes.
Psalm. 90.12 Amongst the Nobles of Egypt whiles they banquited, was carried the picture of death, and these wordes spoken: Looke vpon this,
Herodot. in Enterpe. and so eate and reioyce, as that you remember your selfe shall once be such. The traine of birdes guideth their flight: and the remembrance of our ends may direct our life. Euen in yong yeares then, let this booke be as Philip of Macedon
his boy, saying, Memento Philippe, quod homo es, Remēber, you are mortall. And my earnest prayer is, that as it may be accep∣ted as a token of my dutifull respect to your Lordship, and to your honourable Lady, so it may bee some little furtherance, that you both may still and still liue honourably, and in a good age die Christianly: All which your good beginnings doe largely promise. Much-Clacton. Iuly the 26. 1618.

