


THat my travaile into Ireland, might seeme nei∣ther causlesse, nor fruitlesse, I have thought it ex∣pedient, being one member of your Lordships honorable charge to yeeld you this poore book, as an accompt of my poore voyage, happily not the last, nor the most beautifull present that is intended to your Honour by me, but surely more full of unsavoury toyle for the time, then any plot of worke that ever I attempted, which I write, not of vanity to commend my diligence, but of necessitie to excuse mine imperfection. For whereas it is well knowne to the learned in this land, how late it was ere I could meet with Gerald of Wales, the onely Author that ministreth some indif∣ferent furniture to this Chronicle, and with what search I have beene driven to piece out the rest by helpe of forreine Writers (incidently touching this Realme) by a number of briefe extracts of rolles, records and scattered papers. These things (I say) considered, I trust this little volume shall seeme great enough in such barren shift, & my defect in penning the same shalbe imputed partly to my haste, who must needes have ended all before I should leave the land, and am now e∣ven upon point of my departure. So as to handle and lay these

things together, I had not in all the space of ten weekes. Such as it is, I addresse and bequeath it to your good Lordship, for two causes. First that by the patronage of this Booke you may be induced to weigh the estate and become a patron to this noble Realme, which claimeth kindred of your eldest auncestors, and loveth entirely your noble vertues: The fame whereof is now carried by those strangers that have felt them into many forraine countryes that never saw your person. Secondly because there is none that knoweth mee familiarly, but he knoweth vvithall how many vvayes I have beene be∣holding to your Lordship. The regard of your deserts and of my duty hath easily wonne at my hands this testimony of a thankefull minde. I might be thought ambitious, if I should recount in particular the times & places of your severall cur∣tesies to mee. How often at Oxford, how often at the Court, how at Rycot, how at Windsore, how by letters, hovv by reportes, you have not ceased to further with advice and to countenance with authority, the hope and expectation of mee a single Student. Therefore in summe it shall suffice mee to acknowledge the generall heape of your bounties, and for them all to serve your honour frankely, at least wise with a true heart: Let every man esteeme in your state and fortune, the thing that best contenteth and feedeth his admiration; But surely to a judgement setled and rectified, these outward felicities which the world gazeth on, are there, and therefore to be denied, praiseable when they lodge those inward qua∣lities of the minde, which (saving for suspition of flattery) I was about to say are planted in your breast. Thirteene yeares to have lived in the eye and speciall credit of a Prince, yet ne∣ver during all that space to have abused this ability to any mans harme, to be enriched with no mans overthrow, to be kindled neither with grudge nor emulation, to benefit an infinite resort of dayly sutors, to let downe your calling to the neede of meane subjects, to retaine so lowly a stomacke, such a facility, so milde a nature in so high a vocation, to un∣dertake the tuition of learning and learned men. These are indeede the kirnels for the which the shell of your nobilitie

seemeth faire and sightly; This is the sap, for whose preserva∣tion the barke of your noble tree is tendered. This is the sub∣stance which maketh you worthy of these Ornaments wherevvith you are attyred, and in respect of these good gifts as I for my part have ever bin desirous to discover an offici∣ous and dutifull minde towards your Lordship, so will I ne∣ver cease to betake the uttermost of my power and skill to your service, nor to begge of Almighty God your plentifull increase in godlines, wisedome and prosperity. Fare you well: From Dublin 27. May, 1571.

