


THe good opinion which I long since conceiued of your woorship, ioyned with an infallible experience of your curtesie and friendlines toward me, hath beene (as it were) a continuall spurring of me forward to render againe some token of a duetifull re∣membrance, and of a well meaning minde towarde you. Whiche was the cause, that when I had gone through with the translation of these short Sermons vppon Ioel, I thought with my selfe, that I could not better bestow the fruite of this my labour (such as it is) then vppon
your worship. And as touching the argument of the Prophet (to speake in a word what I thinke) because it conteineth nothing else (in effect) then an earnest and vehement exhor∣tatiō of al estates of men vnto repen∣tance (a thing very necessary to bee practised and put in vre in these our dayes) I was perswaded it would be to some purpose, if the same were gi∣uen forth & declared in as plaine & familiar a method as was possible. Which thing (being accomplished in this treatise) may (as I trust) mini∣ster occasion both of good liking to your worship, & also of increase of spirituall knowledge & comfort to so many, as shall not disdaine the ad∣uised reading & perusing of the same. I might enter here (I confesse) into some larger discourse of & concer∣ning the seuērall circūstances apper∣teyning to the summary declara∣tion of the argumēt of this Prophet
as the time, place & occasiō, when, where, & for what cause, hee tooke vpō him this prophesy, the matter & substāce of the doctrines which hee handleth, &c. But because all that is sufficiently touched & expressed in the preface of the author following, & also in the work it selfe, the godly reader may there find whatsoeuer is requisite to this purpose. only (to end withall) I am to craue of your wor∣ship, that according as god hath enri∣ched you with many singuler orna∣mēts both of mind & body, not on∣ly beseeming a gentlemā of your cal¦ling, but also far surmoūting many other of like estate & degree, so you woulde againe dailye more & more carefully apply thē to the furtherāce of his glory, the benefit of his church & the cōmō weal of this your natiue coūtry. And thus (briefelye) praying pardō for my boldnes & resting my selfe vpon hope of your fauourable
acceptation of this my poore pre∣sent, proceeding onely of good will to your woorshippe, I betake most humbly the successe of al to the most highest, who together with the tem∣porall peace, whiche hee hath giuen you in greate measure, graunt you also the fruition of that peace that passeth all vnderstanding.
Written at your towne of Wether∣fielde the .xvii. day of Ia∣nuary. 1582.

