


THat chosen instrument of God and teacher of the gē∣tiles, the Apostle Paule, whan he shoulde take his laste leaue of the Elders of the Ephesiās, and had faithfully war∣ned them of many maters, yet amōg other thinges, he thought good to geue them this lesson withall: Take hede to your selues, & to the hole flocke, of whome the holy Goost hathe set you to be ouerseers (or Bishoppes) to go∣uerne Act. 20. the churche of God, whome he hath purchaced with his owne blood. For I knowe this, that ther shall (after my departure) greuous wolues entre in among you, that shall not spare the flocke.
Which wordes (ryght reuerende brethrē and felowe Ministres) foras∣muche

as they were spoken to those men, whome the self same office was at that tyme in the churche of Christe cōmitted vnto, which is (at this daye) committed vnto vs by lawful vocaci∣on, we shall thinke them also spoken vnto vs: yea vnto vs most specially, whome the last seasons of the worlde 1. Cor. 10. are come vpon, whyche not only the prophetes, but also Christ and the A∣postles, haue tolde before hande cer∣tainly, shal be (of al others) the most perilous seasons, by reason of raue∣nyng wolues, false greasye anointed ones, and false prophetes.
It standeth vs therfore necessa∣rily in hande, to pondre this gaire diligently, that we may knowe, what an office it is, that the Lorde hath com¦mitted vnto our charge: & what care, studie, and diligence we ought to vse in the same.
For yf it be the maner of suche men, as are geuen vnto the worlde, & to priuate pleasures, to applie theyr diligece vnto those thynges, that ear∣thye princes cōmitte vnto their char∣ge: it shal become vs (with muche mo∣re studious endeauour) to geue atten¦daunce vpō that office, which the most

highe Kyng of Kinges, and Lorde of Lordes, Iesus, Christ, hath layde vpon our shoulders, and shall one daye re∣quire a reconyng of it at our handes, Math. 24 and. 25. whā he shal come in his glorie wyth all his Angels vnto iudgement.
But now thapostle Paule sayeth, that we are ordeyned Bishoppes, (or ouerseers) not promisyng vs a cer∣tain Empire or realme (as we se al∣most al the Bishoppes of our tyme chalenge to them selues, by the auto∣ritie of this title) but admonishing vs of our office.
For asmuche as the Greke worde Episcopus (which is englished a Bishop) signifieth in latine Speculator, that is in englishe, a Watcheman: And where Paule sayeth, we are ordayned to be Episcopi, Bishoppes, that is to say, wat∣chmen, he vseth the same maner of speache, yt God dyd, whā he ordeyned Ezechiel to be a watcheman ouer the Ezech. 33. house of Israel, chargeyng him most diligently to warne the people before hande, of the sweorde that shoulde co∣me, for their sinnes & wickednesses: & with his faythful preaching, to saue the wretched synful people from de∣struction. And in dede me thinkes,

that Paule espied the proude abuse of this name (Bishoppe) before hande, wher he sayeth: Take hede to your sel¦ues, and to the hole flocke.
For like as he cōmitteth the Lor∣des flocke, that is to saye, the congre∣gacion (or churche) to the ministers charge: euen so biddeth he him also to beware and take hede to him selfe, that he set not his mynde vpō priuate honours and pastimes, neclecting them that he hathe taken charge of, and so worke his owne destruction. Yea Paule thōdreth at him also, with the Lordes owne sayeng vnto Eze∣chiel: Except thou speake plainly, and dissuade the wicked from his wicked Ezech. 33. waye, that he maye lyue, the wicked in¦dede shall dye in his wickednesse, but his blood I wil require at thy hādes.
The Apostle byddeth vs also, take hede vnto the hole florke: allowyng here no respect of persones, for vs ei∣ther not to regarde any persone for basenesse & pouertie, or to beare with any for his estate or wealthes sake. But he byddeth vs gouerne (or rather fede) not contrarieng Christes wor∣des, whiche forbadde his disciples to rule and reigne as earthy princes do:

but chargeyng vs to ministre the worde faythfully, whych prescribeth the waye and the vnfailyng rule of saluacion, and ther withal carieth mē into the pleasaūt pastures of the sou∣le, wherin they fynd that meate, whi∣che Psal. 23. Ioh. 6. only fedeth and filleth vnto eter∣nall lyfe, after suche sorte, that it is not possible for them after the dige∣sting of it, to fele either hungre or thurste any more.
And least we should for any cause, recken the office committed vnto vs a smal trifling mater, he teacheth vs, how chargeable a flocke it is, that we are bounden to gouerne and fede: e∣uen the selfe same flocke, that ye sonne of God hathe vouchedsafe to deliuer frō destructiō, with his owne blood. And that one reason (yf ther were non but it) is of so highe autorite (brethrē) that it were hable alone to dryue all lustlesnesse & sluggish drowsynes out of our myndes. For who knoweth not, that in safe keping of a worldlye thing, that a mā is put in trust with∣all, ther is speciall great fidelitie and diligence required? Than how muche more faithful and diligent ought mē to be in Goddes maters, and namely

in safekeping of that flocke, which the Lorde hath raūsomed with his owne blood, and layde vp in stoare in our custodye?
Nother maye we saye, that oure office is out of daunger, by reason of the presence and ayde of him, that is the chiefe & good shepehearde in dede, and vnder that pretēse we to take the lesse hede & trauaile. For Paule spea∣keth before hāde of horrible and sore daungiers. For I knowe this ({quod} he) that after my departure, ther shall gre∣uous wolues come in amōg you, which shall not spare the flocke.
He saithe, wolues shall com, and that sore greuous ones: whiche will not spare so worthie a flocke, so deare∣ly a bought flocke, so noble a flocke. And in an other place, wher he pain∣teth them out with more circūstaun∣ces of wordes, he saithe: The spirite speaketh euidently, that in the later dai∣es 1. Tim. 4. som shall departe frō the faithe, and geue eare to deceaueable spirites and doctrines of Deuilles. Thā ther shall deceauours rise vp, yea such ones as shall disquiete and make hauocke of this flocke, not only wt mennes lyeng commentaries, but also with doctri∣nes of very deuilles, bothe false and

pernicious.
The same mater also hathe Christ testified: who, like as he sendeth out his disciples as shepe among wolues, so dothe he tell vs, that false anoynted greasye ones, and false prophetes shal starte vp (to the vndoing of a great meanye) & their studie shal be to per∣uerte and corrupte the doctrine of the truthe. He warneth vs also, that war¦res Math. 24. Luc. 19. shal be stered vp by their procure∣ment, to assault and destroye faithfull mennes bodies withall.
Moreouer the heade and prince of 2. Thes. 2. all this rable, is in an other place de∣clared (euen the great Antichrist him selfe) whiche shall geue the onsette vpon this sely flocke of Christ thicke and three folde, bothe wt false forged lyes, and open tyrānye of cruel wea∣pon. All whych sayenges, if we com∣pare them with those thinges, that haue happened in our tyme, and doo daily happen still, we shall confesse Christ to be true in his sayeng, & that Paule also spake out of the spirite of truthe: yea it shall furthermore ma∣nifestly appeare, who be those false anoynted ones, and false prophetes, and who that myghtie houge Anti∣christ

is, whome our flocke ought to beware of.
Now to thintent we maye set our myndes considerately vpō our office, and aswel take hede to our selues, as to se to, and (asmuche as lyeth in our weake nature) to prouide for the flock committed vnto our charge, we must nedes haue a rype knowlage of the perilles, that are wōt to be most trou∣blous & most noysome to the churche. Which, albeit they are infinite, & past al nombre, that are dayly blustred vp of hym, whiche like as he walketh a∣bout as a roaring Lyon to destroy vs, so is he most craftie in layeng of sna∣res 1. Pet. 5. and false deceaueable baytes: yet we ought before al thinges, to consi∣dre two maters: false doctrine, & the griefe of the crosse and persecution, which are speciall snares to ouer∣throwe our weaknesse withall. For the deuil knoweth the disposicion of our nature, that in diuine and heauē∣ly affaires, it is wonderfull dull and drowsye, and maye very easely be de∣ceaued: but in other causes (in religiō specially) it estemeth euery thyng ac∣cordyng to the successe and spede, & so it is offended at persecution and ad∣uersite.

By reason wherof we se, that he vseth alwaies this knacke against the flocke of Christ, that either he de∣ceaueth the simple sorte with falsly cō¦ceaued opinions, or disquieteth them with cōtentions and wrangling dis∣putatiōs: or els he feareth them with the crosse of persecution, and bloody warres of cruelly procured tyrannes.
Yf any man wolde require exam∣ples herof, he shal mete them so thick, that he shall not nede to take muche paine in searching of them. For the deuelishe dreames of the Nazarenes maye stande for an example, whiche iomble the lawe and Christ together, and make his merite of none effecte. And whan those dreames were euen scarcely repressed, ther was persecuci∣on done by that monstre of nature. Nero. Hervnto we maye make reher∣sal of Cerinthus, and his successour (that prodigious slaue of lechery, pryde, & crueltie) Domitianus. Among these we wil reckē Arrius, and the tyrānes that folowed his heretical madnesse.
And lyke as the nerer we drawe to thende of the world, so muche yt more pernicious and more perilous is eue∣ry thing: so in our tyme we see that

myghtye houge Antichrist (the bishop of Rome) farre excede al his predeces∣sours in tyranny, and so outragious∣ly raue wyth bothe these sweordes, that a man can not wel discerne, with whether he dothe hurte the churche The ver∣tue of the Popes doctrine. the sorer. For he hath brought in doc∣trine, that is cleane contrarie repug∣naunt to the true doctrine. For it dra∣weth men from God, & maketh them to serue creatures: it teacheth mē al∣so to seke saluacion in their owne me∣rites, and to trust in their owne strenghtes.
He hath also forged suche a kynde of religiō, as hath more twitle twat∣le toyes in it, then the Leuitical lawe, and al the supersticion that euer the gentiles vsed. Yea it is patched toge∣ther with parte of both of them, and is most farre of frō spirite & truthe. Ioh. 4. And yet vnder pretense of this religi∣on, he is aduaunced to so highe power and tyranny, that he is hable to com∣pel them that repyne against it, to re∣presse them that speake against it, & to kil and slea them that resiste, & can not beleue it.
Therfore the lyeng spirite of er∣rour playeth the deuil in the churche

at this daye, and the Bishop of Ro∣mes tyrānical swoord layeth on load withal, and that not vpō priuate per∣sons now as in tymes past long ago, but vpon most myghtye Princes, the most famous cyties: yea vpon al sor∣tes of people his sweorde is drawen, & maketh streames of blood to renne downe euery where. For now we see great cities takē and throwē downe, fieldes laide waste, honest wemē and maydēs defiled with abominable le∣cherie, and yong babes also either kil¦led, or elles (which is the more horri∣ble) maymed of their limmes. We se the flowre of youthe brought to the horrible wyckednesse of buggery, and al hole Germany in the meane space euery where cruelly vexed. And albeit that chosen instrumēt of Satan (An∣tichrist) rage with open tyranny, yet (by ioynyng lyes to his tyranny) his drift is to cloke his deuillishe attemp∣tates, and the occasions therof, to en∣ueagle the vnlearned and simpler sorte with false forged causes, & craf∣tily to cause many folkes, to hate the truthe of the Gospel & true religion.
Let vs awake therfore (brethren) & seing we are placed in the watche

towre, let vs reproue the sweorde, not that is yet commyng, but presently come, and layeth on loade, yea and batheth it self all ready in the bowel∣les of the flocke. For in this case ther is many a mannes faithe assayed. Ther be som, whych bicause they per∣ceaue not the feate of forgeing of lies, are sone begyled.
Ther be some which bicause they can not discerne the true doctrine & ymagined supersticiō asondre, take falshead for truthe. And som ther be, that are yet still afraide of the thōder bolt of the Romyshe curse, that is to saye, Antichristes curse. And som ther be also, which are so offended, whan the crosse and heate of persecucion co∣meth, that after that triall, euery mā maye plainly perceaue, they receaued the sede of the Gospell in to stonye grounde.
In this case therfore, is our diligēt cure required, good brethren. In this behalfe it standeth vs necessarily in hande, to shewe our selues faithful watchemen, so as the people being warned by vs, maye be hable to kno∣we false fained doctrine, to beware of forged supersticion, to shonne the

baites & snares of lies, and in no wise to be offēded, whā persecuciō cometh.
And principally it shal be our parte to geue the onsette vpon the autour of so haynous a mischief (the bishop of Rome) whom not only the prophetes, but also Christ and thapostles (accor∣ding to the histories) directly proclay∣me, to be the right & mightie houge Antichrist. He it is therfore, whom our duetie is to reproue, & to set him out plainly in his colours, for the con∣gregatiōs to loke vpon him, that no man be amased by reason of his falsly & causeles vsurped persone or title, or be afrayde of his vayne gōneshotte of wordes, bicause of his pratīg power.
And against forged supersticion & lyeng doctrines, ther is (doutles) no presenter a remedye, than to knowe the truthe. For where the lyght of the truthe spreadeth out his beames, ther maye the deuil put vp his pypes, for any hurt he can do, with his darke dongeon of lyes.
As for the talkes of some fyne fyn¦gred tēdrelinges, they are not worth the hearing: which bycause they are afrayde of their owne carcasse and pelfe, wolde in no wise haue an ene∣mye

of so great myght & power spo∣kē against, & to be prouoked through such maner of open mouthed playne declaraciōs. Is ther not vnquiet trou¦ble ynough otherwise, saye they? Is ther not dissension & tumultuous vp∣roares ynough besides? what auai∣leth it to throwe fire in to the forna∣ce, and oile in to the fire?
I beseche you (good brethren & fe∣lowe curates) beare wyth me, though I answer these men playnly home at fewe wordes. For I coulde easily cōtemne their prittle prattle talking, if ther were not som of their compa∣ny, that loke to be reported not only for fanonrers of the gospelles truthe, but euen doctours also, and that not of the cōmon sorte of doctours. Who forasmuche as they wōderfully mys∣like this worke, which I purpose to set furthe, can not fantasye all those paynes that men take, in speaking & doyng against the Bishop of Romes tyrannye. And yet for al that, these sa∣me fyne carpet doctours make them selues wōderous busye and earnest, in dryuyng awaye a sorte of lowsye harlot Friers, and maungie Masse-priestes. In this they thinke they do

gaily. And yf they chaunce at auentu∣re to hitte vpō a newe terme of spea∣che, to floute and taunt those vngraci∣ous mōstres withal, Lorde, so bragge they are of it. But yet they wolde not haue the head & chief prince of these monstres to be meddled against, in no wise.
But I wolde haue them to answer me. Doo you thinke it to be true (O you saweye, & more than arrogaunt frierly diuinitie doters) that the A∣postle Paule, yea that God him self hathe ordained you to be watchemen in his house? Sure you will saye, it is true, for you can not denye it onles ye will lose all the glorie of your esti∣macion, which ye set so muche by.
Than what thinke you is the of∣fice of a watchemā? Is it ynough for him to tang the watchebell, whan a rascall common souldiour (or twoo) of the enemies bande cometh, & whan the chieftayn of the Armye, and high Emperour him selfe approcheth with his hole hoost, to make no signe at al? I thinke you wil not graunt that.
But than chiefly shoulde the trompet sounde, than should he ring alarme most of al, than must the cytezins be

cōmaunded to harnesse specially: thā is the greatest daungier of all other. And except the watcheman doo thus, he shall not only be called a necligent cowheardly wretche, but also a false knaue, and a traitour to the common wealthe.
What a madnesse is it than (in the deuilles name) for a mā not to thinke that necessarily requisite, in the admi∣nistracion of the churche, which se∣meth not only profitable, but also of necessitie to be done in the temporal cōmō wealthe? And I pray you, what weapones are they, that Antichrist dothe most hurte and villanye with all? euen lies and craftye deceate are the thīges, that he setteth him self out most with all. Bicause he is furnished with a false title, he reigneth in many mennes hartes, whose ignoraunt blindnesse and simplicitie he abuseth, to establishe his tyrannye. Shall we than suffre thē to be seduced through ignoraunce still, seing it lieth in vs, to deliuer them at ones, from that so haynous a tyrannye, by the light of the truthe? Shall we be afraide to re∣proue that cruell rageing beast, for feare of making him angrye, whose

vse is to do more hurt with flatterie, thā furye? That may not be, my bre∣thren. Naye, we must plucke of thys monstres visour, that he vaūteth him selfe in, and teare of his painted Ly∣ons visage, that men maye se what a slowche eared asse he is, that all this while wolde nedes be taken for that inuincible triumphaunt Lyon of the tribe of Iuda.
Concerning his displeasures, we ought not to be afraide of them, nor adradde of his thonder clappes. As for Apoca. 6. this beast, he hathe allready rose co∣loured him self a great while, wt sayn∣tes blood. Ther be innumerable sou∣les of sayntes vnder the great aultar, whō this beast hathe murthered for the worde of God, and the testimonie that they bare vnto Christ. And ther are serued of the same sawce, euery daye moo and moo. And all they crye How long Lorde thow that art holy & true, iudgest not, nor reuēgest our blood from them that dwell on earthe? But the Lorde heareth their voices, and is ready to come furth to execute iudge∣ment, and to be reuenged as sone as the measure of the beast is fulfilled, & the nombre of his martirs perfitlye

made vp. Let vs in ye meane tyme do the partes of good thriftye stuardes, and trusty watchemen, as it beco∣meth vs to doo. Let vs fede the Lordes flocke with the prouaūdre of his wor∣de: let vs reproue, stampe vnder our fere, and cast awaye poison, that it do no hurte. Let vs poynt thenemie and all his false craftes and weapones we our fyngre, that Christes shepe maye knowe, whom they ought to flee frō. And so shall we receaue the boūteous rewarde, that is prepared for vs. And as for those men, that suffre so muche as the simplest shepe of Christes flock, to be lost through their necligence, ther remayneth horrible payne in stoare for them.
Now being moued by these rea∣sones, I haue taken vpon me this la∣bour (not being ignoraunt what daū∣gier lieth vpon it) to proue the Bi∣shop of Rome, to be very Antichrist. And this same worke (louing brethrē & felowe ministers) I thought good to dedicate vnto you: not ye I thought my self hable, being a yong man, to instructe myne aūcientes: being vn∣learned my selfe, to teache my betters in learnyng: and being a yongling

and barbarous my selfe, to informe men of most famous eloquence, with these my dooinges: but that my myn∣de was to rendre a playne rekonyng of my studies vnto those men, whom I sawe trauaile this many yeares (lyke hartie and constaunt faythfull men) in this matter, and dyd muche good wtal. And so I thought it not vn¦profitable, that this doctrine shoulde openly come to lyght, beyng set furth vnder the publike priuilege of al you, seyng it is necessary, principally in this sorowful tyme of affliction.
But before I make an ende of my tale, I thinke good to speake a lytell cōcerning Antichristes other sweord (that is, his open tyrannye) that men may the more easely vnderstād, what is the occasion of the crosse and perse∣cucion, and that we ought paciently to beare it.
But furst of al, it is to be enquired by whose counsaile, mocion or suffe∣ring it is, that Christes churche ta∣steth of the smarte of the crosse. Ma∣rye, that doo we learne of the only and vndeniable scholemaister of the world, which hathe ben in the fathers bosome from euerlasting, & therfore

seyng he knoweth al secretes, he hath opened them vnto vs, as farre as it is lawful & profitable for vs to know. Whan he sent furthe his disciples to preache the Gospel, after that he hade talked muche concerning the crosse & persecucions, at laste he sayeth thus: Are not two sparowes solde for a far∣thing? And yet not one of them falleth Math. 10 to the grounde without your father. All the heares of your head be nom∣bred. Be not afrayde therfore, you are muche more worthe, thā a great meig∣nye of sparowes.
In these wordes nowe, the Lorde sheweth vs the principall cause of the crosse: that what so euer it is, that the godly are wont to haue chaunce vnto them, it cometh by the will & decreed coūsail of his father. For although it is not the knowyng of Goddes wil, that setteth those that be persecutours on worke, but the luste of their owne priuate affectiō, hate, malice, and des∣pight of Goddes worde: yea and albe∣it Satan (the father of all murther & violence) stere them vp: yet none of al these haue any power, strengthe or force against Christes churche, except the Lorde hym selfe suffre them to

rushe in, and to haue his churche som¦what exerciced therwithall.
For that cause the Lorde calleth the Kyng of Assiria, the rodde of his fu∣rie: Esa. 10. Psal. 17. and Dauid calleth the wicked, Goddes hande and Goddes sweorde: where as nother the Kyng of Assiria hade any respect vnto the wil of God, nother do the wicked regarde the coū∣sail of Goddes prouidence. But thys (louing brethren) is ful of comforte, that nother the aduersaries haue (of them selues) any power against vs, nor that any thing befalleth vs with∣out the wil of God. For seyng the ho∣lye scriptures declare vnto vs, that Psal. 11. 2. Corin. 1. God is not only a ryghteous Lorde, but that he is also a most merciful fa∣ther, certainly what aduersitie so euer chaūceth vnto vs through his coūsail, it threatteneth not to destroy or vndo vs, but promiseth vs saluacion. For how can he mynde ye vndoing of mē, which is the maker of mākynd? wold a father haue his owne children de∣stroyed? wolde he be content to haue them vtterly destroyed & slayne? No. But forasmuche as that propertie is most farre frō the nature of a mortal mā, that is a father: doubtles we may Luce. 11.

not thinke God, which is the foun∣tayne of mercie and grace, to be more vngentil and harder harted, than a mortall man.
Why than (saye they) suffreth he most merciles enemies to fall vpon vs by heapes so? why dothe he cast vs in to their handes, and vpon their we apones than?
But what are you (good folkes) that grunt at this gaire? Thinke ye it a wondre, or neuer hearde you, that a father shaketh the rodde at his chil∣dren? yea Hebre. 12. and that he clappeth them on the buttockes to, for their correcti∣on? Let vs rather loke vpon our sel∣ues, and we shall sone see the causes of all this gayre. For where we being Psal. 51. conceaued and borne in synne, coulde not chose, but be lyke our owne origi∣nal state, and therfore shoulde be the slaues of deathe and damnation, the father of heauen tendring vs wyth mercie (by his owne sonne) hathe takē awaye our sinnes, & chosē vs to be his childrē, & hathe made vs heires of his grace & kingdome. This ioyfull & gra∣cious prouidē of our saluatiō, euen the doctrine of the gospell bringeth vs worde of. And that is it that telleth

vs how we are endetted to god again therfore. It enformeth vs, how we must beleue, it teacheth vs howe to frame our life, and it correcteth our naughtie corrupte maners.
Howbeit forasmuche as our fleshe can not abide to be corrected & nour∣tured, it wolde not in this case be mo∣nished, rebuked, corrected nor founde fault at: no, it abuseth the doctrins of the gospell, to clooke his licencious libertie and lust wythall: & the more careles securitie and libertie it hathe to liue at pleasure, so muche the more it foloweth his owne affections, and renneth wilde wythout bridling. Than therfore it standeth wyth the heauenly fathers iustice, that they which wolde not amende wyth cour∣teous warnyng of wordes, must be corrected with stripes. And yet he sen∣deth not them for any cause, but yt we shoulde cast awaye our careles necli∣gēce, & turne in to ye right way again.
As for examples or testimonies of scripture ther nedeth none in this case, seing euery one of vs fleth in our selues, this corrupt disposiciō of our owne nature. Neuertheles I thinke it not amysse, to note suche

thinges, as haue fallen in our tyme.
The worde of the gospell hathe (by the fauourable grace of God) ben re∣uealed and preached to the people of Germanye, now about fyue & twen∣tie yeares and more. Ther hathe ben disclosed, the fraudes, the false sleigh∣tes, subtil wiles, and blasphemous deuises of Antichristes tyrannye. All darkenesse hathe ben scowred awaye by the light of the truthe. The endles knottes (that befor tyme were indis∣soluble) and the most sorowfull bōdes Hebre. 4. of deathe, were let lose and cutte in pieces, wyth this most kene two ed∣ged sweorde, the Gospell.
And whan this gaire was ones losed, all that euer Antichrist hade buylded in mennes consciences, fell sodaynly downe, and the vayne dre∣des of conscience vanished away like smoke. That made the Bishop of Ro∣me sory for it, straight at the furst be∣gynnyng. And right myghty Empe∣rours, Kinges Princes, and people, were greued at that. Yea they laide their heades together at sondry coun∣sailes, wherby they wolde fayne haue troden downe the corne of the gospell, which was than but grene, & newly

sprongen vp. But al wolde not serue. No. we haue sene thē fall out among them selues, and horribly torne and arayed wyth making warres one a∣gainst an other, which intended to make warre against Christ. And now euen the same are at hande, ready to cheoppe of our neckes: now they set vpon vs wyth fyre and sweorde: now they make hauocke of euery thing, wyth murthering and smothering. But what is the cause? Is Christ more weake, and lesse skilfull in his science, than he hathe ben before ty∣me? Is it bicause he is not hable to re∣strayne, that he hathe restrayned and kepte of (all this while) vnto these dayes? No, That is not the mater. But we haue deserued this miserie through our owne synnes. We haue prouoked him vnto wrathe through our vnthankefulnesse. Our aduersa∣ries are weaponed wyth our owne wickednesses: and therwith they ma∣ke batail against vs. And bicause we haue synned, in that we haue shame∣fully abused the quiete rest, that God hathe geuen vs now a great while, he loketh vpō vs (his necligēt naugh∣ty children (wyth this his present

sharp rodde. Howbeit this we maye comforte our selues in, that seing he is our father, he desireth not the de∣strucciō, nor the death, nother the vn∣doing of vs his childrē, but wold haue vs to amēde, to be saued, and to lyue. And the very cause of the warres and persecutiō, which the Bishop of Rome him selfe pretēdeth in euery place by his bulles, is an vndeniable proofe of this mater. For he crieth out to haue vs burned, bicause (he saithe (we are heretikes.
But what heresie is it? Mary Sir this: bicause we will none of the Ro∣mishe supersticion, we trust not to what is he¦resy wyth the Papis¦tes. our owne merites, we layne to none but only Christ. Him we acknowlage to be our head, our king, our Bishop, our only & sufficiēt sacrifice: & bicause we (accordingly as the Apostle Paule did) knowe nothing, sauing Christ Ie¦sus, and that he was crucified. And although by reasō of our wickednes∣ses (which forasmuche as we are in∣fected wtall) we frame not our selues according to the {pro}fession of our faith, our heauenly father suffreth vs to be plagued: yet yt is not the mater, yt they (which are a great deale wickeder thā

we) are angrye wt vs for, but for this only cause they are horne woode a∣gainst vs, that we holde vs to Christ alone, & are gone quite frō their filthy faithles God seruice. For where som fynde fault at vs, for a disobedience I wotte not what, it is a most vaine tit∣tle tattle, & euen the bishop of Rome him selfe {pro}ueth thē lyers by his owne Bulles. Let vs behold therfore ye exce∣ding Da. 3. 9. goodnes of God, in this behalf. we hade deserued to be destroyed for our synnes, that are bothe haynous & many, for cōtēning ye worde of God, & for our vnthākfulnes, & bycause we haue lyued carelesly, we hade nede to be scourged: but yet the Lorde wil not haue our payne slaūdred wt that title, Act. 5. but reputeth vs worthye of this ho∣nour, that his pleasure is to haue vs put in perile for his names sake, for ye true faithe, & for religion (which is a mater of most excellēcie, and of most high honour) & so to compt vs among the company of his holy martires. O what a fatherly louīg kīdnes is this? O most abundaūt pleynteous mercy. O most riche treasures of goddes gra¦tious fauour. he is cōtent to make vs vessels of his grace, which had alredy Ro. 9.

made our selues vesselles of his wrathe: and he voucheth safe to haue his glory set vp, the vineyarde of his churche watred, and his faithe and truthe testified in that blood of ours, which deserued to be sheadde for our owne exceding great synnes. Who is it therfore, that coulde be weary of this crosse? who cā be sory to suffre af∣flictiōs? In dede our most cruel blood thirstye enemies, are not ware of this glorie of our persecutiō: and therfore it is meate and drinke to them, whā our bodies are destroyed & murthe∣red. They knowe not that iudgemēt abydeth them, that whan our Lorde God hathe chastifed vs ynough wyth theyr furious madnesse, they must be cast into euerlasting fyre, lyke an vn∣fruteful rodde, that is good for no vse any more. But as for vs, it is our parte to saye nowe with the Apostle Paule: who shall separate vs from the loue of God? shal affliction? shal straite Rom. 8. keping? shal persecutiō? shal hōgre? shal nakednesse? shall perile? shall sweorde? naye, in all these thinges we haue the victorie by him, that hathe loued vs. Yea Christ the sonne of God hathe lo∣ued vs, and like as he gaue him selfe

vnto deathe for our sakes, euen so dothe he loue vs, and putteth vs to honour now at ye last caste, after suche wise, that he turneth the infamie of the payne, which we hade deserued, in to the most glorious honour of the crosse, which we must beare for his sake. Notwithstāding his mynde s not, that we shoulde be so tormēted and afflicted, that al must perishe in his persecuciō suffring: but he requi∣eth this, that we shoulde abandon fleshely securitie & expresse that faithe in our conuersacion, that we professe in our communicacion. And as sone as we doo so, he receaueth vs, which are now vnthriftie children, and clip∣peth vs harde in his armes, and so he maketh his wordes to be {pro}ued true, which he spake long agoo: As surely as I doo lyue, I wolde not the deathe Ezech. 18. of a synner, but that he shoulde repent and lyue.
These thinges therfore it is cōue∣nient for vs, to warne and teache the ongregations committed vnto our charge, that the weake be not afrayde of persecucion, that they be not offen∣ded, whā any thing chaūceth amysse, and that they esteme not our faithe

and religion therby: but let them re∣mēbre them selues of those thinges, that they haue deserued the wrathe of God by, & amende them: that they being turned to the Lorde God, maye see him also turne vnto them. Let the wordes sounde in mennes eares (yea let them sounde continually) that the Lorde speaketh by the pro∣phete: O that my people wolde haue harkened vnto me, for yf Israel hade Psal. 81. walked in my wayes. I shoulde sone haue put downe their enemies, and turned my hāde against their aduersa∣ries. The haters of the Lorde shoulde haue fallen (like slaues) vnto their fete, but their tyme shoulde haue endured for euer.
If men wolde take hede to these sayenges with attētyue godly hartes, they shoulde not be offended at perse∣cuciō, but should haue most presēt re∣dresse of al their miseries. But what want ther is euery where in this be∣halfe, I thinke you see it, not without greuous sorowes of your hartes, lo∣uing brethren and felowe ministers.
Mē haue not yet layde awaye their pernicious securitie of synfull life. We are not yet weary of our wicked∣nesse,

we are not yet sory for our syn∣nes. And lyke as wicked obstinate mē haue not suffred them selues as yet, to take curteous warning by the worde: euen so it is not possible for them to be afrayde, whan plagues come vpon them. And forasmuche as we se per∣force that kynde of vnbrydled licenci∣ousnesse in our people, we se also our aduersaries waxe dayly stronger and strōger, & our selues shrinke & become weaker and weaker. But seyng the worlde is in this case, that we shoulde Esa. 1. vtterly despere of it, yf the Lorde hade not reserued his remnauntes of cho∣sen people: it shal be our partes, to ap∣plie our diligēt endeauour, that none be cast awaye, through our slouthful∣nesse or necligence.
Let vs therfore exercice the talent, that the Lorde hathe geuen vs. Let vs wynne as muche as lieth in our pos∣sible power. The Lorde wyll not fayle them, that applye theyr dueties god∣lye. But lyke as he alone geueth the 1. Cor. 3. Math. 3. encreace: euen so is he hable of stones, to make children of Abra∣ham.
Let the daūgerous vsing of our of∣fice constrayne vs, to haue it alwayes

in our mynde, and to take hede to our selues and to the hole flocke, that the churche susteyne no losse, either by false doctrine, or by grief of persecuci∣on. Let vs not spare any paynes ta∣king, let vs not spare for any la∣bours, for any watchīges, no nor yet for our owne life, for it is rather to be called a deathe. Let vs not spare our bodie, for it can not be better spent, thā about the husbandrye of the Lor∣des vineyorde: that at the later day in the dredful iudgemēt, we be not foūde companiones of that slouthfull ser∣uaunt, but that we maye heare that pleasaunt and most comfortable say∣eng: Well fare you good and faithfull Math. 25. seruauntes, you haue ben faithfull ouer a fewe thinges, I will put you in autoritie ouer many thynges: Entre into your Maisters ioye. Amen. Farewel bre¦thren and reuerende felowe ministers. At Zuirike the xii. daye of Decē∣bre. 1546.
