

I Began with a taste of happinesse, and now I end with a taste of wretchednes. Both of these are necessarie to be knowne, that wee may loue the one, and
feare the other. I dedicate this my last theorem vnto you, not as per∣tinent to your condition, but as an Amulet for your consolation: For I beare you record that you haue alreadie tasted how sweet the Lord is,
Psal. 34.8. you haue had a taste of the good word of God,
Heb. 6.4.5. and of the powers ofthe world to come, and haue found them sweeter to your soule then the honey and the honey combe.
Psal. 19 10. Luke. 10.6. And I am well assured that you are a childe of peace, far free from that portion which here my following treatise descri∣beth to be the sinners legacie: for I haue had experience of your vn∣fained faith in Christ, your loue to his word,
Psal. 16.3. and delight in his Saints. I therefore commend this little Pamphlet to your medita∣tions, to stir you vp more & more
to thanksgiuing vnto God,
Coloss. 1.13. who hath called you out of darknes in∣to this maruellous light,
Iohn 15.19. and hath chosen you out of the world that you should not perish with the world. Doubtlesse the peace of conscience,
Philip. 4.7. that peace which the godly doe enioy, is an inualuable treasure, it passeth all vnderstan∣ding: This peace shall euer be vp∣on the Israel of God, though there be no peace at al vnto the wicked. As you therefore haue begun in the spirit, so I cease not to pray for you,
Colos. 1.9.10.5. that you may be fulfilled with the knowledge of the wil of God in all wisedom and vn∣derstanding, that you may walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all things, being fruitful in al good works, and encreasing in the knowledge of God, for the hopes sake
which is laid vp for you in heauen: whereof you haue heard before by the word of truth, which by me and others hath bin prea∣ched vnto you. And here I leaue with you these following medita∣tions, as a testimony of my thank∣full remembrance of many kind∣nesses which you haue shewed vn∣to me, and not to me alone, but to all those which come in the name of a Prophet amongst you.
Matth. 10.41. Reade, meditate, and vse it to your com∣fort, and the God of peace sancti∣fie you both in soule and bodie, and keepe you with all yours blameles vntill the com∣ming of our Lord.

