



MIne afflicted mind and crased bodie, together with other externall calamities haue wrought such sorowfull and lamentable effects in me, that for this whole yeare I haue wholy giuen ouer my selfe to mournfull meditations. A∣mong others, Amintas is one, which being first prepared for one or two, was afterward by the meanes of a few, made com∣mon to manie, and so pitifully disfigured by the boistrous hand∣ling of vnskilfull pen men, that he was like to haue come abroad so vnlike himselfe, as that his own Phillis would neuer haue taken him for Amintas. VVhich vtter vndoing of our poore shepeheard, I knew not well otherwise how to preuent, but by repairing his ragged attire, to let him passe for a time vnder your honourable protection. As for his foes, they either gene∣rallie mislike this vnusuall kind of verse, or els they fancie not my peculier trauaile. For the first, I neuer heard better ar∣gument of them then this, such an one hath done but ill, there∣fore no man can doe well, which reason is much like their own rimes, in condemning the art, for the fault of some artificers. Now for the second sort of reprehenders who think well of the thing, but not of my labour therein, mine answere is at hand. If there were anie penaltie appointed for him that would not reade, he might well complaine of me that publish it to be read.

But if it be in euerie mans choise to read it, or not to reade, why then not in mine also to publish or not to publish it? He that will, let him see and reade; he that will neither reade nor see, is neither bound to see nor read. He that taketh no delight in reading, let him thinke that among so manie men so diuersly affected, there may be some found of a contrarie humor. If anie begin to read, when he beginneth to take no delight, let him leaue of and goe no further. If he folow on in reading without pleasure, let him neither blame me that did what I could, nor be angrie with the thing which hath no sense, but reprehend himselfe who would continue in reading without a∣ny pleasure taking.

