


THere is no study next the practise of Piety, like the study of peace; The Authour of the Epistle to the Hebrewes doth lincke them both together,
Heb. 12.14. Follow peace and
holinesse; as if there could bee no holinesse without peace and quietnes. This Quietnesse is the daughter of Piety, the sister of Humility, the mo∣ther of many a worthy vertue. It is the honour of a family, the ornament of a citty, the muniment of a common wealth, without which no vertue ap∣peareth like it selfe, nor comfort gi∣ueth content. This Art of Quietnes so needefull a study for all good Chri∣stians (Right worshipfull and Welbo∣loued Countrimn) haue I according to the measure of that poore talent which I haue receiued, taught, as here it is deliuered, in my pastorall charge within your country, in sixe seuerall lectures. That I haue heere compa∣cted them together, & brought them out of the pulpit to the presse, I neede no other Apologie then my zeale to Gods glory, the common good, and my countries quietnesse. Whereunto I was the more emboldned for the
stopping of the mouthes of those who enuying my peace, both priuately and publikely, spare not to censure me as an vnquiet person, and an enimy vn∣to peace. Whither I delight to so∣iourne in vnquiet Mesech, or to dwel in the contentious tents of Kedar,
Psal. 20.5 let this small Treatise witnes. If my hart doe not goe with my words, and my desire for mine owne practise with the counsell I giue vnto others, shall not that supreame Iudge, who sear∣cheth the heart,
Ier. 17.10. and trieth the raines, search and trye it out? vncharitable censures of selfe-con∣ceited Critickes, I doubt not but this small Treatise shall finde as well as others which formerly I haue pub∣lished: I expect no lesse then store of carps where curious eyes go a fishing, especially where the Torpedo of blacke enuy doth bait the ook. They who like none but themselues, how should they approoue any thing of
mine? how can they spare their cen∣sure against mee, who neuer speake well of any. But to leaue these Zoi∣lists with as slender respect of their censure, as they doe of any Treatise, my hope is (Right Worshipfull and Welbeloued) that with you these my poore labours, though not for the worth of the worke, yet for the wor∣thinesse of the subiect vpon which it doth worke, shall finde acceptance: It sheweth the path-way vnto Quiet∣nesse, the proper obiect (Right Wor∣shipfull) of your office, and the daily subiect (Welbeloued) of your pra∣ctise. It is the duty of the Minister to teach Quietnesse, of the Magistrate to maintaine Quietnesse, of euery one to pray for Quietnesse and to practise Quietnesse. This our Country hath store of the sonnes of Leui, who preach Peace, and perswade Quiet∣nesse: It hath many a worthy Moses and Ioshua, who make Peace and
preserue Quietnesse; Many a sincere Nathaniel, who seeketh Peace and followeth after Quietnesse: Yet there want not in euery Diuision, Hundred & Tithing, some turbulent Korahs, some seditious Shebaes, some furi∣ous Lamechs, some churlish Na∣bals, some oppressing Ahabs, who are enimies vnto Quietnesse. Wee praise God that our country is so quiet as it is, and doe daily wish vnto the encrease of Quietnesse. Which that it may be effected, it is required of you (Right Worshipfull) that you feare God and be men of courage, that you vse all diligence to cut off the occasi∣ons of variance, and to keepe the peo∣ple in all holy obedience. And for the rest it is required that they learne Pie∣ty, practise equity, doe iustly, and pre∣serue vnity. So shall wee haue a due respected Magistracy, a firme vnited communalty, and a most flourishing country, and the God of peace shall be
with vs, to multiply all peace and hap∣pinesse vnto vs. To whose blessed protection I leaue you, and and these my poore la∣bors to his blessing. 
Steepleashton, Iune, 20. 1615.

