



AS the case stan∣deth in cōmn∣cing of suits: so is it in publi∣shing bookes. The client tryeth his greatest friendes which will giue him countenaunce, and feeth the best lawier to plead his cause: euen so al autors present thē∣selues to suche, which for friendshippe will fauour their endeuour, & with knowledge can iudge of their profession.

Then the reason is plaine, the cause iust, the purpose neces∣sarie which hath mooued me to offer this my simple trauail vnto you, sith I haue often tryed your singular loue, and vnfained friendshippe. I hope you will accept this signe of my continuall remembrance, and seale of my thankful hart, not regarding the gift, but re∣specting my good will. Some peraduenture will thinke I seke praise of oher mens pai∣nes, as arrogant Batillus did boast of Virgils verses. For others haue framed, and fini∣shed this building, and I haue onely layde it ouer with newe colours. But when it shall be well weighed that it is a hard thing to translate authors, & more hard to compare manie

togeather, but most harde to picke and to cul out the most profitable thinges in them, I trust they will not detract frō my labour. This I professe, that my care in beginning, continuing, and ending tis worke hath beene for the be∣nefit of my countrie, not estee¦ming my paines, but hazar∣ding my credite. My desire is to furnish & profit a surgeon with the knowledg of the bo∣dy in mine anatomy and with manifolde and plaine practise in this book. Whether I haue attained the marke at which I aymed, or shot wide: I sub∣mit my selfe to the censure of the learned, and chiefly to your iudgement. For as you are well knowen to be skilfull in the varietie of tongues, and

endewed with all other good learning: so haue you soūded the depth of this art. The con¦sideration whereof hath much more pricked me forward to present this booke vnto you. For as it was due vnto you in regard of friendship: so it was most meete for you in respect of your knowledge. Lucilius would not haue his writinges reade neyther of the most ig∣noraunt no of h best lear∣ned, because the one sort v∣derstoode othing, he other more than himselfe. But I am cotnt not only to haue my ooke reade, but also vnder∣stoode and censured by the skilfull, beeing willing to heare where I haue erred, and readie to amende that which i amie. I knowe that

some mall-contentes will vn∣courteouslie entertaine mee not remembring that tho∣rough my sides they wounde others. Against these I re∣quest your assistaune, that your name abroade, and your countenance in present place, may be a refuge to this poore infant when it shall wander from vnder the fathers wings and want the protection of other friendes. The father of light, from whom all good giftes and graces proceede guide you in his feare, in∣crease you in knowledge, in∣flame your zeale, keepe yo in constancie (and all other Patrons of good learning) to his glorie, the good of the common wealth, the encou∣raging of the godly, the dis∣couraging

of he wicked, and your owne euerlasting com∣ort. Fare you well the xxvij. of October from mine house in Siluer streete.

