



REuerend Sir: Albeit I am conscious to my selfe of my inability to answer the opi∣nion your loue long since hath conceiued of some fa∣culty in me for improuements of a Scholler: yet cannot Salomons word, being represented now to my thought (Stultus reputabitur sapiens si ta∣cuerit) dishearten me from imparting such of my meditations vnto you, as some of them a good while since, and some more lately I had written downe, to satisfie (if I might) some scru∣pulous
consciences, touching the lawfull and con∣uenient vse of the gesture of Kneeling in the Acte of receiuing the holy Eucharist. About the signe of the Crosse in or after the other Sacrament, I had filled many sheetes of paper, before I could reade much of the more accurate writings of other men in that argument, and being loth according to the old Adage, to make that all onely my Cipresse tree: I vndertook vpon earnest request of a friend (more profitable I hope to the Church in his labours, then I can be) to shew the vanity of one who gloriously boasts in print, to make proofe; that the controuerted ceremonies are defended by no other arguments, then are vsed by Papists, and which by elder Pro∣testants haue bene long since answered. Betweene his second (though Senior Ignoto to me) and my selfe, the same was drawne so oft in writing con and pro, that yet I am not ashamed to make it ap∣peare to any vpon what termes I left him. Then an occasion was offered mee to answer some Quaeres about kneeling, and afterwardes more closely to ioyne issue for repelling all the Obiections which I haue obserued in reading, and which for the most part haue bin vrged in conferring with mee. My
arguments and answers such as they be, I must pro∣fesse that I can get no reply to them: yet I doe not perceiue, that any one formerly opposite is willing to yeeld himselfe perswaded by them. And for this cause partly I present & submit them to your reue∣rend censure, whether contempt, or some more lear∣ning wermeetest to be set against them. Partly, for that I am slow in extemporary speech, and so as is nothing likely to purchase an opinion of more iudg∣ment or vnderstanding in me: therefore I had ra∣ther let my pen run as you see, then inter Vocales et reales amicos, to be still realiter a mute. I gratulate vnfeinedly your dignity, and no lesse the comfort of your owne soule, and esteeme in Gods Church, by your learned and godly labours publi∣shed: my desire is to adhere to you still in all serui∣ces of loue, and that with ingenuity: neither soli∣citing nor expecting any thing else, but your fa∣uour and encouragements, as formerly you haue vouchsafed me. The God of heauen grant vnto you many comfortable yeares to help to support his truth with Sions peace, and them that stand for both. So I rest. Ian. 1. 1619.

