

WHen the Lord in a vi∣sion would shew to the Prophet Ezechiel the destruction of the Citie Ierusa∣lem,
he is brought in by the same Prophet speaking thus vnto one of his Agents herein; Goe through the midst of the Ci∣tie,
Ezech. 9.4. euen through the midst of Ierusalem, and set a marke vpon the foreheads of them that mourne, and crie for all the abominations that bee done in the middest thereof. Doubtlesse many such mourners are there in our Ierusalem, whose teares are put in Gods bottle, and for whose sake the Lord yet spares this our Israel: the Lord encrease the number of them. For (God knoweth) we had need call one an other to mourning, and take vp continuall lamentation: for who seeth not how rotten ripe the sins of this land are,
Amos 5.16. and how deep all estates of the same are setled vpon the lees of their transgressions?
And who can chuse but feare that there is a day of wrath,
Zephan. 1.15. of trouble and heauines, of woe and horror neere approching? For mine own part, what deepe impression the meditatiō hereof maketh in mine heart, he knoweth which know∣eth the secrets of all mens hearts. One of my priuat contemplations which I haue communed with my owne heart in silence,
Psal. 4.4. I heere make publique, by communica∣ting them to you and others: To you especially, because I know you to be one of the mourners in Sion, as hauing had experience of your zeale to Gods house, loue to his word, and hatred to the common corruptions euer since you came to be partaker of the vnworthie labours of my ministry. The Lord encrease that good worke which long since he hath begun in you.
This little Enchiridion, if you please, you may binde vp in the volume of your daily meditatiōs. Thus to mourne, is neither hurt∣full to our selues, nor offensiue to our Church. We may be merrie in the Lord, and yet without light∣nes; sad and heauie in heart for our own sins and the corruptions of our times, & yet without dum∣pishnes. If we forget Ierusalem, let our right hand forget to play;
Psal. 137.5.6. if we remember not the peace of this our Sion, let our tongue cleaue to the roofe of our mouth, yea if wee pre∣ferre not Ierusalem to all our mirth.

