


NEither my Affection, nor Am∣bition, could consult happi∣lyer for my Booke; then to make it partner with me in condition even to live Both, by the same Patrones. The livelyhood I by you enjoy; I value at a double Benefice▪ for being conferred by the free, and cheerefull, and unexpected, undeserved consent;
 of so many, and so approved Iudgements: my Credit also hath received a Preferment. Your liberall minds, (as free and royall as your Foundation) endure no other Simony, then the Thankfull Acknowledgements of your Beneficia∣ries: which to make tender of, in the most publike and hearty manner of expression; is the Instructions wherewith This is addressed to you. Honor it, (I beseech you), with your Livery: as you have the Author, with your Li∣ving. And if the excellently learned Society of Eaton Colledge, shall vouchsafe a second Li∣cence to my Booke: having one Fold more, then Ajax Buckler had; I shall well hope, it will be full Censure proofe. Quickly will eve∣ry Peruser understand, how able each of you is, to examine both my Reasons and Authori∣ties: and that I durst not enscribe any thing unto you; but what were Iustifiable. Vnder your Patronage, therefore; the Readers may be confident: that they are not abused. By you, then, shall they receive advantage, as well as the Author.
To my Patrones, am I bound to give ac∣count; both of my Purpose, and my Title. that from you, the Readers may understand me.
 My Intention is, to stirre up the Times to doe that: which by the Sermon they may per∣ceive; the best men have done thus.
My Title pretends to Apostolicall. for upon the Doctrine and Examples of the Apostles; is the Mortification founded, which I here preach for. Had I fetcht it from the Austeri∣ties of the Prophets: it might, perhaps, have beene put off for Iewish. Had I derived it no higher then the Primitives: it might (so pre∣judicate are some mens Iudgemens) have beene censured for superstitious. Therefore have I entitled it to the Apostles: who both revived the Mortifications of the Rechabites and the Prophets: and recommended them unto the Primitives. What-ever examples might also have beene produced, from the Essens or the Cynicks (which by many Rea∣dings, I could have enlarged) must yet also have resolved, into mortification Apostolicall. for 'twas the Apostles which did perfect, and (if I may so say) which did also Christen; that severe Philosophy. The lives of the holy Pri∣mitives, being the practicallest Expositors, of the Apostles: from them have I deduced the frequentest of my examples. This I can as∣sure,
 that this same selfe denying, world-deny∣ing way of mortifying: was not, in those Ages, censured to be Popery. of which had this mortification any tack or relish: both my Iudgement and affection, would be averse enough; from becomming Brokers for it. Most knowne it is, that the examples of those plot-lesse Mortifiers; brought uncredible ac∣cesses unto Christs Kingdome: and that in the most licentious Nations and Ages. And how highly God almightie expressed his be∣ing pleased with them: the many miracles and blessings, which by them he vouchsafed to his Church; are abundant witnesses. And these not storyed, in uncertaine Legends: for which of the Fathers, hath not written them with admiration? Ill luck should both they, and I encounter with, (and the Readers with worse) should their examples now onely be∣come unfruitfull. A more unhappinesse were it, for any to maligne them. which I am con∣fident none will doe, but the guiltie. Such, as maintaining too magnificent an opinion of their owne holinesse: shall like, PachomiusPalladius; in Histor. Lau∣siaca. in Ma∣cario. disciples, grumble at the more mortified Ma∣carius; for out-doing them in the austerities
 they professed. But the number of these, will be lesse, if this Doctrine takes.
My Intentions, (God knowes) are honest. and with the same diligence I have written, will I pray: that God would vouchsafe a bles∣sing to them. For the more hopefull attaining whereof, I most humbly intreat the joy∣ning of your zealous prayers: ô you beloved of God. Vnto whose highest patronage, I hear∣tily commend you all: my most honored Patrones. Resting
From your Patronage, and my Parish, of Saint Albans Woodstreet London. Iune 8. 1637.

