



MAy it please you Syr, thys once more to beare with my rudenes, in presenting vnto your viewe, an other slender conceite, of my simple capacity: wherin although I am not able to bring you anie thing, which is meete to detaine you from your more serious mat∣ters: yet vppon my knowledge of your former courtesy & your fauourable countenaunce towardes all enterprises of Lear∣ning, I dare make bold to craue your accustomed patience, in turning ouer some of these fewe leaues, which I shall account a greater recompence, then the wryting thereof may deserue. The firme hope of your wonted gentlenes, not any good ly∣king of myne owne labour, made me thus presumptuously to craue your worships patronage for my poore booke. A pretty

aunswere is reported by some to be made by Apelles to King Alexander, who (in disport) taking vp one of his pensilles to drawe a line, & asking the Paynters iudgment of his draught, It is doone (quoth Apelles) like a King: meaning indeede it was drawen as he pleased, but was nothing lesse then good workmanshippe. My selfe in like sort, taking vppon me, to make a draught of English Poetry, and requesting your wor∣shyps censure of the same, you wyll perhaps gyue me thys ver∣dict, It was doone like a Scholler, meaning, as I could, but indeede more like to a learner, then one through grounded in Poeticall workmanship.
Alexander in drawing his lyne, leaned sometime too hard, otherwhyle too soft, as neuer hauing beene apprentice to the Arte: I in drawing this Poeticall discourse, make it some where to straight (leauing out the cheefe colloures and orna∣ments of Poetry) in an other place to wyde (stuffing in peeces little pertinent to true Poetry) as one neuer acquainted wyth the learned Muses. VVhat then? as he being a king, myght meddle in what Scyence him listed, though therein hee had no skyll: so I beeing a learner, wyll trye my cunning in some parts of Learning, though neuer so simple.
Nowe, as for my saucie pressing vppon your expected fauor in crauing your iudgment, I beseech you let me make thys ex∣cuse: that whereas true Gentilitie did neuer withdrawe her louing affection from louely Lady Learning, so I am perswa∣ded, that your worshyppe cannot chuse, but continue your wonted fauourable benignitie towardes all the indeuourers to learning, of which corporation I doo indeede professe my selfe one sillie member.
For sith the wryters of all ages, haue sought as an vndoub∣ted Bulwarke and stedfast sauegarde the patronage of Nobili∣tye, (a shielde as sure as can be to learning) wherin to shrowde

and safelye place their seuerall inuentions: why should not I seeke some harbour for my poore trauell to reste and staye vppon, beeing of it selfe vnable to shyft the carping cauilles and byting scornes of lewde controllers?
And in trueth, where myght I rather choose a sure de∣fence and readye refuge for the same, then where I see per∣fecte Gentilitye, and noblenesse of minde, to be faste lyncked with excellencie of learning and affable courtesye? Moreo∣uer, adde thys to the ende of myne excuse: that I sende it into your sight, not as anie wyttie peece of worke that may delight you: but being a sleight somewhat compyled for re∣creation, in the intermyssions of my daylie businesse, euen thys Summer Eueninges) as a token of that earnest and vn∣quenchable desyre I haue to shewe my selfe duetifull and wel∣wylling towardes you. VVherevnto I am continually enfla∣med more and more, when I consider eyther your fauoura∣ble freendshyppe vsed towardes my selfe, or your gentle coun∣tenaunce shewed to my simple trauelles. The one I haue tryed in that homely translation I presented vnto you: the other I finde true in your curteous putting to my trust, and dooing me so great honesty and credite, with the charge of these toward young Gentlemen your sonnes.
To which pregnant ympes of right excellent hope, I would I were able, or you myght haue occasion to make triall of my louing minde: who shoulde well perceyue my selfe to remayne vnto them a faythfull and trusty Achates, euen so farre as my wealth my woe, my power or perrill, my penne or witte, my health or lyfe may serue to serche myne ability.
Huge heapes of wordes I myght pyle together to trouble you wythall: eyther of my selfe or of my dooinges, (as some doo) or of your worshyppes commendable vertues (as the moste doo) But I purposely chuse rather to let passe the sprea∣ding

of that worthy fame which you haue euer deserued, then to runne in suspicion of fawning flattery which I euer abhor∣red.
Therefore once againe crauing your gentle pardon, and patience in your ouerlooking thys rude E∣pistle: and wyshing more happinesse then my penne can expresse to you and your whole retinewe, I rest.

