


I Receiued no sooner the report that your booke was readie for the printer, but I per∣ceiued some priuily repined. I hope you regard not their words, but continue your grounded purpose. You know that enuie lyeth always at ver∣tues gate, and treadeth on her heeles when shee goeth abroad. For as the deafe cannot discern the sweetnesse of musick: so the ignoraunt cannot looke into the excellencie of knowledge. Mar∣uail not if they say, there are ouer many books. For either they can not read, or at least vnderstand none. They neuer tasted Latin, and if some of them haue tipped their tongues with French, and sipped thereon as the dogges do on Nilus, then they blase abroad their skil with Hppias. I doubt not (if learning had leaned vpon the

fauour and fostering of these good Patrons) but all the artes had beene long since starued, and buried: and the poore widowe had beene the best surgeon. A fi∣sher in Thecu dreamed he had taken a golden fish, and therefore he would nowe liue at ease, and cease from labour: so these fooles feede themselues in their vaine fantasies, but when they shall once awake they will harken vn∣to Plato, who disdained not so long to be a scholer, as he desired to be wiser. I would not haue you vouchsafe to remēber these men, which thinke with madde Aiax in Sophcles, that fooles haue the fai∣rest liues. Surely they deserue pi∣tie because they are simple, but stripes, because they are wilfull. An other sort there is which hath more learning, but as little iudge∣ment and honestie For they will whippe Homer as did Zilus, and sift great Hppocas as did Thessa∣lus. They haue sucked Lamiahs brests in Plutarch which when she sae spinning at home layde her

eyes by her in a basen, but put them into her head whē she went abroade. They are as kinde as the cuckowe, which deuoureth the birde that brought her vppe, and with the male spider (as Aristotle sayth) they eate the pray, but take no paines. You haue felt these gnawing at your booke of vlcers, and deuising to cut your anato∣my as small as mootes. Of this sort I say little, because all others say much. For as they haue stric∣ken all writers on the head, so they haue by them againe beene wounded to the heart. This fruite I am sure springeth frō their con∣tinuall carping. They weaken the painefull hande, they make dull the sharpe witt, they poyson the well affected, they sowe con∣tention amongst the learned, they seduce the simple. They haue the tongue of the horsleech, the eye of the cockatrice the talents of the tyger. Not vnlike are they to Procustes the curst hoast, whose guestes were euer too long or too short for his beddes: so to these

men all writers seeme too new or too old, too short or too long, too plaine or too obscure, too simple or too curious. They are alway aguish, for euery thing is bitter to their tast. And deadly sicke of a desperate consumption, for the more they eate, the leaner they are. If you tarie these mens lea∣sure and liking, your papers, will perhaps be eaten with rattes and mothes. Whereas you feare the censure and iudgment of the lear∣ned you do well, if thereby you be made warie in your woorke not weary of your enterprise. For they hauing seasoned their cen∣sure with equitie, and their iudg∣ment with discretion, will passe ouer small faults with silence, and reproue greater slips with mode∣stie It is not vnknowen to them, that the wisest mā hath his wants, and the soundest writer his errors. Then you are not to feare the ig∣noraunt, which cannot iudge of your labours, nor to regarde the enuious, which will not like your endeuour, neither to shrinke for

the godly & vertuous, which will accept your good wil. Behold all hinderāces are plucked vp by the roots: wherfore thē do you doubt wherfore do you quaile? what do you require? what do you seeke? If ther be no peple almost so bar∣barous, no nation so rude, which hath not all arts in their own pro∣per language. If Hippocrates, Galene, AEi, Actuarius, Mschion, accoun∣ted the fathers of this art, haue written in their mother tongue, you haue a large and lawful pre∣sident to warrant this enterprise. And if mine affection (which I owe and beare vnto you) blind me not, I think no such book, in this kind, hath bin published in our tongue. For as zesis picturing Heln, drew the liniaments frō fiue of the fairest virgins of Coton: so this booke is borrowed from the richest treasuries of the best Phi∣sitions and Surgions. Moreouer whereas the parts of surgery haue beene rent in sunder, and scatte∣red abrod, now they are cunning∣ly compiled, and shortly compri∣sed

in one litle volume. But aboue all, you shall honor this profession in the eies of all such who hereto∣fore haue accounted it base and vile For they shal plainly see that it requireth not only a lyons hart, a Ladies hande, a haukes eye (as the cōmon prouerbe is) but more especially good reading, sounde iudgement, diligent obseruation, wise experience. The gray heares of this art shal wyn reuerēce with the reader, the necessity procure loue the variety of things bring delight, the plainesse cause atten∣tion the certainety get credit, the continuance deserue estimation. The matter hath carried me fur∣ther then I purposed, and yet I should haue written more if this bearer had not so sodainly depar∣ted. But of other things at an o∣ther time. Fare you well (good M. Banester) and when you can conueniently, write againe vnto me. The last of Iuly.

