




All Grace, and Glorie; Peace, and Pietie; Prosperitie, and Felicitie, be multiplied and continued, here, and euer.
VOVCHSAFE (Great Graci∣ous, and Glori∣ous PRINCES) amongst the ma∣ny rare Pageants, and rich Pre∣sents
from Court, Citie, and Vniuersitie, exhibited to your Excellencies, as tokens of the common reioycing in your Roy∣all Nuptials, To accept this poore Countrie present of a Punie Di∣uine,
To Artaxerxes. who like the Persian Pea∣sant, is desirous to offer some∣what (though it be but a hand∣full of water) amongst the rest. In the memorable day of your Highnesse happy espousals, when all true-hearted Christians, like Zerubbabels followers,
Zechar. 4.7. with ioyfull acclamations did crie Grace, Grace vnto it; I consi∣dered with my selfe, like the Le∣pers of Samaria,
2. King 7.9. that I should not doe well to hold my peace, for it was a day of good tidings. Therefore to the glorie of God and honour of the
day, I addressed my speech vnto my wonted Audience, as, in my iudgment, was best befitting the present occasions. What my Tongue did then aduenture to deliuer, my Pen shortly after was bold to scrible ouer, and now be∣ing brought from the Pulpit into the Presse, it presumeth to presse into the Court, and to seeke San∣ctuarie vnder your Highnesse Protection.
Pardon (most excellent Prin∣ces) this my presumptuous bold∣nesse, in aspiring to offer this so raw a subiect to such Royalleies. It hath nothing in it (with all humilitie I acknowledge it) wor∣thie of vulgar aspect, much lesse of gratious acceptance; My sole Apologie is, that in the vpright∣nesse of mine heart, out of the ex∣cesse
of mine inward ioy, to the manifestation of my most hum∣ble obseruance towards your sa∣cred Excellencies, I haue aduen∣tured to cast my poore mite into your abounding Treasurie: Se∣ing with mine eyes, and hearing with mine eares the triumphant acclamations, generall congratu∣lations, and religious supplicati∣ons of the people, amongst whom I liue, at the admiration, and for the benediction of your Princely marriage, or euer I was aware,
Cant. 6.12. my soule made mee like the Chariots of Amminadab. And albeit when I had thus set forth my selfe, I perceiued that I was vnmatchably preuented in the vnmatchably preuented in the same course, which I be∣ganne to runne, by a reuerend, learned, and religious Cushi,
who had set forth before me,
D. Willets Trea∣tise of Salomons mariage, dedi∣cated to the same high and mightie Prin∣cesse. Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 2. and by many degrees had ouer-run me, yet I was of Ahimaaz for∣ward spirit, desirous (though like Ascanius, non passibus aequis) to runne after. And al∣beit a wise and well-experienced Ioab, might haue said vnto me, Wherefore wilt thou runne,
2. Sam. 18. v. 21.22, 23. my Sonne, seeing that thou hast no tidings readie? yet (such is the headlong rashnesse of youthfull disposition) I setled my selfe vpon Ahimaaz resolution: But howsoeuer, let mee run. Wherein, as I can hope for no greater acceptance of such simple seruice, then what was spoken to Ahimaaz,
Vers. 30. Turne a-side, stand by; yet I humbly craue of your gratious Excellencies, this fauou∣rable censure, that like Ahi∣maaz,
I may be deemed a well∣meaning man;
Vers. 27. My will was good, though great my weake∣nesse. The Prince of the Kings of the earth, out of the riches of his mercie multiply his graces vpon your Princely Persons; That your Highnesse (right wor∣thie Prince) may be as Abra∣ham,
Gen. 17.4.5. a Father of many Nati∣ons, as Isaac a Father of mighty Kings, as Iacob, your seede may be in many waters:
Num. 24.7. The eternall God multiply vpon you the zeale of Dauid;
Psal. 119.139. 1. King. 4.34. The wisdome of Sa∣lomon; the courage of Ioshua; The honour of Iosiah;
Iosh. 1.6. The ri∣ches of Hezekiah;
2. Chron. 35.25. The strength of Beniah;
2. Chron. 32.27. and the long life of Methuselah;
2. Sam. 23.20. that you may so farre in all Princely and He∣roicall vertues surpasse all the
Gen. 5.27.
former, both Electorall and Im∣periall Fredericks, as you haue exceeded them in the happy lot of your blessed marriage choise. And as for your Highnesse (most religious, excellent, and admired Princesse) the King of heauen make your Royall person like Sarah a Mother of many Kings;
Gen. 17.16. like Rebecka a Mother of thousands of millions, whose seede may possesse the Gates of their enemies;
Gen. 24.60. like Rahel and Leah,
Ruth. 4.11. which two did build vp the house of Israel; The God of Peace encrease more and more in your sacred soule the deuotion of Hannah,
1. Sam. 2.1. 2. Chron. 34.22. the holinesse of Hul∣da,
1. Sam. 25.33. Hest. 4.15. the wisedome of Abigail, the charitie of Hester, the ma∣gnanimitie of Iudith,
Iudith. 2. Iudg. 3. and the dignitie of Deborah; yea the
Lord double vpon your Grace, the long life, admired vertue, and admirable prosperity of that now triumphant Saint our late renowned Queene Elizabeth, whose sweet name your High∣nesse beareth. The blessing of the most blessed GOD rest and re∣maine with you both, to the glo∣rie of his most holy name, the comfort of our dread Soueraigne your Royall Father, the solace of our gratious Queene your happy Mother, to the reioycing of our peerelesse Prince Charles your hopefull Brother, to the honor of Britannie, and ornament of Germanie, yea to the generall happinesse of all those that loue and feare the LORD IESVS,
whose name be blessed now and for euer.

