

RIght Worshipful, 
I shuld thinke my selfe excee∣ding happie, if whiles the skilfull Bezaleels and Aho∣liabs
Exod. 36.1.
of our age doe adorne and beautifie the Sanctuarie of the Lord with their curious, rich, and worthie workes, I might but bring one sticke or stone to the building of the same. But how great soeuer my desire is, I am too well priuie to my selfe, quàm sit mihi curta supellex, how vn∣sufficient all my sufficiencie is. Whiles others lanch foorth into the deepe, it is fittest for me to sit and mend my nettes at home:
Matth. 4.21. Luke 21.1. whiles the rich men cast their gifts (as well they may) into the treasurie, I haue but two mites (yea those but small ones also) to cast in: One I haue alreadie cast into the treasurie, and it hath found acceptance; the other I am now to cast in, (it is all that I haue) God grant it may obtaine the like fauourable countenance.
A smaller mite there could not be, for I cannot call it a Work, nor a Treatise, nor so much as words, for they are but Thoughts, euen those my meditating thoughts, which (according to Dauids counsell) at leisure times,
Psal. 4.4. I haue communed with mine own heart in silence. That I haue cōmumi∣cated them abroad and made thē publike, it was neither for any ex∣cellencie I deemed in them, nor for any vaine glorie I hunt after by the publishing of them. If any man otherwise cōceiue of me and it, this is mine apologie,
Rom. 14.4. I stand or fall to mine owne master. I was induced to the publishing of them, partly because I haue perceiued by experiēce how much people are now delighted with this kinde of writings, and how great good hath been receiued
from them, and partly that I might leaue some publike testi∣monie of my thankfull minde to such as in ample manner had de∣serued the same at my hands. Wherein giue mee leaue (right Worshipfull) in the first place to salute you both, by presenting vn∣to you the first of these my selected flowers: your kind acceptance of my other simple treatise dedica∣ted to another, maketh mee pre∣sume of your fauour vnto this which is dedicated to your selues. I present you here with a taste of Happinesse, an Enchiridion to make you more and more in loue with godlines,
Heb. 6.5. that you may taste how sweete the Lord is, and ha∣uing tasted of that sweetnes, may repose therein your chiefest plea∣sures. Had I the tongue of men and Angels, I could not speake
one halfe of that which they who taste hereof enioy. Take a taste then of this little taste which here I haue prouided for you: expect not in it conceited cookerie, I seek to profit rather then to please; if you come with an appetite vnto it, though it want the sauourie sauce of eloquēce, yet will it rellish well enough vnto you. The Lord God euermore prepare your hearts to receiue it, and grant a good dige∣stion to you in it.

