

MAdame,
Master Richard Greenham. Master Ioseph Hall. they which haue proceeded Gra∣duats in the Art of Meditation, doe commend the infi∣nite obiects in the Theater of the world, as the most fit subiect of Meditation. Reason sheweth this their position to be most true: for where may wee haue either more
varietie of matter for our minds to worke vpon, or more readie meanes to set the same on worke, then in the great varietie of the worlds wonders, which are conti∣nually obuious to our eyes? The whole world is a table, wherein is portraited foorth vnto vs infinit wonders in the seuerall natures of all the creatures, not for vs to view alone, but with a fruitfull vse to meditate vpon. All the creatures are made for Man, and shall not we be led by the prospect of them to wonder at the merci∣full respect God hath to so poore a creature as Man? There is none of all the creatures but rea∣deth vs a lecture in this common schoole, and shall we be such idle truants, as to learne nothing of so many masters? The workes of the Lord are great,
Psal. 111.2. and
ought to bee sought out of them that loue him:
Vers 4. He hath made his wonderfull workes to be had in remembrance. O that wee vsing the creatures so continually as we do, would make better vse of them then vsuallie we doe; I haue here set downe a little paterne of meditation in this kinde; had some skilfull A∣pelles hand been in it, to draw and polish the lines of it, it might peraduenture bin worth the per∣asall. Now in this colour as it is, though I my selfe be silent in cra∣uing pardon for it, or excusing it, yet you might iustly say vnto me as Apelles said to an vnskilfull Painter, Though thou hadst said nothing, yet may I easily gesse by the workmanshippe that it was done in haste. As it is, (Madam) I make bold to
consecrate this little Treatise to your name, the rather, for that (besides all other respects of duty which doe oblige me vnto your Ladiship) you vouchsafed such kinde acceptance vnto the first fruits of my labors in this kinde, which vnder your name was sent to see the world: In hope of the like acceptation of these my poore endeuours, and fauourable par∣don of my boldnesse, I commend this meditation following to your better meditations, and your selfe with all your holy medita∣tions to the Almigh∣ties good bles∣sing.

