



SIR, it is long since you did first looke on mee with your helpfull fauour. I haue for twentie yeeres af∣ter those times stood below in the common place of the Church: yet sometimes I haue beene drawne vp aboue the obscure shades of the Countrie, and by forceable intreaty, risen higher then is ordinary for such an heauy lumpe of refuse mettall.Pistillo retu∣sius. And being in London at a festiuall triumph, I was a partner of the common ioy for the ioyfull prosperity of our most hopefull Prince of Walles. Then and there I was pressed forth (aere amicabili) with a friendly motion, to be∣come an actor in that great assembly. I must confesse. I was willing on my way, which made my labour more light, so that I hallowed that holy Sab∣bath with two Sermons, as a paire of Pigeons, or two yong Turtles.Luk. 2.24. I did wish richer offerings to bestow in such a solemne sacrifice of Vowes, but I brought my best, to testifie for my heart. What though I am vnworthy of respect, as the least Bell in the Temple (imo ne tintinnabuli in fi∣bria vestimenti Araonici) not worth a little Bell vpon the skirt of Aa∣rons Ephod.Exo. 28.33.34 Yet I thought it my duty without any intreaty to ring my Bells that day in the holy place. When I had comfortably ended my daies worke, it came to passe beyond my thoughts, that one of my auditors and I exchanged thoughts. He as it seemed a francke Popeling, of his chari∣ty offered me his thought, that I was too officious. I for a present reward bestowed my thought on him, that I was excusable, as the man which being requested to goe a mile with his friend would goe twaine.Matth. 5.41 I was wil∣ling to be warned and to take better heede to double diligence, abundans
cautela non notet. Heere I resolued neuer to perach vp to the presse, a∣mong the learned sages and holy writers:Vitiligatores tantum exti∣mescens. therefore did I seriously resist all louing importunities intising mee to venture loose coppies of this and other my weake labours into the hands of my chiefe friends.
My reason for my deniall was, quia nescit vox missa reuerti: a man may shoot foorth two arrowes with more ease and speede, then fetch one backe againe. Yet now at the length I haue yeelded my selfe, and presu∣med to send my first fruit to my first friend liuing, in your acceptance to liue or dy. I must confesse my desire is that you would accept it as a wel∣come present of my humble thanks () and thinke my thanks as hearty as I meant them. You haue heard the cause wherefore I stayed these twins at home so long after their birth, with a centurie of their naked brothers.Agrippo steri∣or. I doe willingly acknowledge mine owne pouerty, by which I thought my selfe vnable to cloth them with decent apparel. And I was ielous of their rude education, least I should heare worse of them abroad then at home. If I haue beene too slow, I craue pardon with my feare to be too hastie.Ne incalciatus in montes. Let it be said of me, that I am too like to many of Adams kindred and mine owne: that I haue learned more good rules then I can obserue, as that of Columella: Matura satio saepe decipit, sera semper mala est. Yet I rest in hope of your loue which I haue chief∣lie loued. I might adde some expert extenuation of this seruice which spark of Art may better become my betters. Namque si Scotista Rheto∣ricetur, he is easily espied, vt Graculus inter musas. It is inough for me in this illustrous age of high Science, and rich Art, Craesi pecuniae te∣runcium addere. Therefore to preuent many needlesse words, in these few I yeeld my selfe to owe so much vnto you, that I must remaine your debtor for euer, and

