



MOst Reuerend Eather, and my verie honourable good Lord; I will not say it was my happe, but the proui∣dence of God, and my happinesse, to preach this Sermon, before my dread
 Soueraigne, in his summer pro∣gresse, at Saint Albans: where, be∣side, that I was an eare-witnesse of the wisdome of Salomon, and a diuine Oracle, speaking through his gracious lippes: I did also experi∣ment it to bee true of his highnesse, which was once vttered concerning a Romane Emperour: Qui apud te audent dicere, magnitudinem tuam ignorant: qui nonaudent, bumanitatem. Senec. controu. lib. 7. contr. 8. He that dares speake before him, knowes not his greatnesse, and hee that dares not speake before him, knowes not his goodnesse. For such is his Maiestie, in Attention, and Attention in Maiestie, as is a∣ble to make the most Audacious Ti∣merous, and the most Timerous Con∣fident. What I then deliuered, by rea∣son of so high a presence, so great an Audience, & so ample a Church, hath left such an Eccho behind it, as hath caused many to heare the sound of it, that heard not the voyce it selfe: many to report diuersly of it,
 and some earnestly to desire Copies of the whole Sermon. To satisfie all, and to preuent my often trouble, and others miss-reporting, who either bet∣ter it, or worse it in the rehearsall; I am bold at last to commit it to the Presse, & to present it to your Grace, vnder the banner of whose patronage and encouragement, as of a most wor∣thie and eminent Captaine in the Israell of God, I am prest, although an vnworthie Souldier of Christ Iesus, to tender the vtmost of my seruice toward the benefit of his Church. Now as this Sermon, at the first hearing thereof, receaued a most fauourable preiudgement, and acceptance, from the deepe wisdome of highest Authoritie, for the worke sake, to the which his Maiesties reli∣gious disposition was seltly-inclinable: so my trust is, that your Graces great Iudgement and learning, for a zeale to the same worke, will kindly accept
 of it (how small a peece soeuer,) bea∣ring the stampe of his Maiesties ap∣probation, and let it passe for Currant vnder your Graces countenance, with more facile examination, and easie Censure. Touching the Royall pur∣pose and promise of his Maiestie, whereby the repaire of the decated Church of Saint Albans, is made possible, & (I trust) feazable, least any should 2. Cor. 12. 6. thinke or speake more then they see, or heare in me, I cannot say that I was either Author, or any principall meanes or Mouer in it, except with the flye vpon the Coach, I should crie Ecce quantum pulueris excito: behold what a dust I made, when I did nothing to the purpose. For who am I first; or in∣deed any man; that I, or they, should be able to moue the deepe thoughts of a Kings heart; which by a tran∣scedent peculiar, is in Prou. 21. 1. manu Dei, in the hand of God, to turne as
 the riuers of water, and to manage as it pleaseth him? Nay further, there can be neither action, or Inten∣tion, will, power, or purpose in any man, that is good (how little soeuer:) but it is to be reputed as Omne quod habemus bonum gu∣stue est do∣mini. Hie∣ron: ad Cte∣sipbont. gustus Domini, a gust of the Lords good∣nesse, a touch of his finger, whose prouidence is the first Mouer, whose Grace is the Center, and whose glo∣rie the Circumference, betweene which the lines of our liues, and best intendments, when they goe right and streight, are leuelled. And tou∣ching the meanes or mediating of the businesse, I can claime little, o∣thers much more, and yet none verie much: for such was the religious . propension of his Maiesties roy∣all heart, readily prepared, (as our sweete Sauiour sitting at Iacobs well) to doe good, that the humble petition of his louing subiects in St. Albans, was but the discouerie of a
 desperate sore, to a merciful Phisitian, who was more ready to cure, then they to complaine. Indeed I confesse, that the way being made for me to preach at that time, by that My Lord of Lihf. & Co∣uent. Right Reuerēd Father then attending his Maiestie, (being also an especiall fauorite of the motion) I did as a blunt whetstone perhaps a little sharpen the razor, which had edge enough of it selfe, and like a Horat: Athletaesuis incitatoribus sunt fortiorcs, & tamen ma∣nes deblor, vt pugnet forti∣or. Hieron. weake stander by, onely yeeld an applause and acclamation to my Soueraigne, as a worthie Sed ne{que} ille exbortatione a∣liorum indige∣bat, non magus sanè quam ge∣nerosissimi pu∣giles, putrorum acclamatione. Bapl Athanas. Champi∣on running on so good a race, with so faire a course. Since which time how cōstantly his maiesty hath proceeded, how well the whole busines was spee∣ded & prepared for the publike dis∣patch by that worthy Knight & Sr Christoph. Parkins. Mr. of the Requests, formerly acquainted with Church-building, how many honorable fauorites haue seconded the proceedings, it were ouer lōg to ex∣presse. But I cannot pretermit the for∣wardnes
 of that right honorable Earl of Northhampton (so much ador∣ning high Nobilitie, with exquisite learning, to whom our Church and state is boūd for a Monumēt in wri∣ting of eternall Memorie against all traiterous Romanists) who hath rich∣ly approued & improued his godly de∣sire and former promise toward the repaire of that Church, with a free∣will beneuolence, and first-fruit of∣fering of double weight according to the Sycle of the sanctuarie, as a luc∣kie hansell and example to others, gra∣ced as the best gifts are, with speede and maturitie: so much is S. Albans beholding to his honor, for a short time of his youthfull yeeres there im∣ploied. And what worthie assistance your Grace hath afforded toward the effectuall accomplishment of his Ma∣iesties pleasure, not onely in this busi∣nesse, but in that Religious beneuo∣lence of late for Prague in Bohemia,
 all true Christian hearts doe see and acknowledge to the glorie of God, cheerefully contributing to such seue∣rall good workes, and blessing God for the holie desires of his Maiestie to∣wards the Gospell at home and a∣broad; as also for your Grace, whose vigilancie standing Centinell upon the highest watch-tower of the Church under God and his Maie∣stic is ready to apprehend all occasions for the Aduancement of Religion, Charitie, and Learning. Neither are the Religious purposes of his Maiestie, thus happily springing up in his royall heart, so carefully strea∣med out by your Graces Expedition, but they are answerably speeded and passed along through the Land, by the most vigilant Prelates. Especially that My Lord B. of Lon∣don. Right Reuerend Father, our most worthie Diocesan, Caelestis tuba. Am∣bros. that hea∣uenly trumpet, Eloquen∣tiae Regia: Greg: de Basilio. and Kingly Pa∣lace of diuine Eloquence, hath not
 onely excited many our brethren to the diligent prensation of the Cha∣rities of the better sort, as a prospe∣rous winde breathing forwardnes into them (that I may use his ho∣nors owne words) according to a trust reposed in his Lordshippe, but also doth continue a most honorable care, and cautelous respect to the faithfull employment of all Collecti∣ons made for that worke of Saint Albans, so happily begun, without a∣nierubs or interruptions, saue onely such as may serue to make the pro∣ceedings more circumspect and sound. Yet if this worke so well becomming the Magnificence of a Christian King, Letters patents. (as his Maiestie acknowledgeth) and commended by your Grace for a Christian, Religi∣ous, an holy and acceptable work, should have no opposites, it were seeing the reedifying of Nehe∣miah 4. 1. the Temple had many enemies: and our
 age is not without manie, impugning the good successe of such-like buil∣dings. The Anabaptist cannot but distast the erecting of Churches, & houses of Gods publike seruice, because he standeth upon his owne pri∣uate Inspiration, and neuer aspireth higher then a conuenticle at the most. The Libertine who liues at large, cannot but esteeme the Church a Prison, the publike Ministery a Sessiōs of Enquirie, where he suppo∣seth himselfe arraigned, and condem∣ned, and therefore the graues and Tombes are as the shadow of death, occasioning feare and horror before he comes to execution. The Popish Recusant, who had wont to make more of the Cage, then of the byrd, and more of a materiall Church, then the spirituall Exerci∣ses, is out of loue with our houses of prayer, because therein their Masse-Priests, and strange lan∣guage
 is silenced, their Images de∣faced, their Iewish sacrifices, Idola∣trous Inuocations, and Adorati∣ons are abandoned. And aboue all these, the Couetous polititian, cannot chuse but be a Church-ene∣mie, whose Mammon is his God, whose priuate estate is his Idoll, to whom onely hee buildes his house as a Temple, and intends all his ser∣uice: as Ieremie saith of such like: Ierem. 22. 14. he buildes himselfe a wide house and large Chambers, hee makes himselfe faire windowes, and see∣ling with Cedar, and paints it with vermilion: but if he see anie thing bestowed on Gods house, or on the Ministry, he crieth with the officious purse-bearer in the Gos∣pell, Mark. 14. 4. Quorsum haec perditio? To what end is this wast? A lesse liuing would suffice, a lighter Cloke would serue Iupiter, and a lesse Church would serue the people to
 assemble in. Of this sort are they, that by farre-fetched Trenches closely carried, doe seeke to under∣mine and ouerthrow all, as Eusebius de vita cō∣stant. lib. 1. c. 46. Licinius in the dayes of Constantine, under∣afaire pretence (that the ayre with∣out the Citie was more wholsome then the aire within the Citie where the Churches stood) would haue drawne the people to serue God in the fields, that hee might haue Cogitans euerionem Ecclesia∣rs, ibid. demolished the Churches in the Citie. Neither are they prote∣stants onely, as the Romanists would haue it, that would pull downe Chur∣ches: but the Couetous polititian, whatsoeuer maske of Religion he putteth on, like an Atheist, and, worse then an heathen, aymeth at the spoile of his God, if it may serue for his pri∣uate Emolument. For who were they that first incroached upon Church∣liuings, and drew away the tythes and maintenance from the secular
 priests, and so by consequence from the Ministerie, under the name of good men, and Religious, but Monkes and Fryars? It was Cardi∣nall Wolsey, who by authoritie from the Pope, to satisfie his Coue∣tous or Ambitious desires, or both, did pull downe sortie Monaste∣ries, and ransacked them of their wealth. And as by credible testimo∣nie, I haue heard it often related, the same Cardinall being sometimes Abbot of the Monasterie of Saint Albans, sent to the Prior and Co∣uent there, that they should conuey up their plate to London, such as be∣ing massiue and old, was growne out of fashion, under colour that he would take order for the new refor∣ming & refyning of that unfashiona∣ble siluer, which being sent vp accor∣dingly in carts, did so wast in the mel∣ting belike that vestigia nulla retror∣sū, there came nothing backe againe
 that euer was heard of. And what∣socuer face the Papists doe make of Church building, yet it seemes they preferre pollicy before their owne de∣uotion, for every where, saith a late Obseruant Trauailer in the lowe Countries, Mr. Ioseph Hall: dec. 1. ep. 5. Churches fall, and Ie∣suites Colledges rise; so that not onely the furie of warre hath ruina∣ted Churches, but euen superstition for aduantage, doth that among st them, which couetousnesse would faine doe among st vs, robbe God of his houses, and seruice, of his tithes and maintenance. Wherefore the great Cardinall, who accuseth vs, to haue Angelis & hominibus cae∣lum tenentibus omnia & illis delita & no∣bis salutaria Monumenta eripuerunt. Bellar. In pre∣tat: de lib. Ar∣bit. bereaued both Saints and Angels in heauen of all Monu∣ments due to them, or heathfull to vs, may a little turne his com∣plaint vpon his owne friends and sectaries, and tell them of the spoile and dilapidations occasioned in sa∣cred and holie things, by their owne
 couetous and ambitious pollicie. But to leaue their Ruines, and come to our present building: I finde seuerall obiections made, a little hindering the forwardnesse of wel-disposed people toward a worke so good. 1 Some doubt least their should be superstition in building up Churches, seeing (as they say) wee finde neither the name of Church in Scripture, nor the buil∣ding of Churches commanded. 2. O∣thers finde fault that an Abby Church should be reedified. 3. Some are offen∣ded with the greatnesse of it, because a lesse would serue the people. 4. And some againe suspect the faithfull im∣ployment of the money collected. To all which, seeing I haue already excee∣deed the length of an Epistle, under your Graces Reformation, I am bold to answer. 1. The first, who doubt superstition, and finde no Scripture for Churches, I would desire to re∣member that, euen the Name Church
 (in our tongue signifying Church, Ky∣rith, Dom: the Lords house Angl. Scott: Ger: Gods house,) is read for the  1. Cor. 11. 18. place of Christian Assemblies, in St. Paul to the Corinthians: and the Com∣maundement for building and pre∣paring such places of prayer is inclu∣ded in that generall rule: 1. Cor. 14 26. let all things be done to edifying;  1. Cor. 14. 40. let all things bee done honestly and by order: which must needes respect the comlines of the place, if possible to be obtained. And therefore when some at the first erecting of comelie and spacious houses of prayer, in the time of Constantine cauilled at their greatnesse and decencie, because in perscution they were more homely, the Gangren Councell made a Ca∣non against such as should affirme, that the houses of God ought to bee bare and Contemptibi∣les. Hieron: Zanch. in prec. 4. contemptible; for they may be simple and bare upon occasion and necessitie, but they ought not to be so, when there is peace, opportunitie
 and authoritie to illustrate them. And whereas it is obiected, that there is no expresse and particular charge in Scripture for Churches: no more there was for Hospinian: de orig. Templ. ca. 4. Synagogues in the law, yet they were builded, and fre∣quented, by the seruants of God, and euen by Luk. 4. 15. 16. Iohn. 18. 20. Christ Iesus himselfe, and the As 15. 21. Apostles, and they were worthily commended, who did build Luk. 7. 5. Synagogues, when the destruction of them was much lamented. But to free our selues from suspition of any Superstitious conceipt, of materiall Churches, we are not so inamored of them, as the Iewes were, or the Papists are, who suppose an inherent Ps. 74. 8. holinesse in their stones and orna∣ments, that the building of them is meritorious to saluation, expiating murders committed; and that pri∣uate prayers are Bellarm: de cultu sactorum lib 3. cap. 9. bettered, when they are vttered within a consecrated Circle. we know that Christ Iesus is
 our true and Chrisius ve∣rum & catho∣licuon Dei Tem∣plum. Wol∣sius in 2. Reg. 12. ex Tertull. Catholike Temple, which sanctifieth our prayers when they are made in him onely; and that through him our bodies and soules, are made Temples of the holy Ghost, and wheresoeuer our Supplications are offered in spirit and truth, they are alike acceptable to God. For what Quid sancti∣talis hi lapi∣des habere po∣turrant. par: in dedic. Eccl. sanctitie can there bee in stones saith Saint Bernard, much like a Protestant, but that Sancta sunt anima propter inhabitantem spiritum Dei in nobis, sancta sunt corpora propter ani∣mas: sacta est c∣tiam propter Corpora do∣mus. ibid. the place is made holy by the bodies of Saints there assembled, the bodies are sanctified by the soules, and the soules by the holie Ghost dwel∣ling in them. Neither is Church∣building a worke of it selfe acceptable to God, but as it is referred to his seruice, as it is used for the Assem∣blies of holie men to Hospinian: de orig: Tem∣plor. 6. 6. praise God, to pray to him, to heare his word, to administer the sacraments, and to nourish faith and charitie a∣mongst Gods people. There∣fore
 Saint Hierome reprooues the vanitie of great buildings, when men haue no care of other dueties and vertues; when they Ad Demetri∣ad: ad Nepoli∣an: Ministro∣rum nulla Ele∣ctra. ib. adorne their Churches, and make no good choice of Ministers, nor re∣gard the seruice of God how sleightly that is performed. And Saint Chry∣sostome commendeth building of churches upon this condition, that if a man doe it with other graces and vertues, it Cum cateris bonis addita∣mentum est be∣nis, sine cate∣ris bonis passio est sacularis gloria. clnys. oper. imperf. in Matt. 23. is an addition to his other vertues and goodnesse: but if hee haue care to builde Churches without other good workes, it is but a passion ofsecu∣lar and vaine gloris. And when they are built with greatest state, if the word of God bee silenced in them, his seruice and sacraments pol∣luted, then with Saint Halirie; we affirme that the Montes mihi & lacus & rceres & 10. ragines tutrores sunt. Hil contr. Auxent. Church of God is not bound to faire buildings: but mountaines and lakes, prisons and
 gulphes, are safer then they. Yet with the truth, and right seruice of God, which by his great blessing we enioy, they are excellent Orna∣ments, holie to the Lord, and Ta∣bernacles amiable to all faithfull hearts: and with St. Austin, we say, that Hodie malibo∣mines qui couā∣tur si sieri pos∣sit, non esseecclesias vbiillis praedicen∣tur praecepta des, noune & ipsū Christium occiderens, si in terra viuen∣tium inueni∣rent? August. ser. 220. de tempore. such as would haue no Chur∣ches where the Ordinances of God should be preached, it is like∣lie they would euen kill Christ, if they found him againe vpon the earth. 2. Secondly whereas some object that the purpose is to reedifie an Abby Church, as though it were some needelesse forlorne Monument of superstition; It is farre other∣wise: for this Church was reserued from the spoile, purged from the abu∣ses, and purchased by the inhabitants, for a parish Church, so created and consecrated to Gods diuine seruice, in the time of Reformation, and by the Authoritie of King Edward the
 sixt of blessed memorie, and so hath continued, with the frequent resort of many passengers, and a great people inhabiting the towne. 3. But a lesse Church (will some say) would serue the people. It is true, but thē who shold haue the parings & the shreds? Arbore deie∣cta qutuis colli∣git ligna. Whē a Trce fals, cuerie one gathereth vp the stickes. Great things by that meanes come to little. When his Maie∣stie was pleased to prouide for the re∣paire of this Church, hee knew well that a lesse coate would haue ser∣ued the little boy in Xenophon, Xenoph. Cyro∣pad. then his owne, and the greater would haue fitted the bigger; that a lesse Church would haue serued the peo∣ple perhaps for fitnesse, but yet his high wisdome deemed the preserua∣tion of a propertie to bee best Iustice: and would haue Suum cuique, eue∣ry one, his owne, were it great or lit∣tle: supposing it to be et pessimi ex∣emplinec sui saeculi, a bad example Traian: apud Plinium,
 vnbecomming his peaceable and religious gouernement, to suf∣fer the limme-poling of such ve∣nerable Monuments, especially be∣ing so necessarie for the recourse of his louing subiects, and bea∣ring witnesse of the first entrance of the Christian faith into this Realme, by the blood and Mar∣tyrdome of Saint Alban, being a true storie, although some∣thing disfigured by the fabulous Additions of the superstitious. And lastly, touching the feare and suspition of the faithfull Employ∣ment of the money collected, Al∣though I cannot say as the Pro∣phet, in the time of King Ie∣hoas so peremptorilie, there neede no account bee taken of the men, to whome the money is deliuered for the workemen, because they deale faithfully: 2 King. 12. 15. yet it is certaine, that hitherto, they
 haue proceeded verie carefully, prouided their materials verie fru∣gallie, and forwarded the worke verie industriouslie, not desiring to ingrosse the mony, further then the necessitie of the worke requi∣reth, and still keeping a booke of accompts, therein ready to exhi∣bite all their proceedings, to the examination and censure of those worthie Knights adioyning, or to any other well-willer to this busi∣nesse, who shall request it. For the continuance of which faithfull di∣ligence, considering howe strong a motiue the vigilant eye, and a∣bundant caution of the Right Re∣uerend Father, my Lord Bi∣shoppe of London will bee to the under-takers, I dare promise all good dealing; yet if standers-by may doe any good, both I and o∣thers haue vowed to bee inquisi∣tiue into the businesse, and (fin∣ding
 anie miscarriage,) to in∣forme and clamour against the faul∣ters. But I rest in hope of a bet∣ter Office, wherein I may rather commend their doings, then finde fault. In the meane time, ceasing to bee further troublesome to your Grace, I humbly take my leaue, neuer ceasing to pray, as dutie bindeth mee, for the prosperous & victorious reigne of our dread So∣ueraigne, and his royall issue, that the weakest in his house may bee like Dauid, and his house a sure house, like Dauids, euen like Gods house, and as an Angell of the Lord, before the people: And for your Grace, that after manie successe-full labours in your pasto∣rall Charge, by ruling and tea∣ching the Church of God, ac∣companied in this life, inward∣lie with comfort of conscience, outwardlie with double honour,
 you may receiue an incorrupti∣ble Crowne of righteousnesse and glorie, from that great Shepheard of the Sheepe, Christ le∣sus, our Lord and Sa∣uiour, Amen.

