



Right Worshipfull:
GOod Wine needes no Bush, a good face no band: but grose Wine a Bush to vent it: a course face a band to grace it. Were my lines polite they neede lesse Patronage, but such they are that they want tutelage. The old Romans had their tutelar▪ gods,
 but they by them rob'd God of his honour: be you to be a tute∣lar god, Ps. I haue sayd you are Gods. (you may be hereafter a titular god) so God shall haue prayse by this my labour. When Adam beheld his owne naked∣nesse, he ran to a Bush to hide his follies: Now the World must view my many weaknesses, I come to you to shelter my fraylties. But Adam, and I differ in this: He like a Wood-cocke thrust his bill in a Bush, to be kept close from the eyes of Eter∣nity: I would be shrowded vnder your bowes to be kept dry from the stormes of Calumny. Adam might thinke that God would follow him: the Diuell I thinke (for detractors are Diuels) will follow me: if he do, your gene∣rous name on the front of this Pamphlet shall be a generall ex∣orcisme to coniure this spirit, ad∣iuring
 him to more then Pytha∣gorian silence. But silence: why should I looke for any such in∣dulgence, as that these nifles and trifles should purchase your Countenance? Beleeue it Sir, the fault is yours, because you haue beene benevolent, therfore am I growne impudent: re∣mooue that cause, the effect cea∣seth, if you restrayne your cur∣tesie, I shall refrayne mine inso¦lency; but your worship (as yet) hath not done the one, therefore am I presumptuous in not doing the other.

This flaming Bush I do duote to you,
Wherein the Churches portraitre to view,
I haue displayd, adorn'd with roote, and bole
The Barke, the branches, leaues too of the soule,
With soueraigne fruits. A second task remaines
Which God assisting doth require my paines:
Namely to shew how this our Bush with fi
Doth flame▪ as alwayes subiect to the ire
Of Diuell, Pharoh, Turke, and mitred Pope
Which would with faggot quite burne vp her

And then a third, wherein shall be disrid
How this our Bush that in the fire is tride,
Doth finde her Planter so benigne and kinde,
That she consum'd is not, but more refinde.

This the Platforme of this my building, it is no great edifice, onely three bayes: whereof the first you haue here in facto, alrea∣dy reade; the other are in fieri, perhaps in squaring if the work∣man be not discouraged: How∣euer this is vented, the good∣will of him that dwelt in the Bush, dwell with you: he that was figured by the Ram in the Bush, protect you, while I that haue laboured and beaten the Bush will serue you

