



Right Honourable,
SALOMON the wisest King, writ three several books, and in those three severall books he taketh three se∣verall Epithetes and Stiles unto himselfe: in the Pro∣verbes he calleth himselfe Salomon the sonne of David, King of Jsrael; In Ecclesiastes, he calleth himselfe the Preacher, sonne of David, King of Ierusalem; And in the Canticles, he calleth himselfe Salomon onely. In the first booke he giveth directions to
 all men, and as a King hee speaketh to all; in his second booke, he as a Preacher spea∣keth to Jerusalem below here, he speaketh not to all here as King of Jsrael; In his third booke, he speaketh onely to the Church above. So the Lord when hee giveth his Lawes, he giveth some Lawes to all, as King of the Nations, and some Lawes he giveth to the Jewes, his peculiar people, and the Gos∣pel he giveth as to the Church above; the law which he gave to all Nations, was the law of Nature manifested to Adam before the fall, and this Law was repeated againe to Noah in seven Preceps, as not to commit Idolatry, Fornication, to abstaine from things strang∣led,Act. 15.20. Levit. 17.10. and from blood; those Lawes were morall Precepts, I will set my face against him that eateth blood, this is not the cere∣moniall part of the Law, but in detestation of cruelty it is forbidden to take a member from a living creature, and to eate the blood while the life is in it; but to eat things strang∣led, or cold blood, was but the ceremoniall part; thirdly, the Lord renued this same Law againe upon Mount Sinai, to all Nations, but he added to it his judiciall, and ceremoniall Lawes, as peculiar to his people the Jewes, and in this respect it is called their Law,Ioh. 8.17. is it
 not written in your Law, because this Law was directed to them after a speciall manner, and therefore they are called his people, hee came to his owne,Ioh. 1.11. and his owne knew him not. These ceremoniall Lawes did not binde other people, as they did the Jewes; therefore when Jonah came and preached to the Ninevites, he spake nothing to them of the ceremonies of the Law; so when Daniel spake to Nebuchadnezzar, he spake nothing of the ceremoniall Law. So when Elisha spake to Naaman the Syrian, he spake not a word of this Law to him. So when the Prophets spake to Tyrus, Sydon, and to the Nations round about, they spake nothing of those ceremo∣nies to them, these belonged only to the Jewes, they are forbidden to eate things strangled, or a beast that dyed of it selfe, but yet the Gen∣tiles might eate of such.Deut. 24.2. And here we may marke a difference betwixt circumcision and the rest of the ceremonies of the Law, for many that were not of the Church of the Jewes used circumcision, as Herodotus Strabo, and Epiphanius testifie, for circumcision was given to Abraham and his posterity, not onely to Abrahams posterity who lived within the Church, but to those also who came of Jsmael, Esau, Keturah, &c. and howsoever
 those did circumcise rather by imitation, than for conscience, yet it was a law given to all Abrahams posteritie; but the rest of the cere∣monies did no wayes binde them; but the morall part of this Law bindeth them all. It was a great mercy of God, that when man had fallen frō him, that he giveth him a Law againe,Hos. 11.6. and doth not suffer him to wander as a Lambe in a large pasture, and like an un∣tamed Heifer which knoweth not the Yoke, and that one should not devour another,Habak. 1.15. as the Fishes of the Sea, but giveth him a Law to hedge him in, and keepe him within the bounds. Man hath a threefold life, his spiri∣tuall life, his naturall life, and his civill life; the Lord in his Law had regard to all these sorts of lives; first, his spirituall life, which is called the life of God,Eph. 4.18. and hee taketh order with this in the first Table; Secondly, his naturall life, that he be not killed, nor his blood shed; and thirdly, for his civill life, that he may have the meanes to live comfor∣tably,Marc. 5.26. which is called a mans life, in the Scrip∣ture. Other Lawes of Men are but concer∣ning circumstances, and they are but the ap∣plication of this Law, to this or that particu∣lar people, and they stand not unmoveable, as this Law of God doth, but upon occasions
 they may be altered and changed; there∣fore the Persians that made their Lawes which could not be changed, incroached too farre upon the LORD and his privi∣ledges, and all other Lawes are to be recti∣fied by this Law, and the farther that they goe from this, they are the more imperfect; Men set the Dyall by the Sunne, and their Watch by the Dyall, The Dyall commeth neerer to the Sunne than the Watch; so when men reduce their Lawes to this Law, then they set the Dyall to the Sunne, but when they rectifie their Lawes by any o∣ther Law, they set but their Watch to their Dyall. Many have written already upon those Commandements, to whom we are much beholden, and the Hebrewes Proverbe is true of them, nisi ipsi elevassent lapidem non inventa fuisset sub eo haec Margarita, but yet there is something left to be cleared, and as there was oyle enough so long as there were Vessels in the Widdowes house; So there shall be matter enough for all those who are to intreate of this Subject: and my in∣tention especially is here to cleare these things out of the phrase of the Originall Tongues, and the customes of the people of God, and although there be things handled already
 by others set downe here, yet when yee find these things, count them not as vrticam inter myrtos, but as myrta inter myrtos, for both come from him, who is the Authour of Truth.
It may please your Lordship to accept of these my Travels, as a signification of the honourable respect I carry to your Lordship, whose vertue and learning hath brought you to this eminent place. Laertius writeth of one Crates, that bestowed his gifts very foo∣lishly; for he gave to his Flatterer tenne Ta∣lents, to his Whore a Talent, to his Cooke ten Mnas, to his Physitian a Drachme, to his Philosopher three halfe pennies, to his Coun∣sellor fumum, smoake; foolish men value the basest things at the highest rate, and the high∣est things at the basest rate; But I know, my Lord, that you weigh things in the balance of the Sanctuary, and thinke more of those hea∣venly things, than of those base and sinfull pleasures, which the world are so much ta∣ken up with; The grace of God be with your Lordship, and keepe and preserve you for ever.

