



RIGHT HONORABLE,
WHen the Israelites were tra∣velling through the wil∣dernesse to Canaan, the Lord gave them three guides, Mo∣ses, Aaron, and Miriam; of those three guides Miriam was the meanest; she was a woman,Mica. 6.4. the in∣firmer sexe, and she murmured first against Moses, therefore she was stricken with lepro∣sie: Aaron was their second guide, but in somethings hee proved a blinde guide to them, for hee set up a golden calfe before them: Moses was their third guide, but hee could not bring them to Canaan, it was
 Joshua who brought them to their rest. So there are three guides which direct men in this world; first corrupt nature, or natura non suscitata, that is, nature not wakened or stirred up by learning; this guide is but like unto Mi∣riam, and oftentimes it murmureth against Moses, the law of God. The second guide is ratio suscitata, reason wakned and stirred up, and somewhat refined by learning and hu∣maine sciences; yet it is but a blinde guide, and oftentimes it murmureth, and repineth a∣gainst Moses as well as leprous Miriam. The third guide which directeth men here; is the law of God, which sheweth us the way to Canaan and our eternall rest. Moses guid∣ed the Iewes three manner of wayes; first by the ceremonies; secondly by the Iudiciall; and thirdly by the Morall precepts. The cere∣monies did dilineate to them Christ to come, and as a painter when hee is about to paint a man, first hee draweth some lines and draughts, and this is called ; Secondly hee addeth the blacke colours, and this is cal∣led ; and lastly the vive colours, and this is called ; then we discerne plain∣ly whom hee did delineate before: wee take up at the first that hee is painting a man, but
 wee cannot discerne in particular who it is: The first lineaments (as it were) of Christ were drawne to the Patriarches; then Moses added the blacke colours in the ceremonies; but when Christ came in the flesh, then hee was seene in his vive colours: and as the fa∣thers say, to the Patriarches hee was in spicis, to the Iewes in farina, sed nobis in pane; that is, the Patriarches saw him as it were, but in the eare of the corne, the Iewes saw him in the meale, but we see him in the bread set upon the table before us. The second way how Moses directed them, was by his judiciall lawes, guiding them in their policie and commonwealth, where for hardnesse of their hearts, hee permitted many things to them; but their chiefe and principall guide was the Morall law, which is that guide of guides. David when hee breaketh out in commenda∣tion of this law, hee spendeth the whole 119 psalme in praise of it, and there is not one verse in it except the 122 which hath not some epithet of the law of God in it, as his judgements, his words, his lawes, his testi∣monies, his commandements, his covenant, his statutes, and his precepts &c. It may be said, perhaps, that this law seemeth not to be
 such a guide, seing it is called a killing letter, and the ministration of death: but this is only accidentall to it that it is so called,2. Cor. 3.6.7. when it meeteth with the perverse and corrupt nature of unregenerate man, then it is the ministra∣tion of death and a killing letter; but when it meeeteth with a regenerate man, then it be∣cometh a guide unto him; therefore the fa∣thers say well, Datur duris in flagellum, profici∣entibus in paedagogiam, & perfectioribus in solati∣um; the law is a whip and a scourge to the stubborne and disobedient, it is a tutor to those who begin to learne new obedience, but it becometh a comforter and a coun∣seller to those who have made any pro∣gresse in holinesse,Psal. 18.26. and as God himselfe with the pure hee will shew himselfe pure; and with the froward hee will shew himselfe froward, so doth this law shew it selfe a hard and a rigorous Taskmaster to the wicked. This law being such a perfect guide, and so necessary in the Church, what monsters are these Antinomians who set themselves against the law, and will banish it out of the Church, whereas Christ came not to destroy the law but to fulfill it Christ and Moses were in the mountaine together:Matt. 5.17. Matt. 17.3. so the Church sang the
 song of Moses, and the song of the lambe,Revel. 15.3. the Law and the Gospell must not be separa∣ted. Those who would remove and banish the law out of the Church doe as theeves do when they come to robbe and steale; the first thing that that they doe in the house, they put out the light that they may steale the more securely: So carnall and profane men, that they may sinne the more securely and with greater liberty, doe labour to a∣bolish the law out of the Church; but the Lord never lighted his candle, that it should be put under a bushell. The Lord hath set men in three ranks in the world: some in the meanest and basest condition of life, some in a middle condition of life, and some in a higher condition: this law is ne∣cessary for all sorts and conditions of men: for to those who live in the lowest and basest condition it is necessary to uphold them, they have not beene unfitly compared to a fishers net, which hath lead to make it sinke, and corke to make it swimme; so poverty and crosses hold the poore man down and make him to sinke, then the comfortable promises of the law of God make him to swimme and hold up his head: so this law is necessary for
 those who are in a middle state, it is like the tongue of the ballance to those to make the scales stand right, but it is most of all necessa∣ry to those who stand in high places, for high places, as David saith, are slippery places. In Israel when a man built a new house he was commanded to make a battlement about it,Deut. 22.8. lest men should fall over and indanger them∣selves; so when men are in eminent places, the best battlement to save them is the law of God. I know, my Honorable, and very good Lord, when yee remember Gods goodnesse towards you who hath advanced you to such an high place, and continued you in such favour with your Prince so long, that ye will be thankfull to your God, and that ye will not forget to make this law your philactery,Prov. 3.3. and put it like a chain about your necke. The reasons, my Honorable Lord, that have mo∣ved me to seeke your Lordships patrocinie to this worke, are first, because I know ye love the truth. Secondly, because ye have so faith∣fully and honourably carried your selfe often in those weighty imployments which his Majesty and the State have committed to you. And thirdly, because you carry your selfe so respectively to all sorts of men at home: these
 motives encouraged mee to take the bold∣nesse to present this treatise to your Lord∣ship. And although I be not able to bring a lambe, the sacrifice of the richer sort, yet if I bring but two turtle doves,Levit. 5.7. I know your Lordship will accept of it, because a man is debter for that which he hath,2. Cor. 8.12. and not for that which he hath not. The grace of God be with your Lordship, and preserve you blamelesse in soule and body untill the com∣ming of the Lord in glory.

