


Most Honorable and my very good Lord,
IOB the wisest and the Iob. 28. 7. richest Prince in the East, searching where wise∣dome might be found, he could not finde the place thereof; He could not finde it in the land of the living; the depth saith, it is not with me; and the Sea saith, it is not with me; the Vultures eye hath not seene it for all his sharpe sight; and for the worth of it, it cannot be got∣ten for Gold, neyther can Silver be weighed for the price thereof; then hee subjoyneth, God understandeth the way thereof, and he
 knoweth the place thereof: for he looketh to the ends of the earth, and seeth under the whole heaven. The wisedome which Job speaketh of here, is Gods secret wisedome in his workes of nature, which none of the world, although they were as sharpe sighted as the Eagle, can understand. Now if man be so ignorant in Gods workes of nature, much more is he in the workes of grace; and he may say as Agur sayd, when he considered Ithiel and Vcal (Iesus Christ the wisedome of the Father) surely I am more brutish Pro. 30. 2, then any man, and have not the understan∣ding of a man. David when he lookt upon the heavens, the workes of Gods hands, he Psal. 19. 1. sayd; The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament showeth his handy worke: then he telleth how they declare his glory and what sort of Preachers they be, The vniversality of their preaching, their line is gone out through all the earth even, to the ends of the world; Then their diligence in preaching, both day and night; Lastly, how plainely they preach, n all languages. Yet this their preaching is but an indistinct sort of preaching in respect of the preaching of the Gospel. We may see some of his wise∣dome
 in the heavens which are his handy worke: but nothing of the hid treasure and riches hid up in Iesus Christ, can we learne by this preaching. But Paul speaking of the preaching of the Gospel by the Apostles, saith, their sound went out into all the earth, and their words into the ends of the world; hee Rom. 10. 18. changeth their line into their sound. There is a great difference betwixt these two sorts of preaching, a naughty person winketh with his eyes, he speaketh with his feete, and teach∣eth with his fingers, but hee speaketh more Pro. 6. 13. distinctly with his tongue: So the Lord preacheth indistinctly (as it were) by his worke; but by the sound of his Gospel, hee preacheth clearely and plainely. Where shall we finde these treasures of grace and hid wise∣dome? this treasure is to bee found in his Law; therefore the Iewes call it desiderium mundi, and it is more to be desired, than Gold yea than most fine Gold. The Angels them∣selves Psal. 19. 10. with stretched out neckes, desire to looke into this mysterie; even as the Cheru∣bims with stretched out neckes looked downe to the propitiatorie. If the Angels 1 Pet. 1. 12. have such a desire to behold this wisedome, much more should man have a desire to
 search into these mysteries: for he tooke not upon him the nature of Angels, but he tooke Heb. 2. 16. on him the seede of Abraham: Happie is that man that findeth this wisedome, and the man that getteth understanding, this wise∣dome is onely to be found in the Law of the Pro. 3. 13. Lord. I have indevoured (my Noble Lord) in this treatise to make some small path for the younger sort to this wisedome; And I have abstained from these questions which doe more hurt than good to the Church. Plutarch maketh mention of a number of Su∣ters to one maid, but they fell to such conten∣tion amongst themselves, that they did teare her all in peeces: too many disputations in effect doe rent the truth, & nimium altercando amittitur veritas: the best way to come by the knowledge of the truth, is, to bee con∣versant in the Text it selfe, and to bee ac∣quainted with the phrase of the holy Ghost speaking in his owne language. Let it not seeme strange to any, that I seeming a stran∣ger should take this boldnesse to offer these my labours to your Lordship. I cannot acknowledge such strangenesse: for wee have one Lord, one faith, one baptisme, one Ephe. 4. 13. God and Father of us all; We live all under
 one gratious King, and there is small or no Heb. 13. 13. difference in our language: we differ not as the Act. 2. Cananites and these of Ashdod, yee say sibboleth and we say shibboleth, yee speake the Dialect of Matth. 26. 73. Jerusalem, and we the Dialect of Galilee, small or no difference. But the reason wherefore I made choise of your honour, is the good re∣port which I heare of you every where, your name smelleth as the wine of Lebanon, yee have put on righteousnesse as a garment, yee are eyes to the blind and feete to the lame: Hos. 14. 7. the blessing of him that is ready to perish Iob 29. 14. commeth upon you, and you have caused the widowes heart to sing for joy I here were many notable and excellent parts in Iob, he despised not the counsell of his man-servant or of his maid-servant, here was his humi∣lity: yet when he sate in judgement, what grace and majestie had he? they gave eare and kept silence at his counsell; the young men saw him and hid themselves, and the aged arose and stood up before him; he was hospitable to the poore, he did not eate his Iob. 30. 1. morsels alone, he was pitifull to the father∣lesse and to the widdow, and he disdained the wicked, that he would not set them with the dogges of his flocke: happy is that Land
 where there are such judges. Another cause which moved me to grace this worke with your Lordships name, is the desire I have, that others may reade it the more willingly for their owne profit, and even as a faire entrie leadeth the beholder to looke more particu∣larly upon every part of the building: so the beholder of this worke set out under the pro∣tection of your honours vertue, will the more earnestly affect the perusing of the same, in confidence that so much worth as is eminent in your Lordship would hinder any mans boldnesse to present unto you a trifle. And for conclusion, when Jacob was to send his sonne Benjamin into Aegypt, he prayed that Gen. 42. 14. God Almighty would give him favour before the man: So my earnest prayer to God is, that this treatise may first be acceptable to the Church of God, and then unto your Lord∣ship: And so I have obtained that which I desire. The grace of God be with your Lord∣ship, and make that the long continuance in the charge which his Majestie most worthi∣ly hath layd upon you, may produce long happinesse to this Common wealth.

