




IT is an ancient saying of a diuine Phi∣losopher, that Common-wealths are then happie and fortunate, when either the Wise and Learned, called Philosophers, gouerne them, or their Gouernours and Rulers be Philosophers; that is, louers of Wisedome and Learning. Some, to make resemblance of this Truth, doe Emblematize it in the Picture of Pallas, (whom the Anti∣quitie deemed the Goddsse of Wisedome) portraicted with a Sheild or Target: by which they would giue vs to vnderstand, that the whole World, figured vnder the forme of that Sheild, is gouerned of Wisedome; and by meanes hereof, a Prince to be inuested, as it were, into a possession of two Kingdoms; the one, of Saturne, which is Contemplation: The other of Iupiter, which is Action. And to make this to appeare more plaine, the Astronomer is bold to say, That no great matters for weighti∣nesse, nor firme for perpetuitie, can be done by any, but in whom Saturne the Philosopher, and Iupiter the King, are vnited,
 (like Hippocrates Twinnes) sympathizing in one, and the same person of a chiefe Gouernour, whom for that cause, they call most happie, as hauing the Dietie of Pallas (to vse their wordes) residing in his Brest; both to possesse Knowledge, and to carrie the Launce: For that Knowledge without Power and Might, profiteth few; and Power, without Knowledge and Wisedome, doth hurt many. This seemeth to haue been a receiued Truth of the Antiquitie: For, in this sense wee read, that the Kings or Rulers of former times were chosen such, as should both at home prouide for the aduauncing Vertue, and repressing Vice; And also repell Foreine forces from Inua∣sions; yea vpon occasions likewise, Lead an Armie abroad: shewing that in these two thinges, was necessarily comprized the very chiefe Office of Kinges and Rulers: The one to be per∣formed by good Lawes, and administring Iustice alwayes: The other, by Armes, and Martiall Cheualrie, as the times re∣quire: For this last, is extraordinarie, and in case it must be so: But that former is ordinarie and perpetually in vse, and not to be omitted. For this cause in those heroicall Times, all Kings were both Iudges, and Captaines of Warre, as sayth Aristotle This is manifested in the first Kings of the auncient Grecians, 1 Aeacus, 2 Minos, and 3 Rhodamanthus, who1. 2. 3. all three were called by no other name vsually, then by the name and title of Iudges; manifested likewse in those Epithets attri∣buted to Kings, by Homer, calling them, Shepheards of the people; to note a speciall care appropriated to them of Legall protection euery way, which also is the very same argument that the holy Ghost is pleased to vse in S. Paul, shewing the end for which Rulers and Kings are appoynted, euen that they by Gods fauour, faythfully executing their Office, the people vnder them may 1. Tim. 2. 2. lead a quiet, and a peaceable life in all godly∣nesse and honestie. And for specialtie the said Poet Homer celebrateth Agamemnon King and Generall of the Grecian Armie against Troy. And to speake out of Historie, we read in Herodotus, that Dioces among the Medes, was first made Iudge, and afterwards King: hauing appoynted to him a cor∣porall
 Guard, aswell for his owne safetie, as also to keepe in awe the Potent and Mightie, and to represse in them insolent Wronges against the weaker sort of inferiour note. Againe, the Lacedmonian Kinges, as in time of peace they ruled by the Sword of Iustice; So in the Field against their Enemie, they had an absolute Commaund, (though perhaps herein, some will say; by a speciall Commission from the Ephori, deliue∣red them enclosed in that round peece of Wood, called their Scy∣tale,) both for a good King, and a stout Warriour, by those two epitheted adiunctes defining him a fit Gouernour of his peo∣ple, aswlll for Warre, as for Peace. Neither the Romans, who succeeded the Grecians in the Empire, were herein wanting to themselues; for they also after their example, constituted Kings for Iustice sake, as Tullie sayth, by their Authoritie to be main∣tained among them for the common good. Now this name of King, hauing the stile of great State and Maiestie, (as being most eminent amongst men) was therefore so plausible to the Isra∣elites, and so liuely in their Eye, as that they thought themselues inferiour to the Ethniques, so long as they were without a Ruler by that Name; and therefore asked of Samuel a King, first to Iudge 1. Sam. 8. 5. 20 them only: But afterwards they would haue a King like other Nations, both to iudge them, and also to goe be∣fore them, and to fight their Battailes. And so they had a King by appoyntment from GOD, promised them before in Deuteronomie, Deut 17. 14. 15. if they should aske one when they were come into the land of Canaan, which he would giue them to possesse; For as then GOD was their sole and onely King; and being the King of Kings, was instead of all, and vouchsafing them alwayes his one presence, was still among them betweene the 1. Sam. 4. 4 Cherubims, fr whence the Lord answered, & gaue out Oracles in all weightie matters, by 1. Dreames 1. Sam. 28. 6 by  Vrim, or by his 3. Prophets; in this manner designeing Iudges for Peace, and appoynting Captaines for Warre extraordinarily, as Ioshua, Num. 27. 8. Iudah, Iudg. 1. 2. Othniel, Iudg. 3. 9. Deborah, Iudg. 4. 4. Ge∣dion, Iudg. 6. 14. &c. And so to Samuel, 1. Sam. 7. 15 who iudged Israel al the dayes of his life: And annoynted Saul  Sam. 10. 1. the first King to
 be the Gouernour of the Lords inheritance. But to goe on in the matter proposed, it appeareth by those former allegations of Testimonies and Examples, that Men at the first were made Rulers and Gouernours ouer people for a common defence to them both in Warre and Peace: and therefore wee may not thinke but they were qualified through Wisedome thereto, as hauing that Eye of the Learned, defined to be the Iudicious discreete Eye, clearely insighted in the precepts of true Policie; which said Eie, is framed & fashioned, as it were, first out of a wit  perspectiue, to inquire into the qualitie of State-affaires. Se∣condly,  out of a Iudgement deliberatiue, fitted by much ex∣perience to define and determine them: And lastly, out of a  Minde resolute and expedit for speedie execution accor∣dingly. For this Eye weighing, in the Balance of a Well in∣structed discretion, the differences of former Times passed, with the late Customes of our moderne Times, and now present in esse, both 1. abrogateth, 2. reformeth, and also 3. establisheth1. 2. 3. Lawes; prudently attemperating the reason and vse of them, to the distinct formes of Gouernment in seuerall; which by reason of Change in the manners of the People, must of necessitie admit also Change and alteration in themselues: and so in the sense of that Ciuill Law maxime, as thinges that happen a new, haue need of new reforming Remedies: Which none can be excogitated fitly, and set for good, without this iudicious Eye of the Learned; for which cause it hath been in very high esteeme alwayes among Kinges, Princes, and men of State, in that ranke for Wisedome remarkable. A matter therefore for ex∣cellencie not only in Confession deseruing approouement, but much more in Action (suffragating thereto) singulerly applauded; as is pregnantly related in Histories of former age. But what needs any recitall of forreine examples for testimonie of this truth. To write personall Commendations of liuing Princes, es∣pecially to themselues, may be held a verball Simonie; yet, Shall true prayses be smothered in silence, for feare of vniust blame? Onely I doe deprecat the suspition of Flatterie, and craue to be bold to vtter a true thought of a loyall Heart, and say, Your
 Highnes, ô most Noble, (worthely so tearmed) defender of the Fayth, (which indeed is the very true, auncient, Catho∣lique Fayth) beeing not onely Learned your selfe in all know∣ledges fitting (for Ornament) the stately personage of a Monar∣chicall Gouernour, (for this cause to be truely accompted a LIVING LIBRARIE, and a Walking Studie); But also singulerly affecting, and charily forstering the professors of Learning and good Artes, (in both these names a myrrour of Kings) doe make alone, without example, the asseueration of the former assertion good, in asmuch as thus ordering the Go∣uernment politique of your Realmes and Kingdomes by Wisedome through holesome Lawes, you haue setled and established them in a blessed Christian Peace and tranquili∣tie, beautifying, and beatifying, both Church and Common∣wealth thereby. This apparantly manifested to all your Sub∣iectes, (I meane Subiectes of the best note for true loyal∣tie to your Royall Scepter) who seeing, (and confessing also an acknowledgment of the same) doe rightly and willingly attri∣bute it to that iudiciously discreete Eye of Learning and Wisedome, spoken of before; and is in your Maiestie the better quick-sighted, and more clearely perspicuous, for that it hath receiued illumination from the Spirit of that Wisedome which Salomon calleth, The Wisdo 7. 26. Brightnesse of the euerla∣sting Light, and, The image of Gods goodnesse. In the vertue and power whereof, your Maiestie being alwayes guided, can at no time be deceiued in the course of your Gouernement; which as it is now in apparance, wilbe hereafter better made knowne in the publique good, being the chiefe end of a well setled State. For this Wisedome telleth Kinges and Prin∣ces, that they are appoynted Rulers ouer Men for Mens sake. And as by this, they are Lordes; so are they Tutors and Pro∣tectors of their People. O truely iust and most lawfully ruling Prince! who in this sublimious state of a preheminenced Soue∣raigntie, hath notwithstanding adioyned, and (as it were conser∣ted) reuerend Modestie to Princely Maiestie, desirous to be held and reputed of his Vassals rather Good for Clemencie,
 then Great for Power; a Father of his Contrie, much ore, then a Lord ouer Men: whom he knowing to be giuen him of God, for their speciall good and benefite, is not sedu∣ced by high thoughts of his stately▪ Dignitie, from executing the kind, and loue-meriting partes of that necessarie Charge committed to him from aboue, acknowledging with Adrian the Emperour, the Common-wealth to be the Wealth and Welfare of his People, and not his owne in proper. A true and plausible effect of Wisedome and Learning specified in that worthy saying mentioned before, and much celebrated in the writinges of the best learned Politiques of either Philoso∣phying Rulers, or Ruling Philosophers, making happie Common-wealthes by the vse thereof, and for it worth hath carried a long my Pen vnto this discourse, the rather because it hath a true conformitie with your Maiesties Royall deportment, in the whole course of your Highnesse Rule ouer vs with great correspondence. But this notwithstanding (though verie plau∣sible both in opinion and example.) Religion, in specialtie, is that, which first reduceth the Throane of a Prince into a forme of gouernment by wisdome; & afterwards raiseth and setleth it in an Eminent height of a most florishing state; For those Common-wealthes are in the Eye and speech of all men religiously wise, most firme, & permanent, in whose middest is seated the Temple of God, yea who themselues are in deed the very Temple of God; so as all Kings and Princes, which doe reigne with God, doe reigne most happely and best secured; as of your Maiestie is acknowledged to bee well vnderstood for a truth, euen at the first entrance and commencement of your Reigne ouer vs. For, (may it please your Grace my most gracious Soueraigne) to giue me leaue, I shall remember vntoThis Confe∣rence eld at Hampton Cout anu. 14. 1603. your Highnesse your owne words, making proofe thereof, in that Conference had with the Lords, Bishops, and others of the Clergie, about Church-matters when to declare your Prince∣lie meaning in calling that assemblie, you sayd, It was after the example of all Christian Princes, to take the first course for the establishing of the Church, both for Doc∣trine
 and Policie: Wherein your Highnes manifested thatSee  Lib. 1. pag. . religious Care, which is best fitting the Royall person of a Christian Prince, knowing, and doing to your Subiectes also thereby to know, that the maine Piller of a Politique State for happinesse, in permanencie and stabilitie in Religion; which cannot be setled, but by that true Wisedome whereof Salomon speaketh, calling it, The Wisd. 7. 25. Breath of the Power of God: For, if God Iob. 12. 18. looseth the Coller of Kinges, and girdeth their Loynes with a Girdle, as Iob speaketh, which as by interpretation out of Daniel, Dani. 2. 21. taketh away Kings, and setteth vp Kinges; it is out of question, that the Throane of Princes is the Throane of God; So acknowledged, and in words confessed of the Queene of Sheba, when she sayed to Salomon, 2. Chro. 9. 8. Blessed be the Lord thy God, which loued thee, to set thee on his Throane as King in stead of the Lord thy God. And this Throane, Dauid calleth the Throane 1. Chro. 28. 5 of the Kingdome of the Lord ouer Israel. And in a fit correspondence hereto, Salomō testifieth vnto God, that he made 2. Chrno. 1. 8. 9. him King ouer a great people, to reigne in his father Dauids stead, Therefore in the Prouerbs the Wisedome of God challengeth this power of Constituting Kings, to her selfe only, saying, By Prou. 8. 15 16. me Kings reigne, and by me Princes rule. This is that wisedome of God, which dwelleth with prudence, and findeth out knowledge, andver. 12. Counsell, euen the true knowledge of the King of Heauen; without which no King can well reigne, nor beare rule on Earth. In this sence speaketh Lactantius verie soundly to the purpose:Lib. 5. Instit. 8. Therefore doth all euill and mischiefe (saith hee) daylie encrease, lying heauy and weightie vpon man, because God the maker and gouernour of this world is forsaken, and wicked Religions professed against his true wor∣ship: For, All the wisedeme of man, (sayeth the same Au∣thor)See consisteth in this one thing: first, to know God; pag. 1. 2. 3, lati. Lib. 1. then to worship him: So, Wisedome preceading, and Re∣ligion attending, it must be, that true Worshiping of God, is a Consequent, to a Sound knowing him, as Hee is to be
 worshipped. Writing of this matter to your sacred per∣son, I beseech your Highnes, let mee vse here your owne wordsSee  pag. 1. 2. 3. Lattin. for proofe to be alleaged out of your owne Booke of the Institu∣tion of that most noble and heroicall Prince HENRIE, our late Prince of the best and greatest hopes.
In the beginning of which your said Booke, your selfe doth professe, None to be meete to gouerne a Christian religi∣ous Nation, who doth not (how great soeuer) from his heart, worship and reuerence the diuine Godhead. AndLib. 1. 6. in the Latin. proceeding further in this Argument, your Maiestie setteth downe Two degrees of this Worship from Mah to God: The one Inferiour, which ascendeth: The other Exteriour,1. 2. which descendeth. The former consisting in Prayer, and in Fayth towardes God: The latter, in Actions issuing from that Fountaine: so as that former conteineth nothing else but a right vse of Religion to be exhibited vnto God: That other, respecteth the Rule of Christ; Math. 7. 12 Luke 6. 31. What you would Men should doe vnto you, euen so doe yee vnto them; which is the Rule of Iustice and Equabilitie, preceptiue in the Law and Ghospell for Loue and Charitie to each other. Heere to continue this Discourse, (into which I am willingly entred, as being fitted in part to the Argument of this my Booke, treating ofSee  Lib. 1. pag. 7. in the Latin. Prayer) I humbly craue leaue of your Maiestie, to speake here∣of vnto you, out of that your learned Treatise truly Religious, and Christianly Politique. I find in it Religion defined, that manner of worshipping God, which himselfe hath appoynted out of his manifest reuealed Will, receiuing life from a true Fayth; and so by it seemeth to be animated and quickened vnto all good Workes: also preserued by a right Conscience, and so continued in that knowledge of God, (with which he hath enlightned the Minde of man) both against Reprobation, and Impeni∣tencie,pag. 16. lat 19. the Leprosie of the Soule; and also against Supersti∣tion, the very Nurse and Fosterer of rronious opinions perem∣torily derogating from the truth of Gods word. This then kept sincerely pure from pollution of Sinne in Manners, and of errours in the doctrine  Fayth, that interiour worship of
 God which your Grace there mentioneth, will haue an easie ascent vnto him, and be the more plausible in his sight for accep∣tance, religiously commended by Deuotion, and Zeale in Prayer.
To enforce heere a necessitie of Prayer by Arguments (which is sufficiently treated of in the Preface, or fore-speech of this my Booke) were to set a Candle in the Sunne flaming to giue light at noone-day: For although Diuinitie, (as it is ōccupied in the Theorie of God, and heauenly thinges, both to be beleeued, and hoped for,) may seeme a speculatiue Discipline, onely for the Soules bare knowledge; yet, if the Schoole-men graunt (which argue this poynt) that Consent in beleeuing the Doctrine of Christian Fayth, is an Action of the Will and Minde of Man; it must needes follow, that Diuinitie is also a Practicque Doctrine, which requireth the same of Man: For what respecteth Consent, but Action in consequence vnto Knowledge, which was in precedence to it? Christianitie consisteth not in Wording: It is meere Vanitie, yea dissolute Securitie, to dicourse of Fayth, out of the Scriptures, and for defence thereof to alleage Theologicall reasons, and Autho∣rities, if also there be no Consent, and Agreement for acting the Workes thereof. Christ said to his Disciples, Ioh. 13. 17. If yee Know these thinges; blessed are yee, if yee Doe them. Doing therefore, and not Knowing onely, blesseth the Chri∣stian▪ For, Hee that Luk. 12. 47. Knoweth▪ and Doeth not, shalbe beaten with many stripes. As so by all true consequence, Diuinitie is a Practicque Doctrine, and not onely Theo∣ricque, and Speculatiue.
To come then to the matter of Prayer purposed, for asmuch as our Soule hath no habilitie of it selfe to deserue any thing, but must depend wholie vpon Christ; who is the true bright shi∣ning light of righteousnes for all grace working acceptance before God, (which not obteined, all knowledge contempla∣tiue is idle, and vnprofitable) wee must needs holdit very ne∣cessary (The state of the Soule, thus disabled through it owne infirmities) that wee attend vpon Prayer sedulously and seriously,
 by it in Christs name to call vnto God for his Spirit, to lighten our vnderstanding with the iufluences of his Grace, which is only powerfull vnto all virtue, as [to analogize great things to small] may be obserued in the Moone, to worke vpon these in∣feriour Sublimarie bodies, in euerie one (after their seuerall qualities and natures) conformably to the Light it receiueth from the Sunne. There is no assurance to the Elect and Godly of obteining either spirituall Graces, or otherwise the fauour of God, for any other temperall Benefites, but by Fayth. This is the Sollicitor, that maketh the motions in the celestiall Star-chamber befort the Throane of the high Iudge of our Souls for accesse of our Supplicatorie Requestes, to bee pre∣sented and pleaded there, by our Aduocat Christ. And how doth Fayth make these motions, but by Prayer onely? For as, Lib. 1. pag. 11 in the latin. Fayth in that your Maiesties Princely Institution is truely sayd to bee the Nurse, and Cherisher of all Religion, and Pietie. So is Prayer there also said to be the fosterer, aduancer, and mainteynor of this religiouse true Catholicque Fayth; by which is wrought in our mindes a firme perswasion, and sure ap∣prehention of God his Promises; as your Highnesse hath there defined, calling it that Golden Chaine, by which the faythfull Soule is lincked, and annexed vnto Christ: for in him onely are they made; and to the godly by him, and for him, shallbe alwayes yea and Amen.
The Faythfull assurance of the Godly, is in 1. grounding,  and 2. guarding. If then the Godly will be grounded as the  Mount Sion, which cannot bee remoued but standeth fast for euer; And guarded as Ierusalem, which is compassed about with Hilles on euery side; Let them bee intentiue to continuall Prayer, which cherisheth their fayth, setling it in Gods pro∣mises, whereby it is made strang against all Ephe. 6. 16. the firie Darts of the wicked, And to Pet. 5. 9. resist the Diuell. So as Prayer, next to Preaching the Word, ought most specially to bee had in esteeme and regard of vs: But first in place, is the diuine Word, out of which God speaketh vnto vs by his Ministers, and in∣structeth our Consciences in the true knowledge of his Fayth,
 (for Fayth Rom. 10. 17 is by hearing,) and therefore great care, and diligence is to be vsed, in hearing frequently the sacred Doctrine with attention and reuerence, as your Maiestie Lib. 1. pag. 5. aduiseth.
Next to it, succeedeth Prayer, for the very speciall vse and necessitie thereof as may appeare prooued both in the examples of the godly practizing it, & also in the exhortatiue precepts giuen for it throughout the whole body of the Scripture, and so Lib. 1. pag. 12. in the Lattin (as I take it) vnderstood of your Highnesse commending next to that most absolute forme of Prayer made by our Saui∣our Christ, the diuine Psalms of Dauid, from whence▪ as out of a rich Ʋaine, and pure Fountaine, may plentifully bee taken, those formes of Prayers and Supplicaions that may make for either 1. Necessitie, or for 2. Comfort▪ Now that the Ministry1. 2. of the word preached, hath of right a precedence to Praier; and that Prayer, in the next place is subordinated therto as a subsequent, may thus appeare; For that the Word, being the ground of Gods promises in Christ, signed to vs by the Seale of his Spirit, wee had neede to bee first instructed by it, how that God being not as man that hee should lie, or repent him of the good hee purposeth to his Children, is verie Truth it selfe, and so secureth them of performance, in asmuch. as hee knoweth it to bee a part of his glorie (whereof hee is alwayes ielouse) to performe what hee promiseth in his Word.
Againe, the Nature and Effectes of Prayer, both what it is in it selfe, and how to be confined, and also, what force it hath in working to the good of them that vse it, is also first to be learned; which cannot be had before it be taught out of the said diuine Word. Hereby our Fayth well instructed, addresseth it selfe the more boldly and soundly to Prayer, which is a singuler prero∣gatiue of Gods high seruice for his Glorie vouchsafed his Children; Yea, and commaunded to be offered vp of them at all times, for the supplying all their wantes, both in spirituall Gra∣ces to the Soules good, and also in Temporall commodi∣ties to the welfare of the Body. At all which times, wee are specially to haue good respect of our behauiour and gesture in
 Praying, that it be with all Reuerence due to such a Maie∣stie, that filleth the Heauens. For if a Subiect may not dare Lib. 1. 13. at▪ to present himselfe before the King (whether by Petition, or otherwise) but submissely and accommodately; How much lesse is any Man▪ (who is mortall) to presume to call vnto the Al∣mightie GOD, as to his companion and fellow?
In deed a wise discreete Man will not appeare before any of eminent Superioritie, to aske any thing at his hands, but well prpared euery way in reuerent Gesture, and fitting Spea∣ches; for hee bringeth his Errand with him well furnished▪ If then such prouident care be had of worldly Authoritie for worldly respectes how ought we to be aduised in what sort & man∣ner wee doe present our selues, and our speaches, before the Lord God, crauing of him Spirituall graces. Of all these pointes, I haue spoken in the Preface, to my Booke sufficiently (I hope,) and I may say also of purpose, for the instruction of some Readers, perhaps not so throughly learned in the knowledge of them, as the necessitie thereof requireth: Needlesse therefore may seeme heere any commentation vpon a Subiect of this Nature. But vouchsas▪ mee herein your most Gracious aspect, I hambly craue it; and bee pleased to know, that your Highnes first Booke of your  in concurrence of this matter corresponding to mine, did first induce mee to insert this Discourse, and hath continued mee also in it vnto this extent of longitude; the which being graciously pardoned of your Maiestie, J may hope of a fauourable con∣struction in the Argument it selfe thus discussed: For, as in s∣cussing the matter and subiect of my Booke (which is made specially for Prayer,) I follow the common stile of Dedicatories for example, which all in a manner doe the same: So, hauing in purpose to consecrate it vnto your Highnes, I thought it very meete for appluse to fashion, in some sort, the handling of the mat∣ter contayned therein out of that your Maiesties Booke, as it were by a suffragie from your owne mouth witnessing the Truth of what is alleaged from thence in my writing, and so to commende it to the censure of the indicious and wise Reader. Were I either able for Learning, or for my Person worthy to
 blaze, and decipher the singuler, and most eminent endowments of nature (wherewith the Diuine Maiestie, from aboue hath boun∣tifully enriched, and gratiously blessed your sacred Maiestie) I would most gladly (as already acknowledged of others) so to their learned udgments ascribe my opinion also in particuler, for a testimonie of my Loyall heart vnfeinedly deuoted to the best and highest thoughts that is fit for Subiects of true allegeance and Fealtie to carrie of your Highnesse honourable, heroicall, and well deseruing Prayses. Notwithstanding that I may not seeme to forget carelesly the Lawes of dedicatorie writings or pur∣pose neglect, for feare to bee reputed a flatterer in following them (which drawing to the conclusion, doe commonly insert in the Catastrophe a commemoration of personall commendations▪) J will capitulate some few speaches of that sense, such as I haue read, recorded, and published in other mens Writinges, and so after this manner onely, as it were by my bare suffragie, applaude in assent to the truth of their renowming encomies. Your Maiesties Kingdomes and Dominions consisting of a Two∣fold gouernement; the one Spirituall in all Church-causes, and ouer all Persons: The other Temporall, for the managing of Ciuill and Politique affayres with great dexteritie both supreame and soueraigne, is therefore celebrated to be beau∣tified highly, in the wordes of excellent Knowledge, Wise∣dome, Prudence, Iustice, Religion, and Godlinesse: which must needes be those Princely qualities▪ for which your High∣nesse (as one sayeth) beeing eminent, wee▪ your Subiectes are, and shalbe, the happier.—Your Theologicall Wise∣dome and Learning in matters of Religion; your witten , and other your Bookes, and sundry Speaches, ex∣tant & in the Eye of the World, can sufficiently witnesse: yet for more specialtie it is made knowne, & manifessed in that int lo∣cutorie Conference mentioned of mee before in this Dedica∣torie; Of which I reade these seuerall Iudgments giuen out by great persons of State, and High note, eare-witnesses the same time of your Maiesties entercourse speeches, then vt∣tered & auerred, to haue been such as that one sayeth, J am fully
 perswaded, that his Maiestie spake by the instinct of theConference. pag. 83. 84. spirit of God. Another saith, that hee had often heard and read, that, Rex est mixta persona cum Sacerdote; But hee neuer saw the truth thereof, till that day. And a third, accomodating his testimonie in truth to these, writeth; That the Title of a liuing Librarie, and of walking Studie, might pro∣perly  fit your Maiestie: for which cause he sayth further; ThatIn the Preface to the Reader. it was pittie to loose one Sillable of your admirable Speeches: The words whereof there, and then vttered by your Highnes in that Conference bieng like Apples of Gold, with pictures of Siluer for the apt fitting them in their places conueniently, and iudiciously. Nay the same partie sayth further, That your Maie∣stie did so admirably both for vnderstanding, Speech, andPag. 20. Iudgment, handle the points there propounded, as that they were sent away (vpon the breaking vp) not with Contentment onely, but astonishment.—And as touching your Politicque wisdome, Prudence, and Iustice in State affaires, thereby administred and brought into good Gouernment: Yea, as oneIn the Preface to the Reader sayeth, (to vse his owne wordes) beautifying it to Gods glorie, with the Churches good, as many may with truth acknowledgeConference. it, as haue loyall Hearts deuoted to a truth, and will be well affected in sinceritie to testifie and confesse the same vpon oc∣casion.
But neither is here wanting publique Testimonie hereof, for∣asmuchThe Prote∣stants Coun∣terpos to the Catholicques Supplication as I finde it also auouched in print; Such to be the rare Perfections,▪ ad admirable Guiftes of the aboue-said Vir∣tues wherewith the bountifull hand of Gods diuine Maiestie hath endued your Maiestie, as in the deapth of your proui∣dent Iudgement, wee doubt not, but you foresee, what concer∣neth both the Spirituall, and Temporall gouernment of all your Kingdomes and Dominions.—Then well said hee, who thus said. Our dutie, as wee are Men (yea, I may say, as wee are true Subiectes,) to be an acknowledgment of our setled State in your Royall person.—Many more Testi∣moniesThe Preface to the Con∣ference. of a deserued Truth in this kind, might be heere alleadged. But to your Maiestie (whose humble deportment in those
 your most eminent Sublimities hath alwayes held suspected all wordes of Prayses in commendation of your owne person) these alreadie cited, may seeme perhaps, distastfull, and so reiected, as not acceptance-worthy. If it be offensiue thus in the Phrase and Stile of others to write vnto your Maiestie of your selfe, as it were, in os laudare; yet because it hath the Testimo∣nie of a loyall Heart deuoted to the best Thoughts (as I haue said) of your rare Virtues much prayse worthy; and there∣fore meete to be vttered at all times, as occasion fitly serueth, both in writing and speaking without dssimulation, I may hope also it to be pardonable; And therefore am yet further bold in all hu∣militie to craue your Graces most gracious fauourable leaue to adioyne to these former, mine owne priuate commenda∣tion of your singuler clemencie, and benignitie towards your Subiectes. For among all those guiftes of Grace, and Nature, (which are in your Maiestie for varietie manifold, and for their worth very singuler) none yet for applause generally may seeme rightly superiorating that of Bountie, and Clemencie, noted of all in your Grace more eminent, as remarkable for ma∣nie presidented particulers. A memorable virtue, and eternizing Memorie; the which as it is best agreeable to mans Nature; so, beseeming none more then Kinges and Princes, (as they write,) because it conciliateth and breedeth the loue of their Subiectes; by which both Securitie, issuing therefrom, and also Stabilitie; proceeding out of it, is gotten, and procured to the common good of all subiected to their gouernment; whom, rather to finde good, and dutifull, then otherwise to make such, is honour to them; which is, to feare not a King, but for a King: And this to doe▪ is a strengthning safetie both to King and Subiectes.
Wise Tactus, giueth this Precept of a pittying Iustice, ToIn Agric. be content most often with the Repentance of one offen∣ding, and not often to punish all offenses: Yea, saith Clau∣dian the Poet; It is a kind of Punishment to see an Offen∣dour deiected with true Sorrow for his faultes, submisly entreating pardon. This is that true Magnanimitie, which your Basilicon treateth of, and aduiseth to be imbraced: Not in
 taking reuengement, but by accompting him, that hath offended, vnworthy your Anger; and so by ouer-swaying that Passion, to triumph, and ioy greatly in this, that you Lib. 2. pag. 100. haue commaunded your selfe, (yea against your owne will) to graunt Pardon.
And this by way of Counsell there written of your Maiestie, appeareth through your owne practize in this your Graces milde gouernment ouer vs, to haue been set downe in great iudgement, long premeditted and purposed for action; know∣ing and rightly vnderstanding, that it causeth Man by imitation, to draw neerest vnto God, whose Mercie, and louing kind∣nesse, is aboue all his Workes.
For this cause, are Kinges and Princes in the Scripture,Psal. 82. 6. tearmed Gods, that they being by function Lieuetenants to GOD vpon Earth, should also expressely imitate, in their RuleIoel. 2. 1. and Gouernment, this diuine Virtue (appropriated to his Na∣ture,) of Clemencie, Patience, and long Suffering. A virtue so highly applauded and magnified of the Heathen, that (as Ari∣stotle writeth) Many Philosophers haue attributed diuine honours to it, calling it Beneficence of doing good. And Seneca will haue that onely Lightning which Iupiter sen∣deth foorth, to be most plaucible and milde; herein hauing refe∣rence to those kind of Lightnings which the Latines call albas Manubias, and sayd to be harmelesse, for that they are made by Iupiter in a friendly traiection, and shooting foorth to the Sunne without offence to any.—This was a constant opinion of An∣tiquitie; doing thereby to vnderstand, that Iupiter (whom they tooke to be the Prince of the Gods,) is neuer angrie at any, neuer hurteth or violateth; neither iudgeth & condemneth any. This, though fabulously deliuered in the writinges of those auncient, both Philosophers and Poets, doth yet seeme paral∣lelwise to keepe the same proportion, with the like, aurred by the Hebrewes, concerning the common calamities of Plagues, Pestilence, Diseases, and other Casualties, happening to Man for a chastisement of Sinne: in which respect, all such kind of Euill, is called Malum paenae, and in this name sent from
 God, as the Scripture teacheth.Isay 45 7. Amos 3. 6.
Notwithstanding (say they) these Euils come not from God immediatly, as from the efficient prime cause to be taken for the chiefe Author of them; but are deriued by a certaine con∣sentBodin de repu. lib. 4. from a middle intercurrent cause not inhibiting and restraining the ordinarie or extraordinarie course of them; the which cause, they in their vsuall speach expresse by the word Hiphil: Not thereby denying his Iustice, but preferring his Mercie and Clemencie; forgiuing rather then punishing:Psal. 103. 8, Da. 9. 9. which causeth in his Children a Sonly feare, tempered with an obseruant Loue, prescribed to Kings as an example for imi∣tation, that so they doe honour God in Heauen by this virtue of whom themselues are honoured on Earth, by that his owne Title. How, and in what Tearmes this is performed, your Lib. 2. pag. 23. 25. 24. 25. Maiestie sheweth in that your Comparison of a King, and a Tyrant, by apt Notes differencing them: where you define a King to be as a Father indulgent, and a Lord, Soueraigne, but not vnkind: one, not so much borne to his people a King, as giuen of God from aboue, for their good and tranquillitie, conserued through holesome Lawes, thereby procuring Loue; which he must accompt for his Sanctuarie, and onely Refuge. A most luculent Testimonie, seeming to be instructed from out the voice of Nature it selfe, suffragating thereto in Truth; and so to receiue a worthy allowance the more plausibly. For Nature hath framed the chiefe Maister-ruling Bee, which is the King in the Swarme of Bees, without Sting, of purpose, that it might not annoy and hurt any of the lesser Bees, which are vnto him as his Subiectes, to follow, and attend him at commaunde∣ment.
This Discourse, my dread Soueraigne, wherein speaking to your selfe, I haue spoken of your selfe (I trust not too boldly, because truly loyally,) I will end with the words of Cassiodorus;In Agric. Mercie and Clemencie is that only virtue, to which all other virtues refuse not in honour to giue the preheminence. If to haue taken in hand this Argument, and to haue accommodated it to your Royall person in this manner prayseably, bee an
 ouer-fight blame-worthy, I may say (vnder your Highnes reformation) that I presumed vpon the nature and qualitie there∣of, and so hope for the Argument sake, which is of Clemencie, a resplendent virtue in your person, (being also entertained in Truth, and discoursed in Loyaltie,) to finde accordingly a fa∣uourable pardoning Construction; which most humbly I craue of your Maiestie, to be the same (if you please) which Al∣phonsus King of Aragon, (a most victorious, and learned King) gaue of one Lucas a Phisicions demonstratiue Oration, in it, highly commending the King to his face. If those thinges, saith Alphonsus, which thou hast reported of mee, be true, I heartily thanke the immortall Gods: If otherwise, I humb∣ly beseech them to cause, that they may be true in mee.
Howsoeuer this my commendatorie is accepted of your Ma∣iestie, I for mine owne part, am so well instructed in those former Testimonies of your Regall virtues, and alleadged of mee, of right, (so occasioned for the credite of them) as to conclude this matter, by your Gracious patience. I rest in the iudgmentes of sw great personages (both sometimes of you honourable prie Councell) now deceased, and say with them in their wordes: The first speaking thus. This whole Land was much bound to GOD, for setting ouer vs, a King so Wise, Learned, and Iudicious. The other thus acknowledged; that, We were very much bound to GOD▪ that had giuen vs a King of an vnderstanding Heart: Which appearing manifestly in sundry particulers of your blessed Gouernment, is yet chiefely and most singulerly ennobled by your Maiesties heroi∣call Spirit, diuinely instincted to plead Gods cause against his, and your Enemies; whose Supplication offred vp to your Highnes in the beginning of your Reigne ouer vs for Tolera∣tionAnno Domi. 1603. of Poperie, (a false vsurped Cathollecisime (in right tearmes) an Idolatrous Superstition, diametrally opposite to the very true Catholicque Religion, as blending of Truth, and Fasehood,) your Maiestie hath repelled; and is well accepted, with ominous acclamations (as I may say) of all true∣hearted Subiectes, to the best secured safeite of your sacred
 Royall person vnder GOD, whose Houour you haue thus vnidicated, by continuing the Ghospell among vs, to sine foorth for the enlightning the Hemisphere of this our Church, vnder whose roofe the Arke of God may not permit the Phi∣listims 1. Sam 5. 3. 4. Dagon of Ashdod to haue footing. For away with all them, who with the same Tongue sweare by the Zeph. 1. 5. Lord, and sweare by Milcham, and yet pretend a holy Worship to him, whose Name they doe thus dishonour. Hee is a plaine Ephraimite, that for Iudg. 12 6. Shiboleth, pronounceth Sibboleth. No lisping-halting Laodicean hypocrite, can be a True professer of Gods Religion. Neutralitie is a Birth of Luke-warmenesse; which is, and is not: Would bee, but dare not bee; aad therefore seemeth onely, as temporizing with the present. Who are such, are meere Politicians, double-faced like Ianus; yea blind, though seeing: and deafe, though hearing: without all Sense, and feeling of Truth, because they are possessed with sares; and faint-hearted, doubting all thinges, and mistrustfull of all: Which make Religion, a mat∣ter of indifferencie, and arbitrarie, left to their choyse, to make the Lord, or Baal. GOD: yea, and if they refuse Baal, in this sense; yet to follow the Lord that is the true GOD, as themselues please, and so to Worship him in part, after their owne corrupt fancies, But the wrath of God is vpon such, and Iudgement hath alreadie taken hold of them, which is theate∣ned in Isaiah: To Isa. 6. 9. 10. Heare in deed, and not to vnderstand: To See plainely, and not to perceiue; by reason, that their Heart is made fatte, both to a heauinesse of the Eares, and to the shutting vp of the Eyes, that they might not con∣uert and be healed. A heauie Iudgement. But the Tem∣gle of GOD, and the Altar (which Iohn meant by ap∣poyntment of the Angell in the Apocalips,) is not for these o Reue. 11. 1. Worship therein: for they being prophane and reprobate, are for the Court () onely with-out the Temple, not measured, but refused, and giuen to the Gentiles. To whom God speaketh in Ezekiel; Ezek. 20. 39 Goe yee, and serue euery one his Idole, seeing yee will not obey mee. And Christ telleth
 them, that he will Math. 10 33. denie them before his Father in Hea∣uen, because they haue denied him before Men in Earth.2. Timo. 2. 12. Who these bee, are knowne by the print of the Name of the Beast, whom they Reue. 14. 9. Worship, marked in their foreheads: whose punishment is there also set downe, euen Torments in Fire andver. 10. 11. Brimstone without ceasing: A most iust reward of all Hypo∣crites, and Apostataes, which either counterfeite Holines, or reuolt from their Fayth; and so are lincked in fast to the Reue. 17. . Whore of Babilon, and drunke of the Wine of her For∣nication. But on the other side, they, which feare God, and Reue 14. 7. worship him that made Heauen, and Earth, the Sea, and the Fountaines of Waters; are also knowne by a diffe∣rent note, euen by their Reuel. 14. 1. Fathers Name, written in their foreheads, for they are not ashamed of their Profession, beeing the Sainctes which keepe the Commandements of God, andver. 12. the Fayth of Iesus: All such▪ shall cease from their La∣bours,ver. 13. and their Workes follow them: For, these con∣sessing Math. 10. 32. Christ here, before Men, are also confessed of Christ before his Father, which is in Heauen: and before Luk. 12. 8. the Angels of God, I was put in minde of this Note, by your Maiesties wordes of your selfe, in your Basilicon, say∣ing: Lib. 1. pag. 4. I haue neuer been ashamed to professe openly, what I thought of GOD. True, for what your Highnes haue thought of God, and of his Worship, is so well manifested, as there needes no disputation to satisfie any not partilly minded; much lesse the euill Tounged, and the malicious Carpers, who calumniously, and faulsely, haue otherwise traduced your Maiesties Name by that imputation. If Wishes may take effect, they are not wanting to your good Subiectes, against as many as haue euill will at Sion, and seeke to disturbe the Peace of Israel, laying Cockatrices Egges in the shade of secret de∣signes, to haue them hatched by some thunderclaps of Trea∣son, and other Trecherous practises whatsoeuer. O that these of Pelops race were all abandoned from hence, if any beic. ad Att. lib. 15. ept.▪ 1. here yet residing in your Maiesties Realme or Realmes, so as their Names be not once heard amongst vs. Paul taxeth the
 Corinthians, in that they had entred into fellowship with Infi∣dels, partaking with them in outward Idolatrie, as forsaking their first loue: seeming thereby, to haue receiued the Grace of God in vaine, to which they were called; and telleth them, that they were vnequally 2. Cor. 6. ver 14 ver. 15. ver. 16. yoaked, for, Light hath no communion with Darknesse; nor, Christ with Beliall hath any concord; nor, the Temple of God, with Idols. So likewise, what part hath the Protestant with the Papist; and the true Ghospellers, with the hollow-hearted Neuters? There can be nothing betweene these: though they are 1. Ioh. 2. 19. among vs, yet are they not of vs: For, can their Leprous rottenSee the Prote∣stants Coun∣terpoise. Sect. 12. affections entertaine any true Thought of either Zeale to∣wardes GOD, or of Loyaltie to your Maiestie, who main∣taine Positions most dangerously Trayterous in opposition di∣rectly against both the one and the other. The Emperour Constantine by his politicque Proclamation, discoueredLib. 1. Tripart. hist. cap. 7. the dissembling of Christianitie in some of his Subiectes; whom therevpon hee banished, and sayd, Seeing they were not faythfull to God, much lesse would they be to him. I leaue this concluded with S. Hieroms Iudgement; There can bee no sound affection of them to each other, whose Profession of Fayth, and Religion, is not the same, but diuerse.
And now to come to the matter, for which this Dedicatorie is to your Maiestie, that I might put my selfe and others in minde of our dutie towardes GOD; the which beeing first knowne, is subordinatly next, and the more readily, and care∣fully discharged vnto your Highnesse person.—I haue written this Treatise intituled the Miscellanie of Orizons, being the Argument in chiefe; prefacing it with certaine Re∣guler preparatiues instructing the deuotion vnto Prayer. To which also are annexed certaine Meditations of the Lords Supper, and of Mortalitie; all for the aduauncing the Wel∣fare of the Christian Soule. An Argument of necessarie con∣sequence in this great dotage, of the World possessed generally with the Spirit of slumber, and securitie; through which, Cha∣ritie
 is become cold, as seeming altogeather deaded in the frozen dregges of Sensualitie, obdurating the Consciences for want of Fayth, which by no meanes is better cherished, encreased, and mainetained, then by Praier; as to your Maiestie is wel knowne, Lib. 1. pag. 12. lat. 14. appoynting it to be frequent, solitarie, and priuate, yea specially in Bed aswell as publicque; at all times vpon occasion, as the Minde suggested, with exception to all vnlawfull Matters, which cannot be of Fayth: And, Rom. 14. 23. Whatso∣euer is not of Fayth, is sinne.
It is a Worke framed to the seuerall vses of all sorts of Men, of all degrees in a manner, to be practized by them as necessitie requireth (my hope is) to the benefite, and comfort in the Lord, of as many, as shall delight in the practize of a Christian Fayth by Prayer. For it cannot bee, (in whom soeuor the cele∣stiall fire of a feruent Fayth is kindled, though for a time it may seeme perhaps to be suppressed) but the same will breake foorth into a flame of that Godly zeale which Paul testifith Coloss. 4. 1. 13. Epa∣phras to haue had for the Colossians, striuing for th in Pray∣ers, that they might stand perfect, and full in all the will of God. This Worke I huue presumed to publish vnder the Protection and Patronage of your Maiesties name, for the better acceptance abroad with applause.—It beareth a testi∣monie of my Loyall Heart towardes your Highnesse; to whom all my endeuours, of what nature soeuer, are most specially due. And for my Religious intention to doe thereby also a common good, my hope is, it will the rather be well accepted. For I may not doubt, least it be preiudiced by the hard censure of a needlesse, and superfluous Writing, because of the great va∣rietie, and multitude of Bookes of the same Argument.
The materiall Temple, was re-edified vnder Zerubbabel by the labous, paines, and imployments of sundry & diuers Worke∣men, euen by accommodating things of the same Nature, as Lime, Stones, Wood Yron, &c. So may it be said of the studies and endeuors of learned Wittes, which labour in their Writings, by knowledge to further & erect the Building of the spiritu∣all Temple, though for matter and subiect, one and the same.

The manner of penning this Worke, may seeme strange for order and composition: likewise for Matter and Subiect per∣haps much borrowed from others; so as I may say, All heere, and nothing heere, to be truly Mine: For, as the compiling the instructing Preparatiues, with the Prayers, and the di∣gesting them vnder their certaine Heades, and the Medita∣tions vpon the Lords Supper, and Mortalitie, is all mine owne; so yet I doe confesse, I haue excerpted, and culled out of Authors, both Wordes, and Sentences; sometimes whole, sometimes the Clauses, and Members of them; not alwayes the same, but in part, as they were to be accommodated to the mat∣ter in hand. Neither doe I feare herein to be stigmatized by S. Hieromes censure, with a branding J▪ for I haue to some places cited by mee, ascribed the Authors Names, vpon whose credite I might warrant the Allegations: other Writers of a sus∣pected note, and so not of that Authoritie with vs, as to be allowed, especially in a subiect of this Nature, (they differencing from vs in some Materiall poyntes) I haue for that reason, concealed, to auoyde preiudice, and wrong, which often is occa∣sioned through scrupulositie.
J say then, I doe ingenuously acknowledge, that the Matter, and Stuffe of this Worke, is in part borrowed: But I may truly claime to my selfe the framing and fashioning it in order as it is set foorth. Let not the Spiders Webbe, wrought of the threddes which the Spider it selfe doth weaue, be of greater accompt and esteeme, then is that iuyce of sundry mellifluuous Hearbes which the Bee gathereth, and by a certaine mixture and pro∣pertie of her Breath, (as Seneca writeth,) altereth into that sauour and taste of pleasant sweete moysture which is cal∣led Hony. Wee see also, that Embroderers worke Tapistrie, and Arras with partited Threddes of sundry colours, which themselues doe not first make. I doe not by this, argue the worthi∣nesse of this Worke: Bee it, as they which read it, shall censure it. If all herein written be ascribed to others for Inuention, as not mine, being aptly disposed, and well applyed for sense, it shalbe to mee a thing indifferent; so that out of this Worke thus com∣posed
 by me & ordered for phrase, & stile, hauing both in word and Sense, a fit correspondence with the analogie of Fayth, this principally: then next that, such fruite & profit doe redounde to the Sonnes of the Church, as may cause (if but one) godly and truly sanctified Cogitation (gayned thereby) to arise and settle in some one Christian soule at one moment. If God out of his Mercie shall be pleased thus to blesse these my Labours what-soeuer, I haue my Wish and Desire; which is the end of my Proiect in the first attempting hereof: Most humbly be∣seeching your Maiestie, that of your gracious clemencie, (wherewith you glad and comfort the hearts of your Subiects louingly loyall) you will be pleased to vouchsafe a fauoura∣ble aspect in the acceptation hereof, not presumptuously re∣quired, in an opinion of worth; but vpon a confidence of your wonted grace, submissely craued in the name of true, and vnfeigned loyaltie. Plinie writeth, that the Idoll of Apol∣lo, which was mute at all other Times, did then (as seeming so∣dainly to be reuiued) discourse at large, when the Sunne casting foorth his quickening comfortable Raies, appeared bright shining in the Face of it. And that many of Apolloes not Idols, but Sonnes, (which before kept silence, in a manner mute, and dumbe, encircled (I may say) within the confined shadie Couerts of their priuate readinges,) since enlightned by your Maiesties serene Countenance, gracing their Studies, haue been encouraged, and (as it were) receiuing Life from thence, haue breathed foorth in publicque Writinges, is euident (as a matter to be confessed and acknowledged of all.) For euen our Life, and our action (which is manifested thereby) must needes proceed from the strength and vigor that harbou∣reth within your most royall Heart, by reason that all the Arteries of this Common-wealth, doe dayly beat in the sweete temper of that regall Authoritie, and this Fatherly indulging Clemencie; in that, excelling all your Predi∣cessors, in this equalizing the best, in both happy, because profitably eminent; and thereby also making all your Subiectes most fortunate. So then (most Gracious and
 dread Soueraigne) our dutie (as wee are your Subiectes, en∣ioying this happinesse by you) is first, a true acknowledgment of a setled state in your Person; with a protestation before God for all Loyall obedience in all dutifull deuoted Sub∣mission: Next, (as wee are Christians) to render our most heartie, and humble Thankes vnto God, (who) in mercie vouchsafing fauour to this Realme, hath placed your Highnes King ouer the same a Wise, virtuous, peaceable, and mer∣cifull Prince, to the inestimable good and happinesse of your people; vnder whose tuition, and patrocinie, true Religi∣on, godly Discipline, the best studies of Learning, by holesome Lawes administred in equitie, doe flourish, and are maintained. In this name therefore, (which is also a duty com∣maunded in the Scripture, and now properly ours,) doe we sub∣missely offer vp the Calues of our Lippes, for a Mor∣ning and Euening Sacrifice; euen earnest Supplications, and feruent Prayers dayly to that diuine Powerfull Maie∣stie in Heauen, (who giueth safetie vnto Kinges, and is the keeper and onely defender of all politicque States, that harbour the Ghospell of Christ,) for the perpetuall safeguar∣ding, and prescruing your Scepter, and Regall dignities, in all Christian peace, and Tranquilitie; beseeching him▪ to bee GOD to you, and your Seed, as hee promised to bee vnto Gen. 17. 7. Abraham, and to his Seed after him; that accordingly hee blesse the gouernment of all your Maiesties Dominions and Kingdomes, in your selfe now Ruling; and in your Sonne, our noble Prince Charles after you: Who being your lawfull Heire and Successour to those your Kingdomes, may in like manner be the liuely representatiue Image of your rare, and singuler endowments of Nature, and Grace; and so by your ex∣ample, to become a Nursing Father, in defending, preseruing, and propagating the truth of the Ghospell; hauing in minde al∣wayes that saying of the euerlasting Wisedome the Sonne of God, in the Prouerbes: Prou. 4. ver. 8. ver. 9. Exalt her, and shee shall exalt thee. Shee shall giue thee a comely Ornament to thy Head, yea, a Crowne of Glory shall shee giue thee. For,
 I Prou. 8. ver. 17. ver. 15. ver. 16. loue them, that loue mee; euen to glorifie them: For, By mee Kings reigne, and Princes rule. This Memoriall beeing as a Frontlet before his Eyes, must needes tell him, that Hee is to bee as  burning Torch of all Virtue, and Godli∣nesse aboue others; by the Light thereof, to direct the foote∣steps of his Citizens in the whole course of their liues; as your  he admonisheth in your  by the name of a demie∣God▪ . 1. pag. 2. 3. t. sitting vpon this Throane of GOD, to be his Lieuete∣nant ere on Earth.
The which Throane and Seate of Maiestie, (my Prayers vnto God for your Highnes to be continued vnto your owne Person in all happinesse all your life long first and chiefly premit∣ted;) I humbly craue at Gods hands next, that Sam 7. ver 12. When your dayes be fulfilled, and you sleepe with your Fa∣thers, to reigne with them in Heauen, that then the same your hereditarie Throane, may be the Throane of Dauid vnto your Sonne, in him, and in his Seed, which shall proceed out of his Body to be established.
I conclude with the wordes of Salomon: Let Reg. 2. 45. King IAMES be blessed, and his Throane be established before the Lord for euer. And to this, let all Loyall faithfull Subiectes of an immaculate allegience, giuing their assent in the wordes of Nehemiah, Nehem. 2. ver. 3. God saue the King for euer: and say with one heart, and voyce: Amen, Amen.

