


I Hope it shall not be accompted pre∣sumption, (most noble Prince) to of∣fer to your Maiesty, the first fruites of these my simple and rude labours, se∣ing the cause is Iesus Christs, that King of Kings, and Lord of glorie, whilk is heir defended, euen the euer∣lasting trueth of God, against the venimous stings of one of the
Reu. 9.3. Locusts of that Antichristian Kingdome. The right whereof does most iustly belong to your Maiesty, both in re∣spect of these rare and singulare gifts of knowledge and vn∣derstanding, whilk the Lord hes vouchsaued vpon your Ma¦iestie, in sik a plentifull measure, that your subiects does ac∣knowledge it at home, and strangers does admire it & com∣mend it abroade: whereby you are not only able to
1. Pet. 3.15 ran∣der a reason of that Faith whilk is in you; but also able to
Tit. 1.9. stoppe the mouth of the aduersary, and convict the gainsaier whatsumeuer, by that
2. Tim. 13.15. worde of trueth wherewith your Maiesty hes bene brought vp from your ve∣ry infancy: so that all the wise men of Babel, I meane the
 Cleargie of that Romane harlote, is not able to resist the mouth and wisedome whilk the Lord hes giuen to your Ma∣iestie. And also in respect of that supereminent power, (as
Rom. 13.1 the Apostle calles it) whereby as you are most able, so are you most oblished to maintain his truth, propagate his king∣dome, and nurishe his owne spouse, whilk hee hes
Act. 20.20 purcha∣sed to himselfe by his owne blood, by the breasts of your Maiesties gouernement, as it was promised of olde that his
Esa. 60.16 spouse shoulde suck the breastes of Kings. So, who is more oblished, then ye, Sir? Who so sufficient and able e∣uery way to mantaine it, as ye Sir? Your knowledge bindes you: your profession bindes you: your soueraigne authoritie, as yeare a King in Israel bindes you. For, as the wisest king that euer was hes saide, and left it in write: or rather that King of Kings in him and by him,
Pro. 8.15 Princes raigne by me. Ye holde your kingdome of him, Sir, and must lay down your crowne at his feet, and must stand vp and giue a recko∣ning of the gouernement of his Kingdome, of the mainte∣nance of his trueth, and of the nourishing his spouse in that day. Your knowledge, Sir, is able to iustifie it : your soueraigne authoritie able to defend it  Ye haue re∣ceaued that
Heb. 4.12 Eph. 6 17, 2. two edged sworde of Gods Spirite in your mouth, able to wound, yea to consume that man of sinne and sonne of perdition: ye haue receaued that
Rom. 13.4 sworde of justice and judgement in your hands, able to
Psal 101.8. destroy betimes al the wicked of your kingdom and to roote out from the city of the Lorde, all the workers of iniquity. Ye know, Sir,
Reu. 17.4.5. the abhomina∣tion of Babel, that as it is said of the verteous woman
Pro. 31 26 Many wemen haue done vertuously, but thou sur∣mounts them al: so the contrary may be said of her: many hereticks hes taught erroneously, & worshipped & wrought
 abhominably: but the
Reu. 17.1. whoore of Babel, the Kirk of Rome, in heresie, in abhomination, in idolatry, hes surmoun∣ted thē all, that euer went before her, or euer shall come after her:
Reu. 13.1.3 6. Manye beastes haue spoken blasphemously, but that
Reu. 13. & 16.13.14. & 17.3.4.5.6. & 18.24. seconde beaste that hes two hornes like the Lambe, surmounteth them all in blasphemy, tyranny, cru∣eltie, and abhominable idolatrie, destroying and ma∣king marchandise of the soules of men and wemen. Other heresies did but subuert some fundamentall pointes of Religion, but the Kirk of Rome hes subuerted them all al∣moste. Of other heresies, some was but against the God-head of Christ, other some against his māhood, other some against his offices and benefites, or some one head or other: but the doctrine of the Kirk of Rome, is against them all. Iniurious to his God-head, in making him, not onely inferiour to the Father, in teaching that he is not  but also inferior to the very creatures, in praying to Mary to command her Son, Iure Matris impera Redemptori, as I heard your Maiesty most solidely proue, and so worse then the Artians. Iniurious to his man-hood, to all his offices, his benefites, and all the meanes, inward and outward, of the knowing & ap∣plying of him. And last of all, iniurious to his soueraigne glory, in cōmunicating it to stocks & stones, a peece of bread bones & ashes, & the skurf skarf of all things, as I hope, I haue made manifest in this my answere. So that moste iu∣stly it is called
Reu. 13.11. 1. Tim. 4. the speach of the Dragon, and the do∣ctrine of Diuels by the Spirite of God. And if the pro∣fession of sik a Diuelish doctrine be too great an euill, what would the practise thereof be? I meane the idolatrous Masse that abhomination of desolation. The miserie, allace, were too greate,
Matth. 9.36. to see the people of this countrie scattered as sheep without sheepheards, dying that second & euer∣lasting
 death, for want of the bread of life and gospell of sal∣uation. But this would be the misery of miseries, if the
Reu. 17.4 golden cupe of Babel, full of all abhominations, shuld be set to their head againe, to drink the deadly poison of their owne damnation. And certainly, if
Amos. 8.11.12. this famine of the worde of God, whereby not onely
Amos. 48. two or three citties, as the Prophet sayes, but twenty or thirty Paro∣chins in some places, should be compelled to goe to one, if they were desirous to drink the waters of life; this I say, is a iudg∣ment heauie ynough. But what a iudgement would this be, if they were compelled to byde at home, and it were but in their owne families, by that abhominable Masse, the rounde bread, the Gods of Babell. Surely a great many of the people of this countrie, does not
1. Reg. 18.21. halte nowe betweene these two thoughts, whether God be the Lord, or Baal: but hes forsaken the Lord and his Gospell, and in their heart desires the op∣portunitie to say to their round bread, these are our Gods who hes redeemed vs from hell, and these will wee worship, at least secreitly, til our strength grow, & our nom∣ber encrease. The reste of the iniquities of this land, were too great to prouoke the Lorde of hoastes, suppose this impietie, (whilk the Lorde forbid for his Christs sake) bee not added vnto all the reste, and aboue all the reste. For what sinne is comparable to idolatry? or what iniquity hes bene euer so se∣uearly punished, as idolatrie? a sinne that is immediatly a∣gainst God, against Christ, against his glory: a sinne that made
Ex. 32.28. Num. 25.9. 2700 of the Lords owne chosen inheritance to fall in the wildernesse, for the golden Calfe, & Ba∣al-Peor. A sinne that prouoked the Lorde in sik a high measure, that it made him delyuer his owne people (whome he had planted in that land of promise, and to whome he had sworne to be their God)
Iudg. 11.12.13 14.25. ouer in the hands of their e∣nemies
 round about them, so that whithersoeuer they went, the hande of the Lorde was sore against them. A sinne that
1. Reg. 11 5.11. rent the kingdome of Dauid a∣sunder, and made ten parts of it to be giuen to Iero∣boam the Son of Nebat, suppose the person was cal∣led
2. Sam. 12 24.25. Iedidiah, the beloued of the Lord, & the promise was made vnto him, that
2. Sam. 7.12.13. his house and throne shoulde stand for euer. And finally, a sin that first mooued the Lord
2. Reg. 17 18. to put awaye Israel from before his face, & caused their land to vomit them out, without al hope euer to returne againe, and then made
2. Chro. 36.16.17.18 19.20.2. Reg. 25.10. his wrath so hote againste Iuda, till there was no remedye but the Temple, the Kings house, and the houses of all the nobles, were brunt with fire, the Kings sonnes firste slaine before his eies, then his owne eies put out, himselfe bounde with chaines of steill, and he and his people carried captiues to Babel, wher there they remained for the space of 70. yeares. Are not these things falne forth
2. Cor. 10 11. as examples to vs, & ar they not written for our instruction, as the Apostle sayes, vpon whome the ends of the world is fal∣len: and is not
Reu. 17.4 the abhomination of Babel, their ido∣latrous Masse, as great abhomination in the eyes of the Lord, as
1. Reg. 11.5 Milcom the abhomination of the Ammonites. Is it a lesse idolatry to worshippe a
Ex. 32.4. 1. Reg. 11.5 Iud. 2.13. golden Calfe, the gods of Egypt, or a grauen sheepe Aschtaroth, the gods of the Sidonians, then to worship a bit of breade, made of wheate, groūd in the mil, baken in the ouen, coniured and erected vp by a Idolatrous Priest, whilk is the God of Ba∣bel, the Kirk of Rome. Is there any more Godhead in the one, then in the other? Hes their idole of the Masse any more life, feeling, or mouing, then the idols of Egypt and Sidon had? and does not the Kirk of Rome giue as great, yea rather greater
 worship and Religion to their round bread, then Iuda or Is∣rael gaue to their golden calfe, or to Asttaroth the grauen sheepe. For they worship it as their Creator and redeemer. And as the worship of the golden Calfe, is called
Deut. 32.17. the worship of Diuels in Moses song: so the Idolatry of the Kirk of Rome, whereof their rounde breade in their Masse, is one of the principall, is called
Reu. 9.20. the worship of Diuels, by the voyce that came from the foure hornes of the golden altare. For what Kirk or Kingdome vnder heauen is there to be found, who in the tyme of the blast of the sext Trumpet, when that fearfull army of the Turkes was loosed to ouerrun Christendome, does worship Idoles of golde and siluer, of brasse, of woode, and of stone, but the Kirk of Rome? And if the worship of God by Images, as Is∣rael did in the golden Galfe, whilk is but the breake of the se∣cond command, be called the worship of Diuels, shall not the worship of a false Creator and Redeemer, as they doe in their Masse, whilk is not only the breake of the first command, but also the stramping vnder foote of the sonne of God in the go∣spel, be most iustly called the worship of Diuels? And is not the Lord as iealous of his glory now, as he was then? and hes hee not sworne
Esai. 42.8 that hee will not giue it to another? and hes hee not
Reu. 13.14 15.16. & 14 8.9.10.11.12. & 16.1.2.10.19. & 17.1.2. & 18.2.3.3.5.6.21. & 19.19.20.21. & 21.21. threatned as seuere iudgements against the whoore of Babel, and the worshippers of the beaste and his image, and them that receaues his marke, openly or priuately, as euer he did against Iuda or Israel? Did he not cause it to be proclaimed, by an An∣gell with an loud voice, that the foundations of the earth might heare it, and tremble, that they shall drinke of the wine of the wrath of God, yea of that pure wine, powred out in the Cupe of his wrath, and they shall be tormented day and night before the holy Angels
 and before the Lambe: and the smoake of their tor∣ment shall ascend for euermore, and they shall haue no rest day nor night, that worships the beast and his Image. And heard not Iohn him that sate vppon the Throne, the judge of the whole earth, say, that Ido∣laters shall haue their portion in the lake that burnes with fire and brimstone, whilk is the second death. And seing the knowledge of our redemption surmounteth the knowledge of our creation: and the benefite of our redempti∣on exceides (by many degrees) the benefite of our creation: shall not the worship of an idole redeemer, and of a false Iesus, as they doe in their Masse, surmount by many de∣grees, the worship of an idole creator, as Iuda and Israel did? For the greater the light be, and the greater the mercie be that is bestowed vpon any, their sinne must be the greater. And as the light of the gospell is more
2. Cor. 3.6.7.8.9.10.11.12.13. glorious then the light of the law, so the idolatrie of these that are vnder the Gospell, must be more abhominable then the Idolatrie of these that were vnder the Law. Theirs was but
Heb. 10.28. the dispysing of Moses Lawe: but this Idolatrie of their Masse, is
Heb. 10.29. the stramping vnder foote of the bloode of Christ, and so worthy of sorer punishment (as the Apost. sayes.) And supose that the iudgement were to fall but vpon the commit∣ters of this sinne onely, it were too great, but it woulde reache further to a whole kingdome wherein it were committed, if by repentance and execution of iustice, it were not preuented. For shall
Gen. 20.9 Abimelech King of Gerar, feare the iudge∣ment of God vpon his whole Kingdome for one a∣dultery only intended, and that in ignorance? And what may a whole land then feare for sik abhominable Idola∣trie in so cleare a light of the Gospell? And shall the ten tribes feare
Iosh. 2 21. the wrath of God to bee kindled againste the
 whole congregation of Israell, For the rebellion of the o∣ther two tribes, in setting vp an altar to sacrifice vpon as they thought? And what should wee feare then againste this whole land, if there were altars reired vp not to worship God on, but the Idoll of Babell. And if
Iosua. 7. Achans theft, suppose both the person & the sinne was vnknowne: yea suppose there was no suspition, neither of the one nor of the other, spoyled all Israel of Gods presence, made them fall before their enemies, and made the Lorde refuse to be in the middest of them, vnlesse the sinne & per∣son was tryed and searched, and the Anathema taken away? And would not Babels Idolatrie be much more effec∣tual to spoyle all the land, if it were defiled therewith of Gods presence, to make vs fall before our enemies, and to make the Lord to departe from vs: suppose it were but in one person, se∣ing the sin is more odious in the Lords eyes, our light greater, and we more obleist nor they were. And suppose that this ab∣homination should be but in priuat families, yet it is
2. Tin. 2.17. a fret∣ting canker, as the Apostle sayes, that frait hath infected a member of the bodie, it will insect the rest; if it be not pre∣uented by cutting of the festered member. And the Apostle sayes,
1. Cor. 5.6. a little leauen leaueneth the whole lumpe, and experience hes taught that by proces of time a little leck, hath sunke a great ship, & one person infected with the pestilence hes infected a whole kingdome. The first Idolatrie of the land of Canaan began with
Iug. 17.5.3. Teraphim Iehouae, siluer san∣ctified to the Lorde to bee an Image, but afterwarde it grew vp to the worship
Iug 2.13. of Baall and Aschtaroth. It was in the beginning, but in one onlie familie, the familie of
Iug. 17.1. Micah. but in proces of time, it passed from that familie to the tribe of
Iug. 18. Dan. and from that tribe to all the rest of the
ug. 2.13.14. Tribes: till at the last all Israell sinned & did that
 whilk was euil in the sight of the Lord. So there is no questiō, Sir, & your Maiestie put not to your hand, as your haue begun to doe it will get foote in this land, & it would passe from fa∣milies to tribes, from priuate houses, to temples: from the worship of the round bread to the worship of stockes & stones, and so by one degree to another, till it haue made all guiltie, what by infecting, what by Communicating with their sinnes, and then bring the fearfull vengeance of God vpon all. And suppose, Sir, that you haue not neede to bee taught of any for that light and vnderstanding where-with the Lorde hes annoynted you, in so greate a measure beyonde many, doth teach you all things, and your Maiestie hes laid so sure foundation of maintenance, both of iustice and religion within your land, and hes begun so substantially to prosecute the same, (for the whilk from our harts we render glory and prayse to God.) So that all further exhortation of your Ma∣iestie would seeme to be superfluous, yet I must borrow leaue at your Maiestie, to be bolde with all humblenesse of mind & reuerence of hart, to God and to your Maiestie, to beseeke you by the price of Iesus Christ your Lord, to stirre vp the bowels of your compassion ouer this desolate countrie, for
1. Reg. 1.20. vpon whome are the eyes of all Israell but vpon you Sir? And what King is there vnder heauen vnder whose gouernement the gospel, hes had so free a passage, & the kirk of god hes had sik purity & libertie, in sik peace for so long a time in a whole kingdome, without heresie or schisme as vnder your Maiesties gouernement. So that wee were both vngrate to God and to you Sir, if with all thanksgiuing we did not acknowledge it. Take therefore for examples these worthie Kinges, who hes receaued a good reporte in the word of the Lord and now re∣sting from their laboures, hes receaued that incorruptible crowne of glory. Put on their affections Sir, and follow their
 actions, that your report heir, and crowne heirafter, may be equall,
2 or rather aboue theirs. Let your heart q melt, Sir, with good Iosias, not for our fathers transgressions, as he did, but for
Eze. 9.4. our owne sins, and the sinnes of this land: For God
Act. 17.30 31. Rom. 2.16 regarded not the time of their ignorance, when the Gospell shyned not, but now since that light is bro∣ken foorth, he admonishes all men to repent, because he lies set a day (whilk cannot be far of) wherein he will iudge euerie one by the man Christ Iesus accor∣ding to his Gospell. And if that great
Reu 10.1 2. Angel had not descended vnto vs, with that little booke open in his right hād, & the land had not bene once purged of idolatry, we should not
Ioh. 15.21.24. haue had sinned, but nowe we haue no cloake for our sinne. Stirre vp your anger with Moses, Sir, who suppose he was
Num. 12.13. the meekest man vppon the face of the whole earth, yet when he sawe the golden calfe his
Ez. 32.19 anger was kindled, that he brake the Tables of stone, the Lords owne worke and write, brunt the Calfe in the fire, braied it in powder, scattered it on the waters, and made the people to drinke thereof. Follow the example of good Iehosaphat, Sir, who
2. Chron. 27.4.20. sought the Lord his God, walked in his precepts, lifted vp his heart to the wayes of the Lord, purged his lande of Idolatrie: and first sent Levites with his owne Princes to teache all the citties of his kingdome the law of the Lord: and after being admonished by the Prophet, for helping of the wicked, and louing them who hated the Lord, (suppose he was his neighbour king, joined in affinity with him) he so repented, that he went from the one end of his kingdome to the o∣ther, euen from Beersheba to mount Ephraim, and brought his people to the Lord their God, and esta∣blished
 religion, and justice in all the citties of his kingdome, and therefore the Lord was with him, he prospered, & had riches and honour in aboundance. What ioy of heart, Sir, brought Ezechias to the hearts of all the godly, aswell indwellers, as strangers, when he
2. Chro. 29 & 30.31. purged his land of Idolatry, brake the brasen serpent whilk the people had abused, opened the dores of the Tē∣ple whilk were shut vp, restored the worship of God, sent messingers with letters throughout al Israel, to conuert them to the Lorde their God, restored the Priests and Leuites to their ministry, as the Lord had commanded by his Prophetes, spake to their hearts, strēgthened them in their offices, prouided for their maintenance, that they might be encouraged in the Law of the Lord. Followe these examples Sir: send Pa∣stors throughout all the borders of your kingdome, to teache your subiects the Law of their Lord, and the Gospell of their saluation, establishe Religion and Iustice in all the citties of your Kingdome. Cause the
Zach. 14 8 9. waters of life to runne frō the heart of your countrie, vnto the borders thereof, that publickly and priuately, the Lorde may be but one, and his name one, and he may be a soueraigne King in all your land, as it was prophecied and promised. Establishe Pastors in all your Kingdome, strengthen them in their offices, and speake to their hearts. Prouyde for their maintenance, that they be not distracted, but may be encou∣raged in the Law of their God, and in the execution of their ministrie. And when it is reported to your Maiesty, or ye heare of any, be they many, or be they fewe, be they man, or be they wife, be it publictly, or be it secretly, in any of the citties or parts in your Maiesties Kingdome, that they haue gone out to entise others to Idolatry, or hes committed Idolatry them∣selues,
 ye try it, searche it, and seeke it out most diligently, for so the Lord hes most straitly commanded. And if it be true & certaine, that sik abhomination is done in your kingdom; take euill out of Israel, that he may haue mercy on vs, and multiply his blissings to vs. And then may ye Sir, (hauing done all these things) take God to recorde, that you are cleane from the blood of all your people, be∣cause you haue kept no meane back from thē, whilk your cal∣ling craued, but hes caused the whole counsel of God to be shewed to them: so that if they perishe their owne blood may be vpon their owne heades. And then shall forraine nations and strangers say of you Sir, as
Reg. 5 7. Hiram, and the Queene of Sheba saide of Salomon, Blissed
Reg 10.8.9. be the Lord God who hes set sik a wise and vnderstanding Prince ouer Scotland, to builde his Kirk, and to exercise iustice & iudgement there, it was for the loue the Lord had to his Kirk there, that he set sik a wise and vnderstāding Prince ouer them. Yea,
Psal. 78, 4. the generations to come, shal tell to their children, and their childrens children, the great work of the Lord, whilk he hes done by you, Sir, in this land. I haue heard your Maiesty grauely protest, before God, in two generall assemblies, that it was one of your Maiesties greatest desires, and ye were euen, as it were, ambitious of that worke, to plant euery Parochin within your kingdome, with a Pa∣stor: that the posterities to come, might say, King IAMES the sext, hes done sik a notable worke in his dayes. Confirme your self, Sir, in that purpose: for ye know, Sir, who hes said,
1. Sam. 2.30. I will honour them that honors mee. There is no que∣stion, Sir, and I speake with confidence, if ye honour him in this kingdome, and be faithfull to him in the gouernement of it, he shal honour you: not only by making you to raigne in that euerlasting kingdome, but also by lifting you vp to bee
 rewler ouer moe Kingdomes heir. The Lord annoynted Da∣uid King ouer all Israel: yet he gaue not the possession of it al at once, after the death of Saul, but first proued him with the gouernement of one Tribe seauen yeares and a halfe, & then finding him faithfull ouer that, he placed him rewler ouer all the rest, & established all Israel in his hand. So there is no question, and I am sure of it, if ye honour the Lorde to the vttermoste of your power, in the gouernement of this kingdome, and giue him a proofe of your fidelity therein: that as he hes giuen you the vndoubted right by birth, to bee a King ouer moe Kingdomes then this, so shall he make you rewler of them, and establish them in your hands: onely Sir,
Iosua 1.6.7.8.9. be ye strong and couragious to do with al diligence as the Lord hes commanded you in his worde, and as ye see these faithfull Kings hes done before you. Decline neither to the right hand, nor to the left, & then assu∣redly I dare promise you in the name of the Lord, hee shall not leaue you or forsake you al your dayes, and none shall be able to stand before your face And as he was with Iosua and Dauid, so shall he be with you. For the Lord is true who hes promised, and then shalt thou pros∣per in all thy waies. And consider vpon the other part who euer prospered vnto the end, but these that walked as the Lord had commanded. For true is that whilk the Lorde spake by his Prophet to Asa,
2. Chro. 1.4 2. He is with you while ye be with him, and if ye seeke him, he wil be found but if ye will forsake him, he will forsake you. Was the Lord any longer with Saule, Ioash, Amazia, Vzzia, al Kings of Iuda, then they were with him? No, no: but from time they forsooke him, he forsooke them. Because Saule
1. Sam. 15 23. & 16.15. despised the word of the Lorde, in sparing whome he should not haue spared, the Lord despised him from be∣ing
 King ouer Israell, and the Spirite of the Lorde forsooke him. Because Ioashe forsooke the Lord,
2. Chro. 24 20. in permitting Idolatrie at the request of his princes, the Lord forsooke him and his kingdome, and deli∣uered them into the hands of their enemies. Because Amatzia did euill, and obeyed
2 Cro. 5.16. not the councell of the Prophet, when he admonished him, the Lorde de∣termined to destroy him. Vzzia al the
2. Cro. 26.5.16.18. dayes that he sought the Lord, the Lorde prospered him, but frō time he lifted vp himselfe to corrupt himself, and to trespasse against the Lord his God, in passing the li∣mites of his calling, and inuading the Priests office, he had no honour of the Lord but was smitten with leaprosie. But let all these things be farre from your Ma∣iestie, since you see what euerie one of these hes done to Kings and Kingdomes before you, let your hearte be constant be∣fore the Lord your God all the dayes of your life, that priores
2. Cro. 25.26. & posteriores, be neuer registrate of your Maie∣stie as it was of them, neither in the bookes of the Lordes cōmentary before him, neither in the Chronicles of the kings of Scotland, but that both your former & latter may be that whilk is good and right in the eyes of the Lord. That both the Lorde may giue this testimonye to your owne conscience, and to the conscience of all his children, that hee gaue of Dauid, I haue founde you a man according to my owne hart that will doe all my will: and also, that it may be written of your Maeistie in the Chronicles of the Kings of Scotland as it was written of Dauid, Ezechias, Io∣sias, in the Chronicles of the Kings of Iuda, that King IAMES the sext, his harte was persite toward the Lorde his God all his dayes, and his gouernement was in sik peace and Iustice, that after him there was none like him of al
 the Kings of Scotland: neither was there any sik before him, who did cleaue vnto the Lord his God, with all his heart, and followed all his commandements, and neither declined to the right hand, nor to the left. Nowe the Lord graunt to your Maiesty, that yee may finde this fauour in his eies for his Christs sake. I haue nowe taken this boldenesse, to offer these my labours vnto your Maiestie: as a testimony of my moste humble, and loyall hart vnto your Maiestie, as God the sear∣cher of the heart knowes. Your Maiestie did exceedingly en∣courage mee, to let it goe forth vnto the light, what by your Maiesties moste gracious acceptation of my indeuour, and moste fauourable censure, and approbation of my laboures: what by your Maiesties humane counsell and aduise, confir∣med by your Maiesties Priuiledge and authoritie to mee to publishe the same. Sik was your Maiesties humanitie to mee, not onely in these, but in all your actions, both publick and priuate, with all your subiects, of whatsomeuer ranke or degree. Ye kyith sik humanitie and affabilitie, that that saying of Trajanus the Emperour, that a Prince shuld be haue himself so to his subiects, as he would haue thē to doe to him, if he were a priuate man, is verefied in you, Sir, wherein certainelie ye need not to giue place to any of whatsomeuer ranke: you expres it so liuelie in al your actions, & I haue found it for my owne parte by experience. So that your Maiestie hes often caused me to remember, that notable saying of Titus that Romane Emperour, A subject should neuer goe sad hearted from the speach of his Prince: The whilk experience makes me to conceaue hope, that your Maiestie will pardon this my boldenesse, will accept in good part this my small myte. I therefore most humblie desire your Maiestie to accept it, as from your Maiesties moste hum∣ble
 obedient seruant and subiect. For whose peace and prosperitie, I am alwaies earnest with the Lorde. Now the God of all peace, euen that King of Kings, powre all light and grace in all aboundance, more and more, vpon your Ma∣iestie, and so roote and ground your heart in Iesus Christ, that ye may honour him more and more in your life and cal∣ling heir, that ye may be honoured of him againe, both in this life, and in that day with immortall and euerlasting glorie. Amen. From Aire the 18. of Nouember. 1602.

