


YF they be wor¦thye prayse who for a zeale and desyre that they haue to do theyr neyghbours good, do wryghte and put in prynte suche thynges as by experyence they haue proued, or by heare saye of graue and trustye men they

haue learned, or by reading of good and auncyent authores they haue vnderstan∣ded, to be a salue or medycyne, to a mans body or to a parte or membre of the same, how muche more deserue they thank and prayse that teache vs a true comfort salue & medycyne of the soule, spyrit, & mynde. The whych spyryte and mynde the more precyous, it is then the bodye, the more daungerous be hys sores and syknes, and the more thancke worth the cure thereof, For a well quyeted mynde to a troubled bodye, yet maketh quyetnes, and sycknes of bodye or losse of goodes is not muche paynfull, to hym that estemeth it not, or aketh it pacyently.
But an vnquyet mynde, yea to a moste hole bodye, maketh helth vnpleasaunt, & death to be wyshed, And an vnsacyable mynde and sore wyth desyre of more, ma∣keth ryches, pouertye, and health a syk∣nes, strengthe an infyrmyte, bewty a de∣formyte, and welth pouertye, wken by comparyng hys felycytye wyth a better it leseth the grace and ioye of that it hath and felyth the smart of that it hath not.
The to amende thys in wealthe,

and to take awaye sorowe and griefe, where no iuste nor apparaunte cause of gryefe is, is a greate mayster of physy∣kes dede, and worthye muche commen∣dacyon, what is he then worthy that can ease gryefe in dede, and make healthe where a verye sore restyth, I meane that can ease a man set in afflyccyon, take away the gryefe from hym that is perse∣cuted, lose the prysoner yet in bondes, take awaye aduersytye in aduersytye, make greuous syckenes not to be felt, make pouertye ryches, beggerye to be reioysed at.
Dyuers learned men heretofore by reasons grounded of mans knowledge wrot and inuented great comforte agay∣nste all kynde of gryefes, And so emonge the gentle and phylosophers bokes, be bokes of comforte, But whosoeuer folo∣weth but worldlye and mans reason to teache comforte to the troubled mynde can geue but a counterfeit medycyne, And as the Surgyon doeth, whyche colorablye healeth, or the physycyon, whyche geueth medycynes that doeth astunyshe and mortyfye the place, they deceyue the pacyent, And peraduenture

to the outward showe they may bring i a certayne stowtnes and blynde dissem∣blinge of payne, But the true healyng of gryefe and sorowe they had not, for they lacked the grounde, they lacked that, that shoulde heale the sore at the bone fyrste, that is true fayth in Christ and hys holye word. All medycynes of the soule, whych be layed on the sores therof, not hauynge that cleanser wyth them, be but ouer hea∣lers, they do not take away the ranklyng wythin, and many tymes vnder colors of hasty he alyng, they bryng fourth proude fleshe in the sore, as euell and worse as that, whych was furst corrupte.
Thys man whosoeuer he be, that was the fyrst author of thys boke (if oure iud∣gement be anye thynge) goeth the ryghte waye to worck, he bryngeth hys grounde from Gods worde, he taketh wyth hym the oyle and wyne of the Samarytan, he Luk. x. d caryeth the hurte man from thence as he lay hurt, and bryngeth hym to hys right hoste, where no dowt he may be cured if he wyll hym selfe aplye hym thereto, It is red in hystoryes that the maner emong the olde Egyptyans or Assyrians was when any were syck to lay hym abroade,

that euery man that passed by myght tell if he had bene vexed wyth lyke syckenes what thyng was that, that dyd cure and heale hym, and so they myght vse i to the pacyente. And by thys meanes it is thou∣ght, that the scyence of physyck was first found oute. So that it maye appeare that thys redynes to teach an other that thing wherein a man fealeth ease of gryefe, is not onlye Christian, but also naturall.
In oure greate trouble, whyche of late dyd happen vnto vs (as all the worlde ☜ doth knowe) when it please God for a tyme to attempte vs wyth hys scourge, and to proue if we loued hym, In reading thys boke we dyd fynde greate comforte and an inwarde and godlye workynge power much releuyng the gryefe of oure mynde. The whych thyng now callynge to remembrance, we do thynke it oure du∣tye not to be more vnnatural then the old Egyptyans were. But rather as the of∣fyce of a Christian is to be ready to helpe all men by all wayes possyble that we can, and especyally those that be afflicted.
And herevpon we haue requyred hym of whom we had the copye of thys boke ☜ the rather at our request and commenda∣cyon,

to set thys boke forth and in prynte, That not onelye we or one or two more, but all that be afflycted maye take profyt and consolacyon if they wyll, Yea and they that be not afflycted, maye eyther see what they should haue done in theyr tro∣ble. Or what hereafter they ought to do, if anye lyke happeneth, Knowynge cer∣teynely, that suche is the vncerteintye of the world and all humayne thynges, that no man standeth so sure▪ but the tempeste of afflyccion and aduersyte may ouertake . cor. x. b h, and if the grace of god do not syn∣gularly helpe him, caste hym doe and make hym fall, Wherfore it is moste ne∣cessarye alwaies to haue in redyues suche godlye medytacyons and medycynes, as maye pacyye Gods wrath begynnynge to kyndle, and defend in parte the bytter∣nes of afflyccyon, whereof thys boke is very plentuous and full. Fare you well. From oure house at So∣merset place, the▪ vi. day of May. Anno. 1550.
