


AT your requests, in your seuerall Sheriualties (Right worshipfull) I preached these two ser∣mons: where I trust the Lord gaue a blessing, to the fruit of my barren and vnworthie lippes. But be∣cause the most part of Auditors heare sermons, as Trauailers, by the lawe, might vse Grapes: that is: eate someDeut. 23. 25 for the present time, but cary none away with them: and for that our
 Lord and Sauiour teacheth such fruga∣litie in feasts of small preparation, that the fragments should be gatheredohn. 6. 12. vp, and nothing lost: I haue thought it not amisse, to presse out the liquour of these my grapes, and present the reuer∣sion of them, as it were after the feast, in this basket of leaues: for a more ge∣nerall vse, and longer continuaunce. If the remaynes seeme greater then the former prouision, impute it to Gods blessing, that suffereth no decrements, nor want at his feastes: and to the short allowance of tyme, wherewith my wordes (but not my sense) were assy∣sed, and stinted at the first deliuerie. In such earnest businesse, when there is no surplus of time to bee borrowed, we holde it lawfull to temporize: not quen∣ching the spirit, but cōueying the streams
 of our words within narrow banks: after which sort, they may be more fruitfull (the Lorde assisting) then if they ouer∣flowed, all without boundes or measure. But howsoeuer then, these exercises were abridged by the hower, yet now in the writing, I haue giuen them more free vent, and libertie, where euerie man may bee the caruer of his owne time, in hearing and reading. And in this maner nowe published, I sende them abroade, vnder your names and tytles (Right worshipfull) that they may be, not onelie a pledge of my good will to you both, vnited in one Epistle, as yee are in loue; and in loue like Da∣uid1. Sā. 20. 17. 2. Sam. . 2 and Ionathan: but also giue te∣stimonie of that commendable order in your graue assemblies, where I perceiued both Iudges and Gentlemen, beginning
 their affaires, with the first fruits of their knees, eares, hearts, and tongues consecrated to God, and directing the rest of their proceedings accordingly, in wisedome, and iustice. In this loose and prophane age, wherin too many make an Idole of their priuate fancie, and blesse themselues in their mother witte (the moste base Idolatrie of all others,ib▪ de vera elig. ca. 38. saith Austen) It is a comfort yet, that the Cedars, and men of greatest note, will beautifie Gods seruice with theyr worthie examples, as they strengthen iudgement with their Authoritie. The deligent execution of iudgement in ciuil causes, is without doubt an acceptable seruice to God. For which purpose, both Iudges, & Rulers are commanded to be wise, and learned, that in the same they may serue the Lord▪ yet not onely as ciuil
 Politicians, but as holy Christians with feare and trembling. And therefore theyPsal. 2. must kisse the sonne, least he be angrie, and bende the knees of their wisdome, power, & authoritie, to the name of him first, that is president ouer the congrega∣tion of the gods on earth. The heathens neuer durst attempt any matter of great importance, without inuocation on their gods, and some solemne inauguration, or sacrifice, performed by their priests, and wizards; to get a forehand blessing to their actions. Euen amongst them it see∣med absurd, and arrogant, to commence graue enterpryses, without calling a greater power to their assistaunce: al∣though some did attribute so much to their owne wisedome, prowesse, and for∣tune, that they thought praiers were for simple wretches, and fooles, as Aiax (like
 an Atheist) vaunted: Aliorum est vin∣cereMelācthon rat. de precat. Do iuuante, &c. Other coward∣lie fellowes may obtaine victorie by the helpe of God, but such as he could do well enough without him. Yet such were accompted most miserable, euen of those that had onelie a generall glimse of an vnknowne God: and therefore Homer at all hard assaies, sheweth how great, & small, did enterprise nothing without some supplication to the gods. As for the auncient Israelites, they had their Le∣uitesNumb. 10. with trumpets to go before them; Priestes and Prophets assistant in all1. Sam. 13. 13 difficult occasions. When Saul left Sa∣muel, he proued himselfe a foole, though hee offered a selfe-will sacrifice to the Lord. And what became of the penne of the Scribes, or the wisdome of the wise, when they leaned to their owne fancies?
 The pen (saith Ieremy became vain,Ierem. 8. 9. the wise mē are ashamed, afraid, & taken, for lo: they haue reiected the word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in thē? But the practise in those your assemblies, declare your reuerence to ho∣ly exercises, which to your cōmendations and gods glory are continued: the Char∣ter of heauen being first vnfolded, & the Commission from the next supreame Go∣uernor, afterward being read, that both your authoritie from heauen, and earth, may giue the Iudges confidence in their proceedings, & good successe in their de∣terminations. In that place at two seue∣rall times I was a witnes of the generall cōsent of many worthy gentlemē, for the furtherāce of peace, iustice, & good order: but I haue had dayly experience in your selues, & som others about vs, with what singular
 care and dexteritie, you haue managed the weightie affaires, both of your Prince and country, whensoeuer you haue beene emploied, by commission from the one, or petition from the other. Neither haue your publike employments withdrawne you from the exercise of priuate vertues: your delight in holie exercises is mani∣fest, by your diligent repaire vnto them, your affabilitie, and kindnesse appeareth in the courteous carriage of your selues towardes all men that deserue not the contrarie. Which personall qualities are also graced with a diligent reformation of your followers: a matter of greaterIn Pagy∣ic. dicto Traiano. magnificence (saith Plinie) then for a man to reforme himselfe. Whence it was that the Queene of Saba was not onelie in admiration of Salomons wis∣dome,. King. 10. 5. and answers; but also of the sitting
 of his seruants, and the order and appa∣rell of his attendants. To confirme and encourage you in this course of vertue, ye haue had both domesticall, and neigh∣bour examples, whereof some haue en∣ded their race, others remaine still, not forgetfull of their Countrie by priuate occasions, or greater preferments. A∣mongst whom I may register these two worthy & ancient standards, sir Hen∣rie Cocke, and sir Philip Butler, knights of especiall marke, and accompt, such as since my remembrance haue flou∣rished in the Courts of the Lords house, and yeelded much excellent seruice to their Prince, succour to their coūtry, and shadow to the Preachers, and ministers of the truth. Neither is the last of these qualities to be the least regarded, espe∣ciallie amongst vs, where the ministers
 are prouided of maintenaunce, but as yonger brethren, hauing liuings for the most part like the Amazonites, giuing sucke but of one breast, the other being diseased with a Wolfe, or quite cut off with an Impropriation. For who seeth not how euerie Bramble is readie to scratch them that creepe low? euerie co∣warde hartned to strike him that may not strike again? I speake not this for im∣patiencie of want, or iniuries, or to plead an irregularitie to priuiledge any cor∣ruption in vs: for wee haue learned both to be abased, & to abound, to turne our cheekes to the smiter: and giue for aPhilip. 4. 10. Math. 5. need the coat of a poore vicaridge, to him that by law can take away the cloake of of our parsonage. But so long as the Lord maintaineth the crowne vpon the head of his annointed handmaid, & continu∣eth
 our gracious Prince nurse royall of the Gospel, & mother of peace: we are to expect safely vnder such as you (Right worshipfull) being hir hands, & wings of defence, as she is the Angel of God vpon the earth for the preseruation of his pro∣phets & people. And I must confesse, that as the Lord hath planted this barren iu∣risdiction with many fruitfull vines: so haue they receiued frō time to time much comfort & assistance in their ministerie, by you the religious gentlemen of digni∣tie, and countenaunce, wherein you giue testimony thai you feare the Lord, whose lowly ambassadors you kindly entertain. And his true feare is the only grain, that setteth a perfect glasse, and a liuely tinc∣ture vpon all other wordly respectes and colours: which shall flourish, when Nimrods Babel, Absolons pillar, & all gorgeous buildings, with the names
 of their founders shal lie in the dust. Nei∣ther amongest these comforts receyued, toward the encouragement of the Mini∣sters here abouts, may I forget the tender regard of that reuerend father, placed o∣uer vs, now L. B. of Lond. whose entrāce was in much fatherly kindnesse towards vs: not in any hard exactions, coloured with beneuolence, but rather in forbea∣rance of auntient duties; since when he hath declared his continuall care, by di∣uerse cautions giuen for our gentle and courteous vsage: beside the preuention of some late expenses, and payments, that else-where, the meanest liuings tasted deepely of▪ All which temporall encou∣ragements, being supplies of some cōten∣tation to a meane estate, we thankefully acept, as at the handes of God, thereby acknowledging our selues deepely bound
 to distill our spirits, and studies into such wine of comfort, as may againe cheare both God and men. In the depth of which desire, I the most vntimely slippe in the vineyard, haue tendered these two Ser∣mōs, as an after gleaning of grapes, vn∣to the presse of learning: the licor wherof if it hath any waterish, or earthly wet, impute it to the caske: if it haue any ce∣lestiall rellishe, or sweet sauour, yeelde the praise and glorie to God, who is able to turne our weake water, into wine of strōg consolation; whereof I wish the perpetu∣all fruition, to your selues as to mine own soule. And further desiring the Lord of his abundance, to multiplie his graces spirituall & temporall, vpō you & your posteritie for euer: I hūbly take my leaue.

