



RIght Honourable, the Religion, or more truly, the superstition of the malignant Church of Rome, hath two speciall priuiledges aboue any religion in the world that either hath been, or is. The one, that the professors of it may eate their God in the Sacrament: the other, that they may kill their King in their discontentment; not only when he is an Heretike, but, as the law saith,It is the reason giuen why Pope Zacharie deposed Hil∣aerike King of France, and set vp Pipine in his place in Gratians de∣cree. part. 2. caus. 15. c. 3. Alius. when he is In∣utilis, not for their turne and to their mindes. The former hath bin the cause of the spilling of much blood in the daies of Q. Mary: the latter of deposing of so many Kings, and murthering of them, in France, and other places of Chri∣stendome, and of the manifolde treasons in the daies of Queene Elizabeth of blessed and happie memorie. And of two attempts against his sacred person and state, in these
three yeeres space. The first was but a smoake, the latter should haue been a sire: the first was but the lightning; the latter should haue been the thunderclap; if he that is the God both of lightning and thunder had not gratiously pre∣uented it. Now the former of these points they defend euery where: but the latter they a little blush to heare of; not that it is not in their hearts, but because their hands want power to effect it. Yet that it is their doctrine and constant opinion, hath been prooued in a small treatise, which I pre∣sented to our I honor some few moneths ago. And that so apparantly that they are at a default, as the Councell was Act. 4.16. What shall we doe to these men? for sure∣ly a manifest signe is done by them, and is openly knowne to all them who dwell in Ierusalem: and we cannot denie it. So with a little change it may bee said by them; What shall we say to these things? for surely a manifest truth is told by them, and it is openly knowne to all them who dwell in England: and wee cannot denie it. For though they haue endeuoured to answere it, yet they haue not bin able to denie any thing in it. Only these Char∣mers of the spirituall Egypt haue endeuoured to doe in like manner with their inchantments.Exod. 7.11. But as all the Sorcerers miracles were not true, but onely sleights and trickes by the helpe of Satan: so are not these for the most part, but only Iaglings, and not able to deceiue any but fooles & chil∣dren, either the ignorant, or the seduced alreadie. And in many things in effect they say as Iudah:Gen. 44.16. How can wee iustifie our selues? God and man hath found out the wickednes of vs all. But not to digresse further: at the time of my presenting of the foresaid Treatise to your Honour, it pleased you to shew me Campians tenne Rea∣sons, lately taken in a Papists house, translated into English;
wherewith many were perued, and others made to stag∣ger in the way o truth; because of the goodly shew of truth that such gilded lies haue put vpon them by such cunning Orators. Your Honour was then giuen to vnderstand, that they were answered by diuers, especially by that worthie and excellent Instrument of Gods glorie, and one of the most glorious lights of our English Church, Doctor Whitakers. The book was shewed you; but being written in the Latin tongue, you wished for the m re benefit of the generall, that it might be turned into English. Your will was a com∣maund vnto me, who professe I owe much dutie to your Ho∣nour, and haue had lesse opportunitie than will to shew it, for these few yeeres space I haue been towards you: and now as soone as I could, for my publike seruice of the Church in my poore ministerie, I haue effected it. Touching which if I may bee bold to deliuer what I thinke in few words, thus much I say for Campians reasons: I account him bold in all, foolish in many things; yet wise in this, that in the be∣ginning he tels vs they are his tenne chiefe Reasons. Here∣in he is like to the foolish Painter, who when he had made two pictures of two small beasts, which after they were made, nothing resembled those which he intended, writ o∣uer their heads, This is such a beast, and this such an one. So he hauing composed these tenne Rhetoricall speeches, be∣ing so without reason, which he intended they should haue had, he calles them reasons, lest the reader in perusing should haue mistaken them, as he he had done in writing. Doubtlesse at a conclusion Campian is an excellent fel∣low; and if he could haue furnished as good premises, as he hath enhaunced and amplified the conclusion, he would haue put the answerer to much trouble. But now we may say of them as Hierom said of the bookes of Iouinian:Hieron. aduers. Iouinian. lib. 1. It
is harder to know what he holds,Multo diffici∣lius est nosse, quam vincere. . Portenta ver∣borum descrip∣tionis dedecus. Vel per fbrem somniare, vel a reptum mor∣bo phrenetico, Hippocratis vinculis alli∣gandum. Hieron. cont. Heluid. cap. 3. Ne responden∣do dignus fie∣ret, qui vince∣retur. Quia loquaci∣tatm facundia existimat. Quia maledi∣cere omnibus, bonae conserea∣tiae signum ar∣bitratur. Obscandalum fratrum, qui ad cius rabien mo∣uebantur. than to confute his opinions: not for any deepnes of matter, but because he is as Hierome calles Iouinian, one that loues to speak darkly. For he hath (as he speaketh) bumbasted words, deformed discourses, and he that reades him aduised∣ly, would thinke him either dreaming in some distem∣pered fit of an Ague, or perhaps rather sick of a fren∣sie, so that he had neede of Hippocrates physicke or fetters: which had been farre more meete for him, than an answere from so worthie a man. Hierome had three speciall reasons why he was hardly induced to answere Hel∣uidius. First, lest by answering he should make him bee thought worthie the encounter. Secondly, be∣cause hee accounted his babling to bee eloquence. Thirdly, because hee made it a note of a good con∣science, to raile and speake euill of others. Which things might well haue staied this worthie man from wri∣ting, seeing all these three might well bee feared, yea mani∣festly sound in this hereticall Iesuite, more than in Helui∣dius. But as Hierome, to remoue the scandall of the brethren, who were moued by his outrage, or might be infected by his poyson, broke off his silence: so did this excellent Champion of Christ encounter with this vn∣circumcised Philistine of Antichrist; and hath answered him for manner, not as he and his manner of writing well deserued,August. cont. lit. Petill. Do nat. lib. 2. c. 37. Tantum vos diliganius, vt viuatis, quantis estiis errorem odimus, vt in∣tereat, qui vos perdit. but yet withall so, as his owne nature and milde disposition was accustomed, who might haue said of him∣selfe as Augustine of his dealing with the Donatists: We so loue your persons that we wish you may liue; and so hate your error, as desiring it should perish, which workes your ruine. So meekly hath he answered him in all things, saue some few times by his prouecations he is a
little sharpe, as Moses the meekest man was once or twice moued at his people and their peruersenes. For the matter, he hath kept that course with him, which he hath com∣monly and commendably (in my poore opinion) obserued, when he dealt with other aduersaries, that is, hath answe∣red to the full that is obiected, but hath not troubled him∣selfe to forecast what might be moreouer obiected, to take that away; which makes any mans worke both tedious and obscure. And this as it seemeth hath been the cause of Du∣raeus his replie: it falling out in this warre, which Cam∣pian speakes of, as in marshall affaires; when the defendant maketh shew of no more strength, then that by which hee might wel repell and conquer the present assaults of the first part of the band; the second is prouoked and tolled on vpon hope of the victorie, as if there were not strength enough to resist them: so Duraeus happily thought, that D. Whita∣kers had spent all his strength in opposing of Campian, and that he should haue found an easie aduersarie in a se∣cond encounter: but his hopes deceiued him, for he hath found him sufficient for this assault also. Now Duraeus his defence of Campian, and D. Whitakers of himself, haue I, according to your Honours desire, annexed to the other, but yet only by briefe marginall notes: wherein I haue en∣deuoured to make both the obiection and answere as full as I could, and doe iniurie vnto neither. If the aduersaries shall thinke that I haue not giuen their Champions reasons and obiections, their full weight, I protest to them wittingly I haue not diminished him any thing at all. If they thinke he hath any more force in himselfe, let them translate him into English; and though my leisure be small from my pub∣like Ministery and ordinarie studies, yet will I take so much time frō them, as to translate Doctor Whitakers also to
the full. In this which I haue done, I haue not taken that li∣bertie in translating of the answeres, as I finde he hath done who hath translated Campian, and yet haue I not strickt∣ly tied my selfe vnto the words, but followed our English phrase, which hath his proprietie of speech, as well as the Latin. Not to be too troublesome to your Honour in with∣holding you from the treatise which followeth. When you come to it, you shall hardly finde any controuersie betwixt vs and the Synagogue of Rome, but it is in part touched, (confusedly I grant, but otherwise it could not be, seeing he was to follow the steps of him who had very little method in him, and lesse matter) and therefore it may be as an En∣chiridion, which being euer had with you, and read with some diligence, as your great affaires of the state will per∣mit you, you shall hardly be vnfurnished of some pregaant matter, against almost all the points, which the aduersaries haue made goodly in shew, but nothing in substance. And thus I commend these my small labours to your Honour, who set me on worke. Vouchsafe I humbly beseech you, to accept thē as a memoriall of my duty to your Honor. And as you haue alwaies professed the true Christian and Apo∣stolike faith, and detested error & superstition: so I intreate your Honor that according to your place you will still ende∣uour to maintaine the same truth against all Opposers: and further the good lawes,Ille haereticum interficit, qui esse haereticum patitur. Caete∣rum nostra cor∣reptio, viuifica∣tio est, vt haeresi moriens, viuas Catholicae fidei. Hieron. coat. Pelag. lib. 3. c. 6 but specially the execution of them against all such seducers as this Campian was in his time. And if that be true of Ierome: He kils an heretike who suffers him to be an heretike: but a iust punishment of them is the quickning and putting life into them, that dying to their heresie, they may liue to the Ca∣tholike faith. Vouchsafe them also this pitie, knowing at length by experience it is not the way for authoritie to wi
them by lenitie, but to represse them, and so gaine them by iust seueritie. At the leastwise haue compassion on the many thousands of this kingdome that haue been and daily are corrupted by their inchantments, and thereby made arch∣enemies of their Prince, the Church, and State, yea and of their own saluation. Now the God of glorie,1. Sam. 2.0. who honours them that honour him, encrease your spirituall graces and earthly honour, and make you more and more a speciall in∣strument vnder his Highnes of the peace and welfare of the Church and Common-wealth, accom∣plishing all your desires for present pro∣speritie and future felicitie.

