



IT is not vnknowen to your Honor, how the aduersaries haue neuer ceased since the beginning of hir Maiesties moste hap∣pie reigne vntil this day, by their bookes in great numbers written and published, and by al other means, that possiblie they might deuise, to trouble the state of the Church, and to diffame that holy religi∣on of Christ, which through Gods great
mercie, and godlie lawes of our gratious Souereign, is according to his holy word established amongst vs. VVhat they haue wrought with manie of al estates, and how mightelie they haue preuailed with that strong & effectual illusion of Satan, which hath aduaunced Antichrist vnto that supremacie of power, authoritie, and credit in the world, wherof the holy ghost by SS. Paul & Iohn hath foretold, la∣mentable experience can witnes in the backsliding, and continuall falling of ma∣nie away from vs, to their own final per∣dition, to the grief of the godlie, & to the great encouragement and comfort of the enemie. And among other examples of this Apostasie, I offer to your Honor one verie notable, euen the man with whom I haue in this booke to deale, who hauing bene late not onlie a common professor of our religion, but a publick minister and
preacher of the same in our Church, hath not onlie reuolted from vs, through some worldly tentations, and run ouer into our enemies cāp, but hath also lifted vp his heel against vs, and in open writing most ma∣litiously and bitterly railed at vs. Occasi∣on of vttering his conceiued malice a∣gainst vs, in his late writing he taketh by a certein Preface of mine before the an∣swer to D. Saunders demonstrations of Antichrist, which being not verie long, and handling no great variety of matter, I neuer thoght could haue prouoked the Aduersarie so much, or procured so long and large a Confutation. I looked rather that the substance of my book concerning Antichrist, should haue bin answered by some that would maintein Saūders argu∣ments, wherby he laboreth to prooue that the Pope cannot be Antichrist; which be∣ing in deed a weighty and moste materiall
controuersie, required the learning and diligence of the moste sufficient scholler amongst them. Neither coulde I other∣wise suspect, but seeing I had written in latin against a latin Aduersarie, he who∣soeuer should take in hand to set forth anie thing against me, would haue done it in the latin tongue. But M. Rainolds, who was appointed (as he saith) to aun∣swere my booke of Antichrist, and in all his actions professeth himself to be orde∣red by those, to whose gouernment he hath submitted himselfe, pretending in shew to publish a confutation thereof, hath written onely against the preface, wherin are handled other matters, & so hath answered nothing to the principall question, wherof the book, that he would seeme to haue confuted, speciallie entrea∣teth: & further hath written not in latin as I did, but in english, as liked best his
gouernors & himself. VVherupon I was at the first partlie persuaded to passe o∣uer this Refutation of his with silence: & the rather, because I listed not to reason or deale against such a one as he is, of whom for manie respects I could not con∣ceiue anie hope at al, that euer my labors should doe him good, hauing thus embra∣ced pernitious & deceitful error, & wil∣fullie cast awaie from him the loue of the truth, which once he had in shew recei∣ued, which he pretended to beleeue, and which he did in deed profes. Which kind of men through Gods iustice for the most part are giuen ouer into such reprobate hardnes of hart, that they can neuer af∣ter be reclaimed, but continue alwaies de∣sperate to their euerlasting destruction. Notwithstanding, when I perused better the contents of his booke, and tooke aduise of the godlie, what were best for me to do
herein, whether I should make answer to this man, or rather obeying king Ezechi∣as commandement, let him alone, and say nothing to him, I was in the end resolued to set forth a plain and sufficient answer to his whole volume, not for his sake, of whom I haue no hope, nor respect, but in regard of others, who thereby maie ei∣ther be confirmed in the truth, or preser∣ued from error.
I see the Aduersaries drift especiallie was, to breed in the minds of our coun∣trimen a misliking of this our religion, which himself hauing once liked wel, was after (I know not how) moued to mislike. The which he endeuoreth to performe by some other means, then heertofore haue commonlie bene vsed, as anie man reading his book may soon obserue, wherin he shal finde continual allegations of testimonies out of our owne writers, craftely brought
in, to shew a dissension of iudgements a∣mongst our selues, that so his readers may be induced to thinke the worse of our do∣ctrine, and of vs al. A deuise ful of fraud, dishonestie & malice, to take aduantage of mens infirmities & imperfections a∣gainst the eternal truth of God, which he cānot by ordinarie & lawful kind of rea∣soning refute. Betweene Luther and Zuinglius about the Sacrament, was a sharp contention, hotlie debated in manie books, & the same hath cōtinued since to the great hindrance of the gospell and of∣fence of many. In which contrary writings and discourses, are found oftentimes har∣der speeches of either against other, then were to be wished, yet such as the godlie seruants of the Lord in contention about the truth, somtimes ar moued to vtter a∣gainst their brethren. S. Paul openlie and sharply reprehended S. Peter to his face,
whereat wicked Porphyrie catched a like occasion to raile at Christiā religion long since, as our aduersaries do at these daies. VVhat a violent and troublesome contention was there betweene Theo∣philus of Alexandria, and good Chry∣sostome of Constantinople? VVho knoweth not how sharplie Cyrillus a learned and wise Bishop of Alexandria hath written against Theodoritus a godlie and catholick Bishop, in a contro∣uersie touching the catholick faith? Both Bishops, both catholickes, both learned, both godly, both excellent pillers of the Church: and yet he that readeth both their writinges, would thinke that both were daungerous enemies of the Church and faith of Christ, and of all Christi∣ans to be auoyded. So in the bookes of Luther and Zuinglius, and those that maintaine either part, appeereth (I
graunt) great sharpnesse and bitternesse of dissension: who all notwithstanding, if ye set the heat of disputation aside, were as godlie, as learned, as zealous Chri∣stians, as the worlde had anie. Nowe commeth in M. Rainoldes like a craf∣tie enemie, and gathering a heape of such speeches, out of sundry their bookes, hath in diuers places of his confutation inser∣ted the same, as anie occasion woulde serue, to make his readers acquainted therewith, that seeing such earnest con∣tention among the chiefest professors of the Gospell, they may be further with∣drawn in alienation of minde from the loue and liking thereof. VVherein also to helpe his purpose, he hath vsed two kindes especially of vnlawfull sleightes. One is, to report among others the testi∣monies also of open Aduersaries to the doctrine of the Gospel, as namely of Ga∣briel
Fabritius against Beza, and of Castalion, and such others, as eyther being professed papistes, or doubtful pro∣testantes, ought not in this case to be re∣garded. Another is, to falsifie the iudge∣mentes and sentences of our writers, and so to make moste vntrue reports of them. As for example, in his 12. cha. pa. 356. he affirmeth, that we begin secretlie to disprooue the Churches faith, touching the manner of Christs crucifying, name∣ly, that his handes and feet were pearsed with nailes, and for proofe hereof alled∣geth testimonies out of Marlorate, Musculus and Bucer, in whom no such thing is in anie place to be found. And that euery man maie perceiue what plea∣sure he hath, & what libertie he taketh to himself of speaking and reporting a∣ny thing vntruly, he accuseth Castalion to haue made a discourse in the Preface
written to K. Edward the sixt, before his translation of the Bible, in proofe that Christ is not the true Messias; which ve∣rilie is a foule slander, as any man maie iudge that readeth the same: so be char∣geth vs with the abhominable heresies of the Trinitarians, Libertines, Ana∣baptists, Antinomi, Dauid George, and such like, whom we detest as much as they, against whom both wee haue written more then they, and our Magi∣strates, both ecclesiasticall and ciuil, haue also seriouslie proceded. VVith such alle∣gations of al sorts, out of al writers, for al purposes, hath he fraughted and stuffed his book: other substance and waight of matter is there none therin, so that of it self it might be thought moste vnworthie of answer. Yet because such bookes doe harm abroad, and it is expedient to haue the aduersaries folly and weaknes dete∣cted,
I haue vndertaken this labour of an∣swering M. Rainolds, and that in eng∣lish, for the same consideration that cau∣sed him to leaue the latin, and write in the english tongue: which I thinke he hath not done, so much for want of skil therin, as that his writings might commonlie be read and vnderstoode of englishmen. This my labour I offer to your Honors good acceptation, humblie beseeching you, that I may publish it vnder the safe∣gard of your honourable protection. And as you haue bene alwayes a zealous louer of Christes Gospell, and by your godly wisdome haue done your endeuour to ad∣uaunce greatly the Lordes cause from time to time, and to hinder the practises of the enemy, so I beseech the Lord to en∣crease in you all those Christian vertues, to the benefit of Christes Church, and the common wealth of this Realm. Thus
I commend your Lordship to Gods moste mercifull and gratious preseruation, be∣seeching him to prolong your dayes vpon earth, with multiplication of all graces necessarie for this life, and for the life to come.

