



TO you, well-beloved in our Lord Jesus Christ, doth this small Treatise offer it selfe, and hath shrunke it selfe into this little quantity, that hiding it selfe in a narrow roome,
it may accompany your purses in your pockets, and so warne you to pull them forth more fre∣quently and more wil∣lingly for mercifull deeds, then perhaps you have heretofore accusto∣med. Neither doth this little booke barely re∣quest at your hands your constant practise of libe∣rality towards your nee∣dy brethren, but doth even require it at your hands, as a thing abso∣lutely necessary to your salvation. It cites you be∣fore the tribunall of your owne consciences, and
making evident proofe that your Lord and Ma∣ster, whose Lord and Ma∣ster, whose stewards you are, hath commanded you to be plentifull in those kinde of expences, doth as an advocate, de∣mand and request of the judge of that court, (even the conscience of every one of you) to make and register a firme order and decree (if it will shew it selfe a just and righteous judge) that from henceforth you shall be large and abun∣dant and forward and ready to this good work so often as occasion shall
offer it selfe, yea that you shall studiously seeke af∣ter all occasions to do it as often as may be. No man can be saved with∣out good workes, more then without faith, be∣cause that faith is not lively which produceth not good workes, and chiefely those good workes that do specially pertaine to every mans state of life, as this doth to the state of wealthy Christians. He that re∣solveth not to obey God in doing every good thing required at his hand, is no more upright,
then hee that resolveth not to obey, in leaving every wicked thing pro∣hibited. Many thinke themselves sound, if they purpose to cast off every knowe evill deed, though they settle not in themselves, a like firme determination to per∣forme every knowe du∣ty. But herein they be∣guile themselves. He casts not from him all his transgressions, nor hath respect to all Gods com∣mandements, that casts not from him faults of omission, and endeavou∣reth not to put in practise
affirmative precepts. Gods authority must be no lesse submitted unto, when hee requireth a thing, then when he pro∣hibiteth, when he saith this doe, then when hee saith, this doe not. So hollownesse appeares as much, in not doing the one, as in doing the other. Yea carelesnes & unwil∣lingnesse to know good duties argues guile of heart, as well as care∣lesnesse or unwillingnes to doe what wee have knowne. That you may therfore approve the sin∣cerity of your soules in
the working of mercy & bounty, as well as other vertues, I have here de∣clared unto you the ne∣cessity therof; And so be∣seeching you to reade what followeth, with a will to be convinced and to practise, & beseeching the Lord, to teach and perswade your soules, in this matter, I commend you to his favourable guidance,April 27. 1637. and shall rest ever

