



WOrshipfull and welbeloued, I haue (not long since) preached amongst you some things, concerning the nature of the New Birth. I am glad to vnderstand, that in handling of them, I gaue to some of you some good content. I am willing (you see) to renew your content, by offering the same things now to your eyes, that for∣merly to your eares; that the serious (and I hope) often reading, of what you but once heard, may instruct you better, and ground you further, in this necessarie do∣ctrine. And, Oh that the Lord of Heauen would please so effectually to co-operate with his Word, that many of you may become partakers of this happy and sauing worke of grace! My greatest couetousnesse is, that your soules may be thus inriched; my greatest ambiti∣on, that they may be thus aduanced. To this end haue I bent mine endeauours amongst you in the constant imployment of the talent lent me by God: which, how heartily doe I wish and pray, that it may be auaileable for your renouation! For in truth, the whole world is not worthy to stand in comparison, with this life of ho∣lines. I say it againe, All the greatest aduancements, profits, pleasures (which this prick of earth, this almost nothing, which we tread vpon, is able to afford), are in no sort to be esteemed desirable; if they be laid in the ballance, against those heauenly preferments, those in∣finite treasures, those vnutterable comforts; whereto
 this estate of grace doth bring those that are brought vnto it, euen in this present world in some good mea∣sure: but most fully in the vpper region of this world, the stately pallace of heauen, the fairest roome of this large house, and the Presence Chamber of the King of Kings. Why then is any man, especially why is any of you (to whom these things haue been frequently deli∣uered, on whom they haue been earnestly pressed, on whom they are constantly inculcated; why (I say) is a∣ny of you) so worse then childish, yea, then brutish, as to be carelesse of seeking that vnspeakable felicity, from which nothing can hinder you, but your owne sloth∣full negligence, or wilfull carelesnesse, in not vouchsa∣fing to seeke it? This small Treatise I am now bold to dedicate vnto you; both that it may witnesse to your owne consciences, and all that reade it, that none of you doth want grace for want of meanes to get it, ei∣ther on Christs part, the King of your soules, or on my part, his vnworthy Ambassadour: and also that it may be present with you at all times, to prouoke you to get that holinesse, without which (you haue learned, that) you cannot be saued. Accept (I pray you) of this my labour, as a testimony of my desire of your soules wel∣fare; and make this one onely sufficient recompence of this, and all other my trauel amongst you, in receiuing the grace that God offers; and striuing to bee such, as here you may find, that all the citizens of heauen must bee, euen men regenerate. So with my most feruent prayers to God for your prosperitie, I kindly take my leaue; resting (so long as the ouer-weightinesse, and o∣uer-toylsomnesse of the place shall suffer) your Pastor,

May 8. 1618.
