



RIGHT NOBLE EARLE, in former times, it was held so deepe an office of iustice, to eternize the memories of worthie personages de∣ceased, with sumptuous monuments, and learned Epitaphes, as in the ouerthrowes of warre, the dead were ransomed, to haue honorable funerals, at as hye a price, as the liuing Captaines, in hope of further seruice. One of the chiefe of the seauen wonders of the world, was the sumptuous sepul∣chre of king Mausolus, which his louing wife Artimisia caused to be e∣rected: and in aduantage, she hyred with rich rewardes the most famous Poets of Grece to register his life & vertues. The performing of these louing and naturall dueties is the cause, that the memory of so many famous men (long since ingraued) is at this day so fresh, and to posteritie the incourage∣ment to vertue so great. And to say the truth, the Cronicles of good mens actes, are the guydes of wel doing: on the other side, the blaming of vitious deedes, is the bridle of euill attempts. The noble Emperor Alexander called Seuerus, would often times say, that his firmest motions to do well proceeded of this cause, that Historiographers should write well of him, by the warrant of good desart, and furthermore hee feared to iniury any wryter, lest he should defame him through a froward and malicious disposi∣tion. Your Honorable Lordship in solemnising most sumptuously the fu∣nerals of the thrise noble Lord and your deare brother, the late Earle of Sussex, fully assureth the world, that you regarded his worthinesse farre more then his wealth. And to giue him his right, the full report of his vertues, would be a taske as troublesome, as to gase against the Sunne paine∣full. But for that in greatest things, it sufficeth to show a good will: Much moued by the passion of a cōmon sorrow for the death of so gracious a Lord, but farre more by the generall bruite of his diuine and heroicall vertues: I haue written this small remembrance of his mightie merits, no better gar∣nished, then precious stones set in brasse: protesting that I onely haue re∣ued my Instructions of vpright fame: stopping one of my eares when af∣fection

praysed: and the other when enuy detracted. So that (right hono∣rable) you may greatly pacifie your naturall sorrow with this precious com∣forte. That this briefe regester of his worthynes common to the world: May be an Image of honor to the wise: which present I humbly present vnder the protection of your Lordship, as the shadow of your selfe. Being the heire of your magnanimous brothers honours by law, and of his vertues by nature. No more but the Lord protect your Lordship in health and hap∣pines.

