



MOst dread and renowned Soue∣raigne, may it please your excel∣lent Maiestie: Such is the power of true Religion, and the hope that all men haue to be deliuered from error and their naturall mise∣rie, and to attaine supernaturall and eternall good thereby, that they which haue tasted it cleaue vnto it more then to all the hopes of this life beside: The law of thy mouth,
Psal. 119. saith Dauid, is better to me then thousands of gold and sil∣uer. This is the reason why the cause of religion, and the state of our Church, this day vnder your Highnesse most happy gouernement, is so deare and acceptable to vs, that the opposition and violence of our greatest e∣nemies can neuer make vs weary of defending it; but as the seruants of Isaac,
Gen. 26. when the Canaanites stopped their wels, opened them againe, and would neuer
 yeeld the inheritance of their master to the heards men of Gerar, no more can we endure the truth of religion to be choaked with Popish heresies, or the inheritance of our Lord to be taken from vs by the Swaines of Rome:
Nazianz o∣rat. 2. de Pace. Gods blessed truth being of that value that, in defence thereof, his meekest seruants will stir, and the mil∣dest fight before it shall be indamaged by their forbearance: Our assurance through Gods mercy, of that we pro∣fesse, and the benefite of our faith, and the certaine knowledge of our aduersaries vngodly and reprobate practises against it, is such, that no course of theirs can discourage vs, no contention beate vs off, no importu∣nity make vs shrinke from that which we know to be the truth.
Aen. Sylu hist. Bohem. When a certaine iester (set on by others as it was thought) in the presence of the king of Hungary, spake to a Noble man of Prage touching his religion, because he fancied not the Romish Seruice, but was addicted to Rochezana a follower of Husse, the Noble man gaue him this answer: If thou speake of thy selfe, thou art not the man thou conterfets, and so I will answer thee as I would a wise man; if by others setting on, it is meete I sa∣tisfie them; Heare me therefore: Euery man vseth Church ceremonies agreeable to his faith, and offers such sacrifices as he beleeues are acceptable with God: it is not in our owne power to beleeue what we will; THE MINDE OF MAN CONQVERED WITH POWERFVLL REASONS, WILLING OR NILLING, IS TAKEN CAPTIVE: I am sufficiently resolued of the religiō I follow; if I follow thine I may deceaue men, but God that searches the hearts I cannot deceaue; nor yet is it fit I should be like to thee: one thing becomes a Ie∣ster, and another thing a Nobleman; this you may take to your selfe, or report, if you please, to them that set you a worke.
 This zeale of the truth, and conscience surprised with the authority thereof, is it which leades forward so many learned men of all sorts into contention with the Papists, and constraines them, both by vehement preaching and open writings, to oppose them who ne∣uer cease to corrupt the faith, and poyson all sorts of people with discontent and violent hatred against their brethren, and by the working of Iesuites and Semina∣ries (much after the fashion of Antheninus the Mathe∣matitian mentioned in Agathias) to shake all the quar∣ters of your kingdomes: in which course, through long practise, and some conniuency, and for want of straiter execution of the lawes against them (the dangerous sequel whereof we will daily pray God to turne aside) they are growne so vehement and fierie that scarce any part of our faith can please them; no not the truthes that we hold in common with themselues, nor any part of your Highnesse gouernment, because it is not holdē in capite of the Pope.
Athenae. The Stoikes beleeuing that none but a wise man could do any thing well, concluded, that therefore none but a wise man could make good pottage, or season a messe of broth well: and because, in their conceite, their master Zeno was the wisest of all men, they concluded againe that the broth could not be good if it were not made after Zenoes direction; whose vse was to prescribe to the twelfth part of a Coriander seed: possible that he might haue pri∣matum ollae, or least the cookes of Lacedaemon should exempt themselues from his iurisdiction. This Hilde∣brandine humor, of ouerruling all things, so possesseth our Aduersaries, that now the Church of England hath neither God, nor faith, nor religion; the King of England no crowne, no dominion, no subiects; the
 state no iustice, no lawes, no gouernement; because the Pope giues not the ingredients, or confirmes them not.
I am the meanest person and least able of many, and the best I can do falles short of that which these exqui∣site times require.
Theodor. de prouid. l. 8. Theodorite saies; The maiesty of things depends not a little vpon the manner of handling them; and therefore such as meddle with any high argument, haue neede of great power both of tongue and conceit; because such as weigh the force of words more then the nature of things, iudge of the things according to the weight, or weakenesse of the words. But the condition of the place where some∣time I liued, trāsported with much superstition, and im∣portuned with Romish Priests and their bookes, and, sometime, their libelles set vpon our Church doores, drew vpon me a necessity of doing what I was able; when for diuers yeares I was inforced, by priuate wri∣tings and conference, to maintaine, or expound, what I preached openly. The benefite whereof I found to be such, both in stablishing my owne conscience, and re∣couering the people, and repelling such as seduced them, that I was easily drawne forward to proceede, and much of my time to bestow in dealing with the Se∣minaries: vntill at the length it is now come to this, that I am inforced in the open veiw of the world what I haue spoken in the eare,
Mat. 10.27. secretly, that to publish on the house-top, and, now againe the second time, to do that which I thought at the first, to do but once. My owne priuate condition is not such that I should greatly care what a∣ny man write against me, & all that reade my Aduersa∣ries Reply will easily perceaue him vnworthy to be ho∣noured by an Answer, and most vnworthy to haue his name or Caracters mentioned in your Highnesse pre∣sence;
 but when the cause it selfe is Gods, and belongs, as part thereof, to the common cause of our Church, I would not by despising a meane Aduersary forsake it, or giue occasion to any that had vsed my former Booke to misdoubt what I haue written: but hauing, in my priuate life, many spare howres (whereof I must one day giue account) I would bestow them the best way, in doing something that might helpe my countreymen out of their superstition. And although my Aduersary with whom I deale be of no great note (for the Heralds cannot finde his pedigree till they come to Noes Arke) yet his arguments and discourse transcribed from Do∣ctor Stapleton, and Gregory of Valence (two of their chiefest writers) being such as are most vsed, for the depressing of the Scripture and succession of our Church, and for the aduancing of the Popes authority in the matters of faith; I vnderstand to be so gratefull to Zenoes disciples, by reason they relish so pleasingly of the Coriāder, that I haue thought it not amisse to bestow my answer; that if, reason and the truth will do it, they may be satisfied. The truth is of that composition and strength it selfe that God can relieue it by his weakest instruments, in whom he shewes his power and worke∣manship against his proudest aduersaries. Deus ita arti∣fex magnus in magnis vt minor non sit in minimis. And therefore S. Austine confesses to him: Omnipotens ma∣nus tua, semper vna & eadem, creauit in coelo Angelos, in terra vermiculos, non superior in illis, non inferior in istis: And this my poore indeauour I most humbly present to your Highnesse, whose gracious speeches, not long since, to me, both touching my former writing, and this Defence thereof, then scarce begun, haue imbol∣dened
 me: though my owne affection, I thinke, it selfe would haue swayed me herein if I had neuer seene your Highnesse.
The generall apprehension of the good which the Church obtaines by your most gracious zeale and con∣stancy for religion (the liuely sence whereof infuseth it selfe, as the soule into the parts of the body, into all quarters, not of your kingdome alone, but of the Chri∣stian world round about vs) moues all men to your Highnesse, whose sufferings, endured for the same, at the hands of Antichrist & his ministers, haue taught vs that the greatest Princes liuing, as well as meaner per∣sons, may be persecuted for the testimony of Christ; and being possessed with the zeale of his house, can and will in defence thereof, expose themselues, their crown, their reputation, their children, their life, and all the hopes of this world, to the most imbruted enemies that euer were: and neglecting the deceiueable pleasures of their Court, and trampling their owne greatnesse vnder their feete, can tell how to make themselues a way to e∣ternity; and, by cleauing to the Church, and resisting Antichrist, assure their state, and make their honour greater, and lay vp in their bosome the assured hope of a better kingdome in the world to come. This is it, most dread Soueraigne, that affects vs all, and leades your poore subiects, towards you: that now whatsoe∣uer any is able to speake, to write, to thinke, to breath; he thinkes to be yours by right, by whose meanes and example all men speake, and write, and thinke, & breath the purer:
Veget. pro∣cem. ad Va∣lentinian. and in affection (where Princes reigne but by permission) we feele our selues to be yours so farre, that vnfainedly we think Neque recte aliquid inchoari nisi
 post Deum fauerit Imperator. Which our Aduersaries shall now giue vs leaue to say the freelier, where the Kings learning matches his power, and (without the helpe of any mans flattery) is seene to board their Col∣ledges; that, whose countries and persons he gouernes not by his lawes, their Schooles and consciences he be∣gins to ouerrule with his disputations. Which thing we hold to be so farre from impairing Royall digni∣ty, that
Suarez. he who hath said it, must hereafter be deemed one of the King of Arragons oxen, when,
Non hominis sed Bouis vo∣cem este re∣spondit. Al∣phons apud Anton Pa∣norm. l. 1. Naueler. after so many mightie Princes in all ages honou∣red more for their learning and writing then for all their greatnesse besides: Dauid, Solomon, Iulius Caesar, Constantine, and Charles the Great; Iustinian, Leo, Palaeologus, Cantacuzenus, the Alphonsi, and diuers more: after the Emperour Sigismund, commended for playing the Deacon at the Councell of Constance: Henry the eight writing for the seauen Sacraments, whose booke, subscribed with his hand, they glory to haue in the Vatican;
Posseuin. Concil. Me∣diol. 1. sub Borthom. the Cardinall of Millan thinking it the highest commendation he could giue the late king of Spaine, in eius regia dignitate, vt verbo complectar, sa∣cerdotalem animum licet aspicere: he will now haue the vse of your Highnesse pen in maintenance of your lawes and religion, and whereby most graciously it pleased you to offer them instruction before you would execute your authority against them, to be the laying by of your imperiall dignity; neuer remembring that for a king to descend to the Preacher,
I the Preacher haue bene king in Ierus. Eccl. 1.12. is the worke of piety and clemency towards his subiects, but for the Priest to climbe into the kings throne and play the Monarch, is the brand of Antichrist.

2 Sam. 14. The King is as the angel of God in hearing of good and bad, his words will seasonably giue your Highnesse oc∣casion, by speedy and diligent execution of your lawes, to let Iesuites and Seminaries, and the disciples of Hil∣debrand, see you are a King still, that by assuming the Doctor, when you please, can teach them their duties; and by exercising your power when you haue done, will repell their practises with effect, and free your peo∣ple from their presumptions. Their shamelesse abusing your Highnesse lenity, and taking spirit by being suffe∣red to multiplie their contestations against your sacred person, gouernement, and people, makes vs all wish, when Edicts do no good, they might heare the Lyon rore, that his voice might once chase such cowardly beasts out of the forrest, and vnearth them too if they would still be running into their holes for harbour. The Landgraue of Hesse (a milde and gracious Prince, but whose clemencie was much abused) being cast, by ad∣uenture, on a Smithes forge, ouerheard what the Smith said all the while he was striking his iron:
Oth. Meland. Duresce, in∣quam, duresce, vtinam & Langrauius durescat. And the presumption of this generation is such in corrupting the truth with their bookes, and opposing it with their heresies, in casting the state also and your sacred person into those manifest and dismall perills, (from which they will neuer desist so long as they are among vs) that your subiects are generally of the Smiths mind, to wish, these sonnes of Beliall, that fly-blow Religion, and blast the lawes, and honour, and the estimation of Princes, with their breath; placing their greatest pietie in the greatest mischiefes they can bring to their Prince and countrey, may feele the mettall harder that by law is
 tempred for such as are of their spirits, and know not how to vse your Highnesse clemency. I speake not of simple Recusants, but fugitiue Iesuites, and Seminaries, that haue renounced their allegiance to their naturall Soueraigne, and made themselues the Popes creatures, and vowed him blind obedience in all that he shall com∣mand them. For many Papists,
Maffae. vit. Ignat. when their seducers are remoued, shall come home to obedience, and repen∣ting them of their Idolatrie and superstition, imbrace your Highnesse gouernment, and the Religion stabli∣shed: but when vnnaturall fugitiues, and such as they haue Iesuited, haue attempted to consume vs, and, by blasphemous writings, vnnaturall reports, traiterous li∣bells, barbarous conspiracies, from time to time these fiftie yeares together, haue vndermined our state, and, by the wofull ruine of some, haue shewed what they in∣tend to all Kings and Princes that entertaine not their vassallage,
Sylu. Girald. Topograph: Hib. M. Wrightin∣ton and M. Brettergs horse, oxen and kine, kil∣led in their pastures, a little before the late Queens death: and now lately, the messen∣gers horses; poisoned at Wigan in Lancashire. it is not to be hoped that their faire protesta∣tions can giue vs assurance, as we had experience lately in him that writ the QVODLIBETS: but as it is noted of the Irish long ago, A securibus nulla securitas; si securum te reputes securim senties: est longè fortius timenda eorum ars quam Mars, eorum pax quam fax, eorum mel quam fel, malitia quam militia, proditio quam expeditio, amicitia praefucata quam inimicitia despicata. Their poisoning of so many your Highnesse subiects with heresies, and re∣uiling Gods blessed truth, their preying vpon the states and persons of their followers, and filling them with ha∣tred and reprochfulnesse against their brethren, till it come to the killing of our very cattell and dumbe beasts; is the least of their doings: the state and gouernment hath bene odiously defamed, the lawes reuiled, the
 Iudges railed on, and threatned; the Nobles disgraced, and in fauour of the formallest Miscreants, and to bol∣ster out the damnablest treason that euer was, the PVB∣LICKE ACTS AND RECORDS of the kingdome, entred in the view of God, and men and Angels, are discre∣dited, and denied. Yet these are the persons, beginning where the Diuell did when he seduced Adam, that be∣come our ghostly Fathers, and are canonized for Mar∣tirs: Sine Scriptura Theologi, sine miraculis Apostoli, sine veritate Catholici, sine pace sacrifici, sine patientia Mar∣tyres: sine vera fide religiosi. Their zeale for the Catho∣licke faith and saluation of soules is pretended, but their drift is to captiuate all to the Popes Monarchy, and their owne ambition.
Plutarch. Zo∣nar. When Caesar was desirous to leade Cleopatra in triumph, that she should not mistrust, or preuent him, he sent her word that he was in loue with her.
Philostrat. Philip of Macedon, leading an armie against By∣zantium, said, that hearing of the beautie of the citie he was going a wooing, and would make loue to her. But the Orator told him againe, it was not the manner, in his countrie, to go a wooing with swords, but with musicke, and they that were in loue brought not instruments of warre, but of melodie. It were to be wished that as Philip, by this conceite, was intreated to spare the citie, so your Highnesse clemency might haue perswaded these men to let the Popes pleni∣tudo tempestatis alone, & spare their countrie: but when their practises are made the profession of their Catho∣licke faith, and their loathsomest treasons the cause of the Catholicke Church, and the punishments inflicted for the same accounted martyrdome; when they haue made their priuate quarrels the publicke faith of their Church; what hope is there but they will perseuere?
 When Ephesus was distressed with a dangerous battery,
Polyaen. in a time of siege, the Gouernor, with ropes, tied the walls and gates to Dianaes Temple, that so, being con∣secrate to the goddesse, the enemie should assault them at his perill. This is now become the Iesuites policy, first to tie euery thing to the Temple, making their innoua∣tions and conspiracies the Churches cause, and then cry them downe for heretickes that finde any fault: that so neither Church nor state, nor magistrate, nor subiect, nor lawes, nor Religion, nor Court, nor country, can be free from their intermedling.
Cedren. There was a time when the Eunuchs were so potent and busie in the Greeke Empire, ouerruling and disturbing all things, that it be∣came the saying of a great man; if you haue an Eunuch in your hand dispatch him, but if you haue none, buie one and dispatch him. The Iesuite and the Masse Priest hath plied his statizing in such fashion that his name may well bee put in the roome of the Eunuch: and before your Highnesse lawes against them be put in execution, that their haunts and harbours may be stopt, and the places of their entertaintment scoured, and the femall hierar∣chy, where they breed, be put downe, their plots will neuer haue end; nor is it possible your Highnesse state, or person, shold haue security. Our words against them are many, and some mislike our earnestnesse; But the Kings danger made Croesus dumbe sonne speake:
Herodot. and we had rather sustaine the enuie of our words then ano∣ther day feele the issue of their deeds.
Silu. Girald. When the King of Meth asked aduice of one Turghesie, how certaine noi∣some birds, lately come into Ireland, that did much harme, in the countrey, might be destroyed, he answe∣red, Nidos eorum vbique destruendos: the next way was to
 destroy their nests where they bred. They are none of Saint Colmans birds that there should be any such danger in chasing them: but what manner of birds they are your Highnesse may perceiue by a story in Maximus Tyrius. One Psapho,
Max. Tyr. serm. dwelling in the parts of Lybia, desirous to be ca∣nonized a God, tooke a sort of prating birds, and secretly taught them to sing, PSAPHO IS A GREAT GOD; and hauing their lesson perfitly, he let them flie into the woods and hills adioyning; where continuing their song, other birds also, by imitation, learned the same, till the hedges rang with nothing but Psaphoes dittie, GREAT IS THE GOD PSAPHO. The countrey people hearing the birds, but ignorant of the fraud, thought Psapho to be a God indeed and began to worship him. This same is the Popes practise: desirous to effect his ambition, and shew himselfe to be a God, he maintaines a sort of discontented fugitiues in his Seminaries, as it were in so many cages, where die∣ting them for the nonce, he easily teaches them what tune he pleases; and hauing done, takes off their bells and sends them home againe, where filling euery hedge and out-house with their tunes, no maruel if other birds of the same feather, and as wise as themselues, by con∣uersing with them, learne the like. This is the guile of Heretickes,
August. the learned to plie with their art, and the simple with their errors.
It is incredible and enough to amaze a man to listen them, whether he reade their books, or heare their peo∣ples wilde discourse. Modestie is banished, christian cha∣ritie, that should guide all men in seeking the truth, is ex∣tinguished; confidence and prefidence carrie out all things; the sacred Scriptures are put to silence, the persons of men are sacrilegiously disgraced,
Gen. 37.31. as Iosephs coate was dipt in
 blood: the Popes Breues, and bare lust, sway all things with them; no rule of reason, no example of the anci∣ent Church, no president of antiquity, may be opposed against the Popes will: his brest must inspire all things, his determination must be the rule of all mens faith, Not what is spoken, but who speakes must be regarded.
Staplet. Albertin. The Bi∣shop of Rome is the infallible rule of faith. Hence it comes that all their questions and disputations Hildebrandize, and are fortified with such conclusions of the Popes infallible and vnerring authority, and grounded there∣upon, as the ancient Church neuer heard. This was the vttermost that Mahomet could do for the establi∣shing of his Alchoran.
Alchor. Three Angels taking him into a mountaine, the first ript his brest, and washt his bowels in snow; the second opened his heart, and tooke out a blacke graine which was the portion of the Diuell; the third closed him vp againe, and made him perfit: then they weighed him in a paire of ballance, and ten men being not able to counter∣poise him, the Angell bad, Let him go, for no number of men should be able to weigh against him. If it had not bene the Popes good fortune in this manner to haue bene wa∣shed, and clensed, and weighed by the latter Deuines of the Church of Rome, the Iesuites specially, in their Schools, he had fallen short of Mahomet, and the con∣trouersies betweene him and vs were soone at an end, when not his will, but the word of God, in a free coun∣cell, should determine them.
We are not the first that haue complained of the cor∣ruptions of Rome, and the Popes vsurpations, but all a∣ges haue done it before vs. Clemangis, in a certaine Epistle to Gerson, saies, That all things falling to decay, and going to nought, in such manner as neuer was before,
 yet no man might bewaile or vtter it: and what meanes of remedy, what hope of amendment, saith he, can there be where we may speake neither of amendement nor remedie: where they that giue the wounds are counted good, and ex∣cellent, and rare men, worthie of all commendations and re∣ward; and they which indeauour to keepe them off are called leaud, perfidious, and wicked persons, worthie of all shame and reproach? The immoderate and vnbounded ambi∣tion of the Pope, being the Patriarke of the West, and the pride of his Clergie, were the first occasion that so many errors and corruptions came into the Church: for the administration and managing of all things being in their hands, it was an easie matter, howsoeuer men complained, for the court of Rome to bring in what it pleased.
De Sept. stat. eccl. Vbertine saies, Albeit among the Locusts there be but one King that hath all manner of principality in euill, yet the sanctity of Prelates could not, on the suddaine, be brought to such wickednesse, vntil first, for a long time to∣gether, they began to fall, by pompous ambition: and mul∣tiplying the superfluous state of temporalities; by Simoniacall couetousnesse, peruerse elections, and carnall promotion of such as they fauoured, and neglect of spirituall worship: these wicked dispositions going before, the Diuell, at last, by these meanes might fully bring in the complete forme of the GRAND MISCHIEFE.
In Lament. Ierem. Pascasius complained 700 yeares ago, that there was almost nothing belonging to secular life but the Priests of Christ administred it, nor no worldly af∣faires but those that serued at the altar put themselues into it. And hence it comes, and not from any ordinance of God, or example of the ancient Church, that the Pope, with his Bishops and Cardinalls, so presumptuously contest with Gods annointed Kings. It was not so when
 Christ said, it shall not be so among you.
Luc. 22. Liberat. bre∣uiar. Nor when Leo the first, with many of his Bishops, VPON THEIR KNEES, INTREATED THE EMPEROR and his wife for a Synode. Nor when Leo the fourth,
Grat. said to the Emperor Lewis, That if he had done any thing inconueniently, or not holden the path of his lawes, he would reforme what he had offended, AT HIS IVDEGMENT. Nor when the Emperor Iustinian began his lawes with we COMMAND the Bishops and Patriarkes of Rome, Constantinople,
Nouell. and A∣lexandria.
Auentin. Nor were his Prelates the companions of Princes, when Charles the Great tooke downe the Bi∣shop of Mentz about his proud Crosiar staffe, with such words as these: See, our Shephards, that professe the Crosse of Christ, in ostentation, in wealth, in excesse, challenge the greatest Emperours. But these monsters grew vp since. Thomas of Aquin, (or Thomas of England) saies, that which bred them was the loue of temporalties.
Tho. in 6. Gen. Ex TVNC exorti sunt in Ecclesia gigantes, in magnis & mira∣bilibus supra se ambulantes, qui potius videntur Reges, vel Marchiones, quam Episcopi, vel Abbates, & ideo nō mirum si per eos erigatur statua Babilonis, & terrena ciuitas di∣latetur. These men (not remembring that howsoeuer in picture, the eie be one of the noblest parts,
Plato Timae. yet euery colour is not fit to paint it: least so it ceasse to be an eie) with out∣ward greatnesse and vsurpations would set foorth their Priesthood. And in very deed abusing the fauour and liberality of godly Princes, (who thought nothing too much they did for the Church) to their owne lusts, and ambition,
The Empe∣ror yaue the Pope some time, So hy power him a∣bout, That at the last the sillie kime, The proud Pope thrust him out. Chaue. Sim. Schard. Hypomnem. thus at last they shouldred into their thrones, and stole their scepters. One Rupescissanus, a Friar, told the Cardinalls, some 300 yeares since, that the Pope and they were the Peacocke whom all the birds had inriched with their feathers, whereby she was
 growne so proud that she would neuer know her selfe til the Kings of the earth should come, another day, and taking euery one his owne feather, leaue her as bald and naked as they found her. And then as their pride was the beginning of all these errors and corruptions in Re∣ligion, that trouble the world, so their humiliation shall be the end of them.
It hath pleased God in a speciall manner to call your Highnesse to this worke, and by your hand to dedicate it; your most Christian MONITORY to the Emperor and Princes, performed with admirable learning, and inuin∣cible spirit hath made the entrance, and as it hath pur∣chased your Highnes that reputation in Gods Church, and honour with strangers, and authority with aduer∣saries, and admiration with all, which few Princes, since Constantine, haue had before; so shall it, in time, and by degrees,
Apoc. 18. awaken the Kings of the earth, and declare it selfe to be the loud cry and mightie voice of the An∣gell which God hath sent to raise them vp and to call his people out of Babylon. And although the Iesuites, & their complices by their busie writing, would seeme to oppose it, yet it so sticks in their crowne, that from the Cardinall to the Friar, they giue themselues no sa∣tisfaction in answering, but still as one of them sallies foorth another followes him, as if they meant openly in the field to bewray their weakenesse and crie for helpe; and though they fight desperately, yet is it as the Goth, mentioned in Procopius, with his enemies weapons stric∣ken, and sticking in the top of his pate, whereof he died as soone as he returned out of the field. And albeit their words be vile, and all honest eares abhor so sacred Ma∣iestie to be violated thereby, yet the loue of your sub∣iects, and the seruice of Gods whole Church toward
 you for the same, shall weigh them downe. And God who hath called your Highnesse with Dauid, and Con∣stantinē, to be reproached, and threatned, by such as Shemei, Doeg, Zosimus, and Ennapius were, will giue you the same honour in all generations to come, that they haue had: and when the Iesuites haue that o∣pinion that their Lord the Pope is God vpon earth, so far aboue Emperors and Kings, no maruell if their bur∣then giue them courage and make them lustie.
Alchor. For the Asse that bare Mahomet in his Nurses lap feeling the pretiousnesse of his loade, prickt vp his eares and out went all the company; and when some askt, if this was the beast that yesterdaie was not able to stand on her legs, but was faine to be lifted vp, that now went so lustily, she answered, O that ye knew who I carrie on my backe. It was the conceite she had of her burthen that gaue her this courage and lift vp her eares.
But leauing thē to their presumption, who, as Isido∣dorus Pelusiota speaketh, beare themselues on their Priest∣hood as if they had a tyrannie, when they haue wearied themselues with resisting the truth offered them, & are swallowed vp of their owne pride and turbulency, your Highnesse throne shall be established, and the soule of your enemies shal be cast out as out of the mid∣dest of a sling; and all their followers of what sort soeuer which so vnthankefully haue bene content to reape the fruite of your peaceable gouernement, and gracious fa∣uour, and bounty and clemency towards them, but will not ioyne in the worshippe of God, nor follow your Highnesse in the exercise of the word and Sacraments; shall see their turpitude. The rest by their praiers to God for your Highnesse safety, and sacrifice of their best affection thereunto, will make it appeare that your
 care of their peace, and zeale for the truth, hath not bene in vaine. And let not your Highnesse doubt the good successe of your cause. When Luther first began to stirre against the Popes pardons his friends cried he would neuer be able to preuaile,
Chemnit. and bad him go to his Cell, and pray Lord haue mercy on him, for there was no dea∣ling against the Pope. But his fatall houre being come, God shewed the contrary, and throwing down the Ta∣bles of those money-changers, made it soone appeare that there is no counsell or power against the Lord. Na∣zianzen saies, that the Emperour Iouian, taking the cause of Religion into his hand, and labouring to haue the world consent therein (which is your Highnesse most noble and proper indeauour) thereby both strengthened religion, and brought strength from religion to himselfe. Your Maiestie in our late Soueraigne Queene Eliza∣beth hath obserued, that no power of the enemie can hurt Gods annointed that honor him; and such as haue heard your Princely speeches, many times touching this matter, can tell you haue fixed your confidence in him that will preserue his seruants, when a thousand shall fall at their side and ten thousand at their right hand.
Psal 91. Your Highnesse is more then an ordinary man: God hath set his owne image, as it were vpon his gold, in an eminent manner vpon you, which he hath not done vpon other men: your cause is Gods cause, your zeale and constancy is for Gods truth; they are Gods in∣heritance and peculiar people you defend, it is your right you stand for, and a blessed gouernement you maintaine. Your enemies are Gods enemies, and vp∣hold themselues with the basest dishonesty, foulest meanes, and detestablest practises, that euer were: And therefore as God hath suffered you for the manifesting
 of his glory, to be the obiect of their fury, so he will make you the president of his mercy to al posteritie. His promise made to Iosuah shall neuer faile you,
Iosh. 1.5. Psal 46. I will not leaue thee nor forsake thee. We wil not feare though the earth be mooued, & the mountaines fal into the middest of the sea. Though the waters thereof rage, and the mountaines shake at the surges of the same. Yet is there a riuer whose streames shall make glad the City of God, euen the Sanctuary of the Tabernacles of the most high God is in the middest of it, and it shall not be mooued. Our God shall relieue it early: when the nations raged and the kingdomes were moued, God gaue his voice and the earth melted; the Lord of hoasts is with vs, and the God of Iacob is our refuge. Our enemies, like Ari∣ans, are ceased to be Christians. Lucifer Caralitanus saies, Cum sitis Ariani, inhumani, impij crudeles, homi∣cidae, non amplius eritis Christiani. And your people that obey and serue you,
Isid. Pelusiot. being a company holden together by true faith, and the best policy, are part of the Church of God for which Christ gaue himselfe to die. Your High∣nesse most happie gouernement is the fountaine of our weldoing: when Princes maintaine religion and exe∣cute iustice, punishing wicked men, and rewarding the godly,
Psal. 72. then they come downe like raine vpon the mowen grasse and as showers that water the earth. One part of the King of Persia his Title in ancient time was that he did Rise with the Sun, and giue eies to the blind night.
Theophy. Simocat. Lips. pol. And the King of Mexicoes Crowne oath had wont to be, I will minister iustice to all, the Sunne I will make to shine, and clouds to raine, and the earth to be fruitfull; the riuers will I store with fish, and all things with plenty. For godly Prin∣ces procure all these things from God to their people, which must be acknowledged, when tyrants and such as feare not God, by their euill gouernement, and neg∣lect
 of religion, many times darken the aire, and hinder the raine, and make the fields barren, and riuers empty. Pliny enquiring the reason why the fields, adioyning to Rome, in old time were so fruitfull, saies, It was be∣cause they were tilled by the chiefe gouernours, such as Fabritius, and Cincinnatus were, Ipsorum tunc manibus Imperatorum colebantur agri, gaudente terra vomere laure∣ato & triumphali aratore. Which your Maiesty doing so painefully with your owne hands, in a more noble field, the Church of God; all godly minded shall bid God speed the plow, and daily waite till the briars and thornes be rooted out, and the dew of Gods grace fall on the barren part, that the Plowman may neuer be wearie nor his hand weake, nor his workmen vnfaithful to him, but all that are about him, and his Noble ser∣uants by his example may giue ouer sleeping, and put their hand without looking backe, to the same worke; that the enuious man, that soweth tares, may be driuen forth, and their owne houses may be the greenest and cleanest part of the field: till he come that shall giue end and rest to euery labour, and recompence, beyond all that can be thought, the workmans trauell: and bin∣ding the good corne in sheaues, cast the tares into vn∣quenchable fire. God euermore continue and increase his mercies to your Highnesse, and lay your enemies at your feete, that you may see an end of all dissentions, and stablish peace and vnity in the Church.

