


MOst worthy & right Worshipfull Gentlemen (of the Innes of Court,) vnto you, as vnto one of the fairest Ornaments of this happy Realme. I com∣mende the benefit of this small Treatise: And I am wel perswaded, in this Dedication, that I salute the best paret of all the yong Gentlemen of Englande: For what Course so-euer, they afterwardes followe, there are very fewe Gentlemen, but, either are, or haue ben of your Societie: It is very wel knowen that these famous Hou∣ses are the first intertayners of your Lybertie.
For (notwithstanding) in your Gouernments, there are many good and peaceable Orders, yet your chiefest Discipline, is by the Purse. Those that are disposed, studdie the Lawes: who so liketh, without checke may follow Dalli∣ance: And (certainly) the wanton , which you (con∣tinuallie) behold, are not vnlike the Sirenes Inchauntmēts (were Poets faynings true;) you cōtinually walke by the Adamant Rockes, which drawe Siluer and Gold, as fast as Iron and Steele: you must be armed with more experi∣ence then the capacytie of yong yeares: or els, assirte your selues that Repentance will vnlose your Fetters: there is an olde Prouerb: Euil Company, corrupteth good maners: And (truely) I cannot see, how yong men, of the best educa∣tion: should escape vnpoysoned, when vice is so conuersant with elder yeares.
O how happie were it for your Posteritie, if the Innes of the Court, were farre from Dicyng-houses, or Dieyng hou∣ses, with their Originall, the Deuill. But, if you cannot be thus seperated, this little Booke, will (with regarde) guide you as safe, as the Clue of thréede did Theseus, in the La∣berinth. These Houses (outwardly) are of the substance of other Buildinges, but within are the Botches and Byes

of Abhomynation: they are lyke vnto deepe Pittes, couered with smoothe Grasse, of which, men must be warned, or els, they can hardly auoide that their eye can not discouer:
You can haue, no fairer warnings then the steppes of your Companions falles, nor I, a more fortunate Rewarde for my trauaile, then to see you (worthie Gentlemen) to floorish.
I beseeche you, to be aduised: It is a more precious mat∣ter, to shun & Mischiefe, by other mennes harmes, then to learne the goodnes of a thing, by the losse therof. This sharp Discouerie, will make your fleering Deceiuers, my open Enemies: but I shalbe well strengthned, if my true Affec∣tion, broode in you a disdaine of their fellowshyp, & let them spurne their woorste, they hurt them selues, that are angrie with good Admonition. I dedicate this Booke to the Ma∣gestrates to whome, appertaineth the chastisment of euyll liuers, your woorst enemies: I dedicate to you (courteous Gentlemen) the Fruits of Noble Alexanders Counselles, as beseeming your worthinesse: I am but his Trouch-man, and your trustie frend. And (truely) your wisdomes may make his graue Counselles more profitable then their seuere Dis∣cipline: for the Medicine is of more value, that preserueth Health, then that which cureth Sicknesse. The health of a Gentlemā, is Honour & actions of vertue: in which, Alex∣ander (liberally) instructeth you: The Maladie, nay, death of a Gentlemā, is an vndoyng to the posterytie, which is haste∣tied, by the sucking of Shifters: Of whome, I (constantly) hope, the good Maiestrates will ease you: I leaue further Ceremonies, in my Preface, leaste I seeme to iudge your Wisdomes, who are (for Learninge) a faire Beautie of the Common-wealth: my plaine Methode, in writing, showeth you a large hole to see Daye, which is ynouffe (with an Ad∣uauntage) who retayne the vertue, to drayne Honie from a Weede: I ende to trouble you, at this time: but in no time, will leaue to bée:
Your assured Frende:
George Whetstones.
