



SYr, (desirous, to acquite your tryed frendships▪ with some token of good will:) of late I perused diuers of my vnperfect workes, fully minded to bestowe on you, the trauell of some of my forepassed time. But (resolued to ac∣companye, the aduenturous Captaine, Syr Humfrey Gylbert, in his honorable voiadge,) I found my leysure too littel; to correct the errors in my sayd workes. So that (inforced) I lefte them disparsed, a∣monge my learned freendes, at theyr leasure, to polish, if I faild to returne: spoyling (by this meanes) my studdy of his necessa∣rye furnyture. Amonge other vnregarded papers, I fownde this Discource of Promos and Cassandra: which, for the rarenesse, (& the needeful knowledge) of the necessary matter contained therein (to make the actions appeare more liuely,) I deuided the whole history into two Cōmedies: for that, Decorum vsed, it would not be conuayde in one. The effects of both, are good and bad: vertue intermyxt with vice, vnlawfull desyres (yf it were posible) queancht with chaste denyals: al needeful actions (I thinke) for publike vewe. For by the rewarde of the good, the good are encouraged in wel doinge: and with the scowrge of the lewde, the lewde are feared from euill attempts: maine∣tayning this my oppinion with Platoes auctority. Nawghti∣nesse, commes of the corruption of nature, and not by readinge or hearinge the liues of the good or lewde (for such publication is necessarye,) but goodnesse (sayth he) is beawtifyed by either action. And to
these endes: Menander, plautus, and Terence, them selues many yeares since intombed, (by their Commedies) in honour, liue at this daye. The auncient Romanes, heald these showes of suche prise, that they not onely allowde the publike exercise of them, but the graue Senators themselues countenaunced the Actors with their presence: who from these trifles wonne mor∣allytye, as the Bee suckes honny from weedes. But the aduised deuises of auncient Poets, discedited, with the tryfels of yonge, vnaduised, and rashe witted wryters, hath brought this com∣mendable exercise in mislike. For at this daye, the Italian is so lasciuious in his cōmedies, that honest hearers are greeued at his actions: the Frenchman and Spaniarde folowes the Italians humor: the Germaine is too holye: for he presentes on euerye common Stage, what Preachers should pronounce in Pulpets. The Englishman in this quallitie, is most vaine, indiscreete, and out of order: he fyrst groundes his worke, on impossibilities: then in three howers ronnes he throwe the worlde: marryes, gets Children, makes Children men, men to conquer king∣domes, murder Monsters, and bringeth Gods from Heauen, and fetcheth Diuels from Hel. And (that which is worst) their ground is not so vnperfect, as their workinge indiscreete: not waying, so the people laugh, though they laugh them (for theyr follyes) to scorne: Manye tymes (to make mirthe) they make a Clowne companion with a Kinge: in theyr graue Counsels, they allow the aduise of fooles: yea they vse one order of speach for all persons: a grose Indecorum, for a Crowe, wyll yll coun∣terfet the Nightingales sweete voice: euen so, affected speeche doth misbecome a Clowne. For to worke a Cōmedie kindly, graue olde men, should instruct: yonge men, should showe the imperfections of youth: Strumpets should be lasciuious: Boyes vnhappy: and Clownes, should speake disorderlye: enterming∣ling all these actions, in such sorte, as the graue matter, may in∣struct: and the pleasant, delight: for without this chaunge, the
attention, would be small: and the likinge, lesse.
But leaue I this rehearsall, of the vse, and abuse of Comme∣dies: least that, I checke that in others, which I cannot amend in my selfe. But this I am assured, what actions so euer passeth in this History, either merry, or morneful: graue, or lasciuious: the conclusion showes, the confusion of Vice, and the cherising of Vertue. And sythe the end tends to this good, although the worke (because of euel handlinge) be vnworthy your learned Censure, allowe (I beseeche you) of my good wyll, vntyl leasure serues me, to perfect, some labour of more worthe.
No more, but that,
almightye God be your protector, and preserue me from dainger, in this voiadge, 
the xxix. of Iuly. 1578.

