



WHen I first pēned this Treatise, which now I offer to your Lordships, I did it for mine owne priuate exercise, and the satisfying of certaine friends that desired it. Afterward seeing some hope that it might doe good abroad, principally in the countrey where I dwell: and desirous, if it were possible, to do any thing that might helpe the seduced out of their errors, and confirme the rest in the truth, I was easily perswaded to put it forth; and the rather for that the questions handled, touching THE AVTHORITIE AND SENCE OF THE SCRIPTVRE, and SIGNES OF THE CHVRCH, are the profitablest that can be stood vpon, and such as I haue alway obserued our people commonliest vse, and most desire to looke into; not being able to apprehend the difference, or iudge of the reasons in other
 questions; but presuming that if by certain marks they could find which is the true Church, there would remaine litle dif∣ficultie in the rest, forsomuch as therein they should find the truth in euery controuersie.
2 The proper cause why our aduersaries put this deuice into the peoples heads, was to dazle their eyes, and delude their sences with the name of THE CHVRCH; that when they should find the word of God, and all discourse against their opinions, yet that name should amaze them, while they might beleeue nothing vntill they were perswaded, by other marks, that it came from the CHVRCH. And no doubt this is theApollodor. Bibliothec. li. 2. Gorgons head that inchanteth and oppresseth them, euen the learnedst of them all, and holdeth them in bondage to their errors, hauing a conceit that they wil heare nothing against the Church: which they presuming to be the Papacy (though it be but AN IMPOSTVME BRED IN THE CHVRCH, or A DISEASE GROWING TO IT) will go no further. All their speech is of the Church: no mention of the Scriptures, or God their Father, but their MOTHER THE CHVRCH. Much like asSolin. poly. hist. c. 33. they write of certaine Aethiopians, that by reason they vse no mariage, but promiscuously companie together, it cometh that the children onely follow the mother: the fathers name is in no request, but the mother goeth away with all the reputation. Let their talke be listened, and their bookes perused, and it will appeare, this authoritie of their Church is at the end of euery question, and striketh the stroke: asPhilostrat. in imaginib. one saith pleasantly of Aesops Fables, that therein the Foxe is the chiefe stickler of all the company. The beasts seldom meet but he is among them, and beareth his part with the busiest.
3 This matter is handled in this Booke betweene my aduersarie and me. For though others haue done the same
 before me, yet I haue done it in mine owne method. The wa∣ter is all one, but the vessell wherein I haue brought it, is my owne. And it was the iudgement ofTrinit. l. 1. c. 3. & de Menda∣cio. c. 6. Saint Austine, that In places infected with heresie, all men should write that had any facultie therein, though it were but the same things in other words; that all sorts of people, among many bookes, might light vpon some, and the enemie, in all places, might find some to encounter him. The Ie∣suites, which are the Popes Ianizaries that guard his person, and were brought in now at the last cast, when the state of the Papacie was at a dead lift, to support the waight of the maine battell, haue pestered the land with their writings, and filled the hands and pockets of all sorts of people with their papers; yea fannes and feathers are lapped vp in them; wherein it is admirable to see how presumptuously they take vpon them, in disgracing our persons, belying our doctrine, and coining and defending strange opinions of their owne, neuer heard of afore; as if Chrysippus schoole had bred them,Diog. Laert. in Chrysip. who vsed to make his boast, that many times he wanted opinions to aduance, but if once he had the opinion, he neuer wanted arguments to defend it: whose writings, seeing they cannot be suppressed, pitie but they were effectu∣ally answered. The applause that ignorant and vnsetled minds giue them, and the conquest that of late yeares they haue made of a few Libertines and discontented persons, hath so fleshed them, that it is incredible how they brag and sing, likeAuentin. An∣nal. lib. 2. the clownes of Germany, when they had expelled the Franks:
Mille Francos, mille Sarmatas semel occidimus:
Mille, mille, mille, mille, mille Persas quaerimus. But I dare boldly say it, that if the maner how they haue pre∣uailed be looked into,Praescript: Tertullians speech will fall out to be
 true, It is the weaknesse of some that giueth them the victory, being able to do nothing when they encounter an able faith. Discontent and vanitie of mind, voide of the knowledge and faithfull practise of religion, are good dispo∣sitions to heresie. They liue Gentiles, saith Cyprian, and die heretickes.. Dio Laer. in Epicur. Epicurus, in his time, with teaching plea∣sure and libertie, filled the most houses and cities with his friends. But if we looke what the motiues were that led them away, and what the Iesuites said against vs, I presume three verses inPol. Plautus will answer them:
Quid ait? quid narrat? quaeso quid dicit tibi?
Nugas theatri, verba quae in comoedijs
Solent lenoni dici, quae pueri sciunt.
4 A singular misery no doubt, and aboue all other to be lamented, that mans mind so free, so ready, so able, with those helpes that God hath left him, to search out the truth, yet should not be satisfied, nor rest contented with heauen and earth, or any other thing that God hath reuealed for the fin∣ding thereof: but suffereth it selfe to fall into opinions, and with the conceits thereof, as it were with irons and fetters, like a prisoner to be shut vp in the bottome of a lothsome dun∣geon, where they can find nothing but the crawling of blind error, and vnsetled opinions, and irksome vncertainties, as vermine creeping round about them. If euer any thing de∣seruedAgathias hist. lib. 1.  pitie, it is to see ignorant men and women, that know nothing themselues, thus to be imprisoned in the iayle of opinions, by the deceit of cunning seducers,The Quodlibets make ful demon∣stra of all this: besides that which we see with our eyes. that seeke no∣thing hereby but to rob and spoile them, possessing the wiues, leading the children, vsing the goods, to swagger and serue their owne luxuriousnesse: that since the Harpyes were cha∣sed away, and Bel was ouerthrowne, neuer was there such a greedy and rauenous idoll as the Seminary; with his backe
 and belly sinking and drowning all that entertaine him. I neuer thinke hereof, but Moloch the idoll of the Ammonites cometh into my mind:Paul. Pagius. paraphr. Chal∣daic. in Leuit. 18.21. It was an Image hollow, and had seuen chambers or ambries in it: they opened the first and offered meale into it: in the second they put pige∣ons; the third receiued a sheepe, the fourth a ramme, the fift a calfe, the sixt an oxe: and if any man would offer his sonne or daughter, the seuenth was ready for him; his face was like a calfe, and his hands altogether framed to receiue gifts of the standers by; the liuely por∣traiture of these seducers, if we please but a little to compare the shape and conditions of the one with the other.
5 And would to God they had made our land, their na∣tiue country, but a stage for these fooleries, and not turned it into a theater of their tragedies andVide pater si tunica filij tui sit an nō? apud Math. Westm. pag. 71. vnpriestly practises: or had planted their superstition in the heart of the subiect, so as a little more roome had bin left for loyaltie to the magi∣strate. For what conclusions are these to be brought into a kingdome?Posseuin. Bib∣lioth select. pag 17. It is iudged that no Christian monarch hath his crowne wholly giuen him from heauen, vnlesse it receiue firmnesse and strength also from Christs Vicar the Pope. AndRoderic. San∣cius Episco. Za∣morensis. alled∣ged and followed by Cárerius, de potest. Rom. Pont. pag. 131. againe, It is to be holden, according to the Natural, Moral, and Diuine law, with the right faith, that the Lordship of the Roman Bishop is the true and only immediat Lordship of al the world, not as concer∣ning spirituall things onely, but also as concerning tem∣porall things: and that the imperiall Lordship of Kings dependeth vpon it, and oweth seruice and attendance thereunto, as a meanes, minister, and instrument; and that by him it receiueth institution and ordination, and at the commaundement of the Papall Lordship it may be remoued, reuoked, corrected, punished. In the go∣uernment
 of the world, the secular Lordship is not ne∣cessary either of pure, or meere, or expedient necessitie; but when the Church cannot. Resoluing this article therefore, we say, that in all the world there is but one Lordship, and therefore there must be but one vniuer∣sall and supreame Prince and Monarch; who is Christs Vicar, according to that ofDan. 7.14. Daniel: He gaue him do∣minion, and honor, and kingdome, and all people and languages shall serue him. In him therefore is the foun∣taine and originall of all Lordship, and from him the o∣ther powers flow. All their religion is full of this doctrine, and hence proceed the monsters of conspiracies against our State. Whereby it appeareth, IT IS NOT RELIGION THEY STRIVE FOR, BVT SOVERAIGNTIE: and not the consci∣ences of men, yeelding to their ceremonies and superstitions, will satisfie them, vnlesse they may also haue their willes in ouerruling all, and the Crownes of Princes, and the Scepters and subiects of the Kings of the world be at their deuotion. Whereby they haue branded themselues for euer with the in∣deleble character of the Ministers of Antichrist: that being but Priests, and confined to their bookes, and hauingMat. 16.19. & ibi Ferus. § Tertiò obser∣uandum & illud quòd signanter dicit. no o∣ther commission but TO PREACH AND TEACH, yet thus they creepe into thrones, filling the world with Anarchy and confusion; and whose soules they should winne to God by ministring the word and sacraments, their bloud they sacri∣fice to the diuell, by stirring them vp to treason and rebellion, and canonize them for MARTYRS when they haue done. We thinke it lamentable that isAnton. Magin geograph. pag. 168. written of the great Turk, how at Constantinople, in the place that sometime was the pallace of Constantine, now he keepeth fierce Elephants, and a thousand other cruel beasts: and in a stately Church neer to adioyning, where God was wont to be honored, he feedeth sa∣uage
 monsters, and to euery pillar therof tieth Lions, Beares, Wolues, Tygers.Witnesse the murders of the infant of Spaine, the Prince of O∣renge, the French King, King Iohn of England, the Irish warres, the English rebellion in the North, the Frēch massacres, the infinite trea∣sons against Qu. Elizabeth and his Maiestie and aboue all other the Powder trea∣son in Nouemb. 1605. This is the practise of the Man of Rome: in the pallace of Constantine, where formerly of old, godly Bishops had wont to be entertained, he stalleth vp purpled Machiavellians, and vnreasonable beasts to prey vpon Con∣stantines successors, and deuoure the Princes of the earth: and to euery pillar of our Churches welnigh in Europe, he chaineth Wolues and Libards to flie at our throates, when∣soeuer we come within their reach. And those heards that we see of Friers, Seminaries, Masse-priests, Iesuites, preten∣ding to be the Pastors of our soules, be nothing else but so ma∣ny Beares and bloudie Tygers, chained to the pillars of our Churches, the fatall enemies of Princes and their people, to suck their bloud: saue that the Turks lions at Constantinople with feeding and familiaritie of their keepers become tame and gentle; but the Popes sauages of Rome by no for∣bearance or mercie shewed them can be mollified: no gentle vsage can tame their nature; no clemencie will reconcile them, no diet will swage their thirst of bloud; no benefits, no patience, no endurance can alter their hearts from practi∣sing against their mercifullest Prince, and dearest countrey. Alas for our people, that haue made choise of such maisters. I rememberQ. Curt. l. 6. Se¦quidem gratu∣lari quòd in nu∣merum deorum receptus esset Alexander; cae∣terùm misereri eorum quibus viuendum esset sub eo qui mo∣dum hominis excederet. the speech of Philotas touching Alexander, what time he would be made a god: That he was glad A∣lexander was receiued into the number of the gods: ne∣uerthelesse he could not but pitie their state who must liue vnder him that would exceed the degree of a man. The Popes Deitie therfore maketh them in a miserable case that liue vnder him, that disdains the place that God hath allotted him. The alliance they haue with the Church of Rome, wil not let them see this, though the former agesSigeb. ann. 1088. coun∣ted it nouelty and heresie, andAnna Caesa∣rissa hist . Refert Illyric. with passion cried out of it.
 For adultery is a foule sinne, yetCael. Rhodi∣gin. l. 10. c. 35. among the old Arabians no man was reputed an adulterer if he were sib to the woman: which is the reason why nothing is amisse among our aduersaries, because the men that do it are sib to the Ro∣mane Church.
6 There is but one way to preuent the danger that may he feared from this generation and their practises: and that is, that sinne be seuerely punished, and a preaching ministery setled, as much as is possible, in all places of the land, and painfull preaching effectually maintained against the mani∣fold discouragements of this iron age, whereby the subiect may be taught obedience, and ignorance and superstition (the roote of disloyaltie) may be expelled; that slie Papists, specially those of the better sort, be met with, and not suffered with cunning and friendship to slide through the fingers of the Magistrate: that besides all other courses vsed to bridle them, they be reuoked to continual conference with such per∣sons as are euery way fit to encounter the reputed learning of their Seminaries, and to lay the vain rumor of it: that finally his Maiestie and the State, vpon all occasions, be encoura∣ged against the manifold dangers and troubles, which (to the exceeding griefe of all good subiects) their gracious care ouer the Church, and Zeale against false religion, bringeth vpon them; and that by deuoting our selues to their obedience, and expressing our contentment in their gouernment, they be en∣couraged to proceed and take heart for euer in the faith and profession which the sacred lawes of our land and the mercy of God haue hitherto vpholden to vs, and vnder which we haue liued so happily, and obtained such strange deliueran∣ces against all our enemies. The persons that must do this, are your Lordships, and the rest of your place, the Fathers of the Church, whose seates were first erected, euen from the begin∣ning,
 for such very purposes. No contradiction nor contentiō must weary you, no peace must make you secure, no opposition dismay you. The chiefe magistrates of our state are properly in your hands, to frame their conscience, to direct their pro∣ceedings, to stirre them to action: the inferior sort of the Cler∣gy meddle not with this charge; it is your Lordships, to whom the cure belongeth. The vigilancy, Zeale and courage of the Primitiue Bishops (to say nothing of our Grindals, Iewels, Pilkintons, and other famous Prelats of our time, your Lord∣ships predecessors) was admirable in these businesses: after God once blessed them with an orthodoxal magistrate to sup∣port them, there could no heresie harbour vnder them, but they draue it out. They were faithfull Fathers to the Church, and Tutors to Emperours, and by their Zeale and courage made the names of METROPOLITAN and BISHOP the most gratefull and honorable titles in the world; that euery toung pronounced them with ioy, and euery heart affected them with contentment; when the negligence and securitie of some that succeeded in after times, gaue the first occasion to quar∣rell at it, and depraue it.
7 If this be wanting, that God be not pleased, but sinne increase, and so much superstition remaine still in the land vnreformed,. Georg. Pachy∣mer. NO HVMANE VVISEDOME CAN KEEPE OVT GODS IVDGEMENTS, BVT THEY VVIL COME AT THE LAST VPON VS. We haue bin often threat∣ned, and the world about vs, amazed at our dangers, won∣dreth how we haue escaped.Cedren. hist. pag. 542. When Nicephorus Phocas had built a mightie wall about his pallace, for his securitie, in the night he heard a voice, crying, : Though he built as high as the clouds, yet the citie might easily be taken, the sinne within would marre all. If the diuell had
 employed any wit against vs, but THE FRIERS, our feare should haue bin the lesse: but all ages, and this beyond all, sheweth their practises to haue bin of extraordinary ascenden∣cie. It is not much lesse then 500. yeares sinceWickliffe. in Tialog. pa. 143. a Bishop of Lin∣colne gaue the Frier this definition: Est cadauer mortuum, de sepulcro egressum, pannis funebribus inuolutum, à diabolo inter homines agitatum. There is nothing about him, but it relisheth of the graue and destruction; and God deliuer vs from him.
8 There is a generation that thinketh there is no diffe∣rence betweene the two religions, but they may be reconciled, and all this ado needeth not. Two sorts of people say thus. The first are certaine POLITICK ROMANISTS, to extenuate the foulnesse of Popery, and to hold mens conceits toward it in the meane time till oportunitie serue to set it wholy vp; what time they wil change their dittie, and say, the difference is so great, that they which hold our part must be burned at a stake. The second are IGNORANT, AND VNDERSTAND NOTHING, but liuing voide of the knowledge and conscience of all reli∣gion, are possible of his mind that TuronensisGreg. Tuon. hist. Franc. li. 5. c. 43. If both the one and the o∣ther were follo∣wed: neither were is any hurt if going between the altars of the Gentiles and the Church of God, a man should giue honor to both. writeth of, who said it was best of al, si & illa & illa colantur; neque esse noxium si inter Gentilium aras & Dei Ecclesiam quis transiens, vtraque veneretur. Whom God in his iudgement giueth ouer to this opiniō, to plague their sloth; who minding nothing but Epicurisme & earthly things, and not enduring the paines and conscience to make triall of that which should saue their soules, are seduced by this perswasion, and plunged into Atheisme, to thinke the iust defence of our faith to be no∣thing but the maintenance of contention. Wherein, at one breath, they haue not onely censured our State restraining Papistry, and all the Churches throughout the world, insi∣sting vpon the difference; and the Church of Rome too
 that proclaimeth it and pursueth it: but they haue also con∣demned the Primitiue Church and all the Doctors therof, who would neuer yeeld, I wil not say in an opinion, but not so much as in a form of speech, or in the change of a letter, soun∣ding against the orthodoxal faith. The difference between the Councell of Nice and Arius was but in. & . a letter.Georg. Pa∣chymer. hist. l. 5. The con∣trouersie whereupon the Latine and Greeke Churches brake, touching the proceeding of the holy Ghost, depēded but vpon two prepositions,  and . The monstrous heresie of Nesto∣s, lay but in the change of for . one poore letter; andConcil. Ephe∣sin. Graec. p. 10. . Cyril would haue him euen in that to gratifie the Church: and when he would not,Dalmat. apo∣log. in Concil. Ephesin. six thousand Bishops rose vp against him for it; so religious were they that had religion, that THEY VVOVLD NOT EXCHANGE Basil. apud Theodo∣rit. l. 4. c. 19. A LETTER OR A SYLLABLE OF THE FAITH, VVHEREVVITH OVR SAVIOVR HAD VT THEM IN TRVST. Which is our iust defence that write in the controuersies against all our censurers. ;Epist. ad Cle∣ric. Constanti∣nopol. in Con∣cil. Ephes. p. 72. saith Cyril, : Are we enemies to peace? no: we rather wil pul it to vs with violence, so that the true faith withal may be confessed. But when it cannot be obtained, we cleare the truth, and by expelling their errors, labour to plucke the seduced out of the fire, and bring them to knowledge, that their soules may be saued, and their life reformed, and the State secured wherein they liue.
9 And this my poore endeuour in this kind I humbly present to your Lordships, vnder whose iurisdiction I exercise my ministery; not in affiance of any thing therein worthy your reading, whom our Church hath long since knowne to be the same that Eunapius saith of two other in his time, , and ; nor in hope to escape the disgracefull censures of inter∣medlers;
 but in zeale to my countrey, and assurance that it may do good therein, going vnder so HONORABLE protecti∣on. I am so meane a man, and obscure euery way, that I fea∣red the truth would sustaine losse, and be contemned for my obscuritie, if some extraordinary fauor did not leade it forth. And let it go forward indeed, and shew it selfe abroad, ha∣uing THE TRVTH to support it, and so acceptable an in∣scription to go before, and the name of so VVORTHY PA∣TRONS to leade it forth.
And so desiring pardon for this my boldnesse, I humbly commit your Lordships to the mercifull protection of Al∣mightie God, who long continue your prosperous estate, and make you happie instruments of much good vnto his CHVRCH. Octob. 29. 1608.

