



RIght Reuerend Father, it were no small happinesse to the Christian world, if true Reli∣gion might reigne as a law, vnthwarted and not oppo∣sed, and the Orthodoxe faith, being obscured by no questions and cauils, were onely published and not disputed.
For Religion and Faith may not vnfitly be resembled to streams, or wels of water, which of themselues being pure and wholesome, become muddie when they are troubled: so the former are made lesse pure, and many times defiled by tumult and contention. And euen as in inunda∣tion of waters, fields and meadowes adioyning are turned into mire: So when contention (com∣pared
 by Salomon to the ouerflowing of wa∣ters, Pro. 17.14.) ouerspreadeth the greene pastures of sacred truth, sundry parts of godli∣nesse are laid waste, and some filth of error clea∣ueth to the same.
Contentions in Religion produce many e∣uils, whereof these are remarkable. First, while people are rapt into factions by heat & humor of contention,Publius Mimus, Nimium alter∣cando veritas amittitur. the very grounds & maximes of Religion vse to be shaken, and scarce any thing is left setled and indubirate (so farre as the sub∣tiltie and pride of mans wit can preuaile.) Next, whiles one partie hastily opposeth another, it falleth out so, that each of them looking to∣wards the aduerse Tenet, do proceed to some contrary extremitie of doctrine, as dangerous many times, or perhaps more then that which they oppugne. And in this case it is verified which S. Augustine saithDe Gen. ad lit. lib. 9. cap. 8.: It is difficile or hard for men, whiles they auoid one extremitie not to run peruersly into another. Also, discord reprocheth and disgraceth Religion: and exposeth Christi∣an faith to the opprobrie and derision of the world. By reason of that distraction which hap∣pened about the heresie of Arius, the Fathers
 report that Christian Religion was brought vp∣pon the stage, and made ridiculous to the Pa∣gansEuseb. vita Constantin l. 2. c. 60. & l. 3. c. 12. Greg. Nazian. apol. fugae. Socrat. hist. ec∣cles. l. 1. cap. 3. Sozomen. hist. l. 1. cap. 15.. And Chrysostome saithChrys. in Gala. cap. 1.: For this cause are we become a reproch to Iewes and Gentiles, be∣cause the Church is rapt into a thousand factions.
The same also hath caused States and Com∣monwealths more vnwilling to harbour Reli∣gion. Libanius the sophister, and other Pagans, tooke occasion to incense Iulian to the extirpa∣tion of Christianitie, because the Empire was so much molested by the contentions of Christi∣ans. And Ammianus MarcellinusHist. Rom. lib. 22. num. 8. pag. 253. reporteth, that the same Iulian was wont to say in reproch of Christians: That no sauage beasts were so cruell one to another, as Christians were among themselues. And vpō this occasion also was he the more en∣raged against thē. And Kingdoms & Common∣wealths are sometimes embroyled and shaken asunder by discord happening about Religion. In the daies of Hildebrand, who raised a noto∣rious schisme in the West Church, a Popish Bi∣shop (alledged by Auentine) saith as followeth. All right is confounded, & lawes are perished;Auent annal. Boior. l. 2. pag. 547. there is no faith among men, no peace, no humanitie, no shame, no securitie, no gouernment, no rest from euils: All
 the world is in an vprore and together by the eares, Cities and Countries are in armes,Otho. Frising. chron. l. 6. c. 36. p. 127. &c. Otho Frising. (a credible historian) reporteth: that the Chri∣stian world was inuolued in so many miseries, em∣broyled with such mischiefe, oppressed with so great perils, and consumed with so lamentable destruction, arising from Ecclesiasticall tyrannie and discord: that nothing could be added to the present calamitie, and the horrible confusion of the times might well haue bene compared to the darknesse of Egypt. And our countreyman Thomas Walsingham in his Chronicle saith,Tho. Walsingh. hist. Angl. in Henric. 4. p. 420. that two hundred thousand people were slaine in the garboile which followed vpon the schisme of Popes.
And besides the former euils of contention, these which follow are not to be forgotten. First, Religion and faith, which of all other things should be most certaine and indubitate, whiles it is questioned beginneth to be doubted off: and discord in Religion nourisheth certaine seedes of Atheisme. Secondly, as plants which are often remoued, cannot take roote and pros∣per; so points of faith and pietie, being remoo∣ued out of their old standing, or bended this way and that way, begin to lose their reuerence
 and stability in the soules of men. Thirdly, as in building, so in contention, one opponent gain∣saying another, plucketh downe that which by a common labour and consent hath great need to be builded vp. Fourthly and lastly, as it is im∣possible to follow guides whose backes are each to other, and their faces looke a contrarie way: so Gods people, whose right is to be led by their spirituall guides, in one beaten path of faith & godlinesse, are with perill of their saluation di∣stracted, (not knowing what to do) when their leaders call them contrary waies.
In regard of these and many other the like effects, it were greatly to be desired, that vnitie & concord, the chiefe badge and ensigne of true Christians, Ioh. 13.35. and the maintainer of the safetie and prosperitie of the Church, might by some godly meanes or other, be established in the Christian world.
There is in these our dayes a grieuous diui∣sion, and a wall of partition among the Christi∣ans of the Westerne Region. The Pontificians of the one partie, and the reformed Churches of the other, are in hostilitie: and it cannot be denied, but that the same threatneth perill

 Church; to wit, That the Popes iudgment is infallible: That he is Lord ouer the whole Church, &c. That the publike Seruice of the Church doth best edifie in an vnknowne lan∣guage: That lay men may not without Papall licence reade the holy Scripture, &c. The Oecu∣menicall Councell of EphesusConcil. Ephes. edit. Peltan. to. 4. cap. 10., writeth in this manner to the Emperours, Theodosius and Va∣lentinian: Your maiesties desiring that pietie may be cōfirmed, haue enioyned the holy Synod to make a more exact proofe of the doctrines propounded, &c. Here∣by it appeareth, that in those dayes, not onely particular Bishops and Popes, but the whole bodie and state of the Clergie were so farre sub∣iect to Princes, as that these had externall au∣thoritie to enioyne and command them to serue Christ Iesus in their callings.
3. Many of our aduersaries opinions are im∣probable, vnreasonable, and absurd. The Scrip∣ture (saith Cardinall CusanusCusan. Epist. 2. ad Bohem. pag. 834.) hath no greater authoritie to binde or absolue the faithfull, then the Church will. The definition of the Pope (saith Gret∣sar) is as authenticall as the sacred ScriptureGrets. def. Bellarm. de Scriptu. p. 1457.. For∣nication in the Clergie (saith Pighius) is a smaller of∣fence then mariagePigh. contr. Ratisbon. loc. 15. To worship images is merito∣riousAndrad. or∣thod. explic. lib. 9. pag. 284..
 When the Pope deliuereth a definitiue sen∣tence touching faith, the spirit of God assisteth him infallibly in his conclusion, but not in his premisesStapl. Relect. contr. 4. q. 2. no∣tab. 4. Canus. loc. theol. l. 6. c. 8.. He may priuately thinke, teach, and write heresieBosius de sig. eccles. l. 18. cap. 6. Caietan. de author. Pap. & Concil. cap. 9. Bannes, Azor. Greg. Val. Gret∣sar, &c., and yet in his Consistorie he shall alwaies sententiate and define veritie. He may be a lad of ten yeares oldReade after∣wards in this booke. p. 118. and pag. 142. Cassand. de of∣fic. boni viri, p. 39. De fide in Christum mor∣tuum & resusci∣tatum, de chari∣tate Deo & proximo collo∣canda, contro∣uersia nulla est. Porro in his du∣obus capitibus pietatis summa consistit, &c., an ignorant and vnlettered gull, vnable to write his owne name, or to vnderstand grammar; and yet he is the sole Authenticke Iudge of controuersies in Religi∣on, and the whole Church is obliged vpon the greatest penaltie, to beleeue his definition. And yet in this case the Church is not gouerned by new reuelation.
4. Some of our aduersaries (more ingenuous then their fellowes) confesse, that we beleeue and hold the foundation, the summe of pietie, or maine and vitall matter of Religion.
Now in regard of the premises, it appeareth that our aduersaries haue no iust cause to em∣broile and disturbe the Christian world, and in hostile and barbarous manner to deale with vs for matter of doctrine: considering that if they do not falsifie our TenetThey lay to our charge, that we hold: God to be the author of sinne. That a regenerate person hath not freewill. That iustifyed people, are not inwardly clen∣sed from mortall sinne by grace. That Sacraments do not conferre grace. That the Church mili∣tant is a Platonicall Idea. That euery priuate and vnlearned Christian is a iudge of controuersies, and an interpreter of Scripture. That the true Church visible hath no authority to determine con∣trouersies of faith. That the Eucharist is onely a figure of Christ his presence, and an empty signe. That good works are not meanes of saluation. That we yeeld no honor to the blessed Virgine, and other Saints, &c., and impose that vpon
 vs which we are free from. We maintaine no publike doctrine, but such as hath formerly bene reputed orthodoxe and Catholicke: and is either necessarily, or at least wise with greater probabilitie and apparence of truth, deriued from sacred Scripture, and from the Primitiue Councels and Fathers, then the aduerse Tenet defended by them.
The matter then, which principally & with∣out present hope of reconciliation deuideth Christendome, is the pride and vsurpation of the Pope. And no doubt other doctrinall con∣trouersies are subtilly kept on foote, to be a stal∣king horse for this.
When these maximes and theorems ensuing be considered, let each impartiall Reader re∣uolue with himselfe what is the true cause of the discord whereof I speake.
No Chapter, no booke (of holy Scripture) is cano∣nicall, but by the Popes authoritieGreg. 7. Apud Baron. tom. 11. an. 1076. Num. 33..
The Pope may place the (fabulous) booke of Her∣mes and Clement his Constitutions, among canonical ScriptureStapl. Relect. controuers. 5. quaest. 3. artic. 4. pag. 514..
The Roman Pontifex by the right of true Religion may command all men, touching all their particular
 affaires and actions, and he is the Lord of all tempo∣rall thingsBosius de rui∣nis gentium, l. 1. c. 18..
He is that statue in Daniel, which shall crush in peeces all the kingdomes of the earthBosius de sig. eccles. l. 17. c. 3. Otho. Frising. chron. l. 6. c. 36. Romanum im∣perium, ferro in Daniele compa∣ratum, pedes ex parte ferreos, ex parte fictiles ha∣buit, donec à la∣pide praeciso de monte sine manibus, exci∣sum subruetur. Quid enim ali∣ud lapidem sine manibus excisum, quam Ecclesiam, &c? Haec, regnum, circa finem mundi, quem pedes signifi∣cant, ferreum propter mattē, fictile propter conditionem, in ea parte quae in∣firmior fuit per∣cussit: dum Regē orbis non tanquā Dominum orbis vereri, sed tan∣quam de limo, propter humilem conditionem factum fictilem, gladio anathematis feie docuit. Ipsa vero quae antea parua fuit, & humilis, in quantum montem excreuerit, iam videri potest, &c..
The Pope may depose kings, (saith Tho. Bosius) for iust causes, and without any cause: because they be ignauious; yea for their age, and for an iniurie of∣fered to one AbbotBosius de sig. lib. 17. cap. 4. pag. 406..
It belongeth to Romish Bishops (saith our coun∣tryman Saunders) to pronounce the King an heri∣ticke, and to declare that his subiects are exempt from yeelding all future obedience to him: and they (Popish Bishops) are to do their endeuours, that some other may be enthroned in his seate; and if sub∣iects will not proceed herein according as they ought (traiterously,) then the Pastors are to procure by any meanes whatsoeuer (poyson, gunpowder, mas∣sacre, &c.) that he which sits in the chaire of pesti∣lence may no longer reigneSander. de visib. Monarch. l. 2. c 4..
And what distaineth the king and maketh him an heriticke, or worthy of this fatall blow? Haereseos incusatur & damnatur Fredericus, quod inter alia, Romanum Pontificem, ipsum anathematis
 vinculo astringere non potuisse dixerit (saith Fazel∣lusFazel. de reb. Sicul. l. 8. c. 2. p 443. Vide Vsperg. chron. an. 10 12. pag. 241.:) The (Emperour) Fredericke is accused and condemned of heresie, because among o∣ther sayings he affirmed, that the Romane Pope could not anathematize, (or by his curses de∣priue him of his imperiall dignitie.)
And Papirius Masson saith: The Pope being transported with vehement hatredMaiore odio incensus, &c., sent into France a certaine Archdeacon, with Breeues containing dire∣full censures to be published against Philip then King: If he would not acknowledge himselfe subiect to Pope Boniface, as well in things ciuill and temporall, as in spirituallPapir Masson, de episc. vrb. l. 5. vita. Bonifa∣cij. 8..
Thomas Saunders also saith: The King ought to be deposed, if he will not blade it for Christ, Mat. 26.25. (that is, for the Popes tyrannie and lust) also if he permit diuorces, or affirme vsurie to bee lawfull, &cSander. de vi∣lib. Monarch. l. 2. c 4. Pro Christo stringere, &c. Theoderic. Ni em. de schis. pa par. l. 2. c. 7. Vsu∣raepalam in curia Romana exer∣cebantur, & non reputabatur peccatum. Torniel. annal. p. 161. A Pon∣tif. maximo fuit dispensatum, cum Emanuele Portugalliae Re∣ge, vt duas suc∣cessiue vxores duceret: & cum Katherina Ferdinandi, & Elizabethae Re∣gum Hispaniarum filia, vt successiue duobus nuberet fratribus, Angliae Principibus.. Or if within his owne dominions, he restraine the horrible and importable exacti∣ons and oppressions of the Pope: or if the King will not come at his callTho. Walsingham. hist. Anglor. in Edward. 2. pag. 79. Gulielm. Nubrig. hist. Angl. l. 2 c. 16. Centum homicidia inter fines Angliae à clericis cōmissa (sub Henrico secundo, &c.) Tot millia taliū &c.: Or if he do impaire the immunities of the Romane Church: (that is, among the rest, will not permit Ecclesiasticall
 and religious persons to be lawlesse and exempt from ciuil obedience:) Or if he violate Sanctua∣ries, that is, do not tollerate theeues and villans when they runne to Cardinals houses, or other priuiledged places, thereby to euade the iust penaltie of their demeritsPapir. Masson. de Episc. vrbis l. 5 in Vrbano. 5. Scelesti homi∣nes grauissimis facinoribus per∣petratis, ad Car∣dinalium do∣mos fugere so∣liti, legū nodis, & digno suppli∣cio eximeban∣tur.: Lastly, if the Em∣perour or King, chance to tread awry in exhibi∣ting complement to the Pope, it may hazard his safetie. Fazellus reporteth as followethFazellus de re∣bus Sicul. l. 8. c. 2. pag. 439. Ex decreto Pontificis. Cui cum de more, &c. (à principio non fuit sic.) Errorene lap∣sus, an superbia, incertum. Altius vt par erat in Pontificis, animoinsederat, quam vt vnquā excidere potue∣rit.: Fre∣dericke came to Rome at the Popes appointment*, To whom Gregory (as the manner was) offered his right foote to be kissed by him. The Emperour (whe∣ther of ignorance or pride (it is vncertaine) did scarce touch the Popes knees with his lips. This dis∣courtesie, entred (as it was meete) so deepely into the Popes breast, that he could neuer forget it, &c. And what might be the sequele thereof, (besides the story it selfe) let the doctrine of Thomas SaundersSander. de vi∣sib. Monarch. l. 2. c. 4. Elizei gladius vltimo loco numeratur, velut quem effu∣gere nemo possit, etiam si gladium vel Asahelis, vel Iehu effugerit: sic spiritualis potestatis censura euitari nullo modo potest. resolue vs, who saith: Elizeus his sword is mentioned in the last place, (1. Kin. 19.17.) as being such which no man can escape, although he haue escaped the sword of Asahel and Iehu: Euen so, the censure of the spirituall power can by no meanes
 be auoided. And Cardinall Baronius hath a me∣morable sentence in maintenance of a most immane and vnnaturall act against the Empe∣rour.Baron. annal. tom. 12. anno. 1106. num. 14. When young Henry rebelled against his father, and deposed him from the Empire: brought him (his father) to his end; and for fiue yeares after his death kept him vnburied: Who (saith Baronius) can denie but that this was an eminent worke of pietie? And you haue no more cause to blame this sonne, then to accuse one for putting bonds vpon his father when he is mad, furious, and franticke, by meanes of some deadly ague.
And from hence it may appeare, that the proper and adequate cause of the discord and diuision of the Westerne region of the world in matter of Religion, is the ambition of the Ro∣mane Pontifex, and the pernitious doctrine of his fautors and parasitesPapir. Masson. de Episcopis vr∣bis. li. 6. in Leo. 10. rehearseth the speeches of Longolius, say∣ing to the Pope: Te non tam quasi Pontifi∣cem maximum, quam vt Princi∣pem Romanū, id est, Regum omnium Re∣gem., held on foote to sup∣port the Papall throne.
There be some which forbeare not to censure Diuines of our part, for continuing the breach in Christendome, and maintaining controuer∣sies in Religion. But I entreate these censors in∣differently to consider. 1. That the truth which we maintaine is the common right of all Gods
 people as well as our owne, and that in defence thereof we passe not the bounds of our calling. 2. Other states of men are as lyable to the op∣pression of the Pope as the Clergie, and as vna∣ble to beare it. 3. Let them repute with them∣selues, the acts both of present and elder times. Could his excellent Maiestie (whose abundant cle∣mencie, his very aduersaries cannot dissembleMaster Brialy Apologie prae∣face, pag. 8. We cannot without note of more then barbarous ingratitude but acknowledge, that tender reser∣uednes, and euer gracious dispo∣sition, whereby since his High∣nesse first entry into so great op∣position against vs of the state and time: We haue yet neuer∣thelesse bene (in respect of for∣mer times) mildly forborne or but sparingly delt withall, &c.) be permitted within his owne dominions, after the most hatefull and mischieuous treason that euer was named vpon earth, to impose an oath of ciuill obedience and externall loyaltie vpon his owne subiects? And with what impudency, spite and follie, did the Romists oppose his iust and necessary proceeding in this case?
But ascend we to former ages: were the States of this Realme, able or willing to endure the gree∣uous and continuall pillage and oppression of the Pope in this kingdome? Surely, they com∣plaine in Mathew Paris in these termes: Satius nobis mori, &c. It were more desirable for vs to die, then to liue in this oppression. And England is become as a vineyard, which the wild boare (the Pope) hath rooted vp.Rex Angliae Vasallus Papae. Math. Paris. pa. 844. Our Lord the Pope hath deuoured vs with his rauenous iawes, &c.


next to God we all liue and breathe. Lam. 4.20.) You are a father and friend to the Clergie, o∣uer which God and his Maiestie hath placed you, & I my selfe haue my particular station in your Diocesse, and exercise my function vnder your Episcopie. In regard whereof, I thinke my selfe obliged, both to acknowledge your fauors, and to select your Lordship to be my Patron. And if this my seruice may proue in any measure pro∣fitable to the Church, whereof I am a member, and gratefull to you and to the rest of my supe∣riors, I shall thinke I haue laboured to purpose. Otherwise I must accuse my selfe of being ouer busie, and acknowledge with Saint AmbroseOffic. l. 1. c. 2.: That tacere nosse quàm loqui difficilius est: It is more difficile to know when to be silent, then to speake. And thus presuming no further, I rest,

