



MOst reuerend Lordes and deuines, ha∣uing composed this English mirrour, of selected counsels in sacred scripture and graue censures of morall gouer∣nours, applyed to a generall instructi∣on: where in the good, maye see the large rewards of vertue, & the bad the seuere scourges of wickednesse. The booke (with a fearefull boldnes) I haue armed with the shield of her Maiesties royall protection, who is the liuely example of Dauids righteousnesse, Salomons wisedome, Augustus clemency, and what vertue so euer is els contained in a reli∣gious gouernment: at whose feet (rather by deuine miracle, then worldly policye) enuye, and her worst enemies fall: so that (in effect) her excellency is a figure of the whole worke: and the worke, the iudgementes of religion, honor, and iustice. Religion containing the godly counsels of the Clear∣gie, honor the fortitude of the Nobility, and Iustice the wise∣dome of temporall magistrates, the three chiefe members of this blessed gouernment, whereof her Maiestie is the heade and glorye. The first part containing the conquest of Enuie (next vnder her Maiesty: who containeth the whole) I haue directed to the right honourable nobilitie, to whom apper∣taineth the swoord: the second part, containing Enuies o∣uerthrow by vertue: or more properly her Maiesties peace∣able victories, I reuerently present to your reuerende Lord∣ships, as cōquests gained by grace: The last part containing,

a fortresse, against Enuy: instructing euery estate with sacred and moral counsels, in the offices, and disgraces of their pro∣fessions, I humbly present vnto the temporall magistrates, vpon whose wisedomes all good gouernments are buylded. The part which I submit vnto your graue censors, I hope, will be well accepted, containing so holy matters, as peace, godly gouernment, deuine prouidence, &c. Peace is your vi∣sible attyre, the beauty of Gods Church, and of temporall blessinges, the most precious. Saint Paule among the offi∣ces of a Bishop, forbiddeth him fighting: yea perswadeth him to abhorre it in others: and by circumstaunce or law∣full imagination, counselleth him to protect and defende peace. I need not priuiledge my boldnes, in numbring the manifold benefites thereof, you (Reueren de deuines) dayly preach them, and by grace and your godly labours, Eng∣land possesseth them. God continue his peace (which passeth all vnderstanding) among vs. To which good God, I zea∣lously pray, for the prosperity of his church, the wel∣fare of your Lordships, and all other true prea∣chers of his word, with what title so euer they be adopted.

