



THE bright beames of your Honours most gratious coū∣tenāce, shewing me fauour not inferior to that of Ahasuerosh extended to∣wards Queene Ester, whē he held out the golden scepter: and your honourable acceptance (together with the vndeserued thankfulnes
of those worshipful assemblies, ac∣companying your honors seuerall times at those spirituall bankets which your honors appointed me the most vnskilfull of all other to set out; hath caused other blos∣somes and fruite from the tree of life to spring forth, which the cold of the winter had almost killed. And furthermore, hauing many goodly plants in my vineyard (as other men haue in theirs) both fresh & greene, and yet the fruite both bad and small (though they haue bene pruned and trimmed a long time by other labourers, as by my selfe): I much maruelled what might be the cause thereof. And digging for a fountaine to water my garden, I found a cor∣rupt vaine in the earth, that poy∣soned my trees, and made the fruit naught. A handfull wherof I haue bound vp in paper (because it is
straying) that as the Euangelist Luke dedicated of loue his booke vnto his deare Theophilus, so I might haue something to present vnto your honors for a Newyears gift. Which might be Tanquam purae nec non mentis gratissimae pro summis in me vestris accumulatis be∣neficijs indicium. And though veri∣tas odium parit, as the prouerbe is: yet because she cannot endure to creepe into a corner, (she greatly reioycing of your loue and coun∣tenance towards her, and her chil∣dren) intendeth to walke abroad. Yet for her better safetie vnder the couert of your hors. patronage and protection, vnto whom for iust cause shee chiefly commends her self: your noble honors being such as feare God like Cornelius, with your houshold; and to all good learning more gratious then ecaenas: vnto whom sinne is so
odious, and who are such godly fauourers of all that be vertuous. And thus crauing pardon for this my boldnesse, leauing these the first fruites of my poore labours publicke, as an earnest of my lo∣uing dutie, presented like the Wi∣dowes mite, into the treasurie of your Honors fauourable tuition, to be preserued from the spoyler: I humbly take my leaue: daily commending your honours vnto the protection of God. Framfield in Sussex. Anno. 1602.

