



Sir,
I Have read of gratitude, in Birds, and Beasts; of a Lions thankefulnesse to a Romane Captive; of a Storke which cast a precious Stone into the bosome of a Maide, which had healed her of a wound: Which deeds of Nature doe speake to me that Gospel Luk. 10.37. Vade & tu fac similiter, Goe thou and doe likewise. Now if Solomon thought to shame the Sluggard into pains, by sen∣ding him to the busie Ant; Ile thinke
it, no disparagement, to learne in Na∣tures Schoole, gratitude of a Bird. Those many favours of Love which your noble spirit hath heaped upon me, laid such a strickt siege to my thoughts, that I knew not how to res∣cue my selfe, but by this publike decla∣ration; wherein, whil'st I shew my du∣ty, I proclaime my weaknesse; and de∣serve this censure (from the world) to bee a man guilty of gratitude: yet no matter, 'tis a lesse crime to commit an errour, then to forget a friend: and if Naaman did not remember his maide, which told him of the Prophet, I dare say, his ingratitude was a fouler disease then his leprosie. The last Summer, when Divine Justice had scattered us over all the Land, your house was my
noble Sanctuary; where I saw, as much Religion practised, as an Hypocrite can talke of; and such reverent conformi∣ty in your private Chappell, that obe∣dience might there safely stand for a Lecture; and bending the knee (to the Jesus of men) would not loose a voyce, but get a blessing. And now, sir, for my royall entertainement, I present you with a paper paiment, this poore Sermon, which wear's no costly dresse; preach'd in a time of sadnes, when sorrow is the best eloquence. To your hands I ten∣der it, and your religious Lady, who (to the glory of her Sex) sees her selfe oftner in a Booke then in a Glasse, and is so enamour'd with saving knowledg, that she resembles the Bee, which lives in honey, or the Birds of the fortunate
Ilands, which are nourished with per∣fumes. Now the good will of him that dwelt in the Bush, preserve you both, and your virgin sister (second to none in Vertue) who now increaseth the poore with Almes,Mrs. Mary Puliney. as she will hereafter Heaven with a Saint: and the God of Jacob, give you the blessing of Joseph, the precious things of Heaven, and the precious things of the Earth; & grant, that what you sowe beneath, you may reape above; God Almighty lead you by the hands, from Grace to Glory; 'tis the prayer of him who is, and ever will bee

