


A SOVLDIOR of Kinge PHIL∣LIP, of MACEDONIA, (Righte honorable) suffering ship∣wracke,Brusonius lib. 3. and languishinge throughe necessitie and extreme sicknes, A Macedonian mooued with compas∣sion, moste louinglie entertayned, and longe cherished and releeued him. Who being well recouered, promised at his departure if he might come to the presence of his Soueraigne to requite his frendship. At the lengthe cominge to the courte, the souldior made reporte of the shipwracke, but not of the kindnes of the Macedonian: and contrariwise, so incensed the Kinge against his louinge countryman, that he obtained a graunt of all his li∣uinges: But afterwarde his ingratitude and trecherous practise being discouered to this good prince, he reuoked his guifte, and in detestation of his dealinge caused him to bee marked with a hotte iron:Idem. The Emperor CLAVDIVS reduced all those to their former bondage, who neclecting the bountie and loue of their Lordes, in infranchisinge them: requited them in the ende with anie vnkindnes. This foule vice Ingratitude hathe bin common in all ages, and yet so odious to the vertuous and
 best disposed, that they haue lefte behinde innumerable exam∣ples to the like effecte, for the rooting out thereof from all socie∣ties. If the former ages who knewe not the liuinge GOD, nor his holie worde, haue bin so carefull herein: Then ought wee, muche more, who knowe not onlie howe odious it is, to man: but howe hatefull it is, cheeflie in the sighte of God. For we maie see in the holie scripture, howe often the children of Israel weare plagued for their vnthankefulnes.Exod. 14, 15, 16, 17. &c. and howe the Lor∣de often complaineth therof, sayinge by the Prophet I say, I haue nourished and exalted them and yet they dispi∣sed mee,Isaie cap. 1. the oxe knoweth his maister, and the asse his cribbe, but Israël knoweth not mee &c. Also by the Prophet Ieremie,Ierem. cap. 8. The Storke, the Turtle, and the swal∣lowe, doe obserue their time: but my people doe not knowe the iudgement of the Lorde. In the newe Testa∣ment also, when Christe had clensed the ten lepers, and but one of them gaue thankes,Luc cap. 17. our sauiour said, Are not ten clen∣sed?Mich. 6. Osee 13. where bee the other nine? &c. By whiche and ma∣nie other like places, it is manifest, howe ingratitude is vile bo∣the in the sighte of GOD and man. Wherefore to cleare my selfe of the suspicion of my guilt herein, whiche your honor maye iustlie conceiue against mee, in deferring so longe before I present some testimonie of my bounden dutie to your good Lordship, (hauing so ofte, and so largelie tasted of your honou∣rable bountie and fauor.) I haue therefore strained that small talent I haue, to pleade my cause in this behalfe to your ho∣nour: Most humblie beseeching the same, to pardon the wan∣tes wherewith this my simple trauaile is blemisshed, throughe my lacke of leasure, and learninge. The first, denieth me to perfecte it, as I purposed: The other, to polishe it as it ought, that shoulde bee presented to so noble a personage. whose heroi∣call vertues so manie graue, and learned men haue eternised to
 all posterities. For leauinge your natiue countrie, where so ma∣nie godlie and vertuous are countenanced: So manie learned aduaunced, and so manie studious incoraged by your honour. What other countrie in Christendome, but knoweth that your lordship is a Noble, and moste faithfull counsellor to her excel∣lent Matie, a zelous fauorer of the Gospell, and of the godlie Preachers thereof, a louinge patron of learninge, and a boun∣tifull Mecoenas to all the professors of worthie artes, and sciences: whereof my selfe is a witnes, who haue often harde the same in other countries, to your euerlastinge memorie.
Learninge woulde be soone put to silence, without the aide and supporte of such noble Peeres as your Lordship: which was well considered by the Emperors, and Princes manie hun∣dreth yeares since: whereof Artaxerxes the Kinge of Persia hath lefte behinde him this example, who wrat to a ruler of one of his dominions to this effecte. Kinge of Kinges great Artaxerxes to Hiscanus gouernor of Hellesponte gree∣ting.Suidas. The fame of Hippocrates a Phisition is come vnto mee, therfore see thou geue him as muche goulde as he desireth, and all other thinges he wanteth, and send him to me. He shalbee equall with anie Persian in honor, and if there be anie other famous man in Europe, spare no money to make him a frend to my courte. Also Phillip of Macedonia fauored Aristotle, comitting his onlie sonne Alexander the great to his tutorship,Aul. Gell. lib. 9. cap. 3. reioysing that he had a sonne borne in suche a time, as he mighte haue such a famous Philosopher to be his instructor.Aelian. de Var. Hist. lib. 13. ca. 7. The same Alexander so honored the poët Pindarus, that at the destru∣ction of Thebes he gaue chardge that the familie and kinred of Pindarus shoulde bee spared.Plutarchus in Alexand. Hee loued so learninge that he vsed to laie the Jliades of Homer (which he learned of Aristotle)
 with his dagger vnder his beddes head. Also hauing learned certaine priuate instructions of his said Scoolemaister, after ha∣uing knowledge that Aristotle had published the same to others, hee was highly offended: and althoughe hee weare busied in the great warres against Darius, yet in the middest of those waigh∣tie affaires, hee wrat vnto Aristotle, blaminge him for partici∣pating to others, that which hee desired to haue proper to him selfe. Sayinge, Howe can I excell others, in any thinges I haue learned of thee: if thou make the same common to all, for I had rather goe before them in learning, then in power and aboundance. Gellius setteth downe the Epistle of the King to Aristotle,Aul. Gell. lib. 20. cap. 4. with the aunsweare there∣vnto, being worthie to bee imprinted in the mindes of the ho∣norable, that they might bee for euer remembred. Scipio Africa∣nus vsed the Poët Ennius as his companion in his greate af∣faires,Plinius lib. 7. cap. 30. Idem, ibid. and to shewe his griefe for the losse of such a one, caused the image of Ennius to bee laide with him in his owne tombe. Augustus countinanced Virgill, and so loued him: that after his death, hee carefullie preserued his workes from the fire to the which they weare adiudged.Horatius. Mecoenas manie waies shewed his noble minde vnto Horace,Mossellanus su∣per Gell. lib. 1. cap. 26.
Cicero in orat. pro Archia. and Plutarche was in highe estimation with the Emperor Traian. Yea famous citties and comon wealthes haue imbraced the learned, Smyrna and sixe other citties so loued Homer, that after his deathe, there grewe great controuersie amongst them, which of them should rightlie claime him to bee theirs. Athens honored a longe time Demo∣sthenes: Rome reioysed for Tullie. And of later times Florence boasted of Petrarke,Sabellicus. and Roterodam of Erasmus. with manye other citties that did the like to diuers famous men. And theise againe to requite their honorable regardes, made them famous throughe their worthie workes to all ages, that deathe to the which their bodies by nature weare subiect, coulde not extincte
 nor burie their memories: but that the same remaine so longe as the worlde shall indure. And to speake of some of them, Ari∣stotle, greatlie honored Phillip, and was no lesse carefull for the education of Alexander. For when hee came to bee kinge, besi∣des the houlsome preceptes hee prescribed vnto him of regiment, yet hauinge knowledge of his earnest desire, to vnderstand the natures and qualities of all creatures, compyled almoste fiftie bookes, intreatinge of the same: hauing by the commaundement of Alexander out of Greece and all Asia, manie thowsandes of Hunters, Faulkeners, Fowlers, Fishers, Heardmen,Aul. Gell. lib. 13. cap. 7. and suche as kepte bees, birdes, or anie other liuinge thinge: to helpe and aide him, with theire knowledge and experiences, in searchinge the secrettes, natures and qualities of all creatures. Ennius beinge mindfull of the noble inclination of Scipio,Petrus Crinitus de poëtis Latinis. did highlie extoll his worthie actes, registring them in his learned cronicles to all posterities: Ʋirgill to shewe him selfe thankefull to Augustus: spent manie yeares about his famous worke of Aeneiads, to deriue the race of the Emperor from Aeneas,Idem. and the noble Troians.Macrobius. Horace amongst his rare & learned workes stuffed full of wise and graue preceptes, oftentimes enterlaceth the same with the birthe the bountie the learninge, and the noble qualities of Mecoenas, & hathe made him for euer famous, & renowmed. Plutarche besides his priuate bookes he wratte to Traian, of counsell and gouernement:Suidas. Hee framed that excel∣lent worke of liues, and comparisons betwene the Romanes and the Grecians: giuing due commendation aswell to the Ro∣manes, as to his owne countrimen. By which wee maie gather, that learning grounded vppon vertue hath bin alwaise enemie to ingratitude, and cannot lie hid, but is euermore workinge, & bewrayeth it selfe as the smoke bewrayeth the fire, And if anie thinge happen worthie memorie: by the benefit of the learned it is imparted, by their trauailes to future time. If there
 chaunce nothinge in theire age famous, yet they set them selues a worke in handlinge suche accidentes, as haue bin done in times paste.Cornel. Nepos. Dares Phrigius beinge a sowldior at the battaile of Troye, made a large discourse thereof, yet like one too much af∣fectioned, can scarce finde an ende of the praises of Hector. Homer finding small matter in his time to handle, attempted the same argument, being lothe that his countrymen shoulde lacke their due commendacion, and therefore almost as farre on the other side, extolleth the valour, and highe prowes, of Achil∣les:Petr. Crinit. and the counsaile, and pollicie, of Vlisses. Lucan seing no∣thing honorable in Nero to intreate of, fled to former times for matter, where he found to set his worthie muse a worke, and wratte in verse (equall with the haughtines of the argument) the battailes and bloodie conflicts, betwene Cesar, and Pompey. Seneca dispairinge of the nature and inclinacion of his vnto∣warde scholler the same Nero: wratte lamentable Tragedies, & bookes of great grauitie and wisedome. Moreouer learninge hath that secret workinge that tyrauntes haue bin mittigated therewith, and haue dissembled their affections for the time. Dionysius the elder desired to heare Plato,Plutarchus. and was contented a while to listen vnto him, after whome his sonne, hauing bothe his name and nature, did seeme outwardlie to loue and reuerence Plato, and sente him great guiftes to Athens, and inuited him to his courte.Suetonius. Petr. Crinit. Nero for a time embraced Lucan and Seneca, al∣thoughe naturallie he was wickedlie inclined: but hee soone did degenerate from their discipline, for there can bee no league be∣tweene vertue and vice, nor perfecte vnion of meere contraries: And although time reuealed the bloodie mindes, of these cruell tirantes towardes those famous men, yet wee can not finde the like outrage, and crueltie done vnto the learned, by those that are honorable vertuous and noble minded: but by suche as bee of cruell vile and base natures, who are alwaies enemies to
 vertue, and loue none, nor like anie, but such as are of their owne vglie stampe. For it is a rule that faileth not, that those that are moste honourable, are most vertuous: bicause honour alwaies followeth vertue, as the shaddowe doth the bodie: and it is as vnpossible that a bodie shoulde be without a shaddowe in the sonne, as the right honourable in this life shoulde be voyde of vertue. Thus it is manifest howe learninge hath bin embra∣ced, and had in highe estimation, by great Princes and noble Peeres, and that worthelie: Bicause by the benefit thereof, The actes of mightie Monarches & great Princes, and the matters and thinges of former time worthie memorie, done by sage Go∣uernors, and valiant Captaines. The manners and Lawes of straunge nations, & customes of oulde time. The mutabillitie of worldly felicitie, and howe the wise haue behaued them selues in bothe fortunes: haue bin presented vnto them as in a glasse, for their instruction, from which they might drawe vnderstan∣ding and good counsaile, to instruct and gouerne them selues in all their actions: and finde approoued examples for the whole course of their life, eyther to bee imitated, or eschewed. Of which singuler benefit, wee likewise are pertakers: For hereby, this present time behouldeth the accidentes of former times, as if they had bin done but yesterdaie. and wee maye behoul∣de the natures, & quallities, of our great grandfathers grand∣fathers, as if they yet liued before our eies. And as former ti∣me, and present time, haue reaped thereby, this inestimable Juell; So likewise, future time so long as the worlde shall indu∣re, shall taste of this blessing: For our succession, shall see what we haue seene, and behoulde hereby what famous thinges weare enterprised and done in our daies, as if they weare euen nowe standing at our elbowes. Yet howe greatlie learning hath bin impeached since the firste florishe thereof, when in stead of such louing and bountifull princes and patrons, the worlde broughte
 forthe,Bapt. Egnatius de Romanis principi∣bus lib. 1. & Pom∣pon. Laetus in Rom. Histor. compendio. Licinius who tearmed learning a poyson and plague of the common wealthe. And Ʋalentinianus his partner in that opinion, with the cursed crewe of their companions, As Caligula, Nero,Alexandriae Biblio∣theca omnium ce∣lebertima, in qua cccc. millia volu∣mina librorum in∣censa, Frecul. Cron. tom. 1. lib. 7. cap. 9. Sed Plutarchus in Caesare, & Aul. Gel. lib. 6. cap. vlt. & Sabel. Ennead. 6. libro 7. scribunt se∣ptingenta millia in eadem consumpta. Vaticana Romae Bi∣bliotheca, sub Cle∣mente 7. à militi∣bus Germanis & Hispanis cremata. Aeneas Syluius de Europa.
Instructiss. Budae Bibliotheca per So∣limannum incensa 1526. Aug. Cur. Athenae deletae, & funditus euersae, per Machometum 8. Turcarum Imp. 1452. idem Curio. Diocletian, with Machomet, Baïazet, and such like monsters of nature, being cruell persecutors, enemies of all hu∣manitie, and distroyers of all discipline: who dispising God and all goodnes, did degenerate so farre from their forfathers, that they delighted whollie to spill the blood of the worthie men, to burne the famous libraries, and to rase and ouerthrowe the vniuersities, and schooles, of all artes and sciences: as in the tragicall Histories of former times is recorded, and can not bee but with great griefe remembred. And althoughe learning hath bin greatlie decaied in these later times, Yet wee must (with thankes vnto God therefore) confesse, That it hath plea∣sed him alwaies, to raise vp some louers and fauorers therof, who haue tendered and embraced the same, and for the pre∣seruinge it to their posterities, haue lefte behinde singuler monu∣ments of their care, & zelous mindes in this behalfe: As Char∣les the great,Bapt. Egnat. de Rom. principibus lib. 3. Kinge of Fraunce, who erected two vniuersities, the one at Paris, the other at Pauia, placing therein many famous men: and Sigismundus Emperor, who highlie extolled the lear∣ned,Idem ibi. and blamed the Princes of Germanie, for their small re∣garde vnto them: And vnderstanding by somme, that althou∣ghe he cherished the learned, yet it was saied they were but pore and base persons, aunswered: I loue them who excell others for vertue, and learninge, out of the which I measure nobilitie. Also Ferdinandus gaue yearelie out of his treasurie, great som∣mes of money to the readers of diuinitie, Phisicke, Rethoricke, and Philosophie, to the great incouraginge of those that weare inclined to good studies:Pontanus de libe∣ralitate. Likewise Alphonsus King of Na∣ples, who vsed to saye, he had neuer greater pleasure, then when he was in the companie of those that weare singuler for know∣ledge,
 and learninge: Laurentius Valla & Panormitanus, with diuers other tasted of his goodnes, and found him a rare ex∣ample for princes, for his continual desire to aduance learninge. I mighte heere likewise bringe in diuers other, not inferior to them for their loue to the learned: As Fredericke Duke of Saxon Prince elector, and the Lorde Ernestus his brother, who erected the vniuersitie of Wittenberge, and the said Du∣ke noblie countinaunced and defended Martin Luther, against the furie of Pope Leo the tenthe, and all other his aduersaries. Also Laurentius Medices Duke of Florence honoured Picus Mirandula, and Hermolaus Barbarus:Crinitus lib. 15. cap. 9.
Volaterranus in Geog. and Borsus Duke of Ferrara, reioysed in Titus Strozza. with many other Princes, who for their noble inclinations in this behalfe, amongst these mighte iustly haue their places.
BVT remembring I write to your good Lordship. I will therefore abridge of purpose, that which might bee more larglie amplified, knowing there needeth no Apologie to bee made vn∣to your honour, in the behalfe of learning: whose noble minde hath bin so addicted to the same these many yeares, that diuers, who are nowe famous men, had bin throughe pouertie, longe since discouraged from their studies: if they had not founde your honour, so prone to bee their patron. But I confesse, I haue thus largelie written therof to this ende, That if anie other happe to looke herevppon, in knowinge your zeale & honourable care of those that loue good letters: They might also knowe thereby, that you haue possession of that grounde from which true nobili∣tie florisheth: And likewise that you followe the good examples of manie Princes, and great personages, who are renowmed the∣refore, beyond anie other their desertes. And likewise, if anie be coulde, in countinancinge the learned, (as there are tootoo manie, whose frendship is (as I may saie) frozen, and starke towarde them.) This mighte a little thawe and mollifie them: and serue
 as a spurre to pricke them forwarde, to follow the steppes of your good Lordship. There be three thinges greatlie desired in this life, that is healthe, wealthe, and fame. and some haue made question which of these is the chiefe: the sick, saieth health. the couetous, comendeth wealthe. and bothe these place good name laste of all. But they be bothe partiall iudges; for he that is of sincere and vprighte iudgement, is of contrarie opinion: Bicause that healthe, and wealthe, though they bee ne∣uer so good, and so great, determine with the bodie, and are sub∣iecte vnto time; But honour, fame, renowme, and good re∣porte, doe triumphe ouer deathe, and make men liue for euer: where otherwise the greatest Princes, in shorte time are worne out of memorie, and cleane forgotten. For, what is man in this worlde? without fame to leaue behinde him, but like a bubble of water, that now riseth, & anon is not knowne where it was. Which being wel cōsidered by your honour, you haue made choi∣ce of the best parte, and embraced throughe vertue, that which liueth, and neuer dieth. For vertue (as I said) alwaies goeth before honour, & giueth a perpetuitie of felicitie in this worlde, and in the worlde to come. And althoughe throughe the ini∣quitie of time (as is declared) such excellent learned men as haue bin, are not to bee expected in this oulde age of the worlde, Yet as zelous care, and dewtifull affection as euer was to their Lordes and Patrons, there is no doubte dothe gene∣rallie florishe and is apparante: whereof your honour hath had tryall, by the learned labours of manie famous men. Farre be∣hinde whome, my selfe, (although of all the meanest) yet bein∣ge pricked forwarde by your good Lordshipps bountie, and in∣couraged by your great clemencie, moste humblie presente theise my gatheringes, and gleaninges out of other mens haruestes, vnto your honour: a worke both pleasaunte and pithie, which I haue garnished with manie histories, with the proper applica∣tions
 and expositions of those Emblemes that I founde obscu∣re: Offering it vp to your honour to looke vppon at some houres for your recreation. I hope it shalbee the more delight∣full, bicause none to my knowledge, hathe assayed the same be∣fore: &, for that diuers of the inuentiōs are of my owne slender workmanship. But chieflie, bicause vnder pleasaunte deuises, are profitable moralles, and no shaddowes, voide of substance: nor anie conceyte, without some cause worthie consideration: for the wounding of wickednes, and extolling of vertue. which maie serue, as a mirrour: to the lewde for their amendement. & to the godlie, for their better goinge forwarde in their cour∣se, that leades to euerlastinge glorie. Beinge abashed that my habillitie can not affoorde them suche, as are fit to be offred vp to so honorable a suruaighe: yet if it shall like your honour to allowe of anie of them, I shall thinke my pen set to the booke in happie houre; and it shall incourage mee, to assay some matter of more momente, as soone as leasure will further my desire in that behalfe.
THE almightie God from whome all honour and true nobillitie doe proceede, who hathe manie yeares, moste lo∣uinglie and liberallie, indued your Lordship with the same, blesse and prolonge your daies here, that wee maie behoulde the consummatiō of happie ould age in your honour: before you shal∣be summoned to the euerlasting honour, which is alwaies perma∣nent without mutabilitie, Amen. At London the XXVIII. of Nouember, Anno M.D.LXXXV.

