



THe shortnesse of Sa∣tan his time (most noble Earle) in this worlde by hys ex∣treame rage, wher∣in in these dayes ful of all daunger hee goeth farre be∣yonde hymselfe, may very well ap∣pere.Apoal.  In which short time no doubt, he will so bestirre him, that the very deapth of his craftes and mischiefe shalbe instantly imployed to the di∣sturbance of the Church of God, & the vpholdinge of hys owne king∣dome (now readie to fall) in that he
possibly can, eyther in hymselfe by continuall temptation, or in his in∣strumentes and members, by sedi∣tions, conspiracies, treasons, hypo∣crisies & dissimulations in all thin∣ges but especially in matters of re∣ligion,Ephes. 6. which S. Paule termeth spi∣rituall craftines in heauenly things. Which thing is most euidēt in these last messengers of hys, the Iesuites or rather Iebusites, the verye dregs of the bottomlesse pitte, led by the vncleane spirite of error, which do not a little disturbe the poore flock of Christ, maruelously disquiet and trouble the consciences of the ig∣norant, and occupie with noueltie the heads of the multitude by their secreate conferences, where they haue accesse: and by their pamflets and libelles spread abroade, where they thēselues cannot come: wher∣unto is adioined one other perilous mischiefe, namelye the workinge hand of the dissembling Papist, and Atheist, whereof the one being di∣spensed withall from the Pope to conforme themselues often times
outwardlye vnto the lawes, that thereby they maye the safelier and without suspition further the Iesui∣ticall attempted enterprise, is the verie mischiefe of our time. These insinnuate themselues oftentimes into suche places wherein they can doe harme, and by flatterie winne great credite in the world, and euer as opportunitie serueth, they geue the Gospell a blowe, so that some∣time they wounde daungerously to the greate hinderance of true doc∣trine, and the againe renewinge of Poperie. These they be (right ho∣nourable Earle) that are the verye poyson of our time. The Pope by his Iesuites and seminaries, without these is altogether lame and can do nothinge. The simple papistes all∣thoughe obstinate, and refuse for conscience to come to the churche, in respecte of these are nothinge. These vnder color of law dare bold∣ly, and impudently impugne Gods lavve, these deface the preachers, discredite the ministerie, seduce & deceyue the people, so that where
anye one of these is of credite or countenaunce in any parish within this land there the minister trauay∣leth in vayne, hys doctrine is with∣out credite and fruite be hee neuer so painefull. There is nothinge but brawles and contention, there the people haue their mindes alienated from the preacher vnprepared to receiue the Gospell, and very ready for these seminarie Iesuites. Thys poysoned infection (righte noble Earle) must either haue a speedie & strong purgation, or els it wil breed into an incurable leprosie. It is now past recouerie by preaching & tra∣uell of the minister. For thereof is made either a skoffe or els a matter of course without fruite, therefore the swoorde and authoritie of the stronge magistrates, ioyned with a feruent zeale of Gods trueth, must cure this infection: the preacher is too much in contempt, and the in∣ferior magistrate too weake to re∣medie this mischiefe, which if it be not in time prouided for, will bring this florishinge realme and churche
of God therin nourished vnder our gratious Debora vnto such miseries and iuste deserued plagues,3. Reg. 18.19.20.21.22.23.24. Paral. 28.29.34.35.36. Ierem. 52. Thren. 1.2. Cant. 2. 2. Corr. 11. Prouer. 12. as the sufferie of lyke hypocrites in the dayes of Ezechias and good Iosias did bringe the kingdome of Israell vnto. For these be those foxes that Salomon would haue taken foorth of the Lordes vineyarde leaste they vtterlie spoile it. These bee Operarij dolosi that canne and will dissemble their countenaunce agreable vnto the time, whilest they sette forward the decay, and seeke the ouerthrow of our happie time, and no mar∣uell hereof for the deuill himselfe is transfigured into an angell of light to further his owne purpose. Ther∣fore euery one of Gods children in his place and calling, are to oppose thēselues to their vttermost against these and suche like enterprises of Sathan: The godlye magistrates in the zeale of Phinies and Iehu with the swoord to suppresse these newe spronge IesuitesNumb. 25. 2. Regm. 10. (as her gracious Maiestie with her honourable and godly counsell haue necessarily be∣gon
to doe) and wythall to roote forth of this common wealth these disguised Gybeonites,Iosu. 9. Iudg 13. 1. Reg. 18.19. and dissem∣bling Ephramites, that can not, or wil not pronounce Shiboleth right∣ly, and as they should doe. The Bi∣shops, preachers and ministers with the spirite of Elias painfully to ga∣ther the drosse and poperie againe (lately scattered by these Semina∣ries) out of the harts of the people, both by preaching & writing, and in like sorte to enforce the true do∣ctrine of Christ his Gospel earnest∣ly vpon them: so shall the Lordes busines be done with effect, and the Lord will withdraw his curse from vs, which we haue iustlie deserued for dooing his worke hitherto so negligentlie. Herein I thought I could not any waie bestow my tra∣uell better for the time, and more for the profit of gods Church, then to ansvvere certaine crabbed que∣stions, touching a pretended reall presence, subtillie penned by some secret enemie, to the troubling of the minds and consciences of the
simple. Wherin I haue also added a discouerie and confutation of the subtiltie of the Iesuitical opinion of iustification, guilfullie vttred a late by Sherwin at his death. But by Al∣bertus Pighius, and others verie daungerouslie long agoe at large put foorth to the hurt of manie, which answere I haue offered vnto your Honor, not as things vvorthie of such a personage, but that vnder so good a protectiō they may with more fauor come into the handes of manie, presuming greatly here∣in of your accustomed clemencie, alwaies coupled vvith the feruent zeale of true religion. Wherein the Lord dailie more & more encrease your godlie zeale to his glorie, your owne felicitie, and the great com∣fort of his Church. Amen.

