



RIGHT HONOVRABLE:
GREAT is the excellen∣cy of the creatures of God: for God taking a view of the workes of his hands, Gen. 1. 31. saw eue∣ry thing that hee made; and behold, it was very good. And amongst all the visible creatures, greater is the excellent dignity of Man; made with an erect body, a coun∣tenance full of maiesty, and with eyes looking vp∣ward towards Heauen, the place of his future ha∣bitation; whereas all other creatures looke down∣ward.
 And in Man, farre more excellent is his better part, the Soule, Gn. 1. 27. created in the image of God; expounded by S. Paul, to bee ph. 4▪ 4. righteousnesse and true holinesse. God hath not made vs, as S. Augu∣stine saith, Aug. Solil▪ q. p. 7. of that sort of creatures, which haue onely a being, or which haue a being and increasing; nor of that sort of creatures, which haue not onely a being and increasing, but sence; but God hath made Man hauing not onely a being, and encreasing, and sence, but hath made him little inferiour to the An∣gels: because he hath giuen him reason and vnder∣standing to know God. And this diuine, and in∣corporeall substance, the Soule, is created, and in∣fused into the body, not onely to giue life, and sence, and motion to the body, and to set it on worke to performe the actions of this life; but e∣specially, that the body may bee the soules instru∣ment of doing good: that while we liue on earth, the whole man may glorifie God, both in body and soule; as S. Paul exhorteth, 1 Cor. 6. 20. Glorifie God in your body, and in your spirit, which are Gods. And these two, the soule and body liue together; but they die not together: for when the body decay∣eth, and dieth, the soule liueth: yea, liueth, to liue with the body that sleepeth in the dust of the earth; when as at the 1 Thess. 4 16. voyce of the Arch-Angell, and with the trump of God, it shall Dan. 12. 2. awake, and rise; and then the same soule and body being vnited and ioyned together againe, shall 2 Cor. 5. 10. appeare before the iudgement seat of Christ, that euery one may receiue the things done in his body, according to that he hath done, whe∣ther it be good or bad. And seriously considering,
 that this is the certaine state of Man; to liue heere on earth, for an Iob. 14. 14. appointed time, then to die, and af∣ter that, to come to iudgement, as the Apostle saith, Heb. 9. 27. It is appointed vnto men once to die, but after this the iudgement: as also waighing well the ouer∣spreading iniquity of these last euil dayes; wherby not onely 2 Pet. 2. 7. 1. the soule of many a righteous Lot is vex∣ed, in seeing and hearing from day to day, the filthy con∣uersation and vnlawfull deedes of the wicked; but God is greatly dishonoured, his Saboth propha∣ned, and his worship neglected: and for neglecting the offered meanes of saluation, many perish, lose their soules, and depriue themselues of the King∣dome of God; I cannot sufficiently bewaile the carelesse security, and the exceeding great neglect, that is in many, about the sauing of their poore soules. For, that men, endued with reason & vnder∣standing; being wise, and carefull enough for the things of this world; should be so voyd of vnder∣standing, as not to prouide for, and preserue the better part, the Soule; not to prepare an habitation and resting place for the soule in the Celestiall Pa∣radise; but carelesly to passe ouer their dayes, and suffer their poore soules to perish euerlastingly: O carelesse security! For this cause, Right Honorable, I haue for many yeeres, bended my studies, and framed my selfe, to 1 Cor. 1. 23. preach Christ crucified, Heb. 6. 1. laying the foundation of repentance from dead workes, and of faith towards God. That o men hearing of Christ, might beleeue in him; and beleeuing in him, might repent of their sinnes, redresse their wayes, and a∣mend their liues; and in all vertue, grace and good∣nesse,
 be followers of Christ: and hauing both faith and repentance, might be more easily stirred vp to deuout prayer, and calling vpon the name of the Lord, that they might be saued. And being moo∣ued, and now at the length resolued, to bring forth some of my more priuate labours, to more pub∣lique view; I haue like a young Merchant, aduen∣tured this my Ship vpon the dangerous seas of mens different opinions, and various conceits: and therefore it is in danger (specially in this my first voyage) to bee tossed with some stormy windes of euill censure, and sinister interpretation. But my comfort is this; my Ship is sound, and my commo∣dities not corrupt: And to the end, that these my labors may finde better entertainment into whose hands soeuer they shall come; I haue heeretofore determined, and doe now presume to dedicate them to your Honour: humbly crauing your Ho∣nors fauourable acceptance of the same. I dare not say to your Honor of this my booke, as the Iewes sayd vnto Christ of the Centurion, Lue 7. 4. Dignus est, it is worthy that your Honour should accept it: but I rather say in the Centurions owne words, Matth 8. 8. Non sum dignus, I am not worthy to bee graced by your Hon. Greatnesse; for I am conscious of mine own vnworthinesse. Neither is my booke worthy, ei∣ther for sublimity of stile, or eloquent phrase, or profundity of learning, to craue so honourable pa∣tronage. The matter is it which I commend vn∣to your Honour: The way to the Celestiall Paradise. A way, which the wise men of the world refuse to walke in, counting it foolishnesse: which ignorant
 men dreame not of, because their eyes are blinded: which the naturall man knoweth not, because it is spiritually discerned: which worldly men thinke not of, because they are earthly minded: which prophane people despise, being irreligious: which wicked and vngodly men regard not, because their hearts are hardned: which hypocrites know, but will not walke in the same, except it be in the sight of men, to haue the praise of men: and wherein good men walk, but with many failings, wandrings, and goings astray. And to the end, that the wise men of the world may be more wise to saluation; that ignorant soules may bee inlightned with the knowledge of the truth; that the naturall man may be borne againe, may awake from the dead sleepe of his sinnes, and liue the life of grace; that worldly minded men may bee lesse earthly, and more hea∣uenly minded; that prophane people may be more religious; that wicked and vngodly men may come to repentance; that hypocrites may bee more zea∣lous and sincere; and that the godly may be more confirmed in the good way, and more encouraged to hold on the good course which they haue be∣gun, that continuing to the end, they may bee sa∣ued; I haue penned this Treatise; Declaring how a sinner may bee saued, and come to life euerlasting. Which, if it may finde fauour in your Honours eyes, it will be more welcome to the world, I shall be more encouraged in the worke of the Lord; and be for eer bound, to Ephs. 3. 14. bow my knees vnto the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, in your Honours behalfe; that as the Lord of his mercy and goodnesse, hath
 giuen you great honour on earth, so he would gra∣ciously preserue, and increase your honour heere, and crowne you with glory, honour, and immor∣tality in the Celestiall Paradise.

