



Right Honourable,
COnsidering how hard a thing it is, by reason of that fraile and corrupted nature we carry about with us, to profit by
 praise; and finding moreover,Vt quis∣quis est lau∣de dignissi∣mus ita mi∣nime lib en∣te suas au∣dite solet laudes. Bu∣chol. that the more deserving and worthy any are of it, the lesse desirous they are to heare it; Iudg∣ing your Lordship to be of the same minde, I resolved not to de∣taine you with matter of that nature; nei∣ther indeed dare J giveIob 32.22 flattering Ti∣tles, fearing the se∣cret reproofe and
 stroke of God in my owne Conscience. I have adventured to addresse this Dedi∣cation to your Lord∣ship, partly for the shrowding and shel∣tring this little Booke under your Honours name and protection, which I humbly crave; and partly because J deemed your Lordship a fit patron of it, the Lord having added
 this to al his other fa∣vors, as to give you a hart stirred up in du∣ties of his Service & Honour, which is the subiect of this Trea∣tise; I conceived also some hopes that you might see something in it, whereby you might be farther pro∣voked and stirred up in the earnest Love, and open profession of the Truth wherof you
 have given abundant Testimony before many witnesses, which this Treatise cals for, and gives some light unto. Blessed be the Divine Maiesty, who (notwith∣standing the great seve∣rity of that Sentence in Holy Writ,1 Cor. 1.20. That not many wise men after the Flesh; not many mighty, not many Noble are called) hath, in your fresh and
 florishing times, amidst the confluences of many worldly blessings and contentments, looked upon you, and made choice of you for himself to doe him service, and hath taught you to e∣steeme the world as it is; when he hath passed by so many of high birth, and of great ranke and quality, who are migh∣tily enthralled, and lye prostrate, adoring the
 seeming felicities of this present world. What re∣mains then but that you advance forward, and doe still more Nobly & worthily, improving those singular endow∣ments bestowed on you to the best advantage of the giver of them. Thus shall the Lord still goe on to performe his pro∣mise,1. Sam. 2.30. That such as ho∣nour him he will ho∣nour. The truth and
 comfort of which I doubt not but your Lordship hath already found and felt, the greater & more excellent part of which remaines to be fulfilled to you when your earth∣ly honour is layed in the dust, and your soule ad∣vanced to that hoped for perfection. For the full accomplishment whereof hee shall ever pray, who rests

