


RIght Honorable & my good Lord, beeing tied vnto your Lordship with those bonds, which to recount in particular, were to exceed the bounds of an Epistle, as first for my electiō into that famous Seminarie of good learning neere VVinchester, secondly for my better promotion in∣to that enermore iustly to be called Inde value ex Equo Troiano, vi ri omni tē∣pore, virtu∣te excellē∣tes prode ūt Polyd. Virg Hist. Angl. l. 19. p. 381. New Colledg in Oxford (two most honorable foundatiōs of one sole Founder VVilliam of VViccham) lastly for my ex∣ceeding great hopes and farther incouragemēts in the Ministerie; all which kind fauours, as I ac∣knowledg them to haue proceeded only, or espe∣cially by your Lordships meanes, so in a thankful remembrance thereof, accept I beseech you these two small Treatises ensewing, as pledges of my duty, and the meere Interest of that Honor which is due vnto your Lordship, and hath beene of a long time (Iconfesse) vnpayd, but not vnremēbred wherfore, hauing not as yet any thinge of mine

owne store worthy the bestowing, I haue borrow∣ed these few lines from one, that is rich in this kinde: whose soule I trust is with God, his fame with the world, and his bones had rested in the graue, had not the restlesse malice of his cruel ad∣versaries herein exceeded, by taking, or rather raking them vp out of the See the decree of the Coun∣cell of con stance, and the Execu∣tion in ox graue, after hee had quietly slept in the Lord, for the space of 41. years; committing them to the mercy of two merciles E∣lements, Fire and Water; And as if this crueltie had not siced to aswage there bloud thirsty ap∣petites, Councell must be called vpon Councell, Bishops, Archbishops, See Wal∣singham▪ pag 188. Lib. memo rabilium ex don Nic. Hre Atm ger and lastly the Popes San∣ctitie must be consulted, about the vtter rooting out, and abolishing of his name, and doctrine from amongst the memorie of men, & herevpon letters are sent in all post haste from the Bishops vnto the Walsing∣ham. Ib pag 204. Pope, from the Pope to the king, from the king to the Archbishop, and from both king Pope and Archbishop vnto the Ib p. 306. Pope Gre∣gorie ent a Bue by ▪ brea∣thing out theats a∣gainst the Vniuersity for uffer∣ing Wick∣lies opini∣ons to take so deepe  aduenus dicti  nunij du in penduo, haerebant, vtum papalem Bul∣m  honor reciper velomnino cum dedecore refutare. Walsing. p. 200  undry other Bulles against him Ib. Chancellour of Oxford, and last of al to make the matter more sure▪ the high Court of Parliament is summoned wherein his articles beeing before condemned, must needs be published and recorded; But man

Ipse con∣silium eoū dssipauit, qui perdit sapientium sapientiam & pruden∣tium prud tiam epro∣bat solo nutu Wal▪ words re∣torted pag▪ 218. purposeth, and God disposeth, for behold that God which sitteth on high, laughed thē to scorne frustrated their bloudie designements, preserued his painful & learned works, to stop the mouths of lying The A∣pologie of the Roman Church is deuided in∣to three se∣ueral tracts wherof the second is this that the Prote∣stants Reli∣giō was not so much as in being at▪ or before Luthers first appear ing. See the Title pag. This is a mst mani∣fest  Pamphleters which write that our Re∣ligion is nothing else but a newe and vpstart do∣ctrine, scarsly euer heard of before Luthers time, the sharpnes of which obiection (if there be any edg in it I haue rebated in another Treatise dedica∣ted vnto an other verie Honorable Iudge of this land, of your ordships neere acquaintāce Iudiciā sit pene lectorem▪ where I haue demonstrated most cleerely, to the eie, (as they saie) the fondnes and vanitie of Father Parons in his 3▪ Con∣uers. Part▪ 2 pag. 487. The Apol. Tract. 2. Cap 2. pag. 105. Parsons, & our Pseudo-Catho like Apologists calumniations, both against the parson of Wickliffe, and doctrine of our Catho▪ like Protestant Religiō: accusing the one of foul heresies, and monstrous absurdities, and appeal∣ing the other of manifest newnes and new-fāgle∣ne▪ I haue (as I trust) freed both from that vniust and slaunderous imputation, in the iudgment of the indifferent reader: for others that stand po∣pishl, indeed sottishlie affected, in the Romish religion, from whom a man shall not bee able to wring any other answere but this, we know that we are in the right and you are in the wrong (I am affraide)

I shall not be able to satisfie non si persuasero no, not when I haue perswaded them. But to let them passe, & to excuse my selfe vnto your Lordship, why amongst so manie Scholastical Treatises by him written, which are with vs extant, I shoulde choose rather to publish these two small Bookes, taken out of his popular discourses, and those pēned (as it should seeme) not long after his first open manifestation of his mislike with their no∣ted corruptions and abuses. The motiues or in∣ducements were these: first because these Trea∣tises are short and entire of them selues: secondly because our Hee with his Disci∣ples went barefooted and basely clothed, in course rus∣set garmēts—adoined himselfe to the beging Friars, ap∣prouing their po∣uertie and extolling their per∣fection A∣pol. Tract. 2. Cap. 2, pag. 106. Wickliffe himselfe sai eth, he wēt too wel ap∣parelled, rather thē otherwise consumendo bona paupe∣rum in ex∣cessiuo victu & vestitu De Ver. Scrip. pag. 192. & per∣secuting the beg∣ging Friars more then any man of his ranck place or time. Woodeford in a Ms. Treatise in defence of the orders of Friars obiecteth too great excesse of apparrel vnto his followers. Adversaries, whose forheads are tenderer then other mens, shame not to write and cite Wickliffe for one of the order of the Beg∣ging Friars, adioining himselfe vnto that Sect, appro∣ving there pouerty, & extolling there perfection: which notorious vntruth, is confuted in everie page & passage almost of these Two Books: lastly I haue chosen rather to publish somewhat of this argu∣ment, in regard of your Lordships vtter detestati∣on of all Iesuiticall Friars, and Friarlike Iesuits. For what is spoken of the one, mutato nomine may wel be vnderstood of the other, and what is inten∣ded

against the Friars, may truly be extended vn∣to the Iesuits, they are so like in hypocrisie, blas∣phemie, treacheries, treasons, lyings, and damna∣ble Equiuocations. And as Tales po∣tentes in Clero▪ siue personae simplices Collegiat aggregatae, quae religi∣onem Chri∣sti dissip ant sub pallio sanctitatis vel punien tur hic per praepositos suos, aut la∣icos; vel de∣struentur per vastra∣tiones ho∣stiles; vel congregāt facinoa in vltionem diuini iudi∣cij, dicente Apostolo Rom. 2 E∣xistimas autem o homo &c—Est enim dare mensuram in scelera vs{que} ad▪ quam opotet vltio∣nem diuini iudicij expectare. De Verit. Scrip pag. 432 433. Iohn VVickliffe prophe∣cied of the Friars, that in short time their great Monasteries, (their great sinnes so requiring it, when the measure of their iniquities shoulde bee compleat and full,) would come to great confu∣sion and desolation: so of that other Sect is there a prophecie extant of a Arias Monanas praefatione prae∣fixa Bibiis Interlinearibus, sublata sunt haec verba in quibusdam edit, contra eos qui soli sapere so∣li bene viuere Iesum{que} propius insequi sibi videantur, at{que} id palam professi iactitent. At{que} hi (inquit) quod neminem qui alias bene audiat, palam improbare audent, aliorum quos ad eam rem occulte inducere possunt ingenijs & nominibus abutuntur. Horum aut , ec ar∣tes fallunt, nec gregem prodere aut cognomen indicae iuuat: vtuntur quidem ili mano & inaccessibile ad suas agendas res mysterio, sed quod facie ijs qu siplicius  agere volunt pelluceat: quod{que} non post multos annos tandem aperiendum est  illius qui illuminabit abscondita cordis, & occulta tenebrarum, tunc laus erit vnicui{que} secundum opera sua. man very famously lear∣ned, that in short time these counterfet Iesuits, would be vnmasked, their vizors pulled of from their faces, and there knaueries and treacheries discovered vnto the whole world. For my parti∣cular I neither wish nor prophecie there finall de∣struction, only the downe-fall and ruine of that damned Sect, is that which I professe I do aime at, and to vse Against the order of Friars pag. 22. VVickliffs words to saue there persons & destroy their errors. Wherefore, fearing lest too ma∣ny

of all sorts of men should bee bewitched with this Circean Sect, I haue presumed to offer vp these few lines, as it were so many warrants to bee signed by your Lordships hand, and sent abroad into all parts of this land, that by vertue of them, mēmight ether apprehēd, or amend thē, take thē, or take heed of thē. What should I trouble your Lordship any farther, VVickliffe hath not as yet wanted a There was one William Iames a great Fol∣lower of Wickliffe. Vir vti{que} pulchrae li∣teraturae, & elegantis facundiae▪ Walden. To. 2. p. 47. Iames to follow and embrase his do∣ctrine, nor your Lordship a deuine to honor you and your most honorable Profession; professing my selfe to haue learned of this Vide lib. Ms De ex∣posit. 10. Mandat in sine libri. Heagreeth fully with my L Cook in his 5. book of re∣ports and the booke De funda∣mentis le∣gum Angliae in defēse of the Kinges Regaltie. Doctor of the E∣uangelicall truth (as I find him by Papists stiled) to make more account and vse of the Common Lawe of this lād. And thus crauing pardō of your Lord∣ship for hauing so long detained you from grea ter businesses of the Cōmon wealth, committing both him and my selfe vnto your Lordships pro tection, I end, wishing vnto your Lordship, and to your vertuous Lady my derest Sister, with al yours endlesse comforts both of this life, and of that o∣ther to come From the Publike Librarie in Oxford. Feb. 10. 1608.

