

Wherein
1. IT is shewed first, that it is not safe for the conscien∣ces of Catholikes to adhere alwaies to the Pope, and neglect the command of their temporall Prince.
2 That if the Pope should exact from Catholikes, that obedience, which is due onely to their temporall Prince, they should by obeying the Pope disobey the com∣mand of Christ, and be truly traitours to their Prince.
3 That it is possible for Popes to challenge such an obedience, and that de facto Pope Boniface did chal∣lenge it of the King, and inhabitants of France.
4 That it is probable, that the Pope that now is, in condemning the late Oath of Allegeance, and in challen∣ging a power to depose temporall Princes, demaundeth of English Catholikes the foresaid temporall Allegiance, and vsurpeth that authoritie, which Christ hath not giuen him.
5 That although it should be granted, that it is pro∣bable, that the Pope hath such an authoritie, yet so long as it is but probable, it is titulus sine re, a title, which can neuer be put in execution without manifest diso∣bedience to God, and iniustice to temporall Princes.
6 That the Pope neither is the Iudge of temporall Princes in temporall causes, nor as yet by any authenticall instrument hath defined, that he hath power to depose tem∣porall Princes, and that therefore it is probable, that he hath no such power.
7 That the manner of his Holinesse proceeding in condemning my bookes, and commanding me to purge my selfe, and the fallacious dealing of my Aduersaries, doth clearely shew, that they in their consciences are not per∣swaded, that the doctrine for the Popes power to depose Princes, is a point of faith.
8 The causes of the beginning and increase of this doctrine are briefely insinuated, and that if all temporall Princes would vse the like meanes to defend their Soue∣raigntie, this controuersie would be quickly at an end.
9 That Catholikes are bound to read, and examine this question, otherwise their ignorance will be willfull, damnable, and inexcusable.
10 That they may lawfully read my bookes, notwith∣standing the Popes, or rather Card. Bellarmines prohi∣bition to the contrary, and that I deserued not at their hands such vncharitable words and deeds, for the loue and paines I haue taken for their sakes.
