



MY LORD,
A Great part of this Sermon is spent vp∣on a Quare: per∣haps a Quare will be put to the Sermon it selfe; that in Iob, Quare misero data est lux? why doth this poore Labour behold the light? I can an∣swer nothing, but the Reuerend Iud∣ges, before whom it was bound to ap∣peare vpon tryall, adiudged it to be pressed. Appealing to the Chancery, so great vnion and harmony is be∣tweene
 the Courts, no reuersing of the Doome was to be had there. So Obe∣dience, Gratitude, and Modestie striuing together, the last could not alone make her party good against two. Obedience pleaded, that au∣thority is dissolued, when sullen si∣lence possesses such as are com∣manded to speake, (or print, all is one.) Gratitude aduised me by an Embolisme, or intercalation, to in∣sert my priuate thankefulnesse among the publike gratulations of all men, some for redresse of their wrongs, some for the dispatch of their inter∣minable suites, some for faire denyall of their vniust petitions, accounting your Lordship another Cato, of whom they durst not aske any thing irregular; the good reioycing to see,
 as the Athenians sent out their Sa∣laminian ship, swift and sure, in dan∣gerous seasons: so this acedious and corrupt Age, incountred with your assiduous and actiue integritie, the most curious interpreters of great actions, euen those, who wished not such honour to your profession, dee∣ming it an Egyptian spoyle, (and a mysterie disclosed, that a Gouernour might be chosen out of Rome) con∣fessing, where many were thought capable of high place, vntill they at∣tained it, Imperio proditus infe∣rior; your Lordship by the assistance of His grace, which will conduct you to the races end, hath satisfied, if not exceeded, expectation. Then Mo∣destie, tho blushing at Ʋnworthines, yet hoping to shun the censure of
 ouer-forwardnesse, neuer adventu∣ring, but Candidior postquam tondenti barba cadebat, consented to tender it vnto your protection; Nil illum amplexa verebor. Ʋouch∣safe then from your first Chaplaine, these first Fruites, & capitur mini∣mo thuris honore Deus. When God gaue his people an haruest of fruites, hee reserued to himselfe a sheafe of thankes; such a sheafe for the haruest of fauour and mainte∣nance is this, accompanied with prayers to that high God, who giues salutem sublimium orationibus humilium, still to multiply his gra∣ces vpon you, and giue you the true happines of this and a better life.
 Gresham Coll. Decemb. 4.
