



MOst gracious Ladie, and
noble Princesse) whē Ze∣rubbabel
that faithfull
prince of Iuda beganne to
build the temple, with the
stone of tinne in his hand,Zachar. 4. 10.
the people reioyced: but
when he had finished the worke, and brought
forth the head and chiefe stone thereof, then
shoutings vvere heard, of those that cried,
grace,Zachar. 4. 7. grace vnto it. If then the people of
God in this kingdome had great cause to re∣ioyce,
when religion began first to be planted,
and the spirituall building of the Church to be
reared, much greater ought our ioy now to be,
when we see religion continued, and hope, if a∣ny
thing yet be wanting, that the same in good
time may be perfited.
Others will striue diuersly to expresse the
ioy of this happie day, and to solemnize the

entrance and initiation of so religious and
much desired raigne of your Highnes louing
lord and our gracious Soueraigne: some by
pleasant pageants and shewes, some by vali∣ant
and martiall feates of armes and iustings,
some by rich and costly presents and gifts: but
we among the rest, the Ministers of the Go∣spell
of Christ, both by preaching and setting
forth the great mercies of God towards vs,
and by writing to conserue a perpetuall memo∣rie
thereof, will consecrate our tongues and
pennes to this seruice: that we may say with
the kingly prophet Dauid, My tongue is the
penne of a readie writer,Psal. 45. 1. I will entreat in
my works of the king.
Your Grace hath great reason to be glad
of this day, whose honour able estate is thereby
enlarged, according to the rule of the law,
Mulier marito concrescit▪Iustinin▪ cod. lib. 3. tit. 4. leg▪ 28. the ladie en∣creaseth
with her lord: your royall issue and
princely heire reioyceth, whose noble title of
inheritance is augmented: your Highnesse
faithfull seruants and domesticalls haue not
the least part in this common ioy, whose true
and diligent seruice, is like to be highly recom∣penced.
But all these ioyes, which particularly
in any of these may be singled, in the Church
and commonwealth of England doe all con∣curre
and are not onely dubbled, but multipli∣ed.

God, hath giuen in his mercie to vs, both a
comfortable husband to his▪ Church, a carefull
parent to the Commonwealth, an honourable
Master▪ to all honest and louing subiects. The
first shall haue (we trust) ioyfull experience of
his Christian pietie, the second of his fatherly
benignitie, the third of his princely equitie:
that both Church may say with the spouse in
the Canticles.Cant. 1. 3. We will remember thy loue
more then wine; and the Commonwealth as
the Prophet of Eliakim,Isa. 22. 21. he shall be a father
to the inhabitants of Ierusalē; and▪ be whole
realme, as the same prophet saith, he shall be
called a repairer of the breach,Isa. 58. 1. and a re∣storer
of the decaied pathes.
And now most noble Queene, seeing God
hath aduanced your H. to this great honour,
honour him againe that hath honoured you.
Forget not him that hath remembred you,
and serue him faithfully, that hath preuented
you with blessings liberally. Two Annaes are
famous in scripture:1. Sam. 1. Anna of Elkanah for her
godly posteritie in Samuel, Anna of Phanuel
for her deuout pietie in praying in the temple.Luk. 2. 36.
Elkaab, whose wife the first Anna was, sig∣nifieth,
the possession of God: Phanuel, whose
daughter the second was, is as much to say, the
sight of God. Anna also is interpreted, grati∣ous,
or mercifull. Answerable vnto these

names were the effects: the first had a vertu∣ous
sonne Samuel, a possession of God in deede:
the second saw Christ in the temple and con∣fessed
him: and both of them were vertuous
women. God graunt vnto your Highnes the
possession of Elkanah, encrease of spirituall
sight, and knowledge with Phanels daugh∣ter,
and to be a right Anna, both to fin grace
with God, and to shew mercie and compassion
to men.
Two other of this honourable and Christi∣an
name, Anna, I finde in the Chronicles of
this nation, both vertuous Queenes, your
Highnes worthie prdecessours, one wife to
Richard the 2. sister to Wincelaus king of Bo∣hemie;
the other, ladie Anna Bullen, wife to
king Henrie the 8. and mother to our late
gratious Soueraigne Q. Elizabeth. The first
is honoured for her studie in the Scriptures;
who had in those blind daies the 4. Euange∣lists
in English,Fo p. 507. col. 1. and the doctors of the Church
vpon the same. The other is commended for
her excellent vertues;Fo . 10▪ . as her sinceriti in true
religion, her Christian charitie and princely
liberalitie toward the poore, whose almes gi∣uen
that way in three quarters of a yeare, are
summed to be 13. or 14. thousand pound. And
now God hath sent vs a third Queene Anna,
which we trust in all these princely vertues as

shee continueth the Christian name, so will re∣viue
the honourable fame of these vertuous
matrones. That innocent ladie Queene Anna
Bullen, though by the malice of her aduersa∣ries
traduced, yet both by her godly death, and
Gods blessing vpon her posteritie is sufficiently
cleared. At her coronation these verses were
exhibited:
Regina Anna, paris regis de semine nata
Et paries populis aurea saecla tuis.
As Anna Queene of princely race
doth equally descend,
So to her people golden daies
her offspring shall extend.
These propheticall verses, if I may so call thē,
had their due accomplishment afterward, in
the happie issue of this Ladie, then vnborne,
Queene Elizabeth, by whome indeede this
Church of England enioyed a golden time:
such as the like (as his Maiestie saith) hath
not been read nor heard of since the daies
of the Romane Emperour Augustus.Prefac to the Reader in . And
it is the comfortable hope of this nation of
England, tha God hath raised your Highnes
vp another fruitfull Anna, by whose royall
offspring this lanà may long haue fruition of
like golden and happie daies, which God in his
mercie graunt.
The Lord make your grace, vnto his Ma∣iestie,

 Dborah to Baruch, as Huldah to
Ios, as Esther to  Aashuersh: Christ
Iesus graunt you the pietie of Rebecca, that
consulted with God, the zeale of Mriam,
that praised God,2. Sam. 14. the knowledge of the Teko∣,2. Sam. 20.
that perswaded Dauid, the wisdome of the
matron of Abel that deliuered the citie, the
charitie of the Shunamite,2. King. 4. that prouided for
the Prophet: that the Church of God behol∣ding
your zeale toward God, your  to his
Chur; desire to the truth, obedience  his
word, humilitie in your high estate▪ mercie
and pietie toward the pore members of the
Church, constancie in vertue and all goodnes,
may blesse you with the saying of the wise man
of the godly matrone;Prov. 31. 29. many daughters haue
done vertuously, but your surmount them
all: and that you may be eternally blessed in
heauen, that in that day it may be pronounced
to your comfort▪vers. . Giue her of the fruit of her
hands, &c.

