


Right Worshipfull,
SVch and so great hath beene and is the exorbitancie of Mans lusts and affections, since the wofull fall of our seduced Parents, that like ouer-growing & ouer-crow∣ingAffectus qua∣si vbertas ani∣morum est na∣turalis. Nam sicut in sentes ager qui est natura foecundus exuberat, sic animus incultus, &c. Lactànt. diui. Inst. lib. 6. cap. 1. weedes, they haue miserably pestered the

soile of Mans soule. And as to other lewd enor∣mities and haynous irregularities they driue wretched man: so especially to Discord, and Contention, euen till it breake out into fell murder and bloudshed. This Saint Iames plainly tells vs.Iam. 4.1. From whence are warres, and contentions among you? Are they not from your lusts that fight in your members? There are three of these lusts, which principally serue this way; whichTres sunt af∣fectus qui ho∣mines in om∣nia facinora praecipites a∣gunt, &c. pro∣pterea poetae tres furias esse dixerunt, Lact. Jnst. lib. 6. c. 19. La∣ctantius saith, gaue occasion to the Poets to feigne three Furies, that is, Pride, Couetous∣nesse, and Lust; all pestilent weedes in the garden of Mans heart, and miserably choaking the tender plants of Peace, and Loue. Pride is like the Bramble:Judg. 9.15. For as that would needes tyrannise ouer all the Trees; So Superbia, will superbire, that is, super alios ire, bee aboue all: and as the Bramble is good for nothing but to scratch, so Pride willing to doe nothing but contend, for,Pro. 13.10. Onely by pride man maketh con∣tention, as Solomon saith. Couetousnesse or inordinate loue of riches is as Thornes (that is a fighting and pricking plant too) which hin∣ders the Seede of theMatt. 13.22. Word, that it cannot grow vp to the procuring of peaee and chari∣tie:

and therefore wee are commanded to cut them vp, by the Prophet,Jer. 4.4. Breake vp your fal∣low ground, and sowe not among thornes. Lust is like a Nettle (another wrangling weede) which is called vrtica quia vrit tactu, it burnes in touching: So Concupiscence first fires the body with the flame of lewd desires, and afterwards the world with combustions of dis∣cord. Which being so noysome, must by Christi∣ans be rooted vp, according to the prophecie,Isa. 55.13. For Thistles shall grow Firre-trees, and for Nettles the Mirtle tree. Not that wee can wholly destroy these desires,Nos affectus & perturbatio∣nes, quam diu in tabernaculo corporis huius habitamus, & fragili carne circundamur, moderari & regere possu∣mus, amputare non possumus. Hieron. ad De∣metrian. Apud nos ci∣ues sanctae ciui∣tatis secundum Deum viuen∣tes metuunt cupiunt{que} do∣lent, gaudent∣que, August. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 14. cap. 9. that is neither possible to Man, nor required of God, but that we should curbe, and restraine them, and turne their violence another way, bee ambitious of heauen, couetous of spirituall graces, and lust after Gods presence in grace and glorie.
But alas, in stead of tilling the ground of our hearts, we let it lie like the sluggards field,Pro. 24.30. all ouer-growne with Briars and Thornes of contentious lusts, euen to such an haruest, that it may seeme, some men endeauour by crueltie and couetousnesse, not onely to kill humanitie and kindnesse in their hearts, but euen to depo∣pulate, and roote out mankinde it selfe from

the earth. This is euident and plaine by all stories from the beginning of the world. I will let passe Cain, Nimrod, Nebuchadnezzar, Pharaoh, Antiochus, Herod, Nero, Domi∣tian, Dioclesian, Decius, Maximus, Lici∣nius, Phalaris, Dionysius, Sylla, and others, both because they are innumerable, and would take vp a large volume to touch but a little of each, and also because they being heathens are no better then dogs in accompt, and euery dogge will doe his kinde. Neither will I trouble you with the relation of the strange persecution vsed against the Christians in the primitiue Church, which were done with as much wit, and malice, as Hell and the Deuill could deuise, as may ap∣peare by that which Saint Cyprian obiects to Demetrian.Deus solus in terris aut non colitur, aut non est im∣pune quod co∣litur. Innoxios iustos, Deo charos, domo priuas, patri∣monio spolias, catenis pre∣mis, carcere includis, be∣stijs, gladio, ignibus punis. Nec saltem contentus es dolorum no∣strorum com∣pendio, & sim∣plici ac veloci breuitate poe∣narum, admo∣ues laniandis corporibus longa tormen∣ta, multiplicas lacerandis vis∣ceribus, nume∣rosa supplicia, nec feritas at∣que immanitas tua vsitatis po∣test contenta esse tormentis, excogitat no∣uas paenas in∣geniosa crude∣litas. Cyprian. ad Demetrian. The onely true God, saith he, is either not worshipped at all, or else not freely without punishment. Innocent, iust, and men deare in Gods sight, doest thou driue out of their houses, spoile them of their patrimonie, binde in chaines, shut vp in prison, and tormentest with wilde beasts, fire and sword. Neither art thou contented with compendious and short paines, or torments which would quickly dispatch vs, but sundrie engines are multiplied to teare out

our very bowels leisurely, and thy sauage dispo∣sition is not satisfied with vsuall tortures, but thy subtill crueltie hath found out new punish∣ments to destroy vs. But these wretches lear∣ned in short time to stake their hands, whilest they found,Vigelius Saturninus qui∣primus hic gla∣dium in nos e∣git, lumina a∣misit. Claudius Herminianus in Cappadocia indigne ferens &c. Cum viuus vermibus ebul∣lisset, Nemo sciat aiebat, ne gaudeant Christiani, Ter∣tull. ad Scap. cap. 5. partly vengeance falling on their owne heads for hating Gods Saints, and. Arist. Eth. 1.13. Nec ta∣men deficiet haec secta quam tunc ma∣gis aedificari¦scias, cum caedi∣videtur. Tertul. ad Scap. cap. 5. Dum opprimi∣tur crescit. Hi∣lar. l 7. de Trin. Haud secus quam si quis vitem secatione pronocet ad vbertatem. Just. Martyr. Col∣loq cum Tryphon. &c. part∣ly the Church to increase, by that which they thought would destroy it.
The more meruaile it is that ChristiansCrudelitas vestra, gloria nostra est. Tertull. ad Scapul. whose glory it was to endure cruelty from the hands of others, should in time through pride and couetousnesse come to loose their glory by ex∣ecuting cruelty on others. For that it is so, I would Writers had neuer had iust occasion to affirme, nor Readers iust reason to lament. Strange it is that Christians I say,Rom. 15.33. whose God is the God of peace,Jsa. 9.6. whose Sauiour the Prince of peace,Ephes. 6.15. whose calling is to the Gospell of peace, should through sauage crueltie giue as much offence to Heathens, as euer heretofore Heathens gaue to them. For what true religi∣ous heart will not grieue to heare, that which is written by a Christian, concerning the Perui∣ans

a people of the West Indies,Postquam in∣gressis Perusi∣um Hispanis mores eorum, facta & atrocia saeuitiae exem∣pla quae passim ab ijs edeban∣tur, inspexere, nunquam ex eo non modo fateri volue∣runt, nos esse Christianos fi∣lios Dei (sicuti ab Hispanis audiebant) sed nec ita quidem in lucem edi∣tos, vt vulgo nasci homines solent. Quippe fieri non posse vt tam ferox & truculentum a∣nimal ab vllo homine geni∣tum, & faeminae partu editum sit. Ita{que} eorum animis penitus insedit haec o∣pinio, nos mari esse ortos, ac proinde nos vira Cochie vocant, quíppe Cochie apud eos valet Mare, & vira spu∣mam significat. Ergo nos è mari concretos, & coalitos, spuma{que} nutritos, vulgo fe∣runt, ac venisse in terras ad vastandum, & perdendum mundum. Benzo. hist. non. orb. lib. 3. cap. 21. who per∣ceiuing the direfull and irefull carriage of the Spaniard towards them, did not onely refuse to acknowledge Christians to be Gods sonnes, but also denyed them to bee bred and borne into the World after the common fashion of men, thin∣king it could neuer be, that so sauage and bloud-thirstie Creatures could either bee begotten of Man or brought forth of Woman. And there∣fore they were verily of this opinion, that these men were bred of the Sea, and nursed vp of the froath of it, and afterwards sent to Land to waste and destroy Mankinde out of the world. And so ill did these pretended Conuerters carrie themselues in that worke of planting Christia∣nitie among the Heathens, that the poore In∣dians openly professed vnto them,Postquam Hathney cogitabundus aliquandiu haefisset, à monacho petijt vtrum etiam Hispanis caelorum janua pateret, Cui respondenti bonis Hispanis patere, Cacicus, fine longiore deliberatione coelum se nolle petere, dixit, sed potius inferos, ne eadem illi cum hac crudeli gente, manfio communis esset. Et his laudi∣bus, honori busue Deus & sancta fides ab Hispanis in America afficiuntur. Barthol. Casáus. Narrat. crudel. Hispan. pag. 23. That they had rather goe to Hell by themselues, then to Heauen with the Spaniards.
But these things were done farre from home,

a great way abroad, it may bee there is better behauiour among our selues. It should be I am sure. God hath ingrafted in euery mans heart shame and feare, and theseOmne ma∣lum aut timore aut pudore na∣tura Perfudit. Tertull. Apolog. cap. 1. saith Tertullian, are the bridles to restraine the necke of cru∣ell tyrannie and greedy auarice. ButAuaritia est hydria Samari∣tanae, de quâ qui biberit siti∣et iterum. Petr. Blesens. Epist. 141. de∣uouring Couetousnesse, which like the Samari∣tansJoh. 4.28. water-pot, is neuer filled, but still thir∣steth, and like a man sicke of the Dropsie (who the more hee drinketh, the more he may) is neuerHaec sitis di∣uitiarum mise∣ris pectoribus assidet, & am∣bitionis salsu∣go, bibulam a∣nimam occu∣pat, vt per fas & nefas ad lo∣ca superiora, &c. Cypr. de nat. Christ. in Prolog. Auaritia nullis expletur opi∣bus, & quanto amplius habu∣erit, plus re∣quirit, & ne{que} copia ne{que} in∣opia minuitur. Hieron. Epita. Paulae. contented neither full nor fasting, breaketh through these brazen gates of shame and feare, and with her iron hands of Woluish rapacitie, seekes to satisfie her lust vpon euery obiect, though thousands and ten thousands must perish for it. Which I could make plaine by in∣finite particulars, if it were a thing that needed any great proofe.
But I will giue you but one instance onely, which will aboundantly suffice in this case, and that is the infinite crueltie and oppression which hath beene vsed by the Bishop of Rome, against the whole Christian world, for the satisfying of his Ʋulturean auarice and Luciferian pride. What deposing of Kings, exposing of their Crownes, transferring their Kingdomes, slaugh∣tering

their Subiects, demolishing Temples, sac∣king and ransacking of Cities, exhausting trea∣sures, emunging mens purses, there haue beene by this meanes, the whole West can witnesse, and our Ancestors in this Kingdome as well as any.Videsis lector Matth. Paris. de hac re misere conquerentem. I insist not on particulars, for it were an infinite worke. This one shall serue for all of Hildebrand, or Helbrand, called Gregorie the seuenth, ruining and cruelly ouerthrowing Henry that famous but vnfortunate Empe∣rour; and all for that hee would haue main∣tained against him that which by God and by mans Law is but the Princes right.
Good God!Quanta au∣tem mala, quot bella bellorum∣que discrimi∣na, inde subse∣cuta sint, quo∣ties misera Ro∣ma obsessa, capta, vastata, quod papa su∣per papam si∣cut rex super regem positus fuerit, taedet me morare. Denique tot mala, tot scis∣mata, tot tam animarum quam corpo∣rum pericula, hujus tempestaris turbo inuoluit vt solus ex persecutionis immanitate ac temporis diuturnitate ad humanae miseriae infaelicitatem sufficeret comproban∣dam. Otho. Frising. Chron. lib. 6.36. What thundring of Excom∣munications to curse him, what exciting of other Princes to destroy him, what arming of his Subiects, yea his owne Sonne to rebell against him, what ouerthrowing of Cities, wasting of Countries, ouerturning Churches, spilling mans blood, weakening of whole Christendome, was there at that time! Euen enough by the iudgement of a graue Historian, to proue the common calamitie of Mankinde. But if you should adde to this their other Cruelties, as their

manifold intrusions into that See by poysoning their Predecessors, their schismes by Antipopes,Erant eo tempore tres qui Pontifices haberi volebāt Gregorius 12. Benedictus 13. & Iohannes 23. nec potorat fa∣cile iudicari quis eorum ve∣rus ac legiti∣mus esset Pon∣tifex, cum non deessent singu∣lis doctissimi patroni. Bell. de Pont. Rom. lib. 4. cap. 14. three at a time, no man knowing which was the true Pope, their mutuall cursing and dam∣ning each other, their violence against the liues and goods of holy men, as the Dulcinists, Wickleuists, Waldenses,Prelatos & Clerum peni∣tus aspernan∣do, &c. Chron. Chron. fol. 227. Habitus est Io∣hānes Hus lin∣gua potens & mundiore vita clarus- Ibid. fol. 267. Hussits, and o∣thers, meerely for finding fault with their in∣tolerable Pride, you may iustly conclude, that the scarlet Whoore, hath iustified Nero and Domitian, as Jerusalem did iustifie Sodome and Gomorrha.
But it is no maruell to see the members of a false Church offer violence to each other, or to the Professors of the Truth. For it hath euer beene seene,Semper & boni omnia mala passi sunt, & fecerunt ma∣li. Saluian. de gubern. Dei, l. 1. that good men haue suffered ill, and euill men inflicted it, saith Saluian. As for righteous men they offer no violence to any. None hurts, nor destroyes in all my holy Moun∣taine,Isa. 11.9. saith God.Isa. 2.4. There, Swords are tur∣ned into Sythes, and Speares into Mattocks. Whilst quite contrarie, Among false Christians Tooles of good husbandrie, are made instru∣ments of crueltie,
Ʋirg. Georg. lib. 1. Sarcula cessa∣bant, versique in pila ligones, Factaque de rastri pondere cassis erat. Ouid. Fast. 1. Et curvae rigidos falces conflantur in enses.

And crooked Sythes are turned into sharpe-bi∣ting Swords. Religion is as jealous as Loue, it can indure no Riualitie. And therefore the greatest hate that euer Hath beene, saithNihil germa∣nos Dei culto∣res aeque se conciliat, at{que} consentientes de Deo senten∣tiae; quemad∣modum cōtra, nulla re faci∣lius dissoluun∣tur amicitiae quam diuersa in huiusmodi tebus animorū sententia. Na∣zianzen. Orat. 1. de Pace. Na∣zianzen, hath arisen from contrary Religions; as on the other side, the greatest Loue that is to be found on earth, is among them that agree to∣gether in the Truth.
But, O then, what shall we say to them who being of the same Religion, and vpon termes of peace, haue practised most exquisite torments vpon the innocent bodies of their Friends and Confederates? I say of the same Religion, if there be any Religion indeed in those men, who by ferine crueltie maintayne their insatiable a∣uarice. For Saint Iames tells vs,Iam. 3.17. The wise∣dome that is from aboue, is first pure, then peace∣able, gentle, easie to be intreated, full of mercy, and good fruits, without iudging, and without hypocrisie. Which plainly shewes, that where there is notLorin. com. in Iacob. 3.17. verbum , but , the wordes and workes of peace, but of contention and violence, there is no Religion indeed. The World knowes what I meane, and your Wor∣thy Societie haue vnderstood it,Bernard. non verbis sed verberibus, as one speaketh, by that most

inhumane and woluish butchering vp of your faithfull Seruants, and Agents, at Amboyna in the East Indies, by the most vnheard tor∣ments of the perfidious Dutch there. Of which I may say as S. Augustin said of the ciuill warres of Marius and Sylla,Quae rabies exterarū gen∣tium, quae fae∣uitia Barbaro∣rum huic de ci∣uibus victoriae ciuium com∣parari potest? Aug. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 3. c. 29. What rage of for∣reine Nations, what bloodshead of Barbarians, is to be compared to this treacherous tyrannie of Confederates to their Friends?Pax cum bello de cru∣delitate certa∣uit, & vicit. Illud enim pro∣strauir arma∣tos, ista nuda∣tos. August. de Ciuit. Dei, lib. 3. cap. 28. Peace hath contended with Warre for crueltie, and gone beyond it, for Warre ouerthrowes armed men, but this coloured Peace hath prostrated naked men. Naked, saue onely of innocency, that, their soules being throughly cloathed withall, hath kept them safe from the scandall of trea∣son laid on them, or the torments of hell threat∣ned to them.
But, O vnkinde, vnnaturall! You this to vs? We this from you? Whilst the Blood of our valiant Countrimen lies reeking on the ground, to keepe you in your owne Land, doe you waste∣fully spill the blood of our faithfull Countrimen in a strange Land? O more then Scythian bar∣barisme. Doe you so requite vs? What will you gaine by this, but in time to stinke before other Nations, asGen. 34.30. Simeon and Leui did before

the Shechemites? And therefore if your sa∣uage hearts haue any place for patience, or if you be not vtterly forsaken of all humane inge∣nuitie, heare the aduise of him that wishes you well.
First, fall downe on your knees, and with bleeding heartsPrimus foe∣licitatis gradus est non delin∣quere, secun∣dus delicta a∣gnoscere; Illic currit inno∣centia integra quae seruet, hic succedit me∣dela quae sa∣net. Cyp. Ep. 55. confesse this execrable Villa∣nie, and pray to God,Act. 8.22. that if it bee possible, this lewdnesse may bee forgiuen you. For I per∣ceiue you are in the gall of bitternesse, and in the bond of iniquitie. Secondly, as one aduised a lesse malefactor,Et siquidem patratum est seclus, preca∣tor, supplicato, obsecrato, te ad Iudicum pedes prouol∣uere ne desi∣nas, donec im∣petraueris vt tradaris, ex sententia cal∣culo{que} Iudicis carnifici vt suppliciū des. Honori tibi vertetur apud inferos, ante purgatum hinc ire. Synes. ep. 44 Begge and intreat some temporall Iudge to censure you, and deliuer you into the hands of some Executioner, to bee put to death. It will be an honour vnto you, at your future triall, to part out of this world purged by iudiciall censure. If it had been onely an outward iniurie in the businesse of Trade and Traffike, yet were you bound in conscience to makeSi enim res aliena propter quam peccatū est, cum reddi possit non red∣ditur, non agi∣tur poenitentia sed singitur. Si autem veraciter agitur, Non remittetur peccatum nisi restituatur ablatum. August. ad Maced. Epist. 54. restitution by pecuniarie compensation. For that which is vniustly taken and peruersly detayned, will bee at last as vnpleasing to the conscience,Postea implebitur os eius glacea, Pro. 20.17. as is grauell in the teeth. But for murder what recompence can bee made, see∣ing

all the world is not able to restore life againe to the poorest creature depriued of it? And therefore Gods appointment is,Gen. 9.. that whosoe∣uer sheddeth mans blood, by man shall his blood bee shed. Making it iust, that each man shall suffer in himselfe, what he hath first done to an∣other. Yea, in iniuries of a lesse nature then Murther, Lex talionis takes place,Matth. 5.38. Exod. 21.24. Leuit. 24.20. Sciendum est quod Deus  lebat istam  nam insligi,  quilibet pate∣retur malum quod fecerat. Tost. Abulens. Tom. 2. in Mat. quaest. 322. An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth; for God wold haue euery man indure what he hath done. And the very Heathens thought this a most iust Law, asAristot. Ethic. lib. 5. Dicunt Rhadaman∣thum dicere, rectam fieri vindicam si quis patiatur ea quae fecit. Erat autem Rhadaman∣thus Iudex ju∣stissimus, & propter hoc apud Gentiles Poetica fictio posuit eum esse vnun de tribus iudicibus animarum apud inferos & sic tanquam fa∣mosum allegat eum Aristoteles. Tost. Abulens. in Mat. Tom. 2. quaest. 322. Aristotle reports of the Pythago∣reans; who further tels that euen Rhada∣manthus himselfe could not but iudge this Law to be iust. Wherefore it is no maruell that theSi mem∣brum rupit meum ex pacto talio esto. Ludou. Charond. leg. Antiquar. Leg. 78. Romanes put it into their twelue Tables. And howsoeuer some ancient Jewes say, that in wrongs of a lesse nature then Murther, this law was not exactly obserued, but somtime for an eye or a finger, money was taken either according to common estimation, asVi Tostat. loc. Citat. Rabbi Solomon hath it, or after the will of him that endured the in∣iurie, as Iosephus sets downe; Yet for Mur∣ther

there was no agreement to be made for mo∣ney, nothing could satisfie but the Death of the murtherer, according to Gods owne edict. Num. 35.31. Yee shall take no satisfaction for the life of a Murtherer which is guiltie of death, but he shall surely be put to Death.
If you will doe none of these, then know that noneScito quod nulla ciuitas impunelatura sit sanguinis nostri effusio∣nem. Tertull. ad Scapul. of your Cities or Territories shall drinke in our blood without iust Reuenge. The Heathens could say and confesse of Murthe∣rers,Act. 28.4. that vengeance would not suffer them to liue, and thatVictima haud vlla am∣plior potest magis{que} opima mactari Ioui, quam Rex ini∣q. Senec. Herc. tur. Iupiter accounts the murthe∣ring of Tyrants, as the fattest sacrifice. And if you feele no outward Iudgement fall vpon you, thinke not your selues free, or innocent, nor yet voide of punishment, for it is. Sy∣nes. Epist. 32. torment enough to bee wicked and to be let alone in the guilt of sinne. Yea, in the opinion of all Diuines, z it is the most miserable thing in the world,Qui per diu sceleratus im∣punitus ma∣net, eum opor∣tet existimare infaelicissimum de quo neque Deus ne{que} ho∣mo sollicitus est. Synes. Epist. 44. Dilatio vindictae dat locum paenitentiae. Nec dici potest, nulla ibi est vltio vbi nulla conuersio est, quia mens dura & ingrata jam fibi ipsa supplicium est. Leo ser. 5. de Epiph. Hoc est terribile, hoc extremum, cum jam non corripimur pro peccatis, cum jam non corrigimur delinquentes. Orig. hom. 8. in Exod. to sinne and thriue therein, for that bringeth the sinner to hardnesse of heart, and stupiditie in his leud∣nesse, which makes him fit fewell for the euerla∣sting fire of Hell. And how much better were

it for a man to indure some chasticement, yea to put himselfe to paine by Repentance in this world, then to runne on in the delights of sinne, and so to bee tormented with easelesse and end∣lesse paines in Hell eternally.
But you are secure of that, for you haue done nothing but Iustice, you haue punished Traitors and malefactors, Such euen by their owne con∣fession, &c. But O vnpoliticke crueltie! Will you so farre vsurpe vpon the Deuils right, that you will first make men guiltie; and then plague them for it. Can you bee so ignorant of the law of Nature and Nations, as not to know, thatConfessio fa∣cta in tormen∣tis non valet. ff. de quaest. lib. 1. § Diuus. Bart. Pum. Summ. in verbo Confessio. Confession forced from a man by tor∣ment, is of no value against him. The Law saith that no torment should bee vsed,Tortura ju∣dicijs non prae∣cedētibus infe∣renda non est. Panorm. in cap. Cum in contem. de reg. iur. Bar∣thol. Fum. Sum. in verb. Tortur. without some probabilities before causing suspition in the partie tormented:Confessio fa∣cta in tortura, si non perseue∣ret non praejudicat, quare videtur fecisse metu tormentorum. Panormit. in lib. 1. H. de quaest. cap. 1. & 31. quest. 2. Lotarius. and that if a man con∣fesse in torments and denie it afterwards, such confession is nothing, as proceeding from feare of torments. Now that this was the case of our innocent Countrey-men, viz. To bee accused without proofe, or probabilitie, yea to bee for∣ced by torments to accuse themselues, which

they afterwards vpon their Deaths stiffely de∣nyed, is so cleere and plaine, that no mire and dirt of contrary aspersion and accusation can obscure it, or deface it; and hath beene so suf∣ficiently in two Treatises proued vnto you, that all the water betweene England and Amboy∣na, cannot wash you cleane from the crimes of treacherous Crueltie, and cruell Treacherie.
But to leaue these men, let me in few words speake to you, O worthy and noble Aduen∣turers. It cannot chuse but bee a great griefe vnto you, as it is to euery true English heart,Difficile est pressam malis innocentiam non dolere. Hieron. ad Iuli∣anum. to see innocencie and fidelitie suffer what is due to fraud and villanie. Yet this, God often permits, for reason best knowne to himselfe. In such cases, wee are withLeuit. 10.3. Aaron to lay the hand on the mouth, and to bee patient, which is the onelySudatur e∣nim ac labora∣tur quamdiu hic viuitur; Nec sud anti∣bus & laboran∣tibus alia pos∣sunt quam pa∣tientiae subue∣nire solatia. Cypr. de bono pa∣tient. comfort in all distresses. This is that vertue which keepes a man inLuc. 21.19. possession of himselfe, euen when hee is vniustly dispos∣sessed of his goods. And let vs not wonder that we must bee patient in bearing wrongs from one another, for God is so himselfe toward vs, who wrong him continuallie;Quotidie contumelia afficitur praesens, & audiens & videns, & ne{que} fulmen immi∣sit, ne{que} mare jussit terram inundare, &c. Chrysost. hom. 3. ad Po Antioch. And though hee

bee able to reuenge himselfe to the full, yet hee forbeares it with infinite long animitie. Consi∣der againe, that Christian warfare differs from theIn Olympi∣cis illis certa∣minibus, co∣ronem conse∣quuntut qui decertant; At in Christi pa∣laestra contra∣ria coronarum lex est. Sic e∣nim lege san∣citum est, vt qui percutitur, non qui percu∣tit, &c. Isid. Pe∣lus. lib. 2. Epist. 196. Olympian combatings, for there, hee which strake the greatest blow went away with the garland; but here, not hee which strikes, but hee which beares the greatest stroke shall goe away with the Crowne. Adde vnto this, that God is thePlus impro∣bum illum cae∣dis sustinendo: ab illo enim vapulabit, cu∣ius gratia su∣stines. Tert. de Patientia.
Patientes facit de secutura vl∣tione securitas Cypr. ad Demet. Reuenger of the Innocent, and the seuere Punisher of such as offer iniu∣ries to their Brethren. For hee who hath said,Deut. 32.35. Rom. 12.19. Vindicta mihi, Vengeance is mine, hath also said, Ego rependam, I will duly ren∣der it. Neither feare you, but that this late inhumane Practise in Amboyna is registred in Gods blacke Booke to bee repaid againe vnto the Actors, with full measure in due time. In the meane season, let vs not cease to waite vpon God, and commit our cause vnto him, comfor∣ting our selues thus farre, that yet it is much more. Jsid. Pels. lib. 2. Epist. 257. wretched a thing to doe iniurie our selues, then to suffer it from others.
Which that You may the better doe, I haue presumed to offer vnto your Worshipfull Ac∣ceptance, this excellent ensuing Cordiall,

prescribed, and tempered by a most skilfull Doctor. And if you please, let It bee as1. Sam. 16.23. Dauids Harpe to Saul, a peece of spiri∣tuall melodie, to expell from you that distur∣bance of minde, which the euill spirit of In∣iustice, and ambitious Auarice in those false Friends, hath offered to bring vpon you. It hath long lyen by mee, wayting for some occa∣sion to come abroad, and would God it had wanted this at this time. But seeing it is as it is, I beseech you to accept it, and reade it, and J doubt not, but as you shall finde in Iosephs brethren enuie and malice to bee an old disease; so you shall also finde in Ioseph himselfe,Patientia quae est inside ossa sunt inte∣rius, ipsa sunt quae frangi nō possunt. Psal. 34.20. August. in Psal. 33. patience and dependance vpon God an ancient Antidote. I must confesse for my selfe, J haue beene much pleased and deligh∣ted in reading of it, as once the royall and noble Auditorie was affected in hearing of it, and therefore I am the more willing to commu∣nicate to others, what I haue found beneficiall to my selfe. The rather, for that I am much bound to your Worships for many charitable fauours receiued from you, for all which I haue returned or can returne nothing but my poore

Prayers to GOD for your prosperous and flourishing estate, and happie successe in your most Honourable though hazardous and dan∣gerous Enterprizes. And these (my prayers I meane) which are theAduersus ar∣ma, milites, Gothos quo{que} lachrymae meae armasunt. Ta∣lia enim imuni∣menta sunt sa∣cerdotis. Am∣bros. in Auxent. Orat. 5. Tom. 3. weapons of a Christi∣an Minister, shall neuer bee layd downe whilest breath is in my bodie, but I willRom. 15.30. Vim facimus Deo non com∣pellendo sed flendo, &c. Am∣bros. striue thereby euen with GOD himselfe, and against all your Enemies, that you may still long prosper in your great and weightie Af∣faires of Trade, to the glory of GOD, the honour of the English Nation, the inriching of our Weale-publike, the comfort and content∣ment of your owne hearts, and finally the spiri∣tuall locupletation of the poore Heathens, with the treasurie of the knowledge of CHRIST, one dram whereof is more worth, then all the Wealth of the world beside. And indeed, this is one principall end of Merchandizing, if not in Mans purpose, yet in the intention and ap∣pointment of GOD. For
—Virgil. Non omnis fert omnia tellus.
saith the Poet, Euerie Land abounds not with euery Commoditie,— Nonne vi∣des croceos vt Tmolus odo∣res, India mit∣titebur mol∣les sua thura Sabei? At Ca∣lybes nudi fer∣rum. Virgil. But one Countrey is ex∣cellent

for one thing, and another for ano∣ther. Seneca could see no other end of this, but thatVt necessari∣um mortalibus esset inter se ipsos commer∣cium, si inui∣cem alius ab alio aliquis pe∣teret. Senec. Epist. GOD would necessitate men to a kinde of familiaritie with each other, whilest one was constrained to supplie his wants by another. But the maine reason is, that the glorious merchandise of his Holy GOSPELL might also bee communicated to THEM that want it, and so whilest men ad∣uenture for Earth they might gaine Heauen. Which I feare me hath beene rather hinde∣red then furthered by these vnciuill broyles, and vnconscionable proceedings of Those that would make the world beleeue they are the onely deuout maintainers of RELIGION; concerning whom I would haue said much more, but that I am restrayned by that speach of the Orator, which. Jsid. Pelas-epist. lib. 2. Ep. 163. one commends as a Patterne to bee followed, I feare least if I should speake that which befits them to heare, J should fall into that language which becomes not mee to vtter. So leauing them to GODS censure, I humbly take my leaue of your Worships, beseeching the GOD of Heauen to looke vpon You with the fauourable eye of his all-sufficient

Prouidence, that by his heauenly Blessing vpon your painefull proceedings, You may all become profitable Members of his CHVRCH in this world, and glorious SAINTS in his King∣dome in the world to come; and this for CHRIST his sake, To whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, one GOD in substance, three Persons in subsistence, bee all honour and glorie, now and for euer, AMEN.
From my Study. Feb. 1. 1625.

