


RIght Honorable, and by right most worthie to be honorable, because deserts haue made you truly honourable. The wisest hath said it, that much rea∣ding Eccl. 12. 22. is a wearisomnes vn∣to the flesh. And therefore in this scribling age, wherein presses be oppressed with the number of bookes without number, it may seeme a thing not meete any more to write, vnlesse for the sufficiencie of the worke it might be in steed of all other writings, and so the reader might be eased of the labour of much reading. Notwithstan∣ding, by the iustnes of the cause, which I neither might if I could (because it is iust) nor could if I might (hauing in a publique assemblie taught it) forsake: I haue been
 drawen to publish this treatise; that what I haue taught, may here be made more fully to appeare to any that is otherwaies minded.
Now whereas it may seeme ouer great boldnes for me to presse your Honour with these my labours, that are alreadie ouer pressed with your owne (if yet they may be said to be yours, and not rather the labours of the Church and Common-weale) yet I haue presumed to doe it vpon these two reasons: First, in respect of the cause which I manage. Secondly, in respect of my dutie vnto your Honour. And first in respect of the cause, the Sabbath being a principall meanes whereby the seede of religion is sowen in our hearts, and the holie fire as it were is kept in amongst vs. It being assailed by aduer∣saries of diuers sorts, to whom should it flee as vnto a Sanctuarie for succour, rather than vnto your Honor? who haue alreadie taken home vnto your honourable familie the truth, like as the beloued Disciple did the Ioh. 19. 27. mother of Iesus, being recommended vnto his care. Yea being your Honor haue not alone taken home the truth, but also publiquely in the highest and solemnest assem∣blie of this land vndertaken the maintenance and the defence of the same truth against the common aduersa∣rie the Papist. In regard whereof, as the eare that heard you, blessed you; and the eye that seeth Iob. 29. 11. you, giueth witnes vnto you, and the hearts of all well affected Christians (to whom the report thereof hath come) applaude it, shouting and crying as in the Prophet, Grace, grace vnto it. So could I ioyning in Zach 4. 7. heart and affection with them, doe no lesse than testifie the same by presenting these my labours vnto your Ho∣nour, to whom of right they appertaine, as a part of that
 truth which is vndertaken by your Honour, but gain∣said by these aduersaries. For first, they hold the Sab∣bath Rhem. in an∣not. in Mat. 15 sect. 3. Rhem. annot. in Reu. cap. 1. sect. 6. to be but a tradition. Secondly, the alteration of the day to be without scripture or commande∣ment, yea plainly otherwise than prescribed by God himselfe in the 2. Commandement: (for so it pleaseth them to terme this fourth commandement.) Thirdly, the rest but perfunctorie and sleight: for they allow such workes to be done vpon the Sabbath, as shall be permitted by their Prelates, that is, such as please Bellar. lib. 10. de cultu imag. themselues, or such as by custome (which euer decli∣neth) haue preuailed. And lastly, the holinesse of the day to consist in comming to shrift, and hearing of Catechis. Rom. quaest. 21. de Sabbath. Masse. Against all which falshoods, this truth of the doctrine of the Sabbath flieth vnto your Honour for patronage, and after a sort maketh supplication vnto your Honour to be a meanes, that as by the Kings most excellent Maiesties proclamation it hath alreadie, so by law it may further be prouided for: at least, vt ne quid Sabbathum detrimenti capiat, for Gods lawes to many are but as cobwebs to the great flyes, which they easily breake, without they be strengthened by the Prin∣ces lawes, as with other nerues and sinewes: for want of which we see that the Sabbath, the best day of seuen, is more prophaned in most places, than all the other se∣uen, as though God had made it to be prophaned, and not to be kept holy. And this in respect of the cause.
Now in respect of my selfe also I could doe no lesse: for being imbarked in that ship, whereof your Lordship vnder the Kings most excellent Maiestie as the ma∣ster Pilot holdeth the helme, I meane your Lordships garrison towne of Portsmouth, and succeeding others
 a teacher in that Lecture whereinto your Lordship first breathed life, I could doe no lesse than in dutie pre∣sent these firstlings of my labours vnto your Honour: especially hauing alreadie receiued fauours from your honourable selfe, as also no small incouragements from Sir Beniamin Berry, and Master Antho∣ny Ersfeld. these your Lordships worthies and notable instruments of gouernment in that place. So that I thanke my God, vpon the point of whose prouidence I haue alwaies stee∣red on my course, I may most truly say that of them (my conscience bearing me witnesse that I lie not) which once Tertullus spake with another mind of Felix, that by them wee haue receiued these two benefits, great quietnes, and many worthie things haue been Act. 24. 2. done vnto vs, onely that which followeth wholy and alone appertaineth vnto your Honor, that this is who∣lie by your prouidence. And therefore should not I, as in particular for my selfe, or as the mouth of many others, wholy acknowledge it, we might yet be more vn∣gratefull vnto your Honour, than Tertullus to Felix.
By these reasons therefore (right Honourable) I be∣ing lead, haue presumed to approach so neere vnto your Honour, as to put foorth these my labours vnder the liuerie of your honourable fauour. Wherein although there be nothing answerable vnto your greatnes, yet if, as the finger serueth to point vnto the Sunne, and the iuyce of a Limmon to ingraue aswell as Aqua fortis, so this may serue to point vnto that which I would, but cannot attaine vnto sufficiently to make knowne your Honours worthinesse, and something to expresse the thankfulnes of my heart, I wanting better meanes to vtter it, I shall thinke my selfe not to haue attained the lowest degree of happinesse in my low estate.

 And thus humbly crauing of your Honour pardon for my boldnes, I cease any further to interrupt you from your waightier affaires: yet not ceasing in my best wishes vpon my knees to pray vnto that God, who is good without qualitie, great without quantitie, infinite without place, and euerlasting without time, that hee would long preserue your Honour amongst vs, that the Prince may long enioy you such a subiect, the Common-wealth such a Councellour, the Church such a stay, the truth such a Champion, the souldier such a Leader, and learning such a Patron; and after this life here ended, there to enioy with him another that neuer shall haue end.


