


WIse Salomon the sonne of holy Dauid a prudent kyng; and a peaceable Prince, Reuerēd father in Christ: very fittely in his sweet songes resem∣bled the Churche of God vnto a Vine,Cantic. 2.15. Ezech. 13.4. Esay. 5.1. and the ene∣mies thereof vnto raue∣nous and greedy Foxes. For that the Vine be∣yng a spreadyng plante diligētly trimmed and paynfully attended vnto, stretcheth abroad his sappy braūches and broad leaues, for a succour and harbour in a storme and is a comfortable & gladsome fruite to him that eateth it or tasteth the liquor of the same.Ionas. 4.7. Whiche Vine the Foxes sometymes spoyle and endamage by robbyng the fruite, sometyme by bruysing the young and tender braunches therof, before they be able by their grouth: to succour themselues, frō so ma∣ny sortes of assaultes most daūgerous. And not lesse aptely our Sauiour Christ, the Sonne of God in his holy and diuine Sermons likeneth it vnto a field,Math. 13.24.25. wherein good seede is sowne by the paynefull husbandman, & corrupt seede scat∣tered by the hād of the enemyes. Of both which

similitudes albeit many & excellent notes may be gathered, yet the whole scope of them both in my iudgemēt is this: to shew that shootyngs vp and encrease of Gods Church beyng but frō a feeble and weake begynnyng, is continually by Sathan and his mischieuous ministers not a little disquieted, that thereby the gladsome fruite, and looked for encrease therof is much let and hindered.
What the remedy and redresse therof is, I leaue to your Lordshyp to cōsider, whom (with the rest of your godly and learned brethren and Reuerend Fathers,) Gods diuine prouidence hath placed ouer vs (as in a high watchtower) to foresee and discry the subtle assaultes of so slye and cruell enemyes.Act. 20.28. Heb. 13.17.
And I hartly wish that it might not iustly be affirmed, (or beyng iustly affirmed I would that the losse of the soules of many poore Chri∣stians did not auouch the truth of the assertion) that euen frō the tyme, wherein the first scourge (wherewith the Lord afflicted his Churche in the bloudy dayes of Queene Mary) began: nei∣ther in, and from that tyme alone, but euen long sithēce also, to the great hurt of Christes church, & hinderaunce of his chosen,Math. 24.24. Math. 13.25. Math. 7.15. many false Christes arose, and while the watchmen slept, many ly∣ing seers, and seducyng Prophets, vnder Lam∣bes skinnes, craftely crept into the sheepfold, priuily whisperyng peruerse thynges, to seduce and beguile the simple. And though the word of

God (his name be praysed) haue a cleare & free passage amongest vs, and the bloudy bandoges of the Romish Sinagogue be tyed vp, that by thē the sheepe of Christ, are in lesse daunger to be worryed: yet is not the encrease of that heauēly seede so great, (with grief be that hard, which is spoken with sorrow) as many as do weene & most men do wish for.
For the roaryng Lion dayly rūneth about,1. Pet. 5.8. & his ministers are not idle: zeale in hearyng and charitie in practising waxeth cold: but specially the continuall labour of Gods husbandmen be∣ginneth to fainte, thornes & bryers grow vp in the Lordes field,2. Cor. 11.14. The cause of heresie is want of preachyng. Math. 22.29. Rom. 10.14. Esay. 29.9. Ierem. 23.2. Zach. 11.17. Ierem. 50.6. Esay. 56.10. Math. 15.14. & the deuill transformyng him selfe into an Angel of light deceiueth many. The reason is (as I take it) that those which ought to be breakers of Gods bread to satisfie & relieue the hungry soules of his Saintes cānot breake that, which they haue not: neither are able ma∣ny of them being vnarmed to withstād the ene∣my: or those which are able, either can and will not, bycause they are sleepy: or beyng both able & willing hauing a watchful eye vpō the Lordes inheritaūce, they dare not aduenture beyng di∣uers wayes discouraged with the sundry & ma∣nifold fetches of Heretiques: especially not be∣yng acquainted with the daunger (of that poy∣son which dayly floweth frō our Louely Familie) to be sure of their owne safetie keepe them sel∣ues out of gunshote.
Of the Heresie it selfe in one worde to vtter

the truth of that, which almost by the experience and practise of three whole yeares I haue pro∣ued to be true, it is the most pestiferous, & dead∣ly Heresie of all others, because there is not al∣most any one particular erroneous & Schisma∣ticall phantasie,HN. his heresie mingled of all heresies. whereof the Familie of Loue hath not borrowed one braunche or other thereof, to peece vnto thēselues this their brokē Religion.
The encrease of this Familie is great, & that dayly, because the withstanders are not many: the defenders are wily as Serpentes & would fayne in lyfe seeme innocent and vnblameable: In profession of the one they boast very much: of the other they walkyng very closely do iusti∣fie them selues, because fewe haue to finde fault with them, yet haue they their lothsome spottes and ougly deformities, as in this booke to the diligent reader playnely may appeare.
Their bookes are many disorderly and con∣fusedly written both for matter, and manner of thynges deliuered in them, their phrases are such as the Scripture speaketh of cloudes with out water,2. Pet. 2.1.2. Iude. 12. and lightenyng without rayne, their blossomes are as dust and their fruite as rottennesse.
The proofe hereof I referre to the sequele of the Treatise which ensueth, the which I desire your Lordshyp the rather to accept, because that within this Isle of Ely, and other where, within your Lordshyps Dioces, diuers doe su∣spect that to be true, whiche common fame re∣porteth,

that dayly those swarmes increase, which in the end (I feare me) will wonderfully disquiet, (as it hath already begonne in diuers places) and molest the Church of God. The Lord vouchsafe when his pleasure is somewhat to cut them shor∣ter: and graunt to those vnto whom the care of his Church and ouersight of his flocke belongeth, vi∣gilant and watchfull eyes, carefull harts, willyng myndes, and strōg and hable bodyes to finde out, and to roote out beyng founde, whatsoeuer doth disquiet the buildyng vppe of Sion, that we may keepe the spirit of vnitie in the bonde of peace, and be but one folde vnder the shepheard Iesus Christ our Lord, who blesse your Lordshyp with the fulnes of all spirituall blessinges, to the ho∣nour of his name and profite of his Churche. Amen.
Cambridge September. 30. Anno. 1579.

