



I Sende vnto youre
worships, some few
lines and leaues of
mine, long agoe
written vppon the
Canticles of Solo∣mon,
for the dearest
friende that I had
amongst men, whil
he was liuing vpon
earth: and lately published, for the profite of
Gods people, at the earnest request of some
of my very Godly friendes. For mine owne
part I was vtterlye purposed, either to haue
buryed the same (as diuers other things that
I haue writtē vpon other books of holy scrip∣ture)
in perpetuall darknes, that they shoulde

neuer haue beheld the light of this sunne, or
els to haue suffered them to perish amongest
wormes & moaths, as the common prouerb
is. Wherevnto I was the rather ledde, not
for want of good will to benefite the church
of Christ, (all whose causes and euerye one of
them, shal thorow Gods goodnes be so deare
vnto me, as mine owne life) but partly by rea∣son
of the great sinne and insufficiencie, that
I find in my selfe, to perfourme that dutye in
action, wherevnto in affection I will alwayes
be readye, and partlye also by reason of the
great learning and light, that God hath be∣stowed
vppon this last age of the worlde, but
most especially by reason, of that wonderfull
waywardnes, and curiousnesse, that I see the
spirites of sundrye men to be possessed with∣all,
whom nothing can please, but that which
they them selues affect. For if a man bring
new thinges, they are discontented, for that
men walke not in former antiquity. And if a
man, tread in the steps of the auncient, their
stomackes loath it, & they count it coleworts
twise sodde. And yet these men that are so
diuersly conceited, hatch or bring foorth no∣thing
of their owne, either new or olde. For
mine owne part I will not denye, but that in
this poore worke that I now publishe, I haue
beene greatlye holpen, by the light of other
mens workes vpon the same booke, both old

and new writers I mean: But most of all fur∣thered
therein by the writings of men, thogh
of late, yet of worthy memorie, who hauing
receiued more knowledge in tongs, & more
light in the word, by reading, hearing, confe∣rence,
and meditation therein, haue more
soundlye interpreted the same, than such as
went before them in the fleshe. And yet
I haue not so sworne, into all their wordes,
but that vppon reason, I hope I maye both in
translation and sense now & then with their
good leaue swarue from them. Whatsoeuer it
be let the church iudge, and take it I beseech
your worships, into your hands frō the hands
of him, that wisheth you all and euery one of
you, al good in Christ. In the penning whereof
I can simplye confesse, that I haue neither
sought gaine nor glorye to my selfe, but in all
simplicity and shortnes after my maner, labo∣red
to come to the true meaning of the holy
Ghost, and the obseruation of such necessary
doctrines, as the Lorde made mee able to see
for the time. The course that I haue taken
therin, is plaine and profitable if I be not de∣ceiued.
First connecting the chap. togeather,
then diuiding them into their seuerall partes
and portions, afterwardes giuing the sense of
them verse by verse, and lastly obseruing such
doctrines, as most fitlye agree with the place.
If any man see more or better, I pray him, not

only not to contemn this that is, which is but
to publish that which maye more edifie. And
as for your worships, I beseech you to accept
it, as at the hands of one that doth vnfained∣ly
both loue & reuerence you all in the truth,
and for the truth. And sith it principallye in∣treteth
of the church, let it be a whetstone to
ad an edge to your care & loue, for the church
& the causes therof: and the rather because of
the practises of the wicked against it, both at
home & abroad, that sith they doe what they
can to vndermine it, thogh it be to their iust
condemnation, you maye doe your vttermost
to the vpholding of it, sith in the peace & flo∣rishing
estate thereof, standeth the glorye of
God, & the good & quiet state of the whole
land, & euery particular sound member ther∣of.
Christ Iesus the onely head of the church,
encourage your heartes and strengthen your
handes, to minde, speake and do those things
that may tend to his glorye, and the good of
his people, and be answearable to the places
wherein he hath put you, in the cōmonwelth,
that when the dayes of your dissolution shall
drawe nigh, you maye in the testimonye of a
good hart, feel to your comforts, the assured
and vnmoueable hope of the heauenly inhe∣ritance.
London the 25 of this Maie. 1585.

