



I Haue not, neither can forget (Right Honorable) your courteous acceptati∣on of that simple gift, which not long since I presumed to present your Honor withall. Since that time I confesse my selfe a debtor to your Lordship: and therefore haue strained my selfe for kindnesse receiued to shew at the least thankefulnesse againe, and to recompense the meannes of that gift by an other of that sort. Iubemur (saith one) colligere frag∣mentaBarnard. Cant. ser. 5. ne pereant, id est, ne minima beneficia obliuisci: Wee are bidden to gather vp the verie fragmentes and crummes, that is, not to forget the least benefites. First then J will declare the contentes of this present treatise: Secondly, the reasons that mooued mee thereunto: Lastly, why I would haue it passe vnder your honors name.
First of all therfore, as in my former booke I haue gathered toge∣ther into one summe (the Lord by the gracious assistance of his

spirite directing me) the whole doctrine of the Church of Rome, and opinions of Papistes: in that worke but plainely and nakedly offering to the Readers viewe, the substance of the controuersies, and state of the questions betweene vs: So further I thought it not amisse, to bring to light, and to shew as in the face of the Sunne, the manifold absurdities, inconueniences, shiftes, subtilties, blasphe∣mies, which our aduersaries in defense of their errours are con∣strained to vse in oppugning the trueth. This I haue accordingly perfourmed, I trust, in this worke, that the weaknes of their cause, the beggerie of their Religion, the vanitie of their Councels, and deceite of their heartes might appeare and be made knowen to all the worlde.
This booke I haue intituled, the PILLERS OF PAPISTRIE: which is built vpon lies and vntruthes, faced out with rayling, and bitter speech, propped vp with blasphemies, and patched to∣gether with dissonant & contrarie opinions among them selues. The proofe of these particulars followeth at large discoursed in this treatise. First, as touching thir lying and vntruthes, I could haue wished that they had embraced his wise counsell, that saith: Aut cauenda sunt mendacia rectè agendo, aut confitenda pae∣nitendo, non autem cum abundent infoeliciter viuendo, augenda sunt & docendo. August. lib. 2. de mendac. cap. 21. But they are so farre from correcting by repentance, that which they haue offended in practise, that they are not onely become lie∣makers, but lie-maisters, not practisers of this craft, but teachers & defenders. Concerning their railing speech, it is al the Rhetorike they vse: Such are no better then sheep-biters, & meacockes among thē, that haue not filed & whetted their toongs to smite & wound vs withall. But here I say vnto thē, as Augustine did to the heretike Pascentius: Literae tuae nec ad reddenda conuitia me pro∣vocant,Epist. 177.

nec a reddendis literis me reuocare potuerunt: So neither shall their rayling writinges prouoke vs like∣wise to passe the bondes of modestie, and to pay them home in the same kind, neither yet cause vs to cease from answering their follies.
Nowe as for their blasphemies, it woulde offend a chast and a Christian eare, to heare what horrible and vngodly sayings doe passe from them: in the second piller of this booke we haue set downe a whole kenning of them. But as Augustine saieth to some, who the more readily to descrie heretikes, them selues also fel into blas∣phemie: tolerabilius in suis foueis delite scerent vulpes, quāDe men∣dacio. lib. 2. cap. 9. propter illas capiendas in blasphemiae foueam caderent venatores: The Foxes might more safely lurke in their holes, then the huntsmen, to take them, should fal into the pit of blasphemie. So though we were the foxes, and they the huntsmen, it is no good way for the huntsmen to snare themselues, to entangle the foxes. But we in deede are the huntsmen, and they the foxes, as it is said, take vs These foxes, these litle foxes, that destroy the vines. Cantic. 2. 15.
Concerning the dissensions and diuisions among papistes, it is no strange thing, as he saith: Omnia vitia errores{que} mortaliūAugust. in Math. ser. 11. diuisi sunt inter se & contrarij: apud Idolorum cultores diuisi sunt spiritus Iunonis & spiritus Herculis; Paganus & Iudaeus hostes sunt Christi, sed diuisi inter se; Arrianus & Photinianus haeretici, & diuisi inter se; sic Donatistae, sic Maximinianistae. All vices and errors among men are deuided and contrary to themselues: among the Idolatrous Heathen, the spirite of Iuno and Hercules are diuided; the Paganes & Iewes enemies to Christ, and yet diuided: the Arrians likewise & Pho∣tmians, the Donatistes and Maximinianistes: ad also the Sco∣tistes

and Thomistes among the Papistes deuided betweene them selues, yet Ambo pertinent ad regnum diaboli, Both doe be∣long to the raigne or kingdome of the Deuil.
Now the reasons that haue moued me principally to enterprise this businesse, were these. First in respect of those countrie men of ours, which haue suffered themselues a long time to be seduced and deceiued with false opinions, and a vaine shew of holines, beeing as it were made drunke with the whore of Babylons intoxicate cuppe: that they now at the length seeing the nakednes & beggerie of po∣pish religion, would take heed to themselues in time, and thinke it enough, yea & too much, to haue sipped of that poisoned cuppe, lest drinking more deepely thereof, they afterward bee constrained to draw out the dregges, & to be partakers of their plagues: of them we say with Augustine, Licèt non timentur vt perdant, nonEpist. 105. negligendi sunt tamen, vt pereant: Though we feare them not to hurt vs, yet they must not be neglected and suffered to be lost.
As for their ring-leaders, and sect-maisters, our counsell also to them is, that they would learne at the length to giue place to the trueth: Augustine said of some Heretikes: Puto, quòd ipse di∣abolus,Epist. 167. si authoritate iudicis, quem ipse elegerat, toties vinceretur, nō esset tam impudens, vt in ea causa persiste∣ret. I thinke if the deuill had beene so often ouercome before a Judge of his owne choosing, hee would not bee so impudent as to persist still in an euill cause. But our aduersaries haue bene often vanquished euen by their owne iudges, the testimonies of auncient writers and consent of antiquitie, and yet for all this will not yeld. Well, as one saith, Non oramus vt moriantur inimici, sed vt corrigantur, sic mortui erunt inimici, iam enim correcti non amplius erunt inimici: Wee desire not, that our enimies were dead, but amended, and so our enimies shoulde bee deade,

for beeing once amended and corrected, they would no longer bee our enemies.
There are other also of our countrimen, who (though not so far gone as the other, yet) are not sufficiently grounded in knowledge, or setled in iudgement to be able to discerne betweene the truth & errour: Qui breuia non valent intelligere, prolixa non a∣mantAugust. Epist. 101. legere, Who can neither vnderstand briefe matters, nor will abide to read long: for their sakes also haue I compiled this treatise, neither verie long to worke vnwillingnesse, nor yet too shorte, to hinder vnderstanding. But euen as they, whichAug. solis loq. ca. 14. haue tender etes, do not first behold the sunne, but the fire or the starres, or some such like, and then turne them to looke vppon the sunne: so must wee deale with these men, Gradibus perducendi adsūma sunt: By degrees they must be brought to vnderstande the higher points: For their cause cheifly haue I vndertaken this labour, that they which are not able to conceiue the chiefe matters in question, yet may safelie take knowledge of the nakednesse and poorenesse of our aduersaries cause.
Concerning my selfe also, some what there was, which in this re∣spect induced me to sei hand to this plough: for as he saith, Vt dis∣camusAugust. ad Dulcit. qu. 4. inuitare nos debet suauitas veritatis, vt doceamus cogere debet necessitas charitatis: As the pleasantnes of the truth doth entise vs to learne, so the bond of charitie should vrge vs to teach. And the rather considering that now is the time or not farre off, wherein the fall of Babylon is to bee expected and loo∣ked for, according to the prophesie in the Reuelation: EuerieCap. 18. man, that beareth hatred to the scarlet and bloodthirstie whore, ought to shewe his readinesse in defacing and pulling downe the Kingdome of Antichrist. As Christian Kinges

and Princes then by their sacred authoritie haue begunne for their part to lay Babylon wast, so is it our part to disco∣uer her nakednes: they are the Lordes Captaines to slay the ene∣mie, wee his watch men to descrie the enemies comming: They with battaile, canons and engins, do batter the walles, wee come with ropes of argument and perswasion to pull downe the towers:2. Sam. 17. 23. They fight with Sauls sword, and put on his kingly armour, wee must assault Goliah with Dauids sling & stones out of the brook. The text saith, they shal make the whore desolate and naked, eateApo. 17. 16 her flesh and consume her with fire. It is our part to strip her, and make her naked, and shew her filthines: by the word of God to des∣crie their corruptions: Then commeth the Christian magistrate, and eateth her flesh and burneth it with fire, that is, draweth out the sword of Iustice after them. Now in the last place vnto your honor I briefly direct my speech, vnto whome I do consecrate, and deuote these labours of mine, as a signe of my thankefulnes, and a pledge of further duety to your honor: as also vnto one, who him selfe is able to iudge of these matters: neither is it the least part of your honors studie & care to be throughly acquainted with the cō∣trouersies of Religion: as it is most meete honourable personages should be. Themistocles (as Augustine reporteth it) did not care, that he was counted somewhat rude, because he could not sing to the pipe at feastes: interrogatus, quid sciret, respondit, rempublicam ex paruamagnā facere: It was enough for him to know how to enlarge the commonwealth, of a lit∣tle one to make it greater: so may I say it belongeth chiefly to Christian Magistrates, scire Religionem ex paruamagnam facere, to know how to enlarge and propagate Religion, and to cause the Gospell to flourish.
The Lord hath aduaunced you to this seate of honor: for promo∣tion,

(as the Psalmist saith) neither commeth from the East, norPsal. 71. ver. 6. 7. from the West: but it is the Lord that setteth vp one and pulleth downe another. The chiefe husbandman hath planted you as part of an hedge to keepe his vineyard: your honor now is in place to profite the Church of God greatly, in aduauncing of learning, in helping to furnish the Lordes haruest with plenty of labourers, in encouraging the workemen of Gods house, whose bandes doe hang downe, and their knees waxe feeble. There are many in this land, who would gladly be set a woorke, and can not: whose out∣ward wantes doe slake their inward desire: for that olde saying is most true, : there is no such heauie clogge, as pouertie is: And the Poet spake by good experience:

haud facilè emergunt quorum virtutibus obstat
Res angusta domi.

You (Right Honorable) with the rest, as one well saith, pug∣natis contra visibiles inimicos, nos pro vobis contra inui∣sibiles: your honors by sage counsell and aduise, fight against our visible enemies, but we fight for your by our studie and praiers a∣gainst the spirituall and inuisible: Let therefore the souldiers of this spirituall warfare be encouraged still, cherished and made strong, to fight their battailes lustely. The Lord hath now made your honor a captaine to leade his souldiers into battaile, and to set them in aray: Augustine writeth well vpon those wordes: Prouerb. 31. 19. She putteth her handes to the Aug de tempor. ser. 217. ▪wherue, & her handes handle the spindle: opus tuum in fuso sit, non in colo, in colo enim est, quod facturus es, in fuso, quod fe∣cisti: Let thy worke be in the spindle not in the distaffe: that is in the distaffe, which thou maiest doe hereafter, that is in the spindle which thou hast alreadie done. So when God bestoweth vpon a man, honor, riches, authoritie: omnia ist a in colo sunt, tran∣seant

ad fusum, These things are yet vpon the distaffe, let them be spunne out, and turned vpon the spindle. But your worke, I trust, Right Honourable, is alreadie in Fuso, not in Colo: and wee hope, that vnto your good beginnings, you will adde also good pro∣ceedings: and the Lord both vnto your good proceeding, and ver∣tuous beginning, shal giue an happy end. In te nūc puta cuncto∣rum ora & oculos conuersos, & ad spectaculum vitae tuae totam consedisse Angliam: Al mens eies are vpon your Honor, and haue as it were set led themselues to behold your doings: God grant (and we trust) that all things shall be answearable to their expectation. Lastly, the Lord prosper your godlie enterprises, and giue a blessing to your holy Counsels, euen the blessing of Caleb: That as Caleb droue the Anakims great Giantes by strong hand out of Hebron, so at the length, by your prudent & godly counsaile, with the assistance of the rest of the Honorable Lords of the Counsell & Nobilitie, vnder the leading of our happy Iosua, & gracious Soue∣raigne, the Romish Anakims, traiterous Iesuites and Seminaries, with other rebellious and hollow harted Cananites, may be weeded out of the Lords fielde in England: that you with faithfull Caleb and Iosua, may also haue an euerlasting inheritance, in the heauen∣lie Canaan, through the onely merites of Iesus Christ: to whom bee praise for euer.

