



GRacious Soueraigne: As I haue heretofore (by Gods speciall grace assisting me) trauailed in some bookes of the old Testament, so now I haue assayed to doe the like in the newe:Non potest quisquam mare navigare incre∣pidus, nisi qui ante in flumini∣bus navigarit, Ambros de A∣braham, lib 4. Sicut frumentú gemino mola∣rum opere cu∣ratum nitecir, Hierome. . Prophetis & Euangelio, non tria, sed v∣num tabernacu∣lum. hom. 5. in Leuit. For like as one cannot saile in the Sea without feare, that hath not first tried the riuers: so the deepe Sea of mysteries in the newe Lawe cannot well be sounded, vnlesse we haue first coasted by the old: and betweene them both, as the wheat betweene the two milstones, so the truth is tried out: Origen well obsetueth, that this was S. Peters error when he would haue had three tabernacles, for Christ, Moses, and Elias: for I haue read (saith he) that for the Prophets and the Gospel, there are not three but one taber∣nacle: There is the same substance of both, and one truth: both the Prophets and Apostles were ministers of the same house, wherein are diuerse mansions: the one shewing vs onely (as it were) the neather roomes, the other bring vs into the vpper chamber, where Christ eare his passeouer with his disciples:Mark. 14.15. Bernard well noteth that the diuine Scriptures haue a threefold grace;Diuinae Scriptu∣rae triplicem ha∣bent gratiam, deliciotae ad fa∣porem, solidae ad nutrimentú, efficacesad me∣decinam, in Cantic. ser. 67. they are pleasant to the tast, solide for nourishment, and efficacious for medicine: the first of these is seene specially in the old Scriptures, which is adorned with prophe∣ticall types and figures, as meate curiously addressed to the tast: but the sound∣nesse of nourishment, and efficacie to heale, is most found in the newe.
And thus hauing made an entrance into the Apostolicall writings, I haue made choice of S. Pauls epistles, and among them of this to the Romanes, which is as a key vnto the rest: which as Augustine saith of the Gospel of S. Iohn, est contra omnes haereticos, is against all heretikes: this one epistle bea∣teth downe all both old and newe heresies:In Scripturis ti∣bi loquitur De∣us, non minore fide, quam si ti∣bi ore ad os lo∣queretur. de duplic. Martyr. and that which Cyprian affirmeth of the Scriptures in generall, that God speaketh there as verily, as if he spake vn∣to vs face to face: so in this diuine epistle such heauenly oracles are vttered, as if they were deliuered with Gods owne mouth.
There are few either old hereticall positions, or newe popish errors, which if they be propounded plainely, may not be confuted by this epistle; If I say,Ecclesiae victo∣ria est, vos a∣perte dicere, quod sentitis, &c sententias ve∣stras prodidisse superasse est. Hierome ad Cresiphon. If I say, they will vtter their minde plainely without equiuocating trickes, and sophi∣sticated doubting: for as Hierome saith, it is the victorie of the Church for you to speake plainely that you thinke, and to bewray your opinions is all one as to con∣uince them.
We blesse God, who hath raised vp your Maiestie as a notable instrument

both of discouering and disswading Popish error and superstition: to these your gracious proceedings in the building of Gods spirituall house, all your faithfull subiects and true hatred Christians vse those ioyfull acclamations, which the people did to Zorobabel,Zachar. 4.7 9. when he brought forth the head stone, say∣ing, grace, grace vnto it: of Zorobabel it is said, his hands haue laid the foundation of this house, his hands also shall finish it. And we all hartely pray, that by your Princely hands, this worke by you happely begunne, vtterly to extirpate Po∣pish superstition,Nondum vindi∣catus est, qui vindicat, qt in coeli adoratur, nondum vindi∣catur in terti. de bon. pattent. may in good time be perfitly accomplished: We craue not reuenge vpon our aduersaries for their malice, for as Cyprian saith, Christ is not yet reuenged, who shall take reuenge, and he who is worshipped in heauen, is not yet re∣uenged in earth: But our desire is, that such wholesome lawes as are alreadie e∣nacted, may effectually be executed, to bridle Popish recusancie, to cause those to returne, which are alreadie seduced, and to keepe them from infecti∣on, which are not yet peruerted:Ille haereticum interficit, qui haeriticum non patitur: nostra autem correctio viuifecatio est. lib. 3. on. Plag. for as Hierome well saith, he killeth an heretike that suffereth him no longer to be a heretike: as for our correction, it is their quickning. God hath made your Highnesse as the Pilote and steeresman to guide this little ship of the English Church, that it dash not vpon the rockes of false reli∣gion: the ministers of God are as the oatemen: they which are lustie and strong to work,Ingemui tantá nobis in esse ne∣gligentiam, vt nec veritatem possemus astru∣cre, cum alij valeant pro ve∣ritate inculcare mendacium. de vir. perfect. Tanta debet esse merces e∣uangelizantis regnum, qua ne{que} contriste∣tur, ne{que} txtol∣latur. in 1. Tim. 3 Illam stellam seruantes, quae Magos perdux∣it ad Christum. would be set to their tackling: of such we may complaine with Hierome, I mourned to see such negligence among vs, that some cannot defend the truth, whereas they are forward to thrust vpon vs lies for truth, &c. others would labour at the oares, but they are feeble and want strength: such would be encouraged, as Ambrose saith, such ought to be the reward of him that preacheth the glad tidings of the kingdome, that he neither thereby be discouraged, nor lifted vp, &c.
Thus while both the sturdie marriners doe fall to their busines, and the weake saylers are hartened to play their parts, your sacred authoritie guiding the helme, we may at the length bring the ship by Gods grace safely to the shoare, fearing nothing while we follow our load-starre Christ Iesus, & as Am∣brose saith, obserue that starre which brought the wisemen vnto Christ: who in his good time, we trust, shall conduct this our ship, with our Soueraigne Pilote, the noble officers, the painfull marriners, and the patient passengers, vnto the hauen of euerlasting life: Amen.

