



THat which PLATO saw but in contemplation,Tum de num beatas fore re∣spub. cum aut eas regerent Philosophi, aut reges philoso∣pharentur. that Com∣monwealths
should be then happie when either Philoso∣phers
gouerned them, or the gouernours became Philoso∣phers;
we see by Gods goodnes now brought into action
(your Christian Maiestie beeing not onely a princely Pa∣tron
of humane learning, and Philosophie, but a peerelesse
professor of Theologie.) King HENRIE the eight your
Highnes noble predecessor in the royall Diademe of this Imperiall Kingdom,
for writing against Luther in defense of the Papal religion, had giuen vnto him
the Title of Defensor Fidei: but that princely Epithete is more due vnto your
Maiestie, who both by your penne and sword doe vphold and maintaine the
truth,Scripsii tu totam epistolā manu, vt ipsi a∣pices fidem tu∣am, pietatem{que} loquerentur: E∣pist. 26. that the saying of Ambrose of the Emperour GRATIAN may be worthi∣ly
spoken of your Maiestie: You wrote (not an whole Epistle onely as he saith,
but whole Bookes) with your owne hand, that the very letters doe proclaime your faith
and pietie. This your diuine fauour vnto Religion and princely exercise in wri∣ting,
hath emboldened me diuers times heretofore to present my Commen∣taries
vpon certaineHexapla on Genesis. Harm, vpon the 1. of Sam. Hexapla on Exod. bookes of the Scripture vnto your sacred hands: and
your gracious acceptance of them hath emboldened me also to exhibite this
Worke vnto your princely view. Here in all humble dutie I doe offer a Trea∣tise
and explanation of the most difficult booke of the Old Testament the
Prophesie of DANIEL: what I haue performed therein, and especially in the
vnfolding of Daniels 70. weekes, the Worke it selfe shall testifie. I trust, that
by this my trauell, that which seemed before obscure, will appeare plaine and
easie; and the depth which would before haue taken vp an Elephant,Prophetia ob∣scura est, quod alio tempore canitur, alio cernitur. De vi. perfect. will af∣foard
footing for a lamb. Hierome saith, A prophesie is obscure, because it is said at
one time, and seene at an other: But now we see that which the Prophet said, and
so that which was wrapped vp in obscuritie, is now fulfilled in historie.
These my labours I most humbly submit to your princely iudgement and
direction, and your MAIESTIE with bended knees of my heart, I commend
vnto the diuine and highest protection.

