



RIght Noble Prince, it may seeme strange to some, that I
offer vnto your princely viewe, in these your Highnesse
young and flourishing yeares, a Commentarie vpon the
most difficult and obscure booke of the old Testament:
But I trust your Highnesse shall not thinke it vnseasona∣ble,
to be acquainted with the mysteries of holy Scripture
in this your princely youth:2. King. 24. 2. As Iosias that godly king of
Iudah,2. Chron. 34. 3. at the sixteenth yeare of his age did set his heart to
seeke the Lord, and read vnto his people out of the booke of God: So did
Honorius the young Emperor season his first yeares with true religion and pi∣etie:
As Ambrose ioyneth them both together: Honorius iam pulsat adolescentiae
fores,In obit. Theod. s. prouectior aetate quam Iosias,Hebrewe. R. Saadiah. R. Levi. R. Ezra. R. Salamon. R. Moyses. Honorius now standeth at the next doore to
be a young man, somewhat elder then Iosias: S. Luke wrote his Gospel to no∣ble
Theophilus, which name is interpreted, one that loueth God: whereupon
Ambrose thus noteth, si Deum diligis, ad te scriptum est, and if thou loue God, it
is written to thee.Greekes. Iosephus. Origen. Theodoret. Oecumenius.
Touching the obscuritie of this booke, it is such, as that it is tempered as
well with varietie of historie to delight, as with profunditie of mysteries to
exercise the Reader:Latines. Ireneus. Tertullian. Eusebius. Hierome. Augustin. Bernard. Rupertus. Lyraenus. Dionys. Carthu▪ as Augustine well saith of the Scripture in generall, si nus∣quam
aperta esset, non te pasceret, si nusquam occulta, non te exerceret, if it were no
where plaine and open, it would not feede thee, if no where obscure, it
would not exercise thee.
This part of the Treatise I haue presumed to offer to your Highnes, as the
former part I was bold to present to his Maiestie.New writers. Protestants. Melancthon. Oecolampad. Calvin. Pellican. Osiander. Pappus. Fulke. Napeir. H. Brough. Polanus. Genevens. This prophecie treateth
chiefly of the alteration and chaunge of States and Kingdomes: of the honour
and prosperitie of good Kings, and of the ruine and bad successe of hard and
cruell Potentates: here we haue the most cleare prophecie in the Old Testa∣ment
of the Messiah the Prince of Princes. These are subiects fit for Princes
meditations, and matter meete for noble spirits to be occupied in.
I haue omitted no meanes (to my power) to helpe to furnish this matter:
I haue therein abridged the best Commentaries, and Writers both old and
new, as they are set downe in the margen:Romanists. Hug. Cardin. Caietan. Arias Ma. Vatablu. Pererius. Pintu. Rhemists, with others. and some of them, which were de∣cennali
cur a elaborati, with tenne yeares trauell set forth, as Pererius confesseth
in his Epistle Dedicatorie. This labour I haue vndertaken, not so much to re∣deeme
the time, which otherwise might be mispent: for as Seneca saith, maxi∣ma
pars vitae elabitur male agentibus, magna nihil agentibus, tota aliud agentibus,

the greatest part of a mans life passeth away in doing euill, a great part in do∣ing
of nothing, and almost the whole, in doing other things then we should:
neither herein doe I expect any terrene reward or recompence: The heathen
Orator could say,4. . Nullam mercedem virtus, quam hanc laudis gloriaeque desiderat,
vertue desireth no other reward then praise and glorie: not that vaine praise
of men in this life, which they hunted for, hauing no knowledge of God: but
the praise of God in the next world: I chiefly then haue propounded to my
selfe the profit of the Church of God: for as euerie one that liueth in the com∣monwealth,
ought to seeke the good thereof: so euery member of the Church
should labour some way or other, for the edifying of the whole: If any mislike
my diligence in writing, as this age wanteth not carpers, I much passe not for
their vnfriendly censure, so that I may doe good to others: and here I may say
againe with the Orator,. Malui multis post diebus sententiam meam laudari, quam
à multis hodie reprehendi, I had rather that my endeauour many dayes hereafter
should be commended, then now of a fewe reprehended. I haue heretofore
exercised my penne in handling of controversies against the common aduer∣sarie,
and as I was prouoked, haue written also in mine owne defence, both a∣gainst
forren enemies, and some domesticall: But now, those occasions beeing
if not altogether remooued, yet somewhat intermitted, I haue propounded
vnto my selfe this course in the explaning of Scripture: In which kind, as
heretofore I haue exhibited to your Highnesse a briefe and compendiarie
Treatise vpon some part of Scripture,Harmonie vp∣on the 1. of Samuel. so nowe I make amends with a lar∣ger
Commentarie, whereof your princely pietie, vertue, clemencie (of the
which of late I haue had particular experience) doe promise and euen assure
me of your gracious acceptance: I then in signe of my dutie and thankfulnes,
together with these my labours, do offer my selfe, and my best seruice to your
Highnesse: whom I beseech God so to blesse and encrease with all spirituall
and princely gifts, that the age following may say of your Highnesse, as
Ambrose of Honorius after the decease of that good Emperor Theodosius,Ambros. in obit. Theodos. Tantus
Imperator recessit à nobis, sed non totus excessit, reliquit enim nobis liberos suos, in
quibus debemus eum agnoscere.

