


YE may perceiue (right Worshipful) in perusing the former Epistle sent to mee, how sore I am befet with the importunities of my friends, to publish this Pamphlet: Truly I am and haue bin (if there be in me anie soundnes of iudgement) of this opinion, that whatsoeuer is committed to the presse is commended to eternitie, and it shall stand a liuely witnes with our conscience, to our comfort or con∣fusion, in the reckning of that great daie.
Aduisedly therefore was that Prouerbe vsed of our elder Philosophers, Manum a Tabula: with-hold thy hand from the paper, and thy papers from the print or light of the world: for a lewd word escaped is irreuocable, but a bad or base discourse published in print is intollerable.
Hereupon I haue indured some conflicts between reason and iudgement, whether it were conuenient for the common wealth, with the indecorum of my calling (as some thinke it) that the memorie of Tan∣creds Tragedie should be againe by my meanes, re∣uiued, which the oftner I read ouer, and the more I considered theron, the sooner I was won to consent therunto: calling to mind that neither the thrice re∣uerend & lerned father M. Beza, was ashamed in his yonger yeres, to send abroad in his owne name, his

Tragedy of Abraham, nor that rare Scot (the scholer of ourage) Buchanan, his most pathetical Ieptha.
Indeed I must willingly confesse this Wor sim∣ple, and not worth comparison to any of theirs: for the writers of them were graue men; of this, young heads: In them is shewn the perfection of their stu∣dies; in this, the imperfection of their wits. Neuer∣theles herein they al agree, commending vertue, de∣testing vice, and liuely deciphering their ouerthrow that suppresse not their vnruely affections. These things noted herin, how simple so euer the verse be, I hope the matter wil be acceptable to the wise.
Wherefore I am now bold to present Gismund to your sights, and vnto yours only, for therfore haue I coniured her, by the loue that hath bin these 24. yeres betwixt vs, that she waxe not so proude of her fresh painting, to stragle in her plumes abroad, but to contein her selfe within the walles of your house; so am I sure she shalbe safe frō the Tragedian Tyrants of our time, who are not ashamed to affirme that ther can no amarous poeme sauour of any sharpnes of wit, vnlesse it be seasoned with scurrilous words.
But leauing them to their lewdnes, I hope you, & all discreet readers, wil thankfully receiue my pains, the fruites of my first haruest: the rather, perceiuing that my purpose in this Tragedie, tendeth onely to the exaltation of vertue, & suppression of vice, with pleasure to profit and help al men, but to offend, or hurt no man. As for such as ha neither the grace, nor the good gift to doe well themselues, nor the common honestie, to speak wel of others, I must (as I may) heare and bear their baitings with patience.


