


THe holie Euangelist S. Luke writing his Gospell to no∣ble Theophilus, saluteth him by the name of , that is, most worthie or excellent: and the same Euangelist, doubteth not to call the brethren of Beroea, , more nobleAct. 17. 11. and honourable, because they receiued the word with all cheerefulnes. Where∣by the Scripture teacheth, that vertue and pietie doe bring foorth true nobi∣litie: diuine grace being added to a

noble race doth make it more honou∣rable: and true Religion graft into a Princelie generation, is more admi∣rable. For whereas to bee highly de∣scended of an ancient house, is but an humane priuiledge: as hee well saith, Noble birth is excellent, but yet a gift from. the parents. True pietie doth make vs (as the Apostle saith) that we be , partakers of the diuine nature, 2. Pet. 1.Plutar. de liber. edu∣can. vers. 4.
This your Grace, I know, and am well assured is not ignorant of, nor vn∣expert in: and as your owne nation doth hold you a right Christian Peere, and both a zealous professor, and a con∣stant protector of the Gospell; so wee trust, that this Church and Countrie, to the which you are happily arriued, shall finde you. One said of Plato: Non ac∣cepitSeneca. Platonem nobilem Philosophia, sed fe∣cit: Philosophie receiued not Plato noble, but rendred him: he was not noble when he entred, but noble after he had profited in the studie of Philo∣sophie. But your Honour both the Church receiued noble by natural pro∣pagation,

at your first entrance; and by continuance shal make you more noble by the fruites of your spirituall regene∣ration. Iphicrates, when one Harmodius descended of the auncient and noble Harmodius, obiected to him the basenes of his birth, thus prudently answered:. My nobilitie beginneth in me, and yours en∣deth in you. But, your Honour (noble Duke) as it began not with you, being deriued from your honorable parents; so, I trust it shall not die or end in you, being continued by vertue.
Now then, seeing God hath exalted you to the honour of this life, aduanced you to the fauour of your Prince, hath giuen you both the priuiledge of na∣ture in your noble condition, and the praeeminence of grace in your Chri∣stian profession; it must be your care to honour God, who hath so highly ho∣noured you: to be a faithfull Steward (according to your honourable name) of your greatnes, that Religion by you may flourish and waxe great, of your fa∣uour with your Prince, to countenance the truth, and promote good causes.

We hartely pray, that you may be to his Maiestie, as an Hur to hold vp MosesExod. 17. hands, which we trust notwithstanding shall remaine steadie without any prop, and as a faithfull Eliakim to be as a sure naile, vpon the which wee may safelyIsai. 22. 24. hang (next vnder our Hezekiah) the ves∣sels of the Church, the affaires of Reli∣gion. God make you as a Ionathan to Dauid, a friend to the faithfull, as an A∣hikamIere. 26. 24. to Ieremie, a Patrone of the Pro∣phets, as a Gamaliel to the Apostles, aAct. 5. mediatour and aduocate for the inno∣cent.
Concerning my enterprise at this time: as I haue alreadie presented to his Christian Maiestie, a generall trea∣tise of all controuersies of Religion be∣tweene vs and the Papists, as a pledge of my seruice and dutie, and testimonie of my ioy: so vnto your Grace as a princi∣pall helper vnder him, and a pillar and Peere of the kingdome, I haue beene bold to offer this small book (a defence of my former writings against the ca∣uillous aduersarie) as a token of my loue, and signification of that hope,

which we all conceiue of you.
I will presume no further at this time to be troublesome: I hartelie wish vnto you the Prophets Agurs moderation, that you be neither too much lifted vpPro. 30. 8. with prosperitie, nor pressed downe with aduersitie: like vnto Phocion, that. noble Athenian, that was neuer seene ei∣ther to laugh, or weepe: not to reioyce too much in worldly preferments, nor to grieue too much at crossing discontent∣ments: yea I say with S. Paul to A∣grippa, God make you like that wor∣thie Apostle, , not onely al∣most,Act. 26. 29. but altogether, in the knowledge of Gods word, in faith and zeale: That as Zacharie prophecieth, Holinesse shallZach. 14. 20 be written vpon the horse bridles: that your triumphes, your warfare, your martiall feates, may be consecrate vnto God and sauour of religion: that it may be said of you as Ambrose writeth of a religious Earle: Quantum imperatoriAmbros. serm. 89. in bello militat, tantum & in pace militat saluatori: He warreth in battell for the Emperour, in peace for our Sauiour. And as hee againe saith: Sub tectum

tuum iam sauator ingrediatur, &c. Let Christ now enter vnder your roofe, into your house, your familie, your heart, that you may enter vn∣der Christs roofe and king∣dome in heauen: to whom be praise for euer.

