



MOst Noble Prince, I had not presu∣med to present these fewe lines to your Highnes viewe, but that I re∣membred that wise saying, vnto the which your Princely nature will sub∣scribe:. Although thou art borne a King, yet heare as a mortall man: which sentence is much better ex∣pressed in Scripture,Psal. 82.7. I saide ye are gods, and ye are all children of the most High, but ye shall die as a man, &c. Which place is thus interpreted by our blessed Sa∣uiour, If he called them gods, to whome the word was giuen:Ioh. 10.35. be∣cause they heard and receiued the word, they are so called: Nothing maketh a mortall Prince more like in earth to the immortall Prince and great King in heauen, then to be wil∣ling to heare, as Gods eares are open vnto the complaints and suits of all: So your princely humilitie and humanitie beeing apt to receiue and regard, what is presented and exhi∣bited, hath emboldened me thus to write, and to offer vnto your Highnes this simple gift, as a testimonie of my seruice and dutie.Ex histor. Aeliaen. One writeth that Socrates that graue and wise Phi∣losopher, seeing Alcibiades very insolent, and much lifted vp, because of his grounds and possessions, which he had gotten about Athens, brought him to a place of the citie, where he shewed him a mappe of the whole earth: wherein hauing found out Athens, he was bidden by the Philosopher, to

point out his owne grounds: which beeing not there noted, he further said vnto him, Why art thou proud for those things, which are not extant in any part of the earth.. But herein your Highnes is much vnlike, who, though this famous Island of Great BRITTAINE, wherein your Hon. lot lieth, be no small or obscure part in the terrestriall Globe; yet doth, and must rather affect the euer-during kingdome of heauen, then the transitorie glorie and pompe of the world: as that king∣ly Prophet Dauid, hauing a goodly earthly portion, euen that famous and flourishing kingdome of Israel, yet reioyced more, that he had his part in Gods kingdome: thus sweetly singing, The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, and of my cuppe,Psal. 16.7, 8. &c. the lines are fallen to me in pleasant places: I haue a faire heritage.
Of this worthie Prince Dauid this first booke of Samuel treateth, setting forth his princely vertues, and worthie acts, his anointing and inauguration to the Crowne, beeing yet but very young, his ouercomming of Goliath, his patience in trouble, faithfulnes in his seruice to Saul, his meekenes, euen in sparing his enemie: which with other his excellent vertues, are thus elegantly described by Ambrose: Quam mitis Da∣vid, humilis spiritu, sedulus corde, facilis affatu, &c. fortis in praelio,Lib. 2. offic. c. 7. mansuetus in imperio, patiens in convitio. How milde was Dauid, humble in spirit, carefull in heart, affable and gen∣tle: valiant in battell, milde in gouernment, patient in reproch. Againe, the same father thus further commendeth the wor∣thie acts of Dauid: Facta sancti David consideremus, quomo∣do Goliam interfecit,Apolog. Dav. c. 6. Sauli pepercit, convitiantem Shemei susti∣nuit, &c. Let vs consider the acts of Dauid, how he slue Goli∣ath, spared Saul, endured railing Shemei. The first of these is most for your Highnes imitation, that as he in his young yeres encountred with Goliath, slue him, and cut off his head: So your Highnes following the worthie example of our Dauid the Kings sacred and Christian Maiestie, oppose your selfe, e∣uen in these your tender and springing yeares to that Goliath of Rome, and professe your selfe an aduersarie to the whole bodie of Popish and Antichristian superstition: your princely youth is no let to your religious profession: as Ambrose saith of Honorius the Emperour beeing yet but a child: Non mo∣veat aetas, principis perfecta aetas est, est enim perfecta aetas, vbi

perfecta est virtus: Honorius iam pulsat adolescentiae fores, pro∣vectior aetate, quam Iosias. Let not his age mooue you, a Prin∣ces age is perfect: for age is perfect, where vertue is perfect:In obit. Theodes. Honorius is at the next doore to a young man, elder somewhat then Iosias. Democrates among the Athenians beeing very aged, going vp to the toppe of the tower panting and brea∣thing, but of no strength, said, that all the citie of Athens was like him: for they breathed (that is,. attempted much) but pre∣uailed little. But God shall giue vnto your Highnes strength, not onely to attempt, but to accomplish great things for the seruice of his Church: that Deborahs prophesie shall be ve∣rified in you, to be as the Sunne, when he riseth in his strength:Iud. 5.31. and Iaakobs blessing take place, pronounced vpon Iudah: Thine hands shall be in the necke of thine enemies:Gen. 49.8. thy fathers sonnes shall bow downe vnto thee: So that, when His excellent Maiestie hath finished his faithfull seruice to God here in earth, and runne out his happie course, which God graunt he may hold out long, we may say of your Highnes, as Ambrose of Honorius the Emperour, after the death of Theodosius: Theodosius tantus Imperator recessit à nobis,In obi. Theodos. sed non totus re∣cessit, reliquit enim nobis liberos suos, in quibus debemus eum agnoscere.

