


THat which in some part you have heard, I now make a visible word, first to quicken a little the me∣morie of that good soule now with God, to whom you had the relation and love of a father: Se∣condly, to doe you the office of comfort and grati∣tude amidst our great losse, and indeed, according to the equitie of Gods owne Law, none should make an Epitaphi∣call Monument to that name rather than my selfe, because none on earth is so nigh of kin. And, ô that I might say, what shee, though in Paradise, yet doth; even as the faith of righteous Abel, he being dead, yet speaketh: O that I might raise out that exam∣ple and copie of goodnesse, out of yours and mine, and much other private knowledge: For the kingdome of Heaven, the grace of Christ in her, it was Thesaurus in agro absconditus, A trea∣sure, a pearle of price, private, and hidden in a field of humble innocencie: Simon the sonne of Onias, was (as saith the sonne of Syrach) both a faire Olive, and a tall Cypresse tree: but shee was no haughtie Cypresse (the more barren, the more high) an Olive, if you will, of love and humble growth, or a fruitfull Vine of low stature, as saith the Prophet, Ezech. 17.6. Yet the sha∣dow, the honour of her vertues, it shall follow, yea though she did not affect it, but seemed to flie from it rather, from appearances into the heart: God will have her honoured, he complaines by his Prophet, that the righteous should bee taken away without this
 good testimony, or with a non-considering. Clavus fixus in lo∣co fideli, (as the Prophet speakes,) A naile fastened so sure; her blessednesse can no whit be improved, or impaired, by what wee report. Yet let her light shine, even for the glorie of the grace of God, such a goodnesse should not lye in the grave of our private meditation. Iehojakim and his like let them goe; God would have them punished with rottennesse in their memorie, that they shall not have a man to say so much, as Ah my brother, ah Lord, or ah his glorie: But this his servant the Lord provides her of an everlasting remembrance, and all that knew her best, are knowne to mourne most for such a bud, a flower not much past the spring so fallen. Shee fell in her prime, I am sure not unpitied, not un∣wished for. Artemisia Queene of Caria, so dearly did shee rue the death of Mausolus her husband, that by eating his heart in powder, she thought even to incorporate it to hers, and after ere∣cted him the Mausolaeum, that worlds wonder: and faine I would, as you see, some little pillar to perpetuate and keepe up a while in the world that grace we are now speaking of: but what is mine endevour at the best, more than a vapour that appeares for a little time; and then vanisheth quite away. So you have the first reason why these weake notes dare come into publike light.
The other is a dutie to the root of that branch: And first, of consolation. It pleasing the Almightie to resume that gift hee newly had bestowed by your hands, this caused me, as much as ever did any thing, to looke about mee, even as farre as to mine owne grave; for, Si hoc in viridi, quid in arido? and the issue of some thoughts that may come now to your review. The summe is, that we set our good, our losse, and her advantage to∣gether. A Christian at death parts but with a bodie, and that to a fall rest, for it is totally insensible, and perceives neither priva∣tion, nor presence of good or evill: And they that are long and much exercised in this life, know what a good it is to bee quit of evill: Why died not I in the birth, for so, saith Iob, should I now
 be at rest with the Kings and Counsellors of the earth, and why is life given to the bitter in soule, who long and dig for death more than for hid treasures, and rejoyce exceedingly, and are glad when they finde the grave? Iob 3.
Againe, the bodie of a good soule rests in full hope for the tem∣ple of the Holy Spirit, the instrument of his graces and vertues, yea, the member of Iesus Christ: reason, if it hath any light of God in it, would shew that such a thing must not see finall corruption, that have a better resurrection. See you, I pray, the storie of the dying mother with her seven sons, 2 Macchab. 7. But bodily dissolution is painfull, and what can a moment of time bring? Yea, many suffer not by once dying, what others doe with patience in a living death of the Collick, Gout, Scyatica, and the like: and through age and consumptions, dying is oft times with paine in a manner impenceptible, in which case sure the Lord dealt mildly with this his owne servant, my yoke fellow, he tempered her suf∣fering according to her feeble abilitie: but the paine, what ere it is, by Gods owne appointment, is the only way and passage to end∣lesse joy and blisse: And wise Heathen, out of a meere pang of morall magnanimitie, have taken it up with comfort: A Chri∣stian then should heare it, assisted with such a promise, and grace; and spirit, even with God himselfe. Thus for what concernes the body, a Christians death you see it should not be our discomfort.
And most of him, his soule it in blessefull being after death, and the dead live, that wee need not doubt to talke of our deceased friends, as alive, my sister, my brother, my wife, for they live, though not with us, yet much better: Wherefore it were a wrong to them, even our discomfortable vaine wish, that would have them backe from God, which they by no meanes can desire; yea, we should wrong our God and Saviour, so to undervalue the im∣mediate communion with him in glorie for a vile world: And we should wrong our selves, not to make Gods will ours, and not to yeeld our passive obedience in some good measure, when the
 event especially hath revealed his will to us: for besides the ma∣king vaine our daily prayer, Our Father, Thy will bee done, we strive against the unavoidable will of God, as if a man should thinke much, because hee cannot with his toe overturne the globe of the earth: And what reason have we to looke for such a pri∣vilege, which is not incident to our nature, as the case now is? a non subjection to death, can any one of all those millions which come betwixt Adam and doomes-day say he had it? Besides, what thousands, as we see, doth a plague, or a siege, or a set battell de∣voure together, that walls and bridges have beene made of the dead carcasses, and a poore mercenarie Souldier so rightly esti∣mates this common debt of our nature, even to venture upon it hourely for a small pay, especially if hee hath a forward Leader: Malus mies qui Imperatorem gemens sequitur, saith Pro∣sper. And wee that have Iesus Christ himselfe our Guide and Captaine, and the Patriarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, with all our holy Ancestors, our fore runners, should we repine and thinke so verie hardly, and be so verie heartlesse for death? Honorifi∣cum est ex illo calice bibere quem Imperator noster deli∣bavit, It is our honour, our comfort, to be admitted to the fellow∣ship and communion of the Lords cup; yea, Christ hath taken downe the bitternesse of the cup of death, and hath left us but the , as the Apostle speaketh, Col. 1. That which is behinde; some relique of his affliction, as it were a drop to the Ocean: for Christ hath not foretasted only, but sanctified and sweetned this cup for us, because by the vertue and merit of his death, hee hath separated hell from us, that the death of Christ is the death of death, we can be no worse by death, if we be in Christ, than that from a sinfull and fraile life, we enter into possession of an estate or life happie and good above all the heart of man can conceive, an exceedingly exceeding eternall weight of glorie, as the Apostle speakes. Hence S. Austen checks himselfe; What cause have I to mourne for a mother, of whose happinesse I may be so well assu∣red?
 And I would not have you to be ignorant concerning them which are asleepe, saith the Apostle, that yee sorrow not even as others which have no hope, 1. Thess. 4. It is our ignorance, it is a scandall, which Christians give to Infidels, and to the ungodly, not to be somewhat comfortable in death: Christiani genus ho∣minum morti expeditum, saith Tacitus, according to the old , a Christian is as a man undaunted in death through faith of a better life: And we, if wee had the faithfull comprehension of the blessed promises we might have, it would make us to take up our crosse with joy: Gaudeo deais quae patior, I rejoyce in my sufferings, Col. 1.24. You see the way, that we may be stedfast in our faith, even to ground our hearts on Christ through the word and spirit: the excesse of our feare ariseth from the defect of our faith. And now to bring your consolation home, or a lit∣tle neere. Now your childe hath her propertie, her part in Christ and all his benefits: You see my confidence, did the Lord ever faile to build on the ground she hath laid, true Christian humilitie? God gives grace unto the humble, the grace of remission, and the grace of regeneration, and the grace of perseverance in both, so that in Grace, humilitie in the first, second, and third, as S. Au∣sten sayes truly: And could a soule bee more truly lowly and meeke, than that we now commemorate. The Lord had moulded her of an ingenuous, innocent, and tender frame, both of minde and body, even for himselfe, and before the Lambe of God in her white stole of spotlesse innocencie and joy, she now is and shall bee for evermore, amidst the spirits of the just, who in part are come to their perfection, so it might suffice to our comfort, to have said she was humble. Yet I will tell you of that you know her righte∣ous, even and just disposicion. And her religion, Lord thou knowest it, and I know it, and cannot forget it, how constant in the study of Scriptures? Those of devotion, especially the Psalmes of David: and how continuall in the sacrifice of her prayers, thou didst smell therein a savour of rest: yea Lord, thou knowest shee
 was a pious Monitor, have we not heard this of her, alas we have not prayed together to day: And because a renued preparing, a speciall stirring up of the graces that be in us, is required to that maine part of a Christian to dye well and comfortably, I might much assure you in this too: So had her native and accidentall weaknesse inured and minded her long before of the perill she was to passe, not without an expectance of death in it: And to that purpose the tracts of holy devotion and preparation, they were the most of her study and meditation: The conclusion is, so hum∣ble, innocent an heart and life, of which you had the experimen∣tall knowledge, it must be, it is crowned with an happie death.
Thus I have said enough for your comfort, if not too much for me, and better might have beseemed another pen or tongue, as some may censure; but let them thinke as they will, it is no love of errour, yea, the dutie of remembrance, it was due to the Lords servant now at rest and in peace: and the office of consolation, not like to be done by another, was due to you that remaine on earth.
And lastly, I would have extant a testimony of my gratitude to you, of whose integritie, and love, and godly humilitie, I have had good experience. And though God hath pleased to make a breach upon the bond which caused the union and relation be∣tweene us, and great distance of place and dwelling, may threaten to divide, and cut me off from you, yet I must reckon you ever a∣mongst my best friends. And by the name wee have now treated of, and what ere was deare in it, I pray you let me be one of yours still: Yea, let this writing lye by you, to informe you thus much, that it proceeds from a minde deeply affected to you and yours. And the Lord Iesus Christ blesse you all eternally.
Beckingham in Lincoln. Iune 16. 1630.

