



IT is an vsuall thing (Right
honourable) for subiects
to imitate their prince, &
for inferiours to con∣forme
themselues to the
example of great persons: as Abimeleck
said to his soldiers:Iud. . 4. what ye haue seene
me doe, make hast and doe the like: for as
Ambrose saith,lib.  amplius proficitur exem∣plo:
nec difficile redditur quod iam fact
est, & vtile, quod probatum: men profit
much by examples, for neither seemeth
that hard, which is done before, nor vn∣profitable
that is tried by others:
Thus should we all set before our eies

the example of our master Christ, and
tread in his holy steppes: I haue giuen you
an example saith our blessed sauiour
Iohn 13. 15. this it is to run after the sa∣uour
of his ointment,Cantic. 1. 2. to followe his
sweete example. As Aarons ointment
ranne down from his head to the skirtes
of his cloathing:Psal 134. so Christs holy vestures
are from him as our head dispersed a∣mong
his members: therefore Christ
vouchsafeth to call his faithfull seruants
his fellowes or partners. Psal. 45. 7. be∣cause
they partake of his goodnes, and sa∣uour
of his vertues.
Heere then is set forth vnto vs in this
treatise the example of Christ praying:
that we should therein be like our hea∣uenly
master, to be occupied in earnest
and faithfull praier: wherein in particu∣lar
diuerse profitable points are to be
obserued.
I We are taught how necessary a
thing it is to be suters vnto God by prai∣er:
for if Christ praied, who in respect
of himselfe needed not to pray, but for

our example: who neither wanted any
grace to pray for▪ nor yet had any im∣perfection
to pray against, if he notwith∣standing
praied for vs, much more haue
we cause to pray for our selues, both to
receiue graces, which we haue not, and
to be released of the euills which we
haue. Ambrose saith well: quid pro
tua salute facere oportet,Lib. 5. in L. quando pro te,
Christus in oratione praeuertat? what
should we doe for our selues seeing Christ
watched for vs al night in praier?. where∣fore
as the saying is, it is more necessary
for vs to pray then to breath.
II We learne also by this holy pray∣er
of our sauiour, which was fulfilled in
euery part thereof, how effectuall the
praiers and teares of the faithfull are:
whatsoeuer they desire (saith our sauiour)
shall be giuen them of my heauenly fa∣ther
Math. 18. 19.Ad Celtium. vim faciebat precum
tuarū fidelis ambitio: the faithfull am∣bition
of thy praiers did as it were force
God: saith Hierome Alexander said
to Antipater,. that made great com∣plaints

of his mother: knowest thou not
that she with one teare will blot out all thy
complaints? much more auaylable with
God are the teares of his seruants, which
as precious liquor he preserueth in his
bottles.Psal 56. 8.
III In that our Sauior praied often,Luk. .
and continued in praier, it teacheth, that
we also should therein be daily exercised,
and as the Apostle saith,1. Thes. 5. 17. pray continually:
quia semper accipis semper inuoca: be∣cause
thou hadst need alwaies to receaue, de obit. Theodoii. Xen. lib. 1. de Cy∣ri. .
alwaies pray: Xenophon writeth o Cy∣rus,
that would neither dine nor supp,
 before he had swett; neither
should we eate or drinke before we had
shed teares vnto God.
IV Christ when he praied, was who∣ly
intent and fixed vpon that holy acti∣on:
so should our thoughtes be setled in
prayer, that then most of all men should
follow the wise mans counsell,Prou 4 23. to keepe
our hart with all diligence that we shew
our selues in praier not  but
 as Zeno said of his schollers,

not bablers of words, but vtterers of mat∣ters:
Hierome foūd this to be his infirmi∣tie,
that oftentimes in my praier saith he,aduer Luciferius
aut per porticus deambulo, aut de faenore
computo: I thinke I am walking on the
streates, or accounting my mony: so it is
an easy matter for the thoughts to roue
in praier, which we are taught to settle
by Christes example.
V Our blessed sauiour had therefore
free recourse to praier, because he was of
an holy and innocent life: soe if we would
haue our praiers heard, we must lift vp
pure hands as the Apostle saith 1. Tim. 2. 8.
Basilo saith well: that the presence of an
honest life doth make our praiers to haue
a loud sound..
VI Our sauiour also by his example
teacheth vs for what things we should
cheifely pray: not for temporall, but spi∣rituall
blessings: as v. 17. he saith sanctifie
them with thy truth:1 King 3. Salomon, because
he asked wisdome rather then honour
or riches, pleased god, and receiued them
all, euen those temporall things▪ which

he had not asked: Hierom saith well: a∣uarus
sum ad accipienda beneficia, quan∣to
plus bibero,d Cesiphon. tanto plus sitio: we should
be euen couetous of spirituall blessings:
& the more we drinke, the more to thirst,
for he that craueth temporall blessings,
often asketh them to his owne hurt: as he
that is sick of a feuer,. as one saith, craueth
for wine.
VII Lastly our Sauiour praieth con∣fidently
v. 24. father I will: soe hath he
taught vs to pray without doubting:Mark. 11 3.
whatsoeuer you desire beleeue you shall
haue it and it shall be done vnto you: we
should not be discouraged, though at the
first one request be not granted. Deus dif∣fert
desiderium, non ausert: God differ∣reth
our desire he dissolueth it not: Bias
that heathen philosopher could say,. that
a good conscience is without feare: soe
should our conscience in praier be free
from fearefull doubting.
Thus this example of our Sauiour as a
rich store-house affordeth infinite trea∣sure,
and as a bundle of mirrh sendeth

forth a most fragrant smell. This Christi∣an
exercise, is the supporter of princes,
the sheild of defence for nobles, the ha∣uen
of rest for all: This maketh honou∣rable
persons truly noble indeed, when
they acknowledge him, by whome they
are innobled: and indeed the greater the
affaires of state are, wherein your hono∣urs
are imployed, the more need haue
your honours of spirituall direction: as
Daniel that great Regent vsed to pray
thrice in the day. Herein his Christian
maiestie, imitating the diuine and highest
maiestie may be an example to all both
honorable and inferior subiectes, who as
he practiseth in his royall person,. 11. soe pre∣scribeth
to his princely sonne to pray of∣ten,
and in what manner, and for what
things to pray. And indeed what can be
more honourable then to talke with the
most high? what more comfortable, then
for God to speake to our hartes? for
when we drawe neere vnto God by prai∣er,
he draweth neare vnto vs, and as one
saith: a pure praier is Gods temple:. lucta∣re

ergo cum deo sicut Iacob, vt ipse se
gaudeat superati:Lib 1. de Genes. . striue therefore with
God in praier (as Augustine saith) with
Iacob, that he may ioy to be ouercome.
This treatise I haue beene bould to
present to your honour, and to make
you the honourable patron of these my
poore trauailes: beeing mooued there∣vnto
both in respect of that dutie which
I owe in generall for your noble affecti∣on
& true loue to the vniuersity of Cam∣bridge
whereof I was once a member, &
euer remaine a welwiller, and in particu∣lar
for your honorable fauour to a bro∣ther
in law of mine, your honours ser∣uant:
I say no more at this time, then to
wish vnto you encrease of true honour
and loue of the truth in earth, and after∣ward
euerlasting honour and an endlesse
reward of your faith in heauen.

