



MOST gracious Soveraigne, as under the shadow of your Highnesse great and mighty tree,Deut. 4. v. 18. I meane your Princely and peaceable government, the goodly beasts of the field, honourable and great persons doe solace themselves, so the fowles of heaven, and the little birds,Synopsis pa∣pismi, ad Re∣giam Majesta∣tem: and the Antilogie or counterplea. Ecclesia tri∣umphans ad sereniss. Regi∣nam Antithe∣sis doctrinae Evangelicae & Pontificiae ad Henricum Principem. doe sit and sing in the branches thereof, and there build their neasts, and lay their young: and I among the rest, have brought forth my implumed and unfeathered birds, those imperfect workes, which heretofore I have dedicated to your excellent Ma∣jestie, and now this, which wanteth but the wings of your Highnesse favour to flie abroad.
To your pious and sacred Majestie therefore, I here present this absolute Tractate upon Genesis, such as hath not beene yet (in respect of the order, matter, and manner) set forth vpon this booke: wherein whatsoever questions of weight are discussed, and other necessarie matters added, as the short preface following sheweth. This my third work to your highnesse, I here in all humility exhibite and offer, as an unfained pledge of our hearty joy, for the joyfull entrance of this third yeare of your Majesties happy reigne.
This divine booke of Genesis (as Ambrose advised Augustine,Epist 3. to read the Prophe∣sie of Isaias, Augustine sendeth Volusianus to the Apostles writings) I would com∣mend in the first place, as it is in order first, to be read of all the Scriptures: wherein are declared and set forth the beginning of the world, and the progresse thereof: the punish∣ment of the wicked, and rewards of the righteous: so many examples and enticements to vertue, such judgements and dehortations from sin▪ and the same so lively and effectuall, s if they were now presently done before our eyes: as Augustine saith of this historie of Genesis; I know not how, but as often as it is read, the hearer is so affected, as though the thing were even now effected.nescio quomodo, quotiescun que legitur, quasi nunc fiar, ita afficit mentes audientium, serm. 77.
This worthy history containeth the space of 2368. yeares, above halfe the age of the world, from the first to the second Adam. It insisteth principally in setting forth the life and acts of six honourable Fathers,Cor. 4.16. as starres among the rest, Adam, Noah, Abraham, Isaack, Iacob, Ioseph: from all these your Majestie may receive somewhat: with Adam, who in Enos time, when religion decayed, taught his sonnes apart from the wicked, to call upon the name of God, your princely care must bee, that you and your people, as separated from the superstition of the world, should worship the Lord more purely: with Noah God hath raised you up to bring rest and comfort to his Church: as another Abram,Noah signifieth rest. Abram, an high father. Isaack, laughter. Iacob, a supplan∣ter. Ioseph, added. the Lord hath made you an high Father: as Isaack to procure joy and laughter to the Church: as Iacob, a supplanter of Popish superstition: as Ioseph, to adde what is wanting in the Church, or Common-wealth.
Much bound unto God, is this Church and Common-wealth, for your Highnesse peace∣able and religious government: that whereas we for our sins had deserved with Israel, neither to have King nor Church:Hosh. 10.3.8. as the Prophet Hoshea saith, We have no King, be∣cause we feared not the Lord: and againe in the same place, the thorne and thistle shall grow upon their Altars: yet the Lord in mercy hath blessed us with both.
We praise God for your princely vertues, your worthy clemencie, equity, bountie, piety, which doe shine in your Majestie, as the pretious stones in the King of Tyrus gar∣ment:Ezech. 28.1. your gracious clemencie is as a cordiall unto this land, which having remitted some great offences, must needs passe by smaller trespasses. If David pardoned Shemeis rayling,2 Sam. 19.25. he could not but forgive Mephiboseths negligence. Your princely peace made abroad, doth give us hope of a peaceable state at home: as Davids favour toward Abner, a reconciled enemie,1 Sam. 19.31. was a signe of grace to Barzillai, an ancient friend: what would we have more, your Majestie professeth to be a nourish-father to the Church, counting it one of your fairest stiles, and had rather be loved of all, than feared: as Ambrose setteth forth the good Emperour Theodosius:. 43. When he had command over all, he had rather expostulate as a father, than punish as a judge:Cum haberet supra omnes potestatem, quasi parens expostulare malebat, quam quasi ju∣dex punire, vincere volebat, non plectere, aequitatis judex non poenae arbiter: maluit si∣bi homines religione quam timore astringere, de obit. Theodos. he desired to winne with lenitie, not to force by extremity: an umpire of equi∣tie, not a decreer of severitie: hee would rather bind men by sacred religion, than servile subjection.
Your Highnesse Honourable equitie is manifest, in that your Majestie professeth to love and honour the grave men,Prefat. ad . p. 21. 2 Sam. 20.25. Phil. 1.18. Act. 15.39. and preachers of either opinions: as David did favour both Sadok and Abiathar, priests of divers families: as Saint Paul did joy that Christ was preached, though by them that were of a contrary faction: as Iacob had a right hand for Ephraim, and a left for Manasses: Paul and Barnabas jarred, yet both preached the Gospell: Cyprian and Cornelius differed in judgement, yet both pillars of the Christian faith: Chrisostome and Epiphanius disagreed, yet both enemies to the Arrians: Hierome and Ruffinus were divided, yet in the end were reconciled: I doubt not but all faithfull,Theodoret. lib. 5.6.7. sound, and sober Preachers of the truth, are acceptable to your Ma∣jestie, as good Theodosius embraced Meletius, kissed his eyes and his lips, and made much of other faithfull Pastors: as Valentinian reverenced Ambrose, who sending for him in his sicknesse, salutem sibi quandam venturam arbitrabatur, did thinke he saw health it selfe comming to him:Ambr. in obit. Valentinian. this love of the Emperour was not lost:

Ambrose againe requiteth it; quam meipsum pro tua obtulissem fide: how glad∣ly would I have offered my selfe as in sacrifice for thy faith? as all your Highnesse faithfull Preachers are ready to doe for your Majesties health and life.
Your princely bounty hath well appeared both toward the Church and Common-wealth, not in precept onely, but in practice, as in the rare lifting up of subsidies, but in case of necessity: as Tiberius the Emperour was wont to say;. p. 99. aurum illud adulteri∣num esse, quod cum subjectorum lachrymis collectum esset: that it was adulte∣rate gold, which pressed forth the subjects teares.. p 34. Toward the Church your prince∣ly and fatherly care sheweth it selfe, in that you would have sufficient provision made for the sustentation of the Pastors and Ministers: we shall not now need an Ebed∣melek to make intercession for Ieremies food and maintenance:Ierem. 38.9. nor yet that noble Earle Terentius, who having obtained a notable victory,Theodor. l. 4. cap 32. Pro e prae∣sente senatus, hominumq praeterea vi∣ginti ilia ve∣stem mutve∣runt: orat. post redit. and being bidden of the Em∣perour Constantius to aske what he would, Templum pei pro orhodoxis; did aske to have the Church restored to the orthodoxall teachers. We need no such media∣tors: (our times, God be thanked, are farre more happy) neither yet as Tullie saith, that twenty thousand made request and mourned for him: in a Monarchicall state such suits are not fit, for Isocrates rule is to be held; . ad Demonic. that as in a Democratie the popular state, so in a Monarchie the King onely is to be admired.
Your Christian Majestie, without such remembrances, out of your owne princely heart can consider of the necessity and wants of Church Ministers: as Salomon,1 Sam. 2.3. though he advanced Zadock, yet suffered Heli his posterity to have some of the Priests offices, to eat a morsell of bread:2 King. 2▪ . and Iosias graunted the Priests of the high places to eat bread among their brethren, who much more cared for the Priests of the altar.
Lastly, your Christian pietie is evident, in taking care, that all the Churches in your Majesties dominions be planted with good Pastors:. 43 to increase the number of them: not to suffer it to be empaired or decreased: to thrust in labourers into Christs harvest, and to thrust out loyterers: to supply the one, and employ the other: that none be permitted to stand idle in the market place, that would labour quietly in the Lords vineyard, nor yet occasion be given to such, to say as Sisinnius answered Chrisostome,Ego tibi mer∣cedem dabo si me tanto labo∣re liberaveris. Socrat. lib 6. cap. 20. that would have enjoyned him silence: I will giue you a reward to ase mee of so great a labour. Your Majestie in your princely wisdome knoweth how for the common vtilitie to beare with some mens infirmitie, as fathers (as Augustine saith,) doe beare with their sons whiles they are children, or sicke,qumad modum parentes a filiis, vel pueris, vel aegrotis multa patiuntur, donec pueritia vel aegritudo transeat. de serm. in monte. 34. till their in∣fancie or infirmitie be over.
May I now use to your princely person the words of the kingly Prophet, Prosper with thy glory, (O glorious Prince) ride upon the word of truth,Psal. 45▪ 4. and of meekenesse and righteousnesse: Meekenesse well becommeth the word of truth, the Gospell of Christ, toward your faithfull subjects: Iustice and righteousnesse against the adver∣saries of truth in the land, and your right hand shall teach you terrible things, in rooting out all idolatry and superstition, and rejecting all confused motions for a Ba∣bylonicall Tolleration: for this your Majesties faithfull service in earth,Socrat. lib. 7.23. wee will not presume to say as Nestorius to the Emperour: Mihi ô Imperator terram uhaereticis purgatam tribue, & ego tibi coelum retribuam: Give unto me the earth purged of heretikes, and I will give thee heaven. But Christ Iesus shall say,Matth. 25.2. Well done good

servant and faithfull, thou hast beene faithfull in a little, I will make thee ruler over much; enter into thy Masters joy.
Thus I end, with that chearefull acclamation to your Majestie, which the Councell of Chalcedon sometime used to Leo and Cyrillus, the names onely changed, Vivat Iaco∣bus multos annos, vivat Imperator, omnes ita credimus: Iacobus sic credit, sem∣piterna sit memoria Iacobi.

