




MOst illustrious and Gratious
Princes, Salomon whose ma∣riage
song this Treatise doth
as it were descant vpon, thus
saith in the Canticles: Be∣hold
winter is past, the raine is
gone away,Cantic. 2. 11. 12 the flowers appeare in
the earth, the time of the singing
of birds is come, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in
the land, &c. Arise my faire one, and come away. This
your Highnesse ioyfull day, happily, by Gods grace
accomplished, as the spring-tide doth refresh vs all:

The chast Turtle doue hath louingly called to his
fellow: the other singing birds doe follow: then I
trust, your excellencies will giue mee leaue in this
common ioy, as one of the silly, yet cheerfull birds
sitting in the branches, to cherpe forth and expresse
my gladsome note among the rest: This happie
day who could behold without delight?Pulchrum mihi spectaculum di∣es illa atribuit. Hieron. vit. Malchi. those tri∣umphant
acclamations, and showtings forth of all
well affected, who could heare without great ioy?
which may bee compared to the crowing of the
cocke,Hexem. lib. 5. 24 which Ambrose thus describeth: Hoc canen∣te
suas latro relinquit insidias, hoc ipse Lucifer excitatus
oritur, hoc canente deuotus affectus exilit ad precandum:
At his singing the theefe doth leaue his lurking, the
Sun doth hasten his rising, the deuout affection be∣takes
it to praying &c. So the ioyfull voice of Gods
people, for this princely marriage, as it sheweth the
sunshine of the Gospell, and by Gods grace promi∣seth
continuāce of true deuotion: so we trust it shall
discouer all trecherous practises seeking for innoua∣tion:
Others to expresse their ioy, and professe their
dutie, bring great and rich presents, gold, iewels, pre∣tious
stones, goodly trapped horse, massiepieces of
plate, only I craue leaue among the meanest of the
Ministers of the Bride and Bridegroomes Friends,
amid those costly ornaments to thrust in this simple
gift: that as Nobles by their chiualrie, Courtiers by
their Maskes & brauery; Heraulds by their heraldrie,
Poets by their verses and poetrie, haue striued to set
forth the ioy of this day: so it is fit that Diuines
should not bee behinde with their parts, some by
their speech and Sermons, others by their pen and
writings, concurring in this solemnity.

Augustine hath an excellent saying:De diuers. ser. 43. Habet hortus ille
dominicus non solum Martyrum rosas, sed & lilia Virgi∣num,
& coniugatorum violas: The Lords garden
hath not onely the Roses of Martyrs, but the Lilies
of Virgins, and the Violets of maried persons. The
Lords garden in England hath afforded all these:
Martyrs in Queene Maries daies, Queene Eliza∣beth
was a Queene of Virgins; and now the sweet
mariage bed of Violets hath giuen a pleasant sent:
That mariage is honourable, which vertue com∣mendeth,
and not onely outward, but inward beau∣tie
graceth: as he excellently saith, Solus formae arbi∣ter
petatur Deus,Ambros. lib. de virgini. qui etiam in corpore minus pulchro
animas diligit pulchriores, hoc ipsum quod vos non orna∣tis,
ornatus vester est: God must bee consulted with,
as the onely iudge of true beautie, who loueth faire
soules in bodies not so faire: that is your orna∣ment,
which your selues put not on, but God gi∣ueth.
That wise saying of Olympias Alexanders mo∣ther
is much commended, who thus said of a Cour∣tier,
which had married a faire wife, but not vertu∣ous:
if he had bin wise,. Plutarch. he would not haue maried by his
eyes: for it is not fit either to marrie by the eyes or fingers;
that is, chiefly in mariage to respect outward fashi∣on,
or the greatnesse of the portion: his counsell is
good, that saith, Amor sit in causa non census, venusta∣tem
eligas non vestitum,Vaeler. ad Ruf∣fin. animum, non aurum, tibi nu∣bat
vxor non dos: Let affection be the cause, not the
consideration of wealth; chuse vertue, not the ve∣sture;
the minde, not the gold; marrie the woman,
not her dowrie. This, is euident, was the respect,
which was had on both sides in this royall mariage;
which religion began, and piety & vertue hath

knit. Blessed of God are those thrice renouned pa∣rents,
which haue not sought out a match for their
daughter from among the Canaanites, but with
faithfull Abraham, from the kindred and houshold
of faith: which haue maried religion to religion,
and haue matched the Gospell with the Gospel, and
haue set more by the pious education of both, then
by the promised mountaines of gold. Ambrose wri∣teth
thus of the Nightingale, Luscinia dum oua
gremio fouet, insomnem longae noctis laborem cantilenae
suauitate solatur,Lib. 6. Hexem. c. 24. vt mihi videatur haec summa eius esse
intentio, quò possit non minus dulcibus modulis, quam fo∣tu
corporis, oua animare in foetus: While she sitteth vp∣on
her egges, shee allayeth the laborsome watch
of the night, with sweet melodie: that shee seemeth
to mee as well by her sweet singing as bodily che∣rishing
to hatch her yong &c. The pious education
of princely youth, which on both parts hath been
performed, is like this melodious modulation, wher∣by
those sweet birds are brooded: An happy thing
in all, but twice blessed is it, when Princes from the
cradle are brought to know the Prince of princes,
as Hierome writeth of Paula that noble matrone, that
ioyed in nothing more, then Quod Paulam neptim
audierat in cunis balbutiente lingua halleluia cantare:
That she heard her neece Paula euen in the cradle
with a prettie stammering tongue to sing halleluia,
&c. This hath bin (God be blessed) the good begin∣ning
of both your Excellencies: the continuance
and encrease whereof by Gods goodnesse wee no∣thing
doubt of: and so let me humbly recommend
to each of your highnesse that exhortation of Hie∣rome,
Nunc stude,Ad Demetriad. vt calentem recentis fidei conuersio∣nem,

nouus semper ardor accendat: Studie, that a new
heate of zeale, may stillkindle the warmth of your
growing faith. And now nothing remaineth, but
that with our earnest prayers and desires wee helpe
forward this ioyfull entrance into so great expected
happinesse. This famous kingdome of our nation,
hath ioyned in matrimoniall affinitie diuers times,
with other adioyning countries, with Germanie,
France, Spaine: but with the two latter vnhappily:
Out of France came that manlike Ladie,King Henrie the 6. his Queene. which was
the firebrand of the ciuill wars betweene the hou∣ses
of Yorke and Lancanster: Out of Spanish blood
budded that branch,Q. Marie. that ouershadowed the Gos∣pell
in England; but with the other the nuptiall
coniunction hath bin prosperous: the valiant Ger∣manes
haue taken wiues from vs: as Henrie the
fifth Emperour, maried Maud King Henrie the first
his daughter; and our Kings haue taken wiues from
them. Edward the third tooke to wife Queene Phi∣lip
the Earle of Henaults daughter, that fruitfull La∣die,
that bare vnto the King diuers sonnes. Richard
the second had to wife Queene Anna,Act. and Mo∣nument. p. 467 edit. 1610. the sister
of Wencelaus King of Bohemia; a religious Lady,
whom Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canturbu∣rie
preaching her funerall sermon, commended for
her piety, that she had the foure Euangelists in Eng∣lish,
with the Fathers expositions vpon them: And
wee see to all our comforts, the hopefull fruit of
matrimoniall amitie with Denmarke, which is
part also of Germanie. This coniunction with
France and Spaine was like to that mixture of clay
and iron, wherewith the toes of the image which
Nabuchadnezzar saw in his dreame,Dan. 2. 42. were tempered:

but it would not hold, though they were by hu∣mane
seed, and carnall affinity ioyned together:
But this matrimonial combination contracted with
Germanie doth represent vnto vs, the two tallies or
pieces of wood which the Prophet put together:Ezk. 37. 13.
whereby hee signified, that Israel and Iuda should
grow into one people. This former experience of
such louing coniunctions biddeth vs by Gods
grace to hope well of this. God for his mercy sake
heape and accumulate all his graces vpon your
Princely persons; and giue you the blessing of Salo∣mon,
that obtained together with wisedome, honour
and riches. The Lord giue vnto your Highnesse
(most worthie Princesse) the deuotion ofWhich was most liberall toward the Church. Helena,
Constantine the Emperors mother: the courage and
magnanimity ofWho, her husband be∣ing dead, did resist the Gothes. Dominica, wife to Valens the Em∣perour,
theThe wife of Theodosius the elder, and vsed her selfe to vi∣sit the sicke. charity of Placilla, the fruitfulnesse of
Which bare many children to Arcadius. Eudoxia, the fauour ofWho was most deare vn∣to▪ Theodosius the yonger. Eudocia, the piety ofThe sister of Theodosius iu∣nior, a zealous promoter of the Orthodox∣all faith. Pul∣cheria,
the wisedome ofThe wife of Iustinus the yonger, a wise woman▪ accor∣ding to her name. Sophia: And to come nea∣rer
home, the honour of Maud the Empresse, the
godlinesse of Queene Anne, and goodly encrease of
Queene Philip before mentioned; and the prospe∣rity
and long life of Noble Queene Elizabeth. Vnto
your excellencie (Right worthie Prince) wee
wish the like happinesse: the pietie ofWho vsed to stand & heare the Sermons. Constantine,
deuotion ofWhose custome was to communicate with his souldiers in the campe. Constantius, victorie ofWho going before his armie, would leape downe from his horse, and say, where is the God of Theodosius. Theodosius the
elder, zeale ofWho alone, against the mind of his Counsellors, reiected the petition of the Romans, for the restitution of I∣dolatry. Valentinian, clemencie ofWho was wnt to say whē any should be put to death: I would rather I might restore them that are dead, to life Theodo∣sius
the younger: and to giue instance of your owne
nation, The victorious successe of HenrieWho entred Rome by force, and compelled the the Pope to consecrate him Emperour. the fifth,

that married Maud, the daughter of King Henrie be∣fore
named.
The blessing of God rest, and remaine with you
both: euen that blessing pronounced in the Psalme,
thy wife shall be as the fruitfull vine, Psal. 128. 2. where∣upon
Iustine Martyr giueth this good note: allea∣ging
that saying in the law, how euery one shuld sit
vnder his owne vine; that is,. Dial. cum Tryphon. euery one should be con∣tent
with his owne maried wife, asFuit castus cor∣pore, qui prae∣ter coniugem, nesciret foeminae alterius consue∣tudinem. In obit Valentin. . Plutarch. Ambrose writeth of
the Emperour Gratianus. Such louing contentment,
and pleasant repose, we assuredly trust God will giue
vnto each of your Highnes, vnder your vine. In the
vine three speciall things excell, the tendernes there∣of,
the pleasantnes, fruitfulnes, as was excellently ob∣serued
by that learnedThe B. of Lō∣don, who prea∣ched before the King. Febr. 16. vpon that text, Psalm. 128. 2 Thy wise as a fruitfull vine. Bishop in his sermon: for the
vine euery way easily windeth and turneth, with the
grateful shadow delighteth, and with the fruit there∣of
cheareth: the like flexible disposition, and mu∣tuall
delectation, and fruitfull propagation the Lord
graunt vnto your Excellencies: The Lord Christ
turne your water into wine (with which miracle the
Lord sometime graced the mariage in Cana of Ga∣lile)
that is, all sorrow and heauinesse into ioy
and gladnesse,The B. of Bath, who preached at the mariage of these Prin∣ces; Febr. 14. being the Lords day, vpō that miracle done at the mariage in Cana Iohn 2. as that place of scripture was well ap∣plied
by another reuerend Bishop to that present
occasion.
Among the Grecians, it was a fashion, when they
sacrificed to Iuno, their Goddesse of mariage, they
tooke away the gall from the rest of the sacrifice, sig∣nifying
thereby that there should be no bitternes
in mariage. But our holy Apostle much better dire∣cteth
husbands not to be bitter to their wiues, Co∣loss.
3. 19. Such pleasing contentment and amiable
grace God will send, we trust, to this sacred mariage.

Lastly, this most happie mariage we hope to see fur∣nished,
and accompanied with store and plentie of
all blessings: which Christ our Lord decreed in
heauen: the King our Soueraigne ratified in earth:
The most worthie Archbishop as a spirituall father
in the royall Chapell consecrated and blessed,The L. Arch∣bishop of Can∣turburie ioy∣ned together this Princely couple in ma∣riage. and
two learned and pious Bishops, as the most loyall
and louing friends of the honourable Bride and
Bridegrome, by their pithie exhortations and pray∣ers
in the sacred pulpit dedicated.
And so I conclude, wishing vnto both your Ex∣cellencies
that blessing, which the Elders of Israel
gaue vnto Boaz and Ruth, The Lord make thy wife,
that commeth into thine house like Rachel, and like Leah,
which both did build the house of Israel, Ruth. 4. 11. And
as the Lord promised that Abrahams seed should be
as the starres of heauen, Gen. 22. 17. as Hierome well
saith, Abraham pro filijs claritas ostenditur astrorum:
Abraham in stead of children is shewed the starres of
heauen: So God make your Highnesse seed, as the
starres of heauen, in glorie and multitude, and your
princely persons,De vera cir∣cumcision. as the Sunne and Moone, to giue
light and shine many daies in the Church of God:
and after to be as bright and glorious starres in the
kingdome of heauen, through Iesus Christ the
only Sonne of God, and true Sunne of
righteousnesse; to whom be
praise for euer.

