



RIght Honourable Lords, and ye right Worshipfull Knights and Gentlemen, I feared at the first to pre∣sent this short treatise to your view, remembring what sometime I had read in Hierom: Vereor ne officium pute∣tur ambitio, & videamur sub occasione sermonis, a∣micitias potentium quaere∣re. ad Saluinam. I am afraide least in doing my dutie I bee thought to be ambitious, & while I pretend to write, should intend to seeke great mens fauour: But the Apostles words did more im∣bolden mee, than the others could draw mee back: We cannot but speak the things, that we haue Act. 4. 20. seene and heard: So neither could I containe my selfe, hearing of that honourable resolution, which is in you all to further the cause of the Church of Christ and true religion, but to re∣ioyce

in this common ioy, and among other welwillers of Sion to testifie our inward ioy, and outward thankfulnes to God, and you all for the same. It is written, that the Israelites ga∣thering themselues together against the chil∣dren of iniquitie the men of Gibeah, assembled Hosh. 10 9. Iudg. 20. 1. before the Lord as one man: Such a Christian consent hath well appeared in this sacred as∣semblie to promote Gods glorie and his truth. The saying was wont to be, The greater part hath Maior pars vi∣cit meliorem. ouercome the better: but the contrarie is now wel seene: and that rule, which Plinius Cecilius was wont to prescribe vnto his schoole, that hee had Sciamus eum pessime dixisse, cut maxime sit applausum: E∣ras. praef. in 2. tom. Hieron. worst spoken, which had the greatest applause, begin∣neth now to faile in this great Consistorie, where the best motions, we doubt not, but shall haue the greatest applause. I know not where∣unto better to liken this Christian harmonie, than vnto the Seraphims, that cried one to ano∣ther, Holy, holy, holy Lord of hosts; and to that hea∣uenly song, wherein both the vpper ranke of Isai. 6. 1. those foure glorious creatures, and the nether order of the foure and twentie Elders consen∣ted Reuel. 4. 9. 11. to giue glorie and honour vnto God: that I may say truly in his words; That in this reue∣rent Hieron. Paulin. tom. 3. assemblie, wee haue a patterne of the heauenlie companie.
Now we see performed that worthie saying of his excellent Maiestie; A godly King findeth, Meditat in 1. Chron. 15. 2. part. as his heart wisheth, godly estates concurring with him: For as God hath endued his princely hart with a liuely feeling and inward touch of true

religion; as hee saith, It was fit, that hee, Necesse erat, vt qui poten∣tior cunctis fuerat deuotior fieret vniuersis: Ambros∣serm. 40. which was superiour in power, should not be inferiour in deuotion: So your Ho∣nours are (wee trust) those godly states, which will be readie to concurre with his Maiestie in establishing of godly lawes. Among the rest of the Parliaments in this land, one was called the Edward. 3. anno 29. Anno 1388. sub Richard. 2. good Parliament: another, the Parliament that wrought wonders: But wee doe all hope that this honourable Session shall rather deserue to be so called. That Parliament was of all other the most glorious, which in the beginning of worthie Queene Elizabeths raigne restored reli∣gion: how can this be inferiour, which ende∣uoureth to establish and make better both Church and religion? One saith well; It is one Aliud est quae∣rere quod per∣dideris, aliud possidere, quod nunquam ami∣seris: Hier. ad Demetriad.
thing to seeke what thou hast lost, another to keepe that thou hast. This Church may count her self more happie in holding and encreasing that she hath, than when shee was forced to recouer that which she had lost.
Well may we now say vnto this noble com∣panie, as the Prophet to and of Sion: Glorious things are spoken of thee, O Citie of God. We cannot Psal. 87. 3. but reioyce to heare of your Honors Christian consultation for the propagating of the Gos∣pell, in planting euery where of good pastors, that the people may be brought from the dark∣nesse of their ignorance to the light of know∣ledge: that they be no longer children in vnder∣standing, 1. Cor. 14. 20, and as babes and suck∣lings in religion. Ambrose herein thus pleasant∣ly

alludeth vpon these words, Woe to them that giue sucke: Lot vs make haste to weane our Ambros Ergo paruulos no∣stros ablactare properemus: ablactato Isaak epulū mag∣num sacit Abraham; par∣uulum non ablactatum per temulentiam somnolenta no∣cte opprimit: in Lu 6. 21. little ones: when Isaak was weaned, Abra∣ham made a feast, the child not weaned was in the night by the drowsie mother ouer∣laid. Your Honors then do right well to prouide good nurses, to weane the people from their ignorance, that they be no longer o∣uerlaid with drowsie and negligent pastors: and that such bee not excluded from nursing, which haue store of milke in the breasts, and seeke in peace and a good conscience to nou∣rish the people of God.
But because the nurse cannot giue milke that is not first fed her selfe; most prudent and chri∣stian is that other care to prouide for the main∣tenance of good pastors: which as wee hope will be by our Reuerent Fathers in their graue Synode deuised, so we trust it shall by your Ho∣nourable fauours be furthered: for the Apostle saith, The mouth of the oxe is not to be musled. And Origene well agreeth; Nisi dederit oleum populus extinguetur lucerna in templo: If the people minister not oyle, the lampe goeth out in the temple. Now a∣mong other graue matters of deliberation, if it were not too great boldnes, giue me leaue I be∣seech you to interpose my petition: Saint Paul saith in a case not much vnlike: Set vp them 1. Cor. 6. 4. which are least esteemed in the Church: and I trust you will not despise my simple motion, euen the least of the seruants of Christ. Valerius saith well to this point: We know the noise of geese is

contemned, according to the saying, a goose Reprobata est fatui vox an∣seris tanquam anser inter o∣lores, ea tamen docuit sena∣tores vrbem seruare ab in∣cendio. Valer. ad Ruffin. among Swannes; yet by the chattring of geese the citie of Rome was saued from bur∣ning. May it therefore please you to heare a foole speak vnto wise men: That where∣as men haue of late daies taken vnto themselues great libertie, in Sermons, Lectures, writings, to set abroach strange & vncouth doctrines, exor∣bitant from the current doctrine among Prote∣stants, it might please this honourable Court, that one vniformitie of doctrine may be taught and held; and seeing there are many vnsound doctrines, which, because they are omitted, are not opposite to the articles of religion establish∣ed, that either it might seem pleasing to his Ma∣iestie and you, to haue those articles augmen∣ted, explaned and enlarged, or els, that it be law∣full for none to defend or maintaine those do∣ctrines, wherein the professors of the Gospell in England consent with other reformed Chur∣ches, and dissent from that of Rome, and which are both by our domesticall, and forren writers among the Protestants, maintained against the common aduersarie. And further, that concer∣ning al such points, no inuectiues be vsed of one against another in preaching or writing: that, as the Apostle saith, we proceed all by one rule, that we Philip. 3. 16. Uera illa necessitudo, quam non vtilitas rei familiaris, nō praesentia tantùm corpo∣rum non subdlo a adulatio, sed Dei amor, & diuinarum studia scripturarum conci∣liant. Hier. Paulin. tom. 4. may minde one thing: And this shall bee true friendship and concord indeede (as he well saith) which not worldly profit, or bo∣dily presence, or cunning flatterie, but the feare of God, and the loue of the Scriptures

doth knit together. Pardon my boldnesse Ho∣norable Patrons, who out of the simplicitie of my desire to the peace of the Church, haue pre∣sumed thus to moue. I know you can consider, that champions many times are stronger than their Athletae suis incitatoribus fortiores sunt, & tamen neo∣net debilior, vt pugnet ille qui fortior est. Hieron. ad Iu∣lian. abettors, and the weaker doth stirre him vp to fight that is stronger; as Hierom well saith. I am but a weake man, that haue moued this, God shall make your Honours strong to performe this and more for the good of his Church, and glory of his name; to whom bee praise for euer.
