



AVgustine (Right Reuerend Father)
when a certaine young man of no
good fame,Epist. 1 had accused one Boni∣facius,
a Minister or Presbyter, of a
great crime (they both beeing of
his owne Colledge and societie)
though he gaue more credit vnto
the Presbyter,Quamvis magis Presbytero re∣didissem. yet the matter han∣ging
in suspense and doubt, he sent them both for the
more full manifestation of the truth, vnto the tombe of
Felix the Martyr: for they had a great opinion of such pla∣ces
in those daies. My case at this time in some things is
not much vnlike: who hauing beene a Minister and Pres∣byter
of this Church, and a poore Preacher and writer of
the same now these twentie yeares, am at the last, by one
of obscure fame and name,See Imput. 1. recrimin. accused before your Grace, of
heresie, blasphemie, and charged with the deniall of an Ar∣ticle
of the faith. In which accusation, as I doubt not, but
that your Gr. opinion is as indifferent toward me (whose
Parents, education, studies, and trauailes, you haue knowne
these many yeares) as Augustines was toward Bonifacius;
yet herein my case is better, that I doe referre my selfe to
the iudgement of a Reuerend Prelate liuing, and am not
sent to the triall of the dead.

Archidamus,Plutarch. inter Laconica apo∣thegmata. not much vnlike to the former exampl
beeing chosen an arbitrator betweene two that were at
variance, brought them into the Temple of Minerva,
and hauing first bound them with an oath to stand to his
sentence, decreed, that they should not depart thence, before
they had compounded the controuersie. Crates Thebanus
is said to haue vsed to resort vnto falies that disagreed,
and with perswasions of peace to haue adiudged their strifes..
So your (Honour) not so much by choice an arbitrator, as
by office and place a Iudge in these causes, will bring vs
both (I trust) into the Temple of GOD, there to be tried
by the Scriptures: And as Crates endeauour was to paci∣fie
families, so I hope, your Gr. care is, to settle this Church
in peace: approouing that godly saying of Basilius; 
Basil.) , that
nothing is so proper to a (Bishop) as to be a peacemaker.
Mine aduersarie hath had the prioritie of complaint,
and first filled your eares (though not possessed them) with
his vntrue surmises: for I doubt not, but as Alexander,
when one of his familiar friends was traduced before him,
stopped one of his eares,. as reseruing it for him that was
absent: so your Gr. hath one eare left for me: according
to that rule of Seneca, Vtrique parti actiones dares,
dares tempus,Lib. 2. de ira. non semel audires: magis enim veritas elucet,
quo saepius ad manum venit: to giue vnto both parties
their action, and to graunt them time, to heare more then
once: for the oftner the truth cometh to hand (to be scan∣ned)
the more the light thereof appeareth. Cicero against
Antonie said:Cicer. Philip. 2. quid mihi plenius, quid vberius, quam mihi, &
pro me, & contra Antonium, dicere: But I may adde the
third; that it contenteth me, that I may speake not onely
for my selfe, and against such an one, but before your Gr.
As for his accusations, I feare them not, mine owne con∣science
testifying with me: I will (as Iob saith) take them
vpon my shoulder,Iob 31. 36. and bind them as a crowne vnto me. For,
as Cyprian well saith,de baptism. Christ. but vpon an other occasion; nequa∣quā
sub hoc onere lassitudinem, sed quietem inventuri: vnder

this burthen I shall not finde wearines, but rest. As Augu∣stine
also saith:Lib. 3. contra Petil. c. 7. qui volens detrahit famae meae, nolens addit
mercedi: he that willingly detracteth from my fame,
doth against his will adde to my reward.
But two things I doe not a little, wonder at, that he
durst abuse your Gr. eares, with such vntrue and vnchari∣table
invectures in his Epistle, and the Reader, with such
grosse and absurd ouersights in his booke.
In the first,Epist. Dedicat. he chargeth me with a prophane and irreli∣gious
fact in denyingp. 3. an Article of the Christian faith:
p. 6. with errors, or heresies rather in ppugning the doctrine
of the Church:p. 6. striking at some maine points of faith,
shaking the foundation it selfe, and calling in question, hea∣uen
and hell, the diuinitie and humanitie, yea the very soule,
and saluation of Christ our Sauiour himselfe:p. 7. so barded
in error that they neither she contrition of heart to repen∣tance,
nor confession of mouth to obedience:p. 10. that neither
Rhemist nor Romanist, could lightly haue more disgraced
the discipline and doctrine of the Church in diuers points▪
To these iniurious slaunders,Imput. 2. recri∣minat. 3. 5. 7. my particular answer after∣ward
followeth, which were needlesse to be inserted here.
Thus much concerning my selfe I say in generall in Hie∣romes
words:Lib. 3. adv. Pel. Egone haereticus, quare ergo me haeretics non
amant: am I an heretike, wherefore then doe not here∣tikes
loue me?Apologicall epistle, written as is supposed by one Phillips a Iesuite: and in the Retecti∣on by Woode∣ward an other of that faction. which in their rayling pamphlets and li∣bells
haue made me a marke to shoote at. But that saying
of Cyprian doth giue  Scias hoc semper opus
esse diaboli, vt servos dei  laceret, vt qui conscien∣tiae
suae luce clarescunt, alienis rumoribus sordidentur:
Know this to be alwaies the worke of the deuill,Lib. 4. epist. 2. to vexe
the seruants of God with lies, that they which are cleare
in the light of their conscience, should be blemished with
other mens reports. Now, though he tooke vnto himselfe
this libertie, in this vnfriendly manner to disgrace me, yet
he might haue shewed more modestie, then to outface
me with such vntruths, in your Gr. presence. It is said, that
the actors of those wanton playes, called Floralia: Catone

praesente agere recusarūt: refused to play in Catoes presence:
and he might haue forborne to haue vttered his forged ca∣lumniations
before so graue a personage. But I trust it will
fall out here, as sometime in the like case with Augustine:
Experti dicimus,Tom. 10. ser. 49. nam non crederemus, multi à nobis mala
consilia petunt, consilia mentiendi, consilia circumveniendi,
sed in nomine Christi nullus talis nos tentavit: I speak (saith
he) by experience, otherwise I would not haue beleeued,
many doe aske of vs euill counsell, counsell to lie, counsell
to circumvent; but in the name of Christ, none such hath
tempted vs. Neither (I hope) hereafter, your wisdome will
giue passage or licence to such mens intemperate pennes,
to wound and gall their brethren: yet had hee staied here
onely, in censuring the liuing, and not proceeded to taxe
the memorie of the dead, it had been more tolerable: that
godly learned man Doctor Reynolds, who is now at rest in
the Lord, is thus iniuriously handled by him, and that since
his Christian departure; whereby grace may so happily
worke in their hearts,Epist. dedi. p. 11. that where the truth hath beene here∣tofore
frowardly excluded, &c. as though that worthy mā,
were either voide of grace, or did frowardly exclude the
truth: nay he spareth not to charge him, as guiltie of pro∣fane,See Impu. 1. re∣crim.
irreligious, hereticall, sacrilegious opinions, of grosnes,
sophistrie, profanenesse, &c. It is said of Themistocles, that
in his returne from battell, seeing a dead body lying with
iewels of gold, hee thus spake to one that was with him,
Take thou away these things,Plutarch. prae∣cept. de regend. republic. for thou art not Themistocles:
neither would this man, if he had beene, (I say not of an
heroicall spirit, as Themistocles) but of a sober and chari∣table
spirit, as euery good Christian, haue stripped the
dead of his well deserued ornaments: in seeking to impaire
his credit, he doth but blemish and obscure his owne; and
sheweth himselfe to bee of those, who as Hierome saith,
Hippocratis fomentis magis, quam monitis nostris indigent:
had need rather of Hippocrates medicine, then our admo∣nition.
Now may it please your (Reuerend Fatherhood) to

giue me leaue, to offer vnto your view some of the prin∣cipall
contents of his booke: by the tast whereof, it will
appeare, what relish the rest haue; & by the smell of some
of his flowers,Dixit se foetore eius ferre non posse, non sen∣tis (inquit) pu∣torem teterri∣mum, & in cicere foetere avariti∣am. Hieron. vit. Hilar. one may guesse, what herbs grow in his gar∣den:
as Hilarion said to Hesychius, when a bunch of small
pulse was brought them out of a Churles garden, that hee
could not abide the stinch thereof: Doe you not feele (saith
he) a filthy sauour, and euen his couetousnesse to smell in the
pulse? So by this handfull, which I shall gather out of his
booke, the euill sauour will be found of the rest.
1. Hee much forgetting himselfe, thus breaketh out
beyond the limits of modestie,1. Impu. recrim. charging me with folly, hy∣pocrisie,
falshood, lying, infidelitie, impudency, sawcinesse, Ma∣chiauell
sme, Atheisme, Heresie; as particular instance is gi∣uen,
in more then 80. railing speeches vsed against me, and
others:Contr. Sallust. so that I may say vnto him in Tullies words, Neque
qui tam illoto sermone vtitur, vita honestior est: It is not
like that he which vseth such vncleane spech, can be much
honester in life.
2. I haue obserued 22. slaunderous imputations, wher∣of
some are these: that I would transforme the order of the
Church into anImp. 2. Slan. . Anarchie: that their heads plot, and their
handsSlaund. 9. practise Babylonicall warre:Slaund. 11. that he defendeth
diuers things contrary to the truth of the Gospell:Slaund. 17. that he
iustifieth pestilent & blasphemous heretiks, against the lear∣ned,
and holy Fathers:Slaund. 18. that he holdeth the flames of hell to
be temporall:Slaund. 22. that he called the blessed rootes of the Christi∣an
faith▪ cursed rootes: with such like.
3. Instance is giuen of 34. vntruthes vttered by him:
3. Imp. vntr. 6. As that he beleeueth, I was one of those, which writ the
Letter to Master Hooker; the writers whereof, I knowe
not to this day:9. vntr. that I borrowe diuers things from Car∣lils
booke; which I neuer sawe:vnt. 11. that I fasten all the tor∣ments
of hell, vpon the blessed soule of Christ; which I neuer
thought:truth denied  that there is not one word through his booke,
that insinuateth any suspition of Limbus patrum: whereas,
in the preface following, the contrary is prooued directly,

in 20. seuerall places out of his booke.
4. Among the errors which he is charged with, to the
number of 14. these specially are noted:Imp. 6. recr. 2. he iustifieth the
Latine text, against the originall Greeke in the newe Te∣stament:
error. 2. hee calleth the booke of Ecclesiasticus the
word of God, which the Church of England holdeth for
one of the Apocryphall bookes: artic. 6.error 11. that the bap∣tisme
of infants is not to be found in Scripture, by any ex∣presse
mention; whereas the Church of England holdeth
it to be most agreeable to the institution of Christ: artic.
27. He calleth these sound positions,imp. 2. scla. 15. that the Scriptures
alone are not compleate vnto saluation: that mans will is
naturally apt without grace, to beleeue: that mens naturall
workes are acceptable to God: which are directly opposite
to the doctrine of the Church of England, which holdeth
the contrary: that the holy Scripture containeth all things
necessary to saluation: artic. 6. that man of his owne natural
strength cannot turne and prepare himselfe to faith: artic.
10. that workes done before the grace of Christ, are not plea∣sant
to God: artic. 13.
5. Diuers harsh and vnsauorie speeches are laid vnto
his charge; as that hee applyeth those words of Christ to
himselfe,imp. 7. recr. 1. de bono opere lapidor: I am stoned for a good
worke:ibid. recrim. 3. that Christs conquest vpon the crosse was openly
an ouerthrow, and therefore no triumph: if it were, it was a
triumph before victory:recrim. 6. that there is a most plaine distin∣ction
betweene the holy Ghost and Christ, not in person one∣ly,
but in his diuine nature. These and the like assertions,
(which he would haue tearmed blasphemies) to the num∣ber
of tenne, are obserued out of his booke.
6. Diuers points of arrogancy, and vaine ostentation
are obserued, to the number of 13. whereof this is one,
that hee maketh his boast, that my Lord of Winchester
hath in his last booke much altered his iudgement concer∣ning
the place of Peter,Imp. 8. recr. 10. mooued by the reasons laid downe
by me (saith he) and none but me: wheras it is not true, that
that Reuerend learned father, hath therein altered his

iudgemēt: at the lest, it becam not him so to brag: It might
haue better beseemed the other, if any such thing were, to
haue acknowledged it: As August. thus modestly writeth
to Petrus,De orig. ani lib 2. tom. . a Bishop to a Presbyter: Vellem rescriptis tuis,
quid te docuerit me docere: absit enim vt erubescam à pre∣sbytero
discere, si tu non erubuisti à laico: I would haue
thee by thy rescript to teach me, what taught you: farre be
it, that I should be ashamed to learne of a Presbyter, if
you were not ashamed to learne of a lay man.
Further he chargeth the great English Bible,Imput. 8. re∣crim. 6. which is
authorised to be read in our Curches, with error in the
translation, and with blasphemie in the annotations.
7. Concerning the allegation of the Fathers, I haue
shewed partly his ignorance, in mistaking and misquoting
them, partly his vnfaithfulnes in vntrue alleadging them,
in 30. seuerall places: as namely his ignorance inImput. 1 iustif. 2. 2. Cyril,
ibid. iustif. 3. and recrim. 1. 4. Hierome,recrim. 7. 3. and 4. Augustine:ibid. recr. 2. 3 Tertullian also is strangely
produced, contrarie to his owne iudgement: thus he dea∣leth
also with the new writers, as with Calvine, Beza.
8. Neither can the Scripture escape his vncleane fin∣gers:
as instance is giuen in 26. places: as loc. 17. the Scrip∣ture
saith, He shall not preserue the vngodly, Iob 36. 5. he
readeth, thou wilt not preserue: loc. 19. S. Iames saith, which
hath conuerted, &c. and shall saue a soule, Iam. 5. 20. he rea∣deth,
which conuerteth, in the present: and shall saue his
soule: adding (his:) and he maketh as bolde with many
places beside.
This it is for one to deale out of his element, and to
meddle beyond his skill, for a professor of Grammer, to
take vpon him to teach Diuinitie. He must needes stum∣ble
that walketh in darkenes, and he can not be without
error, that is corrupt in iudgement. Now is verified that
saying of the wise man, ,Prov. 13. 7.
There is that maketh himselfe rich, and hath no∣thing:
As this man maketh himselfe skilfull in the tongues,
in the Scriptures, in the Fathers, and in what not, in all
these proclayming his ignorance: Hierome spake it mo∣destly

of himselfe:Perorat in O∣rig. ad Roman. Fateor, frater Heracli, dum tui, deside∣rijs
satisfacere cupio, oblitus sum pene mandati, quo praecipi∣tur,
onus supra vires tuas ne levaveris: I confesse (brother
Heraclius) while I satisfie thy desire, that I had almost for∣gotten
the commandement that biddeth, Take not vp a
burthen beyond thy strength. But it is most true of him:
who hath (vnbidden) thrust his shoulders vnder a burthen,
that is like to crush him. As Cleon was vnfit to lead an ar∣mie,
and Philopoimen to guide a navie,Plutarch. prae∣cept. de Repub. regend. and Hannibal to
play the Orator: so is this Grammarian to meddle with
Diuinitie. Euripides saying may well be applied to such:
: a Carpenter thou art,
and yet dost not deale with carpenters worke. Seneca well
said, Necesse est, vt opprimant onera, quae ferente maiora
sunt,Lib. 1. de vit. tranq. &c. nec accedendum eo, vnde non sit liber regressuo.
Those burthens must needes presse to the ground, which
are greater then the bearer: And it is not safe going thi∣ther,
whence there is no returne. And so it falleth out to
such according to the saying of Hierome: Qui scribunt,
non quod inveniunt,Hier. ad Lucin. sed quod intelligunt, & dum alienos er∣rores
emendare nituntur, ostendunt suos: They write, not
what they finde, but what they vnderstand, and while they
goe about to correct the errors of others, they bewray
their owne.
Now let me craue a little further leaue to adde some
what concerning the former booke, which is by him im∣pugned,
and this written in defense thereof. The first, en∣tituled
(Limbomastix) I acknowledge to be mine; and am
not ashamed of any matter therein handled, though for
the manner it might haue beene more exact, I confesse.
And for the publishing thereof, this is my excuse, or rather
defense: first, that I was thereunto prouoked in particu∣lar:
againe, I saw in his pamphlet maintained that Popish
opinion of Limbus patrum, which suspition the author
can not auoide, as it is at large declared in the Preface fol∣lowing:
who if he be sound in other points of Protestants
doctrine, it is well: but then is he much wronged both in

the opinion, and reports of them that know him: further,
that booke passed vnder the censure of a graue and lear∣ned
writer of our Church:D Sutcliff. and yet it was printed without
my priuitie.
As touching mine opinion of CHRISTS Descension,
handled in that booke, I will freely deliuer what I thinke:
first, I beleeue the Article of the Descension, to be a neces∣sarie
part of our faith:Lib Instit. 2. c. 16. sect. 8. and say with Calvine, In the des∣cent
of Christ to hell, there is no small force to the effect of
our Redemption, &c. and it auaileth so much vnto the
(cheife) summe of our redemption, that it beeing pretermit∣ted,
much will be lost of the fruit of Christs death: thus
much for the substance of the Article. Secondly, concer∣ning
the manner of Christs descension, I doe hold and be∣leeue
whatsoeuer can be prooued out of Scripture, and
truly collected from thence. Thirdly, yet I affirme, that
out of those three places, Act. 2. 27. 1. Pet. 3. 19. Eph. 4. 9.
the locall descension of Christs soule to hell, can not ne∣cessarily
be concluded. And herein I affirme no more, then
other graue and learned writers of our Church haue done
before me.Confut. of the Rhem. annot. D. Fulke saith, that the article of Christs des∣cension,
is not grounded vpon the first text:2. Act. 3. Bish. Bilson re∣signeth
the second place:B. Bils. Survey. 676. and D. Fulke out of Theodoret
sheweth,Confut. Rhem. ann. Eph. 4. 1. that the third maketh not for the passing of
Christ from place to place, and so consequently belongeth
not to his locall descension. Fourthly, I say notwithstan∣ding,
and professe in the same words, which I set downe
before: They which hold not the locall descent of Christs
soule to hell,Limbom. p. 5. should not condemne the other, as Popish and
superstitious men, that are so perswaded: They which affirme
it, ought not to account them as enemies, or aduersaries to
the truth, that dissent from them therein. He that thus wri∣teth,
is farre from either hauing his head plotting, or his
hands practising Babylonicall warres: as I am slaundered,
as I haue shewed before. Fiftly, I hold the Article of
Christs descension, as the Church of England propoun∣deth
it:Articl. 3. As Christ died for vs, and was buried: so also it is

to be beleeued that he went downe to hell: in which words
the Article of the descension is commended in generall to
be held, without any the determination of the sense: asM. Rogers in his booke of the Catholike doctrine of the Church of England, prin∣ted at Cambr. ann. 607. he
that lately hath learnedlyI would he had written as soundly in some points, as name∣ly concerning the doctrine of the Sabbaoth. p. 163. 195. 192. and in other places. written (dedicating his booke
to your Gr.) vpon the Articles of Religion, by publike au∣thoritie,
hauing deliuered diuers senses of this Article, and
especially these three: 1. some hold that Christ descended
as God onely not as man, &c. powerfully and effectually, not
personally: 2. some as man onely, either in bodie onely, &c.
to the graue, or in soule onely, when he went to the place of
the reprobate, &c. 3. as God and man in one person, &c.
that he went, as it were into hell, when vpon the crosse, and els
where, he suffered the torments, &c. Then he inferreth thus:
But till we know the natiue and vndoubted sense of this Ar∣ticle,
and mysterie of religion, persist we aduersaries to them
which say, that Christ descended not into hell at all, &c.
This was the summe of my first booke, which beeing
written without gall and bitternesse; as he saith, Ego sine
iracundia dico,Cicer. Philip. 8. vt omnia, tamen non sine dolore: I speake it
without anger, though not without griefe: and the party be∣ing
not knowne, which was the author of that Pamphlet,
and so no man beeing personally touched: as Hierome
saith,d Nepotian. Nullum laesi nullius nomen mea scriptura designatum
est: I hurt no man, no mans name is in my writing decy∣phered:
He might in silence haue corrected this error, as
Ambrose saith, Luk. Et si nostra voce non proditur, vel su tamen
crubescat affectu: though he bee not by my voice bewrai∣ed,
yet hee might in his owne opinion haue beene asha∣med:
Yet could he not containe himselfe, but must set pen
to paper, and publish his owne shame, by his vnchristian
and intemperate rayling: according to that saying of Hie∣rome
to Helvidius:. Arbitror te veritate superatum, ad
maledicta conuerti: I thinke, you beeing ouercome with
the truth, did turne to rayling. I haue felt before this, the
whip of popish tongues, and haue tasted of their virulent
pennes; but the badge of heresie, impiety, profanenes, blas∣phemy,
atheisme, was neuer set vpon my sleeue before;

himselfe, that there pined it, beeing more worthy to
weare it in his forehead: hee hath nothing almost in his
mouth, but lying, falshood, hypocrisie, corruption of Scrip∣tures,
contradictions, falsification of Fathers: which things,
if he could fasten vpon me, as he neuer shall, yet it would
nothing helpe his cause;Apolog. 3. adv. Ruffin. as Hierome saith Quid vulneribus
tuis prodest, si ego fuero vulneratus? what doth it helpe
your wounds, if I likewie be wounded? and againe, Quid
refert, si causa cadis, & crimine superes? what doth it a∣uaile,
if you faile in the cause, and bee superiour in obie∣cting
of crimes? I feare not what he can lay to my charge,
for I haue read, :
that neither a weake mans blowes, nor an
vnwise mans threats are to be feared.
Now in this other booke, I haue framed a briefe an∣swere
vnto his calumnious accusations, not medling at all
with the argument and matter it selfe, both because it re∣maineth
by him vnanswered, and for that I will not crosse
the iudgement of some Reuerend learned men of our
Church, but content my selfe with that, which I haue for∣merly
written thereof: I haue onely answered his vn∣charitable
slaunders, and returned them with aduantage
vpon his owne head. I haue obserued of raylings, slaun∣ders,
vntruths, contradictions, falsification of Fathers, cor∣ruption
of Scriptures, with such other ouersights, not few∣er
then 300. his errors beeing more then the leaues, and al∣most
equall to the pages of his booke: if hee had had the
like aduantage against me, he would not haue doubted to
vse that sentence of Hierom against me;Lib. 1. conr. Iovin. Proponam aduer∣sarij
sententias, & de tenebrosis libris eius, quasi de foueis
serpentes protraham, neque sinam venenosum caput spiris
maculosi corporis protegi: I will propound the aduersaries
sentence, and out of his darke bookes I will drawe the ser∣pents,
as out of their holes; neither will I suffer his vene∣mous
head to lie lurking within the windes of his speck∣led
body. But I will forbeare him; yet I must confesse, that
in returning this answer, I wanted the patience of Ioseph,

of whom Ambrose saith,Epist. 44. Malit falsum rimen subire,
quam verum referre that he had rather vndergoe a false
crime, then report a true: or as Hierom writeth of Blesilla,
Blesilla nostra ridit, es dignabitur loquacium ranarum
audire convitia that shee would smile,ad Marcel. nor vouchsafing to
heare the raylings of the clamorous frogges▪ For my ease
is diuers, who beeing charged with her esie, blasphemy, a∣theisme,
must either by silence confesse the crime, or by a
iust Apologie wipe it away: So indeed, I was driuen to a
great straite,Hieron. Pam∣mach. Ocean. as Hierome againe saith; Hoc mihi praestite∣runt
vt si tacuero, res, si respondero, inimicus iudicer, dra
vtraque conditio fed è duobus eligam quod leuius est: simul∣tas
redintegrari patest, blasphemia veniam non meretur▪
They haue brought mee to this, that if I hold my peace, I
shall be held to be guiltie; if I answer, I shall be iudged an
enemie: an hard condition of each side: but of the two, I
will choose the easier: a priuie grudge may (well) bee re∣newed,
but blasphemy cannot be pardoned: which as it
seemeth, was imputed vnto Hierome, as now vnto mee.
Now then, he may thanke himselfe, that began the quar∣rell,
if he be well beaten for his labour, that might haue
slept in a whole skin: and if he cannot fence off that blow,
which is comming toward him, let him afterward learne
to play with his matches. For as Origen well saith, writing
vpō those words in the Gospel;tract. 35. in Math. Omnes belli concitatores,
in eo bello perbunt, quod concitant: all that take the sword,
shall perish with the sword: all the raisers of warre, shall
perish in that warre, which they haue raised.
Now vnto your Gr. wise and graue censure, I present
this my iustification; of whome I might craue iustice a∣gainst
this defamer and slaunderer, who hath obiected ca∣pitall
crimes of blasphemie, and heresie, against a Minister
of the Church, contrary to theatrocem tibi iniuriam esse factam manife∣stum est, si tibi illata est, cum esses in sacer∣dotio. Cod. lib. 9. tit. 35. leg. 4. Valerian. Gale. lawe: which by imperiall
constitution deseruethsi minime haec vera osten∣derit capitali poeua plectetur. Cod. lib. 9. tit. 36. l. 1. Valentin. capitall punishment, if he cannot
prooue the things obiected to bee true: by the Canons it
was censured, byqui in alteri∣us famam pub∣lice scripturam confinx erit, fla∣gelletur. Caus. 2. q. 5. c. 1. Hadrian. whipping, or by beeingqui inuenti fuerint famosos libellos in Ec∣clesia ponere, anathematizen∣tur. Caus. 2. q. 5. c. 3. concil. Elib. excommuni∣cate
and anathematized. But I craue no such reuenge of

him but onely pray; touching himselfe, that hee may be∣come
an honest man hereafter: and that your Gr. would be
pleased, that as I haue beene publikely defamed and tra∣duced
by him, so it may be lawful for me publikely to de∣fend
my selfe: that according to theCod. lib 9▪ tit. 36. lg. 1. lawe, huusodi li∣bellus
alterius opinionem non ledat, such an infamous libell
doe, not hurt the opon of another: which cannot be pre∣uented,
vnlesse some publike satisfaction should be made:
for asLib. de bon. viduitat. cap. 22. Augustine saith well, nobis necessaria est vita no∣stra,
alijs fama nostra: as our life is necessarie to our selues,
so our fame is 
Now lastly  prayethEpist ded. p. 11. that my bookes as abortiue
brats be not suffered to see the sunne, whose light they seeke
to obscure; I am content to stand herein to your iudgment
also, whether of bu wrings are more worthy to come
into the sunne light: as for mine, (whereof some are extant
in your Gr. name, which may deliuerme from his iniurious
accusation, as beeing as enemie vnto that eminent place
and calling) if they were no more meete then his, to be ad∣mitted
vnto the publike view of men, I could wish them
not onely out of the sunne light, but in the fire light also.
But which be the abortiue brats, I referre me to the mid∣wiues
that brought them out, I meane the Stationers that
printed them: I thinke some of them may wish, that his
beggerly brats had beene yet vnborne.
Conning  I am not ashamed to say
with Hierom:Ad Cresiphon. Multi anni sunt, quibus ab adolescentia, vs{que}
ad hanc aetatem, diuer sa scripsiopuscula, &c. prouoco aduer∣saries
vt  artulas exintegro discutiant, & si
quid in meo ingeniolo vitij repererint, proferant in medium,
confitebor errorem, malens emendare, quam perseuerare in
prauitate sententiae: There are many years, wherein since
my youth, vnto this age, I haue written diuers works: I do
prouoke mine aduersaries, to examine all my writings a∣fresh,
and if they finde any fault in my small wit (and vn∣derstanding)
let them bring it forth. I will confesse mine
error, willing rathr to amende it, then to perseuere in a

wrong sentence. And concerning such slaunderous libels,
and immodest inuectiues, as his are, I say vnto your Gr. as
Bernard wrote sometimes to Eugenius:De consid. lib. 1. Miror, quomodo
religiosae aures tuae, audire sustinent huiusmodi pugnas ver∣borum,
que magis ad subversionem, quam inventionem pro∣ficiunt
veritatis: corrige pravum morem, & praide linguas
vaniloquas; &c. flagellum tenes, timeat nuularij ne fi∣dant
nūmis: I maruel, how your religious eares can endure
to heare such strife of wordes, which auaile more for the
subuersion, then finding out of the truth: correct this euill
vse, and stay such vaine tongues, &c. you hold the whip,
let the money chaungers feare to trust to their (counter∣feit)
coyne. And so I ende with that salutation of the
same Father, Plenum vos dierum suscipiat dies vna illu
melior in atrijs Domini super millia, Venerabilis patr▪
Epist. 61.

