


RIGHT HONOVRABLE,
TO Edifie, hath beene euer the height of my am∣bition: hic scripto, ille voce praedi∣cat, saith Clemens Clem. Alex. l. 1. Strom. Alexandrinus; a man may edifie as well by writing as by preaching. I haue euer affected both; and both mine, I acknowledge, are like my selfe, who God knoweth, and I confesse, am full of imperfections,
 quia animarum susceperim curam, qui meam non sufficerem custodire, & factum est, vt docere inciperem prius quàm discere, as S. Bern. spea∣keth. Yet I presumed to present this little Treatise of grace and peace vnto your Honours view: (not to seeke for any shelter, for what is good herein, it will defend it selfe, and what sauoreth of mine infirmity, I desire it may be pardo∣ned of all, and not patronized by any) but only to testifie my humble thankfulnesse, for those manifold fauours which I haue receiued from your Lordship, who may iustly claime the same interest in me, as Saint Paul did in Philemon, thou owest vnto me, euen thy selfe: for you preferred me to my Tutor in the Vniuersity, you furthered my entrance into the Ministery, and after I had laboured, not one night with the Apostles, but many
 daies and nights, and got nothing but afflictions and puritannicall hatred in euery place; your Lord∣ship was my chiefest comfort, the meanes to helpe me to all that little meanes I haue. And your last most honourable and comfortable words and promise to continue your loue vnto me (together with my thrice honourable, and euer truly loued Lord and Master and Mi∣stresse, the Earle of Montgomerie, and his most truly religious Ladies louing respect vnto me) haue re∣uiued my deiected spirits, and gi∣uen life againe vnto my fainting studies: In regard of which, and many others, your great fauours vnto me, I thought my self obliged, not only by my daily priuate praiers vnto God for your Lordship, but also by some publique testimony, to declare my most humble thanke∣fulnesse, and dutifull affection vnto
 your Honour. I confesse this is vnworthy of your acceptance, but seeing it is the best my meane condi∣tion can affoord, I hope your won∣ted loue to me, and my euer readie seruice and dutifull affection vnto you, will excuse my boldnesse, and assure your Honour, that I am one of those many, which will euer hear∣tily pray, that God, the great re∣warder, who hath most gratiously blessed you, and made you great, would still preserue and keepe you in the fauour of himselfe, and of your King, to the glorie of Gods great name, the further increase of your owne honour, and the good of all godly men. And so most humbly crauing pardon for my boldnesse, and taking leaue, I rest

