



PArdon me (sweete Ladies,) if at this present, I depriue you of a iust Apology in defence of your constant Chastities, deserued of many of you, and long sithence promised by my selfe, to some of you: and par∣don mee the sooner, for that I haue long expected that the same should haue beene perfourmed by some of your selues, which I know are well able, if you were but so wellwilling to write in your owne praise, as many men in these dayes (whose tounges are tipt with poyson) are too ready and ouer willing, to speake and write to your disgrace. This oc∣casion had bene most fit, (publishing now the praise of a constant wife) if I had bene but almost ready. But the future time may agayne reueale as fit a meanes heereafter for the perfourmance of the same: if so it seeme good to him that moderateth all. Concerning this booke which I haue presumed to dedicate to the safe protection of your accustomed courtesies; if yee aske me for the persons: I am altogether ignorant of them, and haue set them downe onely as I finde them named or disciphered in my author. For the trueth of

his action, if you enquire, I will more fully deliuer my opin ion hereafter. Touching the substance of the mat∣ter it selfe, I thinke verily that the nature, woordes, ge∣st ures, promises, and very quintessence, as it were, is there liuely described, of such lewd chapmen as vse to entise silly maides, and assayle the Chastity of honest women. And no doubt but some of you, that haue beene tried in the like case, (if euer you were tryed,) shall in some one part or other acknowledge it to bee true. If mine Author haue found a Brytaine Lucretia, or an English Susanna, enuy not at her prayse (good Ladies) but rather endeuor to deserue the like. There may be as much done for any of you, as he hath done for his AVISA. Whatsoeuer is in me, I haue vowed it wholy, to the exalting of the glory of your sweete sex, as time, occasion and ability shall permit. In the meane time I rest yours in all dutyfull affection, and commend you all to his protection, vnder whose mer∣cy we enioy all.

