



RIght Honorable and Wor∣shipfull Gentlemen, or whatsoeuer: Since it hath pleased God to stir you vp to be instruments of his glory, in so hono∣rable an enterprise as the inlarging of his Maiesties Dominions, by planting his loyall subiects in so healthfull and hopefull a Countrey as New-England is; where the Church of God being seated in sincerity, there is no lesse hope of convincing the Heathen of their euill wayes, and converting them to the true knowledge and worship of the li∣ving God, and so consequently the salvation of their soules by the merits of Iesus Christ, then else-where though it be much talked on, & lightly

or lamely prosecuted. I therefore thinke it but my dutie to offer the view of our proceedings to your worthy considerations, hauing to that end com∣posed them together thus briefly as you see; where∣in to your great encouragement, you may behold the good providence of God working with you in our preseruation from so many dangerous plots and treacheries, as haue beene intended against vs; as also in giuing his blessing so powerfully vp∣on the weake meanes wee had, inabling vs with health and ability beyond expectation, in our greatest scarcities, and possessing the hearts of the Saluages with astonishment and feare of vs, where∣as if God had let them loose, they might easily haue swallowed vs vp, scarce being an handfull in comparison of those forces they might haue gathe∣red together against vs, which now by Gods bles∣sing will be more hard and difficult, in regard our number of men is increased, our towne better for∣tified, and our store better victualed. Blessed there∣fore be his name, that hath done so great things for vs, & hath wrought so great a change amongst vs.
Accept I pray you my weake endevours pardon my vnskilfulnesse, and beare with my plainenesse in the things I haue handled. Bee not discouraged by our former necessities, but rather incouraged with vs, hoping that us God hath wrought with vs in our beginning of this worthy Worke, vnderta∣ken in his name and feare; so he will by vs accom∣plish the same to his glory and our comfort, if wee neglect not the meanes. I confesse, it hath not bin much lesse chargeable to some of you, then hard

and difficult to vs, that haue endured the brunt of the battell, and yet small profits returned; onely by Gods mercy wee are safely seated, housed, and for∣tified, by which meanes a great step is made vnto gaine, and a more direct course taken for the same, then if at first we had rashly and covetously fallen vpon it.
Indeed, three things are the overthrow and bane (as I may terme it) of Plantations.
1. The vaine expectation of present profit, which too too commonly taketh a principall seate in the heart and affection; though Gods glory, &c. is pre∣ferred before it in the mouth with protestation.
2. Ambition in their Governours and Comman∣ders, seeking onely to make themselues great, and slaues of all that are vnder them, to maintaine a transitory base honour in themselues, which God oft punisheth with contempt.
3. The carelesnes of those that send over supplies of men vnto them, not caring how they bee quali∣fied: so that oft times they are rather the Image of men endued with bestiall, yea, diabolicall affecti∣ons, then the Image of God, endued with reason, vnderstanding, and holines. I prayse God I speake not these things experimentally, by way of com∣plaint of our owne condition, but hauing great cause on the contrary part to be thankefull to God for his mercies towardes vs: but rather, if there bee any too desirous of gaine, to intreate them to mo∣derate their affections, and consider that no man expecteth fruit before the tree be growne; advising all men, that as they tender their owne well fare,

so to make choise of such to mannage and governe their affayres, as are approued not to be seekers of themselues, but the common good of all for whom they are imployed; and beseeching such as haue the care of transporting men for the supply and furni∣shing of Plantations, to be truely carefull in sending such as may further and not hinder so good an acti∣on. There is no godly honest man, but will be helpfull in his kinde, and adorne his profession with an vpright life and conversation, which Doc∣trine of manners ought first to bee Preached by gi∣uing good example to the poore Savage Heathens amongst whom they liue. On the contrary part, what great offence hath beene giuen by many pro∣fane men, who being but seeming Christians, haue made Christ and Christianitie stinke in the nostrils of the poore Infidels, and so laid a stumbling blocke before them: but woe be to them by whom such offen∣ces come.
These things I offer to your Christian conside∣rations, beseeching you to make a good construc∣tion of my simple meaning, and take in good part this ensuing Relation, dedicating my selfe and it euermore vnto your seruice; beseeching God to crowne our Christian and faithfull endeuours with his blessings temporall and eternall.

