


RIght Reuerend, that which King Asuerus saide of Mordechaie, when he found by reading in the Chronicles the great pleasure he had done him, by discouery of a dangerous treason against him, What Honor and dignity (saith he) hath bin done to him for this? The like (though not the same) may I say, concerning your Lordships and Worship, vpon recor∣ding with my selfe, the many and great fauours which you haue done me from my youth, to this day: what duty and ser∣uice (for I may not say, what Dignity and Honour) hath bin returned to you for all this? My Conscience doth aunswere me with some checke, as his Seruants answered their King: There hath beene nothing done. If vpon this aunswere, that Heathen man entered into some deliberation with him∣selfe, how to recompence Mordoche, my checke would proue a sting in the end, if I should alwayes suffer my selfe to forget your very great and most constant Good-will and benificence. For one of you; to wit, my Lord of Carlile, was vnder God, the foundation of all the learning and preferment which I enioy, hauing cherrished me in his Colledge (whereof he was a most

worthy Prouest and Gouernor, neglecting himselfe and his, for the good of his house;) and afterward, sending mee to the place where yet I abide, by Gods goodnesse; and there haue beene, and still am much comforted through the great loue & care of that Reuerend and most courteous Deane of that Church, whereof I am a Member. The third, vouchsafing me his louing respect, both long before and since hee was ad∣uanced to his first Sea. Entering into some deliberation, what I might do, not for dignifying you (albeit that were my part to do, were it in my power) but for deliuering my selfe from su∣spition and imputation of an ingratefull minde, I resolued to presume vpon your great and well approued benignity and pa∣tience to dedicate to you, and vnder your three names (being for your place and painfulnesse, cheefe setters foorth, and tea∣chers of Christianity) to publish a great part of this my Chri∣stian Dictionarie, which with much and long labour, and not without some fruite (I hope) to the Godly Professors (for whose sake and good, cheefely, I meant it) I am sure, vvith much gaine of knowledge, and encrease of iudgement to my selfe, I haue at length (as I could) finished it. Vnto which, if your Honourable Lordships will affoord Patronage, Coun∣tenance, and gracious Aspect, I shall in such wise, acquite some part of bounden dutie towards you, as yet I will acknow∣ledge my debt encreased▪ by the addition of dignity vnto me▪ so to grace this poore but painfull Work▪ as it may haue shelter vnder your wings, against the carping Tongues of the enui∣ous, who neither will put forth their strength to do good, nor yet will beare with others, which desire to employ their Ta∣lents. Thus crauing pardon of my boldnesse, and submitting my selfe and endeuours to your fauourable acceptance, I com∣mend you all three, to him who is one in Essence, and three in persons; the Blessed Trinitie, in vndeuideable Vnitie. Whose wisedome and power, euer guide and defend you in earth▪ till his infinite goodnesse and mercy, haue glorified you in heauen.
From my house in Canterbury. An. Dom. 1611.
