



Right Honourable,
AFter many Children (Bookes I meane) which are a fruite that springeth out of wit (as out of a wombe) eleuen in number, which God hath gi∣uen me in the few and euill dayes of my pilgrimage; hee hath now at length of his goodnesse, added vnto them a twelfth (a Beniamin) like the twelue sonnes of Iacob: It is my last and youngest child, begotten and brought forth in my old age, being fast for∣ward to the yeeres of a man.
In naturall generation, the first borne (Reuben-like) is the beginning of Parents strength, the excellency of dignity,

and the excellency of power; Gen. 49. 3. But it is other∣wise in this spirituall birth, where the first that come into the Christian World, (by weakenesse of iudgement in the parents, and want of yeeres and experience) they are com∣monly the feeblest and vnworthiest; those prouing most strong and excellent which be last borne. Good Madam, I could wish that I might so speake of this my Beniamin, the sonne of my right hand, and of my old age; and surely I haue some little reason to hope it will proue so: (pardon the ouermuch indulgence of a father, euen holy Dauid could ouer fancy Adoniah his childe, and good Elie could ouerua∣lew two not good sonnes) because this is the off spring and issue that proceeded from me in the greatest infirmity of my body, but in the best strength of my mind; when I had in an ancient City, and a great people for the space of thirty foure yeeres and aboue, beene exercised in my Ministery from Sabboth to Sabboth; so as I may trust this Treatise wil haue more perfection then his brethren. Which howsoeuer it may proue for manner of handling, yet hereof I am well perswa∣ded, that the matter and argument is most worthy and weighty; for it is about our holy and effectuall calling, to our celestiall and eternall King, by the Ministery of the Gospell; which is the beginning and first step into the state of grace, after wee are entred into this elementary world, and our most excellent dignity therein. As Constantine the Great acknowledged, that to be a true Christian by diuine voca∣tion, was more esteemed of him then his Crowne and Em∣pire, which are corruptible; the other being vncorruptible and neuer perishing, as the worke of Gods exceeding great power, wherein he vttered no lesse strength and might, then in the creation of the World, or in the resurrection of Christ from the dead; Ephe. I. Verse 19, 20. For in this worke

of effectuall calling, the Elect being by nature dead, corrupt and blind in minde, peruerse in their will and affections, are by a wonderfull force (yet sweetely and with delight) drawne to the life of faith, being enabled to see Christ, and to loue and obey him as their Sauiour, calling them out of darkenesse into his maruellous light.
The reasons mouing me to single out your Honour from among many both honourable and worthy friends of all rankes, vnto whom I might dedicate this Christian Dia∣logue, are two. First, the report of your true calling to Christ, and of your sound loue & obedience to your caller, and great affection ye beare to all about you, called to be Saints, both faithfull Ministers and Christians. Secondly, for that ye haue been the chiefe instrument vnder God, to call my eldest sonne to be the first that euer actually enioyed that great exhibition, a good while sithence giuen by your right noble and most honourable Husband, the Earle of Leycester, for the maintenance of two Schollars for euer in the Vniuersity Colledge at Oxford: for the which, if I should not euery way as I am able, shew my selfe thankefull to your Honour, I should be most vnworthy of such a benefit, being so freely conferred vpon one vnknowne to your Honour. The daily prayers of my Family, which are all the better for this good turne, both haue beene, and shall be offered vp vnto God the Father, through Christ his Sonne, for his gracious and po∣werfull guiding and keeping of your Honour in his comfor∣table and holy seruice and feare for euermore; Amen.

