



THe Stoike Philoso∣phers
(righte honora∣ble
& my singuler good
Lorde) haue saide both
truly and wysely, that
the worlde is made for
man, and man is made
for god, to thende that
man may haue all plea¦sure,
and god maye ha∣ue
all honour. Seinge
then, that such a creaciō of man, and the world,
is thus framed by the myghtie finger of god, &
man especially made for god: I doubte not, but
your honor beinge goddes liuely image vppon
earth, and fashioned to hys lykenes, concerning
the reasonable soule, as all others suche hys
creatures are: will remember for your parte, to

forsee and to doe your dutie from tyme, to time,
and indeuour youreselfe in all your actions to
haue god alwayes before your eyes, and to ex∣ercyse
your mynde all your lyfe longe, with all
godly practises, aswell in aduauncing religion,
to goddes glorye, as in dooyng Justice for mās
benefite, that god alone as hee is alwayes pray∣sed
in Heauen amongst hys aungels, maye euen
so haue hys holy name onely honored here vpō
earth amongst hys people. But because mans
nature, throughe Adames falle, is altered
from that perfection, wherin it was at the first,
and is muche subiecte therfore to great corrup∣cion
of lyfe and maners: It is to be feared, that
all men will not alwayes be myndefull of their
dutie, excepte they bee often warned and put in
mynde of that they oughte to doe, wherby they
maye consider still what they are. For by wan∣ting
the remēbrance and exercise of wel dooyng:
they may declyne from god, (a thing sone donne
where god is not feared) and so wallowe in syn¦ne,
the playne effecte of gracelesse people. For ye
deuill beinge greate aduersarie to all goodnes,
(whom that auncient father of famouse memo∣rie
Hughe Latymer, called the moste vigilant
byshop in hys vocation) is neuer ydle, but still
occupied and busie, in sowing cockle and darnel
amongst the good corne and pure wheate of the
lords haruest. So that yf their be not as quicke
wedyng hookes, & as sharpe yron forkes; rea∣dye
at hande to clense the soyle from tyme to ty∣me,
as the weedes are, and wilbee readye to
spring vp & growe: in the ende all wilbe wedes,
and antichrist hymselfe will be lorde of the har∣ueste.
This muste I saye, that warenes in all

thinges is euermore very wisdome, & of adui∣sed
dealynges comes perfection, and thinges
foreseene do always the lesse harme. For which
cause lawes are enacted, not onely to punishe e∣uill,
when anye is committed, but also to preuēt
euill not to bee committed at all, that men being
warned before hand, may take hede the rather,
how to offende lawes for feare of the sworde, &
lyue in good order, to escape the seueritie, and
sharpe rodde of iustice. I doe wishe therefore
that man were as apte to doe righte, as hee is
readie to speake of right, and to be all together,
as he would seme to bee: least otherwise lawes
stand not in vaine, when great occasion geeues
iust cause of speedie redresse. And in thys behalf
magistrates are to be put in remembrance, that
they hauing gouernement and execucion of iu∣stice
in their handes, maye bee good ryghters of
all wrong doynges, and iust dispensers of gods
lawe, and mans lawe, both to lowe and hyghe,
to ryche and poore, without any respecte or re∣garde
of parson. For most true it is, that where
iustice is dulie ministred, there is god moste
hyghly honoured, and sweete is that sacrifice to
god, whē the lyues of lewde men are offered vp
to suffer paynes of death for wicked dooynges.
I will not speake to aggrauate execucion for
all mysdeedes, eyther seuerally or generally, be∣cause
I thinke it both nedelesse, and a great fol∣lie
also, and a thinge almoste impossible for man
to hope by onely demaūding, to haue the amen¦dement
of all thinges preciselye, that presentlye
are amysse: but thys I reache at, that where a∣mongst
a nōber of gawles and great greefes in
thys common weale, there spredeth one especial

mischiefe as yll, nay woorse than anye plague:
my meaning is to sett all other faultes aparte,
and to disclose this one aboue the rest vnto your
Lordship, that by your honorable meanes and
great aucthoritye, it maye at the leaste bee some
what refourmed, yf not all together amēded or
taken away. I do meane that ouglie, detestable
and hurtefull synne of vsurie, whiche being but
one ī grossenes of name, caries many a mischief
linked vnto it in nature, the same synne beinge
nowe so rancke througout all Englande, not in
London onelye, that men haue all together for∣gotten
free lending, and haue geuen themselues
wholye to lyue by fowle gayning, makinge the
lone of monye a kinde of merchandize, a thinge
directlye against all lawe, against nature, and a∣gainst
god. And what should this meane, that
in steade of charitable dealing, and the vse of al∣mose
(for lending is a spice therof) hardenes of
harte hath nowe gotten place, and greedie gay∣ne
is cheefelye folowed, and horrible extorcion
commonly vsed. I do verely beleue, the ende of
thys worlde is nyghe at hande. And the more
is thys euill to bee pitied, because men doe lulle
thēselues with the exercise thereof in such sorte,
as thoughe there were none offense in it at all,
wheras amongst all other offenses next to Ido¦latrie,
& the renouncing of god, and hys magi∣strates
vpō earth, there is none more heynous,
none more offensiue, and none more hurtfull, to
anye well gouerned common weale. For besi∣des
that the very sinne of vsurie, is expreslie for¦bidden
by godds worde, aswel as either thefte,
aduowtrie, or whoredome: the countrey and
realme where thys offense is commonlie vsed,

cannot longe continue in prosperous wellfare.
And sorie I am to saye it, but I see it & knowe
it ouerwel, and therefore I must needes saie it:
I do not knowe anye place in christendome, so
muche subiect to thys foule synne of vsurie, as
the whole realme of Englande ys at thys pre∣sent,
and hathe bene of late yeares. For men of
wealth are nowe wholy geeuen euery wheare
all together to idlenes, to gett their gaine with
case, & to lyue by lending vpon the onely sweate
& labour of others. Wheras god willeth euerye
man to lyue in hys vocation, and hee that will
not laboure eyther wt body or minde, according
to his callyng rightly, should not eate at al, for∣biddīg
men to make lēding a kīde of liuīg. But
these men do not liue in any vocation, but being
the diuels knowē apprentices in earth, & bound
to doe, as hee woulde haue them: seeke when
they are dead to serue hym in hell, as I take it.
For god sayeth by hys prophete Dauid,Psall. 15. that he
shall neuer dwell in hys tabernacle, that hathe
put out hys mony for vsury. And therfore, whe¦ther
should suche men looke to goe, when they
are deade, but straighte to the diuell, seeynge in
earth they serue such a master.
There bee two sortes of men, that are alwayes
to bee looked vpon very narrowly, the one is
the dissemblinge gospeller, and the other is the
wilfull & indurate papistes. The first vnder co∣lour
of religion, ouerthroweth all religion, and
bearing good men in hande, that hee loueth play¦nesse,
vseth couertelie all deceypte that maye
bee, and for pryuate gayne, vndoeth the cōmon
welfare of man. And touching thys sinne of v∣surie,
none doe more openly offende in thys be∣halfe,

then do these counterfeite professours of
thys pure religion. The wilfull Romaniste, as
he professeth an hatred to thys religion, so ha∣uing
mischiefe boyling within hym, deuiseth by
indirecte meanes to aduaunce his welfare, that
hee maye haue monye in store againste a good
hower, suche as hee loketh for. So that betwixt
the secrete dissembler, and the open blasphemer,
the world is made a praye, and deuided betwixt
them, and god thereby moste hyghely dishono∣red.
Neyther doe either of these people followe
you for youre persone or vertue, but for youre
fortune and aucthority. Cicero sayethe wiselye,
holsome seueritie, doth greatly excede the vayne
shewe of folish pitie. Clemēcie is good, I deny
not, but that is to bee vsed to good men, or else
towardes suche as of whome there is good ho∣pe
of theire better behauioure hereafter. But
where clemencie is altogether abused, and ma∣keth
as it were an open waye to all lowsenes
in maners and carnall libertie of lyfe, there seue∣ritie
must needes stryke a stroke. For to what
ende are good lawes made, yf there bee no exe∣cuciō
of them? As good pyke strawes, as make
lawes that want a magistrate, to see them well
kepte obeyed and fulfilled. For the lawe it selfe,
is a dūme magistrate to al men, wheras magis∣trates
are a speakynge lawe to all people. And
therefore, as gouernours do submit themselues
to lawe, and lyue thereafter: so will the people
submitte themselues to gouernours and theire
doynges: suche force (lo) hath example of life,
especiallie in magistrates. Neyther are gouer∣nours
priuate persons, to lyue honestly to them
selues onelye, but they are publique officers to

do good vnto many, and by wise aduise, to haue
care ouer them, that neyther will, nor can haue
care of themselues. And thys I saye, that like
as one maye bee a good magistrate to the peo∣ple,
and yet no god man to hymselfe: euen so may
one bee a good man to hymselfe, and proue
no good magistrate to the people. And of these
two, lesse harme doth that man, who priuatelye
offendeth in hys lyfe: than hee that publikelye
offendeth in his charge. Nedeful therfore were
it, that all magistrates were good men in theire
offices, because the common welfare dependeth
vppon their wel doyng. And good it were also
neuer to remitte apparante greate faultes vnto
any person in aucthority. For the magistrate a∣busing
hys office, deserueth more punishmente
than doth the priuate personne. For as hee abu∣seth
hys charge, so doth hee deceaue hys trust, &
by example geeuethe great cause of muche euill
But lett no men in any estate presume therfore
to doe euill, because they hope to hyde their euil.
doyngs from the princes knowledge. For tyme
doth discouer all, and god hath graunted thys
priuylege vnto prynces, that wicked attemp∣tes,
shall neuer haue deepe roote. For although
wrong dealings maye be shrowded for a space,
and bee kepte vnder couerte: yet they will oute
at laste, and bee opened with shame, the rather
to set forth gods myghty iustice, and to aduaun¦ce
hys endelesse glorye
Amongst the Romaynes, there were censo∣res,
appoynted as commissioners, to searche out
the doyngs of such as eyther had borne office, or
were notorious offenders: and finding any such
to bee faultie, they did streighte wayes remoue

them, and punish them with infamie. The same
order is yet vsed in Italie, Spayne, and Por∣tugale,
and good iustice done againste all vn∣iust
magistrates, and euil lawyers. And thus it
is. Such as ouer hastelye haue rysen to great
welth, haue ben sifted for theire life and doings
by commission, and stripped out of all, when
they were taken in a trippe. Now then, needes
must I saye thus at thys time, that amongst all
sortes of men, sinne aboundeth here for wants
of chastisemente, euill men beinge ouer ryfe, &
good men ouer scante, such as shoulde do good.
Or els how is it, that vsurie amongst other syn¦nes
(for I will at thys tyme say nothing of ma¦gistrates)
is so vniuersally vsed, whiche ought
in any wise to be weeded out aboue all other fa¦tes.
For as I thinke, and must saye stil, vsurie
onely, is the cheefest cause of the greatest miserie
in thys lande, aswell to geeue occasion of great
waste, as also to make muche wante, and wil be
in the ende, the vndoynge of all, yf it bee not lo∣ked
to in tyme. The Romaynes neuer began to
decaye, till vsurie lorded amongst them, for then
priuate gaine thrust oute common profite, luste
was holden for lawe, ydlenes more vsed then
labour, ryott in steede of diett, vice better regar¦ded
then vertue, no charitye at all, no loue be∣twixt
man and man, but euery man for hymself,
and the whorlepole of pride and ryote ouer∣flowed
in all thynges, and in all places.
Plato saieth, there must bee three thinges in
euerie good state. A magistrate to gouerne,
lawes whereby to gouerne, and execucion of
lawes for maintenaunce of gouernement. And
Diogenes sayed well, where neither lawes

haue force, nor water hath course: there shoulde
no wise man willingly seeke to dwel. For wher
euill men beare rule, (as it is alwayes, there
where lawes are stopped of theire ordinarie
course) there cannot anye good man haue place,
because they are alwayes contrarie. And thys
I saye, that in al common weales, it is as great
a blame not to cherishe & mainteine the good &
godly, as it is a great shame to suffer the offen∣dor
& wicked man to goe vnpunished. For both
must haue theire desertes, or else yt state is not
iustely gouerned. And as weedes are to be roo∣ted
out of euery gardeine, so are good herbes to
be oftē watred & cherished stil, with good earth
or els they wil perish, and wyther soone away.
And amongest all others, I woulde the reli∣giouse
learned men of thys lande, were so cheri∣shed
and esteemed, as they haue well deserued,
and together with theire good cherisinge, I
would theire good warninges were throughly
folowed. Yea I woulde they were better hol∣den
vp, in that which they haue mainteined and
professed in good learnynge: although their li∣uings
and entertainements were not made mu¦che
greater: The preachers I doe meane, & the
godly ministers of this time, for they still ex∣claime
maynely against sinne to discharge their
duties, they crie out continually against all vsu∣rers
with open mouth, and in all their sermōs,
and yet, what auailes it? nothing at al. The rea¦son
is, for yt the ciuil magistrate doth not ioyne
with them, and see that executed by censures of
the lawe, whiche they so earnestly rebuke in the
pulpite, and shewe foorth godds threates most
vehemently, for suche synnes so muche suffered,

and so lyttle punished. For what sayeth the lew¦de
man, when the good preacher hath donne?
See howe properlye hee gyrdes at the matter,
yonder sellie man (sayeth hee) hath saide, but he
can do no more, thankes be to god. And fond is
y• man, sayeth y• vsurer to others, whatsoeuer
hee bee, that will not suffer a poore simple prea∣cher
to haue his wordes, when others haue the
deedes, and lyue in all wealth and iolytye in
thys world. Lorde god send to Englande some
Solon, for thys redresse, who toke away the vsu∣rers
bookes and their gaynes from them, & for∣badde
such filthy lucre, & brought in nouas tabulas,
whiche are sayde in greeke to bee Seiuachtheia, as
who should say, an easement of a burdeine. For
that all debtours were discharged from all such
creditours that had lent theire money for vsury
and gayne, or at the least wise, were eased from
the vsurie of it. Thus did Solon in the detestacion
of vsury, a sharpe kynde of dealynge no doubte,
and a straunge: but in great diseases, sharpe cor∣rysiues
muste needes bee vsed, when lenitiues
will not serue. And shall I name one, that hath
bene in oure age, and wishe hym now a lyue, to
cure so great a cancre? Woulde god Englande
had a Cromwell, I will saye no more. I doe
reade, that long before the conquest, king Edgare,
that iuste gouernoure and seuere magistrate a∣gaynste
all lewde officers and extorcioners in
thys lande, did amongst hys other good deedes
make proclamacion to haue al the wolfes killed
in Englande and Wales, because they were ra∣uenouse
beastes, and deuourers of sheepe and
other cattell, to the great harme and hynderaun¦ce
of hys subiectes. And to haue thys the better

done, hee appoynted manye to paye for theire fi∣nes
and reuenues, wolfes heades yerelye: some
moe, and some lesse, and such as could not bring
wolfes heades in, payed theire fines and reue∣nues
in mony. Now suche force toke thys good
order in this lande, that within a while, there
was not a wolfe to be had, neyther in Englād▪
nor yet in wales. And Laudvvallus prince of Wa∣les
brought in 300. wolfes heades in one yeare
for hys tribute, which hee was bounde to pays
yerely. And afterwardes when no moe wolfes
heades were to bee had, hee payd to the kynge a
certayne yerely reuenue. Thys was a good dee¦de
surelie, and a gracious proclamacion: for sin∣ce
that tyme, whiche is sixe hundreth and odde
yeres past, no wolfes haue troubled this land.
Nowe yf youre lordeship, with others could
procure by your good meanes, that in your ty∣me,
there mighte bee neuer an vsurers heade in
England: I doe thinke you shoulde doe a grea∣ter
good deede to thys lande, then euer was
doone by kyllinge of wolfes. For these bee the
greedie cormoraunte wolfes in deede, that ra∣uyn
vp both beaste and man, who whyles they
walke in sheepe skynnes, doe couertlye deuow∣re
the flocke of England, vnder coloure of their
wealth & counterfeit honesty. And what if there
were therefore a lawe to searche out these hypo¦crites,
and to vnuisar these maskinge minyons,
and suche as they bee, that make warre of sett
purpose against god and hys lawes, that stryue
so maynelye againste hys holye will and com∣maundementes.
And the same lawe to be so exe∣cuted,
that as wolfes haue bene ridd out of thys
lande, they shoulde all likewise either suffer the

paynes of death, or be banished thys realme for
euer, that there myght herafter no moe vsurers
bee found in Englande, than are wolfes to bee
had here at thys daye? I do thinke surely, this
woulde bee as swete a smelling sacrifice in the
sight of god, as euer was offered since Englād
was firste conuerted to the faithe. Kynge Dauid
praiyng god to sende vnto his sonne Salomon iud∣gement
and righteousnes, saieth that hys sonne
being assisted by the myghty power of god, shal∣bee
honored of all princes vpon earthe, because
hee should deliuer the people frō vsury. A great
good deede no doubt, and worthy of such great
honor as Salomon afterwardes enioied, and a ve∣rie
meete example for al princes to followe, that
they mighte haue like honor. And touchinge
a lawe to bee made, I doe not see, but it is as
necessary to haue one against vsurers as against
theues, and a great deale more. For theues stea¦le
manye tymes for necessitie, wheras vsurers
robbe and vndoe all men, for greedy gluttonye.
The one stealeth a crowne in the hyghe waye,
the other robbeth men in the hyghe streate, of al
that they haue: the one stealeth a little, to sustey¦ne
nature: the other scratcheth vp the whole
treasure of England, to serue hys owne coue∣tous
and wretched desire, to the vtter vn∣doynge
of thousandes. Therfore it were good,
these vsurers were all gone one waye or other,
out of thys realme, for here in Englande they
do no good at al, nay, they doe all the myschiefe
that is donne, and wilbe the cause of vtter ruine
to thys lande, yf they bee not taken vpp in time,
and cutt shorter by the heades. Good men ther∣fore
must haue this care to sifte out lewde men,

and till gouernours geue good example of good
lyfe, euill men will cōtinue to be euill stil. But if
this lawe seeme blodie, although the hanging of
poore wretches for small matters, is counted
nothing blodie at all: then woulde I, that the
olde lawes of England were put in execucion,
such as are called kyng Edwards lawes, or the
common lawes of England, whereof one was,
that the goodes of an vsurer after hys decease,
should turne to the benefite of the prince, when
twelue men had founde by proofe, that the par∣tie
deceased was an vsurer in his lyfe time. For
in those dayes, no enquiry was made by verdict
so long as a man lyued, whether he was an vsu¦rer
or no: but y• matter was referred wholly to
yt ecclesiasticall lawes during mēs lyues. This
I thinke would make the fewer vsurers, when
twelue men shoulde bee triers after their de∣ceases
what trade they vsed in theire lyfe, and
finding them by profe to haue committed vsury
(whiche as Glanuil sayeth,Glann. l. 7. . 16. & li. 10. . 3 is then done when a∣nye
thing is receiued ouer and aboue the princi∣pal)
to geeue vp straight wayes the dead mans
goodes from hys heyres, executours and assig∣nes,
to the prince and gouernour of the lande.
But some will saye, yf the lawes were put in
execucion, it would turne to the hurte of all mē,
for that none would lend hereafter to anye bo∣die,
eyther more or lesse, and nede there wilbee
alwayes, as there hathe been heretofore. I do
aunswere, and saye, that the hungry desyre of
man, dothe enforce neede manye tymes further,
then there is cause of neede in deede, seekynge
for a great deale more in all thinges, than natu∣re
craueth. To whose sufficience, if mans gredy

appetite, could aunswere, and yelde themselues
content, with the blessed frute of this lyttle pa∣radise
of Englande, one man shoulde haue little
cause to borrowe of an other. Or if they had can
se (as I cannot deny but neede may bee, & that
great neede sometymes,) yet yf men were en∣vred▪
with the feare of god, and acquaynted to
lende freely, and to doe to others, as they would
that others should doe to them: I woulde not
doubte, but that charitie would abound vniuer∣sallye,
and the moste would bee as loth to lende
for gayne, as theye would bee loth to kill, or to
murder a man by the hyghe waye side. And I
truste also that men woulde then as fast runne
from a knowne vsurer, as they would flie nowe
from a madde dogge, or rather from the diuell
hymselfe, if they sawe hym in hys likenes. But
what doe these worldlings now a dayes? They
doo not lende to helpe the neede of others, but
to benefite themselues, and wher they finde the
greatest vnthrifte, that hath landes, or other ly∣uinges
lefte vnto hym: there they wilbe moste
redie, to feede hym in hys ryott and vimecessa∣rie
expences, makynge theire gayne to bee hys
chiefest hurte, yea a greater hurte in deede, then
all hys wilfull and folish charges otherwise, as
maye well appeare in the discourse of thys my
deuised booke. Wheras they that feare god, and
wil bee suche men in deede, as they would seme
to be, should not deale in thys sorte, but follow∣ing
theire trade, in what vocation soeuer it be,
oughte to helpe the needie and worthie parson,
with some parte of those goodes, that they ha∣ue
lawfullie gotten by theire trade and maner
of liuyng, whereby they maye receiue vsurie at

godds handes, who dothe geue an hundred for
one, to all them that geue or lend frely for hys
sake. Thus I haue boldlye, and I trust with
godds spirite moued your honor to loke well
to your charge and calling, desiring you to take
in good parte my good meaninge, for my desire
is, that my naturall countrey, might bee parfite
and blessed, without daunger of euill, or infec∣tion
of mischefe, to corrupt this state, or destroy
thys noble land. And the boulder I am to deale
thus with your honor before others, because I
haue knowne you, and that noble race of youre
brethren, euen from theire yonge yeares. And
with your honor, and that famous erle of War∣wike
deceased, and your noble brother, nowe
earle of Warwike lyuinge, I haue had more
familier conference, then with the rest: and espe∣cially
with your honor (I doe thanke you most
humblie therefore) I haue had sufficient proofe
of youre carefull mynde, euen in reading not o∣nely
of the latyn, but also of the Italian good &
and sounde wryters, to knowe and to vnder∣stande
the best vsed gouernement, and the chefe
lawes that haue ben made in all ages. And as
youre mynde hath bene thus godly enclyned to
knowe, so it appeareth very wel, you haue euer
had a good mynde, to put youre knowledge in
practise. And this must I saye, that godds pro∣uidence
is greatly shewed in thys behalfe, and
the queenes maiesties blessed estate most euidēt¦ly
appeareth to bee the stronger, in that it hathe
pleased her hyghnes, to haue chosen so stayed &
so discrete a noble man, as you are, to deale in
the affaires of the state. For I knowe, and
therfore wil not feare to saye, that you haue ben

next to the Queenes maiesties most mylde and
gracious disposition, a great helpe and meane
of thys most calme and mercifull gouernement,
a thing so ioyfull to all good people as nothinge
can be more: although it hath playnely fallē out
in profe, that both the Queenes mercie & your
nature hath ben greatly abused, and the princes
goodnes especially moste vnthankfully recom∣pensed.
Whereupon her maiestie hath ben enfor∣ced
much against her nature, to vse the sworde,
a thinge so needefull when gentle meanes wil
not serue, that without so doing no state coulde
stande, nor man could lyue. And such hath thys
world ben, is, and wilbee euer, that princes vpō
cause must doe, & in reason are bound to do that
whiche they would not of themselues doe, yf it
were not for very necessity, to auoyde a greater
inconuenience. And therefore are counsellours
about a prince, that they might alwayes geeue
the best counsel, and procure thereby the safety
both of prince and state, that when clemencie
will not serue, they maye vse the contrary. But
amongst all other needefull aduertisements, I
do wishe that your honor and others of youre
callinge shoulde neuer at any tyme lett slippe a∣nye
good occasiō offerd for the welfare of Eng∣lande,
muche lesse to bee carelesse in that greate
trust, which is committed vnto you. And ther∣fore
as the master of a shippe, hath euer an eye
to keepe a righte course, a phisicion alwayes a
good mynde to heale hys paciente, a capitayne
euermore a carefull heade, to gette the victory:
euen so my good lord, I pray god you may be a
faythfull counsellour to the prince, and a wat∣chefull
magistrate to the people, to the aduaun∣cement

of godds moste holy worde, and for the
welfare of thys lande. And so to care for the
whole bodie of the state, that whilest you take
the defense of some one parte, you do not leaue
other partes of the state vndefended or smallye
estemed. Thus yf you doe, as I pray god you
maye doe, and I hope in god, you will do no
lesse: I do well assure my selfe, that vsurie a∣mongest
other faultes will no more shewe her
face hereafter in Englande, than the starynge
Owle, will loke vpon the bright sunne, or the
fearefull mouse, abyde the wilie catte. And I
hope, that by such good meanes, thys noble real
me will greatly florishe, and the people will be∣come
euery daye better and better: and in might
waxe stronge: in riches, plentiful: in renow∣ne,
famous: in vertue, honest, and in religion
zelous. All whiche blessed and happy welfare,
god graunte for hys sonnes sake Jesus Christ,
in whom your honor, & al others do lyue, moue,
and haue a being, whose name bee therefore
praysed for euer. Amen. From the
Queenes maiesties hospital at
saincte Katherynes, thys
twenty of Julye.
1569.
