



WHen I call to minde, (Right wor∣shipfull) the tēporall be∣nefits wher∣with it hath pleased Al∣mightie GOD to blesse mee, by those secondarie meanes of my maintenance, which I haue recei∣ued, vnder his gratious prouidence
 from you, I can not, but in the humblenes of my soule acknow∣ledge with all thankfulnes of hart, his diuine goodnes, and I account it also a part of my duetie, to dis∣charge some kindnes and seruice vnto you. Wherefore, in respect of the many benefites reaped by your Wor. accept, I pray you, this simple trauell, the first fruites of my deuinitie, your Schollers New∣yeeres gift, presenting his entire and hartie affection towardes you: which at your leasure, may it please you to pervse, and if you shall esteeme this worth the view of the world, hereafter (it may be) I shall be perswaded to passe the rest to the publike print.
The rather, because of late, I chaunced to light vpon a very scan∣dalous report, which an vnkind Countryman of ours doth inflict vpon vs in that immodest Preface before the last edition vnto the
 Christian directorie.
Wherein the Authour confi∣dently auerreth, that we the Mini∣sters of the Gospell (whom it plea∣seth his fatherhood to terme Scis∣matikes and Heretikes) can set forth no Bookes of true deuotion, profi∣table to godlie life. And he blush∣eth not to render a three fold reason therof: the one drawne from the testimonie of S. Paul the 2. Tim. the other from S. Peter. 2. Pet. 3. and the third againe from S. Paul, and so concludeth, that we are all but moc∣kers and deceiuers, when we talke of Mortification and a quickning spirit, for saith he (to vse his owne wordes) they can not preach this point of true pietie, vnlesse they should impugne the principall Ar∣ticles of their owne doctrine.
What shalbe done vnto thee O thou false tongue? the Lord shall iudge thee, did I delight in this defamatorie kind of declayming I
 could annatomize some of our Gentlemen like Iesuits, in their pri∣uie pleasant prankes so conceited, as would easilie procure the most mortified Catholike of Rome to blush and smile.
Is it a small matter, publikelie, and in print, so shamefully to belie and scandalize an whole estate of a Re∣alme? but, Quid non audet paterni∣tas vestra? sufficeth vs we stand or fall to our God; & we passe very li∣tle to be iudged by you, or of mans iudgement, he that iudgeth vs is the Lord, who will make the counsels of the heart manifest, and then shall euery man haue his praise of God.
But if it had pleased his Father∣hood to haue conferred with some of his own Catholike brethren con∣cerning this matter, they would (no doubt) haue freelie confessed vnto him (as they haue found the pra∣ctise of true Mortification in some of their houses, where they haue bin
 priuate prisoners, though it were not in the wearing of the haire, nor in voluntarie scourging of them∣selues. Howsoeuer this man plea∣seth him selfe and the brethren of his owne broode with these forge∣ries: Yet he that commeth with any reuerence to the reading of this Pamphlet, shall confesse, that we can preach and teach true Mortifi∣cation.
Alexander was esteemed (and that worthilie) a noble Prince, whi∣lest he stood in
Megabizus schoole, and said nothing, but when he be∣gan to talke idlelie of those things hee knew not, the Schoolmaster told him, that euen his litle children would laugh him to scorne.
I am loath to trouble your Wor∣with a number of vaine wordes, for I perceiue, in many wordes there may be many slips, and so many trippes taken.
I commend this first aduenture
 of halfe my substance vnto the pro∣tection of your fauourable iudiciall iudgement. And so I commit you and yours vnto the tui∣tion of th' almightie for euer.

