


AS I have sometimes read, & oftentimes ru∣minated, the kinde question of that Pagan Prince, concerning the honorable reward of his faithfull servant; So have I beene abash't in my self, that I have not enquired soe care∣fully, what was due to you for your loue, as he did to him for his loyalty. [VVhat honour (sayd he) hath beene done to Mordocay for this?] should I not have asketd my self the same long since, for your kindnes, not much inferior to his seruice? And now that (of late) I have begun this inquisition, my conscience answers with shame: [There hath nothing beene done] with shame (I say) & blushing, that a heathen shall thus remember an inferiour, and a christian should thus forget such freinds, as I have founde you all to be: whose favour & kindnes though it be not vpon recorde in chronicle, yet doth it well de∣serue soe to be. And now to doe you the best honor, that can come within my power; I doe here present vnto you, and to all men, this true commemoration, and thankefull acknowledgment of these your favours, which were soe abundantly bestowed on your part, al∣though soe vndeserved on myne. We Schollers, have
nothing but papers to honour our best freinds with∣all, our most, and best is done, when we have put their good names in print, and by publike jmpression, given the world notice of the precious respects, their good nature hath cast vpon vs.
And if this my endeavour, may be accounted but your least honour, I have what I desire, as one ayme of this publication. The matter published, intendeth an ho∣nour jnfinitely higher, even of God, who once enabled me to speake it, and hath now encouraged me to divulge it, principally for the glory of his name, & next, for the renowne, and fame of yours, whose rare libera∣lity, it were most jnjurious to bury in these dayes, wherin so litle of the like is alive. I beseech you take in good part, what I present vnto you from a good hart. I was once hopefull to have beene more happy in my residence with you, then I can be in writing to you. But the almighty meant it otherwise, on him I cast all my cares, and strive daily for contentment, and comfort, in a state (in many regardes) much more meane. I hope nothing shalbe offensive to you, of that I have written, it being all gratefull, when it was spoken. If in the lat∣ter end I seeme more playne, and downe-right, in divers passages both concerning you, and my self. I pray you pardon me, it was to sustaine my owne vprightnes, and to wype away those foule and vnworthy jmputations, wherwith some malignant mindes and mouthes did as falsely, as basely, reproach and traduce me, (and that to my face) for such grosse miscarriage among you, as made me incapable of soe good a condition & service as yours was. God for bid J should justify them till I dye (sayd Iob, and soe say I) and giue away my jnnocency. I had rather dye blameles, then live blemisht. And to bunge
vp, & make mute for ever, these evill tongues, I could not but relate, that truth, which is able to remooue their sclanders, and reveale my integrity, to all persons, that shall please to pervse these particulers. The Lord of his infinite goodnes, make good this poore attempt of myne to you all, and to all others, into whose hands & harts, I desire it may come. The same God, be ever your God, and shyne vpon you in the pure light of his sweete countenance, that all things may be fully disco∣vered vnto you, which may further you to him, where you may shyne with him, in that glorious and inacces∣sible light, which noe corruption can inherit, or attaine. To his grace and blessing, in vncessant desire of your temporall prosperity in your Society, and spirituall and eternall prosperity, of soule & body; I commend every one of you, with my owne soule, and soe rest.

From my house in Flushing September 12. 1621,
