



Good Madam,
VNthankful∣nesse is a great defi∣ler of con∣science, both as it is a great sinne against iustice;

and as it prouokes wrath, whereby such persons are de∣liuered vp to vile affections. And though thankefulnesse cannot stay in the instru∣ment, but goeth by it to the author, yet it is due to such, by whose hands God conueyes his benefits. It hath pleased that blessed God▪ to stirre vp your Ladiship for my good: first, in calling mee to be a Minister to your Honou∣rable familie, how weake so∣euer; yet not without some fruit by his blessing, whose power is seene in weakenesse; where, how I was cared for, my conscience doth witnesse: secondly, in your opportunity (preferring publike good,

so were your words) giuing me a free, and comfortable entrance into this charge, wherein I now labour, accor∣ding to my measure. And from that time, I haue beene followed with kindnesse from that house; but that special∣ly refresheth mee to remem∣ber, that for the worke of my Ministerie, your Honour willed mee to count you as my mother. I am bold thus in particular, to propound you for Gods Honour, as an ex∣ample, especially to Patrons.
And finding my selfe so much bound, I haue long thought how besides my prayers, I might by some pa∣per testimonie, shew my selfe

thankefull to your Ladiship; and resolued at last to write these notes faire, and send them for the helpe of your faith and comfort, in wit∣nesse of the continuing, of my true care for your soules good. Hereunto I was the rather inclined, for that I vnderstood, some to haue found helpe (through the mercie of God) to the quie∣ting of their conscience by the reading of them, when they were in shorter notes of a Sermon: In the meane time, diuerse friendes called vpon mee, for some thing to the Presse, from which the knowledge of mine owne wants hath hitherto kept me,

yet debating it thus; If the matter be profitable: first, it is not likely to bee hurt that way, but more vsefull then by writing: secondly, more fit to some for reading; and to conuey bookes to friends, more commodious then Co∣pies in writing. Here I stucke at this, that good books for this helpe bee not scant; but then I thought againe, that acquaintance being a helpe to make them knowne, all come not to one hand: thidly, my desire to leaue testimonie of my faith, on whom I hold: and how, fourthly, that God hath glory of diuersitie of gifts, which manifest the

spirit, giuen to profit withall: fiftly, that my selfe owe to them that haue so aduentu∣red themselues. It yelded, not without feare, I confesse, yet commending it to God for his blessing, and to the loue of my deare friends to fur∣ther it, it is now out of my hands.
Good Madam, vse it a∣mong other helpes: I once left a little thing with you, to helpe you in examination of your title to Heauen, this may a little further that as being (I thinke) fuller, to that purpose. Calling made sure is a great comfort, and aduantage for a Christian,

many giue testimonie to you: you haue giuen good example in your constant respect of Gods ordinances, glorifie God more with the fruites of your faith and loue; call for the inspirations of the spirit, to be carried earnestly after him, hee purchased a people, to be iealous of good workes: looke into the felicitie of Gods chosen dayly, bee still making it sure in your owne conscience; the end of this life puts Gods people in pos∣session of endlesse life. The highest in the earth, haue but terme of life in their pre∣sent things, how great so euer; and dying out of Christ, are

without end miserable. Bles∣sed are they that so trust in Christ, as to haue the Lord for their God: that is to bee knowen in experience by the spirit of Christ, destroying the dominion of sinne, and lading vs, so as that in the course of our life, we are with God, though foyled for our humbling in many temptati∣ons. The God of life, pre∣serue your life of his good pleasure, for the good of many, that praising God for you, may by their prayers further your grace heere with the exercise of it: the Lord bee with you, your Ho∣nourable sister with hers, all

that belong to you, and guide your hearts into the loue of God, and to looke for his Sonne, the blessed hope from heauen.

