



May it please your Most Excellent Maiesty,
MY Presumption vvere not easily excusable (Most gracious Soueraigne) in fly∣ing to the Sanctuary of your Maiesty, for the pro∣tection of this poore Treatise, if the great importance of the Cause, vvherof
I vvrite, did not change my Feare into Hope, and raise vp my Hope as high as Confidence, that Christianity Maintay∣ned, by vvhat pen soeuer it be perfor∣med, needeth not feare to find benigne acceptance from so Gracious and Great a King as you are; vvho glory more in that most Sacred name of being a Chri∣stian, then in that most ancient Stocke of Royall Progenitours, vvhich so glo∣riously adornes the Diademe of your Sacred Maiesty. For I do not in this oc∣casion pretend to act either the Offen∣siue or Defensiue part of any one parti∣cular Religion, honoured vvith the Name of Christianity; but I only come in the generall Name of a Christian Church, vvithout treating vvhether it be Latin or Greeke, East or VVest, of England, or of Rome: and therefore I cannot despayre of being graciously admitted by your Maiesty.
My Scope, and ƲƲorke, as I am say∣ing, is only to maintaine the authority
of Holy Scripture, the Mystery of the Blessed Trinity, the Deity of our Bles∣sed Sauiour, the infallibility of his A∣postles, the povver of his Miracles, the necessity of his Grace, and of the abso∣lute Certainty of Christian Fayth; a∣gainst an Aduersary, vvho seeketh to turne the diuine beliefe of Christians in∣to humane Opinion:Pag. 36. & 37. & pag. 112. n. 154. Who teacheth that our assurance of holy Scripture, & of all the verityes contained therein, is butIbid. probable, and credible; and con∣sequently such as may vvell be false: Who continually vrgeth,Pag. 112. lin. 3. that God, as sure, as he is good, neither doth, nor can require of Christians an infallible, and certainly vn-erring Beliefe of his vvord; That men, neither are bound, nor can belieue diuine ReuelationsPag. 330. lin. 13.25.33. further then they are made apparent & euident to them; and that it sufficeth vnto Saluation to belieue the GospellPag. 37. lin. 20. & squ. as vve do other Stories; as much as vve doPag. 327 n. 5. lin. 28. Cesars Commentaries, or the Hi
story of Salust: Who proclaimesPag. 144. n. 31. the Apostles, vvith the vvhole Church of their time, to haue erred in matters of fayth, euen after they had receiued the Holy Ghost; That after their Deaths,Pag. 292. infi∣ne & 293. Initio. the vvhole Church vvas presently infected vvith vniuersall Errour; and that the vvhole Church of thePag. 338. lin. 5. Gen∣tils may fall avvay into Infidelity: Who shuttethPag. 292. & 393. the gates of Mercy against penitent sinners: Finally vvho openeth an easy vvay for the deniall of all those maine points of Christianity aboue mentioned, as it vvill appeare in this ensuing Treatise.
Vouchsafe therefore, Most gracious Soueraigne, to consider hovv Christia∣nity is impugned by some, euen in this your Kingdome, and the incouenien∣ces and dangers thereof; and preuent both them, and such others of the selfe same kind, as may grovv greater if they be not preuented, by your Zeale and Care. I cannot doubt, but that your
Maiesty vvill do it euen for the Piety of the thing it selfe, though my Aduersary (vvho yet pretends that he is vvholy of your Maiesties Religion) giues you a more particular offence, by departing from the very doctrines, vvhich you be∣lieue. For besides diuers other single differēces, he neither allovves the Nine and thirty Articles, vvhich your Maie∣sty, in your Royall Declaration, affir∣mes to containe the true Doctrine of the Church of England; nor holds he the Succession of Bishops to be necessary in Gods Church;Pag. 356. & sequ. vvhich experience tea∣ches to tend expresly to the confusion of the said Church, and destruction of Monarchy.
And though God hath made your Maiesty most happy, both in a Royall Consort, of singular and rare endovv∣ments both of Body and Mind, & vvith a plentifull and most hopefull Issue, (vvhich vvith my hart I begge may euen last to the very end of the vvorld)
and vvith an Obedient & Loyall Peo∣ple, and vvith povver both at land and sea, and vvith times both of Plenty and Peace, vvhilst almost all your Neigh∣bours are in vvarre and vvant; yet no∣thing vvill euer be more able, to esta∣blish You in all these Felicityes, nor to auert all disasters from your Maiesty, then not to permit, that there be any conniuence at such enormous Errours as these, vvhich partly openly, & partly couertly, are vented against Christ our Lord, and all Christian Fayth.
The God of Heauen preserue your Maiesty in all Health and Happinesse, to his greatest Glory, your Maiestyes ovvne Felicity, and to the ioy & com∣fort of all your Kingdomes.

