



LEt it not offend you that I your sonne so farre in∣ferior to you in grauity, & sufficiency of know∣ledge, haue thus presu∣med to followe you in be same steppes, I meane, preaching vpon be same Text, and publishing this my ude worke. I haue done nothing (neither ould I if I would) vnto your disparage∣ment I do but lispe, where you speake; I reepe where you did go, and runne: I in∣structed
the low shrubs, you the high and mightie Cedars. I the subiect, you the King, Prince, Councell, and Nobles of the Land. You in a loftie, I in a low style. I spake to a fewe Mechanichans, you to a mightie Monarche, and many worthy Peeres. Your labours preferred to publick view by motion of a most reuerent Father. Dedicated primarily to a most learned and excellent King; and secondarily, to a great and noble Counsellor. I alas do looke no higher then to your worshipfull selfe (and haue need of pardon for this presumption to) being moued to shew my selfe by some priuate persons, who desired this birth should not die in the birth: But happily you will be offended that I call you father, hauing no resemblance and likenesse to you, not so much as in countenance, gate, speech or Iesture. True it is, I resemble you in nothing at all; neither in wit, nor clocution, learning, experience, reading, iudgement: I haue no agreement nor con∣currence with you in method, instruction,
disposition, application, phrase, example or sentence, scarce a word from you (for I had seene you foure yeares ago, and had not since lookt on you.) Howbeit I am bold, and I trust (without blame) to entitle you Fa∣ther; because of your precedency in years, grauitie, graces, experience, degree and place, as also for that you not onely went before me in time, I being an after birth: but were the occasion of this birth, in so much as when I was to chuse a Text wher∣upon to preach before a Corporation of Smiths; your entreating on this Scrip∣ture before me moued, and brought me the sooner to thinke, and resolue of it as meete, and fit for my purpose. If it shall please you not to disdaine me, I will bind my selfe not to enuie you. Your labours may obscure mine, but my light cannot dimme yours, it shines too bright: yet Bad∣gers skinnes helped the building of the Tabernacle, as well as silke and purple. So as Gods children profit, and his glory be promoted by the varietie of our gifts, and
endeauors, that shall suffice me plentifully and I doubt not, but it will content you▪
Fare you well. October. 25. 1610.

