



IT is an vsuall manner (right honourable) for all those that goe about to publish any work or writing of theirs, to dedi∣cate it to some one or other, eyther to be a Testimony to the World, of their mutuall loue and friend∣shippe, or else to witnesse their dutifulnesse or thankfulnes for benefites receyued, or else that vnder the protection, defence and fauour of authority, their works may the better pass and be the safelier guarded and defended a∣gainst all busie reprehenders. Wherefore vn∣willing to break the receiued custome, & loo∣king amongst the Honourable, to when for

benefites I am bounde: As I confesse that a∣mongest them I haue founde many and great welwillers, so to you two, whome my estate hath compelled to trouble and vse moste, for your constant good will and continued fa∣uour shewed and benefites bestowed, I am aboue all others most bounden, and there∣fore as a thankfull remembrance haue dedi∣cated this simple sily labor vnto your honors. God in these our days, hath raised vp a num∣ber of worthy, learned carefull men for the Church of od, whereof some bestowe them∣selues wholy in teaching of their flockes; o∣thers for the more generall benefite of the Church, spend part of their time & paines in writing. Of the latter sort, some translate into our tongue the learned works of other, some set out learned Sermons, Catechismes and o∣ther treatises for the admonition & instructi∣on of the people: some shew their learning in mightily refuting and confounding the com∣mon aduersaries: Yet amongest them all, one thing I see wanting. For where I see that God hath giuen vnto men two manner of Instruc∣tions and teachings: one by his word, another by his creatures, and for to help our dulnesse o learne by his creatures, hath by his Spirite in his holy Worde, giuen a meruellous num∣ber of Lessons drawne from thinges sensible. In the former manner of teaching, God hath blesse vs (in comparison of our Fathers a∣boundantly)

But in the latter I haue not seene any man of our time, that of purpose hath ta∣ken paynes. Which want no doubt is some cause, that (by these outwarde thinges, which God hath appointed to bee so many helpes not onely for the present necessities of this life but also to Heauen) Men, ignoraunt of the good Lessons which the Holy Ghoste giueth by them, for want of further and dee∣per consideration, are detayned vppon earth, and drowned in earthly thinges, and doe not possesse but are possessed of their possessi∣ons. Wherefore in some little part to sup∣plye that wante, but cheefelye to giue to o∣thers of greater learning and giftes, occasi∣on to bestowe this way some part of their leasure: I haue collected into the order of an Alphabet these fewe Lessons giuen by the spirite of God: Wherein, as I haue cheefely respected the benefite of the ruder sorte, so to accommodate my selfe vnto them, I haue endeuored with playnesse asmuch breuitye and shortnesse as I possibly could, and there∣in for the moste part, I haue deliuered the very wordes of the Holy Ghoste, worde for worde: And wheresoeuer I haue gone a little from them, yet there the very wordes giue manifest occasion of the collection. Which, that it may of all men the better and with lesse payne bee seene and viewed, I haue in the Margent noted not onely euery Chapi∣ter,

but also euery verse whence I haue ga∣thered the note set downe. If then any may be occasioned by meane hereof, by the sight and vsing of earthly blessings, to lift vp their minds to heauenly contemplation, and thank¦full consideration of the Power, Wisedome, and goodnesse of God; then haue I my de∣sire, and that which I onely seeke for. Thus I commit your Honours to the protection of Almighty God, whoeuer preserue both you and yours. 
Danbury, the 29. of Ianuary. 1585.
