



SIR, you see the effect of importunity, and the efficacy of your fauor towards me; in that the sermon which was at first priuate, in res∣pect of the Audients; is now become publique in pespect of the rea∣ders. Wherein it resembleth the Image, that is taken out of the painters shop, where few behold it, and placed in the open market, where euery one will censure it. I haue deli∣neated two dwelling places of the godly, as my memory, notes and parenthesis of vacant
 time permitted: thone fading, restles, and wretched in earth, thother permanēt, quiet, and blessed in heauen. And I wish that my labour therin, may be like the liuelyest pict∣ure and poeme, which the more neerly, nar∣rowly, and often it is suruiewed, the more it feeds the eye and the mind of the behoulder with delectatiō: as the iudicious, or rather cē¦sorious Poet says, both of the one & thother
Vt pictura, poesis, erit quae, si propiùs stes,
Horat. in Arte.Te capiet magis, & quaedā si longiùs abstes.
Haec amat obscurū, volet haec subluce videri
Haec placuit sēel, haec decies repetita placebit Neither can J conceale, that in diuulgating of this sermon, I was both vnwilling, & wil∣ling: vnwilling, because of the slendernesse thereof, and the captiousnes of these critick times: in which that is vsuall which Salust said to Caesar;Sal. ad Caesar. de ordinand. rep. (ad repraehenda aliena facta, aut dicta, ardet omnibus animus) all are ear∣nestly bent to reproue other mens dooings, or sayings: willing, because I desired to deci¦pher the sincerity of myne obsequiousnesse towards her, whose memory I wold my te∣nuity & obseruācy were able to eternize: & because I was loath to reiecte your pressing motiō, whose more thē cōmō curtesies may
 duly craue the vtmost of my possibility. Her perspicuous worthines, your experimented kindnes, mine own propēsiō to endeuor to do good by any means, haue more swaied with me, thē that I could be hindred to edify the faithfull, and induced to withhold good frō the owners thereof, by surmizing, that the froward will condemne me, either of im∣pudency or flattery. From flattery the vni∣uersall acclamation of multitudes, that both knew her, and heard of her, will, (I know) acquit me; from the blame of voluntary & shamelesse intruding my selfe into the sight of the world, your learned apology (I hope) shall purge me. For malice had wanted one morsell to thrust into her insaturable gorge, had not your forcible perswasions subdew∣ed me, and cast me as a pray vnto her deuou¦ring teeth. Neuerthelesse, let one tax the pro¦lixity, not weighing the extraordinary occur¦rents: let another balance in the weights of worldly eloquence, the cours & vnpolished style; desiring perhaps finer breade then is made of wheate, and rather an eloquent, thā learned Physitian to cure his maladie: let a∣nother reprooue thinculcating of vulgar ob∣seruations, and obuious documents: forget∣ting, aswell that Paul, that noble instructor
 of the gentiles, (by daily reading of whose Epistles, the golden mouthed father saide, that he knew how to deuide the word of truth aright) was not ashamed, to write the same things again; as also that t becometh rather an Athenian, than a christian, to hant after nouelties: yet they that haue their wits exercised, to discerne good from euill, shl perceiue, that J haue not erred from the faith; and that J haue not depraued the depo∣situm, and talent of wholesom doctrin, com∣mitted to the church by Christ, and recom∣mended by the apostle to his scholler Timo∣thy.Tim. 6.20, incent Liri∣. adu. prophā uat. cap. 27. J haue kept (to borow the words of mel lifluous Vincentius Lirinensis, on the fore∣sayde exhortation of the apostle) that was committed vnto me, not that I haue inuen∣ted; that J receiued, not that I deuised: that I learned, not that J forged of mine owne wit; that hath beene publickly taughte, not priuately maintained. As I haue receiued gold, so J haue endeuoured to render and returne gold: and not to giue, either impu∣dently, lead, or fraudulently, copper, and the shew of gold, in steed of sincere gold. And in returning it, J haue been, (non author, sed custos, non institutor, sed sectator, non ducens,
 sed sequens: & cum dixerim noue, non dixi no∣ua:) not an author, but a keeper: not a tea∣cher, but a scholler, not a leader, but a follo∣wer: and albeit J haue arraied somethings in attire of a new fashion, yet there is no dif∣ference in the matter and substance. Wher∣fore not distrusting, but that as I haue put this sermon in writing at your entreaty, the concise sinewes and epitome whereof was els likely to haue been vtterly motheaten; so you will patronize it against such malig∣nantes, as either reprehend, that they will not amend, or else are despisers of whatsoe∣uer their selues were not agents: with my praier, that it may benefite as many, as did beare vndissembled loue vnto her, whose happy remembraunce hath both wrung it out of my hands, and drawn it into the light and that the faith which I am perswaded is in you, may dwell in you vnto the end, as it first dwelt in your worthy grandmother, and in your godly mother, I commit you and yours to the gratious protection of the Al∣mighty, whom I desire to sanctifie vs throgh out, and to keep our whole spirit, and soule, and body, blameles, vnto the comming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

