



IT is the manner, vse, and custome of all that set
foorth any thing to be seene and read of others, to
set downe some reasons that mooued them to take
such pains, and to publish their labors. In the yeere
of our Lord, one thousand, fiue hundred, eightie
two, a testament trāslated into English, at Rhemes
in France, was published in print, by the English fu∣gitiue
Papists resiant there. The censure, view, and
examination whereof, hath euer since been hartily
looked, or rather longed for, of all both rich and
poore, high and low, that feare God and loue his truth. But by what occasion I
cannot tell, it hath been hitherto delaied. Whereupon I thought it would not
be amisse, neither misliked, if some thing in the meane space might be done,
toward the satisfaction of the well affected, and the repressing of the triumphes
of the contrarie. Therefore at my returne from London, from Michaelmasse
terme last past, I tooke in hand to discouer the loose, corrupt, vniust, and vn∣true
dealing of our Rhemists in their marginall notes. Which if I could effect,
and bring to passe afore an answer to their whole worke came foorth, I did sup∣pose
that it would somwhat diminish the griefe of manie good men, and make
them the more patiently to expect and wait for the censure of the whole work.
And againe, if it should happen, that by reason I tooke it in hand so late, that I
ould not compasse it, or bring it to passe, afore the censure of the whole worke
were in presse, yet I did thinke, that bicause that worke could not be but verie
great, and therfore chargeable; that it would not be thought amisse of, if some
part were answered by it selfe, which the poorer, and those which either were
vnable, or vnwilling to be at charges with the other, might attaine and haue
with small cost. Now hauing by the fauor of God gone through it, I thought
that I could not choose a better patron for it, than your Grace, whom God
hath aduanced to the highest Ecclesiasticall place and dignitie in our Church
of England. For some make the dedication of their works, testimonies of old
friendship and familiaritie, and as it were monuments of their old long conti∣nued
loue. Which cause if there were no more, were sufficient, considering the
loue, wherewith you haue imbraced me these thirtie yeeres and vpwards. O∣thers
do it to witnes their mindfulnes of their dutie to them that be in hono∣rable
place and calling. And why should not I heerin also imitate them, sith it
hath pleased God, leauing me in a meane place, so highly to aduance you? O∣thers
to get the fauable patronage and defence of their works by high dig∣nitie
and authoritie, against all maleuolous cauillers and backbiters, whereof
this wicked world is alwaies full. And heer of both I stand in great need, hauing
the whole band of Popish sophisters in this against me, and also none can bet∣ter
protect and defend me, than you, either for learning and iudgement, or for

power and authoritie, wherewith God hath indued you. Their whole worke
consisteth altogither of lieng, fraud, and deceit, which I thought not vnmeete
in some part to touch, disclose, and make manifest in this mine Epistle. First in
their Preface, then in their Translation, after in their collected and concluded
Annotations: lastly, in their thicke and threefold allegations of the fathers.
In which I will vse all possible breuitie and shortnes; for that my purpose is but
to giue a little small taste of their foule and shamelesse dealings, whereby the
sinceritie of their dealing in the rest may be the easilier and better gessed at.
The first part of their Preface maintaineth against the whole course of the
Scriptures, and against all authoritie of the ancient primitiue Church, that it
is not necessarie for al Christians to haue, and read the Scriptures in a knowen
vulgar toong.Deut. 6. vers. 7. 8 9. Which if it were true, why are all men commanded continually
to talke of them, and to write them vpon the doores, wals,Psal. 1. vers. . and posts of their
houses, and how should they meditate in them day and night? How should fa∣thers
teach them to their children,Psal. 78. v. . and they againe to their children?Psal. 19. ve. 7. The
Scriptures giue wisedome to the simple, why then shall not the simplest seeke
in them to waxe wise?Iohn 5. v 39. If life be to be found in the Scriptures, why shall not all
search them that looke for life?Rom. v. 1. v. . If they be written for our learning, why should
it not be as lawful to learne by reading, as by hearing? The Cōstitutions which
they sundry times alledge,Cleme. l. b. 1. cap. . as ordeined by the Apostles, do appoint Laie men
to read the Law, the books of the Kings,Epistla ad Marcellam. the Psalmes and the Gospell. Saint
Hierome commendeth poore plough men, bicause at the plough taile in their
worke and labor, they could sing the Psalmes. Our Rhemists adde of their owne
(beleeue them if you list) to salue the matter withall, that they sang in a lan∣guage
they vnderstood not, and wherein they could not read those Scriptures.
Saint Chrysostome exhorted the common people to get them Bibles,In the homi∣lie▪ quoted in their epi∣stle. and Te∣staments,
and refuted the same obiections, which the Papists at this day make
to the contrary. But our Papists tel vs that he dealt like a pulpit man, and ther∣fore
his rules must not be generall, but serue for his owne people, which he
preached vnto. As who should say the pulpit were not as meet a place, to de∣liuer
the rules of religion, and a generall truth in, as the schooles. They adde,
that euery artificer dealeth in the hardest, and deepest matters of religion,
omitting the more easie, that they presuppose no difficulties, that they aske
for no expositor, that they feele no depth of Gods science in Scripture, that
maners, and life are nothing amended, that priuate fantasies, and not the
sense of the Church, and doctors thereof, in interpreting the Scriptures is fol∣lowed.
And whosoeuer knoweth the state, and condition of the Church of
England, knoweth all this to be an beape, and dunghill of lies packed togither.
If their commendation of their Churches moderation, in not wholy condem∣ning,
nor forbidding generally vulgar translations, be not a lie▪ then Master
Harding,In the fift part of his answere to the apologie, Chap. 16. . and such other like of their side, haue abused vs, in telling vs, that the
malepartnesse of Heretikes made the Church altogither to forbid the vulgar
translations. Their accusations of our translations, haue alreadie been so well
answered by Master Doctor Fulke to Martinius, that I neede not to touch
them. Their reasons likewise being both many, and friuolous, whereby they go
about to prefer their vulgar latin version, before the text in the toongs, where∣in
they were first written, I leaue to him, or them, which shall answere the whole
preface in order as it lieth: onely three things, I will admonish men to consi∣der
of, in them. First that they tend not so much to giue credit to the vulgar

text, as to discredit al texts whatsoeuer, to the end that either men might haue
nothing to ground their religion certainlie on, or else to make their Church
of Rome their only stay. Secondly, that they confesse the Fathers in this point
to be against them, namely whose opinions are that the Latin text should
yeeld to the Greeke, and Hebrue: but they thinke to avoid it with a slie shift,
that they meant the true, and vncorrupted text, as it was in their daies, and
times. But Lodouicus Viues a learned man, liuing in the daies of Henrie the
eight, in his annotations vpon Saint Augustine de ciuitate Dei,Iib. 14. cap. 8. telleth vs, that to
his time (a fewe vnlearned dolts excepted) all men preferred the texts in
their original toongs,Lib. 15. cap. 13. before the others translated out of them. Therefore ei∣ther
our good Masters of Rhemes must tell vs of some great corruptions that
haue crept in of late yeeres into the Greeke, and Hebrew texts, or else they
can not blame vs for not crediting them against the learned of all ages afore
vs, old and new, one, and others. Thirdly, that the Councel of Trent goeth not
so far as our new Masters of Rhemes: For they preferre it onely before all La∣tin
translations, making it amongst them the onely autenticall texte: In which
it is plaine that either the Pope, or the Councell might, and did erre. For Eras∣mus
dedicated his translation to Pope Leo, and vnder his approbation manie
men tooke it for autenticall, and now your Councell iudgeth it not autenticall,
therefore either Leo, or they iudged amisse, take whether they will. Thus much
for their Preface. Their Translation (how much soeuer they brag of paines,
care, and conscience to deale sincerely) is fraudulently framed to make poore
men thinke the Scriptures to be more obscure and darke a great deale, than
they are, and so to fray them (as much as in them lieth) from taking paines to
read them. I note this onely, not bicause it is not full of other corruptions, and
partialities, but bicause leauing them to the censurer, or censurers therof, I
take that which euery blind man may see, that they haue studied therin for no∣thing
lesse, than perspicuitie, & plainnes. For they haue both hunted for words
of purpose, which the people do not vnderstand, as superstantiall, didrachmes,
cense, stater, scandall, scandalized, Corbanah, euangelized, scenopegia, pa∣raclete,Iohn 2. v. 4.
prepucie, Neophyte, depositum, gratis, and such like: And also left
their sentences vnperfect,Iohn. 21. vers. 22. halt, maimed, and without sence, and all to strike
simple persons in a maze, As what is to me & the woman? and this man what?Rom. 5. vers. 18.
As by the offence of one vnto al men to condemnation, and such like, which in
English haue no sence. Their collections, and conclusions how weake and fri∣uolous
they are, though it will sufficiently appeare in mine answeres to their
marginal notes; yet I hope it wil not be amisse, if some also be noted down here.
These shall be of two sorts, one so grosse that euery simple man may see the va∣nitie
of their collections: the other more cunninglie, but yet deceitfully ga∣thered.
The deceit of the later sort is also double, either grounded vpon wil∣full,
and slaunderous misreporting of our assertions, or else vpon aequiuocati∣ons,
and ambiguitie of words, wherewith it seemeth they delight them selues
greatly, and thinke it a wonderfull peece of learning to deceiue their poore,
simple & credulous followers. The first sort void of all shew of probable conse∣quence,
are throughout their Testament very many. But to auoide tediousnes,
I will content me here with a very few.Vers. 23. In the first of Matthew. Our Sauiour
Christ borne in mariage, yet of a Virgin, honoreth both states, and withall
teacheth vs that virginitie, and continent life are preferred before mariage.
In the second of Matthew vpon the murdering of the children,Vers. 16. by this we learn,

what credit is to be giuen to the Church in canonizing Saints, and celebrating
their holydaies,Vers. 8. &c. In the third Chapter, vpon those words. Yeeld therefore
fruit worthy of penance. Iohn preacheth satisfaction by doing worthy fruits, &
works of penance.Vers. 2. Both in the third & fourth chapter, vpon Iohns preaching in
the desart, & Christs going into the desart, to be tempted of the diell, they ga∣ther
a warrant for popish Heremites, that make a profession to liue out of the
societie & companie of men continually,Vers. 21. and so to end their daies. In the sift of
Matthew vpon these words, except your iustice do abound, &c. whereby we see
(say they) saluation, life and iustification not to come of onely faith, or impu∣tation
of Christs righteousnes.Vers. 13. In the sixt chapter, vpon these words, Leade vs
not into temptation, they saie that Beza according to the Caluinistes opini∣on,
saith that God leadeth into temptation, therefore he maketh God the au∣thor
of euill.Vers. . In the seauenth chapter vpon these words, Lord, Lord. These
men haue faith, otherwise they could not inuocate, therefore to beleeue is not
enough. I could haue drawne out a great number as bad, or woorse than these,
but I will heere stay. For I haue giuen a sufficient taste, what might be done in
the most part of their Testament, almost in euerie chapter. Now concerning
their double deceit afore spoken of, whereof the first is grounded vpon ma∣lice,
which blindeth them, and maketh them wilfully against their owne con∣science
and knowledge to mistake and misreport our assertions. One common
cauill, is the finding fault with our translating of , and , repen∣tance,Vers. .
and to repent, and amend, Mathew. 11. and repeated in many other
places, which is grounded vpon this slander, that bicause we do not allow
that the fruits of repentance be works satisfactorie for sinne, therefore we do
not teach at al those testimonies of harty, and vnfeined repentance. Another
cauill very cōmon also riseth vpon that, bicause we confesse (as the holy Ghost
hath taught vs in the Scriptures) that God is the author of euerie act, there∣fore
they gather also that he is the author of euerie sinne, or euill. Which ma∣licious
collection, though it haue been ten thousand times answered, and
that fully, yet they cease not still odiouslie to obiect it. And bicause we denie
that Christ after his death went into Limbus Patrum,Actes 2. vers. 7. as they without al war∣rant
of the word imagine, therefore they maliciouslie giue out that Caluin
and his followers denie an article of the Faith,1. Peter. 3. ver. 19. and therfore conclude them to
be infidels. In all their notes touching iustification by faith, they deale with
vs, as though we ascribed iustification to an idle faith, which worketh not by
loue, and vpon that false ground, they gather many things against vs, as shall
appeere in mine answere to their notes. But all that are wise, and haue eies to
see, do perceiue, that in this maner of dealing, they do but vtter their owne
shame, in making no conscience of cogging, lieng, and slaundering, & in steede
of battailing with their enimies, they make themselues sport with their owne
shadowes. Now to their amphibologies, and aequiuocations; which are also to
long to pursue. The Rhemists vpon the fift to the Galathians confesse, that
Paule when he ascribeth iustification to faith, speaketh of such a faith as work∣eth
by charitie, and yet in all their notes against iustification by faith, they
dallie, and play, and dazel the eies of the simple with the ambiguitie of the
word, being diuerslie in diuerse places taken. The like dealing they vse about
the words of iustice, and iustification, which when they know them to be di∣uersly
taken, and in sundry senses, yet they delude with the sound of the words
those, who for simplicitie are not able to discerne the diuersitie of the sense. I

wil not heap vp here more of these examples, a number will offer themselues
in reading of mine answers. The alledging of the Fathers thicke and three∣folde,
is for two fraudulent respects. One is, that those which are doubtfull to
what religion they may encline, and to which side to cleaue, may continue
doubtfull, and without resolution still, whiles both our aduersaries, and we al∣ledge
Fathers, and accuse one another of corrupt dealing in them, and they
poore soules not able to repaire to the Fathers to see whether side dealeth
truely. The second is to continue the false perswasion of their credulous follo∣wers,
in thinking that all antiquitie maketh for poperie. To these two ends it
is, that their allegations are so many. First therefore to auoid this their fraud,
it is to be noted, and obserued, that a maruellous number of their allegations,
touch no point, nor matter in controuersie betwixt vs. As for example,Mat. 2. ver. 16. they
alledge Origen to prooue that the innocent children murthred by the com∣mandement
of Herode,Mat. 3. ver. 10. haue beene honored for martyres. Augustine to
prooue that not to do good is damnable.Mat. 3. vers. 8. Hierome to prooue that fasting,
praier, and almes are fruits of repentance, or as they terme it, penance, Cypri∣an
to prooue that they are false martyrs,Mat. 5. ver. 10. that suffer not for iustice. Chryso∣stome
to prooue that by the church the gouernors thereof be vnderstoode.Mat. 18. vers. 17.
Ambrose to prooue that God hath left to his church authoritie aswel to loose,Mat. 18. vers. 18.
as to binde. Which kinde of proofes for matter not denied, if they had beene
omitted, and left out, the great glorious shew of Fathers had beene blemished,
and their campe verie nigh halfe dissolued. Next is to be marked, that if they
catch any thing that maketh for them in any Father, they neuer looke how
rightly the Father collecteth it, and by what good reason he warranteth it, it
is with them sufficient that he saith it.August. epist. 19. But Augustine teacheth vs to giue that
reuerence onely to the canonical Scriptures, to beleeue. whatsoeuer they say.
And for others of what learning or holines soeuer, not to beleeue bicause they
speake, but bicause they prooue that which they speake, either by the word it
selfe, or by good reason grounded vpon the same word. And here also bicause
they are woont to triumph that we make this a colour to reiect the Fathers,
when they make against vs, it is to be remembred that they themselues do not
without exception admit the Fathers.Hos. de side & symbolo ca. 19. But they appoint an other rule to trie
them, and their saiengs by, that is, the decrees, and determinations of their
owne church. Thirdly it is to be noted that they alledge those bookes very of∣ten,
wherin they know that the Father which wrote them, was far ouercarried
with heate of contencion, that they themselues will not, nor dare not defend
many things that passed them, as Hieroms bookes against Iouiuian, and Vi∣gilantius.
Fourthly it is not to be passed ouer, how they abuse Augustine in lea∣uing
those bookes which he wrote against the heretike Pelagius,Retract. lib. 1. cap. 23. concerning
the question of Freewill, and alledging testimonies out of other books, where∣in
he himselfe did confesse, that he did erre of ignorance. Fiftly they force di∣uers,
and sundrie to serue their turnes, whether they will, or no. Sixtly to make
the greater shew, they furnish out their number with such as they know to
haue beene burnt on the face for forgerie, and cite them vnder the reuerend
names of Clemens, and Dionisius Areopagita, and such like. Finally it is not
to be passed ouer, that they for the corroborating, and proouing of the vsurped
primacie of the bishop of Rome, they hunt for speeches of the Fathers spoken
in extolling Peter, or in commending the faith, then professed at Rome, or els
the excellent learning, and vertue of some notable bishops there, which then

gouerned that church, and them they racke, and set on the tenters to prooue
that, which they neuer thought of, that is, the vniuersall power, and authority,
which the bishop of Rome now claimeth. The practise of the primitiue church
doth best declare, both what the Fathers ment, and also what power and au∣thoritie
he had. In that it is manifest that he was a bishop as other bishops,Hieronimu Euagro. Nicenum con∣cilium cano∣ne 6. af∣terward
by consent of men a patriarch limited as other patriarches, a subiect
to the Emperour in commission vnder him as a delegate, that men might ap∣peale
from him, and that the Emperour might, and did appoint in such cases
of appeale delegates to affirme, or reuerse the bishop of Romes former sen∣tence
and iudgement.August nus ad Epistola Par∣memam libro prmo cap 5. & contra literas Petiliam lib. 3. cap. 25. So far was he from that vniuersalitie of power, which
he hath heertofore vsurped, and yet challengeth. But why should I dwel so long
in these matters, & exceede the length of an Epistle, seeing they haue brought
nothing of anie weight, in anie matter of controuersie, but it hath beene (and
that they know well enough) often, and fullie answered by diuers, and sundrie
alreadie? But bicause being fugitiues, and hauing no honest ordinarie vocati∣on
to occupie themselues about, they neuer make an end of writing, wherein
they do nothing but set new colours on old matters, to make their sencelesse
followers beleeue, that they bring in new allegations, neuer before answered:
Therefore (vnder your Graces correction be it vttered) I would wish that our
controuersies being drawen into a sum, might by your authoritie be deuided,
to so many learned men, as your Grace shall thinke conuenient and compe∣tent
for that purpose, to examine, and to reduce and bring into the best frame
and forme they can, all the arguments of the aduersaries, and to ech seuerall
argument the answere, as plainely and briefly as it can be comprised, which
being done, and compiled into one, or two volumes, whatsoeuer they write
hereafter, except they bring (which I thinke impossible) some newe thing
heretofore vnheard of, to be referred to those volumes for answer, and so to
cease troubling the world with more bookes. Touching mine answers to their
marginall notes (I hope it will appeere) that I haue studied with as much bre∣uitie,
and plainnes as I could possibly, to discipher their vanitie, and trifling,
wherewith they haue blotted, and blurred their margents of their Testament.
Their translation, and larger annotations, though many times great occasi∣ons
are offered to carpe at them, yet as neere as I could possiblie, I haue left
them vntouched, to him, or them (whosoeuer he or they be) that of purpose
shall deale with that matter. To the end that my truth, and simplicitie of dea∣ling
may the better appeere to the Reader, of what sort soeuer he be, I haue set
downe the text, wherevpon their notes are gathered, according to their owne
translation, and their notes, word, forword, and then mine answers. By which
doing, I hope it will well appeere, that when out of their most partiall transla∣tion,
which they of purpose haue framed for their best aduantage, the things
which they gather, will not follow▪ nor be confirmed: that they are vtterlie
destitute of all helpe of the scriptures, how soeuer they labor to wring them to
their purpose. But concerning mine owne doing this shall suffice. If this which
I haue done, shall by you (most reuerend father) be iudged to be pro∣fitable
for the church and people of God, I haue that
which I desire. The Lord God blesse, keepe,
and preserue you. At Dunburie
the xij. of Aprill.
1588.
