



RIght Worshipfull, it is now almost a yeare and a halfe since there came to my knowledge a Popish Pamphlet made and scattered abroad, as it see∣meth, by some popish seedesman, and I cannot tell whether some ligter in our quarters, which yet I hold to be more then probable. This pamphlet he intituled, A few plaine and forcible Reasons for the Catholike Faith, against the Religion of the Prote∣testants. These reasons comming into the hands of a young Papist and Recusant, as I take it, whom this or some other deceitfull workeman had poysoned with the venome of Po∣perie: He attributed so much thereunto, that being moued by a faithfull and louing kinseman to renounce his popish re∣cusancie and to come to the Church and become a Prote∣stant, he answered that he was vndoubtely perswaded that he held the right, and therefore would persist therein, and that because They were resolued and put out of doubt of the truth of their Religion by these foure Reasons. The afore∣said yong Papist deliuered these 4 reasōs to a Minister of his
 acqutance, with purpose to haue them deliuered to a god∣ly Preacher, as a chalenge (for so I interpret it) by reason that he by his vigilant and industrious trauell stood much in their light, that they could not spread their popish heresie so farr and so freely as they desired. This Pamphlet being thus come to his hands, God offering opportunitie of a Christian meeting of some few of vs Fellow-ministers, he brought forth vnto vs, and specially requested me (the Pamphlet being not very long) a little that time to peruse it, which in some part I did. Being further moued by him to take it in hand, and to frame and answer thereunto. I alleaged for a tust ex∣cuse, that there was in it nothing new, but that which had beene often obiected and often answered: And therefore as this Crambe I held not worth the answering, so if any vn∣resolued were desirous to receiue satisfaction in the matter, they might plentefully find it, if they listed to peruse what before time had bene answered by many others. Howbeit not so satisfying him, for that it seemed good (these 4 Rea∣sons being so highly esteemed) to discouer the vanity of them, I was content to take them with me, as he requested; Yet without any certaine promise to deale with them, the rather because I had then in hand some labor of writing in another argument, which being finished, finding by perusing them, how full of vaine ostentation they were how subtle by a new fiction to pretend somewhat for Poperie out of the Religion of Protestants, how pernicious by striuing to worke the high∣est resolution in Papists, how closely the matter was conueted to get authoritie and credit to popish heresie by these Corner creeping reasons, which seemed already to be made familiar to the vulgar sort. I thought it a point of charitie plainly and demonstratiuely so to lay open the vanity of them, as euen the vulgar sort, whose iudgement was already captiuated, by these reasons, might be able to discerne the truth of my an∣swer.
 Many things in the same arguments he bna her∣tofore copiously and learnedly written by sundry graue Di∣uines, which yet in one respect or other, being aboue the reach of common Christians, haue either not come to their hands, or exceeded the measure of their capacitie. For their sakes therefore haue I chiefly trauelled, not to speake much but to speake plainely, and as neere as I could the point of the obection.
After I had finished my first Copie, I was constrained to write it the second time, hauing no other meaning but to re∣turne my written answer to my godly brother of whom I re∣ceiued the Copie of the 4. Reasons, so to communicate it, if he thought there were any that might receiue satisfaction by it. The young Papist that deliuered abroad the Reasons had before boasted, that because the Reasons had rested some time, as he thought, in the hands of him, to whom they first came vanswered, therefore he was sassured that they could not be answered The truth is, that before I could obteine leysure to take them in hand, or was indeed fully resolued so to do, there passed one quarter of a yeare and more, and when I had finished the answer I made no haste, as to some is knowne, to write the second copie. When at conuenient times I had finished it, I sent it to be deliuered in writing: and I vnderstand accordingly it was, and came to sight as of some other, so of that very Papist, who was the instru∣ment to giue abroad the Reasons, who as the maner of them is, hauing read some three or foure leaues, flung it vp, and made a tush at it saing, He could answer the booke himselfe; And not vnlike he could after their fashion, euery child and audacious woman amongst them presuming to speake Fa∣thers and Doctors, as if their idoatrous Priests and fami∣liars did speake in them. My godly brother hauing iust cause to suspect that the sayd popish Reasons were dispersed, and
 considering that it was very hard for one written copie to sere for all that were corrupted by them perswaded me to suffer y answer to deprinted. I did, as he knoweth not ha∣stily intertaine his motion, but wished to haue the aduise of some other of grauity, godlinesse and learning, from whom receiuing incouragement, I yet made no hast, being vnwil∣ling in such satietie of bookes to increase the number, especi∣ally hauing nothing to say, but what had bene better said be∣fore. Now at last perceiuing it to be desired and expected of those whom worthily I respect that I should permit my answer, such as it is, to be imprinted. I haue yeelded my poore seruice in this little booke, to the censure of the Church of God, to the instruction of the seduced, if it so please God, and haue exposed it to the vttermost calumniation of the restlesse aduersarie, who like raging sea is alwayes foa∣ming vp his owne shame, and casteth vp continually myre and dirt.
And because my ordinary ministerie hath now for some good time bene bestowed in that place, where your Worship is an ordinary hearer, considering also that the occasion hath sprung vp within the diuision of your Magistracie. I haue presumed to offer vnto you, and to publish in your name this small fruit of my extraordinary labors, for remem∣bring that worthy Griffith Hampden Esquire of blessed memory, who first called me to this place, and likewise his sonne of great hope William Hampden, by whom I re∣ceiued much comfort and incouragement in my Ministerie, whose blessed end was to me no smalzeale of Gods blessing vpon my poore labors, and now acknowledging Gods fauour towards me, who hauing taken away hath supplied your Worship resolute in your selfe and in your worthy ser∣uice, for the truth of whom I haue receiued more then com∣mon loue: For which in all thankfulnesse I render my selfe
 bound. I thought it my duty to dedicate these my poore in∣deuors to your worshipfull selfe and Name; Beseeching you to accept this my slender gift as a testimony of that due re∣spect which worthily I beare towards you. I pray God long to continue the honour of your whole house, both in your selfe present, and in all the the hopes posteritie, and espe∣cially to make the long continued honor, which in this life you haue, eternall in the kingdome of his Sonne. From great Hampden in Buck. 1608.

