



TO recreate my selfe, after some more serious Studies, I tooke oc∣casion to exercise my Inuention in the illustration of my Motto; which being thus finished, my friends made me beleeue it was worth the preseruing; and grew so importunat for Coppies thereof, that I could not deny them. But doubting, lest by often transcribing, it might be much lamed through the Scribes in∣sufficiency (as many things of this nature are) I thought fitting, rather to exemplyfie the same, by the Presse, then by the Penne. And to that end, deliuered it ouer to some Stationers, to haue onely so many Copies, as I intended to bestow.
Yet considering that other men (to whom I meant them not) might peraduenture, come

to the view of those Lines. I thought it not amisse, by way of Preuention, to remooue such Cauills as may be made against mee, by those vnto whom I am vnknowne. Not, that I care to giue euery idle Reader, an account of my Intentions: But to shew the Ingenuous, that the Carelesnes expressed in this Motto, pro∣seeds from an vndistempered Care, to make all my Actions, (as neere as I can) such, as may be decent, warrantable, and becomming an ho∣nest Man: And that those, who shall foolish∣ly seeke (from thence) to picke aduantages a∣gainst me: may know, I am too well aduised to write any thing, which they shall bee iustly able to interpret, either to my hinderance, or disparagement.
Let me want esteeme among all good men, if I purposed (or haue any secret desire in me) that any part of this, should be applied to any particular man; but so as euery one ought to apply things vnto his own Conscience; and he that beleeues me not, I feare is guilty. My in∣tent was, to draw the true Picture of mine own heart; that my friends, who knew mee out∣wardly, might haue some representation of my inside also. And that, if they liked the forme

of it, they might (wherein they were defe∣ctiue) fashion their owne mindes thereunto. But, my principall Intention, was by recor∣ding those thoughts to confirme mine owne Resolution; and to preuent such alterations, as Time and infirmites, may worke vpon mee. And if there bee no more reason inferr ed a∣gainst me, to remoue my opinion, then I am yet apprehensiue of: I am confidently per∣swaded, that neither Feare, nor Force shall compell me, to deny any thing which I haue affirmed in this Poem. For, I had rather bee degraded from the greatest Title of Honour that could be giuen me; then constrained to deny this Motto.
Proud Arrogance (I know) and enough too; will be layd to my charge. But those who both know me, and the necessitie of this reso∣lution, will excuse me of it. The rest (if they mis-censure me) are part of those things, I care not for.
The Language is but indifferent; for, I af∣fected Matter more then Words. The Method is none at all: for, I was loath to make a busi∣nesse, of a recreation. And we know, he that rides abroad for his pleasure, is not tyed so

strictly to keepe High-waies, as hee that takes a Iourney.
If the intermixing of sleight and weighty things together, be offensiue to any. Let them vnderstand, that if they well obserue it, they shall finde a seriousnesse, euen in that which they imagine least momentary. And if they had aswell obserued the conditions of men, as I haue done: they would perceiue that the greatest number (like Children which are allu∣red to Schoole with points and Aples) must be drawne on with some friuolous expressions, or else will neuer listen to the graue precepts of Virtue; which, when they once heare, doe many times beget a delight in them, before they be aware.
Many Dishes of meate which we affect not may be so Cookt, that we shall haue a good ap∣petit vnto them: So, many men who take no pleasure to seeke Vertue in graue Treatises of Morallitie, may (perhaps) finding her vn∣lookt for, masked vnder the habit of a light Po∣em, growenamord on her beauty.
The foolish Canterbury Tale in my scourge of Vanity, (which I am now almost ashamed to read ouer) euen that, hath bin by some praysed

for a witty passage: And I haue heard diuers, seriously protest, that they haue much more feelingly bin informed, & moued to detest the Vanity of the humor there skoffed at, by that rude Tale, then they were by the most graue precepts of Phylosophy. And that makes me oftentimes affect some things, in regard of their vsefulnesse: which being considered according to the Method of Art, and rules of Scholler∣ship, would seeme ridiculous.
But I vse more words for my Apology then needes: If this will not giue you satisfaction, I am sorry I haue said so much; and, if you know which way, satisfie your selues. For, how I am resolued (if you thinke it worth the taking notise of) the booke will tell you. Farewell.

