



For as much as euerie true Minister is the Lords watch-man, and thereapon bound by the band of obedience towards God, to blow the Trumpet, and warne the people, when he seeth the sword of the Lord come uppon the land, that is, the Plague of Pestilence, dearth, Famine, War, or any suchlike: and for that I haue not hitherto seene or heard of anye warning giuen by any brother in publike of this sword of the lord laide uppon this land, by dearth of Corne and other commedities, although I esteemed my selfe the moste unworthie of all others, yet I could not with∣holde from the publishing of this little paper-worke, hoping that it might be a motine unto those that are better able to take this matter in hand, or at least a discharge unto my self of that Talent that God hath giuen me, the which name end enour if it please Almightie God to blesse, I shall account my trauel wel bastowed. Let that saying therefore of this pro∣phet Ezekiel written in the 33. Ch. ver. 7. & 8, be alwaies before thee, & in thy minde. So thou O sonne of man, I
 haue made thee a watch-man vnto the house Israel, Therefore thou shalt heare the word at my mouth, and admonish them from me, when I shall say vnto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shalt die the death, if thou doost not speake, nor admonish the wicked of his way, that wicked in an shall dye for his iniqui∣tie, but his blood will I require at thy hands. By both which doctrines or lessons of the Lord, we are taught how needfull and necessary a thing it is for the Minister of God to bestir himself both in season and out of season, in the work and word of the Lord. A sorry watchman would he be counted of his Captaine, that being set to watch the Citty, would sleep in the night and play in the day, and let the ene∣my come in which way he would: so careles no doubt are many at this day amongst us, who being set to watch ouer the house of the Lord, let the lords enemies come in and out, which way they list. For could there such crueltie or coue∣tousnes abound as doth, or such dearth and fam in encrease as is like to be, if the Trumpet of Gods word were well soun∣ded, and the people of this land duely admonished? no, no, it could not be, but some hearts would be opened: for doth not the Lord complaine that his people are destroyed for lack of knowledge? Hos. 4. 6. & could they or would they commit such things as are dayly don amongst vs, if they were right∣ly admonished of the same? Therfore looke unto it my bre∣theren, that ye be not found negligent in the worke of the Lord, I say, that ye be not hot nor cold, but zealous for the Lords glorie. Gine the Lord no rest day nor night, but call upon him continually, call upon them likewise that are cō∣mitted to your charge, that euery man may know his own
 disease, and break off sins by repeat once, and do the work of the Lord faithfully, as it becometh good disposers of those treasures committed unto your trust, not looking so much unto those things that concerne your own estate in this life, as unto the things of the Lord Iesus, his flocke, his lambes, his sheepe, his People, his Chruch, his king dome; which grace the Lord grant us for his Christs sake. Amen.

