



FOr as much as euerie true Minister is the Lords watch-man, and thereupon bound by the band of obedience towards God, to blow the Trumpet, and warne the people, when he seeth the sword of the Lord come vppon the land, that is, the Plague of Pestilence, dearth, Famine, War, or any such like: and for that I haue not hitherto seene or heard of anye warning giuen by any brother in publike of this sword of the lord laide vppon this land, by dearth of Corne and other commodities, although I esteemed my selfe the moste vnworthie of all others, yet I could not with∣holde from the publishing of this little paper-worke, hoping that it might be a motiue vnto those that are better able to take this matter in hand, or at least a discharge vnto my self of that Talent that God hath giuen me, the which mine endeuour if it please Almightie God to blesse, I shall account my trauel wel bestowed. Let that saying therfore of this pro∣phet Ezekiel written in the 33. Ch. ver. 7. & 8, be alwaies before thee, & in thy minde. So thou O sonne of man, I
 haue made thee a watch-man vnto the house Israel, Therefore thou shalt heare the word at my mouth, and admonish them from me, when I shall say vnto the wicked, O wicked man, thou shalt die the death, if thou doost not speake, nor admonish the wicked of his way, that wicked man shall dye for his iniqui∣tie, but his blood will I require at thy hands. By both which doctrines or lessons of the Lord, we are taught how needfull and necessary a thing it is for the Minister of God to bestir himself both in season, and out of season, in the work and word of the Lord. A sorry watchman would he be counted of his Captaine, that being set to watch the Citty, would sleep in the night and play in the day, and let the ene∣my come in which way he would: so careles no doubt are many at this day amongst vs, who being set to watch ouer the house of the Lord, let the lords enemies come in and out, which way they list. For could there such crueltie or coue∣tousnes abound as doth, or such dearth and famin encrease as is like to be, if the Trumpet of Gods word were well soun∣ded, and the people of this land duely admonished? no, no, it could not be, but some hearts would be opened: for doth not the Lord complaine that his people are destroyed for lack of knowledge? Hos. 4. 6. & could they or would they commit such things as are dayly don amongst vs, if they were right∣ly admonished of the same? Therfore looke vnto it my bre∣theren, that ye be not found negligent in the worke of the Lord, I say, that ye be not hot nor cold, but zealous for the Lords glorie. Giue the Lord no rest day nor night, but call vpon him continually, call vpon them likewise that are cō∣mitted to your charge, that euery man may know his own
 disease, and break off his sins by repentance, and do the work of the Lord faithsully, as it becōmeth good disposers of those treasures committed vnto your trust, not looking so much vnto those things that concerne your own estate in this life, as vnto the things of the Lord Iesus, his flocke, his lambes, his sheepe, his People, his Church, his kingdome; which grace the Lord grant vs for his Christs sake. Amen.

