


SIR,
NOting seriously the great securitie of the age in which wee liue; how men are addicted to pro∣fit and pleasure; and how they either cursorily, or else not at all, doe contemplate and prac∣tise that which concernes the life to come: I was animated, to propose these my vnpo∣lished labours to the view of Christian Readers. He that searcheth and seeth the hearts and reines, knoweth that the origi∣nall motiue exciting me to put pen to pa∣per,
 was a desire to bestow some Spirituall gift on the Church of God, for the confir∣mation of the godly, the consolation of the afflicted, the awaking of those whom sinne (like a poysonesome and drouzie Aspe) hath lulled asleepe in obdurate and daun∣gerous carelesnesse. I haue endeauored, according to the small portion of grace gi∣uen vnto me, to charme the deafe Adder; and by blowing of the Trumpet, to prepare the Lords Souldiers, which must fight his battels vnder Christs banner against iniqui∣tie; to the end they may be circumspect, and not preuented, or circumuented by their spirituall foes, that watch and walke continually, seeking whome they may de∣uoure. Many before me haue ranne a faire course in this race; and haue thrust their sharpe sickle into this haruest; in whose steps I gladly acknowledge my selfe to haue troden; and I freely & voluntarily confesse, that my penury hath gleaned some bundles of eares that lay scattered in their copious fieldes. To him that shall obiect, my draw∣ing of water out of the fountains of others, and my resounding (as an Eccho) of their voyces; I reply, that as Aeschilus the Po∣et, was accustomed to say, that his Trage∣dies
 were but small dishes of great Homers Suppers; so my slender repast may be cal∣led, the fragments and reliques of the de∣licate dishes of Learned, Christian, and Godly Authors. And to them that shall twi, that heere is scarce ought written, that hath not been published before; what shall I retorte also? But that, either the forme is transformed; or the language al∣tered; or (at least) the vsage of the latter Prophets and Euangelists imitated; who haue repeated much, and oftentimes ver∣batim trāscribed out of those that wrought before them, as their purpose and occasion required. Is not this euident in Deuterono∣mie, the Cronicles, and the Gospels? Is Paul ashamed to write the same things to the Phillippians? Nay, doth he not esteeme it a sure and behoouefull matter for them? Is not the generall Epistle of Iude the bro∣ther of Iames, a compendious abridge∣ment and recapitulation of the latter Epistle of Saint Peter? Therefore an intent, to prooue our doctrine consonant to auncient and approued writers, (as Oecumenius, Theophilact, and other, aswell old as Mo∣derne haue done,) is not to bee misliked nor reprooued. But doe I frame an Apo∣logie
 in this respect? and not rather inferre with an eminent, sound, and profound Di∣uine, that he that helps himselfe with the precedent workes of others, cannot iustly be blamed; since the holy Apostle affirmes that all things are ours; and are ordained for helpes and furtherances to bring vs to CHRIST IESVS. What successe will accompany my enterprise, I leaue to him, who, though Paul Plant, and Apollo water, yet onely giueth the increase. If I haue brought but the least stone, or sticke, that may serue for the promoting of Gods Edi∣fice; If I haue presented but one threed, that may be vsed in the garnishing of Christ Sanctuarie; If I haue reclaimed but one sinner from the path of perdition, vnto the way of Paradise; so that any shall heereaf∣ter say vnfainedly, my Soule hath been bet∣tered by this Booke; this is the marke I ai∣med at; and praised be God, from whom all good and perfect gifts descend. Some readers are still desirous of Novelties, not regarding to performe what they haue for∣merly learned: like guests, that disdaine the meate that is set before them, euer longing after change and varietie of dishes. Some Readers respect not what they read, so they
 be reading: Like thirstie trauellers, that drinke of euery fountaine, not considering whether the water be wholsome, or hurt∣full. Some Readers procure diuerse Books, and boast of the store and multitude of thē, though they apprehēd the doctrine but in small measure: Like those that furbish many weapons, and keepe them in their houses; but are commonly vnexpert, ey∣ther to defend, or offend, when they are drawne to tryall. Some readers vse Books, more for shew and ostentation, then for study of Godlines, and reformation of manners: Like Children, that burne lamps and candles in the night, but either watch not, or else vse no exercise, whence profit and commoditie may redound. At a word, some readers reprehend what they perceiue not, or depraue what they vnderstand; misliking matter or methode, or phrase, or all these: Like the captious beholders of a garden, that reiect hearbs and flowers, whose vertue and operation they are jgno∣rant of; and blame the contriuing and plotting of that which they haue often seene. In this variable dispositiō of readers, it is not possible to satisfie the appetite and expectation of all: my confusion craues
 order; my harshnes desires a sponge; my shallownes longs for waight and depth; and therefore I am vrged to intreate the skilfull, to pardon the defects; the curious, to wink at the escapes; the vnlearned, to suspend their censure; the resolued, to beware of proposterous and intemperate zeale; the lukewarme, and them that are frozen in their dregs, to suffer the words of exhorta∣tion; finally, I entreat all, vnto whose hands these vnadorned Treatises shall come, to embrace my good meaning in the armes of Christian loue and curtesie; and to re∣member the blessed Apostles Maxime, that a man is accepted according to that he hath, and not according to that hee hath not, if there be first a willing mind. Finally, least my preface resemble a swolne head, disproportionable to the dwarfelike body following; or become another Myndus, that had ample gates, it selfe beeing a very little Cittie; and therefore the Cynick flou∣tingly aduised the Cittizens to shut the gates, least the whole Cittie should goe out at them: aboue all other, I submissely im∣plore your fauour, for the acceptation and patronizing of my slender trauell; beseech∣ching you not to be displeased, that I haue
 beene emboldned, to dedicate this simple worke vnto you. I was prouoked by your zeale to pure and vndefiled religiō, by your vnpartiall regard of Iustice, by your feruent affection to benefit your Countrey, and by your loue to Learning and the learned; (which vertues, as they are infused into you by the Author of all sincere vertue, so they seeme in you to be hereditarie, and deriued and transfused from your gracious Progenitors;) by these things I was pro∣uoked, to yeeld this testimony of your de∣serts, as a consenting harmonie and gene∣rall applause of the multitude. And thus praying the Lord, to multiply and continue his mercies vpon you and yours; I humble commend this declaration of my reuerent and due conceit of your worthines vnto your selfe, and your selfe vnto the Almigh∣tie.

