


SIR,
ATriviall Businesse hath made an Intrusion upon yours of weight: A very Schoole point (so in ac∣count) but worthy a ve∣ry Wise Mans Considera∣tion, even yours. I need say little of it, it is big-enough and can speake for it selfe. An old and ordinary subject it is, but new∣ly handled, and in no ordinary way. I will say no more of it but this, and it is enough; It
 but seldome or never when the Elder are disinherited.
Your hand was put forth to uphold this pillar, that was not Substantive enough to stand of himselfe, nor had so much wis∣dome as to cleave to a Nother; so, though he had your hand, yet he stood not, he is falne: So it must needs be sooner or later with every man, who hath not a single eye to that invisible Hand, who is the Great Supporter of a Man, and onely makes the house a Blessing: The low Cottage, as well as the high Throne, is established by Righteousnesseb, it is spoken more thenrov. Chap. vers. 12. vers. 28. vers. 5. vers. 14. n. 41. 32. once, nay Twice doubled, as the c Dreame, for the thing is certaine.
Since he fell we have been in our Ruines, and in them, some of us, having recourse to your selfe, found you as ready and active as you were able; you said you would doe it, and what you said was done, your word was your deed. This and more, whereof none can speake more then can my selfe, renders you honoured, I think of all, that in a faire and cleare way
 (else you will not heare of it,) have had occasion to use you: And my intendment here, is but to tender my acknowledge∣ment thereof, and you cannot be offended that I shew my selfe thankfull.
I could give you Titles of respect, &c. and not flatter neither, as the manner is, and as some doe, who feare not their Ma∣ker Job. 32.. But what are Mans eulogies in a wise Mans esteeme? Nothing: They, whom the King of Kings will honour, are honoured indeed; and they who honour Him, shall be so honoured, that's certain. You will give me leave then to leave the common way of complements, a way I could never comply with, and to be your Remembrancer in two things; they are very grave and weighty both.
1. God hath given you a rich portion in things below; It is a point of your ex∣cellent wisdome, not to think these The portion (It was, and is the Righteous Mans Sinne He received his good things not as he should, as a pledge of Gods further favour, but as a full and compleate re∣ward: as a propriatory not as a Steward and an Ac∣countant: he accounted his life as his, and as if there had been no other; Bish. Andr. pag. 316.) either during or satisfying: not During; of such portions it will be said, as once it was, In the Time-past, Thou had'st
 them; pleasures, profits, honours; They were, now they are not; And when they were, and thou had'st them, They were not satisfying; They filled, They wearied thee, They did not satisfie, no more then the East winde doth satisfie an hungry sto∣mack. There are three markes upon the Rich-mans folly, which makes it very re∣markable.
1. He said to his soule, Thou hast much goods; That was a great mistake; They were the goods of the Body, not of the soule: Barnes full, and Coffers full, and yet the soule not the fuller, not the richer; perhaps the poorer, the leaner; The more emptinesse, the more of that fulnesse.
2. Laid up for many yeers; A cleere mistake that too; for, that Night, the soule was pluckt away. But grant a continu∣ance for many yeers, a thousand twice told; yet an end comes at last; They must be eternall good-things, which an eter∣nall soule can relish and enjoy, being su∣table and proportionable thereunto.
3. Take thy ease; That was a third de∣ceit
 exceeding all; for suppose, The soule continue with the Body, and the Body with the Goods: Soule with Body; Body with Goods, wife, children, riches, health, honours, all continued together, there were no parting: suppose it so; yet we know, for so we read, that the Mountaine (it contains all the fore-mentioned) may be strong, yet the Man weake upon it; The Mountaine may continue, yet the Man may be troubled; It was Davids case: All is in Gods face towards us: if that shine up∣on a Man, all is well and Lightsome; if that be clouded or hid, all is nothing; The Man will be troubled. God can, without Taking the soule away, or goods away, He can put the Spirit of a Man into such a condition of darknesse, as that all those comforts shall be to a Man, but as the white of an egge, no more relishing. As there be joyes the world gives not; so are there afflictions, the world inflicts not, saith a Learned Divine Mr. G. Childe of Light. 6.. There is a breaking of the bones, whereof David
 complained, when there is not a bone in the body out of joynt: The soule may be broke with sorrows, vvhen there is a con∣fluence of vvorldly comforts round about us. And this requires our Marke for mighty reasons: for it is as difficult a thing to goe-out of our selves to God a∣alone for comfort; as to goe-out of our selves to Christ alone for Righteousnes. The Rich-mans Tower is as strong now as ever it was, in his conceit  Prov. 18. 11., and he is as firmely bottomed upon his Mountain; and he speaks as confidently now to his soule, Take Thy Ease, as ever he did; for though the History be old, the practice is new. But this is our wisedome, and for this we shall be counted understanding Men, if looking for ease and Comfort, we look up to God with a single eye and trust per∣fectly on Him; for enquire from one end of the heaven to the other: Aske of the Barnes and Winepresses, they are the ful∣lest and fattest places under the Sunne, aske them or any Creature else, whether they
 can give ease to the soule? They will an∣swer, no, it is not in them: though yet they can contribute a great deale, But then the light of Gods countenance must shine through them, if not, they contribute No∣thing; That He may be known and ac∣knowledged to be the God of all comfort and the Father, not of some, but of all con∣solations. What ever outward comforts we have, the comfort of our spirits is from God. So then we are driven to this con∣clusion; God onely makes the soule to Rest, and gives it ease; and that is never, till He deales bountifully with it Psal. 117. 7., till He satisfies it with Himselfe a sutable and propor∣tionable-good both During and Satis∣fying.
The soule is scattered and lost, when it is parcelled-out to variety of things: It can∣not fixe now, It doth but roule like a Ship at Anchor in a Tempest; It must be brought to the Vnity of one Desire and one love; Till then, it will be as unstable as the water; as restlesse as a Meteor, still tossed,
 and in doubtfull suspence: So Truth it selfe Assureth by that very Metaphor. Luk. 12. 29. Psal. 9. 112.. But, ô the peace, the securitie of that person, whose heart is fixed trusting in the Lord! he hath left Cisterns, Creature-comforts, and is gone to the Fountaine, where he shall be satisfied; he is got to the Rock of his sal∣vation, where is an abiding; and now he shall stand fixed and firme upon his foun∣dation, like the Rock, against which the raging waves may beat, but shall be bro∣ken; Nay, more fixed is he then so, faster he stands then the hills or mountaines, yet, because of their setled standing, are they called perpetuall hills, everlasting Moun∣taines b. 3. 6.. So fixed is this person; and it must needs be so, for he findes underneath the everlasting Armes Deut. 33 27..
I know, I have transgressed my Rule at this point, for I have been too long upon it; Yet I pray you, doe not think so, be∣cause it is an high point, and I should say yet more unto it, because it is so high, and of such mightie concernment; for this is it
 which, being well observed, will hold-up a mans Spirits, when the body must fall asunder from it selfe; and make the heart rejoyce, when the eie-strings must break: But I consider your person and place, there∣fore I wil winde up all and your thoughts together in one word, which you often meet with; I will onely annex Selah here, a word, which sounds high and gives an elevation to the minde answerable to the matter; so your thoughts are raised now, reaching after good-things, which shall endure as long, as Eternitie is long, for ever; And this is to be Truely ex∣alted; This, in a True sense, to be high∣minded.
II. God hath given you a Name upon earth: He hath given you to know too (and you blesse His Name for it) that here∣in is the least degree of your glorie. A Name upon earth is nothing, though it should endure while the earth endures; Nothing that, to eternity, after which the soule is Biased.

You may reade of one, who had a Crown set upon his head, consisting of many Crowns, for he was an Emperour Aug. de Civ. dei lib 5. 26., yet he would not make that the Crowne of his rejoycing; but this was it, That the Name of Christ was called upon him; that he accounted his honour. An honour in∣deed, which reacheth from earth to hea∣ven, there to be perpetuated; and such ho∣nour have all His Saints. And this Name you account your chiefe honour also, for it is called upon you; And you must count it your chiefe work too: For I must tell you this with it, and then I have told you all; It is the hardest thing in the world, To be a Christian indeed, and Indeed to answer that Name, for it is an hard thing for selfe to crucifie selfe; To offer a holy violence to ones selfe, even to the plucking out, or cut∣ting off that, which is most pleasing to Na∣ture: yet so we must doe (saith one , &c. Clm. Alex. Stro. li. 7. pag. 500.) if we wil be Christians Indeed: And we must believe him, for he assureth us so, from the mouth of Truth it selfe, The violent take it
 by force. We must labour here, if we look to rest hereafter; if any think other wise, he is deceived: We cannot think to goe-in at a narrow gate, and finde no straitnesse. A harder matter it is to tread the way of ver∣tue, then to keep a narrow path in the dark∣est night Book of pro∣vidence. chap. 4. 5. , &c. The flesh must not live now that it may live hereafter: It must die now, that it may not die. Chrys. on Rom. 8. Hom. 13.. These are Chrysostomes words englished, and they make cleare demon∣stration, That, though it be a matter of ease and no labour to be a Christian In Name; yet it is a point of difficultie requi∣ring labour and strife both, to be such an one Indeed. Herein then is your strife, and work (wherein you will be Abundant, be∣cause of the Abundant reward) to answer this worthy Name worthily; And I pray heartily to the God of power to lead you by the hand, and strengthen you in the work, for it is a Mighty work; But if He put forth His hand, and your eye be upon the recompence of reward, you will breake through all difficulties (as is said of Abra∣ham Chrys. upon Gen. Chap. 12. Hom. 31.) like Spiders web's: for you are cal∣led, not, as was he, from one Land to ano∣ther,
 but from earth to heaven, yet he plucked up his feet and so ranne: That you may doe so, even so runne, that you may obtaine the end of your race, your Crown, is the prayer of him, whom you have en∣gaged, St. to print my selfe

