





Most Reuerend Fathers, &c.
THe many pious Instructions, and Christian Pledges, which I haue at your hands, and by your meanes receiued of our holy Mother the Church, haue so oft informed me, in that Wherewithall a yong man ought to cleanse his way; and so much confirmed me in the comfortable study thereof: 
That (howsoeuer the vaine inclinations of youth temp∣ted the contrary) I was euer conscionably fearefull of trifling away all my first age, in the pleasures of Sensua∣litie. Yea, so often haue you rung in my eares that gra∣tious and most serious Memorandum of the holy Ghost; Remember thy Creator in the dayes of thy youth, &c. That (more often then I should haue beene) I was thereby put in minde, both to contemplate the works and mer∣cies of the Almighty: and to endeauour also (as the slendernesse of my vnderstanding, and the frailties of my yeeres would giue leaue) so to imploy my selfe, that the little time I purposed to spend well, might (if it were possible) produce something, which (being as well profitable to others as to my selfe) would make a little recompence for those many dayes, my youth and the temptations of the world, would force me idlely to consume.
And I thanke God; somewhat hath beene already effected, which (notwithstanding my owne personall vnworthinesse) the Church hath vouchsafed with a mo∣therly approbation, both to receiue at my hand, and by her reuerend Authority to deliuer ouer also vnto others: Whereby I haue beene encouraged, to proceed according to those beginnings, and (as a testimony as wll of gratitude, as of obedience) now to consecrate vnto the vse, of good men, and in the name of your RRces this; the little gaine of my one Talent. Being a Metricall Translation of those sacred Canonicall Songs dispersed in the Old Testament, and anciently vsed to be sung by the Primitiue Churches: My Thankefulnesse it witnesseh in this; that I offer vp the best fruit of my la∣bours vnto those, by whom I was first taught how to be so imployed: and my obedience is also testified, both in thus submitting it vnto your graue Censures, and in 
hauing thus, according to your desires, imployed my poore faculty in the seruice of the Church. For nei∣ther by any vaine-glorious humour of my owne, nor by the motion of any giddy Seperatists, but by some of you, was I first called and encouraged to this worke. In the performance whereof, I haue been euer mindfull of that Religious reuerence, which was fit to be obserued in so weighty an vndertaking. And I hope, I haue so effected the same; as Gods Maiestie may be praised in it, your RRces, pleased with it, good Christians benefit∣ted by it, and my owne soule receiue comfort therein.
The liberty I haue taken, and the manner of my pro∣ceeding in this Translation hath been little diffrent from that, which (in my Preparation to the Psalter) I professed to vse in the Translation of the Psalmes; and I doubt not, but the greatest fault which shall be disco∣uered therein, vpon notice giuen, may be asoone (al∣most) amended as found out.
That to the glory of God they may be sung either in publike, or in priuate, as your RRces shall see cause; I haue endeauoured to procure from some of our bst Msitians, such Notes as (being easie, and proper to the matter) might the more accommodate them, for the praise of God, according to the laudable custome of sin∣ging now in vse. Moreouer; that such as are delighted with those Exercises, may not make meere sensual Mu∣sicke, but expresse melody both cceptable to God and profitable to themselues, by knowing the Vse, and mea∣ning of what they sing. I haue (according to the Truth, and agreeable to the doctrine of the Ancient Fathers) prefixed a briefe Prologue before euery Song. Where∣in I first shew the generall meaning and scope of it, ac∣cording to the litterall Sense: then, how in the spirituall and most principal Sense, it hath respect to the Misteries 
of our Christian Religion; and that each Song doth ap∣pertaine vnto vs, vpon some occasions, in this age of the Church, as properly as it did to them, for whom they were first composed. Which in the Arguments them∣selues, is so euidently and particularly declared, as I hope it will be well perceiued, it was not my owne idle fantasie which directed me.
This your RRces doe well know, and how the vse of these Hymnes hath been continued in the Primitiue Churches; yea, and retained euen to this day in many Congregations, as not impertinent to vs of the last A∣ges. And to me it seemeth they neuer were (all at once) so much vse-full, as now in these times, if the ne∣cessities of this Age be wll considered. For which Cause; being thus to your hands presented, ready fitted for vse, according to the kinde of Musicke now best ap∣proued of for subiects of this nature; And seeing also, they are both desired, and may without any knowne in∣conuenience be generally admitted of: I doubt not but you will be pleased to recommend the practise of them to all those who are willingly disposed for such Exerci∣ses. For, though some scoffing Ismaelites may deride this addition of Songs, to that ouer-many which (as they thinke) the Church already hath. Neuerthelesse; You, who by your experiences finde, that the humane nature in all things requires variety, to keepe it from loathing; and by your spirituall knowledges are assured, that God prouides for his Church, neither more nor lesse of any thing then shall be requisite. Euen you also know; that these are not to be accouted a vaine, or burthensome addition to our Psalmes: especially when the Apocri∣phall Inuentions of mn may there haue place.
And when these shall be compared with those Mea∣surs we haue hitherto made vse of in our deuotions, I 
doubt not (seeing the matter is of the same Authority) but the manner of expressing it shall make this no lesse worthy of entertainment then that; (and though I should say more worthy, I thinke it were no arrogance.) For (if I mistake not) as naturally haue I exprest the sense of these Songs, and as plainely as most prose Translati∣ons haue yet done. And, if any indifferent man, who knowes the Poesie and power of the English tongue may be my Iudge; I assure my selfe, hee will censure the expression to be such, as that it shall neither be obscure to the meanest capacities, nor contemptible to the best Iudgments: but becomming the purpose it was intended for. I haue not lept on a sudden into this employment; but in studies of this nature haue now consumed al∣most the yeeres of an Apprentiship. And if it be well weighed: First, how full of short sentences and suddain breakings off, such like scriptures are: Secondly, how fre∣quently these particles For, But, and such like, which are gracefull in the Originall, will seeme to obscure the de∣pendancy of sense in the English phrase, if they be not carefully needed: Thirdly, how harsh the Musicke will be, if the Pauses be not vsually reduced vnto the same place, which they haue in the first Stanza of each Song: Fourthly, how many other differences there must be betweene this kinde of Lyricall verse and what is smoothed onely for the reading: Fiftly, how the Tran∣slator is tyed to make choise, not of what is easiest, but of that kind of verse which may become best the nature of euery Song: Sixtly, how he is bound not onely to the Sense, but to the very words (or words of the same pow∣er) which another hath vsed: Lastly, how beside all this strictnesse, he is euen in conscience also constrained, so to expresse things by circumlocution (when he shall be forced to it) as that, although his phrase be of the same 
power, it will not be warrantable vnlesse it be so also done, that the manner of speaking, peculiar to these writings, may be all the way perceiued by those vnder∣standing Readers who are acquainted therewith. I say, If all these circumstances be well considered (and how difficult they make it, to close vp euery Stanza with a Period, or some such point as the voyce may a while decently pause there) I am both perswaded a worke of of this nature, would neither be hastily aduentured vp∣on againe by any other; nor my labour herein be alto∣gether disesteemed: who haue bin mindful of all those, & many other particulars, considerable in such a busines.
And now; that it may be finished with more exactnes, then my owne industry is able to adde vnto it.
(If in any part of these Songs the genuine Sense be not yet well expressed,) vpon reason giuen, and the lst notise vouchsafed from any of your RRces, after the view of this; I shall be ready to amend it, according to your directions. Or if the Tunes haue not wll suted the nature of them; Those who haue formerly bestowed their paines (and many other also) will be liberall of their best Art, more to apt them for the glory of God. For, although this Booke hath already the allowance appointed by Authority, and so much the appro∣bation of many other good men, as that they de∣sire it generally published (at least) for their priuate deuotions: Yet, knowing these vndertakings can neuer be too perfect, I haue purposed this Impression for no other end, but to be distributed among your RRces, and my other speciall friends. That if there be any ouer∣sight committed, or ought necessary omitted in them; it might be reformed and supplied in the next Edition, by warning and instruction from some of You.
But, I hope it shall not be found very defectiue; And 
in my Epistle to make answere vnto those many ob∣iections, which vulgar vnderstandings will be apt to frame against this vndertaking; I thinke it also need∣lesse. Because you, to whom (onely) I at this time pre∣ferre it, are all sufficient enough without information from me, to perceaue how friuolous those doubts and cauils be, which the weakenesse of such are apt to inuent.
And if your RRces be herewith satisfied, I value not how the wits of our age shall censure the Stile I haue v∣sed; for though many of them are well acquainted with the raptures in Hero and Leander, the expressions in Venus and Adonis, and with the elegancies becomming a wanton Sonnet; yet in these Lyricks, in the naturall straine of these Poems, in the power of these voyces, and in the proprieties befitting these spirituall things, their sensuall capacities, are as ignorant as meere Ideots: and had it the Poeticall phrases they fancy, I should hate it; or were it such as they might praise, I would burne it.
That which I feare will be the greatest blemish to this labour; is, my owne indignity. For I must con∣fesse, I am the more vnworthy to be imployed in these holy things: Seeing I am none of those, who are allowed to intermeddle with the Mysteries of our Christian Sanctuary. Neuerthelesse, if what I haue per∣formed be allowable in it selfe, and by your approbati∣ons once consecrated to a holy Vse, doubtlesse (if no mans Will stand for a Reason) it shal be no lesse auaile∣able, then if some eminent Father of the Church had la∣boured therein. And whensoeuer it shall be againe vn∣dertaken, this I am certaine of; No man will go about it with a heart more desirous to be rectified, or more fearefull to offend against the M•tie of these Scriptures.
And I trust no man will enuy me the honour of this employment: For, though it be no meane contentment to a Christian (whose soule is touched with the vnder∣standing of these things) to be any way an instrument of Gods glory, yet (if we truly consider it) that which I haue aspired vnto therby, makes me in regard of You, or in respect but of the meanest of those who are admit∣ted to administer the blessed Sacraments, no more then a hewer of wood, or a drawer of water, for the old Sacri∣fices, was in comparison of the Leuite, who offered on the golden Alter.
God knowes with what minde I haue proceeded in this endeuour; and therefore Reward and Acceptati∣on from aboue the Sunne I am certaine of. But the course of things below the Sunne, I haue so well consi∣dered, that should I reach the perfection of what I went about, yet all my labour might be no to purpose. For as the Preacher saith, Eccl. 9.11. I haue seene vnder the Sunne, that the race is not to the swift, nor the battell to the strong, nor yet bread to the wise, nor riches to men of vn∣derstanding, nor fauour to men of knowledge; but time and chance commeth to them all.
If my paines shall be aiudged vnnecessary, yet my comfort is, I haue onely spent my owne meanes about it, and not vnder the colour or pretence of being im∣ployed, fedde my selfe fat on the patrimonies of the Church, without effecting (or so much as intending) any thing to her aduantage. And if it be thought pro∣fitable; that profit shall be gained without hinderance to any other mans preferment. For I neuer intend (though my necessities were more importunate) to peti∣tion for so much as a lay-Prebend in recompence of my labours. Only your benediction, your loues, & your ho∣ly Prayers, next vnto Gods glory, is my principall aime. 
And seeing neither the manner of my education, nor the course of my life, nor the performance of this worke (though I will not iustifie my selfe) can yet ap∣peare to be such as may disparage the Church to re∣ceiue these endeauours at my hands: So much confi∣dence haue I in your Fatherly dispositions towards all well affected persons, of what outward condition soe∣uer they be, that I am verely perswaded you would not for a few ouer-sights, sleight all my paines; but rather to the encouragement of others (for no affront in these studies can dishearten me) graciously vouchsafe in some measure to accept what I here make humble proffer of vnto your RRces. Which if you please to doe, I shall euer acknowledge my selfe obliged for your Christian respect, and study such things, as (perhaps) will make me hereafter more worthy of your esteeme.
So, presuming that if I haue deliuered Reason, it shal be with your Wisedomes, euery whit as Authenticke as if I had begun, continued, and ended this Epistle with the Prouerbs, or ouer-worne Sentences of olde Au∣thors: I humbly wish (according to the custome of my Countrey on this day) a happy NEVV-YEERE to all your RRces, and to the whole Church, in her seuerall af∣ires, a most prosperous successe.
Ianuary the 1. 1621.
