



SIR;
MVch hath beene the re∣spect, and many the courtesies; which, I haue receiued from your no∣ble Father. And the greatest re∣quitall

I can giue him; is, to make my selfe (as far as in mee lyeth) such a one, as that hee neede not repent, nor be asha∣med of the respect hee hath showne mee: and that, if I should dye vnable to repay his kindnesses; he might yet, haue some cause, to think his fauors not altogether lost vpon mee. Nay rather, might reckon them among the good deedes he hath done) in regard I haue made vse of them, (not to fol∣low my pleasures, but) to ena∣ble me in some good endea∣uours.
Of which, this little volume is a part; & knowing, I should

well witnesse my loue vnto him, whensoeuer I gaue good testimony of mine honest affe∣ction towards you. Lo, as a pledge therof, I consecrate to your vse, these Exercises. And, with your name, deliuer them ouer to the world. That, when, and wheresoeuer they shall be read; you may be remembred, both for a louer of these kinds of studies, & a Fauourer of his, who was desirous to bee ho∣nestly employed. For, such haue you approued your selfe towards mee, both in your courteous familiarity: and by that free accesse, which in my meditations, I haue alwayes

had to your Library.
Accept then these papers; & let it not be tedious vnto you, sometime to read them ouer. For, though I may be thought fitter by many, to accompany you in the way of pleasures: then to present you with any sound precepts of morality, or Religion. Yet, I hope, you shall finde me an Instrument: readier to encourage you, in e∣uery of those vertues, wherwith your education hath acquain∣ted your youth: then to whi∣sper ought, that may bring you in loue with those vanities; whereunto, ouer-many other of our Gentry, are so much en∣clinde.

For, though that way, I might haue more bettered my fortunes, and esteeme, a∣mong some men. This way, I am sure, I shall better satisfie my conscience, and my dutie to God.
Neuerthelesse, I prefer not this to instruct you; but, to be a Remembrancer, of those things, in which you haue al∣readie beene instructed. For, your good Father, hath not onely largely prouided for you, the temporall felicities: but, asmuch, as in him lieth, prepared you for that Blessed∣nes, which is treated of in these Exercises. More he cannot do;

seeing, it must be euerie mans particular endeauor, that shall purchase him this treasure, be∣ing the most invaluable that can be. For, the greatest Monarch of the world, hath neither power to giue, nor take it, from you. Yea, and without it, the more of other blessings you possesse, the more miserable they will make you. But, I know, you will bee happie in the prosecution therof, that you may treble that happines, in the possession of it. And, to that end, you haue my pray∣ers, who am

