



THese Hymnes (Dread Soueraign) hauing diuers waies receiued life from your MAIESTIE, (as well as that approbation which the Church alloweth) are now imprinted ac∣cording to your Royall Priuiledge, to come abroad vnder your Gracious Prote∣ction. And what I deliuered vnto your Princely view at seuerall times, I here pre∣sent again, incorporated into one Volume. The first Part wherof, comprehends those Canonicall Hymnes, which were written, and left for our instruction, by the Holy Ghost. And those are not onely plainely and briefly expressed in Lyrick verse: but

by their short Prefaces, properly applied also to the Churches particular occasions in these times. Insomuch, that (howeuer some neglect them as impertinent) it is thereby apparant, that they appertaine no lesse to vs, then vnto those, in whose times they were first composed. And (if the con∣iecture of many good and learned men de∣ceiue them not) the later Part, containing Spirituall Songs, appropriated to the seue∣rall times and occasions obseruable in the Church of England (together with briefe Arguments, declaring the purpose of those Obseruations) shall become a meanes both of encreasing Knowledge, and Christian Conformitie within your Dominions: Which, no doubt, your MAIESTIE wisely foresawe, when you pleased to graunt and command, that these Hymnes should be annexed to all Psalme-bookes in English Meeter. And I hope, you shall thereby encrease both the honour of God, and of your MAIESTIE. For, these Hymnes, and the knowledge which they offer, could no other way, with such certainety, and so little inconuenience, be conueied to the

common people, as by that meanes which your MAIESTIE hath graciously prouided.
And now (maugre their malice, who la∣bour to disparage & suppresse these Helps to Deuotion) they shall, I trust, haue free scope to worke that effect which is desi∣red; and to which end, I was encouraged to translate and compose them. For, how meanly soeuer some men may thinke of this Endeauour; I trust the successe shall make it appeare, that the Spirit of God was the first moouer of the worke. Wher∣in, as I haue endeuored to make my Expressions such as may not bee con∣temptible to men of best vnderstandings: So I haue also labored to sute them to the nature of the Subiect, and the common Peoples capacities, without regard of catching the vaine blasts of Opinion. The same also hath beene the ayme of Master Orlando Gibbons (your MAIESTIES seruant, and one of the Gentlemen of your Honourable Chappell) in fitting them with tunes. For, he hath chosen to make his musicke agreeable to the matter, and

what the common apprehension can best admit; rather then to the curious Fancies of the Time: Which path both of vs could more easily haue troden. Not ca∣ring therfore, what any of those shall cen∣sure, who are more apt to controule, then to consider; I commit this to Gods bles∣sing and Your fauourable Protection: Humbly beseeching your MAIESTIE, to accept of these our Endeuours; and praying God to sanctifie both vs and this Worke to his glory: Wishing also (most vnfainedly) euerlasting consolations to your MAIESTIE, for those temporall Comforts you haue vouchsafed me, and that felicity here, which may aduance your happinesse in the life to come. Amen.

