



Anagrams on the name of Sir William Sidney
Knight, deceased.
Gulielmus Sidneius
En vilis, gelidus sum.
*But*
 Ei' nilluge, sidus sum.

BEside our great and Vniuersall care,
(Wherein you one of our chiefe sharers are)
To adde more griefe vnto your griefs begunne,
Whilst we a Father lost, you lost a Sonne,
Whose hapelesse want had more apparant beene,
But darkened by the Other 'twas vnseene,
Which well perceiuing, loth indeed was I,
The Memory of one so deare should die:
And thereupon I the occasion tooke
For to present your Honor with this Booke,
(Vnfained, and true mournefull Elegies,
And for our HENRIE, my last Obsequies)
That he, which did your Sonnes late death obscure,
Might be the Meane to make his fame endure:

But this may but renew your former woe:
Indeed and I, might well haue doubted soe,
Had not I knowne, that Vertue which did place you
Aboue the common sort, did also grace you
With guifts of Minde, to make you more excell,
And farre more able, Passions rage to quell:
You can, and may with moderation moane,
For all your comfort is not lost with one,
Children you haue, whose Vertues may renew;
The comfort of decaying Hopes in you.
Praised be God, for such great blessngs giuing,
And happy you, to haue such comforts liuing.
Nor doe I thinke it can be rightly sed,
You are vnhappy in this One that's dead:
For notwithstanding his first Anagram,
Frights, withThe English f his Ana∣rams. Behold, now cold, and vile I am:
Yet in his last, he seemes more cherefull farre,
And Ioyes, withThe English f his Ana∣rams. Soft, Mourne not, I am a Starre,
Oh great preferment: what could he aspire
That was more high, or you could more desire?
Well, since his soule in heau'n such glory hath,
My Loue bequeathes his Graue, this Epitaph.


Here vnder lies a SIDNEY: And what than?
Dost thinke here lies but relicks of a man?
Know;pitaph. 'tis a Cabanet did once include,
VVIT, BEAVTIE, SVVEETNES, COVRT'SEY, FORTITVDE.


So let him rest, to Memory still deare,
Till his Redeemer in the Clowdes appeare
The while, accept his VVill, who meaning plaine,
Doth neither write for praise, nor hope of Gaine:
And now your Teares, and priuate Griefe, forbeare,
And turne againe, to this our Publike care.


