


SIR.
YOur deputie Master Loggins, hearing that I had some ancient notes of the Customes and Or∣ders concerning Swanns, desired me that you might have a sight of them, which I have sent you; together with certaine Presidents or formes of Commissions for keeping Swanheards Courts, and Copies of ancient Patents, which I recei∣ved of a very honest gentle-man Master Edward Clerke of Lincolnes Inne Esquire, Father to Sir Edward Clerke one of the Masters of the Chaun∣cery. These he delivered mee about 18. yeares agoe at what time Sir Lawrence Tanfeeld late Lord Chiefe Baron, and my selfe had a deputa∣tion
from Sir William Androwes, of that walke, which Master Loggins now hath from you. Master Clerke was before mee, but as I remem∣ber he told me he had his deputation from my Lord of Buckhurst, and not from Sir Iames Mer∣vin. Howsoever, the titles are truely by mee transcribed, as I received them written with his owne hand. There are Orders also Printed; and yet somewhat differing from these, which Orders were made at one particular Court long agoe. And at a Court holden at Burford in the county of Oxon about 15. yeares agoe by the sayd Sir Lawrence Tanfeeld and others, some new Orders were made; which Sir Laurence Tan∣feeld sayd were Warrantable by the Commis∣sion, and lawfull to be made, where and when they were fit and necessary for the preservation of Swannes. Yet so that those particular Or∣ders may bee altered upon occasion: But the ancient Customes contained under the name of Orders may not. There hath beene so little care taken for preserving and publishing these ancient Customes, that they are not of all Gam∣sters knowne. And your deputies commonly send their servants among us, who as they are more or lesse covetous, so do they impose more
or lesse upon us: And when wee that are the ancient gamsters oppose them, wee have some contention. You shall therefore (Sir) doe well, if comparing these with your other notes, you finde them to serve generally for England, as well as for our river of Thames: That you give to all your Deputies, and to all Commis∣sioners copies, that so all gamsters may know the certaine Customes which are to bee kept: And so I bid you heartily Farewell.

From Alborne in Wiltshire, this 26th of Ianuary, 1631.
