



Ingenious and learned Academians, I do not present this my small about vnto you, intreating hereby your patronage thereof. For how can I expect so greate a fauour since most of you dissent from me in that Re∣ligion which is here mantayned: neither as houlding this poore worke, for any art therein, worthy your iu∣diceons vew. For I am not onely conscious to my self of myne owne weaknes: but do also grearly admyre your pearcing and cleare eyed indgmentes.
To you then I exhibite it, as appealing to the Mo∣ther (such is my confidence in your impartiall and euen censures) as Iudg betwene her sonne and my self. For wheareas my designed aduersary at this present M. Whyte, (to whom your vniuersity haith first geuen his education for literature, and since hath graced him with the inuesture of Doctorship) in answear to a Catholic Treatise (first pēned by one of my fellow-labourers in the vineyard of Christ) haith written a most virulent and scandalous booke, entituling it, The way to the true Church. The which booke was fownde so full of corruptions, vntruthes, and other such baisse matter, that it was houlden in the opinion of many great and learned Preistes, rather worthy of contempt then answear.
Neuerthelesse M. Whyte, not onely in the Preface of this said booke, but also in diuers places of his se∣cond worke, vaunteth much of his sincere dealing in the first, as particulerly pag. 129. where saying that it is the profession of Iesuites in their wryting, to rayde bookes, counterfeat, forge, and lye: he then thus ambiti∣ously

concludeth. My aduersary can not present the Reader with one conclusion (meaning of his first book) one doctrine, one quotation, one lyn on letter, to make him really see wherein I haue fayled.
Now this idle venditation of ingenuity and vpright dealing, haith awakened my sleeping pen, and in∣deede haith geuen birth to this short Treatise, whear∣in I do vndertake to make good our former censures, that is, to demonstrate, that the very ground and bur∣den of his first booke, is mere corruptions, vntruthes, and other such impostures, in the euicting of which poynt I am so secure, that I willingly make your selues Iudges both of him and me, being assured, that in a true and serious perusall of this my accusatiō, you shall synde no cador in Whyte, nor any of Gods spirit in him who styleth him self Gods minister, but rather in reguard of your frustrated hope, you shall haue iust reason to say of this childe (who seming Iacob, proueth Esau) Expectauimus lucem, ecce tenebra. Es. 59. which deformities of his, I am not of so rigide a Iudgement, as to ascribe to your famous vniuersity, for at this present, I do not wholly approue that comō position of the Ciuilians, partus sequitur ventrem: And we all obserue, that those faire heauenly bodies, som∣times bring forth monsters.
It is certainly reported, that desyre of praise (a win∣dy Mteor ingendred in the Region of self conceate) first inuyted M. Whyte, to support forsooth, with his learned hand, the threatning and falling piller of his new Church: and thereupon he instantly stept into the number of writers, hauing thereby already gayned great applause and approbation from the wauering vn∣certaine multitude, in whose weake opinion, he see∣meth to haue ouerpassed most of his tyme and ranck: but I doubt not, but by the assistance of him, who In

veritate educet iudicium, Es. 42. and by the ensuing dis∣couery of his calumnious forgeries, so to picke the swolne bladder of his pryde, as that all his frothy os∣tentation, shall resolue to nothing: and that his wry∣tinges (lyke vnto new found wells, being commonly of acompt onely for a yere or two) which heretofore his fauorites haue so highly estemed: shall for euer af∣ter remaine contemned and neglected: which euent may well be expected since it often hapneth, that he who ryseth sodainly, faleth precipitatly.
But as in this following Treatise you shall be fully satisfyed of the want of his sincerity, so here I hould it not inconuenient, to geue some touch of that oppro∣brious tongue of his, which casteth most fowle and vndeserued aspersions of contumely and reproch vpon all Preistes and Catholickes. For euen in his Epistles of this his booke impugned by me, he wryteth, that the, Iesuites are the Popes Ianisaryes, that Priests are cunning seducers possessing mens wyues, &c. vsing their goods to swager, and serue their owne luxurious vse, & that since the Harpies were chaced away, and Bet was ouerthrowne, neuer was such a greedy and rauenous Idol as the seminary, and that friars, seminaryes, and Masse Priests, are so many beares and bloody, the Tigars, the fatall enemyes of Princes, &c. that the Papists laity, doth liue in extreame ignorance, and finally that their religion teach∣eth to pay no depts, murther Kings, and tendeth cheifly to all bloody conspiracies, &. Our innocency in all which pointes, one daye will discouer, when the valye of each mans actions shalbe drawne awaye, and when all deedes and thoughts shalbe plainly laid open, at what time M. Whyte, for theese and other his most false, iniurious, and vnchristian reproches must render a seuere account; only at this present our retaliation to him shalbe to saye with the Apostle1 Cor. 4. maledicimur

sed benedicimus, blasphemamur sed obsecramus and tel∣ling him, that by these his Philppickes and declama∣tory inuectiues, he haith worthily gotten the reputa∣tion of being counted a good rayler, and hath bene carefull (as it should seeme) to warrant in him self those wordes of the Scripture:Iac. 3. the touge is an vnruly euill, full of deadly poyson.
And now illustrious Academians (whome God hath en∣dued with transcendent spiritts, and vnderstandings farr aboue the vulgar) suffer me, before I remit you to this following discourse to present vnto you touch∣ing our Catholicke faith, these few admonitions, the which you are not to contemne, as proceeding from me how meane soeuer, but rather herein to remem∣ber, that from the earth (the lowest element of all) we best obserue the motions of the heauens.
Make then particuler triall of the cheefe grounds of our Catholicke religion, and looke backe vnto the Continuall practize of Christes Church since it first beinge, & assure your self, that we shall not be found superstitious and blynd (as it pleaseth M. Whyre & others to terme vs) for how can they be blind, who be∣hould the articles of there faith with the eyes of all antiquity.
Examine it by the rules of Gods sacred word, & for the true sence of his written word (as following e∣uen the iugments of the most dispassionat and sobe Protestants) us  nl  par. 1  74. recur to the ioynt expositions of the pri∣mitiue fathers, who liued, when the church was most florishing, and in her full orb; and know, that the leaues of scripture, without the intended sence of the holy Ghost,eil in his  sence of the Adology. are but leaues without frute. & as touch∣ing his vnwritten word, call to mind that saying of Tertulian: Id uerius, quod prius, id prius, quod ab initio; id ab initio, quod ab Apostolis.
Remember, that the most markable ProtestantsLuth. tom. 2. wittenb. anno. 1551 lib. de seu. ar bitr. pag. 454 for learninge, do confesse, that those doctors are patrons of our Catholicke fayth, who liued when the Spouse of Christ was most spotles, chast, and intemerat: Apoynt indeed so euident, as that from their learned monuments we are able to delineat,Beza in his preface vpon the new Testa∣ment, dedica∣ted to the Prince of Condy anno. 1587. and draw the ve∣ry Image and face of the present Romane religion; & as for the more obscure passages occurring in them, your ingenuityes may suppose them to be the sad co¦lours or darke groundes, seruing onely to giue greater luster and life to the whole portrayture. Be neuer per∣swaded (since it is graunted, that the Romane Church was once the true church,Doctor Hum∣frey li. de vita Iewelli. and the time of her sup∣posed reuolt cannot be knowne) that the daughter of Sion, could euer so vnespiedly become a Babilonian strumpet.
Deuide not your selues frō that most conspicuous church of Christ, which haith bene promised, Esa. 2.60. Micheas. 4. psalm. 19. Math. 18. that in all ages it should gloriously appeare to the eye of the world, lest so in sew thereof, as for the last refuge, you be forced to forge a Mathematicall and aery Church, consisting of certain imaginary inuisibilites, impugned by the fathers, Hiero. E∣pist. ad Pam∣mach. and your more iudicious wryters: Dotr Hum∣frey in Iesui. part. 2. rat. 3 pag. 240. since it being,Athanatius. li. de decret. ni∣cen. Sinod. mearly consisteth in a not being.
Suffer not a Heteroclyte sectary,August. lib. 3 de baptismo contra Dona∣tum. ca. 2. who reiecteth (though contrary to gods word Hebru. 4. Roman. 10. Iohn. 10. and his owne brethrenDoctor Co∣uell in his de∣fence of Hoo∣ker pag. 86.) all regular, ordinary, and mediate vocation (like an other Melchisadech, borne without father or mother) to plant in your soules a new kind of religion neuer heard of before, till a libidenous Monke by mutuall breach of vowes, had yoked him selfe with a lapsed Nunn: and be a certained, that such a nouelist must needs be one of those, who say they are Apostles, and are not, but are found liars.
Finally relinquishe, and abandon that supreame soue∣raignty of the priuat reauealing spirit (condemned e∣uen by Christs owne 1 Cor. 12. Apostles) it being first cheefly erected, therby to decline the weighty authorityes of the auncient fathers in the exposition of Gods sa∣cred wryt,Doctor Saraui∣a contra resp. Bez. pag. 360. & to reduce all thinges to the most graue (for-sooth) and inappealable tribunall of each illite∣terate mans empty scull and braines. Thus do the gos∣pellers of these dayes,Cartwright in his second re∣ply part. see. pag. 142. hould the fanaticall reuealing Spirit, as their mount Sinay from whence they receue their new euangelicall lawe, it being in deed shadow∣ed with a cloud,Apoc. c. 2 not wherewith to couer it owne ouer glorious infallibility, but with a cloud or mist of pride, ignorance, and vncertainty.
And thus worthy Academians, leauing you to the cen∣sure of your vnworthy sonn,Petr. 2. c. 1 I take my leaue, expect∣ing, that my good meaning herein, shall ouer-ballance with you,Iohn. 1. c. 4 my bouldnes, and wishing euen in the bow∣els of Christiane charity, that euery one of you weare strong armed with our most aunciēt Catholicke Roman faith; for then you would easely learne to contemne those poore and weake assaults, which euery first ap∣pearance of new doctrine doth threaten: it being an acknowledged, & experienced truth that Hareses Tertul. li. de prescript. a∣pud cos multum valent, qui in fide non valent.
Your well willer in Christ Iesus T. W. P.
