



THE Gospell (Right Ho∣norable) is like the Booke of Canticles; which begins with a Kisse, and ends in Spices. The ve∣rie sound of it imports Glad
 Tidings of PEACE; withoutRom. 10. 15. which, this Inch of time al∣lotted, is but , a Dead kinde of Life, as Plato1. De Re∣pub. speaks of a Guilty Conscience. Forwere a man The Darling of the World, with Titus Ves∣pasian; were he so repleni∣shed with all earthly good things, as that no mortall creature durst wish the like,De Ciuit. Dei, l. 5. c. 25. as S. Augustine speakes of Constantine the Great: yet if in this matchlesse prospe∣ritie, hee want the fauour of GOD, and Tranquillitie of minde; he is no better thanAElian. l. 1. Xerxes Plane-Tree, which tooke no delight in it selfe, though it was richly hung with Bracelets, Tablets, Span∣gles, Chaines of Gold.

This Peace of GOD, soPhil. 4 7. Gal. 6. 16. Col. 3. 15. much magnified in Scrip∣ture, is better known by fee∣ling than Discourse; and be∣ing the fayrest Iewell vnder Heauen, is peculiarly giuen to the Elect, who cherish the sparke therof, with workes of Pietie to GOD, and Equi∣tie to their Neighbour.
Thus, in briefe, hath your Lordship the drift, and scope of this present Indeuour.
Now that I, a Grasse-hop∣per (in respect of many lear∣ned) dare thus boldly, and hoarcely sing in the eyes and hearing of Him, who is Magnus in Magnis, Prim{us} inHieron. Ad Pammach: Primis,  Herôum, is, (I confesse) Piaculum: whereunto notwithstand∣ing
 the Noblenesse of your Honours disposition (which is wont with Artaxerxes, toAElian. l. 1. take in worth Synaetas hand∣full of water) the Correspon∣dence of the Treatise with that High place of Iustice whereto God hath aduan∣ced you; together with the zeale of declaring my thankefulnes, and duty for so many Incouragements vouchsafed from your Lordship, haue, in a manner, instigated me.
Goe on (most Noble Lord) to be a Sanctuarie to Conscience; a Place of Refuge to the Innocent, & Oppressed; and remember to serue that GOD with a faithfull heart, who so graciously hath set
 you in the seate of your Re∣nowned Father; and go not onely beyond Him, but Your Selfe too. And as hi∣therto your Lordship hath esteemed of Siluer, as of Tinne; and contemned the Wedge of Gold, which so many great Idolaters doe crouch to: so still, in this Exuberance of all things, continue contant: Et nudum Christum, nudus sequere. Du∣rum,Hieron. Grande, Difficile; sed Magna sunt praemia.

