


IN the depth of winter, when lighte keth, heate faylethe, Riuers are congealed, a hoarie froste couereth the face of the earth; then the vitall spring, vent forth of their hidden vainis, mor bundance of water, a warmer liquor more feruent streames, a better digested' substance. In like sort (my deare fren∣des, whom I loue moste effectually, be∣cause I knowe that you loue God effectu¦ally) it fareth with youe while the light of true Faith and Religion, is banished oute ōf Englande, the heate of Chritie exiled, the fluds of almes and bospali¦tie (which in former ages ranne a ine) are frosen with imptatiue Iustice, and a solifidian erroure: while all the chur∣ches are hoary white without Image, Ta∣per, Alter, priest, sacrifyce, piety or deuotion:
 your faith shyneth more bright, youre hope appeareth more firme, you charitie castethe a greater flame, youre bowels of mercy issue forth fuller strea∣mes of liberalitie & christian commisera¦tion. When others lye either wallowing∣in wickednes, or buried in slepe, or drow∣ned in sensualitie, many houres before the sonne shewethe his beames aboue our horison: youre prayers, youre sighes, your teares, appeare before the face of God. They spreade theire rayes in the Lande of the euerlastinge, as acceptable to god, as delightfull to Angells. Your prayers ended in voice and external shew but not in hart & internall deuotion, im∣mediately foloweth some other godly exer∣cyse of pietie and Religion: After some charitable worke of mercy and compassi∣on, consequently to this some good con∣ference or study of spirituall bookes, so that from morninge till night, you seme to me to doe nothing els, but weaue such a spirituall Cortayne, as couered the ta∣nacle, more various for vertues, then That was with silkes: Or lyke those haynes of goulde the Spowse of Christe¦war
 besett with studs of siluer. Murenulas auteas faciemus tibi, vermiculatas ar∣gento. We will make thee bracelets of goulde, studded with siluer. Cant. 1. But aboue all youre singuler vertues, none stroke so deepe a maze into me, as your feruoure & deuotion in receyuing the blessed Sacrament. I know parte, but he onlye knowethe all, whom there you participate, What hazard you put your selues into, to come by it, with what Ibily of harte you communicate, and what notable effects thereupon enssue. Therfore to you I present these my simple Meditations the which I am assured you practyse better, then I can pen them. Therfore accepte them as a forme rather of that you doe, then of what you should do. And in recompence of my paynes, I will craue nothing els. but one effectuall sighe to my sweete Sauiour when you com¦municate, & enioy the heate of your de∣uotion, for that Ī weigh aboue all trea∣sures. From my cell in the Charter house at Maclin.

