



AMong the number of our worthie acts of Parlement (right Honoura∣ble & my most singular good Lord) the statute of land measure is of great importance, and equitie. Certaine persons (wanting sufficient know∣ledge for the executing of that sta∣tute) notwithstanding intrude them selues into that weightie function as sufficient. Sundry of their false rules, and vntrue waies of mea∣suring, as also sundry true rules (by some of them) falsely apply∣ed, in this small treatise are discouered. Mine intention was not in the time of penning thereof, nor long since, to publish the same: but of late vpon great vrging, and persuasion of him (at whose request I did write this talke) and of certaine other my friends and acquaintances: I yeelded at their requests to the pub∣lication thereof. The necessitie, and worthines of the matter re∣quire learned and exquisite ordering, which I must resigne to be performed hereafter by the learned. By this treatise I may bee likened to a broyled founder, whose onely charge is to make mixture of mettals, and to roughcast them. The filing, gra∣uing, and polishing, are done by other artificiall workemen, who goodly set out the same to the eye according to the riche∣nes of the metall. I, a simple man among the common people,
 haue set forth this discourse to their behoofe, by the playnest waies I could deuise, and for their easiest vnderstanding: Sun∣dry learned workes of the Mathematicals (for such as vnder∣stand or affect learning) are extant in our vulgar tongue: as Euclide, the workes of Doctor Record, of Master Leonard Digges, of Master Thomas Digges, and of some others. But because these learned bookes can not bee vnderstoode of the common sorte, and that they be as iuels, and riches, sha∣dowed or wrapped vp from their sight: I haue thought good by a plaine and popular discourse, to laie open vnto the vnderstanding of euery reasonable man, the necessities and commodities of those singular workes and knowledges, and the great abuse, inconueniences, and iniuries, the common weale susteineth by crediting and reteyning of ignorant doers, and neglecting of learned and skilfull writers, and practisio∣ners. As wise and learned men, when they speake vnto a sim∣ple and vnlearned man: frame their speache to his vnderstan∣ding, which in the like cause they would vtter otherwise if they spake to one learned: so must some man to the behoofe of the common weale manifest those enormities popularly, that the hurt which ignoraunce bringeth in this weightie mat∣ter may vniuersally bee knowen. I (although farre vnmeete to take so weightie a cause in hande) haue aduentured for the discharge of my conscience, and my duetie to the common weale: to manifest (as I best could) certaine great inconueni∣ences which the common weale daily susteineth by vnlearned practisioners, humbly submitting my selfe where reformation is needeful, to the correction of the learned. And for because it is vniuersally knowen, that the continuall application of your noble hearte and minde, is to the furtherance of learned know∣ledges, of equitie in causes, suppressing of ignoraunce, and to the commoditie of the weale publike (whereof your Honour
 is a principall piller) and for that your Honour hath been mine especiall good Lord, I doe presume (as enforced thereto by duetie) to dedicate vnto your Honour this small treatise: most humbly requiring pardon for such my great boldnes, as also that your Honor would vouchsafe to receiue the same into your noble patronage.

