



IT was the asser∣tion of the wi∣sest of the sons of men (Right Worshipfull Patronesse) that all riuers goe into the Eccles. 1. 7 Sea. Some think they doe it to doe their homage,
 and pay tribute to that place, from whence they receiued their beginning. So hath it been my long nine yeeres longing de∣sire, euer since I haue had a doore opened (by your friendly meanes) to enioy and imploy my poore Mi∣nisteriall talent, in testimo∣nie of my grateful remem∣brance of your vndeser∣ued, though by me of you then desired fauours in those daies of my trials (al which trials the trier of hearts knowes came not on me for any singularity,
 but of meere simplicitie and sinceritie of my con∣science) that there might passe backe frō me to you some small slender drops of those fuller streames of your then more then or∣dinarie beneuolence and beneficence, & euer since most gratious coūtenance towards me. So that I may say to you as S. Hierome did to a friend of his, tibi quod possum debeo & quod non possum. I am indebted to you in the highest ex∣tent of my abilitie, and in a higher straine then I am
 able to reach vnto. In ac∣knowledgement whereof (seeing other hoped-for meanes faile me) I be seech you to accept of these three Sermous, treating of the properties of a sincere Preacher, being the first diuulged fruits of mine a∣boue twenty yeeres labors in the Ministerie. Which I present not vnto you with the best thought of requi∣tall of your fauours, but as a bill of mine hand what I owe, and how deeply I am ingaged. All which if vpō perusall you finde (as in∣deede
 they are) but rude and rough hewed, yet I hope the worth of their subiect (compared with the rockinesse and barren∣nesse of the soile and seate where they were bred) will winne some fauour from your friendly & fauour∣able aspect. Howsoeuer it be, this wil breed me some contentmēt, that by these I haue indeuoured what in me lieth, to make knowne mine vnfayned sensible thankfulnes, for your re∣spectiue and vnrequitable kindnesses. And whatsoe∣uer
 is wāting in me, I pray the God of all fulnesse to fulfill in you, making you the plant of his owne right hand, being planted in the house of the Lord to Psal. 92. 14. bring forth more fruite in your age, and to be fat and florishing. And whē death shall approch to shut vp the full period of your age-worne daies, for your fauours shewed to his ser∣uants, well may you bee able then to consolate your decaied spirits, say∣ing with good Nehemiah: Remember me O my God con∣cerning
 this: and wipe not out the kindnesse that I haue shewed to the house of God, and on the officer thereof. I humblie take my leaue, Dartmouth in Deuon∣shiere this October 14. 1614.

