



WHereas, Mr Richard Mounta∣gue, hath written two Bookes, the one, called A new Gagge; the other, A iust Appeale: Which ma∣ny esteemed as dange∣rous vnto our Church, and State. I esteemed it my dutie, to reade them, and to satisfie my selfe in the poynt; whether they were so faultie, as was preten∣ded or not. When I had read, and well con∣sidered of them; I could not but resolue, that they were in deed dangerous vnto our Church.
 For that he endevoured by them to change our faith, into the faith of Rome, and Arminius. Which deed I could not but detest: because that faith of Rome, and Arminius, is false and er∣roneous: And vpon that detestation, I became an humble suter vnto the Lord God, to pre∣serue our faith in the puritie thereof, seing he is the Author of truth, and his eye-lids preserue pure knowledge. Now, out of the same affection, I prostrate my selfe & this Cause, before your reverend, honourable, and graue Iudgements, and high authoritie: with all submission, and fervent desire; Craving
That you will 1. take this Cause into your consideration.
2. Preserue the faith of our Church in the puritie it hath had hitherto.
3. Endevour to prevent the corrupting of it in time to come.
I doe most willingly confesse, that I may seeme to some, to deserue blame, in that I doe thus presume, to offer my selfe, into your most honourable presence, and Tribunall. Yea, I am ready to giue that judgement against my selfe, when I consider the meannesse of my condi∣tion, and the poore talent which I offer vnto
 you. But none of those things could discou∣rage me in this businesse: when I consider, 1. Your most honourable, and fatherly care, over this Church, and State, of which you are members; receiving with all readinesse, and mildnesse, the complaints; yea of the meanest suters. 2. Your service herein, will be acceptable to God; for, by his Law, The Foxes must be taken, that eate vp the Vines, yea, it is an honour, beyond earthly honour, to doe it: for thereby a name is purchased, excelling humane titles: even the name, to be called Good servants, and faithfull vnto the Lord God; and they are also admitted into their Maisters ioy. Againe, this office is most seemly for your most high and honourable Court: because, You are (therefore) called together, by his sa∣cred Maiestie, our most gracious King: That things amisse might be redressed: And, the redresse of evils in the Church, and our faith, is of all other, most comely, and gracefull: for, thereby, the Word of God receiveth freer passage, and mens salvation is furthered. The doctrine of our Church, doth call for your protection against all intruders, (even of it selfe) though all men should hold their peace:
 Because, it deserveth protection, in as much as it was penned, and composed, by most re∣verend, learned, and holy Authors, & Fathers of our Church. It is in it selfe, most agreeable vnto the divine, and sacred Revelation: yea, wanting nothing, any kind of wayes, of a safe, and fit expression of, and direction vnto, our Christian faith: so as we may truly say, the Church of England is not inferiour therein, vnto any Church in the Christian world. Lastly, This cause does indeed, in a speciall sort belong vnto you, for you are possessed with it (in part) alreadie. This doctrine of our Church received the authoritie it hath, first, from that most high and honourable Court, whereof you are. By it also it hath bin preserved in that state, till this present time. Wherefore I rest well assured, That you will not impute my boldnesse vnto me. Now, I might alledge some reasons to moue you, to vndertake the worke: but I will not doe so. For that would be very vnseemely and ill be∣fitting: For what man (well advised) would light a small and dimme candle, to further the light of the Sunne in his greatest strength? And this would be my case, if I should moue
 you by reasons: For you know more then I can write or speake.
Who would put him forward, that is more ready to doe, then any can be to aske? And this is your case, experience doth witnesse it: In whom we see not the spirit of Iehu, that was zealous for the Lord of Hosts, but rather of the Lord of heaven and earth, who is rea∣dy to heare before we call vpon him; yea, to call to vs, when we are negligent to call vpon him. And thus would you doe, if it were fit for your place and authoritie: so mindfull, willing, & ready are you in Gods service, and the good of your Countrey. Wherfore I haue onely this to say, Goe on—For the Lord is with you. We your Countrey-men, true lovers of our Church and State, are with you, to helpe you with our prayers vnto God, to render thanks vnto God, and our gracious & renow∣ned Soveraigne: and to you, saying, in the words (once) spoken by King David; Blessed be God, and blessed be You. And to giue his sacred Majesty, and You, the honour due vnto you; saying, Many of your Predecessors haue done well, but You surmount them all. Thus I commit You and
 your Labours, vnto the protection and favour of the Almightie.
LONDON. This first of Iune. 1626.
