



THere is engraffed, and deep∣ly rooted in mans minde, an Man iudgeth corruptly accor∣ding to the eu of worldly mat∣ters. error and false opinion, whi∣che euen immediately after his dounefall, did spring and shew it selfe out of originall sinne, to iudge of Gods Prouidence according to wordly euents: and if sometime hee see the better side, and iuster cause oppressed fraudu∣lently and tirarmously, then he eyther denyeth altogither Gods care ouer mortal men, or else doubteth of the equitie of the cause, and giueth iudgemēt, that those which are ouercome, haue the weaker title, and are cast away from God, and that the conquerours and victors doe de∣fende the sincere parte and better title, and and are accepted of God And this thing commeth to passe especially in matters of religion, where men according to the estate of kingdomes, and
 inclination of the people, do weigh and esteme  frutes of a ubting minde matters of eligion. the truth of the same. I his greeuous error, if it continue any space in mans brest, it breedeth in some an Apostasle, and vtter departing from God: In othersome troublous motions, and flitting mindes, whiche in time do quenche in man all sense of godlynesse, and at last carieth him headlong into a godlesse contempt of Re∣ligion, or driueth him downeright into dread∣full desperation. For mans minde, which was
gonies of the inde and con∣ience intolle∣ble. created to searche out the truth and to olw the same, is not able to indure those conflictes, and assaultes of a vexed mind: and sorely I am of this opinion, that the gnowings and frettings of the conscience which arise by meanes there∣of, are more dolorous than any torments whi∣che mans body may sustayne. Pompeius Magnus ompeyus Aagnus. ariuing at Mitelenen, after that famous foughtē fielde of Pharsalie, discourseth with Cratippus his whose race of life, and maketh large mentiō of his aduerse fortune, and lastly drowned in the gulfe of despaire, viterly denyeth Goddes prouidence, by cause in a iust and good quarrelf (as himselfe thought) God suffered him to fall.
emades. And Demades that eloquente orator and graue Senator of Greece, giuing as holesome counsaile in matters touching the commō wealth, as ey∣ther
 Themistoclēs, Miltiades or Pericles, was wōt to alledge for himselfe, that frowarde fortune and vnhappie desteny, did frustrate his deuises.
VVhiche voyce albeit euen then it escaped not iust reprehēsion of the wise, yet it paynteth liuely vnto vs the ruine of the Attyke commō wealth, the greate perilles and daungers in all cinill regiment, and the declining of Empires and kingdomes. VVe liue no doubt in the last times, and old age of the world, which is feeble and doing, for by common eourse of nature; after vigor and strength, foloweth inclination and fayntnesse, and tho end of things is always weake: VVherein we see the rage of Sathan to spurre mens myndes to ward furie; to stirre vp troubles, cruell warres, and all kind of calami∣ties euery where, and for that he knoweth the restitution of mankinde to approch, and hys time short, he omitteth nothing vnattempted, to drawe great swarmes and companies of the worlde, to forsake nuereligion, and to runne into ignorance and blasphemy.
And that I may let passe those, that vpon the Occasions that moue wordling to relinquishe Religion. coastes of Hungary depart frō vs to the Turke persuaded with wealth and prosperous suc∣cesse of his wares: VVhat Tragedies dothe the Diuell moue on each side of vs to terrifie men
 from folowing Christ his ensigne, and from a free and liberall profession of his most sacred and cernall Gospell In Scoplande we haue heard of dayly slaughters and butchery of Christes children, where it is now a common sleight to minister an Italian dramme vnto their Princes, and trayt crously to murder the peeres and no∣bles of their land. The dealings of the Duke of Alu and his successor in the lowe countries, are more lamentable, where no lawes, no faith, no promises are kepte, no antiquitie of noble families regarded, no faithfull seruice to theyr Prince and countrie remembred, no silence nor abiuring of rue religion accepted, but Spanishe crueltie executed uppon all ages, degrees and fexes, without any consideration: besides these, no spoyle nor robberie of mens substaunes, no extreame punishments nor torments, no rasing of townes and Cities, no adulterie nor filthy Sodomy can cōtent their monstrous and most vile natures and appetites. All good natures tremble and quake at the reports of the French eruelty, exceeding Phar and Nero in all rage and tirannie, whose proceedings are such, that we may gather that their determinate mindes and purposes are noteeasse, vntill they haue the hart bloud of all those in whom any sparke
 or breath of Christian Religion at any tyme heretofore hath hath appeared, and so driuing away the shining brightnesse of the Gospell, to re∣duce the Romish Idoll, and to exalt him in all Europe, as the chiefe Monarche agayne. For now they cloke not their malice with pretence of suppressing rebellious subiects: but lynking vnto them the Spanish natiō, do most euidētly professe them selues the sworne enimies of Christe his espouse, and the chiefe defenders and Champions of Babylonish Idolatrie. The puissance and greate mighte of that side, theyr terrible executions, and the froward euents of lawful and godly enterprises, languisheth and wholly discourageth many men that hereto∣fore haue giuen some countenance vnto the Gospell: And no mortall wight were able to continue in so sharp and endlesse a battel firme and constant, without an vndoubted assurance of Gods prouidence and fatherly care ouer them. VVherefore godly men comfort them∣selues with a grounded faith, being tossed too and fro, in vehemente stormes and tempestes, and do knowe that the sonne of God guideth the sterne of his shippe, and as hee promised, so hath he in deede exhibited his holy spirite, by whome hee giueth vnto his children courage
 and strength, to giue testimonie of the trueth, without dred in the middle of all punishments and rmēts. Touching the fornamed Tirants,  me God hath giuen stout stomackes, till , greete victories, whereby they are growh into a licetious boldnesse, bending  ght against Christ his Church: wee  our selues, that God wil withdrawe  his generall graces, that he will de∣pri them of all their of nments in body and mind, that he wil leaue them vnto themselues; as he forsooke Pmpey, lcibiades, Alexander and VVhat end aby∣deth the enimies of the Gospell. Valerianus. such like. VVe haue an especiall example here∣of in Valerianus. the Emperour, who in the be∣ginning for his vpright iustice and valiant hart, was deerely beloued of the Senate and com∣mon people, but afterward, setting himselfe a∣gainst Gods Church, became captiue vnto Sa∣pores. Sapores. king of the Persians, who vsed his head as aootostoole, mounting vpon his horse, and in his olde age, vnskinned him from the toppe of the head vnto the plant of the foote, so that at last he found an ouermatch stirred vp by God, Chaldaeus Pa∣raphr. cui con∣tradicit tamen Caluinus. that taught him how tender in the sight of the Lord are the woundes of his saints. Their pla∣ces are prepared no doubt: albeit somewhat de∣ferred the stacknesse thereof, wil be recompen∣ced
 with the weight of the same. Cayne his fra∣recide was punished in the seuenth generati∣on. Bias his opinion is noted of the wise, who when he sawe a wicked monster prosper say de, Asshredly that felow must needes be punished, al∣beit I liue not to see it. The historie of Bessus ser∣ueth herevnto, who murthered his owne fa∣ther, Plutarchus. and liued long after in greate prosperitie, vntill at the last, passing by a nost of chittering birdes as he went to a solemne banquet wel ac∣companyed in great madnesse threw down the nest with his speare saying, These birdes doe righte and daye with their noise lay vnto my charge the murther of my father whervpon he was apprehended, condemned, and executed. Let no man therfore fret bycause of the greene Psal. 37. bay tree in Libanus: stay but a little, and the leaues will fail, the tree will rotte away, and the plague thereof will no where be founde.
And touching our selues, I see no cause why we should in the quarrel of our God conceyue
VVhat Christi∣ans ought to do in these peri∣lous dayes. such trernoling and feare at the great strength and tyranie of our enimies, as many car∣nall men nowe do. VVhen Hierusalem was in greate distresse and daunger of mighty nimies, Esay the Prophete is sente from the Lorde with thys iniunction, In silence Esay. 30.
 and in confidence shall bee your strength. VVhat is this silence? and what is this confidence? First it is our duetie to suffer afflictions patiently. Secondly, not to busie our selues out of our vocation. Thirdly, not to mistrust Gods helpe, and so carnally to enter into vngodly leagues and vnlawfull friendships, as the kings of Iuda No leagues are to be made with Gods enimies. leaned sometime vppon the Egyptians, nowe vppon the Syans, and in the ende were made slaues vnto them, and cast out of Gods fauour, for so speaketh the prophete Iehu vnto Ieho∣saphat▪ 2. Para. 19. VVouldest thou helpe the wicked, and loue them that hate the Lorde? for this thing the wrath of the Lord is vpon thee. Agaynste, such difference and vnlawful defenses are these wordes spoken: In silence and confidence shall be youre strength: that is to saye, awaite vppon Ieza. 30. 31. 48 Psal. 32. Gods hād, runne not to the Egyptians, Turks, Papists, and to haue help of them. Your cause is good and iust, the almightie regardeth you, and if you bee put to the worse, yet is it better to suffer calamities, than with vnhonest deuises to hurt a good matter. Let no man faint therfore, bycause now adayes, many worthy men ende∣wed with the giftes of Gods spirite, are Tiran∣nously The estate of Christes Church in this worlde. murthered, by most ile and dishonest persons. Such troubles the Church neuer wan∣ted,
 but hath passed them all, and shall continue vntill Christes comming to iudgement.
The face and countenance of Gods Church is not alwayes after one maner. It is sometime ample, faire, and glorious: sometime smal, halfe darke and contemptuous in the world. Muche like the Moone, who according to hir place, re∣ceyueth from the Sunne sundry beames, so
The lighte of Christes church neuer wholly quenched. that the Diuell shall neuer be able vtterly to extinguish hir light: for euen in hir wane shee spreadeth hir out at large, and waxeth rounde and full againe. And albeit, some braunches of the Church be cut off and perish, yet the roote and stocke of the same abideth alwayes sound and vncorrupte. In the conseruation whereof, the pleasure of almighty. God is to excercise our faith, hope, and inuocation, and to giue vs to vnderstand, that he will not permitte mans deliberations to take place in the regiment of our liues, but to acknowledge our protection to come from aboue, least we might proudely boast Our wne handes haue done these things.
Iudi. 7. If the Church be not cōserued by those meanes whiche carnall reason deuiseth, or at what time VVhy God hel∣peth not accor∣ding to mans policie and de∣uises. our harts do earnestly wishe it, or by such men who according to our iudgement, are of suffici∣ent wisedome and strength to archieue it, wee
 are euen then by vse & experience taught, that the regimēt of Christes congregatiō much va∣rieth frō ciuill policie. For vnto promises of tē∣poral blessings, a condition of calamitie and af∣fliction is most comonly annexed, wherin the beautie of Christs espouse shineth most clere∣ly, in that she beareth constantly and patiently for Gods cause, pelne, and miserie, and at the last, is deliuered miraculously and gloriously.
VVe haue a mirror hereof, in that notable promise Ismael. Iacob. Kedar. Nabayoth. Gene. 25. made to Abraham and to his posteri∣tie by Isaac. In thy seede shall the nations of the earth be blessed, frō which blessing Ismael is not only excluded, but also cast out and banished. Yet surely out of Ismael by his son. Kedar, that mighty nation of the Arabians often mentio∣ned in the Scripture, did issue and spring, and from his eldest sonne Nabaioth descended the Nahatheans,
Ismael and his generation with their estates. a people in Arabia faelici, of whome the Poets speake much in their monumentes, attributing vnto them the same name. Maho∣met the first author of the Turkish blasphemie, and the erector of the Saracens kingdome, de∣riueth his progeny by a long contract from the said Ismael, whose posteritie do rule wide and broade throughout Asia, Atricke and parte of Europ eue at this day, & do not cesse to make continual warre with Abrahā his children, that
 is to say with the true Church of Christ.
But Iacob the heire of the blessing, and hys children are ledde by and by into exile out of the Iacobs condii. and of promise, & becōmeth subiect to a strange king in Egypt, where his posteritie endured hard seruitude and detestable slauery many yeeres. E∣au Esau prospereth. Gene. 36. in the mean season, enioyeth at home pleasant est & pcace, and in plenty and wealth multiply∣eth and encreaseth that nation called Edumites. Now albeit the Israelites seeme to be abiect from god, yet they are preserued wonderfully, & most The Israelites miraculously de∣liuered. worthy & euident tokens of Gods fauor toward them, are shewed in the land of Egypt, and lastly with Gods mighty hand and stretched out arme, they are deliuered from Pharao his cruelty, and are reduced into their naturall countrey. God do the not therfore giue euents and successe by such meanes and wayes, nor at such times as hu∣mane reason craueth and desireth: but with his long tarying, sharpneth our faith, and kindleth an ardent inuocation in vs, and so eyther mitigateth or wholly taketh away miseries and calamities. Albeit, the ayd & cōfort of the holy Ghost doth The power of the holy Ghost principally in torments. neuer shew it selfe more manifestly than in assi∣sting & comforting the godly againste the fierce and outragious torments of the wicked, whereby they are kept from despaire, stayed from deny∣ing their God, and preserued from murmuring & repining against his maiestie.

VVherefore let all men that haue a place in The Captayne and delyueres of the Churche. Christes Church, rest and stay them selues vpon God in these days of ours, wherin the world run∣neth vpon wheeles: let them set before their eies, that Dani. 12. which is written in Daniel, At that tyme shal Michael stande vp the greate Prince, which standeth for the children of thy people. And agayne, There is Dani. 10. none that boldeth with mee, but Michael youre Prince. These sweete & heauēly cōsolations, are the only refuge & chiefe pillers of the godly, and their whole cōfidence is reposed vpon the Lord of hosts, the son of the liuing God, who nameth himself the Emperour and Captaine of his Army and is indeed that great prince Michael, who war∣cheth and wardeth his owne people, preserueth his espouse in stormes and tempestes, giueth hir Halcions dayes to hatch hir yong ones, represseth and bride leth the furor and rage of Tyrants.
The remembrāce of these things as they are meete for all the members of Christes Churche, so are they most necessary for princes and Magi∣strates, beeing the nourcing fathers thereof, the keepers of the two Tables, and the defenders of  his holy word the Gospel, agaynst whom Sathan & his limmes do rage and rore with a wōderfull furie, enuying their prosperitie, vndermining their estate, and thirsting after their bloud & de∣struction. VVher by I haue bin moued to drawe
 thys little treatise, being indeed nothing else but a Consolation for Princes and noble men against the subtile practises & bloudy purposes of cruel tirants. This argument surely was most meet for a wise and profounde learned man to labour in. And I hartily wish, that some excellent wit, vpon the viewe of this my rude (but strōg foundation) might be moued to make some more beautifull building. In the meane season, vntil some better artificer take this worke in hand, I thought good to publish this commonefaction or instruction, which I most humbly offer & present vnto your right honorable Lordship, not as a matter need∣ful to put you in remembrance of any thing that should be wanting in your honor apperteyning to the dutie of a wise counseller and iust magi∣strate, but rather to be as glasse for you to see and behold, to youre great comfort, howe God hath by his mighty hand always kepte and defended all such Princes, Coūsellers and Magi∣strates, as haue aduāced his glory in setting forth true religion, and executed iustice in their voca∣tions and callings, wherin with what great study & care of minde you honor hath labored nowe many yeeres, God & good men can tell & are e∣uident witnesse, & your self recording the diue∣lish deuises of your enimies to thwart and fru∣strate your proceedings, to preiudice your pru∣dent
 policies, and to bring youre honor to vtter ruine and destruction and on the other side, how God of his greate goodnesse hath giuen good e∣uents to all your enterprises, and preserued youre honor from tyme to time, euen miraculously in great perilles and dangers, must needes acknow¦ledge Gods gracious fauor (and that I may so speake) his approued and vnperceable armor, wherwith he succoureth and saueth  iudges and magistrates that are learned in his lawe, kisse his son Christ and become fosters and nourcing fa∣thers of hys Spouse the Church.
The liuing God preserue your right honorable Lordship from all euill, conserue and keepe you vnto the ende in the knowen truth, defende you with his mighty hande againste Sathans rage and furie: and finally, suffer you not to be discouraged with these greeuous temptations and daungers, whiche must needes without his ayde, not onely trouble, but also vtterly discomfort you in your calling in these Tragical times, wherein the Di∣uel bendeth and brandesheth his frie dartes with greatrage, & terror against the magistrates brests. But comfort you, make your yoke pleasant and your burthē light through the word of truth and grace of his holy Spirit, Amen From Exceter, the last of Febru. Anno Domini. 1576.

