


MOst Gratious and dread Soueragne. Al∣beit my slenddr skill cannot affoord any discourse worthie the view of your Ex∣cellencie, neither my deadded, and dai∣ly interrupted, and Not  but perss, that studie  plo Treason persecuted studies, will giue me leaue to accomplish that little, which otherwise I ght vndertake and performe: Yet being nboldeed, both by your high , and gra∣tious fauour, euer shewed vnto all good litterature, especially concerning Diui∣nitie: and also vrged by mine owne bounden dutie, and particular affe∣ction; I presume to present vnto your Highnes this sho ing ea∣tise. For your exceeding clemencie, es, and rare modestie, in the most einent estate of to mightie a Monarch; as it cannot but winne vnto you great loue, in the harts of all considerate Subiects: so on the other side doth it encourage them confidently to open their mindes, and in dutifull manner to vnfold themselves vnto their so louing and astable a Suraine. And whereas  the no vulgar praise of your Maestes pe) you haue made open and often profession of your vigilancie and care, to aduance the diuine honor of our Sa Christ, and his most sacred Religion: Then what faithfull Chan should

slagger, or feare to lay open, and deliuer publikely, that which he assu∣reth himselfe to be ver expedient, necessarie, and a reeable towards the furnishing, and seting forward of so heauenly a worke? Moreouer, if I your Maiesties poore subiect, haue by studie at home, and trauaile abroad, attained vnto any small talent of learning, and knowledge: to whom is the vse and fruite thereof more due, then vnto my so graous, and withall, so learned a Liege?
 Is it a dutifull manner of vnfolding your selfe, to charge his Maiesties gouernment with persecution, and that of mens studies, with persecuting heauily the sincere profes∣sors of the onely true Catholike faith? with molesting grie∣uously great numbers of most ciuill biects? with ming∣ling his gouernment with bitter stormes of persecution? to threaten him with feare of rebellion or treason? Indeede, I must needes say, you vnfold your selfe perhaps more than you would. For whereas your desire is to lie hid vnder the cloake of commending his Maiestie, for exceeding mildnes, clemencie, affabilitie, &c. before you are aware, the truth of your opinion breakes out, and bewraies it selfe to all the world.
 Finally, for a proofe of my sinceritie, affection, and dutifull loue to∣wards your Maiestie, this may I iustly say that in time of vncertaine for∣tune (when assured friends are most certainely tried) I both suffered dis∣grace, and hinderance for it, being stiled in Print, A Scotist in faction: therein farther employing my pen in Atvvo-solde discourse (which I hope hath been presented to the view of your Maiestie) the one contai∣ning a defence of your Highnes honour: the other of your title, and in∣terest of the Crowne of England. And if then my zeale and loue of truth, and obligation to your Maiestie, drew me out of the compasse of mine owne profession, to treate of law courses: I trust your benigne Grace will now licence me, out of the same fountaine of ruencie and like zeale vnto Gods tuth, no lesse respecting your Maiesties eternall honour, and heauenly inheritance, something to say in matters of diui∣nitie: hauing been the best part of my studie, for more then thrise seuer, yeares.
 The late quarrels betwixt the professed, and secret trai∣tors, the Iesuites and Priests, haue made all men of any iudgement, able to discerne, what disgraces and hinde∣rances either part hath by other; when both parts can so easily and suddenly agree with the good liking of your lay-Papists. The best seruice you doe his Maiestie, in this book,

is that you confesse so plainly, that both his honour, and his title to the Crowne of England, were not onely called into question, but iniured, and denied by your Popish saction. And yet this intelligence you giue him, is no newes: for it was discouered before out of a letter of Parsons in  
 the Ie∣suites defence, against the Secular Priests.
 Whereinto I may conueniently enter with that golden sentence, with which your Maiestie began the Conference, holden in Iay last, be∣tweene certaine of your cts, about some controuesie  Rligion: A Ioue principium: conformable to that in holy writ, I  , ad Apoc. cap. 1. 8. Omega, that is, The begianing, and the end, saith our Lord: And ying it vnto Princes, I may be bolde to say, that nothing is more expedient, and necessarie for Kings: nothing more honourable, and of be assu∣rance for their estate, then that in the very beginning of their agne, they take especiall oder, that the supreane, and most pussat Mnarch of heauen and earth, be purely, and vprightly serued, aswell in their owne exemplar liues, as throughout their Dominions. For of Almighty God his meere bouncde and great grace, they receiue and holde their Da∣dems and cely Seepers: and cannot possesse and enioy them (their mighty Forces, and most prudent Counsailes notwithstanding) one day longer, then during his de will and pleasure. Which that wise King witnesseth, speaking in the person of Gods wisedome, Per me Reges reg∣nant, Pronerb. 4. Dan. 4. By me Kings doe raigne. And Nabuchodonozer sometime King of Babilon, was turned out to grase with beasts, for seuen yeeres, and made to know and confesse, that the highest doth commad ouer the king∣domes of men, and disposeth of them, as pleaseth his duine wisedome. But I neede not stand vpon this poynt, being to well knowne, and duely confessed by your Maese.
 His Maiestie wisely, and fitly applied the saying of the Poet, to signifie, that whatsoeuer we vndertake, must be be∣gun in the name of God, with desire, and trust of his bles∣sing. But what conformitie hath that of Christ either with Virg Eclog. 3 Theoc it. I∣dyl. 17. . the Poets sentence, or his Maiesties purpose, or your owne application? Our Sauiour truly professes of himselfe, that he is R. . 1. 8. 11. & 2. 8. Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, which is, which was, and which is to come: the first, and the last: that is eternall. Neither the Poet, nor the King our of the Pt in∣tend to speake any thing of Gods eternitie. Neither can you reasonably apply that speech of our Sauiour, to secure Prin∣ces in their estate, if they begin their gouernment with Pro∣uiding for obedience to God, by true religion. But how

little agreement there is betwixt Christs speech and the Poets, it may easily appeare by this; that if his Maiestie, in stead of Abs loue Principiu, should haue said, I am Alpha and Omega, or Christ is Alpha and Omega, no man could haue vnderstood his meaning by his words.
 But thence there be in this our most miserable age, great diuersities of Religions, and but one onely, wherewith God is truely serued and pleased, as saith the Apostle. One body, one Spirit, as you are called into one  hope of your vocation, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme: My most humble suite and supplication, to your high Maiestie is, that you to your eternall good, will imbrae, maintaine, and set forth that onely true, Catholike, and Apostolike faith, wherein all your most royall progenitors liued and died or if you cannot be wonne so soone, to alter that Religion in which it hath been your misfortune, to haue been bred and brought vp: That then in the meane season, you will not so heauily persecute, the sincere professors of the other.
 It is an easie matter to perswade his Maiestie to main∣taine, and set foorth the onely true Catholike and Aposto∣like faith: that is, to doe, that he doth alreadie. But the Ro∣mane religion hath neuer an one of these properties: as it will appeare in the suruay of your reformation.
Diuers of his Maiesties progenitors liued and died in the profession of true religion many yeeres before a number of your Popish heresies were hatcht. Neither doth hee now maintainc it, because, by Gods speciall prouidence, he hath been brought vp in it; but for that as it appeares in the •Anno 1580. Iune 20. Confession of Scotland, after long and due examination his Maiestie is thoroughly resolued in the truth by the word and spirit of God.
Who would thinke that hee which a little before iustlie commended his Maiestie for exceeding clemencie, mildnes, louingnes and affablenes, should now challenge him for persecuting heauily the sincere professors of the onely true Catholike and Apostolike faith?
 Very many vrgent, and forible reasons might be produced, in fauour and deece of the Catholike Romane Religion, whereof diuers haue bin in most learned treatises, tendered to your Maiestie already. Where∣fore I will onely touch three: two of them chosen out of the subiect of this booke: The third selected from a sentence of your Maiesties, recor∣ded in the aforesaid Conference.

I doubt not but if those learned treatises, you bragge of,
 be come to his Maiesties hands, either they haue had, or shal ere long receiue sufficient answere. In the meane while, let vs consider these your reasons.
 And because that argument is, as most sensible, so best assured, which proceedeth from a principle that is either euident in it selfe or else gran∣ted, and confessed for true: My first proofe shall be grounded vpon that your Maiesties owne resolute, and constant opinion (as it appeareth in the said Conference) to wit: That no Church ought further to separate it Pag. 7. selfe from the Church of Rome, either in doctrine or ceremonie, then she hath departed from her selfe, vvhen she vvas in her flourishing, and best estate. From whence I deduce this reason: The principall Pillers of the Church of Rome in her most flourishing estate, taught in all poynts of Religion, the same Doctrine, that she now holdeth and teacheth; and in expresse tearmes condemneth for error and heresie, most of those Articles, which the Protestants esteeme to be the principall parts of their reformed Gospell: Therefore if your Maiestie will resolutely imbrace, and con∣stantly defend that doctrine, which the Roman Church maintained in her most flourishing estate; you must forsake the Protestant, and take the Catholike into your Princely protection.
 The most flourishing and best estate of the Church of Rome is that out of question, of the sinceritie whereof wee haue witnes in the Rom. 1. 8. Scripture: from which no Church ought, or may depart: not because they may not dissent from the Church of Rome; but because they must hold the true faith: for which the Apostle commends the Church of Rome, that then was.
The antecedent of your reason is false. The Church of Rome, in the Apostles time, did not teach many of those points that the Popish Romish Church now holds; witnes the Epistle to the Romanes, wherein diuers maine matters of her faith are recorded.
 To demonstrate vnto your Maiestie, that we now hold in all poynts, the very same Doctrine, which the most approoued auncient Doctors, and holy Fathers held and deliuered: Because it is too long for an E∣pistle, I reserue it to the booke it selfe, for the poynts it handleth; and will here briefly note out of it, some such old reprooued errors, that the Protestants doe reuiue, receiue, and auowe, as the very sinnewes of their Gospell.
 The most approued ancient Doctors & holy fathers, were the Apostles, with whom, how you shew your agreement,

in the points, this booke handles, wee shall see in the parti∣culars: All other writers haue those properties in a farre in∣feriour degree: from among whom, if I would deale strictly with you, I might pick the Fathers of the Greeke Churches, and all those of the Latin that were not members of the Romane, as it was a distinct Church from all other: For so is the Ambros. de sacra lib. 3. c. 1 Prosper de lib. ab. ad Russin. Romane Church conceiued, and spoken of by his Maiestie. But I will not presse you so hard, though I may chance to put you in minde of it now and then.
All points that haue been reprooued by some of the an∣cient writers are not errors, and many times the same words haue not the same meaning.
Martin Luther the ring-leader of the new pretended reformation, layeth for the ground-worke of his Religion, That man is iustified by By faith only, or by faith a∣one, vvere english, so is not, by only faith. Aug. d  & openbus cap. 4. Cap. 20.  only saith: and in this he is applauded and followed of all Protestants: and yet as testifieth the most sound witnes of antiquitie, S. Austin, that only faith is sufficient to Saluation, was an error sprung vp in the Apostles dayes; against which, the Catholike Epistles of S. Peter, and S. Iames, and S. Iohn, were principally directed. And the author of that error was that infamous Sorcerer Simon Magus; as the blessed Martyr Ireneus hath recorded in his first booke against heresies.
 For the doctrine of iustification by faith onely, I referre the reader to the article of iustification. That we are vnlike the heretikes, of whom S. Augustine speakes, it may thus ap∣. The faith they so magnified, was a dead faith The Apostle ( De side oper. cap. 1. Non quale   , &c. Austin, in refutation of them) speaks not of euery kind , by which we beleeue in God; but of that wholesome and truly angelicall faith, the workes whereof proceede from loue. And againe: How long therefore will they be deceiued that pro∣mise themselues euerlasting life by a dead faith? Besides, they despised good workes as needles, either before, or after iu∣stification. Hoc Paulum arbitra sunt dicre,  alum, &c. They thought (saith Augustine) that Paul wild vs to doe euill that good might come of it. But it was not the A∣postles meaning (saith he) that by the professing and inioyning of faith, Vt opera iu stitia contem natur. good workes of righteousnes should be despised: But that euery man might know that he may be iustified, iamsi legis opera nō prae∣esterint. though he haue not done the workes of the Law before. For they follow him that is iustified, not goe before him that is to be iustified. Yea

 cap. 20 Simon the Sorcerer doubted not, blasphemously to af∣firme, that the commandements of holy life were giuen by the Angels, that made the world, who thereby . brought men into slarie. Of whom  D. B. P.  cap.   Aug.  
Theodret saith, that because men are sa∣ued by grace and faith, therefore he gaue by all meanes  to commit wickednes.
 An other principall piller of Fryer Luthers Religion, con niall of free will; wherein he iumpeth with the olde rotten  Manes, of whom the Manid cans were named.
Manes so denied free will, that he tooke away all assent of the will, in mens daily sinnes, making the necessitie of sinning naturall, from the creation, as proceeding from the euill god, or beginning, which he blasphemously and ab∣surdly deuised: August. d side contra Manich. cap. 6. 7. & de ha∣res. cap 46. He (saith Augustine) made two diuers be∣ginnings, each contrary to other, and both eternall. And from these two natures and substances of good and euill; so that he ascribed the beginning of sinne, not to the freedome of will, but to the substance of the aduerse faction. Yea so faire proceeded the Manichees, that they affirmed Co.  Maich. lib.  cap. 8. (saith the same Augustine) that euery liuing creature had two soules, A gente l à gente  brarum. one from light, another from darknes. Manes brought in fa∣tall necessitie Histor. lb.  cap. 10. (saith Socrates) and tooke away free will. We contrariwise acknowledge that there is but one God, or au∣thor of all things created, that he made vs in our kinde per∣fectly good. That sinne came in first by freedome of will both in men and Angels, and that, by free will, without any necessitie of constraint, it is daily committed. It appeares further, to our comfort, in that place of Pr al. co Pelag S. Hierome, that the Catholikes, or true Christians in his time, were in like sort charged by the Pelagians, with the Manichees error, in de∣nying free will; because they would not confesse, that a man may be without sinne, if he will: which is one point of difference betwixt vs and the Papists.
 One Prolus an erronius Origenist taught that sinne was not taken a∣way   in Baptisme, but only couered, as is recorded by that holy man, and auncient Father Eanius. M. Perins (in the name of the Church of England) affirmeth in like manner, that originall sinne remaineth still, and raigneth in the regenerate, albeit it is not imputed vnto them.

Neither Methodius, out of whom Epiphan. tom. 1. lib. 2. haeres. 64. & ibid. Metho∣dius. Epiphanius recites
 Proclus opinions, in many leaues together word for word; nor Epiphanius himselfe refute that of the remainders of sin, after Baptisme: rather they both confesse, that the . sproutes and branches of concupiscence abide in vs; yea that . sinne dwels in vs, by which the diuell preuailes. The Apostle (saith Methodius) Rom. 7. seemes to make a three-fold law. The first, the law of the minde, according to that good that is ingrafted in vs. The second, by the assault of the diuell, vrging and distracting the minde, by imaginations . full of passion. The third, which . triumphs in the flesh by sinne; which the Apostle calles the law of sinne dwelling in our members. That Hieronym. contra Pelag. lib. 1. in prin∣cip. 
Hierom is of our opi∣nion in this point, it appeares in his booke against the Pela∣gians.
Iouinian was accounted a Monster by S. Augustine, for defending ho∣nest Marriage to be of equall vertue, and merite with chaste Virginitie: and saith further that this heresie was so sottish and fleshly; that it could not deceiue any one learned Priest, but onely some few simple and car∣nall women. Yet this our English champion blusheth not to affirme that marriage is not only equall, but better also in diuers respects than Perkin. pag. 163. Virginitie.
 S. Austin was neither so ancient, nor so holie, as S. Paul: hauing him on our side, we neede not feare the other. But the report, you make of him, is vntrue. For these are his words in English. August. re∣tract. lib. 2. cap. 22. This heresie preuailed so much in the citie of Rome, that it is said to haue throwne into the estate of mari∣age euen some vowed virgins, of whose chastitie there had been no suspition before. So farre is Augustine from calling them simple, and carnall. Beside he addes (though you will not be knowne of it) that he Frangebat. weakned and ouerthrew the holy single life of holie men, by rehearsing and commending the Fathers, (Abraham, Isaack, Iacob) who were married men. And where∣as he saith, it could not come to the deceiuing of Aliquorum sacerdotum. any Priests, (for learned and any one is your glosse, besides the text) he seemes to attribute it to the short continuance thereof. It was August. de haeres. cap. 82. (saith he) quickly opprest and extinguished, and could not come to the deceiuing of any Priests.
 The same olde reprobate heretike, barked also against approoued

feasts and fasting dayes, so doe most of our Ministers at this time.
 Our Ministers doe all generally approoue both of feasts and fasting daies, keeping the former more religiously, than you doe ordinarily the Sabbath. The latter we obserue with reuerence and humilitie, whensoeuer they are appointed. 5. Eliz. cap. 5. Raals Abri∣ment of Ships and Shipping. Fish daies superstitiously abused by you, are ciuilly retained by vs with lesse riot than your selues doe vse.
Vigilantius was sharpely reprooued by S. Hierome, in a booke written against him, and hath been euer since vnto this day, esteemed a wicked heretike, for denying prayer to Saints, and honour to be done vnto their Relies: And yet, what poynt of Doctrine is more currant among the Protestants, than this?
In censura sua in illum Hieronymili∣brum. Erasmus, not without cause, findes want of modestie in that treatise of Hieroms; he might haue found want of truth too, if Vigilantius held no worse opinion, than those you re∣cite. But of the former, namely praying to Saints, neither the one, nor the other speakes a word. And indeede it was not the manner in those daies to pray to the Martyrs, but to pray Ophr. de ritu sepeliendi mortu. Eusebius hist. lib. 7. cap. 11. at their Tombes: which custome, it should seeme re∣mained till that time, according to the former practise of the Christians, who assembled ordinarily where the Martyrs were , dorters, slee∣ping places. Tertulliano Areae. ad Sc∣pulam. Aug ad q. vul, haeres. 53.  buried, before they were suffered to haue any Chur∣ches.
 In like sorte, one Aërius to the Arrian heresie, added this of his owne; That we must not pray for the soules of our friends departed; as S. Augu∣stine hath registred. And doe not all Protestants imbrace and earnestly defend the same?
This doctrine of prayer for the dead, the deniall whereof is counted an errour in Aërius, hath no foundation in the Scripture, but was built vpon the tradition of the Fathers, as Epiphan. lib. 3. Tom. 1. hae∣res. 75. he, from whom Austin takes the accusation, confes∣seth.
 A common custome it was of the Arrians, and of other more aun∣cient heretikes, to reiect all Traditions, and to rely onely vpon the writ∣ten D. B. P. Lib. 3. c. 20. Lib. 1. con. Maxi∣minum.  word, as testifieth S. Ireneus and S. Augustine. Doe not ours the same, reiecting all Traditions as Mans Inuention.
A perilous error, no doubt, to rest wholy vpon the writ∣ten word: that is, to beleeue none but God, in matters of his owne worship and religion. Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 20. Ireneus, in the places al∣leaged,

hath no word of reiecting traditions: rather hee speakes the contrarie of Simon Magu, who reiected the Scripture, to establish his owne deuices. S. Austin findes no fault with Maximinus for resting vpon the Scriptures; nor indeede reasonably could: for it is his own doctrine in that August. cont. Maxim. lib. 3. cap. 14. conference with the Heretike, and Cont. Dona tist. lib. 2. cap. 6 & de vat. . les. 2. 3. 6. 
 other where.
Xeas a Barbaous Persian indeed, yet in shew a counterfeited Christian; is noted for one of the first among Christians, that inueyed against the Images of Saints, and the worship done by true Christians vnto them; as both Nicephorus, and Ced comppen doe recorde. Nceph lib. 10. . The reprobate Iewes indeede before him, and after euen vntill this day, the misran. Turkes (enemies of all Christianitie) doe dwell still in the same err: And yet is not this most vehemently auered by our Protestants, and all aluists; although they cannot denie but that a∣boue 900. yeares agoe, in the second generall Councell holden at Nice, they are by the connt of the best, and most learned of the world, for e∣uer accursed that doe denie reuerence and worshippe, to be giuen vnto the Images of Saints?
  of this ame, Calli∣stus, and Gre∣gores, both wri∣ters of histo∣ries. Nicephorus (you should haue added Callistus, that the reader might haue knowne whom you meant, and haue quoted Nicephor. Callist. lib. 16. cap. 27. lib. 16. not 10.) who liued not 400. yeeres since, and Cnus pag. 290. Cedrenus, who liued, as it is thought, about the yeere 1058. are neither of antiquitie, nor credit to auow a histo∣rie not recorded by any of their ancients. But how could Xenaias, about the yeere 478. be one of the first, if the Commen∣tar in Dama. Orthod. sid. li. 4. cap. 17. Com∣mentarie vpon Damascen say true: That the worshipping of I∣mages was condemned as superstitious, by some, about the begin∣ning of the Gospell preached? Cedrenus saith be was one of the first; Callistus after him more then 200. yeeres, saith he was the first.
 The See y an∣svvere in the treatise of ima∣ges tovvard the end.  second Councel of Nice was a conuenticle of Ido∣laters, neither of the best, nor of the most learned; and was presently after condemned by the Councell of Frankfort.
I will omitte sundrie other heades of the Protestants Religion, by all approued antiquitie reproued, aad condemned, that I passe not the boundes of an Epistle, and seeme ouer tedious vnto your Maiestie. Espe∣cially considering that these are sufficient, to conuince that those points (wherein the Protestants affirme the present Church of Rome, to haue so farre degenerate from the auncient) are the very essentiall parts of saith, then maintayned by the Romans: And the contrary opinions no∣thing else, but wicked heresies, of old inuented, and obstinately helde a∣gainst

the same Roman See, euen as they are now our time: and of old also condemned by the same Church in her most flourishing and best e∣state. Wherefore your most excellent Maiestie, being resolute in that singular good opinion, (that no Church ought farther to depart from the Church of Rome, then shee is departed from her selfe in her flourishing estate,) must needes recall the Church of England, from such extraua∣gant opinions, to ioyne with the Roman Church in the aforesaid arti∣cles, which shee in her best time helde for parts of pure faith: And in all others also which they cannot directly proue (in a lawfull disputation be∣fore your Maiestie) to haue beene altred by her, particularly naming the point of Doctrine; the author o the chaunge: the time and place, where, and when ht liued: who followed him, who resisted him, and such other like circumstances, which all bee easily shewed in euery such reuolte or innouation: because th vigilant care of the Pastors of Christs flocke, haue bin alwaies so great, as no such things could be vnknowne, let slippe, or vnrecorded.
Thus much for my first reason, collected from the vntruth of the Pro∣testants religion.
 What are nine points to nine skore; that I may speake the least? and yet it is not prooued, that any of these were held by the Romanes, whose faith Rom. 1. 8. S. Paul commends; nor indeed euer can be.
It is enough for vs, if we can shew by record of Scripture, that the doctrine the Church of Rome now holds, is not that she maintained in her best estate: which we often haue done, and alwaies will be ready to doe. Is it not a good plea in law, to prooue by ancient euidences and deedes, that the land was mine, vnlesse I can shew when, and how the pos∣session of euery house, Medow, Close, &c. was lost? yet it stands you vpon to proue how you came by it, and by what right you hold it. Which you must doe, when all comes to all, by the Scripture, or else your title will neuer be good.
 The second shall be grounded vpon the vngodlines of it, where I wil let passe that high point of impiety, that they make God (who is goodnes it selfe) the author of all wicked actions, done in the world: Tvvo mon∣strous vntr  haue shew∣ed else vvhere. And will besides say nothing of that their blasphemie against our Sauiour Iesus Christ, that he ouercome with the paines of his passion vpon the Crosse, did doubt, (if not dispaire) of his owne saluation: being vnwilling to touch any other poynts, then such as are afterwards discussed in this booke.
 You may well let both these passe: for they are your slan∣ders,

not our opinions, as hath been shewed sufficiently In my an∣svvere to the 12. Articles. part. 2. art. 5. and part. 1. art. 4. The disdaine is at your idola∣grie, not at the. elsewhere.
The triumphant Citizens of heauen (who enioy the presence of God, and happiest life that can be imagined) are by Protestants disdain∣fullie termed, Dead men, and esteemed neither to haue credit with God to obtaine any thing, nor any care or compassion on men, among whom they once liued and conuersed so kindly.
The Saints departed we loue and honour, but are forced to call them dead men, as De vera re∣lig. cap. 55. Austin doth, by reason of your Idolatrie; with the same disdaine, in our weake measure, with which the Phil. 3. 2. Gal. 5. 2. Apostle disgraced Circumcision. Of their credit with God we doubt not; their care of men we denie not: but See my an∣svvere to 12. Articl. par. 1. art. 4. H. What does your Poe, that may release them all and will not? wee know no calling they haue to become our mediatours, with dishonour to God and Christ.
And as for the poore soules departed, who in Purgatorie fire pay deare for their former delightes and pleasures; they depriue them of all humane succour, by teaching the world to beleeue that there is no such matter.
See my an∣svvere to 12. Articl. part. 1. art. 4. l. Vtterly vntrue. We depriue them of nothing, that God in the Scripture allowes them. Prooue your Purgatorie thence, and we will confesse our error.
Concerning vs Christians yet liuing on earth, there is no lesse im∣pietie in their opinions: For they teach that the best Christian is no better in effect, then a whited Sepulchre, being inwardly full of all wic∣kednes, and mischiefe; and onlie by an outwarde imputation of Christs righteousnes vnto them, are accepted of God for iust. To thinke that there is inherent in the soule of Man, any such grace of God, as doth cleanse it from sinne, and make the man iust in his sight; is with them, to We acknow∣ledge such a grace, though not to iustifica∣tion. raze the foundation of Religion, and to make Christ a Pseudochrist: wherein, I know not whether they be more enuious against the good of Man, then they are iniurious, either to the inestimable value of Christs blood, as though it could not deserue any better estate for his fauou∣rites: or vnto the vertue and efficacie of the holy Ghost; as not being able (by likeliehood) to purge mens soules from sinne, and endue them with such Heauenly qualities. I omitte the disgrace thereby don to the Blessed God-head it selfe, making the Holie of Holies, father willing to couer and cleake our iniquitie, then to cure it. And contrarie to his in∣finite goodnes, to loue them whom hè seeth defiled with all manner of abhominations.
 We acknowledge euery true Christian to be righteous in the sight of God after iustification, by 1. Cor. 6. 11. inherent, though imperfect, righteousnes; and account none whited sepul∣chers,

but those that bragge or make shee of holines, Matth. 23. 27 be∣ing but hypocrites. We ascribe our iustification wholy and onely to the mercie of God, in Rom. 4. 3, 4▪ . forgiuing our sinnes, for Christs obedience, by accounting . faith to vs for rightcous∣nes. We enuie not the good of man, but preferre Gods truth before mans pride. Our Sauiour Christs sacrifice we meg∣nifie, as infinitly perfect; but wee know the whole et thereof is not perfected at once in vs, though the holie Ghost be of infinit power, which, in respect of vs, is limited by the gratious and wise prouidence of God. We teach that God doth not onely couer our sinnes, by forgiuing them; but cure our corruption, by abolishing it wholy, yet 1. Cor. 13▪ . Rom. 7. 23. 2. Cor. 12. 9. by little and little. His loue depends not vpon our righteous∣nes: for he loued vs, Rom. 5. 8. 1. Ioh 4. 10. when wee were most vnrighteous: but vpon the estate of Gal. 4 6. Rom. 8. 15. being his sonnes, members of his beloued sonne Iesus Christ, and Ephe. 1. 3.  elected to adoption and saluation by him, before the foundation of the world was laid.
 Vnto these paradoxes, impious against God, and slaunderous to man: If it will please your Maiestie to adde, the prophane carnallity of some other poynts of the Protestant Doctrine; you will (doubtles) in short time loath it. As for example: I hat it is as good and godly, by eating, to And eae of vn. feede the bodie, as to chastize it by fasting. That it is as holy, to fulfill the fleshly desires of it by Mariage, as by Continencie, to mortifie them; yea that it is flat against the word of God to vow Virginitie: And also con∣trarie to his blessed will to bestowe our goods on the poore, and to giue our selues wholy to prayer, and fasting. All which, this Aduocate of the English Congregation teacheth expresse
Is this the puritie of the Gospell? Or is it not rather the high way to Pag. 132. 162. 16▪ Epicurisme, and to all worldly vanitie, and iniquitie?
 To chastice the bodie by fasting wee hold it not only good, but of tentimes 1. Cor. 9. 27. necessary: though we acknowledge neither merit, nor satisfaction in it, which accompanie your popish fasts. Mortification of Rom. 6.  Col. 3. 5. all kindes of lusts, not only that one, we account a necessarie part of sanctification; nei∣ther doe wee allow mariage to fulfill the lust of the flesh, 1. Cor. 7. 2. . but to remedie it: vowing of virginitie we approoue not, because a man cannot be sure that he shall keepe his vow alwaies, though for a time he be able: besides, all lawfull

vowes being things indifferent, 1. Cor 6 12. charitie must giue iudge∣ment of excediencie in making thn. See my an∣svv  the  of V. To make prayer and fasting our whole worke, is to liue in the world without a calling. To giue away our goods to the poore, so to be∣come chargeable to others, is to tempt God, and burthen the Church: to doe it with opinion of merit, is popish pride against Gods glorie.
 I neede not ioyne hereunto, that they teach it to be impossible to keepe Gods Commaundements; and therefore in vaine to goe about it: And father, that the best worke of the righteous man, is defiled with I deny both your conse∣quences. Borrovved out of the tvvelue Articles, and ansvvered by me heretofore. Rom. 6. sinne. Wherefore, as good for him to leane all vndone, as to doe any.
Nay, if this position of theirs were true, it would to low necessarilie, that all men were bound vnder paine of damnation, neuer to doe any good deede, to long as they liue: for that their good deede being stay∣ned with sinne, cannot but deserue the hyre of sinne, which according to the Apostle is: Death euerlasting. If your Maiesties important affaires, would once permit you to consider maturely of these impieties, and ma∣ny other like absurdities, wherewith the Protestant Doctrine is stuffed: I dare be bold to say that you would speedely either commaund them, to reforme themselues, and amend their errors; or fairely giue them their Congie.
 We say it is See my an∣svvere to 12. Articl. part. 2. art. 3. impossible to keepe Gods commande∣ments perfectly to iustification; but wee denie, that there∣fore it is in vaine to goe about it. Yea we truly affirme, that we are 1. Cor. 15. 58 bound to doe our best endeuour, and shall haue acceptation and reward of our workes from God, though not vpon any desert of ours. o the 12. Art. part. 2. art. 2. That our best workes are tainted with imperfections we professe plainly: That they are therefore to be left vndone, neither we say, nor you can prooue: The imperfection that cleaues to them, is by all good meanes to be auoyded, but the workes to be perfor∣med: for it is not the worke, but the imperfection in it that is forbidden.
 I will close vp this my second reason, with this Epiphoneme. That it is impossible for a Protestant, firmely cleaning to the grounds of his ovvne Religion, to hope for any saluation. For they doe, and needes must graunt, that no man can be saued without a liuely faith; and also that a liuely faith cannot be without charitie, for otherwise it were dead: Now then to the purpose; No Protestant can haue charitie: for as witnesseth Saint Iohn. This is the charitie of God, that vve keepe his commaundements. But it is impossible (according to the Protestants) to keepe the commande∣ments:  Epist. cap. 5. 3

therfore also impossible to haue charitie; VVhich is the ulnes of Rom 13. the lavve: and consequently impossible to haue a liuely faith, which cannot be without charitie. And so finally through want of that luely feeling faith, whereby they should lay hold on Christs righteousnesse, to hale and apply that vnto themselues, they can haue no hope at all, of a∣ny fauour, and grace at Gods hands: Without which they must needes assure themselues of eternall damnation, in steede of their pretended certain of saluation.
 True charitie, though not perfect, may be had in this life, and by it the commandements of God may bee, and are kept, though not perfectly: so that a Protestant, firmely cleaning to the grounds of his religion, may yet hope for saluation.
 To these two arguments, gathered out of the treatise following, I adde a third, collected from these your owne memorable wordes related in the aboue named conference: viz. Are wee now come to that passe, Pag. 69. that we must appeache Constantine of Poperie and superstition? Which argueth that your Maiestie iudgeth them, to haue little regard of either piety or ciuility, that would admit such a thought into their minde, as that the first Christian Emperour (our most renowned countriman) should bee nousled and brought vp in superstition: wherein your Maie∣stie hath great reason, for he was most carefully instructed, and taught the Christian Religion, by such holy Confessors, whose sinceritie in faith had bin tried in the hotte furnace of many strange persecutions: And he farther had the good happe to see, and heare together in the first gene∣rall Councell of Nice, many of the holiest, and best learned Bishops of Christendome. Therefore, is it most vnlikely that so Royall a Person, deuoted to Religion, add hauing so good meanes to attayne to the per∣fect knowledge thereof, as no man could haue better; should neuerthe∣lesse in the purest time of it, be mis-ledde into errour, and superstition. If then, it may be prooued, that this most Christian Emperour (the glitte∣ring ornament of our noble Iland) did beleeue such articles of the pre∣sent Roman Church, as the Protestants teach not to be beleeued: Will not your Maiestie rather ioyne in faith with so peeles a Prince, who by the consent of all antiquitie, was for certaine right well enformed, then with these, whome (doubtles) most men deeme to be pittifullie deceiued' Now that Constantine was of the same opinion, in matter of Religion, with the present Church of Rome, may euidently bee gathered out of this that followeth.
 He that denies Constantine to haue been a worthie, a sin∣gular instrument of God, for the good of his Church, wrongs the worthie Emperour, and sinnes against God. But the triall of doctrine is to be fetched, not from the opinions

and examples of men, though neuer so holie, but from the Holie of Holies. It may not seeme strange if superstition were crept into the Church before Constantines time, when the 2. Thes. 2. 7. Apostle witnesses, that euen in his daies the mysterie of iniquitie was alreadie begun.
 First, he was so affectionate vnto the signe of the Crosse, that hee would haue it gloriouslie appeare, both abroade in his business, and at home in his Pallace: and in the middest of the Citie of oe▪ with this Euseb. de vita Constan. lib. 3. cap. 2. Lib. 2. cap. 14: Lib. 4. cap. 26. Posie: In this signe of saluation, I haue deliuered the Cittie. W it also he blessed his visage.
With fasting and other corporall affliction, he chastized his body, that he might please God.
He with incredible admiration, honored prosessed Virgins, and made lawes in their fauour.
He builded many Churches in honour of the Apostles, and Mar∣tyrs. Ibidem lib. 3. cap. 47. & alibi. Chy om. 66. ad pop. Antioth.
And as S. Chrysostome recordeth: He that was reuested in purple, went to embrace the Sepulchres of S. Peter, and S Paul, and all Princely state laide aside, stood humbly praying vnto the Saints, that they would bee intercessors for him vnto God.
He farther tooke order for the burying of his owne body, in the mid∣dest of the Tombes of the twelue Apostles, that after his death he might be partaker of the prayers, which should be there offered in the honour of the Euseb. in vita Const. lib. 4. c. 60 Ibid. cap 71. Apostles. Neither was he frustrated of his holy desire for as it followeth in the 71. Chapter of the same booke, at his funerals, the people ioyning with the Priests, with many cares, and great sighs, powred out prayers for the good Emperours soule.
Againe, at a  feast which he held at the dedication of the Church built by  Ierusalem; some of  cleargie preached and ex∣pounded the holy Scriptures: and othe  me with vnbloudie Sacrifice, and st all conscrlions, appeased the Godhead, and prayed for the Ibidem de via Const. li. 4. ca. 45 hlth of he Prince.
Moreover this alous Eperor reprehended Acasius, (a Nouatian hke)  saying, that it was not in the power of Priests, but of Zozom. lib. 1. hist. Eccl. cap. 21 God only to forgiuesinnes.
Finally, toward true Bishops, the law full Pastors of Christs Church, he caried such a reuerend  that being in the Councell of Nice, he would not iue dowe, efore they  backed vnto him so to doe. And Socr hist. lib. 1. cap. 5. was so farre  vpon h to  pcame iudge, in causes Ec∣clesiasticall; that hee  thre prof ied, that it did not belong to him to iudge of Bishops  to be iud by them.
It was not the , but the thing signified, viz. Christ crucified, to which Constantine shewed his affection, and by

whom he obtained all his victories; . by this God, not by this signe.
The chastising of his bodie was not to please God by the worke wrought, but to fit himselfe to prayer, whereby hee might obtaine mercie, Euseb. de vita Constant. li. 2. cap. 14. . saith Eusebius, appeasing God by sup∣plication. To make virginitie a more diuine life than the ma∣ried estate, as ib. 4. cap. 26 Eusibius in that place calles it, is to say Adam liued a more diuine life before God created Eua, than he could doe afterward; and so to make her not an helpe, but an hinderance to him. De aud Constant. . Eusebius speakes not of the A∣postles, but of the Martyrs, to whom the Churches were de∣dicated, but to God onely, and were called the Lords hou∣ses, Dominicae, .  Kyrch, Churches. They were also named , not because they were built in honour of the Martyrs, but because (as I shewed before) the Christians vsed anciently to assemble in the places Euseb. hist. lib. 5. cap. 2. where the Mar∣tyrs had been buried; or because of Christ who was accoun∣ted the prince of Martyrs, in respect of whom the Martyrs refused the name, as belonging properly to him. Therefore Eusebius calles the Church, , though the translator terme it Martyrum domum, in stead of .
This testimonie out of Chrysostome may well be suspe∣cted, Plessy de Missa lib. 3. cap. 15. being in the same words in a Sermon falsely attri∣buted to Austin, de Sancto Paulo, and alleaged out of a la∣ter writer one Theodorus Daphnopathus, by Garret a Chanon at the least, we may well remember that caueat of Biblioth. li. 6. Annot. 152. Sixtus Senesis, and take the speech to be hyperbolicall.
It Chrysost. ad Pop. Antioch. honul. 66. was the Apostles glorie, that people in such multi∣tudes came to the places of their buriall to pray, though they prayed not to them; nor thought their prayers euer a whit the better, because they were made there. And where there is mention in Eusebius of the peoples praying for the Emperour (with more zeale than knowledge) there is no mention of honouring the Apostles by prayer.
He should haue said with . vnbloodie sacrifices; which were not Mastes, but . prayers, and perhaps some offerings

for reliefe of the poore, and maintaining of the Temple.
Your author saies that Acasius affirmed this onely of the sinne that is to death. Hereupon the Emperour replied; Set vp a ladder for thy selfe (Acasius) and goe alone into heauen: Quae quidem arbitror im∣peratorem &c. Non quo eum laudaret. which (saith he) I thinke the Emperour said to Acasius, not that he might commend him, but that men might thinke, that they are not free from the staine of sinne. Sozomen, that writes the historie, thinkes the Emperour did not intend to praise Acasius, but to instruct other; you affirme peremptorily that the Emperour reprehended him.
Socrat hist. lib. 1. cap. 5. It pleased the gracious Emperour so much to honour those worthie and reuerend Fathers; but it becomes not your Bishops or Popes therefore to exact such behauiour of their Soueraignes; and much lesse to make them As Gregory the 7. sraed the Emperour Henry the 4. his vvie and eldest sonne. Bnno. daunce attendance barefooted, or As Frederick the 1. did to Pope Hadrian the 4. hold their stirrups: as for that profession of the good Emperour, it shewes is zeale, but prooues not that Princes may not iudge Bishops, being their subiects: especially since the reason is strong, for So∣ueraignes principally, for Bishops, but as their deputies. Ruffin. hist. lib. 1. cap. 5. You (saith the Emperour) are appointed gods to vs, and it is not conuenient that man should iudge gods; but he only, of whom the Psalm. 82. 1. Ruffi lib. 1. hist. cap 2. Psalmist saith, God sits in the assemblie of gods.
If then this right Puissant Emperor, and most sincere Christian, reue∣renced the Sacrifice of the Masse, and beleeued that there was power in Priests to remitte sinnes, that Saints were to be prayed vnto, and that prayer was to be made for the dead, and such like, as appeareth by the e∣uident testimonie, o most approued Author, that liued with him: hath your Maiestie any cause to doubt, but that in matters of faith, he agreed with the present Romane Church? Wherefore my hope and trust in Al∣mighty God is, that you in your high wisedome, vpon mature and due consideration, how many old condemned errors the Protestants holde; and with alwell weighing that the whole frame of their Doctrine ten∣deth to the disgracing of God, and his Saintes, to the discouragement of men, from well doing, and doth (as it were) loosen the reines vnto all fleshly liberty, will in time make a most Godly resolution, to imitate that famous Emperour Constantine. He contrary to his former education, em∣braced with ah spower that same Romane Religion, which we now pro∣fesse: And (which is worthy to be obserued) he feared nothing the contra∣rie disposition of the multitude, or greater part of his subiects, that were wholy led another way. But following the blessed example of his most

vertuous Mother S. Hela, reposed himselfe in the powerfull assistance of the Almightie, and chas all other Religions into corners, sett ng vp and firmely stabl shing the Roman Thre can be no cause aleadged, why your Maiestie may not doe the like, i t shall please God effectuallie to stirre vp your gratious mie, and  bend your hart to vndertake it: for at that time there was more likelyhoode of resistance, then now: and no much more helpe at hand, if any resistance should be offered.
 If all you haue said were prooued, as it is not, there are yet many more monstrous abominations in the Romish su∣perstition, at no hand to be approoued or tolerated.
 Pardon me deere Soueraigne, if before I finish this argument, I seeme ouer-bold here to present vnto your memory, that all your most gracious and Godly Progenitors, and all our holy Predecessors, who now (assu∣redly) stande before the tribunall of God; doe demaund and expect no lesse at your handes. For th y founded not Bishopicks, Deaneres, and other sp rituall inges: thy builded not Colleges, and Schooles, for Protestants or their s Ponder well therfore I beseech your Maiestie, whether they doe not, or may not iustly chalenge of you (to whom the administration of iust belongeth.) to see and prouie: that such Churches, Church-ing, and spirituall rewarde, of learning, as they erected and bequeathed to Roman Fishops, and Priestes, be dispo∣sed of and bestowed according to their erections, and foundations. If it shall please the Protestants to erect any new Churches, o bestow any other reuenues towardes their ministers mayntenance, let them haue them hardly, and enioy them quietly: onlie let hem be content, out of their equitie: to leaue vs that which was prouided for vs and bequeathed vnto vs by our most Religious Auncestors.
 Colledges, and liuings were giuen, and founded, for the increase of religion and learning; for both which they are still continued. If they, by iniurie of the time, in ignorance mistooke the truth, it is no wrong to keepe their generall purpose, with amendment of their particular error: if there be any merit in these actions, as you teach, they are much beholden to those Princes, who make their deedes truly meritorious by the right vse of them.
 If all these reasons, and exceeding manie other which might be mu stered, and produced to the same purpose, will not suffice to effect in your Maiestie, a loue and desire, to embrace that auncient Roman f, which all your Renowned Progenitors, so highly reuerenced, loued, and esteemed. Yet let me (prostrate on my knee) most humblie beseech your highnes, in the name of thowsandes: that so farre forth they may preuaile with you, as you will not permitte those rigorous lawes, fra∣med

against recusant Catholikes, to bee put in practize and executed. For how can it seeme comfortable to reason, in your Maiesties deepe wisedome, and iudgement? that your louing Subiects should by com∣pulsion and constrainte, vnder that intollerable penaltie of losse of all their goodes, conforme themselues to such articles of Religion, that by the purest antiquitie were censured to be erronious and execrable? And what misery, and pitty were it, to driue them perforce, either to swallow downe the deadly poyson of their soules, or else to endure besides the disgrace of the state, the losse of their worldly wealth and liberty. Consider, and weigh with your selfe, y most gratious Liege, whether it will not be thought ouer great seuerity, to presse men (euen against humane nature and condition,) with patience to heare their owne profession and beleefe, both vntruely slaundered, and most bitterly reuiled & inueighed against: as in most Ministers sermons it is common∣ly. Yea to giue patient eare to them that blush not publikely, to call our blessed Sauiours body in the holy Sacrament, an abhominable Idole; his glorious and immortall Saintes, senseles dead Men; his Vicar and Vicegerent on earth Antichrist, and euery Catholike an Idolater. With infinit other intollerable reproches; Our constant hope, euen yet, (though against hope) is, that your Maiestie out of your owne sweete na∣turall disposition, and most milde carriage in gouernment hitherto, will not onely moderate, but suspende all such extreamitie: And not suffer it to be extended against them, who in former doubtfull times, were (in manner) the only men, that defended and made manifest to the world, your Title and interest to the Crowne of England; and were no lesse willing to receiue you, when the time came: and as forward to haue as∣sisted you (if need had required) as any sort of Subiects within the land. And neuer since wingly offended your sacred Maiestie in any thing. It may be obiected that they doe not conforme themselues vnto a sta∣tute lawe, made against their Religion: Be it so. Then their Religion toward God, not any contempt of their lawfull Superiour, doth com∣maund them from the conformity, which is pardonable. Considering that they be no inuenters, or followes of nouelties, but onely hold on and perseuer in the aith of their forefathers. And what subiect is there among the most dutifull, that doth not often transgresse and giue of∣fence to one statute law or other: yet for no other law, men are so hardly dealt withall, albeit they violate many of them together. Onely Caholikes are for the traressing of one, hupeled and handled as though they were some haynous rebbels, and trayors: Who (be it spo∣ken without disparagement to others) are (by them that liue neare them) esteemed comonly, the most orderly subiects; as true of their wordes, a und in their deedes, of as great charitie and hospitalitie towardes their neighbours, and compassion of the poore: briefly, of as moderate and cle carriage and behauiour, as mo men in their Countrie: So that to begger and vndoe them (as the execution of that lawe esta∣blished,

must needes doe the poorer sort of them,) would bee little lesse then to vndoe and destroy all good order, and Discipline in the common weale.
 It is required by God at the Princes hands to see, that all his subiects performe true worship to the true God: how then can his Maiestie suffer thousands (as you say) to defile the land, and dishonour God by such a seruice, as he knowes to be idolatrous? For the punishment, and reason of it, I re∣ferre all men to To an Epistle of a Puritan-Papist. VVhy not Cui bono? Master Powels answere, lately published.
 Before I make an end, I beseech your Maiestie, that the old worthie saying of Cassian may be diligently examined: Cu boum? For whose commoditie, to what end and purpose must such numbers of most ciuill subiects, be so grieuously molested? What is the cause why your peace∣able and ioyfull gouernment, should be so mingled with such bitter stormes of persecution? Is it to extinguish the Catholike faith? It eth not in mans power to suppresse and destroy that, which the Almightie supporteth and maintaineth. The gates of ll shall not preue against the Catholike Church. And let but those graue and wise counsailers (who Matth. 16. haue managed the state in our late Queenes daies) enforme your Ma∣iestie vvhether all those terrible persecutions that then vvere most ve∣hemently pursued, did any vvhit at all diminish the number of Recu∣sants: or rather did not greatly multiplie and encrease them, from one at the first to an hundred and moe in continuance. But it may be, they entend by those penall lavves, to enrich your Maiestie, and to fill your coffers: Surely the receits vvill fall our much too short, to govv to any such reckoning. And vvhat delight to enich your treasurie, and stuffe your coffers vvith regrets, and outcries of the husband, vvife, children, vvidovves, and poore infants, vvhen as the best and most assured trea∣surie of a King, is (by the prudent esteemed) to consist in the loue, and heartie affection of his people? Or are these penall lavves, and forfei∣tures ordained for revvards vnto such dependents, as for these or the like doe follovv you? But the reuenues, preferments, and offices, be∣longing to your Crovvne of England, are abundantly able to content and revvard them, that shall deserue vvell of the common-vveal, vvith∣out that so heauie agrieance and heart bleeding of others your Ma∣iesties good subiects. And your Maiesties high vvisedome, and long ex∣perience in gouernment, can best remember you, that such men are not so mindfull of benefits receiued, as the daily vvant and miserie, vvill continually renue and reuiue the memorie of the oppressed.
And vvhen they shall see no hope of remedie, the state being novv Novv are in your right veine. setled, and a continuall posteritie like to ensue of one nature and con∣dition: God knovveth vvhat that forcible vveapon of necessirie may constraine and driue men vnto a length.
 Doe you accuse his Maiestie of desiring to extinguish the

Catholike faith? or doe you dallie with him by this que∣stion? To the 12. Art. art. 1. art. 1. D. The gates of hell are set open to all men by your catholike faith: so that the diuell will neuer seeke to pre∣uaile against it. Either the generall opinion of all men, and the bragges of your owne side are very vaine and false, or else for one Papist in her Maiesties daies and gouernment, there are three now at the least, vpon the very hope of tole∣ration.
These are matters of estate vndutifully propounding to the Popes vassals occasion of heartburning against their So∣ueraigne, to a worse purpose. Bellarm. de summo pontif. lib. 5. cap. 4. 6. 7 It is not lawfull for Christians (saith your Cardinall Bellarmine) to endure a King that is an heretike, if he attempt to draw his subiects to his heresie.
 If then there be no greater reason of vveight and moment, vvhy such dutifull and vvell deseruing Subiects, should be so grieuously afflicted  Bellarm. de pontif. lib. 5. cap. 4. 6. 7. VVould you haue greater reason of re∣straint than idolatrie and treason? Matth. 13. A good reason to suffer all kind of here∣tikes. for their conscience: let others conceiue as they shall please, I vvill ne∣uer suffer my selfe to be persvvaded, that your Maiestie vvill euer per∣mit it, before I see it done. If it be further obiected, vvhy should not your Maiestie asvvell punish Catholikes in your Kingdomes, as Catho∣likes doe Protestants in some other Countries: I ansvvere, that in all Countries vvhere multitudes of both sorts are mixed, as it is in Eng∣land: The Protestants are tolerated, as in France, Polonia, Bohemia, the Catholike States of Germanie, and Catounes, according to that of the Gospell: Suffer both the wheate and cokle to grow vntill haruest. In Spaine, and Italie, where sarse any Protestants be, the case is otherwise. But vvhat is that to England? vvhere are very many Catholike Recu∣sants, and Catholikely affected in euery degree, not onely of the Tem∣poraltie, but in the Clergie also, hardly of the highest degrees of honour to be excepted: therefore for their number and qualitie to be tole∣rated.
 There is great reason to beare with Protestants in any countrie; because there is no apparant shew of Idolatrie in their seruing of God; nor any forraine power, vpon whom they must depend: but Papists are euen outwardly also Ido∣laters, and, vpon paine of damnation, must obey the Popes definitiue sentence (who cannot erre, in seate of iudgment) against all the Princes in Christendome.
 Lastly, if there were no other cause, but the innumerable benefits which euery degree and order of men throughout England, haue, and do daily receiue from our most Catholike ancestors: as the constituting of so many holesome lawes; founding of so many honourable, and

rich rewards of learning, as Bishopricks, Cathedrall Churches, Deane∣ries, Arch-deaconries, Residencies, Prebends, and Benefices: the ere∣cting, and building of so goodly Schooles, Colledges, and Hospitals, and endowing of them with so ample possessions, which all proceeded out of the bowels of the true wisedome, pietie, and vertue of their Catho∣like Religion: Is not this much more then a sufficient motiue why their heires in faith, should be most benignely, and louingly dealt with? and not for the profession of the same Religion, so seuerely afflicted? Let the Protestants in those countries, where they are most molested, ap∣peare and shew, that their predecessors in beliefe, haue been so benefi∣ciall vnto the publike weale: and I dare vndertake, that for their Ance∣stors sake, they shall finde much more fauour, then we sue for. Where∣fore No doubt but you haue all Princes and estates at com∣maund. 
 they can haue no iust cause, to repine at your Maiesties goodnes, if vpon men of that Religion, which hath been so beneficiall vnto your whole Realme, you take extraordinary compassion.
 This makes against you, rather than for you. For the strengthening of the Popish Clergie hath alwaies been the weakening of the Prince; and the establishing of the Popes absolutenes, aboue the authoritie of the Magistrate. There∣fore, that the zeale of our ancestors may not become againe dangerous to our state, it is not onely meete, but necessarie also, to keepe out popish persons, and opinions.
 It lying then in your Maiesties free choise and election, whether you will enlarge and extend your Royall fauour, vnto an infinite number of your most dutifull and affectionate Subiects, who are the most vnwil∣ling in the world to transgresse any one of your lawes, were they not Except the Pope vvill them. thereunto compelled by the law of God: or else vtterly to begger and to vndoe, both them and theirs, for their constant profession of the an∣cient Romane faith. My confidence in the sweete prouidence of the Almightie is, that he will mercifully incline your Royall heart, to chuse rather to pardon, then to punish; because the way of mercie, consorteth better with your kinde and tender nature: it is of better assurance to continue your peaceable and prosperous Raigne: it will purchase mer∣cie at Gods hands, according to his owne promise: Blessed be the merci∣full, Matth. 5. Thine eye shall not pittie him. Deut. 13. 8. 9. for they shall obtaine mercie.
I neede not adde what a consolation and comfort it will be to many score thousands of your subiects, and the greatest obligation that can be deuised, to binde them to you and yours for euer. Now what applause, and congratulation from forraine Catholike countries, would follow this your famous fact? Vndoubtedly all the glorious companie of Kings and Queenes (now in heauen) of whom you are lineally descended: and among all the rest, namely, your most sacred and deare Mother, that en∣dured so much for her constancie in the same Catholike faith, cannot but take it most kindly, if for God and their sakes, you take into your

Princely protection their followers in the Romane faith, and de fend them from oppression.
Thus most humbly crauing pardon of your Highnes, if I haue in any thing exceeded the limits of my bounden dutie, I beseech your blessed Sauiour to endue you, both with the true knowledge of his diuine veri∣tie, and with the spirit of Fortitude, to embrace and defend it constant∣ly; or at the least, gratiously to tolerate and permit it.
Your most excellent Maiesties, most obedient, and loyall subiect, and seruant. W. B.
 What course will best please God in this difference of profession, not humane policie, but diuine truth must deter∣mine. In which if we sincerely obey God, we shall not need to depend vpon the liking, or misliking, either of forraine countries, or Kings, and Queenes departed; who either are no Saints of God, if they loue popish Idolatrie; or, if they be Saints, loue it not.
