


THOSE THAT HAVE imployed their studies and labors, in the diligent inqui∣sition and description of Anatomie, howe the partes of mans body are coupled & knitte together, vvhat properties and powers they haue, vvhat things are healthfull, or hurt∣full vnto the same: haue alwayes purchased great prayse & cōmendation amōgst all honest & vertuous men. And although it be accomp∣ted of some, an yrkesome and cruell thing, to cut and mangle mans lymmes and members: yetThe know¦ledge of A∣natomy pro¦fitable for mans lyfe. the ende and vse of the same is both necessarie and profitable, in all the course and trade of mans life. The cause vvhy those thinges are so studiously sought after, is, that salues and medi∣cines may be more commodiously and skilfully applied and ministred vnto liuing bodies. For how, or to vvhat ende can they vse applications
 to any part, if they knowe not the position, con∣stitution, propertie, and nature thereof?
Besides this commoditie, the inspection ofThe know¦ledge of a∣natomy doe induce vs to thinke y• there is a God. Galen vsu part. & a∣lijs locis. Iob. 10. 37 38. 39. Psa. 19. 33 133. Wysd. 7. Anatomie (as Galene diuinely writeth) de∣duceth the creature, to some knowledge of his Creator. And euen so Iob, Dauid, Salomon, & many other in the holy Scripture, after they haue moued vs to beholde the glory of God, by his handy vvorkes: vvhen they come to the vewe and consideration of mans body, they so speake therof in vvay of admiration and vvon∣dring, that vve may vvell gather the straunge and almost diuine composition of the same, very much to excell all other earthly creatures.
Nowe if men for the declaration of these cor∣porall things, haue bin always heretofore so well loued & liked: Then those can not be misliked,The consi∣deration of the spiritu∣all anatomy and y• fruite thereof. that in a generall Anatomie of vvhole man, aswell of his soule, as of his body, doo endeuer to describe mans excellencie before his fall, and his miserable ruine, together with the causes and consequences therof. And then descende in or∣der to Regeneration and restitution of Gods I∣mage in man, vvherby the Christian liueth, eu by death: his body shall rise agayne, and bee coupled vvith the soule, and so at the last bee
 glorified eternally in the heauenly kingdome.
But vve can haue no helpe in the doctrine of these high mysteries, neither of Hypocra∣tes,The know¦ledge of the se thinges commeth out of gods word. Galene, nor any other bodily Phisition: for they conteyne them selues vvithin the limits of their profession. Those Scriptures then, which be called (and are in deede) Holy, doo playnly reuele this doctrine vnto vs: fir those that haue excelled in vvitte, learning, and iudgement a∣mong the Heathen, vewing the conposition of man, vvere euen amased, in considering princi∣pally two things. First, that amongst all cor∣porallMan part∣ly the fay∣rest, partly y• foulest of visible cre∣atures. and visible creatures in this vvorlde, there vvas none so fayre and beautifull in witte, accions, and stature of body. Secondly, that a∣mongst all the sayde creatures, there vvas none founde subiect to so many miseries and calami∣ties. For this noble and excellent nature of man decayeth muche more horribly, then an Oxe, or an asse: and nature abhorreth mans carkas more then any other liuing creatures: and if it be not interred and buried, there will Serpentes, and Todes, quickly spring out of the same, as experience hath often times declared.
But from whence man hath contracted such excellency on thone side, and such deformitie
 & destructiō on thother side: these wise world∣lingsThe Eth∣niks know the disease of our na∣ture, but they know not y• cause. were not able, with any wisedome to en∣quire and find out. For as S. Aug. well sayth, They felt the disease of our nature: But the cause they knew not. God therfore of his infinite and great mercy, hath comprehen∣ded in the holy scripture, the history and do∣ctrine of these greate matters, out of whome I haue drawen this briefe abstract of Anatomie. And albeit I acknowledge willingly my owneAug. con∣tra Iulia. lib. 4. ca. 14. imbecilitie, and do confesse that many are fitter for this matter then my selfe: yet because it is the duety of a minster of Gods worde, to poynt (as it were) with the finger, out of that riche store and treasure of the holy scripture, what men ought to thinke and hold of such necessary matters: I shall be accompted (I trust) neither arrogant, nor presumptuous, in handling those thinges which are within the precinct of my of∣fice and calling. And for that by experience I right well knowe (if any other) howe busie dis∣dayners will be with my phrase, stile and me∣thode, yet because many of them haue ben long hatching their adled egges, & haue yet brought forth nothing: Let them now finish their la∣bors in▪ karping other mens good endeuours:
 surely they shall soner pyne away with their ma∣lice and enuy, then feare me from honest la∣bours, to do good to my countrey. Let them not spare their Christall eyes on Gods name to re∣prehend my wordes and matter, my inuention, definitions, and diuisions: yea if they will they may note the escapes in the impression. &c. It shall be sufficient vnto me, if the Christian rea∣der, will conster well my good intent: Being al∣so of opinion for my owne parte, that none can excuse his idlenes, that may be profitable any wayes to others.
Now for that this weake and seely Anatomie was loth to go abroad without some especial pro ectiō: I haue selected your worship to be a Patrō for the same: Moued therevnto with that great curtesie and goodwill, which from your first ac∣quaintance with me, you haue shewed towarde me. Moreouer your ardent zeale and loue of the gospell somewhat emboldned me in this enter∣prise, which amongst many other your commē∣dations cheefly commendeth you. It is a greate matter to come of a greate parentage, to haue large hereditamentes and possessions, wherein none at all in Cornwayll doo passe you, and very fewe are comparable with you: But with those
 thinges, to be the seruaunt of Christe, a louer of his gospell, and a foster, & nurce to his church, (as you and that vertuous gentlewoman your Wyfe, are well knowen to be in your countrey) is,Hom. in aliqu. scrip tos locos. as Basilius Magnus sayth, most laudable. In the which, and all other vertues, I beseech God to continue you to your latter ende: and to en∣crease you also in all vvorldly vvorship & dig∣nity. From Exceter the .xij. of March.

