


RIght Honourable, it hath plea∣sed God to vouchsafe your Lordship no small honour in the profession of Christianity, that you haue not onely be∣leeued the truth of the Gos∣pell, but also are made parta∣ker of that glorie of his chil∣dren to suffer for it. To you it is giuen (saith the A∣postle to the Philippians) for Christ, that not onely Phil. 1. 24 you should beleeue in him, but also suffer for his sake. Giuen; as if it were a speciall fauour, which no man attaines to, but they only to whom it is granted by priuiledge from God. To you it is giuen (saith our Matth. 13. . Sauiour) to know the secrets of the kingdome of heauen. And in another place: No man can come vnto me, ex∣cept Iohn 6. 6.

it bee giuen him of my Father. This gift the Lord hath bestowed vpon your Honour, that they which are enemies to him, should be persecutors of you, euen to the death, if it lay in their power, for his quarrell. But the gratious prouidence of God hath manifestly shewed it selfe, in this whole action, on your Lordships behalfe, in that not only you are still preserued, in despight of them, but also that you hold on that noble, and Christian resolution, to pro∣uide for the sasctie of Religion, his Maiesties person, and estate, with the hazard of your owne life, regar∣ding more what your Lordship ought to doe, in du∣tie to God, and your Soueraigne, then what you may suffer by men, for so doing. Now on their part, who can say whether their malice, or their follie is the greater? when I consider the height of their ha∣tred, that reacheth euen to the taking away of life, which is in Gods hands; me thinkes I am not able to looke beyond it. But when I remember their despe∣rate resoluing to commit such a murther, so openly, and their extreame indiscretion, in acquainting your Lordship with their intendment, it seemes to me, that the lightnes of their follie exceeds the waight of their malice. So that they giue all men iust occasion to suspect, that God hath giuen them ouer into a re∣probate sense, as to destroy their soules by intending such a bloody sinne, so to cast away their liues also by attempting it, with so great follie. But leauing them to the mercie and iustice of God, for repentance, or confusion; giue me leaue (Right Honourable) to put your Lordship in minde of that, which I make no doubt, but you know, and thinke on; viz. That

the Lord God (hauing taken your person, estate, and honour into his protection, against these and such like conspiracies) looketh for continuance, and in∣crease of zeale, and care in your Lordship, for the se∣curing, as much as may be in your power, of his holy religion, and his worthie Lieutenant, our gratious Soueraignes person, and dignitie. Now the know∣ledge of danger being a good helpe to the auoyding of it, The Lord himselfe seemes to haue taken halfe the care alreadie, in discouering those, that haue bin, are, and will be the continuall practisers of his Maie∣sties ruine. I were more than conceited, and foolish, if I could but thinke my selfe either able or fit to ad∣uise your Lordship in matters of this nature. Yet let me humbly entreate your Honour, to vouchsafe the reading of that, which, in my poore thoughts, I haue apprehended. That the safetie of Princes dependeth vpon the good pleasure of God, it is out of all que∣stion, especially in their account, who aduisedly, and thankfully remember the late wonderfull, and gra∣tious deliuerance, neuer to be forgotten. Neither can it be doubted, but it is Gods good pleasure to preserue them, as long as they haue care to walke in obedience to him; especially in prouiding for his glorie, by maintaining and aduancing the true reli∣gion of Iesus Christ. So then, the safetie of religion is the securitie of the Prince; and the decay of Gods true seruice, the forerunner of the Kings destruction. As this is true (in generall) concerning all Kings, and Gouernours; so hath it an especiall euidence of truth, in his Maiesties particular. For it is apparant to euery man, that the Papists quarrell to his Maie∣stie

is not for hatred of his person, but of his religion. And therefore so farre foorth will they plot against the former, as they can see likelihood of achieuing the latter. His danger groweth by their hope; and their despaire of bringing in Popish idolatrie, must needs be the securitie of his life and state. Are wee then desirous to rid his Maiestie of this danger, and the whole state of this feare? we see the meanes of accomplishing that desire, to bee no other, than to prouide that true religion may grow and flourish, and Popish idolatrie fade and wither. For neither may wee looke for any blessing from God on the Common-wealth, if he be continually dishonoured amongst vs, by the encrease of Popish heresie; nor reasonably promise our selues any end of treache∣rous and bloodie enterprises, as long as Papists con∣ceiue hope of preuailing for Antichrist, by such at∣tempts. If their number daily encrease, how should their hope lessen? And how is it possible to keepe it from growing, if thousands in this kingdome, remai∣ning in their ignorance, be left as pray to seducing Priests and Iesuits? The conclusion is, that if there be not some religious and wise care taken, as to in∣struct the people in the knowledge of Gods truth, which is the principall: so to ferrit out those lurking Serpents, that breathe Idolatrie and treason into the hearts of his Maiesties people, and to keepe out their like from entring into this Iland, the glorie of God, the safetie of the King, and the prosperitie of this kingdome, are all waining, in the last quarter. For howsoeuer it be very true, that some Popish errors hin∣der not men from remaining good and faithfull subiects;

yet (as his Maiestie most wisely, and truly obserued) None of those, that trulie know and beleeue the whole grounds and conclusions of their Schoole doctrine, can euer prooue either good Christians, or faithfull subiects. For the former, I referre my selfe to most of the points handled in this Treatise ensuing: for the lat∣ter, let the doctrine and practise of the Romish Sy∣nagogue it selfe giue sentence. How can he possibly be a faithfull subiect, that is to be commanded (in the highest bond of conscience) by forreine authori∣tie? Shall we rest vpon the Popes holinesse: as if he forsooth would not enioyne any thing, that should preiudice any Prince in his estate temporall? Let former examples passe; can any true, or iust dealing be hoped for at his hands, whose vassals daily teach subiects, that it is meritorious to murther Princes. Would not the Pope, if hee had misliked that do∣ctrine, haue checkt it long before this time, either in some generall Councill, or by some definitiue sen∣tence of his owne; as your Lordship hath prudent∣ly obserued? And whereas their Arch-priest Black∣well condemnes all attempting of ought against Princes by any priuate authoritie, doth hee not (which is also your Lordships wise obseruation) re∣serue thereby a tacite lawfulnes thereof, in case it be directed by publike warrant? So impossible is it for a Papist (that beleeues the Pope cannot erre, and holds him∣selfe therefore bound in conscience to obey him, in all his commandements) to be a faithfull subiect to any Prince in the world whatsoeuer. But I haue been carried further in this matter, than I purposed; it remaines, that I humbly craue pardon of your Lordship, and com∣mend

there my poore labours to your honourable and gtious acceptance; beseeching God to conti∣nue your life, and to encrease your zeale, care, and wise lo to the glorie of his name, the further ad∣ua of religion, the prosperi of the estate, the sae and honour of his Maiestie, d your owne present and euer∣lasting comfort through Iesus Christ.
From my house on the Tower Hill February 18. Anno 16

