



SOme seaven yeares ago (right Honorable) I was requested by divers worthy Gentlemē, to write briefly some pithie discourse about the passions of the minde: because (as they sayd) they were things ever in vse, and seldome without abuse: they were dayly, yea and almost hourely felt no lesse craftie, then dangerous, much talkt of, and as yet never well taught. Their demaund seemed to me so rea∣sonable, honest, profitable, and delightfull, as I deemed it discourtesie, and incivilitie, not to condescend to satisfie their sute. A treatise hereupon I penned, but I know not how in the inundation of my crosses it suffered ship∣wrack with the rest of my writings: and at what time I supposed it had bin lying rotting in the bottome of the sea, a favorable gale brought it ashoare, where being found (belike by some that liked it well) was taken vp, entertayned, and dispersed abroad. When I beheld it, I wondred, and could not tell whether to reioyce to see mine aborted infant revived, or feare whether it had bin maymed and corrupted: for I doubted it had passed by some hands, which might have cavsed me speake in a language I never vnderstood. At last I fell a perusing of
 it, and in deede found, it had not bin hardly vsed, but kindly dealt withall, & what escapes were overslipped, proceeded rather from the vncorrected copie (for of three this was most vnpersit) then from any vncivill en∣tertaynement. After that the whole impression was dis∣persed, the Printer made meanes to have me adde what I thought wanting, and to amend that I iudged amisse. And so I have augmented this edition with as much more as the first copie conteyned. The which after I had absolved, it seemed of it selfe by a connaturall sym∣pathie to present it selfe vnto your Honour. For literall labours are vsually offered to such personages, with whom they particularly consort: and how could any passions finde out a person more proportionate then your Honour? They concerne Gentlemen and Noble∣men, to guide them in the way of civill conversation: Your Gentrie is well knowne: they appertayne to souldiours to stirre them vp to courage, and magnani∣mitie: your martiall prowesse are patent at home, and famous abroad. They belong to Magistrates and offi∣cers, for discovery and manage of subiects: your place, and evident hopes of further preserment presage, that this part cannot but agree to you. For me thinks as often as I consider your presence about his Maiestie, it see∣meth to me, with mine eyes to behold an other match∣lesse Parmenio, for trust and fidelitie about our invin∣cible Alexander of the North. Wherefore my passions being provided for Courts, Fields, and Senates, finde in you vnited, that they sought for dispersed: for as it is diicill to determine which of them hath chiefest part in you, so it is easie for me to resolve how fit this dis∣course is for you, which levelleth at all three. I doubt
 not but I might say to you as Plotinus a famous Philo∣sopher in Rome sayd to Origen, when he entred into his Schoole to heare him reade, who presently at Origens aspect rubore suffusus, blushing, ceased to speake: OrigenPorphyr. in vita Plot. requested him to proceede, Plotinus replied, that it was time for a professour to hold his peace, when his audi∣tors before-hand knew what he intended to teach. You need not learne of me those things, which both by stu∣die and practise you have attayned vnto: yet it is no small comfort for a man to see, either that he knoweth, confirmed, or that he doeth, approved. If these sillie la∣bours shall content your Honour, I wish no other re∣compence: for that which liketh you in this kinde, I know will not dislike the best: and that which pleaseth the best, by right reason, should be a good inducement, to content all. If these blasted leaves be acceptable to your Lordship, when the fruites are ripe, you shall re∣ceive a fatter crop: in the meane time Christ Iesus preserve you in his grace, protect you from your enemies, and de∣liver you from inordinate Passions.

