



Right Honorable,
WHen the great God of heauen and earth proclaimed by his Prophet to Eli, 1. Sam. 2. 30 that he would honor them that honour him; he therein implied, both an example and a charge for all men to do the like. Therefore is this actiō of honouring thē that honour God, one of those whereof the holy Ghost made choise, Psal. 15. 4. that he might by them giue vs notice of those men which shal abide in the Tabernacle of the Lord, and dwell in his holy hill. It is my desire to performe this dutie to God, by this seruice to your Lordship: wherein I feele and confesse, that I receiue far more then I can possibly giue. For by desiring to honour our Lordship for your zeale in honouring God, I
 encrease mine owne hope, that I am of their num∣ber, who haue obtained already some part of his grace, and shall hereafter haue entrance into his glorie. Giue me leaue (noble Lord) to forget, in this respect, my particular obligation to your Ho∣nour, for your continuall bountie to me, and good o∣pinion of me, that I haue an vnfained desire to maintaine the truth of God, profest in this famous Church of England, against the subtill and dan∣gerous errors of the Romish Synagogue. For I truly and willingly professe, that the consideration of your Lordships feruent zeale for the glory of God, zealous loue of his truth, and true detestation of Popery, haue so possest and rauisht my heart with a longing after your Honour, that it will not suffer any other of your noble vertues (though many and great) either to come into comparison with it, or to haue the least place in my thoughts, while it is in presence. This (in my apprehension) is as much to true honour, as in Demosthenes opinion, pro∣nuntiation was to true eloquence. Let them, that will dote, vpon their worldly greatnesse, as the Pea∣cocke is in loue with his owne feathers. It is true honour to be honourable in his sight, who onely is worthy of honour; and yet graciously vouchsafeth to giue and to command that honour be giue to
 his faithfull seruants. This is the foundation of your Lordships honour in my heart, and vpon this ground wil I daily offer vp my poore prayers to God for your good Lordship, your noble and truly ver∣tuous Lady, and hopefull of spring, that it would please him to shewer downe euery day more & more the comfortable dew of his grace and blessing vpon euery one of you, to the increase of all honour in this life, and happinesse in the life to come, through Je∣sus Christ our Lord:

Tower-Hill May 3. 1624.
