


THose that deeply consider The conti∣nuall war∣fare of chri∣sties church. the estate of Christes Churche, and atentiuely obserue the course of the same doo well perceiue, how aptly and truly it is resem∣bled to battayle and warfare, Luk. 11. Eph 6 Iob. 4. whiles it wandereth heere vppon earth. For it is much lyke an army being alwayes in the feelde: pursued by the enime, and continually ed with assaultes and allarmes.
The Church neuer yeth  ace, nor faithfull leags: and if sometime there are any outward shewes of these thinges, they are full of fraude and deceiue. For the capital enimie of Christ is neuer quiet: but always inuieth his glory and dignytie, layeth snares to intrappe the godly and insatiably thirsteth after their bloud. And al∣though he seeme sometime to remit his vehement assaultes, yet he continueth one and the same diuel,
 and sendeth foorth still supplies against the Army of Christ, who practise new sleightes and poly∣cies, now putting on the vysor of faithful friends, then shewing themselues cruell enimies, seekynge all meanes to suppresse and treade downe the Church of Christ which thing our sauiour testy∣fieth in that reuealation to his so deerely beloued apostle and Disciple on this wyse.
And vvhen the Dragon savv that he vvas cast in∣to the earth, he persecuted the manchilde. And the Dragon vvas vvroth vvith the vvoman, and vvent and made vvarre vvith the remnaunt of hir seede: vvhiche kept the commaund ementes of God, and haue the testimonie of Iesus Christe. The Prophet Dauid also complayneth thus, in the person of the Church. Many are come aboute mee, fat Bulles of Basan, close mee in on euery side. They gape vppon mee vvith their mouthes: as is it vvere a ramping and roring Lyon: many Dogges are come about mee, and the counsel of the vvicked sayeth seege against mee. And Iob, the patterne of patience eeth vs that mans lyfe is a vvar are heere vppon earth.
And that it fareth so in deede with the churche of Christ, not onely those that are studious of an∣tiquytie, and faithful in the  doo right well know, but also this our miserable and wofull age, with many lamentable crampies dooeth adantly testifie the same vnto vs. For although great vexations and troubles, haue al∣wayes afflicted the Church: yet both experyence sheweth, and almighty God hath with many ∣stimo foretolde, that this ble and ba age of the world, should be  and troublesom, then the golden and siluer age. Already passed both for the great sin and iniquitle of men, in the la dayes: & especially bicause the diuill that old dragon
 is now most furius knowing the heauy and hory∣ble day of doome to be at hand: the remembraunce whereof maketh him tremble and quake, bicause his fowle and detitable fylthines and vncleanesse shall lye open to the eyes of all angels and men: when he with all the route of vnbeleeuers, shall be cast downe into endlesse torments, where shall bee weeping and grinting of teeth. And also vnder∣standing, as the Angel sayeth, that hee hath but a Reue. 12. short time: he powreth out most abundantiye his malyce and poyson into the worlde, and disturbeth both good common weales, and godly congregati∣ons.
All partes of the worlde run vpon weeles, bloudy Warres in all partes of ye world. warre rgeth euery where, and whyther soeuer a man turne his eyes, ether towarde East of west, North of South, al things wil appeere to be ful of daungers. In the East the Turke enlargeth hys dominion wastinge the Churche not onely with sworde but also with biasphemous oppinions. In the North east the Tartarians and Muscouittes bee Gods people. In the South and West parts of Italy, Flaunders, Fraunce and Spayne, wee see no durable leagues of peace: but Iunaity, and crueltie practised vpon all degrees, ages, and sexes, shewing any harty loue and iyncere affection to the Gospell of Christ. Amongst these heauy confusions of nations and kingdomes: the shyppe Englande the hauen of Christes ship & the harbour of persecuted men for the Gospell. of Christ hauing binne long tossed with boystious stormes and contrary blasses: and driuen vppon many rocks and quicksandes, insomuch that it see∣med to be in peryll of drowning, hath at the laste recouered a calme roade, and quiet hauen in thys Ilande, where the Prophets and their Children haue me harbored, and lodged, as it were in an∣nother Sarepta and we our selues haue enioyed blessed peace now a good space and season.

Which thinges when woe beholde, let vs not What good men should do in ye consi¦deration of these things so muche busye our selues inquyringe the causes, why God hath so sharply punished other nations and mercyfully spared vs: but rather call to minde the speach of the sonne of God when Pilats cru∣eltye was opened vnto hym in that hee had murdered certen Galyleans, and inforced the rest to drynke the bloud of their Cosyns in their sa∣cryfyces. Although the matter was horyble, yet our Sauiour lettynge Pylate passe, applyeth Luk. 13 the example to the Andytory sayinge, vnlesse you repent you shall all perish. Euen so the cala∣mities and deathes of our neighbours, ought to admonish vs of our synnes, and to moue vs to re∣pentaunce. And let vs bee carefull that wee a∣buse not this peace and quyetnesse beeinge the in∣estimable benifyt & blessing of God: for it can not longe continue amongsts vs, if wee spende it in fylthy concupiscences, and beastly pleasures. For what causes peace and other temporall blessinges are giuen to common Wealthes.
GOD giueth pleasaunt peace, fyrme leages, and carefull Princes at certayne times and sea∣sons. For what cause that men may tumble, and wallow in fylthye pleasure? nothinge lesse. But rather that mariges, procration, and educati∣on of Children, may bee as it were a frye or nur∣cerye for his Churche: and that the doctrine of GODS essence and will, reuealed by his sonne may bee publyshed farre and nigh, that true discipline and Christian conuersation may bee effectuallye practised and executed.
If wee abuse then, this diuine benefyt of peace, contemninge the knowledge of God and neglec∣ttnge good lyfe commaunded in his woorde: this blessynge can not bee durable with vs: and those plagues which GOD hath now a longe tyme withdrawne from vs wyll bee acquited at the last, with heauy and intollerable sharpnesse when hee beginneth to punish.

But as our blessynges at home ought not to breede in vs senssesse securitie: so the forraigue plagues and almost oppression, of the Churche, a∣broade Consolati∣ons amōgst these world¦ly calamy∣ties. should not abashe or make vs shrinke. Let vs not bee mooued with the might and mul∣titude of enimies, whether they bee Turkes, or Papistes: neither let vs bee dismayed which the weake and poore estate of the Churche, to iudge that they therefore be accepted and wee contenmed: which carnall and peruerse speculation mooueth many to reuoulte to Turke and Pope from the Gospell, bicause they often times beholde the Church as a refuse voyde and destitude of all hu∣mane helpe.
In such cases wee ought to take vnto vs in faith The perce armour of godly men. and inuocation those defenses out of the Armorye of the bible whiche will make vs inuinsible, a∣gainst the weapons, and assiultes, of all dyuelles and wicked men. Those munitions are Gods prounises whiche wee ought deepely and stedfast∣ly to imprint in out mindes: and they shall better fortify and defende vs then any stonge Bulwark or Cast'e. Of the which sort among many other are these that folow.
Thus saith the Lorde I vvill beare you vvhen you are olde, I haue made you, I vvill beare you, Esa. 46. I vvill carrie you, and agayne. Canne a mother forget hir Childe? and not haue pittie vpon the sonne of hir vvombe: and if she do for Esa. 49. get it yet vvill I not forget thee Syoh.
How sweete is that speach of the Prophet, which resembleth the sonne of GOD to an Herdma, feedinge his flock, gathering his Lambes egether Esa. 40. swith his armes, caryinge them in his bosome and kindly in treatinge them that beare younge ones: Wherby we are put in minde in our dayly prayer, that we are the sheepe of this shepharde: and ther∣fore
 ought to flye vnto him for succour and defence in all distresses. And no lesse pleasunt is that picture of GOD caryinge his Churche in hys wombe and bosome, proueysinge to beare the same Esa. 44. ct 46. in hir olde age.
Men vse deepe inquysitions and carefull cogyta∣tions, where the Churche shall remayne amonge these ruines of kingdomes, confusion of opinions and infynit domesticall calamyties which we bee∣holde with great, dolor and griefe. The Prophet caseth this carefulnes saying that the Church shal remayne, in the bosome and wombe of God: that is to say, that he wil alwaes defend those places y• harbour & intertaine his church. But amongst the rest, it is chiefly to be obserued that the Church of Esa. 11. God is compared to a sucking infant puttyng his hand in a serpents nest and Cokatrices denne, and playing with them. For as the litle babe sythinge amonge Serpences & Cokatrices: neither vnder∣standeth his daunger, neither is well defensed a∣gainst those vencmous vipers: so the Church doth not throughly seethe crafty conuenticles, and lur∣kyng dennes of hir emiuties, and is assaulted with greater forces then she hath defenses visible: and yet she is myraculously and inuysibly preserued by the sonne of God the protector and defender therof. Whensoeuer therefore wee see our enimyes readye to deuour vs, and our selues destitute of all hu∣maine helpe: then wee may most assurc our selues of Gods presence. If wee be exiled let vs not think that we are therefore abiectes or forsaken of God, or that wee wander alone. For the sonne of God marcheth before with an infinite company of chaste ngels: Christ Iesus is the Herbinger, Warre shal not ouercōe Christes Church. and will lotte out a conuement restinge place for his obedyent people.
Blooddy war rageth presently throughout the whole worlde, and the crueltye of Tyrantes
 increaseth euery where, wastinge and destroyinge many seruaunts of Christ. But they shall not vt∣terly abollsh and vanquish the Church albeit they haue made many breaches in the wals, and seeme now ready to enter: for euen then wyll God shew his presence, to the confusion of Rabsaces and his 2. Reg. 19. Esa. 37. Esa. 31. mighty army: which is lyuelye paynted out by the Prophet in this wise. Thus hath the Lorde spoken vnto mee. Like as the Lyon and Lyones vvhelp roreth vpon the pray that he hath gotten, and is not afraide though the multitude of Shep∣hardes, crye out vpon him neither is abashed for all the heape of them: so shall the Lorde of hostes come dovvne from mount Syon and defende his Hill. Like as the birdes flutter about their nestes so shall the lorde of hostes, saue and deliuer Hie∣rusalem. Therefore O yee children of Israell tourne vnto him vvhom you haue ostentimes forsaken.
Let vs fyxe our eyes and hartes vpon these euy∣dent testymonies of Gods mighty presence & pro∣tection of his Church in such sort that the gates of hell: that is to say the fearce assaultes, and subtyll vndermininges of diuels, and men shall not be able to prenayle against it.
The Churche indeede is a lyttle tower or Oyle, yf you compare it with the warrelyke Castell of Sathan: but by meanes of hyr Cap∣tayne, shee sustayneth and beateth off the beseege and assauites of all hyr aduersaries.
Neyther ought wee to thinke that the Churche The godlye dye with ho¦nour and ti∣rantes with dishonour. shall at ye last be destrcyed bicause many of hir mē∣bers be dyuersely afflicted, and cruelly murdered. For they in theyr tormentes and passions, doo tryumph ouer Tyrauntes, and professe bouldelye theyr Faith and Relygion.
 So the three Children in the fyrie funace try∣uinphed ouer Nabuchodonezor, and the scauen, Machabies against Antiochus, with many others Dan. 3. 2. Mac. 7 who haue left a sweete memoryall of their names euen in this worlde: whereas yrauntes Ieaue and cary with them perpetuall shame and igno∣niie as the wiseman sayth. The memoriall of the iust shal haue a good report, but the name of the Psa. 112. prouer. 10 vngodly shall stincke. For the death of Gods saincts is precious in his sight, and is an entre in∣to euerlasting felicitie. Sapi. 3.
And as the sonne of GOD in the fyrste Ea∣ster, passed through Egipt, and slew al their fyrst Exod 12. borne, and spared the Israelts whose dore postes were sprinkled with the blood of the Lauthe: euen so hee alwayes passed ouer mankynde, subuerting God incre∣seth his lyt∣tle flock and maketh thē a mightye people. great and mightye Princes, who haue afflicted and persecuted his Churche: but sparynge and preseruinge his owne flocke myraculously. The church then shal alwaies continue, vntil the com∣ming of the sonne of GOD to iudgement. And albeit the face and countenaunce of the same bee not alwayes one, and the lighte thereof sometime more, sometime lesse, much lyke the Moone in hir wayne and Eclyps: yet as she after hir chaunge increaseth to the full and shineth most brightlye: August. in psalm. 10. euen so of seauentye soules that descended into Egypt they anymented in shorte spac to six hun∣dred thousande, besydes women and children: and beeinge streytened for a time in obscure corners of Iuryc, shee kindled vnder persecution in suche sorte, that in the dayes of Constantine the Great, shee shined throughout all the world: Shee was beseeched latly by mperours and Princes pow∣ers in litle Magdcburge and Rochell, but was sette at ly bertye in short time, and had free passage almost throughout all these landes.
 Although then the power and furor of tyrants be great, threten destruction to christian kingdoms, and breath out cruelty against the Sainctes. Yet wee ought to know that both fatall ruins, and mutations hange ouer their heades, and also that the sonne of GOD, who hath intituled hymselfe, the Emperour, and Captayne of hys armye, wyll bridle their headdy and varbarous rage, and giue a ioyfull rest and gloryous peace to his Church.
Yea hee wyll also defende and conserue honest Some com¦mon weales that cannot bee ouer∣throwen. Gene. 7. polycies, and Common weales so longe as they suffer Christes shippe to ryde quietlye in their strandes, giue harbour vnto his guie harbour vnto his Churche, mayr∣tayne, Schooles and Uniuersities being the foun∣tayne of humanytie and Christianitie. Euen as the sonne of God in the vniuersall floud saued the Arke and in the same Noah and his family, who were Gueedne and keepers of the diuine promy∣ses, concerning Mcssias Iesus Christe. Whereof The com∣modyties which eng∣land inicy∣eth by im∣bracinge the worde of God. litle England hath had good proofe, who amonge the raging furors of Sathan, the mortall hatred of the worlde, and daungerous conspiracies as well of domesticall as forren enimies retayninge with sure handfalt Christes Gospell, and inter∣taynig his Church, hath binne blessed by almigh∣tie God with the Halcyons daies in their polycie and common wealth, that they might learne both to knowe and serue hn in this lyfe, and hereafter to prayse him throughout all eternyties.
Of this argumente I haue written somewhat largely in the Treatesse following, and haue ap∣plyed the same to the estate of these perilous times & tragical daies, which I humbly present vnto you honor. The reading wherof may happely renew in your minde, the cruell practises and dealinges of wicked men, which with greate dolour and perryl, you were constraned to be holde in that Massacre:
 where amongst an innumerable companye, that pe∣nished as it were with the Machabies: yet almighty GOD in his mercy saued many euen in the fye∣rie furnace and denne of Lyons: and vsed your honour as mother Obadia to hide and preserue 1. Reg. 18. many of Christes seruantes, from the ege of the sworde: whereof, some of them haue giuen open testimonye, to the worlde in their writinges, and haue made gratefull remembraunce of your wys∣dome, honour, vertue and great charges, plentiful∣ly powred vpon Christes members in their myse∣rye, for the whiche you cannot bee vnrewarded at that great daye, That time made you fytte for this your present estate: and the often re∣membraunce of the same wyll not suffer you to bee vnprouided for lyke euents for those that feare God will not be rechlesse by meanes of prospery∣tie, knowing, that there is a chaunge of al things, and nothing vnder the Sunne fyrme and stable.
Morcouer bicause mans wisdome and regy∣ment, is neither happy in time of warre nor peace: without the direction of the worde of God, this matter deriued out of the same cannot be imperti∣nent to your calling. Lastly if your honour whom God hath indued with excellent wisdom, vertue and learninge will fauourably accept this lyttle woorke, it shall the rather escape the checks of the malycious, and procure credit of the honest and godly, The father of al mercy giue you many good dayes and yeares, and direct you with the spirite of wisdome and counsell: that you may continew long a comfort and ornament vnto the Church of Christ and this common wealth increase you pre∣sentlye with temporall honours, and in the ende crowne you with those that bee eternall. From Exetor the last day of May. 177.

