



Honorable, and worthy Witnesses.
I Crave your testimonies, as well for
the preaching, as the printing of these Sermons. You were at sundry times, and in severall places, the best and chiefest of my hearers, and it concernes your ho∣nours to be as inno∣cent in the hearing as it was my duty to be innocent in the speaking. You cannot be ignorant of the Accusation,
and if that were suf∣ficient to make a man guilty,
Si accu∣sasse suf∣ficiat, qui erit Inno∣cens? who should be innocent? as once Julian said of the Christians, the worst man of the best living.
It is the saying of Syracides.
Eccles. 11.7. Blame not before thou hast ex∣amined the truth: understand first, and then rebuke. It was the sharpe censure
of King James in his Daemonology,
Lib. 3. Cap. 1. that un∣certaine report, is the authour of all lies: yet they are worse who lye in wait to finde fault and to turne good into evill,
Ecclus 11 31. of whom the wise man hath com∣plained long since, and we may see how every age of the world renders it, day by day more malicious.

Alas, when there is wanting that ver∣tue which in all men we call Honesty: and that speciall gift of God which in Christians wee call Charity, how are men condemned without hearing, and wounded with∣out offence given? We see in experi∣ence, that dogges al∣wayes barke at
those they know not, and that it is their nature to ac∣company one ano∣ther in those cla∣mors: so is it with the inconsiderate multitude, being once set on, they trust to their tongs, their teeth are gone, and barke and bleat when they cannot bite.
It is a pennance
to a Preacher to bee troubled with tri∣flers, who have neither eyes to see, nor heads to appre∣hend what is said; yet dare they thun∣der and threaten, as if they meant to beare downe all be∣fore them: Every understanding hath a peculiar judge∣ment, by which it answereth other mē,
and valueth it selfe; and therefore it can∣not seeme strange to me to be abused by reports. Let vaine men pricke on in their pride, hoyse up the top-sayle of un∣truth, and flant it out against us, yet God forbid, that these should al∣wayes have wind at will, and finde as free passage to supe∣riours
as they ima∣gine. But seeing it is so easie to faine, and face out re∣ports, I must be con∣tent to leave such professors, to their easie wayes of re∣prehension, than the which, there is no∣thing of more frail∣tie.
When Moses saw the Jsraelite, and the Aegyptian fight, hee
did not say, Why strive you? but drew his sword, and slew the Aegyptian: but when hee saw two Israelites quarrell, he said, Yee are brethren, why strive you? If any thing delivered bee an Aegyptian, let it be slaine by the sword of the Spirit, and ne∣ver reconciled: but if an Jsraelite, and yet questioned, why
strive you? What wrong I have done, let all judge that reade this Sermon: what wrong is done to mee by the accusation, Heave to him, that either mi∣stooke me, or meant me a mischiefe. Hee hath put an Aegypti∣an in the place of an Jsraelite, and an er∣rour in the place of a truth. I said, God is
often a mothe in our counsels, meaning in the successe, and event of mans con∣sultations, which to be an Israelite, these Scriptures doe ac∣knowledge, Deut. 28.28. Hos. 5.12. Zach. 12.4. How these words may be strained to Coun∣sels of State (as they are by my accuser) I confesse it passeth
my understanding.
It may be the failes and follies of some in preaching, to seeke vulgar ap∣plause; A vanity much avoyded by wise men. Saint Au∣gustine affirmed,
Laudari a bon timeo, & amari a ma io de∣testor. that he feared the praise of good men, and detested that of evill. And to them that will reade and remember, our ancients have given
better rules. Saint Ierom desired in prea∣ching,
Hier ad Nept. Lachryma auditorum sunt lau∣des tua. Non pla∣sum, sed planctum. rather to have the praise of the teares than of the tongues o his hearers. Saint Au∣gustine being applau∣ded for his prea∣ching, answeres: F∣lia haec sunt, nos fructu quaerimus. These a but leaves, we looke fo fruit. Chrysostome tol his hearers, he ow them thanks, when th
payed him teares. Si haec audientes, doletis, maximas me debere vo∣bis gratias confiteor, quis est enim qui melae∣tificat, nisi qui contri∣statur ex me? These rules shall I desire to follow both in preaching; and in printing, and for this end I have desi∣red, to make my thoughts more legi∣ble, and my selfe
and my Sermons, the subject of every opinion, wise, or weake.
I have presumed vpon the Dedicati∣on, and having thought upon some Witnesses and Pa∣trons, have addres∣sed my selfe to such friends, as love the truth, and deserve to be loved of it. I wil not trouble you o
any other with fur∣ther reasons of my writing, or with ex∣cuses. He that doth ill, no plea can war∣rant him: and hee that doth well, can∣not easily be discou∣raged with any cen∣sures. I crave no mans pardon in gi∣ving good counsell, but his acceptation; And presents of love may be well ta∣ken
both of friends and strangers. The things I dare say, are both commoda, & ac∣commodata, seasona∣ble and profitable for our times, wher in God smiteth, and his houshold smar¦teth; and such begin∣nings will have feareful endings up∣on their enemies.
An heathen wis man could say, Ad¦versities
are Tributa vivendi, tributes of living. And wise Christians above all ought to know them, and to pay them most willing∣ly. Their Lord and master hath gone before them, and it is their duty to fol∣low him, not as those whining soul∣diers, qui gementes se∣quuntur Imperatorem;
but as those worthy Martyrs, which like a cloud of witnesses, have gone before them. And here I remēber some pas∣sages that may bee patterns for others, which I have heard from some of you, well agreeing with the subject of my Text,
Dicta do∣cta & pia ir verè diligentis deum, & Ecclesi∣am, as namely: He will never dye for Christ, that will not
first learne to live for him. Another of the like nature was con∣cerning comfort in death. videl. Death takes away the pleasure of all worldly things, and Religion the paine of death.
This may well make us prize the rule of the Apostle, that Godlinesse is great gaine, and sure∣ly a godly life is to
be preferred before all good things a∣bout us. VVhat can it advantage a man to be well for the world, and ill, and vile for him∣selfe? He gaines no∣thing that wins the world, with the losse of himselfe. Very Ethnicks in their Ethickes have laid it downe for a rule, that nothing is
so good for a man as to live well. Ho∣nour, riches, plea∣sures, have their va∣luations in the world, and they are the greatest markes men shoot at, and straine their consci∣ences to the highest. But howsoever men give these their good word, yet they will be wanting in the day of death,
when nothing but the gaine of godli∣nesse will profit us.
To purchase ho∣nour, we make ri∣ches our servants; and yet even this consisteth for the most part in the ap∣plause of the multi∣tude, which it may be will follow us in faire weather; but will be sure to for∣sake us in the first
tempest of misfor∣tune, and steere a∣way before the Sea, and wind, leaving us to the rualice of our destinies. Who would trust such an heard of Animals, that please them∣selves with the noise they make, with∣out any true know∣ledge of the cause, or the distinction of vertue and for∣tune?
Let the im∣pious prosper, and they shall be applau∣ded; and let the ver∣tuous be unhappy, and they shall bee despised. Fortune raiseth up men to the horse, and rideth them: who when they are descended, and on foot like o∣ther men, and they and their fortune parted, we shall see
a bitter contempt spurne at the one with as great liber∣ty, as a base Groome dare presume to beat the other. Who seeth not then the profit of Godlinesse to be preferred, be∣fore all worldly ad∣vantages?
That skill must needes be the best, which can teach a man to know him∣selfe,
and that gaine the greatest, which is accōpanied with the favour of God, grace of Christ, and comfort of the Spi∣rit, and which can made us blessed in this life, and the life to come. The Saints sufferings, and Sin∣ners sorrowes, have cōtrary beginnings, and contrary en∣dings. Their be∣ginnings
are known by their shortnesse, their endings can∣not be knowne for their Eternity. A good man knowes the worst at the first, and his very sorrow is turned in∣to joy, and his joy is unspeakeable and glorious: but a wic∣ked man knowes his best at the first, and his joy is turned
into sorrow, and his sorrow is not to bee defined. All that our Text can say of it, is, What shall his end bee? Nay, there is yet more both in their joy and sorrow. It is not an alteration, but a conversion. A good mans sorrow is not onely chan∣ged, and removed; but converted into
joy, as the matter of it: but the joy of the wicked is not one∣ly taken away, but made the matter of his future sorrow, and oftentimes as an unknowne sor∣row springs from an unknowne sin, as we shall discover in a second Ser∣mon.
The joy and woe of this world, how
great soever, will saile out of sight; and then death which pursues us, and keepes us in chase, will lay hold, and fasten on our bodies, as prises for wormes, and leave our soules to a worse reckoning. O what an extreame madnesse were it, in the shipwracke of all worldly things,
where all sinkes but the sorrow, to save that for another world? What then remaines to him that all his life hath injoyed fortune for a servant, and time for a friend, but the heavy, secret, sad, and severe thoughts of another life, where neither Time nor Fortune shall favour him? Hap∣py
are all those that have grace to value worldly vanities, at no more than their owne price, and by retaining the com∣fortable memory of a well-acted life, can behold death with∣out dread, and the grave without feare, and imbrace both as necessary guides to endlesse glory.
The sorrowes of
this life, are but of two sorts; The one hath respect to God, when we complain to him against our selves, and for our offences, count him just in all that wee suffer; and to such sorrow Saint Paul hath promised bles∣sednesse. The other hath respect to the world, when wee mutter to our selves
against God, an complaine of him as if hee had don us wrong, either it not giving, or ta∣king away what we desire to have an to hold: forgettin that humble and ju acknowledgment o holy Job, The Lor hath given, and th Lord hath taken, bles∣sed be the Name of th Lord. And such sor∣row
the Apostle ath threatned with eath.
Questionlesse hee s either a foole, or a ebell that wil quar∣ell with God in his avours, or frownes. A foole, if he be ig∣norant whence bles∣sings and crosses come: a rebell, if he know it, and bee mpatient. How meane soever our
estate be, yet is th same farre greate than that wch Go oweth us; and ho sharpe soever o afflictions be, yet th same are farre les than those whic are due unto us.  know impatience full of excuses, an wee say wee rath murmure at th hand, than the pow¦er that beats us: b
take heed, lest like some foolish Curres whilst we bite the stone, wee barke a∣gainst the hand that threw it. See God in all his chastise∣ments, and beare with patience, for whatsoever the be∣ginning is, the end shall be happy.
To conclude, My desire is to all, and you in speciall, for
the acceptation, per∣usall, and Patro∣nage of these Ser∣mons. It is but a small testimony o my unfained obser∣vance of you, and al that love the truth▪ And thus I take my leave, and com∣mend both you, and yours to the God o mercy, and truth, who guide, comfort, deliver, sanctifie,
and preserve you all, and fill you with the comforts of the blessed hope of the appearing of Iesus Christ.

