


DEarly beloued, whan I wyth a lamentable hert consyder wyth my selfe the myserable stare of Englande my natiue cū∣treye, and the great ouerthrowe of Christes pure religiō there, sythe ye moste dolorouse death of our moste godly and vertuouse prince, Kynge Edwarde the syxt: and agayne remem¦brynge howe Idolatrie, superstici∣on, Papistrie, and al kyndes of false worshippinge of God hathe in so shorte tyme ouerflowed so noble a realme: and what an infinite nom∣bre (which wythin these two yeares
 past bare a fayre face towards true religion) are now suddenly turned backe to worship the beast, that is, to enbrace the Babilonicall strum∣pet, and to taste agayne of the cuppe of her abhominacions, I can scant∣lye refrayne myne herte from sob∣bynge, and myne eyes from distil∣lynge of teares. Alasse for pytie, what a great nōbre of Goddes peo∣ple is thys day within Englād, that in theyr hertes do deteste & abhorre that false worshippinge and great dishonourynge of God nowe vio∣lently (I wyl not saye tyrannously) thrust into euery churche and chap¦pel, and wolde wyth all theyr her∣tes (yf they knew whyche waye to bringe it to passe) flye out of that Ba¦bylon nowe the great cytie of synne and confusion? And contrary wyse it wolde pytie any true christen mā¦nes herte to remembre how many ther are wythin that realme (which are fully persuaded in theyr consci∣ences concerninge true religion) that myght wel enough escape and come away, & yet wyl not: but some of them had rather wyth moste ma∣nyfest and shamefull ydolatrie pol∣lute
 both theyr soules and theyr bo∣dies, than they wolde forsake the pā¦parynge of theyr paunches, & theyr best beloued God the wycked Mā∣mon. Other ther be that stāde in de∣fence that they maye tary wel enou¦ghe and cōmūnicate wyth the ydo∣latrers: but I maruell wyth what consciences they can other reade or heare these and suche lyke places of scripture here followynge:
2. Cor. 6.Beare not a straunge yoke (say∣eth saynt Paule) wyth the vnbele∣uers: for What felowship hath righ¦teousnes wyth vnryghteousnes? What cōpany hath lyght wyth dar∣kenesse? What cōcorde hath Christe wyth Belial? &c. Howe agreeth the temple of God wyth ymages? And it foloweth: Come awaye out from amonge them, and separate youre selues (sayeth the Lorde) and touche none vncleane thynge, so wyl I re∣ceaue you. &c. Doutlesse me thynke that thys texte rehersed shulde sore nyppe theyr consciences cōsydering that the Lorde hymselfe speaketh it.
Apoc. 18.Let them weye also thys scrip∣ture: Come awaye my people from Babilon (that is, from that cytie, re∣alme,
 towne, village, house, familie and company, whiche openly disho∣noureth God by ydolatrie, supersti¦cion and false worshippyng) that ye be not partakers of her sinnes, that ye receaue not of ther plages.
Againe, let them remembre this sayeng of the prophete Elias:3. Reg. 18. Why halt ye betwene two opinions? Yf the Lorde be the true God folowe hym? But yf Baal be he, than folow hym.An excuse But many excuse them selues by a boke made and compiled by a great clerke that dyed wyth in these fyue yeres past: whych boke (as they saye) maketh muche for theyr pur∣pose, that is, for goynge to the wyc∣ked Masse. &c. But surely, yf they weye that boke wel, it maketh no∣thynge for them at al: for he wrote that parte of hys boke for them that were but yonglynges in the true knowlege and vnderstandynge of the mysteries of Christes religion, and dwelt in suche a realme or cun∣treye that were cleane ouerwhel∣med wyth Papistrie, and not well reformed as was Englande. He wrote not that for them that hadde ben already wel nuseled and exerci∣sed
 in true religion many yeares (as some of these excusers haue) and are fullye persuaded already in the greatest misteries of pure religion. I dare saye, yf he were alyue he wolde not iustifye, neither beare wyth these men, to whōe God hath geuen so plentie of true knowlege, and that so many yeares ago, but wolde mooste sharply rebuke them and tel them playnly, that theyr ac∣companiyng and fellouship in false worshipping with ydolatrers shuld  moste manifestly extende: Fyrst to the great dishonour of the omnipo∣tent  Lorde their God. Secondarely to the accusacion and condempna∣cion of theyr owne consciences, ha∣uynge so manyfest places of holye  scripture agaynst them: Thyrdly, to the great offence of their yonge and weake christen brethren, whych ha∣ue many yeares knowen theyr opi∣nion  touchyng religion. And final∣ly, to the confirmacion of the olde cā cred and rustie Papistes in theyr grosse erroures and blyndnesse.
But the sorest grefe of al vnto myn herte (were it not that theyr bolde confession of theyr fayth and stoute
 standing and constant perseuering in the same vnto the death comfor∣teth me agayne) is the tyrannicall slaughter and butcherlike murther of the saintes, whych were the true seruaūtes of God, the syncere prea∣chers of the waye of saluacion, the veray martyrs, true wytnesses and constant confessoures of the true fayth of Iesus Christ, whych of late in Englande haue bestowed theyr veray lyues for ye testimony of that truth, whyche they haue in tymes past so faythfully preached to many thousandes of Christen soules with in that realme.
O Englande, Englande, what a sore buffet hath God now gyuē thee: Partlye, by restorynge that bloud∣suckyng byshop the Romyshe Anti∣christ to hys former vsurped autho∣ritie in that goodly realme, contra∣rye to Goddes worde, contrarye to thyne owne lawes, and cōtrary vn∣to al your othes, faith and fydelitie, to thy perpetual shame so longe as the worlde shal endure: And partly, by takynge awaye from thee suche notable Instrumentes, by whose mouthes thou hast abūdantly herd
 God speake vnto thee, and moste lo¦uyngly shewed thee how thou migh¦test be saued, and in steade of them in hys heauy displeasure nowe suf∣freth thy shamelesse shepherdes out of al pulpettes to fede the wyth too shameful lyes? And why? Doutlesse moste worthely. Because, (as S. Paule sayeth) thou receauedst not the loue of the truthe (when thou myghtest haue hadde it) that thou myghtest haue ben saued:2. Tess. 2. and ther∣fore God shal sende thee stronge de¦lusiō, that thou shuldest beleue lyes. But take hede. For prate they neuer so monstrouse lyes, glorious Gar∣dener and butcherlyke Boner with other of that ruflynge route of Ro∣myshe rutters, shall set suche a gly∣sterynge glose vpon them, and with suche counterfeted coloures set thē forth & paynt them, that thou shalte thynke them to be moste certaine & Euangelicall truthes, and shalte be brought into suche dotage and so be bewitched, that thou shalt thynke, that chese is chalke, and chalk chese. Swete is sowre, and sowre swete, good is euel,Esa. 5. and euel good, and con¦sequently, that truth is lyes, & lyes
 are truthes. And yet to say the truth it is maruel, that other the Pope, the Quene, the Nobilitie and com∣mons of Englande, or any other bo¦dye els where, shulde or can credite or beleue suche wethercockes & dub¦blefaced dreamers of myschefe as Gardener and Boner are. Whose wrytynges agaynst the wycked and vsurped authoritie of theyr louynge father nowe the Romyshe byshop, and the vnlawfull mariage of the Quenes mother with kinge Henry the eyght (for so they called them both than) shall to both theyr perpe∣tuall shames remayne, whan they are bothe gone to the deuel, excepte they earnestly repent in tyme, and ratifie agayne that, that they truely wrote than. For yf theyr wrytinges were than false, why dyd they (yf it were but for shame of the world) af∣firme any falshed, and cause it to be wrytten and printed, excepte they wolde openly shewe them selues to be the very chyldrē of the deuell the father of al lyes & falshed? Yf those thinges that they wrote than were true, why do they nowe so shameful¦ly deny them in al theyr wycked do¦ynges?
 why do they not nowe sticke vnto the truth of them euē vnto the death? Vnto death quod he? Naye. whoo there my frende. For bothe they haue alwaye ben moste tender¦ly brought vp, and theyr fleshe is to fyne, delicate, nyce and to tender to suffer ether imprisonment or death for the trueth sake. Yea they had ra∣ther put fyue hundreth to death for affirmyng the truthe (as they haue done many already in theyr tyme) than they wolde either sticke to it them selues, or suffer other godlye persones to lyue, that wolde wyth tothe and nayle sticke vnto it. But here I wyl let passe these open ene∣mies both to God, to the truth, and to all true Christianes inhabitinge the realme of Englande, and cōmit them to the vnsearcheable iudge∣ment of hym, whych knoweth beste howe to vse both them, and al other hys creatures to the settynge forth of hys glorye, and wyll nowe pro∣cede to my matter.
Whan I had in latin red the no¦table confession of the fayth of that excellent learned mā Huldrik Zwin¦glius, I cōsydered (yf it were turned
 into Englyshe) that it wolde be both profitable & confortable to a great multitude of my contrey folke, na∣mely to them that are but yongelin¦ges and weake in knowlege of true religion, wherof some perchaunce are in pryson already for the gospel sake, and some shall hereafter be cal¦led before the Magistrates to gyue a rekening of theyr faith:A christiā ought plaī¦ly & open¦ly to confes¦se with his mouth, the right bele∣fe of his herte. 2. Cor. 4. whervnto yf they shalbe requyred, ther is no remedy, but openly and playnly to confesse wyth theyr mouthes, what they beleue wyth theyr hertes, vn∣lesse they wil forsake Christ and his open truthe, and so (whych God for∣byd) runne into the hasarde of eter∣nal damnaciō. Therfore they muste vnfaynedly saye wyth S. Paule: I beleue, and therfore I speake. For vndoutedly, yf euer we loke to be saued, the playne and open confes∣sion of the mouthe muste necessare∣lye go wyth the ryghte belefe of the herte, thoughe dredful death shulde immediatli folowe. Do beleue with the herte iustifieth (sayeth S.Rom. 10. Paul) but to knowledge wyth the mouthe maketh a man safe. S. Peter lyke∣wyse voucheth the same, sayeng:

1. Pet. 3.Be ready alwayes to gyue a reke∣ning or an answere to euerye man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you, and that wyth mek∣nesse and feare, hauyng a good con∣science.
By these and suche lyke authori∣ties and examples of Goddes holye worde it dothe playnly appere: that yf the Magistrate or tyraūt demaūd of any a rekenynge of theyr belefe, they muste in any wyse boldly and constantly declare it, thoughe they se euen death before theyr eyes.
It is therfore no lesse but playne hy¦pocrisie, dissimulacion and halfe a denial of the fayth of Christe, to be∣leue ryghtly wyth the herte, and for fear, flatery, lucre or worldly gayne to saye or do the contrarye. God graunt vs all therfore to do as Ie∣sus the sonne of Syrack sayeth:
Stryue thou for the truthe (sayeth he) vnto death,Eccle. 4. and God shall fyght for thee agaynst thyne enemyes.
But here one of good knowlege wyl saye.Obiection. Syr I am not yet come vnto that perfeccion to dye for my fayth sake: neither to forsake my cū¦trey, and therfore I wyl abyde by it
 and tary here styl.
I answere:Answere then I wyl aduyse thee who soeuer thou arte, to make thy rekenyng wyth thy selfe before, Examyne thyne owne herte & con∣syder well: whether thou doest vn∣faynedly feele in thy selfe suche a stronge & stoute stomake, that thou canst be content boldly to confesse & byde by thy fayth: and for the truth sake wyllyngly and gladly forsake father, mother, syster, brother, wyfe chyldren, and al worldly pleasures, and further suffer therfore shame, rebuke, losse of all thy landes, goo∣des, and promocions, forsakyng of thy kynsfolke and frendes, lōge im∣prisonment, tyrannical tormentes, and finally moste shamefull death: Yf thou (I saye) vnfaynedly feelest in thy selfe suche a lusty corage that thou canst constantlye and wyth a ioyful herte do al these thynges for the loue of thy Lorde, and for the truthe sake, than on goddes name stande vnto it and abyde all sharpe stormes and tempestes,Eccle. 4  & God shall (as Syrak sayeth) fyght for thee a∣gaynst thyne enemies. And so in al thy greatest trouble thou shalte glo∣rifie
 God.
But contrarie wyfe yf thou feele in thy selfe weaknesse, and arte af∣frayed that thou arte not able to suf¦fer all these thynges, doutynge that thou can not stande stably in the o∣pen confession of thy ryght faythe & beleue, and paciently suffer al the a∣fore named tormentes: Than I wil aduyse the in any wyse to followe Christes aduertisement and cōmaū¦dement,Math. 10. sayeng: whā they persecute you in one cytie (wherin is vnder∣standed village, towne, cuntrey or region) flye vnto an other. For yf thou feeling in thy selfe suche weak¦nesse wilt aduenture to tarye styll, than beware of these terrible threat¦nynges of Christe, sayeng: who so euer shall deny me before men,Math. 10. him wyl I also denye before my father whych is in heauē.Marc. 10. Agayne, who so euer shalbe ashamed of me & of my wordes in this aduoutrouse & sinful generaciō: of him also shal the sonne of man be ashamed whā he cōmeth in the glorye of hys father wyth the holy Angels. Come awaye therfore spedely, and preuent these great daū¦gers of denyal of Christ, and of hys
 knowen truthe.
But thys my poore and symple aduice good brethrē and systers tou¦cheth nothynge at al any of vs that are already come awaye for the gos∣pel sake. For (God be praysed ther∣fore) we haue obeyed Christes voice both speakynge in S. Iohn & in S. Paule. In S. Iohns Reuelacion thus sayeth Christ:Apoc, 18. Come away my people from Babylō, that ye be not partakers of her synnes, that ye re∣ceaue not of her plages. In S. Paul thus sayeth the Lorde:2. Cor 6. Come out frō amonge them, and seperate youre selues from them (sayeth the Lord) and touche none vncleane thynge: so wyll I receaue you, and wyl be a father vnto you, and ye shalbe my sonnes and doughters, sayeth the Lorde almyghtye.
Loo, these two scriptures I haue rehersed agayne, both for our singu¦ler comforte, and for the comfortes of al them, that shall do the lyke that we haue done by cōmynge awaye. And in wayinge of these two afore∣sayd scriptures I can not but moch reioyse and prayse God on oure be∣halfe, and that for diuers consydera¦cions
 followynge:
  Fyrst by cōmyng away we haue declared oure selues to be Christes people. For Christe sayeth: come a∣waye my people from Babylon.
Marke that he calleth the flyers frō ydolatrie hys people. Seyng thā in thus flyinge awaye we are accomp¦ted by this place of scripture to be of Christes people, haue we not muche cause in our hertes to reioyse & glo∣ritie God? I thinke we haue.
  Agayne, for that we haue obeyde the Lordes voyce sayeng: Come a∣way: Come out from amōge them: Separate your selues from them: touche none vncleane thynge, we shal vndoutedly be partakers of the blessynges mencioned in the holye scriptures:Deut. 28. Leui. 26. Thē yf we be partakers of Goddes blessynges, it is a plaine assurance that God is on our syde. Yf God be on our syde, who thā can finally preuayle agaynst vs? Dout∣lesse, neither Reyser, Kinge, Quene tyraunt, deuel, death nor hell.
  Further, in commyg awaye we haue declared that we vtterly detest and abhorre al Idolatrye, supersti∣cyon, papistrie and false worshippin¦ge
 of God, and not to be partakers of them and other abhominacyons, whych nowe ouerflowe that noble realme of England: by reason wher¦of we shal and that most fortunatly auoyde and escape suche greate pla∣ges as now hāge ouer it. For which cause let vs dayly more & more stu∣dye to be thanckful vnto the Lorde.
  Finally, as we haue obeyed (bles∣sed be God therfore) those commaū¦dementes: Comme awaye: Comme out from amonge them: Separate your selues from them: touch no vn¦clean thynge: So shal we be partta∣kers of these promeses followinge, that is: so wyl I receaue you: and wyl be a father vnto you: & ye shall∣be my sonnes and doughters, sayth the Lorde almyghtie.
These swete promeses and spiri∣tual confortatiues let vs be mynd∣ful of both whan we laye vs down to rest, & whē we ryse vp agayn. And giue God most hertie thanckes both for them, and for that grace that he gaue vs to leaue our countrey, li∣uynges and promocyons and cō∣me awaye.
But here a papist wyl saye that
 I am out of my witte,Obiection to saye that we are fortunate with commynge awaye, nowe suffering greuouse ex¦yle, dispatched of our lyuinges, for∣saken of our kynsfolke, and out of the Quenes fauoure. Thys (wyl he saye) is to cōme out of Goddes bles∣syng into a warme sonne.
Answere.I answere: The fleassh and car∣nal reason wyl iudge no lesse. But yf we iudge after the rule of holy scripture, it is qwyte contrarie: For all Christes scholars muste suffer trouble in thys worlde. As S. Paul affirmeth,2. Tim. 3. sayinge: Al they whyche wyl lyue godly in Christ Iesu shal suffer persecucion. Thys exile ther∣fore is our crosse, whych we muste esteme to be swete vnto vs for Chri¦stes sake,Mat. 10. because he sayeth: he that taketh not hys crosse and foloweth me, is not worthye of me. And: yf a man come to me, and hate not hys father and mother, and wyfe & chyl∣dren,Luce. 14. and brethren and systers, yea and hys owne lyfe also, he can not be my disciple.
And touchynge our persecucion and exile let vs patiently beare it. For Christ suffred muche more per∣secucion
 for vs. And was compelled in hys infancie (kynge Herode se∣kynge to destroye him) to flye away out of his owne natiue cuntrey into a straunge lande,Matth. 2 and there to tary a lōge tyme tyl the death of his per¦secutour.
As for the Quenes displeasure towardes vs (though perchaunce so me other causes are pretended) it is doutles for ye gospel sake. Therfore let vs strongly beare it, and cōmitte our hole cause vnto God, & let hym alone wyth the redresse therof, and dayly praye for her true conuersion vnto ye enbracynge of Christes true religion.
But concernynge the spoyle of your landes, goodes and possessiōs, and the lawles robberie of oure ly∣uynges and benefices, let vs glad∣lye cōmitte them into the handes of God, and he wyl moste surely (whā he seeth conueniēt tyme) recōpence euery peny to the vttermoste, other one waye, or els an other: other spi∣ritually, or bodely, or both.Let vs trust surly to Christes, payment. Let vs truste surely to Christes recompen∣sacion, whyche promyseth to vs (I saye to vs) repayment, sayeng:

Matth. 19Euery one that forsaketh house, or brethren, or systers, or father, or mother, or wyfe, or children, or lāde for my names sake, shal receaue an hundreth folde, and shall inherite e∣uerlastyng lyfe. Lo here Christ say∣eth: Euery one. whyche consydered, than saye I, that he dothe not except vs, nether any that hath done as we haue done. For hys promyse is vni∣uersal.The pro∣myse is v∣niuersal. And as the promyse is vni∣uersal, so is also the perfourmance therof, yf man continueth faythfull in hys callynge.
Luc. 18.Saynt Luke rehersyng thys say¦eng of Christ, sayeth thus. Verelye I say vnto you: Ther is no mā that hath forsaken house, eyther father or mother, eyther brethren or wyfe, or chyldrē (for the kyngdome of god¦des sake) whyche shall not receaue muche more in thys worlde, and in the world to come lyfe euerlasting. As thoughe Christ shulde thus say: No man for my cause shal suffer dā∣mage here, but shall enioye muche more againe for it, both in this lyfe, and in the lyfe to come.
Marc, 10.S. Marke telleth Christes tale af¦ter thys sorte: Verely I saye vnto
 you: There is no man that hath for∣saken house, or brethren, or systers, or father, or mother, or wyfe, or chil¦dren, or landes, for my sake and the gospels, but he shall receaue an hun¦dreth folde nowe in this lyfe, houses and brethren, and systers, and mo∣thers, and chyldren, and lādes with persecucions, and in the worlde to come eternal lyfe.Hundreth fold.
Thys hundrethfolde signifyeth a mynde muche better content and sa¦tisfyed with that porcion be it neuer so lytel that God shall gyue one to∣wardes hys fyndyng in hys exyle & aduersitie, than wyth that great abū¦daunce had in tyme of prosperitie.
Christianes for Goddes glorie forsaking theyr houses and goodes, for one house forsaken shalbe many times moste hertely welcome to ma¦ny godly mennes houses. Yea the faythful shal so gladlye receaue thē and charitably intreat them, that they shall thynke them selues fortu¦nate to haue in theyr houses suche straungers and geastes.Act. 10.
So thought Symon the Tāner that lodged Peter, & lykewyse Cor∣nelius the captayne.

Act. 16.So were Paulus and Sylas at Philippos moste gladly takē to lod∣gynge wyth godly Lydia the seller of purple, whych sayd vnto them: Yf ye thynke that I beleue on the Lorde, come into myne house and a¦byde there. I could here bryng you exemples of Abraham, Iob and Da¦uid, whyche for theyr patient suffe∣ryng exyle, spoyle, and losse of lande and cuntrey, were muche more abū¦dantly enriched of God afterward, than they were before.
But here my good brethren and systers,Iouianus & Valen∣tinianus. I praye you marke the exā∣ples of two noble gentlemē, the one named Iouianus and ye other Valē¦tinianus, beyng both of the in hygh fauour and authoritie, and were Ca¦pitaynes of a thousande men a pece vnder Iulianus the Emperoure, whych in the begynnyng professed Christ but afterwards forsoke him, and persecutyng the Christianes be¦came a playne Apostata. Thys wyc∣ked Emperour by a lawe cōmaun∣ded al hys men of warre vnder pay¦ne of losynge theyr promocions to do sacrifice vnto hys false Goddes.In histo. Tripar. lib. 7. ca. 1 Es Theo∣doricut. li. 4. cap. 1. Iouianus notwythstādyng rather
 than he wolde obey a wycked com∣maundement of a wycked Empe∣rour, and so denye and sclaūder the profession of his fayth in Christ, cho¦se vtterly to forsake and departe frō hys great promocion. For whyche cause Christ wel recompensed hym. For after the worthy cruel death of that wycked Emperour, Iouianus was aduaunsed to be Emperoure nexte after hym.
So lykewyse the noble gentelmā Valentinianus beynge a christian folowynge hys maister the said wic¦ked Emperour Iulianus whan he wente to the Temple of hys false Goddes,Theodori¦cus li. 4. ca 5. & Tri∣par. hist. li. 6. cap. 35. was of the heythen Preste be sprincled wyth holy water. And beynge greued therwyth, for the ze∣ale that he bare vnto Christe, gaue the preste a blowe of the eare, & bold¦lye sayde:So may one righ∣tly saye of the Pa∣pistes ho∣ly water. that wyth that water he was rather polluted than purged. For whych thynge, he was first im¦prisoned, and than exiled and bany∣shed. Neuertheles for hys feruente zeale in gyuynge the heythen preste a blowe, Christ afterwardes wel re¦compensed hym. For next after the death of the sayd Emperour Iouia∣nus,
 was he exalted to be Empe∣rour of Rome. So is it playne, yt for their great losses of their {pro}mocions for the professiō of their fayth sake, Christ euen in thys lyfe recompen∣sed eyther of them an hūdreth fold. I coulde brynge mo histories to the confirmacion of this matter, but I wyl for thys tyme content my selfe with these. But yet one lessō derely beloued let euery one of vs learne of S. Paule, and saye wyth hym e∣uen from the very herte thus:Philip. 4. I ha∣ue learned in what so euer state I am therwith to be content. I know howe to be lowe, and I knowe how to excede: Euery where and in all thynges I am instructed both to be ful and to be hongrye, both to haue plentie, and to suffer nede. I can do all thynges throughe Christe that strenghneth me.
Thus makynge an ende of my longe bablyng wyth you dearly be∣loued brethren and systers, I here present vnto you the notable confes¦sion of the fayth of ye greate learned man Huldrik Zwinglius, whych I haue after my grosse knowlege la∣tely translated out of laten for the
 instruccion and comfort of the true Christianes of Englande. And whā I had translated it within lesse thā one leafe of the last ende, one of our brethren shewed it to me translated already many yeares ago and prin¦ted at Zurik. Whych thynge had al¦moste caused me to suppresse my translacion: had not an other after that tolde me, that of the old transla¦cion ther was but a smale nombre printed, & many of them were loste. In consyderacion wherof, he aduy∣sed me & that earnestly to put forth thys my translacion, bothe for the profyte of many of my Christē bre∣thren whych neuer red the former translacion, and also for the reui∣uyng of so worthy a confession, and so haue I done.
I haue also added thervnto two lytle Epistles of myn owne: the one conteynyng my poore and symple iudgement concernyng the confes∣sion of synnes, howe farre the holye scripture wyl beare therwyth. And what I thynke touchynge eare con¦fessiō nowe reuyued agayne in En∣glande. The other Epistle is an an∣swere to the demaunde of a godlye
 lady moste instātly desyryng me to declare vnto her ye true meaning of an hard texte of ye vicha of S. Paules Epistle to the Hebrues, & also what is the synne against the holy ghost, and howe and wherin it differreth from all other synnes.
These thynges wrytten after my rude maner and nowe put forth in printe I besech you take in good worth, and of your Charitie re∣membre me in youre dayly prayers
