



I Should not (Right worshipful and worthie Societie) haue presumed to offer this place to so famous a Citie, but that the parts doe e∣uer, or at least should, follow the nature and processe of the whole. Our common Mother, in and by whom we are all
borne  brought  Christians, challengeth our first seruice. And because some of you as well as my selfe haue enioyed so excellent a Nurse and Foster mother, cherishing and feeding vs with the purest and most pleasant liquor, til we came to some full and perfect age, wee should doe amisse, if wee should forget her in the chiefest and noblest of our thoughts. To you therefore I come, as being sent from the brests of my Mother, to giue you a taste of her milke. Onely remember who it is that must giue the increase both to her in labouring, and you in profiting. Rebecca may Cooke the Venison: but Isaack must giue the blessing. We can but speake to the eare, God must speake to the Conscience. I wish we could condescend to the infancie of our Nurcelings, and become all vnto all, rather studying to make our people Schollers, then to shew our selues Schollers vnto them. When the Iewes heard Paul, Act. 22.2. to speake in their mother tongue, they both kept the more silence, and gaue the bet∣ter audidence. Accept therefore the following Treatise, as a due acknowledgement of my loue and thankefulnesse, wishing not onely with Philo∣sophers prosperitie, Physitians health, the common people ioy, Romanes safetie, S. Paul, welfare, but al∣so with our blessed Sauiour, Mar. 9.50. Peace pow∣dred with pietie: otherwise these congratulations of our ioy, shall but aequalize a drunken Nabals Sheepe sheering, or the fatting of some Epicurean hogges, or the celebration of the festivall revels of the dissolute crue, whose dyet and dainties are the Devils food. Cleanse therefore the Augean stables
of our drunken Tavernes and Tipling houses, with all the blind vaults of professed filthinesse. The Citie of Alexandria in Egypt, nourished the great Bird Ibis, to devoure the garbage and offall of it, and to cleanse the streetes; but he left of his owne filth and beastlinesse more noysome behinde him. They are the Devils deputies not Gods, who being set in their places, like the Kites feed themselues with the offalls of the people; I meane, bribes to pervert the course of Iustice. They who in refor∣mation seeme to amend the exorbitances of their places, and doe it not heartily, imitate the Physiti∣an, who in an Hecticall body, laboureth to kill the itch, &c. Rouze vp your spirits, awaken your Chri∣stian courage, and set your selues heartily against the crying sinnes of these times. But I must take heed least I runne into the inconvenience obiected by that Spartane to the Athenians, That wise men did consult, and the ignorant giue sentence. We may easily iudge our superiours (consulting of remedies) to be guilty of the increasing of the maladies and mis∣chiefes of the State. Drunkennesse and the nurse∣ries of it, vsurping Sobrieties kingdome, as Adoniah did Salomons, haue gotten so strong an head, that they can hardly be resisted. Onely let the Magi∣strate take to himselfe a firme forehead, couragious heart, busie hands, and not partiall, execute lawes with strictnesse and resolution, and God shall blesse the same with happie successe: If otherwise, God will suffer wickednesse to punish it selfe, and that no power can turne the streame, because God will haue it carry the offenders headlong to their per∣petuall
ruine, and his owne revenge: yet must the good Magistrate, even swimme against the tyde, knowing that without conquest, it is glorious to haue resisted: in this alone he were an enemie if he should doe nothing, because he sees so little good come of all his traveile. Let but (worthy Magi∣strates) the endeuour be yours, and you may with comfort leaue the successe to God; and so I cease, neuer ceasing to pray for you.

