



WHat, of what sort, and how great the cōfusion & trou∣ble is in this age of ours, [noble Earle] throughout all christendome, aswell a∣bout all other matters al∣most; as more especially a∣bout matters ecclesiasticall concerning religion, there is no man, that doeth not see: no good man, that doth not greeue at: and no god∣ly man, that with great admiration of Gods iudgements, doth not exceedingly bewaile.
Very great surely is the light of the trueth in this our age, which through Gods singular gift, hath bin found out in the holy scriptures, by some faithfull seruants of Christ, and sprea∣ding abroad farre and wide hath shined forth vnto vs, as the sunne in the firmamēt: but I pray what and how many mistes of errors, how di∣uers and black clouds of heresies, haue bin stir∣red vp and raked out of the depth of hell, by no
smale number of verletts and ministers of the deuill, to cast a darkenesse ouer this heauenlie light?
I speake not nowe of tyrants: which euer haue, and yet doe imploye and bend all their swords, all their power, and the very force and might of their authoritie to this: that these can∣delsticks (of brittle earth I confesse) wherein a∣ny of this light remaineth & shineth being bru∣sed & broken by their iron-blowes; the whole light of the diuine wisedome (if god so pleased) might be vtterly put out & extinguished: & in place therof, that infernal darknes fetcht againe frō hel, might succeed & beare the whole sway.
For this very cause, what in these our wret∣ched times hath bin done: what and what mā∣ner of slaughters of an infinite number of men, in many places committed, and in many other places attempted more then once: wee haue yet in fresh memory. And what, and by whome, the deuil lately assaied in those valleies of yours. though by Gods mightie hand defending you, the slaughter succeeded not to the wish of those vngodly wretches: your self know better, then we do. And now also what that euer-busie Sa∣than, is for the same intent continually attemp∣ting: what deuises he purposeth: what treche∣ries he studies: what weapons hee prepareth:
what warres he brocheth against godly prin∣ces and magistrats, who desire to haue this hea∣uenlie light to shine in their dominions, and la∣bour to spreade the same farre and wide into the whole world, the Lord himselfe knoweth, who dwelleth in the heauens, who also is wōt to scatter the wicked counsailes of the vngodly & to disperse them as vaine smoakes, through his incredible loue and mercie towardes vs, when it is most expedient for his church, and when tyrants do looke for nothing lesse, then a disapointement of their intents, which they so long and watchfully prouided for.
For witnesses take the Pharaohs: Senache∣ribs: Amans: Antiochies: Iulians: and other such like enemies to the church. For still the pro∣mise abideth, The gates of hell shall not preuaile against it. But to let passe tyrants, and to re∣turne to the bodie of our christian common∣wealth so miserably torne in pecces: who is there, I pray you, except he be cleane voide of alpietie, that beholding such and so great a rent of this bodie into diuers shiuers, namely of all those which professe and call vppon Christ as true God and true man, & the onely redeemer of the world diuers of thē defending diuers er∣rors most obstinatly: some, many & those most grosse: others, fewe and those not so waighty:
and vpon these occasions pursuing and hating on another with more then serpentine hatred: and plaging and tormenting on another with more then butcherly crueltie: what man is he, I say, who beholding these things, hearing thē, and waighing them in his minde, is not moued with great griefe, sigheth not, lamenteth nor, poureth not forth teares? The church of Rome once in times of old, was for the great glory of her pietie, her heauenly doctrine, her diuine seruice, christian discipline, and constancie in the faith against all hereticks, most famous: and as the sunne in the firmamēt shineth farr brigh∣ter then all starres, so she shined farre aboue all churches on earth, by example of her excee∣ding christian pietie: that well and fittly she de∣serued to bee generally called the mother of all churches. But into what and into how great darkenesse and blindnesse did she after sinke, by Gods iust iudgement, being as it were cast out of heauen, and in the same still lieth buried and drowned? he that in such great light of the gos∣pell seeth not this, is blinder then a moule. Nei∣ther is it any new thing: seing the same happe∣ned first to the church of the Israelites: after∣ward to the churches in the East, and to them in Greece.
Now to speake of those churches, which in
such thinges as the Romish church hath made an apostasie or backsliding from the Apostles, haue beene forced through her willfulnes and tirannie, at length to forsake her: what horrible heresies in some of them, haue bin fetched out of hel by the ministers of Sathan? Anabaptisme, Libertinisme, Arianisme, Samosatenisme, Mar∣tionisme, Eutychianisme, Nestorianisme, and what not? yea euen Atheisme [I grieue to speak it] spreadeth it selfe aboundantly. The trustie ministers of Christ haue withstood all these, & in many places haue beaten downe their diue∣lish doctrines, and haue preserued their chur∣ches, reformed by the sincere doctrine of the gospell, free from these pestilent mischiefes, and by Gods benefite, do still preserue them: so that we haue no friendshipp nor dealing with such manner offects: and yet notwithstanding this cockle cannot bee cleane weeded out in all pla∣ces. Many plagues do still grow and increase e∣uery where: and many wicked spirites doe still come into the worlde. VVhat then should a christian man, who loueth the glory of God, & the saluation of his owne soule & his neigh∣bours, and desireth to haue a good name in the church [for it is a matter of no smale moment, to bee taken and accompted in the catholicke church, for a true member of Christ:] what I
say, should a christian man do, in such a confusi∣on of things, such a dissagreement in opinions, such a multitude of heresies, such varietie in re∣ligions? I wil, if I can, by a similitude declare my opinion, agreeable to the scriptures.
If a huge & a most mightie armie of enemies should ouercome any cuntrey, killing & spoy∣ling wheresoeuer they came, so as they could not quickly or easily be driuen out againe: what should the inhabitāts of that cuntrey do, to pro∣uide for the safety of thēselues & their childrē?
First they must flie into the strong defensed citties: & tarry there, vntil by gods help the cun∣trey might bee deliuered out of their enemies hāds. Next least being besieged they should pe∣rish by famine, or be cōstrained to yeld thēselues to the enemie: they must looke for as plentifull prouisiō of vittailes as may be. And because vn∣lesse the Lord do keep the cittie, the watchmā watcheth but in vaine: therefore all the people must with earnest prayers call vpō god daily, to bee with them keep, & defend thē. Hereunto it is nedul, that al within the citty do obserue cō∣stantly a brotherly faith, loue, peace & concord among thēselues: sith euery kingdome deuided in it selfe (as the Lord vsed to say) cannot stand: & euen the heathē do witnes, that by cōcord smale matters grovve to encrease: by discordgreat things fal to decay. Neither is the health of bo∣dy
to be neglected, wherin the cittizens must be kept soūd & strong as much as may be, for the profite & defence of the cōmō wealth. For the sick & deseased, especially at such a time, cā pro∣fite the common state very little, nay they are a great burden & combrance to it: so far ar they frō being able to fight against the enimy. Ther∣fore it is very needfull that euery one looke to his health: then, there is need of a careful & dili∣gent watch, least the foes by any suddain assault, or by some deceite or vndermininges should pearce into the citty, & set vpon vs vnawares & vnprouided: hereupō are night watches proui∣ded. But how can there be any watching with∣out sobriety? For by surfeting & dronkenesse heauy sleepe is prouoked: so that there can no watch bee kept. Therefore least being ouer drowned in wine & sleepe, we should bee cat∣ched by our enimies, we had need of sobriety: & what is more needefull, then alwaies to haue weapons in our hands, whereby we our selues may both be kept & defēded frō the blowes of our enemies: and may also be able to repell and put back the enemie? therefore ouer and be∣sides our strong walles & wel defensed rāpiers: the cittizēs thēselues must also be ready in their armour. But nothing can happē more pestilent & pernicious to the cōmō wealth: thē if within
their citty, especially in time of warre, they haue fauourers of the enemie, who may indeed giue them a wipe priuily, howsoeuer they may pre∣tend friendship with the citizens, and professe in words that they cōsent vnto them in al mat∣ters; such are perfidious & traiterous fellowes. Therefore there must great care be taken, that diligent inquirie bee made, who be in the citie: what they doe: what life they lead: & wheron they liue: and if there be any founde to goe out of course from the common profession, life, & manners of the cittie: they may be knowne, ex∣amined, corrected, punished, or driuen out of the cittie. But as there is nothing that can either set a deeper marke of infamie vppon the citi∣zens, or make thē deserue to be more seuerelie punished, then if being entised by large promi∣ses or bribes of the enemies, they betraye their cuntrey: or being terrified by their threatnings, they slipp from their ruler, & shamefully yeeld themselues: so contrarywise, there is nothing more honorable, more profitable, or worthie of greater praise and reward, then if keeping sound thy faith to thy prince and cuntrey, with the publike profession of the faith thereof, thou constantly standest to it euen vnto death, and fightest it out to the last man. Therefore there is need of constancie in thy faith giuen to thy
prince and cuntrey, and a publike professio of that faith euen vnto the death.
By these defensed cities, I meane, those churches, which were once builded vppon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, and afterwardes were repaired againe out of the gospel and truely reformed: and so do hold the same foundatiōs of the Apostles doctrine firme and fast with the holy scriptures, vnderstāding & expoūding the same, according to the sound interpretations of the auncient fathers. These foundations the church was wont to compre∣hēd in that short forme of doctrin, which they cal the catechisme: wherein is contained the A∣postles creed, the Lords praier, and the ten cō∣mandements. The creede brieflie sheweth, both what we must beleeue, and in whome we must place the whole hope of our saluation. The Lords praier manifestly directeth vs, both who is to be prayed vnto, and what is to bee prayed for, as also for what causes God is onely to bee called vppon, and that we aske all that we aske, of him onely: namely because his onely is the kingdome, the power, and the glory: by which addition our assured hope is kindled vnto praier. The decalogue or ten commandemēts, very briefly and plainely prescribeth, how wee must behaue our selues to god-ward, with what
uice we must worship him: in what sort also we must liue with our neighbours: & how we must die vnto our selues, that is, to our cōcupis∣cence, in withdrawing frō it euermore, all such things as it coueteth, against the law of god. Vn¦to these three, & those chiefe partes of the cate∣chisme is ioyned a fourth part: the doctrine of the sacramēts, which by a Synecàoche, is whollie comprehended in the great creed (as they cal it) vnder the name of baptisme. All these thinges summarily gathered out of the holy scriptures, & reduced into a briefe compēdiary, we doubt not with the whole auncient church to cal the foūdations of al christian religion. And because heretikes, when they durst not simplie denie these foundations, were euer wont to wrest & yet do wrest and wring the same for the most part, by false interpretations, to their owne he∣resies: therefore that the true churches may bee discerned from the conuenticles of heretikes: we must vnderstand and expound those prin∣ciples and chiefe pointes of doctrine in no o∣ther sense, then as the auncient church, agreea∣bly to the scriptures, by common consent, spe∣cially in the best approued counsailes, expoun∣ded them.
For what (to say something for exāple fake) can be more firme, certen, & manifestly spoken,
for the article in the creede, of the person of Christ: then those things which wee determi∣ned out of the scriptures in the coucel at Nice, at Ephesus. Constant. Chalced. add also the 5. & 6. by the godly fathers against Arrius, Samosa∣tenus, Apollinaris, Nestorius, Eutiches, the Mo∣nothelites? whosoeuer therefore, teacheth con∣cerning Christs person against the determina∣tions of those counsells: certainely they doe not rightly hold this principall foundation of chri∣stian religion.
Further concerning the grace & benefite of Christ: (the beginning whereof is his eternall loue towards vs, & his free election of vs to the participation of redemption & euerlastin life: but the proceeding of it is the free dispensation of the same redēption once performed vpō the crosse, the effectual vocatiō, iustification, sancti∣fication, & the gift of constancie in the faith: the end is, our glorious resurrectiō & euen eternal life:) I say for this other principal foundation of christian religion, what cā be said more plainly, & more largely, thē that which hath bin in the councells of Africa, determined out of the scrip∣tures, by Meliuitanus, Arausicanus, & others a∣gainst the Pelagians: & which were written by Augustine [to say nothing of others] in manie bookes, against the same Pelagians.

Concerning the holy Catholike Church, what is there needfull to bee knowne, which hath not beene most plentifully and plainely set downe by Augustine aswell in other places, as especially in his bookes against the Donatists, e∣uen out of he foundations of the holy scrip∣tures? But it is a matter of great moment, to knowe what and where the true church of Christ is: being out of the church there is no saluation: and therefore it is an article of faith not of the least accompt.
About the points of the sacraments also, if a man will cōtent himselfe with the simple truth: what is more euident then the doctrine which the auncient fathers, Iustine, Ireneus, Tertulli∣an, Cyprian, and chieflie Augustine haue deli∣uered out of the scriptures and left vnto vs in their writings? One saith: Like as Iesus Christ being by the word of God, made flesh, had flesh and blood: so also we haue learned that the foode hal∣lowed by him, by the word of prayer and thanks giuing, is the flesh and blood of the same incar∣nate Iesus Christ: (euen according to those words of Christ, This is my bodie:) But Christ, that is, the vvorde was made flesh without anie chaunging of it selfe into flesh, but onely by a hypostaticall or personall vnion: therefore nei∣ther is the bread made the body of Christ, by
any transubstantiation of it selfe into the body, but onely by an vnion, and that not a physicall or bodily, or hypostaticall, but onely a sacramē∣tall vnion: Also he saith, by that foode, namely of the blessed bread, our blood and our body is nourished, by a certaine chaunging (of it selfe namely into Christ:) therefore that chaunge which is made in the supper, is not, of the bread into Christs body: nor of Christ into vs, but of vs into Christ, by reason of our ingrafting: as also wee reade in Augustine, that Christ should say, speaking of the receiuing of the Eucharist, I shal not be chaunged into thee, but thou shalt be chaunged into me. The same man saith: vnto this (the foode of the Eucharist) none is to bee admitted, but they that beleeue that our do∣ctrine is true, being washed with the water of regeneration vnto remission of their sinnes, & so liuing, as Christ hath taught them. Therfore no infidells and heretikes: nor they which haue not receiued the baptisme of Christ: not they which liue in such apparent sinne and wicked∣nes, that they giue no notice to the church of their amendment: are to bee admitted to the supper.
Another of them saieth, the eucharist consi∣steth of two matters: an earthly and an heauen∣ly. The bread, though it be sanctified, yet he cal∣leth
it an earthly matter: why so? because it comes from the earth, it existeth on earth, and is eaten with an earthly mouth: the body of Christ he calleth a heauenly matter, not because the substāce of it is out of heauen, but partly be∣cause it is taken into vnitie of the person of the word, and partly because it is in heauen endued with heauenly qualities. For although in the hypostasie, which is the very word, it bee euerie where: yet in the owne proper essence, it is on∣ly in heauen, and not on earth. Whereupon it also followeth, that it is not eaten, either by earthly men, or by the teeth of an earthly body: but onely of those men, who being borne from aboue, do carrie the image of heauenly men & eate it in a heauenly manner, namely in soule & spirite. And yet notwithstanding the very bo∣dies also of the faithful, while they eate onely an earthly matter, they also participate of a hea∣uenlie matter, to their glorious resurrection, & are nourished by it: as the same author in that place very learnedly expoundeth.
I think that by this which I haue spoken out of the creede concerning foure principal partes of christian doctrine, your Hon. can well ga∣ther, [such is your piety, learning & wisedome) what is to be concluded concerning the whole body. The summe is this: that those bee the true
churches of Christ, and therefore called of vs the truely defensed citties of Christs kingdom, which professing generally the sacred scrip∣tures, and specially the catechisme in all places receiued: doe so reuerence the auncient church and auncient fathers, hauing therefore friend∣shipp and communion with them being now in heauen; that neither in their opinions, nor yet in their expositions of the holy scrip∣tures, they will easily decline from them: but onely then, whenas they bee forced to dis∣sent, both by manifest wordes of the holy scriptures, and also by testimonies, and conse∣quences beyond all doubt necessary, drawne from the principles of faith. This surely was counted for a notorious fault in Nesto∣rius, and it is written to bee the cause of his vile heresie: that contemning the fathers, and trusting vpon his owne witt, he expounded the holy scriptures after his owne braine. What speake I of Nestorius? yea that the same contempt of the fathers, and some confidence of their owne witts, and their owne lear∣ning, did cause diuers more besides, other∣waies verie notable men, to fall into sundrie heresies: I could easilie shewe out of the Ec∣clesiasticall histories and councells, if the bre∣uitie of an epistle would suffer me. For whence
I pray was it, that after that most holy councell at Nice, so many heretikes forth with arose: of whome some oppugned the true and euerla∣sting deity of Christ: others his true and perfect humanitie: others the true vniting of both the natures in one and the same person: others the true distinctiō of their natures & their proprie∣ties? hence surely, that contēning the determi∣nations of the fathers in the Nicene councell, and their expositions vpon the holy scriptures: and trusting confidently to their owne witts, and puffed vp with humane knowledge and e∣loquence, they dared euery one to expound, yea indeed, to depraue & wrest the holy scriptures, and foundations of the faith, according to their owne fansies. Hereunto pertaineth that which Vigilius left written in his first booke of the causes of heresies against Eutyches: but they blow forth [saieth he] these smoakes of vaine accusations chieflie: because they are euen sicke of the infirmity of ignorance or disease of con∣tention: and whilst they are gogged on with a fond conceite of minde, they despise the rules of faith deliuered of old by the fathers, onely for this cause, to bring in their owne conceited opinions of innouations into the church. Thus saith Vigilius. This that I say, is confirmed by the dispositions, imitations, and wordes of the
sound fathers on the other side, who expoun∣ding the scriptures and the foundations of chri∣stian faith according to the determinations of the fathers of elder times, haue euer no lesse prosperously then faithfully defended the truth of christian religion, and preserued the same soundly confirmed in the church. To which purpose tend the wordes which they vse in their owne determinations: We therefore eue∣ry vvhere following the determinations of the old fathers, and their rule: doe also determine the same, &c. Nothing then is more safe, then that euery man keepe himselfe within these churches, as in citties well fensed: wherein the holy scriptures are expounded, according to the analogie or rules of faith, and according to the receiued expositions of the auncient fathers: and consequently, which hold the same faith, that the Apostles did, and all the auncient church.
I haue spoken of the first duety of a christian man, which desireth to keep himselfe and his family safe from his enemies, vnto euerlasting life: namely, that he must retire himselfe into the defensed citties of Christs kingdome, and there constantly abide: vntill that at the last all enemies, being put to flight, by the glorious comming of our king, we may be safe and free
in all places.
But without prouision of vitalls, who can long maintaine his life: our victual or sustenāce, is the daily hearing, reading and meditation of Gods word, and the receiuing of the holy sup∣per at appointed times: For by both these wee are nourished, streng thened and we liue: & that through Christ our life, whome they offer and giue vnto vs. He which eateth this bread (takē either by the word, or by the sacraments) shall neuer die. In the Acts: Christs disciples conti∣nued in the Apostles doctrine, and in breaking of bread, that is, in their common loue-feastes, in which the Lords supper vsed to be celebrated. And such heauēly victuals are seeldome wāting in well defensed citties: yet except thou eatest and drinkest, and by that meanes preseruest thy life, what good will it do thee to be in a defen∣sed cittie? Thou must therefore frequent ser∣mons: and receiue the sacraments, and imploye thy selfe in reading the holy scriptures.
3 It is very needefull also, that continuall praiers, both publike and priuate bee made vn∣to God, wherein we must aske those things, which the Lord Iesus hath commanded to be asked of his father, namely al things, which per∣taine aswell to his glorie, as to our owne and our neighbors saluation: and that he would de∣fend
vs from all kinds of enemies, and keep vs safe in the trueth. In the day of tribulation shalt thou call vpon me, saieth the Lord. And is not then chiefly the day of affliction, when heresies do ouerspread and tyrants persecute the truth? Then therefore chiefly is God to bee called v∣pon, and that by faith. And therefore the Apo∣stle Paule saieth, Pray ye vvithout ceasing: and Christ Iesus, yee must praye alvvaies, and not bee vvearie. And he that thus prayeth, and prayeth by faith, howe should he not obtaine? wherefore God addeth by his Prophet, And I vvill he are thee. Aske and yee shall receiue, said also the Lord Iesus Christ: seeke and yee shall finde: knocke and it shall bee opened vnto you.
4 But how can it be, that men should there liue happily, and the cittie be preserued: where the cittizens among themselues keep no friend∣ship? therefore brotherly loue, peace and con∣cord must bee kept: then which, nothing is sweeter, nothing more pleasing to God, and nothing can be more profitable for preserua∣tion of the church: as contrariewise there is no thing, by which, churches and all societies are sooner brought to ruine: then enuie, then hatred, then grudgings, then enmities, then dissentions, then domesticall fallinges out:
Doubtlesse there is no faith, where charity hath not place: sith true faith as the Apostle witnes∣seth, worketh by charitie. And brotherly loue hath euer bin a marke of true christians: Christ himselfe saying: By this shall men know that yee are my disciples, if yee haue loue one vvith ano∣ther. This do the Acts of the Apostles teach vs, where Luke saith of the faithfull: they had one minde and one heart, namely in the Lord. And Tertullian reporteth in Apolog. cap. 39. that the Romanes were wont to say of the christi∣ans: marke hovv they loue one another. For by this brotherly loue, as by the true badge of chri∣stian religion, they would haue christians dis∣cerned from them that were no christians.
5 Further more how necessary the care of health is to all the cittizens liuing in such a citty, to defend them and theirs, and so the whole cit∣tie against the enemies: was said a little before. By this spirituall health, I meane a good con∣science: which as it springeth from faith, so also it preserueth faith, that it cannot quite decay: e∣uē as the life of the body bringeth forth health: and health preserueth the body in life. Euerie one therefore must be carefull, that he keepe a good cōscience. But by what meanes is it kept? 1. after a due sorrow, by a sure trust, of the free forgiuenes of our sinnes which we haue com∣mitted,
through Christ: Next, by a true amend∣ment of life: that is, an earnest studie of auoiding sinnes afterward, and keeping the commande∣ments of god lastly by a firme purpose, if by in∣firmitie we do fal, to rise againe, and to flie vn∣to Christ for pardon. By this meanes shall wee alwaies hold fast a good conscience. He that in this sort constantly looketh vnto his health: let him assuredly know, that the Lord will neuer suffer him, that he shall die at all: that is, that hee shall euer erre and goe astray vnto his last ende, in that doctrine which is necessary to his salua∣tion. For the Apostle saith to Timothie: keepe faith and a good conscience, which while some haue cast aside, they haue made shipwrack concer∣ning faith, that is, the doctrine of faith. They therefore which keepe fast a good conscience, shall neuer make a deadly shipwrack of the do∣ctrine necessary to saluation: Seing God by his grace, indueth them, as with the treasure of a good conscience, so also with a perseuerance in the faith and with a heauenly gift of doctrine. The safest thing therefore, both at all times, and especially in this diuersitie of religions, is, by cō∣tinuing in the churches, where the pure word of God is preached, and the assured foundations of the faith according to the expositions of the fathers, are retained, to imploye our selues in
hearing the word of God, and receiuing the sa∣craments: to call vpon God: to haue friendship with our brethren, and to keep a good consci∣ence to our selues.
6 But vnto all these things, how necessarie watchfulnesse is, who, vnlesse he bee vtterly vnskilfull in all things, knowes not? where there is nothing at all to be feared, as in heauen: there is also no need of watchfulnesse: but they may and they ought to liue in great securitie. But where there want no theeues, robbers, intrappers, flatterers, couseners, traytors, ene∣mies, and where all things are full of treche∣ries, there, howe pernicious and daungerous, securitie and retchlesnesse is, who is he, that knoweth not? Therefore Christ Iesus foresee∣ing the euills which were at hand, saide to the Apostles, vvatch yee and pray, least yee en∣ter into temptation. And Peter, Be sober and vvatch: because your aduer sarie the deuill go∣eth about, seeking vvhome he may deuoure. But what manner of watchfulnes is this, which the holie ghost requireth? what it is to watch in all liuing creatures, euerie man doth know. Therefore a man, in that he is indued with a minde, is saide then to watch: when putting from him all retchlesnesse or carelesnesse of minde, and with open eyes, he looketh atten∣tiuely,
on the things set before him: and wiselie discerneth what be good, and what be euill, what be profitable, and what be hurtfull: that so his will, may reiect that which is to be re∣iected, and choose that which is to bee cho∣sen: may eschew and driue away that which is to bee eschewed, and allowe and seeke af∣ter that which is to bee allowed. VVherefore shaking of the drowsinesse of all carnall secu∣ritie, we must watch: and wee must warilie take heede to our selues, and beware of the subtelties of the deuill, the inticements of the world and the flesh, and of doctrines and so∣phismes of heretikes. Take heede vnto your selues of false prophets, saith our Lord and Sa∣uiour Iesus Christ, vvhich come vnto you in sheepes cloathing, but invvardly are rauening wolues.
7 Now how can any man watch, that is loaden with surfetting and dronkennes? therefore sobrietie is verie needfull. VVhere∣vpon the Apostle Peter first said, Be yee sober, and after addeth, and vvatch: and Paule: let vs bee sober and vvatch. Sobrietie is cleane op∣posite to dronkennesse: and sobrietas sobri∣etie is saide as it were sine ebrietate without dronkennesse. By which word, is signified
by a Synecdoche the very surfett or sickishnes of the stomack. For sobrietie is the moderate vse, not onely of drinke, but also of meate: that we should be contented with such & so much, as sufficeth for sustaining of nature, and preser∣uing of health. Wherefore the Lord Iesus, ex∣horting them vnto sobrietie, dehorted them aswell from surfeting as from dronkenes, say∣ing, Ouercharge not your hearts with surfetting and dronkenes: euidently shewing in one word, howe pernicious and noysome a thing dron∣kennes is. For by it mens hearts are so ouerloa∣den, and pressed downe towards the ground: that they can neuer bee lifted vp, to call vppon God sincerely, to an earnest contemplation of heauenly matters, to an attentiue reading, hea∣ring, & true knowledge of the holy scriptures, lastly, to a profitable consideration of the miste∣ries of God, such as is the Lords supper: and they which are giuen ouer to this vice of drō∣kennes, are most vnapt for all exercises of piety. And howe many are there, which euen for their bellies lake, doe fall from the trueth? So farre from them is it, either that they can or will watch against the enemies thereof, or take heede to themselues because of false prophets: that thus at length they must needes miserably perish. But farre larger and wider doth this
christian sobrietie extend it selfe, of which the Apostle speaketh: Let vs, saith he, be sober and watch: that is, in the moderate vse, not onely of meates and drinkes, but also of all other things in this world. For God would not haue vs to be, as it were by sweet wines, dronken with the too much loue of riches, pleasures, honours, friendes, children, wiues, nay not of our owne liues: but they which haue wiues, to be, as not hauing wiues: they which weep, as not wee∣ping: and they which reioyce, as though they reioyced not: and they which buy, as though they possessed not: and they which vse this world, as though they vsed it not, &c. Now, how needfull this sobrietie is, to the keeping first of faith and true religion: is seene by those, which for too much loue of this world & the things thereof, are wont to fal from the trueth: and others, which neuer thinke vppon amend∣ment of life: & others, in some part, to whome God giueth some consideration: as Demas, of of whome the Apostle saieth, Demas forsooke me, louing this present world. And the Lord Iesus when he had said, Take heede, least your hearts be ouer loaden with surfeting and aron∣kennes: he added, of this other part of dronken∣nes: saying: And the cares of this life: and so that last day come vpon you. For whence are these
cares, but of too much loue of this life? but then there is a third kinde of dronkennesse, which is more pestilent then both the other, by how much more subtile it is, and pertaineth more to the minde then to the flesh: namely, a dron∣kennesse of carnall wisedome, vaine eloquence, and worldlie philosophie. For who so bee addicted to these, as to sweet and counterfeit wines, and therewith bee delighted, and trust vppon them: they then loathing the simplici∣tie of christian doctrine, will verie soone and easily make shipwracke of their faith: Of which thing the Apostle Saint Paule saieth: Bevvare least there bee any man that spoyle you, through philosophie and vaine deceit. For while wee goe about to measure with our carnall spe∣culations, and rules of humane learning, the misteries of God, which the holy ghost hath deliuered vnto vs in a simple and plaine stile and methode: being ouer weighed with the diuine glorie, which we are not able to beare, we fall headlong into the deepe pitt of diuers heresies: as it happened to Arrius, Marcion and almost all the heretikes: seeing the vvise∣dome of the flesh, is enmitie against God: and the fleshlie man doeth not perceiue, nor can perceiue the thinges that are of God: for they
are foolishnesse vnto him. By this, which (so much as the shortnes of an epistle maye suffer) I haue spoken of the three sortes of dronkennesse: how necessary the contrarie sobrietie is, to resist the enemies, and to keep safe the treasure of diuine wisedome: as you, (my noble Earle,) doe verie well knowne, so I thinke there is none, but he may, if he will, vnderstand. VVhat if I adioyned likewise, that blinde and too exceeding loue of our tea∣chers and maisters? wherewith we are for the most part so dronken: that whatsoeuer is said and written by them, the same without all iudgement and proofe wee imbrace and hold with tooth and nayle, euen as the oracles of the holy ghost: contrary to the Apostles pre∣cept: Trye all thinges, hold that vvhich is good. Let vs therefore bee sober, and watch.
8 Our weapons or armour moreouer, are not carnall, but spirituall, as the Apostle tea∣cheth, and are of two sortes: some to defend our selues: and some vsed for offence of the enemies. Of the first sort, are, the helmett, brest-plate, girdle, and shield: of the other sort, the sword, and darts.
First therefore the head of the inward man,
must bee armed with the helmet of saluation: that is, with the assured hope of saluatiō, which as it is already begunne in vs, through Christ by his onely grace, so it shall bee made perfect through him, by the same grace. For vnlesse he haue this assured hope, who can be able to stād in the battaile, and to continue the same? The breast, where the vitall partes lye, must bee ar∣med round about with the breast-plate of righ∣teousnes I say, of righteousnes of faith especial∣ly and of a good conscience. For who is able to stand to coape with so many and so great ene∣mies in the battaile: vnlesse he bee persuaded that God standeth his helper and fauourer by him: and doth from his heart hate iniquity, a∣gainst which; & loueth righteousnes, for which the battaile is begunne?
We must haue our loynes girt about with the girdle of trueth: and our feete shodd with the knowledge of the gospell of peace: that is, it behooueth vs to bee so armed on all partes, with the knowledge, loue, and might of the trueth: that we must be euer ready and prepa∣red, to fight for the gospell: holding in our left hand the shield of faith, wherewith we may re∣ceiue and quench all the fiery darts of the ad∣uersarie: but in our right hand, the sword of the word of God, wherewith the enemie may bee
driuen back and wounded. VVe shall indeed vse the shield of faith, if against al the sophismes and subtelties of heretikes, wee hold fast those principles of faith, whereof we spake, howsoe∣uer wee bee to seeke in refelling their fine and subtle quirks, & then haue we vse of the sword of the word, if we conuince the enemies by ap∣parent testimonies of scriptures, and reasons drawne by necessary consequence from them? to which purpose it preuailes not a little, if wee cast at the enemies, sharp pointed darts, & stin∣ging arrowes out of the quiuers of the auncien∣test fathers: as also we see those laeter fathers themselues haue done, bringing forth the te∣stimonies and arguments of their predecessors, against heretikes. VVe must therefore take vn∣to vs this whole complete armour of god, with earnest praier vnto him: that in these trouble∣some and euill daies, wee may be able to with∣stand so manie, diuers, and mightie enemies, and in the ende we may triumph ouer them.
9 To the preseruation of the cittie and safe∣tie of each cittizen, howe needfull it is, that, the cittie being cleane voide of all the enemies fa∣uourers, hirelings, close workers, and traytors, may liue the more safely and quietly: who, that hath any sight at all in things past and present, can be ignorant? Therefore the church gouer∣nors,
and magistrats must take great care: that according to the Apostles discipline, it may heedfully be lookt vnto, what doctrine each one professeth, and what life he leadeth: & they which being taught and admonished will not amend: to let them bee made knowne to the whole congregation openly, & separated from the holy assemblies, and from the conuersation with the other faithfull: least by their contagi∣on others should also be infected: or least (as the Apostle saieth) a little leuen marre the whole lump. But to euery of the faithfull, let such obsti∣nate men, be as Ethnicks and Publicanes: and let this saying of Iohn bee kept, if any man come vnto you, bringing not this doctrine, namely, which the Apostles haue deliuered concerning the sonne of God, and concerning the founda∣tions of christian religion: him receiue not into house, nether bid him, god speed. This discipline is perpetuall in the church: of which Tertullian in apolog. the 39 chapter speaketh. The magi∣strate further, is to punish by Gods commande∣ment, according to the qualitie of their faults or blasphemies.
10 That which in the ende wee said concer∣ning the last duetie of each cittizen: the same is also in this businesse which wee haue in hand, verie easie to bee knowne; I would it were as
easie to bee performed. Our faith therefore which we giue and promise in Baptisme must constantly bee kept vnto our prince Christ Ie∣sus, to our last ende; yea if need be, euen to the spilling of our blood and our liues. And therefore that doctrine, which by the writings of the Prophets and Apostles, by the mani∣fest principles of faith, and also by common consent of the whole auncient church, wee knowe assuredly to bee the doctrine of Iesus Christ: the same wee must hold and keepe with a most constant faith, against all new o∣pinions: neither must we onely keepe them in our mindes, but also freely confesse the same with our mouths, and openly professe that we will neuer bee willing to decline from the same: and so we must professe it, that vnlesse wee doe it, wee can hope for no saluation. For vvith the heart, it is beleeued vnto righ∣teousnesse: but vvith the mouth confession is made vnto saluation. VVith God indeede, who seeth the hearts of men, onely faith shall bee sufficient: but with men, and for mens sake, the free confession and profession there∣of is also necessarie. Hee vvhich is asha∣med of me before men: I vvill also bee asha∣med of him before my father: said the Lord Ie∣sus Christ. For we while we are in this world,
must set forward the glorie of God, the name of Christ, and saluation of our neighbour: and it is meet that we should make knowne to the whole church, what manner of religion wee follow, and with what faith we are by Gods grace indued: that it may be euidently knowne who be the members thereof. Whereuppon the same Lord, stirring vs vp to this confession, added: He which confesseth me before men, him will I also confesse before my father. And ther∣fore we must neither be allured by commodi∣ties to betray Christ, neither must we be ska∣red, by threatnings and punishments, from free confessing of him: but rather fixing our eyes v∣pon the same Lord, the captaine and perfecter of our faith, who with a willing gladnes suffred the torment on the crosse, not caring for the re∣proch, & sitteth at the right hand of the throne of God, we must constantly runne out our pur∣posed race. For he vvhich endureth vnto the ende shalbe saued.
By these tenne pointes (noble Earle) I hope I haue declared the right meanes, by which, in this so great diuersitie of opinions, about the way of saluation: in so great inuasion & mighty power of euill spirits: and in so cruell tyrannie of the deuill, euerie one may prouide for the safetie of him and his.

I haue now almost 34. yeares by Gods good gift, done my endeauour, that I might my selfe follow the same course: and besides the holie scriptures, which do teach apparently, that it is according to Gods will, I haue learned by ex∣perience of many yeares, that it is a heauenlie and excellent waye. For vppon the very same occasion, leauing the Babylonicall captiuitie, I gatt me into the free churches of Christs king∣dome, as into defensed citties: First to the chur∣ches in Rhetia, where I liued eight months and more: afterwards vnto Geneua where likewise I abode nine months: From thence I came to Strausburgh, where then florished the French church: and there I liued and taught 11. yeares: but not without some conflict, after the death of that ornament of the whole cōmon wealth and parent of the schoole Iames Sturmius, and the losse of the graue elders. After this, being called to Cleue, I was pastor in that church a∣bout foure yeares: with what fruite, though not without my crosse, your Hon. doth verie well know, who (such was your singular piety) were euer my hearer, and no smale helper both with your labour and authoritie, in setting for∣ward the kingdome of Christ. Afterwards in the raigne of that great & incomparable prince Frederike the 3. I professed tenne yeares in the
vniuersitie at Heidelberg: and at length I came to Neustade, the famous & most valiant prince Iohn Cassimiers towne, where in the schoole newly erected I haue taught seuen yeares and more: And where, as yet being a withered old man, but yet by Gods good fauour in good health, I liue by my princes liberalitie: And as by little and little I die vnto the world in bo∣die, so I doe my best eudeauour that I may al∣so more and more die vnto it in minde: I wish it indeed. For the vvorld passeth avvay, and the lustes thereof: And the little worme in Io∣nas, in a little houres space, so gnawed the roote of the gourde, vnder the shaddow whereof he laye secure: that it being withered away, the good prophet had not wherewith to shade himselfe from the exceeding heat of the sunne. This very meanes. I wish that mine owne chil∣dren may also follow.
VVhich is also a principall cause, why I was willing now to publish this summe of all the christian doctrin, not onely in the name of my selfe, but also of my whole familie, which in∣deed I writt long since for another vse & pur∣pose: but now brought forth into light, because that my children, besides the doctrine of Christ Iesus which they dayly heare deliuered in our congregatiōs: may haue also mine owne forme
of the same christian faith, left vnto them by me, which they may follow. For although touching the substance of christian doctrine, I teach nothing in this my confession, different from that which is preached in our churches: yet, for that I am not ignorant, how much the authoritie and example of parents preuaileth with children: therefore I deemed that I should doe a thing, not a little beneficiall vnto them, if I should leaue behinde me in Christs church some picture or image of my selfe; I meane, not of my countenance, but of my faith: which they might often looke vppon, and by which they might be more and more encouraged to the studie of the holy scriptures, to proceed in the knowledge of the trueth, and finally, to the constancie and perseuerance in true pietie. Nei∣ther was it vnknowne vnto me, that hereunto belonged that which the Apostle writt to Ti∣mothie: If there be any man that prouideth not for his owne, and namely them of his houshold, he denyeth the faith, and is vvorse then an in∣fidell.
To this I ioyne also another cause, which per∣taineth properly to my self & mine own estate. That which hitherto I haue in heart beleeued, & with my mouth cōfessed, yea & many years, publikely taught in the church, both by word,
& by bookes published: my desire was to com∣prehend the same wholly in one iust volume: that all posteritie might knowe what my faith hath beene: and that all the faithfull, both now liuing, and to come, and so all the true catholike church, may euidently vnderstand, that I neuer consented to such heresies as do now spread all about, or euer heretofore did spread: specially, seing that if I haue beene deceiued in any one thing, I submit me to right iudgement therein, and I wish that my escape may be examined & reformed by the touchstone of the holy scrip∣tures, and by the analogie of faith.
Now to dedicate this my booke vnto your Hon. I was induced by many and those verie honest causes; which I trust shall not bee disal∣lowed, either of you, or any other good man.
It was meet that a booke, not ill, containing good doctrin, should haue a good patron: who both for his pietie would, and for his learning could, defend the same: and that constantly: whereunto, how much the nobilitie of blood, and generosity of minde, if they be ioyned with true pietie, can help, we haue learned by long expetience. For it is proper vnto a noble man, to be constant in a matter commendable, and worthie of honor: and not to suffer himselfe to be carried away from any honest purpose, ei∣ther
by weale or woe. Sinceritie and constancy are such vertues, as cannot fall into rusticall and scruile mindes. Add hereunto, that I iudged it a thing honest and necessarie, that there should some monumēt be extant to all men in all ages, of my duetiful obseruāce to you, & of our chri∣stian friendship. For the friendship which pro∣ceedeth of vertue, and is therefore sincere and sound, is a thing both with God and men most worthie of all praise: such as was betweene Da∣uid and Ionathan: Peter and Iohn, Paule and Barnabas. For as all haue not faith, as the Apo∣stle said, so al haue not true friendship: & as faith, so also loue is from God, saith Iohn: and sprin∣geth from true pietie and vertue. Ours, doubt∣lesse, was not setled, through flesh and blood: but through Christ, pietie, religion, and loue of the same religion: whereunto afterwards, was added a likenesse of our mindes, studies, & man∣ners, and a most sweet conuersing together for many yeares, whereby the same was confir∣med: and so confirmed that it could not by any, though very great distance of place, no not in many yeares, bee diminished or weakened. What? that it hath not onely cōtinued hither∣to firme and constant: but also hath euer, and stil doth seeme more and more daily to increase: the holy ghost more and more kindling this
brotherly loue in our hearts? I surely for my part do well feele, how great a desire is in me, both to see you, and to speake with you, yea and to imbrace you in the Lord: as also I well vnderstand, both by your letters vnto me, and by your kinde dealings in my behalfe, what great care you haue of me. So true friendship, which is wrought by the spirite of God, is e∣uer wont, continually to be preserued and in∣creased.
And surely such good things as proceed frō God, and may also be for the profite of others: those wee ought to shew forth & celebrate by al meanes that we can, for his glory, & the edifi∣cation of our brethren. Therefore as it was Gods will, that the particular leagues of friend∣ship, of some of the Saintes should be commen∣ded in the scriptures: so this of ours, ought not to be buried in perpetuall silence.
Hereunto also, besides that with your singu∣lar beneuolence & fauour, you haue respected, not onely my selfe (as is said) but also my deare kinse-men, and all that honest and christian fa∣milie of the Limacii: such also, haue beene your good benefites and offices towards me: that vnlesse I would bee vtterly vnthankfull: I must needes minde, if not a full recompence, yet at least an honest declaration of a gratefull heart:
especially seing true friendship cannot consist among the vnthankfull. Now, what was I able to performe, either better acceptable to you, or more beseeming your pietie, vertue, and nobi∣lity, thē that I should dedicate vnto your name, this little booke, wherein, in as much breuitie and perspicuitie as I could, I haue comprehen∣ded a summe of our whole christian doctrine? For what kinde of man each one is, and what manner of study, knowledge, and religion each one professeth, such kinde of works are vsed, and indeed ought to bee dedicated and com∣mended to him. So Luke did write the Acts to his [both in deed and in name] Theophylus: So Caelius Lactantius, his christian institutions, to the most christian emperour Constantine: So Ambrose his godly bookes of faith, and of the holy spirit, to that religious emperour Gratian. So lastly, (to stay no longer in a matter euident) all wise men, haue chosen such patrons for their bookes, as were the bookes: that the title of the bookes might be answerable to their professi∣on, to whome they were dedicated. Where∣fore sith I could in no sort better recompence your deserts towards me, then by dedication of this booke: I desire and beseech you, to re∣ceiue with your curteous acceptation, this [howe small a present soeuer] perpetuall te∣stimonie
of my loue towards you: and that your selfe would still continue in that kindnes which you shew to me. And for my children, T. Cornelius: Ludowike: Hierome: Robert: Lael: Constantia: Anna: Lydia: Violanthes, with their most louing mother, and my deare wife, in the Lord, R. Liuia, I most hartely desire, they may especially after my death, be commended to your good fauour.
Thus for mine owne part, [my noble Lord] I pray that your yeares may bee as manie as mine are: whereby you may still bee a benefa∣ctor both to yours and my friends, as also to our churches, as hitherto you haue beene: but so I wish that you may reach to my yeares and beyond, without those discommodities which are wont to accompany crooked old age: and in respect wherof, he that said, it is a good thing to bee old added thereunto, but not to bee twise old for old age commeth not alone. For euen to liue being old is wont to be a heauie burden to old men: so that they must rather meditate on death and on the graue, then on life, whereof the very name in greeke doth put vs in minde. For the worde signifying an old man in that tongue importeth as much, as one that looketh on the ground.
But seing both to liue, of it selfe is the great
blessing of God, and may be to the profite of o∣thers: and also those very discommodities of life, which follow old age, are profitable to the spirite in godlie men: for these causes, to pray for the long life of some godly man, is no euill prayer, but very good: although old age can not want some inconueniences. The God al∣mightie therefore vouchsafe to preserue your Hon. in sound health, and a good and long life for the profite of many, to his good pleasure. Health and wisedome are two good blessings in mans life.
At Nestade Cal. April. 1585.
