

BEEING well perswaded (right Worsh.) both of your good knowledge in Gods holy truth, & of your vnfained affection ther∣unto, I could not but in loue and duty, pre∣sent you with some: part of my labours. I haue reserued vnto you the last part of my booke, but not the least part of my loue: the last is sometimes the best, and I doubt not but the experience of Gods loue toward you, will constraine you to confesse this last to be the best, seeing I am fully perswaded, that you knowe that there is nothing like vnto the feast of a good consci∣ence. The reason why I would with-hold the Reader a little in su∣spence, is for that I haue wearied him with a large discourse, and as yet haue giuen him no refreshment: therefore being  in the last period of my text, which is the placing of sinne before the conscience, a torment most lamentable, wofull, and miserable, I should vtter∣ly breake his heart, if I should giue him no breathing. No strappade, racke, wheele, or any exquisite torture euer inuented by the witte of man is comparable to this. The Poets haue maked this vnder the furies of hell, whose hayres on their heads they haue, compared to snakes, their eies to sparkling fire, their faces grim and griesly, their hands full of burning torches, &c. The maske beeing taken off, the morall will prooue no fable, but a plaine expression of the grea∣test horror and distresse of mind, that possibly can bee imagined: no physickeeither by purgation can dispatch this humour; or cordi∣alls
by their sweetest spirits, drine these spirits from the trembling heart: No surgerie either by corrasiue, can eate it out; lenitiue, mitigate and asswage the paine; oyles mollifie, or salues cure. Friendship by loue, labour, intreatie, gifts, ransomes, pledges, &c. may deliuer a man out of prison: but who can vnlock the prison dores of the conscience, knocke off the bolts, heale vp the wounds, refresh the decaied spirits of a sorrowfull mind? if there were but one of a thousand, he were better then millions of gold and siluer: but alas, there is but one in all the world, and he seemes to be so farre remote, that the conscience dare neuer once imagine, that if he were sent for he would make any hast to come in time. Power and commaundmay recouer a man from banishment, but what command shall pre∣uaile with the powers of darkenes, and the gates of hell? Au∣thoritie and timecan we are out reproach: but eternitie it selfe can∣not out-last this sorrowe: no countenance can beare it out, or fauour releiue it: this dies not when we die, but makes vs liue, when with all our hearts we would be dead. Therefore (right Worsh.) patronage a fewe verses of a bad Poet: I haue desired to make them sauourie meat: if they tast harshly, excuse the cooke for his good-will, as ready to make amends in the next seruice: if they want arte, or be dressed without their sugred sauce, I hope a good appetite wil serue insteed of that seruice. And the rather I offer them vnto your selfe, because I haue made bold to dresse them with some of your fire, and I doubt not but in regard thereof, they wil be a little the warmer: and though I would not wish that any man should scald himselfe with ouer-hasty tasting; yet doe I wish with all my heart, that the fire of your zeale against the sacrilegious patrones of our dayes, might a little dissolue the cold and frozen hearts of these robbers of Churches, to worke in them a better respect vnto Gods people, and the good of their owne soules. And so praying the Lord to make your heart stable and vn∣blameable in holinesse, I commit you to his grace in Christ Iesus.
August. 10. 1615.

