



THy Children [deare Mother] are growne more nice then wise, and fallen into those humours that are fit∣ter for controlement then obseruation. I desire to be no challenger of my Brethren; yet is it my dutie to be a louer, yea, and (as I am able) a Champion of thy truth. I am deceiued, if this be not one of the maine grounds of that vniuersall decay of know∣ledge, wherewith our people are com∣monly
checked, to wit, that they are not either catechized at all, or else in as many formes as they haue change of teachers: one teacher (as it were) making worke for ano∣ther, and so pleasing the fantasie of their Schollers, that like some woman with childe, that longs for that peece which she sees vpon anothers trencher, and swounes if she misse it, or some daintie Dames, that doat vpon euery beautie, they are euery day loue-sicke a new,2 Tim. 3.6.7. and like S. Paules sillie women, are euer learning, and neuer able to come to the knowledge of the truth. My care shall be to bring them home againe to their Mothers dyet, and let them see both the meate and milke she hath plentifully prouided for them But before I enter vpon her store, I must acquaint them that all their travell a∣broad to fill their braines with new lear∣ning, hath but bin to goe Northward for heat, and in vaine to seeke that candle which they did carry in their owne hands. What plentie of water can there be, where the lead of the cisterne is put all into the Pipes? We haue made so many conveyan∣ces of the Art of Religion into the braines
and brests of our hearers, that if a man would yeeld to runne after his eye or ap∣petite, he shall neuer know where to rest, and after many idle excursions, shall lie downe weary, but vnsatisfied. Art like Sampsons haire is faire and strong.Art quasi Arx, quia s∣ma & pul∣chra. Strong in pre∣cepts, beautifull in methode. And if both these be to be found in any Catechisme, ours shall carry away the honour of it. Others that swarue from ours, are but like a continuall pumping, without mending the leake. Where confusion for want of methode, runneth in faster, then precepts like nailes can fasten themselues. Some teach the Commandements before the Creed, as if they would teach a man to goe before he liue; others cut the Seales in the midst of the writing, as if that which seales all should not hang at the bottome of the bill, bond, or bargaine, &c. But our rule of Religion is to begin with faith, by which we liue, then to come to the law of life by which we walke: after all this to lead vs to Prayer, least we should faint in faith, or waxe weary of workes, and lastly, finding faith but weake, obedience imperfect, and
prayers not as they should be, brings vs to Gods seales as the safetie and securitie of all our estate;Eph. 1.13.14. for being sealed with the holy spirit of promise, after our faith in God, wee haue the earnest of our inheritance, vntill the redemption of the purcha∣sed possession. But I desire not to be like a tedi∣ous Musician, euer tuning, neuer playing; I come therefore first to let you see the milke of our Catechisme, in a briefe and short view of it, and then hauing brought you from the spoone to the knife, to let you behold your more solide meate out of it. You shall find it sufficient both for babes in Christ, and growne men And if you be expert in the first, then may you remoue a forme higher; for I would not haue a Chri∣stian like a dying man, or one sicke of a Pal∣sey, that hauing his senses, memory, and speech, should want facultie loco-motiue, or power to stirre his hands, or his feete: that being neither deafe nor dumbe to heare or answere, should yet haue withered hands, or lame legges to liue as a Christian. All that I wish is that we first labour for the happinesse of knowledge, and then ioyne with it the happinesse of practise. Some
Artisans might liue as well as landed men by their earnings, if they had not a worse boone with so excellent a facultie, of idle∣nesse, and ill husbandry. It should bee a shame for vs to haue the Philosophers stone of the truest riches, and yet to liue like beg∣gars. Behold (O Christian) the transcen∣dent obiects of thy aspiring thoughts, and euer keepe thy soule vpon the wing in me∣ditations of the kingdome of heauen, and the righteousnesse thereof: loathing those muck-wormes of the world, which like the Gentles breed of putrifaction, or Bee∣tles feeding in the dung, can relish nothing but earthly things, or thinke of no other godlinesse but gaine.2 Tim. 2.7. Consider (I pray thee) what is said, and the Lord giue thee vnderstanding in all things.
