



Right Reverend Father,
ANd no lesse honoured Lord. I see
many make use of your lines,
few acknowledge, none return
to give thanks: but no cheat∣ing,
like the fellony of wit;
for hee which theeves that, robs the
owner, and coosens all that heare him.
Why I presume to make use of your name, is
not hard to divine; your interest being so
just, and great, both in the man, and
matter: it is not my respect onely, but your
right; and for encouragement, your own words
may serve mee for a sufficient both plea,
and protection. It is your Lordships, that pre∣sents
of love, feare not to be ill taken of

strangers. Nor could I more fitly dedicate
this Book, which (so much crossing the stream
of natur all corruption) may happily provoke
some insolent, yea, potent offenders.
I cannot so over esteeme these lines, as to
hold them worthy your judicious eyes, much
lesse your patronage: yet, as the case standeth
with mee, it would bee no lesse then injurious,
not to look so high; and I should offend, if I pre∣sumed
not. Benefits received, are bonds obli∣gatory:
and if so, both my duty and thankful∣nesse
make my best services your debt, and if
neither of these, my most endeared affection:
VV hether should the Riverreturn, if not to the
Occan, from whence it received it's streams?
And I have not alone watered my Garden
from your Fountain; but a great part of this
my Candleslight, took it's being (next the Ele∣ment
of Gods word) from the shining Lamp of
your Workes. Many of these are Flowers from
your Garden, Sciences from your Orchard, I
have taken a great part of my Seed from your
Granary: if I shall seeme to saucy, in plucking
and taking them, without leave from the own∣er;
I humbly crave, that restitution and ac∣knowledgment
may serve for part of amends.
If this Posie and new fruit answer your sent
and tast, I have obtained my desire: or if the

graine of this new Crop chance to differ, im∣pute
the fault to the Soyle, and Seeds-man;
though it was not my purpose to impaire the
quality, by improving the quantity.
Briesly, as the Bee gathers from one Flow∣er,
Wax; from another, Honey; from a third,
Bee-Glew, and bringeth to her Hive that
which is profitable from all: so have I (under
correction) filch't from your Lordships worthy
Workes, and other Authors, (both divine
and humane, whether Ancients or Neotericks)
what soever elegant Phrases, pithy Sentences,
curious Metaphors, witty Apo hegmes, sweet
Similitudes, or Rhetoricall expressions I could
meet withal, pertinent, whole some, and delect∣able,
wherewith to enamell this Tratise of
mine: so that you may almost say of it, as Apo∣llodorus
was wont to say of Chrysippus his
Bookes, That if other mens sentences were
left out, the Pages would be void: and o∣thers
cannot but resemble it to Horace his
Daw, which was drest and pranked in other
Birds feathers, being otherwise naked and
bare: nay, my selfe will acknowledge, that to
this Nosegay of strange Flowers, I have put
little of mine owne, but the Thread to bind
them; and that to all this Frame, I have not
much more then made the Pins, which fasten

the joynts together; for most of the materials
were squared and fashioned to my hand, by
more judicious workmen: it is but borrowed
Mettal ast into a new mould. Yet pardon me,
e who hath but a Cock boat to sayle in, must
not go far from the shore: and such as want a
stock of their own, are forced to borrow, and
trade with other mens money. Peradventure
the Magazine of my memory is better fur∣nished
with matter, then the Store-house of
my invention; yet each are so meanly, as I am
forced both to pity and disdaine my felfe.
Who knoweth not, that the suggestion of
one new thought, is harder, and better, then
many repeated? wherein your Lordship excel∣leth
some other of my Authors, as the Sunne in
brightnesse the rest of the Planets. It is re∣ported
of Epicurus, that in three hundred
Volumes, which he left behind him, he had not
made use of one Allegation: who, in our times,
doth resemble him more then your Lordship,
lesse then my selfe? yet this I will avouch in
mine owne praise, that I love wisdome, and
honour learning, as much as they that have
them. And for my defence, if in reasons, com∣parisons,
and arguments, I trarsplant any in∣to
my Soyle: I am no thiefe in it: since I either
say, or am ready to acknowledge of whom I had

them. I have so made use of other mens wits,
as you may see I do not steale, but borrow. I
desie not to conceale their nams, as naughty
women do the right fathers of their children;
though I confesse, many of my Authors
names, and places, of what I have udled up
together, are by me so absolutely for gotten;
that he which would know of me whence they
are taken, and from whom I had them,
would greatly ut me to my shifts: yet have I
not beg'd them but at honour able and well
known gates; they are all, or almost all, so fa∣mous
tht, me thinks, they sutficietly name
themselves▪ without me; for they are both
vich, and they also come from rich and wor∣thy
hands; wherein Authority doth concurre
with reason. But of all the rest, it is easie for
any, that have been conversant in your Lord∣ships
Bookes▪ to know by the smell of each
Flower, which hath had the aspect of your
Sunne.
Neither (if I shall speaking enuously) had
this Web ever beene, but for the Silke, which
I found ready spun from your worthy breasts.
I had suffred sh pwrack on the first shore,
but that I was steered by so good a Pilot, as
your selfe, by whose Compasse I have securely
sailed, and (though sometimes weather-bea∣ten

safely arrived at my expected Haven
Yea, my Molde was so kindly bedewed with
your heavenly cotemplatos; when it was
Sun-burnt; and so gently thawed by your di∣vine
Meditations and other observations,
when it was Frost bound▪ that the earth it
self would cause me blush, if I should not pre∣sent
yo with the first, or best fruits.
Not that my ambit on, or hope doth so far
transportme as to think it worthy your seri∣ous
serveigh, whose houres are taken up with
more excellent and heavenly notions: much
lesse able to add the least gleame, to what you
know: such a fond coceit were as absurd, as
to light a Taper to the Sun, to teach an Eagle
to fly, a Dolphin to swime, or with Phormio
the Philosopher, to read a Lecture of Souldie∣ry
to Hannibal, the most expert warrier of
his time, and I might be worthily laught at
for my labour, as he was: I only offer it to
your censure and dispose, that it might thera∣ther
cree forth, under the safe conduct of
your goodnesse, unto the hands and use of o∣thers;
and even therin feare also, that I have
coveted too high, and intruded too much on
your Lordships more weighty affaires.
Indeed, to alter a little of what is yours,
would interdict mee all Apologie, since that

were to use the pensile upon a picture fini∣shed
by Apelles; or to write the destruction
of Troy after Homer, which with ease may
be marred, but cannot be mended. Suppose,
with Epicurus, you loath to repeate any thing
againe, be it never so pleasing, or profitable;
as it appeares by your compositions you do: yet
far be it from you, to barre others that bene∣fit;
when the same God, by whose Spirit
your Pen was guided, gave command, that
his children should lay up his words in their
hearts and souls, bind them upon their hands,
and between their eyes, teach them their chil∣dren,
repeat them sitting and walking, lying
down, and rising up, yea, write them upon the
posts and gates of their houses.
Besides, experience shewes that the oftner
these Nayles are hammered, the deeper they
pierce; and pierce too deep they cannot; for five
words remembred are better then a thousand
forgotten; and every help to our devotion, de∣serves
to be precious. It was an envious hu∣mour
(not befitting your Lordships worth,
whose ayme is God's glory, not your owne)
which caused Alexander to bee angry with
Aristotle, for making his Bookes common:
and a peevish condition, which made Aspen∣dius,
that cunning Musitian, to play always

so softly on his Harpe, that none conld heare
but himselfe. Vertue is destributive, and had
rather accommodate many with selfe-injury,
then bury benefits that might pleasure a mul∣titude;
and that which is good of it selfe, is so
much the better, by how much the more it is
communicated; yea, to conceale goodnesse is a
vice.
I need not tel your Lordship, that gray ad∣visements
in a fine filed phrase are like ,
Fire, Water, the more breathed, the clearer;
the more extended, the warmer; the more
drawne, the sweeter; or the bright Sun, whose
beames are not the worse, for shining in eve∣ry
corner, but the places the better.
If then I detract not from their worth, who
may not benefit by their use? in which my
care and desire was, with the Bee, to 
my selfe and others without prejuaice to any
one flower. Put case I have faotted and
piled one thing upon another independantly,
and without forme, or order; precious stones
willshine, though set in Lead; and linkes of
Gold, have their true value and lustre,
though a bungler make the chaine.
Indeed, if in borrowing the matter, I im∣paire
the forme, (as many times it commeth
to passe, that sentences translated, or repeated,

doe, like silke twise dyed, loose their glosse) if
I adulterate, or sophisticate any one peece, let
the Author reward me, as Archelaus and
Philoxenus did some, which sang their ee∣ters
illfavuredly and undecently, who either
kickt them on the shinns, or broke their potts,
using these words, you breake mine, I
breake yours; or as learned Musurus Can∣diot
served Marsilius Ficinus, in correct∣ing
his translation of Plato, all over with a
Sponge, finding it to imitate the copy origi∣nall,
no more then Cicero the younger did
his Father, which was only in name; or take
the same course with my Book, which Philox∣enus
did with a Tragedy, that Dionysius
sent him to correct; who finding it not worthy
to bee published, tooke a knife and rased it in
peeces. For praise, I seeke none, as I have de∣served
none; and I am so farre from expect∣ing
thanks, as that I humbly crave pardon;
yea, a conditionall acceptance is all I aske.
Wherefore vouchsafe it your favourable
aspect, and let this meane, but faithfull testi∣mony
of my humble thankfulnesse, be shrowd∣ed
under the wings of your learned Patroci∣ny;
as was Persius under the wings of Pallas;
and Teucer under the Shield of Ajax.
And your deserved greatnesse, shall make it

more acceptable, and by consequence the more
profitable: yea, your name, to which it is con∣secrate,
shall add life to it, as the Sunne to a
withered Plant; and your protection will no
lesse support it, then bones do the flesh of a
mans body, or walls the building of an house.
True, Alexander, at first, disdained the
Corinthian Embassadors, who offered him
the freedome and Burgueship of their City;
but when they told him, that Bacchus, and
Hercules were likewise in their Registers;
he kindly thanked them, and accepted their
offer. If there be any thing herein worthy, let
it induce your acceptance; if not, it may please
you to imitate Caesar, who never rejyced
more, then to heare how they talked of his va∣liant
exploits, in simple Cottages.
Divers doe dedicate their heavenly la∣bours,
according to earthly respects; and I
have often seene an heavenly Pearle, present∣ted
to the hand of an earthly and sensuall Pa∣tron:
but such incongruous, and untuneable de
dications have ever beene harsh to my judge∣ment:
wherefore that I might avoid the like
incongruity, I was bold, in nuncupating my
Booke, to fixe upon your Lordship; in whom, to
the outwad gifts of nature, and fortune, are
conjyned the inward endowments of grace;

as piety, humility, affability, temperance, ju∣stice,
wisdome, with maturity of judgement,
and the like; which by a rare and happy com∣bination,
have met together, as Diamonds
set in a border of Gold, or Sapphirs placed in
a Cabinet of Ivory: touching which your
vertues) for I will not use many words, of
your selfe, to your selfe) I shall rather praise
God, and pray for the continuance and in∣crease
of them, in the secret closet of mine
own heart, than make any publike proclama∣tion
of the same, in the eares of others; know∣ing,
that your selfe affects no other the ater,
for your worth, then your owne conscience.
And in regard of others, it were as needlesse,
as to lend Spectcles to Lynceus, an Eye to
Argus, or to wast gilding on pure Gold. for
who hath heard of your name, that is not dri∣ven
to admiration and veneration of your
singular sufficiencies? Againe, Alexander's
victories and vertues, (to which I may fitly
resemble them) were not to be drawne in the
compasse of a signet; neither did it become a∣ny
to paint them, but Apelles; to grave them,
but Pyrgoteles; to carve them, but Lysip∣pus.
Wherefore I will passe over with a dry
Pen, that which neither befits the person to
write, in regard of his meannesse, nor the

place of an Epistle to containe in regard of
it's expected briefnesse; though
It is detraction to conceale due praise,
When good related, might more goodnes raise.
True glasses both our deformities and fa∣vours
tell: and precepts never shine so much,
as when they are set in examples; nor exam∣ples,
as when they are set in curious persons:
nor is it easie to finde so fit a person, so meet a
patterne for imitation, for incitation.
The which benefit that we may long enjoy,
as a set Copy in the Schoole of this our Nati∣on,
my prayers, with many other, are hearty
and fervent, that your life may be as long, as
it is beneficiall; then shall you as much out∣live
others, as your name you; which will bee
so long, as nature hath an eare, or eye, ortongu;
for though you dye, your sweet remembrance
shall ever live. Oh that these lines might live
but so long, as your fame and known integri∣ty;
then I were confident they should never
meet a grave in comming ages.
Thus loving rather to say nothing, then
too much; I desire your Lordship to accept, as
from an affectionate heart, and dutiful hand,
in part of payment, by way of restitution, this
small Mite; which I bring you, in your owne
and other mens coyne, which is not more yours
than the Author,
And so I commend it's successe to God, it's
Patronage to you, it's use to the World, and
your Lordshp to the protection, tuition, dire∣ct
on of the mighty Creator loving Redeem∣er,
comfortable Preserver of all the Elect.

