


❧ TO THE RIGHT Worsh. Sir WILLIAM AYLOFE, Knight Barronet, and chiefe Iustice of the liberties of HAVERING vpon the Bower: Grace and peace from the Father, Prince, and Spirit of Peace, AMEN.
TRVTH speakes with plainnesse, and modestie beares with patience; the plain∣nesse of the one, might disturbe the pa∣tience of the other; but truth keepes modestie from blushing, and modestie preserues truth from shaming: No shame for plainnesse, whose plainnesse is the truth; nor blushing for modesty, whose forbearance is patience; which is hardly angred, but soone re∣conciled; easily iniured, but seldome offending; sparing much, but stirring little: these two are so priuiledged, that they may keep their court where they please, without controlment of the proudest. But alas, the fashion of this world is changed, and all is become complement; hee is no compleat Gentleman, that cannot be as humble as the toe; as plaine, as if he meant to open all his heart; and as modest, as though hee had learned a whole yeare to compose his gesture: but nature forced, is al∣waies most vnruly; and the face that hath most flushings of heat, hath the coldest heart; and burnings without, are coo∣lers within. Maskes once serued for sporting, but I feare them now to bee vsed in good earnest: painting was but a circum∣stance,
but now it's the best substance: yet let me tell this dis∣ordered age, that painting is meeter for ragged walls, then fine marble; for an unruly Iezebel, then a chast matron: in a word, all strange complements, they are no better then court holy water, or a Popes blessing; and I am sure, where hee blesseth, God curseth. The earth is full of faire words, but they pay no debts, neither is any man the richer for them. And I would to God the fashion had rested in the bodie; but woe is me, it is crept into the soule, and makes all learning but a flourish: Therefore I thought it (right Worsh.) verie good to abstaine from the fashion, because in all kinds, we may finde them by experience to he but a daies wearing: The Taylors care is ouer, if he hit the cut; the Shooemaker, if his shooe hold the pulling on: and euery trades-man thinkes his shop then best furnished, when his wares wil serue the time: but for my part, I know not how to cut out the truth, better then by plainnesse; to plucke it on, then by modestie; and make it serue the time, then by pa∣tience. I care for no more, if so be I may but be a friend of the bridegroome, to wooe his spouse; or as one of his eunuches to trimme her for himselfe: neither euer did I intend to in∣treat for welcome by flatterie, which is alwaies intertained as long as selfe-loue is at home: and to what purpose should I be more curious? I am sure that the painting of windowes stops the light, and that plainer glasse, would permit the sunne a clearer entrance: a black ground best beseemes a white counter∣feit; and a faire countenance needs no varnish: where the wine is neate, there needeth no ivy-bush; neither the right corall a∣ny colouring: So where the truth it selfe bringeth credit, the man with his glosse, winneth small commendation: where the matter is of sufficient excellencie, there is more shew of a preg∣nant wit, then perfect wisedome to vse superfluous eloquence: the naked tale most sets forth the naked truth, and the plainest style, is the soonest vnderstood. I do not condemn eloquence or humane learning in diuine mysteries; it is lawful, I confesse, for the Israelites to take iewels, gold, siluer, and other precious ornaments; but let them take heede how they vse them, least they make a calfe, and then they loose their beautie, hauing
lost their true seruice. Neither would I be so curious in trim∣ming vp of the truth, as though my greatest care should be for the habit of words: for I know that skilfull Apelles, coueting to mend the nose, marred the cheeke; and often the foolish dy∣er, is not content with the die of his cloth, vntill he haue bur∣ned it. I know the word of God hath been sufficiently tryed to my hands, and the holy Ghost hath giuen it a sufficient tin∣cture of beautie. Indeede, in nature there is no tree, but hath some blast; no countenance, but hath some blemish; the fairest leopard is not without his spots; the finest cloth is made with his list, and the smoothest shooe with his laste: But the word of God is a tree of life that is neuer blasted, a glasse that doth neuer shew vs a blemished countenance, a store-house of all garments to be worne without list or seame; and as strong as a leopard, without any spot or blemish; a gospel of peace, prepared with∣out any wooden laste of humane eloquence, and yet sits as close to the feete of the soule, as heart can wish. Neither doe I speake this to excuse my selfe; for I might well learne wise∣dome from the Estrich, that though she taketh greatest pride in her feathers, yet is content to picke some of the worst out, and burne them: so might I picke out many things and purge them in the fire. Alexander laid his singer on his cheeke, least Apelles should paint his skarre: but it is my mind to hold my finger off my skarres, least some skilfull Apelles paint the fin∣ger, not couering but pointing at the skarre; and so lay open as much hypocrisie in the writer, as blemishes in the writing. Therefore (right Worsh.) seeing I am to vndergoe censure, and bee brought before euerie mans iudgement seat, I haue great cause to seek out my aduocate and patron: Iudicem aditu∣rus? patronum quare; must you before a Iudge? seeke out your patron. In duty and loue I could seeke none beside your selfe, & my confidence of your acceptation is so strong, that I feare not the least deniall: you gaue me the first entertainement that euer I had abroad, and therefore in reason I could not but pre∣sent you with the first fruits of my labours. I doubt not but that your selfe doth both see and bewaile the miserie of these wretched times, in which Atheisme, and Policie (falsly so cal∣led,
beeing indeed little better then plaine villanie) and Tom∣porizing, haue like a canker, fretted out the verie heart of pie∣tie. Few there are that seeke for established hearts, and to know precisely whether God or Baal bee the true God: and for resolution, they resolue that the best course is to halt betweene two opinions, that so all times might serue their turnes. But you haue not so learned Christ: for this can I testifie of your paine & diligence, that you labour for nothing more, then the gaining of aduised resolution. If I should say all that I know, the world would censure me of flattery: and if I knewe that selfe-loue were at home with your selfe, then should I neuer feare want of intertainment in learning to dissemble: but both the world, and your selfe must pardon my boldnesse; for I speake not to blaze abroad your praise, but to intreat that kindnesse, that men would admit of your example, as a patterne for imitation. Three things constraine mee to vtter my mind: First, that continuall care which you haue for resolution of many difficulties in diuinity: the means which you haue vsed are but practised of few: one is, that you haue not bin content to take your resolution of diuine truth from translations; but haue taken that paines, that you are able to fetch it from the o∣riginall, and drinke of the purest fountaine: A second meanes is, that of the Philosopher, , to make que∣stion of matters of religion, whensoeuer you haue seene iust op∣portunitie, and fit persons to resolue; neither haue you been content to admit of superficiall answers, but haue pressed argu∣ment vpon them to see the true tryall; and often your own re∣solutions haue bin more agreeable with the truth and context of Sciptures, then that which others haue said: let this teach men of your place, besides their continuall imploiments, to set some time apart, for this excellent knowledge of the originalls of the Bible, and knowledge of that art. A second good example is, your continual care that the legges of iustice may not lie broken in the streets, and no man to raise it vp: A happie thing when men of place count their dignities to be conferred, as a com∣mon good for Church and Commonwealth. Thirdly, for all man∣ner of election, this you onely haue not affirmed by word, but
performed by action, that the place, more then the person, might haue cause to reioyce. For my selfe, I confesse I had no cause to be iticed from you, as the Leuite was from Micah, Iudg. 17. to become a Priest vnto a Tribe or familie in Israel: but least through ignorance I should as soon serue in the ministery of Idols, as the true God, I desired to be a little longer trained vp in the schooles of the Prophets. For my loue vnto your familie, whereof once I was a member, it is this, that all of them might knowe the God of their fathers, and serue him with a perfect heart, & a willing mind. For your vertuous Lady, whō God hath made as a fruitful vine on the sides of your house, that she might likewise grow into the true Vine, Christ Iesus; and be fruitfull vnto her owne saluation. For all your children, that they might be as the Oliue plants of God round about your table. For your eldest son Beniamin; (I hope in name and nature the sonne of your right hand) the Lord make him the strength and crowne of your age, the excellencie of your dignitie, and the excellencie of your power. But I feare I haue alreadie offended; your desire is breuitie: therefore to conclude, I commend and commit this small la∣bour to your patronage: the text I am sure is excellent for these dayes: but for my manner of handling it, I leaue it to the cen∣sure of Gods Church: How-euer it be, I do more then hope, that you will kindly accept it from me, and entertaine it as a testi∣monie of my loue; and not onely so, but vse it for your comfort. Now the God of peace that brought againe from the dead our Lord Iesus, the great Shepheard of the sheepe, through the blood of the e∣uerlasting couenant; make you perfect in all good workes, to doe his will, working in you that which is pleasant in his sight: to whom be praise for euer, and euer. Amen.

