



TVllius, and Caius Plinius, wrote that neither Posie nor Rethoricke seemed sweete or delecta∣ble without the ornament of eloquence Yet an Historie, of whatsoeuer sorte it be written, dooth please and delight: because, men may thereby knowe, the successe of things happened, to the knowledge whereof, the nature of man is bent: yea, the tale of a Plowman, is some∣time delightfull to the hearer, especiallie when any new thing is discouered.
And where the stile of this historie in our English tongue is not, nor at the least, I cā not polish as learned mē might require.

Yet the troth and pith of the matter vtte∣red in plaine sort shall suffice giuing li∣cence, as much (as in me lieth) to whoso∣euer that will take the paines, to write it ouer againe, to beautifie the same, as to him or them shall seeme conuenient: as often times, hath happened among the Greeke and Latine Historiographers and Translators.
The Author of this woorke, right ho∣norable, was a Gentleman of woorshipful stocke or linage, he was highlie esteemed of the Emperour Charles the fift: vnto whose Maiestie, he was sometime Secre∣tarie in his roiall counsel of iustice, and afterward ordained Auditor of ac∣compts of the reuenues appertaining to his Maiestie in the Prouinces of Peru and firme lande.
This well minded Gentleman, after the writing of this Historie, feared the

publishing hereof for two principall cau∣ses: The one, least the discendent of such as had committed things not woorthie of praise, would conceaue some euill oppini∣on of him: or els the issue of the vertuous and noble sort, would iudge the praise and commendations of their progenitors sufficiently set foorth according to their deserts: In consideration whereof, he cal∣led to remembraunce the oppinion of Horatius, which was, that no Historie should come to light vntill nine yeares, were fullie past after the action thereof.
This oppinion liked him not, but rather thought it more cōuenient, that Histories woorthie of writing should abide in sci∣lēce for the space of lxxxx. yeeres, think∣ing that in so manie yeares space, the li∣nage and ofspring of the one sort might consume, and the race of the noble and vertuous, to be contented vvith the

commendation of their Auncestors.
The Kinge of Spaine that now is, ha∣uing perused the originall Copie of this Historie, requested mine Author to pub∣lish the same in Printe: and in accom∣plishment of his Maiesties commaunde∣mēt he hath so doone. And the Englishing of foure bookes of his worke, I most hum∣bly here present vnto your Honor.
I may at this day, God be praised, bold∣lie write that, where the Spanish and Portingall Naciōs dare glorie of their discoueries & Nauigacions, with great commendations of their Captaines, Co∣lon Vasco dela Gama, Magalanez, Hernando Cortez: Don Francisco Pisarro, & Don Diego de Almagro. Now may our most gracious Queen, most iustly cōpare withall the Princes of the world, both for discouery & nauigacion.
The Discouery of the Portingall East India, was atchiued in 26. moneths, & the West India, in shorter space: Maga∣lanez returned not to manifest his doo∣inges: But our valyant and noble min∣ded Captaine, Maister Francis Drake, in his Nauigation, was occupied more, or nighe three yeares: In which time, he sayled, and attained to the knowledge of the East, and West course, which none at any time had euer atchiued.
His paineful trauaile, and maruailous Nauigation, was not obtayned with white handes, perfumed gloues, daintie fare, or softe lodging: no, no: Honour is not gotten with pleasures, & quiet min∣des. For the sweet Roses groweth among Thornes: yet the ignorant will iudge, that perpetuall Fame and heauenly Fe∣licitie, is a thinge to be gotten with faci∣litie and ease. But if the poore Sayler

should sit as Iudge, I am sure that hee would say, how extreame hunger, thyrst, hard lodging vpon Hatches, foule gar∣mentes, blustryng stormes of winde, with Hayle, Snowe, bitter colde, Thunder, Lightning, and continuall perill of life, leadeth the hie pathway to the Court of eternall Fame. The honour of our good Captayne and company, lieth not in my Pen to set out accordingly: therfore, I remit the same to sutche as hereafter shall iustly sette foorth his paynes and trauell: My humble sute, is to beseech your Honour, to accept this woorke into your patronage, and the Almightie graunt your harts desire.

