



WOrthy Sr. and good Madam, though not as I would, yet as I can, I shal euer be ready to testifie my respect and thankfulnes for your loue and kinde fauours towards me;
whereof till the Lord shall be pleased to giue further means, accept (I pray you) this, which as it is a publike, so my desire is, it may bee a perpetuall ac∣knowledgement.
I present you here with the labours of another, which comming to my hands some few yeeres since, gaue mee then so good content, that when I restored the originall to the owner, it left another same behinde it: That not long since, beeing required at my hands to bee sent abroad to the publique view, after some consideration thereof had, and the owner to whom it more
properly belonged made ac∣quainted therewith: and the originall of the Authors owne hand-writing commended and committed vnto mee to that end and purpose, I condiscen∣ded: And that as for their sakes who groning vnder the bur∣then of a troubled spirit, may by the blessing of GOD re∣ceiue benefit hereby: So like∣wise and much the rather for yours, to whom I did destinate the same, from the very in∣stant that the request vvas made.
Vouchsafe therefore (I pray you) to let it passe into the world, vnder the TITLE
of your NAME, which as it will bee a shelter to defend it against the detraction of ill dis∣posed persons; so will it bee likewise as an oyntment powred out,Cant. 1.. yeelding a sweet sauour to make it pleasing, not so much to the nostrils, as the hearts and minds of the well affected, and more godly sort of Christians.
And thus commending you to that our good God,Act. 20.32. and to the Word of his Grace,Heb. 6.10. that is not vnrighteous to forget your worke and labour of loue, which yee haue shewed towards his Name, in that ye haue beene so farre from being ashamed of the Gospell of his Christ, that to the
good example of the godly,Rom. 1.16. and the shame of others, yee haue profest the same in truth and sinceritie,Phil. 2.15. and beene blamelesse and harmelesse, the Children of God without rebuke, in the mids of a crooked and peruerse Nati∣on, among whom yee shine as lights in the world: I take my leaue.

