


Worthy Sir,
I Am forced to set forth my selfe as well as my Sermon, and to satisfie some. I must tell them as well what I am, as what I have said. A short Sermon is often the occasion of much discourse, and many
like the Athenians delight in nothing but to heare and tell newes, and some like the devill are not so idle, as ill occupied in slandering of others. The biting of mad dogges admits of medicine to helpe it, but there is no Physitian that knowes a remedy against a slander. All the com∣fort is, that Mala opinio benè parta delectat, a mans owne conscience may be his cordi∣all: Vnus mihi pro populo erit, one understan∣ding man is better than a multitude, whose very wisedome (as the Wiseman saith) is to be despised, Omnis honestae reima∣lus judex est vulgus, the common people are corrupt judges, Eadem probamus, eadem re∣prehendimus, hic est exitus omnis judicij in quo lis secundum plures datur, in number of voy∣ces there is no certaintie of truth, satis est unus, satis est nullus, one or none may be sufficient to satisfie in a good cause, which as I am perswaded I have undertaken. I am not ashamed to passe it from the Pulpit to the Presse, and to Print what I preached. In both I have your request, and it is some
part of a requitall to say, Hoc ego non multis sed tibi, I owe as much as you have desired, and will not be dainty by your hands to deliver it to others. That you have found the approbation you sought for, is to mee a second confirmation, it may doe more good than I expected: I shall be glad to helpe the weakest, and not to receive him for controversies of disputations. I have not stirred the stone they stumble upon, nor moved their mindes with noveltie, Qui intempestivè monet ille nocet, a monition must be as a medicine seasonably applied. When there is no motion of humours in a body, their very agitation is dangerous, and no pacification to be expected by their purgation; but the Aphorisme is true, when they move remove them, least they doe mischiefe, Si quid movendum move humores, qui turgent purgentur.
Me thinkes our diseases are discovered by Saint Paul in the right method, Tit. 1.10. Many are unruly, vaine talkers, deceivers. Authoritie is disobeyed. Secondly, diso∣bedience
is defended. Thirdly, the de∣fence deceives others. These diseases are apparent in many, whose malady is con∣tention with their Superiours, which they defend by bookes, and by the same, poyson most of the people, who looke not so much into the cause as the com∣plaint, and complying in affection with the Authors, lose the apprehension of the truth, which whosoever shall reveale it to them, shall not be heard for the prejudice they have conceived. Prava dogmata, wicked doctrines make Heretickes and poison their mindes: but diversa studia, small differences will make Schismatickes, and set them out of good thoughts, with∣all they cannot affect. Saint Paul disputes the case charitably, 1 Cor. 11.10.19. he be∣leeves it in part, and passeth not the same sentence upon all, and mitigates the mat∣ter further by an effectuall gradation from Schisme to heresie, as from the lesse to the greater. No marvell you are divided in Rites and Ceremonies, and contrary
Customes, wherein wee for our parts con∣tend not, neither the Churches of God; but study peace and quiet, as counting them no matters of moment to cause con∣tention. Such contentious spirits make Gods people come together, not for the bet∣ter but for the worse, where is the fault? not in the Church, but the bad humours of it, in such as are in the Church, but not of it, in such as have least to doe with it, yet make worke enough for them which have most to doe, and set all into a com∣bustion. I say the holy Apostle helpes the staggering Christian, and labours to make him stand upright.
First, I beleeve it to be in your com∣pany, and onely of those that will not be of you. Secondly, it is from a bad cause to a good end. The devill moves it, but God will have the glory of it, and you shall have the good, in being approved to him. Secondly, in being made manifest to others, and that first, that you are not the Schismatickes: secondly, that you are
such as the Church approves: thirdly, you neede not wonder at Schismes, when Sa∣tan can raise heresies. Thats a happy Church that is without weedes, and a thousand separations are not to be trusted, that seek safety where Satan shall not find them; America is no more the place than Rome, Satan is to be feared hath found and will finde their societies, but I will not accuse them so much as defend my selfe, and tell all men what I am, sure I should be, if I be righ.
I am unus in corpore, as well as unus in capite, one that strives as much for one Church as for one Christ, and as it is my duty to name my selfe a Christian from my communion with Christ, so shall it ever be the same to sirname my selfe a Catholike from my communion with his body. Seeing you have drawne me out to say some thing, I say it for the Church, and seeke pacification of that which is now in agitation; and because the Altar
breedes the greatest quarrell, I will first labour to take away the offence in the name; secondly, I will examine whether every Altar induceth a sacrifice; thirdly, whether the sacrifice superinduceth the sinne of Idolatry; fourthly, I will set be∣fore you severall instances of the excellen∣cies of Gods House to bring us in love with it; fiftly, give directions to avoid danger; and this I am forced to fixe before my Sermon to make it more acceptable in the reading. I know it is not all one to Preach in a Pulpit, and speake out of a Presse, my desire is to make way by a Preface, that no prejudice may re∣maine in a short Sermon, to say it was Preached indeede, but nothing proved. I am to take my leave of you, and know not whether I shall give you thankes for that you have brought me upon the stage, or say I should have thanked you more to have buried all this in my study. Your thankes and mine are to be alike. How∣soever
I will thinke you meant me well, and for that I thanke you, and rest, and remaine.

