



GRateful testimo∣nies of thanke∣fulnes and loue are both Chri∣stian

and commendable; and exemplified by Ioh. 11. 3. 5. 35. 36. Christ himselfe, by S. Paul, Ro 16. 4. 2. Tim 1. 16. 17. 18. and other most excellent instru∣mentsIngratum fi dixeris, sce∣lestum dixe∣ri. in the Church of Christ. This considerati∣on did (as it were) kindle the cole, and excite mine affections, to combine you both in this one significati∣on of my thankful remem∣brance: you are ancient and kinde friends in fayth and loue, and in the fellowship of that famous Society of S. Iohns Colledge in Cam∣bridge; and trained vp (ab originibus) in one Nurcery

of good literature in the Northern-parts, happily founden by Maister doctor Lupton, in the Towne of Sedberge, his owne natiue soile; from whence haue beene transplanted, and in due time, many haue sprung vp, and so become goodly fruitfull plants, and some Cedar-trees, in the Church of England: my selfe likewise was brought vp successiuely in the same Schoole, and, after, vn∣der your wings and com∣fortable Tuitions in the same worthy Vetus ver∣bum; Illa , to∣tiu è O∣raum . Colledge,

whereof I was an vn∣worthy member, and doe blesse GOD that euer I knew the walles thereof: And withall, in retalia∣tion of dutie, so long as I liue, I will instantly and ioyntly pray, as Moses wished to Ioseph (and his seed) That Deu. 33. 16. the good will of him that dwelt in the bush, may come both vppon it and you. My mediocri∣tie in any seruice for Gods Church (if there bee any in mee) is totallie your owne: and therefore I will verie ioyfully and

cheerefully by allusion, or rather by a little inuer∣sion, borrow leaue, and tender this my gratefull testimonie, with that forme of words, where∣with P. Orosius did dedi∣cate his Storie to Saint Au∣gustine, his Maister and Tutor; Totum (quod in me) vestrum sit, quod a vobis ad vos redit; or as Car∣neades Cyrenaeus thankeful∣lie protested of Chrysippus (one of Zeno his disciples) a most Si apud Dios Dia∣lectica a∣retur, nn temerè alia esset, quàm quae a Chry∣sippo inuenta uit. acute Philoso∣pher, after the diligent rea∣ding of his bookes, which

were in number 75. as some report, Si Chrysip∣pus nòn esset, ego nòn essem, I was yours when I was but a Neophyte; and now by the grace of GOD I am that I am; and am still yours, and doe wish hear∣tily, that I might become (being now hoare-headed) as the Germaine Sonne of such shining and burning lights in the Church of GOD, whose giftes and labours are condignelie of note, and price in the harts of many.
I haue englished these

Treatises of that graue and learned Diuine, Mai∣ster Hierome Zanchius; and in this regard I tooke them in hand, for that in Not vn∣like to that  (whereof Athaneus lib. 11.) for varietie and vse. Argument and mat∣ter they are exceeding ef∣fectuall, befitting this sinfull and sottish Age, or rather this degenerating downefall of all sorts of men. They are fruitfull in many considerations; to preuent curiositie; to abandon securitie; to rowze vp the drowsie Christian; to detect the Tempori∣zer; to kindle zeale; to

worke vigilancie; to en∣force repentance; to mi∣nister consolation; to teach the wise; to hearten the weake; to confirme faith and hope of Heauen and Happinesse; to dant vn∣godlinesse; in such sort as hee that runneth may read in capitall letters, and hee that readeth with iudge∣ment and conscience, may finde singular edification.
When I had made an end, I resolued in this kinde to salute you both; which, as it commeth with an honest heart, so

I perswaded my selfe it would bee accepted with the right hand. I pray you censure; and, if there bee no let, yeeld your ap∣probation. Of you twaine I haue iust cause to vouch, as Maister I. Caluin some∣timePrae▪ in E∣pist. ad Rom. writ vppon the like occasion to Simon Grynaeus, (two eminent Diuines in the care of Gods Church) Quorum iudicio si omnes plu∣rimum iure deferant, ego ni∣hil non deferre debeo. And so remaining yours et ani∣mo & vsu; I doe recom∣mend you both, and your

godly endeuours for the furtheranc of the Gos∣pell of Christ, to his most gracious and aboundant blessing, for his great Name sake.
Amen.
Hougham cum Maston. Maij 20. 1611.

