


TRue it is (Gra: and Reuerend) I may say with Barrd,Bern. serm. 30. in Cantic. Quod Animarum susceperim curam, quimeam non suffi∣cerem custodire: I tooke vppon me the cure of Soules, before I was suffi∣cient to watch ouer mine owne. And with Ambrose may further say,Ambr. offic. lib. 1. cap. 1 Factum est vt pri docere inciperem quam dis∣cere. It is come to passe, that I begunne to teach, before I had beene taught. For howsoeuer I had some generall knowlege of Diuinitie (as sometimes Moses had of Canaan, from the top of Mount Nebo;) yet farre enough was I from that particular distinct knowledge, whereby I should haue seated my selfe and others ecclesiastically in our land of Rest.
And whereas in my first view of Religion, much stirre a∣rose about Ecclesiastike forme of ministerie and ministration: and the present established forme being of many (otherwise zealous) proclaimed by word and writing for Anti-christian, and seuerall partes thereof to be direct markes of the Beast, whereas indeede that Reuelation-beast hath rather his chara∣cter, than Characters, marke than markes: I hereupon (be∣leeuing such conclusions) departed the land in the yeare of our

Lord one thousand fiue hundred ninety three, as willing to put in practise that which others had taught mee. And so I wan∣dred to and fro with Salomons bird remoued from her nest, till the yeare 1598. wherein it pleased God to let me see the false∣hood of doctrine, which others had taught, and I (in my sin) had swallowed.
Hereupon I returned from beyond sea, purposing (by rea∣son of my former ouersight) to betake my selfe to some other sot of study.By my Lord Andersons suite to his Grace of Can∣terbury. But then receiuing from some of chiefe place some meanes of incoragement in my Ministeriall function. I since that, haue laboured as I might, and as my giftes could a∣foode, in repairing the walles of Ierushalem, the praise of the whole earth. But, as neuer yet I could want a crosse, so (not Angustines tria cappa cásta,Aug. de gram∣matica libr. . three wicked Speaking of Kornelius Slla Korneius Cin∣na, and Korne∣lius Lentulus. Kaes, but) Pipurè tumens, some prowde swelling Pees, they haue labored to make mee, my Sermons, and writings, nothing amongst their fan∣tasticke and bewitched disciples. For they haue iudged, that if I were held for somewhat, then their ouer-much sparsed cop∣pr would be called in, and their fancies made plaine vnto all men. Indeede, for a man to speake of experience, it woundeth right deep: but let the truth cut me, and cut them; forwards it must, fantasticke Dagons must fall: and disciples must be brought from man to God, from Ihn Baptist to Iesus: for, Be∣holde, hee is the Lambe of God that takes away the sinnes of the world. Some part of my latter labours I heere present, the sub∣stance of certaine Sermons vpon Salomon his Song of Songs, preached in our honourable cittie of London. A Scripture ex∣treamely flowted of Machles-villaines (I might say, Machiuil∣laines) blinde Heretiques and fleshly Humorists, that sauor not the things of God: and therefore the rather haue I hand∣led it, and now offer to publish it: that so any one running by (specially staying by, and surueying it) he may (as in great capitall Letters) see, and reade the sd wisdome of God. The very light that enters here through my little casemens, will put to chase the creking Bats, and staring Owles that abhorre day light: how much more should they be chased and cru∣shed, if some of you (to whom God hath concredited much

varietie of learning) shoulde open the eie-lids of this morning, set this Temples great doores patent, and fil euery chinke with Iehouahs glorie.
Censura est magistra vitae & modestiae.Pomponius Laetus de legib. Correction (saith Pom∣ponius) is the Mistris of life and modesty; and lacke of due cen∣sure, is cause of many an immodest life, of the life of Atheisme. Licinius is said to haue held learning the commonwealths rats-bane: and were not many amongst vs so minded, they would not labor the ouerthrowe of Vniuersities, the impouerishing of the Ministerie, for the lifting vp of Iacke Straw. It remaineth that all of vs do vse our strengths seuerally and ioyntly, for the vphold of good literature, literature the sinowes of our com∣monwealth, the lamp of our Church, the life of our soule. Salo∣mon so iudged, when he begd Wisdom before Wealth, before long life, before power to auenge. From them I turne my quill, and vnto him let vs tune and turne our eares, who rauished in spirite, doth first entitle, aud then sing forth his Song of Songs. But to the learned I must first insert a Praeface.
Valete.
