


To the ryght worshipful, and my sin∣guler good Maister, syr Thomas Spek knyght, one of the gentilmen, of the kynges maiesties most honou∣rable privy chambre, your most boū∣den seruaunte to commaunde at all tymes, Ihon Case wysheth wor∣shyppe, healthe, and prospe∣ritie, wyth encrease of vertue.
Considerynge the du∣ty and seruice whyche I owe to youre good mastershyppe, I have no lesse then iust cause wyth chearfull & rea∣dy herte, to offer the same vnto you. As well for that youre maistershyppe hath not onely shewed manifold beni∣fites to my poore frendes, but also vnto me, beynge one among al other left able to acquite any parte of youre goodnes, my power and habilitie be∣ynge, smalle, myne herte and mynde

beynge readye. In token whereof I haue dedicated thys little boke vnto your maistershyppes name, desiering you accordynge to youre accustomed gentlenesse to take the same in good parte, and also for a testimonye, that if I were able by anye other meane to gratifye youre maistershyppe, that I woulde be as ready as any manne lyuyng. The copye of thys boke was deliuered me by a frende of myne be∣ynge sometyme seruaunte vnto mai∣ster Thomas Sterneholde, whereby it is to be coniectured, that the same were putte in metre by hym, yet not so parfectly perused, by reasō of sodaine deathe, as perchaunce he would haue done, if he hadde longer lyued. Not∣wythstandynge, I truste your master¦shyppe nor any other shall thynke thē worthy to lye in a corner, and neuer to appeare abrode. In hope whereof I haue caused the same to be prynted, & haue dedicated the same vnto you,

as the fyrste fruites of my good wyll, towardes your maistershippe. Thus desierynge God to prospere you in al wor∣shippe & encrese of vertue.
¶ Your good maistershyps most humble seruaunt at al times to commaunde Iohn Case.
DO al your dedes wt good aduice cast in your myndes alwayes the end
Wit bought is of to dere aprice, the tried trust take as your frend.
For frendes I fynd there be but two, of countenaunce & of effect:
Of the one sorte there are inoughe, but fewe bene of the other sect.
Also beware the venune swete, of filed wordes and flattery:
For to deceive, they be moste mete, that best can playe hypocrisie.
let wisdome rule your dede & thought
so shal your works be wiseli wrought
Who lyst to leade a quiet lyfe, who lyst to rid him self frō strife:
Geue care to me, marke what I saye, remēbre well, beare it away.
Hold backe thy tong at meate & mele speke but few words, bestow thē wel
By words the wise man yu shalt espye by words a fole thou shalt sone try.
A wiseman can his tonge make cease, a fole can neuer hold hys peace.
Who loueth reste, of wordes beware, who loueth wordes, is sure of care,
For wordes oftymes, mē haue bē shēt for silence kept, fewe theim repente.
Two eares, one tong, only thou hast, ino thinges to hear, then wordes to wast
A fole in no wise cā hi forbeare, he hath two tonges, & but one eare.
Be sure thou kepe a stedfaste brayne, lest that thy wordes put y• to paine.
Wordes wisely set are worthe much gold ye price of rashnes is sone told
If time require wordes to be had, to hold thi peace I hold the madde.
Talke onely of neadful verities, stryue not for triflyng fantasies.
With sobernes the trouthe boult out, affyrme nothing wherin is doubte.
Who to this song wil take good hede & spend no mo wordes then he nede.
Though he be a fole & haue no brain he shal bi this great wisdome gaine.
Speke while time is, els hold ye styll, words out of time oft things do spil.
Say wel, & do wel, are things twaine twise blest is he, in whō both do raine
Say well is sure a worthy thyng, of say wel great goodnes doth alway sprig
Saiwel frō dowel differ a leter saywel is good, but dowel is better.
Say wel is ruled by man somedeale, do wel to god doth wholy appeale.
Saywel is good, & doth many please do wel is better, & doth the world ease
Saiwel cause mani to scripture cleue for lack of dowel, they quickly leue.
If saiwel & dowel, wer ioind in fraim al were wel & wōne, gote were ye game
Say wel in daunger of death is cold do wel is earnest, and wōderous bold
When say wel for feare doth tremble and quake,
Do well is oconde, and good cheare doth make.
Finis.
