


THE Law promisseth (G. P). all bles∣sing
of this world, &, when this ear∣thly
house of tabernacle is dissolved, a buil¦ding
from God everlasting, yf we kepe it:
But without any token that men wold ke∣pe
it, breaking upon breaking is foretold:
& eight and twenty fold punishmentes,
until at the last Iudah should lose their
Land and be seaventy yeares in the Land
of Nemrod: wher they might behold the
wicked building: which bred confusion of
tongues: and which should end the tōgue
of Adam from comon use. VVhen the first
yere of this captivitie was beginning: Iere∣mie
penned a forme of lamentatiōs: shew∣ing

mans misery to the full. and the roo∣ting
out of Salomons howse, which from
Roboam was Ammonitish: and from O∣chozias
was Achabish: and was often nere
rooting out. that men might better be∣leve
it should wholy decay: and loke unto
the family of Christ the sonne of Nathan
Salomons brother. The Godly in capti∣uity,
as Daniel, who stopped the mouth
of Liones, and Ananias, Misael, with Asa¦rias,
who quenched the force of fyre, were
humbled by these Lamentationes to be∣hold
the dayes of Christ. And presently
from theyr begining Daniel beginneth
his captiuity: as a witness to Ieremies
trueth; and sheweth how God in sorowes
advaunced him to be welthier then migh∣ty
Kinges; and contrived the Kingdomes
which thence should afflict faithfull Iu∣dahs
religion, vnto the forme of one mās
body: and distinct in matter, as Iudahs zea∣le,
or relenting wold be. Ieremyes Lamen∣tations
I have set over into our tongue;
with care to set forth, so nere as our speach

could, the oratorious bravery of his
wordes. But all men, yea all Grekes,
though theyr learning & eloquence were
powred into one head, wold come no∣thing
nere his heavenly gaynesse. They
must lerne his owne language that wold
fill theyr eares with those soundes of Cha¦naan.
Besides his translation, I have shew∣ed
his meaning so far as I demed nede was;
for his conferēce with the other holy wor¦kes.
And him I joyned to Koheleth,. Al∣so
I finished that work which was sent o∣ver
to your G. in Ebrew and Latin which
hādleth Davids Families & Daniels sūme.
That I have also turned into mo lāguages;
as conteyning an explication of comon
Christianity. These I laboured, that your
G. might by ripe yeres, be ripe in the know
ledg of God.

