



THE Prophet Nathan (right H.2. Sam. 7.14.) told Dauid of a sonne that should build a temple vnto God, and sit vpon a throne for euer: touching whom, as Daniel penneth all his booke which I present vn∣to your Lordships, I request your pacience to iudge by a short summe▪ what vse my explicatiō may haue in our Church and state. That speech of Nathans was commonly vnderstood of Salomon: but indeede belōgeth more vnto his brother1. Chron. 3.5 Luke. 3.31. Nathan to whom Dauid gaue the Prophets name▪ that by it the godly might see from what line he should come, which al∣wayes sate on the right hand of the father. And that the Elder sonne of Bathsheba, for whom Dauid made the most heauenly Psalme of repētance,Psal. 51. should not want his dignitie, God gaue him praerogatiues verie fit to allure the world vnto higher matters. He built by Gods commaundement a temple of Ma∣sons worke: & sate after a sort (in Gods speech,1. Chr. 29.23) vp∣on

the throne of the Eternall.1. King. 9.6. Yet God spake vnto him for the people, and he vnto God before the peo∣ple,1. King. 8.47.
wordes touching that his kingdome should not stand.Eccl. 1. And in his whole booke that teacheth how all things vnder the sunne are vanitie, the whole drift is to expoūd the truth of the promised throne. VVhen his line should end in Ie-Choniah, the Eter∣nall Iah sweareth, that if Choniah were a signet v∣pō his finger he would plucke him thence and pluckt his name from the kings: Iah & Choniah made the kings name. and preacheth, ô earth, earth, earth, write him childlesse: for none of his seede shall sit vpon Dauids throne. Him Nebuchad∣nezar kept in prison 37. y, and ouerthrew Salomons kingdome and temple,2. King. 25.27 with all the implements: that Iudah should looke to the other house of Dauid, for the true throne. Then Ierusalem was to be taught a new, in what sort they should see to peace. For them the booke of Daniel is a Commētary handling prin∣cipal points of their Chap. 1. & 9. seuentie yeares thraldome: & seuen times that space vnto Christ his ascention, to reigne in the house of Dauid for euer:Chap. 7. who destroy∣eth vtterly as with a floud Citie and tēple: to shew that such outward things of mans worke could not be fit for to be meant in the most glorious promise vnto Dauid. So Ierusalem surprised by the Chaldeā, and razed by the Romane, is the limites of his story. For the middle space he hādled certaine principall heads, touching Zorobabels people, and the enemies. Zorobabel was the onely of Nathan that bare rule: and that, to build a temple: and to receaue the pro∣mise

of Christ, as in Ag. 2. Then his familie hath an expresse declaration what throne belongeth vnto them.Chap. 7. For they are termed the Sainctes of the high Trinitie: who shall possesse a kingdome for euer, yea for euer and euer. And Daniel sheweth thrones set vp, & one like the sonne of man comming into the world, and againe, ascending vnto the king euerla∣sting, and reigning aey ouer all nations. And this much is the summe of their comfort. Touching the kingdome: he nameth the nations that should suc∣cessiuely take it from thē with open iniurie to their Religion. The Chaldeans had begun.Alexāders iniurie was in that the Priests for one yeare should name their sonnes Alexanders: & all Iudah should take their dates from his raigne, & he their Empe∣rour would be a God. The Persians cōquering them should continue. Next Great Ale∣xander. So interchangeably, the Seleucidae and La∣gidae, vnto ten tyrannical kings. But afterwardes they should be weakened: that Daniels people might hold their own kingdome. He nameth the Romanes: but not as enemies here, vnto their Religion: yet toucheth their comming vp: that all might know by what nation Christ should be kild: when by his birth time the fourth kingdome should fall through the Romanes. And they should be the second Baby∣lon to Ierusalem. But seeing they medled not with the Iewes, vntill they called for their helpe: & that, when the Machabees had vsurped long a kingdome against Iacobs will, no lesse enemies to Zorobabels house then the others (as their familie perished a∣like vtterly:) so the seueritie of God was not to pro∣phecie a comfort against the Iewes calamities, cal∣led for by their own prophanesse, & as it were, open

request. For Caesar and Pompey were called into par∣taking by striuing Machabees: and before had made league and friendship with Iudah Therefore com∣forts in such dealings might not be sent frō heauē. The plainnesse of Daniel is great:Daniels plainnesse. telling of matters that all the world would note. Strabo knew Nebu∣chadnezars greatnes:In Theoph. Berosus better.Euseb. 9. Abydenus toucheth his propheticall traunce: as hearing of that his Proclamation or Epistle sent vnto all the world. Cyrus Conquest of Babel all nations knew: Xerxes fall was more in speech & Alexāders stories better knowen in most people then their owne: his victo∣ries, ambition of Godhead, quick death, and ruine of familie. And againe his Captaines partitions of spoyles: their falling to foure chiefe kingdomes: and two of them principall, Syria and Aegypt, comming vnto perpetuall strife among them selues: these hea∣thē obserued: who knew likewise the strāge successe of Ptolemie Lagidas:Diod lib. 18. and 19. Pausan. in Attic. the stranger of Seleucus Ni∣cator: their league in friendship: their sonnes fal∣ling out: their seeking atonement by that Mariage of Berenice:App. in Syri. their greater warres vpon her death: the ouerrunning of Syria, to win the syrname :Polyb. 5. a further reuenge in Philopators victory. Againe the other sides conquests to syrname Antio∣chus great:Appian. Strabo. his Cleopatras mariage with Ptolemie: his inuading Grece▪ his fall by Rome his Church rob∣bing: his two sonnes Church robbing: their three extraordinarie deathes: these matters be most fa∣mous amōg the heathē: And Antiochus Epiphanes

subtiltie in ouerreaching his brother and two ne∣phewes: his comming vp in Syria: his three inuasiōs of Aegypt:Tacitus. his endeuour and crueltie to haue extin∣guished Iudahs Religiō: these matters, are the most famous of any in heathen stories.Macrob. 2. VVhen we adde vnto them the iest of Augustus, how it was better to be Herods hog then his sonne:Aegl. Sutonius. Tacitus. because of his slaugh∣ter at our Lordes birth: and Vergils harping at a child comming from heauen, noysed doubtlesse by Iewes: and the expectation of all the East of a king arising then to rule all the world: and Tacitus for Christ, Pilate, and Christians: & lastly the manifold writers of Ierusalems fall the last part: then we shal haue open, all the humane points of Daniels booke. VVhen we ioyne from Diuinitie storie Nathans prophecie for Nathan:Ben Arama vpon Exod. Salomons Eldership in a touch of throne and Temple: the threefold charge to write Iechonias childlesse:Ierem. 22. the counsell of God in the kingdomes fall: the blessed title of Nathans house: the high Sainctes and kings for euer:Dan. 7. the thrones, one for God, and an other for the R. Akiba. vpon Dan. 7: in Sanedrin.  sonne of Dauid: the setting vp of kingdomes to deale with Dauids throne, to take notice of their Religion: the time of a kingdome eternall prefixed in a most plaine speech long before, and made famous by 120.Dan▪ 9.24. Dan. 6. Extra. 1.
nations paying Iuda a subsidie to returne: and our Lordes mediation from the Gospell: this being done Daniels matters wilbe all knowen vnto vs. The tongues which he vseth may somewhat trouble vs: why he should write the greater part of his booke

in Chaldie, and the same matter againe in Ebrew: and why his Ebrew hath affected peculiaritie of phrases: yet reasons sensible may soone be rendred. The Chaldie tongue was both knowē to his natiō, & should soone be their vsuall, whē they had lost their owne in Babylon. Besides the North, East, South Dialectes, Syriaque, Arabique, Aethiopian were neare the Chaldie: so that with a little paynes they might learne it. Now it was fit for Dauids throne ruling all the world, to be penned into the largest language of the world, and then most florishing. So he sheweth: that God setteth vp kingdomes, and putteth down kingdomes: and how a kingdome frō heauē stādeth for euer. This he teacheth in Chaldie: as also the state of the world to come: neuer shewed so clearely before. He declareth how the faithles ty∣rants perish for euer: and Iuda raigneth by Christ: as by him also all nations do. VVhē his visions name the oppressours: and his nation the oppressed, then he writeth in Ebrew, and prophetique phrases knowen onely to his learned brethren. The summe of him is this: and his phrase is thus. I thinke my commenta∣tions vpon him somewhat profitable to the good of our state. Them I commend to your L L. to be regarded according to the sage honour of her M. gouernement.

