



DRead Soueraigne, these my la∣bours being in the Presse, beholde Fames Heraulde double trumpe∣ted (the first as Sables, the second as Argent) doth in our Cities streetes sound out a twofold Accent. The blacke-one drew out Basse-larg notes, declaring the Sun-set of our late great Empresse (whose Memoriall be blessed amongst Women.) And this was right sad and dolefull.
From the Siluerie-one, twirled Tones variable of much glee and solace. The first humbled my soule: the second lift it vp. Betweene them both, I was as deuided: weeping, and reioycing: reioycing, and weeping. Wherevpon I remembred, how men (of my vocation specially) are called to be Doues: whose note is glad-sad∣nes and sad-gladnes.
Habel is vanished without seed. Seth is set in Habels

roome: in whom we hope a direct continuance of Seed vnll Christes last Accesse; euen as S. Luke manifesteth Adams seed vntill Christes first Aduent. The Lyon passant, so turned into the Lyon sedent: and sit he last for euer, a Defendour of the Gospell and an Extirper of Ro∣manisme: countenauncing good, and correcting euill, according to the Hieroglyphike Scepter and Sword, the true Insignes of Iehouahs qualification.
Henrie the eight (like a sacramentall eight-day) did cut off the fore-skin of our Corruption. Edward succeeding, reformed much. Then (the fire Paren-thesis o Mary past ouer) our late Deborah Eli-shebet, added to the Fa∣ther and Brothers blessing. It remayneth, that your Highnesse double our Happinesse, as the great GOD o Heauen and Earth hath doubled your King-ship. To whom more is concredited, more is required of such by naturall Proportion. And herein your Royall care will tender:

1 That no one possesse a Pastorall-place, to whom Christ hath not first sayd, Ephphata.
2 That no Leuj may sit at any Receipt of Custome, reaping where he sowes not.
3 That Anah may find-out no Mules in our Epis∣copall fieldes.
4 That Dionysius Atheos may not pill any part of the Common-wealth: much lesse, powle the Church.
5 That Marchants may not buy and sell in the Tem∣ple: much lesse, set the Temple it selfe to ale.
6 That these may not be Censurers of Synne, that liue onely by Synne.
7 That none be set in Eminent-places, who are knowen to be Rhomishly addicted.
8 That Great-flyes may be helde in Nets, so well as the small-one in Cobwebs.
9 That none may be a Mono-polist, which bringes not that gaine to the Monarch.
10 That Poore-men may haue their Causes tryed, without damnable Demurres.
11 That Roscius may not make a standing-occupation of Stage-mumpings and mowings.
12 Ac, vt quid lepidiùs dicam; That the Feminine-gendr may no longer (against all Rule) be in state more worthy then the Masculine by carying all the Cases (Singular, Duall & Plurall, Greeklike) on her backe; whilest the Masculine is contented with the Singular, Accusatiuo carens.

Iis{que} constitutis, sufficit mihi quod haectenus vixi. Plura (minimè{que} baec priuata) non quaero: Dixi. And in this doing, your Highnesse shalbe rewarded of the Highest.
Petrus Nannius Alcmarianus thought he fitted the Time well, in dedicatng his Paraphrasis and Scholia on Salomons Sog, to Spaines Philip and our English Mary, vpon their time of Mariage. A better mariage now; when in Englands vnion with Scotland, we may behold (as it were) a new Coniuction of the White and Red-roses, for making one Nose gay. This naturall vnion, doth strongly call for our Churches vnion moe with Christ: For, what by Atheisme and Romanisme, ouer-much spreading of late yeeres, out Iob was brought welny to the Ash-heape: his Maladies being man, and the sy∣newes-state dissolution, and distraction of members.
Great Alexander vpon his Conquest, is sayd, to en∣ioyne Iudahs Leuites to circumcise their Sonnes by the name of Alexander, as a memoriall of his Hghesse.

Your Ma. will not (neither shall it need) that your Le∣uites be so enioyned. The Sonnes of our studies, we vo∣luntarily deuoue to your Gr. protection: as who both can and will defende the trueth of sacred Learning. I pre (Deo{que} volente) sequemur.
My Booke being in the Prese, before great Israels first-name was proclaymed Head of our Tribes, the seuerall pattes thereof had so their seuerall Dedications: All which Particulars, I now reduce to be Marshalled vnder your Highnes, as the Integrall. For where the King is Genus, the Subiectes be but Species.
Vnto this attempt I haue been made the bolder, for that it pleased God in Anno Di. 1595. to lende vnto me your Maiesties royall hand, for authorising certaine Bibles Briefe. Sommon to Domes day. Sinners sleepe & Resurrectiō. Tables of Houshold go∣uernment. my poore Writings in Scotland to the Preste. From that time, much duetie: but hencefoorth, all duetie (as of creature to creature) is owing to your sacred Selfe (and Seed) as vnto GOD his Great and Gracious Liuetenant ouer vs. Whom God blesse for euer.

