



I Doubt not (Right Honourable) but you well vnderstand the Romanists E∣quiuocations (for so their false-packing is of some W. at. and his fellowes. Secular Priests termed in print) not making conscience (many schollers of them) how deepely they lie, so it may bring present aduantage. Yea, an oth is nothing with such, hauing their Match-diuell euasions, as sometimes had their Hollinshed i Henr. 8. . 30. Obseruant Frier Forest. Who comming to be burnt for teaching people in secret, how king Henry was not head of the Church in his do∣minions, and then put in minde how he had taken an oth to the contrary, he answered, that hee tooke the oth with his out∣ward man, & that his inward-man neuer consented. These fellowes are like to one (of whom Cicero writeth) who hauing taken truce with his enemy for thirtie dayes, did in the night sea∣son inuade his enemies land, saying: that The truce was taken for dayes, not for nights.
Hence it groweth, they will tell plaine people how Christ saide

Masse, and so the Apostles after: as if that Masse (indigesta{que} moles heape of riffe-raffe) were not onely so ancient, but had al∣so Christ for the Authour. But a Scholler can send them to their Infinite-booke containing eight and twenty huge Volumes, dedi∣cated to their Pope Greg. the thirteene, comprising Tracts vtri∣us{que} juris,Tom. 1. lib. Aymari Riual∣li. fol. 45. gathered by Francis Zilettus, where their Record runnes thus: A Petro vltra, &c. Besides other Institutes, we haue from Peter a part of the ordained Masse. For after the consecration introduced of Christ, he vsed (which our Priests now vse) that prayer Pater noster. But Celestine gaue the Masses Introit. Gregor. found out the Kyrie eleyson. The∣lophorus the Gloria in excelsis deo. The Collations were inuented by Gelasius the first: and the Epistle and Ghospel were added to the Masse by Ierome. The Alelujah was taken out of the Church of Ierushalem; and the Creede from the Nicen councell. Pelagius found out the Commemoration of the dead: and Leo the third introduced Frankin∣sence. We haue the kissing of the Pax from Innocentius the first: but the singing of Agnus Dei was instituted by Ser∣gius, &c. As thus they make their Masses beginning more Antient then it is by their owne Record: so, the same was (as appeareth) a long time raking into one. Not a few hundred yeares was that Beggers cloke patched togither.
They will make a publike brag of their Papall succession, and yet know that it is vndefined who succeeded Peter. Some of them saying Linus, some Clemens, and some they know not what. Wherewith we can put them in minde, how a great sort of their Popes were Distinct 65. capite Hosius. sonnes, begotten by Subdeacons, Deacons, Priests. Who by an ordinance of their Apostaticall Church must needes be Bastards: and so in their vnderstanding of Deu. 23.2. they must haue beene vncapable of all Ecclesiasticall function, specially of Popeship. Though Parentall vices must not be imputed to

Children (for thereby they would euade, abusing Augustine therein) yet Children in ciuill policie haue beene by lawe diuine and humane disinherited, and made vncapable of many exter∣nall priuiledges, by reason of Parents vices. And by this rule it is, that our late malcontented Seculars (assuming Ro. Parsons the Iesuite to be a Bastard) do vrge his incapabilitie of Church-function. If such (in the censure of their owne lawes) haue beene the Succeeders (a Dozen whereof In a Tract of Min. mar∣riag. Doctor Barnes from their owne writings hath produced) how then, not to touch their many PapallTheir Gene∣brard noteth in his chron. 23. schismes (sundry hold∣ing many yeeres) be∣tweene the yeare 254 and 1439.schismes, can they prooue their bragged succession? Here∣withall we may put them in minde of Pope Ioane (who brought forth her Babie in the open-streete betweene Theatrum Colossae and S. Clements Church) whereof arose their tenne Pees.
Penes portam Petri & Pauli, peperit Papa, pater patriae, paruum puerum. Graced (as Chronica compendiosa vt∣tereth) with a Diuells speach, crying out in a Consistorie:
Papa pater patrum, Papissae pandito partum. For au∣thoritie of which Historie we haue writers many, against whom they cannot (without blushing) except: as, Polycronicon, Caxton, Volateran, Nauclerus, Marianus Scotus, Marti∣nus Polonus, Functius, Sabellicus, Sigibertus Gembla∣cens. Laonicus Chalcondila, Platina, Mare Historiarum, Chronica compendiosa, &c. This standing so: their Succes∣sion will prooue but doubtfull, schismaticall, whorish. This they know well inough, but with the simple they must equiuocate and iuggle for aduantage.
They will tell the simple, how all translations of the Bible (ex∣cepting their Latine-one) are false and intollerable. Whereas, what knowledge soeuer they haue of ours, their schollers know, how our learned-men can produce many hundreds of grose er∣rours, from their Dunsticall latine-one, For this, see their Santis Pagnin in prae∣fat. ad Clem. 7. & their Driedo l. 2. c. 1. de ca∣talog scriptur. fasly termed Ieroms. To giue an vngainesayable touch: in Ezra. 9.8. for paxillus,

they reade paxillius. In Prou. 16.11. they reade lapides secu∣li for sacculi, In Psal. 133.16. they reade, viduam ejus bene∣dicam for victum: and in Luke 15.8. euertit domum she o∣uerthrew the house: for euerrit she swept the house: with many such Quid for Quos.
If Bellarmine and such say, that this hath come to passe through drowsinesse or ignorance of their Monks, who first writte them (nam Monacho, quis indoctior?) how comes it to passe, that they haue printed them estsoones without correction? Is i, because they would be constant, although (God knowes) in euill? But not to speake of such Monkish errours: how haps there is such warre betweene two of their Popes (Sixtus quintus and Cle∣mens octauus) Bellum papa∣le per Th. Iames shewes this. either of them hauing their Edition, with ( know not) how many thousand variations: and whether of the Popes copies will they follow? Arias Montanus in his preface to the Interlinear Bible, will tell them how the latine translation faede corrumpitur, is filthily corrupted. Hereupon it is; that not onely the two Popes laboured to mende it, but also, that Pagnin leaueth the old latine for following the Hebrue and Greeke: as Arias after him, doth also thousand of times leaue him, for fol∣lowing the originall more nerely.Hieronym. ad Suniam: & habetur dist. 9. Aug. de doctr. Chrst, et ep. 19 And vnto the Originall, hee teacheth vs to runne in all difficultie: as was of yore the sacred aduise of Ierome and Augustine. In the meane time I dare say, that God his prouidence hath so ouerwatched this Bible (held in his right hand, Reuelat. chapt. 5.) as vnworthy he is of any Pastorall place, that from the corruptest translation is not able, to hold our Christian doctrine against all Romish Pagan-inuen∣tions.
With these Equiuocatours I sometimes in the succeeding Treatise (so well as in the former) doe conflict: maintaining the ancient doctrine of Faith against their Romish innouations. A∣gainst this (I doubt not) some of that Faction will kicke, in my

natiue country: which somewhat more then a yeare since coulde like of a violent hand in secret, for bastonadoing the Authour. For a Religion it is, that cannot be defended so well with words as swords: nor so easly by open plaine dealing, as by secret treat∣cheries and publike Equiuocations. Which considerations had, I the rather haue (in this particular Dedication) fled to him that Can; and for holy respect I feare not, Will, oth accept and pa∣tronize qualiacunque sunt these my poore labours. 

