


Most excellent Princesse
I May faile in Vulger Titles; But, in my valuation of your heroïcal Virtues, I cannot be deceaved. Therfor, I am the less curious in common Attri∣butes. For, those Accōplish∣ments, which in my repute, are your greatest glorie, are well manifest in that, which is the greatest temporall honour; even in those Virtues, which have conquered a Kingdome for you, in the harts of many millions of people: And procured you thousands of affectionate ser∣vants (who never sawe your Majestive) Not only in your owne Territories, and in the Do∣minions of your Freinds; But, in the Citties

& Kingdomes of your Enimies also: And, they who are vnwilling to confesse this, to give you honour; have honored you, in discovering it by their envy.
Among those, who are in Affection, your Ma.ties loyall servants, I am one: and, in my owne Country, great multitudes have tooke no∣tise of a speciall Obligation, which I had, above many others, to honor & serve you. For, I do hereby most humbly, & thanck∣fully acknowledge; that, when my over-forward Muse first fiutterd out of her neast, Shee ob∣tained the preservation of her endangered Li∣bertie, by your gratious favour: and perhaps, escaped also, thereby, that Pinioninge, which would have marred her flieng forth, for ever after.
Which extraordinary Clemencie (in so great a Princesse, to a person so vndeservinge) did not only much magnify your noblenes, in the opinion of others, but so chayned my hart also, to the love of your princely Goodnes; that (all∣though I was hitherto compelled to smother my vnprofitable thanckfulnes in my breast, be∣cause I wanted meanes to discover it according to my desires) I have eversince, bene spiritual∣ly present with your Ma.tie (& with God, for

you, by my Prayers) in all your Afflictions, & Exaltations. And, faine I would have effec∣ted something, which might have witnessed, that I had a Hart, though not a Fortune, to be serviceable in the best manner.
My Muse, was the hopefull st meanes I had of this ambition; & by her, I, awhile promised myself, some healp. But (after I came to bet∣ter vnderstanding) I preceaved, her over-ear∣ly Flights into the world, had (in her prime growth) so spent those tymes of opportunity whereby she should have enabled her self, for brave Attempts; that shee could never be strong enough, to make wing halfe so high as my Desires.
Yet, by your Ma.ties royall Father, of blessed Memorie (who, a litle before his death, was plea∣sed to honour mee with his gratious respect) I was commanded to perfect a Translation of the Psalmes, which he vnderstood I had be∣gunn; & by his encouragment, I finished the same about the tyme of his Translation to a better Kingdome. Wherein, God soe enabled mee, that many have well approoved thereof; and, I, latelie resolving to make it publike (wan∣ting other Testimonie of my thanckfulnes) con∣ceived it would be no dishonour to your Ma.tie

if before the same, I convayed your beloved Name to that Nation, who so dearlie affect you.
But, when I had well considered thereon I thought it would be a very pertinent comple∣ment, so to doe. For, they were Afflictions or Deliverances from Afflictions, which were occasions of every Psalme: Therfore, none but they who have bene afflicted, cann relish the sweetnes, or vnderstand, the depth of these Raptures; And therfore also, they who come nearest in their Christian suffrings to those whome they personated, shall best feel, & vnderstand their meaning. In which (if I be not more a stranger to your Highnesse, then I thinck I am) you have bene honored aboue all the kings & princes of the world: &, in my opinion you have had more occasion to make personall Application of these Hymnes vnto your selfe, then any of them.
And, there is no shame (most excellent Princesse) in the Crosse of Christ. For, the highest honor cōsisteth not in wearing a crown; but, in a Crowne that hath many Thornes in it; & the more Thornes the more honorable. Though the sonns of men, do skoffingly turne this glory into shame, & seek after Vani∣ties;

yet, they who shall sitt nearest unto Christ Iesus in his Kingdome, must drinck deepest of his Cupp: And, your Highnes hath (in my Observation) more largly, pledged him, then many other. For, in all these Hymns (all which, are prophecies of such things as pertaine to Christ, & his Mysticall body) there are fewe passages, communicable to his Mem∣bers, but (even in my owne knowledge) your Ma. may apply them vnto your self, as a depen∣dant on him. And, God let mee not live, if I do not thinck, that more honours you, then to be Empresse of the world.
And, because it is the greatest honour to come so near, both to the Type & the Prototype, of our suffrings, as your Ma. hath done; &, to beare so many marks of the Lord Iesus. Because also, some skoffing Ismaelites have mentioned these Glories to your Dishonour; I wil to your Praise, repeat some few, out of those many which are appliable to your Ma. &, they shal be such, that most will confesse, they are the very same Afflictions, whereof (as a type of Christ) king David complained.
He, was exalted by God; &, yet, cast downe. He was annonited king, & yet enioyed not the Kingdome. He was driven

from his owne possessions, & compelled to soiourne in a forraigne Land. Kings & Rulers, were confederated against him. He, was remooved from his Kindred; & his Acquaintance were sett far off. His enimies were powrefull, & too strong for him. His adversaries were multiplied: Yea, they insulted over his calamities; & many judged his cause so bad, that they pronoun∣ced him forsaken of God. The proud, for∣ged lies against him. False witnesses layd things to his Charge which he knew not. Princes, sate & spake against him. The mighty, persecuted him without a Cause. They had almost consumed him vpon earth. They waited to destroy him. The Bands of the wicked robbed him. They spake of peace vnto him when they purposd warr. Trouble, & anguish, tooke holde vpon him: &, he was persecuted, when God had smitten him. The Vn∣godly reioiced in his Adversity; & cryed There, there, so wee would have it. He was reproched of his Neighbours. He was the scorne of fooles. The Drunckerds made songs of him. They said he was cast downe, & should never rise againe: And

many other suchlike passages, there are, which my memory confusedly retaines. In all which, (together with your Roiall Consort,) you have heene a partaker, in such measure, as Christians of inferior Degree, cannot commu∣nicate in the like Suffrings, in the same sense.
Nor are these things, only, Appliable vnto your Highnesse in an extraordinary manner; But all those consolations, Hopes, Delive∣rances, promises of Mercye, Favours en∣ioyed, Resolutions of Praise, & Thanksgi∣ving, with others of this nature, throughout the Psalms; are in a singuler manner, pertinēt also to you: & (no doubt) so applied, by your Ma: in your owne hart, as occasion is offred.
Which, when I had considered (for, your Highnes, as a glorious Member of Christ Ie∣sus, is often in my serious & retired thoughts) And, I, remenbring also, that, long since, I vowed a Pilgrimage to your Ma.tie (so soone as I could be furnished with some Presēt) I thought this my endevour would not be impertinētly pre∣sented: therefore, I thus prepared the same; &, am now come, to accomplish my Vowe. Which I humbly desire, may be acceptable to your Ma.tie I doubt not, but you often peruse this Booke in other Translations. Yet, these Meditations,

may, perhaps, occasion (either now, or hereafter) some vse or application of them, to your extraor∣dinary comfort. Howsoever; It is, in my owne esteeme, the best Iewel, that I have: and, if it were answerable to my humble Affections, it would be the richest that ever was presented to a Princesse.
But, lest my over-long Epistle become te∣dious, I will thinck, by my selfe, what, I have more to Say; cravinge pardon for thus presu∣minge, vpon my hopes of your Acceptation; and, for my conceiving it possible, that (after so many yeares) the memory of his Name should be re∣tained, with your Highnesse; who hath, in all this time, produced vnto your veiwe, no Testi∣mony that he retaines any Memoriall of the be∣nifits, which he long agoe receaved, by your fa∣vour. I distrust not, the obtaining of that which I desire; for, my hart tells mee I am thanckfull; Some live, who have heard mee professe it; God, it witnesse of it, every time I come vnto him for my owne Soul; And I am, in all that I am.

