


OF all those things in this world, which are wont amongst men to cause the greatest feare, I know not any that may be greater, or of equall compare to that of an euill intention, and secret ill meaning. And by so much truely the more, by how much it shall bee the more deepely rooted in those that are of obscure Bloud, humble Birth, and base mindes. For in such, it is vsually more forcible, and lesse corrigible. But both of them, the one and the other, are like vnto Hunters; who (taking vp some close standing shadowed ouer with boughes) lye in wait for our destruction, and euen then, after that we haue receiued our deaths wound, we are neuer awhit the neerer in discouering whence our hurt came. These are Basi∣lisks, whom if we view them first, their poyson loseth its force, and is of so much the lesse preiudice; but if they once gaine the hand of vs (by getting a kinde of dominion ouer vs) they bring vs in dan∣ger of our vtter vndoing. They are a scandall to a Common-wealth, the promoting Knaues of Innocence, and the very executioners of Vertue; against whom the wisedome of man is not of power to pre∣uaile, or able to guard it selfe. Of these kinde of men, from whose subtill gins (as traps tending to death) no person liues secure, I (for mine owne part) haue euer been more afraid then of any other beasts, how fierce or hurtfull so euer. And more especially in this present occasion, wherein a large field is laid open vnto them, where∣in they may sow the seed of their venome, calumniating mee (at

the least) with the reprochfull attribute of an ouer-bold and rash∣headed fellow, that I should presume to offer to so powerful a Prince, so poore a gift. Not considering, that this my boldnesse first grew from that necessitie, where-into their feare had put mee. For, as those Cities that are weakely fortified, meanely mann'd, and of small force for defence, haue so much the greater need of braue and wor∣thy Captaines to maintaine them, by resisting the furious violence, and sharpe assaults of their enemies: So in like manner was it need∣full for me, to helpe my selfe, and make vse of your Lordships pro∣tection, in whom, with so much splendour and glory, are made ma∣nifest to the worlds view, those three parts (Vertue, Blood, and Power) whereof true Noblenesse is composed. And because it is a peculiar propertie belonging there-unto, to fauour and protect those, who (as to a Sacred place) with-draw themselues thither for their better safety, I rest so secure vnder the shadow of your Lord∣ships protection, and rely so much vpon your noble disposition, that you stretching out the wings of your accustomed clemency, my booke shall vnder them (as Chickens vnder the Hens wing) remaine free from those that shall seeke to wrong it: And together therewith ob∣taine this happinesse, that you making that great, which in it selfe is little, admitting a poore Picaro, to become a Courtier, shall giue a being to that which had none before, a worke of such Greatnesse and Excellencie, as shall make your Lordship to appeare the more. Whose long and happy life is desired of no man more then

