



THe choice (right honorable)
whiche Luke the Euangelist
made, in dedicating this hi∣storie
of the gospel, which he
wrote to that noble mā The∣ophilus,
& which that man
of worthie memory. M. Iohn
Caluine tooke in dedicating
these his labours to the lords
of Frankeford, driueth mee to
dedicate this my small labour of translating this booke
into the English tongue, and though it is but little that I
haue done, in comparison of the labors of the other two,
and not woorth the offering to men of great estate: yet
least that I should seeme singuler in dissenting from these
two singuler instruments in the Churche of God, & that
in one and the self same booke, I haue presumed to make
bolde of your Lordships name, hoping that your H. will
not mislike to haue it witten in the forehead of this boke
with noble Theophilus & the Lords of Frankeford, spe∣cially
sith that I doe it, in testimonie of my dutifull loue
to you, for the manifolde graces of God in you, and be∣nefites
which I haue receiued from you. Men doe com∣monly
in their Epistles write either in the commendati∣on

of the worke or in the prayse of their patrone, or in
discharging of themselues of the discredite which their
enemies woulde lay vppon them: but I craue par∣don
of your honour, if in studying to bee short, I o∣mit
these thinges. For first the verye name of the go∣spell
of Iesu Christe, and then the names of Mat∣thew,
Marke, and Luke the Euangelists, and of M. Caluine
the gatherer of the Harmonie, & the writer of the Com∣mentarie,
do yeeld more credite and commendation to
the matter, then all that I can say of it all the dayes of my
life. Only this I say of M. Caluines labours here, that in
my simple iudgement it is one of the profitablest workes
for the church that euer he did write. Next for your prai¦ses,
as you like not to heare them, so I will not offend you
in setting thē down, nor giue others occasiō to cōdemne
me of flatterie. They which haue best knowen you, say,
that you began a good course in your youth, that you
witnessed a good confession in the late time of persecu∣tion,
that your constancie hath beene testified by your
troubles at home, and trauels in forraine countries: you
haue continued your profession in the midst of your dig∣nitie,
Lordships, and liuing left by your parents, and in
the seat of gouernment, wherein our Soueraigne & most
gracious Queene hath placed you, not falling a sleepe in
securitie in this so peaceable a time. My good L. continue
to the end, so shall you bee safe. I speake not this as if it
were your owne strength that hath holden you vp all this
while. But meditate somtimes, I pray you, vpon the 71.
Psalme, and pray that Lorde as Dauid did, who kept
you in your youth, that he will keepe you in your old age,
now that your head is hoare and hayres gray. And
I beseech the mighty Lord to thrust them forward which
are drawen back by their youthly affections, and to raise
vp them that fell away for feare of troubles, & to waken
those which in this quiet and calme time do sleepe in se∣curitie,
or waxe wanton with the wealth of the worlde,

that we may meete the Lord with true humilitie and ear∣nest
repentaunce, to see if hee will bee intreated to
continue his mercies towards vs, least he turn his correc∣ting
rod, which he hath so ofte shaken ouer vs, into a de∣uouring
swoord to consume vs. Of my selfe I will say
nothing, the mouthes of the wicked cānot be stopt, their
false tongues I hope shall teach me to Walke warilie, &
I haue learned, I thanke my God, to passe through good
report and through euill and to commit my selfe and my
cause to him that iudgeth right. The Lord of Lords pre∣serue
your honour in safetie, and multiply all spirituall
blessings vpon you and yours:
From Kiltehampton in
Cornewall, this 28. of Ianuarie. 1584.

