



IT IS AN OLDE SAY∣ing
(Right honourable) and
no lesse true then olde, that
faleable wines neede no iuic
bush: which prouerb impor∣teth
thus much, that thinges
which are of thē selues good
and commendable haue not
anye, at least no great neede
of commendation. If there∣fore
I shouldee with fine filed phrases, with gaye geason
woordes, with straunge examples, and notable hysto∣ries
compound some long prologue and tedious Preface,
in commendation of this most excellent work and Com∣mentarie
of that famous member, and faithfull Doctour
of Gods Church, Maister Iohn Caluine, I might cause
your Honour to suspect the fondnesse thereof: I my selfe
should seeme to doubte of the goodnesse thereof: and fi∣nally,

minister occasion to many to condemne me of fol∣ly.
Omitting therefore that which is needlesse, I discend
vnto that which is needefull: to wit, to excuse my selfe
of arrogancie, wherof some may accuse me in that I dare
presume to dedicate vnto yonr honour, this my transla∣tion,
vnto whom I am altogether vnknowen. The loade
stone as men say, writers do testifie, and experience doth
teach, hath in it selfe such power, force and vertue, that it
draweth iron vnto it, though it be farre distant: right so,
vertue doth drawe men vnto it, and the reporte thereof,
causeth men to loue those whom they haue not seene, &
to reuerence those of whō they haue only heard. Which
thing sithence it is so, there is no cause why I shoulde ei∣ther
bee accused of arrogancie, or condemned of impu∣dencie,
for approching so boldly vnto your honour, and
for suffering this my translation to appear in your name.
For your friendes confesse, and your foes cannot iustly
denie that God hath placed in your noble brest greate
aboundance of most heroicall vertues. I omit to speake
of that rare report of your vnfeigned religion which re∣foundeth
euery where, and redoundeth to your prayse.
I should be tedious, if I should set downe particulerly the
most vndoubted testimonies of your faithfulnesse to∣ward
your dread Soueraigne: I shoulde seeme to flatter if
I should extoll that godly magnanimitie wherewith the
Lord hath endued you to maintaine his truth, to defend
the Realm, to sub due those proud aspiring papists. That
great and earnest care which your honour hath alwaies
had, and euen now hath to support the poore ministers
of the word, and gospell of Iesus Christ in Gods cause, &
in good causes, hath in it selfe sufficient force, to enforce
not only mee, but all thankfull heartes by word and wri∣ting
to bewray all thankfulnesse & dutifulnesse towards
your good honor. As this, so that singuler liberalitie vsed
at all times by your Lordship towards my friends, hath

caused me in dedicating of this booke to your honour,
to testifie some part of my thankfull minde in their be∣halfe.
And heere I am to craue pardon of you, whiche I
hope I shall easily obtaine, for that I haue not behaued
my selfe finely as I might, though faithfully as I ought in
this my worke. And thus fearing prolixitie, I conclude,
praying vnto the Lorde God of heauen and earth, that
King of Kinges, and Lorde of Lordes, that he will graunt
vnto your honour, and to the rest (whom he hath placed
in the like degree of dignitie) his holy spirite, that spirite
of wisdome and vnderstanding, that you may thereby be
so directed, that all your thoughts, woordes, and workes,
may tend to the setting foorth of Gods glory, the main∣tenance
of true religion, the preseruation of the Realme.
So shall England haue wealth, be voide of woe, enioy so∣lace,
be free from sorrow, possesse plentie, not tast of po∣uertie,
inherite pleasure, and not see paine. Whiche God
graunt.

