



COnsyderynge (moost gracious Soueraigne) how lo∣uyngly, how fauourably, and how tēderly your hygh∣nesse hath taken myne infancy & rudenesse in dedica¦tynge the whole bible in Englysh to your moost noble grace. And hauyng sure experience also how benygne and gracious a mynde your hyghnes doth euer beare to all thē that in theyr callyng are wyllynge to do theyr beste: It doth euē animate & encorage me now lykewyse to vse the same audacite to¦warde your grace: Neuer intendyng nor purposynge to haue ben thus bold, yf your most noble kyndnes & princely benygnite had not forced me here vnto. This (doutles) is one of ye chefest causes why I do now with moost hūble obedience dedicate & offre this translaciō of ye new Testamēt vnto your moost royall maiestye. And to saye ye truth: I cā¦not perceaue ye contrary, but as many of vs as intende ye glory of god haue all nede to cōmytte vnto your gracious protection & defence as∣well our good doynges as our selues: Oure good doynges I meane, & not our euel workes. For yf we went aboute euel, god forbyd that we shuld seke defence at your grace. But euen our weldoynges, our good wylles & godly purposes, those wt all humble obedience must we & do submytte to your graces moost sure protectiō. For as our aduersary ye deuell walketh about lyke a roarynge lyon, & seketh whom he may de¦uoure. And as ye enemies of Christ went about to tangle hymselfe in his wordes, & to hunt somwhat out of his owne mouth: Euē so do not ye enemies of gods word ceasse yet to pycke quarels, & to seke out new occasions, how they may depraue & synistrally interprete our wel do∣ynges. And where as wt all faythfulnes we go about to make our bre∣thren (youre graces louynge subiectes) participante of the frutes of oure good wylles, they yet not regardynge what profite we wolde be glad to do them, reporte euell of vs, sklaunder vs, and saye the worste of vs: Yee they are not ashamed to affirme, that we intende to peruerte the scripture, and to condemne the commune translacion

in Latyn, whych costumably is red in the church: where as we purpose the cleane contrary. And because it greueth them that your subiectes be growen so farre in knowlege of theyr dewtye to God, to youre grace, & to theyr neghboures, theyr inwarde malyce doth breake oute in to blasphemous & vncomlye wordes, in so much that they cal your louynge & faythfull people, heretikes, new fangled fellowes, English biblers, coblers of diuinite, fellowes of the new fayth. &c. with such o∣ther vngodly sayenges.
How nedefull a thynge is it then for vs to resorte vnto the moost lawfull protection of God in youre graces suppreme and imperiall authorite vnder hym? Without the which moost lawfull defence now in these turbulent & stormy assaultes of ye wycked, we shuld be, but euē Orphanes,Psal. lxvii. and vtterly desolate of comforte. But God whom ye scrip¦ture calleth a father of the comfortles and defender of wedowes, dyd otherwyse prouyde for vs, whan he made youre grace his hye and su∣preme mynister ouer vs.
To come now to the original and fyrst occasion of this my moost humble laboure, and to declare howe lytle I haue or do intende to de∣spyse this present translatiō in Latyn (or ony other in what language so euer it be) I haue here set it forth, & the Englysh also therof, I mean the texte which cōmunly is called S. Hieroms, and is costumably red in the church. And thys (my moost gracious Soueraigne) haue I done not so much for the clamorous importunyte of euell speakers, as to satisfye the iust request of certayne youre graces faythfull subiectes. And specially to induce and instructe such as can but Englishe, & are not learned in the Latin, that in cōparynge these two textes together, they maye the better vnderstonde the one by ye other. And I doute not but such ignoraunt bodies as (hauynge cure and charge of soules) are very vnlearned in the Latyn tunge, shall trough thys smal laboure be occasioned to atteyn vnto more knowlege, and at the leest be cōstray¦ned to saye well of the thynge, whyche here tofore they haue blasphe∣med. The ignoraūce of which men yf it were not so exceadyng great, a man wolde wonder what shulde moue thē to make such importune cauillacions agaynst vs. It is to be feared, that frowardnesse and malice is myxte with theyr ignoraūce. For in as much as in our other translacions we do not followe thys olde Latyn texte word for word they crye out vpō vs: As though al were not as nye the truth to trā∣slate the scripture out of other languages, as to turne it out of the La¦tyn. Or as though the holy goost were not the authoure of his scrip∣ture aswell in the Hebrue, Greke, French, Dutche, and in Englysh, as in Latyn. The scripture & worde of God is truly to euery Christē

man of lyke worthynesse and authorite, in what language so euer the holy goost speaketh it. And therfore am I, and wyl be whyle I lyue (vn¦der youre moost gracious fauoure and correction) alwaye wyllynge and ready to do my best aswell in one translation, as in another. Now as cōcernynge thys present text in Latyn, for asmuch as it hath bene and is yet so greatly corrupt, as I thynke none other translaciō is, it were a godly & gracious dede, yf they that haue authorite, know∣lege, and tyme, wolde (vnder youre graces correctiō) examen it better after the moost auncient interpreters and moost true textes of other languages. For certaynly, in cōparynge dyuerse examplers together, we se, that in many places one copye hath eyther more or lesse then a¦nother, or els the texte is altered from other languages.
To geue other men occasion now to do theyr best, and to expresse my good wyll, yf I could do better, I haue for the causes aboue rehear¦sed, attempted thys smal laboure, submyttynge (with all humblenesse and subiection) it and all other my lyke doinges, to your graces moost noble Maiestye. Not onely because I am bounde so to do, but to the intent also that through youre moost gracious defence, it maye haue the more fredome amonge your obedient subiectes, to the glory of the euerlastynge God: To whom onely for your grace, for youre mooste noble and deare sonne Prynce Edwarde, for your moost honourable counsell, and for all other hys syngular gyftes that we daylye receaue in youre grace. To hym I saye, which is the onely geuer and graun∣ter of all thys oure welth, be honoure and prayse for euermore. To youre grace, continual thankfulnesse, and due obedience, with longe lyfe and prosperite: Fynally to vs the receauers of gods good gyftes, be daylye increace of grace and vertue more and more. Amen

