



BY your Lordships and the rest of the Councels Letters at Kinsale, bearing date the 27. of Decemb. last, 1601. directed to the right H. the Lord Chaun∣celour, and the rest of the pri∣uie Councel here your Lord∣shippe aduertised your happy and blessed successe (by Gods most gracious prouidence) obtained ouer the Arch-re∣bels Tyrone, Oddonell, and the rest of the rebels and Spa∣nish inuadours, vpon Christmas Eaue, being the 24. of December: which most famous victorie and great hand of the Almightie, I had aduertisement the sixt of this present, that 14. Priests of the rebels were dispersed a∣broad, to perswade and incense the vulgar and common sort, that the rebels & Spanyards receiued no such losse or damage as your Lordships said Letter deliuered: nor as the common brute most confidently conceiued and knew to be: by which practise they meant the more soūd∣ly to holde in and continue their faction. Whereupon I thought it both reasonable, and discourse agreeing to the nature of trueth, to make knowne to the world, that
 the rebels losse & damage was not lesse then your Lord∣ships said Letter mentioned, but in higher measure and greater preiudice to thē then that Letter expressed: wher∣by the world may see the falshood and deceipt of these beastly Priests, & the drift of these rebels and traitours to drawe vnconstant men and wauering subiectes to their cursed purposes: I confesse I haue very coldly & barely handled this subiect, and rather dimmed and diminished the worth & dignitie thereof, then beautified and ador∣ned the same with matter or method: wherein I humbly beseech your Lordshippes pardon, as also in my boldnes in presuming vpon so nice an argument. But pearles and precious stones require no ornaments to set them forth: neither doth the originall cause of my writing, neede or aske any florish my selfe or any other mortall man can make in the same, being a worke directed and purposed by the power & strength of Iehoua, the great God of hea∣uen and earth: and effected & performed by your Lord∣ships valour and worthinesse, being Gods instrument appointed for the accomplishment thereof: which are matters more then sufficient in themselues to recōmend the cause to the world. And so in all humble manner I wil leaue my poore labour to your Lordships Honourable li∣king and fauourable censure, and your Lordships person to be protected vnder the blessed wings of the Almighty. From my house in Dublin the 30. of Ianuary. 1601.

