



RIght Honorable, for so much as my selfe, with the whole progeny of our name, haue beene alwayes exceedingly bounde, Next to the Right Honorable our good Lord the Lord Burleigh, Lord high Treasurer of England, Vnto the late right Honorable Sir Fraunces Knolles the elder Knight, Treasurer of her highnesse most honourable household, deceased, in regard of their sinceare iustice, and charitable respect of most iniurious and wicked practises heretofore vehemently prosecuted a∣gainst vs, for no lesse then the liuing we all pos∣sessed. Both whome therefore (vnder your Lordships good fauour) I can not, but in all my best indeuours, during life remember, Not for∣getting as in duty I am bound, the Right Ho∣norable Sir William Knolles Knight, now Con∣troller of her Maiesties sayd most honorable household, and such other his right worship∣full
 and honorable minded off-spring, as still re∣maine our good fauorers. Amongst whom, the right Worship. M. Robert Knolles more then a yeare passed of his accustomed kindnes aduer∣tised me, that your L. I know not by what meanes, vnderstanding of my indeuors in these Mathematick Sciences, was pleased to take fur∣ther notice of me by my personall presence. For the which, as the time hath not bin fitting by reason of your L. most serious important & honorable imployments, aswell to the seas as o∣therwise this yeare 1596 well knowne to the whole world. So haue I bin willing to catch hold of the opportunity thereof so far: as in the meane time to hammer out (if selfliking deceiue me not) a rare piece of Mathematicke stuffe, to bring vnto your L. view, together with my self: tending both to the profit and pleasure of all worthy english Gent. that either addict them∣selues to contemplacion at home, or to Marine traueyles abroad. Which if it may receiue fauo∣rable allowance at your good L. hands, I shall thinke my selfe suffiiciētly defended against all ignorant or malignāt detractors, and be the ra∣ther hereafter encouraged to go forwards with like matters. Thus praying vnto God for the long preseruacion of your Honour, I cease.

