



IT maie (perhaps) seeme somewhat straunge, there bee∣ing so manie lear∣ned and godlie bookes set out, that I haue not bene discouraged thereby from writing: I desire therfore leaue of the good Reader, that I maie bee heard what I can saie for my selfe. First therefore it maie be answered, that though a matter be handled of neuer so manie: yet the varietie of time and place, maie alwaies mini∣ster some new and profitable matter to speake of. Beside this, I haue spe∣ciall reasons, and those also manie, to alledge for my selfe in this behalfe. First, it may be said, that though the Argument heere handled, especially dice and card plaie, haue bene con∣demned, as it were by a general con∣sent of all Nations: yet are there verie fewe founde which haue in
 particulars vnfolded, & laide abrode the vglinesse thereof. They haue taken the beastlinesse of this game to be so plaine, and so euident a case, that they haue not vsed manie rea∣sons in the proofe thereof. And least I should seeme to affirme this thing at a venture, without some triall, onelie to excuse my selfe: the Rea∣der shall vnderstand, that I haue made inquirie, & that the most that hath bene said of anie that I can heare of, is of Pascasius, which hath entered into the secrets of this idle pastime, & hath bewraied the hid thoughts of gamesters, and their di∣stempered affections. In this res∣pect (I saie) he hath said very much, although concerning the vnlawful∣nesse of this game, hee hath said nothing at all. Daneus, a learned di∣uine, hath proued that this game is vnlawfull, but yet in fewer wordes then can satisfie the patrones ther∣of. I haue not heard of manie o∣ther, and I am the sooner brought to thinke, that but few haue taken
 paines in this thing, because the forenamed Pascasius, making great inquirie, could not heare of anie (as he saith) that hath of purpose writ∣ten a treatise of this matter. It ought therefore (as I said before) the lesse to be accounted an vnne∣cessarie worke, which speaketh of that, that so few haue spoken of, especiallie in our English tongue. And I haue ben the bolder to take this thing vppon mee, because I cannot thinke, but that the Lord, which cannot awaie with idlnesse, and hath graunted me so great lea∣sure, requireth it at my handes. This my enterprise shall the lesse bee meruailed at, if men consider that my miserable experience in these vnthriftie games, canne make mee speake that, which those that want the like experience cannot, though otherwise they bee neuer so eloquent. Beside that, it shall make more for the glorie of God, and more against this sinne, when it is cried out vppon, of him that
 hath had his delight therein, ra∣ther then when it is spoken against of him that hath had no acquain∣taunce with it: and hee teacheth well, which would haue vs, Ex∣cerpere ex ipsis malis, quod in∣est boni. I shall also, by this meanes, cheere and make glad, the heartes of those good men, whome I doubt not but I haue heeretofore gree∣ued and vexed with following this confused and foolish gaming. Neither shall it be a small comfort vnto mine owne soule, not one∣lie for the present time, but euen when those that stand about my bedde can doe mee no good, when the women are almost readie to binde vp my face in a napkin: It will bee (I saie) at that time a great staie vnto my soule, when I shall consider that, that hande, that hath beene so defiled with the cursed bones, and with such filthie papers, now hath beene at defiaunce with them, and hath
 writ against them. This I doubt not in my greatest extremitie, will bee a witnesse vnto me, that both hand and foote, and euerie part of mee are purged, and clean∣sed, and purefied with the preci∣ous bloudshedding of the sonne of God my almightie redeemer. All these reasons beeing well waied of mine indifferent Reader, this my booke shall (I hope) haue the bet∣ter enterteinement at his handes. Concerning the matter and sub∣staunce of this treatise, my pur∣pose was, to sette downe a diffe∣rence betweene the childe of God, and a naturall man, in vsing the present thinges of this life. The naturall man, as a brute beast; look∣eth vpon whatsoeuer is before him, and neuer goeth further, and as a brutish swine, which feedeth vn∣der an Acorne tree, mindeth one∣lie the Acornes that lie seattered vppon the ground, neuer looking vp to the tree from whence they came: so this people nussel themselues
 in the creatures, neuer lifting vp their heart vnto the Creator: and some are so grose, that they thinke God is greatlie honoured, when they are so much delighted with the creature, that they are neuer sa∣tisfied therewith. For when their ares are altogether busied in pi∣ping and singing, when they rest their soules, & laie themselues down in the melodie of Organs and qua∣uering, they call it an heauenlie noise: but it is an earthlie noise, & they are Epicures that delight so much in it. And therefore Plautus, describing Epicures, setteth them out by these words: Viuunt musi∣cè. For whie maie not the dronken glutton as well saie, that sweete lus∣cious meate and drinke, haue an heauenlie tast? Manie of these men can tell the naturall reason of earthquakes, windes, snowe, haile, and raine, and of all meteors: they can shewe reasons, howe meate and drinke doth nourish our life: but the Lord and giuer of life, they will
 not acknowledge. They are busied altogether in secondarie meanes, but the cause of all causes, the high and mightie God that holdeth the sterne both of sea & land, & ruleth with his becke both heauen & earth, & work∣eth vsuallie by meanes, oftentimes without meanes, sometimes contrarie to all meanes, they wil not remember. If a man speak of this first cause, they thinke there is no wit in anie such talke: they are alwaies in their A, B, C, as Caluin that good man noteth: & as blinde buzzards keepe altoge∣ther below: but the learned Christi∣an, like an eagle mounteth vp aloft, & vseth the creatures as steppes and staires to ascend vnto the high God, he is the resting place of their ioie, he is the stay & center of all their delights. They pitie the foolishnes of such, as make their back & their bel∣lie, their bowling, dicing & carding their God. For how can the vanitie of these vaine things helpe them in the time of need? When they are sore sick, their gaie coats must be let off.
 When their stomacks be taken from them, what good will their meate & drinke do them? They cannot stand to bowle, they cannot sit vp to play a set at Maw. If they thinke that the sight of their companions will ease their grief, they cannot haue that nei∣ther: for their delight is in pleasant things, but the sight of a sicke man is altogether vnpleasant. They will not be tender hearted, they will not be like affected, they will not weepe with him that weepeth, they wil not by sorrowing by thee, beare parte of thy griefe. Then shall thy soule be heauie, & thou shalt haue none to comfort thee, but shalt die in thy sinnes. This shall the end of these men be, for they shall eate the fruite of their owne labour. When these things come vppon them, then shall they know that they had good counsell giuen them. But I forgette my selfe, which reason with the bel∣lie & the back, which haue no eares to heare. I may wish well, & so foorth, but there is little hope of a∣mendement,
 I will turne my speach therfore to thē that maie do good in this matter, & haue authoritie to pu∣nish & put down this sin. And I hū∣blie beseech all those that are put in trust with any such office vnder her Maiestie, that they would in this be∣halfe discharge that dutie that is laid vpon thē, in banishing this iniquitie that hath such a great traine of sin to wait vpō it. A man (saith our statute) that suffereth for his gaine vnlawfull games in his house, shall forfet, for euery day. 40. s. except he hath a pla∣card: & thē it shall be cōteined in the same placard, what game shalbe vsed in the same house, & what persons, shall play thereat: to this he must be bound in the Chaunserie, before he put it in execution. The gamesters themselues shall forfette for euery time vi. s. eight pence, but if they be seruing men & men of occupation (vnles it be in Christmas) they shall forfet for euery time 20. s. And both seruing men and other beside this forfet, may be cast in prison, vntill
 they be bound in a sufficient summe to play no more. The officers that make not serch euery week, or at the least euery moneth, where it is like vnlawfull games are vsed, shall for∣fet 40. s. And to the end that both magistrates, & others, might the bet∣ter be put in mind of their dutie in this behalfe, proclamation of this sta∣tute must be made euery quarter, in euery market. If I should set downe how far the officers are from execu∣ting this good law, they might be a∣shamed of thēselues, & hang downe their heads. For what a shamefull thing is it, that they should not only not put downe this sinne: but put to their helping hand to set it vp. They are bound to search wher it is likelie such vnlawfull games are vsed: but they giue licēse to those men to vit∣tle whom they know, that they will keepe all kinde of ill rule, & main∣teine lawles pastimes. What can be more cōtrarie to their dutie that they are bound and sworne vnto? They2. l. 10. 27. should knock downe their signes, &
 make a iakes of their houses, or a draught house to feed swine in: but they make them sanctuaries for sin. Those dronken beasts, to whom be∣fore it was some paine to seeke vp their copesmates, now they haue more libertie to riot themselues, & to call gamesters vnto them. If all the dronken beasts in the town had laid their heads together, what other thing would they haue desired? Of themselues they could not haue brought this thing to passe, & there∣fore the Magistrate must help them. O that men would consider aright of this thing. We all know, that when but one priuate man doth commit a∣ny trust to the faithfulnesse of ano∣ther, what trecherie is it, one to de∣ceiue the other? For the one had not bene hurt, except he had commit∣ted his trust vnto the other. He ho∣ped he wold haue ben an aid to him. To whose faithfulnesse shall he then flie, seing he is hurt by him to whom he hath committed himselfe? A man may be defended against another, for
 he putteth no trust in him: but to take heede of him, whom without breach of loue he could not once sus∣pect, it is almost vnpossible. Seeing therefore it is so hainous a matter, for one priuate man to be vnfaith∣full to another, how great treacherie & treason shall we thinke it is, to be put in trust of such honourable per∣sonages, in so waightie a matter, as concerneth not onely the safetie of one man, but of an whole countrey, not onely to neglect this charge, but to betray the truth, & to strengthen the enemie against it? Beare with me (good Reader) though I be earnest in this matter: for this cousoning ga∣ming, that I speake against, is the fa∣ther that begetteth, the mother that bringeth foorth, and the nourse that bringeth vp, all kinde of sinne what∣soeuer. And who can remedie this thing, but such as haue authoritie, & are put in trust with this matter? The cause of this losenes is, because men would faine be accounted piti∣full. If a gamester be of any wealth,
 then he plaies away nothing but his owne; though poore men loose their customers, & be vndone with bea∣ring them companie. If they be all poore that play, then it is pittie to trouble them. The scripture indeed doth oftentimes commend the poore vnto the Magistrates, they must nei∣ther oppresse them themselues in their priuate affaires, neither must they suffer others to doe them vio∣lence: but when poore men do iniu∣rie vnto the poore, when in steed of following their calling, they follow dronkennes, and idle gaming, neuer regarding whether their poore wife & children sinke or swim: when by this means besides other mischiefes, in a short time the whole parish must be charged with thē & their charge, who seeth not that in this case to pity them, & to let them goe vnpunished, is extreame crueltie? The mercifull God, notwithstanding he setteth down a special charge for the poore: yet when they are thus vnrulie, he straitly commandeth the Magistrate
 to haue no respect of person: Thou shalt not (saith he) fauour the person of the poore. Leui. 19. And againe, Thou shalt not esteeme a poore man in his cause. Exo. 23. He repeateth his saieng for feare of forgetting.
Euery man is euen a beast in his owne vnderstanding. We know not what it is to be cruell, & what it is to be mercifull, & therefore we must lerne of the only wise God, seing he vouchsafeth to teach vs. Punish him, punish him: seemes to be a cruell speach in their cares: but they heare not the pitiful cōplaint of the poore children that call for bread & drink, & thorough the noting of the fa∣ther, there is none to giue them. If the punishment that is laid vppon a poore wicked man for his amende∣ment, seeme cruell, which would also fraie those that see his punishment, or heard of it, from committing the like fault: what great crueltie shall we think it to be, to grieue the harts of all righteous Lots, that can not chuse but mourne, when they see sin
 vnpunished? What crueltie is it to se women & children almost starued, & the whole countrie grow into de∣caie? The mercifull God open the eies of our Magistrates, & make thē see a difference betweene mercifull seueritie & cruell pitie. We haue an English prouerbe, which saith, that foolish pittie marreth a citie: but it is little thought vppon. They maie perhappes thinke they shall bee well thought of, by suffering the wicked to go scotfree, but it can not be. The people shal curse such a one, & the multiude shall abhorre him: but to them that rebuke the wicked shalll be sweetenesse, & vpon them shal come the blessing of euery good man. Pro. 24. 23. For open rebuke is better then secret loue. And though the parties punished, winch a little at the first: yet hee that reproueth a man, shall finde more fauour at the last, then he that flattereth with his tongue. If men wold but open their eies, experience would teach them the truth of that which I say. For,
 by reason of their fearefulnesse and loosenesse, this waies men make no account of them: they despise the Lord, & therfore the Lord despiseth them. Now they do nothing, they are accounted as a king in a stage play, that only maketh a show, & whē he hath done, he goeth his waies: wher∣as otherwise the Lord would cause men to loue & honor them. To keep their court dinners, or to haue their men & officers to waite vpon them, is but an outward thing, & an acces∣sarie matter to giue some counte∣naunce to their office: but the chiefe thing, the essentiall part of their du∣tie is, to doe iustice & iudgement. But men are hard to be intreated in this matter. I therefore, beseech all pastors & teachers, that they would not suffer themselues to be decei∣ued witht he disguised names of par∣son or viccar, which names the scrip∣ture knoweth not: but that they would remember, that they are ap∣pointed as continuall watch men to ring the alarum bell, & to beat & to
 knocke at the consciences of men, especially of the Magistrates, which maie do all in all in this matter. For, it is great pittie, that they shuld wāt so great a benefit, as is the putting them in minde of their dutie, espe∣cially seing the whole Church recei∣ueth so great losse by their slacke∣nesse. If I spake of mine owne head, my words might be little set by: for who am I that any mā shuld esteme of my saying? But because they be the words of the great God, they must be set by. Apollos was a very eloquent learned man, & yet he was very well content to be more thē ad∣monished of a poore simple man: I desire my Reader, that he would do the like. For I protest before the Lord, & his Angells, & before all the world, that I haue not spoken anie thing for any delight that I haue in reprouing: the truth whereof, the Reader may easily see, if he consider that I haue reprooued no mans fault so much as mine owne. If I seeme to be more vehement then needeth,
 the cause thereof is, because it is both long, since this our good statute was made, & also a contrary custome hath almost ouergrowne it. It hath bene smoothered & shamefully kept vn∣der of a long time. And it is noted of one, that a Law, the farder it is from the first authoritie, which is as it were the first stroke wherewith it is first sent abroad, the weaker it is. And that a custome, the longer it cō∣tinueth, the stronger it is. I speak not this, to end any should be discoura∣ged from labouring against this sin, (for the word of God is mightie to bring down euerystrong hold, & e∣uery high thought, that lifteth vp it selfe against the almightie: but that we shold rouse vp our selues to fight more manfullie against it, seeing it hath so manie, & so mightie enemies to defende it. And because there is little hope, that the Lord will take awaie this losenesse of life from vs, either by preaching or by the seue∣ritie and diligence of the godlie ma∣gistrate, so long as we cast away from
 vs so churlishlie his blessed disci∣pline, that hath bene so louingly of∣fered: let vs throw our selues downe and craue forgiuenesse for this our great rebellion, & giue enterteinmēt to it at the last, that the vse & praise of our catholike religion maie bee seene, and that it maie appeare in hir perfect beautie. We see nowe, that euerie bodie maie do what him list∣eth, without controlement. The Church maie seeme to bee nothing els, but a companie of outlawes. And what reproch is this to the holy and righteous Lord Iesus Christ, which is the Lord thereof? What Christian heart doth not bleed, to see open & common dronkards to come to the Church, and to be accounted catho∣likes? How wonderfullie doth this sinne preuaile for want of church dis∣cipline? Know you not (saith the A∣postle) that a leauen sowreth a whole lumpe of dowe? How manie are in∣fected, whilest the corrupted parties are not cut off? What great commo∣ditie is the whole Church depriued
 off, for want of this communication? If these filthie persons were thus ba∣nished the Church, & deliuered vn∣to Sathan, vntill they had acknow∣ledged their fault, and washed their faces with teares of repentance before all the congregation, this fearfull pu∣nishment would make others afraid to offend. The parties that hath of∣fended shall receiue a singuler com∣moditie by this thing: for now they be not of the Church, and yet are ac∣counted to be of the Church: they thinke their case is verie good, and harden themselues in their sins, and so goe to hell (as it were) in a sleepe, before they be aware: wheras by this wholsome discipline they would be awakened out of their deepe sleepe, they would be made ashamed, and so repent. Thus if they were confoun∣ded in this world, they should bee glorified in the world to come: vpon their repentance they should be re∣ceiued againe, then should they, not onely be in the Church, but of the Church: theyr sinnes which were so
 fast bound in heauen, but not in earth, should then be loosed, both in heauen & in earth. These things are confessed & wished for in our cōmu∣nion booke, as it were by a generall consent of the whole Realme, & that manie yeares ago: & yet we stand at a staie, and account those good men our enimies that perswade vs to the practise of it. The Lord for his mer∣cies sake, that sitteth in the heauens, and laugheth his enimies to scorne, & that can bring to passe with the tur∣ning of an hand, whatsoeuer he wil, bring this thing to passe. Wherfore shall the Papists saie, We neuer saw the like wickednesse in our fathers daies? O Lord deliuer thy word from this reproch, and deliuer vs from the slauerie of sin & Sathan, & our own rebellious practises, to freedome & libertie, which is no where els to be found, but in putting on the easie yoke of Iesus Christ, & in being go∣uerned by his word. We shal not thē anie longer vse the name of Christ, as men are wont to vse an olde cloke,
 which put it on when any stormy tēpest is towards thē, & are ashamed of it when the storme is ouer. Men shall not then anie longer vse the calling vppon the name of God, as they vse Aqua vitae, only when they lye a dieng: but they shall professe the calling of his name throughout the whole course of their life: then shall not the son of God be ashamed of vs before his father. If the glorious kingdome of Iesus Christ were thus set vp, we should haue euen an hea∣uen vpon earth. I am afraide I haue troubled my Reader with loking an Epistle, and therefore I will heere take my leaue of him, wishing him well to fare in the Lord.

