



NAture it selfe (most noble Grinald) hath taught the husbandmen that are skilfull in grafting, & inoculation, to fence the imps engrafted into the stocke, with clay, straw, morter or lome mixt with chaffe vntill the plant haue got a just strength, left by anie iniurie of the wether it might receiue hurt. The same thing hath God, the author of all wisdome & of eue∣rie good gift, of his exceeding mercie, towards all mankind, prouided cōtinually in ye husbādrie of his Church. For he hath both infused inwardly into his most excellent plants, that vial sap which is necessarie vnto cōtinuance, or rather vnto eterni∣tie, as those which are borne againe of his mightie word: & also by the couert of the same word, hath fenced those that are plā∣ted in Christ against the iniuries that outwardly might happen vnto them. In this manner was that auncient Church of the Iewes confirmed of old by the holy seruaunt of God Daniell a most faithfull Prophet, against the violence & fraud of tyrants and of false prophets that were to come: And so also this our Church since the first comming of Christ, remaining in expe∣ctance of his second and glorious appearance, hath euermore by all his good seruants, and especially by this most holy Apo∣stle and Euangelist S. Iohn, the disciple whom Christ loued, bin preserued against like, or also greater tempests: strengthened

with his owne forces, and couered as with certaine eaues least by this perpetuall shower of incommodities, it should rot, or anie way drop through. For this Apostle, vndoubtedly inspired of God, hath both mightily defended the truth of the doctrine, and person of Christ, and the loue of the Church from the ve∣nimous teeth and bitings of heretickes by his Gospell, there∣by adding an accomplishment vnto the other holy and diuine Gospels: and also hath in this booke of Reuelation maintai∣ned the faith and pacience of the saints, from the violent in∣uasions of most cruell enimies, and of most false hypocrites. This diuine and wholesome prouidence, most familiarly layd out vnto vs in this booke, Satan hath not ceassed from the be∣ginning to oppugne, that he might plucke the same (if it were possible) out of the mindes of the godly and elect. For as he hath striuen against the credit and authoritie of this booke ve∣rie much: so (when the authoritie thereof was established) he went about by all possible meanes to corrupt the sence and meaning of the Authour. What and howe mightie engines, howe cunning and daungerous vnderminings he hath em∣ployed to shake and ouerthrow the authority of this booke, many godly & learned men haue long since declared. He hath pretended the vncertaintie of the Author, the phrase, stile, and arguments, and hath abused the labour of some good men to bring this his purpose to passe. What? is the Author vncertain of that booke which was committed vnto the custodie of seuen Churches, and those the most noble and renowned of all Asia, and preserued of them most religiously? It is a fable. For shall those Epistles which were written vnto the onely Church of Rome, of Corinth, and the like, be of certaine and constant au∣thoritie from the testimonie of that one Church vnto which they were written, and shall the authority of that booke be cal∣led into question (if God will) which was written vnto seuen Churches? They that pretēd incongruity of speech, verily shew themselues to be of rude and rusticall iudgement: who do not thinke that our speech, as much as may be, ought to be attem∣pered vnto the heauenly lawes. They obiect strangenesse of the stile, the publicatiō of his own name, & the oftē repetitiō of the

same things. O worthie thetoricians! who wil not haue the stile to differ in a different matter. They thinke it agreeth with the modestie of S. Iohn to haue concealed his name: as if S. Iohn in this argument did not see it more materiall, that by diuerse times expressing of his name, he should (as Daniell did of old time) commend the credit and authority of the booke vnto po∣steritie of time to come: then by suppressing his name to pro∣uide for this imaginarie modestie whereof they speake. Is it not as modestly done of S. Iohn, that he doth in expresse wordes professe him selfe the Author of this booke: as when in the last chapter of his Gospell, he doth by circumlocution describe him selfe? Verely in neither booke did he erre from modestie: but did in both of them, by addition of his name, confirme the cre∣dit and authoritie of his writing, necessarily & for the publicke good of the Church. That they thinke the same thing is often repeated, is partly false, and partly where any such repetition is, necessarie: which thing our interpretation shal declare. How necessarie this argument was in the Church of God, we decla∣red in the verie entraunce: and no man will denie, that with cleane eys shal looke vnto the history of the Christian church. Wherefore, albeit the authoritie of this booke seemed not so great vnto some good and godly men in times past, yet can not their particular iudgement ouerthrow the publike credit ther∣of: but it is necessarie that the authoritie thereof should in the Catholicke Church be accompted entire, beleeued, professed, and preserued. As for the meaning and sence of the Author, what need many words? Here verely if any where else, that say∣ing is true, how many heads, so many opinions. But this euill of ignorance, and dissenting in iudgement, is partly borne with vs from the darknesse and infirmitie of our nature: and partly in∣creased or heaped vp by singularitie of affection: which incon∣uenience that common aduersarie of our saluation hath much increased, both by his owne practise, and by the indeuor of his ministers and instruments. Therefore the darkenesse of that ig∣norance infused into our minds within, and scattered abroade without, hath for the most part affrayed good men, otherwise excelling in pietie, learning, vtterance, art, and authoritie, from

writing any thing in this argument, or at least from publishing the same. This modestie I commend; but I follow it not. Why so? wilt thou say; I will shew in few wordes what cause mooued both others to require it of me, & me to write of this argumēt. So shall I (as I hope) both approue mine enterprisevnto good men: & take away the suspitiō of immodestie. There were ther∣fore some good persons that required this dutie at my hāds, for that (I will vse their owne words) they esteemed me to abound with good meanes to interpret this prophecie of the newe Te∣stament, by reason of my continuall reading and diligent exer∣cise in the old Testament. I as priuie vnto mine owne pouerty, excused my self, refused the worke, and denied it earnestly. But they replyed, that this modestie was counterfaited, appealed vnto their owne iudgements of me, and flatly charged me to do it of enuie. The importunitie of these men forced me much, es∣pecially when I considered, that both in conference with my friends, & in scholasticall disputations (which I oftentimes held in mine owne house) I knew that some things had bene vttered by me, and both noted and taken in writing by mine auditours without my priuitie. Nowe, I see what happened in old time to the holy fathers, & what now a dayes also vnto some good men. They of modestie withdrew and suppressed their meditations, words, & writings: but by that means they opened a large field vnto the impudencie and audaciousnesse of others. For when yet their corps was scarcely buried, writings, capsodies & com∣mēts were published in their names, as if they had bin authors of them, which either they neuer bred, or the other vnskilfully gathered, or impudently counterfaited. A most vnworthie act, and to be repressed by reuenge of the Magistrat. I had rather once be immodest in the iudgement of these men, then beget anie immodest person, which should attribute vnto me his own inuentions and dreames. Of this exposition I will say nothing, saue that I will acknowledge it to be mine owne, and that with mind not to boast my self: but to prouide for afterwards, that no man ascribe vnto me that which him selfe hath fained. I pro∣mise to say the truth wheresoeuer by the grace of God I am a∣ble: and to be brief in all things: lest either I in writing, or good

men in reading, should be said to loose their time. If any thinke otherwise then I do, their libertie of iudgement shall for me re∣maine vnto them. For I do not, as a iudge, giue sentence vpon the worke of others: but as one that would furnish the same feast, bring in my dish amongst them.
This litle worke (most noble Grinald) I thought good to de∣dicate vnto you, for your owne sake, for the publike, and for my selfe. For your sake, that you may know and find, that I do with the consent of many good men, vnfaynedly reioyce in your be∣halfe, for that godly care wherewith you are wont to examine both the word and iudgements of God, of which this booke is as a most plentifull treasurie. For the publike cause, that the same your most holy studie, which shortly (as I trust) shall be profitable to this country, to all Germanie, and to the church, may by this small light of my dedication be set in the sight of all men, and may be of glorie vnto God most gracious and migh∣tie, of example vnto good men, and of ornament vnto your selfe. For mine owne sake, because I am bound hauing bene ho∣noured of you to honor you againe, a man most honora∣ble by your owne desert, and an ornament of your countrey of Germanie. Fare∣well. the 17. of March 1591.
