


MAN in the dignitie of his creation (right woorshyp∣full, and my very good Pa∣trons) hath this excellent denomination, he is termed , a litle world within it selfe, as carry∣in within the litle compasse of his smale brayne, the whole order, and disposition of a common wealth. But if by inuersion it may be alowed, to returne vnto smaller thinges, the greatest, we may then right wel resemble the world vnto mankind, saying, The worlde is lyke vnto a man, and of good right and reason, the greatest time & age of the worlde being now consumed, and gone. This face of the worlde, as it were lying sicke of age (which age it selfe in deede is a malady vareco∣uerable) this same last age of the world, may best be likened then vnto an old man: But an old man is twyse a childe, children be foolish, & froward,

and besides the infirmitie of sicknesse, they be na∣stie and noysome, full of vncleannesse, in whose frowarde follie, this aboue al thinges must be re∣membred, that old men, howe iust soeuer the cause be, can abyde no reprehension, nor cannot endure the hearyng of theyr faultes: And so for all the worlde, though neuer any age were so wicked, so foule, so filthy, so nasty, and so loath∣some, as this our age is: yet we say, we be cleane and holsome, we say we be sweete and sauery, we say they be not wyse that reprehende in age any thyng. Age in deede is honourable, howbeit not that age which Seneca ad Lucilium calleth Elementaria senectus, but that age whereof Tullie remembreth de senectute: Remem∣ber alwayes, sayth he, that I speake of that age whereof youth hath layde an honest foundation. It is not yeeres, or gray hears, nor wrinkles in the browe, nor furrowes in the face, that bryngeth reuerence vnto age, but an honest life past before, which continueth with reuerence vnto the ende. An olde Ruffian, or an auncient Callet, is not for theyr continuaunce in wickednesse worthy any reuerence. A sleepie age geuen to idlenesse, that resteth not without feare, and is voyde of hope of goodnesse, seeking securi∣tie

for the time, pretendyng that we were best be at quiet for the time of our lyfe, we are not able to endure the troubles that may com∣passe vs: this age is not honorable. And such is our age, and like altogeather vnto testy old fro∣ward age, that how iust soeuer the cause be, can abide no reprehension. What, we lyue in the olde age of the worlde, and haue the examples of all the ages of the worlde before vs, and our end is to be looked for, no man wotteth howe soone: Shal not our punishment be the greater, our con∣demnation the more iust, howe much the more warninges and examples haue been geuen vnto vs since the beginning of the worlde, yf we take no heede thereby? And howe muche I pray you haue we profited? Amongst Gods special com∣maundements, is God honoured? Is Gods name reuerenced? Was euer any age so outragious in Othes? So blasphemous in railing? So rooted in periurie? When God turned his gratious counte∣nance to wardes vs againe, and renued the glory of his Gospel, did we suspect that wickednesse should haue been vnweeded, that blasphemie should haue spred such blossomes, that common swearing should haue ben thus suffered as it is? Thought we that Papistes should haue had any

place of aucthoritie? Thought we that contenti∣on should haue ben so common, or that consience should haue ben ruled by riches. Nay veryly, we hoped for better, and I wot not when any age was worse. It is true that affliction and trouble tryeth: God is neuer letter serued, then in ad∣uersitie. Wealth maketh vs Wantons, peace bre∣deth pride, we haue quite forgotten Mariana tempora. This complaint as it may truely be made in diuers respectes, so specially in this, that Gods most glorious name is not halowed nor ho∣noured, but vainly vsed, terribly abused, & blas∣phemed most outragiously. Some faultes against the second table, because they concerne the com∣mon wealth, are somewhat duely executed, nay I dare boldly say that lawes for haukes egges, for couies of Partriges, and eyes of Phesantes, are with much diligence obserued and looked vn∣to: (and good cause that so they shoulde) But this that concerneth Gods honour, and the glorie of his maiestie, this whereof God hath geuen a special charge, wherunto God hath annexed his terrible threatnings, this commaun∣dement of the first Table, concerning the reue∣rence of Gods owne name, is (fie for shame) to much neglected. Yf Princes woulde forget it, if

Counsellours consult for common wealth only, yet may not Diuines speake? What though we be lyke vnto women, for that when we haue sayd, we haue doone, our aucthoritie stretcheth no far∣ther: yet in a reasonable cause a woman may speake with honestie, and speake agayne and agayne to, vntyl she be heard. Vnto you therefore this I remember, not in suspitiō of your diligence, that be far from me, for I professe gladly, and I geue God thankes, I knowe that both in doctrine and life, none labour more feruently: but as litle sand to continue a long lasting edge, vnto a strong gentle Scithe: So I humbly beseeche you styll to continue your earnest Zeale, to the promoting of Gods glory, Namely, and most specially when o∣portunitie of time and place shal serue, that some strength of law earnestly be by your wysedomes required, againe and againe, to be established for punishment of vaine swearing, and for the vtter cuttyng of, of forswearing or periurie. The dis∣commodities of the outragious excesse in appar∣ret breedeth much more woe then many deemes for: drunkennes, is a deathful disease, & it disma∣keth a man, so that be ceasseth to be that he was: But this vice cōcerneth not man so much as God: No tonge can vtter, no pen can expresse, no mor∣talitie

can conceiue the sinful wickednes, the dis∣honour vnto God, the mischiefe and misery vnto mankinde, that groweth therby: Of this it plea∣sed God to styr me vp to write somewhat, wher∣of I yeeld most humble thanks vnto his maiesty, that it pleased hym I should bring somewhat, whether it be heare or wooll, or sand, or Oyster shelles, to the building of his Temple. The mat∣ter is worthy for al men to regard, though it be a common thyng (euery body can say it is so) our age is dainty, and lusteth after nouelties: the pro∣fession of our faith in religion, is like vnto our foo∣lish fancy in building. We delight in shewes, in trickes and toyes, in cornered Windowes, in tops of Chimneies, though the bottomes be not. So we dispute curious vnprofitable preternecessarie que∣stions, not regarding the grounde and substance, which is most necessary, as without the whiche we are not. That your godly wisedome right wel considered, when in your auncient reuerend age, you wrote yet instructions for the tender youth, a Woorke which to your presence for to commend, is not so seemely: it was in deede a hammer, a Hatchet, a swoorde, an axe, to beat, to cut, to wounde, to destroy Antechrist and all Heritiques. Old men are vncleane and nastie,

the hope is in the youth, whom well to enstructe in faythfull literature, and studiously to traine vp to his glory, is the only hope that remaines to our age: the strength of which hope, is the stablish∣ment of good lawes in tyme, for the reuerende vse and honour of Gods name. Which neglected or intermitted, the euyl of example that amongst vs remayneth, is lyke to poyson more pottes, then all the Vineger in Europe is able hereafter to make sweete or seasonable. God graunt that his honour may most specially be tendred, and that thereunto all other Potentates, Prin∣ces, and Dominions whatsoeuer, may with condigne reue∣rence bende and obey. Amen.

