



WHen that I had (right Honourable) with an earnest intent to proceede very farre in the Ma∣thematikes published my late booke of the Mathematicall Iewell, dedicated euen of meere duety, vnto the right Honourable Lord Bur∣leigh, Lord high treasurer of England, whom from the aboundance of my hart I can not but with your Honours good fauour, as a Myrror of Iustice and pietie, a Patterne of true Honour and Nobilitie, not onely at this time againe, but during life, in all my good actions to remember. Yet not long after espying my yeares to run on, the world to slip away by me, whiles I was occupied in these studies that brought nothing but delight: and withall remembring thé example of the silly Grashopper, and the saying non semper erit estas. I began in maner to droupe and languish, as one out of hope, and euen vpon point either to giue them ouer, or to attend them at more leasure, which of all thinges those studies may not like because they rather more earnestly require a mans whole indeuour, Sticking fast in this mammering of dispaire, your Honour beyond all ex∣spectation or cogitation of mine, drawes me forth of the poore coun∣trie Cabin where obscurely I lurked, into your more open presence, and there so adorned and beautified me with your Honourable cur∣tesies and fauour, so renoumed my name at the Court amongst per∣sons of high regard, and (not content therewith) without any least desart of mine, of purpose, as I take it, to encourage me to proceed: thereby not a litle bewraying your Honours hidden skill and secret good will to the Mathematicke sciences, most liberally bestowed on me a yearely pension or stipend: that verifying the old Adage: Honos alit artes, I was enforced againe to my former Byas, and so much the more strongly, to the end that your Honour conceaued opinion of me, and fauourable auouchments in my behalfe, should not be vtter∣ly made void, earnestly bending vpon those pointes which may most helpe or forward Nauigators for their long voyages and new discoue∣ries being now almost prepared and in point, to furnish them with such familiar instruments and precepts, carrying no lesse facilitie then this treatise doth, that them selues shall bee able to strengthen their owne nauigations, in whatsoeuer arte may assist them: But lest

in the meane time whiles I am thus busied; euen to the vttermost of that leasure which this diuers world alloweth me, I should be thought to sleepe of your Honour, of whom I haue beene so many waies fa∣uourably incyted, I could not but exact so much intermission from those waightie actions, as to seeke about in my Mathematicke storehouse, for some ready present wherewith I might the whiles shew my selfe broad waking vnto your H. And all sodeinly as I was tossing and seeking, me thought I hard the fresh sound in mine eares of the peece of Ordinance I saw your H. shoote off at Greyes this last sommer. Thereupon I sought no further, but seeing your H. both by your honourable office and course of yeares to carry a staffe, with that conceite bent my head wholy to metamorphose that instrument which by chaunce I then shewed vnto your H. & others there: vnto a Mathematicall staffe, fit for so noble a mind as your H. hath, euen frō your first knighthood, wonne in the field, hetherto carried, and dayly expresseth, by diuers such noble and martiall exercises. And the same staffe cleane void of all loftie florishes, singuler easie to be conceiued, euen for the vnlettered, to learne and worke by, without any man∣ner of arithmeticall calculation, although I know your H. most a∣boundantly farre to exceede any ordinary Arithmetician, and not de∣uoid of some partes Geometricall. Which staffe, as effectually framed as my selfe and my man (whom purposly to forward these actions, I haue euer since your Honours saide liberalitie bestowed, retained) cold without any first patterne contriue: I most humbly present to your H. together with this treatise of the vse thereof, beseeching God to prosper your H. in all your, honourable actions.

