



THere is nothing wherein the Antichristian crew is found more condemnable (Noble Marques) nor that by their lin-sey-wol-sey confusions, they haue dared clamp the sincere twist of Gods trueth, with the torne clouts of their brain-sicke superstitions, instanced especially in their many fold sepulchromany. Whose blame therefore we blase, that such cullours of Asdod remaine not so standered out, euen in Israels campe, vnder this our protested refor∣mation. But to award the malignance of any gain-said af∣fection, I strong-hold my self (by this nuncupation of you) vnder your Marqueships Mecenatisme. For as by the fo∣ster-father-hood of such high callings, Gods Altar-mens trauels in his own trueth, ought to be steil-bowed▪ so these great-good gifts of nature and grace, in body and minde, that God hes garnelled vp in you, does plentifully promit that comfort to vs. For (to Gods glory I speak, beside these personal parts of such vigorous talnes in statur & strength, so dexterously kythed by a peereles pausty in all campe∣strial prowes, and pas-tyming exployts, that (if I may say it) by a grace-full Gygantinisme, the commonly doughy are become your dwarfes) your minde (which is more) thogh yet adolescent, is so magnifickly inner-manned▪ that in rauersing these forraine territories (as ye Heroikly in∣tend) ye can se no singular thing, that in some compēdious Micro-cosmo-graphy does not shine in your self. And

therefore, althogh the Magogick negotiation of Schittim (the bordel of both the whordomes) hes ship-wreaked the soules f some, almost of your rank, yet being so mainly munitioned with that panoply of God, I hope to see your triumph ouer such temptations: As happily did your hea∣uen-dwelling Father of incorruptible memory. For so long as ye resolue to loyalize the loue of your soule to the Lord, and of your body to the betrothed breasts of that Lady that ought it, the gates of hell shall not preuaill. But least ye prolong too long the iust experience of these high expectations, that Kirk and Country conceiues of you, be intreated (my good Lord) to retrinch and abridge your forain tary: that so not onely the viduity of vs your wel willing followers by your fairing away, may be remoued: but also the pinching langour of these two your dayly beed-Ladies: your Mother, to wit, the mirrour of all godly graue matronisme, and your Spouse now the yong fruteful Matriarch of that multi-potent Marquesad. So shall Dauid enioy his owne Ionathan, and Israell, now in his growing need his mediating Ioseph, of all men now-adayes most skant: But the Lord by his pasport of protection giue your Lordship continuall conuoy to your rinks end. And grant that 
Coelum non animum mutet qui trans mare currit.

