



RIght Hono∣rable: Diogenes being demaun∣ded what thing of all other wa∣xed olde soo∣nest, and liued also longest: aunswered: Benifite. The which (sayde he) bestowed vpon an vnworthy person, & of vnthankefull minde, dieth streight with∣out further fruite: but done to a worthie man and of courteous nature, it is neuer forgotten, but augmenteth bonde during life. So, my Lorde, confessing my selfe not

only bounde to your Lordship in mine owne respect, hauinge heretofore tasted of your Honour, but dulye remembred by my late Lorde and Fathers testament of his great bonde vnto you (who liuing loued and ho∣noured your Lordship, and dying was de∣sirous to shew to the worlde that he was not forgetfull of your Honourable fauour and courtesie shewed him) and nowe also of my Lord my Brothers, succeeding him, whose bonde your Lordship still increaseth to you with your large and friendlye loue to him, which doth no more binde him, than hee is nowe and euer will bee thankefull to your Lordship in acknowledging the same: I haue presumed vnder your fauour to offer to your Lordship this meane Present as a witnesse of my dutie and loue, and of your Lordships honor and goodnesse, meaning for life to retaine with me a gratefull minde

to your Lordshippe. Howbeit, when I con∣sider the learned writers of our Englishe Nation, and pervse their graue and wise inuentions and discourses of their owne do∣ings, excellently writtē in our owne tongue, without interpretation of others workes, knowing that to translate onely is a farre lesse reputation, than to be an Author of any good worke, and to bee tyed to others wordes & constructions bringeth ofttimes in an other language obscure and darcke phrases: as I doe reioyce in them, so am I ashamed of my selfe, that this small gift of mine to your Lordship neither aunswereth my good will vnto you, nor is worthie (as I wishe it) of your Honour. Yet my good L. let me humbly intreate you to esteeme (as Darius sayde) not the value of the gift, but the occasion of the thing giuen. And how much the gift of it selfe is but simple and

without curiositie, so much the rather the same well considered, is to be lykened to vertue it selfe, which needeth no glorious shewe or ostentation to the iudgement of the wise. By meanes whereof, I am imbolde∣ned in this rude and homely stile to prease to offer to your Honor the fruites of my simple traueyle, and to dedicate this noble and pleasant Treatise, which at the first sight will seeme to manye a vaine thing, treating only of Beastes: but better adui∣sed, they shall finde it within full of Mo∣ralitie, examples, and gouernement.
Some perhappes will thinke my labour bestowed in the translation hereof, and of∣fered to your Lordshippe, superfluous, for that your Lordship vnderstandeth the Italian tongue verie well, and can perfitely speake it. For such as vnderstande anye tongue, in which any good Authour hath

written, doe rather desire to reade it in the same tongue, wherein it is originally writ∣ten, than in any other translated. Wherfore Plato the great and learned Philosopher willed such as talked with him of Geome∣trie, to repaire to Euclydes, or else to reade it in his owne tongue. To those I aunswere. That I haue committed no errour to dedi∣cate it to your L. (vnlesse peraduenture in presumption) to thend that such as vnder∣stande not, may be pertakers of your gifts: and your L. that vnderstandeth, maye at your pleasure and leysure, conferring the one with the other, be iudge of the mat∣ter, as I haue made your Lordship patrone and my only Mecenas. As concerning the morality and sense of this Philosophie, it is shadowed by the maner and speache of brute and dumbe beastes, and by the ex∣amples and gestes of their liues, which ca∣rieth

such a veyne of delite with it, as a∣mongst a number of Italian Authours, which I haue read, I coulde finde none better in my poore opinion for mee to deale in, and pleasanter for your Lordshippe at voyde times to reade than this. Wherein you may my Lord, see into the Court, looke into the common wealth, beholde the more part of all estates and degrees: and the in∣feriour and common sort also maye learne, discerne, and iudge what waye is to be ta∣ken in the trade of their life: but Courtyers aboue all others attending on the Princes presence. A Glasse it is for them to looke into, and also a meete schoole to reforme such schollers as by any maner of deuise, practise, or subtiltie, vniustlye seeke to aspire, or otherwise to abuse the Prince.
Thus my Lord, leauing further to en∣large mee, and to trouble your Lordship,

humbly beseechinge you to take my rude paines and bolde offer hereof vnto your Lordship in such good part as I haue ment it (deliuering it to your honorable protecti∣on, knowing my little labour herein to bee subiect to the censures and reproofe of ma∣ny, that are readie to carpe at euery little fault, or finding themselues touched anye waye, will mislike a troth) with offer also of my humble dutie to your Lordshippe, I humblye take my leaue, wishing your Lordshippe and your noble house long life and happie suc∣cesse in all your affaires.

