


AS in all Artes and Sciences,
(most honorable Lady) crafti
conclusions & diuelish enuē¦sions
haue snbtilly crept in,
& diseatfully peruerted the
naturall and true vse therof,
in lyke case, ye and much more, such false
inuasions from tyme to tyme, haue not let
to assay the snbuersion of the true & sincer
Religion, for such hath bene, and is the fond
and foolysh phansie of dyuers, that they
can neuer content themselues to ground
their sure fayth and Religion on gods holy
word, and such electe vessels as he hath cho∣sen
for the better declraring & expounding
therof. But seking other meanes and wayes,
than those that god hath appoynted, at the
length growe not onely themselues to great
confusion, but blind and disceaue the poore
and simple wittes of their hearers if more
be not the great mercy of god. To their

euerlasting damnations,Math. 23. such they are that
Christ calleth blind guides, whom he cryeth
woe vnto, for if the Blind lead the Blind
then fall they both into the pytte. They fol∣lowe
the trade af Iuglars, who by disceauing
the eyen maketh that to appeare which in
deede is not. But of these hipocrtitical
VVolues inuested in Lammes skinnes our
Sauiour hath geuen vs sufficient admoniti∣on
& warning. Vnder the pretence of sincer
lyfe they bolster vppe and mayntayne a
huge heape of sinne and no maruayle for
when man forsaketh his maker and clea∣ueth
to himselfe what can come therof but
sinne and diuelishnes. For such as is the tree
of necessitie such must be the frute, for who
hath gathered fygges of Bryers, or Reasons
of thornes. But the chefe occasions of this
blind fancie of man, may well bethought to
haue bene chefely too. The one is Philowtie
or selfe Loue, the other avarise or couetous∣nes,
for if we were not ouerwhelmed and
drowned in our owne conceyptes, we would
well consider our owne weakenes, and if we
knewe our selues then would we not leaue
the trew word of God and stick to our selues
wherfore not in vayne sayth the Ethnike
Poet, this is a golden sentence which came

from heauen : Knowe thy selfe.
Yf we had this knowledge, then would wee
not promisse farther then we were hable to
performe, then would we not leaue the trew
way, and seeke by wayes, then would we not
leaue the doore of the Sheapefold, and clime
vppe other wayes. Then would we not for∣sake
the holy scriptures, & cleaue & adhere
to our owne inuensions.Lib. Re∣tract. Therfore right wel
sayth Augustine caueant ergo &c. Let such
take hede lest that by their lippe wisedome
they voyd thēselues of the crosse of christ,
and so stumble at the stombling block, they
follow not the example of Paule, for he saith
Quod accepi, id tradidi vobis, that which I
haue receaued that doe I preach and deliuer
vnto you, he dorst go no farther then his
commission extended vnto, for he knewe
himselfe to be no master, but a messenger,
But these men wilbe messengers accompted
and yet they be masters, for they frame their
messadge other wayes than their charter or
commission giueth them libertie, if in the
world it be accompted treason for the Em∣bassadour
to do other messadge then that is
giuen him of his Prince, then what Trea∣tours
are these to the Prince of Princes, and
Lord of Lordes, who sayth he that addeth

or deminisheth one iote from his word, hea∣peth
to himselfe damnation. And because
man is thus blinded in his owne conceypte
and is so deceaued in himselfe, therfore doth
he leaue the troth, and imbrace falshod, ther¦fore
doth he forsake God and his word, and
sticke to himselfe and his owne imaginati∣ons?
The second cause of these blind errours
may well be thought to be coueteousnes of
priuate gayne and lucare, for there can be
no better credence or profe than experiēce
it hath bene well tried in this our age, ye as
also in the ages past what gaynes and riches
haue bene gotten by such vayne, vngodly,
and vnlawefull practises as hath bene vsed,
saluation hath bene made trafficke & mar∣chandies
to be bought and sold with mony
Remission and forgeuenes of sinnes, which
cost our Sauiour Christ his most precious
bloud, by receauing of pardons and therfore
well paying, was often tymes graunted. I
nede not to reherse all such detestable enor∣mities,
and couetous poolinges of christian
soules as hath bene in vere, and all vnder the
oulloure and pretence of pure and trewe
Religion: VVhich is as much to saye a bind∣ing
and cooplinge of vs and our Fayth to
Christ and gods holy word for it came of

Religio to bind agayne.Etymolo∣gye. But wheras they
shoulde binde vs to Christ they loose vs
from him and bynd vs to theire vayne ima∣ginations,
foolish fancies, and deuelysh tra¦ditions,
and yet in any wise must they be
called, Christes vicares on earth, and fayth∣full
seruaunts, but this practise is no newe
thing for euer since the beginning the De∣uell
could turne himselfe into an angell of
light otherwise his perswasions woulde not
be followed neither could he get his praye,
these men maye well bee compted to be of
a Crokidelles kynd, who in the riuer neele
when he wanteth his pray, hath no waye to
get the same but by disimulatiō for he fay∣neth
himself to wepe & lament til such time
he getteth the man into his daūger which be¦ing
moued with pitie cometh to viset hym,
but then greedely doth he deuouer him, but
these are worse then Crokydelles, for he de∣uoureth
but the body, but these deuouer
both body and soules, and all for the fylling
of their owne purses, and satisfying of their
couetous minde if then these bye wayes
ought to be left, then let vs followe the hye
and beaten way: Let vs onely imitate our
Sauiour Iesus Christ and his most holy ap∣postles,
for he sayth exce dedi vobis exemplum

behold I haue geuen you an example, so that
we ought to frame our selues after his exam¦ple,
our lyues after his lyfe, and so we ought
to interpretate as he hath geuen vs autoritie
and commission: therfore these holy doc∣tors
and interpretators of the holy scrip∣tures,
which haue indeuored themselues to
declare and expound the hid mysteries of
the holy ghost which also from time to time
haue bene approued and allowed to be right
and trew expositors. would well be conside∣red
and followed. Therfore haue I gathered
together in this lyttle volume the interpre∣tation
of our most auncient Fathers vppon
certaine places: wherof most doubtes both
haue, & dayly do arise and for the better con¦firming
of their credite I haue set before
their words, such textes of the holy scrip∣tures
as they do most ground vpon, and in
these fewe questions you may easely and wel
perceaue what false and erronious opinions
haue bene raysed of the rest, therfore God
graunt vs so to waye and diligently consider
hereof that we may truely knowe his blessed
will and plesure as also frame our liues and
workes therafter to his glory & to the helpe
of our poore brothers necessitie. Amen.

