



IT is nowe (my singuler good Lord) almost two yeres sithens I determyned with my selfe, to haue translated into our vulgare tounge, the foure bokes of Grison, treatinge in the Italion tounge, of the art of Rydinge & breaking great Horses, and to haue geuen the same vnto youre L. as M. Secretary Cicill can well testifye. Who I thanke him of his goodnes vouchsafed to peruse my first draught, and misliked not the same. But after that I hadde translated two bookes therof, and sawe to what inconueniēce I was bound: hauing to folowe so doubtfull phrases, & maners of speaking, and so confuse an order of writing, as in my iudgement he v∣seth, (being in dede a far better doer, then a writer) by meanes whereof he is constreyned to make manye repeticions of one thinge, and to vse more wordes then nede: I coulde not satisfy my selfe therwith. And therfore leauing to translate any fur∣ther. I sought howe to bring so good a matter as that is, into a new forme & better if it might be, and therby to make it the playner and also the briefer, in which my doinge I truste, if Grison him selfe were liuing, I should not offende him at all. For sith it was his intent to make other men partakers of his excellent knowledge in this art, so necessary to be lerned, and therfore of ryght to be published: it wolde not greue hym then to haue his meaning so playnly expressed in an other tong, as the readers might casely vnderstand the same. Which whe∣ther I haue so done or not, I refer that to your L. iudgement, who hath no small skill, not onely in both tunges, but also in the art selfe, wherein your H. is a chiefe mayster, aswell by knowledge as also by office, and therfore most mete to be both

iudge and patrone of this booke. Which if it shall please your H. to receyue wyth a willynge hande, and seme to allowe my doyng therin, by encouraging the esquires and ryders of the stable in breakyng the Queenes Ma. horses, sometimes to fo∣low thinstructions therof (and the rather for that old Alexan∣der their firste mayster, was him selfe as I vnderstande, some∣tyme Grysons scholer) and so geue an example to all others in like maner to folowe the same: And specially now whilest the quenes Maiesty mindeth so graciously to prouide for ye breding and kepyng of great horses, whiche no doubt shoulde be to the greate profiting of this our cōmon weale: In the most partes wherof, partly for lacke of arte, and partly for lack of exercise, chiualry is sore decayed: I shal not only thinke my labour wel bestowed: but also to haue receiued ye greatest reward yt I could possible wish or desire. Yea, and shalbe encouraged therby, to attempt hereafter some other thyng of more weight. Wherin I may shewe my selfe thankefull to your L. for so courteously acceptynge this my labour & good wyll, whiche is and shal∣be alwayes bent to do your H. suche poore seruice as I can.
