



AFtre what time the barrein tra∣ueiles of longe seruice, had dri∣uē me to thinke libertie the best rewarde of my simple life, right honorable Erle and that I had determined to leaue wrastlyng with for∣tune, and to giue my self wholie to liue vpon my studie, and the labours of my hand: I thought it moste sitting with the duetie that I owe to God and manne, to bestowe my time (if I could) as well to the profite of other, as of my self. Not co∣ueting to make of my floudde, another mānes ebbe (the Cancre of all commune wealthes) but rather to sette other a flote, where I my self strake on groūd. Tour∣ning me therefore, to the searche of wise∣dome
and vertue, for whose sake either we tosse, or oughte to tosse so many pa∣pers and tongues: although I founde a∣boute my self, verie litle of that Threasu∣re, yet remembred I that a fewe yeres paste, at the instaunce of a good Citezein (who might at those daies, by aucthoritie commaunde me) I had begonne to tran∣slate, a litle booke named in the Latine, Omnium gentium mores, gathered longe sence by one Iohannes Boemus, a manne as it appereth, of good iudgemente and diligence. But so corrupted in the Prin∣ting, that aftre I had wrasteled a space, with sondrie Printes, I rather determi∣ned to lose my labour of the quartre tran¦slacion, then to be shamed with the haulf. And throwing it a side, entended no fur∣ther to wearie my self therwithall, at the leaste vntill I mighte finde a booke of a bettre impressiō. In searching wherof at this my retourne to my studie, although I found not at the full that, that I sought for: yet vndrestanding emong the booke sellers (as one talke bringes in another) that men of good learning and eloquēce, bothe in the Frenche, and Italien tonge, had not thought skorne to bestowe their
time aboute the translacion therof, and that the Emperours Maiestie that now is, vouchedsaulfe to receiue the presenta∣tion therof, at the Frenche translatours hande, as well appereth in his booke: it kindled me againe, vpon regard of mine owne profite, and other menues moe, to bring that to some good pointe, that earst I had begonne. For (thought I) seing the booke hath in it, muche pleasant bariee of thinges, and yet more profite in the pitthe: if it faile to bee otherwise rewar∣ded, it shall it thanckefully of the good be regarded. Wherefore setting vpon it a fresshe, where the booke is deuided acor∣ding to thaunciente deuision of the earth, into thre partes, Affrique, Asie, and Eu∣rope: hauing brought to an ende the two firste partes, I found no persone in mine opiniō so fite as your honour, to present theim vnto. For seing the whole processe ronneth vpon gouernaunce and Lawes, for thadministracion of commune weal∣thes, in peace and in warre, of aunciente times to fore our greate graundfathers daies: to whom mighte I bettre presente it, then to a Lorde of verie nobilitie and wisedome, that hath bene highe Mare-shalle
in the fielde abrode, deputie of the locke and keie of this realme, and a coun∣sailour at home, of thre worthie princes. Exercised so many waies in the waues of a sickle Commune wealthe: troubled sometime, but neuer disapoincted of ho∣nourable successe. To your good Lorde∣shippe then I yelde & committe, the firste fruictes of my libertie, the firste croppe of my labours, this firste daie of the Newe yere: beseching the same in as good parte to receiue it, as I humblie offre it, and at your pleasure to vnfolde the Fardle, and considre the stuffe. Whiche euer the farder in, shall fieme I truste the more pleasaunte and fruictefulle. And to con∣clude, if I shall ondresrāde, that your ho∣nour delighteth in this, it shal be a cause sufficiente, to make me go in hande with Europe, that yet remaineth vntouched. Almightie God giue vnto your Lorde∣shippe prosperous fortune, in sounde ho∣nour and healthe.

