


MY good Lorde,
certaine auncient Phi∣losophers
haue made
maruellous complaints
against the ingratitude
and misknowledge of man, for that he
neuer entreth into his owne conscience,
and considereth not his owne proper na∣ture,
althoughe that his industrie and
prouidence be so great, that it spreadeth
all abrode. In such sort, that neyther the
compasse and largenesse of the Earth,
the violence nor deepenesse of the Seas,
neyther the amplitude and spreading of

the Ayre, neyther the burning heate nor
distance of the Sunne, neyther yet the
course or reuolutiō aswell of ye Clouds,
as of the Firmamēt, can retaine or hin∣der
the celerity of his Spirit, but that he
will séeke & know the nature & resort of
al y• is contained in the vniuersal world.
The furie and rage of y• wilde beasts he
tameth and maistereth, and he only re∣maineth
without bridell or snaffle, by
his diligence and promptnesse of wit, he
hath described the properties of herbes
and plants, the secret vertues of stones,
with the calcionating of mettels. And
notwithstanding man is so masked and
disguised, that he knoweth not himselfe.
He is the Heraulde, beginner and fore∣shewer
of things contayned in the cir∣cute
of this worlde, and yet he is blinde
and dumbe in his owne doings. He fore∣séeth
and discouereth the nature and pro∣pertie
of the Elementes, he reformeth,
ordeyneth, compasseth and weyeth that
which is séene vnder the concauits of the
Skies. And neuerthelesse, man in him∣selfe

is as one confoūded and ouercome.
In consideration wherof (my good Lord)
I haue vnto him addressed this Rule, by
the which he may contemplate and ad∣uise,
without being drawen beside him
selfe, his infirmitie and miserie, (to the
ende) that making an anotamie or fore∣shewing
of all the partes of his life, he
be the sooner moued to detest & abhorre
his vile and corrupt liuing. And if we
would be equitable Iudges of humaine
actions, what is this worlde, anye other
than a Rule, circle or compasse, where
as some play the handicraftes men, & of
base condicion, others represent Kings,
Dukes, Earles, Marquesses, Knights,
Barons and others constituted in dig∣nities,
and notwithstanding, assoone as
they haue layde downe their maskings
and disguisings, and that death cōmeth,
which maketh an ende of this bloudie
Tragedie, then they knowe themselues
to be all men, and wretched sinners, and
then the Lorde God which is in heauen,
laugheth at their foolish enterprises, and

vanities, as witnesseth ye Prophet Da∣uid,
yea with such a dreadfull laughter,
that he maketh vs quake for feare, and
the earth to shake. Man then (in my
iudgement) is subiect to an infinit num∣ber
of miseries and calamities, in the
which he is wrapped in from his birth e∣uen
to his graue (wherefore) séeing this
pitiful Metamorphose, & also his excellēt
degrée of honor, which throughe his per∣fectnesse
and insolent life he shal obtain,
he is constrained to wish and desier hea∣uen,
yea to sigh and crie out for it, as the
place of his firste originall and birth.
Which is in summe (my good Lord) that
which at this present I doe offer, conse∣crate
and dedicate vnto your Lordship.
Although that I must nedes confesse, as
the veritie is, that in consideration of
your vertues, integritie of life, sinceritie
of maners, to the knowledge that your
Lordship hath in all good disciplines, as
well deuine as humain, to the rigorous
assaults of fortune, the which you haue
vanquished and ouercome by your me∣rites

as well in the publike weale of
Scotland, as in our Realme of Fraūce:
the memorie whereof is so great, that it
spreadeth all ouer Europia. It shoulde
therefore be more decent and comlie to
honor your Lordeship with a Rule of
triumph and honor with the which the
auncient Romains were accustomed to
celebrate and eliuate the memorie of
those that had profited their natiue coū∣trie
than to present you a Rule of mise∣ries,
such as I haue here entituled, with
the which your Lordship I trust will be
contented, hoping for some other worke
of mine better labored and pollished.
Which I pretend by the help of God,
to treate on in another tongue,
and that shortly shal come to
light vnder the protec∣tion
and fauor of
your deuine
vertues.
