



FOr want of a costly and precious Iewel, haue here offered to you this base gyfte: The discriptyon of Aphrique (my good lorde) though not so good as is wylled, nor so ex¦cellent as is wyshed. Yet mooste humbly besechynge you to take it in good parte. It is sayd the minde of gyftes is best: For in the gyftes of frendes, the value of the thinges whiche be presented, be not to be considred, but the good wyl of the presenter. That worthy Kynge

Xerxes receyued thanfully of a cer∣teyne stranger a handful of water, And Chryst also accepted the wy∣dowes two farthynges, and pre∣ferred theym before other greate and ryche offeringes: So I trust you wyll this my rude and homely present, and wey in an equal peyre of balans my good wyl towardes your Lordeshyp, for to my power I haue done, and as farre as my capacytie wolde reache, as well in the translation as other wayes, I haue wrytten, In magnis et volu∣isse sat est. In greater thynges whi∣che might passe my simple capacitie it is sufficiēt for me to haue willed, wyl otherwhiles especially in those thinges which might passe a mans power, doth merite comendacions although his enterprise take no ef∣fect. To my purpose. Now seynge that the end or extinct of my longe

wyshe is fynyshed, I can not but hyghly laude God therfore, so ioy∣full is your Lordeshyps prosperus successe vnto me, as the fortunate hour is of the traueling woman in the delyuerance of her chyld, your longe aduersitie was not so lamen¦table, but your prosperitie is as ioyful. Trulye as often as I per∣pende and wey with my selfe the depnes of your aduersities causeth me to wonder, consyderynge how that you haue ben tossed in the wa¦ues of the sea, in stormes, tēpests, and in extreme peryls, yea, amon∣gest (if I myght so say) deuouring Lions, and yet to se how god hath preserued your good Lordeshippe: what may I say. shal I ascrybe it to dame Fortune, as the poites did in olde time, and render vp thankes to her? No certeinly, I shal thanke the myghty Lorde aboue, the pre∣seruer

of his electe. I do fully per∣swade with my selfe that god hath chosen you, and preserued you, to the ende that you shulde be hereaf∣ter, (when it shall please oure ver∣tuous Quene to call you) a worthy coūceller, a preseruer of the publike weale, & a fortherer of her good & godli laws: for god hath endowed you with a mooste precious gyfte, and hath gyuen you a great talent and wel worthy. For that you day¦ly augment and encrease it. Howe can a man but wonder (thoughe that the giftes of God be not to be marueiled at) as often as he shal conceaue with hym selfe the course of your lyfe togethers, with your education. I meane your longe im∣prisonment, in suche a desert place, where in a maner neyther siuilitie, nor wysedome was to be learned, yet to beholde your state and study

howe that you haue applied youre mynde to good letters, as well to the Romains as to the french, Ita¦lion, and Spanysh besides al these I can not so easely expresse as con∣ceaue the nomber of other vertues and qualyties▪ which raine in you, what condinge prayse dothe that chylde deserue, which with out a nourse doth fede him selfe with the swete pappe of learnynge? Euen so howe much is your Lordship wor¦thy of lawde, who without tutors but of and by your owne industry and labour, haue atteyned to this perfection of learnynge, what preg¦nant wyt is this, it is easely deser∣ued, howe well you haue folowed the peynters lyne, here may we se nulla preterit sine linea dies so haue you let no day escape without dra∣wynge of a profitable lyne, as you haue begon so procede, and euery day drawe a lyne to the profyte of

your good lady and quene aduaun¦cement of her honour, and the com¦mon weales, so in studyeng, with god you shall be reteyned, and of the people beloued. For yf the late offenders had bestowed their wit∣tes and emploied their knowlege to the seruice of theyr Quene and my∣stres, God wolde haue prospered them, but seynge they dyd contra∣ry, he shortened not onely theyr most nequitious and wycked pur∣pose, but also punysshed some of theym accordyng to theyr desertes. Truely it was a Goodely myr∣roure and glasse, for all nobles to loke in, exhortyng your Lordeship to beholde both theyr beginnynge and theyr endes. what was the di∣struction of the countrey of Caria, which once was suche a plentyfull contrey as ours hath ben and wyl be ageyne, nowe we haue so ver∣tuous

a quene, and noble councel, who studyeth dayly and trauaileth hourly to bryng in plenty, but only the lybertie of a multytude? This vnlawfull lybertie is called Anar∣chie, a myschyefe truly as euyll as any tyranny, I wold al men wold haue in remembraunce this godly sayeng, Nosce te ipsum, Plato dis∣crybeth this diuyne sentens to god Appollo, but truly I wyll discribe it to all men, and wolde councel thē to lay the feare of God before their eyes, to remember their beginning, theyr byrth present state, and end, So wolde I wishe that your lord¦shyppe wolde beare in memorye, your former aduersities with the goodnes of God extēded vpon you, in delyuerynge you out of the han∣des of all your enemyes, haue a re∣spect to the poore, gyue attentyue eare to theyr peticions, feade them

which honger, and gyue theym to drynke which thyrst, and cheryshe your poore seruantes, for to what prayse with god, loue with the peo¦ple, honour to the renome doth the noble man ateyne to? which in time of his auctoritie and lyfe preferreth and aduaunceth his pore seruaun∣tes, percontra in how much displea¦sure with God, hate with people, distruction of his honour, and into other infinit dangers doth he incur in whose seruyce his poore seruan∣tes do not floryshe but decay. I cannot but lament so often as I call to memory the lamentacions of dyuers of the late dukes seruantes the which (as they sayd) be vtter∣li brought to ruine and extreme po¦uertie by seruynge of him, wheras they trusted to haue floryshed, yea some of them cursyng him, and wy∣shed that they had neuer seene his

head. Alas alas what ouersyght was it, when that in his chyfe and freshe dignitie he myght haue ad∣uaunced them whiche toke peynes and spent theyr substans to do him honour. Truly eyther couetousnes surmounted him, or els vnderstan¦dynge fayled him. We haue one worthy Byshoppe in this realme, which hath purchased him selfe per¦petuall honour and prayse, as well for his conuenient hospitalitie, as for preferrynge of his seruauntes, whose doyenge be notable, a clere myrrour for all the reste of nobles to beholde, trustyng your lordship wyl folow his steppes, and lay his actes before your eyes as a glasse to loke in, so in doenge, I knowe god wyl (as he hath al redy) cause the people to loue you, gyue you long lyfe: with prosperous successe and your fatall ende honorable. I

shall not neade (my good Lorde) to be tedious in rehersing of many of these exāples, for that I know your singuler wysdome hath attei∣ned to a farder knowledge of them then I am able to declare or shew, but to the entente that other maye therby be admonished, so by coun∣cell may folowe the steppes which leade them to vertue and goodnes. I haue enterprised (honorable lord to translate into Englyshe Aphri∣que, Asie. and Europia, the .iii. parts of the worlde, and for asmuche as the hole volume is great, and ha∣uyng smal tyme, and leysure gran∣ted to me, wolde be loth notwith∣standyng this fyrst part shulde be hindred in the impression, thought it good not onely to dedicate this to your Lordshyp, but also for the fruite I perceaue in the hole worke to thende that the reader shulde sa∣uour

ye residue, haue therfore both set forth the hole table & a prologe, trustynge that he wyll couet the o∣ther two partes. And bycause I owe to my lorde of Darbie for his many and manyfold plesures done for me, a great some, I pretend in one part of payment to presente to him the discription of Asie, or La∣cie the seconde parte, beynge also greatly in daunger to my good mi∣stres Clarentius for her sondrye trauayles for me, haue appoyn∣ted the last part of Europia to her mystreship. These two laste with expediciō I wyl endeuour my selfe to end In the meane season, I shal most humbly beseche your Lorde∣shyp to accept this in good worthe and the faultes therein, do impute to ignorans, partely for want of tyme, besydes al this to consyder my pore estate, longe tyme absent

absent from my studies, and the be¦ginnyng of my enterpryses, being the first that euer I translated out of the frenche tonge, and to my sim¦ple iudgemēt (the obscuritie of the sentences considred) neyther is the translation out of latin, Italion, or Spanyshe, so difficile and hard, as the translation of french into Eng∣lyshe. To conclude in token of a Newyeres gyft I do here exhibit vnto your Lordship this discriptiō of Aphrique. A gyft I graunt not so gret as is owed, nor so good as is wyshed, (as before I sayde) yet where office and loue oweth much and wyll wolde paye all, thoughe power drawethe backe not able to discharge either loues dette, or ac∣quite all that wyll wolde, yet by the vewe of any reasonable iudge the yelde of thone, and the bente of thother, ought with the creditour

to supply the thyrdes defect.
The cause occurrynge lyke in me, be it lawfull to vse such a shyft, not onely to excuse my small habilitie exhibytynge so small tribute of so much as is owed and wylled, but also to grate at your Lordeshyps handes, notwithstandynge accep∣tacion therof as of a sufficiēt mo∣numente of loues dette, and token of wylles wyshe, how so euer malyngne power shall temper the same in the vtteraune. Thus I cōmende your Lorde¦shyppe to God.
