



THE Philosopher Zeno (Right Ho∣nourable,
and my most worthily estee∣med
Lord) being demaunded on a time
by what meanes a man might attaine to
happinesse; made answere: By resor∣ting
to the dead, and hauing fami∣liar
conuersation with them. Inti∣mating
thereby: The reading of an∣cient
and moderne Histories, and endeauouring to learne
such good instructions, as haue bene obserued in our Pre∣decessors.
A Question also was mooued by great King Ptolomy,
to one of the learned wise Interpreters. In what occasions a King
should exercise himselfe, whereto thus hee replyed: To know
those things which formerly haue bin done: And to read
Bookes of those matters which offer themselues dayly, or
are fittest for our instant affaires. And lastly, in seeking
those things whatsoeuer, that make for a Kingdomes pre∣seruation,
and the correction of euill manners or exam∣ples.
Vpon these good and warrantable grounds (most Noble Lord)
beside many more of the same Nature, which I omit, to auoide pro∣lixity,
I dare boldly affirme, that such as are exercised in the rea∣ding
of Histories, although they seeme to be but yong in yeares, and
slenderly instructed in worldly matters: yet grauity and gray-hea∣ded

age speaketh maturely in them, to the no meane admiration of
common and vulgar iudgement. As contrariwise, such as are igno∣rant
of things done and past, before themselues had any being: con∣tinue
still in the estate of children, able to speake or behaue them∣selues
no otherwise; and, euen within the bounds of their Natiue
Countries (in respect of knowledge or manly capacity) they are no
more then well-seeming dumbe Images.
In due consideration of the precedent allegations, and vppon the
command, as also most Noble encouragement of your Honour from
time to time; this volume of singular and exquisite Histories, va∣ried
into so many and exact natures, appeareth in the worlds view,
vnder your Noble patronage and defence, to be safely sheelded from
foule mouthed slander and detraction, which is too easily throwne
vpon the very best deseruing labours.
I know (most worthy Lord) that many of them haue (long since)
bene published before, as stolne from the first originall Author, and
yet not beautified with his sweete stile and elocution of phrases, nei∣ther
sauouring of his singular morall applications. For, as it was his
full scope and ayme, by discouering all vices in their vgly deformi∣ties,
to make their mortall enemies (the sacred Vertues) to shine
the clearer, being set downe by them, and compared with them: so
euery true and vpright iudgement, in obseruing the course of these
well-carried Nouels, shall plainly perceiue, that there is no spare
made of reproofe in any degree whatsoeuer, where sin is embraced,
and grace neglected; but the iust deseruing shame and punishment
thereon inflticted, that others may be warned by their example. In
imitation of witty Aesope; who reciteth not a Fable, but graceth it
with a iudicious morall application; as many other worthy Writers
haue done the like.
For instance, let me heere insert one. A poore man, hauing a pike
staffe on his shoulder, and trauailing thorow a Countrey Village, a
great Mastiue Curre ran mainly at him, so that hardly he could de∣fend
himselfe from him. At the length, it was his chance to kill the
Dogge: for which, the Owner immediately apprehending him, and
bringing him before the Iudge, alledged, that he had slaine his ser∣uant,
which defended his life, house, and goods, and therefore chal∣lenged

satisfaction. The Iudge leaning more in fauour to the Plain∣tiffe,
as being his friend, neighbor, and familiar, then to the iustice
and equity of the cause; reprooued the poore fellow somwhat sharpe∣ly,
and peremptorily commanded him, to make satisfaction, or els he
would commit him to prison. That were iniustice replyed the poore
man, because I kilde the dogge in defence of mine owne life, which
deserueth much better respect then a million of such Curres. Sirra,
sirra, saide the Iudge, then you should haue turned the other end of
your staffe, and not the pike, so the dogges life had beene saued, and
your owne in no danger. True Sir (quoth the fellow) if the dog would
haue turn'd his taile, and bit mee with that, and not his teeth, then
we both had parted quietly.
I know your Honor to be so truly iudicious, that your selfe can
make the morall allusion, both in defence of my poore paines, and ac∣ceptation
of the same into your protection: with most humble sub∣mission
of my selfe, and all my vttermost endeauours, to bee alwayes
ready at your seruice.
