



THe paltring Poet Cherillus, dedicated his dauncing poemes to that mighty Monarche Alexander, saying, that he knewe assuredly, if that he woulde not accept thē in that they were not pithy, yet he wold not vtterly reiect thē in that they had a shew of Poetry. Aemilius thinking to gratify that worthy conquerer Caesar, with some curious peece of workmanship, waded so far in the depth of his arte, as strayning curtesie with cunning, he skypt beyond his skill, not beeing able to make it perfect. VVho beeing blamed of his freend, for stryuing further thē his sleeue would stretch, answered: that although arte & skyll were wanting to beau¦tifie the worke, yet hart and wyll did polish that part, which lacke of cunning had left vnperfect. VVhose answere, as one guilty of a greater cryme, I clayme for a sufficient ex∣cuse of my folly, that durst enterprise to stryue beyonde my strength, knowing my selfe vnable, both by nature and arte to bring this or any part thereof by mine owne skill to a wyse ende. For if the Fouler is to bee condemned of folly that takes in hand to talke of hunting, then may I wel be dubbed a dolte, which beeing vnskilfull, dare take in hande to de∣sipher the substaunce of Loue, that am but a foole.

But as there is no greater cooling carde to arash wit, then want, so there is not a more speedy spurre to a willing mind, then the force of duetie, which droue me in a double doubt, either to be counted as bold as blinde Bayard, in presuming too farre, or to incurre the preiudice of ingratitude, in being to slowe: But as wishes are of no value, so his will as vaine that couettes to paie his debtes with counterfait coyne, there in I finde the fault, and commit the offence. For beeing greatly indebted to my honourable good Lord by duety, for the first payment I offer although not mine owne labours, to you his honours worthy Nephue, this small pamphlet of M. Iohn Boccace a famous Poet, and translated by M. Bar∣tholmewe Young of the middle temple, a peece of worke worthy the wearing, in that it sheweth the manner howe to esehew deceitfull & wicked loue: which considered although wisdōe willed me to goe (non Vltra crepidā) I thought good to present this pamphlet vnder your worships protectiō: ho∣ping you will deigne to accept the matter although it be but prose, though something vnsauery for want of skil, yet accept the Authours well meaning for his and my boldnesse, in that his skill and my good will is not in the wane, whatsoeuer this worke dooth want. The Emperour Traian neuer wan∣ted sutors because so curteously he would heare euery mans complainte. All that courted Atalana were hunters, where Moecenas, lodgeth schollers will flocke. And your worshippe being a worthy fosterer of the learned, hath forced my au∣thour by your vertue and me by duetie, to offer these his fruites at the shrine of your worships curtesie. Beseeching the almighty to send you health, wealth and prosperity.

