



IN asmuch, ry∣ght vertuous father, as god hath not onely called you for longe (as ma∣ny men haue wel perceiued) to suche a knowledge of hys moost holy worde, as dyd styrre vp in you both a great reuerence towardes the same, and cause you ryght earnestly
 to desyre to haue it trewly taught & set forth to the glory of god in al pla¦ces, but specially amongest vs hys people, of thys your natiue coūtrey: but hath also, after it hath now plea¦sed hym to offre the same frely vnto vs, called you to haue the ouersight therof, I haue thought it not onely mete, but therwythal my boūde dew tye to present thys my poore worke vnto your faythful dyscretion. And not bycause I dyd eyther iudge any thynge to be in it whych I wolde de¦clare vnto you, as yf you were igno¦raūt of the same, or els that I feard you wolde not prouyde (as much as in you laye) the trewth in al thynges to be knowen and set forth wythout the vtteryng of my rude and symple mynde in it: but onely bycause I, knowyng the slendernesse of my ler∣nyng, and beyng yet constrayned to wryte of thys so weyghty a matter, feared that there might be sumwhat
 wrytten of me in it, that shoulde not fully agree wt the veryte of goddes worde, which is now so greatly desi∣red almost of al mē to be sincerely de¦clared, that it semeth they wold euen deuoure the same, yf they myght but ones spye it out. I haue therfore hū¦bly gyue this poore worke vnto you inspecially, that it myght rather be corrected by your godly iudgement and dyscrete ouersyght, thē thought worthy to be thankefully receyued. And lesse the rudenesse therof might yet let you from the reading of it for the same, I haue here also, in a brefe summe, set forth the special matters of it, whych are these.
Fyrst, in declaryng how our Lorde Iesu Christe myght be honoured a ryght in thys sacrament, when it is mynistred at an holy souper, I haue shewed what God gyueth vs by his holy worde and sacramentes, & speci¦ally what he gyueth vs by this most
 holy sacramente of hys bodye and blode, by the whiche I haue sayde, that our lorde Christe, (though tho∣rowe his heauenly spirite also) of∣fereth and presenteth vnto vs hys very body and blode, as it was both in sufferynge death for vs here and as it is also at the ryghte hande of God for vs nowe, that is to saye, as his very bodily Passion & trew Re∣surrection and Ascensyon, was and is continually the onelye meanes that purchaseth vs the grace and good wyll of God for the remyssion of all our synnes, and presenteth the same freely vnto vs by hys mooste mighty spirite & by this his holy sa∣cramente, for to helpe vs bothe to a sure fayth and trust in the same free remyssyon, and for to woorke in vs also all the hole strength and vertue of his very body and blode: as the very same mekenesse, loue and cha∣ryte with al the holynes, ryghtuous∣nesse
 and purite that hath alwayes bene and is in it. These .ii. thynges chiefely doth our lorde Iesus Christ offer and freely present vnto vs by hys myghtye and mooste heauenly spirite and by thys holy sacrament, to thentente that we myghte so re∣ceyue by the vertue of hys bodelye passyon, whyche he suffered yet but once for all, the free remission of our synnes at all tymes, and by his trew resurrectyon and ascensyon our full iustificatyon: lyke as he hathe dyed for the one aswell as for the other. By meanes wherof I haue sayd al∣so, that thys sacrament is called the bodye and blode of Christe, and the very testament or promyse of theym beyng present with it thus, at al such times as it is ministred according to his institutiō. Wherupō I haue in lykewyse further declared, that for∣asmuche as there is present thus the bodye and blode of Christ, so muste
 this nedes be the honoure and wor∣shyppe specially dew vnto it when it is ministred. That we do fyrste and before we wyll receyue it, beyng the treasure of all heauenly vertues, cō∣ceyue suche a fayth and trust in hys bodyly passyon and trew resurrecty∣on, thorow this his free and vndeser¦ued callynge of vs to the better re∣membraunce of it by thys sacrament of hys owne instituting for the same purpose, as maye cause vs both to laye awaye all the vyces within our corrupt bodyes with suche a repen∣taunce as feleth vs sumwhat to haue nede of the greate vertues of∣fered in it, and to beleue also that we shall the more assuredly receyue then the full remyssyon of all oure synnes thorow the worthines of the same passion and resurrectyon.
And secondly yt we do forth with vp on thys callyng of vs vnto faith by thys sacrament, receyue it externally
 also accordyng to hys ordinance, for the strengthenyng & confyrmyng of the same fayth the more assuredly in vs, and for our better encreasyng in his most godly vertues. And third∣ly that we from thence forth do geue ouer oure selues holly to the rest of hys lawes, but specyally to the cha∣ritable and louyng expressing of his mekenesse and pacience to oure ney∣ghboures agayne, lyke as he hathe moste gentely dealte with vs in ge∣uyng theym vnto vs freely before. These .iii. thinges, repentance, faith, and amendemente towardes oure neyghboure, are the special honours dwe vnto thys sacrament at all such tymes as it is ministred accordynge to his ordinance, wherwith we must honour it in spirite & verite. And yet do not these kindes of honouring it, let yt we shold not at al such times as we wyll receyue it, humbly honoure it with all the powers and membres
 of our bodyes also (yf some necessitie do not debarre the same) as with the vncoueryng of our headdes, wyth the knelyng and bowyng downe of our bodyes, and with the praysyng of hys goodnes therein with oure tounges: but the honouring of it in spirite and veryte doeth seclude all other tokens to be done vnto it, but when we can so wourshyppe it be∣fore. As to wete: we can neuer ho∣noure thys sacramente a ryght with handes and knees, but when we can fyrst conceiue such a fayth and trust in the bodylye passyon and trew re∣surrectyon of Christe for the remys∣syon of our synnes, by hys free cal∣lyng of vs vnto it thorow ye presen∣tyng of thys his sacrament to be ex∣ternally receyued in the remēbrance of the same, as causeth vs both to re∣pent of our former synnes, and to be redye and glad to receyue it also ac∣cordyng to hys ordynaunce for the
 better assuraunce of the same fayth in vs. The whiche fayth as we can neuer conceiue it by thys sacrament, but onely when it is presented to be externally receyued accordynge to Christes ordynaunce (for hys ordy∣naunce in it and in al other thynges is the onely thing that causeth vs to gather a sure fayth in hym) so is it then onelye to be wourshypped ex∣ternally also, and at none other tyme.
And thyrdely I haue shewed by a plaine declaratyon taken bothe out of the holy scripture and of the vse of the prymatiue churche, that there should no messe be done wher∣in the souper of the Lorde is hand∣led, without communicantes, that is to saye, without suche as maye haue the sacrament communicated vnto them. And that thys is trew, sayncte Cyprian speakyng of the ryghte v∣syng of the lordes supper sayd also,
 in wrytyng of it thus: uti{que} ille sacer∣dos uice Christi fungitur,Lib. ii. Epist. iii qui id quod Christus fecit, imitatur. That is to saye, that priest doubtlesse doeth ex∣ecute the office and doing of Christ in thys sacrament, that doth folowe euen the same thyng, whiche he dyd in it. Nowe yf that priest do execute the offyce and doynge of Christe a ryght, that foloweth it only ye Christ hym selfe dyd in it, then do not those priestes vse thys sacrament a ryght that wyl not entende, when they wyl holde the souper of ye Lord, to styrre vp a trew fayth in Christ for the fre¦remyttyng of all synnes and for the conferrynge of all other vertues, by the offerynge of it to be receyued ex∣ternally, and that wyth the gyuyng of suche thankes, thorow the recy∣ting vp of ye great goodnesse of god shewed forth in oure sauiour Iesu Christ, as may quickē in the people both a sure fayth in Christ and also
 a reuerence towardes hys ordinaū∣ces, or euer they shall receyue it: but wyll make them beleue eyther that they shall receyue as muche profyte yf they do but loke vpon the sacra∣ment as God hath ordeyned to put into theyr myndes by the corporall eatynge and drynking therof, or els that they shal take as muche profyt yf they do receiue it but in one kynd onely, as they shuld yf they dyd take it in both.
And fourthly I haue declared that it ought to be muche reproued in a trew christen man, to be present at the holy souper of the Lorde, and not to receyue ye sacrament. Bycause the doynge therof muste nedes pro∣cede of the imperfection of fayth: as eyther bycause men do not beleue these wordes a ryght when they are spoken vnto them: take, eate, take, drynke, or yt they do not esteme dere ynough ye healthfull meate & drinke
 of hys body and blode, or elles they haue some superstitious feare of the sacramētes, in thynkyng them to re∣quyre a ful perfection of lyfe to be in vs before we shoulde receyue them, when they requyre none other per∣fection to be in vs then that we wyll but ones desyre vnfeynedly to haue oure imperfection and weakenesse strengthened by suche thynges as they frely offre vs to do ye same with all. Now whyche of all these thre do holde a man from receyuyng of the sacrament, it is doutlesse worthye great reprofe.
These foure thynges specially, dere father, haue I declared in thys lytle worke, and for the better profe of them to be as they are here decla∣red (as it semeth to my poore iudge∣ment) I haue also confuted some of the principall argumentes, whyche the Pope, thorowe hys adherentes,
 was wont to make for the contrary. Moste humbly desyryng your good lordshippe now, that yf there be any thyng in it whych do not agree with the veritie of goddes worde, to ad∣monyshe me of ye same, that it might so thorow your godly correction, at the least way do not hurte, though it be lyke to do but lytle good. Which thynge yf it myght please you of your goodnesse to do, I woulde not onelye retracte and wyth all dyly∣gence reuoke agayne all suche faul∣tes as your discretion shall fynde in it, but also thynke my selfe boūde to praye for your good estate so longe as my lyfe shoulde endure. The whyche I beseche the lyuynge God, thorowe hys dearely beloued sonne Iesu Christe longe to continue, to the glorye of hys moste holy name, and to the profyte of your soule.
And thus moste hartely fare ye wel.

Wrytten the seconde yeare of the reygne of our souerayne lorde kyng Edwarde the syxte, and the xiiii. of Nouem∣bre. 

