



SIR,
YOur extraordinary ap∣probation, and accep∣tance of my Directions for walking with God, fal∣ling into your hands, by Gods good provi∣dence, I know not how; accompanied with such noble circumstances, and expressi∣ons of much undeserved respect to the Au∣thour; but especially of your affectionate love to the 1. Tim. 1.11. glorious Gospell of the blessed God (farre dearer to every gracious heart, which truely tastes the mysterie, and mercies of Christ in it; then it's dearest blood, or whatsoever is most dere-able under the Sunne, or admired most amongst the Sonnes of men), hath en∣couraged

me at this time, to take the bold∣nesse, to present this present Treatise more immediately, and by speciall interest into your owne hand. And I am the farre better pleased with my choise; because I hold it a matter of singular comfort, and speciall con∣sequence, to have an hand in diverting the eie of any, that attends upon earthly Majesty, from too much gazing upon the outward il∣lustrious splendour, which is woont to glister in the Courts of great Princes; to the admi∣ration, and embracement of the glorious, and ever-lasting beauty of the Lord Iesus: In re∣spect whereof, all the fairest beames of felici∣ty and joy, which shine from the most orient Imperiall Diadems, that crowne the face of the Earth, are but a Moate of darkenesse, and Lumpe of vanity. And that for divers reasons; 1. First, Such as stand in the presence of mighty Kings, are, or ever should be, men of greatest parts, deepest understandings, and most eminent abilities every Way: Which being happily sanctifyed by a fruitfull influ∣ence from Heaven; and by the helpe of the holy Ghost, bent to the right end, and spent upon the Objects, they ought; become glo∣riously serviceable to the King of Kings; pro∣portionably to their native excellency above ordinary gifts, and the vulgar sort of suffici∣encies. Great endowments, in what kinde so∣ever, gvided by a divine hand, in their exer∣cise and agitations, doe ever, a great deale of good. To give Instance, and not stirre from

the Court: The Lord of Heaven vouchsa∣fed to King Iames, of famous memory, and One of the learnedest Princes, that ever wore a Crowne upon Earth, such a strong and enlarged understanding, that wee should have magnified it, as admirable, even in a pri∣vate man. The same good hand of providence in great mercy, directed it upon the right Ob∣ject; even the defense of the But as for the holy truth professed by my selfe, and those of the reformed Religion, &c. King Iames Re∣monst. pag. 176. holy Truth of our blessedly reformed religion, and destruction of Antichristianisme, that accursed Hydra of all heresies; and notoriously infamous, both to this, and the other World, for horrible Massacres, and Bellarmine, Eudaeo∣no-Iohannes, Suarez, Becanus, Mariana, with such Monsters▪ teach the Doctrine of Parricides Ibid. pag. 5. If any except, and say; these are but private Doctors: Heare King Iames afterward: If the Pope doth not ap∣proove, and like the practise of King kil∣ling; wherefore hath not his Holinesse imposed some severe censure, with a fearefull frowne, upon the Booke of Mariana the Iesuite, (by whom Parricides are commended, Nay, highly extolled) when his Holinesse hath been pleased to call-in some other of Mariana's bookes. Againe, wherefore did his Holinesse advise himselfe, to censure the decree of the Court of Parlia∣ment in Paris against Iohn Chastell? Wherefore did he suffer Garnet and Oldcorne, my Powder-miners, both by Bookes and Pictures, vendible under his nose in Rome, to bee inroled in the Canon of holy Martyrs? And when Hee saw two great Kings murdered one after another: wherefore by some publike declaration did not his Holinesse testifie to all Christendome, his inward sense, and true apprehension of so great misfortune, as all Europe had just cause to lament, on the behalfe of France? Wherefore did not his Holinesse publish some Law, or Pontificiall Decree, to provide for the security of Kings in time to come? Ibid. pag. 222.223. See Histor. Iesuit. put out by Lucius. Wherein you may see their bloody behaviour in many Kingdomes.murthering of Kings. Where∣upon, besides that, Hee hath by his Princely Pen, given such a deadly wound to that Beast of Rome, that Hee is never like to stand upon His foure legs againe: Hee hath also left in His learned Labours, such an immortall mo∣nument of Demonstrative light, & invincible Remonstrance against that bloody superstition, that I am perswaded, it will proove a most

soveraigne The mighty working of King Iames his Workes upon the Ad∣versaries, is intimated unto us to in the Preface before his Workes.
They looke upon His Maiesties Bookes, as men looking upon Blazing , with amazement; feating they portend some strange thing; and bring with them a certaine influence, to worke great change and alteration in the World: Neither is their expectatiō here∣in deceived; For wee have seene with our eyes, the Operatiō of His Majesties Works in the Consciences of their Men so farre, as from their highest Conlve to their low∣est Cells, there have been, that have been converted by them. Bishop of Winten. preservative, and a mighty Mo∣tive, far stronger then a mountaine of Brasse, to keepe all His Royall Posterity, which shall hereafter successively sit upon His Regall Throne, to the worlds end, in a thorow uni∣versall, and everlasting detestation of Popery. Chamier, that great glory of France, and the whole Christian World, was bountifully en∣riched from Heaven with singularity of lear∣ning, and Polemicall Parts; which being tur∣ned the right way, have happily produced a Panstratia, such victorious Volumes, and so unanswerably triumphant over all Popish Sophistry; that not all the Iesuites in Chri∣stendom, tho they should rake Hell afresh, for some new, rotten distinctions, to uphold their tottering Babell, shall ever bee able to reply to any purpose. Gnash the teeth they may with griefe and shame enough; raile like the vassals of the Revel. 19.2.great Whore, impressioned with the impudency of her forehead, and lie a∣gainst Him voluminously; But for any possi∣bility of a sound Answer, they must all let that alone for ever. As on the contrary, great parts empoisoned, and mis-imploied, plague extraordinarily. The greater sufficiency with∣out grace, is but a sharper sword in a madder hand. Hatred to goodnesse, and height of Place, attended with capacity and cunning, worke a world of mischiefe. Iulian, the Apo∣state, being an Emperour of admirable elo∣quence, and exact learning; What horrible

worke? What hurt and havocke did he make in the Primitive times, amongst the people of God! The Iesuites at this day, brought up in variety of literature, and Take policie as it is now a dayes taken by common phrase of speech: — As we say, that a right Polittian is a very Machiavell; — so it may bee said, that in Politicall go∣vernment, or Machi∣vellian policy, none goeth beyond the Ie∣suites at this day. De∣cacord. Quodlib. 3. Art. 4 pag. 64. No, no, their course of life doth shew what their study is: And howsoever they boast of their perfections, holinesse, meditations and exercises; yet their platforme is heathensh, tyrannicall, and able to set Aretöne, Lucian, Machiavell, and the Divell himselfe, in a sort, to Schoole. Ibid. Quodlib. 3. Art 3. pag. 62. The Iesuites manage matters more Machiavellianly, then Machiavell himselfe. Answer to the Iesuited Gent. pag. 70. Iesuites are Fathers of mischiefe, friends to themselves, benefactours to seditious persons, Masters of Machiavellisme, Traytours to England, and to their Prince. An Answer by one of our Brethren, a Secular Priest, to Blackwels letter, written to Cardinall Cajetan. 1596. Circa Med. Machivellian my∣steries, become the grand Impostours, and Impoisoners of innumerable Soules; the most notorious Incendiaries, and Assasins, that ever the The Iesuites are to be marked out for the most malicious, trayterous, and irreligious Calumniatours, that ever lived on earth, unworthy that ever the earth should bea them. Quodl. 4. Art. 2. pag. 99. earth bore: such But Mariana likes better, to have a Tyrant poysoned by his Chaire, or by his Apparell, and Robes, after the example of the Maurinian Kings; that beeing to poysoned onely by sent, or by contact, Hee may not bee found guilty of Selfe-fellony; and the Soule of the poore Tyrant, in the flight out of the Body, may be innocent of the fact. O Hell-hounds! O diabolicall wretches! O infernall Monsters! How long then? How long shall Kings, whom the Lord hath called his Annointed; Kings, the breathing Images of God upon earth; Kings, that with a wry, or frowning looke, are able to crush these earth-wormes in pie∣ces; How long shall they suffer this viperous brood scot-free, and without punishment, to spit in their faces? King Iames Remonst. pag. 227. Such is the religion of these Reve∣rend Fathers, the Pillars of the Pontifician Monarchy. In comparison of whose religion and holinesse, all the impiety, that ever was practised among the Infidels, and all the bar∣barous cruelty, that ever was perpetrated among the Cannibals, may passe henceforth in the Christian World for pure clemency and humanity. Ibid. pag. 235. Adue religi∣on of the Iesuites: —For to speake truth; To deale in State-matters, and to practise the death of Princes, are as essentiall parts of their function, as their confession it selfe. Iesu. Catech. lib. 3. cap. 13. murtherers of Princes, Tantum relligio potuit suadere malorum. But what would hee have done, if hee had knowne the massacre of France; or the Powder-trea∣son of England? &c. They make the cause of Religion descend, to the execrable acti∣ons of murthering of Princes, butchery of people, and fiering of States. Sir Francis Ba∣con. Essaie. Of Religion. Butcherers of people, Firers of States,

and Blowers-up of Parliaments, as former Histories never heard of. Thus, when men of Place, and imploiment, mighty and remarke∣able in the World, improove the utmost pos∣sibilites of their Wit and Art; of all their na∣turall, and acquired Parts, to serve their own turnes, and attaine their private ends; to rise, revenge, grow rich; or more imme∣diately by some speciall service, to advance the Kingdome of darknesse, and dominion of Antichrist; O the Luciferian pride, the injustice, the cruelty, the Machiavel∣lisme; the putting of faire pretences up∣on pestilent plots; the drowning of inno∣cency in the Depths of State; the crafty and mercilesse pressures of Gods people, and those, over whom they domineere! It is then a work of great Waight and Worthinesse, to winne a great man to the waies of God. Here∣by the common state of goodnesse is migh∣tily strengthned; and which is an equall hap∣pinesse, the Divels side goes downe, and Beli∣als hang the head. For according to the emi∣nency of his Gifts, and greatnesse of Place, is the excellency of good, or excesse of ill, that Hee doth. It were to bee wished therefore, if God so pleased, that all the incurable, and im∣placable enemies to the grace of God, good men, and power of godlinesse, were Dunces and Fooles; that they might not bee able to manage their malice and power, with such Depths and dexterity, to the more dangerous

under-mining of the kingdome of Christ; and their owne more desperate ruine, and greater damnation. 2. Secondly, Great men are subject to great temptations; And therefore, it is the harder Taske, and more honorable triumph, to turne them on Gods side. Had not an All-mighty hand mastered the tem∣ptation, steeled his Faith, and represented to his eie, the matchlesse glory of an im∣mortall Crowne; Moses had never been able to have parted with the magnificent state, and pompe of Pharaohs Court: where Hee might have wallowed in varietie of all worldly delights; and to take part, with His afflicted Brethren, of a world of miseries, in a vast and roaring Wildernesse. There was never carnall man since the Creation, but in such a Case would have followed the Court, and forsaken Gods people. Hester, a weake Woman, could never possibly have holden out, against the fury of so mighty a Favourite, the hazarding of Her high Place, the favour of so great a King, and even life it selfe; had She not been upholden by an extraordinary strength from Heaven. No great Woman in the World, wanting Grace, would ever have runne such an hazard: but have suffered the servants of God to sinke, or swimme; so that She might swimme downe the Current of the times without crossing, and enjoy the present without perill. It was a  tempta∣tion▪  nathan, and a very  Dilemma:

Either, leave to adhere to David, or resolve to lose a Kingdome. But the hope of an earth∣ly Crowne, could not hire Him to hold His peace, and betray the innocency of His hea∣venly Friend: And Ionathan answered Saul his Father, and said unto Him; Wherefore shall Hee bee slaine? What hath Hee done? The dread of dis-countenance from two angry Kings, whose indignation is as the roaring of a Lyon, was a terrible Motive, to have made Micha∣jah temporize: (not a Server of the Times, and His owne turne in the World, but would in this Case have tuned His Pipe to Ahabs pleasure, especially encouraged by the flatte∣ring concurrence of so many false prophets). But the sight of the mighty Lord of Heaven and Earth sitting upon His Throne, and all the Host of Heaven standing by Him, infused such an holy fortitude into the spirit of this Man of God; that no greatnesse, terrour, or Ma∣jesty of any crowned Potentate, could possi∣bly daunt His courage, or dash Him out of countenance: And therefore Hee answeres with a resolution, as high as Heaven, and out of a sacred pang of seraphicall zeale: As the Lord liveth, whatsoever the Lord saith unto mee, that will I speake. So that Hee may discharge a good conscience, and doe as God would have Him, Hee is at a Point. That Message, which th lmighty had put into His mouth, must  Him to a centur  from so 

owne Coate; to a suspicion of dis-loyalty, for crossing so peremptorily the Kings Plot; to smiting, both with the fist of wickednesse, and taunts of the tongue, from His fellow Seers: Nay, tho His faithfull dealing throw Him into a Dungeon, there to bee fed with the Bread of affliction, and Water of afflicti∣on; untill the full wrath of an enraged pro∣phane King fall upon Him to the uttermost. Thus, let the World say what it will, what∣ever flesh and blood suggest to the contrary; Howsoever unsanctified great Ones storme and disdaine; yet assuredly, every true Friend to Iesus Christ, must bee content farre rather to bee dis-courted, then desert a good cause; or not to defend the innocency of a gracious Man, tho in disgrace; and to speake for Gods people, tho Haman rage to roote them out quite, as a company of singular exorbitant fellowes, who serve God as they list, and keepe not the Kings Lawes:Hest. 3.8. As is unanswerably evident, by the precedency of these newly named, noble, and holy Saints. I confesse, this may seeme precise Doctrine, and a divine Paradox to all the great Masters of pleasure, and Minions of luxury and pride; whose blood runnes fresh in their veines, and mar∣row is yet strong in their bones; Nay, who having attained the height of their ambitious aimes, sit now aloft in the very top of their un-blessed bravery and greatnesse, drunke with the pleasant wine of worldly prosperi∣tie,

and holding in scorne, the holy preaching of the good way, the syncerity of the ser∣vants of Christ, and society of the . 1. Pet 2.17.
Da mihi Christianum, & st quid dico. Brother∣hood. Yet I can assure them in the Word of Life and Truth, the now embracement, and practise of . precise walking, will incomparably more comfort them upon their Dying-Beds, in that great and last encounter with all infer∣nall powers, about the immortality, blisse and glory; or the endlesse, and unsupportable paines, and misery of their Soules; then if they had been the sole, and soveraigne Com∣manders of all the Kingdoms of the Earth, all their life long. But no marvell in the meane time, that, as the Spirit of truth tells us, and punctually to my purpose;1. Cor. 1.26. Not many Wise men after the flesh, nor many Mighty, not many Noble are called: Not for any impossibility; For the irresistable might of the Spirit, worketh upon whom it will; and some Great Men are good: but by reason of the difficulty. Be∣ing beset with such variety, and strength of temptations, they are rarelier, and hardlier wrought upon by the Word, and woone out of Satans en-snarements. High roomes, tem∣porary happines, & abilities above ordinary, so puffe them up, and transport them beyond themselves, with such a deale of Selfe-love, Selfe-opinion, Self-prizing; that their proud and obstinated spirits, will by no meanes stoope to the simplicity of the Gospell, ∣gularitie of the Saints, and the foolishnesse

of preaching. But if at any time, they heare of a Nathan, Ieremy, Amos, Chrysostome, Latimer, &c. They are very loth to lend their atten∣tion, lest thereby, they should bee made Me∣lancholike, put in mind of the Evill day, & tor∣mented before their time. But if they have the patience, They are ready to startle in their seates, and whisper One to an Other: You see now these preciser Fellowes would damne us all to Hell: Let us breake their bonds asunder, and cast away their Cordes from us. Such adoe there is, and a world of worke, to bring such noble Bedlams into their right minds; and to fright such Idolizers of their owne sufficiencies; and wilfull graspers of their gilded Fetters, from their admired follies, and honorable servi∣tude. 3. Thirdly, a gracious Man about a Royall Person, is a goodly Sight; & full well worth even a Kings Ransome. Fidi imperator bus manete, sed anie hos Deo, propter quem & ijs, quibus commissi a traditi estis. Nazian. Orat. 12.
At quî propter Deum? Quia si Deum mtuetis, & studiosè dabitis ope∣ram, ut eius mandata servetis, fideles his eti∣am Dei causâ eritis. Elias. For never any, except himself truly feare the great God of Heaven, can possibly bee cordially, and conscionably serviceable to any of our earth∣ly Gods. A Principle so cleare, and unque∣stionable, that no Man of understanding, and Master of his owne Wits, except himselfe be notoriously obnoxious, can have the face to deny it. Please they may, bee politically plausible, flatter extremely, and represent themselves to ordinary observation, as the onely Men for loyalty and love: But if wee could search, and see their hearts, wee should find them then most laborious to serue them∣selves;

and advance their owne ends, when they seeme most zealous for their Soveraignes service. Ahitophel, in the Sunne-shine of peace, and calmenesse of the Kingdomes time, did accommodate himselfe to the pre∣sent, both in Consultations of State, and reli∣gious conformitie: But no sooner had this hollow-hearted man espied a dangerous tempest, raysed by Absoloms un-naturall treachery, but Hee turned Traytor to his na∣turall Lord: when Hee observed the Winde to blow another way, He followed the blast, and set his sailes according to the weather: Which made David after complaine; But it was thou, O Man, even my Companion, my Guide and Familiar: We tooke sweet counsell together, and walked unto the House of God in company. Where∣fore let Great Men, without grace, professe, and pretend what they will; and protest the impossibility of any such thing, as Hazael did in an other Case; yet ordinarily, (I know not what some One morall Puritan amongst a million might doe) in such tumultuous times, and of universall confusion, for the se∣curing of their temporall happinesse; which, without timely turning on Gods side, is all the heaven they are like to have in this World, or the World to come: I say, upon a Point of great advantage, and advancement with safety, they would flie from the decli∣ning State, and downe-fall of their old Ma∣ster; tho formerly the mightiest Monarch up∣on

earth, as from the ruines of a falling house. And it can bee no otherwise; for they have no internall Principle, or super-naturall pow∣er, to illighten and enable them, to set their shoulders against the Torrent of the times, and to bee overflowne with it. But now, Hee that truly feares God, would rather lose His high Place; Nay, his posterity; As much hearts-blood, if He had it, as would animate a whole Kingdome; then leave His lawfull Soveraigne Lord, in such a Case, upon any termes, tho Hee might have even the Im∣periall Crowne set upon His owne Head. For conscience, that poore neglected Thing; Nay, in these last, and looser times, even laughed at by men of the World; yet a stronger tie of Subjects hearts unto their So∣veraignes, then Man or Divell is able to dis∣solve; ever holds up his Royall heart erect and unshaken, when all Shebnaes, Hamans, and Ahitophels, would hide their heads, and shrink in the wetting. Which conscience of his, if upon such occasion Hee should unhappily wound; Hee knowes full well, it would fol∣low Him with guilty cries, for his so base temporizing, and traiterous slinking, all the daies of his life. Whereas gracelesse and selfe-seeking greatnesse, can well enough, in the meane time, conquer such clamorous ac∣cusations of an ill conscience, with the boiste∣rous excesse of carnall contentments, even as the Sacrificers of their Sonnes to Mloch in

the fire, drowned their lamentable cries, with the louder sound of Tabrets and Drummes. Ambitious Nimrods, are able by the inordi∣nate heate after humane greatnesse, to digest, and drive away the after∣stings of bribery, basenesse, if not close bloodshed (their ordi∣nary meanes of mounting) with their delight in domineering, and beeing adored above o∣thers. It is a fit Passage therefore in our Common Prayer-Booke: That it may please Thee to endue the Lords of the Counsell, and all the No∣bility, with grace, wisedome, and understanding. Grace is fitly put in the first place: For, under∣standing and wisdome, without this heavenly Iewell, doe but prepare their Owners, to doe the greater mischiefe; To oppresse innocency with finer tricks, and more un∣observedly; to plague Opposites more plausibly; to com∣passe their owne ends more exactly; and at last, for the abuse, and mis∣imploiment of their great Parts and Places, in serving themselves, and not seeking Gods glory, to be damned more horribly. Without sanctifi∣cation by speciall grace; the rarest endow∣ments All vertues turne to vices, when they be∣come the servants of impiety. King Iames Remonst. pag. 249. degenerate: Wisedome into craft; O the vanity of great Men, who thinke it to bee the chiefe fruit of their greatnesse, to abuse their power insolently, to the ruine of their inferiours! Not remembring (being blinded by their passion) that they have a Superiour over them, to make them yeeld an account of their unjust proceedings, forcing to make restitution with interest. Histor. of France. In Lewis the tenth. Power into private reuenge; Valour into vi∣olence; Prudence into plotting their owne ends; Courage into foole-hardinesse, to up∣hold

a faction; Policy, into plastering over soule-businesses with faire colours: All of them are basely, and unworthily made subor∣dinate, and serviceable, onely to the setting forward, and safe-garding their owne out∣ward felicity. Without this celestiall Load∣starre, to steere aright in all affaires, there will ever be some warping. A great man, a Friend, an enemy, feare, cowardlinesse, affection, fa∣ction, partiality, covetousnesse, malice, or something, will certainly sway, and transport away. But now, a godly Man, besides his pre∣sence, Qui eateros dignita∣te praestat & authori∣tate, debet maiori eti∣am pietate in Deum ef∣fulgere, quò caeteris ex∣emplosit, virtutem co∣lendi & divina manda∣ta servandi. Cyr. Alex∣and. lib. 8. in Ioan. exemplary precedency in piety, and prayers, which are ever pleasing and prevai∣ling with God; the discharge of his Place with integrity and truth, improving industri∣ously all opportunities, high favours, interest in great Ones, and utmost possibility every way to advance Gods glory, promote good causes, protect good Men; Hee may also, by observing the calmnesse of a Royall counte∣nance, and openesse of a Princely eare un∣to Him, wisely and humbly suggest some things, and speake those words for the pub∣like Good, and good of religion, wherby not only a Kingdome, but the whole Christian World may fare the better. Vpon these, and the like grounds, I hold it an high happinesse, and great honor, to have an hand in working spirituall good upon those excellent spirits, which hold high Roomes, or stand in neare attendance unto mighty Princes. And by

this time, you easily discerne my drift, and rightly apprehend the top of my ambiti∣on in this Dedication: even to doe your Soule good, Which is much more Worth then the Whole World, and must never die. To which I conceived a doore opened; when it pleased you, in more then ordina∣ry manner, to manifest your liking, and al∣lowance of my last Booke. And therefore, Sir, I beseech you, out of the generousnesse of your noble disposition, to doe me that fvour; Nay, that right; Nay, that honour, for so I shall account it: As not to conceive the least thought, that hereby I goe about to seeke great things to my selfe; or ever to come nearer the Court, then by the continuance of my daylie heartiest praiers for the salvation, and life of King Charles, my dread and dearest Sove∣raigne. I am drawing apace towards my long Home,Eccles. 12.5. and must shortly appeare before that high and everlasting Iudge; and therefore I desire to lose no time, but to ply, all I can, the businesse God hath set me about, for the short remainder of these few and evill daies; that by the mercies of God, I may finish my course with joy; and give up that last, and great ac∣count, with favour and comfort, in the Name of Iesus Christ. Mee thinkes, besides many o∣ther, and mighty divine Motives, that one Parete ijs, qui prae∣sunt vb & concedite: Nam ille vigilant pro animis vestrs; ta∣metsi prius tam dine dictum est, tamen ne nunc quidem reticebo. Huius enim comminationis terror animum mihi concutit. .
De Sacerdot. lib. 6. in princ.
Nam illi vigilant pro animis vestris, tanquam ratione reddituri. Hic∣cine exiguus tibi vide∣tur comminationis ter∣ror? Equidem illum, quantus sit, verbis ex∣primere non possum. Ibid. Lib. 3. Ad fin. speech of Chrysostome, who Himselfe many

times preached Primùmigitur persva∣deamus, ut iurament ∣rum fuga in melius mu∣tationem faciat: etsi enim heri, & nudiuster∣tiùs de hac vobis locutus sum materi, neque tamen hodiè desistam, neque cràs, neque pe∣rendiè eadem persvadere. Chrysost. Ad pop. Antioch. Hom. 5. About the beginning of His Homilies upon Genesis, Hee tells them, that Heri, Yesterday I handled this, or that; or to the like sense; And the same, Chrysostome preached in the Afternoone: as appeares by these words, Hom. 11. in 1. ad Thess. Qúemadmodum si quis lucis Lychnaeo aquam aspergeret — aut oleum duntaxat eximeret, lucemexting veret; ita habet & donum Spiritus. Hee tooke a resemblance from the Lampe that burnt by Him, when Hee was preaching; And sayes, You may qvench this Lampe, by putting in water; and you may qvench it, by taking out the oyle, &c. And so did Great Basil also, as appeares by these words: Hexam. Hom. 2. ad fin. Facta est igitur Vespera, & factum est mane dies unus. Sed hi nostri de illâ Vesperâ sermones, a hac Vesperâ iàmoccupati, hic orationi nostrae finem imponunt. And so did Austn, that mighty Disputer; as appeares by these words: In Psal 88. (as Hee counts) Conc 2. Ad reliqua Psalmi de quo in matutino locuti sumus, animum intendite. every Day, and gave a Vnde & Episco∣pum necessecst, in singulos, ut sic dicam, dies sementem facere: ut ipsâ saltem assuetudine Doctrinae, sermonem Auditorum animi retinere possint. De Sacerd. Lib. 6. pre∣cept for it; and yet professeth, that the dread∣fulnesse of those words, Heb. 13.17. For they watch for your soules, as they that must give ac∣count, did strike a great terrour into his heart; should make all Gods Ministers resolve, to doe nothing else almost, but reade, meditate, preach and pray. Wherefore, noble Sir, I shall have my full desire, and utmost end, if you be but pleased, to make me the happy Instrument of helping you towards Heaven; and give me leave to gaine this advantage, for your spiri∣tuall good, by your love unto my Ministeriall Labours; that they my thereby leave a more kindly, and deeper impression in your appre∣hensions of heavenly things; and worke with more life and power, for a sound erection, and sure settling of the Kingdome of Iesus Christ in your owne Soule. You stand in a Sane! Aulica vita per se est status Deo placens, interìm tamen est vitae genus lubricum, periculosum, ac varijs Lipsious obnoxium; in quo multa fiunt contra Creatore, propter con∣servandum humanum savorem: In Aulis prae∣cipe negotiosus est Sa∣tan; Obcit spectra dis∣gratiae & favori prin∣cipals, ut isdem exter∣riti uliciomittant fa∣cienda, & faciant omit∣tenda. Qui in Aulâ constans est in veritatis confessione, & iustitiae observatione, ille can∣dem cum Christo expe∣ritur sortem, qui in Au∣lâ Pontificis & Hero∣dis contemptus, illusus & percussus fuit. Qui meticulosus est, & in gratiam Magnatum à regulā veritatis & iu∣stitiae recedit, is facili∣mè in abnegationem Christi incidit. Ger∣hard. In Harmo. Hist. Evang. cap. 5.
In aulà, quò quis cor∣rupor moribus, aut corrumpentior muneri∣bus, còbcatior. Satis bur. In Policrat.
Bernard was wont to complaine: That the Court received such as were good, but made them  Cuia bonos facilius recipere, quàm facere consuevit. Plures in eâ defecisse bons, quàm malo, profeissep chavimus. De Consid. Lib. 4. Cap. 4. Maiórne esse poterit spes no∣sira in Palatio, quàm ut  Imperators simus? Et ibi quid non fragile, plenúmque peri∣culis? Et per quot pericula pervenitur ad grandius periculum? August. Conf. Lib. 8. Cap. 6. Hos erim ipsos, ques beavit, perdidit. How gloriously then doth a Ioseph, a Ionathan, a Deniel, a Mordeca, a Nehemiah, an Hester, an Ebed-melech shine in a Kings Court? slippery Place, tho you stand in the presence

of the mightiest Defender of the true Religi∣on, of any Monarch under Heaven. For altho Satan bee most solicitous, and stirring in all Places, and now more then ever (the long Day of Mankind drawing fast towards an e∣vening; and the Worlds troubles, and time neere at an end) to doe all the mischiefe, Hee can possibly; yet you may bee assured, Hee re∣serves his most desperate services, ambush∣ments, surprises, practises, and Powder-plots, for Kings Courts: Because Hee findes there, an extraordinary Confience of Greatnesse, Power, Wit, Policy, noblest Parts, and other mighty engines; the edge and excellency whereof, if Hee shall bee any waies able, by improovement of the utmost skill, in his old Trade of tempting, to turne the Wrong way; Hee gaines farre more, then if He should win to His side some millions of private Men. If Hee prevailes there, Hee knowes himselfe in a faire way, to make foule worke; and is often woont thereupon, to empoison, and plagve e∣ven a whole kingdome. For your support therefore, and surer standing in such a Case; and that you may trample upon, with an holy contempt, and noble disdaine, the false, Delectatio occidit & praeterijt, vulneravit & transivit, miserum fecit & abijt, infelicem reddidit & reliquit. August. De Temp. Serm. 3. Quid permanet in homine, nisi quod quis{que} aut legendo, aut oran∣do, aut bonae opera faci∣endo pro animae salute, in thesauro conscientiae suae recondiderit? In∣felix enim volupias, infelicior cupiditas at∣que luxuria, per transi∣toriam dulcedinē prae∣parant sempiternam a∣maritudinem. Idem. Ibid. Serm. 55. dure∣lesse,

pestilent sweetnesse of worldly plea∣sures, and vanishing glister of all earthly glo∣ry; there is no way in the world, but to em∣brace the Lord Iesus, in the armes of your umbled Soule, fallen out for ever Ista est filioli, vera poenitentia, quando sic convertitur quis, ut non revertatur; quan∣do sic poenitet, ut non re∣petat. Ibid. Serm. 3. with eve∣ry sinne, and fallen in love unfainedly with all Gods blessed waies. For by Faith, and Faith alone, (which how it is brought into the heart by the Holy Ghost, you have in the Body of the Booke) wee overcome the world. And that in all respects; Not onely in regard of the furious enticements, and keene baites of carnall delights, riches, and rising; but al∣so, of comminations of cruelty and torture; Nay, of the stinging provocations of con∣tumelies, and cruell mockings. May you please to take notice of the power, and property of it this way; and in what manner this glorious Princesse conquers, and sets her triumphant foote upon the necke of the World, as upon Her vanquished Vassall, in two or three passages. 1. First, While as yet the Soule, tho never so admirably, and universally endowed with rarest illuminati∣ons of humane wisedome, naturall, morall, metaphysicall learning, & Mysteries of State, is wholly gvided by the eies of sense, and car∣nall reason; it lookes upon the world, and worldly things, as upon the onely Paradise of sweetest contentments, choicest pleasures, and chiefest Good; of the favour and fruition whereof, it would rather bee damned, then

dispossest: But upon the Kingdome of Christ, and it's spirituall glory, as upon a thing not worthy searching into, and seeking after; a sower, strict, and uncomfortable condition; fit onely for some few precise fooles, and those, scorned, contemptible underlings; who understand not the world, but want Wit, and Art, to grow rich, and rise; to render them∣selves remarkeable to the eies of men, and greaten their posterity. But let that glorious eie of Faith be once planted in the Soule, and the Case is quite altered. Those former fa∣ding Lights of sense and reason, are obscured by the presence of this heavenly Sunne, and vanish, with all their vanities. For now this new, beautifull Lampe, shining in the face of the Soule, doth represent to it's apprehensi∣on, the World, set out in greatest brauery, and to the utmost worth, as worth Esto, delicieris, E∣sto, inebrieris; bodiè & crs & annos de∣cem & viginti & tri∣ginta, & quinquagin∣ta, & centum etiam, quod est impossibile: imò fvoles, ponamus etiam quid ultra centum; Quid verò lucraberis? Nibil. Chrysost. in E∣pist. ad Philip. Serm. 13.
Si quis divitum uni∣versum mundum possi∣deret, tot{que} scros ha∣beret, qunt nunc in rbe terrarum sunt homines, ac ubique terrarum aedes, civitates, gentes suâ ditione teneret, ontes ac fluuiy auro sibi pro aquâ fluèrent; tribus certè obolis huiusmodi hominem, unà cum divitijs suis, nisi ad columasparet, dignum non duceremus. Idem. In Mat. Hom. 64. nothing; as a dead rotten Carion, a very Dunghill, full of all loathsomenesse, deformity and filth. Which heated by the fire of mens furious lusts, sends up continually such fumes of vani∣ty, and he lish Mists; which unhappily hide their sight from any glimpse at all, of all that incomparable beauty, which shineth in the countenance of Christ; or glory of the joyes a∣bove, which last eternally. But it now lookes upon the Kingdome of grace, as upon a Rock

of Diamonds, or Crystall Mountaine thicke beset, and glistering full faire with variety of richest Pearles, and truly orient; I meane, as upon the most amiable, and admirable Object under the Sunne; as the best, and blessedest thing to bee loved, and looked after in this life. 2. Secondly, Every man is naturally, and notoriously greedy of hearts-ease, and joy in one kinde or other: of which, rather then they will misse, they doe not sticke, many times, to light a candle at the Divell himselfe, for some joviall lightsom-nesse and mirth, such as it is; a madnesse above admiration, and followed with infinite miseries. And therefore, untill they lay certainely hold upon, and really pos∣sesse somthing more pretious, surer comforts, sounder ioyes, which may out-balance the weight of all wordly treasures, and over-top the height of all humane happinesses, both in excellency and sweetnesse; they will by no meanes, upon no termes, suffer their hearts to bee drawne, and divorced from possession of the present, and the Bird in hand, as they say; I meane, from that poore, little, leane, ima∣ginary nothing of contentment; which they seeme to extract, with much adoe, and most certaine losse of eternall blisse, from earthly things. They will, in the meane time, sticke to the world as fast, as Pherecides the Atheni∣an, to the ship; who held it on the shore with his hands; and one of them cut off, Hee held it with the other; and both beeing cut off,

Hee held it with His teeth. But let once the weary Soules of these former Worldings, truly wounded, and broken in peeces with weight of sinne, and sense of wrath; leane up∣on, and lay downe themselves in the bosome of the Lord Iesus, bleeding upon the Crosse, prizing his purity as well, as His Passion; and so taking Him upon And how that is lear∣ned, Chemnicius tells us: Ordo divinus est, quòd vult quidem E∣vangelizare, sed paupe∣ribus; vult sanare sed centritos; vult praedi∣care dimissionem, sed captivis; Vult educe∣re & liberare, sed vin∣ctos, hoc est, sub peccato conclusos; Vult conso∣lari, sed contristatos, & lugentes; Vult respice∣re sed ad contritum spi∣ritu: Beneplacitum est Domino, sed super ti∣mentes eum, & in eis, quisperant super mise∣ricordiá eius; Vult re∣ficere, sed laborantes & oneratos; Vult corona∣re misericordiâ & mi∣serationibus, sed caput humiliatum, non turgi∣dum; Vult infundere oleum misericordiae, sed vulneratis, &c. Exam. Decr. Trident. p. 2. De Contrit. cap. 4. Gods termes: And then reflecting with a sensible and serious contemplation, upon that Pearle of great price, of which they now stand possest; by the worth whereof, they have sealed, and made sure unto them, a full discharge from the end∣lesnesse of Hellish torments, and a most un∣doubted right to eternitie of Heavenly ioyes; Nay, possession given them of the thrice glo∣rious, and ever-blessed Deitie, and all His per∣fections, excellencies, felicities, so farre as an infinite God-head is conceiveable, and a Creature capable: I say, then, and never be∣fore, will they easily, and willingly leave their Hold-fast of the World, and bee con∣tent for ever after to settle their dearest love, seeke their truestHilaritatis nostrae om∣nis rivulus defonte du∣cendus pietatu; Winton. Opuse. Posthu. pag 73. comfort, and have their heartiest conversation Anima, quae amat, ascendit frequentèr, & currit familiaritèr per plateas coelest Hierusalem, visitando Patriarchas, & Prophetas, salutando Apostolot, admirando exercitus Martyrum & Confessorum, &c. August. Tom. 9. p. 2. pag. 1003. above. 3. Thirdly, Faith hath many pretious Effects: It justifies, paci∣fies, purifies, mortifies, rectifies in all trouble∣some turnings of our life, and also satisfies the heart. As the Soule of Man is immortall by

nature; so it is immeasurable in it's appetite and aspirations, edged with an infinite de∣sire. The boundlesse capacity whereof, can never bee filled, untill it apprehend, and en∣joy as it's owne, an object infinite, as well in eminency of good, as durability of time. And therefore except Faith, by bringing the Lord Christ into the Soule, give us the infinite God himself, and make Him our Portion, the Cor humanum in de∣siderio aeternitatis non fixum, nunquam stabile potest esse; sed omni vo∣lubilitate volubilius, de alio in aliud transit, quaerens requiem, ubi non est. In his autem ca∣ducis & transitorijs, in quibus eius affectus captivi tenentur, ve∣ram requiem invenire non valet; quoniam est tantae dignitatis, ut nullum Bonum, praeter summum Bonum eisus∣ficere possit. Ibid.
Cùm obiectum intel∣lectus sit omne ens, nun∣quam eius capacitas ex∣plebitur, ac proindè ad ultimam persectionem non perveniet, done apprehendatur omne ens: quod accidit, cùm apprehenditur Deus, qui continet in se per∣fectiones omnium enti∣um. Pauon. Disp. 2. q. 1. Prop. 4. heart of Man never will, or can possibly bee satisfi∣ed in this World, or the World to come. But here bee tossed continually, and torne in peeces, like the raging Sea, with restlesse distractions, carking, discontent: And here∣after roare everlastingly in Hell with un∣knowne horrours; and for the irrevoca∣ble exclusion, from the supreme and sove∣raign Good, the ever-springing Fountaine of all peace and pleasure, and His glorious pre∣sence even for ever & ever. If the Soule of man, saith Lib. 1. Sect. 12. Hooker, did serve onely to give Him Bee∣ing in this life, then things appertaining unto this life would content Him, as wee see they doe other Creatures: Which Creatures inioying what they live by, seeke no further; but in this contentation doe shew a kinde of acknowledgement, that there is no higher Good, which doe any way belong unto them. With us it is otherwise. For altho the beauties, rich∣es, honours, sciences, vertues, and perfections of all men living, were in the present possession of One: yet somewhat beyond, and above all this, would still bee sought, and earnestly thirsted for. It is no marvell,

saith Quid in hoc mundo stabile? Quid firmum? Quid porrò non breve & incertum, & csui non serviens? Quale istud bonm est, quod semper timeas amitte∣re? Quod vel auferen∣dum as te metuas, vel à te relinqueadum sci∣as. Nam etsi nullo eri∣piatur casu, vel morte certè perdendum est. Et si vita nostra tendatur per mille annos, & ad extremum illum totius diem aetatis, quotidia∣nâ voluptate veniamus; quale hoc quaeso Diu est, quod sine deletur? Aut quis illius volup∣tatis structus est, qui sta∣tim ut cessaverit, vide∣bitur tibi nō fuisse? Age iam, transactum vitae tuae tempus animo re∣volve. Nonne videbitur tibi umbra quaedam fu∣isso, quod transijt, & in∣star somny tenuis incer∣tum esse omne, quod vi∣detur? Hoc idem & decrepitus senex senti∣re potest: Cui convenit dicere cum Propheta, Dies mei sicut umbra declinaverunt, & ego sicut foenum arui. Quòd si baec etiam hîc possumus dicere, ubi quamvis brevis, tamen quia praesens est, vita ista magni penditur; Quid in futuro dicturi sumus, ubi maiori aetatis sci∣entia, transactum omne pro nihilo est. Haec tu tecum diligenter revolvens, & brevitatem vitae huius aeternitatis contemplatione despiciens, ipsum quo{que} contemptum mundi maiori cum vir∣tute contemne; Et ad illum tantū diem para te, in quo mundi gloria finienda est. Aug. Epist. 142. Greenham, if riches fill not the Soule, for they were all made for man, His Soule for God. Whatsoever is capable of God, that can never bee satisfied with any thing else: All riches, all prefer∣ments can not satisfie one soule: But when God is come, it is full & whatsoever is added more, it run∣neth over. These, and the like, are the mighty Works of Faith. And even so let this Prince∣ly, and victorious Grace, attended with all Her heavenly traine, tread down triumphant∣ly before you still, the painted Bables and Ba∣bels of al transitory glory, and ungodly great∣nesse; hold still fresh and flourishing in your ie, the immortality and blisse of a never-fa∣ding Crowne; and shine faire and fruitfully in your Soule; untill it set you downe safe, in the midst of the most glorious and ever-during Kingdome of Heaven; and having there finished her blessed Task, resigne you up, and leave you for ever, to the Beatificall vision, and full fruition of Iehovah, everlastingly blessed; and to the endlesse enioyment of ful∣nesse of ioy and pleasures, at His right hand, even thorow all eternity.

