


SVch is that svveernesse, and imprisable com∣forte of spirite (Righe VVorshipfull and pious Syr) vvhich the readinge of Saintes Liues can effecte in our soules, that I fully persvvade my selfe that amongest the exercices be∣seeminge a Catholike Christiane, the readinge and perusin∣ge his present subiecte, vvill not be the leaste forcible and efficacious to induce men to embrace vertues Path, and constantly to sustaine the manifoulde afflictions vvhich in these our miserable times are moste ordinarie and frequent vvith Gods best belouede seruantes, this litle vvorke, smal∣le in quantity, yeat riche & precious, for the mattere it doth treate of, containeth the life of that most rare and ad∣mirable Sainte, S. Francis; vvhich came to my handes by meanes of a poore (yet euer honeste) banished countrey man of myne, vvho vvantinge helpe, and meanes, to publishe it, I most vvillingly sett therevnto my helpinge hande to fur∣ther so good a vvorke vvhich beinge novve perfectede, I commende vnto your selfe, as one selected and chosen by me, vvorthie in manie respectes before others, desiringe that you vvoulde vouchsafe to vndertake the patronizinge of this my euer propens duety tovvardes your best deser∣uinge selfe; vouchsafe therefore fauorably to accepte of y greate goodvvill, though shrovvded vnder the veyle of a small presente, vvhich I offer not as intendinge thereby to requite, or equalize those many benefites of yours, for my best endeauours vvilbe farre avvantinge from due propor∣tion and equality, seinge that the acceptaunce hereof requi∣reth
a nevve kindnese; but to renevve and stirr vp in my selfe some memorie of your respectede desertes, and accor∣dinge to my povvere to shevve my vvillinge desire to gra∣tifie in vvhat I may your greate good vvill, I presente vnto you not that vniuersalle and moste admirable troope of all Gods Saintes (for that these you and others may hereafter by some other meanse receaue) but this one life in particu∣lare, of that most blessed man S. Francis; vvherein you may be houlde (as in a glasse) the full abundance of Angelicall conversation; and as in vvhich is compendiously contayned the sume of a perfect life, I vvill here omitt to recounte his rare vertues, his invincible fortitude, his Admirable tempe∣rance, profound humility, patience, longanimity, most fer∣uent charity, immouable fayth, dauntles hope, and such like innumerable vertues, because all these vvilbe exactly mani∣fested vnto you in this treatis, yea such is the excelentcie of this Saint, that (beit spoken vvithout preiudice, or dero∣gation to other Saints) he is thought by his surmounting holynes, to haue atchiued and purchased not the lovvest seate in euerlasting ioy, for vvhill the Prince of Angels, and greatest of all creatures in naturall dovvries (Lucifer him selfe) thinking by his arrogante pride to haue ascended, and (as the scripture saith of him) to haue been Similis altis∣simo,
Esaye 14. like vnto the highest, vvas throvvne dovvne headlong in to the bottomles dongion of hell and euerlasting damna∣tion he by his most rare humility, he hath deserued to be exalted, and in throvvned in that kingdom, vvhich he by his contrary pride irrecouerably lost: So as in this vve may see the deuine providence, and vnsearchable vvisedome of god allmyghty, vvhich revvardeth all, according to theite deserts,
Luc. 1. veryfying this saying, Deposuitpotentes de sede, & ex∣altauit humiles; he hath put the mighty from theire seate, and hath exalted the humble and meeke, agreing allsoe vvith an other place,
Luc. 18. Quise exaltat humiliabitur, & qui se humiliat ex∣altabitur he that exalteth himselfe shalbe humbled, ore cast dovvne, and he vvhich humbleth him selfe shalbe exalted, thus vve se hovv he exalteth his Saints, vvhill Lucifer and his complices are depriued of that place, vvhich theire vniust aspiring could not yealde them, and therefore are becom an aprobry to the rest of the blessed Angeles, and deadly
enimies to mankynde: seekynge allvvayes by theire mani∣fould delusions to bringe others into that desperat estate in vvhich they knovve themselues to be for euer: for as Saint Peter saith. Diabolus tanquam leo rugiens cir cuit,
1. Pet. 5. quaerens quem deuoret. The deuill like a roringe lyon goeth about seekinge vvhom he may deuoure, Against vvhom, and vvhose most guilfull procedings: vvhat is more avaylable, and of greater force, then the vertue of Christ his vvounds his, and al Saints merits and intercessions; vnder vvhose bannour he that fighteth (as all Christian Catholiques ought most cōstantly to doe) although, often tryed, and assalted by spirituall foes, yet can he neuer be ouercome, and hauing patience to su∣stayne, it vvill redound vnto a greater crovvne of glorie. For if vve suffer afflictiones in this vvorlde, and for the since are loue of God endure them couragiously: vve shall vndoubtedly reape those incomprehensible revvardes:
1. Cor. 2. Quae nec autis audiuis, nec oculus vidit, nec in cor hominis ascendit, vvhich neyther eare hath heard, nor eie hath see ne nor hath ascended into the hart of man to imagine the molestatiōs, and troubles, of this present vvorld,
Rom. 8. are not condigne of the glorie to come (as the Apostle saith) Non sunt condignae passio∣nes huius temporis ad suturam gloriam quae reuelabitur in nobis, neither must vve imagin that if God send afflictions vpon his seruants, either temporall, or spirituall: that he vvith∣dravveth his loue, or zeale of our saluation: nay his scourge doth presage greater loue, and affection to his tried ser∣uants: for he saieth, Ego quos amo arguo, & castig.
Apoc. 3. vvhom I loue: I chasten, therefore he often suffereth our spirituall ad∣uersatie to trie vs, (as he did holie Iob) not aboue our povver to resiste, but vvith his grace to ouercome,
1. Cor. 10. and con∣quere our enemy Fidelis enim Deus est qui nō patietur nos tētari supra id quod possumus, sed faciet cum tentatione prouentum. For God is faithfull, vvho vvill not suffer vs to be tēpted aboue that vve are able, but vvill make also vvith temptation issue, that vve may be able to sustaine, but vvhat should I incul∣cate patience and perseauerance vnto such an on as your selfe: seinge that amongest soe many seruants of God you haue all ready borne your parte in these afflictions; vvhere∣vvith God is vvonte to try his best beloued saruants, in so much as all eares are filled vvith the sound of your valorous
courage, in so stoutly enduringe the assalts of your enemie, all conques speake of it, and all hartes stand amazed at the strangnes of your vertuous life. Dere Syr, thrise happie are those, vvho sustaine any affliction in this vvorld, for Gods sake, for our sinnes deseruinge (no doubte) much pu∣nish net: vvho can not esteeme it agreat, and particulare fa∣uour to be vsited here vvith some mole stations: rather then to haue the paines due to sinn reserved, to be in the next vvorld, a housand times more seuerely punished. For seein∣ge:
Apoc. 21. Nihil coinquinatum possi intrare in regnum coelorum. No vncleane thinge can entere into the kingdom of heauen, but if any pains remaine to be inflicted: they are to be pur∣ged vvith that fire of purgatory, infinitly, and vvithout cō∣parision, exceedinge in heate our terrestriale fiere. Much therefore and extremly blinded are those, vvho thinke them selues happy vvhen they escape the punishments of this vvorld, litle consideringe the iustice of God, vvho lea∣ueth not the least sinn vnpunished, and if the estate of such that deferre those paines vntill the nert vvorld, be much to be lamented and pittied, vvhat (alas) and hovv miserable, then is the condition and estate of those vvho neither in this, nor in the vvorld to come; can satisfie for theire com∣mitted crimes but through all eternitie, are to sustaine the vnexplicable tormentes of hell fire, this I leaue to the con∣side ration of those, vvho are segregated from that soulde & vnitie, of the holie Catholique Churche, out of the vvhich no saluation can be had: vvhich most miserable condition, hath novv posessed the greatest parte of our deere coun∣trey; for like an vniuersall deluge, heresie hath so infected and drovvned the soules therein, that they cannot lifte vp theire drousie eies, to confider their desperat estate, but by vvallovvinge in all kinde of vicious behauioure, do make themselues a derision to their enemie the deuel; a sorovvfull spectacle to the vvise, & thereby purchase ende lesse miserie to themselues. The thinke euerie houre spent in the exer∣cisse of vertuous life, to be vainly emploied, & esteeme it an happinese to exceede in vices; deridinge those, that giue them occasion eithere by vvord, or vvritinge, vvhich may induce to the seruice and true honor of God. and hould it a madnese, to spende any hovvre in readinge, (much more in
imitatinge) the heroicall actes of Sainctes: yea they vvill ra∣ther scoffe, at any vvorthie, & memorable exploite done by Gods seruantes (caling it a delusion of the deuell then ende∣uour to consider that Sainctes by mortification of the fleshe, and not by pampringe, and decking theyr corrupti∣ble bodies, haue obtained the priuileges of Gods searuants) by makinge themselues an habitacle of the holy ghost; vvheras the other by doinge contrarie, make theire corpo∣rall substance, a mansion house of all vices. VVho so there∣fore desireth, to exterpate, and banish from him these euils? let him first repayer to the vnity of the Catholike Church, vvhere he may not only be pertaker of the contynuall prayers, and deuotions, done in the same, by the liuinge here one earth, but allsoe of the sufferrages, of the immor∣tall, and blessed soules in heauen, vvho can, and vvill most ceartaynly succour, and help those that trust in Gods, and there protection: lett them therefore suppose, vvhen the finde and reade the life, and actes, of any Saint, that then they haue gotten an vnfallible directory, of there future conuersation: Amongest vvhich I earnestly commend this of Saint Francis, to theire mature consideration, out of the vvhich they may dravv a compendious rle, to guide them in all theire actions. But I vvill returne my speach agayne to your most respected and Right vvorshipfull selfe: desiring your fauourable kyndnes to interprete this my ouer bould attempte, accordinge to the sincerity of my intention, and so I committe this present treatis, vnder the shielde of your benigne acceptance, for knovving my selfe obliged in all duty, to apply my best indeauours, in such sorte, as maye seeme acceptable to your selfe, acknovvledginge allsoe my selfe soe much bound in insoluible bonds, to vvish, and pray dayly, for the most prosperous, and godly proceedings in all things, both of your selfe, and your vvell deseruing fa∣mily: vvhich togeather vvith your selfe (for breuities sake) I most hartyly offer conioynedly vnto thall mighty his pro∣tection, desiring him to giue you all sufficiencie in tempo∣rall respectes, and superabundant increase of supernaturall graces: And lastly I request you vvould vouchsafe to spend some vacant hovvers in reading, and admiring, this Saints perfection; and if any one reape any spirituall frute by this
my labour, I accoumpte my paynes fully revvarded: If not, my vvilling mind remayneth vnvyolable: yet hovvsoeuer, let all be done to the honor and glory of the euerlasting deity, three in persons, and one in essence: next, (before all creatures) most vvorthy honor and glory, to Christ his most blessed mother, perpetuall virgin, to the holy Appostles, Saint Francis, and all the heauenly troope, vnto vvhose in∣tercessions, I once againe perpetually commit, this mortall perigrination of you, and yours: happily to be consumma∣ted: that after this transitory life, you may possesse togea∣ther vvith them, eternall ioye and felicitie. Amen.

