


THe Author of this work,
styling himselfe accor∣ding
to the nature of
his part therein THE
CITIES ADVO∣CATE,
after tenne, or
twelue yeares space from the first date
of the accomplishment, resoluing at last
to permit the edition, doth reuerently
here aduance and present to the ho∣norable
good acceptance of your Lord∣ship,
of all the Lords, and other the wor∣thy
persons, to whom, in the qualitie of
the cause, the consideration reacheth;
The cleare refutation of that pestilent er∣ror,
which hauing some authority for it,



and many iniurious partakers, layes vpon
the hopefull, and honest estate of APPREN∣TISHIP
in LONDON, the odious note of
bondage, and the barbarous penaltie of losse
of Gentry: to the great reproach of our
Kingdomes policie, and to the manifold
damage of the publike. In this one act
of his, the Aduocate therefore doth not
onely seeme to be the Patron or Defen∣dor
of birth-rights, and of the rights of
fortunes, but the Champion also of ciuill
Arts, & of flourishing Industrie among
you: the sinewes, and life it selfe of Com∣mon-weale.
The occasion which indu∣ced
him to enter the lists single against
a multitude, in this good quarell, was
priuate, as appeares by the Letters at the
end of the worke, but the cause, is abso∣lutely
such (according to his best vn∣derstanding)
as he should not refuse to a∣bett
& second with his sword, the strokes
of his pen, to that purpose. For, though



the Schooles, and Camp, are most pro∣per
for Honor and Armes, yet the anci∣ent
wisedome, and the like ancient boun∣ty
of our Sages, did euer leaue the gates
of Honor open to City-Arts, and to
the mysteries of honest gaine, as fun∣damentall
in Common-weale, and sus∣ceptiue
of externall splendor: according
to the most laudable examples of rising
Rome, vnder her first Dictators, & Con∣suls.
By which their such moderation
and iudgement, they happily auoided
two opposite rockes; tyrannicall appro∣priation
of Gentry to some certaine old
families, as in Germanie, and the confusi∣on
of allowing hereditarie Noblenesse,
of Gentry, to none at all, as vnder the
Sultan, in Turkey. With how true and
entire a good will this free seruice is per∣formed
by the Author may easily be ga∣thered
from hence, that hee willingly
giues the obliuion of his owne name in∣to



the merit; conscience of the fact, suf∣ficing.
Now, for him to informe your
Lordships and the rest (out of the title
de origine iuris, in Caesarean Lawes) how
the noble people of oldest Rome accep∣ted
the booke which Gnaeus Flauius de∣dicated
to their name, and vses, what
were it else, but inofficiously to dictate
your part, and not humbly to offer his
owne; which neuerthelesse here he most
officiously doth, being truly able to say,
vpon his owne behalfe, that he hath pur∣loined
no mans labours (as that Flauius
did) but is through all the true and
proper owner.

Valete in Christo Iesu.
XI. Cal. Nouember. MCICXXVIII.
