



Much Honored and Noble Lord;
ALthough the eminency of your other personall worth, great Wisdome, and noble parts, a sufficient attractiue to euery honest heart, by reason of the particular interest it hath in the common state of good∣nes; or your speciall bounty to my selfe, which ought to stir vp an ingenuous minde, to apprehend any opportunity of due and deserued acknowledgement; or your publike deportment in the face of our Country, so worthy, and Honorable; and managed with such true honesty, graue modera∣tion, and noblenesse of spirit, which cannot but draw

from euery heart truely sound to our great Lord in Heauen, and His Royall Deputy our highest Soue∣raigne vpon earth, a great deale of reuerence & loue; I say, though any of these seuerally, might exact from me, a more exact and able demonstration of the thankefull deuotions of my heart: yet my Lord, (and you may beleeue mee) there is another thing besides all these, which was the strongest, and most predomi∣nant motiue to quicken mee to this Duty, and Dedi∣cation; euen your sincere and inuincible affection to the Gospell of Iesus Christ, His faithfull Ministers, and most precious Wayes. And this, to tell you the truth, is farre the fairest, and most orient flower in the Gar∣land of all your goodnesse; and incomparably aboue all your Greatnesse, were you aduanced euen to de∣sert; nay, to the highest top of all earthly felicities, and mortall honour. For howsoeuer, the world euer beside it selfe in point of faluation, and starke blind in the right apprehension of Heauenly things, doth ote vpon guilded miseries, stinging vanities, golden setters; and wickedly deemes Haec iustorum simplicitas deri∣detur: quia ab h∣ius mundi sapien∣tibus, puritatis virtus, atuitas ceditur. Greg. in ap. 12. Iob cap. 16. pursuite of purity, the height of folly: yet I can assure you in the Word of life and truth; the richest, and rarest conluence of all humane happinesses; the most exquisite excellencie, and variety of the greatest worldly pompe and splen∣dour, that euer the Sunne saw, since the first moment of its creation, or shall looke vpon while it shines in Heauen, is but dust in the ballance, to one graine of grace; it is but Et quid diuitiae, peruntes & tran∣sitoriae facultates, nisi  aeter na diligentibus sunt  Greg. in 1 Reg. cap. 2. dung to an humble minde, sauingly illightened with a forecast, but of the least glimpse of that incomprehensible, endlesse glory which shall shortly be reuealed: It is all in the true valuation, but

as a vaine Non debet pro magno habei ho∣nor humanus; quia nullius est ponde∣ris fumus. August, de Ciit. Dei, lib. 5. cap. 17. smoake; which doth not onely vanish, as it riseth, and vtterly looseth it selfe at the highest; but also drawes teares frō a mans eyes; nay, at last, wrings the very heart-strings of euery impenitent soule, with that extremest euerlasting horrour, which would burst ten thousand hearts, seriously and sensibly to thinke vpon before-hand. It is not onely vanity, but also vexation of spirit. Let worldly wisdome say what it will, and hold them melancholike, and Cùm coeperit Deo quis{que} viere, mundum contem∣nere, iniurias suas nolle vlcisci, nolle hîc diultias, non hîc quaerere foelicitatem terre∣nam, contemnere omnia, Dominum solùm cogitare, viam Christi non deserere; non solùm à Paganis dicitur insanus; sed quod magis dolendum est; quia & intus mul∣ti dormiunt, & vi∣gilare nolunt, à suis, à Christianis audiunt—Di∣ctum est & de ipso Domino, quod in∣saniret. August. in Psal. 84. madde, who by the helpe of the holy Ghost hold a constant counter-motion to the course of the world, and cor∣ruptions of the time, that they may keep a good con∣science, the richest treasure, and dearest Iewell that euer the heart of man was acquainted with; who infi∣nitely desire, rather to be religious, then rich; to bee good, then great; to enioy the fauour of God, then the soueraignty, and pleasures of all the kingdomes of the earth: yet assuredly, when all is said, and truely summed vp; it is onely the true feare of Gods blessed Name; a zealous forwardnesse for his glory, good∣nesse, and good causes; at this day, vnhappily, and to the ruine of infinite soules, called by the world, prag∣maticalnesse, and, Too much precisenesse, which can truely beautifie, and adorne both all other personall sufficiencies; and indeed sanctifie and blesse all pub∣like imployments and seruices of State. For the first: A Professor euen something Popish, doth yet truely teach, that Nobilitas He∣roica est eminen∣tia quaedam nota∣bilis, &c.—per quam homo fi per adoptionem Fili∣us Dei, fit Sponsa Christi, sit Tem∣plum Spiritus Sancti: sine quâ, nobilitates caet∣rae nihil sunt, nhiil proficiunt. Gers. Tractat. De nobilitate. Heroicall nobilitie is an illustrious eminency shining in a man by the heauenly infusions of supernaturall grace, whereby he is made by adoption the sonne of God, the Spouse of Christ, the Temple of the holy Ghost; without which, all other Nobilities are nothing; not worth a but∣ton.

Suppose a faire and goodly horse to the eye, as exquisitely featured, colourd, paced, as that fained by Bartas, to be managed by Cain; yet if he wāted mettle, he were worth nothing to a man of spirit. Giue me the most magnificent glorious Worldling, that euer trod vpō earthly mould; richly crowned with all the ornaments, and excellencies of nature, art, policy, pre∣ferment, or what heart can wish besides; yet without the life of grace to animate and ennoble them, hee were to the eye of heauenly Wisdome, but as a rot∣ten carkasse stucke ouer with flowers, magnified dung, guilded rottennesse, golden damnation. And that which is more dreadfull; when the sunne of his short Sum∣mers day is set, the hot gleame of transitorie prospe∣rity past, and the bitter tempestuous winters night of death approacheth; from which all the Gold and Pearle of East & West can no more deliuer him, then can an handfull of dust; I say, then shall bee powred vpon his head, that terrible showre of snares, fire andPsal. 11. 6. brimstone, and an horrible tempest. His soule sinkes im∣mediatly in a moment into the depth of remedilesse misery, and is desperately plunged for euer into the bottome of the burning Lake. His body descends in∣to the graue, as into a dungeon of rottennesse & hor∣ror, arrested, as it were, by the second death, in the de∣uils name, and at length haled and dragged vnto the terror of that great and last Day; where no creature can rescue him, no mountaine couer him, from that vnquenchable wrath, & neuer-dying Worme, which shall euer lastingly, day and night feed vpon his soule and flesh. Wheras now, on the other side, that poore neglected One, who hath in truth giuen his name vn∣to

Christ and his gainefull seruice, perhaps by the World most disdainfully and contemptuously tram∣pled vpon euen into the dust, with the feet of cruelty and pride; at least most certainly, euer made extreme∣ly vile, and contemptible by the villany of Cùm coeperit homo Christianus cogitare profice∣re, incipit pati linguas aduersa∣tium. Quicunque illas nondum passus est, nondum pro∣ficit: quicunque illas non patitut, nec conatur pro∣ficere. August. in Psal. 119. tongues, and Heb. 11. 36, 38. cruell mockings; yet is such an One as the World is not worthy of: in the meane time, in the meaning of the holy Ghost, Isa. 6. 2, 3. a Crowne of glory in the hand of Ieho∣uah, as beautifull and amiable, as the bloud of Christ and his righteous roabe can make him; crowned full gloriously with Ezech. 16. 14. zech. 13. 11. Gods owne comelinesse which hee hath put vpon him; designed from all eternitie in due time, (for so his sanctification now assures him) to weare an euerlasting Crowne of blisse. And when his pilgri∣mage is past, death is to him the day-breake of eter∣nall brightnesse. Vpon his last Bed, his blessed soule shall finde that fresh-bleeding Fountaine for sinne and for vncleannesse set wide open vnto it, by the hand of Faith, ready now at its departure, to raze out the last sinfull staine: It may confidently, in the Name of Christ cast it selfe into the open armes, enlarged bo∣wels, and dearest embracements of the Father of all mercies: It may feele the glorious presence of the sweetest Comforter, presenting vnto it a foretaste of Heauenly ioyes: It shall haue the last sweetnesse, and triumphant truth of all the promises of life, able to confront and confound the vtmost rage, and very Powder-plot of all the powers of darknesse, made good vnto it: A mighty guard of blessed Angels shal attend vpon it; waiting with longing and ioy to beare it tri∣umphantly into the bosome of Abraham. His bodie shall goe into the graue, as into a chamber of rest, and

bed of Downe, sweetly perfumed vnto it, by the sa∣cred body of the Sonne of God lying in the Graue; locked there full fast with the barres of the earth, and fenced with the omnipotent Arme of God, as a rich Iewell in a Casket of gold, vntill the Resurrection of the iust. And then, after their ioyfullest meeting, and glorious re-vnion, they shall both bee for euer filled with all those vnmixed pleasures, blessed immorta∣lities, & crowned ioyes, which the dwelling place of God, the glory of Heauen, and the inexhausted foun∣taine of all blisse, Iehouah himselfe blessed for euer, can affoord. Now let the scornefullest opposite to the power of godlinesse, tell me in cold blood; whether that honorable wretch; or this honest man bee more truely noble and happy? For the second: So naturall, saith Lib. 5. Sect. 1. Hooker, is the vnion of Religion with iustice, that we may boldly deeme, there is neither, where both are not. For how should they be vnfainedly iust, whom Religion doth not cause to be such; or they religious, which are not found such by the proofe of their iust actions? If they, which im∣ploy their labour and trauaile about the publike admini∣stration of Iustice, follow it onely as a Trade, with vn∣quench able and vnconscionable thirst of gaine, being  in heart perswaded that Iustice is Gods owne Worke, and themselues his Agents in the businesse, the sentence of right, Gods owne verdict, and themselues his Priests to de∣liuer it; for malities of iustice do but serue to smother right, and that which was necessarily ordained for the common good, is through shamefull abuse, made the cause of com∣mon misery. Full well did this learned man perceiue, and rightly apprehend, that the purity and power of Religion alone, doth truely honour all Honours, dig∣nifie

all dignities, actuate with acceptation and life all morall vertues and endowments of art, sweeten all gouernment, strengthen all States, settle fast all Im∣periall Crownes vpon Princes heads: That it is no humorous conceite, but a matter of sound conse∣quence, that all, either personall duties, or imploy∣ments of State, are by so much the better performed, by how much the men are more religious, from whose abilities the same proceed: That when Heauen is made too much to stoope to Earth; Piety to Policy; Publike good, to priuate ends; there authoritie is embit∣tered, inferiours plagued, and too often, Law and Iu∣stice turned into Wormewood and rapine. He truly inti∣mates, what a deale of hurt is done; what a world of mischiefe is many times wrought, insensibly and vn∣obseruedly; when a wicked wit, and wide conscience weld the sword of authoritie. For it is easie, and ordi∣nary for a man so mounted, by legall sleights; putting foule businesses into faire language; and by a dissembled pretence of deeper reach, to compasse his owne ends; either for promotion of iniquity; or oppression of in∣nocency: especially, sith he knowes himselfe backt with that Principle in Policy: It is not safe to questi∣on or reuerse transactions of State, though tainted perhaps with some impressions of miscarriage & er∣ror: And that it is holden a Solaecisme in State-wis∣dome, and vnseemely, for priuate innocency to con∣test too busily with passages of publike Tribunals. These things I thus discourse, and declare vnto your Lordship, to represent vnto you the vanity of that honour, which is not directly and sincerely subordi∣nate to the Honour of God: (at the best, it is but a

breath, and yet not able to blow so much, as one cold blast vpon vngodly great Ones, when being sudden∣ly carried from their stately and sumptuous dwel∣lings, they shall bee cast into vnquenchable flames.) To let you see the excellencie, and worth of those happy wayes, to which it hath pleased the Lord of Heauen, out of his speciall mercy, to bend the eye of your Noble minde: and that you may know what it is alone hath had power, and the preroga∣tiue, (and shall for euer, in whomsoeuer takes Gods part) to make you, both more truely Honou∣rable in your Selfe, and more faithfully seruice∣able to our King and State; both to cast a Diuiner lustre vpon your personal vertues, and to make your managing of publike businesses (many times most vnworthily swayed awry, by that foule fiend, Fa∣ction, partialitie and priuate ends) worthy, conscion∣able and iust. For which, euery honest eye in our countrey that lookes vpon you, blesseth you; and shall mourne most bitterly for your absence from amongst vs, when you shall be gloriously gathered to your Fathers. So let all that truely loue the Lord Iesus, His blessed Gospell, and Seruants, bee as the Sunne, when he goeth foorth in his might, and at last full sweetly set in the boundlesse Ocean of immortall blisse. In these wayes of life, my Noble Lord, which in the sence and censure of Truth it selfe, areProu. 3. 17. wayes of pleasure, and paths of sweetest peace; it is the infinite desire of my heart, and drift of this Trea∣tise I now offer into your Honours hands; that you would still aduance forward, and doe more nobly still. That you would improoue to the vtmost, the

height of your excellent Vnderstanding to a fur∣ther, and more full comprehension of the Mysterie of Christ; which though it bee a Sealed Booke, to the sharpest sight of the most piercing humane wise∣dome; yet reueales to euery truely humble, spiri∣tuall eye, the rich and Royall treasures of all true sweetnesse, contentment and peace. That you would hold it your greatest honour and happinesse, as it is indeed, to grow still in fruitfulnesse Clos. 1. 1. in euery good Worke; in Rom. 12. 11. feruency in spirit, in 1. Iob. 3. 3. puritie, in Phil. 3. 20. Colos. 3. 2. Hea∣uenly-mindednesse, in Ephes. 5. 15. precise walking, &c. with singu∣lar watchfulnesse, and the more punctuall, and fre∣quent search and perusall of your spirituall state; both because the depths and delusions of Satan are most intricate and infinite: and because Not many no∣ble, &c. 1. Cor. 1. 25. That you would hold on in that valiantnesse for the Truth, and all good causes; which ordinarily gathers vigour and puissance proportio∣nably to the swelling fury of all aduersarie, either mortall, or infernall powers: Euer patiently pas∣sing by with generous magnanimitie, and braue contempt, all the vile Iob 30. 8, 9. Psal. 35. 15, 16. and 69. 12. I am verò illud quale, quàm san∣ctum, quòd si quis ex Nobilibus ad Deum conuerti coeperit, statim hnorem nobili∣tatis amittit: aut quantus in Christiano populo honor Christi est, vbi religio ignobilem facit? Statim enim vt quis melior esse tentauerit, de eioris abiectione calcatur, ac per hoc omnes quodammodo mali esse coguntur, ne vises habeantur. Ita seculum totum iniquitatibus plenum est, vt aut mali sint, qui sunt in illo, aut qui bo∣ni sunt, multotum persecutione crucientur. Si honoratior quispiam religioni se applicueit, illicò hono∣ratus esse defistit—Si fuerit splendidissimus, fit vilissimus. Si fuerit totus honoris, fit totus iniuriae—Si bonus est quispiam, quasi malus spernitur: Si est malu, quasi bonus honoratur. Nihil itaque mi∣rum, si deteriora quotidè patimur, qui deteriores quotidiè fumus. Saluianus. De ver iudicio & prouid tia Dei. Lib 4. pag. 128, 129. raylings and contradictions of Satans Reuellers, and Popish insolencie; (For vainely to affect the acclamations, and applause of worthlesse men: or to bee deiected vnmanlily with their vniust accusations and anger; are both equal∣ly ignoble, and most vnworthy a man of Honour,

and vertuous Animae sorti & constantis est, posse obuctari his qui auellere moli∣untur, & nihil fa∣cere vt hominibus placeat: sed ocu∣lum suum inten∣dere ad illum in∣sopitum oculum, & ab eo solùm gloriam expectare—nulliúsque pili facere huma∣nam laudem, vel conuitia, sed transire vt vm∣bras & somnia. . Chrysost. in c. 6. G. Hom. 3. resolution. Yours shall bee the Crowne and comfort, when all Popery and pro∣phanenesse shall lye buried in the dust, and dun∣geon of Hell. In a word, the thirstie longing of my heart, and heartiest prayer shall euer be; That you may shine euery day, more and more gloriously in all personall sanctitie, plantation of godlinesse in your owne Family, and where you haue any thing to doe; and in an holy zeale for setting forward the affaires of God, when, and wheresoeuer you haue any power or Calling. That when the last period of your mortall abode in this Vale of teares, which drawes on apace, shall present it selfe: You may looke death in the face without dread; the graue without feare; the Lord Iesus with comfort; and Iehouah blessed for euer, with euerlasting Ioy. Thus let all the sauing blessings of our most bountifull heauenly Father, through Iesus Christ, by the Holy Ghost, be plentifully and for euer vpon your Honou∣rable Selfe, and all your sweet and Noble Chil∣dren.

