


I Am persuaded with some of my friendes often ex∣hortations (noble Earle) to suffer to bee published, suche thinges as I haue thought vpon, touching the newe order of Monks, which Italy an other Affricke in this kinde, hath lately brought into Christendome. For sithens I hard both of the title wherewith this newe army of Satan bewtifieth it selfe, as also the suttle∣tie with which it insinuateth it selfe to the worlde: many thoughtes entred into my minde, as well of the continuall hatred of this enemy against Christ: as of his craft, and power in assaulting the Church. ForThe considera∣tion of Satans continuall ha∣tred, and craft against the as he sheweth a singular wylines in his de∣uises: So in the execution, and perfor∣mance thereof, hee declareth a maruel∣lous

power, wherewith he is endued: theChurch profi∣table to the godly. earnest meditation, and consideration whereof, I thinke to be a great helpe, and furtherance vnto godlines. VVherefore I suffered my selfe the rather to bee per∣suaded, to communicate to the gentle rea∣ders (for others I make no account of,) such things as came into my minde. And whereas I see the custome of dedicating, and inscribing vnto some man newe workes, to haue bene receiued of all men: and the same to be both ancient, and not vngodly, it may be perceiued by the onlie example of our Euangelist Luke: whoLuk. 1. 4. Act. 1. 3. doubted not to dedicate his historie of the Gospell, and the Actes of the Apostles, to a man which in deed loued God, & god∣lines: I thought good to follow him. Now while I considered, vnto whom I shoulde offer this my labour, who might bee not so much a Patron, as an indifferent iudge thereof: you especially (noble Earle) for your singular godlines, learning, and cur∣tesie, ioyned with great wisedome came vnto my minde. For I knowe your iudge∣ment to be such, and so sound: that those which professe them selues to loue, and fa∣uour the trueth, and godlines: may safe∣ly,

and worthilie rest in him. Therefore I trust, you will accept the same, accor∣ding to your curtesie, with the like minde, I present it vnto you: that is to say sin∣cere, and well meaning. And so you shall haue me now alreadie sundry wayes indebted vnto you for your sin∣gular gentlenes, hereafter most beholding vnto you.
At Heidelberge the Calendes of Ianuarie. Anno. 1576.

