



AS our Sauiour Christ (Right Honorable) hath buylded his Church, which he hath so1. Cor. 3. 11. Eph. 2. 20. Math. 16. 18. dearely bought, and purcha∣sed, vpon him selfe the onely sure rocke, and foundation thereof, then the which (as th Apostle sayth) no other can be layde: So on the other side, hath Satan alwayes sought no∣thing more, then to vndermine, shake, and (if it were possible) to ouerthrow the same. For he well perceiueth, that so long as this spiritu∣all house, & glorious buylding standeth firm∣ly, and surely grounded, and founded vpon Christ the euerlasting trueth, the way, and theIo. 14. 6. life, contayned in the doctrine of the Pro∣phets, and Apostles: (whiche they not onely haue deliuered to the Church by liuely voyce: but as the faithfull Notaries, and Secretaries of the holy Ghost, haue also registred, and cōmit∣tedRom. 15. 4. to writing in the sacred Scriptures, for the

continuall comfort, and instruction thereof:) it remayneth vnremoueable, and inuincible agaynst hell gates, and all the formes, and tempests raysed agaynst it, by him, and all hisMath. 7. 24. 25. Io. 8. 44. instruments. Wherefore he layeth all his bat∣terie, and bendeth all his forces agaynst this foundation, labouring by falsehood, and lyes, whereof he is the father, to corrupt, depraue, alter, obscure, and deface the Gospell of Christ, and the worde of life: and thereby to subuert, and ouerturne, or at the least, to weaken, and shake the fayth of the faithfull, resting wholle therevpon. This hath bene euer from the be∣ginning his practise, and is at this lay, and shal be vntill his kingdome be vttterly remoued, and taken away. Wherefore he is fitly namedIo. 8. 44. by Christ, a lyer, and a murtherer from the be∣ginning. For as by lyes he laboreth eyther to extinguish, and abolish, eyther to discredite, and peruert the trueth of the worde: So doth he therby intende, and purpose the murdering, and destruction of mankinde both body, and soule. For the which cause our Sauiour Christ, as a moste wise, and prouident, and therwith∣all louing, and carefull head, and gouernour of his people: foreseeing the daungerous, and malicious attempt of his, and their aduersaries, giueth warning thereof vnto them before hande, that they might not be founde vnpro∣uided, and vnfurnished, when they should be assaulted, and so by securitie, and carelesnes, loose the field, and the victorie. Therefore asDeut. 13. well Moses, and the Prophets, before the com∣ming of Christ, inspired with his spirite, as al∣so at his comming in flesh, he him selfe, and

his Apostles do giue vs a watchworde, and of∣ten admonishe vs to auoyde, and take heede of false Prophets, false Apostles, and false tea∣chers,Math. 7. 15. though they worke signes, and myra∣cles, and come in sheepes clothing, that is, make neuer so great a shewe of the true Pro∣phets of God in outward apparāce: yea though they (following the steppes of their father Sa∣tan, who transformeth him selfe, the sooner to2. Cor. 11. 14. 15. deceiue, into an angell of light,) turne them selues into the Apostles of Christ. Herehence is it, that the Apostle▪ Paule chargeth the Gala∣thiansGal. 1. 8. 9. not to beleeue an Angell cōming from heauen, but rather to holde him accursed, if he should teach vnto them any other doctrine, then that which at his mouth they had recev∣ued. In which words he implieth a high, and a waightie reason, to wit, that the trueth of the glorious Gospell of Christ is such, and so great, that not onely no humayne authoritie, and waye of perswasion whatsoeuer, should moue vs to forsake the same: but that no angelicall, or heauenly messenger whatsoeuer shoulde perswade vs to the contrarie thereof. To the same purpose Iohn willeth the faithfull no to1. Io. 4. 1. beleeue euery spirite, but to trye the spirites whether they be of God, because many false Prophets are entred into the world. But albe∣it this warning, and caeat agaynst false Pro∣phets be in diuers places giuen vnto vs: yet then especially doth our Sauiour Christ, and his Apostles labour to stirre vp the godly to a more continuall, and earnest watchfulnes, and warynes, when they foretell of the state of the later dayes, wherein we liue: by howe muche

they foresawe those times should be more pe∣rilous, then any other, in the which Satan, per∣ceiuingApo. 12. 12. his time, and kingdome to be short, should rage most violently, and vse most ex∣treme tyrannie, and put in vre most straunge, and vnwonted practises to driue them from the onely foundation Christe. Take heedeMath. 24. 4. 5. 11. 23. 24. 25. 26. Mar. 13. 21. Luke. 17. 23. (sayth our Sauiour, speaking of these later times) that no man deceiue you, for many shall come in my name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceiue many, and there shall arise false Cristes, and false Prophets, and shall shew great signes, and wonders, so that (if it were possible) they should deceiue the very elect, beholde I haue tolde you before. Paule the Apostle likewise sayth, that in the later tymes,1. Tim. 4. 1. 2. 3. 2. Tim. 3. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. which he therfore calleth perilous, men should depart from the fayth, and should giue heede vnto spirites of error, and doctrines of diuels, which should speake lyes through hypocrisie, and haue their consciences burned with a hote yron: that moreouer some should haue a shewe of godlines, but should denie the power thereof, from which he willeth vs to turne a∣waye: that as Iames, and Iambres resisted Mo∣ses, so should these resist the truth, being men of corrupt mindes, and reprobate concerning the fayth. Peter also, & Iude, declare that there2. Pet. 2. 1. 2. 3. nd. 4. 18. should be false teachers, which should priuily bring in damnable heresies, euen denying the Lord that had bought them, and that many should folow their destructions, by whom the waye of trueth should be euill spoken of, and should turne the grace of God into wanton∣nes, and deny God the onely Lordae, and our

Lorde Iesus Christ. But that is chiefly to be2. Thes. 2. 3. 4. 8. 9. 10. 11. considered, and marked, which the Apostle Paule writeth of Antichrist, and his comming. For before the later day, he sheweth that there should come an Apostacie, and departing fromAntichrist. the faith, and that the man of sinne should be disclosed, euen the sonne of perdition, which is an aduersary, and exalteth him selfe agaynst all that is called God, and is worshipped: so that he shall sit as God, in the temple of God, shewing him selfe that he is God, that euen in his time the mysterie of iniquitie began to be wrought, that his comming should be with the effectual working of Satan, with al power and signes, and lying wonders: and in all de∣ceaueablenes of vnrighteousnes among them that perishe, because they receiued not the truth, that they might be saued: and that ther∣fore God should sende them strong illusions, that they might beleue lyes, that all might be damned, which beleeued not the trueth, but had pleasure in vnrighteousnes. In theseThe liuely des∣cription of the kingdome of Antichrist. words the Apostle doth most fully, and liuely set foorth the whole kingdome of Antichrist, to wit, that he should bring with him a depar∣ting from the fayth, as the word doth sounde, that he should be openly discouered to the world to be the man of sinne, full of all abho∣minall and haynous attempts agaynst the ma∣iestie of God, that he should be the childe of perdition, working his owne and others de∣struction: that he should not onely directly set and oppose him selfe, but also exalt and lift vp him selfe agaynst God: that he should sitte with authoritie in the Church of God, and ad∣uaunce

him selfe as God: he declareth further, that euen from the time of the Apostles, Satan hath priuily sought to laye the foundation of this his Antichristian kingdome: and the meanes to bring the same to passe, he also de∣scribeth, to wit, that it was done by the effec∣tuall and mightie working of Satan, with all power, and lying signes, wonders, and myra∣cles, and all subtiltie, craft, and deceite. Final∣ly he sheweth who they are that shall be sedu∣ced, and deceiued thereby, namely, they that are castawaies, and ordeined to destruction: and he addeth therewithall a reason thereof: the contempt of the trueth, whereby they might be saued: and that this shall be the iust iudge∣ment of God, to giue them therefore ouer to the strong illusion of seducing, and erroneous spirites, to their vtter confusion, & destruction.
These things (Right Honorable) beeing considered, and layde together, and compared both with the former, and the present state of the Church of Christ on the one side, and the pernitious practises of Satan in both: we shall easily perceiue that in the later, he hath farre passed the former: and that in both, he hath euer striuen agaynst Christ the foundation of his Church: and the very effectes do declare the same, if we looke but a litle therevnto. For immediatly at the first publishing of the Gos∣pell,1. Cor. 1. 23. he brought to passe, that Christ became a stumbling blocke, and a rocke of offence vnto the Iewes, as he is also at this day: and toIewes. the Greekes and Gentiles foolishnes, as like∣wiseGentiles. in their ofspring, the Cerinthians, Mar∣cionites, Maniches. Arrians, Nestorians, Euri∣chians,Heretikes. and such like heretikes oppugning his

diuine and humaine nature: and at last in the Turkes we see it euidently come to passe. All which waying the doctrine of Christ crucified, with the balances, and waightes of humayne reason, the course of nature, Philosophie, and mans wisedome, haue accounted it but mere folly and playne vanitie. Neuertheles theseAntichrist and his doctrine. being open, and professed enemies, and caste out of the body and bowels of the Churche, haue not bin so hurtfull and daungerous, asConcil. Florent. dist 22. 22. Sa∣crosancta. Antichrist, priuily lurking (as it were) in the very bosome, and sitting in the middest ther∣of: pretending him selfe not onely to be a true Christian, but also to be the head of theConcil. Triden. 1. decret. Sess. 4. Lind. li. 1. ca. 4. Church of Christ, the Vicar of Christ, the suc∣cessor of the Apostles, and his Romish religi∣on and doctrine onely, to be the Christian Catholike, and Apostolike, though it be ne∣uer so expresly, and directly to the contrary: and by his Traditions, Canons, Councels, and determinations, chalenging vnto him selfeBonifac. 8. Extra. vnam sanctam. authoritie vppon the consciences of men, in making them equall, and of like force with the written word of God, and exacting obe∣dience therevnto, vpon payne of condemnati∣on.Trid. Concil. sess. 7. ca. 1. Cath. Rom. To be short, erecting a blasphemous sa∣crifice of the Masse expiatorie, and satisfacto∣rie for the quicke and the dead, agaynst the onely most sufficient and perfect sacrifice of Christ, robbing him at once of his kingly, Priestly, and Propheticall dignitie and office: and so consequently spoyling him of his soue∣raigne titles, and names, Iesus and Christ, and therewithall his Church of the benefite, cause, and ende of his comming in fleshe. By this Romishe Antichrist, and his members, Satan

hath more mightily preuayled agaynst theAntichrist a more deadly enemy to Christ and his king∣dome, then all other. Church of Christ, and shaken the foundation thereof, more daungerously, subtilly, secretly, and continually, then euer he did before. For although he hath not in flat wordes with the Iewes, Turks, Arrians, and such like heretikes, denied the Godhead of Christ, or his man∣hood: yet in effect hath he done the same, in depriuing him of his office, as I haue sayde, and the end and scope of his comming, which is, to be the onely Christ, the annoynted, and holy one of God. Therefore Iohn describing1. Io. 2. 18. 22. 23 Antichrist, sayth, he shall denie Iesus to be that Christ, and that therein he should deny the fa∣ther, and the sonne, because whosoeuer deni∣eth the sonne, the same hath not the father. And agayne, Euery spirite that confesseth not Iesus Christ to haue come in the flesh, is not of1. Io. 4. 2. 3. God, and this is the spirite of Antichrist, of whom ye haue heard, howe that he shoulde come, and now already he is in the world.
But to omit the monstrous▪ and manifoldeThe means vsed by Antichrist to set vp his king∣dome. errors, drawen from the sinkes and puddles of all heretikes, wherwith this confuse, and huge Babell of this Antichristian kingdome haue bin buylded vp: the meanes, and instruments wherby the same haue bine brought to passe, are rather at this time shortly to be noted and marked, as seruing most vnto my purpose. The Apostle Paule, as I haue touched before, she∣weth,2. Thes. 2. that Satan should to the accomplishing therof, vse all power, falshood, deceit, & strange illusions. And the same doth the spirit of GodApo. 17. 1. 2. 3. 4 set foorth in the Reuelation, by the image of a whore gorgeously arayed with purple, and

searlet, & attyred with golde, precious stones, and pearles: hauing a cuppe of golde in her hande, full of the abhominations, and filthi∣nes of her fornication, wherewith she maketh drunken the kings and inhabitauntes of the earth. Hereby the spirite of God paynteth out the hypocriticall, and goodly outwarde shew, which as well Antichrist, and his ministers, as his doctrine should make vnto the world, ther∣by to seduce, and deceiue the same. This al∣though it may be perceiued to be most true frō time to time, in the hypocriticall swarmes of Popish Abbots, Monkes, Fryers, and suche other religious orders, as likewise in the schol∣men, and Canonistes, the spirituall enchaunt∣ments, and bewitchings of whose gloses, di∣stinctions, definitions, and conclusions, haue as strong illusions beguiled the world, and not onely the simple sort, but the very wysest them selues, and most learned: yet especially the same is to be seene at this daye, in the new, and lately inuented Secte of the Iesuites which the Romishe Antichrist hath set foorth as the laste proppe, and staye of his totering, and ruinous kingdome. For he perceiuing, (that as the A∣postle Paule hath foreshewed,) Christ hath be∣gonne2. Thes. 2. 8. to consume it with the breath of his mouth, and abolishe it with the brightnes of his comming, that is, the preaching of his glo∣rious Gospell: and seeing moreouer the world to growe to a disliking, and contempt of the ignoraunce, sluggishnes, and lewdnes of their other orders taken from men, as Dominicke, Benedict, Fraunces, and suche like: hath sent abroade into Christendome this newe Secte,

hypocritically adorned with the name of Iesus, & furnished with more shew of learning, holi∣nes, & godlines, thē their other Popish frater∣ternities: to the entent that Iesus Christ mayMat. 26. 49. be the sooner betrayed, while these holy Ie∣suites giue him a Iudas salutation, and kisse.The Iesuits giue Iesus a Iudas salutation and kisse. And because he standeth in good hope that these be the men, by whom he shall recouer agayne, that so large a circuit of ground, which hee hath loste, and Christe by his Gospell hath gotten in Germany, Fraunce, Englande, Scotlande, Denmarke, Swethlande, and other countries in Christendome: he maketh great account of them, and chiefly fauoureth, che∣risheth,The Iesuites the Popes chiefe hope. encourageth, and aduaunceth them: bestowing vpon them to the mayntenaunce, and increase of their nurceries and Seminarie houses, great Abbasies, lands, liuings, & sump∣tuous buyldings, in Italy, Fraunce, and some partes of Germany. Furthermore, he vseth this speciall policie, to cause them by al meanesOur Vniuersities of Oxforde and Cambrige haue had to muche experience thereof. priuily to allure, and entice the youth of the Vniuersities, and countries, where the Gospell is preached, to depart from the places where they are, vnto these their Seminary houses, to the ende, that being there for a time nouseled, and trayned vp, vntill they be hardened in hy∣pocrisie, obstinacie, and malice agaynst the trueth, and poysoned with the pestilent errors of the Romish Antichrist: they may be sent out as newe false Apostles into their owne countries, or els thither, where it is thought they may do most harme. Whenn they folow their forefaithers the Scribes, and Pharises, the like hypocrites, who (as Christ sayth) com∣passedMat. 23. 15.

the sea and land, to make one proselite, or of their profession: and when he is made, make him two folde more the childe of hell, then they them selues: And therfore that hea∣uy woe which Christ pronounced agaynst the Pharisees, must needes, if they repent not, light vpon these Iesuites, whose wicked example, as in diuers other things, so in this they doe em∣brace.
The consideration of these spirituall practi∣ses of Satan in this newe supplye of false Pro∣phets of Antichrist, wherewith he oppugneth our fayth, besides the outwarde forces, and worldly policies and enterprises, which he ioy∣neth therewithall: as also the pestilent seedes of Arrianisme, Anabaptisme, Libertinisme, the Familie of Loue, Epicurisme, and Atheisme, which he hath euery where sowen, (I feare me,Math. 13. 24. while the Shepheards of Israell were a sleepe:) ought to awaken al the professors of the Gos∣pell, and to make vs to looke about vs, and to stande continually (as it were) vpon watch and ward, especially those whom the Lorde hath appoynted to be watchmen, & ouerseers of his people. Nowe the waye to withstande theseThe waye to a∣uoyde Satans & his ministers temptations & assaltes. strong temptations of Satan, and his ministers, is to sticke faste vnto Christ the foundation of our fayth, deliuered vnto vs by the Gospell of trueth: and (as he giueth vs warning) as good Eagles to flee to the carkase, and therevpon toMat. 24. 13. 28. rest and perseuere vnto the ende: stopping our eares at the voyce of all false prophets, and ly∣ing spirites, which goe about to withdrawe vsIo. 10. from the same, and acknowledging onely, as the good sheepe of Christ, his voyce beeing

our true and onely head shepheard, speaking vnto vs in his holy worde. And to the intente our countreymen, which as yet are not so wel acquaynted with the name, professiō, doctrine, and purposes of these Iesuites, (and therefore are the sooner to be deceiued thereby) may be the better armed, and prouided agaynst them: I haue thought good to translate this little Treatise into our mother tong, written in La∣tine by a learned, and godly man, beeing pub∣like professor of Diuinitie in the Vniuersitie of Heidelberge, who as wel for that he remay∣ned in that place, neare vnto the whiche they haue buylded some of their eastes: as also for that he had diligently read some of their bookes, had good cause to knowe them. The methode, and order which he vseth, and the matter therein conteined, I trust is such as can not mislike the godly: and I had rather the same should be gathered by the reading ther∣of, then by my report. Only this I will say, that I thinke it to be very necessarie, and profita∣ble for this present time, and occasion: where∣in we are newly and freshly assaulted by these Antichristian Champions, albeit with the olde and rousty weapons, somewhat scowred and burnished: but of the same edge and force that the other were of. They maye be per∣haps terrible to those, which only looke vpon the brightnes thereof, but not to them which haue more regard to the sharpnes, & strength of the same, as in the late combate with them by triall it was founde. As for the causes which haue moued me to dedicate this small labour vnto your Honour, they are two. The one,

because the Author making his choyse, hath offered the same vnto a most godly Earle: and therefore hath moued me to tender the same, to a personage of no lesse honor and godly∣nes: that it may come into the hands of men, with the better acceptation, and liking. Se∣condly, for the priuate duetie, and thankful∣nes, which I owe vnto your Honor, in respect of that courtesie, and good will your Honour hath extended as vnto all other, of my cal∣ling, so also vnto me. And because I was not able to do that which other haue done of their owne abilitie in this matter, I haue (rather then I would doe nothing) borowed of an o∣ther to supplye my want. Howsoeuer it be, my good will hath not wanted. This onely is my desire, at the Lords hands, that, as I hope, your Honour will not refuse this so simple a duetie of my parte: so the fruite and benefite there∣of may come vnto many. The Lorde encrease his singuler giftes, and blessings in your Ho∣nour, to his glory. From London the thirde of Nouember. 1581.

