



Right Worshipfull:
WHat the Elders of the Iewes vnto Iesus Christ,. of the Centurious loue vnto their NationLuk 7.5. might bee said vnto all, of your loue
 and care of our Eaton∣bridge; where by Bap∣tisme you were initiated, and whereof the spirituall wealthEsth. 10.3, you haue earnest∣ly sought, both by your owne bountie, and other annuall pensions procured by you, from your worthy friends *, and worshipfull alliance in the adiacent parts, vnto the Minister, which should bee there resident, to edifie the people on the most holy faith. It is not to be forgot∣ten of any, how you began to honour God, whew he began to honour you, and how hee hath gone on, in honouring you, as you haue him: If
 any should, I cannot, nor will forget your great good∣nesse extended towards me (of all the Lords seruants the least and vnworthiest) since you first saw me: your counsell, countenance, and encouragement after my first entrance into that Cure, (now eleuen yeares past:) and lately your power∣full hand stretched out, in the happie strength thereof, to saue mee from the repro∣ches of them that would hauePsal. 57.3. swallowed mee vp; are (if I would ingratefully be silent) most euident testi∣monies to the vnderstan∣ding world. And yet vnto
 all these (as if all these were small in your sight) it plea∣sed you afterwards to adde other fauours, when you tooke me to your house, and sent mee home, not emptie, but full of comfort and cou∣rage in the worke of the Ministerie, for the time to come. As Dauid vnto the Lord, I might say vnto you; Is this the manner of man2 Sam. 7.19.? What shall I render vnto you, for all your benefits towards mee? My selfe I owe you, and such as I haue giue I you; These few impolished papers: But what are these? of which the acceptation
 will be the augmentation of my debt: or why these, ra∣ther than some other of my labours is that place, which some haply iudge (if I would needs to it) more worthy the presse? Nothing but pressure (God is wit∣nesse) brought me to the presse: and these (being mine immediate Meditati∣ons after the Commence∣ment of my terrible trou∣bles, and the fruits of those sorrowes, or sorrowfull thoughts, which were then, in my soule) would (as I thought) vnto the people of God be acceptable; as is, vn∣to God himselfe; the bro∣ken
 spirit, the broken and contrite heartPsal. 51.17.
Nothing else, Right Wor∣shipfull but these rude lines, (which, in the dayes of my trouble, I found by enqui∣ring in the Sanctuarie of God, or otherwise by rea∣ding, meditation, obserua∣tion, and experience,) haue I (Me penes) to present vnto you: but for you, and your honoured family, all prayers and supplicati∣ons in the spirit, I will (as my daily sacrifice) offer vp∣on the golden altarReuel 8.3., vnto him who regardeth, and despiseth not the prayer of the destitutePsal. 109.17. The
 Lord blessed you and assist you in your high calling: The Lord giue you the price of that other high calling of God in Christ IesusPhil. 3.14, for which with all Saints you presse vnto the mark: The Lord make you fa∣mous in Bethlehem, and alwayes to doe worthily in EphratahRuth. 4.11. The Lord increase you more and more: you and your children. Blessed bee yee of the Lord which made Heauen and earthPsal. 115.14, 15.. Thus recommending this little booke, with my selfe the poore Author thereof, vnto your implored Patronage
 and Proection, I craue par∣don for my boldnesse, and rest

Eatonbridge, Iune 7th. Anno Salutis, 1630.
