


RIGHT REVEREND,
THE Preacher speaking of himselfe, said, that for his preachings hee sought to find out accep∣table words,Eccles. 12. v. 10. words of de∣light, which in the same verse he calleth words of trueth: where I obserue that words of trueth, may bee words of delight, delight not being con∣trarie

to trueth, neither pleasure vnto profit: Such words are compared to goades & nailes,Eccles. 12. v. 11. which CHRIST the great Pastour giveth vnto his Ministers, the Masters of Assemblees, who are appointed by him for to fasten;Bernar. su∣per Cant. yea, and to naile mens soules vnto him selfe: Such words are full of substance:Qurit a∣a ver∣u, cui consentiat a corre∣iem,  illumi∣nur ad cognitionē, cui innita∣tur ad vir∣tutem, quo res. nctur ad sipien∣tim cui  tur ad de∣rem, cui tetur ad su∣illa,  sua∣tur . they are faire with∣out faird.
As it is not good in preaching to make vse of swelled hydropick words of man his invention, neither must man take that for simplicity of the Gospell, which diverse call simplicity, viz. words wan∣ting a due & painefull meditation, which is the very digestion of the spirit: Ill stu∣died words can not be these acceptable words of Solomon: Of them can bee made no nailes for the fastening of loose and vstable soules.
I ever thought this part of the Ministrie a painefull part, not to be done without great paines: Some speake of a Booke day, but all our dayes should be Booke dayes. If a Pagan could be moved for any thing to say, Ab perdiat diem, alace I haue left a day, what shall he say, who is a labou∣rer in the Lords Vineyeard?
They who would doe this worke as they should, must with earnest prayers, painefull reading, and serious meditati∣ons emptie their veines of their blood, till palenesse the STVDDIE MARKE bee printed vpon their face: They must watch while others sleepe, and labour at the candle: They must forsake the fea∣thers and the downes at the chirping of the birds.Eccles. 12. v. 4.
In some measure I striue to this, though not as I would: Happie is the servant that is vigilant, hauing ever his loines girded and his candle in his hand,Luke 12. v. 35. waiting for the coming of his LORD.
Let it please your Lo. to take in good part this part of my labours, wherein is a boxe of balme, a little te∣stimony of my thankfulnesse for the great kindnesse, whereof in my great affliction it pleased you to make mee partake: The bloody persecution in France did scatter many Churches, and mine amongst others: At my coming heere you refreshed mee with your comforts, and placed mee besides your selfe, where I find the LORD'S bles∣sing vpon my labours: To Him alone belongs the glory.
And seeing it is the LORDS will that man bee thankfull vnto man, let me heere name three speciall friends to whom neither name not blood haue bund mee, but great loue and kind∣nesse in time of mine adversitie, the bond whereof as I hope shall never bee broken. At my first coming to Edinburgh, good Doctour SIBBALD, the glory and honour of all the Phy∣sicians of our Land, would haue mee to abide with him:Note. But afterward, a preaching at a fast hauing made mine acquaintance with Sr. William Scot of Eli, that great Scots MECENAS, Pa∣tron to great ROLLOCVS, hee after that did keepe me with him, as one of his owne Children:2. Tim. 1. v. 18. the LORD grant vnto him that hee may finde mercie in that day: From Sr. William you brought mee to Glasgow; of that your favour let mee not forget a speciall instru∣ment, even that wise and godly man, Mr. Iames Rbertoun, Comisser of Ha∣miltoun, with whom I wish that I might both liue and die.
I heere in the dedication of this treatise acknowledge your bounty with a thankfull profession.
And seeing our Bookes are our Chil∣dren, the bisb of our braines,Libri Liberi. it is most convenient, that you who haue the Patronage of the FATHER, should also vouchsafe a blessing to the Children. Which looking after. I intreat the Most High to preserue you vnblame∣able both in Soule and Body, vntill the day of his appearing.
At Glasgow
the 23 of December, 1628.

