



RIGHT Worshipfull and the rest beloued: It is a conclu∣sion of St. Augustines,S. August. in Epist. ad Mar∣cellin. That there is nothing can be spo∣ken more briefely, nor heard more ioyfully, nor vnder∣stood more acceptably, nor performed more fruitfully then the duty of thankfulnesse. This is true of thankfulnesse to God; of which St. Augustine speaketh; and true of thankfulnesse to men, as experience teacheth. Of the first S. ChrysostomeS. Chrysost. Hom. 51. in Genes. affirmeth, Nihil tam gra∣tum Deo vt anima grata & gratias agens: That there is nothing so acceptable vnto God as a
 thankfull minde, nothing more pleasing in his eyes;S. Chrysost. Hom. 1 ad po∣plum An∣tioch. and therefore he calles thankfulnesse a rich treasure, yea a heape of riches, a fountaine of good, and a tower of strength, because by the memorie of benefits receiued, we are strengthe∣ned that we fall not backe by Ingratitude, then which nothing is more detestable in the eyes of God, as S. BernardSt. Bern. serm. 1. de septem miseicorijs. Sen lib. 2. de benefic cap. 22. Sabellic. lib. 7. cap. 1. Exempl. Baptista Ful∣gos. Plutarch. in Apophth. testifieth. And for the se∣cond thankfulnesse to men; not only men (as Au∣gustus Caesar, (of whom Seneca,) Alexander of Ma∣cedon (of whom Sabellicus,) Artaxerxes that King of Persia, (of whom Fulgosus) with diuers others, (of whom Plutarch) reporteth:) But euen the bruite beasts themselues, may seeme to haue been delighted with it, and as it were to take pleasure in it. Witnesse that story of the Dragon, which (as AelianusAelianus de varia Hist. lib. 13. relateth) was nourished by a Boy in the Citie of Patras in Achaia, and being growen bigge, and driuen by the Citizens into the wil∣dernesse, (not being forgetfull of him by whom he was nourished) when in processe of time the Boy trauelling thorough the wildernesse, was set vpon by theeues, hearing his voyce, he came pre∣sently to assist him, and in thankfulnesse destroyed the theeues, and conducted him safe on his iour∣ney. Witnesse that story of the Panther (of which GeminianusGeminian. de Exempl. maketh mention) which hauing her yong ones fallen into a pit, and (while she sought for helpe) meeting with a man whom with feare and fawning she perswaded to follow her; when he had deliuered her yong shee left him not, but in thankfulnesse kept him from danger till hee
 came forth of the deserts.Pierius Valeri∣anus Hierogly∣phicor. lib. 19. Witnesse that of the Eagle, which being saued by a Reaper (who came to fetch water) from the violence of the Serpent that had poysoned the Fountaine, and almost kil∣led her; the Serpent being cut in peeces with his hooke, and the Reaper carrying water to his fel∣lowes, the Eagle did flye after him; and when his fellowes had drunke and were poysoned, he being about to drinke himselfe, shee hindered him from drinking, labouring with her wings to breake the pitcher: by which (seeing his fellowes some dying, some dead before him) he perceiued her thankful∣nesse vnto him for deliuering of her from the cru∣eltie of the Serpent. To conclude, witnesse that famous Historie of Androdus the fugitiue seruant;Aulus Gellius. who by errour falling into a Lyons denne, which had a thorne in his foote; Androdus pulling it out, the Lyon nourished him for a time with him; and when he escaped thence, being (taken for his of∣fence and) cast to a company of Lyons, where that Lyon also (being taken by hunters) was kept: The Lyon knowing Androdus his old Chyrurgion, would not suffer him to be deuoured, and there∣fore both were set at libertie, and the Lyon follow∣ing him euery where like a Dog, was pointed at by all men with this observatiō, Ecce leo hospes hominis, Ecce homo medicus leonis: Behold a Lyon the Hoste of a man, and behold a man the Physition of a Lyon. Thus you see not only God, but also men and bruite beasts, haue beene delighted with the duty of thankfulnesse. To acknowledge therefore those many fauours which I haue receiued, both
 from you all in generall, and from some in a more especiall manner. For from you the learned Pastour (I must confesse) I not only sucked my first milke in the Vniuersitie, but receiued my en∣couragement and furtherance to be planted in this Citie, and (by a free election) in this place, wherein (by Gods gracious fauour) for these foure yeeres and vpwards, I haue happily continued. And from you my worthy and euer honoured friends (with whom I haue liued,) I haue obtained not onely a principall part of my liuelyhood for the present; but (by a most free and noble gift) a Pastorall charge, wherein I may exercise (with much com∣fort) my ministeriall office for the time to come. Nor can I here end, for from many other in parti∣cular I haue not wanted priuate fauours, witnesses of their pietie to God, and good will towards me. How then can I be silent and suffer my selfe to be iustly branded with the coale of Ingratitude? To preuent this, I haue aduentured to offer (as a Fare∣well) these my weake meditations vnto you, which though they be farre vnable to satisfie your deser∣uing, yet may they remaine with you (when I am gone,) as a testimonie of my desires. They are a New-yeeres gift (in respect of the time, and in re∣spect of the subiect,) not too high for any, nor too base for the best, fitting, pleasurable and profita∣ble for all, if you reade, and remember, and practise them with Conscience. They are a plaine and di∣rect plat-forme of the state of a Christian, shewing how we may walke, from the true knowledge of Christ (which is the foundation of all) to the true
 Vnion, and Communion with Christ and his Church; and in these to that heauenly newnesse, in and by which we must all passe through the ma∣nifold Labyrinths, and dangerous temptations of our spirituall enemies; from the old Iericho of this world, to that new Ierusalem in the kingdome of heauen. And this is the summe of all that we can teach, or you can desire to learne. Being therefore now (by Gods prouidence) to take my leaue of you, my last request shall be (both to you and to God for you,) That not onely these meditations, but also all my poore endeauours may by Gods blessing, so remaine with you, that they may work in you all, such a measure of this excellent know∣ledge, this blessed Vnion, Communion and new creation, that you may haue peace, that true peace of Conscience, and comfort of soule for euer; that the Lord of peace may giue you peace alwaies by all meanes,2 Thess. 3.16. and that the gracious presence of God the Father, God the Sonne, and God the holy Ghost. may be with you, blesse, preserue, and keepe you all in the kingdome of Grace, to the kingdome of Glory for euer. And thus not ceasing to pray for you; I rest. From my study at Sr. Samuel Tryons, in the Parish of St. Christophers. April. 1622.

