



RIght Worshipfull Sir, if this small Treatise had beene a learned discourse of some high point of Diuinitie in controuersie at these daies, it might vvell haue beene thought beseeming the fauour of him, vvho hath not only spent all his life in the Vniuersitie among the lear∣ned, but for his great learning and vvisdome hath many yeares beene chiefe gouernour not onely of those that are studious and de∣sirous of learning, but of great learned men themselues, and those vvhich are teachers of others. But seeing it containeth nothing els but common and ordinarie instructions vn∣to godlinesse, and consolations in trouble;
 it may be iudged more fit to be presented vnto some, vvho though hee vvere of like vvorship, yet might be of lesse learning and authoritie among the learned. But my A∣pologie and defence for my selfe, is this, That such haue beene your deserts a great vvhile, not to others alone, but euen vnto my selfe, that they haue craued somevvhat at my hands long agoe, as vvell as at others. Presu∣ming therefore of the thankfulnesse of many others vnto you, according to their dutie, I could not satisfie my self in this my (I wil not say vnthankfulnesse) but insufficient thanks; and so this oportunitie being offered, I did not consider so much vvhat vvas meet for you to receiue for your desert, and for your place, as what I vvas presently fit for my abilitie to bring: euen a little fruit of my labours, for your aboundant kindnesse to∣vvards me:2. Sam. 4.15.33. as the Prophet Elisha did to the Shunamite, for all her great fauours to him and his. And as the fruit of your fauour hath not beene for a fevv dayes or months, but hath extended it selfe vnto many yeares, so I vvas desirous to leaue behind me some testimonie of my dutie againe, vvhich might
 continue for some yeares: and that as you haue long since by many deserts attained vnto that commendation vvhich the spirit of God giueth vnto Boaz,Ruth. 2.20. That you haue not ceased to doe good to the liuing, and to the dead; so your vertues might be remembred to the glorie of God, not onely vvhiles you liue, but when you shall be dead. Of vvhich if I should say nothing my selfe, knowing so much, and hauing so good cause; not onely the many learned diuines and students in o∣ther arts, which vnder your wise gouerne∣ment continue the studies still in your Col∣ledge, with great encouragement from your selfe; but those godly preachers especially, vvhich these many yeares haue come from thence into diuers parts of this realme, vvith great profit vnto the Church of God, vvill speake sufficiently both for the time present, and this next age to come: vvhich doe vvil∣lingly and in all places acknowledge them∣selues, and their learning, and the foundation of all their preferment to be vvholly behol∣ding to your selfe. Which godly care of yours in aduauncing of learning and pietie (you being a professed patrone of learning
 and learned men) shall so much the rather continue and encrease in you to the good example of others of your ranke, vvhen be∣sides the blessing of God vpon your labours this vvay (vvhich is principally to be regar∣ded) you shall perceiue, that by obliuion it is not altogether forgotten of men. And thus hoping that you vvill accept this, as a testi∣monie of my true thankefulnesse vnto you, vvhere better requitall is vvanting, I pray God to blesse you in your Colledge still, that from thence, as frō an excellent schoole of the Prophets, there may come continu∣ally manie faithfull Pastors into the Church of God: not so much like those that vvere brought vp at the feet of the great Doctor Gamaliel,Act. 5.34. Chap. 13.1. and 11.26. as those that vvere at Antioch, vvhich gaue the first name vnto Christians: that God may be honored, and the Church edified by your meanes more and more: and so your selfe not onely haue the conti∣nuance of a good conscience here, but most of all in the last day, They may bee your crowne,2. Cor. 1.14. and you theirs: vvhen all of you appearing before the Lord, you may vvith much comfort say vnto him, Here
 am I,Isai. 8.18. and the children whom thou hast giuen vnto me: and hee againe vnto you,Matth. 25.21. Jt is well done good seruant and faithfull, thou hast beene faithfull in little, I will make thee ruler ouer much, enter into thy masters ioy. So ve∣rie humbly and heartely I take my leaue. Norton in Suffolke. May. 1604.

