


RIGHT Reuerent Fathers in God, & right gra∣ciouse & honourable Lords; I presume to offer this Treatise of the Sabbath day, vnto your graue & iudicious considerations; as vnto whom it doth more principally appertaine, to weigh & determine, of ques∣tions & controuercies, of such great consequence; and whose it is, in a most eminent manner, to see that all corruptions in Gods worship be reformed; all Truethes of God, fostered & cherished; and all the partes of Gods worship, duly & religiously obserued.
Amongst other things in this Treatise, I humbly desire your Lordshipes, to take these fiue, into your best & deepest considerations: 1. That that Sacred or∣dinance of Gods Sabbath (then the which, is not any in our Church more ancient; commanded by God in his Morall Law; ratified by Christ the Sonne of God; prac∣tised by the Apostles; & also by the primitiue Churches after them, for 300 or 400 yeeres together) is now sin∣fully trampled vnder foote, & prophaned. 2. That the Decalogue, & 10 Commandements of Almighty God, are not wholly and fully taught and maintained in our Church, but onely by partes & by peeces. 3. That God hath not his whole & intire worship & seruice, prescri∣bed in the first Table of the Decalogue, but is denied one fourth part thereof weekly. 4. That Gods 4th com∣mandement, is by the commō doctrine in our Church, wholly frustrate and nullified, both roote and branch. 5. That by very many in our Church, there is grosse su∣perstition committed, Gods worship corrupted, yea plaine Idolatry wrought: and that by sanctifying of the
Lords day, for a Sabbath day, by the 4th Com. These things (as I beleeue) you shall find cleerly proued in this Booke.
Vnto whose consideration should I commend these things, for redresse, if not vnto your Lordshipes? hath not his Maiestie therefore deputed you, vnto your se∣uerall charges, to ouersee, & see to the well ordering of the Church, & worship of God? and hath not the Al∣mightie, laied it vpon you, To warne some, that they teach none other doctrine, 1. Tim. 1.3? And, To redresse the things that are amisse: Or, To set in order, the things that are wanting, Tit. 1.5? Downe then with that Idoll, the Lords day Sabbath: so dealt Hezekiah with the Brazen Serpent, when idolatrously abused: and bring into its roome, & into the Church of God againe, that ancient ordinance, Gods Sacred Saturday-Sabbath; let not an idoll of mans deuiseing, stand in Gods Church, where an ordinance of Gods, inioyned by a Morall Law, should stand.
Oh my honourable Lords, what a pitty it is, to see Antiquity, true and honourable Antiquity, I meane the Lords Sabbathes, troden vnder foote! why should not our Church, become followers of those Ancientest, and most pure Churches, of the primitiue times, that liued next after Christ, & his blessed Apostles, in obseruation of the Lords Sabbath? Who, so long as they retained their greatest purity, so long they religiously obserued the Saturday-Sabbath. Why should not your Lord∣shipes, exhorte vnto the obseruation of the Sabbath day, as did that Godly Bishop Ignatius in his time? Epist. ad Magnesi. And why should not your Lordships, defend the Sabbath day, as did that famouse Bishop Athanasius, in his time? Centur. iiij. cap. 6. pag. 410. This done, the Law of God should be taught and maintained, in our
Church, in its integrity and perfection; the 4th Com∣mandement should be in vse, amongst vs againe; and be accounted as Morall, as any of the other nyne: and God should haue his whole & intire worship, prescribed in the first Table, as well amongst vs, as euer he had among the Iewes, when they were the onely people of God. If it please not God, to inkindle your Lordshipes hearts, with more zeale for his glory, in this behalfe, then is to be found among common Ministers; Gods Sabbaths, are like still (which God forbid) to lay waste, his Lawes to be partially taught, and his intire worship, to be still denied him.
Let none suggest vnto your Lordships, that the ob∣seruation of the ancient Sabbath, is Iudaisme: for Athana∣sius, liuing in those first ages of the Christian Churches, taketh away this obiection, saying, Wee keepe the Sabbath day, and yet we are not tainted with Iudaisme, Centur. iiij. In the Booke of Common Prayer, after the 4th Comman∣dement (wherein the old Sabbath day, is by name spe∣cified) is publikly rehearsed by the Minister, we are or∣dered to vse this deuout prayer, Lord haue mercy vpon vs, & incline our hearts to keepe this Law. Which prayer, & which commandement, cannot (vnder your Lordships correction) be vnderstood of the Lords day, nor of any other day, but the old Sabbath day onely: Wherefore, the obseruation of the old Sabbath, is no Iudaisme; vn∣lesse we be taught, to pray to God, to incline our hearts to Iudaisme. It is not vnknowne vnto your Lordships, that not many yeeres since, the Crosse in Baptisme, hath by some bene counted idolatrouse, & the holy dayes, Ro∣mish, & yet hath our Church freed them from such im∣putations; I trust therefore, that in your graue & reli∣giouse consultations, it will be iudged meete, that the Lords Sabbaths, shall be also freed from the slaunder of
Iewish, Iudaisme, and the like: If the Holy dayes of the Saints, may be defended, I trust the Holie day of the Holie one of Israel, shall be protected.
I haue done myne errand, I haue discharged my duety; the cause is no longer myne, then in my breast; I now commend it vnto your Lordships, for protec∣tion: the cause is Gods; and therefore youres, and the Churches; it deserueth the patronag of the greatest, & of the lernedest.
Tis true, my person is meane; I care not though it be fleited, so the cause be honoured: Iudges, regard not persones; but Causes.
In Courtes of Iustice, if any sewe or informe for the King, if the Kings Title, be in question, though the Informer be meane & neglected, yet the Cause is much regarded; for it hath all the honour & furthe∣rance, that the Iudges & Courte, can afford it: in spe∣ciall sorte, the Iudges, they take in with it, & mannage it, as if it were their owne: Counsaile shall be assigned to pleade for it; other causes shall stand by, whilst it be tried; informer & witnesses, shall be countenanced, & incouraged to speake, & the like; so as if possible, the Kings Title shall get the day. Let me petition your Lordships therfore, in your Triall of this Controuercy, to haue regard whose the Title is, that is in question: it being the Lords Sabbath; a branch of the Morall Law; a parte of Gods worship; and one of the most ancient ordinances, that euer God established in his Church; the Title is plainly Gods therfore: yea, it is called the Sabbath of the Lord, or the Lords Sabbath, and, myne Holy Day. The Title being Gods then, let it haue that fauourable and honourable triall, in your Synods, Consistories, & Consciences, the which earthly Kings Titles obtaine, in their Courtes. Who euer make
squemish of it, your Lordships, as Iudges wil take in with it I trust; knowing, the Title of him is now in que∣stion; of whom you hold all you inioy for the present, and hope to inioy hereafter: let the day be Gods; let iudgement passe on his side, if possible; let the Infor∣mer, haue incouragment & countenance; all helpes & furtherances; if not for his owne sake, yet for his Cause sake; and for Gods sake; hee, pleads the Kings broad Seale, an expresse precept; the 4th Com. one of the 10 Morales; and one of the First Table too; what bet∣ter, or higher Euidence can be demanded?
Let no argument, or Text of Scripture be vrged, to the abolishing of this ordinance of Gods Sabbath; to the impairing, & ecclipsing of the Morall Law, & 10 Commandements; and to the ouerturning of any parte of Gods worship, once established in his Church, if pos∣sible they may be salued and answered, by any warran∣table distinctiō, or exposition: Nor let any answer passe for orthodox, wherby any iote or title of the Decalogue, or any parte of Gods worship, should be denied: This, I humbly begg and craue of our Lordships, and that in the name of God, whose Title I informe for; and whose Title you are to iudge for, and defend; and that by vir∣tue of your places, & high offices. For I hold it as an vndoubted Maxime, that it is not godly, nor Lawfull, to abolish an ordinance of Gods, being a parte of Gods worship, once established in his Church, & prescribed in his Morall Law; vnlesse some most pregnant Text, can be brought against it, which doth necessarily & most cleerly abolish it, so as it can be no wayes answered; of which kind (vnder your Lordships correction be it spoken) I know there is not any one Text that can be showne, in all the New Testament: Now God forbid, that any of his ordinances, should be throwne downe,
when they may (if we pleased) be still retained.
It may easily be thought, that in so large a Treatise as this is, wherein is handled so many arguments, & an∣swers, passages, & particles, & that in a new Argument, not formerly wrote of by any, that some or others of them may sauour of humane frailty; & stand in neede of further study; I craue of your Lordships, that such a thing may not be racked & dwelt vpon, but that the body of the Treatise, & maine Argument, arguments & answers may be attended; the which are so cleere & sound (to my vnderstanding) as I am good Confident, the cause shall obtaine your Lordships Patronage.
So demeane your selues, in deciding, iudging, and defending Gods Title, here on earth; that when the Lord Iesus, that chiefe Shepheard & Byshop of our soules shall appeare, then you may receiue, an Incorruptible Crowne of glory.

