



MY most Honorable good Lord,
THE Great GOD who honoureth these that ho∣nour him, hath honou∣red your Lo. with ma∣ny graces both spiritu∣ally and temporally: As for the spirituall, of the loue of the trueth, and courage for the same,
 your L. hath already given a cer∣taine proofe: wee all looke for more as occasion shall serue: In whomsoever the spirit of IESVS truely is, that man will goe from grace to grace: He (said our Master,Ioh. 15.5.) that abideth in mee, and I in him, the same bringeth foorth much fruite.
As for the TEMPORALL, your L. is the first of the Royall blood in this Land after his MAIESTIE: You are the Sonne of the most wise and wor∣thy Father, who in his lyfe was a most fast friend both to CHVRCH and Commoun-wealth.
The Lord also hath made you the Sonne of a most Religious and Noble Lady, even of a Lady LYDIA, whose heart the LORD in great mercy hath opened, for to let in and lodge the KING of GLORY. After my six∣teene yeeres absence in Fraunce at my re∣turne I arrived at KINNEILL, where her Ladiship received mee with such courtesie, that shall never want my most heartly and humble thankes.
In testimonie of my great desire to serue your L. I present you with these two mst precious ORIENTALL
 PEARLES, viz. GRACE and GLO∣RY, which are from him,Luk. 1.78. whom ZA∣CHARIE in his Song calleth ORI∣ENS ab alto, the day spring from on high: In this sermon you will see whose Counsell you should cheefly seeke: All the counsell of men with the counsell of Achitophell may easily bee turned into follie;2. Sam. 15.31. but heere is the counsell that failed never, even the COVN∣SELL of GOD:Note. When ever your Lo. is for to deliberate vpon any graue and weightie matter, let this secreet ejaculation first goe before, LORD guide mee with thy Counsell, and af∣terward receiue mee to Glory.
Note. The whole Church of Britaine most humbly intreats your L. to conti∣nue in your good course and courage for GODS glory: Read often these words of good MORDECAI to Ester. Thinke not with thy selfe that thou shall escape in the Kings house:Esth. 4.13.14. For if thou altogether holdest thy peace at this tyme, then shall there enlarge∣ment and deliverance arise to GODS people from another place, but thou and thy Fathers house shall bee de∣stroyed:
 And who knoweth whe∣ther thou art come to such honour for such a tyme as this? Your Lo. sitteth at the common-sterne; Helpe vs with your power, and wee will helpe you with our prayers.
Let it please your L. to take this Ser∣mon in good part, though it be but litle.
Note. At the making of the Tabernacle not only were the great and rich presents acceptable, as PVRPLE, SCARLET, and BLVE SILK, but also RAMMES SKINNES, and GOATES HAIRE, which the poorer sort was able onely to affoord.
For to make an end by humble prayers to GOD for your L. I intreat the most high,1. Thess. 3.13. the God of Maiestie and mercie, to make your heart stable and vnblameable in holinesse, till hee hath in you crowned his graces with glorie.

At Glasgow the 13 of Februar 1629.
