



RIght Worshipfull Sir, in respect of your place indeede, some learned Treatise of Iustice might haue seemed more fitting: which if I had at∣tempted, I could haue added nothing vnto that, which you daily practise, and haue done many yeares, to the great good of that part of our countrey, wherein God hath placed you. But yet, as you are a Chri∣stian, and a professor of the Gospel, and so (euen in the multitude of Gods blessings, many waies, and plentifully powred out
 vpon you) are subiect with all the rest of Gods children, vnto some afflictions and crosses; this argument, I hope, for the time present, or to come, may seeme not altogether vnseasonable. Seeing that the Lord hath saide, that if any man will follow him,Matth. 16.24 he must take vp his crosse and follow him. And therefore that is it, which euery one must looke for, at one time or an other, and in what kind it shall seeme best to his heauenly wisdome. For here I haue laboured, to shew out of the word of God, many reasons of the pati∣ent and comfortable bearing of the same. But whatsoeuer it be, it proceedeth from an heart vnfainedly well wishing vnto you: and so I pray you accept of it, as an apparant testimonie of the same.
And for your selfe, good Madame, though your owne vertues and kindnes deserue much, God hauing put vpon you that crowne of glorie,Prov. 16.31. that Salomon speaketh of, namely, that your age is found in the way of righteousnes, e∣uen
 in these most corrupt and dangerous times: yet the worthie memorie of M. Robert Foorth sometimes of Butly, E∣squire,Prou. 2 17. heretofore the guide of your youth, your selfe beeing ioyned vnto him in the neerest couenant of God, had beene sufficient to mooue me among o∣ther his friends and allies, to shew what te∣stimonie of loue I could vnto any of his.
Whose zeale to the Gospel of Christ, and loue to all, that professed it: with his since∣ritie in executing of iustice, heartie affe∣ction to all his neighbours; great hospita∣litie and releefe to the poore, euen in the times of greatest scarsitie and want; with most excellent orders in his family for daily praier, for reading the Scriptures, and for singing of Psalmes, doe yet speake for him, and shall whiles this age remai∣neth. Whose vprightnesse of heart vnto God (wherein he was a right Nathanael,Ioh. 1.47. euen a true Israelite indeed) I pray God, that all his right worshipfull children, sonnes and daughters may set before their
 eyes, as an example to follow.
And so praying God to blesse you both, with many comfortable daies together in this life, and eternall happines after death in the kingdome of heauen, neuer to be se∣uered: with the like blessing of God vpon the right worshipfull your children, and childrens children on both sides, I bid you all most humbly and heartily fare-well in Christ. Norton in Suff. Iun. 24. 1608.

