




DIsdaine not mighty Prince those humble lines,
Though too meane Musicke for so dainty eares,
Since with thy greatnesse, learnings glory shines,
So that thy brow a two-fold Lawrell beares
To thee the Muses, Phoebus now resignes,
And Vertues hight eternall trophees reares;
As Orpheus Harpe, heavens may enstall thy pen
A liberall light to guide the mindes of Men.


Although my wit be weake, my Vowes are strong,
Which consecrate devoutly to thy name
My Muses labours, which ere it be long,
May graft some feathers in the wings of fame,
And with the subject to conforme my song,
May in more lofty lines thy worth proclame,
With gorgeous colours courting glories light,
Till circling Seas doe bound her ventrous flight.


Ere thou wast borne, and since, heaven thee endeeres,
Held backe, as best to grace these last worst Times;
The World long'd for thy birth three hundreth yeeres,
Since first fore-told wrapt in Propheticke rimes,
His love to thee, the Lords deliveries cleeres,
From Sea, from Sword, from Fire, from Chance, from Crimes,
And that to him thou onely might be bound,
Thy selfe was still the meanes foes to confound.


I doe not doubt but Albions warlike coast,
(still kept unconquer'd by the heavens decree)
The Picts expell'd, the Danes repell'd, did boast
(In spite of all Romes power) a state still free,
As that which was ordain'd (though long time crost
In this Herculean birth) to bring forth thee,
Whom many a famous Sceptred Parent brings
From an undaunted race to doe great things.



Of this divided Ile the Nurslings brave,
Earst, from intestine warres could not desist,
Yet did in forraine fields their names engrave,
Whilst whom one spoil'd the other would assist:
Those now made one, whilst such a head they have,
What world of words were able to resist?
Thus hath thy worth (great IAMES) conjoyn'd them now,
Whom battels oft did breake, but never bow.


And so, most justly thy renowned deeds
Doe raise thy fame above the starry round,
Which in world a glad amazement breeds,
To see the vertues (as they merit) crown'd,
Whilst thou (great Monarch who in power exceeds,
With vertuous goodnesse do st vast greatnesse bound,
Where, if thou lik'dst to be more great, then good,
Thou might'st soone build a Monarchie with bloud.


O! this faire world without the world, no doubt,
Which Neptune strongly guards with liquid bands,
As aptest so to rule the Realmes about,
She by her selfe (as most Majesticke) stands,
Thence (the worlds Mistris) to give judgement out,
With full authority for other Lands,
Which on the Seas would gaze attending still,
By wind-wing'd Messengers their Soveraignes will.


The Southerne Regions did all Realmes surpasse,
And were the first which sent great Armies forth;
Yet Soveraignty that there first founded was,
Still by degrees hath drawne unto the North,
To this great Climate which it could not passe,
The fat all period bounding all true worth:
For, it cannot from hence a passage finde,
By roring Rampiers still with us confinde.


As Waters which a masse of earth restraines,
(If they be, swelling high begin to vent)
Doe rage disdainefully over all the plaines,
As with strict borders scorning to be pent:
Even so this masse of earth, that thus remaynes,
Wall'd in with waves, if (to burst out when bet.)
(The bounding flouds o're-flow'd) it rush forth, then
That deluge would o're-run the world with men.

Then since great Prince) the torrent of thy power,
May drowne whole Nations in a Scarlet floud,
On Infidels thy indignation powre,
And bathe not Christian bounds with Christian bloud:
The Tyrant Ottoman (who would devoure
All the redeemed souls) may be withstood,
While as thy troups (great Albions Emperour) once
Do comfort Christs afflicted flock which moanes.


Thy thundring troups might take the stately rounds
Of Constantines great Towne renown'd in vaine,
And barre the barbarous Turks the baptiz'd bounds,
Reconquering Godfreys conquests once againe;
O, well spent labours! O illustrious wounds!
Whose trophees should eternall glory gaine,
And make the Lyon to be fear'd farre more,
Then ever was the Eagle of before.


But, O thrice happy thou that of thy Throne
The boundlesse power for such an use controuls!
Which if some might command to raigne alone,
Of all their life they would be-bloud the scrouls,
And to content the haughtie thoughts of one
Would sacrifize a thousand thousand souls,
Which thou do'st spare, though having sprite and might,
To challenge all the world as thine owne right.


Then unto whom more justly could I give
Those famous ruines of extended states
(Which did the world of libertie deprive
By force, or fraud, to reare Tyrannick seats)
Then unto thee, who may and will not live
Like those proud Monarchs borne to stormy fates?
But whil'st frank-sprited Prince, thou this wouldst flee,
Crowns come unsought, and Scepters seek to thee.


Vnto the Ocean of thy worth I send
Those runnels, rising from a rash attempt;
Not that I to augment that depth pretend,
Which heavens from all necessitie exempt,
The Gods small gifts of zealous mindes commend,
While Hecatombes are holden in contempt:
So (Sir) I offer at your vertues shrine
This little incense, or this smoke of mine.

