



WELBELOVED in the LORD,
The word of God is a treasure
of knowledge:Psal. 19 v. 7. Jt maketh
wise the simple. It made David
Psal. 119. 99 wiser then his teachers. Blessed is
the manPsal. 1. 2. whose delight is in Gods
law, and who meditats on the same
both day and night. This is the wise∣dome
of the wise; butProver. 12. 23. in the hearts
of fooles be proclamations of fo∣lie,
for they knowe not thatProver. 5. 21. the
LORD pondereth all their goe∣ings.
Happy are yee, if yee can acknowledge
the day of your mercifull visitation:
your God hath blessed you with many
blessings: He hath done to you amongst

many Cities, as Joseph did to Ben∣jamin
amongst his brethren, to whom
he multiplied the number of hisGenes. 43. 34. meas∣ses aboue theirs: But in a particular
man hee hath blessed you with the
powerfull preaching of his Gospell.
The Lord who in Zacharias dayes pro∣mised
to make theZach. 14. 4. Mount of Olives
to cleaue, that Ierusalem hidde with
hils might bee seene by all nations;
hath in this land, which was Scotia,
a land of darknesse, made a way to the
sight of his glory, and to you in a spe∣ciall
maner: I pray God yee bee thank∣full,
and that such favors continue.
It hth beene Gods providence by the
occasion of the French bloody warres to
bring me amongst you: My soule (the
Lord is my witnesse) wisheth your well:
In testimonie therefore of my sincere
and hearty loue, receaue favourably these
two Sermons, with some fewe prayers.
Take it in good part that I present
you with them.
All that is done in this envious and

taxing age is lyable to censure: Many
striue to stop a worke at the first stop,
as though the praise of any were their
prejudice: The tongues of such are ar∣med
withPsal. 120. 4, sharpe arrowes of the
mightie, and with coales of juniper.Note.
* Let such knowe that the best repro∣ving
of others is to doe better them
selues.
It is my desire that yee would ac∣cept
this little, and vouchsafe it a
rowme of lodgeing in your favour,
as being a testimonie of loue from
him, who shall alwayes pray1. Sam. 15. 9. the E∣ternitie
of Israell, to make his gra∣ces
raine downe plentifully vpon you,
Psal. 133. 3. as the dew of Hermon, and
as the dew that descended vpon
the mountaines of Zion, where
the LORD commanded the bles∣sings.
So humbly taking my leaue,
I intreate the LORD, in whom all
Col. 1. 19. fulnesse dwelleth, to replenish you
withEphes. 1. 3. all spirituall blessings in Hea∣venly
places.

2. Cor. 9. 10. Now hee that ministreth seede
to the sower, both minister bread
for your foode, and multiplie your
seede sowen, and increase the fruits
of your righteousnesse: Not els but
humbly taking my leaue, I remaine
GLASGOVV this 5. of
November 168.

