



RIght reuerend father, and very ho∣nourable Lord, besides many other weightie reasons, whereby I haue beene mooued to commend this simple present vnto your Lordships fauour, which it is not necessarie nor conuenient to make all the world acquainted with (it is enough that your Lordship priuately doth take knowledge of them) it may be sufficient openly to professe thus much; That whereas my selfe, with all the rest of my brethren & fellow ministers, were in our countrie, and in all the rest of your L. Dioces of Norfolke and Suffolke, the last sommer inioyned by your letters sent to your officers to that ende (according
 to the order set downe before in print, by the authoritie of the Kings most excel∣lent maiestie) to come to the Church eue∣ry weke vpon the wednesdaies and fri∣daies, with the rest of our people & flocke committed vnto vs: there and then to be occupied in praier and fasting, to intreat the Lord for our sinnes, and for the sinnes of the rest in this land: that so his heauie hand, which by the pestilence was then very sharpely, and that a long time stret∣ched out in many cheife cities and towns of this realme, and namely, of this your L. Dioces, as Norwich, and Yarmouth, and some other might be called in at his ap∣pointed time,Sam. 24.16. as it was in the daies of king Dauid. Whereby it came to passe, that both here, and in many places els, there was much more preaching & hea∣ring of the word of God, and praying vn∣to him, then was before, and otherwise would haue beene. So that by meanes of the straite charge laid vpon all by your L. letter, there was much good done in this countrie at that time, the fruite whereof
 I hope, remaineth vnto this day. For though the booke containing the cause and order of those fasts, which was made by some of the cheife gouernours in the Church of England, and was authorized by the Kings Highnesse, did (as I take it) not onely giue leaue vnto all places pub∣likely to meete vpon these aboue named daies to these ends, but did inioyne them to it: and so all men might haue taken knowledge of it, and of their dutie there∣in from thence: especially when the cause of it (namely so grieuous, and so vniuersall a plague) was so notorious, that it could not be hid from any: yet it was found too true by experience in many places, that vntill such time as men were further cal∣led vpon by your Lordships letter, full of great and weightie reasons to perswade thereunto, that neither many ministers had any care to call vpon their people to so holy and necessarie a seruice, nor the people any great deuotion to come: So slowe are men vnto any part of Gods seruice, yea though it doth so greatly cō∣cerne
 them, especially to this principall part of it in fasting and praier (which hath beene very long out of vse) that they had neede not onely lightly to be called vpon, but with many strong coards violently hailed vnto it: though vnto all matters of the world, they are so forward and hastie, that they runne of their own accord, and none can stay them. Hereupon it hath come to passe, that a great part of the good, that this way hath beene done vn∣to the people of God, and seruice to his maiestie, is to be imputed vnto your lord∣ships diligent care, who did so timely, and effectually stirre vp men vnto it: especially in respect of those cheife places & others, vnder your Lordships iurisdiction, which then were greatly subiect vnto this visita∣tion, as well as other parts of this land, neither are they all of them yet free from it. Therefore these beeing part of my la∣bours at that time, they are in some sort due vnto your Lordship, by whose means I receiued incouragement thereunto, as others did to the like. And I haue presu∣med
 to present them vnto your Lord∣ship, that by them you may see, and by one may iudge of the rest, how readie we are, and shall be, to yeild obedience to all your L. godly proceedings: promising for my selfe, and presuming of the rest that when we shall be likewise comman∣ded (which we expect, and hope for in time) to keepe solemne dayes of thanks∣giuing for the mitigating of this plague in so great measure in the most places, and for the cleane taking of it away in many, we will be, by the grace of God, as ready to performe that part of seruice, as we haue beene forward vnto this. And in the meane season according to our boun∣den duty we will indeauour not only pri∣uatly to be thankfull vnto God, but vpon all such daies, as we haue our publike as∣semblies, to doe it in some part, and to call vpon our people to be thankfull to God with vs, both in hart, words, and life: least the Lord for our vnthankfulnes doe returne vpon vs with the same, or some other great punishment of his. Which
 we haue so much the more cause to feare, vnles we thus seeke to preuent it, because the late memory of so great a worke, both of iustice in sending the plague, and of mercy in taking it away, is not so fresh & effectuall with all men, nay with very few, as it should: but they like to vngratious children so soone forget the rodd, as it is off their back. And seeing by these your Lordship may take knowledge, that by your godly incitation many were made more painfull in their callings (at the least for that time) then otherwise they would have beene, whereby also God was more honoured, and the people more instruct∣ed: your Lordship will according to that high place, wherein God hath placed you, especially to that end, take all oppor∣tunities by word and writing still to incite all men to be zealous and feruent in the worke of the ministery: by giuing all good incouragement vnto the painfull la∣bourers in Gods haruest, and by quick∣ning vp them that are any way slothfull and negligent, and by discountenancing
 them that are altogether careles and idle, and by stopping vp the passage vnto al idol sheapherds & hirelings, who seeke the fleece and not the flock: whose right arme as it is cleane withred vp, and their right eye vtterly darkned so as the Pro∣phet saith they haue neither will,Zach. 11.17. nor abi∣litie to doe any good in the Church of God. That so not only the gospell may still more and more be purely preached in this your Lordships Dioces, (as now by the grace of God it is, and hath beene a long time by many learned & great men) but that the people in all places may be compelled diligently to frequent it: & not only themselues to yeeld obedience vnto it, but to haue their children & seruants,Act. 10.2. euen their whole families willingly cate∣chised: that they may feare God with all their househoulds. That so we may blesse god, not only for your comming among vs, but much more for your continuance with vs, and ouer vs: and pray to him for you (as we doe, and mind to doe) that the Lord will long preserue you zealous of
 his glory, and carefull of the good of that part of his church, ouer which the holy ghost hath made you ouerseer,ap. 20.28. which al∣so Iesus Christ hath purchased, not with gold or siluer, but with his owne most pretious blood. That so among the rest of his good and faithfull seruants, who haue vsed their talents well,ib. 25.2. he may giue you a full reward in the kingdome of heauen, who hath said, if thou loue me feed my sheepe, if thou loue me, feed my lambes.. 21.1. For though the daily exercises of the word of God should be sufficient of themselues, to purchase credit and reue∣rence to thēselues with all sorts of people, as to the most holy ordinances of the eter∣nall God; and the great wantes, that are in all men, should driue them to seeke to them continually as to the meanes of their saluation, whereby all their wantes might be supplied: yet such is the irreligion in many, and the want of feeling in others, that they are no more forward vnto any part of Gods seruice, or of the meanes of their owne saluation, then authority doth
 compell them. Thus assuring my selfe, that your later deedes will be answerable to these good beginnings, or rather happy proceedings; yea that they will goe farre beyond them in all godly zeale, I comfort my selfe, with the rest of my brethren in the daily expectation and hope of it: pray¦ing to god,Psal. 69.9. that the zeale of his house may euen consume you: that so you waxing old in all well doing,Prou. 16.31. your age may be so much the more honorable, beeing found in the way of righteousnes. And so not doutibng of your Lordships fauou∣rable acceptatiō of these my poore endea∣uours, I leaue them to your fatherly and honorable protection, and my selfe, & my seruice to your continuall commande∣ment, very humbly taking my leaue. Nor∣ton in Suffolke. 30. Aprill. 1604.

