



YOu haue read, I take it, right honorables, of Polycletus rule:Polyclet Regula. A speeche applyed to those men, whose ex∣cellencie many haue imitated, more haue enuied, but none haue attained. Those that haue imitated, haue been Socordes, and so vnworthie, be∣cause they neuer trauailed to knowe mat∣ters
 of estate. Those that haue enuied, haue beene Vecordes base conceipts, and so vn∣willing because vnworthie. And those that haue not attained, are Excordes in pusillani∣mitie and infirmitie of the mind. But there are yet another number Cordati Homines re∣nowmed men for wisedome, yet are not re∣nowmed for wealth. These enuie not any mans estate, but attribute vnto Fortune, the goods of Fortune: To the bodie, the goods of the bodie: to the minde, the ri∣ches of the minde: and to Caesar, all things due vnto him. Such should wise men be, that what they are not thought worthie of by the worthiest; they should content them selues with, as well as the meanest. Wher∣vpon I considering, that I cannot atchieue the knowledge which is worthie of your most honorable fauours, request, this may be worthie of your pacience. Wine which in base Dutch is called Drozen or Moder, is good for somewhat, it will make a com∣pound. So my wit may hereafter with your
 present protections & honourable allow∣ance make a simple. But as there is of the yeare foure quarters: so is there of a mans knowledge, fouretimes. The Spring: the Summer: the Autumne: and Winter. The infancie, the youth: the middle age, (ripe iudgement:) and the olde age (right follie.) And because my knowledge is none, it cannot be termed any. Howbeit, for that I haue euer heard, my true honou∣rable Lord and maister, publish your lord∣ships excellent partes, which he recordeth often from his heart: I doe the rather presume of your Lordships clemencie in his absence. That I may approach with all this simplicitie vnto all that singulari∣tie: Who in witt beeing a Paterne to all men: may (where it wanteth) be a Pa∣trone to mee. I cannot be tedious in my writing. Woulde I had the like priui∣ledge, not to be odious in my enditing. But so had I neede to bee in Arte Polycle∣tus: in happe Polycrates: which because I
 am not, I care not. Onely, I respect your Lordships true estimation, and I expect the Readers due consideration. I cease, not ceasing to remember your Lordships in my dayly wish for your long prosperitie.

