


MOST DREAD SOVE∣RAIGNE, It was wisely said by the Royall Preacher, The me∣morie of the Iust is blessed:Prov. 1. 7 But the name of the wicked shall rot: To haue a good name both in this life and after Death is a blessing promised vnto

the Righteous: But as for the vngod lie their names become mouldie and rot∣ten: Qui injuste  omtur just damnantur.
This consideration should rouse v all men to the doing of that which is good but chieflie KINGS and PRINCES▪ whose liues are to bee seene in Chronicles by all ages, which come after: While other mens names within a little space are bu∣ried in obliuion, the Chronicles the Re∣gisters of times cry vnto the World, Read and consider vvhat sort of men such and such haue beene.
Of Saul it is writter, that his sinne of rebellion in sparing Agag was 1 Sam. 15, 23. as the sinne of Witch-craft, & that his stub∣bornnesse was as idolatrie: His enuie against Dauid, & his consulting 1 Sam. 28 7 with the Witch at Endor shall bee manifest to all Ages to come: Dauids 1 Sam, 13 14. Vertues and his Vices 2 Sam 11 8. are penned: Solomons 1 Kin. 3. 9 vvisedome & his 1 Kin▪ 11 9 folies, 1 Kin 12▪ 14. Re∣hoboms contemning of the olde coun∣sellers 1 Kin. 16 2 A habs and 2 Kin. 16 ▪31 A haz his wic∣kednesse 2 Kin. 23 . Iosiah and 2 hr. 20, 3 Iehoshaphats goodnesse shall bee to bee seene and reade so long as this world shall last.
Note Oh, that Kings would consider how in a short life they may soone plot the euill which sh staine heir good name to the worlds end.
Note Manie may Flatter a Prince while hee liueth: But so soone as hee is gone, Trueth which while hee liued was warded, then commeth out and plainelie declareth to the world whether hee was a wise man or a foole.
Note There is no sinne so secret, but GodIoh. 1. 47. in his owne time shall bring it to light: If King CHARLES rule well, and bee truelie godlie like Nathanael without guile, An hundreth yeares after this Great BRITAINE shall blesse the Name of King CHARLES, yea, and that till God end Time in Eternitie.
* The seuen Stars of the Charles▪Waine are not so glorious as shall bee the seuen Letters of CHARLES in GODSReuel▪ 17. 18. Booke which is the Booke of Life.
Though your Maiesties Bodie after Death lye rotten in the Graue, yet shall your Royall Name as if it were perfumed & enbalmed, haue a most sweete sauour like these Garments wherein Iacob got his Fa∣thersGen. 27, 27, blessing the smell whereof was as the smel of a field which ye Lord had blessed.
Seeing there is nothing more powerfull to moue a man to liue well, than to re∣member that hee must die, and after comeGrego. Mors ipsa cum vene∣rit vinci tur si prius quam ve∣niat sem∣per timea∣tur. for to reckon with his God: For this cause haue I penned this Treatise of Sicknesse bringing vnto death where your Maiestie may see the most fearfull Skirmishes, which are betweene the faithfull Soule & the ene∣mies of our Saluation: For this cause haue I called it, THE LAST BAT∣TELL OF THE SOVLE. Loe,Iob. 5. 27 this wee haue searched, so it is, heare it, and know it for your good.
Let it please your Maiestie to looke vpon these my Workes with a fauourable eye and to take them into your Royall Pro∣tection: They were brought foorth in the Land of Your Birth, euen in your olde SCOTLAND, Whereof your Maiestie is now the hundreth and ninth King.
The particular place where this Booke was penned is your owne GLAS∣GOWE, a Citie once greatlie beloued of great King IAMES your Maiesties Father of blessed memorie: * A Citie that looketh for the like fauour from your Royall MAIESTIE.
My chiefest spirituall desire is, that this may bee comfortable to sicke Soules: My first temporall wish is that your Maiestie would daine it with a blink of your Fauour: Let it obtaine your Royall Approbation, which shall bee to it as a Passe-port, which neither Pride nor Enuie shall bee able with Reason to reiect: If anie man be con∣tentious, I heere appell vnto Caesar.
Let mee bee so bolde as heere to aske a Petition from your Maiestie, which gran∣ted, I will atcount a sufficient recompence to all my Labours.
This is it, That it would please your Religious Maiestie to take a specall care that the prophanation of the Lords blessed and hallowed day bee remoued from this Land: It is come to such a custome and that chieflie betweene Edinburgh and Glasgow, that by no meanes the Church is able to refine it, except that by your Royall authoritie their Market dayes bee changed: Note▪ The abuse is so great that if your godlie Maiestie knew it, yee could not in∣dure it: The keeping of this Precept is the onelie one which hath a memento before it, and yet it is most forgotten: It is the verie Key of Religion.
Let it please your Maiestie to consi∣der what good Nehemiah did for the re∣formation of such an abuse.
I contended, said hee, with the No∣blesNeh. 13. 17 of Iudah, and saide vnto them, What euill thing is this that yee doe, and prophane the Sabbath day? Didvers. 18 not your Fathers thus, and did not our God bring all this euill vpon vs, & vpō this Citie? Yet yee bring more wrath vpō Israel by prophaning the Sabbath.
See what Nehemiah did.
It came to passe that when thevers, 19. gates of Ierusalem beganne to be dark before the Sabbath, I commanded that the gates should bee shut, and charged that they should not bee ope∣ned till after the Sabbath, And some of my Seruants set I at the gates, that there should no burden bee brought invers. 20. on the Sabbath day: So the Merchands and sellers of all kinde of ware, lodged without Ierusalem once or twise: Thenvers. 21. I testified against them, and said vnto them, Why lodge yee about the wall: If yee doe so againe I will lay hands on you.
What wrought that?
From that time foorth came they

no more on the Sabbath: Afer he had done this good worke, hee looked vp to God by prayer saying, Remember mee,verse. 22 O my God concerning this also, and spare mee, according to the greatnesse of thy mercie.
I pray God that your Maiestie may reforme this great abuse with that good Nehemiah: Note If this yee doe, I am assu∣red that Your God shall remember You concerning it, and that hee shall spare You according to the greatnesse of his mer∣cie.
One thing I desire earnestlie that your Maiestie once at least in the day would carefullie consider these weightie wordes of DAVID spoken vnto SOLOMON: Thinke that King IAMES hath said them to King CHARLES: These1 Chr. 28. 9 Sicut po∣tentes po tenter tr▪ menta pa∣tientur, sic & ju∣sti pr∣mijs fruen∣tur plenius si recte ex∣ercue▪ rint potestatē. bee the words,
* And Thou CHARLES my Son know Thou the GOD of thy Fa∣ther, and serue him with a perfect heart, and with a willing minde, for the Lord searcheth all hearts, and vn∣derstandeth all the imaginations of the thoughts: If Thou seeke Him he will bee found of Thee, but if Thou for∣sake

Him hee will cast Thee off for euer.
Now I intreat the Lord so to ingraffe these words into your Royall Heart, that the practise thereof may appeare in the out∣ward swaying of your Scepter.
Note Let this little Manuell of the Last Battell of the Soule bee like a Page at your Maiesties Chamber-doore with his morning memento mori: Yee Kings are Gods because God hath so called you: I hauepsal. 28. 6. called you goddes, said God, but yee shall die like men: Crownes haue their compasse and Thrones haue their Tombes: Prince, People, great and small, all must goe to Golgotha for to make their beddes in that place which Iob calleth the SlimieIob. 21. 33 valley The French prouerbe is true.
La mort mord les Rois aussi. bien que les conducteurs des charrois.
So most humblie intreating the most high to grant to your Maiestie to reigne both well and long ouer vs, I remiane

