


MOST dread and renowned Soueraigne, may it please your excellent Maiestie: such is the power of Trueth, and specially in Religion, that they which haue once tasted it, cleaue vnto it, more then vnto all the hopes of this life besides: The Law of thy mouth (saith Dauid) is better vnto mee, then thowsands of gold & siluer, Psal. 119.72. Yea, such is the excellency of Gods blessed Trueth, as his meekest ser∣uants, will stirr in the defence of it, & the mildest fight, before it shall be indamaged by their forbearance.
I durst not petition your Highnesse, nor aduenture these lines vnto your Maiesties consideration, vntill I had by diligent studie first, so setled my conscience in the certaine trueth of them, as my minde gaue me, that I am tied in conscience, rather to departe with my life, then with this Trueth; so captiuated is my conscience, & inthraled to the Law of my God. Here therefore I tender this Trueth, with my life, vnto your Maiestie; that, vnto your Godly consideration; this, vnto your clemency & mercy; and both, to the pleasure of the Almighty.
I remember, when the Booke of the Law had bene lost, and was found againe by Hilkiah the Priest, in the Raigne of Iosiah, 2. King. 22. that Hilkiah sent it by Sha∣phan the Chaunteller vnto the King: which giueth me to vnderstand, that in matters of Gods worship, in case failings and corruptions be found out, the Supreme
power, the King, is to haue knowledge of it. More parti∣cularly, when the Lords Sabbath was thought to be prophaned, by the Disciples of Christ, by plucking eares of corne, Mat. 12. to whom did the Pharises complaine, but vnto Christ, the Lord and Master of the Disciples? And when in Nehemiahs time the Sabbath was propha∣ned, by treading the Winepresse, & bearing of burdens, Nehem. 13. to whom did Nehemiah turne himselfe, but vnto the Rulers & Nobles of Iudah, for redresse?
I addresse my selfe therefore vnto your Maiestie, humblie beseeching you, to take it into consideration: 1. That that most ancient, & sacred ordinance of Gods Sabbath, prescribed in the Morall Law; (and religious∣ly practised, by the most anciët & primitiue Churches, neere 400 yeeres after the Ascention of Christ, euen so longe as they retained their brightest purity; and which ought religiously to be sanctified, to the worlds end) it is now prophaned, & trampled vnder foote. 2. That the Decalogue & Law of God, is not taught & maintained in our Church, in its fulnesse, integrity, and perfection; but onely partially, & by peeces. 3. That God hath not his whole & intire worship & seruice, prescribed in the first Table of the Decalogue; but is denied one quarter, or fowrth part thereof weekly. 4. That by the common doctrine in our Church, the 4th Commandement is wholly frustrate, & altogether nullified, both roote and branch. 5. That by most men in our Church, there is grosse superstition committed, Gods worship is corrup∣ted, and by many plain idolatry wrought, by keeping the Lords day for a Sabbath, by the 4th Com.
Amongst other things, I haue (as I beleeue) made these fiue things, manifestly appeare in this Booke; and now I humbly present them vnto your Highnesse con∣sideration; trusting, the cause will speake for it selfe; and
its bare mention, will call for a Reformation.
It was the laudable and Godly care of your deere Fa∣ther, to cause in his time, a new Translation of the sa∣cred Bible, for the correction of but here and there a word; how much more (I trust) will his suruiuing Sonne & Heire, be mindfull of such weighty matters as these are? Almighty God, hath honoured this eternall Law of the 10 Commandements, with such honour, as he vouchsafed not, to any one portion of Scripture besids, in all the Sacred Bible; for hee deliuered it, in most Ma∣iesticall and terrible manner; in flaming fyer, the earth trembling, Moses & the people quaking; hee spake it & proclaimed it, with his owne voyce, and wrote it with his owne finger in Tables of stone. The Eternall Sonne of God, whilst on earth bewraied such care of this Law, as that hee ratified it, and euery iote & title of it, to the worlds end, saying, Verily, I say vnto you, that vntill heauen & earth passe, one iote, or one title, shall in no wise passe from the Law, till all things be fulfilled, Mat. 5.18. The Church of God, in this Christian Kingdome, honoureth at this day, this Law of God; for shee hath inrouled it, in hir Booke of Common Prayers; and ordered, that it be deuoutly reade, at the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, & at other times of holy Assemblies. I trust therefore, your Maiestie will afford this sacred & honourable por∣tion of Gods Word, your best protection.
The Law, it is the inheritance of the Church, as wee reade Deut. 33.4. and who should defend the Churches right, if not your Maiestie? King Dauid chose this Law, for his inheritance, as we reade Psal. 119.111. and I be∣leeue, so hath your sacred Maiestie; defend it therefore: Why should the corrupt expositions thereof, which the ignorance of former ages haue hatched, be still retai∣ned? Why should one part of this sacred Scripture, be
retained, & an other part of the same, reiected? Why should not God haue his whole and intire worship, pre∣scribed in this Law, as well as some partes of it? you will not indure it, that your Coyne be clypped or impaired, but count him for a traitour that doth it; how thē should you thinke well of him, that will clippe & impaire, this current & golden Law of God? you cannot indure it, that any part, of your Royall inheritance of Crowne Lands, should be detained from you; And how should you indure it, that any part of your Spirituall inheri∣tance, the Law of God, should be withholden from you any longer? Why should we serue God by halues any longer? The Lords Sabbathes, which are a portion of Gods Law; and a part of your Maiesties, & the Church∣es inheritance, now contemned as Iewish, and ceremo∣niall, and now prophaned & trampled vnder foote, I humblie beseech your Highnesse, to take a care of.
As the 5th Commandement, is directed vnto infe∣riours; so is the obseruation of the Sabbath, in the 4th Cōmandement, directed vnto Superiours, as M. Brere∣wood in his Treatise on the Sabbath, hath well obser∣ued; the care therefore of Gods Sabbathes, pertaineth vnto Kings; and the 4th Comm. doth in a most eminent sorte, oblige Kings: Hence no doubt it was, that Nehe∣miah that Godly Gouerner, tooke the reformation of the prophaned Sabbath, into his care & charge: Whose steppes, may it please you to treade, hauing finished the great worke, you may to your eternall comfort, with him, petition Almighty God, to be mindfull of this your care & zeale for him, saying, Remember mee, O my God, concerning this &c. Nehem. 13.22. How famouse vnto all ages, are those Godly Kings, Hezekiah, Iosiah, & the rest, for Reformers of Religion, & for Restorers of the worship of God! Oh that your zeale, might equall
theirs; that it might be left as a monument, vnto all posterity, that you Restored the worship of God in his Sacred Sabbaths.
If I be able to compare them, none of your Progeni∣tours, did euer leaue the like honourable fact, to this, vpon recorde; vnlesse it were they, that made the Re∣formation from Popish Idolatry: and that indeed, may be compared with this: for that, concerned the 2th Com. and this, concernes the 4th Com. that, was a Morall Law; and so is this: that was touching a parte of Gods worship, in the first Table, and so is this. Two Morall Laws, to wit, the 2th Com. and the 4th Com. haue bene corrupted, for many hundreth yeers toge∣ther; the one, by Image worshiping &c; the other by Sabbath breaking: as for the former, that hath (by the Mercy of God) bene reformed, this hundreth yeers, and vpwards, euer since we departed from Rome; and Gods blessing, hath abundantly followed our Church, euer since. As for the latter, we still sticke fast in the myre; and remaine still in ignorance & blindnesse, to∣geather with Rome, to this day; and this, waiteth for the Reformation of our English Nehemiah, Hezekiah, or Josiah.
As it was with the good Kings of Israel and Iudah, in restauration of Religion, still they left something vn∣done; So our Ancestours, though they reformed the corruptions about the 2th Com. yet they left the high places, I meane the prophanatiō of the Lords Sabbaths, still vntouched. No doubt, God foresaw it, that the reformation of one of his Commandements, was worke enough, for those his seruants, in those gaine-saying times; the reformation of the other, he hath reserued for these later times: oh that these times, might be so happie, as to take the Time! Let not posterity, take this
Crowne & glory: The restauration, of the integrity of Gods worship, and the raising vp againe, of Gods Sab∣bathes, call for your Maiesties helpe: Helpe O King.
Tis true, innovations are dangerouse, yet in some case necessary; as we see by new lawes daily inacted: But this is no innovation, it is but the reuiuing of an old Law, a long time laine dead; and the putting into exe∣cution, Gods 4th Comm. now, and of long time out of vse. Neither can it be thought a thing impossible, to be done, or disaduantageouse vnto your Realme: for the change of the Sabbath, from the Sunday, backe againe to the Saturday, that holy Day Gen. 2.3. will not proue (I suppose) one farthing losse, vnto your Subiectes: and for your Maiestie, it is but your pleasure; say the word onely, & it is done; your Maiesties proclamation or the like, workes a present Reformation: Let me say vnto your Highnesse therefore, as once those seruants of Naaman said vnto their Lord, when the Prophet bad him, but this smale & easy thing, Goe wash, and be cleane: If it were a great thing, which the Lord requireth of thee, wouldest thou not haue done it? how much rather when he saith vnto thee, wash & be cleane? 2. King. 5.13. I leaue the application. To conclude, the coun∣saile of the Lord is, to inquire for the old way, Ier. 6.16. be pleased therefore, to serch the Scriptures; and to in∣quire of your reuerend Bishops, and lerned Clergy; as they will answer it before God, if this be not the old way, and the way wherein we must walke, to the Worlds end.

