



RIght Worshipfull Sir, though the kingdome of Ireland did bereaue his countrey of yours, of a great part of that good, which by a certain right it hoped for from you by reason of your long seruice there vnder Queene Eliza∣beth of blessed memorie, in the chiefest and most honourable seate of Iustice, by the space of 15. or 16. yeares together: yet the benefite vnto both the Kingdomes was thought to be so great thereby, that the losse was so much the more easily borne.
And now at the last this countrey doth willingly acknowledge, that it hath great
 cause to thanke God, not onely for your safe returne vnto it some years past, furnished with greater experience for gouernment; but also with hope of neuer departing frō them any more: sauing that in your last imployment, vnder his Highnes (whome God long preserue) into his Ilands of Iar∣sie and Garnesie, they were suspended frō that hope by the space of certaine moneths.
Which beeing faithfully performed and ended, their hope is renued, that you bee∣ing now at the last, merito tuo maximo donatus rude, may say of this countrey Here is my rest. Which my selfe ha more speciall cause to desire in regard my ministerie, which by your presen you haue often and long giuen great coun∣tenance vnto.
And you, good Madame, both since th happie ioyning of you both together, a long before, by your continuall comming to the publike assemblies, though a goo way off; both winter and sommer; neue hindered by the heate of the one, or th
 cold of the other, and that by the space of 20. yeares, haue giuen so good an exam∣ple, like vnto those, that traueled without wearisomnes through the vaile of Ba∣ca,Psal. 84.6. with hope to appeare before God in Syon; that you haue incouraged many vnto the like paines, and haue left the slothfull without excuse. By which, & some other good examples like this, the credit of Gods word among vs hath in some to∣lerable sort beene hetherto vpheld.
For which, and for many other great fauours from you both, I present these small fruits of my poore labours vnto you, as a perpetuall testimonie of my thanke∣fulnes vnto you; and to God for you. Desi∣ring him to multiplie his graces vpon you, and long to preserue you to your owne mutuall comfort, and the good of so many, as doe depend vpon you.
And the like blessing of God be vpon the good and forward hopes of the wor∣shipfull M. William Spring your onely child; that his youth may be still so seaso∣ned
 with religion and learning, that in time to come he may in the seate of Iustice for the good of his countrey, by his deserts goe beyond all his progenitors: and so long vphold the credit of that right worshipfull house. And so I most humbly take my leaue of you all. Norton in Suff. Iun. 24. 1608.

