



THis briefe Historie of the life and death of Iacob Almansor: the Victorious, was intended to the now deceassed; yet euer renowmed for Learning, and worthily stiled Iacobus Pacifi∣cus, your Royall Father. The death of some who had vndertaken the Printing; and the generall Visitation of this your Realme with sicknesse, hath delayed the publishing, and altered the designe of the Dedication.
The Wandering Ghost of this Learned, Vertuous and Victorious Almansor who ne∣uer
suffered repulse, being now come into England, and clad with an English garment presseth into your Kingly presence, and ex∣pecteth condigne entertainment. Though the Storie bee ancient, and your Time and Religion also from his much different▪ yet he hopeth that Vertue and Valour are neuer out of season: Nor the Wisdome and Industrie of any, bee hee Heathen, Mahometan, or Chri∣stian, to be disesteemed.
As Alexander was enflamed with the ex∣ample of Achilles, who liued long before him: Caesar by that of Alexander of a different time and Nation; the one being a Grecian King of Macedon: the other but a priuate Gentle∣man of Rome: and Scipio a young Roman that triumphed ouer Africke, was animated by the Historie of Cyrus the great King of Persia described by Xenophon. So if at this day among Christians, they that haue any heart, are enkindled in their courage, when they reade of the Clemencie of Caesar, the Magnanimitie of Alexander, the Integritie of Aristides, the Constancie of Cato, or the Iu∣stie and Goodnesse of Traian, being but Heathens of former Ages, that knew not
Christ, nor Christian Pietie: with more reason Almansor of much later Age, though a misbeleeuing Mahometan may well ex∣pect, euen in these times, among the profes∣sors of perfect Pietie, his Vertues should not be vnregarded; nor his well ordered life and death be buried in obliuion.
I leaue them that list to dispute the truth of his Historie; or whether it bee not a pat∣terne of Perfection deuised: as many haue supposed the like of Cyrus, described by Xeno∣phon. Howsoeuer the Truth bee; I hold the one and the other of better vse, being thus published, then to be buried in silence.
I doubt not but your Royall Fathers In∣struction, and your owne worthy disposition hath figured in your noble brest many wor∣thier Christian patternes for Imitation: Yet by comparing our selues with Heathens, with Infidels, with Mahometans, and other Misbeleeuers; we attaine the better and clee∣rer knowledge of our aduantages and de∣fects. Hereof your aduenturous Trauailes in your younger yeares haue giuen you good experience▪ Hee that knoweth no Countrey but his own, knoweth not the worth or wants
of his owne: Commendandus ante omnes qui sa∣pientiam toto orbe requirit saith Marsilius: which oportunitie of personall Trauaile being not alwayes permitted; it must bee supplyed by Bookes and Histories. The aduertisement following will informe the particu∣lars how this briefe Historie came to the Presenters hands, who re∣maineth

