




Molli discumba▪ via. Scu Haec via illi summa.


IF those be patrons fittest for our labours,
Whose vertuous actions merit our respect,
Who fitter then your selfe for to protect,
Our infant Poems with your mature fauor?
Whose fragrant bosome euer had that sauor,
And perfect relish, that the pure effect
Of your sincerest loue would thinke no shame,
To take in worth what from Pernassus came.


Beleeue me Sir, those manie well tuned straines
Of your concording vertues haue produced
These harsher poems: let me be excused
Sith what I write concernes poore homely swaines.
That vsed to frolicke in the spacious plaines,
My muse with no Cadmean drops infus'd
Shelters her humble selfe vnder your wing,
Which if you grant, she may securely sing.


Call but to mind the seedplot of your youth,
Stagyras well-spring, Britons Hesperie,
Which at one time receau'd both you and me,
You to grow vp, me to admire your growth,
Hoping to see that which might glad vs both.
Your inward graces, graced outwardly.
For now my Poems rellish when they finde
So great a fortune in so great a minde.


If I should speake but what I doe conceaue,
I should make stale those merits of your owne,
In shewing them which be already showne,
Yet if I were but able to engraue,
In monumentall tablets, you should haue
The highest place because the highest growen
In ripe and pregnant iudgement which approue,
Both art and nature beare you speciall loue.


Long may you flourish in the grouth of time,
To be a refuge to the muses nine,
Diuinest shades should shadow powers diuine,
That when poore Celsus writes in ragged rime,
He may receiue protection by your shrine,
Whose beauteous raies with more perfection shine,
Then the malignant censures of the worst
Shall ere raze out, if that their gall should burst.


More could I write (for subiect had I still,
Of writing more and more,) but modesty
Tells me your vertues would not praised be,
For vertues praise doth from her selfe distill,
Wherefore I curbd th'intention of my will,
Ioying to see these honors which I see,
So well portraid in you, that your worth,
Makes the earth glory in so great a birth.


