



WHen the natures of men are cleere peruerted, then it is high time for the Satyrist to pen som∣thing which may diuert them from their impietie, and direct them in the course and progresse of Vertue; vp∣pon which consideration, I, (as the meanest Me∣nalchas that is able to play vpon an oaten pipe) began presently to describe the nature of Men, made so farre good by obseruation, as my weake and immature iudgement could attaine vnto; meaning to make the Poets verse an Axiome: Scribimus indocti, docti{que} poemata passim. This thus discussed and weyed, I was long in doubt to whom I should dedicate this vnfruit∣full vintage, rather gleanings, or whō I should

flie vnto for sanctuarie, if the sinister Reade (as who euer wrote without his Detractour) should carpe at my labours. Wherefore standing longer in suspence then the matter required,  picked forth your selfe, most able to weaue an Apologie for your friends defects. Let not there∣fore the maleuolent censures of such men whose chiefest eye-sores be other mens workes, and whose choisest content is to blemish them with imperfections, receiue the least countenance from you, whose iudgement by giuing these my labours approbation, shal be a greater argument of their merit, then their partiall censures shall argue their want. Hiparchion was graced as well as Musaeus, though the best of his measures was but piping to the Muses. For the paines of well-affected Authors neuer faile of patrons (at least amongst ingenuous men) to protect thē, of fauorites to second them, or guardians du∣ring their minoritie to foster them. And such is your integritie and true loue to learning, that the meanest sheepheard if the flie for refuge vn∣der your shelter, shall be accepted aboue the mea∣sure of his deserts, or meanes of his hopes. For without question, if your acceptance did not far exceed the height and weight of my Discourse, Quid hic nisi vota supersunt? there would no∣thing remaine for me, but to fall to my prayers,

in beseeching the kind & vnkind Reader (like our penurious pamphlet Orator) to commiserate my Treatise, and in stead of a narration, to make a publike supplication: but being protected by the singular care and prouiding eye of your fauours; —Maior sum quàm cui potuit fortuna nocere.
I haue penned this short Discourse, interwo∣uen with history as well as poesie, for two things summarily, and especially for the first thereof. The first is the iniquitie of this present time wherein we liue: so that Nature had either time now to send an Ambassage or neuer: since
At{que} homines prodigia reru maxima. Mulier formosa superne desinit in piscem—
Such is the course of degenerate Nature, that in a conceipt of her selfe she thinks she can mend her selfe by being adorned with vnnaturalized ornaments, which Nature neuer apparelled her with. The second reason is the motion of a priuate friend of mine, whose pleasure may com∣mand my whole meanes, yea my selfe to the vt∣termost of my abilitie. These reasons haue I alledged, lest my Preface should seeme naked of Reason, which were ridiculous to the reasonable Reader, and to you especially, whose maturitie in arguments of this Qualitie, hath gained you a deserued Opinion, enabled by Iudgement, of power to counteruaile the censures of others lesse

iudicious. Thus tendring you the fruites of m Reading compiled, and in manner digested, no out of selfe-conceit, but aime to publique goo intended, Irest. From my studie. May 24.

