





RIght Worshipfull, I haue
penncd heere a short Trea∣tise,
entituled the Golden
Fleece, which I no sooner had
reuieed and corrected, ma∣king
it fit for the presse: as not doubting
but it should passe the presse of detraction,
which delighteth more in carping, then dis∣creet

censuring of others labours: But I
bethought me of some Patron, not so much
for the prsruing this my first issue from a∣bortent,
as from the detraction of male∣lent
carpers, whovse to finde fault with
Nature herselfe that she set not the Oxes
ornes vpon his backe rather then vpon his
head, being the stronger and more puissant
part. At the first I resolued to dedicate these
fruits of my labours vnto him, from whom
 receiued the grouth, and quiet encrease of
my studies: But it pleased God to alter my
purpose, y preuenting him by death, who was
the nourisher of my slender endeuours, and
the protectour of mine orphane labours,
which had no sooner hapned then in a distast
of my studies, wanting him, whose relish
sweetened my vnseasoned poemes, I was fully
resolued to haue wrapped this tract vp in ob∣liuion,
and to haue depriued it of publike
view. But the troubled course of our estates,
and the fauourable regard you had of our at∣tonement,
which is now so happily confir∣med,
enforced me to consecrate this pamphlet
as one of Bassas fragments, to your best af∣fectioned

selfe: to shew a willingnesse in me
to gratifie that sollicitous and carefull regard
you euer had, since the time of our desola∣tion,
euen his death, whose life was a mir∣rour
in his time, and whose well concording
death ensued, as a reward of eternitie for
his well spent daies: for his fruits shall fol∣low
him. The argument of this Treatise
is morall: the vse spirituall, morally deriued
from Iason sonne to Aeson by Polymela,
who, after the death of his father was com∣mitted
to the tuition of his vncle Pelias: he
to vsurpe the possessions, limited to his
Nephew Iason deuised a dangerous enter∣prise
for him, to get the Golden Fleece
of Cholcos, which he huing atchieued
with great honour, and the safe returne
of such Argonautes as went with him: recei∣ued
his inheritance,Vid Ouid, in Meta∣mor.
and propagated his glo∣ry
to the vtmost bounds of Asia. The vse,
or morall implies: what felicity they shall ob∣taine
that with resolution and long animitie
sustaine the peillous gusts of afflictions,
with a respect had to vertue, without which
regard no happy or successiue euent can at∣tend

any intendment: This tract though com∣pendious,
may afford no small fruit to your
conceuing vnderstanding, shadowing vn∣der
this title of Golden Fleece, the reward of
a sincere and prouident pilgrim, who with
Iason endureth patiently the surging Sea of
persecution, the rging tempests of ffli∣ction,
not to be allured with the inchanting
voice of the Syrens melodie, abstaining
from Cyrces cup,Ponet De∣us his quo∣queine. Virgil. saying by the peril∣lous
rockes of Scylla and Charybdis, and now
at last arriuing at the port of a prosperous
repose, crieth out; hic edes fata quietas
otendunt.
Alexander had his Homer in reuerence,
Alcybiades his Socrates, Caesar the peru∣sall
of his owne deuine writings, Scipio
Affricans the workes of Xenophon, E∣paminondas
will receiue instruction of his
Lysias,In Cyro∣pedia.
Agesilaus of Xenophon, Scipio
by Genesius: Yea Bassus was sometime
acceptable to his Caesar.
I feare not but there be euer some Maee∣nas
to giue a fauourable respect to the mea∣net
labours. Socrates thinketh his works

very fruitfull, and to haue produced good ef∣fectes,
when by them he hath prouoked
any to the knowledge and learning of ver∣tue.
Stylpho the Romane had neur attai∣ned
the chast name of a continent Citizen,Vid. Cicer. in lib de Orator.
if he had not applied his corrupt disposi∣tion
to morall discourse, and made morall
poems a soueraigne for his lasciuious inten∣tions.
Those famous matrons of Rome, Octauia,
Gorcia, Caecilia, and Cornelia, bestowed
no lesse time in moralitie then Tullia,Vid. Apo∣theg Plu∣tarch. &c. Lu∣cilla,
and Claudia did in musicke and har∣monie:
more renowne attained they, by
morall obseruations, then those wanton
Dames did by their discourse of Hyme∣naeus.
Semyramis and Cleopatra neuer grew
more memorable for their affecting dain∣ties,Vid. Trog. Pom.
then Hermyone and Dyotmia for
their morall precepts.
Many which professed moralitie, haue
beene the preseruation of whole Cities, as

Aristotle,Vid. Quint Curt. in octau. lib. in descrip. Dyon. & Dyonisij. by whose meanes, and for whose
sake Alexander commaunded the Cittie
Stagyra to bee builded agine, being de∣molished
in the raigne of his father Phi∣lip.
The like of Socrates we reade,Vid. vit. Socrat. and reason
good, since Apollo termed him the wisest
man in all Greece.
But wherefore should I prosecute this
argument,Vid. Apo∣theg. de Apell▪ & Prolog. alwaies putting my hand with
Protogenes to that table which I am sure
can be bettered by no colours? Receiue this
vnripe fruite into the warme harbour of
your loue, let it be kindly entertained, least it
blush and be ashamed, to receiue so ill an en∣tertainment,
where it expected an vndoub∣ted
welcome.
This Mindian building haue I erected
before her, to vsher her, and encourage her
modest face, with the assurance of your ac∣ceptance.
The Lord of heauen continue his bles∣sings
towardes you, lengthen your daies,
multiply your comfortes heere vpon earth,

that enioying Heauen vpon Earth in this
life, you may be inuested with the
crowne of immortalitie in
the world to come.

