



SIR,
SOme have I heard affirme, (but more tari∣ly, I hope, then truly) that to bee a Knight and a Scholler, was the Mirror of Knight∣hood: howsoever the Tenet hold, sure I am, that you are

this Mirror. Being as you are ennobled by desent, so ena∣bled by desert; a patron to the lerned professant, and in all leing a ich proficient. This i was, and this onely, which first induc'd me, con∣trarie to that native diposi∣tion everbred in me, so free∣ly to tender my selfe to the knowledge of you; and which hath ever since stam∣ped in mee so deepe an im∣pression of you. Let others affect your Title, while I live to honour your selfe. The generous and free goodnesse of your minde, is my object, than which it is not possible to treate of a more attractive subject. This

is to bee incomparably va∣lued above any outward good. Let this serve for the prelude, not to delude you, for you are wiser; but to expresse my selfe really un∣to you, whose noble sc∣cesse I doe intimately ten∣der. You may bee pleased to remember that at my last entercourse with you, it was my promise upon a precedent purpose to ad∣dresse some small memori∣all to publike view under your Name, in lieu of those many respects which I beare you. Which promises, I must ingenuously confsse, (as in this kinde, so in all o∣thers justly grounded) it

hath beene ever my course religiously to observe. For in comming short of per∣formance in what wee pro∣mise, argues either a preci∣pitate rashnesse in the pro∣miser, or inconstancie in his resolves, or forgetfulnesse in what he undertakes. It is recommended unto us by authenticke storie, that it was the usuall observation both of a Roman Emperor, and of an English Monarch, never to promise any thing but what they registred and set downe with their owne hands: which rule requi∣reth imitation even of in∣eriours. An Expression whereof I have here made

in the tender of this Alpha∣beticall gradation of Cha∣racters, to your generous & ingenious veiw. Neither (indeede) without a precee∣ding ground of reason did I make choyse of this Subject. For howsoever the argu∣ment may seeme much bet: yet in my opinion may it bee much bettered both in style and substance. Many Characters (I confesse) have beene published both in former times, when the ig∣norance of the age could scarcely render the ambi∣guitie of the word: as like∣wise in these more refined times of ours, wherein, as in habit and attyre, so in dis∣courses

of this nature, no∣thing but rarities (bee they never so light) can afford delight. But to give them their true and native Chara∣cter, they relished more of Aphorisme. than Character. For to suite them with their approvedst and reten∣tivest title, what else are Characters but stampes or im∣pressures, noting such an es∣peciall place, person, or of∣fice; and leaving such a marke or cognizance upon it, as the conceit may nei∣ther taste of too much lightnesse; nor the cloze of so wittie an observance leave too much bitternesse, nor the whole passage or

series incline to too much dulnesse? Truth is, he that should strive in each parti∣cular, either for Style or Sub∣ject, to please the various palats of all men, would prove an excellent Taylour to fashion this age; & might in time make a Coate for the Moone. Strong lines have beene inrequest; but they grew disrelishing, be∣cause they smelled too much of the Lampe and o∣pinionate singularitie. Clin∣chings likewise were held nimble flshes; but affect∣tion spoyl'd all, and disco∣vered their levitie.
Characterisme holds good concurrence, and runns

with the smoothest current in this age; so it bee not wrapp'd up in too much am∣biguitie. Hee writes best, that affects least; and effects most. For such as labor too intentively to please them∣selves, they for most part make it their labour to please none but themselves. This hath beene ever my maxime, that singularitie and affectation are Antypodes to Iudgemnt and Discreion. Selfe-opinion mak's a mans selfe his owne Minion. He is the true Embleme of Narcissus, and doates more on his owne shadow, then an others substance. But I will not looke too much on

these Glo-wormes; they are soiles to the purest paper: leaving their spongie La∣bours to the worst of cen∣sure. For these few dige∣sted papers, (wherein you shall too highly prize mee, if at vacant and retyred houres you daigne onely to peruse mee) I dare confi∣dently avouch, you shall finde me to have preferred the pih before the rinde, and caused the Maid to at∣tend upon her Mistrisse. My provision was how to fur∣nish the maine building: for other ornaments or im∣bellishments of art, they tendered themselves; they were not much sought af∣ter.

Now it resteth that this Character or token (for so the word may import) of my true zeale, unto your Noble selfe, retaine that impression in you, which he retaines that honours you. These are more lasting me∣morialls than materiall jewels, and to the judici∣ous more imcomparably pretious. The richest Ca∣binet is the minde; the trea∣sures thereof purer than the Oare of any Mine. which when wee commu∣nicate to our friend, wee make him really ours, wee enfeoffe him in ours; yea, wee incorporate him

in us, and make him indi∣vidually ours. So may we ever bee, till I surcease to bee

