


WHā I had fynyshed thys trea tise which I toke in hande to trāslat of good zeale toward ye most sacred, and holy worde of God, deuisynge wyth my selfe vnder whose protecci∣on the same beyng printed

myght be published abrod, althoughe I knowe not youre Lordship by any cō∣uersaciō, & acquaintaunce, but only by a general fame that maketh you to be gra cious, & acceptable to the worlde: for thys cause spe∣cially, that you fauoure all good letters, and chiefelye the holie scripture, wt those expositours whyche moste sincerelye and purelye ex∣pounde the same: I coulde fynde out none to whome for the sayde respectes, I thoughte more conuenient to dedicate this my trāsla∣ciō than to your good lord

shyp. To whom although I be vnworthi to offer this presente, boeth for my base∣nes of degre, and also of learninge, yet is the worke it selfe of suche pryce, that it maye iustelye chalenge so worthy a patrone. In thys Chapter ben certaine textes, whych beynge crop∣ped oute from the reste, haue ministred to lear∣ned men muche matter of argumentacion: some ex∣poundynge them one wai∣es, some an other.
And forasmuche as there is nothynge, but by euyll enterpretacyon it maye be depraued, and that in all

al cōtrouersies to find out the trueth, ther is no rediar waies thā to heare the hole tale tolde, I thoughte it a dede worthy the labour to set out in our English tōge the exposiciō of ye righte ex∣cellent Clarke Iohn Bren cius, which he writeth vpō the sixt Chap. of Iohn: not leapyng out from one text to an other, but thorowely expounding it euē in ye selfe same order, in whyche the Euāgelist wrot it: so yt the circūstaunces shal not a li∣tle helpe to the true sence & vnderstādig therof, which māer of exposiciō is much

to be cōmēded. And contra ri thei are worthi dispraise which rashli plucking out the texts as thei come first to hād, not wayinge thē wt the rest that eyther folowe or haue gone before, make thē serue to their own pur pose: and apply theym to suche an exposiciō as they thē selues haue conceyued before in their own mynd. Wherupon often time ari∣seth much altercaciō i wor des, whych wold easely be auoided, if at y• begynnyng had bene laied a suar fun∣dacion of reasonyng. But thys expositour Brencius

declareth hys mynde in o clere an order, that auoy∣dynge all confusion, the diligente reader maie sone perceyue howe iustlye one thynge dependeth vpon an other: so that for thys poynte, that is in decla∣rynge howe the textes shoulde ryghtly be vnder∣stande, by the iudgemente of well learned menne, he maye be compared to the beste interpretoures that haue bene in anye tyme longe before. What shuld I speake of hys eloquence whyche maye be sooner

maruayled at, than folo∣wed?
If it please youre Lord∣shyppe fauourablye to ac∣cepte these my laboures, not a litle shall I be in∣couraged to goo forwarde wyth the reste of the Ho∣melies, or some other thing of lyke Profite: and ac∣quaynte my selfe agayne wyth those studyes, why∣che beynge begunne of me in youth, and so continu∣ed forthe certayne yeares, haue bene a longe season, althoughe not quyghte left of yet very much remit ted, and slacked.

The liuyng God whyche nowe of hys infinite good∣nes hath sent vs peace frō mortal bodili war, giue vs also concorde of myndes y• agreyng in one sound doc∣tryne we may be vnited and knyte as mēbers of one misticall body, to our head Iesus Christ our lord, to whom be glory for euer.
