



AN Orphant Worke (most mighty Emperour) we doe now present unto the view of your Sacred Maiesty, and doe dedicate it to your renowned name, being the Astronomicall exercises of our Parent of late approved memo∣ry, which by the leysurable stu∣dies of the Author are increased to so large a volume, that so they may be more commodious to Posterity, than the bare title of Exercises doth promise. For if ever HORACES Law were observed, it is in this Booke, which commeth forth after Three times nine yeares are expired. For when our Parent at the first, had onely pur∣posed to treat in this Booke of that wonderfull new Starre, which was seene in the yeare of seventy two, and diligent∣ly to examine the opinions of others concerning the same, and had begun to print it at Vraniburg, (all things go∣ing

forward according to his owne desire) it happened in the mean time, that he began to make a new and exact de∣scription of the course of the Sunne, and to assigne and point out the severall places of the fixed Starres, even to halfe a minute, according to their Latitude and Longi∣tude, and lastly to search out the intricate motions of the Moone, all which at length be performed, and hate heere added to this Volume; so that we may truly affirme, that this Booke in respect of the worthinesse of the matter, de∣serveth a more famous title, than to be called Astronomi∣call exercises. How difficult it was to performe, in respect that things lay deeply hidden, and therefore required the more labour to find out, having beene before in paine at∣tempted by others in former ages, I leave to their consi∣deration, that have any the least knowledge in Astrono∣my. Now this incomparable labour, which is above the envy of malevolent persons, seeing that our Parent in the last yeares of his life, together with his other studies, hath devoted to your sacred Maiestie, we therefore his survi∣ving heyres, having Printed it after his decease, doe now most humbly offer it to your Highnesse: Which wee have done to the end, that we might give an account of his stu∣dies to the chiefe Monarch of the Christian world, and might take away all occasion of detraction from the envi∣ous, whom eyther their owne malitious natures have stir∣red up against him, or their evill dispositions and igno∣rance have so corrupted and blinded their iudgments, that they should thinke it all lost, which was bestowed on these royall Sciences; which was very little, in respect of that which was necessary, and in regard of the honour and glory which redoundeth from thence. But in this Com∣plaint, the most learned and excellent men of all ages, may

beare us cōpany, who were envyed while they lived. Since no age hath wanted some who with ARISTIPPVS and EPICVRVS, have disdained Mathematicall learning as vaine and idle, and have hated the Professors thereof with more than barbarous malice. Neverthelesse, most mighty Emperor, we being held up and sustained by the au∣thority of your Imperiall Maiesty, who are placed on the highest Pinacle of honour, have no reason to regard the envy of others. But have cause not to dispise such idle censures, and call to minde the examples of your Ma∣iesties Ancestors; namely, ALPHONSVS King of Ara∣gon and Castell, ALBERTVS of Austria, FREDE∣RICK, CHARLES the fifth, and the like, who were all favourers of this noble study, and did extend their mu∣nificence and bounty to the professors thereof. For (that I may instance one of many) who could be more magnificent than ALPHONSVS, who out of his owne praise-worthy and memorable bounty, did bestow upon the Tables of the Coelestiall motions, above fodre hundred thousand Du∣cats. Notwithstanding the Aristippusses of our time, doe thinke it might better have beene bestowed on sports and idle pleasures. But yet these men doe not consider that ALPHONSVS by this meanes hath gotten to himselfe e∣verlasting glory, while the fame of other Kings is buried in obscurity. But yet how lame and defective are these cost∣ly Tables! And not to be compared with the labours of our Parent. Because they never made any observation from the Heavens, but by comparing the observations of the ancients, and noting the Progresse of the Starres, they have pacthed up this bundle of Tables. This defect di∣vers learned men have endeavoured to supply, and e∣specially the most famous COPERNICVS, who yet was

much hindred by wanting fit Instruments, so that hee could not attaine to his desire, although he hath more per∣fectly rectified the motions than any of his Predecessors. Wherefore with consident modesty we dare affirme, that our. Parene hath excelled all the Astronomers of former ages, in the accurate restoring of the motions, and that neyther any King or Prince except ALPHONSVS, hath bestowed so much upon Astronomy, so that he did not onely employ his whole Revenewes, arising from his Lands and offices which he held under the King of Den∣marke, but also of his owne proper stocke, he layd out aboue a hundred thousand Thaleri. But when after the death of this praise-worthy King, the charges grew so great, that he was almost tyred therwith, being sent for out of his Country by your Maiesties command, he endeavored to make the Tables of the Coelestiall motions dedicated to RVDOLPHVS, to exceed the Tables of ALPHONSVS and COPERNICVS, that so your Maiesty (having promised to helpe him in the charges thereof Astronomy might live by your Maiesties liberality, and your Maiesties name might live eternally by Astronomy. When having thus intended to doe, God tooke him away both in the middle of his age and Worke, to the great hinderance of Learning, and the losse of us his heyres. Now therefore, that we may benefit Posterity, whereof we ought to have especiall regard, we beseech your Maiesty by the holy rites of Vrania the heavenly Muse, that you would not in these trouble some times of Warre, neglect the opportunity of gaining eternall praise, by finishing those I ables, which albeit they require some charge, yet it is a worke that may well beseeme your Imperiall Maiesty. For as the Poet said, Sint Maejenates, non dierunt, Flacce, Marones.

So we may say, that if we could have such Patrons as AL∣BERTVS, FREDERICK, and CHARLES the Great, there will not be wanting such, who will cheerefully un∣dertake this labour, and finish that which remaineth. Whereby we dare promise, that your Maiestie by rectifying the study of Astronomy, shall gaine perpetuall fame and glory, which shall continue as long as the Starres endure. And so to conclude this our Dedication, wee commend your most sacred Maiesty to the Protection of Almighty God, and our selves as beeing the heyres of TYCHO BRAHE to your Maiesties protection. From Prague the day before the Calends of August, in the yeare of Christ, 1602.

