



THe life of a Christian (Right Worshipfull) is aptly compared, by that skilfull teacher S.1. Cor. 9. 24. & Hebr. 12. 1. Paul, vnto the running of a race for a game. The goale is the end of this life, and the game or price, the crowne of glory. Now as they that striue for games, carefullie prepare their bodies for greatest fitnes and vantage, to their enterprise, and thereto long before, applie their whole stu∣die and inuention, euen so will euerie true Christian, aduise of the race of his present life, as, at the end thereof, a price may be gi∣uen vnto him. Which similitude, as it hath great light to induce vs to conceiue the ex∣hortation of scripture studies, and heauenlie meditations, so yet shall it further enforce vs, if wee consider it cloathed in the fit circum∣stances of time. For like as a man that is to

striue for a mastrie, doeth so much the more busie himselfe in all his preparations, as hee perceiueth himselfe to bee more vrged with shortnes of time, and other difficulties in the place of his triall, so wil the shortnes & euil∣nes of our time (if we waie it well) quicken our care, & stir vp our vttermost endeuour, to frustrate euen all the inconueniences ther∣of whatsoeuer. And certainly if wee stand vpon this circumstance of time, whether we behold the shortnes or the euilnes there∣of, either way it will bee concluded, that if we loue our owne saluation, and hope to at∣taine that crown of life, it standeth vs vpon, to shape out so much time, to the search and studie of the scriptures of God, as that wee may worthely be numbred with thē, which the Prophet Dauid saith, do meditate vponPsalme. 1. the law of God both daie and night. For if the Lorde iustlie require obedience to his will, and withall mercifullie haue left vs the exact fourme thereof in his word, how shall not we be guiltie of our own blood spilling, if by ignorance we erre, and by erring enkin∣dle his hote displeasure against vs? The short∣nes of time must whet vs on more egerly, whether wee think of the ficklenes of mans

life (whose breath is in his nosthrils) or els of the dissolution of all things, so readie now at hand. The shortnes and vncertain state of this life, must tell vs in the mids of our tem∣porall profits and pleasures, when our affec∣tions would begin to feed vpon them, and our hearts offer to sit downe in them, that it may in no wise be so with vs, wee may passe through as with a light touch, the necessarie and lawful vse of these things, but our dwel∣ling must still bee in remouing tentes, vntill wee come to Canaan. Yea it must daily crie in our eares, break off, & be brief in all things belonging to bodely prouisiō, for great mat∣ters haue you to set in order, and verie little time to do them in. Also it shall vpbraid vn∣to vs our negligēce (if we faile in this watch∣fulnes) as sauouring strongly of hypocrisie: when it shall stir vp the witnesse of our own conscience against vs, that wee are not so carefull for heauenly things, as for the earth∣ly. Now if to the shortnes of mans age, we adioyne the ruinous cōdition of this world, readie (for ought we know) euerie moment to fall from the foundations (and vvhich shal bee done sodenly vvithout vvarning vvhen it commeth) there seemeth to bee no corner

for foolish securitie to hide her head in. But the arguments that might be dravvne, from the iniquitie and malice of the present time, are yet (if it vvere possible) more vehement. For vvhether vve labour to learne the feare of God, or yet set foorth our selues to prac∣tise the same sincerely, in either vvay is dan∣ger, and offensiue places to fall vpon. The Deuil knovveth his time to be but short, and therefore he bestirreth his stumps most bu∣sily. Against vve should learne, he frayeth vs vvith heresies and dissentions in the church. Whilest we are learning, he seeketh to en∣snare vs vvith vnsoundnes. If both these faile him, yet in our practise, he vvill heape vpon our backes reproaches and persecutions, till vve groane again. It is hard to saie, vvhether those that he holdeth back vvith the first en∣gine, or els they that hee ouerthrovveth vvith the tvvo latter, be moe in nūber. That there are verie manie of the first sort, vvee may gather by this common and prophane obiection: What religion should we rest vpō, when wee see so manie opinions in the world? Or who should we beleeue, when the Preachers agree not among themselues? This obiection (I saie) being commonly in the mouthes of

high & lovv, as it nakedly bevvraieth their shameful ignorance in the scriptures, so doth it openlie discouer the rottennes that is in their hearts before the Lorde. For vvere it not, that they haue setled themselues vponZeph. . their lees, and like it best of all, to be ignorant of the vvay of truth, lest their darknes should be controlled by the light therof, they should finde in the scriptures strong leauers, to lift out of their vvaie this stumbling block. The Lord by Moses telleth the children of Israell,Deut. 1. that if a false Prophet should rise vp amōgst them, to seduce them vnto strange gods, they should not harken vnto him, but take it, as a matter vvherein the Lord did proue & trie them, vvhether they loued him vvith all their heart, and vvith all their minde, or no. To the same effect speaketh Paul, There must1. Cor 11. 1. be heresies among you, that they that are ap∣prooued may bee made manifest among you. And our Sauiour Christ hath tolde before, That false Christes and false Prophets shouldMath. 24. 4. arise, in the last times, so as to seduce (if it were possible) the verie elect. And imme∣diatlie addeth, Behold I haue told you beforeverse 25. hand. Now if the Lorde haue dealt so gra∣iouslie with vs in his word, as to leaue vs

instruction therin to furnish vs against these offences, and wee delighting in our owne shame, wilfullie depriue our selues of the benefit thereof, can we thinke by that means to escape the reuenging hand of the almigh∣tie? Surelie common sense doth tell vs, that if such men had but one right sparke of the loue of God in them, they would be so farre of, remouing or abstaining themselues, from the studie of the scriptures, at the sight of these swarmes of heresies, as that much ra∣ther, they would sise out farre larger times thereunto, and bend their wits with greater force, to sort out the trueth from euerie falshood: especiallie seeing the issues of truth and falshoode, are life & death. Others looke into the liues of professors, and willinglie from thence take occasion of falling. Do you not see (saie they) that manie of these pro∣fessors, saie well, but doe euil? Nay some of them feare not to multiplie their sinne with blasphemie, saying, There is not the best of them all, but will doe as other men doe, when occasion is offred, they meane, when sinne commeth to hand. In deede manie professors giue euil example by their liues, a great num¦ber being hipocrites. Yea amongst the sin∣cere,

manie shew their slips and falles, whi∣lest yet the new man is tender and not come to his growth. If anie man at the sight of these thinges, either deferre his comming, or yet slacken his hold, woe shalbe his portion. For these thinges also hath the Lorde fore∣warned vs of, saying, Because that iniquitieMat. 24. 12. shalbe multiplied, the loue of manie shal waxe cold. Is not this a faire watchword? Then he addeth, But he that endureth to the end shalbe saued. Which is a flat priuatiō of the health and saluation of all such, as shall take offence, and giue backe, at the sight of iniquitie in o∣thers. Those that say, There is not the best of these holy professors but will, doe as others doe, speake it not as a knowne trueth, (for it is a manifest lie) but because sinne hath such do∣minion ouer them, as that it can not once en∣ter into their heades, to conceiue what a case the mortification of a Christian may be: like as it is said in our prouerbe: He that is in hell, thinketh there is no heauen. But howsoeuer these wretches feede themselues in their sins, with this imagination, that all doe accom∣panie them, (as though all were well, if they had companie inough to goe to the diuel,) yet (if the Lord grant them not better grace)

they shall find, (all too late,) that they were much deceiued, in manie their supposed cō∣panions. Those therefore that are the Lords▪ will be so farre off discouraging, or cooling, by the euil examples of professors, as that ra∣ther, their heede, studie and watchfulnesse, will be doubled in them by it. The same likewise I say, by all other iniquities, and iniuries of time, that can be reckoned. Doe we see secret and open persecution or vio∣lence prepared for vs? Let vs remember that the disciple is not aboue his maister, nor theMat. 10. 24. seruant aboue his Lorde. Doe they lade vs with odious names and titles, and deride our simplicitie as Ismael did Isaac? Let vs notGen. 21. 9. be discouraged. Is it not ioy to vs, to bee like our Lorde and maister Christ? If they called the father of the houshold Beelze∣bub,Mat. 10. 25. how much more his seruants? Yea, let the prophane filthians euen afflict vs for ho∣ly exercises, and crie out of vs, as not the friendes of Caesar, because we wincke not at their wickednesse: let them (if they will) dis∣daine vs euen the aire to breath withall, and themselues vnder the cloake of our disgrace, continue in all dissolutenesse: wee shall not saint hereat. It shall but declare vs to be the

true children of God and not bastardes. AndHeb. 12. 6. 7. . in this case, let the comfortable wordes of him that suffered a thousand times more for vs, stand before our eies: Verely, verely I sayIoh. 16. 20. vnto you, you shall weepe and lament, but the world shall reioyce: you in deed shalbe sad, but your sadnesse shall turne into ioy. And againe, And you therefore now shalbe holden in hea∣uinesse, but I will see you againe, and yourverse. 21. heartes shall reioyce, and your ioy shall no man take from you. Tribulation is the fornace of  the Lord, if we be gold and not chaffe, we shall not be turned into ashes by it, but made ore pure from our drosse. The sound corne ideth winnowing, it is the chaffe that the winde carrieth to and fro. If wee suffer with Christ we shall be glorified with him. nd there is no comparison of our suf∣fngesRom. 8. 17. here, with the ioyes and glorie that shalbe reuealed vnto vs afterwarde. For af∣terverse. 18. the affliction of ten dayes, if we bee faith∣fullApoc. 2. 10. vnto the end, the Lorde shall giue vs a owne of life. And we shal see the day whē te sonne of man shall send his Angels whichMat. . 4. sall gather out of his kingdom all things that ffend, & those that work iniquitie: & shal cast hem into a fornace of fire, there shall be wai∣lingverse. .

and gnashing of teeth. Then shall the iustverse. 43. shine as the sunne in the kingdom of their fa∣ther. Whosoeuer, on the contrarie part, pre∣ferreth the pleasures and ease of this life, to those ioies of the life to come, or shall deuide themselues (according to the politikes of this worlde) as though they could enioy them both: let them in time againe consider that saying of Christ: If anie will come after me, let him denie himselfe, and take vp hisMat. 16. 24. crosse, and follow me. Let them (I say) consi∣der it, lest the cunning carriage of themselues in this life, according to the dissimulations of men, to auoide these worldly afflictions bring them not, a day too late, to heare tha sentence of Christ, to their condemnation which at first was set downe for their in∣struction.Mat. 10. 37. 38. He that loueth father or mother a¦boue me, is not worthie of me: and hee that lo¦ueth sonne or daughter aboue me, is not wor¦thie of me. And he that taketh not his crosse and followeth after me, is not worthie of me These thinges I had (right worshipfull co¦sen) as standing in your presence, to speake vnto all those that should come to reade my booke. They that are ignorāt of these thing haue need to heare them. And as many also

as haue pure minds, may be excited & stirred2. Pet. 3. . . vp, by their remēbrance. Now the first fruits of my simple labours in these matters, I offer (as it were) thorough your handes vnto the Church of God: both in regard of many cur∣tesies, wherein you hold me bound & deep∣ly endebted: as also in that I haue experience of your great desire, to see the foggie mistes of ignorance and error dispelled, & the cleere light of the shining truth, to break forth, in al things. How well the same is in these points perfourmed by me, I cannot say: I humbly submit me to the iudgement of the Church. This only my conscience beareth me witnes of, that besides the glorie of God I haue sought nothing in all this businesse. If any thinke straunge, that one of another profes∣sion hath done this: I suppose they wil easily be satisfied, when they shall cōsider, that the doctrine of our ministers, being grieuous∣lie slandred, seemed rather to require, this de∣fence and testimonie from some of their hea∣rers, then from them selues, in their own be∣halfe. If anie yet further aske, while I haue done it. This is my answere: if some other els had done it, I hope I should haue receiued it with thankes giuing. Fare ye well most

louing cosen, and according to your wonted kindnesse, receiue this simple token of my good will. The Lord blesse & preserue you, and youres, vnto his heauenlie kingdome. 
London the XX. of the IX. Moneth.

