


AS I haue made you a beholder, & vsed your name in my firste conflict with this kinde of men (louing cou∣sin) so in my pro∣ceeding, and to the verie ende (which God shall giue whē he seeth it good) I trust, I may be bold, to continue the same course. Wherefore now againe I returne, presenting vnto you, not Glouers matters, in any of those points plainly and professedly, which then were betweene vs: but the generall and great heades of that schisme, wherein he was first ouertaken: and that specially betweene Browne (the famous achbuylder of such ruinous founda∣tions) and me: though others also are not omitted where opportunitie is offered. For so haue these matters, vpon the occasion of the Admonition, growne somewhat large at length, as now appea∣reth. By my former writing I had stirred (as it

seemeth) the hornets nest. By this (I hope) I shall either driue them in again, or els take away their stings, so as they shall seldomer hurt any. Those 8. conclusions, wherewith you see I front the aduer∣sarie, are as so manie Canons, to beate downe (through the power of God) the paper wals of his proude bulwarke. The sielie defences that he ma∣keth at euery assault, & entering of his breaches, you shall iudge your selfe, in this booke, comming as it were to the very sight and view of the seue∣ral actiōs. It may be, you haue alredie heard som∣what, of the course and behauiour of this people. For though their ful swarme and store be (as it is most likely) in London, and the partes neare ad∣ioyning: yet haue they sparsed of their companies into seuerall partes of the Realme, and namely, into the West, almost to the vttermost borders thereof. For which cause, (mee thinkes) I haue reason yet so much the more to bee confirmed in this choyce of my dedication, sith so, the rather, as by your hand and meanes, this benefit of disco∣uering their iniquitie, and making knowne their poison, may more readily be communicated vnto many in those parts. And as you are now in the seruice of your prince, esteemed a worthy man to haue the leading & training of so many, to be pre∣pared for the defence of your countrey and of this land, against the bodily enemy, so may that fauour

be manifoldly greater, which the king of kings shall in this seruice vouchsafe you, by making you moreouer, as an vpholder and deriuer of these de∣fences of his truth, into those weake parts of your countrey. Whereinto such vndermining aduersa∣ries haue entred, & caried away many soules frō the common means of their saluation: namely the preaching of the Gospell, which is called of the A∣postle, the power of God vnto Saluation,Rom. 1.17. to all that beleeue. And thus also, if in the mids of your weapons (as it were) you shal allot your times like∣wise, to the preparing & attaining skil, weapons, and strength to fight the Lords battails against your spiritual aduersaries, happy & happy again shal you be. Your diligence, & watchfulnes in the seruice of your God and Queene in this life, shall find rest & perpetual peace & quietnes herafter. Yea your renoume increasing here on earth, shalbe much more abundantly increased, so as no earth∣ly pen can describe it, namely, when the king of glory shall set a crowne vpon your head. Thinke on these things (most louing cousin) as I doubt not you do, and propound that worthy captaine Cor∣nelius vnto your selfe, as a companion to walke with, or at least, as an example to imitate. And let that which others take for a reason to hold them backe, bee a double spurre vnto you in this case: Namely the generall contrarie practise of the

multitude. Remember that he, that coulde not lie, hath sayde it, Narrovve is the vvay that lea∣deth to life, and fevve there be that finde it. And, Striue to enter in at the narrovve gate. A worde to the wise is sufficient.2. Pet. 3.1. And hereby I hope I shall but stirre vp your pure minde (as the Apostle speaketh) which is already forwardly running in this race. Neuertheles, I haue counted it my duetie, alwayes, and by all good occasions, to put you in remembrance of these things. For your wealth and good estate both of bodie and minde, are of neere and deere accompt and price with me, as the Lorde knoweth: to whose gratious guiding and protection, I most humbly commende you, and all yours. From London, the 12. of the sixth Moneth.

