



GOOD MADAME,
These holy and heauenly Medita∣tions were by the Author of them at first conceived up∣on occasion of the decease of that Religi∣ous

Gentleman, of blessed memory, your deare Father, under whose roofe hee then lived. Since which time it hath pleased God to giue you further occasion of Meditation in this kind, (not to menti∣on the losse of the Author himselfe, which I well know, very feelingly affec∣ted you) by renting from you as it were the one halfe of your selfe, that worthy Knight, that was one flesh with you while he lived, and continueth one spirit with you notwithstanding his decease. It hath pleased God thus by sundry crosses successiuely to exercise his graces in you, and to preach that vnto you by reall, and those domesticall, (I may well so call them) Sermons, that this Discourse and Treatise mainly tendeth unto. Neither ought it at all Prov. 3. 11, 17. Heb. 12. 5, 6. to dismay or discourage any of Gods Children, when they shall consider, how it pleaseth God to follow them with Crosses, either in this kinde, or any other. Lam. 3. 27. Heb. 12. 10. It is for our good, that we be trained up in the schoole of afflictions. The Spirit of God pronounceth them Iob 5. 17. Psal. 94. 12. blessed, that are corrected and in∣structed.

And the very Heathen them∣selues haue held them Bias . Infae∣licem dicebat cum, qui in∣faelicitatē non tulisset. Laer. Nihil mihi videtur infae∣licius eo, cui nihil unquam evenit aduer∣si. Demetrius Cynicus apud Senec. de pro∣vid. c. 3. Hinc Amasis Poly∣crati; . Ne∣minem un∣quam novi, aut fando audivi, qui non ad extremum funditus perierit, postres omnes pro∣sperègestas. Herodot. hist. l. 3. unhappy, that had never tasted of any unhappinesse. Happy are wee that ever wee came into this Schoole, so be wee proue not truants in it, but Psal. 119. 67, 71. come better out of it then wee came in. Now this how it may be effec∣ted, this blessed servant of God now with God, having long beene experien∣ced, and well profited therein, doth from the Spirit of God speaking by Moses the Man of God, here manifest. In regard whereof I haue the rather made choice to addresse that to your LADIESHIP, which your wel-deserving both of the Author and his issue doth otherwise giue you good interest in, and a just title unto. And so wishing unto your selfe, and all other that shall make use of it, that bene∣fit by it, that by the Author was at first entended in it; with thankfull acknow∣ledgement of your great loue and kind∣nesse shewed both to him while hee li∣ved,

and to his poore Widow and Fa∣therlesse ones since his decease, I take leaue, and rest

