



RIGHT WORSHIPFVL, Hauing prepared and fit∣ted for the Presse, some part of the labors of that worthy seruant of GOD, that spent much of his time with you, and vnder your roofe both drew in and let out his last breath; the doubt was easily decided, to whom they should be addres∣sed. None seemed to lay more due and rightfull claime to them then your selfe. The maine meanes of his maintenance were from your Familie while he liued:

and the principall stay of his, vnder God, hath bin from You and Yours since his deceasse. Neither may any more iustly challenge the benefit of the light, then those that haue ministred oyle to the lamp. The Author, I doubt not, had he liued to publish them himselfe, would so haue disposed of them. And which way could I, his deputy, more fitly direct them, then whither he himselfe did in all likelyhood intend them? Much benefit by them, I assure my selfe, may redound to all sorts. But your selfe may more spe∣cially reap fruit by them more then ordi∣narie; in that you were formerly a parta∣ker of that by word of mouth then deli∣uered, which is now here by help of pen and Presse further represented to your eye, and so reduced to your minde and remembrance againe. The most that shall light on them, they will salute but as strangers at first sight; with whom yet their worth once knowne and duely weighed, will soone gaine them fauour and good acceptance. To your selfe and some few more they shall repaire as anci∣en

cquaintance, renewing that familia∣e, which they haue formerly had with ou. But the better you are acquainted with them already, the lesse need is there that I should commend them vnto you. A strangers commendation is superflu∣ous betweene those that are inwardly ac∣quainted already. Let these few lines ra∣ther serue to acknowledge mine owne engagement vnto You & Yours, (which I vnfeinedly acknowledg, & wish I were any way able really to testifie) for that loue & kindnes that you haue from time to time shewen, & do yet shew to the Au∣thor of this worke: wherein I may well say of you (and I speake it without flat∣tery) as Naomi of Boaz, that you cease not to doe good both to the liuing and the dead.Ruth 2.20. The Lord increase daily the number of those, that do feelingly and effectually commi∣serate the forlorne estate that the poore children of his Prophets, after their Pa∣rents deceasse, are ordinarily exposed vn∣to; and aboundantly recompence what∣soeuer kindnes you haue shewen or shall shew, in that kind, into the bosome of

You and Yours. That which h lso doubtles will not faile to do, who as is not vnrighteous to forget the paines and lo labor of those that minister vnto his Saints;Hebr. 6.10. so much lesse will he forget or be slacke to reward the labor and charge, that is be∣stowed vpon those that are (through his blessing) a meanes to make Saints. To his mercy and bounty I heartily recom∣mend you, Dan. 12.3. and so rest

