


Howsoeuer it greiueth mee to heare of much more to se the troubles wherewith Sathan (knowinge his time to be short) doth trouble the Church of God in all places about vnprofitable and Popish Cerimonies, yet (to tell you the whole troth) my greife is the lesse when I consider that both they them selues, who be most troublesome, and do most vrge those Reliques of Rome be ambi∣tious,Rom. 16, 17, 18 Phil: 3:2, 19: Gal. 6.12. or Dumme Dogges or, non Resident, seruing their bellies, and minding Earthly thinges, euen like their Predecessors, who vr¦ged the Cerimonies of Mozes in the Primi∣tiue Churches, and their proceedinges (like them selues) be so exorbitant that they can∣not but proue odious to all men. VVhat a-matter is this, that after the Sacramentall Bread is ministred, the Cup should be denied because of not kneeling? If any of theis scru∣pulous Ministers had played such apart, thoughe it were with one, openly knowne to liue in sinne notorious without repentance, whom by the 26. canon no Minister shall in any wise admit to the receiuing of the holy Communion, how would that Precisian be trounced But in this Puritan Gouernement of the Church
 there is no fault but non consormitie to super∣stitious vanities, A Bird of theit fether may Preach scores of Popish Doctrines, be scan∣dalous in life, and at his last cast at dice when he hath lost all, say, In the Spite of God let him do now what he can, and yet hould his owne well inough, An other mans owne and ill inough I mighte well say if the law might haue due course well, God amend all, and re∣straine the remnant of this Rage. In meane while I reioice to heare that it is giuen to any of Gods people not only to beleiue in Christ but also to suffer for his sake, hauing the same fight which they see or heare to be in their Ministers,Phil, 1, 27: as it becommeth the Ghospel of Christ, the sincerity wherof belongeth as well to the people as to the Ministers of Christ. for howsoeuer all are not to weare the whore of Babilons Smocke, yet all are to make con∣sience of bowing the knee to Baal. To con∣firme your zeale against the superstition of Kneeling I haue longe sought (being often so∣licited so to do by you) and at length found a short but (in my poore iudgement at least to mee) a sufficient discourse which I haue printed, that I may comfort not onely you but many other also who are in doubt, with that comfort wherewith I my selfe am com∣forted of God. I say Comforted. For when
 the iudgment is satisfied the heart is comfor∣ted, This onely I requyre of you that there be no inquiring after or gessing at the author or publisher. If that hurtfull curiosity were mortified learned men now fearinge that hu∣mor would be boulder to wright and pub∣lish their Godly iudgments, touching points in cōtrouersy among other I heare of a more larg & learned treatise of this point which no doubt the authour will publish in time or o∣ther for him if cursous heads itching eares, and wanton tongues do not hinder. In meane while let vs make as good vse of this, as wee can. And the Lord give vs vnder∣standing in all thinges
Farewell
