



MADAM;
SOme moneths are
past, since I made
bold to recom∣mend
to my Right
Honorable LORD
your Husband, an
ENGLISH
GENTLEMAN;
whom hee was
pleased, forth of
his Noble disposi∣on,
to receive into his Protection. Into whose
most Honourable service hee was no sooner en∣tertained,

and upon due observance of his inte∣gritie
approved; then upon approvement of
his more piercive judgement, he became gene∣rally
received. Out of these respects, my most
Honourable Lady, I became so encouraged, as
I have presumed to preferre unto your service
an ENGLISH GENTLEWOMAN,
one of the same Countrey and Family, a deser∣ving
sister of so generous a brother: Or (if you
will) a pleasing Spouse to so gracious a Lover.
Whom, if your Honour shall be but pleased to
entertaine, (and your noble Candor is such, as
she can expect nothing lesse) you shall finde
excellently graced with sundry singular quali∣ties,
beautified with many choice endowments▪
and so richly adorned with divers exquisite
ornaments, as her attendance shall be no dero∣gation
to your Honour, nor no touch to your
unblemish'd Selfe, to retaine her in your favour.
Sure I am, the sweetnesse of her temper, sorts
and sutes well with the quality or disposition
of your Honour: For shee Loves without any
painted pretences to bee really vertuous, with∣out
popular applause to be affably gracious,
without any glorious glosse to bee sincerely
zealous. Her Education hath so enabled her,
as shee can converse with you of all places, de∣liver
her judgement conceivingly of most per∣sons,
and discourse most delightfully of all
fashions. Shee hath beene so well Schooled in
the Discipline of this Age, as shee onely de∣sires

to retaine in memory that forme which is
least affected but most comely; to consort with
such as may improve her Knowledge and practise
of goodnesse by their company; to entertaine
those for reall and individuate friends, who
make actions of pietie expressivest characters
of theyr amity. Diligent you shall ever finde
her in her imployments, serious in her ad∣vice,
temporate in her Discourse, discreet in
her answers. Shee bestowes farre more time in
eying the glasse of her life to rectifie her errors,
if there bee any, then the glasse of her face in
wiping of such outward staines as might ble∣mish
her beautie. Neyther in preserving that,
is shee altogether so remisse, as not to retaine
that seemely grace in her feature, as may put
her in remembrance of the unexpressive beauty
and bounty of her Maker. Neate she goes usu∣ally
in her attire, which she puts on with more
care then cost. And to these shee addes such a
well-seeming grace, as she bestowes more beau∣ty
on them, then shee receives from them.
Phantasticke habits or forraine fashions are so
farre from taking her, as with a sleight but
sweet contempt they are disvalued by her. She
wonders how a wise state should employ so
much time in inventing varietie of disguises to
disfigure theyr Shape. This makes her desire
rather to bee out of request with time, then
with a civill and well-composed mind; whose
honour it is to bee prized more by her owne

internall worth, then any outward weare.
Constant shee is in her behaviour; wherein she
affects little, but observes much. With a bash∣full
admiration she smiles at these civilized si∣pring
Dames, whose onely glory it is to affect
a kind of reserved state; which, as they hold,
consists principally in a minc'd speech, set
looke, or ginger pace. Shee loves alwayes to
bee her selfe, nor to entertaine ought which
may estrange her from her selfe. So as, there is
nothing in the whole posture of her Behaviour,
but with a native gracefull propriety doth infi∣nitely
become her. Take upon her to instruct
others, shee will not, such is her Humilitie; al∣beit,
every moving posture which comes from
her, may be a line of direction unto others to
follow her. Complement shee affects not, as the
world takes it. The word in his owne native
and unborrowed signification is good, and in
that sence she admits it; but to be restrained to
an inforced formality, shee cannot relish it.
Whence it is, that she preferres the incompara∣ble
Liberty of her mind, before the mutable
formality of a Deluded age. Shee desires to be
Compleat in the exercise of goodnesse; to im∣prove
her Honour not by titles but a lovely
and lively proficience, graced with a continuate
practise in all vertues. She cannot indure this
later introduc'd kind of Complement, which
consists in Cringies, Congies, or supple salutes.
A cheerefull modesty is her best Complement,

which shee ever weares about her as her chie∣fest
ornament. Decency, shee affects in her
Cloathes, affability in her Discourse; shee hath
made a covenant with her eyes never to wan∣der,
nor intentively to bestow themselves on
any other object than the glory of her Maker.
A proper personage is no such attractive mo∣tive
to her eye, to make her loose her selfe.
Whatsoever shee undertakes beseemes her, be∣cause
shee affects naught but what naturally be∣comes
her. Her beauty is her owne; and
whatsoever else may better accomplish her.
Her pathes are evenly vertuous; her desires
truely religious; Piety is her practise; which
shee expresseth so fully in every action; as the
whole course of her well-disposed life is not so
much as justly conscious of the least aspersion.
So highly shee values her Estimation, as she will
not engage it to suspition. Promises cannot
tempt her, nor hope of advancement taint her.
She wonders one should preferre a conceit of
being great before a desire of appearing good.
Protesting Lovers she holds for no better then
deceiving Lures. Bee their vowes of seruice
never so incessant, their assaults never so vio∣lent;
her resolves have vow'd her constant.
Hope of Profit cannot surprize her, nor
thought of Pleasure vainely delude her. Esti∣mation
she holds her highest grace; with which
untainted shee purposeth to goe to her Grave.
Shee knowes how to fancie; and in her shee

retaines what shee fancies most: A chast soule;
this is that she loves, and with which she cheere∣fully
lives. Shee was neuer yet acquainted with
a passionate ah me; nor a carelesse folding of her
armes, as if the thought of a prevailing Lover
had wrought in her thoughts some violent Di∣stemper.
So seriously doth she taske her selfe
to imployment, as she never reserues so much
time as to treate of so light a Subject. Yet shee
unfainedly vowes, that if it be ever her fortune
to make her choyce, her constant affection must
never admit any Change. To be Generous in e∣very
action, hath beene ever the height of her
ambition. Howsoever she might boast of Des∣cent,
her desire is to raise it by Desert. Shee
holds, no family can bee truely Generous, un∣lesse
it be nobly vertuous. Her life must ex∣presse
the line from whence shee came. Shee
scornes to entertaine one thought below her
selfe. Or to detract from the glory of that
house from whence she came. As the blood
that streames through her veines was nobly
Derived, so must it not by any action or affection
drawne from the rule of her direction, become
corrupted. For Honour, she admits it, but sel∣dome
or never admires it; the Staires by which
she meanes to clime to it, must be faire & firme,
or she will never mount them. She rather ad∣mires
the Ages folly; while shee observes how
many hazard their high-priz'd liberty, for a
vading glimpse of popular glory. Her desires

are higher seated, where they are onely to bee
sated. A secure State consists not in styles but
vertues, which are Honours surest stayes. There∣fore
her highest Honour reflects on her Creator,
wherein she is so farre from fearing, as shee is
ever wishing more Corrivals. THIS is the
GENTLEWOMAN whom I have presumed
heere to present vnto your Ladiships seruice;Such, to your Honour, is her zealous affecti∣on, as shee makes it the sole Apologie of her Pre∣sumption: which shee weaves vp in this Dimensi∣on:
whose sweete converse will at retired houres
afford you choicest solace. Neyther, should
you ranke her amongst the lowest of your me∣ney,
will it displease her, such is her Humility:
for she hath learned as well to obey as command.
Nor will she spare for any paines, so her dili∣gence
may please. Onely (Madam) be pleased to
shine upon her with the gracious raies of your
favour,To serve some GREAT ONES l've bene oftimes wood. to shrowd her bashfull endeavours un∣der
the wings of your Honour; and entertaine
her blushing approach with your benigne Cen∣sure.But HERS I'm vow'd, that is both GREAT and GOOD.
So shall you finde a constant desire of re∣quitall
in her; and engage Him, whose intimate
Zeale to your Honour recommended her,

