



RIght Honorable, I confesse that for lack of skil in diui∣nitie, & of knovv∣ledge in other fa∣culties, I am vnfit to present any thing in vvriting vn∣to your Lordship, vvherein diuine eloquence ought to be shevved, see∣ing your honor hath been practised these many yeres (as I may say) in continuall hearing and reading of the best learned, both of this Realme and other Realmes: vvhereby you are able to iudge, and to correct that vvhich is either vnaptly or vntruely
 sayde of any man, concerning the knowledge of God and his true wor∣ship. Notvvithstanding, considering my dutie tovvards your honor, and also your accustomed gentlenesse in accepting aswel the good wil of them which according to their habilitie of∣fer but a mite, as also the great lerning of those Diuines, vvhich in their ser∣mons & writings do much excel the most parte of those Pastors that are not vnprofitable instructors of the vn¦learned: I am so bold as to offer vnto your Lordship this short expositiō of the Prophet Abdias, which not long since I haue vttred priuatly to the cō∣moditie, I hope, of a few, & nowe (if your Lordship will voutsafe to be the patron of so smal, & so rude an inter∣pretation of this peece of Scripture) I mind to publishe it to the benefite of many, if perhaps it may do them any good, into vvhose hāds it shal come.
 In it I haue vsed the iudgement of di∣uers learned men, whose words I haue translated out of Latin into Englishe, and haue disposed thē in this Treatise, as I haue thought good. Therfore the doctrine therin conteined, vvhich is sound, is other mēs: the maner of hād∣ling it, vvhiche is rude, is mine. That which is lacking in the maner of hand∣ling, is recōpenced in the truthe of the doctrine. As the doctrine is true, so it maketh the words of the Prophet plain vnto the simple & ignorāt people: and also it helpeth not a little to the vnder∣standing of the other Prophets, and of diuers places of the Scripture therein recited, and giueth some good instruc∣tions perteyning to fayth and good vvorks. Therefore although it be but a small and shorte Treatise, it maye serue by the vvorking of the holy Ghost, bothe to the encrease of diuine knovvledge, and also of a godly life, in as manye as shall take paynes too
 reade it. My duetie tovvardes your Lordship, moued me to dedicate it to your honor: that as through the helpe of your boūtifulnesse, many ignorant people are much instructed in diuers places in the word of God, by the prea∣ching of the Gospel: so by your Lord∣ships succor towards the publishing of this little booke, many may somthing augment their knowledge in the holy scriptures, by reading the interpretatiō of this Prophet. How so euer it shall please God to vvorke, my minde is to bestovv that little talent that God hath giuen me, to the setting foorth of hys glory, and to the profit of his Church, not neglecting your Lordships ho∣nor: Muche encrease vvhereof God graunt you in this vvorlde, and in the vvorlde to come euerlasting blessed∣nesse, through Christe our Lorde.
 The .xxi of August. 1574.
