



Worthyly Honoured,
VErtue the greatest Signall and Symbol of Gentry: is rather expressed by goodnesse of Person, than greatnesse of Place. For, howsoever the bleere∣ey'd vulgar honour, the purple more than the person, descent more than desert, title than merit: that adulterate Gentility, which de∣generats from the worth of her Ancestors,

derogates likewise from the birth of her Ancestors. And these be such, whose in∣fant effeminacie, youthfull delicacie, or na∣tive libertie hath estranged them from the knowledge of morall or divine mysteries: so as, they may be well compared to the Ostrich, who (as the Naturall Historian reports) hath the wings of an Eagle, but never mounts: so these have the Eagle-wings of contemplation, being indued with he intellectuall faculties of a reasonable soule; yet either intangled with the light chesses of vanity, or trashed with the hea∣vie poizes of selfe-conceit and singularitie, they never mount above the verge of sen∣suall pleasure. But I am here to tender un∣to your Honours judicious view, a Gentle∣man, quite of another garbe: One, whose Education hath made formall enough, with∣out apish formalitie, and conceiving enough, without selfe-admiring arrogan∣cie. A good Christian in devout practising, no lesse than zealous professing; yet none of the forward'st in discoursing on Religi∣on. For hee observes (as long experience

hath brought him to be a judicious obser∣ver) that Discourse of Religion hath so occu∣pied the world, as it hath well-neere driven the practice thereof out of the world. He esteemes such only happy, who are of that number, whom the World accounts fooles, but God wise men. Hee understands, that whatsoever is sought besides God, may so imploy the Minde, as it may be occupied, but never satisfied. He observes the whole Fabricke of humane power, and hee con∣cludes with the Preacher; Ecquid tam va∣num? He notes how the Flesh becomming obedient, behaveth herselfe as a faithfull servant to the Soule: This governeth, the other is governed; this commandeth, the other obeyeth. Finally, he summes up all his Ob∣servations with this: Hee that Sigheth not while hee is a Pilgrim, shall never rejoyce when hee is a Citizen. This is the Gentle∣man, whom I have presumed to recom∣mend to your protection: and to you hee makes recourse, not so much for shelter, as honour: for his Title, it exempts him from servile bashfulnes, being an English Gentle∣man.

Now, if any of those corkie Censu∣rers, Qui Mercurium in lingua non in pectore gerunt, shall chance to accoast my Gentle∣man: I resolve me, his Education hath made him so accomplish'd at all assayes, and his conversing with the most piercing'st judge∣ments, hath brought him to that perfecti∣on, as hee can discerne of what mould or temper these Criticks are;Mancipia paueae lectionis cum sint. concluding, vo∣ces sunt,☞ For my Dedication, in¦stead of all un∣necessary excu∣ses of presump∣tion, I wil cloze briefly with this constant Resolution: Though to your TITLE there be HONOVR due, It is your SELFE that makes mee HONOVR you. praeterea nihil; as is said of the Nigh∣tingall. This only resteth; if I limme him to the life, in spite of censure, he will merit the patronage of honour: if I faile in my Art, (as I dare not presume of my strength) it is in your Honour to impute the fault ra∣ther to the pen than the man, whose inti∣mate affection to your Lordship, made him erre, if he erre.

