


RIGHT Honorable, it is not vnknowne vnto your Lord∣ship that in the dayes of our late most blessed Soveraigne of famous memory, some vn∣naturall Englishe, who as Fu∣gitives had departed their Countrey, did malici∣ously and slaunderously write against our stare Ecclesiasticall and Civil, and oftentimes against those who governed both the one & the other.

And albeit the pretence whereof they did make shew to the world, was only the restoring of the Romane Religion, yet men of deeper iudgmēt could not be ignorant, that they had a purpose to prepare their credulous Scholers for a day of al∣teration otherwise; and in the meane while to make them discontented with the present times, which they ceased not to lade with al calumnia∣tions, and wicked imputations whatsoever. A∣mongst this number was and is a certaine auda∣cious person, vvho termeth himselfe Doctour Hill: and being a man of no more then a compe∣tent learning, but yet of a very bolde spirit, hath traced the steps of other his felowes which went before him. For he principally maketh shew to yeelde Reasons, why Popery should be the true faith of Christ, and for that purpose heapeth vp a many of weake and worne-out Arguments: but toward the middle of his booke falleth into other points, as if this Kingdome our Countrey, were a sinke of wickednesse beyond all the nati∣ons of the earth, and therefore detestable to God and good men. In respect of which vnsufferable defamations, it was helde most fit that this Trea∣tise should receive an Aunswere: but especially for the pointes of Papistrie broched and vrged

therein, which may beguile the harts of the sim∣ple, or such who are not indifferently affected. Having therefore at the intreaty of others vvho wishe the flourishing of true godlinesse, travei∣led some-vvhat in this Argument, for the bet∣ter setling of such as will take paines to reade or heare, it now remaineth that I should recōmend the protection therof, to your Honorable Lord∣ship, to whō of right & duty it appertaineth. For as heere-tofore, so alwaies I must acknowledge, that whatsoever my poore labours can effect, is due vnto your Lordship as to a special maintai∣ner of true Religiō, a lover of our Coūtry, a Pro∣tectour of our Vniversity, an vp-holder of lear∣ning, & vnto me a most Honorable Patrone.
Almighty God evermore blesse and encrease your Honour, to the good of his Church, to the service of the Kings most gracious Maiestie, & to the great benefite of this Common-wealth. From Vniversity College in Oxford. Ianuar. 4. 1604.
Your Lordships Chaplein much bounden
GEORGE ABBOT.
