



AMong the rest of the most holy and wise Prouerbes of king Salomon, who both for godly policie, and al∣so for purity of Religion, may wor∣thily be esteemed the wisest of all kings, all the time of his vpright∣nesse and sinceritie: these senten∣ces (Right Honorable) are expresly commēded by the most holy Spi∣rit of wisedome it selfe, to belong to the wise; yea euen to those who ought to be most wise aboue all other; to wit, the Princes, Iudges and Rulers of the people of God.
It is not good (saith the wise king) to regard the face (that is, the person of any man) in iudgement. The reasons follow.
Him that saith to the wicked, Thou art righteous, shall the people curse, yea multitudes shall abhorre him.
But to them that rebuke him shall be pleasure, and vpon them shall come the blessing of euery goodman.
They (that is, euery good man) shall kisse the lippes of him that answereth vpright words. Prou. ch. 24 ver. 23.24.25.26.
The which Sentēces do briefly & very pithily giue to vn∣derstand these two things: first how great vprightnes ought to be in all Princes, Iudges and Rulers, to the end they may
 iudge righteous iudgement: secondly, how great the bles∣sing is, which by the sentence of God himself, doth belong to all such; namely, that they shall be a ioy to the people of God, that the people again shal reuerence thē, & that God wil heare their prayers for thē. They shew also herewithal, that on the contrarie, such as take an vniust course, haue re∣proch and dishonour, yea vengeance due vnto them.
So gratiously is the God of righteousnesse inclined and bent toward his righteous seruants; and so wrathfully is he setled in his iudgement and decree against the rest.
But leauing to treate of the dutie of the Magistrate and Gouernour, which is not the present purpose: may it please your Honour, to giue one poore Minister of the word of God, in the name of manie, who by the grace of God haue care of our own bounden dutie; your fauorable good leaue, in regarde of the premises, to testifie that great ioy which we haue by you, and that reuerend estimation which we haue of you, with harty desire of all increase of Gods best graces and blessings vpon you, & the rest of our good Gouernours vnder her Highnesse; because of that care of vprightnesse of iudgement, wherewith God of his mercie hath honoured and graced you in the sight of vs all, to the sensible and publike benefite of all: seeing (as it is euident from the holy sentences before rehearsed) it is the will and pleasure of God, that we of dutie should so do. And the rather also, because we perceiue that mercie is linked with iustice, in your gratious and currant proceedings; the which we know from the booke of God, to be effectuall to helpe singularly, to the establishing of the honour & peace of the throne of our most gracious Queene Elizabeth, whose royall souereigntie through her whole dominions, we humbly beseech God of his infinite mercy, euen for Ie∣sus Christs sake, long and happily to continue and aduance among vs. Amen.
Such (right Honorable, our very good Lord) is the ge∣nerall purpose of the present writing, but yet so as the more
 particular intent, is to testifie the late increase of our ioy, reuerend estimation, & humble prayer with hartie thanks∣giuing to God for you, & all other our good & godly Go∣uernors, vnder her Maiestie; as also the increrase of our hū∣ble & harty thankfulnes to you and thē, and to her gratious Maiestie especially, euen for the late point of so great mer∣cifull iustice, which you haue established and put in execu∣tion among vs, to the singular glorie of God, honor of your gouernment, and comfort of all well-disposed subiects, in that you haue suppressed the vagabond life of a most wic∣ked and vnprofitable, yea a most dangerous and harmeful sort of people: the which being of too ancient breede a∣mong vs, were of late yeeres so mightily increased, that by their licencious and vniust, yea verie sturdy and shamelesse vagring and begging, all mercie of almes-giuing was so vi∣olently catched vp and deuoured at euery rich mans gate, and also at euery meane mans doore, that mercie was de∣generated, to the cruell and wastfull feeding and fostering of such an idle and wicked rout, as by the rule of the holy Apostle, were altogether vnworthy of any almes, in so much as they were such, as vtterly refused to work. And be sides, in vaine confidence and proud presumption of an imagined prescription of time, at the first mention of their restraint, they feared not, at our dores, to speake contemp∣tuously and skornfully of so holy a purpose, as if it had bene an impossible thing, that rogues shold haue abiding places, and that beggers should liue of their labours.
But thankes be to God, to her Maiesty, and to you: this excellent point of mercifull iustice, was no sooner aduan∣ced and authorised by gratious Statute wisely penned, and enacted by high Court of Parliament, to the same effect and purpose; but it hath so prosperously, and with so spee∣die successe preuailed, that God hath, to the great comfort of all that loue true iudgement & mercie, shewed euident∣ly, that his good hand went with the execution of it, as no doubt his good Spirit was formerly president in that holy
 consultation and aduise, which was taken about it.
The which one Act (right Honorable) how many good acts it hath wrought, highly to the honour of God, and her Maiestie, and the whole gouernment; and also, how good & cōmodious it is to the publike weale of the whole natiō, a long narration would hardly suffice worthily to declare. O how much filthinesse of adulterie and fornication, of the vagabonds themselues, is hereby cut off, which was wont in more then brutish maner, to be practised in all places of their confused lodging together, at euery Faire and mar∣ket through the land, after they had filled themseues with the fattest of the rost, and drunke themselues drunken with the strongest of the Beere that their Hostesse could pro∣uide for them, for that which they had partly begged and partly stollen the same day! What a cloake and couert of much bastardize, practised by the rogues bad-good ma∣sters, mistresses, & dames, is hereby taken away; seeing they shal henceforth no more cary about the base-born, to hide them in farre remoued places, or to leade them about, as their owne naturall children, as many of them were wont to do! How are not only the disordered births, but also the vntimely deaths, of many young infants, preuented; the liues whereof (though the fruite of their owne bodies) this mercilesse and sauage people little regarded! How grati∣ously is the man-stealing of some proper children, with the intollerable misusage and disfiguring of them, hereby de∣feated, so that their cruell and vnnaturall practises, shall no more abuse the pitie of others by begging with them! Who knoweth howe manie priuate persons shall bee hereby safegarded from robberies and pilferies; yea and the pub∣like peace, from dangerous mutinies & rebellions, by such euil instruments (I mean counterfeit souldiers) as were en∣tering into that rude faction? In al these things, how are the soules of such miserable and forlorne sinners, tendered and plucked out of the diuels iawes, as we may say; in that the most abominable course of their life is dammed or hedged
 vp, if happily they may at the last, held by due correction, in a more orderly conuersation, be brought to repentance, as there is hope that God wil giue many that grace! To speak the sum of al in few words; how happily are a most lawlesse & licētious multitude, whch by their wādering disorder of life, eluded all law, brought within the iust limits & disciplin of lawe; yea such a monstrous and sottish multitude, as nei∣ther regarded Church nor common wealth, neither God nor Prince, neither word, prayer, sacrament, nor mariage, neither wife, nor child, nor any honest labour, either tou∣ching themselues, or for the education of their adulterous off-spring: but liued, and delighted themselues in a most barbarous and beastly confusion, to the multiplying of a most vile generation! And how is the whole land it selfe, & the sacred seat of iustice, disburthened of that guiltinesse and dāger of Gods wrath, which might in short space haue growne, now at the last, by ouer long sufferance: seeing so great and foule euils, would certainly haue cried to heauen with a loud and shrill voyce for vengeance; if they had not thus tempestiuely, by the power of lawfull authoritie, and by the godly care and remorse of our Magistrates, bene made as it were dumbe and speachlesse before the iudge∣ment seat of God!
And now also, yet further then all this, by the deniall of disordered succour, or toleration to the idle and vagrant; ô how cōmodiously may poore labouring housholders, and vncounterfeit impotent and aged people, yea many thou∣sands both of yong and olde, such as shall be found to need reliefe, be, by that vncomfortable and waste charge, which was euen cast away in that former course of giuing, now relieued and cherished in their honest & lawfull trade of life, to the great glory of God, & to the singular blessing of the whole land; if happily according to the good proui∣soes, and liberties authorised to the same end, by the wor∣thy Statute and explanations thereof, the prouision for the poore shall be with a liberall heart, and with a wise and dis∣creet
 hand duly collected and imployed.
Wherfore finallie as a kindly fruit of all former respects; howe ought not all the people of the lande be the more willing both in this and also in euerie other good, dutifull, and comendable seruice of all iust contributions, requi∣red on the behalf of her Maiestie; euen for this, that it hath pleased her Highnesse, to take so gratious an order, vpon the humble information of your Honours, that her Subiects should be cased for euer of so great and noisome, and euery way so vngratefull a burthen; and not onlie so, but to pro∣uide also, that true almes, may be giuen and distributed in such a maner, as euerie contributor may haue much more comfort in the bestowing of the same, & greater hope of a more rich blessing from God, vpon euerie one, that is a mercifull and chearfull giuer, then they could haue before?
But who (as was said) can sufficientlie, without a large discourse lay forth the worthie partes, of this so noble and princelie an Act; which shall stand for euer in record, for a blessed memoriall of the right godlie wisedome and care of our gratious Queene Elizabeth; and of all the worthies of the high court of Parliament; and namelie, of your Ho∣nour in this behalfe, among all other worthie Acts? Verily, more & greater good, both to our selues & to all posterity, through the gratious blessing of our God, wil grow from it, then easilie can of the wisest be conceiued; if the iustice herein prescribed, beeing still pursued and practised as there is good hope it shal; mercie also, and liberality, which is likewise therin intended, and commanded, may be ready to acompany and support iustice, according to the mindes of the Law-makers. That is to say; if, as all loitering drones and lubbers be forbidden to be fatted abroad, so no diligent Bee or painefull Labourer be suffered for want of necessary reliefe toward his ouer great family & charge of children, specially in time of sicknesse, or in old age, or in times of dearth, be suffered, as it were in the hardnesse of winter, when no flowers can be found, to pine away and
 perish while he is closed vp, as it were in his hiue, at his own home. This verily, should be a verie vngodly and vnchri∣stian, yea an vnnaturall euill, as all cannot but confesse. Ne∣uerthelesse it is no greater, then there is some danger of it, in many a blind and vnmercifull nooke in the land; if it be not preuented by the gratious circumspection of those, to whom it shall belong. Yea the places of best hope, will alwayes find it needfull, that the poore should haue many good friends, of those that be in speciall authoritie, to cause the law to speake, and to put the rest in mind of their du∣ties herein, lest their crie should ascend vp before God more lamentably then euer before.Musculus in Matth. 12. Certè turpis est mendici∣tas, sed tamen proximo suo quis{que} succurrat iubet Deus. Alioqui crudele esset non dare egenti quae necessaria sunt, & interea pro∣hibere ne mendicet. Verily this common begging is an vn∣seemely thing (as a learned man saith) Neuerthelesse (as he addeth) it is the commandement of God that euerie man should succour his neighbour: otherwise it should be a cru∣ell thing not to giue vnto the poore man such things as be necessary, and yet to forbid him to beg.
God of his infinite mercie grant therefore, that all his Magistrates, in all places, according to that great trust and large power committed to them in this case, may haue ten∣der care, to see that all things may be faithfully & diligent∣ly performed in this worthy seruice, for the reliefe of the poore, such as shall be found to be so indeed, as the Apostle speaketh in the like cause. 1. Tim. 5.3.5. And the same God grant, that euerie one to his power, smaller or greater, may according to the mind and pleasure of our higher po∣wers, and chiefly of God himselfe, not onely indeuour the preuenting of euery mischiefe, not beseeming the Gospell of Christ; but also by all meanes, labour the furtherance & aduancement of so worthy a work, as is the practise of mer∣cie, to the strengthening of iustice; which being well dis∣posed and imployed together, are answerable to the good∣ly brasen pillers of the porch of Salomons Temple, Ici &
 Boaz to the establishing & cōfirming of the Princes throne & of the cōmon wealth, and of all lawfull callings, trades & traffike therein, as it were frō the Sion of the Lord. So great & tender care hath the Lord, that the poore of his people should for his sake be mercifully & liberally prouided for.
Now therfore, for the issue of this speach; may it please you right Honorable, so far to fauour the present indeuour of your humble Orator, that this Treatise following, dedi∣cated to your Honor, & intended for a gratulatory monu∣ment, of the aboue named Act of Parliamēt (which shutting the doore against idlenes, & all vnthriftie & wastful mispla∣cing of almes; doth open the gate to the blessed practise of true liberalitie in such sort, that true thankfulnes also, may therwithal be let in, which before wēt a roguing, with those that regarded no home) may by the allowance, & accepta∣tion of your Honor, be some furtherance to the work, euen to the best, that this so weake a hand could attaine vnto.
And thus most humblie & heartilie beseeching God, of his infinit goodnes & mercy, euē for our Lord Iesus Christs sake, to blesse & preserue you long, in your right honoura∣ble, healthfull, & cōfortable estate, here in this present life, to his own glorie, & to the seruice of her excellent Maiesty; for the iust & peaceable gouernmēt of the cōmon wealth, to the ioy & comfort of al that do wel, & to the terror of the rest, so long as they shal continue in their vngratious & vn∣ciuill courses. And likewise beseeching God, that after this life ended, when you haue seued your time, according to the counsell of God, you may haue your part, in the inheri∣tance of his heauenly kingdome, among the rest of his most honorable Saints. I craue of your Honor, all fauorable par∣don of my boldnes, in presenting and dedicating these my poore labours vnto you vnder the credit and protection of your name. From Culford in Suffolke the 13 of May 1600.

