



OF all other pra∣ctise of phisick, that parte most cōmendeth the excellēcy of the noble facultie, which not on∣ly releeueth the bodily infirmity, but after a sort euen also correcteth the infirmities of the mind. For the instrument of reason, the braine, being either not of well tempered substance: or disordered in his parts: all exercise of wisedome is hindred: and where once vnderstan∣ding lodged, wit, memorie, & quick
conceit, kept residence, and the excel∣lencie of man appeareth aboue all o∣ther creatures: there vnconsiderate iudgement, simplicitie, & foolishnes make their seat, and as it were dispos∣sessing reason, of her watch tower, subiecteth the nature of man vnto the annoyance of infinite calamities, that force vpō vs in the course of this fraile life, & baseth it farre vnder the condition of brute beasts. The heart the seate of affection (and neither im∣moderate in temper, nor in figure or quantitie otherwise disposed then is expedient for good action) the seate of temperancie, of iustice, of fortitude and liberalitie, dayly practice of phi∣sicke sheweth how much it is dispo∣sed and framed to mediocritie of af∣fection wherin vertue consisteth, by such meanes as nature ministreth, & the phisitian hir great steward accor∣ding to her will, dispenseth where need requireth: in so much that what
reason bringeth to passe by perswa∣sion and counsell, that medicine and other helpes of that kinde seeme to worke by instinct of nature. The dayly experience of phrensies, mad∣nesse, lunasies, and melancholy cured by this heauenly gift of God, make manifest demonstration hereof. The notable fruit & successe of which art in that kinde, hath caused some to iudge more basely of the soule, then agreeth with pietie or nature, & haue accompted all maner affection there∣of, to be subiect to the phisicians hād, not considering herein any thing di∣uine, and aboue the ordinarie euents, and naturall course of thinges: but haue esteemed the vertues thē selues, yea religion, no other thing but as the body hath ben tempered, and on the other side, vice, prophanenesse, & neglect of religion and honestie, to haue bene nought else but a fault of humour. For correcting the iudge∣mēt
of such as so greatly mistake the matter, and partly for the vse of ma∣ny that may neede instruction and counsel, in the state of melancholy, & affection of braine and hart, & wold haue both to satisfie their owne doubts, and to answer the prophane obiections of others, I haue taken this paines to confute the absurde er∣rour of the one, & to satisfie the rea∣sonable and modest inquiry of the o∣ther that seek to be enformed. I haue layd open howe the bodie, and cor∣porall things affect the soule, & how the body is affected of it againe: what the difference is betwixt natural me∣lancholie, and that heauy hande of God vpon the afflicted conscience, tormented with remorse of sinne, & feare of his iudgement: with a Chri∣stian resolutiō according to my skill for such as faint vnder that heauie burthen. And that I might to the vt∣termost of my endeuor (as other bu∣sinesse
wold permit me) comfort thē in that estate most comfortles, I haue added mine aduise of phisicke helpe: what diet, what medicine, and what other remedie is meete for persons, oppressed with melancholie feare, & that kind of heauinesse of hart. I haue enterlaced my treatise besides with disputes of Philosophie that the lear∣ned sort of them, and such as are of quicke conceit, & delited in discourse of reason in naturall things, may find to passe their time with, and knowe the grounds and reasons of their pas∣sions, without which they might re∣ceaue more discomfort, and greater cause of error. This I haue deliuered in a simple phrase without any cost, or port of words to a supposed frend M. not ignorant of good letters, that the discourse might be more familiar then if it had caried other direction it otherwise would be. Chaunge the letter, and it is indifferent to whome
soeuer standeth in need, or shal make vse thereof. I write it in our mother tong that the benefit (how small soe∣uer it be) might be more common, & as the practise of all auncient phi∣losophers hath ben to write in their owne language their precepts, whe∣ther concerning nature, or touching maners of life, to the end their coun∣trey men might reape the benefite with more ease, and seeke rather for sound iudgement of vnderstanding, then for vaine ostentation of strange tongs: which is also after a sort fol∣lowed in translations: so I tooke it meetest to impart these fewe poyntes of philosophie, & phisicke in English to the end our people, as other natiōs do, might acquaint them selues with some part of this kinde, rather then with other friuolous discourses, nei∣ther profitable to vse, nor delectable to the vertuous, and well disposed minde. This my slender endeuour I
dedicate to your name right wor∣shipfull M. Osbourne, to whom be∣sides I am particularly beholdinge, your good fauouring of vertue and learning in certaine of my acquain∣tance of the best marke hath moued me to geue this signification howe readie learning is to honor her fauo∣rers. she hath many daughters, and they be all knit in loue: betwixt thē there is neither enuie, nor iealousie: where one is honored and receiueth entertainment, there all congratulate without detraction: and euen as in a darke night one star breaking out of a thicke cloude, though it be but small, deliuereth a farre more cheer∣full and comfortable light, then if it shone with many in a cleere euening: so this vertue hath the more grace, & beauty in you, insomuch as almost all such planets haue a long time ei∣ther bene whollie eclipsed, or quite fallē out of their spheres, to the great
discōforte of such as trauaile in this kinde of night workes, and busie thē selues at the lamps and are carefull to vpholde with perplexed studie the society of mankinde by learning and instruction. There be a fewe that shine with you, their honor groun∣ded vpō vertue, shal stād for euer: the Muses and the Charites haue their names in perpetuall record: and I a seruant of theirs in their names per∣forme this duetie vnto you in this sorte as I haue declared. Fare you well: from litle S. Bartlemewes by Smithfield the 23 of May. 1586.

