




AFter the last assembly of the high Court of Parlament was dissolued (right honoura∣ble sir) being earnestly reque∣sted to preach at Pauls crosse the Whitson monday folow∣ing, according as it pleased God to giue me at that time his spirite of vtteraunce (and doth to al other that pē their mouth in the truthe & scare of him) I intreated on this par∣cel of the Gospel, red that day Sic Deus dilexit mundum &c. Which Sermon finished, and I readie to depart from the Citie home to Winchester, I was importunately of diuers, and those of diuers sorts of callings, set vpon, to haue the copie of my Sermon in all the haste to printing, whose petition for a great while as tatly I withstood as they did earnestly vrge the same, and shooke off all such su∣ters, as diuers times in like cases I had done before to other, ommending their zeale, but crauing pardon to dystrust their

iudgement and deny their request in that behalfe. I was cha∣lenged that I should answer for this with him that buried hys talent in the napkin, but I forced not of that chalenge, nor of twentie reasons moe, in so much that of some, mée thought, I had more mystiking for so stiffely denying, than I had liking before for preaching, but this I put vp also and rode my ways. Neuerthelesse when this petition ceased not so, but stil I was more and more sollicited with letters, and credibly enformed how that of some it was called in question, whether al things were true alleaged agaynst the aduersaries, and howe of o∣thers it was defended, and that diuers noters of it were in∣quired of their notes thereon, and that an extraction of their notes and sentences was collected, and so they would rawely set it out: thse things, although I did not altogether credite them, but counted them as further driftes to make mée the willinger, yet was I thereby (I must néedes confesse) cleane ouercome, and had rather of the twain set it out my selfe, than it shoulde haue come in any huxsters handling. I knowe not what mooued them to driue me herevnto, for God wote and al the world may sée, there was nothing in it but that was euen Commune Sanctorum (as they say) such matter as euery one of them did knowe alreadie, as well and better than I could tell them. What of that? since they will néedes haue it, it is come forth as it is, and if they like the playne truth, they will beare with the homely vtterance. Glory I sought none but Gods, God he knoweth, and they may easily sée by the stile so roughly hewen. Yet some will thinke it more than to smac∣ker of glory to set it out, and I my selfe was of the same opi∣nion, but that I sawe some men sought glorie by not setting out their doings, retaining better the estimatiō of things they haue done, by suppressing them, than those that lay them forth to euery mans descant on them. And therfore seing that is an argument Pro & Contra, not reckening what men wil iudge theron (for I knowe before hand if one will say wel, another will say ill) I haue yelded to mine importunate suters. The

causes that mooued mée, was their too too earnest pressing: but I am euen with them, whome if I made eagre before to haue it, I doubt me I shal wéery them now to reade it. For where I had nothing then but certayne imperfect notes to directe my memorie, nor coulde so well remember (many things pas∣syng betwéene) to followe the tracke of my selfe woorde for woorde as I spake it: I was contente to record it as I coulde, and so to furnish my former notes with further prouision, that I haue made nowe, I dare not say for shame a Sermon, but euen a volume thereon. Neuerthelesse I was the better con∣tent to wink at mine owne ouer shooting my selfe, bicause now it should not be I any more that shoulde speake it vnto them, but themselues to them selues that should reade me, shoulde speake it for me, & when they are wearie, lay me aside a gods name, and make foure Sermons (if they please) of one: so may I perhaps not be irksome to them, where had I so spo∣ken in the pulpitas I haue written in the paper, I shold haue ben a great deale more than tedious. But sithe that is allo∣wable in a Booke, that is not sufferable in a Sermon, it made me the bolder somwhat▪ the more to amplifie. Thinking ve∣rily that neyther Demosthenes, nor Tullie, spake altogether, as they wrote, at least not so largely, for so they myghte haue tyred theyr hearers, notwithstanding all theyr eloquence. As for eloquence, here is none: neither I haue it, nor my mat∣ter desires it. Whiche though it be not set foorth in sublimi∣bus1. Cor▪ 2. humanae sapientiae verbis, yet haue it truthe ioyned with simplicite, it is inough. Albeit I craue pardon, to atempte to dedicate so meane a treatise to your Lordship, but the reason that moued me herevnto was this: Where once before the Quéenes Maiesties Court (her highnesse béeing then in pro∣gresse at Titchefield in Hampshire) an acquaintance of myne did preache somewhat aboute this argument of Iustification, your honour then being present, it pleased you so to accept the same, that ye desired eftsoones to heare at Southe Hampton somwhat more theron, which he to his abilitie (as the streight∣nesse

of the time permitted) did performe. Howe your Lorde∣ship then liked thereof I will not say, but, good Lord, what an inwarde ioy and comforte he conceyued at that your honours acceptation, and many a thousande syth, hath he priuily tolde me since, howe he more estemed your iudgement, than if all Cambridge hadde giuen that verdicte on him: not that hée thought to open away to set forth him selfe thereby, for that had bene to abuse your honours goodnesse: nor that he was I dare say for him, one whitte prouder thereof, for he felt his owne infirmities: but that he greatly reioyced to sée the eur∣tesie of so noble a hart, so zealously affectioned to the preachers of Gods worde. And as he stil commended this to me, so with this zeale of your L. (whose censure I alwayes drad before) I was nowe so emboldened that I durste presume to clayme patronage of your honour to this my Pamphlet, for Sermon will I not call it, since it hath excéeded a Sermons boundes. Neyther is the handling worthie of any name, although the matter can not be named worthily inough. For the matters sake therfore, not for the manner of it, I shoued it out, when I could not holde it in, and among others chéefely commend it to your good Lordship, whome as God hath made not onely a singular succourer and especiall setter forth of his truth and al good letters, but also a publike patrone therevnto, and e∣uen a father to our moother and nourice of learning, the renounted vuiuersitie of Cambridge, that now (God be praysed for it) flourisheth vnder your protectiō: so he vouch∣safe to his glory, your ioy, and our comfort, long to blesse and prosper your ho∣nour therin.

