



MAny haue been the wel-willers and furtherers of my labours, for our Grammar-schoole: yet few there are to whom I owe more, then vnto your worthy and louing fathers, M. Iohnson and M. Chadeton; both for their direction and incou∣ragement which they haue giuen me therein. Ha∣uing therfore bthought me to whom the Questions of Grammar (hich re to make all difficulties in the Accidence and Gram∣mar most plaine and easie, and which containe the very ground of all) might most fitly appertaine; I finde none, after those vnto whom I haue dedcated my former School-labours, to whom these doe more of duty belong then vnto your selfe: that I may in some part repay vnto you, or at least vnto yours, that debt which I owe vnto themselues. And first for M. Iohnson your father: because he hath yeelded vnto me the greatest help (next vnto my Honou∣rable Lord) in laying the foundation of all my School trauels; both in setting me more earnestly thereunto, by his graue aduise, and also supporting me by his bounty, that I might be able the bet∣ter to goe through with the Worke. Moreouer, for that (besides his singular indeuours for the furtherance and aduancement of all good Learning, whereof both in Vniuersity, Citty, and Cou∣trey he hath giuen so good testimonie) I haue knowen none, who hath come neere vnto him, in his great care, that the best▪ speedi∣est surest and most easie waies might be found out, for all Schools, according to our receiued Grammar, and most approued Schoole Authors, and the same to bee made vniuersally knowen, that all euen the meanest both Maisters and Scholars may proceede

with delight, and all good Learning may go happily forward. So for your father in law M. Chaderton: because he hath not onely vouchsafed to peruse som part of my labours, and to afford me his iudgement and censure therein, but hath also beene pleased to affoord some principal experiments, which himselfe hath obserued. Who therefore can  isike, that I thus dedicate vnto you, this first Ground work of our grammar school, contained in these questions? Which being rightly laied, it is concluded by the ioynt consent of all the learned, that the whole building must needs goe most happily forward. Yea, I dare be bold to affirme, that a schollar of any aptnesse, being made perfect in these questions (which hee may learne together with his Accidence and Grammar; and that as soon, as he would learne the bare rules alone, if not much sooner) shall finde such a furtherance to attaine those sixe helps of Lear∣ning, which wise Socrates so much commands, as he shall go for∣ward with all ease and cheerefulnesse euer after. That I may fully perswade all men of the truth heerof; I will first rehearse all the seauen marks which Socrates giueth, of him who is fitted to make the most excellent schollar, as our most learned schoole-maister M. Askam hath set them downe. His hopefull schollar must be 1. , that is, as he expounds it, one apt of wit, and hauing all qualities of minde, and parts of body, meete to serue Learning. as, wit, will, tongue, voice, face, stature & comlinesse. 2. , that is, of good memorie, which is called the mother of Learning. 3. ▪ a louer of learning; which loue will ouercome the hardest learning in time: and without which, the schollar shal ne∣uer attaine vnto much. 4. , a louer of labour, one who still take paines at his book. 5. , one that is glad to hear and learne of others. 6. , one that is apt to moue questi∣ons, dsirous to searche out any doubt, not ashamed nor afraid to aske, vntill he be fully satisfied. 7. , one that loueth to be praised of his father, maister, or others for his well doing. A childe of this nature thus louing praise, will feruently loue and earnestly desire Learning, gladly labour for it willingly learne of others, boldly aske any doubt. Now for thse helps, though the two first bee speciall benefits of nature, yet may they be much in∣creased and preserued (chiefly the Memory) by this perfect vn∣derstanding of all the grounds of Grammar; thorough this plaine

order, so directly in all things agreeing with their Accidence. But for the fiue last, there will neuer any meanes be found, whereby they will more speedily be wrought, and appeare in children, then heerby; when they can answere so readily and perfectly to euerie Grammar question. For this (if they be well applied) will winne them such loue from their maisters, and Parents, and also such praise and commendations, from all who examine them, or heare them posed with so much ease through the plainenesse of it, as will make them to striue who shall carrie away most commendations; and so who shall take the most paines. And then the first Authors being seconded with the help of Grammaticall translations, so v∣sed as is prescribed, not to make them truants, but to lead them surely by the hand▪ past the difficultie of all schoole Learning, and still afterward with other new supplies of Commentaries and the like, shall make the whole way so delght some, as they shall neuer wex wearie in all their course but be euer made more earnest to climbe vp to the top of all good Learning. If it be obiected that questions of Accidence and Grammar haue been set forth by o∣thers, I answere that sundry haue indeede taken very profitable and commendable paines heerein: To all them I acknowledge our Schooles much beholden; and my selfe especially. And yet ayming at the same generall benefit and furtherance of Learning, which they doe, I hope none of them can be offended, if out of all of them laied together, and not iniuring any one of them, I haue indeuou∣red to gather one more plaine, easie, full, and more agreeing to our Accidence and Grammar in all things; and to make all their la∣bours of much more vse to Schooles then euer heertofore. For be∣sides that som points of principal vse & arising directly out of the Booke, are wanting in all them which heere you shall finde, they haue more-ouer many hard and strange questions intermixed, not so necessarie for the first enterers, and which doe much trouble the younger sort. Many also of those questions in them, which are ga∣thered directly, are placed out of the order of the Accidence, or else distinctions of the Chapters are not obserued, or they are set down in too obscure tearmes, or ouershort for children to conceiue: that both maisters and schollars doe soone cast them out of hand, and that very few of them are knowne in our Grammar Schooles. I haue therefore laboured to drawe these so, as they may serue

most fitly and easily, for all schooles, according to the course which must of necessitie be taken, so long as our Accidence and Gram∣mar remaine; which cannot be altered, without very great incon∣ueniences to Schooles, and setting both maisters aend schollar al∣most newly to begn, to be acquainted with their new rules, or at the least to bring much disturbance. I haue also striuen to make them so plaine, that not oely the Teachrs, but euen the young schollars themselues may appoe one another by them, and vnder∣stand each thing fully. For the necessarie qustions, which I haue adioyned, onely for making the rest more clare, I haue set an Asteriske vpon them▪ to distinguish them from those which are contained directly in the booke, to vse or omit as the maister will, and a hand pinting at some places which are of most necessarie vse. For other questions (to th'end that our young schollars may not be troubled at all with them, nor hindred by them in learning their Accidence; and yet may in fit time be acquainted with all of them, which shal be most needfull: that nothing may be wanting hereunto to make our schoa a sound Gramarian) I purpose (God willing) so much as (vpon further aduise) shall be thought fit, to set them briefly in the margts ouer against the ruls to which they belong, as I haue done some fewe alreadi; or ele in the end most shortly by themselues. Accept this beginning as a token of my thankefulnesse to those your graue father, who haue desr∣ued so well of the Church of God, and of all good learning, that I wish to keep a perpetuall memorie of them; and withall, as a pledge of my thankefull affection euen vnto your selfe for your ancient loue, and of my heartie desire, to adde somewhat to yours by these and other my trauails. Accept them as a witnesse of my vnfained study, for that good, which  trust shall hereby be conueyed vnto Schooles and all good learning, in making the first entrance so e∣uen, as that it may be run in with al louing emulation. By the wel∣come and kinde entertainement of my first labours, I shall be more incouraged to go forward with the work during my life; vntill I may either put the last hand vnto it, or that others after me may supply whatsoeuer is wanting in my poore indeuours, being but thus entred into. Ianuarie 12. 1611.

