



Thincke it not strange, o most holy spouse of Christ, that a new interpretatiō of the Apocalyps is presented unto thee: considering that among so many both of olde & late wri∣ters, it is the judgement of all, that the Revelation, needeth stil a∣nother Revelation: and that these wordes be continually soun∣ding in thyne eares, The Lord hath spoken, who shall not pro∣phecy? For the Lord hath not onely spoken of old by dreames & visions, but also he speaketh daily, so often as he vouchsafeth to illuminate the mindes of his servaunts, for to manifest the hiddē truth of his word, & to expose the same openly. And with whō∣soever God doeth thus communicate, he thincketh that necessi∣tie is laid upon him, for to manifest unto others, that which him∣self hath receaved. And in deed, should the candel be lightned for to be putt under a bushell? should the comon danger of all, be privily declared for the benefitt of one onely? Is it not rather for this, that being put in the watch tower, he must give warning to the rest, for to avoide with all speed the present danger? The Lepers knew this well, & they could say, that if they had kept the joyfull tydings untill the daye light, evel should have come upō them. But what and if any should conceale the eminent danger, of what punishment should he be guilty? Verely of so much the more greater as the difference is between one altogether lost, and one that is deprived of joy but for a few houres. And therefore ha∣ving learned from this Apocalyps, that shortly a great tentation shall invade all Christendome, in so much as the sword of the Lord shall be made droncken in heaven, & all the host of them shall be overthrowne, & that you, the Christian Churches of Germany, France, & Britanny, are by name favorably admoni∣shed of this tempest by written Epistles: I finding by the will of
 God these Epistles which doe shew this thing, & understanding by the inscriptions, to whom they were written, I durst not other∣wise doe, but to render them, to whom they belong: least by the intercepting & keeping of them secret by me, I should both be∣traye your welfare, and be condemned as guilty of treason a∣gainst God. There is no godly man but he seeth, that the Divine worship despised, the most holy word of God derided, the great securitye & pride of the Pastors, & the altogether corrupt and dis∣solute maners of all, of whas order and condition soever they be, doe foretell of some horrible calamitye shortly to come. Now these Epistles doe not foretell the thing by ambiguous cōjecture, but by most plaine wordes doe teach a goulf full of miseries to be at hand & readye to invade us. Thou spouse, see, I pray thee, the seale, knowe the hand, the wordes, the style of the writter,; thou knowest well the voice of the Bridgroome: yf the letters be sent unto thee by him, as they doe shewe, it is more then tyme to cast off those defylements, which thou hast drawen to thy self, by a to much & to long securitye, least otherwise yf thou continue to be negligent unto this thing, thou maiest at the last be suddenly pur∣ged with great sorowe by the fyre of the refyner. Notwithstāding least thou shouldst thinck that I bring onely such great sorowe & morning, beholde also a great joye & a great triomphe. For af∣ter this tempest shall presently followe joyfull dayes, & greatly to be desired; for what can be more pleasant unto the chaste spouse, driven out by the Romish whore (vvho vauntes her self to be the true vvyffe) & by the same vexed so manye aages by all maner of contumelies & in juries, then to see finally that impudent harlott, her nose slit, spoiled of her clothing & ornaments, defiled vvith dung & adle egges; & finally butnt & consumed by fyre? Lift up thyne eares a little & receave of this Prophecy, not some obscure signes, but most certen arguments of the Bridgroomes short co∣ming to avenge thy greif, & deliver into thine hands the vvhore, that thou maiest poure out upon her all the heat of jelousie. And for the increase of thy joy, receave vvithall the last destruction of the Turcks, soone follovving the destruction of Rome, for this
 must first be abolished, the fevvell onely & matter of the barba∣rous tiranny of them, the sinevves of vvhich shall altogither be di∣solved & cutt off, after that Christendome shall be purged by an exceeding great destruction of her, of her hainous vvickednesses, as the Apocalyps plainely shevveth. And that thy joy maie be full, knovve also the uniting together of the Ievves vvith the Chri¦stian nations: and so unto the end a most happy tranquillitie. Thinges indeede very great, & greatly to be admyred, parte vvher∣of hath already bin manifested in some sorte to the Christian Church, in so much as vvas fitting those tymes, yet far from the end of the Prophecy, unto vvhich approching, is reserved a more full knovvledge: the other parte is so strange & so unexpected, as I could not ever finde in any, not so much as a probable suspiciō of it out of this Apocalyps. All vvhich effects notvvithstanding, vvill yeilde unto us this nevv centurie of tymes vvhich novv vve enter into, as our exposition, yf I be not deceaved, doth make plaine. For novv is begun the last acte of a most long & most dol∣full Tragedie, vvhich shall overflovv vvith scourges, deaths, ruines: But this Scene being removed, shall come in the place of it the pleasant prospect of a perpetuall peace, accompanied vvith abon∣dance of all good things. Thus then thou hast, most deare Spouse of Christ, the residue of the course of thy vvarrfarre, stand novv in the hatches, & after long tossing, at lenght beholde the Iand; hi∣therto the cloude seen a farre of hath deceaved thee, but novv be∣holde the sea shore, & knovv the mouth of the haven it self. Let thy eies judge, vvhether I be vvorthie, to vvhō the revvard of good nevves be givē. For so farr of is it, that I thinke that vve must stād to the judgement of Rome alone, as I hope I vvill convince by ne¦cessarie arguments, that she is altogether by Gods just judgement bereft of her lightes; vvherby at length shee shall sodainly rush into eternall destruction
Therefore let her minde & judge these things as she pleaseth, she shall knovv shortly, vvhat it is, by her inchantments, to de∣ceave her self & others. Thou in the meane vvhile, o naturall Spouse, be mindfull of the tempest at hand, & prepare thy self for
 it; hale in the shoote, be carefull of the helm, look to plie the pūpe; least in the entrance of the haven, vvhich God forbidde, thou make shipvvrake. And novv see hovv very acceptable this Reve∣lation ought to be to thee, not onely for the future events of ve∣rie great moment indeede, but also in regarde of the memorie past: to vvhich if thou shalt turne thine eies, thou shalt see even from the Apostles times, that, that continuall path, in vvhich thou hast set thy foote steppes, hath beene marked out vvith so plaine paternes, as thou need desire no plainer historie; & also thou shalt enjoie a most pleasant remembrance of the dangers vvhich thou hast fuffred, vvhich yeilde unto thee so many arguments of the in cōprehēsible providēce, vvisdom, love, truth of God, keeping thee safe amidst great distresses. Surely this addition vvith the rest of the Apostolicall vvritings adjoined to the old Testament, mini∣streth Histories of the vvorlde it self from the first beginning unto the latter end thereof: for vvhich cause this unestimable treasure ought to be to every one most deare. And these are the causes cō∣cerning you, o Christian Churches, of my publicke vvriting: There are also some causes that concerne the Prelacie, namely, mercy & vvrath: mercy because I savv many ignorant rude and unskilfull in the heavenly truth, as yet to vvorship Antichrist as a God. Those vvere to be taken out of the javves of hell, yf so it should please God. For vvhich thing I vvill go before to shine un¦to them vvith so great plainenes of truth, that they shall necessa∣rily see, so that they vvill open their eies, that, that Prelate of Ro¦me is that man of sinne, to vvhom yf they persevere to cleave, they cānot be saved. Truly my indignatiō is kindled against the Ie¦suites: For vvhen by happe I fell on Ribera interpreting this same holy Revelation: Doe, saied I, the Papists againe take courage, that that booke vvhich of late they permitted scarce any mā to touch, they should novv undertake the full handling thereof? Was it a vaine shevv at the sight vvhereof, yea in dimme light, a fevv yea∣res agoe they trembled, that novv they boldely endure to looke in to the same glasse, & crie out that some other thing is shevved in it then their Pope? O vve drovvsy men & sluggards if vve suffer it!
 Therfore I thought that their croaking is in some sorte to be restrained, estee¦ming that it would be worth the labour, to shew to the Iesuites, how wicked¦ly they are madde, how foolishly they trifle, how they understand none of these Mysteries, how it cannot be, that here they should be any thing weise; that if they desire the truth, as they make a shewe, at least weise they may have mee a helper to search it out; or if otherweise they doe yet despise it being of∣fred, an aprouver of their condemnation. But yf they will not be silent, for I know that for a short time they shall fill heaven and earth with their noise; yet I hope to have given that force of light, wherby they being hereafter bereft of all shew of reasons, they shall vomit forth no other thing, then their mere blasphemies against God and men. Thou holy mother, by what kindnes & clemency thou art towards thine, pardon, I beseech thee my slendernes, where I shall have slipped; chiefly respect not, nor regarde the rudenes of my stile; the scope of us both is the truth onely; let mee stemmer unto thee, mo∣ther, after what manner soever; I bring unto thee Mandrakes such as I could finde; as for the curious, who doe regarde wordes more then the truth, ther are no herbs in our basket for them; unlesse this, that yf they be diseased with the drowsie sicknes of too much elegancie, they may fetch hēce, yf they please, , the perfume of bitumē or earth pitch, and the herbe called Goates beard, Strab. book 16. wherby, as the Sa¦beans, they may shake off their drousy disease, and awaken their dull senses.
I pray God, that you Christian Churches, by understanding may profite in godlines, and by true and earnest repentance, may either quite remove a∣way the evil hanging over you, or be so armed with his might, that in al stor∣mes you may stand invincible.

