



OVR Sauiour hath not
without good cause,
(Right Honorable) so oft
called on vs to watch
and pray,Mark. 13. 33. and 14. 38. ioyning these two toge∣ther;
and warning his Disciples in
their greatest dangers to watch and
pray, that they might not fall into
temptation; and also charging vs al
to watch and pray continually, that
wee may bee accounted worthy to
escape all the euils that shal come to
passe,Luk. 21. 36. and to stand before the Sonne
of man: because wee can neither
watch vnlesse we pray, to obtaine
strength from the Lord by it; nor
pray with any comfort or power

vnlesse we watch; nor euer get as∣surance
to escape the euils that shall
come on the world, much lesse the
temptations of Satan, and damnati∣on
of hell, and appeare with bold∣nes
before our Sauiour, vnlesse we
both watch and pray. In regard
whereof, first my dutie to the Ma∣iestie
of God, who prepared the
watch against so needfull a time;
and after so graciously caused my
poore desire therein to be accepted
in his church, hath encouraged me
to endeuour to adioine vnto the
watch, this short directiō for praier,
as a secōd part & vnseparable cōpa∣niō,
for the further good of his ser∣uāts,
of whō sundry haue desired it
at my hands. And secōdly, your La∣diships
most fauourable acceptance
of it, being dedicated vnto my Ho∣norable
Lord, perswading mee of
your Honors vnfained desire both

to obserue the same, and walke in al
the waies of the Lord, haue imbol∣dened
mee to presume to offer this
vnto your Honorable Ladiship:
both to testifie my dutifull & thank∣full
affection to your Honor also:
and withall my feruent desire that
you may both walke hand in hand
all your daies, in the selfesame nar∣row
way of eternall life; as be∣ing
of the same heart and holy
accord; inabled thereunto by the
spirit of the Lord, obtained by con∣tinuall
and instant prayer. That so
ye may shine as glorious lights to∣gether
in the earth, and after in the
heauens aboue the brightnes of the
Sunne for euermore.
This shall bee in the meane time
your key into the palace of the Al∣mightie,Mat. 7. 7. 8 and 21. 22.
and to the presence cham∣ber
of his glorious Maiestie:Psal. 135. 18. where∣by
you may be admitted at al timesIames 4. 8.

to most familiar conference; receiue
immediate answers from his High∣nes:Esay 65. 24
obtaine the riches and plea∣sures
of his house, with the most
pretious iewels of his treasurie, to
adorne you farre more gloriouslie
then al the pearle & pretious stones
of all the Princes of the earth: all
which shall vtterly vanish as the
dimmest star, when the brightnesse
of your glory shall appeare.Gen. 32. 28. and 1. 2. You
shall as Israel preuaile with your
God;Hebr. 1. 14. haue his Angels and all the
hoasts of heauen at your desire;Iames 47. all
being at a perpetuall league with
you:Ephes. 6. 18. vanquish the diuels and put
them to slight:Iob 22. 27. 28. 29. ouerthrow the plots
of the wickedest, and bee accepted
for the Church: subdue in your
selfe each corruption: bring euery
thought into an holy obedience:
finde the Comforter at hand in all
your trials; the sweete voice of the

Spirit, making you with cōfidence
to call him Abba, oh Father;Rom. 8. 15. 16. and gi∣uing
you most strong assurance of
a kingdome, and the life of the An∣gels
in the very terrours of death.
And in a word, you shall thus most
happilie redeeme the daies of our
vanitie, and treasure vp in heauen
abundantly against the time of the
perfect accomplishment of your e∣ternall
triumph and felicitie.
Wherunto according to my per∣petuall
bounden dutie I shall al∣waies
striue during my life; both
by my incessant prayer, and all o∣ther
holy meanes, which the Lord
shall in mercie vouchsafe vnto mee
his poore and vnworthie seruant.
And in this studie towards your e∣ternall
glory and happines I rest my
selfe; nothing doubting of your
like honorable acceptation of this
my poore endeuour, howsoeuer

penned in a most plaine and famili∣ar
stile; not to delight the curious
with an houres reading, (which I
leaue to others) but to helpe the ho∣nest
heart that is desirous to learne
of our Sauiour how to pray,Luke 18. 1. and
coninue therin in this life without
fainting,Esay 65. 13. 14. to reioyce and sing with
the Angels for euer after; when
all others shall weepe and
mourne, and neuer find
any comfort or re∣lease.

