



SEeing that all of vs of this
Nation (most Gratious and
Excellent) doe aboue all
people, owe vnto the
Highest, our liues and Re∣ligion,
with all our bles∣sings;
and next vnder him, to his Anoynted,
your most royall Father, our drad Soue∣raigne;
to whom he hath giuen vs, by whose
hand he hath so miraculously saued vs, and
doth still preserue vs aliue in the midst of our
enemies: we are therfore euery one alwaies

bound (in what thing soeuer he shall inable
vs thereunto) to testifie our acknowledge∣ment.
Pardon then the desire of your deuo∣ted
and most affectionate poore seruant, if
he shall endeauour in all humility, to witness
his thankefulnesse vnto the Lord of heauen,
and to his Annoynted, by seeking to adde
somewhat vnto the Honour, and deserts of
his royall progenie: euen of you, who are the
rich gifts of the heauenly bountie, and the
flourishing branches, of that happy sprea∣ding
Cedar. And what is it, which might
still more aduance you in the eyes and hearts
of all the people of your most noble Fathers
Dominions; then if now from your first
yeares, you might beginne to be the blessed
instruments of the Almighty, of an euerla∣sting
benefite to the present and all succee∣ding
generations? whereby you might knit
all hearts more surely vnto the holy God,
and his supreame deputy here amongst vs; as
also to your selues his Regall issue, and vnto
yours for euer. Accept therefore, to this
purpose (I beseech you) this weake labour
thus begun, of searching out, and inquiring
of all the speediest, surest and most easie en∣trance
and way to all good learning in our

Grammar schooles. To the end, that those
rare helpes of knowledge, which the Lord
hath graunted to this last Age (some of the
principall wherof haue been scarce knowen,
or very little practiced, so farre as I can find;
and most of the rest haue bin only knowen
amongst some few) might by your Princely
fauours, be made common vnto all, for the
publique good of the present Age, and of all
times to come. The Lord God hath giuen
vnto your Highnesse and Excellency, to be
born, and to liue in the time of most glorious
light, and knowledge; in which, if the expe∣riments
of sundry of the learnedest, & most
happily experienced Schoolemasters and o∣thers,
were gathered into one short sum, all
good learning (which is the chiefest glory of a
nation) would daily flourish more & more,
and be conueyed to all places & times; that
not only this age present, but also al posteri∣ty
should haue iust cause euermore to mag∣nifie
the God of glory for you: for how must
this needes oblige all sorts, if this heauenly
gift of learning, might thorough you be at∣tained
with much more ease, delight, & cer∣tainty;
and also in shorter time, with lesse
charges to Parents, without that extreame

sharpnes vsed ordinarily in schools amongst
the poore children? How shall it increase
your lasting comfort & honour, if by your
Highnesses fauours, the work thus entred in∣to,
shall soone come to an happy end! For as
some very learned and of much experience,
haue begun already to help herein; so others
of the chiefest gifts and imploiments in this
kind, shall not disdaine to lay-to their hands
to bring it in time to some perfection. Why
should wee the liege subiects of IESVS
CHRIST, and of this renowned kingdome,
be ouergone herein, by the seruants of Anti∣christ?
many of whom bend all their wittes
and ioine their studies, for the greatest ad∣uantage
of their learning, euen in the Gram∣mar
schooles, onely to the aduancement of
Babylon, with the ouerthrow of this glori∣ous
nation, and of all parts of the Church of
Christ; to bring vs vnder that yoake againe,
or else to vtter confusion. Or why should
we omit any time or opportunity, which the
Lord offereth hereunto? The hope therfore
of your poore seruant is, that your Highness
and Excellency will not impute anie pre∣sumption
to this indeuor, (though thus vn∣dertaken
by me the vnablest of many thou∣sands)

but that you will accept it, according
to the desire that hath bin in me, to do good
thereby to this Church and Nation. And the
rather, for the vndoubted assurance of the
exceeding benefit, which must needs come
in time, by the best courses once found out
and made publick: and for that though such
a work haue bin long talked of and wished,
yet it is still generally neglected. The expe∣rience
also which the Lord hath shewed,In the true Watch and Rule of life, made farre more perfect and plaine in this 5. Editiō. in
the readinesse of sundrie very learned, in a
worke of not much lesse difficulty, to helpe
most louingly, with their best aduices, to
bring still to better perfection, dooth giue
your seruant certain hope of the like cheer∣full
assistance herein. Howsoeuer; yet it shall
remaine for a further testimony of duety to
the heauenly Majesty, of thankfulnesse and
loyall affection towardes our Liege Soue∣raigne,
and you his Royall Progenie. That
as you are the worthy sons of a Father most
renowned of all the Kings of the earth, for
singular learning, and for holding vp, and
aduauncing by all meanes the glorious light
therof; and as you are not inferior to anie of
the Princes of the world in your education
and first yeeres: so all sorts may thorough

you receiue an increase of the same shining
light, and all hearts may be still more firmly
bound by your perpetual benefits. To you
thrice happy Prince, I offer it most humbly,
as the poore Widowes mite, amongst the
great gifts presented vnto your Highnesse:
And to you right noble Duke, the study of
your seruant, if he might but in any one thing
further you in that sweet and pleasant way of
learning, wherin you are so graciously pro∣ceeding.
Finally, I trust that it shal euer stand
as a true witnesse of an vnfained desire to∣wardes
the perpetuall flourishing of this
Nation, with all the Church of CHRIST.
And in this humble desire, I commend
your Highnesse and Excellency vnto him
who aduaunceth and setteth vp Kings in
their throne, and hath sayde that he will ho∣nor
those who honor him. The whole suc∣cesse
I commit to that Supreame Grace, who
looketh at the heart, and accepts the will:
whom you desiring to follow shall reigne
with him in that most blessed light eternally.

