



RIGHT HONORABLE,
YOur Goodnesse as the timely Spring, sprou∣ting foorth into the buds, and blossomes of pious resolutions, and so Honourably atended, is as a Citie set on a hill, which cannot bee hid. But promiseth a farre off, vnto all honest passengers to bee a hiding place from the wind, and a covert from the Tempest: Isa. 32.2.

Wherefore this insuing Treatise ha∣uing now receiued its birth, & being; and as a Pilgrim, being to passe abroad into the world, to seeke entertainment; doth conceiue hope of safety vnder your sha∣dow, and of good acceptation in the Church, and among others of the hou∣shold Faith, and heires of Promise, through your fauourable acceptance. And therefore I haue made bold hum∣ly to present it vnto your Honourable protection, and noble admission, to doe your selfe its first service; that from this hill of SION, unto the valleyes of the same; the streams therof running downe, as a riuer of still waters, may refresh, and make glad the City of GOD.
Which preasent, as it is mine, can pro∣mise no more vnto your Lordship, than could the Carkeis, of a dead Lyon vnto SAMPSON or than IEREMIAH his girdle, which was profitable for nothing: (Iere. 13.7.) And therefore, as a thing vndesi∣red, to be buried out of your sight. Yet if you shall vouchsafe to waye the con∣tents,
 and the matter whereof it consi∣steth, you may be mooued to thinke the same meete to attend your most retyred presnce.
But not to detaine your Lordship in the gate; because of wisedomes voyce: (Prou. 8.1.) Whch is as the noise of many waters: (Reu 1.15.) Crying from within and saying. Eate O friends; drinke; yea drinke abundantly, O beloued. (Cant. 5.10.) Yea come, buy Wine, and milke, with∣out money, and without price: (Isa. 55.1) Therefore humbly taking my leaue, and leving your Lordship a this feast of fat things, which the Lord of hosts hath made vnto all people (Ia. 25.6.) there well to fare. And with my vnfained, and fer∣vent desire, and prayer vnto God, for a daily grouth, and increase of all grace in your Lordship so happily begunne, I doe rest, and shall for euer remaine.

