


I Woulde verelye wishe (most vertuous and ryght honourable Lorde) that as I perceaue my selfe most addict and tied with the bondes of singular & great benefits flowing from you, euen so Fortune would suffer that I might feele, although no faculty or abi∣litie of recompence, yet at the least some hope of rē∣dring of thanks, which may flow likewise from me vnto your honor. For as often as the remembrance of your munificent liberalitie towardes me, entreth into my mynde (which entreth truly very often) euē so often am I affected and vexed with incredible so∣row, fearing least the note of a GethicallGethical. 2. ingratitude (thē the which ther is nothing more odious) should be imputed and layde to my charge. But that this kinde of life might be no longer bitter & sharpe vn∣to me: I haue thought good to seeke some waye and meanes to produce and shewe forth some argument of a gratefull hart, and thankeful minde towards your Lord∣ship. And although I am not ignoraunt that you do not much regard nor boaste of your benefites bestowed (as the cōmon sort of welthy men do) nor do therfore helpe them that be of lower degree, because you do eyther aspire or desire to haue thankes to be geuen vnto you for a recompence, or that you woulde haue your liberalitie to be praysed and setforth vnto others: yet I (as my dutie is) do greatlye esteeme and weigh them which you haue disposed, not onely vpon me, but also do bestow them daily vpon others, and for my part do iudge them worthy immortal laud & praise. In recompence whereof, because I haue no other treasures to exhibite vnto your honour but only the litle TalentTalent. 3. of my exile & sclender learning, I haue thought good to dedicate vnto your lordship these my Prelections and readinges (although simple and rude, yet playne and profitable (vttered of late by me in Paules Church in London,Paules church. 4. London. 5 that they may bee defended and deliuered from the malignant aduersa∣ry, by your honourable wisedome & ready helpe. And this to attempt three things haue enforced and moued me: that is honesty, fidelitie, and grateful duty. Honesty to auoyde occasions of obloquie, fidelitie, to accomplish promise, gratefull duty in one or other thing to benefite my Country, vnto the which (as PlatoPlato. 6. saith) and not one∣ly vnto our selues we be borne and brought forth:Gicero lib. 1 officiorum. Sed ortus nostri (inquit) partē patria vendicat, partem amici. That is, but part of our birth and being, our CountryeCountry. 7. doth vendicate and chalenge, the other part our Parentes and frendes doe requyre. Cassiodorus,Cassiodorus. 8 who of a Senator of Rome, was made a deepe diuine, writeth of thys thus in hys Epistles: Nobilissimi ciuis est, patriae suae augmenta cogitare, sed eorum max∣ime quos respublica summis honoribus obligauit. It is the part (sayth he) of a noble and worthy Citizen to haue regarde for the good encrease & aduancement of hys Coun∣try, but in especiall it behoueth them so to doo, whom the welthe publique hath tied and enhaunced to honour & dignity. Hierocles,Hierocles. 9. est patria (ait) velut alter quidem deus, et primus maximus{que} parens, quare qui nomen ei imposuit a reipsa non temere patriam ap∣pellauit, vocabulo quidem a patre deducto, pronunciato tamen feminina pronūciatione, vt ex vtro{que} parente mixtū esset. &c. The Country (saith he) is as it wer an other god, and the fyrst and the greatest parent, therfore he which set vnto it that name, did not vn∣aduisedly name it of the thing it self, Patriam, the word being deriued a Patre, a father, yet pronounced in the feminine termination, that it should be a mixt thing deriued from both the parentes. And thys reason doth insinuate and declare the Countrye, being but one, to be honoured equalie with both the Parentes, and when it doth thus set vp the honour of the Countrye, it doth graunt that both the Parentes are not of a greater price and estimatiō, then the Country, but doth vouchsafe to beau∣tifie it with equall honour. What should I molest your honourable eares with the multitude, not onely of authorities, but also of examples of most valiant and noble men? Which did not onely employ & bestow al their industrie, study, labour, and di∣ligence, goodes and landes, but also did aduenture their owne liues for the benefit, profite, and safegarde of their Country. But because I will not ouerpasse them all, I wyll recite two or three, and will first beginne with Gods booke. What prayse
 worthy is that mighty Capitaine and man ful of prowes Ioab, which fighting a∣gainst the Syrians for his Country sayd to his brother Abisai:2. Sam. 10. If the Syrians be stronger then I, thou shalt helpe me: and if the children of Ammon be to strong for thee, I wil come and succour thee: be strong therfore, and let vs be valiaunt for our people, and for the Cities of our God, and let the Lord do that which is good in his eyes. It would be to long to rehearse the history and chiualdry of Iudas MachabeusIudas Ma∣cha. 10. & other Emperours of great puissance, whose piety and loue toward their Country, is comprised and shewed in the holy scriptures, I could bring forth (besides these) the notable vertue and courage towarde their Country, of certayn Gentils. Curtius a famous Romayne, and a noble yong man, for the safegarde of his Countrye, cast himselfe into a gaping Caue of the earth, and so willingly dyed. Publius Decius the fa∣ther, and Publius Decius the sonne, aduentred their heades for the safety of their com∣mon wealth, and manfully dyed for the loue of their Countrye. Chodrus king of A∣thens, when he vnderstode by the oracle of Apollo,Apollo. 11. that AthensAthens. 12. coulde not be saued, but by the death of the king (the enemies for that cause commaunding that no man should wound or touch the body of the king) to saue his country, put of his princely apparel, and put on beggers raymēt, and so went to his enemies, and of them was willingly slayne. PhileniPhileni 13 the twoo brethren, had leauer to haue the boundes of theyr Country, then the course of theyr liues to be enlarged, and therefore suffered them selues to be buried quicke. Herodotus,Herodotus. 14 of all writers of histories compted the chiefe, doth record in his seuenth booke, that two of the Countrye of Lacedemonia tooke their iourney frankly and of their own accord vnto Xerxes,Xerxes. 15. king of Persians, to the end that they might suffer such paynes as the Lacedemonians were iudged by ora¦cle to sustaine. The cause which moued them was this: The Lacedemonians, con∣trary to the nature of al leagues and lawes, had slaine the Embassadours sent vn∣to them from Persia. Which fact being both haynous and odious, deserued a re∣uengement to be inflicted vpon the Lacedemonians. Wherupon these two men be¦fore mencioned, came to Xerxes, willing him to execute on them what kinde of tor∣ment and death it pleased him, that he might be moued by that to spare their Coun¦try, Xerxes the king (expending & weighing both their piety toward their country, & also their bold & strōg encouragemēt of mind) did not onely deliuer thē frō al spices of tortures, but also desired them that they would remayne and make their abode with him. The parties answered: how can we liue here say they forsaking the good rules and lawes, which are put in vre in our country, & abandoning our selues frō the society & company of noble & notable mē, for whose sakes we repaired hether to aduenture our liues? If these men (being but Heathen and Paynims, destitute and voyde of al diuine knowledge) were so feruently enclined to the beneficiall furthe∣rance of their Country: how much more ought a Christian (indued with the know∣ledge of God and his lawes) to be zealously enflamed toward his country? These reasons and ensamples, as wel taken out of the holy scriptures, as other prophane authours, moue me to consider (right honourable Lord) both my duty that I owe to my natural Country, and also the accompt that I haue to render for the litle ta∣lent which God hath deliuered vnto me, wherby I am violently enticed to bestow for the benefit of my Country, some part of my study vttered in certaine Lectures. Which attemptate I trust wyl not be takē in the wurst part, neither of your honor, neither of those that shal read them, for here is not onely the exposition of the Epi∣stle it selfe set forth, but also certaine controuersies in religionReligion. 16 so debated, certayne heresies so refelled, and the glittering face of Papacye so defaced, that neyther the Scotist,Scotist. 17 Negry. 18 Furies. 19 the Sectary, nor the Papist shal haue any iust and lawfull occasion to saye , to the contrarye.Aristiphon. in Pluto. Notwithstanding the furies of certayne snuffing detrac∣tours, and the MomishMomish. 20 affections of biting ZoilousZoilus. 21 persons, had almost disanimate me from so vertuous an atchiefe, and godlye attempt. But no maruaile, for that pernicious and noysome Stepdame of Vertue Disdayne and Enuy,Enuie. 22 putteth in her foote, to let euery honest enterprise. Saynt AustineAusten. 23 in a certayne Sermon sayth: Inuidia est odium alienae faelicitatis, respectu superiorum, quia eis non equatur, respectu in∣feriorum, ne sibi equentur, respectu partum, quia sibi equantur. Vnde Cain inuidit AbelCain & A∣bel. 24 pro speritati, Rachel LiaeRachel & Lia. 25 fecunditati, Saul Dauid faelicitati. Enuie is the hateful disdaine of an other mās felicity, in respect of the superiours, bicause enuious men be not equal with thē, in respect also of inferiours, least other mē should be equal with them, & in respect of their equals, bicause they be equal with thē, wherupon Cain did enuy the prosperity of Abel, Rachel the fruitful deliuerāce of Lia, Saul the felicity of Dauid. Valerius MaximusValerius Max¦imus. 26 saith: Nulla tam modesta faelicitas est, quae malignitatis dentes vitare possit,Lib. quarto. di∣nites enim sunt alienis iacturis, locupletes calamitatibus, immortales funeribus. Vnde quidam in∣terogatus,
 quomodo inuidos non haberet, respondit: si nihil (inquit) ex magnis rebus habueris aut nihil feliciter gesseris, nam sola miseria caret inuidia. There is no felicity so modest & gentle, which can auoyd the teeth of malice & yll wil. Enuious men be rich with other mens losse, welthy with other mens misery, immortal with other mens death. Wherof a certaine man being demaun∣ded how he might haue no enemies, if (saith he) thou haue no part of great and woorthy giftes, or if thou do nothing luckely & worthy prayse,De complāc tu naturae, for onely misery is far from enuye. AlanusAlanus. 27. writeth. Quod inuidis aliena prosperitas aduersa, aliena aduersitas prospera iudicatur: hi in aliena gratula∣tione tristantur, in aliena triflitia gratulantur. Vnto the enuious other mēs prosperity is counted aduersity, & other mens aduersity is counted prosperity, they reioyce whē other mē be sad, & they be sad, whē other be glad. Which to cōfirm with ensample, what nede I go any further then to PliniePlinie. 28. the writer of the natural history, who maketh mencion of one Caius Furius Ctesinus,Lib. 1. ca. 16 who being enfraunchised from seruile bondage, & dwelling as it wer in a poore cotage, receauing of a lytle plot of grounde belonging to the same more ample, large, & aboundant fruit of grain, then his neighbours did of great & wyde fieldes, fel into the handes of enuious persons, who accused him that he with sorce∣ry & witchcraft did intoxicate other mens fruites and graines, wherupon he had a day indicted vnto him by Spurius Albinus (being one of the EdilesAediles. 29.) to appere to his an∣swer to cleare himselfe. Caius (fearing condemnation by the verdict of the people) brought al his rustical instruments presently into the iudgement place, he brought also his daughter, a ioly sturdy dame, wel decked and dressed, besides fat & well fed Oxen, and said with a loud voyce: Haec sunt QuiritesQuirites. , 0 mea veneficia. O you Romaines (said he) these be the sorceries that I vse, & I cānot at this presēt shew vnto you the hard labours of my handes, the careful carckes of my watchings, and dayly traue∣linges: which things the Iudges hearing, sensibly vnderstoode that this occasion proceded from dame , which (as BiasBias. 31 saith) is euer faelicitatis comes, the col∣laterall companion of felicitye,Stobeus ser 1. de pruden she neuer sleepeth, but euer watcheth to bring ver∣tue and good fame to desolation and destruction: I wyll not nowe stande to recite what sinister reportes, diuers flattering parasites,Parasites. 32 not lyfe, but lippe Gospellers, bearing two faces in one hoode, carying fier in oneFire in one. 33 hand, & water in the other, sow¦ers of discord, reapers of mischief, hath not long sith bruted. But how vntrue these reportes were, I prouoke no further then to these aduersaries, which wer the ori∣ginal authors of the same brutes, what care is and hath bene taken both for the set∣ting foorth of Gods glory, encrease of vertue, & repressing of vice, the sayde mutte∣ring ArgiArgi. 34. may them selues (if they wyl) testify. I call them Argos, bicause they be nec lusci nec paeti,Pontanus, poreblinde nor squint eyed, but of a very perfect and quicke sight: forso¦much as they haue a soueraigne collyry for their eyes. Actius Sincerus (a man of a rare wit, and of no les nobilitye) when a question was proposed among the Phisicions, what should be the most special remedy for the perspicuity of the eyes (one saying that the moyst vapour of fenelFenel. 35 was good, an other that the vse of christall or glasse) affirmed that  was the best soueraigntie for the eye sight. At the which the PhisicionsPhisitions. 36. were so dismayed, that they were had in derision of al the auditours, & not a litle offended. Why (saith he) doth not enuy cause a man to beholde and vewe al thinges very largely and fully? and what is a more present remedye for the eye sight, then when the vertue and facultie of feing is made greater and broader? And forthwith he rehearsed this distichon out of Ouid.Ouid. 37.
Lib, 1, de ar te amandi.Fertilior seges est alienis semper in agris
Vicinum{que} pecus grandius vber habet.
But as disdainful as  is, she cānot hurt them which euer haue in store the precious iewel of pacience. Cassiodorus vpō the Psalmes writeth. Quod patientia est quae omnia vincit aduersa, non colluctando, sed sufferendo, non murmurando, sed gratias agendo. PatiencePatience. 38 is that which ouercōmeth al aduersitie, not in wrastling against it, but in susteining & suffering it, not by murmuring, but by thankes geuing. XenophonXenophon. 39 male∣dicenti sibi cuidā tu (inquit) maledicere didicisti, ego (cōscientia teste) didici maledicta contēnere. Xenophon said to one that enuiously railed vpon him, thou hast learned to speak e∣uil: but I (my conscience bearing me witnes) haue learned to contemne & despise all euil sayings. But what nede I to trouble your honorable eares (being otherwyse occupied with most vrgent & waighty matters) with this my heaping sentence vp¦on sentence, example vpon example, history vpon history, for asmuch as these my ex¦postulations are vtterly impertinēt vnto the porte, to the which I entend by gods grace to ariue. Therfore I wil end & cease to trouble your Lordship with ambagi∣ous winding of words in this tedious & trifling epistle, & wil enter into the porch of my disordered discourse, desiring God to replenish your mind with the light & grace of his holy spirit, that al your doinges may wholy redounde to the glory of Gods holy name. Amen.
Veritati non praeiudicat antiquitas.
Although antiquity clayme the chiefest place,
Yet shal it Verity neuer deface.
