



I Haue both heard & read oft tymes,
that Bookes and Cheeses may very
well be likened one to the other,
in this poynt: for the diuersitie of
mens iudgementes giuen of them.
For they are wares both, to be loo∣ked
on for loue, and bought for
money. The Cheese once out of the
Presse, shortly after comes to market
to be solde: where (perhaps) it is ta∣sted
of many, before it be bought. And bookes once imprin∣ted,
are presently in shoppes, where many peruse them, ere they
be solde. Nowe▪ some that haue tasted the Cheese, wil say (per∣chaunce)
tis too drye: an other wyl say, tis too ful of whaye▪ the
third wyll say, the meate is good, but it is yll handled: the
fourth wil (contrary) say, it lookes better then it is. Come an∣other,
he wyl say, Berlady tis prety good meate. Some wyl say,
It is litle worth: and some wyll say, It is starke naught, but
that is an euyl toungd felow. Some wyl say, Tis Cheese: thats
a blunt whorson. Some wyl say, Twil serue: he is to be borne
withal. Some wyl say, Tis good meate when one is hungry:
he is woorthy to haue a peece of it (if he can get it) when he
hath nothing els to dynner. Some wyl like it very well, and
giue money for it: he is most worthy to haue it, & much good
may it doo hym. And thus of Bookes, and so of this my
booke among others. Some wyl say, It is too dry, it wants the
sap of Sapience, neither hath it yenough of the Runnet of Rea∣son.
Some other wyl say, It is too sul of the whay of wanton∣nesse,
which in wise mens taste, seemes very sowre. Some wyll
say, The inuention is prety, but it is yll pend. Some other wyll
more commend the pennyng, then the matter. Some wyl say,
It is prety Poetrie. Some wyl say, It is meane stuffe. And some
(perhaps) wyl say, It is bald ryme, not worth the reading: but
that is a malicious Lob, for my lyfe. Some wyll say, Tis verse:
he speakes his mynd plainly. Some wyl say, Twil passe for Po∣aetrie:

let hym passe for & cetera. Some wyl say, It is good e∣nough
to reade, when a man hath nothing els to doo: he may
reade it (if he can come by it) in such idle tyme. Some (per∣haps)
wyll prayse it more then it deserues, and geue coyne for
it, rather then goe without it. Such are best woorthy to haue
it: and wel may it like them, when they haue bought it. Well,
such as like it not, I pray you beare a good tongue, and let it
alone, and God be with you. I wish you well, and perhaps
I wyl agaynst the next Terme, prouide you some other
newe ware for your olde golde. Tyll when, and
euer, I wish you all, with my selfe, the grace
of God, and well to fare.
From my
lodgyng this .xiiii. of May.
Anno Domini. 1577.

