



FROM the seas of ELISA, souerain lady, & from the
city built by the sonne of the Bretan Helena, there
came to your highnes King dome, an epistle from a
Lerned Ebrew, full of Eloquence, & rabbi{que} skill:
iudged to conteyne sparkes of matter, which with
due nourishment might geue occasion to kindle far off the light
of the Gospell, winninge such fauour of migthy states that it
might turne to the comon good of Christendome. This Iew se∣meth
by his epistle to be of great autority, not only amonge
Iewes, which are in Constantina the chiefest of the world, that he
carying them after him, the rest over the east will soner folow: but
also with the greatest there: of whose affection nothing may be
spoken, vntill it please him self to open his mynde. He writeth in
the tongue that was first vsed in the world: in which all the holy
prophetes bookes are written: and all diuinity graduates must
know, or bethought to see with other mens eyes: & by English
vniuersities they are bound to know: ne ther may plead ignoran∣ce:
but as they are highest in your maiesties praeferment, so the
care to awnswer toucheth them principally. His epistle penned
with exquisite care sheweth in his first entrance, skill putting all
to the tryall, ether to overmatch Christianes by Iudaisme, for all
theyr groūdes, yf they graunt his, & passe thē ouer as not dashing
all faith: or, yf by modesty & dexterity he be taught, how both
Talmudes wilfully disturbe the Bible, that the Light of Christ
should not shine to them being in Satans darkenes: he cannot
by Lerning lenger resist: but by all Turkes iudgement, vpon his
owne groundes of Scriptures auctority, he shalbe vtterly over∣throwen.
After his begininge, he continueth sundry poinctes in
Lerned reuerence: First commending, matters of England: next,
requesting some petitiones of instruction. Our diuinity is in his
spech highly estemed: as standing vpon the clear power of Gods
hand: & removing weedes: such as I think he blameth in Grekes.
For as the Iewes, so they, haue overwhelmed all the Scripture, as
with netles: which being vncutdowne, the thrueth cannoth be
sene. Then he thinketh that N. hath great occasion to reioyce for a
greate nomber that he hath broght on to the knowlegde of God:

from which help he also the Iew him self stretched out his hand: &
caught an Omer full: while he standeth behind the wall: looking
through the lattice, & knocking at the gates of vnderstanding.
After this he slideth vnto commendation of your highnes Li∣gier,
at the city of Constantine, for his great care to settle him in
Christianity, And after this praeparation he floweth most plenti∣fully
into your maiesties commendation: that by your speciall
tendering haue diuines so ready in the Golden candelstick of the
Law for the generalles to bring them vnto few heades: & for the
particulares, the bowles, Knoppes, & flowres. Others he com∣mendeth,
as may appeare in his Epistle: and after, he cometh to
his requestes: wherin first he sheweth a fervent desire, & most
harty affection to haue N. sent to teach all the synagoges in Con∣stantina,
promising that he shalbe receaued as an Angel. But first
he wold haue the sum of all the Scripture plentifully handled:
& endeth his Epistle with à Lerned sonnet. This Letter was
brought vnto my Lordes grace, to croyden: where he should be
best at leasure. But his grace seing an English Endorcement, and
saing that he could rede no further, bade the bringers send it to
me. Others also counted ready in the tongue of diuinity, could or
wold say litle to it. Here vpon it returned towardes the east, not
with small hazard: yet▪ by Gods goodnes, it came safe to me to
Basil. I durst not returne the Letter: being of so weighty impor∣tance,
to abide new daunger. But I printed an awnswer to my Lor∣des
grace: shewing the principall effect: thinking that his gr. wold
haue sent for an whole copy or haue written: that in this so
weighty bysines, to doe good to all the world, no shadow of negli∣gence
or delay should appeare. But because that is not done, I
haue printed the whole Epistle vnto your M. whom the care
should chiefly touch: & will shew, according to my leasure more
then others had hereyn, my poore opinion of proceding: yf your
highnes geue me leaue. My care is the greater: for his G. dealin∣ges
in as great matters about the Bible, Labored in, ten whole
yeres, vpon your M. word: & crossed after all that labour, & char∣ges
of so great time, by his Graces will & autority. I shewed his
G. how, vpon Dan. 11. 38. vnskilfulnes, allowed by his skill, betrayd
Gods name, & whole religion, to Satan. Yet there, three Greke
translationes, yf they had bene knowen in England, might haue
geuen light vnto à sure trueth: besides the most stedfast certenty
of the Ebrew terme: So Polychronius the Greke, might for all
Daniel. Then his G. yelded: with high Promises. Since a new diffe∣rēce
as great fell. That, this Iew may end: whose Epistle foloweth.













THvs your M. seeth the Epistle: desired of many sent to Eng∣lād:
thēce to Basil: of one made many: that all may see it. The
awnswerer should be, my L. G. for Lerned fame & auctori∣ty.
A Greater cause his G. never dealt in: then to open all te bible,
both Testamentes in Ebrew. And yf his G. knoweth nought in
Ebrew: Greke will doe as well, for Byzantium: and better for Eng∣land:
to calme waues blowē of late, to the ruine of all religiō, & ler∣ning,
which this Epistle to the Iew will quiet: & brede a windeless
Cymatolegen. His G. knoweth who stirred a dissention: for the
principal article of the Crede: for Christ his passion, wether his
soule went from his body. The Greke tongue, in spech to this Iew
will cut off all cōtrouersy: as Lerned linguistes & the sure in Scri∣pture
groundes know that all was euer plain to the Simplest. The
Euangelistes told that Christ his soule should goe presently from
his body to his kingdome, to Paradise, to the hand of God; euen
through the veile of his flesh into heauen. This the Euangelistes
taught: and no one syllable in te Prophetes euer taught otherwi∣se.
Now the prophetes phrase of all soules departing this life is: a
descendinge to Sheol, or  And in spech of full death amonge
such as held the soules immortality in an other world: with the
bodies death, they mentioned the soules descent to scheol, & ,
Inferos, Hell So Homer V. 3. for thousandes: so Demosthenes for
4000. slain at one fight by K. Philip. yet they held them to be in
happy case: & with theyr Goddes. So the Crede is penned by a
phrase vnwrestable: plain to all Iewes & Gentiles: till the Barba∣rous
wold Lerne Diuinity, as from Dauus in the market, against
religion & all Lerning. This all his G. may cure saffely by writing
in Greke, wher none may say that Christ descended to Gehen∣nuo:
& wher , to him & all good, is Paradise. So his Graces
, wold win him Eternal fame. And I trust your M. will not
appoint a meaner then his G. to this charge But, I must leaue that,
to your Maiesties wisdome. yet I hope, all in a case of so weighty
importance, may doe well, when occasion forceth them to deale,
then to speak in humble care, somwhat touching te weight of
Lerned busines: wherin they haue best occasion to see the right:
and what should be done. Thus I wish your M. all good medi∣tationes,
and one that conteyneth all: how God sitteth on à fiery
throne, & that all men must . where 
that there not Gehenna but paradise may be your blessed rest.


