


Right Honourable,
THE meane Artificer that found fault with Apelles, so long as hee presumed not vltra Crepidam, was heard and allowed so well; that the most Excellent Painter thereupon amended his picture: and yet the same be∣ing the onely one (perhaps) of some ordinary person, well or ill done, could greatly hurt no man. But great hurt and preiudice (my Lords) may ensue vnto many, yea, euen vnto your selues and your posterity (ioyned as they are, and may bee, with other Noble families) by the mishapen, ill wrought, and deformed Pictures of false Pedigrees and Descents of English Nobilitie, which some busie Antiquaries (as they would be called) of late intruding, haue pub∣lished in Print. It were therefore to be wished, that Bookes of that kinde should bee examined by experienced Officers, and therewith haue your Lordships allowance, before they passe the Presse. But sithence hitherto it hath bin neglected and lightly passed ouer, as a matter of smal importance, and of lesse profit; I trust I shall with your Honourable fauours, doe my Prince and Countrey the seruice, yea my selfe and fellow-Officers of Armes, the right; presuming not vltra Caduceum, to exa∣mine the writings of these intruders, and reforme their errors: whereof to giue you a taste.
Iohn Stow (in the Vinnet of his Annales, printed 1592.) hath made, Richard Duke of Yorke, and Anne Mortimer, to be Father and mother to K. Edward 4. in doing where∣of, he hath made the said Richard to marry his owne mother. M. Milles (page 543.) saith, that Charls Brandon Duke of Suffolk, by Margaret Lady Mortimer his second wife, had issue, Henry Earle of Lincolne, Frances wife to Henry Grey, Marquesse Dorset, and Eleanor maried to Henry Clifford Earle of Cumberland; whereas the said Henry, Fran∣ces, & Eleanor, were the children of Charles Brandon, by Mary the French Queen. M. Martin, in his History of the Kings of England (page 60.) hath. That King Iohn of England, had issue foure sons; Henry, who was after King; Richard elect King of the Ro∣manes;
William of Valence Earle of Penbroke, and Guydo Disnay: which William and Guydo, were the sons of Hugh le Brun, Earle of the Marches of Aquitain in France, and not King Iohns.
What a confusion and trouble may this breed in after Ages; both for Descents, Armes, and true Kindred: as also suits of Law, Duelloes, and Challenges; Nay (my good Lords) were not the Crowne so well established in the King, and his Royall issue (which God long preserue:) what a Way is heere opened (if it bee not stopt in time) for vaine Titularies and Competitors to presume on? So dangerous a thing it is, for the vnskilfull to deale in matters of Herauldry, that are not sworne & pro∣fessed Officers thereto. Had I bene as forward to set out mine owne labors, as those haue bene to vent the imperfect Collections of others, I might (I thinke) haue writ∣ten of this subiect before some of them were borne: for any time these fiftie yeeres, it hath bene my studie. And when I had almost finished a true Catalogue of the Kings, Princes, and Nobles of this Realme, that haue bin since the Normane Con∣quest, with intent to leaue it to posterity only in Writing, and in the Office and Col∣ledge of Armes (which indeede ought to be the Store-house of all honourable Acti∣ons and Designes) I staide awhile at sight of the blinde and mishapen whelps, which the ouer-hasty brought forth. But now, as well for the Reasons afore-shewed, as also at the instance of some of my Honourable Friends; I haue thought meete (ha∣uing first made his Maiesty acquainted therewith) to publish and present the same vnto your Lordships; wherein besides the errors aboue cited, your Honours shall haue heere in the next leafe following, many others: yea, such as cry out to bee re∣formed, by your authority; which I trust of your owne Noble care and Honoura∣ble dispositions you will so execute, that henceforth the Nobility and Gentry of this Land, together with the Officers of Armes, may hold their owne better: And that the vndigested Notes of dead Heraulds and Painters bookes (to the preiudice of the liuing) be not published by any. And that in these matters of Armes and Descents, none but sworn Officers of Armes may be suffered to meddle; yea, & that amongst our selues, none may be suffered to giue the ancient Ensignes and tokens of Honour and Armes, vnto such as haue neither Descent nor Deserts to commend nor enable them thereunto.
These and the like abuses done to our Profession, are enough (my good Lords) for me to point at by way of Epistle, and fully sufficient (I hope) to draw your Ho∣nourable cares for amendment thereof. But many more great errors haue I likewise discouered, yea (almost) in euery page of my Booke: which Booke (with my poore endeuours) I humbly offer vnto your most Noble protection and Patronage: And if your Honors shall be pleased, fauourably to censure and accept the same (as ear∣nestly I wish and pray you) I shall thinke my paines heerein well bestowed, & take encouragement to perfect and finish a farre greater worke begun in this my Professi∣on: otherwise to do you the best seruice I am able.

