



I Presented vn∣to
your Highnes (most
gracious Soueraine) the
Concent of the holy Sto∣rie:
endeuoryng there
to shewe, that all the
Booke of trueth brea∣thed
from one spirite.
That coulde not be de∣clared,
vnles the times
had a most exact playnnes: which I recorded to be cer∣taynly
chayned, euen from the fall, to the Redemption.
For that, I layde downe the pure wordes of the text:
whereof an angel tolde: That from the ende of Iudahs
captiuitie 490. yeeres are pared out vnto our Lordes
death. Against this last part, a Learned man of Oxford
long disputed: not denying the wordes to haue Gods au∣thoritie
in them, nor yet differing from mee for their
beginning and ende. but affirming, That the Angell
meant no certaine tyme. And setting aside the Angels

wordes, he affirmeth, That from Olympiades 560. yeeres
precisely may be gathered by the Greeke affayres: And
going on by the Iewes common weale, maketh a partitiō.
He maketh the Temple (a marke most famous) the limit
of both partes: as I had done, but not in lyke tyme.
From Zorobabel and Iosuahs returne from Babel, he
maketh yeeres an hundreth and seauen vnto the buyl∣ding
of the Temple. There I say that ancient Ebrewes
vniuersally, ancient Greekes vniuersally, and Latines
most generally olde and late, keepe them within 32. yeres,
and that Scripture and lyues of all famous men agree
with that. After the buylding of the Temple, are by
him to our Lordes death 453. yeres: which I wyll grant
him, and fiue more. In this laboure of his I blame his en∣deuour
of two generall errours: That he disanulleth the
propriety of the Angels wordes, and affirmeth, that the
returned from Babel lyued 107. yeeres to buylde the
Temple. He read twelue monethes, as his hearers trium∣phed.
Some of his Lectures he sent me, by which I might
iudge what matter could be in the rest. I could haue wi∣shed
that he woulde eyther haue spoken where I myght
reply, or haue printed his opinions, that rumors myght
not preuayle aboue iudgement. I haue printed many se∣uerall
workes against him. The summe of them is this:
That all his gaynsaying is extreamely erroneous: and
that he hath not blamed with any colour of sounde lear∣ning,
one worde of my Booke. Those small workes of my
Defences for our Religion, and common trueth, oppug∣ned
by one pretending peculiar differing from me: who
for these two poyntes haue all Nations, Religions, and
Studies, on my side: Them I humbly commende to your

Highnes, that they may be censured by some Learned,
countenanced as trueth requireth, and considered ac∣cording
to the honour of your gracious gouernement.
A priuate censure hath passed betwixt vs all ready.
For my Lord Archbyshop of Canterburies grace, was
chosen vmpier, and examined both sides argumentes.
I hope I may with modesty pleade his testimony, though
for my selfe, yet in a publique cause: where it is good for
all to knowe the full strength of the trueth. His Grace
did wholly approue the Concent for euery whit: where
his wisedome saw Heathen (that deceaued Diuines)
confuted most plentifully, by most ancient Heathen of
their owne kinde, and vniuersally by all Iewes. And tou∣ching
former Christians folowyng Gentiles on Daniel,
folowing Iewes in Ezra, his Grace saw them holpen from
errours, by their owne graunt: that when the D. and I
ioyne issue for the space betwixt the Alter and Temple:
Prophane heathē haue there no worke: but olde Diuines
Ebrew, Greeke, Latine, tell him, that he went very farr,
further then they woulde wish him. And touching cros∣sing
the Angels propriety, I can not thinke that Europe
beareth one learned Christian, or that Iury (which trem∣bleth
at Gabriels oration) hath now one man, that hol∣deth
the number vncertaine. I thinke his Grace will tell
your Highnes so much. And your Maiesties signification
of your Princely determination, woulde more breake
young brauing Studentes, whom reason in such vnex∣pected
soyles can not bende. I greatly reuerence my lear∣ned
aduersarie, and commende him, that he woulde not
haue all libraries set on flame by fire of iudgement in few
wordes, without tryall in one twelue monethes fight.

But I shoulde more commende him now, if at the last
he woulde tell, how playne the Scripture lay alwayes,
though no heathen before setled Iubilees aright with the
Chronicle. His fame of Learning, and my more confi∣dent
resistance, maketh many thinke that the Scripture
is hard, where our long labours differ. The fault is vn∣tolerable
in the one of vs two, eyther in him or in mee:
and the faulty shoulde be forced to yeelde, that none
thinke amisse of Gods worde. I refuse not to abyde all
disgrace, yf my trauels be not founde true for the story,
profitable for the quietnes of the state, and fit for a Prince,
reigning in these west endes of the earth, the possession
of Christ. Our Marchantes that passe ouer all Nations,
can not carry into the East more noble marchandise
from the West, then skil of teaching Greekes, vpon what
occasion, euer hitherto they missed 1500. yeeres in 4000.
and marred all the holy story, and lost religion: and cau∣sed
the Christian Arabians to follow and fayle alike.
And that poynt hath been hence first opened, in
that lytle worke to your Maiestie, and in a further ex∣plication
of it. Likewyse, where by the tyme and kinred
of Christ, they may moue any Iewes: there, I trust, that I
may affirme, without chalenging more then due, that to
your Highnes first, both poyntes were declared in full
and constant Concent. What the paynes hath been to
contriue vnto agreement so many most intricate pointes,
as for this harmony of Scripture haue been ioyned, from
east writers of hard and diuers tongues, and subtilties:
not Ebrew onely, but Syriaque and Chaldean, in sundry
Dialectes from Greekes and Latines of all sortes, auoy∣ding
the errours of all, bringing nothing but matters of

difficultie, and all iudged faultlesse: any may iudge, that
considereth but the hardnes of the least of these studies
seuerally. The payne is augmented by the greatnes of the
charges: not mainteined by great allowance of Diuinity,
but gotten through Ebrew skill, and spent on Diuinity:
though it be a rule of God and man, that none warre on
their owne charges. Yet duetie bindeth all men to fur∣ther,
as they can, celestiall knowledge. But paynes in this
sort, loseth much of the due encoragement. And some
encrease of griese I felt, that when I had a meaning to
looke to my selfe by other meanes then Diuinity: I was
requested by one of your Maiesties honorable Counsel∣lers,
a Diuine, to take rather your Highnes preferment:
the delay whereof hath hindred myne owne course.
But all this may soone be cured, when it is knowen to
your gracious care ouer Learning.

