



SEeing that Catechi∣zing is very profita∣ble, not onely when it is vsed by the Mi∣nister in the publike assembly of the Church, but also by Parents and Housholders pri∣uately in their families; I haue written this little Booke, to bee some helpe to you, in making vse of it in your families. I pray you consider these weighty arguments and reasons, that shew the necessi∣ty of Catechizing, whereof some haue relation to God, some to the
 persons to Catechize, and to bee Catechised.
Concerning God, first, his commandementExod. 12.27 & 13.8.14. Deut. 6.7. Prov. 22.6. Ephes. 6.4.; secondly, his example, who briefly deliuered the whole Law and GospellExod. 20. Mat. 22.37.38.39. Gen. 3.15. & 17.7.; third∣ly, it is a meane to preserue the worship of God pure: this being neglected after Iosiah, Religion decaied very much. This is one meane to purge out the leauen of Papistry and other errours, and that if heretikes come among vs, they may be remoued or reclai∣med. Papists say in their Cate∣chisme of Trent, that wee haue gotten ground of them by Cate∣chizing. Let vs take heed that we lose it not againe by omission thereof: fourthly, this is a meane to inlarge Gods Kingdome, and we ought to restore backe againe, and to consecrate to God, the children which we haue receiued of him.

Concerning the persons to Ca∣techize, first,Gen. 4. & 8.19. Ios. 24.15. Heb. 6.1.2. 2 Tim. 3.15. we haue the exam∣ples of Adam, Abraham, Iosu∣ah, and the Apostles, and so was Timothy trained vp; and since in ecclesiasticall histories it doth appeare, Catechizing to haue beene vsed by the people of God in the time of Origen, Socrates, &c. Secōdly,Acts 20.26. Col. 3.16. they haue the charge of them that are committed to them, and must answer for them. Moreouer, they are bound to bee able, and to imploy their talents for the good of others: thirdly, they shall receiue ioy by the suc∣cesse of such labour, when God shall be glorified, the Church and Common-wealth receiue benefit, and themselues haue diligent and faithfull seruice performed:1 Cor. 3.8. fourthly, the griefe and woe they sustaine by the wickednesse of in∣feriours, furthered or not hinde∣red by them.

Concerning the persons to bee Catechized, first, hereby their memory may be helped, when fun∣damentall points are briefly set downe, and they may haue therby some meanes to know their duties to God and men, as they couenan∣ted in Baptisme: secondly, hereby they may the better be fitted to re∣ceiue the Lords Supper: thirdly, their health and saluation is here∣by procured: fourthly, many mi∣series, yea besides the rest, damna∣tion will bee the portion of them that remaine ignorant and vnre∣formed, for man is borne like a wilde Asses colt, rude and vnruly, or like a field vntilled, so as hee must by teaching be fitted for good duties. Know also, that not onely children, but such as bee of moe yeeres, may receiue profit by Ca∣techizing. For some haue not spent their youth so profitably, as to bee plentifully indued with
 knowledge as they are, which are said to haue the spirit powred vp∣on them,Acts 2.17. but haue neede of a guide, euen in fundamentall points, and are but babes,Heb. 5.12.13.14 and haue need of milk; yea, & it is pro∣fitable to men that are already in∣dued with knowledge and sound iudgement,Rom. 15.4. 2 Pet. 1.12. & 3.1.2. to bee stirred vp and pricked forward; yea, the Apostles doe write of fundamentall points (among other things) to such Churches as did know the truth, and were full of knowledge and of pure mindes. Finally,Iob 28.28. Iam. 3.13.15.17 Ephes. 4.21.22 24. Esa 11.9. Prov. 18.4. 1 Iohn 5.18.20. bee carefull so to know, as to practise, what you see to be reuealed in the Word of God, so shall you bee renued in knowledge after the image of God, and shall grow in knowledge more and more, and be filled there∣with, as God hath promised, and be in wisedome as a flowing brook, that cannot bee drawne dry: and be preserued from sinne that is to
 death, and bee like builders buil∣ding vpon a rocke. This let vs doe, and wee shall giue vp our ac∣counts with ioy together, and so I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which is able to build you vp, and to giue you in∣heritance among all them that be sanctified.Acts 20.32.

