



RIght worshipfull, you shall rightly so bee called, if you worship God aright: And thus you doe vndoubtedly, if you worship him in Spirit and truth: for the Father re∣quireth such worshippers. But thus for certaine you
 cannot doe, vnlesse his Spirit dwelleth in you; which I hope it doth plentifully, and pray it may still more abun∣dantly, vntill you come to dwell with God in the king∣dome of heauen. The kinde entertainment I once found in your house, makes me in∣debted more than I am able to discharge: my God that dwelleth in his house, I meane, your bodies, repay it ten fold into your bosomes, or hearts rather; for the bo∣some receiueth the transito∣rie, but the heart the true treasure; & God (you know) dwelleth within, not with∣out his holy Temple.
This Temple of God, your bodies, giue me leaue to put
 you in minde (though not inmindfull already) to ad∣orne on the inside in the best manner, that so the glorious beautie thereof being seene of men, it may redound to the praise and glorie of the builder and housholder: for it is strange to see the folly of many in this last and worst age of the world, who take great paines & bestow much cost in beautifying the out∣side vntill it euen shine again with gold & pretious stones. The fashion now adaies is changed euery day, and yet they can neuer light vpon the right fashion. For the Temple was couered with lead on the outside, and on the inside was ouerlaid with
 pure gold. It were good then for those which are couered with gold, and are so glori∣ous without, to beware lest within they bee ouerlaied with lead, or such like base metall. Doe men vse to paint Churches on the out-side, where the winde and wea∣ther would soone cause the colour to fade away? Let the hid man of the heart be trim∣med vp in the best manner, paint heere as much as you will, spare no paines, spare no cost, let it be done in colours of gold, vntill you shine a∣gaine as lights in the middest of a froward generation: this is a pretious thing in the sight of that God which dwelleth in you.

As a token of my loue and vnfained affection, I heere present you with the First-fruits of my labours: First-fruits I call them, but in that sense happily as Christ was Maries First-borne, when as she neuer had other childe. If you kindly accept hereof, I haue part of my desire: if you and others profit heere∣by, I haue all, and God too (I trust) who set mee on worke; for he willeth not the death of a sinner, and I would not be a sauour of death vnto any. My hearty praier then vnto this our gracious God is, so to blesse this little mite cast into the Treasurie for the repairing of his house, that it may helpe to build
 you vp daily more & more, vntill you reach to the hea∣uenly Ierusalem; where I hope in Christ our Sauiour to dwell with you once againe, and world without end. God send vs a ioifull mee∣ting. In the meane time, whiles I liue, I will rest

