



ABout the middes of Q. Eliza∣beths reigne, gratious Soveraigne, some Courti∣ers tooke occasion, by our corruptions in transla∣tion of the Bible and Notes, to plead that our re∣ligion was but mans invention. To restraine their course, I wrote A Concent of Scripture, contriving a dou∣zen kindes of hard studies Thalmudique & Attique to one scope: couching large matters in so many severall wordes. That paines was of esteeme, till I dealt with certen Scottes concerning preven∣ting Neroes, hoping for Priamus happines: and M. Iames Melvin sent frō Edenburg a letter by post, of your Maiesties favour, which letter came to me opened. Then my Lord Peregrin Willoughby warned me to looke to my selfe: and soone a Sumner coūterfaiteth an other mā, & the same day a Cōstable & pursuivant offred 40. marks to tel wher I was: And I made over to Middelburg, and print how your Maiestie would be King of our language. A Drifat of those copies D. B. brent, noysing that I wrot treason: twise he brent them, vn∣der Q. E. and vnder your Maiestie, and conspiring to scoffe the Scot∣tish mist vnder cover of confuting mee, alloweth a libell raving a∣gainst Archb. Wh. and D. Bilson for the Creede: (teaching that our Lord went hence to Paradise.) And highly extolling Maister Lively for a most vnlearned Iudaique and Ethnique exposition of Daniel:

dashing all the frame of Scripture Concent. At the same time a Iew wrote from to citie of Constantine, your Maiesties ancestor, a sup∣plication to haue our Gospell opened in Ebrew. The Queenes Agent, Barton, sent the Letters: two severall copies. B. D. conspired to Libell that I forged the Epistle printed: And when I compiled lately a treatise vpon our Lo. familie, clearing our Nation from Iudaique errours, and touching foure Genevean Schollers of his bent to Albion flames, the thankfull wight receyving a booke, shewed as much grace as a Bargulus Illyricus, and threatned to stay your Maiestie from Ebrew manifestation of our glorious Gospell. For these partes I ac∣cuse him to your Highnes, vpon this Commaundement, 1. Cor. 16. If any loue not the Lord Iesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maran Atha. I hope your Highnes that hath placed him high, will not suffer a Babylonian Lucifer to lifte him selfe aboue God and your State. And for his indevour to hinder the Iewes salvation, your Highnes will take heed, that you ha∣zard not your Familie by Gods anger, but will tender every worke bent to salvation.
