



THE whole Booke of GOD (most
gratious Soueraigne) hath so great
an harmony, that euery part of it
may be knowen to breath from one
Spirite. Al soundeth the same poynt:
that by CHRIST the sonne eter∣nall,
we are made heyres of lyfe:
whom they that knowe not, abide
alwayes in wrath. Prophecyes in
euery age, the first larger, the later narrower, all briefly tolde,
all for euent fully recorded: these shewe the constancy of this
trueth. The lyke reuolutions are of Abraham, Iacob and his
children togeather, of Sems house: & againe to Iapheths sonnes,
and all families: wherein the former be stampes of the later: so
that in one speach, an other thyng also is spoken. These shew
the eye of IEHOVAH, and his spirite. The kinredes, places,
and tymes, the lyghtes of narrations, are registred so profitably:
that it shoulde be a blasphemy to affirme any one to be idle.
Our LORD his Fathers are recorded from Adam, by Dauid
and Nathan, to his Grandfather Ely: likewise they, after whom
he is heyre to the kingdome of Dauid, Salomons lyne so long
as it continued: and afterwardes they who from Nathan were
heyres to Salomons house. So other Families, who came all of
one, as from them all come: they by Moses and the Prophetes
be plentifully expressed. In like sort the places of their dwellinges
are cleerely taught. The course of time is most certaynely ob∣serued:
euen to the fulnes, the yeere of saluation, wherein our
Lorde dyed. Of which time the very houre was foretolde by an

Angell, not seauen yeeres before, but seauentie tymes seauen
yeeres. Dan 9. 24. To this all, other Ebrewes and prophane
Grekes, beare witnesse strongly agaynst them selues. These
helpes be starres in the Story. The frame of all this, with
coupling of ioyntes and proportion of body, will much allure to
study, when it is seene how about one worke all Families, Coun∣tries,
and Ages, buylde or pull downe: and finde the kindnes or
seueritie of GOD. For this worke I endeuored, to call auncient
Ebrewes and Grekes, to further the buylding of iustice and
peace, to come from Salem and Athens, to these endes of the
earth, the possession of Christe: to speake in Englande the
tongue of Eber and Iauan. This my paynes, I humbly present
to your Maiestie.

