


WHere as You expect thankes at the handes of her Maiesties Heraults, for en∣termedling so sparingly and gently with that, which appertaineth to their profes∣sion. Contrarie to your expectation, and answerable to your deserts, my selfe (be∣ing the most vnable) haue vndertaken to answere your vnkinde speeches: as also your vntrue, and erronious writing touching matters of our profession and science, published in your Britannia. In deede you dealt but sparingly, and after a sort gently (as you say) in the hand∣ling of our misteries at the first: but in your fourth and last Edition (though your Preface spake as it did, sparingly still) yet your Booke hath swelled with large additions of He∣rauldrie: in which you haue (by your patience) been too busie, and venterous; except your proceedinges, in those poyntes, had been more firmely grounded vpon experience. And I doubt not, but the grouth and encrease of your Booke hath sprung from some of those Heraults labours, which you so much holde in scorne. Nay, it can not be denyed, but since the death of Glouer, late Somerset Herault. 1588. you haue gleaned not onely handfuls, but whole sheaues, out of his industrious collections, being reserued in the Li∣brarie of that Honorable Lord Treasurer deceased, and by that meanes incommoned to your vse, and free recourse. I would his Gloues might haue fitted your handes in such sort, as you might haue smoothly carried them away: his Notes (I meane) I wish you had neither misunderstood,

nor misreported; as contrariwise you haue, in such palpa∣ble maner, that (me thinks) euer hereafter you should distrust your selfe in the search of such mysticall poyntes, without the aduice of an Herault better experimented then your selfe. I prognosticate alreadie, what entertainement in these mine aduertisementes, I shall haue: It will be obiected from your selfe, that I vnderstande not your Booke. I con∣fesse mine intelligence not so great, but my feare is the grea∣ter, and my care the more, to vnderstande you by helpes; so that the trust in my selfe is the lesse: And this suspition (I hope) will force me to make sure worke in that I vndertake. Valure (they say) may be too bolde, and Learning too full of quillities: the one standing more vpon the brauerie of his fyght, then the goodnes of the quarrell: the other, more vpon the generalitie of his knowledge, then the trueth of his cause. The mother tongue of euery Nation (as you af∣firme) is the best conseruer of Originall names: And your selfe endeuour to get a more ample credite in Historie, by auouching that you haue read ouer many home-bredd Historinas. By your example therefore, I am induced to beleeue that English Authors, and English Heraults (though they haue concealed their trauayles from the worlde, and not published a Rapiamus generall vpon euerie light occa∣sion) are to be credited for the trueth of English successions, discentes, and reportes, of all honorable designementes. Againe, who is more vnfit to describe the trueth of actions in their proper nature, then such affectate Nouices, as haue their mouthes and pennes running ouer with the foaming Muste of vn-refined Eloquence? who chouse rather to let the trueth of the matter slip, then to abate one title of their selfe-pleasing phrase. Therefore, I haue heard meny great statsmen affirme, that the Court hath affourded more abso∣lute Wisemen for any actiue employment in the Common∣wealth, then the Schooles: which falleth out especially, be∣cause to these proceedinges of the one in Arte, there hath

not been added some lecture of discretion to qualifie the same withall; which is to be had dayly by examples, and practise in the other. And doubtles for a meere Scholler to be an Historian, that must take vp all by hearesay, and vncertaine rumors, not being acquainted with the secretes, and occurrences of state matters, I take it (as many others affirme with me) verie vnfit, and dangerous. I hope you will (in some sort) acknowledge this to be true, if indiffe∣rently you take a viewe of these errours by your selfe com∣mitted; a man of so rare knowledge, and singular industrie. Yet no one man so generally well seene in all thinges, but an inferior person in some one speciall matter, may goe be∣yonde him. In regarde whereof, contemne not these few Collections of mine (wherein I haue not vaunted my Lear∣ning, but cleared the trueth, according to the oth and pro∣fession of an Herault) vnlesse learnedly with trueth you confute the same: Vntill then, I bid you farewell.
