



WORTHY SIR:
THere are two sorts of Men that are repu∣ted happie; to whom it is given:Plin. Epist. Lib. 6. Epist. 16. Aut Scribenda facere — aut Legenda scribere. Eyther to doe thinges worthy to bee written, or to write what is worth the rea∣ding. Were I as succesfull in the one, as you in the other, I might presume of a faire approbation and friendly
 entertainement of these few notes, which I conceive fit for the presse for no other cause, but that they haue already appeared in the Pulpit, whence they were receiued with zealous silence, deepe atten∣tion, and fullnesse of affection, such as I may not hope for or expect a∣broad. For readers are not (for the most part) so beneuolous as hearers: and I haue obserued of the eye, it is farre more censorious than that sanctified sense of salvation. There are many thinges that in Elocu∣tion,Ambr, lib, 6. Epist 40. Aurem praetereunt, as St Amb ose speaketh. That doe passe and escape the Eare; which, when they come vnto publicke view, are more neerely noted and more stricktly obserued; not a sentence, not a word but it is weighed (som∣times with the false weights of misprision, sinister construction,
 and Envie) weighed in the bal∣lance; and therefore it is good coun∣sell of that Reuerend father, that before wee deale out our poore en∣deauours, wee should doe the same. Trutinare & discutere omnes scrupulos maleuolentiae ponde∣ratè & discussè,Idem ibid. Try and proue every graine (as it were) and scruple against which the enuious man may except. But for my selfe, I ac∣knowledge I haue beene delinquent herein: this labor I leaue vnto those that haue leisure to bee curious. Thus much the paines that I haue taken doe assure mee, that I haue not done the worke of God negli∣gently: and yet I confesse not exact∣ly according to the itching eares and eyes of this age. It shall suffice that I haue followed the example of a more Elder and Auncient of the Primitiue fathers. Qui non
 secundum artem scripserunt sed secundum gratiam.Ambr. lib. 8. Epist. 63. They de∣liuered what they receiued, not in the intising words of mans wis∣dome,Gal. 1.10. 1 Cor. 2.4. (whom if wee should seeke to please, wee were not the Servants of Christ) not in the intising wordes of mans wisdome, but in the de∣monstration of the spirit; In whose language I had rather speake fiue wordes (and these I speake are his) than ten thousand wordes in the tongue of men and Angells.1 Cor. 14.9. And truly this is my confidence, that of those that are Religious, and by consequence iudicious, these my meditations will bee approued, in that they speake in the Dialect and phrase so familiar vnto them. As for the matter and subiect, it is such as I suppose will afford accep∣tance also it is the desire of our Soule, it is the ayme of our hearts,
 Ioy. Next, that which may adde au∣dacitie and boldnesse to the Booke, and life vnto the Authour, it wilbe your courteous. Censure, or (of which you see I haue presumed) your benigne Patronage, and fauo∣rable Tuition of it. As for ap∣plause, it is a thing I neither affect, nor expect. Pardon, is fayre; yet approbation better; and this the summe of my desires:Cyprian ad D. Corneliū. Papam de Cardinalibus virtutibus, & vsque ad eius ascensū. Non gloriā mendico, sed gratiam, as that blessed Martyr speaketh. I seeke not for fame but fauour; If you may, approue; if not, excuse mee to your selfe; and others, (aboue others) by how much your iudge∣ment is more solid than theirs; To your selfe; and you honour my la∣bours, more than enough. I know in respect of my immature yeres, these preproperous Meditations will be reputed as the hastie fruits before




 the Summer. Vnto this you are prompted of the Prophet how to reply;Esay, 65.8. Thus saith the Lord: As new wine is found in the cluster, and one sayth, destroy it not for there is a blessing in it. These Sermons, though not the first of my labours are something forward I confesse; yet I dare say, there is blood in these grapes, there is wine in the cluster,Esa. 63.3. and what will I but that it make glad the heart of man. God grant that there may bee a blessing in it, that it may cause him that is ready to perish to forget his sorow, that it may comfort all that mourne in Syon, that it may giue beauty for ashes, and the garment of glad∣nesse for the Spirit of heauinesse. These things haue I written to none other end, but this (may I bee so bold to borrow the wordes of the Apostle) that their,1 Ioh. 1.4. that your Ioy
 might bee full. As there is diffusion in the affection; So with the dila∣tation of mine heart, I wish you all the Contents of this Booke. And if it may be more; a stedfast continu∣ance in the feare of the Lord, which is honour, and glory, and gladnesse,Ecclus. 1.11 12. and a Crowne of Reioy∣cing; the feare of the Lord, which giueth ioy and gladnesse, and a long life. I conclude in the benediction of St. PAVL. Now the God of hope fill you with all Ioy,Rom. 15.13 and peace in beleeuing, that you may abound in hope through the power of the holy-Ghost; vnto whom in my prayers that proceed from him I commend both you, and you est.

