



ARistotle the wittie philoso∣pher
(right Honorable) noteth, that as
the eyes of Battes are affected towardes
the light in the day: so is the minde of
our soule to those things, which of Na∣ture
are verie manifest.
That appeareth in all our studies: wherein, after ma∣nie
yeeres paines, we get but that which in the ende we
see to haue been cleere in the first, if our eyes had been
opened to behold them: and finde that we may soone
shewe vnto others, manifolde obscure points quicklie,
which our selues were long in searching.
Your Lordship by experience in my studies, may bee
a fit example herein. For, whereas I spent manie yeeres
labour in searching the Concent of holy Writers, which
haue penned for vs the Booke of Truth, cleering the
Prophecies vnto their euents, through the right Famy∣lies
and course of times, and to compell other Hebrewes
and Greekes to serue them: your Lordship learned after
little direction, that which I could not finde in paines of
long continuance: and that no lesse for Scripture, than
for old Heathen stories.
And euen as I was long in contriuing of them into an
order, which soone might haue been seene: so others, in

studie my Ancients, of great fame and desert, for mat∣ters
triable by ey-sight (and thereupon euident vnto all,
who will rest vpon Gods authoritie) either will not, or
can not see that, which now I beholde as cleere as the
Sunne in his greatest brightnes: and I knowe that your
Lordship doth no lesse.
Yea, who would not be our suretie? when the striuer
is confuted with the verie title of the Defence, THAT
CHRIST our Lord died in the time properly fore∣told
to Daniel. Also, who would not acknowledge the
weaknes of mans minde, when this Apologie is found
extreamely needfull, for satisfaction of some Students
in both Vniuersities? One learned man of the one V∣niuersitie
told mee, that an aduersarie had turned all a∣gainst
mee, all of all degrees: in so cleere a case, that hee
presently was driuen to yeeld vnto mee, as soone as he
heard the proprietie for which wee stroue. For when I
told him of Gabriels prophecie, I asked him, whence the
time must be counted, and whether? He said, from the
speaking, and vnto our Lord his death. I bad him tell
their D. that he must doo so too. So he doth, so he yeel∣deth
vnto mee, so our cause had been determined by the
striuer, if the blindnes of some had not ben meruailous:
who hauing lost their hold, (not three daies before they
perceiue it, as the Babylonians) but three yeeres, yet tri∣umph
of a victorie: so that some of the other Vniuersi∣tie,
began a little to triumph with them. Hereupon this
Apologie I write in defence of my selfe, of Daniell the
wise, of Gabriel the angell, and of mine Aduersarie, a∣gainst
himselfe: that the middle space cannot by religi∣on,
learning, arte, or wit, be holden vncertaine: neither
hath he Heathen concent anie thing worth, but in the
parts despised, by all Writers vpon the Prophetes and A∣postles,
and also by prophane Greekes, the most ancient,

and the latest. These two poynts end the controuersie.
I commend to your Lordshippes protection my cause:
which (I thinke) shall more neede authoritie, than skill
to defend it. Art careth not for the manie of Aduersa∣ries:
yet to bridle manie striuers vnseasonable and
vnreasonable, authoritie of high personages,
(who priuately maye deale) is now
for mee specially re∣quisite.

