



YOVR M. gaue intelligence vnto a gentleman of Middelburgh, of a prelates disgracing of my poore self: vvhich thing caused him some sadnes; & my self more. He demaunded of your highnes no censure touching me: but thinking that he lerned more substance of divinity in a short conference, thē in 64. yeres afore (as it pleased him to say,) procured me before I vvas vvare a great stipend to professe yf I vvould: & also vvrote to knovv vvhether you vvould employ me in England or like that els∣vvhere others should: & knevv that it vvas against all Christianity & the peace of life, to censure any that seeke no prefermēt: vvher∣by yf they requited like greefe, much disgrace vvould be spred, vvhere amity should beare the svvay. In his grief he replyed vpon the prelate: as vpon one not knovving the seasoning of his tongue in honesty: &, by hinderance of the best paynes for mans good, bent vnto the ruine of the Kingdome. Your M. best kno∣vveth his vvhole hart, by his Letters. The Letter of the prelates tongue vvhetted too sharp, he gaue me: to reply for my self, as I thought meetest. The party I knevv by the speach: & shevved him the very syllabes: I think your M. looketh that I should avvnsvver: & not suffer you to be led amysse by him. Therfore I vvil first shevv vvhat man I hold most assured to be the repor∣ter: next, vvhat I avvnsvver to his particular speach: By these ar∣guments I gathered that the Archb. of Cant. vvas the man. By a man of his, the very same speach vvas uttered among some that spake in great thankfulnes for my paynes; & vvas counted to be

il affected vnto the knovvledge of salvation: & he & his family alone are avvonder to the Lerned; noted the only that could not afford me good vvordes; vvhose penne & tongue (as they say) hath caused the vvhole nation, to be better spoken of. Your M. may remember vvhat he sayd of the litle book that drevv all the Scripture vnto Christ. & shevved the vse of every parcell, from the begining to the End: & called thither all kindes of Fastern & vvestern opening stil vvhere they erred, euen by them selves: carying half a skore of seuerall most hard & needful studies thither, & examining all auctours not only in their ovvne tongues but by theyr ovvne veyne & course of study. The praelat sayd to your highnes that it conteyned but the curious quirkes of an yong head. vvhere as yf he had studyed 31. y▪ ever since he vvas Doctor, hovv in one speach to shevv him self extremely voyd of all grounds of Lerning, & of all conscience for the truth: and of all care vvhose eares to infect vvith Atheism, the Tempter could hardly cary him  into partes more iniurions to all holy vvriters, & to men, for the marrow of theyr vvisdom: vvhich hold the dignity, though a yonge head vvith old study call them to build in England, far from theyr ovvne countrey: to our glory, & theyrs.
This old spech might sone tell, yf any prelate misused your M. eares extremely, vvho the party should be. for hardly vvil one nation bring tvvo of his mind and hart: confident to condemne vvhat he knovveth by his bare Latin studies no more thē a babe: & extremely bent to hinder the good of his ovvne religion. The same prelate vvrote vnto the staioners to hinder a commentary of myne vpon Daniel: & caused many of them to blaspheme the trueth. Vnto vvhom I shevved by D. Saravia that he vsed more auctority thē your M. had to lend him. The good of your ovvne Kingdome might not be hindered by any auctority. Yf he could tell me vvhere I missed I vvould thank him: othervvise, yf he hindered, the vvork should be printed elsvvhere, & him self bla∣med

for hindering your comon good. By D. Sarauia he  me his ansvver: that it vvas better the trueth of Daniel vvere hid, then antiquity should be disgraced for missing as in my Epistle. VVhether I be to lerne mild vvriting of him, his vvorkes peste∣red vvith disgraces compared vvith my Epistle to the LL. vvil shevv sufficienly. This Spirit, & that, uttered to your M. vvill argue one & the same soule: that I may vvel knovv vvhat prelate your M. meaned. Daniel cometh forth by the prelates better aduise, & auctorising: & my paynes is dedicated to the LL. of your M. most honorable privy cousel, to be regarded according to the sage honour of your M. governement. They all saving he sent me seueral vvord of special favour: & some of them be∣leued that I had made the Bible as clear as any other book: & sayd that vvhat soeuer I vvould it should be done for me: vvher∣upon I vvrote a request by a M. of that faculty, that theyr Lord∣shippes vvold move your M. ether to recompense my longe paynes after great old promises, or, to giue me leaue to goe to the King of Scotland. Thence I had sure promesse of greate re∣compense vpon bare copies not dedications of my paynes: & sin∣gular helpe offred to put forth the Bible in such playnnesse, that a vvhol nation might soō understand it: & see the glory & certē∣ty of it. Thither I returned avvnsvver: that I vvold no lōgerserve your M. if I vvere not recompensed by fiue monethes end, by the begining of Lent. The LL. sent me by D. Cesar this ansvver: that they thought my studies not inferiour for iudgemēt in Di∣vinity to any in England: & they bade me tell D. Cesar vvhat I vvould haue, that he might moue your M. & they further ad∣vertise your highnes. I returned my mind: that your M. should be my chooser: & that I vvold like best of that vvhich you appointed for me. Thus a mā vvould haue thought that a cōclusiō frō their LL. should not find cōtradictiō from any vvhose voyce, faith, & honour must be in the message sent from thē to me by D. Cesar. Yet they vvere persuaded that the Archb. vvould neuer suffer

your M, to see the clear certenty of Divinity, bicause you vvould so litle regard his bare Latin studies. This theyr mynd vvas she∣vved me: And vvheras they meant to haue moved your M. to bestovv on me the charge of London (vvich he meant for D. Bā∣croft) & this vvas noysed by the clarks of the counsel; it vvas more talked that the Archb. vvould vvork him self any disgrace to hinder my being so nere occasion to open the Bible to your self: thus it pleased them to say, & think: In so much that a Bacheler of Divinity of Ripon, vvho knevv the Lords purpose for me: & his, against me; & my resolution vpon his next iniury to leave your governement, vvent to Lambeth for good vvil to aduise him better: But he could not haue fit talk vvith him; by reason that he vvas moved by some other, to some heate, and afore he could goe again to him, he brak out as it vvas expected. This shevveth most certenly vvho the prelate should be. For as this dealing is stranger then lightly should befala man of natural rea∣son, though all honesty vvere set asyde: So the same man should be the likest to embreath into your M. the speach so deadly con∣demned by the Gentleman vvhom you made Iudge of that vvhich you bad S. Iohn St. vvrite vnto him. That your M. may better mark the strange contemt of trueth in the Archb. & his boldenes in other matters, as that, vvhich the spech mentioned, vvas censured: I must briefly tell against vvhat dealings he brake out openly.
As I vvayted, vpon the LL. leasure, to move your M. for me, in sad vvether of vvinter, I vvas vehemently requested by Lerned & Zealous Christians to assemble the People, by my preaching, to pray for better vvether. VVhich vve & others prayed for, & ob∣teyned: & many marked the meanes, & the event. In those sermons I chose Scriptures to open, vvhich Latin oryet Greek studies never opened; being so very familiar to all Hebrevves, that none of the Apostles age & nation vvold stagger in them. S. Stephens oration Act. 7. is of this tenour: speaking in the pro∣phetes

skill vsual in repetitiōs, flovving vvith matter vvhich ma∣keth England, & al vniversities blame the text, or brede vnsavery expositions: & that vvhere the speach is fullest of heauenly vvis∣dome. Him I expounded to the hearers confort: that they might better like of your governement, for that in your dayes Scripture vvas more cleared then 1500. yeres afore. And those poinctes I had printed afore to your M. & found great thankes then, from Zurick, the French, Dutch, Denmark, Scotland, & others. And yf it please your highnes to try your Archb. lerning, I dare assure you that all his latin studies vvill never expound S. Stephē: to tell vpō vvhat lavv of Moses he vvas called into iudgement: by vvhat re∣lation to Scripture the miracle of his face vvas to be like an An∣gels: hovv he frameth calling of Abraham from VR. hovv Ia∣cobs family can have 75. soules, & but 70. in Moses: hovv the Speach of the burial in Abrahams purchase can be true: by vvhat ground he affirmeth that the Patriarches bones vvere caryed out of Egypt, & buryed in Sychem: & hovv our enemies graunt this true▪ Likevvise for Moses age of 40. yeres in Pharoes court: vvhat vvarant he had: vvhat authours allovvable to all Ievves vve haue for that: Hovv Rempham can stand in Amos, a propre name: vvhere the text is Chiun: & Babylon for Damascus, by the like vvarrant: & to vvhat poinct of his accusation his oration belon∣geth: & vvhy he endeth in Solomons temple: & vvho but he sayd that VR vvas in Mesopotamia: or vvho but Philo the Greek sayd thad Abraham vvas called after his fathers death. A Doctor that fayleth in any of these poincts vvill disgrace the first Martyrs Apologie: And amonst his defenders in Latin & Greek stu∣dies it is almost all disgraced. Strangers thank your M. for clearing S. St. by my pen.
And herein your M. may satisfy your self; vvhether your high preferred Archb. vvith his accusations vnlavvful, though they vvere true; or the defendour of your faith, on his ovvn charges, by shevving the agreement of all the Bible; in vvrit, vncorrupt:

in meaning, sure, by enemies graunt, deserveth better acceptation for ground of study, far from phantasies. Although my trauel in this kind might have moved the Archb. to favour my paynes so much as the temporal Lords did for clearing Daniel by hea∣then for story: for his chief Question, by Nathan the Prophet 2. Sam. 7. Which none of his Latines or yet Greeks, I trovv, haue done: for his tvvo tongues, by plain reasons, but neuer marked, as I iudge, by any, saving one levv: although my dili∣gence might haue stirred his Love, it stirred only his enuy: and dayly it vvas noysed hovv he meant to defeate the LL. purpose: so that tvvo gentlemen conferred touching his course: & the one sayd: Shall I tell the Bishop that he taketh an vnhonorable course. The other avvnsvvered: No. The Bishop vvill but mock. This vvil not be strange to the Archb. for I vvrot it vnto him self: that he might consyder vvhat a goodly thrid he had spun that hauing receaued 50000. poundes of the Church is counted but a skopher in the greatest matters. For my self, he knovveth that I afforded him good language: & labored to countenance him: but still ready yf he vvold neuerend his iniu∣ries to call him to accompt for all at once. After I had ex∣pounded S. Stephen as plain to Ievves, vnexplicable vvithout them: I toke a text: 1. Pet. 3. Speaking to Ievves, hovv the Spirit of Christ preached in the dayes of Noah: to them vvhich are novv Spirites in Prison: vvhich very phrases they them selves haue: yet of vs the Greek is badly translated: & the divinity vvorse expoūded: Saving of Maximus Monachus & his auctours, & M. Beza: vvith Zegedin, & his folovvers But none vvithout Ievves auctority can satisfie the doubting, vvho vvill be taught hovv the phrase vvas vsual.
This text vvas comonly cited to proue that our L. descended to Gehenna by such vvho think that Hell in the Crede signifieth the state of the damned. I handled both: That S. Peter had no such meaning: nor the Greek Crede. This meaning I made of

the Greek Credet: that synce Greeke vvas first spoken vntil the Crede vvas to be penned: as vve must iudg by that vvhich vve haue in record:  is nothing els but to goe from this vvorld: vvithout distinction of Ioy or torment, leauing that to further consyderation: &  in all the old testament, the vvorld of Soules: and Hell in our translations, of force the same; & so in our Crede, & so taken by K. Ed. & by your M. that vniustly they that leaue our Church quarel herein, as though vve denyed our L. to goe presently to heaven. My opinion herein I printed to the Lerned nobility, & inferior gentry: VVho, some of them vvrote to Basil that no humane paynes vvold ouermatch a ful treatise in the same tenour. Against this the Archb. brake out to open rage: vvith his bare commentary Latin, the plague of Divinity: & not vvorth one yeres study of tvventy, that the Bible vvil require. First, he gaue out vvord that I should be stayed from preaching. Many vvere sad. but I vvas glad. For I knevv that God called our long difference for Diuinity into the open iudgement of the vvorld, & in this matter he had sayd to one M. Samford attendant vpon a noble earle, vpon occasion of translating the Ps. 16. That he vvold burne in this opinion that Christ descended to Gehenna. And to ioyne in some spe∣cial article vvith him, I chose this text, knovving hovv the  that to descend to hel vvas, true of a soule gone vp to heauen, vvold catch the bare Latinist. But I slayed in the realme till he vvold break out into some open action: that he could not aftervvardes deny his proceding. He bare the high commissioners in hand, as D. Cesar & D. Levvyn, that he Sent for me to ansvver for my Doctrine: & yf he had by request, I vvold gladly: yf he had vsed commaundement for the article knovven; it had bene Atheisme, to turne your auctority against your oth, & fayth. He vvas bound to knovv your religion con∣firmed by act of Parlement. But hovv far his messenger differed in his caryage from all civility & lavv, I am ashamed to print:

the LL. haue read it, & requested me to lay the blame vpon his man: but others sayd that the high shirif must ansvver for the vndershirfs faultes. Here vpon I resolved to leaue the realme: & shevved the LL. his monstrous dealing: hovv the bare La∣tinist vvould be teaching me in Greek & Ebrevv general poinctes: & I shevved hovv a D. his frend lamented that he could not beat into his head the bare Conceit of my studies, & many other extreme vnlerned partes, some printed against him, as denying the Greek style, all from the LXX, in all the nevv Testament. And I sent vnto him self a copy: & further matter hovv his vnlernednes brought your M. auctority vnto manifest Atheisme & most senseles, against your ovvne good. Then he yelded: vvith great promises, yf I vvould but acknovvledge them that vvold be my frendes. Also he sayd that he sent for me but to ansvver D. Andrevves for the descent to Hell. He might haue requested me, & I vvould haue satisfied him: But to betray your M. auctority to be a slave to Heresy: that vvould not be good, nor semely for me. As he sent me this vvord: I vvrote from Leyden in Holland that I vvould defende myne opinion in Cambridge: yf he vvould hazard his fame vpon any that should reply. At that he raged vvith termes that the messenger lothed to report: Lest I should pay his vnlernednes vvith as good. Therupon I vvrote an Epistle to the Lerned nobility shevving hovv through all the Bible (vvherin one errour stayneth al) he suffred bad notes: to bring errours a thousand at once: To make all the Credite of Moses & the Prophetes no∣thing vvorth: & there in I ansvver his heat: VVherin he vvill burn in this opinion that Christ descended to Gehenna. Novv my L. treasorer S. VVilliam Cecil asked him vvhat further matter he had to hinder theyr purpose. Then this he invented: that I vvrote vntruly that he determined betvvixt D. R. and my controversy, to your M. For that, I printed him a ful avvnsvver. Then came that nevv speach, vttered to your M. vvhich I am

sure came from him. And this much for, vvho the party should be. Novv for ansvver. Though his speach might be held a back biting: yet I vvill suppose that he dealt better to mean but our open contention: for the descent to hel. VVherof I haue vvrit∣ten here, vnto him self, a ful treatise. And vvheras he ought to proue that the Greek Crede is of his mynd by the General tenour of the tongue: and that all the Bibles ages beleued that Christ should goe to Gehenna, & that your M. is of his mynd: I resist, that neuer any Greek, heathen or Ievv toke  in his sense: but all vniforme in myne: that all the Bible vtterly refuseth that his sense: & all Ievves & Gentiles vvould take myne in one meaning, profitable for faith & past all colour of vvrangling: as Articles of religion ought to be plain: & that K. Ed. the 6. the rare noble prince your M. brother, once the only hope of our nation, so vnderstood the Article: and that your M. oth is to defend that meaning. To your M. to the most noble King of Scotland, vvhose M. offred me myne ovvne desire for divinity, to the Archb. his ovvne hart, to all Lerned nobles, & other Christianes I commend the trueth: to be tendered as yee look to finde the fauour of God: & to God him self I commend his ovvne cause: & the passage of his sonne from hence vvhether he vvent for the redemption of our soules: that his holy vvisdome may shine in this vvord of Sal∣vation, from the holy directly, .

