



MOYSES Maymonides (Gracious K.) a libra∣rie
of both former Talmudes, the Ierusalemy and
Babylonian, which from hard languages vn∣knowen
to his nation he made familiar Ebrew, so
that they say from Moyses to Moyses the like to
Moyses was not, his works are exceeding profitable
to cleare the New Testament. For as S. Paul saith, he differed not
from the Iewes common graunt, but that they knew not God to be in
Christ reconciling the world vnto himself: So Maymonides hath in∣finite
much that cleareth the Apostles trueth more fitly then Greek
and Latin Fathers doe. And where the Apostles confute Pharisees: he
recordeth their doctrine, that all may see the holy Apostles had iust
occasion. In this sort he hath two sorts which the New Testament bat∣tereth.
Both he recordeth in his treatise of repentance. One is this,
That Moyses law shall stand for euer vnchanged, and Messias shall
come to Canaan to conquer all nations. The other is this, That all his
learned taught, all the good things spoken by the Prophets for Israel
in the dayes of Messias, are but for the commodities of the body. This
is the common Iewes religion, whose God is their belly. They which
worshipped starres, thinking they had soules and would enrich their

worshippers equally made their belly their God: they who brought the
flood: and confusion of tongues, vnto the prophane Caesars that made
themselues Gods, and the King of Locusts which say they bee Iewes
(Rom. 2. 28. 29.) but by a Synagogue of Satan: & both are the great
dragon, Apo. 12. The new Test. telleth that the old speaketh of Eter∣nall
blessing in Christ his death ending Moyses, Dan. 9. And the
Iewes sin against the holy Ghost. For Aben Ezra could not deny this
vpon Dan. 9. that the seaueny seauents are from Daniels prayer vnto
sealing Messias the holy of all holines. He endeth sacrifice and offring:
and left bread and wine, for the flesh and blood of beasts: and wee all
sweare in the Lords Supper, that sacrifices bee ended by our Lords
death: and by that Supper, his flesh and blood is the food of our soules,
and hee would destroy Ierusalem, that no place of sacrifice should bee.
That S. Stephen taught (Act. 6. and 7.) faithfull vnto death, and
found the crowne of life. When Ierusalem is destroyed, as the Angeli∣que-faced
Stephen taught from the Angel Gabriel, Christ sendeth
his Angel to teach Iohn of an heauenly Ierusalem: against which,
Rome shall fight to the end of the world: first by open tyranny, against
martyrs: & when the Empire is destroyed for that, Satan will turne
himselfe into an Angel of light: and set a Vicar of Christ with two
hornes of a Lambe, but with the lawes or mouth of the Dracon, to set
vp the former Empire and to be the King of Locusts: all bent to the
wealth and ease of this world. This Iohn teacheth: whom Chapter by
Chapter I expound, first briefly, by arguments vpon euery Chapter
then a scholion much larger: which I dedicate vnto your Maiestie,
for the increase of knowledge in your people, still to come out of BA∣BYLON,
confusion, to IERVSALEM the sight of peace.

