



ALL dignities (Most Gratious Queene) haue assembled them∣selues in your Maie∣stie, striuing (as it were) to make you Great and Glo∣rious: Whether we respect that great Monarchie of Fraunce, whose Iewell & darling you are, or that great Mo∣narch HENRY the fourth your no∣ble
 Father, surnamed GREAT for his MARTIALL CHIVALRIE, or your Most Illustrious Mother descended of the howse of the great Duke of Florence, or your most Christian brother King of Fraunce surnamed IVSTE, or your noble Sisters, the one married to the great and CATHOLIKE King of Spaine, the other to the potent and warlike Duke of Sauoye. And although your Maiestie may seeme to haue left all these dignities in leauing Fraunce, & transporting your selfe to Inglād: Yet they follow you as inseparable attendants on your royall vertues; yea now there is a new dignitie accrewed vnto your Maiestie greater then all the rest, to wit, Your mariage with our great King CHARLES, his great Crowne and Kingdome: because by your for∣mer dignities, you were only daugh∣ter and Sister to Kings and Queenes;
 by this you art a greate Queene, and Spouse to the mighty Prince and greate King of the great Brittanie: and by him, you haue all the great∣nesse also which the Royall bloud of him and his Ancestours can adde vnto yours. I may adde to all this another thing which doth agrandize your greatnesse more thē all the rest: to wit, your Maiesties Constancie in Religiō amidst so many diuers sectes of heresie, your zeale towards the Ca∣tholike cause, your compassion of your Catholike Subiectes, for whom you are often suppliant to our noble Souueraigne in all their distresses; & lastlie your manie pretious and rare indowmentes of nature & grace, for which our noble King loueth you dearely, your subiectes admire you, and God hath blessed you with a Royall and hopefull issue. When I cast mine eyes on the resplendent
 beames & lustre of this your Great∣nesse, I confesse I was daunted, and feared to approach to so Great maie∣stie, especiallie with so litle a present, as I had prepared, to wit, this litle pam∣phlet rudelie compiled, and in res∣pect of it selfe and the Authour, no∣thing beseeming, because nothing proportionate, to your greatnesse. But because great Princes, who can∣not be Higher or greater in Tempo∣rall dignitie, disdaine not, yea take pleasure, to bowe euen to their lowest Subiectes, and doe willinglie accept of their loyall duties and respectes, be they expressed by neuer so litle presentes, I aduentured (presuming on your Maiesties great and gratious Goodnesse) to dedicate this my booke vnto your Royall Maiestie, & my selfe and humble seruice with it: hoping that although in other res∣pectes, it be too litle a present for so
 great a Queene, yet in that it contai∣neth the Iudgement of the great A∣postles and Apostolicall Doctours of the first age after Christ, concerning the Protestant Religion conteined in the articles authorized by Parla∣ment, it will not be slighted nor light∣lie esteemed by your most Excellent Maiestie: It will rather confirme and comfort your Maiestie in the Catho∣like faith, when by this booke you shall perceaue, that you professe the same religion which the Apostles and Apostolicall Doctours preached and deliuered; which S. PETER taught in our countrie; which S. IOSEPH of Arimathie (who buried CHRIST and was at his mothers death and As∣sumption) taught and practised at Glastenburie, where he and his com∣panions fixed their aboade, and pas∣sed their life in fastinges, watchinges and prayers, as our Annalles doe te∣stifie:
 Which not onelie the noble Kings of France, from CLODO∣VEVS the first Christian King, to King LEWIS the IVST who now raigneth, imbraced; but also our first Christian King LVCIVS re∣ceiued from that holy Pope ELEV∣THERIVS, who sent him not onely preachers to instruct him and his people, but also, as our Annales re∣corde vnto vs, sent vnto him an hal∣lowed crowne, and extended the limits of his Kingdome to Norwaye and Den∣marke: Which faith all our first Chri∣stian Kinges who were also Saintes mantained by sword and Scepter: as Sainct LVCIVS our first Chri∣stian King, S. LVCIVS or LVCIAN Apostle to the BAVARIANS, S. CONSTANTINE Emperour amongst the Grecians, S. CONSTANTINE King, S. THEODRICKE, the two SS. ETHELBERTES, the two SS.
 ETHELDREDS, S. GVNDLEVS, S. OSWALD, S. OSWIN, S. SEBBE, S. CEADWALL, S. INAS, S. SIGE∣BERT, S. RICHARD, the twoe SS. ALFREDS, S. CEOLNVLPHE, S. FREMVND, S. KENELME, S. E∣THELNVPH, SS. EDGAR, S. ED∣MVND, the two S. EDWARDS, and S. MALCOLME, and their holie Queenes also imbraced: as S. HELEN Queene and Emperesse mother to CONSTANTINE the great, S. AV∣DRIE or ETHELDRED, S. CHIN∣NEBVRGE, S. EANFLED, S. ER∣MEMBVRGE, S. ETHELBVRG; S. ERMVILD, S. HERESWIDE, S. BVTHILDIS, S. SEXBVRGE, S. WILFRED, S. EADGITH, S. AL∣GVIE, S. AGATHE, S. MARGARET, S. MAVDE. To which I willinglie adde our holie Queene S. BERTH, as whom your Maiestie so much re∣presenteth and resembleth. She was
 daughter to a King of France, so is your Maiestie: She was married to King ETHELBERT who then was of a contrarie religion to her; so is your Maiestie despoused▪ to our King CHARLES the GREAT, different as yet from your Maiestie in Religion: She was allowed a Bishop and others to be about hee, who were of her re∣ligion; so is your Maiestie: She by her prayers and good examples together with some religious preachers sent by S. GREGORIE the great, procu∣red the conuersion of her HVS¦BAND and his people vnto the Chri∣stian and Catholike▪ faith and reli∣gion; so we hope that your Maiestie shall by your holie prayers and exam∣ples, for which our soueraigne loueth you dearely be a cause of his conuer∣sion to the Catholique Faith; at least, we hope your Maiestie shall worke in him such a liking of the Catholike
 Faith, that he shall neuer permitte that faith to be persecuted, for the defence whereof against Luther, King HENRY the eight, his great vncle, was the first who by Pope LEO the Tenthe, was Honoured with the glorious title of DEFENDOVR OF THE FAITH, which with the crowne and Kingdome is line∣llie defcended vnto his Maiestie. Certes, his morall life free from all note of vice, in which he yeeldeth to no Christian▪ Pince in Europe, see∣meth to promise noe lesse. This our Kingdome (most noble Queene) is stiled in auncient histories THE DOWRIE OF MARIE the mother of God: Which per∣chaūce is the cause why it hath beene so fortunate in Queene MARIES, as in Queene MARIES, as in Queene MARIE who resto∣red the Catholike Religion after the death of her brother King EDWARD
 the sixt: and in Queene MARIE our Souueraignes grand-mother, who sanctified our Land with her bloud shed for defence of the Catholike Faith: and Iastlie by your Maiestie our last Queene MARIE, by whom this land is blessed by a royall issue and as we hope shall in time be mad happie by restitution of the Catho∣like Religion, ether in your owne, o your childrens dayes. And the rathe when England shall see by the Iudge¦ment of the Apostles, that the Ca¦tholike religiō aggreeth in all point with the religion taught & deliuere by the Apostles and first Apostolical preachers, and that the Protestant re¦ligiō is discoūtenaunced, discarded condemned by them. This shall ap∣peare by this booke, which I, you Maiesties most humble subiect, a old student in holie learning, doe i all dutifull manner present vnto you
 wishing to your Gracious Maie∣stie, and to our noble Souueraigne, your deare Spouse, a long and happie raigne in our great Brittainie, & such a temporall raigne amongst your subiectes, as you may both raigne in heauen eternallie with God, his Saintes, and Angelles.

