



Beloued in the Lord:
I Was requested very earnestly by a right Worshipfull person, that hee might haue a Copie of my Sermon, Preached at the Assises at Winchester: another put mee in minde of publishing it, and a Dedicatorie Epistle required. To answere all these; if I publish it, I shall satisfie in exhibiting the Copie requested: And albeit I am not ouer earnest to haue it published, yet I may suppose, that that part of the Sermon which is a∣gainst the Masse (the thing most of all respected in the speech) may serue among other Writings for the confutation of that pretended sacrifice. But for De∣dicatory Epistle, to whom more properly & of right doth it appertaine then to your Honours? (if it may please you to accept of it) your selues being the most principall persons in the Auditorie, most iudicious to discerne all things then spoken: and being ac∣quainted with pleadings in Law, may iudge what validity our reasonings haue in matters of Religion.
 The pleadings in Law are ingenious, and ought to be very demonstratiue, strong in proofe, that things may be euidently cleared before they come to sen∣tence: yet this difference, that in Law-pleadings one pleadeth against another; In our matters one speaketh, and no man in the place must contradict: yet we must not be in that respect more bolde, but more circumspect; for God heareth, and many wit∣nesses. What I haue said against the Masse, I haue read, and resolutely approue to be the truth: and if shortnesse haue made obscurity or weakenesse of proofe, or insufficiencie in a matter of so great im∣portance; when it shall be replied, by Gods grace I will strengthen the Arguments, and giue more a∣boundance of testimony accordingly, as things are by me alledged. In pleading against the Masse, a∣boue all other controuersies in Religion, your Ho∣nours are very competent and conuenient Iudges. For with you are handled cases of restitution, if any thing be taken away: matters of trust to be per∣formed: alienations of things in that respect, and alterations not to be admitted, voluntas testatoris, the testators will especially to be regarded, the ends proposed in grants to be obserued: that if the Masse Priest, were put to his triall at your iudgement seat, he should receiue the very same iudgement I haue
 set vpon him. He must restore the Table he hath ta∣ken away, place it againe in the middest of the Church as our common Prayer booke alloweth, that it may be farther from an Altar, or (if not) to haue such a iudgement as to be a Table & not an Altar; he must restore the great Loafe he hath taken away, hauing put in steed of it a thin Wafer Cake, the knife must be brought again, alienation must be re∣called: that the Priests onely must not participate, alteration forbidden, and to minister vnder both kindes, the end prescribed by our testator to be kept, euen by eating the Bread, and drinking the Cup, to 1. Cor. 11. 2. shew forth the Lords death vntill he come. For the Masse is a new inuented Religion, and as it is said in Scholes, Vno absurdo dato mille sequuntur, Grant one absurdity and a thousand will follow: so is it with the Masse Priest, one absurdity hath bred many absurdities; he hath inuented a mysterie, and yet his mysterie keepeth not the rule of such myste∣ries as are in the olde Testament, which should be the patterne for all mysteries. And againe, as his mysterie agreeth not with the Scriptures, so the Masse Priests intention agreeth not with his Masse booke: that as it is said, he that is out of the way the faster he runneth the farther he is out; so is it with the Masse Priest, once out, neuer in. The Masse
 Priests dealing (in respect of God and in respect of the people) is like a tenure in England which I haue heard of, where the Tenant maketh proffer of a Present to his Landlord, but deliuereth it not, that the chiefe Lord may say vnto him, I thanke you for nothing. For concerning God, the foolish Masse-Priest vnderstandeth not, that that which is the Priests portion, and that which the Priest eateth, (as it is in the Leuiticall Offerings) is not the Sa∣crifice, but that which is burnt is Gods offering, and the bloud sprinkled at the mercy seat, is the attone∣ment: but he eateth all his offerings, drinketh vp all in his Chalice, and rinceth his Chalice, that he may be knowne to drink all, that God may say to him I thanke you for nothing: But as for the people, they may all the yeare long (excepting once a yeare when he receiueth but halfe) say to him we thank you for nothing. And for the Masse Priests intention not to agree with his Masse booke it is as euident. For his prayers are in the plurall number: and he intendeth himselfe only. Againe, he prayeth to God, only that the oblation which the whole family had offered (meaning the Bread and Wine which the brethren had offered, part whereof was to serue for the Com∣munion) might be made the Body and Bloud of his most beloued Son Iesus Christ. And vpon it bring∣eth
 in the Institution, which is for taking & eating: but he intendeth not, but offering of Christ himselfe for a propitiatory sacrifice; not marking that a body broken & bloodshed is already sacrificed; and what is once sacrificed cannot be sacrificed again. There∣fore our Sauiour sitting in person at the supper, deli∣uered his Body broken as already sacrificed, and his Blood shed, to preuent a Masse Priest for to offer him: For his sacrifice as a Doctor of the Church Gregorius Na∣zianzenus. saith, is, insacrificabile sacrificium, a sacrifice that cannot be sacrificed againe. Besides these ab∣surdities, this is also not to be ouer-skipped, that when he saith Ite missa est, Goe your wayes, it is dismissing time; the speaker meaneth that some should depart, and those that remained should com∣municate: for all might haue adored, if that only were intended, but all could not communicate: but he intendeth no such thing as a Communion, that they that remaine must adore only, and receiue no∣thing, that stil the people may say, We thank you for nothing: The truth is, the old prayers which are in the Mass book are mistaken: for in the prayers, what is for offering, is to be referred to those offerings which the disciples had offered for the maintenance of the Church, but the mysteries of the Body and Blood of Christ, were to be receiued according to
 our Sauiours Institution: in so much that we liuing now by Tythes, those prayers are out of vse. More might be said, but a Dedicatorie Epistle must not be ouerlong. The Text of my Sermon is a mattor of great obseruation; short in words, but large in meditation. Let vs looke to the ordering of our wayes, and not so much with them to attend an vn∣necessary adorning of Temples made with stone, and a false aduancing of Sacraments: so shall wee haue better shewed vs the saluation of God; and we true worshippers in spirit and truth. The people of the land haue accepted this Religion, as to pray in their mother tongue, to offer praises in singing of Psalmes, with the Preaching of the Word if they may haue it. Lamenting much when their lot is to dwell there where they may not haue it: I write what I know. The summe is, if we offer praise, and order our wayes, we shall in greater confidence looke for the comming of him which is to come, euen our Lord Iesus Christ, iudge to be of the quick and the dead, vnto whose grace I commend your Honours in all your iudgements.

