


My dearest beloued:
AS you professe your selues in Religion to be Christians: so I am most assured, none of you wil be so prophane and impious, as wil∣lingly to be deemed people without Re∣ligion, or to haue the most odious and impious name of irreligion, or atheisme ascribed vnto you. Al that be Doctors, Preachers & Rabines in Religion, a∣mong you, do teach, that euery christi∣an at least must vndoubtedly hold, all pointes of faith which they call funda∣mental & substantial, namely those ar∣ticles & Creede which the Apostles of Christ deliuered vnto Christians.
Then the first & principal of them which are: I beleue in God the Father al∣mighty maker of heauen & earth. And in Iesus Christ his onely Sonne our Lord, are principally to be embraced. Denyal of the first, denieth god, affirming & pro∣uing such denyers atheists. Doubting
 or denyal of the second, condemneth al beleefe in Christ, and the some of chri∣stianity: and taketh away al articles of christian Religion, substantial, or not substantial, if any such can be in a true Religion: which I may not now dis∣pute, but onely demonstrate this: If there be a God almighy maker of hea∣uen & earth: both you, and I, and all thinges els, are his worke and creatures: we haue receaued our essence, being, & al of him. In al thinges we depende of him, & he of none, but independant: and we owe, and must pay and render vnto him, al diuin worshippe, praiers, supplications, oueraigne dutie, and A∣doration.
If Iesus Christ be his Sonne, & our Lord, & came to redeeme the world: he tauhgt true Religion vnto it. And that Religion could not dy with him, whose death was death to death, but foundatiō and life of religin, and life & redemp∣tion to vs and al to th end that shal be saed. The scriptures say, He shal reigne for euer, and of his Kingdome there sbal be Luc. 1. 28 Dan 7. 14 & 17. noe ende. Al people, Tribes, & tongues,
 shal serue him. His Father haith geuen him Mich. 4. 7 Dan. 3. 100. Dan. 4. 31. Ps. 2. 7. the nations his Inheritance, & his possession the eudes of the earth.
The law of the Gospel teacheth, and al good Christians doe and must beleue, that the law of Moyses was but tēpora∣ry, a pedagoge to Christ, and in him eua∣cuated, and ended. That Christ was the Messias, taught an euerlasting Law, no other to succeede it, the world shoulde neuer want a true Religion, the eternal King and Bryde-grome, must haue sub∣iects, & a Spouse for euer.
The Iewes and Thalmud acknowledg, that the Law of the Messias, was to suc∣ceede that of Moyses▪ when it had reig∣ned two thousand yeares, and this of the Messias, to endure for euer.
Mahumet that monster, such a pretē∣ded reformer as in these dayes haue pro∣ud many: freely confesseth the truth, & longe continuance of the Religion of Iesus Christ, and was vnborne when it had ruled aboue sixe hundred yeares.
Your english protestant Doctors and rules in Religion, are farre deuided frō the Romane Church, yet they freely and
 generally graunt, It was pure and im∣maculate, sixe hundred yeares neare that seducers time.
For my purpose, your good, and con∣tentment, at this time, I aske noe more but this, to which, al but atheists, haue geuen allowance: That we are bound to pray, and the doctrine & praiers vsed in the primatiue Church, within the first sixe hundred yeares, are holy, to be v∣sed and frequented,: except you will not allow his warrant that said: It beho∣ueth alwaies to pray, and not to be weary. 1. Thes. . Pray without intermission. or any of you sha be so desperate, to equal, or preferr your selues in pride to Lucifer, to think ther is any time, thought, word, o dede, wherein you neede not the helpe of God or are not dependant of him.
Therfore to make alsecure in these vn¦fortunate dayes of dissention in Religi∣on, and take all euasion away frō all, e∣uen those that seeke to excuse excuses in sinne. I haue collected this manual of psal. 104 old Catholick deuotions, such (to be breefe) as the title thereof enformeth you: And such as by the best testimony
 of God him self, his holy Primatiue Church, and best learned Saincts there∣of, together with your owne conscience and al presēt consent, neither wil, nor can deceaue you. Yet I haue not in this Treatise, but slenderly in respect, han∣dled any controdersies of this time, but propose vnto deuotion, Meditations, and Praiers dayly & necessarily to be v∣sed of al priuate and vnlearned persons, which may pretend daunger to besdu∣ced in so great variety of doctrines. The contentes wil appeare, either in a particuler Table, or if that be omitted, in the titles of the Chapters and spiri∣tual Exercises. If any desire better to enforme their vnderstanding of the chei¦fest questions in Religion, handled in these dayes, by this Religious maner & methode of disputing, by the praiers them selues of the primatiue Church, & Sainctes thereof (although they may cictr by he great wordes & brags of many desiring to be called learned, that none of the Romane Church, wher∣of am est vnworthy an performe it for that religion or chife points ther∣of)
 I remit them to my late booke de∣dicated to our present Queene and her Ladies, of that order in disputing, and subiect, where they shal find the doc∣trine of the external sacrifising Preist∣hood, & external Sacrifice: Transubstan∣tiation, & real presence of Christes blessed body & bloud there: Inuocation and pa∣tronage of the blessed Virgin Mary, al ho∣ly Angels and Sainctes both in general and particular: Purgatory, & Praier for the dead, inuincibly (I confidently affirme it, & wil mantaine it) and demonstrat∣ly proued by the prayers them selues of the primatiue Church, & holy Fathers within the first fiue hundred yeares of Christ. The serious consideration of these two workes, I commend to your equal Iudgments and best deuotions, to geue sentence how you haue bene led or nusled, vsed or abused, in this so vr∣gent and important businesse. And I make euen the vnlearned and enemies to be Iudges in this cause, whether the mouth of hose that speak vniust things be stopped or noe, that at least we of one ps. 62. nation, kingdom, and kinred, with one
 faith and minde, may singe, that holy songe with the heauenly Angels, Glory in the highest to God: & in earth Peace to men of good will. Let vs not be wiser Ro. 12. then we ought to be wise, but to be wise to sobriety, hating euil, cleeuing vnto good: louing charity of fraternity one with an o∣ther: Instant in praier, thinking the same together: If it may be, as much as is in you hauing peace with al men: Careful to kepe the vnity of spirit in the bonde of peace. Eph. 4. Eph. 6. By al praier and obsecration, praying at al time in spirit, and in it watching in al in∣stancy and obsecration for al that be holy. that at length we may hope, the hea∣uenly bedewed teares of holy praiers, may quench, or slake at the least, that raging and consuming fire, which the poysened blases of polluted mouthes; & rottē fuel o defiled liues, haue blowne, kindled, and mantayned, to flame so longe. God of his rnfinite mercy graūt that with one consent and one mouth, we Ro. 1 may honour him; for which I shal euer pray: and so rest:


