


PLease ʒour Maiesty, Iwes not of minde at the first, that this warkesuld haue commed out in my time: For the conscience of my awn weaknes, testifies vn∣to me, that nathing worthy of light can pro∣ceed from sik a ane: Ʒit notwithstanding, be∣ing ouercome at the last, be the instant sute of our Kirk and Session, Iwes content, that their authoritie suld command mee in this. And gifit sall please the Lord to blesse it, in sick sort, that poore and simple anes▪ may finde, ather comfort or instructioun in it:

suppose learned eares finde na conteniment, I will thinke my selfe aboundantly satisfied: For seeing God hes sanctified mee in some measure to his warke, it mann bee an argu∣ment of his euerlasting blessing, that giff, quhill life lasteth, it may be imployed alway to the profite of his Kirke: For quha am I, that suld not imploy his awin graces to his awin glorie? and I pray God, that it may bee found in that great day, that howe meane that euer they be, ʒit they were accompani∣ed with this speciall grace, that they were wel vsed. And suppose ʒee be ane King, Sir, of this kingdoome presentlie, and Apparent of anevther: Ʒit thinke with Ʒour selfe, that all ʒour magnificence, honor, wealth, liber∣tie, and all the rare gifts, quhilk God of his mercie hes planted in Ʒou, cannot be vther∣wayis weill imployed, except they be imploy∣ed to the defence of the trueth, and of that pure and syncere discipline, grounded ther∣vpon: quhilk to Ʒour Maiesties great praise, and to our singular comfort, hes this lang time, be ʒour M. authoritie bene established

in this Countrey: For this sort of doing shawes, that God hes not onely made ʒou an heire to earthlie kingdomes, but also hes ap∣pointed ʒou, to be ane fellow▪ heir with Iesus Christ, of that immortall kingdome, and glorious Crowne, that cannot fade or fall away. And as Ʒour M. life and libertie, hes hithertils bene conioyned, with the standing and libertie of Iesus Christs kingdome with in ʒour Countrey: continue and stick be this libertie: and, na doubt, Iesus Christ sal stick be ʒou. I will not fash ʒour M. with monie words: onely this I doe Ʒour M. to wit, that I cleeth not this warke with ʒour M. name and authoritie, for onie worthinesse that I thought to bee in it▪ for it is rudely set out, in sensible and hamelie tearmes, as it was re∣ceued of my mouth, and as it pleased GOD for the time to giue me it: But I had this re∣spect, that as it is the first thing that proceds from me: sa I thought meet, to make it the first testimonie of my thankfulnes and syn∣cere affection, als weill to the truth of God, as to ʒour M. seruice: quhome vnder God,

I tender as mine awn life: and wald be glad, that God wald blisse mee with they moyans, that might aduance Ʒour highnes name or estimation, baith heer in this present warld, and in the warld to come. And in the mean time, because I may not as I wald, I sall doe as I may, in my praiers continually remem∣ber Ʒour royall persoun, togither with the Queene Ʒour bedfelow: and craue continu∣aunce of Ʒour race, at the handes of the al∣mighty God, thorow the righteous merits of Iesus Christ: vnder quhais protection, for now and euer, I leaue Ʒour Maiestie. From Edinburgh, the 9. of Decemb. 1590.

