



THe register of time (right Ho∣norable) which the Greekes cal Chronicon, the Doctors of the Hebrew kinde tearme Seder O∣lam: that is, the Order of the worlde. They haue many phra¦ses from anci∣ent holy men doubtlesse, which the Apostles do confirme: as, the Worlde to come, Paradise, the seconde death, and such. In lyke sort Seder Olam, seemeth to be a phrase vsed from the Prophetes tyme. It conteyneth deepe mat∣ter in it. For who woulde not be astonished, consi∣deryng that God sendeth all men to learne the age f the worlde from the recorde of the Fathers, vnto

Terah? vnlesse he knew the purpose, to declare the fa∣thers of whom Christ commeth. Now it is more strange, that thence it is not continued by Abraham, Isaak, and Iacob, three so rare men. But the course is broken of at Terahs death: and soone after a new order is taken: how many dayes or monethes after I dare not discusse. But presently thence in the narration, from the promise of Christ the Epoche goeth: and Abra∣hams age is tolde what it was then: which can not be exactly gathered, how from his fathers age it depen∣deth: as the Learned cast all from Adam to Charans byrth, at Terahs seuentyeth yeere exactly. From the perigrination vpon the promise of Christ, vnto the Lambe, the yeeres are to the very day: and lykewyse thence to the Temple: what day of what yeere from the Lambe it was buylt: in what yeere of the king the buylder, and how long he reigned: and how long af∣ter the diuision, euen to what day of what moneth it was brent, for idolatry. Then the exact accompt for day and moneth is not layde downe, though the whole Captiuity be recorded for the iust yeeres: VVhen it is ended, thence a new, vpon a rare occasion, to a rare man, by an Angel, the Ierusalemy in Rosh hashana. onely of any created that hath a proper name of Angel, the tyme is pared out in a rare phrase of speach, vnto the death of Christ, our sauiour, vnto the very tyme of the euenyng offeryng, when he offered vp him selfe. The speach and the matter is so heauenly and precious, that as of olde tyme that pro∣phecy was openly read of all the Iewes, and knowen of all the East: (it doubtles Iosephus meant. bell. Iud. 7, 12.) So all the worlde from their Childhood should read it, and all the learned shoulde styll reduce the new Testa∣ment vnto it, and expounde the olde Testament by it.

For it is the abridgement of the New, and the key of the Olde. The state after our Lordes death, is called A new Heauen: And his death ended the last Olam, or Iubilee, or yet the later part of the olde worlde: as that part before the flood is tearmed of S. Peter. Thus Seder Olam shalbe a goodly title for the Ebrew accompt, from since the first Adam stoode on the earth, vntyll the se∣conde Adam arose from the dust, and went into the heauens. Certaine obseruations I haue writted for this space, registred by the wysedome of God: to keepe the holy text in his natiue clearenesse, agaynst entangle∣mentes of Iewes and Gentiles. I coulde wysh the dex∣terity of Daniels wit. For the matter is worthy. And that which my paynes coulde breede, I was desirous to commende to your Lordshyp. Some remembrance I woulde leaue, how much I am beholdyng to your Honour: though none writes in a Calender all good thinges done to him. Of your Lordshyp I may say out ofOdyss. 1. Homer, that you haue been vnto me, as a father to the sonne: and I wyll neuer forget that tenderyng. I founde many honourable Patrons, but your Lord∣shyps charges were the greatest. The Archbyshop of Canterburies grace was the meanes, sone after my com∣ming to Cambridge in my young yeeres, to procure me a continuall profession of Homers tongue: Wher∣vpon with al speede, the rest of my successe proceeded, vntyll Sir VValter Mildmayes Lecture in Greeke, with the gyft of six Scholershyps as I woulde, and his fatherlike fauour, better encoraged my paynes. And I shoulde iniury all the Gouernoures of Cambridge, yf I woulde not acknowledge continuall singuler cheri∣shing: and one poynt in offering, whether Lecture I woulde of Iapheth and Sems chiefe tongues. But there

to me your Lordshyps charges was fiue and twentie times more then the priuate Greeke profession, and about ten tymes the Value of a Felowshyp by yeere. The greatest alowance that any Noble man graunted any Scholer. So great a desire you had that my paineful and chargeful race of study, which you iudged by your experience able to go through the pikes agaynst com∣mon errours, shoulde there haue practise and tryall. And when good desart, and the best then, taken in hand vpon graue request, and orderly vsed, was least regar∣ded, and worst recompenced in all mens sight, by a good mans errour, not of yll wyl, yet so that you heard, and hundreths more saw an iniury: the same alowance you continued to my priuate labour: VVhereby my Greeke translation of the Hebrew Prophetes was wrought. That diligence calling all East and VVest forces of study togeather, Hebrew, Babylonian, Chal∣dean, Syrian, Arabian, & al together mixt in the Cabala: Greekes of all sortes, Latines of all sortes, all (vsed skil∣fully) seruantes to the Temple: That diligence made me enterprise the Herculean labour of the Harmony. I thinke you remember D. Penyes censure vttered to your Lordshyp, of the Table, entituled, A Sinay sight, how by conference in those poyntes, he thought that he learned the whole frame of the Bible, better then by all his Englysh and foraine paynes, and conference: and that one yeere vpon such tryed groundes, woulde doe more then ten from the common course. The learned D. tolde me what he told your Lordshyp, to harten me, agaynst the busy: but hartened already enough by rare olde tendering. I must heere craue leaue of a further di∣gression, to leaue a memoriall of tenderyng shewed to my young studies. For as sone as I coulde be Graduate,

vpon sodayne disputations in the Greke tongue, wher∣in the readiest of the ancient Maisters came to reply, & many were encoraged to the tongue: worde was sent me, that I should choose where I woulde be Felow. I choose to be, where first an election was: euen foure dayes after I was eligible, and to that Colledge I was chosen: a Colledge which regarded learnyng as much as any coulde. Some partes of a reuerent man, the mai∣ster Maister Shepheard I can not omit. He, when I stoode to be Felow: At the election, tolde, that he woulde haue no stranger but one: and eyther him, or no election, and soone had a generall consent. And thence soone I was allured to Christes Coledge, to be Sir Walter Mildmaydes professour. M. Shepheard perceauing that, to stay me, founde meanes to doble the alowance for all the Felowes. This I did not know vntyll I departed thence: and the nyght before the election, sent for all the Seniores, and me, to supper, and mooued them to promise out of their alowance, and doble from his, all, doble to my Felowshyp. I pro∣mised not to goe from them. On the morow I went to thanke the other Colledge for their good wyll. They taking in griefe that I shoulde refuse their such willing fauour, requested me one thing: onely to be admitted with them, and after to chose. I not kno∣wyng how admission to one house, did cut off the right of an other, was content: but with these wordes: I protest it is agaynst my wyl, onely to satisfie your re∣quest. The admission being done, the learned man D. Still (now reuerent Byshop) sayd, S. Iohns is lost. M. Shepheard hearing of it, was sicke for griefe, as many did report, and tolde for whom he toke all the paynes to amende the Felowshyps: yet hearing how I prote∣sted,

and was deceaued, sent to the Visitor the Byshop of Ely to expound the Law, whether it were an admis∣sion, when the admitted sayth, it is agaynst his wyl. He resolued the admission lawful, and my place lost with them. Then they offered to chose me anew. That I refused: But promised to esteeme of their good wyl, as much as yf I came to vse their fauour. I asked them, why they should so much regarde my young study, of foure yeres? They said: such a course of making Ebrew and Greeke as natiue in yeres so young (at 20. of age) wyll twelue yeeres hence doe that with ease, which all our paynes can not come by. And yf publike cherishyng encorage: I must testifie, that my actes there were so accepted of the Ancient, that none euer could take more delight in pastime, then their accep∣tation myght make delyght in studying. Of mine owne successe, will let others iudge: friendes desartes, I may write into a Calender: which also stirred yours. For, to returne to your Lordshyps fauour: My labour was bred vp by your Lordships charges: I meane the last tyme of it: and vpon it, the trauell in the Con∣cent of Scripture: which I thought to be more then Hannibals, making a way with pickaxes ouer the Alpes. But I know that I haue not lost my labour: but haue soone seene some fruite of it. For since, men of trade, quiet and thriftie, haue shewed vnto the worlde greater skill in the holy story then any, as they, euer haue done in our nation. So that few wyl beleeue their workes to be theirs, but such as do talke with the men, and see their dexterity. They may thinke, and thanke your Lordshyp, the paymaister, for their skill. Some Scholers sayd, that yf all tradesmen were so cunning, preaching woulde not be regarded. They forgate the

prouerbe: Knowledge hath not an enemy, but the ignorant. I am sure that yf all Scholers in the Realme did so far passe them, as by profession they are bounde, and all the common people match them: it would be farre better with them. Your Lordshyp, hath had this ten yeeres a wonderful desire, to see the Prophets speake to our eares, their owne meaning: and expounded in the margent with their owne notes. No man vnlearned coulde thinke vpon so celestial a paynes, to regarde it: But would rather folow custome, to let vs styll confute our selues, not knowing how the mistaking of a fewe places in Scripture, in some poyntes hinder much: and many yeeres may well be spent vpon some one lyne, which is more. This my lytle paynes wyll tell them of that: How the not marking why Moses telleth that, Terah dyeth (two dry wordes) hath made vs, and many nations translate, with flat vntruethes, in so weighty thinges as any can be, of collaterall articles. I am resol∣ued, that the men of great light & sight into Diuinity, most esteeme of a Diuine: and I for my part, more honour one such, then all companies of all other. And thinke my selfe more beholding to your Lordshyp, for your bountifulnes in the due tyme of my study, for the benefite of the Church, then I coulde be to any for an Earledome, when yeeres to set foorth Religion can not serue. And not I onely, but all Diuines must honour you, for this your opinion knowen to many: That you thought a learned Diuine equall to an Earle. Diuines be Carls, yf they wyll not requite that reuerence. As, of my former Patrones in my Homerique dayes, when Homer was my profession, I spake in particula∣rity after the Poets maner, for some speciall occasions,

which men acquainted with those dayes affayres, wyll soone see. So for your Lordshyp, my Patron, in my study for the hardest and principall Diuinity poyntes, hitherty not fully cleared since the Apostles time, I was desirous to leaue this worke, litle in quantitie, but not of lytle study, to be a memoriall of my duety, to your Lordshyp: whom I commende most humbly and har∣tely to the spirite of grace and trueth.

