



THE Tribes of Iacob, Right Worshipfull, which were placed v∣pon the Sea for Marchandise, had stones in Aharons Right-care, re∣membrancing daily their Navigation, to be assu∣red of Gods protection. Isachar had the blew Sa∣phir, the sky colored, to trust in God: when Coelum vndique, & vndique pontus, as Maro speaketh. Zabulon had the Iahalom, the Sardonyx, named in Ebrew of beating, as in Homer, Gallie-men beate the sea with their ores, and still yet doe in Gallies. Aser had the stone called the Sea: Tharassis, thalassa in

Greeke, is the Sea: and happy Asers stone. And these Tribes have speciall blessing in Moyses. That they shall sucke the riches of the Sea: and the hid wealth of the Sand: and, be of force al their dayes. And fame of the Phoenices for navigation in Ty∣rus and Sidon, among Graecians, was for these Tribes; as we may gather by scripture. How Salo∣mons ships went with Chyrams to Tarsis or Tar∣tess, the Law telleth, and Aristotle harpeth vpon it.. Aristotle telleth that Phoenices went to Tar∣tesus, beyond Spaine, and for their countrey trash had such store of silver that they made their very ancores of silver, even to spare so much in their fraight, being full laden with silver, that if they kept their yron, so much silver must be castaway. Aristotle seemeth to have mished in the word Tar∣iess, which meaneth the sea: and not one soile: in Chanaan speach. And for Cethem of Ophir, this honoreth Israels travelling far. I asked a simple mariner which had ben in the west Indians, what they called gold there: he saide Cethem, iust the scripture terme: and yf Spaniards of late for some conceipt did not give gold there that name, Salo∣mons

Fleete may well seeme to have gone into those quarters, and marchantes of Israell to have shewed there that they worshipped the God of Heaven: and to have invited some home with them. And whereas Aristotle writeth of the Car∣thagineans, that beyond Hercules pillers they found an happy soile: and Plato of a most large Countrey, as now we know, Phoenices and Isa∣char with Zabul on might well give the occasion to all this. So honorable would the Law have Merchants care, & Gods care for them that know him. But without singular blessing of God, mar∣chants suffre great losse: it were to be wished that all of stately Companies should have the chiefe groundes of holy learning knowen. Isachar is cō∣mended above all Tribes for skill in times what Israel should doe: as how the feastes of Pascha and all appendantes by the Heavens course should be ruled. As of necessitie they were to be Mathema∣ticianes that goe to the sea: so this Tribe passed them that kept at home. And now a dayes men for so much match Isachar, for Marchandise, but not many Nations for skill of holy Law, yet in

England Merchandes haue bene a great help to hold the Gospel, mainteyning our best lerned a∣broad, to restore the trueth, after our holy mar∣tyrs calling for vengeance from vnder the altar rowled vp the Popes heaven, as a booke rowled: I will shew them S. Iohns Apocalyps wherof I giue you the sum, by chapters, that they may see the marow of his booke. He telleth that Christ shewed the state to come to the end of the world & a vision of him self: as vnto Daniel, ch. 10. this doth he, ch. 1. And in singular sweetnes to the sea∣uen starres in the seauen Golden Candelstickes all these partes be applyed with addition against all Arianes that the Eternal, the Sonne of God, the creatour of the world, is hee that appeared vnto Daniel. So Iohn expoundeth Daniel, into salvatiō of al Iewes of Grace. This goeth through, ch. 12. In easy facility.
Now for times to come, this appeareth ch. 4. God on a throne sitteth a Iudge, like Iasper, for Beniamins temple: & Sardius▪ as Ruben: to fight for the tribes. And Christianes, in state Persones, are 24. Bishops, and besides goodly, this in ch. 4. Then the Lambe & Lion openeth the booke of

seauen seales, ch▪ 5. then he cometh further, against Caess. on horse, white, with plaguing riders, vpon red, black, Pale: For the martyrs, who crave to destroy the Empire, but are bid to expect Diocle∣tianes Persecution. Then shal their profane world be rowled vp, ch. 6. After that, a generall apostasie cometh, ch. 7. How that falleth out, the seaventh seale doth shew. Christ standeth at the golden al∣tar: to receaue all prayers, & Rome bends a poli∣cy against all this. Thervpon Christ, as in Ezekiel, casteth fier into the earth: & Angels trumpetters sound how hayle and fyre is mixt with blood: by that, Popes be made a mountayne: so a moun∣taine of fyre cast into the worlds sea: to set all on fyer. when the star Byshop falleth from his hea∣uens, to turne the law waters, into wormewood and to darken the chief sun, mone, and starres: comming vp by falling & by turning the Scrip∣tures into gal, sone darkning the third part of the Church: that three woes are pronūced ch. 8. By his keyes of the pit, whēce he fetched the woorwood of his haeresies, he bringeth Locustes of monkes to devour all the west, & able to make warres, and becometh King of Locustes: and maketh

warres: and so becommeth a fyrie mountaine, to make hayle and fyer mixt with blood. This was one woe. He weakened the East Empire to set vp the Saracenes: and is plagued from Emphrates: as his Idolatrie and treacherie turned away the East, chapt. niene. Christ reviveth the Gospell, when men eat the litle booke, teaching againe, How he is the Angell of Covenant, and mediatour for the faithfull, capit. 10. Martyrs bringe policies to see what the king of Locustes his citie or Policie is: and he falleth, and the Gospell is restored: and he falleth with worldes end, capit. xj. The same mat∣ter is repeated for Caesars and Pope in a Dragon of Roman armes. As it was called Egypt, capit. xj. and Pharaoh, a Dragon, Esai 27. The vpper part of the Dragon is shewed to be the Romane Em∣pire: one compiled of the foure in Daniel: and the taile is expounded to be the beast arising from the earth, capit. xj. or King of Locustes, capit. 9. he re∣viveth the former Empire, so, that none can live in it, without his marke, capit. 13. His marke is to force Christians to Idolatrie. For which vilanie Roman Babylon is told of a fall, capi. 14. By vrging

Idolatrie, he driueth from his Aegypt, the Church through a sea of fyre and faggot, into the wilder∣nes. Where the tabernacle built hath a smoke of Gods anger, and Angels seauen plague him as he plagued all vnder the seauen trumpets, ch▪ 16. The beast reviued hath no difference from the former: but in bloody colour, & the daughter Rome ri∣ding vpon it, all bloody, ch. 17. Rome shall fall as Babylon & Tyrus did, ch. 18. It shall fall when all nationes sing Haleluiah, vpon the destruction of the wicked, with vnderstanding. Then the Word of God wil catch the beast false Prophet: the whole dragon reviued, & cast him into a Lake burning, with fyer & Brimstō. Which is the secōd death, ch. 19. But the Roman Dragon shal be tyed a thousand yeres, before the King of Locustes de∣ceaueth generally. But then he makes a new Gog & Magog. for the old Ierusalem: & thervpon shal be destroyed, as the old was, by the first cōming, so he by the second, of Christ, from a throne of Iudgement: as the old Gog & Magog was, ch. 20. As Iohn in Patmos saw the heauenly Ierusalem: So Patmos the church tossed with Aegean waues shalbe in Gods sight such as Esay, Ezekiel, Aggei

& Zachary spake of. Christ saluteth vs poore hea∣then with his owue most gracious voice. To him that loued vs, & hath washed vs from our sinnes by his blood be all honour and glory for euer▪
Amen.


NOw because I wish your right worshipfull company, by this paynes to be Isachar & Zabulon, & grauen in blew Saphir, & Sardonyx, that will abide striking, in the brest of the high sacrificer in the heauens: I will briefly touch the sum of this booke. With three Iewes I had spech: At Amstel∣dem with Rabbi Farar a Physician: At Hanaw with the Sy∣nagoge Doctor Rabbi wolf: At Basil, with a Rabbin most desirous of christianity. The other do meane no good. Farar obiected in a great assembly: sayng your Principal scholers make Ioseph son to Ely, and Salathiel to Iechonias, proprely both: and the fourth Kingdome in Daniel to be the Ro∣mane: and that to this day yee cannot agree what Daniels seauens meane: nor to defend our Greke Testament: nor to tell what our Crede meaneth. Beza and Calvin misse in the first three deadly: Liuely & Barlo most athean impudently in the fourth. And for the fift Beza spent sixty yeres to prove the new Testamēt most corrupt, & for the sixt, Geneva layd a trayn to kill you: for denying Catelthein eis haidou in the Crede to meane suffring of hel torment: and for saying, that by all Grekes it meaneth a passage vnto Paradise. And at this last the Hanaw Iew fell back: that Hanaw builders hindered great Princes promises for Ebrew drawing of both testa∣mentes vnto Christ: because you despised Geneva: having

drawen all Churches vnto them: and for Daniels ▪ Genevit Scaliger checketh all former: ending them with Ie∣rusalem: as we Iewes doe: So for all six by Geneva your Gospel should be nothing worth: as by Oxon▪ wher D. R. was suffred to say, the Angel meant no certaine time: but if he had sayd: after 80 seauens Messias shalbe slain he had spo∣ken proprely. They forget God, that dare teach Angels how to deliuer their Message. I graunted that Geneva in all these taught poison to the Gospell: and by blindenes wold make Churches a Synagoge of Satan: and this I wold make good. That Iesus, Mary, Ely are Luc. 3. genealogied, not Ioseph: that Iechonias only, as a King a successor, begat Salathiel, that the Macedonianes were the fourth Kingdome in Da∣niel: that Beroaldus in Geneva rightly limited Daniels sea∣uens. That Beza hath altered no text: only disputed vpon them: that for Luc. 3. he referreth the matter to others, and Mat. 1. and Daniels fourth Kingdome is well handled by Genevean Iunius and Tremelius. And the senat for all, yel∣ded vnto me: and Hanaw little ioyeth in any victory, Beza with Calvin did much good, in their kind: But I wold not haue them my auctours. Thus I disputed with the Iewe. I also glaunse at the Iesuites: for Plantines Bible for fastening to the Bible of the old Testament 1696 vniust blames: and denying the vowels to haue Gods austority: and for stealing the word Romylus from the Chaldy Es. 11. where Ionathan namely condemneth Rome, as S. Paul 2. Thess. 2. saith. Thence the state wholy sinfull shall arise: which shalbe over∣throwen by lerning, and by the spirit of Christ. With the third Iew I speak of the Apocalyps Image and beast answea∣rable to Daniels Image and beastes: and Satan pictured from

the Romane armes, him shewed. So the seven Angels trum∣peters for Romes pluguing of the world, and seaven Angels revengers in the same tenour of Phrase. In my Latin Con. I haue shewd the comparison of both seauen Angels I wil now touch the Phrases. The Bridgemaker to restore Kome, to be a woman riding vpō the old Empire, not reviued with∣out blood, maketh the earth plagued that suffred him: So his goten earth is plagued with boyles of state: when monaste∣ries wickednes is spied. He a mountaine was cast into the sea of nationes: his nationes feal blood, which they shed, star wormewood turned the law waters into bitternes. His do∣ctors fountaines and riuers bitter to death, now cause him blood. He darkened sun of Iustice: sun of Iustice maketh his bite their tongues: that what they speake they vnpeake. He became a King of Locustes and a beast ch. 11. now the thone of the beast is daghkened. Euphrates was in startes loose: now still. Martyrs earthquake shakes much & without Martyrs Baraks victorie is at Armageddon: & Iosuahs haile: to the last victorie. These matters I hope and wish to be as the Pearle Mat. 13. in all your trafiques: and I referre the suc∣cesse and your selues to the tuition of him whose will the vnconstant windes do constantly performe.


