



THe heauenly sayinges
of Moses (Right Honorable)
concerning Melchisedek Gen. 14
and the commaundement of
consideryng howe great the
party is. Heb. 7. can not well
take place in our hartes, vnlesse
the person be knowen: that
all spoken of hym may be ta∣ken
in due sense. For eyther we shall clymbe three
steppes too hygh with Melchisedekians, Hierax, or yet
Origen, who make hym more then a mortall wight: or
we shall fall too low, with the common Greekes, who
make hym eyther a Chanaanite, or leaue hym to be an
obscure man. But when we find out certaynely who the
person is, then we may safely examine all that is spoken
of hym. And in my opinion, that which is written of
hym, reacheth so farre both to the first Adam one way,
and to the seconde Adam an other way, styll ouershy∣nyng
Aarons ceremonies: that an errour in this matter
wyll no lesse frette the webbe of holy Story, then the
worke of a VVeauer is hurt, when many thriddes in

one place are pulde away, which reached through the
whole peece. In a matter of this weight, I iudged my
labours shoulde be well spent, that I myght both shake
off quite, from all myndes which vse my paynes, that
which is to be reiected: and helpe to settle better the
ancient trueth. To that ende I handle the chiefe diuer∣sitie
that haue been touching Melchisedek: and speake
for one opinion more at large: which Hebrewes alwayes
helde, and Latines most commonly: that Sem the father
of all the sonnes of Heber, must needes be the man.
Whereas many and great men thought otheryse: but
neyther the most ancient, nor the most part, nor onely
of the best: I leaue all to the Reader to iudge: who, yf
he be of Learnyng wyll eyther (as I trust) folow the ol∣dest
opinion continued styll, or without blame geue
others leaue to folow it. In chosing a particuler Iudge,
I finde your Lordshyp, meete to geue a right censure in
difficulties: and I suppose you wyll delyght to heare
what antiquity speaketh, and the matter it selfe in this
cause. You shall finde this matter muche lyke that,
wherein once your L. bestowed long tyme in speach
with me: and many of the very same poyntes (though
to an other conclusion) wyll here offer them selues.
As the other, in my mynde, were of profite to be kno∣wen:
so by these I trust, the student in Diuinitie wyll
thinke hym selfe somewhat holpen. And that both may
come togeather, yf it be not a trouble to your leasure to
remember, it wylbe a benefite to Scholers for to marke
how some Counsellers looke into theyr studies, and
teach by sodayne demaundes what poyntes experience
of whole kingdomes require to be playnely taught in
the worlde: which the common sort lytle thynke of:
and for want of indgement rashly dispise. Fiue yeeres
ago your L. requested me to repayre to the Court, con∣cernyng
the Greeke translation of the Hebrew Prophetes

presented to you, and concernyng perusing of the Eng∣lysh:
to haue more integrity and playnnesse accordyng
to the Hebrew and the Apostles Greeke. Then you af∣forded
most wyllingly three houres spech for matters
of chiefe and generall vse, and of great hardnesse: in such
sort that I was amazed how you shoulde haue eyther
such leysure, to be ready in them, from your politicall
affayres and studies, or so right and profounde a iudge∣ment
for the bones in the body of Scripture, as Diuines
skant thinke of, tyll great errours driue them to consi∣der.
Beginnyng from the Greeke, you demaunded why
the 70. should not be more accompted then the Hebrew,
seeing the Apostles folow it: Reason beyng rendred,
that they were to folow it, because Heathen commonly
knew no other Bible. You further examined how farre
they folowed, and in eache kinde tryed out the matter.
Their strangenesse of imitation was, in that they refu∣sed
not bare faultes of Grammer, as often appeareth: to
teach vs not to fight for wordes: Secondly, they folo∣wed
the 70. where they hid their mynde, as in Kenan,
Gen. 11. and Luk. 3. and in Seuentie and fiue soules, for Se∣uentie▪
Gen 46. Acte. 7. or deale as Paraphrastes or abrid∣gers:
which often they do. Thirdly, in some rare vse of
a worde. One example of that offered it selfe. Heb. 10.
which mystaken by Translaters, putteth all men to a
plundge. For it is sayd: No further offeryng remayneth
for sinne, yf we after knowledge of the trueth sinne
 whiche ought not there to be translated wil∣lingly:
rather of pretended malice, from Exo, 21. 13. where
 is in Hebrew Zadah, insidiatus, lying in wayte,
or iazid. 14 wylfull, or malicious spitefull. And so the
disputation was playne agaynst the Iewes, wylfully
faythles: and no further griefe to distresse the consci∣ence
of any. This was examined as a thyrd kinde of the
70. folowed. You examined likewise, turning to your

Bible the 70. Translations refused: when a chiefe mat∣ter
was weakened by the 70. therefore Paule sayde, for
this cause , I raysed vp, not  Thou hast been
suffered aliue:Rom. 9. 17. because he woulde expresse the Hebrewe
more playnely.Exod. 9. 16. Moreouer for heauenly eloquence, how
the Apostles departed from the Translation: namely
Heb. 1. 3. that your L. diligently tryed by Esay. 4. and
other places. Neither was the Hebrew left vntryed with
the 70. for a rare text: or in some vse an onely: VVhy
we say Psalm. 2. Kisse the Sonne: where the Latin hath
after the Greeke, Amplectimini eruditionem. The openyng
of that drewe more matter. I answered, that by both
Translations it myght appeare, that the Hebrew worde
was Bar. Now the Hebrew worde Barar (To teach)
might by proportion of language haue Bar for doctrine:
though so in vse any where it commeth not: but for a
sonne, it doth in the Prouerbes. 31. 2. Bar, and Dan. 3. Bar:
and in the new Testament Actes. 4. Bar-nabas was ex∣pounded,
Sonne of consolation. This text litigious,
for the wryting amongst the Romistes, for the meanyng
with Iewes folowyng the 70. your L. mooued to be
expounded. For the Translaters I gessed, that eyther
they feared to translate for Heathen, vngrounded vpon
the Trinitie a distinct saying of one person, The Sonne,
least Heathen shoulde turne it to a wrong meanyng:
or they marked it not. As in Daniel they knew not how
to translate Iccaret Messiah: Messiah shalbe killed:
because they vnderstoode not the matter: or they fea∣red
to publyshe it in a playne phrase, and in Greeke.
Vpon mention of Daniel, your L. requested an opening
of the whole Booke, and examined the particulers:
what tymes or yeeres it conteyned, what Empires: and
how the Image legges, which were to be made dust,
before the Stone was made a Mountayne, myght not be
taken for the Romans. For so we shoulde conclude with

Iewes, that Christ is not yet come: as also by the fourth
Beast: yf we made it the Romanes. And for the golden
text of Daniels Seauens, your L. had read some that I
then had not, of great accompt. It woulde be too long
to runne now through all. I coulde not faster runne
then through any part of myne owne studies, then you
pursued in demaundes for the chiefe matter. Your
shortnesse in propounding questions, readinesse in
conceyuing a full answere, diligence in trying Scrip∣tures,
dexteritie in replying vpon colour of doubt,
quicknesse in trying what confidence I had in myne
assertions: and lastly, singuler gentlenes of encouraging
my studies, with entreatie to repaire often to you: these
partes do assure me of a Iudge fitte for wyll and skyll.
VVherefore I willingly reuiue the memory of your
Lordshyps spech: to liue through all memory: and to
ende as I began: to your Lordshyppes protection I
commit this Treatise, to finde intertaynement: but so
farre as trueth shall be seene to require.

