




MVCH HONOVRED AND RESPECTED GENTLE-VVOMEN,

FOR three or foure Reasons (commonly) are men moued to dedicate their labours vn∣to others. Either for their Honourable Descents in Bloud; or for their eminent Places in Dignity; or for their Vertuous Example of life; or lastly for some res∣pect of Desert due to their Persons. And although in
 your Humility you will not acknowledge any of these Titles in your selues: yet do I so cleerly see them, eyther all, or the most part therof summ'd, as it were, and compact togeather in your deuout Congregation, that I haue made choice to pre∣sent this little Treatise of Meditations vnto your pi∣ous Reading & Considera∣tions; in regard, that you ayme at nothing more thē true Perfection in your sel∣ues, by procuring the spiri∣tuall good of others, as a most speciall meanes to arriue therunto: which through your industrious
 labour & diligēce, you haue already begun with no lesse laudable, then successefull profit in the education of yonge Gentlewomen of our Nation, in Piety, Vertue, & other excellent Qualities beseeming your sexe.
In this Booke shall you behould (as in a most cleare and christall Mirrour) the vertues of our Blessed Sa∣uiour liuely propounded vnto you for speculation. Herein shall you learne to imitate His, and his Blessed Mothers Humility. Heere shall you spiritually tast of the fruite it selfe, which from these deuout Medita∣tions
 and practicall appli∣cations thereof either to your selues or others, may be gathered. And therfore I seriously commend the same vnto your diligent Perusall, for that the most easy, and readiest way in your more fruitfull pro∣gresse, is (in my opinion) not only to haue a bare knowledg, but also a pra∣cticall exercise of the Hero∣icall Vertues of your Lord and Maister Christ Iesus, the most exact and perfect Modell of all Perfection whatsoeuer.
Accept then (Worthy Gentlewomen) this little
 Diamond (as I may so ter∣me it) or rather inestima∣ble Treasure (in regard of the heauenly food of Soules it conteyneth) so much the more proper to your Vo∣cation, & to the course of life by you chosen; by how much the meanes, & profit therby likely to ensue, are answerable to your intēded purpose & desyre. My la∣bour heerin hath byn the least, but your profit shal∣be my Comfort, and my poore prayers your Atten∣dāts, euer ready to assist you for the purchasing, and in∣crease of such vertues, as are principally requisite to
 the performance of so pi∣ous, and worthy a worke. This 30 of September 1614.

