



QVintus Curtius, the fa∣mous writer of the great battels that king Alex∣ander, the sonne of Phi∣lip of Macedonie, had a∣gaynst the most noble and rich king of the Medes and Persians, cal∣led Darius (right worshipful sir) declareth (that when one Philip the Phisition vnto the said king Alexander, and his most tru∣stie subiect,) by sodain chaunce the king fell sore sicke, to the great heauines of all his royall armie, at which time with all speede this phisition did prepare a medicine, most excellent for his souereigne Lord, whom he so dearely loued, to this end, that the great vertue thereof might preuent his present sicknesse, and immenent danger: but malici∣ous spite that wretched enemie, which ne∣uer sleepeth but watcheth euer, to bring



vertue and good fame to destruction: Im∣mediatly before this gentle Philip did pre∣sent himselfe vnto the king with his medi∣cine, Letters were sent to king Alexan∣der, containing, that the said Philip was corrupted so with money from king Da∣rius, that he had put most deadly poison and vncurable venom into Alexanders medi∣cin. The king perusing the letters, kept them secret vntill he had drunke his medicin, and immediatly hee tooke his phisition by the hand, and deliuered him the letters that he might reade them, hauing in him so great confidence, that he did in no maner of case mistrust him. The cause why I haue alledged this most worthy prince king Alexander, and his excellent phisition Philip, is to de∣clare the great trust in the one, and the fide∣litie in the other, not forgetting the shame∣lesse conditions of the flattering Parasites, which euer walke with two faces in one hood, bearing fire in the one hand, and water in the other: sowers of discord, rea∣pers of mischiefe: which be alwayes ene∣mies vnto the disciples of Philip, whose venemous stings can not hurt them, which euer haue in store the precious, Iewell of pacience, and arme themselues to doe good



to euerie good man, for the preseruation of their liues, by the true rules of the Gouern∣ment of health, which here I am so bold to present vnto your worship. For whereas there lacketh gouernment in a common wealth, the people doe eftsoones fall into ruine. The ships that lacke good gouer∣nance, oftentimes be cast away vpon sands and rocks. And therefore there is nothing vnder heauen that hath life, but if it lacke good gouernment, it will quickly fall into vtter decay. For like as the Creator of all things hath formed the bodies of all men, into the goodliest shapes of euery liuing thing that euer was, or euer shall be: euen so hee hath ordained for man, hearbes, fruits, rootes, seeds, plants, gums, oyles, pre∣cious stones, beasts, foules fishes, for the pre∣seruation of health, to be moderately vsed with discretion, which peserueth the bodie in good estate, without whose vertues the bodies cannot liue, for they bee the nouri∣shers of life. But misusing or abusing them, bringeth to the bodie many diseases, as rheumes, cathers, dropsies, impostumes, gowts, flixes, opilations, vertigoes, blind∣nesse, ruptures▪ fransies, with many mo noi∣some diseases, which come thorowe the



corruption of meats and ill aire. For what auaileth riches, honours, costly buildings, faire apparell, with all the pompe of this worlde, and to bee honoured of the people, and in the meane time to bee eaten with wormes in the breast, or in the bellie, consu∣med with Agues, tormented with gowtes, sorenesse, bone-ach, &c. Well, I thinke an whole Codrus is better than a sicke My∣das.Codrus, Mydas.
And seeing that to possesse health, is better than to gouerne golde, insomuch that health maketh men more happie, stronger and quieter than all maner of ri∣ches, lacking health: as example. Great princes, noble men, men of great substance, when they be wrapped and enclosed with many and sundry sicknesses, and in dayly daungers of death, in their extreme paines and passions, they do more greatly couet one drop of health, than a whole tunne of gold, crying out for the helpe and counsell of the Phisition. Whom Iesus Siracke in his godly booke did counsell all wise men to ho∣nour,Cap. 3. and whom the almightie God did create and ordaine for the infirmitie of mankinde, and also medicine for his helpe, and that no wise man should despise them. Therefore yet againe (right worshipfull



knight) I shall most humbly desire you, to ac∣cept the good will of him, which wisheth the yeares of your prosperous life and health, to be equall to Nestor, Arganton,Nestor. Galen. Arganton. and Galen, whose liues were long, healthfull and happie. And thus wishing the dayly encrease of your worship, with continuall health, to Gods pleasure: who euer be your guide and gouernor, Amen. Your worships to com∣maund.

