



RIght worshipfull sir, if any chamber, haule, galerie, or any newe decked house were ap∣parelled or hanged, all in one mourning dark colour, it would rather moue sorowe then gladnesse: but no plea∣sure to the beholders of thesame. There∣fore, the diuersitee or varietée of pleasaunt colours, doe grace and beautifie thesame, through the settyng foorthe of sondrie sha∣pes: and as it were, to compell the comers in, to beholde the whole worke. Euen so I dooe commende vnto you this little booke (wherein I write parte thereof in youre owne house) whiche doe intreate of sondry thynges, to you I doe hope not vnprofita∣ble, wherein I haue shortly described our poore nedie brother his pouerte. Callyng

vpō the mercilesse riche, whose whole trust is in the vain riches of this worlde, intan∣gled as it were emong Briers. So that in the hower of death, God is fardest from his mynde, and the gooddes euill gotten, are worse spent, and come to nothyng, at what tyme no Phisike can preuaile. I haue also not forgotten the shamefull synne, whiche raigneth in this worlde called ingratitude whiche linially came frō the loines of that false vilain Iudas: neither the Sicophan∣tes, Gatos, Liars and Flatterers of this worlde, the verie poison of the soule. Oh better saieth Salomon, is the woundes of the frende, then the kisses of the flatterer. Furder, how many meanes maie bee vsed against the Pestilence, as good aire, diete, medicenes accordingly: the whiche if it do not preuaile, then commeth on the merci∣lesse power of death ouer al fleshe: fearing no Kyng, Quene, Lorde, Ladie, bonde or slaue, but rather maketh all creatures a like to hym. Then dooe I conclude with the deuine, Gods chief and moste beste in∣strument in the churche. &c. And as I dooe well consider, a gentilmanne of your good nature, can but take your freindes simple

token in good parte. Euen so I am sorie that it is no better to pleasure you, yet ge∣uyng GOD moste humble thankes for thesame, who kepe you in good health & worship.
This .xij. of Marche. 1564.

Nullus vnquam hominem mor∣talem beatumindicet, antequam bene defunctum viderit.
