



MOST SACRED SOVERAIGN:
I haue aduentured to present your Ma∣iestie, not with a faire pourtrait, but with a slight shadow of your imperiall greatnesse, Which I began long since, but then the end was in nubibus, or in abeiance (as our Lawyers say) for I could not finish it (accor∣ding to my proiect) vntill such time as he, which should be sent, Expectatio gentium (Britannicatū) should come, who was or∣dained from aboue to weare all these crownes and garlands, and to reduce this whole Isle (with the hereditary Kingdomes, and Prouinces thereof) to one monarchie, and entire Empire, as they had been in the times of diuers ancient. British Saxon, and some English kings of the Norman, or Danish race, as it shall hereaf∣ter appeare. The foundation of this great worke hath bin layd, by many Kings your Maiesties ancestors (I meane by alliance, not by armes for those plots were frustrate) but as lately by King Henry the eight when he mediated the mariage of his sonne the Prince of England with the Princesse of Scotland your Maiesties mother:Vide R. Ascamin Toxophil. of the Iust∣nes of this vnion. as also in this maner many ages before the good king MalcolmCapito, vt Buchanā.Cammoir proiected this worke (and that with happy successe) by the mariage of Margaret daughter of the Saxon Prince Edward Exul,Buchanan rerū. Scotie. lib. 7. heire of the great Edgar) out of which royall bride-bed your Maiestie is issued. Likewise A∣lexander the first maried Sibilla eldest daughter of William Duke of Normandy king of England. The first Dauid also king of Scotland maried Matilda daughter of the Earle Waldeof and of Iudith neece to the said King William: King Alexan∣der the second maried Ioan Plantagenet daughter of King Iohn. King Alexander the third maried Margaret Plantage∣net daughter of King Henry the third. King Dauid the se∣cond maried Ioan Plantagenet daughter of King Edward the

second. King Iames the first maried Ioane daughter of the Duke of Somerset Grandchild to King Edward the third. King Iames the fourth your Maiesties great Grandfather ma∣ried Margaret eldest daughter of King Henry the seauenth, and of Queene Elizabeth Plantagenet daughter and heire of King Edward the fourth. But these Princes maried onely but daughters of England; but You (most sacred Prince) the great IACOB,An Do. 1603. Iul 25. ap. Westminster. enthronized vpon the Patriarke Iacobs fa∣tall stone, and vpon Saint Iacobs Festiuall espoused solemnely faire England her selfe. And all the former matches were but preparatiues, & (as I said) foundations of this great worke, which your Maiesty (whom I may now call an English man, as well for being descended from so many English Princes, as al∣so for that your Maiesties Father was an English man, and your mother Princesse, and heire of England) hath by diuine preor∣dinance now finished and accomplished in plenitudine tempo∣rum; and that by iust right, for in your sacred person are ioint∣ly met, and coalesced, the royall blouds, interests, and titles not onely of all Great Britaine, but also of France and Ireland. Which to prooue will not require much search, nor study, for they are euident, and I will for breuities sake but thus point at them. For some of them namely Scotland (the Crowne and Scepter whereof (missa per innumeros auos) your Maiestie hath borne from your infancy) all men know and acknowledge your anci∣ent royall right,His Maiesties title to Scotland & to Ireland. G. Buchan. and estate therein. And your Maiesties title to Ireland will be manifest in your Genealogie herein deduced from that great Plantagenet King Henry the second,Lionel Plantag. Du. of Clarence, third sonne of king Ed. 3. maried Eliz. daugh & heire of VVil. Murc-Burk Erle of Vlster L. of Con∣nacht: from whom the Dukes of York are des∣cended. Camden in Hiber. the first English Prince Lord of Ireland, & from his heroycall posteritie (as well Marches as others) who haue been continually seysed thereof vntill this day. His Maiesties title to France, see it more a large in the Argumēt So likewise your Maiesties tytle to the Crowne of France sheweth it selfe clearly in the ancient possessi∣ons of these royall Plantagenets here presented, your Maiesties Progenitors first Dukes of Normandy, then of Aquitaine, Earles of Poictow, of Aniow, of Maine, of Touraine, and of

Britaine, and after of Angolesme: And lastly Kinges of all France in the right of Isabell or Elizabeth sole daughter, and heyre of Philip le bel King of France mother of King Ed∣ward the third,Vide 1. Froissar à Tom  who made a most renowned and happy entry vpon that his royall inheritance: & hee his great heires were not onely titulare Lords, but also actuall possessors of France many yeares, and yet to this day in token of that ancient right) haue seysine of a Gersey, Garnesey, Alderny, &c. are par∣cels of Normandy, and so consequently of France yet possessed by the K. of Eng. part of that kingdome, notwithstanding that counterfeit hethenish law Salica maintained by all the power of France many ages against them.
His Maiesties title frō the British Kings. Your Maiesties tytle, and descent from the ancient kings of great Britaine (and which is least knowne) may thus redily be deriued. The Welsh Bardes, as also our best heralds record thatRussin. Rhese ap-Gruffith (surnamed Atgluid) prince of South∣wales about the yeere of our Lord 1196. (and issued from Cadwallader the last British King) had a daughter namedFaire Iulian. Gwenlhian maried to Edmund. Edneuet Vachan Lord of Bran∣sencle, and chiefe Iustice of Wales, and bare to him a sonne called Gerion, or Ieronim.Grono, this Grono hadTheodore. Tedor, Tedor had Gro∣no, Grono had Tedor, Tedor had Veridik.Meredith, Meredith had Owen. Which Owen maried Catherine (widow of king Henry the fift, and daughter of the French king Charles the sixt) by whom hee had Edmond creaeted Earle of Richmond by King Henry the sixt, his brother vterine. And this Ed∣mond was father of King Henry the seauenth, who was father of Queene Margaret your Maiesties great granmother, &c. But some deriue your Maiesties British race from a namelesse, & a good namelesse daughter of Gruffith ap Leolhin (a Prince f Wales about the yeere 1051) vpon whom (as they pretend) Fleanchus thane,D. Povvel in Historie of the Princes of Wales. or Steward of Abria flying into Wales for suc∣our) begat vnlawfully a sonne, who should be ancester to all the hiefe Stewards to this day: But this being not acknowledged by he best Scotish Historiographers, & the thing not honourable, I may well pretermit it. Lastly, to finish all these your Maiesties

natiue titles to these many Diadems mentioned in this Poësy, I haue inserted a Genealogy of the Saxon Kings drawne from the first vniter of the heptarchye,His Maiesties title from the Saxon kings. and the Godfather of An∣glia King Egbert vnto Matilda the Empresse, daughter and heyre of King Henry the first, and mother of this great Plan∣tagenet King Henry the second, ancester of all the English Kings vntill this day. And from him this poesy is a conti∣nued pedegree vnto Queene Elizabeth the first, and from Her to your Maiesty, and to your Maiesties most excellent Sonne Henry, The Prince of Great Britaine.
Now it resteth that I answere, or excuse some faults found in this Poesy. for some note that I am too long in my induc∣tion, notwithstanding I propound in the first stanze. Others reproue me because I began no higher. Others charge me that I haue concealed, and coloured the faultes of bad Prin∣ces.
The first obiection is answered in it selfe. The second i answered in the Argument following. The third may not one∣ly be answered but maintained by the rule of Christian cha∣rity,1. Peter. 4. Math. 7. which (as the Apostle teacheth) operit multitudinem peccatorum, and the Euangelicall law of Talion prescri∣beth Quaecun{que} Vultis vt faciant vobis homines, & vo facite illis. And I my selfe claim: the benefit hereof, for I confesse I haue other faults besides these. I am ignorant, I am poore,M. Scaurus ita suit pa∣tritius vt 3. supra cum etatibus iacuerit do∣mus eius fortuna, &c. and I am as obscure as M. Scaurus was (of whom As Pedianus maketh mention) and so haue been euer since th fatall iourney at Bosworth: and had then perished vtterly had not the Princely Humanity of the great suruiuing Ho∣ward preserued my young orphan ancester: which with my best seruice (as I am bound) I will euer acknowledge to tha most illustrious family of Norfolke the Durateus equus o great Captaines, graue Counsellours, high Seneschalles Marshals, Treasorers, and Admirals of England: besides ma¦ny other herïocall Gentlemen fortunate, and faithfull to the




royal genealogical tree

I. W. S. delineauit.



Crowne, and Kingdomes.
But to conclude shortly, whatsoeuer be the faults of the booke, or of the Buc I most humbly submit them to your Ma∣iesties most gracious censure, who (next to the omnipotent Lord of Lords) are vitae, & necis Arbiter,Vite, & neele gentibus arbit Seneca. and not onely the supreme, and highest iudge but (which is best) the best iudge. i. the most wise, the most learned, and the most clement iudge.Quicquid dominatur vim Dei habet. Arte∣midorus. And so therefore eftsoones prostrating my selfe, my small talent, (or rather mites) and all at your sacred feete; not seeking either praise, or thankes, nor so much as one branch or leafe of any of these your many Garlands, but with the old Poet
Veniam pro laude peto laudatus abundéOuid.
Si fastiditus non tibi Daphnis ero.
And with the new inauguratorie hymne still pray to the Al∣mighty that.
Your happy dayes may not be done,
Till the great comming of his Sonne.
And that your health, your ioyes, your peace,
May as your raigne, and yeres increase.
AMEN.
