


IT is not for naughte,Igno∣raūce is ye mother of al errours ryght worshipfull Syr, yt of al men, ignoraunce hath bene compted the mother of all errours. Whiche thynge too be most true, we do nowe at this presence, plainely perceyue and se. By godly lear¦ning, the erroneous secte of the papistes is in a maner proflygated and ouerthro∣wen, so that the chief maynteyners of it are cleane ashamed of theyr olde occupa¦tyon, I meane,What godly lear¦ning doth. of theyr Idolatry and su¦perstition. But godly learning was ne∣uer soo diligente, in purgynge the fielde of the gospell from the rubbisshes of An¦tichristes kyngdome,What stubburne ignoraūce doth. as stubburne igno¦raunce is now busy in sowynge it ouer, wyth cockle and darnill, wyth tares, and most pestiferous poyson, whych they do
 so ouer laye wyth suger and honye, that is to say, wyth paynted and coloured hy¦pocrisie, blandiloquence and flatterye, yt a man at the fyrst syght, would embrace thys errour and heresy, for a most whol∣some doctryne, and vnfayned relygyon. But if he, puttynge on the spectacles of goddes worde, wyll loke more narowly vpon it, he shall espye suche a blyndnes and ignoraunce in theyr procedynges & doctryne, that by good ryght, he myght meruayle, that the very infantes do not now, in thys florisshyng tyme of the gos¦pell, perceyue and smell oute thys deuy∣lysshe heresie. For who would not saye that thys commeth of deuilysshe igno∣raunce (onles he be blynder then ye blind¦nes it selfe, that they so shamefully deny the baptisme of yong infantes and chyl∣dren?What is to denye ye baptisme of infants Is not thys too put oure chyl∣dren, from that euerlastyng couenaunte which our lorde god dyd make wyth A∣braham, and in hym, with all vs that be¦leue? I wyll (sayth the lorde) be thy god and the god of thy sede after the.Gene. xvii chapi. Why∣che promyse Abraham beleued, and ther¦fore when he came home, he did both cir¦cumcise hym selfe, & al the male chyldren
 that were in his house. For whye? Cyr∣cumcision was the seale of the people of god, whych by the commaundement of god was ministred vnto all them yt were comprehended in the Lordes couenaunt In stede wherof baptisme hath bene in∣stituted in the newe Testamente. as the Apostle sayncte Paule. Colloss .ij. Chap¦ter, Doth playnly testifie.Circumci∣sion insted of baptism Syth therfore that chyldren were circumcysed in ye old Testament, and long after instructed in ye knowledge of the lawe: it foloweth, & that by good consequence, ye baptysme oughte to be mynistred vnto our yonge infantes, whom we are bound afterwar¦des to bryng vp in ye fayth, and true doc∣tryne. This argumente al the rablement of ye Anabaptistes, is not able to dissolue Suffer not therfore, O good christyans, suffer not your selues too be seduced by these smatteryng Anabaptistes, whyche vnderstande not the letter of the scriptu∣res, wherin (I meane, in the bare letter) they do truste moste. And no maruayle thereof: For they are moste shamefullye ignoraunce in all those thynges, yt serue for to expounde and vnderstand the let∣ter. They knowe not the phrases of the
 scriptures.The Ana∣baptistes are igno∣raunce in those thin¦ges that serue for to expoūd and vnder stand ye let∣ter.
The chyef causes of ye Anabaptis¦tes blynd∣nes and er¦roure.
Nouatus aucthor of rebaptiza∣tion.
How ma¦ny wayes this word baptism is taken in ye new Testa¦mente. They do not obserue & mark how many wayes one thing is taken in the scriptures and worde of God. Whi∣che truely to ye chyef cause of theyr blind¦nes and errour. For yf they had marked howe many wayes in the scryptures of the newe Testamente, thys worde bap∣tysme is taken, they had neuer renewed the olde condempned heresye of Noua∣tus, touchyng thys folysh Anabaptisme that is to saye, rebaptyzaty on or bapty∣zyng agayn. For baptysme is not alwai¦es taken for that outwarde sygne & seale of the people of God, whyche is an out∣ward wasshyng of water, done and my∣nystred in the name of the father, of the sonne, and of the holy ghost, wherby we are initiated into a true fayth, and inno∣cencye of lyfe: whych kynd of baptisme Ihon and the Apostles did mynyster, & nowe in the churche of Christe, is by thē administred, yt be appoynted therto: but often tymes it is taken for the doctryne as Mathewe .xxi. Chapter, and Actes, ye xix. Whych place the Anabaptistes do al¦lege to mayntayne their erroure in thys point. Otherwhiles this word baptisme signyfieth death or matyrdome, as Ma∣thew

.xx. Chapter. Where Christ answe∣reth to the sonnes of Zebede, after thys maner: Can ye drinke the cuppe yt I shal drinke? and be baptized with ye baptisme that I shall be baptyzed wyth? there the blynde may se, that he did meane his pas¦sion that he should suffer. It betokeneth also the inward illumynatyon of the ho∣ly spirite of God, wherby the heartes of the faythfull are illumynated & drawen, as Actes .i. Chapter. Ye shal be baptyzed wyth the holy ghost after these few day∣es. Nowe as they are deceyued in thys thyng by ignoraunce and lacke of know¦ledge, so are they in all the other poyn∣tes. But now that the ignoraunt & sym∣ple myght haue an wholsom Antidotus and conterpoyson agaynst this pestilent erroure, especially in thys point of rebap¦tyzatyon, and baptysme of chyldren: I haue here translated thre most fruyctfull Dialogues vpon thys matter, out of La∣ten into Englysshe: whyche, yf they be dylygentlye perused, maye enarme and fence the reader, agaynste all the obiec∣tyons that can be made and inuented by these phantastycall and madde braynes. And because that your worshypfull ma∣stershyp
 hath bene alwayes earnest in ye defence of the truth, bearyng a singuler affectyon and mynd, towardes all them that are studyous to set furth the glorye of god, which godly affection and mynd ye haue many times (as I haue bene by credible persons enfourmed) declared in your communycatyon, towardes me: I could do no lesse of duty, but to dedicate thys lytle laboure of myne vnto you, in token of gratitude and thankefulnesse, syth that none otherwyse, I am able to deserue or recompence that beneuolente hearte of yours, towardes mee. God of his mercy, vouchsafe with his holy spirit so to rule and guyde your mastership with ye worshipfull gentlewoman youre wyfe, yt whatsoeuer yee shal do, or thinke in al your affayres, maye be to ye glory of god, & sal∣uatiō of of your soule. Amē.
