



MAnkynde, whych is called of the Phylosopher, Microcosmos, Orbiculus, or a little World, hauing in it selfe, eyther Misery, Felicity, or a Meane: although it bee of the most beautifull Forme, and fayrest Shape, excelling all other lyuing Crea∣tures vpon Earth: And also is rightly indued with goodly giftes of Nature, in whose Braine is fixed the Iewell called Reason, the Mother of Arte, and Science, by whom bee wrought, & Inuented marueylous thynges, whereby our eternall GOD is perceyued in vs his Creatures, more aboundantly, than in the hygh Lyghtes mooueable, and fixed in the Fyrmament of Heauen: whose naturall influences bee knowen vnto Mankynde. Euen so bee the vertues of euery Creature heere in Earth: as Beaste, Foule, Fyshe, Ser∣pent, Trees, Plantes, Fruictes, Flower, Hearbe, Grasse, Gumme, Stone, and Metall. There is nothing so secret hidden, wythin the My∣nerals of the Earth, or lurking so lowe vnder the Floudes of the Sea: but by meanes, and pollicy, they are brought to vse. Theyr Names, Qua∣lities, and Natures are knowen vnto the witty Heade of Mankynde: to thys ende, to help Mankynde in the tyme of hys bodily infirmity. These hath GOD ordayned by his dyuine prouidence, that euery Creature sen∣sible, and insensible, should serue hys best Creature, Mankynde.Luke. 1. To thys ende, that he should serue GOD in righteousnes, & holynesse, al the daies of hys lyfe, for these hys Gyftes. And the Philosopher sayth, in libro de Coelo, & Mundo: Deus, & Natura nihil frustra agunt: GOD, and Nature doth nothyng in vayne, but are euer working, and doing: he the prynci∣pall cause, and they hys effect. Yet for all these syngular Uertues, gieuen to Man: through the continuaunce of tyme, Calamities of thys World, Woundes in the Body, corruption of the Ayre, aboundaunce of Humours. &c. the same Mankynde doth decay, dye, and returne vnto the Dust, and become as though hee had neuer bin: although hee bee neuer so honorable, yea or poore, death doth make equality betwene them. Euery mans course is appoynted, they cannot prolong theyr tyme: notwythstanding,Iob. 14. GOD hath ordayned sundry Meanes, by hys Mynisters, to help Mankynde in the tyme of Sycknesse, to ease theyr paynes, and heale theyr Woundes. And I being a Chylde of the Common wealth, am bounde vnto my Mo∣ther, that is, the Lande in whych I am borne: to pleasure it, wyth any

good gyft, that it hath pleased GOD to bestow vpon mee: not fo thys ende, to instruct the learned, but to helpe the ignoraunt, that they may re∣sort to thys little Bulwarcke, whych I doe Dedicate vnto your honorable Lordship. Where they shall not onely be defended in the same, from sicke∣nesse, and Woundes: but also being wounded, through cruell Assaulters of thys Bulwarke, or Sicke, heere eftsoones they shall haue at hand, all ma∣ner of Cordials, and wholesome Salues. Whereby they shalbe the abler, to keepe thys Holde agaynst all bodyly euils: whych I doe call Soare∣nesse, and Sicknesse: for whose sakes, I haue builded this little Fort cal∣ling it my Bulwarke. Not being able to builde any bigger worke of defence agaynst Sicknesse, or euill Dyet: as that Man of worthy memory, Syr Thomas Eliot Knyght dyd, when he builded hys Castle of Health, a Booke very profitable. Would GOD, that all Men of Worshyp in theyr calling, were lykewyse disposed to theyr Countrey, as hee was, and many moe, whose names I doe commend vnto the Reader, wythin thys little Bul∣warke. And although there wyll bee many peraduenture, both malicious, spightfull, and cankred of Mynde, that both wyth slaunder and disdayne, will lay theyr Battry, agaynst thys Fort: I shall be able euer to repulse them, through your Lordshippes good ayde. For I haue builded it very lowe, wanting neyther the strength of Ordynaunce, prouysion of Uictu∣alles, nor the Pollycie of most worthy Captaynes, & good Souldeours: as Hippocrates, Galen, Dioscorides. &c. Nowe finally, I shall most humbly desyre your good Lordshyp, to take thys simple Booke, as an Argument of my good Zeale and Loue, that I bare vnto you, for your good∣nesse towarde mee. For if I were otherwyse able, to gratify your Honor, according to my bounden Duety: I would not leaue it vndone, as knoweth GOD, who euer geue your Lordship continuaunce of Honour, and prosperous Health.
From London. In Marche. 1562.

