


FOr so muche as man bor∣ne in to this vvorlde hai∣the no long time to liue Here, he being (as the Wy seman saithe) lent, not ge∣uen to life: And for that vve must render an accompt, at the daye of Iudgemēt (before that dredefull Iud∣ge, vvhiche is voyde of partialitie) not onlie of vvoordes and vvoorkes, but of eache moment of time spent here, yea euen vnto the thoughtes of our hartes, euerie one in his vocacion and degree: And for my part calling all this to the eyes of my minde: seing also all my acti∣ons hithertho to be verie base and bar∣rain in his sight, vvhiche is the true sear∣cher of al thoughtes: I began to think hovv I might employe my selfe in some vvoorke acceptable to so bountifull and benigne a patrone, and lorde, as haith
beside my creacion and redempcion, not onlie sanctified me and preserued me from my infancie: but also brought me out af that darke Egiptiacal England, (the verie sea of heresie) and placed me vnder so good and graciouse a ladie, in vvhom I dailie beholde manie examples of true Religion, goldie fear, cōstant pa∣tience, and Christian pietie. Therfore finding nothing more agreable to hys diuine pleasure, than is the charitable trauail in mouing the deuociō of others to the effectuall seruice of his Diuine Maiestie by prayer and meditacion: and considering hovv great cōmoditie a litle direction in prayer may bring to the vn∣learned and ignorāt, vvhose vveakenesse I vvolde be glad anie vvaye to releue:
The first parte of this boo¦ke. I haue thought good to put foorth suche spirituall exercises, as I my selfe haue priuatlie vsed, vvith great comfort, in sayieng the Rosaire, Croune, or Psalter of our blessed laidie the virgin Marie, vpon the beades.
The se∣cōd part. And I haue also set doun sundry meditacions and conside∣racions to be vsed othervvyse, touching asvvel the passion of our Sauiour and our redemption: as also the infinite benefites
and Graces most plentifullie bestovved vpon euerie Christiā: to the ende that in thinking therof a good religiouse myn∣de may be more diligent and attentiue to note and marke vvhat is sayd: more inflamed to deuocion: and more moued vvith compunction and sorovve for syn∣nes committed. And thies meditations a man muy diuide in to seuen partes, ac∣cording to the dayes of the vveeke: to the ende that a thankfull hart Dailie be∣holding (as in a glasse) the bountifull guiftes of God maye take occasion to hate synne, and to loue God so good a be∣nefactor and patrone. And because ma∣ny vvel disposed parsones vvolde fayne vvalke accordīg to the vvil of their lorde and Creator: yet doe they vvander astray by vvant of good instruction, rather than vpon malice:
The thrid parte. I haue collected out of de∣uout authors certein lessons an directiōs shevveing, not oulie, good meanes to auoyde synne, and to frame the vvhole course of lyfe according to hys rule and commaundement, vvhiche sayeth; Hoe fac, & viues. Doe this, and thou shault ly∣ue: but also profitable signes and argu∣mentes, vvhereby one muy perceiue,
vvhether he standeth in the state of God his grace and fauor,
The fovverth parte. or no. Lastlie I haue added some rules to knovv from vvhēce cuell thoughtes do proced eand meanes to auoyde them: vvith a figure or por∣trature of the beades, conteining your Lady shippes vsuall Meditacion vpon them.
Thies vvith suche lyke being the sclē∣der fruit of my barrain vvyt hauing no better crop to put in to the barne, I ha∣ue published for the benefit of the vn∣learned, vviche can not skill of curiou∣se discourses penned by great clerkes. And I haue presumed to dedicat this fruit of my poor talent vnto your La∣dyship, my honorable, and most boun∣tifull Maistresse: by vvhose example of Christian lyfe and conuersacion I haue bene muche edified, and animated, as to other Christian exercises, so to this vvoork novv here set foorthe. VVhiche I hope shall fynde better entertein∣ment; for that it passeth vnder the fa∣uour of your honorable countenance. And good reason I haue so to think, for (to omit other places, times, and proo∣fes testifyeing your vertues) synce your
comyng in to thies Countries, you ha∣ue geuen suche demonstracions of true Religion, by the fruits of your good ly∣fe, as for your pittifoll hart, and cha∣ritable compassion, vvith the effect of almoise and vvoorkes of mercie, I may vvel compare you to Paula, vvhom Seint Ierom so highlie commendeth. The tovvne of Louain and other pla∣ces in time of plague famin, vvarre, and heresie can testifie your pietie. The naked then by you clothed, the hungrie then by you fedde, the sick of daungerouse diseases than by you vi∣sited, comforted, and releued; the dead then by you buried, the captiues then by you ransomed, yea the simple sedu∣ced soules then by your meants recon∣ciled to God and his Churche are suf∣fficient testimonies and prooses of your zeale to vertue, and of your perfecti∣on in Catholique Religion: and vvill plead for you before God and man: that as the vvhole course of your lyfe hitherto haith bene accompted among the most honorable in vertue: so vvil your temporall ende be in dede aright famouse in all good memorie and your
second lyfe in heauen verie gloriouse among holie Confessors, for (as Seynt Ierom truelie sayeth) seldome or neuer dieth that man an euell death, vvhich vvillinglie exerciseth the vvoorkes of Charitie. And hys reason is, for that su∣che persones haue many intercessors a∣mong good and vertuouse poor people: and verie vnlike it is and almost impossi∣ble that none of theyr prayers shoulde not be herd.
And thoughe (good Madame) you haue endured many afflictions and gre∣uous aduersities: yet haue you no cause therfore to be discouraged: for they are euident signes of the fauor that God bea¦reth tovvard you. It is à peculiar proper∣tie of God to punish them vvhom he loueth. Examples therof vve haue infi∣nite in holy scripture and othervvhere. Holy Iob dyd neuer vvillinglie eat mor∣sel of bread alone, vvithout company of some one or other poor and needy per∣sone: yet vvere his plagues and afflictiōs so terrible, and his diseases so lothesome as vve tede not of any greater. VVho vvas more pittifull to the poor and nedie than olde Tobie, vvhiche buried the dead: fed
the hungrie; and supplied the vvantes of many: visited and comforted his felo∣vves captiues? Yet dyd he bear the bur∣den of many heuye crosses. And vvhen he dyd stand in most nede of al comfort, he lost the vse of his sight: But vvith thies and suche examples of Scripture you are vvell acquainted. I vvill recompt vnto you others. It is vvell knovven hou charitable a hand and hart Seynt Grego∣rie the great had, the restorer of Christiā Religion in England, to vvhom our Sa∣uiour appeared among others poor beg∣gars, as a special token that God vvas vvell pleased vvith that good mans al∣moise dedes, and vvoorkes of charitie: yet vvas he vexed vvith bodilie siknesse continuallie. It is vvritten of a holie vvo∣man called Liduina so pittifull tovvar∣des the poor and needie, as vvhen she had not sufficient of her ovven to geue, she vvolde begge and borovv of others to releue the necessitie of the poor, Su∣che encrcase ostentimes folovved her hand, as though she euer gaue vvhere need required, yet dyd her porcion fynde no decrease: In so muche as one time (if not oftener) thirtie poor persones vvere
vvell releued of the meat that vvas put in one pot, and in the end as muche meat found in the pot as vvas at the fyrst put in to it. yea she had a purse vvhere in she vsed to put her almose money, vvhiche she called IESVS hys pot, for that it neuer failed: yet vvas this good vvoman euer siklic, and often afflicted vvith many most greuouse diseases and aduersities. And it is vvell knovven hou your Ladieshipp being at Namure in a time of great famin you releued the hun grie soldiors vvith flesh he and pottage, and hovv God so blessed your almoise, as the meat prouided in tuo pottes for thirtie parsones dyd suffice vvell nigh tvvo hundred people. Therfore as you haue Good cause vvith that good vvo∣man Lidunia to magnifye God, vvhiche gaue you habilitie and good vvil to exer∣cise the vvoorkes of charitie) and mul∣tiplied your guystes in your handes: So haue you good matter of comfort by pa∣tient bearing of your vvordlie afflictiōs, expect vvith Liduina the revvard prepa∣red for faith sull and charitable Christia∣nes: knovveing perfectlie that he vvhi∣che geueth but a cup of colde vvater for
the loue of Christ shall not leese his re∣vvarde.
Thies examples shevv you that tem∣poral afflictions casuallie falling vpon good men, are signes and argumentes of Gods fauour. For (as Seynt Gregorie doeth vvell note) there is no greater marke of Gods vvrathe and displeasure, then is a continuall good successe in he∣althe, vvelthe, and vvordlye prosperitie. Yea siknesse and affliction doeth frame and conforme vs lyke to our Sauiour Ie∣sus Christ: vvhom God the Father sent in to the vvorld not to reap the delica∣te pleasures therof: but to suffer great paynes and miseries. What carefull trou∣bles and dredefull perills dyd his blessed mother endure, vvhen it vvas knovven that our maister Iesus should be borne? And after he vvas borne a great nom∣ber of deadlie enemies dyd dailye arise against that svvete babe and her. VVhat terrible fear and care vvith paynfull la∣bors dyd she endure traualing ouer hil∣les and dales; vvhen she heard the cries of mothers for their children haled out of their armes and mordered before their eyes: vvhen shedyd mete the cruell
bouchers that sought to morder her dear childe by the cruell edict of vvicked He∣rod, proclaming all male children from troo yeres olde and vnder to be slaine? vvhat soroufull cares and hard traunlyng dyd that blessed virgin endure to hyde and saue her oulie sonne from the cruel∣tie of those synfull creatures, vvhom her sonne came to sane and kepe from hel and damnacion if they vvolde accept hym? Shal vve then look for priuileige and immunitie from vvordlie afflictiōs, vvhen vve see that spotlesse lamb the sonne of God, and the immaculat vir∣gin his mother to haue endured all mi∣series that the vvorlde could procure a∣gainst them? In verie truthe, afflictions and miseries susteyned by a faithfull Chri¦stian are the bages of our lorde and Mai∣ster. Therfore vve must not grudge to vvear our Maisters liuereys, and to bear our crosse and folovv hym: considering that in so doeing vve haue an assurāce of his entertainement vvith lyfe euerlasting in his high palace of heauen: VVhereun∣to he that bought your laidyship bring you vvhen it shall please hym. In mean tyme I humblie beseche you accept this
myte putin to the box. Interpret of it as I mynde to your honor and to all good Catholiques to vvhose vieue it shall co∣me. I craue onlie the glorie of God he∣reby to encrease, to vvhom I commend your Ladyshippe vvith all true Catho∣liques.



depiction of the virgin Mary and Jesus Christ or the Madonna and Child, in a room


