



THe word of God being the immortall seed wherby we be conceiued and borne againe to be the children of Gods mercie,1. Pet. 1.23. and heires of his glorie:1. Pet. 2.2. the pure milke that doth nourish vs being infants:Matth. 4.4. the bread that doth feed vs being growen greater in Christ Iesus:Psal. 119.105. the light and lanterne that leadeth vs to walke in Gods waies:Ephes. 6.17. Heb. 4.12. Matth. 4.4. Hierem. 23.29. 2. Cor. 10.5. the sword of Gods spirit to defend vs against the assaults of Satan: And finallie, the hammer which beateth downe euerie high thing that is exalted against the knowledge of God: it is no maruell (Right Ho∣norable) if Satan the enimie of our saluation haue in all times dili∣gentlie indeuored to suppresse it, and to depriue vs as much as he might of the great benefit, and sweet comfort which we are to re∣ceiue by it. Hereupon it hath come to passe, that in all ages, as the true and syncere worship of God hath beene corrupted and decaied, and idolatrie and wicked worshippings haue increased: so the Law of God, which teacheth and mainteineth the one, condemneth & ouer∣throweth the other, hath been suppressed, and the cleere light therof smothered. When the Israelits in the wildernes fell to Idolatrie, and worshipped the golden calfe,Exod. 32.19. the tables of Gods commandements (which they were vnworthie to inioie) were broken. When true reli∣gion was decaied vnder Rehoboam and Abija kings of Iudah:2. Cronicl. 15.3. Israel was without the Priest to teach, and without the Law.2. King. 22.8. When vnder the vngodlie gouernment of Manasse and Amon Idolatrie raigned and raged, the booke of God was neglected and lost: when Iehoiakim an Idolater ruled, the word of God vttered by Iere∣mie, and written by Baruch, was cut in peeces,Ierem. 36.23. and throwne into the fire. When cruell Antiochus had taken Ierusalem,1. Mach. 1.59. and sought to ouerthrow the true seruice of God, the books of the Law which were found were burnt in the fire, and cut in peeces. And whoso∣euer

had a booke of the Testament found by him was put to death. When bloudie Diocletian went about to roote out Christian reli∣gion, he caused the holie Scriptures to be burnt, as Eusebius in these words declareth:Euseb. eccles. hist. lib. 8. cap. 2. & 3. Diuinásque & sacras Scripturas in me∣dio foro igni tradi ipsis oculis vidimus. i. We haue seene with our eies the diuine and holie Scriptures in the midst of the market place throwne into the fire. And euen so in these later ages, as su∣perstition and Idolatrie (wherwith God in his iust indignation hath punished the wickednesse of the world,2. Thess. 2.10. for not receiuing the loue of the truth vnto saluation) haue increased: so the word of God hath been greatlie neglected of the Priests, suppressed from the people, & being translated & published by faithfull men for the setting forth of Gods truth, and saluation of his elect, haue beene in open market places (as Eusebius saith) burnt in the fire.Ezech. 7.26. Deut. 33.10. How the law hath pe∣rished from the Priests, who should haue taught Iacob Gods iudgements, and Israel his Law, experience hath shewed, and lear∣ned mens writings do witnes. That famous man Erasmus (in whose daies after the long winter night of ignorance, began both the clouds of darknesse to be dispersed,Erasmus lib. 9. epist. ad Nata∣lem▪ Beddam. and the sunne of Gods word cleerely to shine forth) writeth thus: Nec pauci sunt Theologi praesertim seniores, qui adeo versati non sunt in priscis do∣ctoribus, vt nec Petrum Lombardum, nec scripturas cano∣nicas vnquam totas euoluerint. That is, There be not a few diuines, especiallie of those that be elder, who haue beene so little occupied in the old doctors, that they haue neuer read ouer Peter Lombard, nor the whole canonicall Scriptures. That learned man Andreas Hyperius witnesseth, that he had seene sundrie old ec∣clesiasticall men,Lib. de lectione Scripturae. who after they had receiued some tast of Gods truth, confessed and lamented, that they had neuer read the holie Scriptures. But if these testimonies will not serue to satisfie some, for the conuincing of the great and grosse ignorance, which as a vaile couered the Priests eies from beholding the bright beames of Gods word,Aeneas Syluius Comment. de dict. & fact. Alphons. Reg. lib. 2.17. let them marke what Pope Pius secundus writeth hereof in these words: Pudeat Italiae sacerdotes, quos ne se∣mel quidem nouam legem constat legisse. Apud Thabori∣tas vix mulierculam inuenias, quae de nouo Testamento & veteri respondere nesciat. That is, The Priests of Italie may be ashamed, who are knowne not once to haue read the new Testa∣ment: seeing with the Which fol∣lowed the doctrine preached by Hus. Thaborits (in Bohemia) one can hardly find

a seelie woman which cannot answere out of the old and new Testa∣ment.
And if those Italian Priests, which were vnder that holie fathers nose, were so blind in Gods booke, what may be thought of them that were further off? vnlesse peraduenture, the neerer they were to him, the more they were infected, poysoned, and blinded by him. And if the sunne went downe vpon those Prophets,Mich. 3.6. and dark∣nesse was vnto them for a diuination, that should haue beene the light of the world, & the eies of the bodie,Matth. 5.14.6.23. how great was the dark∣nesse in the bodie it selfe? Especiallie seeing these hypocriticall pha∣risies tooke away the keie of knowledge,Luke 11.52. and as they entred not in themselues, so they forbad them that would, in keeping the light of Gods word vnder the bushell of a strange toong, and not permitting it to be translated into vulgar and knowne languages, and so to be set vpon a candlesticke to shine to the instruction and consolation of them that be in Gods house. Wherein they haue shewed themselues to be hereticall Priests,Chrysost. expo∣sit. 2. in Matth. hom. 44. who (as Chrysostom saith) shut vp the gates of the truth: for they know that if the truth once appeare, they must needs leaue their Church, & from the dignitie of their priest∣hood come downe to the state of other people. Euen so our Haereti∣call popish prelats and priests to mainteine their Idolatrie, pompe, pride, and couetousnesse haue shut vp the gates of the truth, by sup∣pressing Gods holie word, and keeping it from the knowledge of Gods people: as Erasmus trulie affirmeth in these words;Quis non intelligat istos sacras literas ideo velle paucis esse notas,Erasm. li. epist. 21. ad Nicol. Euerardum. ne quid decedat ipsorum autoritati quaestuíque. That is, Who knoweth not that these men (meaning popish Priests & Moonks) would therefore haue the holie Scriptures known but to few, least their authoritie and gaine should decaie. And euen so it is certaine, that if the holie scriptures had beene publikelie in the mother toong, and in the hands and harts of the people, they could neuer heretofore haue beene with the vsurped power of that pelting and powling Priest of Rome so astonied and amazed, with ima∣ges deceiued, with pardons beguiled, with fained & forged reliques mocked, with masses, trentals and purgatorie spoiled, with the hypo∣crisie of Moonks and such other locusts bewitched, and manie mo waies miserablie abused as they were
But they being vtterlie be∣reft, and altogether depriued of this light of Gods word,Esai. 9.2. 1. Iohn 2.22. did sit in darknesse and in the shadow of death: Walked in darknesse and wist not whither they went, bicause the darknes had blinded their eies.

And whereas God of his great mercie, beholding our miserie, hath deliuered vs from this Aegyptiacall darknesse, and caused the day star of his holie word to rise vnto vs, to lead vs (as did that other the wise men) vnto Iesus Christ,Matth. 2.9. in him onely to seeke our saluati∣on:Esai. 9.2. Lib. de resurrect. carnis. so that we which haue heeretofore walked in darknesse, haue seene a great light, to our vnspeakeable comfort: these Fliers of the light of the Scriptures. Lucifugae Scripturarum (as Tertullian called some, and I may truly terme these Popish owles) haue howled and exclaimed against this light, which by the holy Scriptures translated into our mother toong hath shined vnto vs.D. Standish in a foolish booke set foorth in Q. Maries daies. They haue written against it, affirming that it ought not to be in the vulgar language, Idem ibid. pro∣bat. 3. calling it damnable libertie of so hauing it, Alfons. de ca∣stro contr. Haeres. lib. 1. cap. 13. Deut. 6.4. & 11.19. & 17.18. Coloss. 3.16. Chrysost. hom. 3. de Lazar. & in Gen. homil. 21. & 25. August. lib. 3. de doctr. Christ. ca. 1. Hieron. in ca. 3. ad Coloss. Theodoretus de cu∣raend. graec. affect. lib. 5. In the beginning of their Preface. and saying that it is an occasion of Heresie, and haue with all their might and maine gone about to extinguish it. These their assertions how false and absurd they be, contrarie to the word of God, and the writings of the ancient godly fathers, I will not (lest I be too tedious vnto your Honor) at this present further declare.
Notwithstanding all this their barking against hauing the holie Scriptures in the mother toong: yet now our Rhemish and Romish Papists heerin differing from their fellowes, & playing the Apes in imitating vs, as they haue doone also in setting foorth Catechismes which before they could neuer abide, haue at the last published the new Testament in our English toong, and haue promised the rest, which (notwithstanding they saie was long ago doone) hath beene, and I doubt, will be long in performing. This they haue doone, not of a holie zeale, and godlie desire to haue the holie Scripture knowne and read of all people: but rather to keepe them, especiallie their adherents & fauorers from reading it translated & set foorth by vs. In this their worke so long deferred, and now published, they haue committed two foule faults: The one in falselie and foolishlie translating it, by following the corrupt streame of the Latin trans∣lation, and forsaking the fountaine of the Greeke, wherein the holy spirit of God did indite the new Testament, and the blessed Apostles of Christ our Sauior did write it. The other in corrupting & peruer∣ting the sense, and meaning of the holy Ghost by guilefull gloses, and absurd Annotations. Against the former of these faults I did, either almost, or altogether fiue yeers past, write the first part of this little discourse vpon this occasion: The right honorable and my verie good Lord, the L. Saint Iohns of Blet so shortlie after the comming foorth of the said Testament, did let me haue for the space of a month the

vse of it. The which I did verie egarly read, and diligentlie confer. And for that the booke was hard to come by, I did write much out of it, concerning the diuersitie, superfluitie, and want of the said trans∣lation in respect of the Greeke: and also their 10. friuolous reasons in their preface, which moued them to leaue the Greeke, and trans∣late the Latine, with diuers other things. Vnto the which 10. rea∣sons I did then vpon a particular occasion, & for a priuat vse write this answere, neuer intending (as both some men do know, and the long suppressing of it may shew) to publish the same in print. And the rather for that a full answere vnto the whole hath beene long looked for of manie, and wished for of me. The which I would right gladlie haue seene, to the perpetuall suppressing of this as I first in∣tended. But when no such answere came foorth, neither could I learne when anie would: hauing of late a little recognised my an∣swere that had lien long neglected by me, and added thereunto a discouerie of sundrie corruptions committed in the said translation, I haue beene mooued by some that haue seene it, to let it passe in print. The which although I was a long time vnwilling to doo: yet for that it is thought the said translation and Annotations haue seduced some, and confirmed others in error, and manie doo not a little glory of them, I haue yeelded to the putting foorth of this little treatise: that as some haue alreadie in part discouered the absurditie of the Annotations:D. Reynolds▪ D. Bilson. M. Prime. so this I trust may sufficiently shew the weaknesse of those reasons, and corruption of that translation. This small and simple discourse although I confesse it to be vnworthie your worthi∣nesse, yet vpon your great curtesie, I haue beene bold to offer it vn∣to your Honor, to testifie thereby my dutifull mind, and thankefull hart vnto your H. for your fauor shewed me, which I haue found and felt. Humblie beseeching your H. to accept this small mite in goodpart, not weighing the quantitie or value of the gift, but the sincere and hartie affection toward your H. of the giuer. God in great mercie blesse your H. increase his graces and good gifts in you, and long preserue you to the seruice & safetie of hir Maiestie, and the benefit of this Church and Commonwealth, Amen. At Woodhull the 9. of Aprill 1588.

