



RIGHT Reuerend Fa∣ther, in the common con∣gratulation and great re∣ioycing of the Clergie of this Diocesse, at our very first most ioyfull hearing of your Lordships designation vnto this Episcopall Sea of Lincolne: The mercifull Prouidence of God hath assigned me this as my Peculiar, that my Ʋniuersitie-father is become vnto me my Diocesan-father. My earnest desire is, that in the common iudg∣ment of the best of our Clergie, my com∣mending

of this present Discourse, con∣cerning Euangelicall Fasts, vnto so fit a Pa∣trone, may be accepted, as a Peculiar of due∣tie, fitly answerable vnto so fortunate a Peculiar of the Prouidence.
It is indeed a Part of an annuall Rent, which for some yeeres yet to come. I haue heretofore promised in priuate to our Se∣cond Jewell of Salisbury,The Earle of Salisburie out of my Diuini∣ty-studie. But that which once in our Cambridge Philosophy Schooles, I sung out of Pindarus, with a yonger voice, as a Dittie possibly propheticall,  the same I may now in riper yeares, more truely sing out an higher chaire: Howsoeuer my qiuer full of sharp-headed ar∣rowes may sound well in the hearing and vnder∣standing of them,Not to iudge Vertue accor∣ding to the skill of com∣mon people. who haue learned with Socra∣tes of Aesop,
,
Yet surely I shall please the multitude nei∣ther in the maner nor in the matter there∣of. For my experience of the Countrie is

euen the same that good Hooker, a faithfull minister of God in the parts of Kent, and of worthy memorie, sometimes complai∣neth of.Neither doe they please the many, neither doe the many please them. It hath vnto me, as it did vnto him, verified Trismegistus and found him a true man of his word. .
Howbeit, with the same worthy Hoo∣ker, after the example of the Apostle, I la∣bour in all things, and haue laboured spe∣cially, what I could in this, to please also and satisfie euen our common multitude of my brethren in Christ, to their best vn∣derstanding and profit, so farre forth as I might, without hurt or preiudice vnto the matter of my Discourse, which hath beene too vnfaithfully dealt withal by many be∣fore me, who, by seruing humorous peo∣ple too much, haue beene too vndutifull vnto their Text.
The Lord Iesus, who hath doubled outward honour in his Church, vnto you his , his wel-ruling Elder, dou∣ble, treble, multiply his Elizaeus like spirit

vpon you, that by your profitable labours night and day, in the Word and Doctrine, you may, as a second Iohn Baptist, ioyning with the rest of our zealous Bishops, in your vnited force of zeale, against the Schismes and shamelesse sinning of this last vngodly world, pre∣pare the way of the Lord vnto his second com∣ming. Amen.
Whikkenby, 1608. Iunij. 6.

