



FInding mee self vnable in all respects (reuerend Father) to requite the least benefit receiued at your Lordships hands, I haue long intended to present your Lordship with some thing, whereby you might at the leaste perceyue my grateful mynd, in accepting your vn∣deserued goodnesse often vnto me shewed. And finding nothing which might pleasure your Lordship, being no lesse skilful in learnyng, than god∣ly in life, (for as Salomon saith:Prou. 27.7. He that is ful, abhorreth an hony combe.) I thought I coulde not better please you, which are no lesse carefull for the Christian Congregation, than is the Father for
 his children, than by taking in hande some such matter, wherby I mee selfe might be well occupied, the Christi∣an common Wealth edified, and God glorified. For this cause, that the vnlearned, not onely of your Di∣ocesse, but also of all places els in En∣gland, which are destitute of painfull Preachers of Gods woord, (for who knoweth not, that the labourers in Gods Vineyarde be verye fewe?) might be instructed, at the leaste by reading, in the true profession of Ie∣sus Christ, I haue presumed to trans∣late foorth of Frenche, a Sermon of the Lordes Supper, made by the lear∣ned and graue Father, mayster Henry Bullinger. Neither dyd I perceyue, whereby I might more profit all mē, than by handelyng the Lordes Sup∣per, which yerely and often ought to be receyued of al men, nor wherein I
 might better serue my carnall and transitory countrey, than in setting foorth that foode, whereby we are fed to out spirituall and euerlasting countrey. For if we ought to tra∣uaile painefully for the foode of the body, (according to the admoniti∣on of the Apostle Saint Paul:2. Thess. 3.10. That if a∣ny would not worke, the same should not eate:) whiche although we haue in abun∣dance, mainteyneth vs not alwayes, being by syn made subiect to death, howe much more painefull ought we to be for the atchieuing of the foode of the soule, Christe Iesus, which is the bread of life, wherof if we eate by faith, we shall not die, be∣ing by grace made partakers of euer∣lasting life? Wheras there be many, which haue learnedly, & godly han∣deled this argument, I am moued to thinke my labour best bestowed vp∣pon
 this authour, because there is none which I haue read, that dooth in so briefe a summe, in my simple iudgement, more plainly set foorth the doctrine of the Lordes Supper, to the comfort of the professours of the Gospel, or more sensibly disclose the errours thrust into the Church of God, concernyng; the same, to the griefe of the aduersaries of the truth: both the which poyntes he hath so aptly handled, that I knowe not in whether he hath vsed more facilitie. It may be, that some, which haue not only trauailed of purpose into Frāce (the hithermost coastes whereof I neuer saw) there to learne the french tongue, but also at home haue dili∣gently studied to attayne the finenes of the Englishe tongue, (wherein I confesse I was neuer curious,) might haue translated this Sermon,
 much more finely, than by me it is. I enuie not their skill, neither dis∣daine I their trauaile. I haue done myne indeuour, so neare as I could, to vse my selfe like a faithful Inter∣pretour, in yeelding the sense of the Authour truely and yet in such sort, as best might be vnderstood by the vnlearned Reader. Touchyng the testimonies of holy Scripture, alle∣ged by this authour in this Sermon, I haue thought good rather to set them down after the last translation of the Bible, set foorth by aucthori∣tie, than to translate them foorth of the French, that I might the rather hereby cut of the cauilles of the ad∣uersaries of the truth, whith they are woont to make vpon the diuersitie of Translations. And that the dili∣gent Readers, if it shal please them to conferre the Testimonies with the
 Text, may the more easily find forth the same, I haue quoted in the Mar∣gent both chapter and verse, whence they are taken.
Thus, haue I yeelded vnto your Lordship, the causes of my bold en∣terprise, with the order of the han∣deling of the same, which if it may please God to blesse with the in∣crease of the Readers knowledge, I haue my desire. God long preserue your Lordship, to the comforte of his Church.

