



THere hath beene no age, right ho∣norable, which hath more plen∣tifully tasted of God his singular benefites and speciall grace, than this our age, wherein he hath cau∣sed, his vnspeakeable mercy of the light of his Gospel to shine in the darkenesse of ignorance, that our minds might be lightened therby, to receiue forgiuenes of our sinnes offred vnto vs in his sonne Christ,
 our only, perfect & sufficient Sa∣uiour, to our endelesse comfort, and that our footesteeppes might be directed to walke in the pathes of righteousnesse all the dayes of our life, to the glorifiing of his holy name. Neither hath he dealt more graciously with any nati∣on, then with this our Realme of England, wherein the professours of the Gospel liue safe from the foraine enemie, and free from persecution at home, as it were in a Citie of refuge, and a priue∣ledged Sanctuarie, when as our neighbours round about vs, taste either of the one, or feele the smart of the other. And this hath hee brought to passe by the admini∣stration of his faithfull seruaunt Queene Elizabeth, our moste vi∣ctorious Debora, who by the
 mightie power of her Lorde our God, hath woorthily triumphed ouer Idolatrie, which is nothing else but spiritual tyrannie, where∣by the consciences of her subiects were more grieuously afflicted, than were the auncient Israelites by the nine hundred iron charrets of cruell captayne Sysara. God graunt, that shee may iudge vs double the yeeres, which Debora iudged Israell, and that her hand may still prosper and preuaile a∣gainst that Roomish Iabin vntill he bee vtterly destroyed, and yet, all these his gratious giftes so a∣boundantly bestowed vppon vs notwithstanding, such is the cor∣ruption of our nature, and the vnthankfulnesse of our mindes, that in some, pure Religion bee∣ing despised, the stinking roote of Superstition remaineth still,
 and in other, in steade of god∣ly life, whiche is the true fruite of Faith, is spronge vppe the sharpe bryer of Atheisme, euen of the want of the true feare of God, so that there is no Shire, no Citie, no towne, almoste no housholde, but it is either poysoned with the one, or ouergrowen with the o∣ther, if not fully fraught with both. And therfore may the godly well say with Dauid:Psal. 120.4. Woe is me, that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech: and to haue mine habitation among the tents of Cedar. One chief cause of the great increase of these twoo grie∣uous sinnes, is the sinister opinion diuersly conceiued touching God his worde, when as the superstici∣ous thinke it not sufficient, to lead vs to the perfect knowledge of all things, necessary for our saluati∣on, and the wicked worldlinges
 so little esteeme it, that they make a iest of it. If this crooked opi∣nion of both these kinde of men might bee so streightened, that they would at the laste reade and heare God his worde, with a full perswasion, that it is the perfect rule of Faith, and the plaine di∣rection of life, it is, to bee hoped, that these two naughtie trees, Su∣perstition and Atheisme, would bee in short time, if not plucked vppe by the roote foorth of the Lordes garden, yet at the least so snagged and mangeled, that the pleasaunt trees thereof, that is to saye, the godly, should haue the more roume to spreade abrode their fruitefull braunches. Nei∣ther may we looke to see this hap∣pie chaunge in men before God his woord, to be read and hearde with confidence and followed
 with diligence. For if the earth, be it neuer so fatte, it cannot bring forth fruite before it haue recei∣ued seede, much lesse can man, be∣ing by nature barraine grounde, bring foorth the fruites of righte∣ousnesse, before he haue receiued into his heart Gods word, which is the incorruptible seede, wherby we are borne anew. And as we rest in hope, after the seede is throwne into the grounde, that God will send downe the dew of heauen to water the same, that it may bring forth fruit in due season: so if men woulde receiue the seede of Gods woorde into their hearts, it were greatly to be hoped, that God of his mercie woulde cause it to take roote, and woulde with the dewe of his grace so water it, that the barraine soile woulde become good grounde, and the noysome
 shrubbes become pleasaunt trees, yeelding forth the fruites of faith to GOD his glorie in due sea∣son. I neede not further to com∣mende this Booke, considering that maister Bullinger hath alrea∣die commended it in his Epistle following. Neither shall the Rea∣der repent him of his labour, if it shall please him with diligence to peruse it ouer. And because your Lordshippe hath beene a meanes of my maintenance in stu∣die, whereby I haue obteined that simple talent, which GOD hath bestowed vpon m, I esteemed it my dutie to bestow vpon you this my trauaile, as a pledge of my gratefull minde towarde you, and some part of discharge of my due∣tie toward my Countrey. I trust you will receyue it with suche an affection as I doe offer it,
 and so much the rather, because it commeth from your poore coun∣trey man, and was translated in the towne where your Lordship was borne, chiefly to profite the neigh∣bours therevnto adioyning. God keepe your honor in good health, and guide you with his heauenly wisedome in the well ordering of the great and weightie affaires vnto your office incident. From mine house in Bil∣ston the 10. of Februarie. 1579.

