



Gentlewomen,
THough there be nothing more certain, more impartiall, more sudden, then the stroke of Death, yet is there nothing so seldome thought upon, especially of those whose youth and health seem to suppose their graves a great way off. But I may not harbour such a thought of you. The piety of that Family whereof you are very suitable members is a sufficient prohibition. Piou hearts are never barren of profitable thoughts: and amongst all those, where∣with even a gratious heart doth most abound, none are cer∣tainly more advantageous then thoughts of Death; which have ever more thoughts of Repentance, Iudgement, Heaven and Hell for their companions. Yet the best may be bettered: and what I present you with may make your meditations more, and peradventure more usefull then they were be∣fore. Some consolations you shall light upon; which is

you suffer to work effectually, they will go nea to a chearfull expectation of that King of terrours which otherwise you might be sinfully afraid of. The po∣eme (if it may be called so) is a plain one, because I meant to profit not to puzzle you; and yet it is a poeme, that your profit might come in the pleasingest way. To assure you that the rhythme is no disparagement to the divinity of the matter, were to question your ingenuity, a great part of that wherein you exercise your selves both day and night being written in verse,Lorin. in Psalmos. Tom. 1. p. 4. D. proveth it by many good wit∣nesses. which not∣withstanding is the mighty power of God unto salva∣tion. If you accept and gain by this poore present, and withall give it leave to wear your names into the world, my ends are accomplished: and your selves (with all that honoured and religious familie) shall be remembred as often as I kneel before the throne of grace. And I will importunately beg of him that sitteth thereon, to in∣crease the good gifts and graces of his spirit within you. What if your proficiencie in the wayes of piety be al∣ready famous? yet if my prayers find good speed with God, you may sit in glorie a degree the higher. Thus prayeth

