


THE promise, that not long agoe I made to your most Royall Maiestie, I doe nowe perfourme, offering here the other eight Sermons of the 4. Decade, which I dedicate vnto your Royall Maiestie, that of mee you may haue two Decades of Sermons full and who∣lie finished. In March I sent 12. Sermons vnto you: which were fauourablie accepted of your Royall Ma∣iestie as I vnderstand by the letters of that Godly and worthy learned man maister I. Hooper, the most vigi∣lant bishop of Glocester, my brother & reuerend fellow father in Iesus Christ. Who also by the commendation of your Royall M. goodwill to me ward hath hartened mee on, so that now, with farre more confidence and libertie than before, I send vnto your Maiestie this other part of my worke, entreating of most weigh∣tie and holy matters. In this my dedication I respect nothing else, but that, which I de∣clared in my former Epistle, to witt, that I, according to the gift that the Lord hath in∣dued me withall, may helpe forward and aduaunce the state of Christian religion, nowe againe happily springing vp in the famous realme of England, by your Royall Maiesties good beginnings, and counsels of your worthy Nobles. All they of euery nation, that is in Christendome, whiche doe truely beleeue in Christ Iesus, doe hartily reioyce on your Maieties behalfe, and the behalfe of your most flourishing kingdome for this renoua∣tion of true Religion, and do earnestly pray to Christ the Lord, that he will happily bring to a good end the thinge, that you in the feare of him haue happily begonne.
Your Royall Maiestie verily hath aduentured vppon a woorke both very great and full of troubles: but he will neuer faile your Godly endeuoures, that sayd, Behold I am Math.  Whether they that mind to re¦forme the Churches must state to looke for the de∣terminatiō of a coun¦. with you for euer vnto the end of the world. And now also, euen as it hath beene alwayes from the first beginning of the Church, there are many letts and great impedi∣ments, that are obiect against most holy and wholesome intentes, doing what they can to hinder and trouble the reformation of religion: and amonge other stoppes this is one of the greatest, that no small number, euē of the wisest sort do say, that there ought no such hast to be made vpon priuate authoritie, but that the determination of the general coū∣sell in controuersies of religion must needs be stayed for, & altogether looked after, with∣out the iudgement whereof, say they, it is not lawful for a kingdome, much lesse for any o∣ther common weale to ater any one point in religion once receiued, and hetherto vsed. But the Prophets and Apostles do not send vs to the counsels of priestes or elders, but to the word of God: yea in Ieremie we read, How say ye, we are wise, we haue the Ieremie. 8.

law of the Lord among vs? Truly the lying pen of the Scribes haue wrought a lye. The wise haue beene ashamed, they were afraide & were taken. For loe they haue cast out the word of the Lord. What wisedome then can there bee amonge them? Againe in the Gospell we read, No man, that layeth his hand to the plough, and looketh backe, is fitt for the kingdome of God. Therefore the Luke. 9. authoritie of the Prophets and Euangelists giueth counsell, fully to absolue and perfect∣ly to end the reformation of religion once begon with the feare of God, out of, or by the word of God, and not to looke for or stay vppon counsels, which are directed, not by the word of God, but by the affections and motions of men.
For the late examples of some ages within the space of these 400. last yeres or there What counsels haue beene in these latter age celebrated. about do sufficiently teach vs, what we may looke for by the determinations of generall counsels. The causes of counsels of old were the corruption either of doctrine or else of the teachers, or else the ruine of Ecclesiasticall discipline. And good and zealous men haue strongly cryed nowe by the space of 500. yeares and more, that there are crept into the Church superstitions, errours, & abuses, that the salt of the earth is vnsauorie, that is, that the ministers of the Churches are by slouth, ignorance, and wickednesse become vnseasonable, and that all discipline in the Church is fallen to ruine. Bernard Clare∣uallensis, being one among many, is a notable witnesse of the thing & cōdition. And for that cause there haue beene many counsels of priests celebrated, at the calling together of the bishop of Rome, together with the mutuall ayde of many kinges and Princes. But what became of them, what was done in them, and what small amendment or correction of doctrine, teachers, and discipline there was by them obteyned, the thinge it selfe (the more it is to be lamented) doth plainely declare. For the more that counsels were assem∣bled, the more did superstition & errour preuaile in doctrine, abuse in ceremoniall rites, pride, riot, couetousnesse, and all kinde of corruption in the teachers or priestes, & a foule blurring out of all honest discipline. For such men were made presidents of the counsels, as had neede first of all, themselues either to be brought into a better order, or else to be vtterly excommunicate out of the congregation of the Saincts, & they being presidents did in the counsels handle causes neither lawfull, nor lawfully. For the word of God had amonge them neither due authoritie nor dignitie, neither did they admitt to the exa∣mination and discussing of causes those men, whom it was decent to haue chiefly admit∣ted, but them whom they themselues did thincke good to like off, & in them they sought not the glorie of God, and the safegard of the Church, but sought themselues, that is, the glory and pleasures of this transitorie world. Therfore in the holding of so many generall counsels we see no amendement or reformation in the Church obteined, but rather er∣rours, abuses, and the kingdome and tyrannie of the priestes confirmed & augmented.
And euen at this day, although we would wincke & not see it, yet we cannot choose What christians at this day may looke for by ge∣neral coun∣sels. but euen with our hands feele, what we may looke and hope for in a generall counsell. There shall at this day no counsell haue any authoritie, vnlesse it be lawefully (as they expound lawfully) called together. None seemeth to be lawfully called together, but that which the bishop of Rome doth call together, & that which is holden according to the auncient custome and lawes receiued, namely, that, wherin they alone do sit, & haue, as they call it, deciding voyces, to whom power is permitted to determine & giue sentence in the counsel, and to them, who shall thinke it an heynous crime, and directly contrary to the oth that is giuen them, to do once so much as thinke, much more to speake any thing against the bishop & sea of Rome, against the decrees of the fathers, & constitutions of the counsels.

What therefore may you looke for in such a counsell? That forsooth, which I tolde you that nowe by the space of 400. yeares and more the afflicted Church of God, to the detri∣ment of Godlinesse hath seene and felt, namely, that the sincere doctrine of Christ being trode vnder foote, and holy discipline vtterly oppressed, wee see that euery day more and more with the great and intollerable tyrannie of the Sea and Church of Rome, there do increase and are confirmed vnsound and faultie doctrine, most filthie abuses, and too too great licentiousnesse and wicked liuing of the priestes. They forsooth doe crie that it is an heresie to accuse the Pope of errour, in the chest of whose breast all heauenly doctrine is layed vp and conteined. They crie that all the decrees of the Apostolicall sea must be receiued euen so, as if they were confirmed by the very voice of Peter himselfe. They crie that it is a wicked thing to moue any controuersie or to call into doubt the doctrine and Cermonies receiued & vsed in the Church of Rome, especially touching their Sa∣craments, whereof they to their aduauntage doe make silthie merchaundize. They crie that the Church of Rome hath power to iudge all men, but that no man hath any autho∣ritie to iudge of her iudgement. There are in the decretals most euident canons that do set out and vrge these thinges, as I haue told them. Now what maner reformation shall we thincke that they are likely to admitte which stand so stiffely to the defence of these thinges? Truly they would rather that Christ with his Gospell, and the true Church his spouse should wholie perish, thā they would depart one ynch from their decrees, rites, au∣thorities, dignities, wealth, and pleasures. They verily come into the counsell not to bee iudged of others, that they may amend those things which euen their owne consciences and all the world doe say would be amended, but they come to iudge and yoke all other men, to keepe still their power and authoritie, and to ouerthrowe and take away whatso∣euer withstandeth their lust and tyrannie. For afore there were sent out horrible thun∣ders against the accusers or aduersaries of the Sea Apostolique, that is, of the Papisti∣call corruption: after followed the hoat boltes of that thunder, euen sentences definitiue of excommunication: the secular power hath nowe by the space of 30. yeares and more beene called on, and persecution hath beene euery where raysed vpp against guiltlesse Christians, not for committing heynous crimes and defending naughtinesse, but for in∣ueighing against mischiefes and mischiefous men, and for requiring the reformation of the Church: and yet euen at this day most cruell edicts are out, and crueltie is exercised euery day more & more against them, that confesse the name of Christ: yea, such is their impudencie & brasen-faced boldnesse, they dissemble not that the counsell, if any must be celebrated, shall be called for the rooting out of heresies, yea they doe openly professe, that the counsell once held at Trent, was to this end assembled. Nowe since these things more clearely than the sunne are perceiued to be most true, thou shalt, most holy kinge. doe wisely and religiously, if without looking for the determination of a generall counsell, thou shalt proceed to reforme the Churches in thy kingdome according to the rule of the bookes of both testaments, which we do rightly beleeue, being written by the inspirati∣on of the holy Ghost, to be the very word of God. It is law∣full for e∣nerie Christian Church to reforme thinges out of or∣der
But nowe that it is lawfull for euery Christian Church, much more for euery nota∣ble Christian kingdome, without the aduise of the Church of Rome and the members therof, in matters of religion depraued by them, wholie to make are formation according to the rule of Gods most holy word, it is therby manifest, because Christians are the con∣gregation, the Church, or subiects of their king Christ, to whome they owe by all meanes most absolute and perfect obedience, Now the Lord gaue his Church a charge of refor∣mation:

he commended vnto it the sound doctrine of the Gospell together with the law∣full vse of his holy Sacraments: he also condemned all false doctrine, that I meane, that is contrarie to the Gospell: he damned the abuse and prophanation of the Sacraments: and deliuered to vs the true worship of God, & proscribed the false: therefore Christi∣ans obeying the Lawes & commaundements of their Prince do vtterly remoue or take away all superstition, and do restore, establish, and preserue the true religion, according to the manner, that Christ their Prince appointed them. He verilie is a foole or a mad man, which sayeth that the Church of Christ hath none authoritie to correcte such er∣rours, vicces, and abuses as do daily creepe into it. And yet the Romish tyrannie hath so bewitched the eyes of many men, that they thincke that they cannot lawfully doe any thinge, but what it pleaseth Rome to giue them leaue to doe. The Ecclesiasticall histo∣ries make mention of prouinciall Synods held in sondrie prouinces, wherein there were handled matters of faith, and the reformation of the Churches, and yet no mention once made of the bishop of Rome. What may be thought of that moreouer, that in certeine Synodes not heretical, but orthodoxasticall and Catholique, thou mayest finde some that were excommunicated for appealing from their owne Churches vnto the Church of Rome? Sainct Cyprian writing to Cornelius the bishop of Rome doth say, Since that it is ordeined by vs all, & that it is iust and right, that euery mans cause should be heard there, where the crime is committed, & that to euery seueral pastour is appointed a portion of the flocke, which euery one must gouerne, & make accompt of his doings before the Lord, it is expedient verilie that those, ouer whome we haue the charge, should not gad to and fro, by that meanes with their subtile and deceiptfull petulancie to make the concord of bishops to be at iarre, but to pleade their causes there, where they maye haue their accusers present, and witnesses of their crime committed. But letting passe the testimonies of men we do now come to the testimonies in the booke of God. The most holy king Io∣sias Holie Kinge Io∣sias. (most godly Prince) may alone in this case teach you what to do, and how to do with the warrant & authoritie of God himselfe. He by the diligent reading of the holy booke of God, and by the contemplation of things present, and the manner of worshipping God, that then was vsed, did vnderstand that his auncestours did greatly & very farre erre from the plaine and simple truth, for which cause he calleth together the princes and o∣ther estates of his kingdome, together with all the priestes to hold and celebrate a coun∣sell with them. In that counsell he standeth not long disputing whether the examples of the elders ought rather to be followed, or Gods commuandement simplie receiued: whether he ought rather to beleeue the Church, or the Scripture: and whether all the iudgement of religion ought to be referred to the high priest. For laying abroade the booke of the Lawe, he submitteth both himselfe, and all his vnto the Sacred Scripture. Out of the booke of the Lawe both he him selfe doth learne, & biddeth all his to learne, what thinge it is that pleaseth God, namely, that which was commuanded and learned in the reading of the Lawe of God. And presently hee gaue charge that all men should doe and execute that, not hauing any regard to the auncient custome, or to the Church that was at that time: he made all subiecte to the word of God. Which deede of his is so commended, that, next after Dauid, hee is preferred before all the kinges of Iuda and Israel.
Nowe your royall Maiestie cannot followe any better or safer counsell than this, cō∣sidering Faith can∣not be re∣fourmed but b th that it proceedeth from God, and that it is most fit for the cause which is euen

nowe in hand. The disputation is of the Reformation of Religion, and the true fayth of worde of God. Christ. You know that that doth spring from heauen, namely, that it is taught by the word of God, and powred into our hartes by the holy Ghost. For Paul sayth: Faith com∣meth by hearing, and hearing by the word of Christ. Therefore as true fayth is not grounded vppon the word of man so is it not taught or planted by the same. For in an Rom. 10. other place the same Apostle sayth: My preaching was not in the enticing words of mans wisedome, but in the shewing of the spirite and of power, that your faith might not be in the wisedome of man, but in the power of God. Not without good cause therefore doe we refuse the traditions of men, and turne onely to the 2. Cor. 2 doctrine of the word of the Lord, without which it is assuredly certeine, that there is no doctrine nor any foundation of true fayth.
Neither are they worthie to be heard, who thincke that the Canonicall Scriptures are not plaine enough, full enoughe, or sufficient enough, to minister a perfect platforme of reformation. They blaspheme the spirite of God, imputing vnto it obscurenesse & im∣perfection, The scrip∣tures doe sufficient∣ly minis∣ter a full platforme howe to refourme the church which faultes no prophane writer can well abide to heare off. Sainct Paule in defence of the trueth sayth: All Scripture giuen by inspiration of God is pro∣fitable to doctrine, to reproue, to correction, to instruction, which is in righ∣teousnesse, that the man of God may be perfecte, instructed vnto all good workes. What now I pray you is omitted in these woords, that may seeme to apperteine to a most absolute reformation? What I beseech you haue those impudent fellowes to say against this? Proceed, therefore, proceed (most holy king) to imatate the most godly prin∣ces, and the infallible rule of the holy Scripture, proceed, I say, without staying for mans authoritie, by the most true and absolute instrument of trueth, the booke of Gods most holy word, to reforme the Church of Christ in thy most happie England. The Lord Iesus, the head and mightie Prince of his Church, presirue and lead thee his most faithfull worshipper in the way of his trueth, vntill the end, to the glorie of his name, & the good estate and welfare of the whole Christian Church. At Tigure, in the moneth of August, the yeare of our Lord 1550.

