


YOur maiestie would, I knowe righte well, most royall king, admitt a straunger to talke with your Grace, if any newe guest should come and promise that hee would briefly out of the sentences and iudgementes of the wisest men, declare the very truest causes of the felicitie and vnhappie state of euery king & kingdome: and therefore I hope that I shall not be excluded from the speach of your maiestie, because I do assuredly pro∣mise, briefly to lay downe the very causes of the felicity and lamentable calamities of kinges and their king∣domes so clearely and euidently, that the hearer shall not neede to trouble himselfe with ouer busie diligence to seeke out my meaning, but onely to giue attentiue eare to that which is spoken. For by the helpe of God, I will make this treatise not to be perceiued on∣ly by the wit and deepe iudgement of learned heades, but also to be seene as it were with the eyes, and handled as it were with the hands of very ideots & vnlearned hearers, & that too, not out of the doubtfull decrees and deuises of men, but out of the assured word of the most true God. Euen the wisest men do very often deceiue vs with their counsels, and greatly endamage the followers thereof. But God which is the light and eternall wisedome cannot at any time either erre, or conceiue any false opinions or repugning counsells, much lesse teach others any thing but trueth, or seduce any man out of the right way. The wisedome of the father doth in the holy Gospell crie out and say: I am the light of the world: hee that followeth mee, shall not walke in darkenesse, but shall haue the light of life. This eternall wisedome of God as it doth not dis∣orderedly wrap things vp together and make them intricate, but layetb downe in order, and teaceth them plainly, so it doth not onely minister whoalsome counsells, but bringeth them to the effect, which they wish that obey her. Oftentimes verily men do giue coun∣sells that are not vnwhoalsome, but yet in their counsells that is altogether omitted, which should haue beene first and especially mencioned. All the wise men almost of the world, haue beene of opinion, that kings and kingdoms should be most happie, if the king of the countrie be a wise man, if hee haue many wise, aged, faithfull, and skilfull counsel∣lours: if his Captaines be valiaunt, warlike, and fortunate in battaile: if he abound with substaunce, if his kingdome bee on euery side, surely fortified: and lastly if his people bee of one minde and obedient. All this I confesse is truly, rightly, and very wisely spoken but yet there is another singular and most excellent thing, which is not her  ∣monge these necessaries, without which no true felicitie can bee attayned vnto, 

ing once gotten can safely be kept: when as contrarily where that one thing is present, all those other necessaries do of their owne accord fall vnto mē, as they themselues can best wish or deuise. The Lord our God therfore who is the onely giuer of wyse & perfect coun∣selles doth farre more briefly and better knit vpp all shortly, and say in the Gospell. But Matth. 6. Luke. 0. seeke ye first rather the kingdome of God, and the righteousnesse thereof, and ll  thinges shall easily be giuen vnto you. Againe, Blessed are the eyes  that ye see. For I say vnto you, that many kings and Prophets haue  to se the thinges that ye see, and to heare the thinges that ye heare,  neither heard nor seene them. And againe, Nay rather, blessed are they that heare the word of God and keepe it. And this one thing aboue allo∣tr Luke. 11. is vere necessarie. Marie hath chosen the good part which sall not be taken from her. Hauing my warrant therefore out of the worde of God I dare bouldly anowe, That Frō whēce ssuth th felicitie o calamitie of inges & King∣domes. those kinges shal flourish and be in an happie case, which whoalie giue and submit them∣selues and their kingdomes to Iesus Christ the onely begotten sonne of God, being kinge of kinges and Lord of Lords, acknowledging him to be the mightiest Prince and Mo∣narch of all, and themselues his vassalls, subiectes, and seruauntes: which finally doe not followe in all their affaires their owne minde and iudgement, the lawes of men that are contrarie to Gods commaundementes, or the good intentes of mortall men, but doe both themselues followe the verie lawes of the mightiest king and eternall Monarch, and al∣so cause them to be followed throughout all their kingdome, reforming both themselues and all theirs, at and by the rule of Gods holy word. For in so doing the kingdomes shall flourish in peace and tranquillitie, and the kinges thereof shall be most wealthie, victori∣ous, long lyued, and happie. For thus speaketh the mouth of the Lord which cannot pos∣sibly lye: When the king sitteth vppon the seate of his kingdome, he shall take the booke of the lawe of God, that hee may reade in it all dayes of his life, that hee may do it and not decline frō it, either to the right hand or to the left: but Deut. 17. that he may prolong the dayes in his kingdome both of his owne life, & of his children. And againe, Let not the booke of this law depart out of thy mouth, (Iosue, or thou whatsoeuer thou art that hast a kingdome) but occupie thy minde therein day and night, that thou mayst obserue & doe, according to all that is written therin: for then shalt thou make thy way prosperous, and then shalt Iosue 1. thou be happie. It is assuredly true therfore, confirmed by the testimonie of the most true God, & in expresse words pronounced, that the prosperitie of kinges and kingdomes consisteth in true faith, diligent hearing, and faithfull obeying the word or lawe of God: whereas their calamitie and vtter ouerthrowe doth followe the contrarie.
This wil I make, as my promise is, in this annexed demonstration both euident to the eyes, and as it were palpable to the verie handes, by the examples of most mightie kinges, not taken out of Herodotus or any prophane author, but out of the infallible historie of the most sacred Scriptures. Saule the first king of Israell was both most fortunate & vi∣ctorious, so long as hee did in all things followe the word of God: but when hee once gaue Saul. 1. Sa∣muel. 13. 14. 15. &c. place to his owne good intentes and meanings, being vtterly forsaken of the Lord, he hea∣reth Samuel say to his face: Thou hast refused and cast off the word of the Lord, therefore hath God also cast thee away, that thou shalt not be king of Israell. I will not here stand ouer largely to declare the miseries and calamities, wherein he was wrapped from that time forward. For as he himselfe was horriblie haunted and vexed with the euill spirite, so did he not ceasse to vexe and torment his people and kingdome,

vntill hee had brought them all into extreeme daunger, where hee and some of his were slaine, & put to the worste by the heathen their enimyes, leauing nothing behind him but a perpetuall shame and endlesse ignominie. Next after Saule doth Dauid succeede in the seate and kingdome, who without all controuersie was the most happiest of all other kinges and Princes. But what stoare he did set by the word of the Lord, it is euident to bee seene by many notable actes of his, and especially in that Alphabeticall Psalme which in order and number is the hundreth and nintenth. For therin he setteth forth the praise of Gods word, the whoalsom vertue wherof he doth at large wonderfully expound, in teaching what great desire & zeale we ought to haue thereto. For he was scholed & had learned before by priuate mishaps and shameful deeds, & lastly by the vn∣happie seditiō of his graceles sonne Absalom, what an euill it is to decline frō the word of the Lord. Solomō the sonne of Dauid the wisest & most cōmended king of all the world, Solomon 1. Reg. 4. &. 11. did so long enioy prosperitie & praise at the mouth of the Lord, as he did not neglect with reuerence to obey his word. But when once he had transgressed the Lords commaunde∣ment, streight way the Lord did say vnto him: For as much as this is done of thee, and that thou hast not kept mine ordinaunces and my statutes which I com∣maunded thee, I will rent thy kingdome from thee and will giue it to thy ser∣uaunt. And nowe marke that according to that saying, immediately after Solomons death the kingdome was rent into two partes, and that 10. Tribes followed Ieroboam the seruaunt of Solomon. Two tribes claue still to Roboam Solomons sonne. Hee for neglec∣ting Roboam. 2 Para. 12. the word of the Lord & following after straunge Gods, is ouerwhelmed with an in∣finite number of wofull miseries. For the Scripture testifieth that the Aegyptians came vpp against Hierusalem, and did destroy the Citie, Palace, and temple of the Lord. A∣bia the sonne of Roboam ouercame the host of Israell, and bare away a triumphant vi∣ctorie, Abia. 2. Pa∣ra. 13. when hee had wounded and slaine fiue hundred thousand men of the 10. Tribes of Israell. And of this so great a victorie no other cause is mencioned, but because hee beleeued the word of the Lord. Next after Abia, did his sonne Asa a renowmed and most puissaunt king reigne in his steede, of whom the holy Scripture testifieth, that hee Asa. 2. Pa∣ra. 14. abolished all superstition, and did restoare sincere religion according to the word of God: whereby hee obteyned a most flourishing kingdome in peace and quietnesse by the space of fourtie yeares. Againe of Iosaphat Asa his sonne wee read: The Lord was with Iosaphat 2. Para. 17. Iosaphat because he walked in the former wayes of his father Dauid & sought not Baalim, but sought the God of his father and walked in his commaunde∣ment. And therefore for his princelike wealth and famous victories he was renowmed through all the world. But to his sonne Ioram who forsooke the word of God Helias the Ioram. 2. Para. 12. Prophete said: Because thou hast not walked in the wayes of Iosaphat thy fa∣ther, and in the wayes of king Asa, but hast walked the wayes of the kings of Israell, behold with a great plague wil the Lord smite thy folke, thy children, thy wiues, and all thy goods: And thou shalt suffer great paine, euen a disease of the bowells, vntill thy guttes fall out. And whatsoeuer the Lord threatened to bring vppon him by the mouth of the Prophet, that did the vnhappie king feele with vn∣speakeable tormentes to his great reproche: being made an example of wretchdnesse & miserie which doth light on all the pates of them that do forsake the word of God. Nei∣ther was the happ of Ochosias sonne to king Ioram and Athalia in any point better. For Ochosias. 4. Kings. 9 at the commaundement of Iehu hee was stabbed in and slaine wretchedly: bcus hee chose rather to followe the lawes and rites of the kinges of Israell, than the verie true

lawes of the Lord his God. Moreouer Ioas a child yet but seuen yeares old being by the Ioas. 2. Par. 23. 24 labour, fayth, and diligence of the faithfull priest Ioiada restoared to, and settled in the place of his father who was slaine before him, reigned after the wicked Athalia was put to death most happilie and in a prosperous state so longe as Ioiada the priest did line. But when the high priest was once departed out of this world vnto the Lord, the king being immediately seduced by the malice and wilinesse of his wicked counsellours, left off to follow the word of the Lord. And as hee ceassed to followe the Lord. so did felicitie and glorie forsake to followe him. For the Syrians comming on with a verie small power of armed men, doe destroy and put to flight an insinite hoast of Iewish people, they put to the sword all Ioas his counsellours, and make a spoile of all his kingdome. And Ioas for reiecting the Lord deserued with excessiue griefe first to behold this miserie, than to  away with a long consuming sicknesse, and lastly vppon his bedd to haue his throate cru∣ellte cutt of his owne houshold scruaunts, Amasias the sonne of Ioas is renomed for a amous victorie which he obteyned vppon the Idumits, for no other cause, but for obey∣ing Amasias. 2 Para. 25 the word of the Lord. But afterward when hee began to rebell against God and his Prophets, he is in battaile vanquished by Ioas king of Israell, by whom when be was spoy∣led, and compelled to see the ouerthrowe of a great part of the walles of Hierusalem, he was himselfe at the last by conspiratours entrpped and miserablie murdered. Next af∣ter him succeeded his sonne Osias who also as well as his father, enioyed a singular feli∣citie Osias. 2. Para. 26. and most happie life, so longe as he gainsayed not the mouth of God: but when hee would vsurpe and take vppon him that office, which God had properly appointed to the Leuits alone, directly opposing himselfe against the word of the Lord, he was striken with a leprosie, and for his vncleannesse was compelled seuerallie to dwell loofe in banishmēt from the companie of men euen vntil his last and dying day. Iothan also the sonne of O∣sias is reported to haue beene wealthie and victorious in his warres: the cause of this Iothan. 2. Para. 27. felicitie the Scripture dth briefly add and say: Iothan became mightie, because he directed his wayes before the Lord his God. But contrarily Achaz the some of Iothan, as hee was of all the Iewishe kinges almost the wickeddest, so was hee in his life the most vnfortunate. For in so much as hee forske the lawe of the Lord his God, the Achaz. 2. ara. 28. Lord deliuered both him and his people, first into the hands of the king of Syrians, and afterward into the hands of the Israelites, who in one day lew one hundred and twentie thousand Iewes, and tooke captine away with them two hundreth thousand women and children. So Achaz himselfe and all that were his by feeling had proofe of all kinde of calamities, beeing made an example to terrifie all other that doe gaisay the woorde of God. The good and godly king Ezechias succeeded his vngodly father in the seate and kingdome. Of him wee haue this testimonie in the holie Scripture: Hee did that Ezechias 4. Reg. 18. which was right in the sight of the Lord, according to all that his father Da∣uid did. Hee put away the high places, and brake the images, and cut downe the groaues, and all to brake the brasen Serpent which Moses had made. For vnto those dayes the children of Israell burnt sacrifice to it. Hee trusted in the Lord God of Israell. For hee claue to the Lord, and departed not from him, but kept his commaundements, which the Lord commaunded Moses.
And now let vs heare what followed vppon this obedience and faith of his. The Scrip∣ture goeth forward and sayth: And the Lord was with him, so that hee prospered in all thinges that hee tooke in hand. While hee did reigne the most auncient and puissant Monarchie of the Assyrians was broken and diminished. For when Senach∣rib

king of Assyria besieged the citie of Ierusalem the Angell of the Lord in one night lue in the Assyrian campe one hundred fourescore and fiue thousand souldiours. And the king of Babylon also did verie honourably by his ambassadours send prince like giftes vnto Ezechias desiring earnestly his amitie and friendshipp. For the glorie of that most godly king was blowen abroade and knowen in all the world.
Againe when his sonne Manasses a verie wicked man did not treade the pathe, Manasses 4. Reg. 21. and expresse the deedes of his most holy father, but being made king in the twelfth yeare of his age did of purpose crosse the word of God and brought in againe all the superstiti∣on, which his father had abolished, hee was taken captiue and carried away to Babylon: and although by the goodnesse and mercie of God hee was restoared to his seate againe, yet when he died hee left a maymed and a trouble some kingdome vnto his sonne Am∣mon, who also for his rebellion against the word of God as a most vnfortunate man reig∣ned Ammon. 4 Reg. 21. but two yeares onely, and was at the last wretchedly slaine by his owne houshold ser∣uaunts. In place of his murdered father was his sonne Iosias settled in the kingdome, be∣ing when hee was crowned a child but eight yeares old. Of all the kinges of Iuda he was Iosias. 4. Reg. 22. the floure and especiall crowne. Hee reigned quietly and in all pointes most happilie by the space of one and thirtie yeares. Now the Scripture which cannot lye, doth paint out to our eyes the fayth and obedience, which hee did deuoutly shewe to the woord of God, for which that felicitie did accompanie his kingdome. Hee was nothing moued with the admonitions of his father Ammons counsellours. But so soone as hee had heard the woords of the lawe read out of the booke, which Helkia the high priest found in the tem∣ple at Hierusalem, hee streight way committed himselfe whoaly to God and his woorde. Neither stayed hee to looke for the mindes and reformations of other kinges and king∣domes, but quickly forecasting the best for his people, hee beganne to reforme the cor∣rupted religion, which hee did especially in the eightenth yeare of his age. And in that reformation hee had a regard alwayes to followe the meaning of the holie scripture a∣lone, and not to giue eare to the deedes of his predecessours, to the prescribed order of longe continuaunce, no to the common voyces of the greatest multitude. For he assem∣bled his people together, before whome hee layde open the booke of Gods law, and ap∣pointed all thinges to be ordered according to the rule of his written word, And there∣vppon it commeth which wee finde written that hee spared not the auncient temples & longe accustomed rites which Solomon and Ieroboam had erected and ordeyned against the word of God. To be short this king Iosias pulled downe and ouerthrew, whatsoeuer was set vpp in the Church or kingdome of Iuda against the woorde of God. And least peraduenture any one should cauill and say that hee was ouer hardie and too roughe in his dealinges, the Scripture giueth this testimonie of him and sayth: Like vnto him was there no king before him, which turned to the Lord with all his heart, with all his soule, and all his might, according to all the lawe of Moses: nei∣ther after him arose there any such as hee. Whereas wee read therefore that this so commended and most fortunate king, was ouercome and slaine in a foughten battaile, that death of his is to be compted part of his felicitie, & not of his miserie. For the Lord himselfe said to Iosias: I will gather thee vnto thy fathers, and in peace shalte thou bee buried, that thine eyes may not see all the euill which I will bring vppon this place. For there is no greater argument that the people and verie princes of the kingdome vnder that most holie king were meere hypocrites and ido∣laters, than for beecause next & immediately after his death both his sonnes and

Peeres reiecting the word of God did bring in againe all superstition and blasphemous wickednesse. Whereuppon wee reade that for the whoale 22. yeares, wherein the kinges of Iud did reigne after the death of Iosias, there was no peace or quietnesse in Hierusa∣lem, but perpetuall seditions and most bloudie murders. Next after Iosias reigned his Ioachas, Ioachim, Ichonias, and Zede¦chias. 4. Kings. 23. 24. 25. sonne Ioachas: but within three monethes after he was taken, bound, and ledd captiue a∣way into the land of Aegypt. After the leading away of Ioachas, his brother Ioachim ware the crowne: whom in the eleuenth yeare of his reigne being bound in chaynes was slaine by Nabuchodonosor, and lastly (as Ieremie saith) was buried in the sepulcre of an Asse. In Ioachims steede was his sonne Iechonias set vpp, but about three monethes af∣ter hee with his Princes and substaunce was taken captiue and ledd away to Babylon. After him the kingdome was giuen to Zedechias the sonne of Iosias: but because hee would not obey the word of God preached by the Prophete Ieremie, he looseth both his life and kingdome in the eleuenth yere of his reigne. In whose time also the temple is set on fire, Hierusalem is sacked, and the people slaine for the most part or led away captiue. Thus much hetherto touching the kinges of Iuda. For in Zedechias both the kingdome and maiestie or dignitie thereof did fayle and make an ende.
To these if wee add the endes and destinies of the kinges of Israell, we shal againe be compelled to confesse that all felicitie of kinges and kingdomes doe consist in hearing and The kings of Israell. following the word of God, and that contrarily calamities and miseries doe rise by the cō∣tempt and neglecting of the same. For Ieroboam the first king of the seperated Israelites, letting passe the word of God, did ordeyne new rites to worship the Lord by, and erected new temples, but by so doing, hee ouerthrew himselfe, his house, and all his kingdome. Af∣ter him doth Baasa succeede both in the kingdome & idolatrous religion, which was the cause why he & his were vtterly destroyed. Then followeth Amri the father of Achab, who for augmenting idolatrous impietie, is horriblie slaine with all his family so that not one of his escaped the reuenging sword of Gods anger & ielousie. And for because Iehu was faithfull & valliant in killing those tyraunts, in dispatching Baals priestes, & roo∣ting out of idolatrous superstition, the Lord doth promise & say vnto him: Because thou hast zealously done that which thou hast done, according to all that is right in my sight, therefore shall thy children vnto the fourth generation sit on the seat of Israel. And wee read verily that his sonnes and nephues were notable Princes which succeded in the kingdome, euen Ioachas, Ioas, Ieroboam the second of that name, and Zacharias. The other kinges, as Sellum, Manahe, Pekaiah, Peka and Osee, had their kingdome altogether like to the kingdome of the sonne of Iosas, to wit, in a seditious troublesome & a most miserable taking. For they despised the mouth of the Lord. Ther∣fore were they vtterly cutt off, and for the most part either slaine or carried away cap∣tiue by their enimies the Assyrians. From the diuision of tbe people into two seuerall kingdomes after the death of Solomon, there were in number 19 kinges of Israell, and 18. of Iuda. The kings of Israell altogether reigned about 272. yeares, and they of Iuda about 393. Now by the space of so many yeares in the most renowmed & peculiar peo∣ple of God, which was as it were a glasse set before the eyes of all nations to view and be∣hold themselues in, there might the truest causes of felicitie & calamities of all kings & kingdoms in the whoale world be so liuely represented and perfectly paynted, that there should bee no neede to fetch from else where, a more plaine and euident demonstration of the same.
And yet for al that wee are not without other forreigne examples, wherby to proue Forreigne kings.

it. For the Pharaoes of Aegypt were the destruction both to themselues and also to their kingdome, by their stubborne rebellion against Gods word. Againe Darius Priscus and the great Nabuchodonosor enioyed no small felicitie, because they despised not the coun∣sells of Daniel. Balthazar king of Babylon, a despightfull contemner of God and his word, is in one night destroyed with all his power. Babylon the most auncient and famous citie of the world is taken, set on fyre, sacked, and ouerthrowne, and the kingdom transla∣ted to the Medes and Persians. Neither were the kinges of Persia vnfortunate at all, I meane, Cyrus and Darius otherwise called Artaxerxes, because they fauoured the Kings which fa∣uoured gods word and kings which per∣secuted the same. word of God, and did promoate his people and true religion. But on the other side wee read that Antiochus syrnamed Epiphanes was most vnfortunate, who as it were ma∣king warre with God himselfe, did most wickedly burne and make away the bookes of ho∣ly Scripture. Furthermore wee haue as great stoare of examples also euen out of those Histories which followed immediately the time of Christ his ascension. For so many Ro∣mane Emperours, kinges and Princes as persecuted the preaching of the Gospell, and Church of our Lord Iesus Christ, & aduaunced idolatrie and superstitious blasphemie, so many, I say, did die a foule and shamefull death. Of this are Eusebius and Orosius re∣nowmed Historiographers assured witnesses. Againe S. Augustine lib. 5. de Ciuit. Dei, affirmeth that incredible victories, verie great glorie, and most absolute felicitie hath beene giuen by God vnto those kinges, which haue in faith sincerely embraced Christe their Lord, and vtterly subuerted idolatrie and superstitious blasphemie. It is euident therefore that felicitie commeth by good will and obedience to the word of God, & that all kings and kingdoms shalbe vnhappie, which forsake the word of God, and turne them∣selues to mens inuentions. And this I haue, I trust, declared hetherto so plainly, that the hearers may seeme not onely to vnderstand, but also to see before their eyes, and as it were to feele with their hands the pith and materiall substaunce of this whole treatise.
But wherunto doth all this tend? That your Royall maiestie forsooth may vndoubt∣tingly know, & be assuredly persuaded that true felicitie is gotten and reteyned by faith∣full studie in the word of God, to witt, if you submit your selfe altogether and your whoale kingdome to Christe the chiefe and highest Prince, if throughout your whoale realme, you dispose and order religion and all matters of iustice according to the rule of Gods ho∣ly word, if you decline not one haires breadth from that rule, but studie to aduaunce the kingdome of Christ, and goe on (as hetherto you haue happily begon) to subuert & tread vnder foote the vsurped power of that tyrannicall Antichrist. Not that your maiestie needeth any whit at all mine admonitions or instructions. For you haue vndoubtedly that heauenly teachr in your minde, I meane the holie Ghoste, which inspireth you with the verie true doctrine of sincere and pure religion. Your Maiestie hath the sacred Bible, the holiest booke of all bookes, wherein as in a perfect rule the whoale matter of petie & our true saluation, is absolutely conteyned and plainly set downe. Your Maiestie hath noble men and many Counsellours belonging to your kingdome, faithfull, valliaunt, and skilfull heads both in the lawe of God, and men, who for their wisedome & loue that they beare to the sincere truth, are greatly commended amonge forreigne nations. And for that cause all the faithfull doe thinke and call your maiestie most happie. But that hap∣pie king Ezechias (although hee did especially vse the helpe of those excellent men Es and Micheas) did not yet despise faithfull admonishers, euen amonge the  sort of Leuites: neither thought they that in admonishing the king, the lst and  labour in vaine. I therefore hauing good affiaunce in your  good ad godl¦disposition,

do verily hope that this short discourse of mine, touching the true causes of the felicitie and calamities of kinges and kingdoms, shall haue a proiting place with you. Euen I, which 12. yeares since, did dedicate vnto your father of famous memorie Henrie viij. a booke touching the authoritie of the holie Scripture, and the institution and fun∣ction of Bishopps, against the Pontificall chuffes of the Romishe superstition and tyran∣nie, and now by experience know that that labour of mine brought forth no small fruite within the realme of England: am now so bold againe as to dedicate these my Sermons vnto your Royall maiestie. In these Sermons I handle not the least and lowest points or places of Christian religion, the lawe, sinne, grace, the Gospell, and repentaunce. Neither doe I, as I thinke, handle them irreligiously. For I vse to conferre one Scripture with an other, than which there is no way better and safer to follow in the handling of matters touching our religion. And forbecause you are the true defender of the Christian fayth, it cannot bee but well vndoubtedly, to haue Christian Sermons come abroad vnder the defence of your Maiesties name. My minde was according to mine abilitie, and the measure of fayth which is in mee, to further the cause of true religion, which now begin∣neth to budd in England, to the great reioysing of all good people. I haue therefore writ∣ten these Sermons at large, and handled the matter so, that of one many more may bee gotten. Wherein the Pastors discretion shall easily discerne what is most auayleable and profitable for euery seuerall Church. And the Pastors duetie verily is rightly to moawe the word of truth, and aptly to giue the fodder of life vnto the Lords flocke. They will not thinke much, I hope, because in these Sermons I doe vse the same matter, the same ar∣guments, and the very same words, that other before mee both auncient and late writers (whom I haue iudged to followe the Scriptures) haue vsed yer nowe, or which I my selfe haue else wher alledged in other bookes of mine heretofore published. For as this doctrine at all times, & in all pointes agreeable to it selfe is safest to be followed, so hath it alwayes beene worthily praised of all good and godly people. If the Lord graunt me life, leysure & strength, I will shortly add the other eight Sermons of the fourth Decade, which as yet are behinde. And all that I say heere, I speake it still without all preiudice to the iudgement of the right and true Church. Our Lord Iesus the king of kinges and Lord of Lords, lead you with his spirite, and defend you to the glorie of his name, and safetie of all your Realme. At Tigure in the moneth of March, the yeare of our Lord. 1550.

