



THat wise Philosopher Plato in an Epistle to Dyonisius King of Sicile,Pag. 671. hath a wise saying, . That is: It is great safetie not to write, but to learne▪ for those that publish things in writing to the view of all, do make themselues subiect to the sharpe cen∣sures of many. Of whom, some will finde fault with the matter, and some with the manner of deliuering the
 same. And surely I suppose, there was neuer age more fertile then this, in bringing forth malicious momouses, that are more ready to carpe & repre∣hend the well doings of others, then any wayes to doe good themselues. Yea there be many which by finding fault with other mens good and pro∣fitable labors, seeke to procure to themselues an opinion and fame of fine wittes, and singuler learning. Therefore for that I haue bene vn∣willing to be bitten with such Theons teeth, and considering both the great abundance of bookes, whereof in my iudgement a great number might wel be spared, and the plenty of learned writers, which this learned age doth yelde, I not being ignorant of the measure of mine owne foote, but wel discerning my smal myte, from other mens great and many talentes, haue thought good to follow Platoes safe counsaile, in being rather a learner, then a writer. Insomuch that hitherto I neuer published any thing in print, but one other sermon preached a∣bout 14. or 15. yeares past at Paules
 crosse, the which, that reuerend, god∣ly, & learned man of blessed memory M. Thomas Leauer, not onely desired me, but vpon my refusall and deniall vehemently adiured and charged me in the name of God for to penne and to print. But that simple & short ser∣mon was so handled in printing, a∣boue 60. foule faultes being commit∣ted in it (such is the great and intolle∣rable negligence of some printers, which deserueth sharpe punishment) that I haue bene euer since more mo∣ued to continue Platoes safe course of not writing, but learning. Not∣withstanding whereas of late it plea∣sed your Lordshippe to request me to preach at the ministration of the ho∣ly communion in your Church (al∣though you haue there placed a man indewed with good giftes, who both is well able, and also diligently doth discharge that deuty) the which whē I had performed in such sort as God by his spirite inabled me, it pleased your Ladyship to conceiue so good liking of it, that first you sent, and after your selfe spake vnto me to giue you the
 same in writing, not onely for your own vse & instruction, but also for the reformation (if it might please god to giue good successe thereunto) of the vnsound iudgement of some, whose well doing you greatly tender. The which your godly request, tending to so godly an end, when I could with safety neither of conscience, nor duty denie: I haue labored (although more willing to preach sixe sermons, then penne one) to satisfie your desire. And for that there were others also at the same time, which moued me to the same effect as your Ladiship did, and were desirous to haue copies thereof, whom without my ouer great trou∣ble I could not content: I haue by these causes bin vrged, and by some men perswaded, to let it passe in print Hoping that as it liked your Honors, and the other godly hearers, who ac∣knowledged that they were greatly edefied & confirmed in the true do∣ctrine therein conteined, by hearing of it: so by the reading of it, some may be more established in the truth, and others if they will lay away preiudi∣cate
 opinion, and wilful affection: & according to the old law of the Athe∣nians will equally and indifferently heare both parties may be reformed by it.Aeschines cont. . But it is very miserable and lamentable to see, how stubburnly manie stand against the truth, and euen wilfullie shut their eies from beholding the cleare light thereof. Soe that they will neither heare the word of God preached, nor reade godly and learned bookes published for their instruction.Zachar. 7.11. Wherein they follow the steps of their forefathers, who refused to hearken, turned their backes, and stopped their eares that they might not heare, and hardened their hearts as an adamant, that they might not heare the lawe and the words which the Lord of hostes sent in his spirite by the hands of the for∣mer Prophets. Therefore great wrath hath comen from the Lord of hostes. But of these men I will not further at this present speake, onely I beseech God open their eyes, that they may see the miserable estate wherein they stand, and that at the length they may
 turne from darknesse to light,Acts. 26. from the power of Satan vnto God, that they may receiue inheritance among those that be sanctified by faith in Ie∣sus Christ. And to the end that this simple sermon may be a better meane and instrument for the instructing of such as be simply ignorant, and not wilfully peruerse & obstinate, I haue inlarged the same more in penning, then I did in preaching. And haue added some discourses, and sundrie testimonies of auncient fathers, with places of popish and Ethnish writers which in preaching, partly the short∣nesse of time would not permit me to vtter, & partly of purpose I did omit, This sermon I haue neither in prea∣ching, nor penning sought to beutifie with ornaments of words and elo∣quence, which in these diuine & hea∣uenly matters is not so needfull: but haue thought it sufficient for me, to deliuer and set forth the plaine truth, in a plaine and simple phrase, being more desirous, that it may lighten the minds, and instruct the hearts of the hearers and readers of it, with sound
 doctrine, and substance of matter, then tickle and delite their eares with a vaine sound, or glittering shewe of wordes. The which simple sermon such as it is, for as much as your lord∣ship requested me to preach it, and your Ladyship moued me to write it: I haue thought it most meete, to offer and present it vnto your Honors, as a true testimonie and token of my lo∣uing and dewtiful mind towards you for your great fauour shewed me, and sundrie benefits bestowed vpon me. And I humbly beseech your Honors, that if you haue found and felt in∣crease of knowledge in Gods holie truth, and of true comfort, by hea∣ring this & such other sermons prea∣ched, as I am assured you haue, that then you would daily more and more increase & go forward in the loue of the preaching of Gods word, and to imitate that noble example of that noble man of AEthiopia,Act. 8.22. who both read (& that in his charet, trauailing by the way,) the Prophet Isaias, and also heard Philip expound the same. Euen so that your Honors may daily
 more & more grow in the true know∣ledge, feare, and obedience of God, Wherein true Nobilitie doth chiefely consist, not onely daily and reuerent∣ly reade the word of God your selues: but also diligently heare faithfull Phi∣lips, that is, godly and learned mini∣sters truely expound and preach the same. Which is most needfull for you. For as that noble mā profited by rea∣ding, but was conuerted vnto Christ by Philips preaching:Rom. 10.14. so it is chiefly the preaching of the Gospel, which winneth vs vnto Christ, planteth faith, & worketh repentance in vs, and dire∣cteth & stirreth vs vp to walke warely & vprightly before the Lord our god. For as spice when it is brused, is of more force to season, & meat when it is chewed is more meete to norish vs: Euen so the word of god, when it is by exposition as it were brused, chewed & applyed vnto vs, is of more power to season the corrupt humors that be in vs, & effectually to feed vs, that we may liue in holines & righteousnesse vnto God: for want & cōtempt of the preaching of Christs gospel, it is lamē∣table
 to see how many fearfully fal a∣way from the grace of god. Therefore that your Honors may not only con∣stantly cōtinue, but also daily increase in the true worship and feare of God, loue earnestly the preaching of gods word, let it be dearer vnto you than thousands of gold and syluer, sweeter than hony, & the hony comb, & hun∣ger after it as your daily food:Matth. 13 45. esteeme it for that pretious pearle which ought to be more dear vnto you, thā al these earthly and transitorie things of the world, for all flesh is grasse,Isai. 40. and al the glorie thereof, is as the flower of the fielde, which soone fadeth and fal∣leth away: but the word of our God abideth for euer, and shall make vs stand & florish for euer in gods king∣dome, if faithfully in our heartes we beleeue it, and obediently in our liues and conuersation follow it.
Thus assuring my self that your Ho∣nors will take in good part this my bolde aduenture in presenting this small mite and poore gift vnto you: I will forbeare from further troubling you: beseeching God the father of mercie so to worke by his holy spirit in
 you, that you may be filled with the knowledge of his wil in al wisedome,Colos. 1.9. and spirituall vnderstanding, that yee may walke worthy of the Lord, plea∣sing him in all things, being fruitfull in all good workes and increasing in the knowledge of God. &c.
 At my house in VVoodhall the 18. of Februarie. 1586.
