



IT is a true saying of the Philosopher (Right Honourable, and my very good Lord) that there is nothing wherin there is life, but it hath either motion or acti∣on; and such is the condition of man, that a greater measure of both is impo∣sed vpon him, to humble him, than vpon many other crea∣tures: The whole course of his life being compared vnto a Pilgrimage, in which state a man can presume vpon no certaine continuance. For as a Traueller that intendeth to finish his journey, staies not in his Inne, but desires more to be vpon his way, than in his bed: so it is with man, who cannot possesse himselfe in rest, from the time of his birth vntill his death, and oftentimes is troubled with needlesse, and vnprofitable Labours, to attaine vnto his ends; which got, both they and he, perish. Let Alexander that great Em∣perour, be a president of this; who with much Labour, hauing got a great estate, enjoyed it but a short time: and you may reade in this Treatise, with what intollerable paines Antigonus Epiphanes endeauoured to establish his
 kingdome to him; and yet in the end purchased little but a lamentable death. There is none of the Patriarchs, Prin∣ces, Iudges, Kings. Prophets, Apostles, or others mentioned in the Scriptures, that could make euident in the whole course of their life, any better than a laborious and tedious Pilgrimage. With what paines did Abraham wander from Chaldaea, into the land of Canaan? How was Moses tormen∣ted in the Wildernesse? almost to the losse of his soule; but absolutely neuer to come into the promised land. And for
Dauid, how miserably liued hee, when he could not trust his owne friends? this is the state of man, and to say truth, he differs in little (beside reason) from other crea∣tures; and that either lockt vp in silence, or not exprest in some memorable action, makes him so much the more capable of misery: being onely able to distinguish of joy and feare. And that these things may be the more apparant, I haue endeauoured to collect out of the Works of others, this Treatise, wherein is briefly described the Trauels of all the Prophets, Princes, &c. together with the condition of Cities, Countries, Islands and other memorable places, as they are mentioned in the Old and New Testaments. All which, that I might expresse that dutie which hath a long time lien concealed, I haue wholly dedicated to your LL. seruice: humbly intreating your fauourable acceptance of my paines; that so being shrouded vnder your Ho. prote∣ction, they may the better withstand the aduerse opinions of such as please to censure them.

