


THat I make so bold, as in this sort to offer these my labours vnto your graue and learned censure, it is not for any worthinesse of the thing it selfe, as in any sense it may be mine, or for any thing it hath yet had by me: but for the hope that I haue conceiued, that in time it may haue by some of you; as a Lazarus now assaying againe, though once he was but little regarded, whether yet he can speede any better at the rich mans gate.
None other foundation, we all doe know, can any man lay, but that which is long since already laide, euen Iesus Christ: but the building which others may reare therupon, may well be diuers; either commendably answering the foundation laide, or (yet not without reproach and losse to the workeman) swearuing from it. It may answere the foundation laide, as also it may swearue from the same, either in substance: or else but in forme or manner onely. As for the substance (God be thanked for it) there may hardly bee found any such variance at all among vs (I know not of any) as may not in good, or some tollerable sense haue place in the building. The maner is diuers: one kind, that which is commonly vsed by all, the other, that which this present intention of mine doth point vnto. That which is commonly vsed by all, is but to deale by particulars: as either by whole Bookes a-part by themselues; or else by seuerall parcels or portions thereof. And this if we marke, we may see to be the course of all generally: not onely in the deliuery of the Word of God by word of mouth, as we terme it, as by Sermons and Lectures: but also euen of all our writers too, in a maner both olde and new; whether they haue taken but cer∣taine Bookes or some parcels of them in hand, or whether they haue dealt with them all.
The course that this intention of mine doth point vnto, is altogether another thing & diuers from it: not in any dislike of the other but to make vse of this also. For that other is not onely blamelesse in it selfe: but of singular moment withall. And this that I speake of as so far from crossing the other: that it discloseth, both a
 readier, and an easier way vnto it. Neither is it any more but onely to deale first with the whole, and to contriue it into one entire Body: as if hauing the portra∣ture or Image of the body of man, in metall, wood, or stone, but all the members se∣uered from the body, and from their owne proper places, and in many seueral par∣cels themselues, a man should in such sort dispose thereof, and lay euery one to his fellow, that so he should giue forth the true shape thereof againe. Making no doubt, but the best way to come to the knowledge of all particulars, is first to bee acquain∣ted well with the whole.
In my measure, at such a thing herein haue I aimed: but graunting withall, that it is farre beyond any furniture that is in me, in such sort to handle it, as the worthinesse thereof doth require. Therefore haue I made this offer thereof vnto you: yet not onely on mine owne desire, that so it may come to better handling; but also, on a good hope that I haue conceiued, that God will in his good time, set some of you on worke about it. And beginners being first directed vnto the whole, and being orderly holpen therin, after that so, for some reasonable time, they haue beene made acquainted with it, may then at their pleasure descend to particulars: and, as by a more orderly course; so to their much better aduantage. In so much that the thing it selfe is not so much to be commended to any, as that wee all may iustly maruaile, that of so many rare and excellent men, that former ages, and espe∣cially this of ours, both for learning and godly care, haue raised vnto vs: yet is there none, that I do know of, not any one, that hath taken the course that now we speake of; though otherwise, in their kinde, they haue done maruailous well, and many of them in very great measure.
In that my abridgement in Latin, of Master Caluines Institutions, wherein also I shewed, what method I conceiued him to obserue (which to the yonger Stu∣dents, members of the one bodie of you, many yeares since, 1579. I then did dedi∣cate) I both mooued such a thing, and promised withall, that if others should not doe it before, my selfe would make proofe, what I might bee able to doe therein. Since which time I haue now and then, lesse or more, beene dealing with it: and this is the thing that it hath pleased God to vouchsafe me therein to doe.
Those that haue gone on all the whole Bible, or (which is the same) on all the Scriptures, haue gone nearest vnto it: but so farre as they haue gone indifferently on all (on one booke after another in like sort of those that are of Doctrine, as of those that deliuer the Storie intermingling the one with the other; and haue not bin carefull to make their choice of such as did appertaine to the body of the whole, and so to dispose them) so farre haue they also missed the course that now we speake of. But these matters are more plaine in themselues, then that we need any farther businesse to lay them open.
Neither is it lightly to be regarded, that such as are to acquaint others with those things that doe appertaine to the Kingdome of God, should by obseruing this course, euer deliuer vnto the people (and that in some better order then hath beene vsed) the vndoubted word of God: it being of most assured testimonie, both that it is mighty in operation; and that when it is not carefully deliuered, in some mea∣sure as it ought to be, (as also, in these dayes of the Gospell, oftimes it is not, euen by men of notable gifts so farre as they seeke themselues withall) thence is it, that so little conuersion is wrought thereby among the people. The people againe, hauing those things gathered in some plaine and easie manner may haue good encourage∣ment thereby, to acquaint themselues better therewith.
In both which (that more comfortable dicharge of your owne duties therein, I
 meane, and the raising vp of the hearts of the people to a sound desire of those other matters) the better heede that you take, neuer to let downe those good orders that already you haue, & the more careful that you are euer to repaire the ruines there∣of as occasion is offered, the more sauorie Salt shall you bee your selues, and so bee more able to season others: as on the other side, the lesse that smaller matters are in such case regarded; the harder doth it afterward prooue to withstand disorder in those that are greater.
God euer vouchsafe you the mercy, both that you may grow rich in all good gra∣ces: and that euer you be carefull withall, readily to bestow them, to the glory of him that gaue them; and to the helpe of those that neede them.
London, the 25. of Ianuary 1610.

