



SInce the tyme THAT IT HATH PLEA∣sed the goodnesse of God, that in our dayes Religion or the Faith of Christe shoulde be deliuered from the chaines of darkenes, and come forth a∣gaine with her wonted glorie, many of the learned & godly disposed haue done their endeuour, to make so plaine a way as they could, to bring the same to the knowledge of others. whose endeuour and godly purpose althoughe I gladly graunt to be such, as is to be of all men not only receaued, but also with all due∣tifull reuerence imbraced: yet for the truthes sake muste I needes adde thus
 much thervnto, that although diuers of thē haue done very well, yet none hath so absolutely performed the same in all respectets; but that others also may thinke of helping it forwarde; & put to their hād to do what they can. Not that hereby I charge any of thē with error in some points of their doctrine: but only that I finde not in then so good a Me∣thode or maner of teaching, as on the behalfe of all beginners were generally of vs all to be vvished. And although I may seeme, in the iudgement of some, to make this complaint without any cause: yet haue I the warrant of myne owne cōscience, both that there is cause vrgēt inough; & that the cōplaint ought rather to be made on the behalfe of the truth, thē to be suppressed in some pri∣uate respect. Of this am I sure, that so lōg as we tye our selues to the very steps or footings of others, neither can we vse the fredome of our owne pace, neyther do we admit the benefit of a better way.
Vpon which occasion, as I haue bene a while since perswaded, that I coulde not better bestow my labour, to the vse
 of those that wold gladly haue a groūd of religiō, then if I should both contract & interprete the institutiōs of M. Cal∣uine (who in my minde hath come ne∣rest to his purpose: sauing only that he is partly to long, but especially to hard for a beginner); & thervpō set in hande with the worke, & accōplished the same so well as I coulde: so haue I since that time, vpon further aduice of that mat∣ter, me selfe cōtriued the Summe of all religiō (so far as it hath pleased God to prosper the same in my handes) much shorter, & playner in my opiniō, thē the other by any meanes might haue bene brought vnto, following the order that he hath left vs. and because the methods or formes of compacting religion to∣gether that yet are forth, are not (as I take it) come to that perfectiō that were to be wished: therfore haue I streightly followed none that yet is extant; but coasted ouer to the aūciēt high way, so nere as I could aesteming religiō so pre∣cious a thing, that no mā cā bestow his labor better, thē by adorning it so much as he can; and by making it plaine vnto
 others: whether he shall doo it by the leuell of those that haue written be∣fore him, or by some other way of his owne; so long as in substaunce he neuer swarueth from the auncient truth.
The misliking that I haue of those o∣ther Methodes that yet are geuen forth, is not so absolute as some may take it: and, in effecte, is no more but this. Of Methodes we haue two principall sorts. The first is the same vvhich goeth by the order of the Cathechisme: the other, that which the learned do (for the most part) follow, in their Institutions or cō∣mon places of Christian religion. That kinde of Method that followeth the or∣der of the Cathechisme, doth in deede disclose vnto all, after their maner, what is ment by the ten Commaundementes by the articles of the Fayth, and by the Lordes prayer: and by occasion therof, doth also discourse of all Religion, in suche sorte as occasion there is offered. But seeing that the matter of these doth very muche mingle together, the treatise that shal go by their leuell, must nedes come short of a perfect Method.
 Neuerthelesse, they doo very well geeue foorth the true sense of the chiefest points: and because these three thinges before recited are in a maner the onely bookes of the common people, they are no doubt in that respect to singular vse, for that they open those thinges vnto them. That which the learned do com∣monly follow in their Institutions and common places, doth come much nerer to the nature of a iust method; but yet doth not fully attaine thervnto, so farre as I am able to iudge: many of thē dis∣coursing but of particulars, not suffici∣ently tyed together; and the others fol∣lowing so much the receiued order, that they also do not aptly ynough sort eue∣ry mēbre to his propre place. examples vvherof I could geue ynovv, but that so doing I might be tedious. my conclusiō therfore shalbe this, that although both these sorts are to very good purpose, & doo very vvell disclose vnto vs the very substaūce of Religiō: yet for the Method or maner of deliuering the same; they haue yet so farre missed the marke that they shot at, that there is row me for o∣thers
 to sticke betwixt them & the marke, who soeuer cā hit it. & although it be an easier matter to find that there is winning, thē to shed those that are gone before: yet what should let, but that euery one may do his deuour, howsoeuer it shall fall out in the ende.
As for me self, although I know my skil & iudgmēt to be but meane; yet me think I haue espied a couple of wayes, whereby religiō might be geuen forth some what more orderly thē yet it is. And because it hath pleased god to bring the same to my knowledge, I thought it my duty to impart the same vnto others, not onely that I be not foūd, to haue hiddē my talēt: but also to thende, that such as God shall better furnish, may put to their handes and helpe it forwarde.
The former of those is somwhat higher, & such as doth not easily come vnder the capacitie of the common sort: for that throughout the whole discours, it doth e∣uer set by mā, & gathereth all, whatsoeuer is done, & the glory thereof only to God. which kinde of teaching, though to vs it be harder, yet is it (in respect of the cause it selfe) a great deale more naturall, and
 hath his vvarrant in the vvorde of God.
The other is of an easier kind, & passeth after the same maner, that the holy ghost we see doth vse, when he submitteth his speach vnto vs, & applieth his talk to our capacitie: euer directing the talke vnto man, & making him as it were an agent in all those matters that belong thervn∣to. which kind of teaching the common sort do accompt more meete for them.
Howbeit in my mind it is much better to haue both together, thē to haue either apart by it selfe. First because the nature of the cause is such, as that either of them doth oftē giue a very good supply to the other: & ech of thē so linketh with other, that they cannot wel be parted a sunder. Then also, because al men are not always beginners, but many pressing on to fur∣ther perfection. some coueting no more but to crepe below: others desiring to get somwhat higher. some hauing so weake a sight, that the sunne best liketh thē, when clouds intercept the brightnes therof: o∣thers lōging to haue those clouds break, and to enioy al the whole brightnes, that the sūne is able to yeld thē. which two no
 doubt were the very causes, that the holy Ghost hath so tempered his speach, that ech of these may euer haue whereon to feede.
In which respect, thus much I haue to desire of both, that eyther of thē taking what is their owne, or prepared for them, they cōtent them selues that others also may haue their portion. Those that are stronger, and able to walke the harder way, may so bestow thē selues if they list. But yet in the midste of their strength, let them remember, that some others are vveake: and so not be greeued, that the vveake also haue to serue their turne. So on the other side, the vveake must know, that others are strong. yf them selues may haue vvhat is meete for them, they may not repine, that others haue a lesson beyonde them. Let euery one take his owne to him selfe: the rest let him gladly leaue vnto others. Let God be good and gracious to all: let him prouide asvvell for the one, as for the other, let him so∣iourne on the earth, vvith those that are not able yet to rise higher: and let him take vp those vvith him, whom his vvis∣dome
 hath framed meete therevnto.
These causes therefore mouing, I haue thought good to couple these two me∣thodes together, to set them abroade, and to present your Grace therevvith. and, if it please you, the one for your fare-well from the See of Yorke: the o∣ther, I say not, so muche to the welcome vnto the other (let those doo that, that haue gayned thereby) as that, al∣though your Grace be nowe remoued from vs of this your former prouince of Yorke, not only in person, but also from the peculiar charge therof: yet that your Grace vvould euer be ready (as vve no∣thing doubt but you wil) to doo vs good as occasion shall serue. Hovv good opor∣tunities your Grace hath to do good vn∣to many, as others do very gladly behold them; so your selfe also may so farre vn∣folde them before your eyes, as best may encourage you euer to take the aduaun∣tage of them. First hovv much God hath done for you, and vvhat good giftes he hath layde vp in you, to the vse of his Churche heere with vs, it is a thing bet∣ter knowne, then that it needeth any re∣porte
 of me. But this may I say, that her Maiestie that occupieth the place of God next vnder him in these her dominions, hath not bene behinde in clothing with honour these good and commendable graces of God: aduauncing you to so high estate, that vsing the oportunitie therof, your Grace may doo very much good, not only wher your proper charge lyeth, but also throughout the vvhole Realme. The fauour of the people (gene∣rally of the better sorte) so embraceth the same, that whence your G. departure is made, thence do we heare cōplaynts of losse: whither the aduauntage is fallen, there do we see tokens of ioy, & a coun∣tenaunce of a gayne obteined. These are no small helpes of dooing much good. when wisdome & zeale are both at home to order and gouerne all things aright; whom the authoritie and fauour of the Prince doth so vvell accompanie & com∣mende vnto others; to whom the peo∣ple are so well affected, that they gladly like of, and imbrace his dooings: that man may doo much; and is well incou∣raged, not to spare for any paynes to
 be doing good. and as on the one side it would be offensiue to the iustice of god, and therevvithall prouoke ouer greuous a vengeaunce, to ouerslip suche oportu∣nities, when as the Church so much doth neede, that they should be taken: so on the otherside, it is a thing so welcome vnto him, to see al his talents put to such vse, especially when the case doth more specially so require, that he crowneth the same with euerlasting peace.
God be thanked, that we haue the Gospell among vs, so well as we haue it: and I pray God we may long enioy it. Neuerthelesse, whosoeuer examineth the matter more narrowly, me think, he may finde, that the Scepter of Christes king∣dome, is not so aduaunced among vs as vvere expedient: but rather in some hinges caused to stoupe, and restray∣ed more, then is seemely for the ma∣estie of it. Religion vvith vs (I feare) may be in case of that plante, that for a hile hauing harboured Ionas, was stro∣ē to the hat with so naughtie a worme, hat quickly it withered, & left him again
 to the heate of the sunne. Sure I am, that there is vvorke ynough to be done, to occupie all. Let those therefore that si at the sterne, take heede least if novve vvhyle they dravve to the Rockes, they correct not their course, it be ere long to late for them to wish they had done it
God continue and increase his grace towards you: geue you eyes, euer to se what is to be done; strength, and rea¦dines, to performe the same: now to repayre the ruines of Zion, and at length to rest in heauenly Ieru∣salem.

