



AMongst those many duties that are re∣quired in a man any way obliged for a benefit receaued, Seneca setteth this downe for one, Caue ne clam gratiam referas, Take heed least thou smoother thy

thankfulnesse in such a manner as if thou were ashamed, either of him from whom thou recei∣uest, or of thy selfe that thou shouldest receiue; for, Ingratus est qüi remotis arbitris grati∣as agit. This is the reason (right worshipfull) that hath made me bold at this time to dedi∣cate these my simple labours vnto your selfe, not because I thinke them any way worthy your worthinesse, or sufficient in the smallest proportion that may be, to requite those infinite bounties. I haue receiued from you: but to make knowne vnto the world that I am not asha∣med to acknowledge how much

I am bound to bee thankfull, and how little I am able to ex∣presse my thankfulnesse as I should, that haue no better meanes to requite, then by cra∣uing more, that is, by humbly intreating that you will bee pleased, as a full recompence of your former goodnesse in sup∣plying my wants, in this little worke, to protect my infirmi∣ties: you shall thereby not onely adde much vnto your former kindnesses, but giue quickning and spirit to my future studies, and make me bold, by your fa∣uourable acceptance of this, to vndertake matter of farre greater consequence, and better

befitting your worthy patro∣nage. Which I doe the more wil∣lingly promise, because I want not will to performe it. For pity it were but I should euer liue in wants, if I should euer liue to want will, euer to loue and honour him that hath euer sup∣plied my wants. And though this be reason enough to binde me to more then I can either doe or promise, yet Nature, and Name, and bloud, and neere al∣liance, challenge a greater dutie at my hands: and if none of these were, yet forasmuch as I know not any vpon whom it hath pleased God with a more bountifull hand to poure down

his earthly blessings in this life, then vpon your selfe, it cannot but be wisdome in me, to make choise of him to blesse this worke, whom God hath so bles∣sed in this world. Pardon me (Good Sir) if out of a true ac∣knowledgment of Gods goodnes towards you, and by you to∣wards me and mine, and not from any the least touch of vaine glory, or flatterie, or doubt of the like acknowledge∣ment in your selfe, I be bold to tell you (for to my owne com∣fort I speake it) that God hath from time to time, euen from your cradle vnto this day, chee∣red you vp with a bountifull

change, and variety of his bles∣sings. First, with a Father whose prouident care for your educa∣tion when you could not pro∣uide for your selfe, made you a man before you came to mans estate, and layd a foundation so firme, not onely for your owne future benefit, but for the ensu∣ing felicity both of yours, and his posterity in this world, as that I cannot but ioy in the re∣membrance of his wisedome, and carefull foresight, and con∣gratulate the happy successe thereof in your selfe. I meane in prouiding for you in your riper yeares, and his declining time, a better comfort to supply his

want, euen that honorable La∣dy your deare and louing wife, who hath not onely multiplyed your happinesse in this life by her many vertues, and euen vspeakable affection towards you, but by her large and law∣full patrimony, the reuenewes and honour of an ancient Baro∣nie, to yours and her heires for euer, lineally dscending from so many noble Lords her parents and honourable Progenitors. From both whose loynes hath sprong a third blessing not much inferiour to the rest, not onely numerosa proles, many chil∣dren, but many good: and a∣mong the rest, your worthy

sonne Sir Henry Lennard, (whose name and nature I must alwayes loue and honour) as heire both to your honours and honourable vertues. Thus hath God euer blest you, a child, a husband, and a father, and thus God euer blesse you, and adde vnto these his blessings a long life, that you may long liue to be a blessing to other men, and to patronage this, and my future labours in this kinde. Touching which worke so vn∣worthy your acceptance, let me intreate you not to sticke in the title, or to thinke it a subiect vnworthy your grauitie, being grauely handled. It is one thing

to write of passion, and another to bee subiect to passion. The best and grauest writers haue writte thereof, and it vnbe∣fittes not any man to reade what they haue written. The Author I will not commend: let the worke commend the Author. The translation I must not commend, onely I wish the volume had beene farre grea∣ter, so lesse Philosophicall. How∣soeuer, if it finde fauour in your eye, I haue my desire, and I shall thinke it the grea∣test happinesse that euer be∣fell me in this life, to haue done any thing that may content him by whom I liue. And so I end,

wishing you all happinesse in this life, and after this life, that which neuer hath end. 
From my lodging in Westmin∣ster 30. Aprilis 1606.

