


HAving gathered out this Treatise of the Is∣raelites government, more than six yeers since, as a part or mem∣ber of a greater work that before that time I had in hand, & shal not be able as yet to finish: I had in the mean time no other purpose, but to stay it with the rest, til I should be able to finish the whole, and then to publish al togither. But since espieng, that the whole work is like to grow so large, and of such importance withal, that it is not like to be finished, any thing neer within the time that before I conceived (nor convenient it should, but as it may be orderly done) I have now thought good to publish this before, not only to the common use of others, but for mine own furtherance also. For mine opinion is, that wheras the matter is such as craveth good industrie, truly to gather; and iudgement likewise, orderly and aptly to dispose: howsoever I have yet but drawn as it were the first lines therof, yet, when I com to place it in the work it selfe, then by the help and iudgement of others
(by communicating it before unto them, which otherwise I could not have so wel) I may be able the better to do it. Which help or advantage I have thought good rather to use in this part only of al the Bible, for that it is of al the old Testament, the principal part; and not fully inough (me think) as yet digested by others. Which that now I praesent unto you, the only reason is not, for that somtime I have been of your companie (which notwithstan∣ding I so esteem of, as that I acknowledge it my bounden dutie, ever with reverence to be thank∣ful for it) but much rather bicause it doth very wel accord, that such as are occupied in the lawes of the Realm, & now in the way to be in place of govern∣ment heerafter, have som recourse withal unto the righteous lawes of God, & to the government that he of old to his people ordained. Wherin al∣though I have not attanied to that, which were needful to such a purpose, nor may so much as hope to com any thing neer it, in the best that I am able to do: yet may it suffice to commend unto you this consideration, that it shal be good for you to ioin the one with the other. Wherunto wheras you have al∣redie an open way in the text it self, & in those that have written theron: if this little travel of mine, by the shortnes or plainnes of it may any thing fur∣ther, it is the thing that I have desired, howsoever I have praevailed therin. In which respect you are much beholding to the goodnes of God, that hath opened your eies so far, as that now you see it to be your duties, and a special point of wisdom withal, to
have ordinarie teachers of your own: and that he hath, both framed your harts to do accor∣dingly; and given you so rich a blessing therin. By means wherof, the lesse that such weak labors of mine may be to any use unto you, though I am, and so ought to be the gladder of it; and so much the lesse do need, to busie my selfe to make supplie: yet, neither might I of dutie shrink from that, which I am (howsoever) enabled to do; neither is it amisse for you, to be admonished of others besides. Whatso∣ever can be done is little inough: but God I trust wil give supplie; and make you able, not only to un∣derstand his wil, but in som good measure also to do it. Vnto whose grace I humbly commend your selves, and your studies, to be in such sort directed by him, as may be most to his glorie, and to the benefit of those his people where your cal∣ling shal be.
 the fift of September, 1584.
