



THE Prophet Da∣vid complayneth grievously of some, whose wordes were softer then butter,Psal. 55.22. yet vvarr vvas in their harte: they vvere more gentle then oile, yet they were swords. Wherein he seemeth to me, to paint out in some liuely colours, the Recusants of our daies who hauing bloud in their minds, & most savage purposes still in hammering: yet to blinde mens eies, or to turne away their harts from anie care of preuenting
 their danger, deale by Petition & Request, as if they were verie loiall and reasonable subiects. To this end (by that which hath followed we maie iudge) was that Petiti∣on in September last sent abroad, To the Bishops, Preachers, and Gospellers, that be∣ing deceiued by their wordes of charitie, we should not once doubt of anie vncha∣ritable purpose that they would haue, & so shoulde bee taken in the snares which they had privilie laide. But how so euer they smoothlie dawbed ouer their most monstrous designes, and couered with shew of sugred words their most barba∣rous intent: yet the event hath shewed, that vnder the wings of that Popish dissi∣mulation, was hatched the most strange and vnnaturall treason, that hart of man could thinke of; in respect whereof, the massacre of Fraūce though inhumane, the purpose of Haman though very cruel, the murder committed by Simeon and Levi of the Shechemits, though exceeding bloudie; yea the Attempt of Pope Lucius the 2. though monstrous enough, & cō∣ming
 neerest to this of our Recusants, yet haue some honest coulour of excuse. For in that of France, the King being seduced by bad Coūcell, was made to beleeue that by no other means he could execute Iu∣stice (as they tearmed it) on his subiects, & therin not many of great reckoning di∣ed. Haman sought the destruction of strā∣gers; The childrē of Iacob had their sister abused by Hamours sonne who was Lorde of that Coūtrie; & the attempt of Lucius against the Praetor and all the Senators of Rome, was by open force, and not by such dastardlie or cowardlie practises. But this Popish designe, was to the destructiō of almost al the noble, learned either in di∣vinitie or Law, wise and worshipfull in the Land, onlie to attaine to their owne wicked desires without cause of iust wrath not of forainers, but of Contriemen and kinsfolke, and that in a most treacherous and sudden manner. It shal not there∣fore hencforth be strange to me, that our Learned Antiquarie writeth of certaine springs with vs,Camden in Brit. that turne wood into
 stone: neither yet that of Circe fabled to change men into swine: since that wee see the Popish humour, maketh the harts of men to be harder then flint: and Romish Circes by their inchantments, can cause them who before had humane & pitifull affectiōs like others to neighbours, frinds prince, and countrie, to cast of al naturall loue or dutie to all, hauing harts more harde then stones, and being in crueltie worse then Tigers. Oh Sr. wil some men saie, not al Papists were acquainted with this conspiracie. I am of that minde too. But withal this is my resolution, that all perfect Papists, & such as are reconciled to the Pope, though they knewe not of it yet being called vpon, would haue beene assistāts therin. For that subiecting of thē selues to the Pope, as their Head & direc∣tour, and vowing their obedience to his commandements, which if he saie they be to the furtherance of the Catholick faith, they dare not but execute them if they be able; maketh vs iustlie to doubt of their faith & loialtie to our dread Soue∣raigne.
 And if all knew not the verie mys∣terie of this Iniquitie, and the depth of of this purpose, namelie in what sort, or at what houre it was intended to be exe∣cuted: yet in the North parts, where this Petition perchance was framed; yea and in other places too, as I haue beene crediblie informed, there was such bold∣nes and contempt of law, so litle feare to offend, and such open resort to their Ido∣latrous seruice: that manie good mē iudge nether are deceiued (J suppose) therin, that most of the Recusāts, had at the least some great expectation, of an Alteration of the Estate. Nether is it much to be re∣garded that the Preists tell vs, that in Ci∣uill matters, and if the Pope should be a∣gainst the wealth of our Countrie, they would not obay; as VVatsons Treasō him selfe being a Preist, and a Teacher of that lesson, did proue vnto vs. For I am sure he could not make it a matter of Religiō (except of Popish Religion) to murder his prince, to whom hee owed all subiection. And who knoweth not, that it is an easie
 matter for the Pope, whose voice Papistes take as the voice of God, to make his fa∣vorites to beleeue, that all things tend to Religion, that will inlarge his Authoritie? And what will hee not commende as a thing Religious, that compared the mur∣dering of Henry the 3. the French King, to that Miraculous worke of Christ his Incarnation and Resurrection? Can we i∣magine that they who dare vtter such a∣bominable blasphemies, wil shame to af∣firme anie thing? And these so dangerous subiects, because their cōsciences wil not suffer thēto come to our Churches, must craue ether to be resolued that it is lawful to come to our seruice (which they are ful¦ly bēt neuer to be, for they wil nether hear vs, nor read our writings) or else be freed from such punishments as Lawes impose vpon Recusants. A strang conscience it is that manie of them haue, who would bee thought to be more singular, and to haue more feeling and feare to offend then the common sort, & yet if we trie their con∣versation, they are not to be reckoned a∣mong
 the best sort of such as follow noe other direction for Religion, then to bee obedient vnto his Maiesties Lawes, with out respect vnto that God commandeth. Not to speake of their vsual whoredoms, oppressions, malice towards others, and such like good qualities which dailie are seene and knowne to be among them: let the fift of November bee a witnesse whi∣lest that daie shall be numbred in the Ca∣lenders, of the more then Turkish cruel∣tie of Poperie. Haue they a conscience to steale, to liue in adulterie, to deale hardlie with their Tenants or neighbors against Gods laws: & wil not their cōscience suf∣fer them to heare that Service wherein themselues confesse there is no evill? Stand not anie more vpon such tearmes O yee seduced Papists. Leaue that Romish Synagogue whose doctrine cōcerning the worship of God, is superstitious and be∣sides the Word,1. Tim. 4.8. whose deuotion cōsisteth in toies and trifles, & bodily exercise that profiteth little. Leaue I say that crue that warranteth, nay maketh meritorious and
 honorable the deposing or killing of Prin∣ces and Potētates. Depart frō that church whereof to bee is but discredit; For the chiefe Teachers of Poperie assure vs, that to bee of the Romish Church, there nee∣deth no Internall vertue, but onlie to be∣leeue that faith that the Papists teach, & to acknowledge the Pope to be supreame head. The Divell himselfe may be of that Church: what credit gaine you by being of that companie? Be ashamed of them that teach you neither to keepe oath nor promise, to such as they call heretickes. To be short, seeing that church, hath so put vpō her the face of a harlot, that she sha∣meth not to be accompted, in corrupting Scriptures, & the writings of the fathers most vēturous, in treacheries most dāge∣rous, in crueltie most barbarous, & in all odious & vnnatural attēpts, most audaci∣ous:Apoc. 18.4. Go out of her, that you be not partakers of her sinnes, & that yee receiue not of her plagues. O Romish Recusants (for Catholiks I maie not call you, it is not a name that you maie truelie claime) you haue forsa∣ken
 your first loue, or at the least that loue,Apoc. 2.4. that you seemd once to bear to the truth: Remember from whence you are fallen,5. Esa. 51.1. re∣pent, and doe your first works. And as Esay the Prophet calleth the Iewes to consider of Abraham in whom they were first cho∣sen to be Gods Peculiar people: so doe I most earnestlie intreate you,Philip. 2.1. If there be a∣ny consolation in Christ, if anie comfort of loue, if any fellowship of the spirit, if anie compassion and mercie, euen of your own soules, that you looke not from hence forth vnto the glittering shewe of exter∣nall pride in a Mortall man;Heb. 12.2. but vnto Ie∣sus the authour and finisher of our faith. Marke well what he in his word commā∣deth that you maie doe it, what worship he requireth that you may yeeld it, what duties he teacheth that you maie learne and obey the same. So shall you finde the righte true waies to your feete, and peace vnto your soules:Esa. 50.11. whereas if you still walke in the sparkes of the fire vvhich you haue kindled (to your selues) This shall you haue at Gods hand, you shal lie downe in sorrow.
