



HOw bad a guest sinne is, and how vnworthy to be in∣tertayned in the house of our hearts, there is no man but will readily confesse, if he consider, first, how di∣ligent it is to solicit and allure to euill, alwayes pro∣uoking and intising to offend; and when it hath preuailed, how clamorous it is and ready to accuse vs, neuer suffe∣ring vs to haue true peace and quietnesse, vntill by some meanes or other, we finde our selues reconciled to him against whom we haue offended. Neither by any other way can this atonement with God be wrought, so that our consciences may without feare stand before God,Rom. 3.25. but by him only whom God hath set forth to be a reconcilia∣tion through faith in his bloud. He is called Iesus,Matt. 1.21. because he saueth his people from their sins. And,Rom. 5.1. we haue peace with God through Iesus Christ our Lord. Now this peace with God, which Christ by his death hath wrought, paying for a ran∣some thereof, his precious bloud, is made to dwell in our hearts, by
 an assured faith, and stedfast apprehension of the mercies of God in Christ.
But the light of comfort which this most sweet doctrine should make to shine to such, as feeling the burden of their sinne, grone to bee eased of the same, is so dimmed and darkened by the clouds of Merits, and such Satisfactions as men haue deuised to blinde the eyes of the simple withall, that hardly they can finde that true con∣solation. I therefore in two Sermons, preached at Durham, inde∣uoured according to my small talent, to scatter those mists, and to make the Sunne of truth to shine to all such, as wilfully doe not winke against the same. Wherein how little soeuer I haue perfor∣med, my indeuour was to take away some stumbling blocks (where∣by the vnlearned haue beene somewhat hindered) that the truth might haue free passage. This short Treatise hath long lyen hid∣den in corners, almost quite forgotten, at the least without any pur∣pose that I had to publish the same, vntill a right Worshipfull friend thinking better thereof, then it was my part to doe, shewed himselfe very forward to furder the publishing of it. Seeing therefore it must come to light, I humbly intreat your Lordship, that it may goe forth vnder the shaddow of your protection, who haue most right thereto, not only in respect of your Honours diuers fauours shew∣ed to my selfe, but because the Sermons were (long since) preached in your Cathedrall Church, perchance also in your owne hearing, at the least by one deuoted to your Lordship, who will pray the Father of all graces to inrich your Honour with his heauenly blessings, to the comfort of Gods Church, while here you liue, and in the end to your endlesse and vnspeakable ioy, in a better life.

