



MOst Noble Lord, if shad¦dowes could amaze the Wise, my Title-Page
 might giue offence. It speakes of Fire: but such as was made onely to warme, not to burne any thing, vnles stubble. No man shall neede to call for Buckets to put it out, or Hookes to pull downe any liuing-house on whom it kindleth.
Here is no ground for an Vtopian Spirit to mould a new Common-Wealth: no warrant for Sedition to touch the Lords Annointed, so much as with her Tongue: no occasion administred to Ishmael to scoffe at Isaack:
 no Salamanders lodge themselues here.
But here is a Flame that will lick vp all angry Waspes, and inflamed Tongues that presump∣tuously and without feare, speake euill of Dig∣nities, and of things they vnderstand not; rayling on all not so free as them∣selues to foame at the mouth, and to cast their froth on all that are neere, without diffe∣rence.
If any thinke I thought your Lordship a cold, because I humbly
 offer you the cheefe place at my Fire, he shall doe mee much wrong; and your Lordship, much more. Men that are in greatest vigour of bloud and spirits, count it no shame to creepe to a Fire at Winter; not because Nature is defectiue; but oft-times their Imploy∣ments deny opportunity of getting heate, & kee∣ping themselues warme, by naturall agitati∣on.
I bring not this as a Tutor; but as a Pupil, for Protection to pre∣serue
 this Fire from Quench-coale. Shall you vouchsafe me the honour of your Armes vpon mine Alter, I shall bee confident that no man will dare to approach these harmelesse Flames with Spouts and Pailes.
It were a fault piacu∣lar to put your wisedome (as the manner is) reade Your Selfe; I meane, to ntertaine you with your owne Praises. It is enough to your Lord∣ship, that you merit all that Noblenesse, Loyal∣ty, Religion, and vntain∣ted
 Honour can attend you with; although no Eccho do present her self.
And let it bee enough to mee, that in the Ge∣nerall, (for if I should doe more, I should bee thought by Some, rather to boast of fauours, then to acknowledge them,) I make bold to pro∣claime that the Honours you haue done, and still doe to mee, must for euer oblige,

