



MY LORD.
IT is a practise too commo in this scribling age, vn∣der pretence of respect, t send worthlesse emp∣ty Pamphlets abroad in Gra Mens Liveries. Which comes to passe,
 partly because children of the braine, how deformed soeuer, are held so pre∣cious by the Parents, that they thinke themselues not sufficiently graced, vnlesse they procure some Noble person to be the Godfather; & partly because such slimy Comets, although they make a great blaze, cannot moue themselues, without the helpe of the Moone, or of some greater Starre to whirle them about the World, with more ease, and hope. This hath brought much dishonour to many an Honourable Mecaenas; it being like a rich Sumpter Cloath vpon a Colliers sack. Hence, wise men grow afraid and vnwilling to read their Names in Print; and the best deser∣ving Authors are forced to the irk∣some paines of a nauseous Apology, when they do (with praise) performe a Duty,

For my part, I dare not put my selfe into the rank of best Deseruers; nor, to boast any thing of my present performance. Howbeit, thus much I will take vpon mee to affirme, that mine ayme (next vnto common be∣nefit) is Your service; and, that the Subject which I here present, is not vn∣worthy of either the best mans la∣bour,Est autem ea Quaestio cum difficilis & ple∣na controversiae tum digna quae tractetur, & explicetur dili∣genter, Whitak de sacram. controv. de Bapt quaest. 4. cap 5. or the Choycest Patrone.
The following Treatise endeavors to lay open and make good the effi∣cacy of Sacred baptisme, in respect of Regeneration; in which the greatest ought more to reioice then in the greatest prerogatiues on Earth. This is that which (if they belong to the Covenant) makes them members of Christ, children of God, and heires of that kingdome which is aboue.
The whole, for manner of prose∣cution,
 is Polemical:De Baptismo & mysterio san∣ctae fidei, vnus∣quis{que} Archiepis∣copus suos suf∣fraganeos dili∣genter studiose{que} admoneat, qua∣tenus per studi∣um sacrae lecti∣onis imbuti, & de mysterio san∣ctae fidei, & de Sacramento baptismatis, v∣nu ques{que} illorū, in eropria paro∣chia perfectè stu¦diose{que} presbyte∣ras, & vniuer∣sum populum docere, & in∣struere non ng∣ligat Concil. Arelat. cap. 3. sub Car. Mag. A 813. tom. 3 Conil. Par. 1. Sect. 2. pag. 188. edit. Bi∣niana, 1618. yet vsefull, and such for substance, as the Fathers in the Councell of Orleance, vnder CHARLES THE GREAT, thought fit to commend to the care of all Mi∣nisters of every degree, as being neces∣sary to bee diligently and fully expli∣cated vnto the people. Therefore, I hope, I shal not be censured by judici∣ous men to trouble the world with an impertinent discourse, which might, in that regard, disparage your Lord∣ships Name, that it humbly craues leaue to beare.
And to say truth, to whom else should it repaire, either to doe its first homage, or to get vnder Covert-Ba∣ron, but to your Honour, heretofore the Heyre, now the Master of that Ancient, Noble, and much honoured FAMILY, to which I was, and euer
 will be a faithfull & humble seruant; not, in expectation, but only in thank∣full acknowledgment of what I haue already receaued, and of what other my fellow-seruants doe, in your Ho∣nourable seruice, still enioy.
It cannot be vnknowne to such as knowe Mee, how much I stand obli∣ged to your Noble Predecessors, the late Earle & Countesse of Bedford now with God. Nor can any man bee so ignorant as not to see cause why this publique Testimony of my continu∣ed gratitude due to that HOVSE, should, by all Rights, bee laid at your Feet, in whom all the perfections and Excellencies of true Nobility doe so eminently meet, to make you highly honoured in the Eyes and Hearts of all that are able to value true Desert, as being one that not onely holds vp
 the Honour, but addes to the Glory of all your famous Progenitors, who haue deriued to You that Illustrious Dignity you now possesse.
The Good Lord who hath brought you hitherto, be with You, your Noble Lady, and your nume∣rous, amiable, and much promising Progeny, in all things, alwaies. Hee grant you length of daies, increase of all true Honour, the riches of Grace, and the Crowne of Glory. So pray∣eth still

