



My gracious LORD and MASTER.
IF greatest vessels, and the most storme proofe, yet require the strongest guard, when they carrie such a fraight, as Pyrates seeke to make their Prey and Prize: then let mee craue your HIGHNESSE pardon, for putting this my small Barke vnder your Castle Wall, as fearing

both storme and shot; such Merchandise being im∣barkt therein, as may prouoke the whole Fleete of Spirituall and Ecclesiasticall Merchants (Pirates rather, floating euery where vpon the Catholicke, yea Narrow Seas, and not suffering any, bound for the Holy-land, to passe, but such as will Trucke and Trade with them) to surprise and prey vpon me. I know the Cause is good, though I acknow∣ledge the Actor weake. And although this be a kind of fruit, naturally sharpe and tarte (especially to aguish palates, and queasie stomackes) as also accidentally, for want of a good season to giue it a competent ripenesse; hauing, since first it began to bud, growne slowly by succisiue and intermissiue howers, borrowed from my Court-seruice, and my Church Cure; and, till now, lyen close couered vn∣der the late Frostie barren Winter, now reuiued, as the Plants with the vernall Sunne: it cannot chuse but receiue a great addition of ripenesse and rellish, if (besides the vniuersall influence of this comfor∣table season) it inioy but a speciall reflection of your HIGHNESSE gracious Countenance vp∣on it. The rather, it being a Subiect, not vnworthy the knowledge of godly Christian Princes, who ac∣count the care of Religion as the richest gemme in all their Diademe. A care, which hath made the Diademe of your Noble Father, his sacred

MAIESTIE more glorious, then all the Kings in Christendome, and which (J trust) shall propa∣gate his glorie to perpetuitie; vnto the which eare also (as vnto a Crowne) Gods good grace, and the myrrour of his MAIESTIES example, wherein you dayly looke, haue already intitled you, as the most hopefull heire apparent.
And heere giue mee leaue, most Gracious PRINCE, to relate a pithie, and pious exhor∣tation of that learned and godly Bishop Iewell, to Queene ELIZABETH of blessed memorie, vp∣on the like occasion. A speech, which because it doth immediately and primarily reflect vpon his MAIESTIE her happie Successor, I canot wish a worthier Iewell, then your HIGHNESSE, to recommend it.
O that your Grace did behold the mise∣rable disorder of Gods Church, or that you might foresee the calamities, which will fol∣low! It is a part of your Kingdome, and such a part, as is the principall proppe and stay of the rest. I will say to your Maiestie, as Cy∣rillus sometimes said to the godly Emperors, Theodosius and Valentinian: Ab ea, quae erga Deum est, pietate, reipublicae vestrae status pendet. You are our Gouernour, you are the Nurse of Gods Church▪ We must open this griefe

before you. God knoweth if it may bee re∣dressed, it is run so farre. But if it may be re∣dressed, there is no other besides your High∣nesse, that can redresse it. God hath indued your Grace with many graces and fauours: O turne and imploy these to the glorie of God, that God may confirme in your Grace the thing, which he hath begun. To this end hath God placed Kings and Princes in their State, as Dauid saith, That they serue the Lord, that they may see, and cause others to see to the furniture of the Church. The good Emper∣our Iustinian cared for this, as much as for his life. Constantine, Theodosius, and Valentini∣an, and other godly Princes, called them∣selues Vasallos, the subiects and bond ser∣uants of God. They remembred that God furnished them in their houses, and were not vnmindfull to furnish his house. Thus and much more this good Bishop, to the same pur∣pose. And turning himselfe to the Assembly, ha∣uing also reproued Sacriledge and Symonie imme∣diately before, he addeth those words: Haue pa∣tience, if any such bee here, as I well know there are, whom these things touch. Suffer me to speake the truth, it is Gods cause▪ The liuings of such as are in the Ministerie, are

not in their hands, to whom they are due, All other Labourers and Artificers, haue their hire increased double as much as it was wont to be: onely the poore man that labou∣reth and sweateth in the Vinyard of the Lord of Hostes, hath his hyre abridged and aba∣ted. I speake not of the Curates, but of the Parsonages and Vicaridges, that is, of the places which are the Castles and Towres of fence for the Lords Temple. They seldome passe now a dayes from the Patron, if he be no better then a Gentleman, but either for the Lease, or for present money. Such mer∣chants are broken into the Church of God, a great deale more intollerable then were they, whom Christ whipped and chased out of the Temple. Thus they that should bee carefull for Gods Church, that should be Pa∣trons to prouide for the Consciences of the People, and to place among them a learned Minister. who might be able to Preach the word vnto them, out of season and in season, and to fulfill his ministerie, seeke their owne, and not that which is Iesus Christs: They serue not Iesus Christ, but their belly. And this is done not in one place, nor in one Ci∣tie, but throughout England. A Gentleman

cannot keepe his house, vnlesse he haue a Parsonage or two in Farme for his prouisi∣on. O mercifull God! whereto will this grow at last? If the misery, which this plague worketh, would reach but to our age, it were the more tollerable; but it will be a plague to the posteritie, it will bee the decay and deso∣lation of Gods Church, and it. So this good Bishop.
It needes no application. Onely let mee craue leaue to Petition your HIGHNESSE, that you would be pleased to sollicite his sacred MAIES∣TIE for two things. The first is: that a compe∣tent proportion may bee allotted out of euerie Im∣propriation (especially where the Vicaridge in∣dowed is incompetent or none at all) for the main∣tenance of a sufficient Minister. The second is, that some remedie may be vsed, for the more exact pre∣uention of Simonie. These are two things well be∣seeming our great Defender of the Faith. His wisedom can best giue direction, and his authoritie life, to Acts of such difficultie. The great Ship of Good hope, hauing those two goodly Deckes, the Vpper and the Lower, so well Man'd, so well Rigg'd, hauing such a wise experienced Pilot, as his MAIESTIE, to command; such a Masters Mate as your HIGHNESSE, to perswade; such

vnanimous Mariners to obey the becke of their Go∣uernour, what Fort of vice shall withstand her baterie? What force or fraude of foes shall dare to affront her, or be able to board her? What Port of friends will not open its amplissimum sinum, to intertaine free Trafficke with her? What Im∣propriator will not freely come in, and returne a li∣berall share into Gods Sanctuarie? What Simo∣nist shall dare to shew his head, much lesse his gol∣den hands, where once his MAIESTIE, and that Honourable Court of Parliament, haue con∣cluded the contrarie? Yea, what not? What so happie, that we may not hope? Or what so iust, which the grand Aduersarie, euen Satan himselfe may not feare? if these hopefull beginnings may but attaine to a faire conclusion. And Satans ma∣lice shall neuer be able to preuent it, if our sinnes doe not. The Lord blesse his MAIESTIE with many happie halcyon-dayes, & blesse your HIGH∣NES in a daily growth of Grace, and loue of the Truth, that the estate of this Church & Common∣wealth may flourish vnder the King, and his Roy∣all off-spring in all peace and truth, vntill the com∣ming of our Lord Iesus Christ. AMEN.

