



MAY it please your Grace to vn∣derstand, that although, being so little knowne to your Grace as I am, it may seem that I make over bold, so to present this Treatise ensuing: yet, as my selfe am persuaded, divers good reasons there be, that doe occasion me, so farre this once to presume on your Graces goodnes therein; both in respect of a former interest, and of the present matter besides.
The former interest that now I speake of, is, that by the place that then he was in, your Gra∣ces immediate Predecessor, had this Treatise in

his hands a good while together, many yeeres since; and to be his, if so it should stand with his Graces pleasure: and afterward, when hee saw his time, approued of the publishing of it, and so to doe at mine owne discretion. Which notwith∣standing (by occasion) I thought not so good, thē presently to doe, as to awaite a farther opportu∣nity which then began to offer it selfe vnto mee. In the meane season it hath pleased God▪ to take him of from his labours and travells here, and thus otherwise to furnish the roome that he had. In which alteration, besides that no way I haue any cause to varie: I may not deny, but that now I finde iuster cause so to proceed, then I had in the other before.
In the present matter besides, it is very plaine, that there is some question of it: & then are such Treatise as are thereof, in bounden duty to a∣waite the censure of such other approued iudg∣ments, as to whome in such case it doth apper∣taine. Wherein it having hitherto orderly pro∣ceeded to that wherevnto it is come already, it was meetest so to finish the course likewise: & so actually to acknowledge, that arising here, & hence proceeding, it was most to submit it selfe vnto, and to await your Graces censure.
It may be also, that even in godly pollicie (by our Superiors) it will be thought meete, to take some farther order to prevēt the evill, that so free a passage of that other course may seem to threa¦ten: & thē, the better opportunity that God hath givē your G. to such purpose, the lesse could I in any duty or reasō haue turn'd aside to any other.
God long preserue your Grace among vs, to the glorie of God, to the good of his Church, & to your owne comfort withall in him. 
Oxford Iuly 3. 1610. 
