



IT is sufficiently knowne to vs all, that of late yeeres the Lord hath diuersly exercised vs, vnder his gentle chasticing hand. For ha∣uing touched vs before in our cattle & corn; and, that more is, in certaine daungerous, straunge, and vnnaturall practices against our Soueraign, tending to the ouerthrowe of vs all: now of late he hath threatned vs with hostilitie and forrein inuasion, and with the worst, that a proud, an idolatrous, and an insolent people is able to do. Wherein although hee hath not forgot∣ten vs cleane, but in the middest of those threatnings, hath hitherto vsed great mercie towardes vs, yet do we our selues plainly perceiue, that as yet he hath not left off calling vpon vs, but still doth put vs in mind of our wayes, as otherwise also, so especially by hostilitie now, and by the continuance of our enimies malice against vs. Jn which case so long as we stand, it is needefull we take good heede to these two thinges: that the cause be right wherein wee stand, and that we our selues do take it in hand in such sort as we ought to doe, The equitie of the cause both is now, and euer hath beene so plaine in it selfe (seeing that it is for the Ghospels sake, that so they bende themselues against vs) that when of late I entred into a deeper con∣sideration of these callings of God, and thought it needefull to set foorth somewhat concerning the same: yet notwithstanding J then
 thought it needelesse to bestow any labor in beating out that which was plaine ynough in it selfe, and rather chose to imploy my pen in the other, to shew in what sort this good cause of ours should be ta∣ken in hand of vs. Whereupon I did then set foorth an admonition out of the Prophet Joel, the better to gather vs neerer to God, by oc∣casion of the scarcitie wherewith at that time wee were something touched: a text that then did, not onely in respect of that scarcitie, but otherwise also, and yet doth fitly agree to these present dayes, and out of which we might take to our selues, both then and now, instruction and comfort in plentifull measure.
Since which time I haue often marked, that what by our enimies themselues, & by their fauourites that are among vs, and what by the weaknesse of diuers of vs likewise, there is such a desperate fear conceiued of many, that they are vtterly void of any good hope, that these our troubles may be ouerblowne, or at any time sorted to pros∣perous end. For the enimie (we see, and often haue founde) whenso∣euer by his owne strength or our loosenesse he doth hope to preuail, is then passing full of presumptuous boasting and resolute threates. Their fauourites also doe as redily then get holde thereof, and helpe them forward the best that they can: euer blowing such terrors a∣broad, and, for the most part, encreasing them also, & euer casting, wheresoeuer they come, great perils themselues. And when they are foiled, and haue gotten the worse, and finde that God in those their attempts is flatly against them: yet doe they not thereupon leaue of and turne vnto him: but euer continue their former ma∣lice, and busilie repayre their forces againe. Among vs likewise as there be some, that by such occasions drawe neerer to God, and ac∣knowledging that our sinnes deserue, that we should be cleane cut off, doe neuerthelesse, in the goodnesse of the cause, and the mercies of God, conceiue good hope: so are there others, that refusing the comfort that those groundworkes do yeelde, do so much relie on the iust desert of our sinnes, and the seueritie of God against it, or being of a timerous nature, are stroken with such feare by the enimies threates and continuall malice, and by the great perils that their confederates do cast at home, that they haue left them no hope at all, but verily thinke that in the end all will be naught.
Hauing therefore already done my endeuour, by my former ad∣monition out of Joel to stir vs vp to a sensible feeling of those graci∣ous
 callings of God, & vnfeignedly to turne vnto him: I haue nowe thought good, out of some one text or other for to declare what com∣fort the faithfull may iustly conceiue, out of the nature of the cause that we haue in hand, being as it is, for the gospels sake, that we are so much maligned. For which matter I haue made choice of that part of the historie of David, that sheweth how he, being annointed of God to the kingdom, neuertheles could not come vnto it, but tho∣rough many perils, & with much busines before. But although hee were kept out for a season, and had many lets (for a long time toge∣ther) cast in the way: yet in the end he came to the crown, and had it confirmed vnto himselfe and his line for euer. Jn which storie we may see, as it were in a table, both what crosses we must looke for to be cast in the way of the gospel now: & how notwithstanding it shall preuail in the end against them all. And as it was the godlesse and loose gouernment of Saul, that gaue that occasion of remouing that same, and of the bringing in of the godlier regiment of David: euen so, in the late days of ignorance, the gouernmēt of most of our princes hath bine such, so far short of that which it should, as that it ought to be lesse maruel to any, if now it the be pleasure of God to aduance the gospel (the scepter of the sonne of David) to reforme whatsoeuer before was decayed. Which storie lieth in the latter part of the first booke of Samuel, & in the beginning of the second: for which cause also (seeing that it lieth altogether within this compasse) therefore haue I but seldome set down in my quotations the name of the Book, but the chapters, & verses only. And seing that it goeth of this mat¦ter only (wheras there are many other stories & places of scripture besides, that would yeeld the self same cōfort) therfore haue J thoght The Coronatiō of David, to be the meetest name for the treatise.
Now, such as it is, if it please your honour to accept in good part, I thought it my duetie, for to offer the same vnto you, For beeing of this mind, that as I wish the benefit therof vnto al, so notwithstan∣ding J speciall, wish it to the people here, such as belong to your Ho. Liuetenancie (to whō I also, in diuers good respects, am most boun∣den) in al these parts I was not able to find any one, that was more exercised in these affairs: or to whom my self (in al humble duety) was more beholding, or vnder whose protection I could rather wish the same to come foorth. Which although I had finished and sent vp to the print before, to haue come foorth the last terme, before the
 attempt of this late forrein inuasion: yet, by reason that (vpon some priuate respect) a small occasion was taken by such as should print it, to require my further aduice in one speciall point, the long vaca∣tion that hath come betwixt, hath easily brought to passe, that it could not come foorth till now. In which mean time, the daunger of the forrein inuasion (God be thanked) is grown to be litle, and the feare thereof with vs much lesse. But yet notwithstanding, neither is that daunger clene remoued, neither may we looke for any other, but that still they will bee doing with vs, if they may get vs at the aduantage: and, besides that, we may in this one attempt of theirs (being so much broken as alreadie, and but hitherto it is) see some part of that trueth, that out of the Scripture is in this Treatise de∣liuered vnto vs. Which things beeing considered, although nowe it come foorth somewhat with the latest in some respect: yet in others J doe not doubt, but that it may, and will bee thought, nowe also to come foorth fitly ynough.
J graunt, it were to be wished rather, that neither now, nor at a∣ny time else, there neede to be any vse of this, or of any such like, but the causes remaining, the effect also must needes continue. Our eni∣mies will bee enimies still: the seede of the serpent will euer lye in waite, for to annoy the seede of the woman. Though now they bee foiled, and often haue beene (yea, and though they had bene cleane ouerthrowne): yet notwithstanding they will not giue ouer, but cast about it againe for some other aduantage, and redily take it, whensoeuer it falleth into their handes, so long as they are not yet subdued vnto the obedience of the Gospell, but remaine enimies stil, there is nothing els to be looked for of them, but that on al occasions they will be readie to exercise, whatsoeuer enmitie they are able a∣gainst vs. We also on the other side, haue many thinges among vs that should be amended, which we are not disposed to amend, nor so much, as to heare of them neither. Hauing found the spoile of ma∣ny of our Churches in our late Monasteries and Chaunteries (as apparant dens of theeues, as euer were any) wee are not therewith contented. Those that are left we suffer their Patrons (if they bee greedie, and wilie withall) to abuse at their pleasure. Whereby God is robed of his glory, and the people of their saluation. We suffer also mercilesse men, daily more and more to eate vp the pore: to dispeo∣ple fermings, and townes, and to take in all to them selues. If there∣fore
 there were no more but these thinges onely (which in deede I take to bee the greatest): yet were they sufficient, without any o∣ther, so strongly to cry to the Lorde for vengeance, as that it may be no maruell vnto vs, if the Lord do still raise vp enimies against vs. If needes wee will spoyle the Lordes houses heere, and his people withall, both of his word, and of their owne liuings, and will not re∣store, nor grow to amendment: the more that we doe such thinges our selues, the lesse may we maruel if the Lord send in enimies to do the like, and to be auenged on the Lords behalfe, of that which we mean not to amend.
Being therfore so likelie a matter as it is, that some heauie iudge∣ments of God are growing against the vngodlie that are among vs, (and so consequently much businesse to al, one with another indiffe∣rently) and being so certaine, that the Lord is euer wont to exercise those that are his, it cannot bee but to needefull purpose, that this kind of argument should be debated: that so the godly may see what securitie is layd vp for them, and others likewise may know of that refuge, whensoeuer they are disposed to vse it, and turn to the Lord. And so now hauing sayd, what J thought most needeful, to expresse the cause & generall end of the Treatise ensuing, J am not to trou∣ble your Honour any further at this present: moste humblie besee∣ching the Lord of his goodnesse, that as nowe alreadie these many yeres he hath bestowed great blessings on these parts by your godly, milde, and prudent gouernment, so it may please him long to con∣tinue your L. among vs, and to encrease all his graces and mercies towardes you in Christ Iesus.
At York, 28 of August. 1588.

