



IF trueth shame not
more of anie thing,Contra va∣lentinia∣nos.
then when she is hid,
as Tertullian truely
writeth: then it be∣hooueth
her friends
to do her that fauor,
that by all meanes
possible they will earnestly indeuor to bring
her to light, that shee may be seene of them
that seeke her, and knowen of them that
loue her. And although this may perchance
seeme a hard attempt in these our dayes,
wherein falsehoode maketh so fayre a shew,

and hath so great appearaunce of that it is
not, and euery man claimeth to the trueth,
be their doctrines neuer so diuers, yet since
God hath giuen vs meanes to driue awaye
those thicke cloudes of errour and igno∣raunce,
that the sunne of trueth may shine
vnto the worlde, I haue indeuoured in this
short treatise, to take away that colourable
shewe of trueth from the Church of Rome,
that the vndoubted trueth of the Church of
Christ may the better appeare. For we haue
a touchstone, the word of God that cannot
lye, a rule that cannot deceaue, by which
whatsoeuer we trie and examine, it wil soone
bee seene whether it bee true or false. Truth
also is a thing that is auncient, and hath bin
alwayes,De virgini∣bus velan∣dis. sayth Tertullian, and like the good
corne that was first sowen: but errour is that
bad seed which was cast after into that field
by the enuious man.Tertul. de prescripti∣onibus ad∣uersus Hae∣reticos. Seeing therefore that
is true that was first, and what so euer com∣meth
after is false: howe easie a matter is it
for such as search, to see the light, and for
them that inquire after her, to finde the
trueth? For if it bee true that the Scriptures

teach, & that onely, then al that is not agrea∣ble
to that truth, must needs bee false. And if
that onely be nowe true, which in the Apo∣stles
times was true: no number of dayes
or yeares shall prooue that not to bee false
nowe, which then was not true. Therefore
for the benefite of all such as loue the truth,
I haue in this treatise set downe, the doctrine
which was first taught and preached at Rome
in the Apostles dayes, whereof no man
doubteth, but that it must bee the infallible
worde of God, and Christian religion. Then
also I haue added thereunto that which is
nowe holden for the Romishe religion and
Catholicke fayth there. And because these
two doe verie much differ, as hee that rea∣deth
will soone see (for indeede they are no∣thing
like:) and wee are assured that that
which Gods worde deliuereth, and was first,
must needes bee currant, that which hath
no warrant in the worde, and commeth af∣ter,
must needes be counterfeite. I haue en∣deuoured
to bee short, because I hoped it
woulde be the more willingly read, and the
better remembred. And for that cause I

haue not aunswered the argumentes, which
the Romish Catholickes vse for defence of
their opinions, and the rather because it is
performed in an other treatise. But I trust
in this it will appeare, that hee that will im∣brace
the Catholicke Fayth that was then,
when the faith of the Romans was commen∣ded,
whereof the Papistes make greate
bragges, must needes detest that Romish
fayth that is now, and accompt it most blas∣phemous.
This little worke I haue beene
bold to dedicate vnto your good Ladiship,
not onely as a discharge of my duetie of
thankefulnesse toward your Honour, to
whome you bounde mee long since by ma∣nie
vndeserued courtesies: but also because
that then I knewe your great zeale, and fer∣uent
desire and loue to the trueth, and your
Christian care to augment your knowledge
of the will of GOD: Whereof I nothing
doubt, but the Lorde hath giuen vnto you
great and happie increase. To whose abun∣dant
mercies in Christ I commit your good
Ladishippe, alwayes praying that hee will
here confirme you in his trueth, and conti∣nue

all his good graces tovvardes you, vn∣till
hee shall take you out of this vale of
miserie, to raigne vvith him in end∣lesse
glorie, Amen.
