



RIght Worshipfull, ha∣uing trauelled now a long time in my mi∣nistery, as your selues can witnesse, I yet finding no great comfort of all my labours, may perchance bee decei∣ued as was Eliah, (and with all my heart I wish it were so) who in his time complained that none truly religious were left,1. King. 19.10. when God had reserued many. I will not therfore resolue with my selfe as did Ieremy,
 not to speake any more in the name of God,Ier. 20.9 or to forbeare to preach; but rather hope, that hee who hath set me to worke (though the seede of my husbandry lye hid for a time, and is not seen to sprout) yet will in the end giue a gracious blessing, and a plentifull haruest. And for such good successe of these my la∣bours, I wil alwaies pray most hear∣tily to the Master of the haruest, the only giuer of all good things. For, as Samuel said,1. Sam. 12.23. God forbid I should sin against the Lord, and cease praying for you, but I will shew you the good and right way: so shall my indeuour be, I trust, alwaies (by Gods assistance) that the light of truth may shine in the hearts of you, and of all my Pa∣rishioners, and guide euery of you in all your actions. Being therefore very desirous to see some fruite of all my labours: I resolued with my
 selfe, that the readiest way to plant the true knowledge of God, is, to instruct the youthes in the grounds and Principles of Religion: assu∣ring my selfe, that such as once find a sweetnesse in that knowledge, will hunger and thirst more and more for further vnderstanding. I there∣fore expounded the tenne Com∣mandements, indeuoring therin to be plaine, for the instruction of the simple and ignorant. For children (such as my people are in vnderstan∣ding, and God of his goodnes make them in deed his obedient and duti∣full children) must be fed with milk of easie doctrine, not beeing as yet able to digest strong meates, or vn∣derstand hard points of deeper knowledge. And much to that ef∣fect that I taught out of the Pulpit, my pen also hath set downe, that words vvhich may easily be forgot∣ten,
 though they bee attentiuely heard) being again presented to the eye, as another remembrancer of that which was sayd, may make a deepe impression in the heart, and so be more remembred, and better regarded. These my small labours, though not worthy to be presented to your Worships, yet the matter being such as no Christian may be ignorant of; and I intending the same especially for the people, ouer whō God hath placed me, am bold to publish the same in your names, earnestly desiring, & most heartily beseeching God, that as in worldly reputatiō you are the most eminent of my Parish; so you & your fami∣lies, may be vnto all about you god∣ly patterns of true Christian zeale, and all holy obedience. O that the light of true godlinesse might so shine from you and your houses,
 that thereby others your neighbors may be prouoked and incouraged, with all alacrity to prayse God for the truth of his glorious Gospell, and in singlenesse of heart to serue him. And that in this true Christi∣an zeale and for wardnesse, you may be furderers of Gods glory and of his truth: Imitate I most heartily in∣treat you, the couragious example of that man of God, good Ioshuah, who to drawe on others to the ser∣uice of the true God, thus professed: I and my house will serue the Lord.Iosh. 24, 15. Which that you may say and doe feruently and vnfainedly; the Lord in mercy for his Christs sake, worke it in your hearts, and in the hearts of all them that call vpon the name of the Lord. So be it.

