



COnsidering with my selfe (right
Honourable) how many that
haue some desire to wake in
right wayes and perfect paths,
are seduced and misse-led, and
that willingly, hauing this per∣swasion
once setled in their
hearts, that the bishop of Rome
is their head here vpon earth, whom they ought to o∣bey:
Seeing also on the other side, not a fewe, that
cloke and colour many their trecheries and treasons,
when they suffer as euil doers for their wicked purpo∣ses
and practises, as if for their conscience sake they
were thus delt withall; I thought I could not bestow
time better, then if by any means possible, I might by
my paine & trauel, light the candle of trueth to them
that are in darknesse and ignorance, and discouer the
hypocrisie of the other sort, who vnder pretence of

conscience, doe against all conscience and duetie.
Both which partes, my desire hath bene to performe
in this treatise. For if by triall of the Popes title, and
examining his euidence I prooue that he maketh an
vniust claime, to the supremacie ouer the whole
Church of Christ: and if in view of his doings, and
proofe of his practise it may plainlie appeare,Iohn 10. 1, 10. that as
he like a thiefe entred into that honor that now he in∣ioyeth,
so in the same he plaieth the thiefe in deed, &
doeth nothing els but rob and steale, and kill: I hope
then the simple, and so the better sort of the two, will
not so readilie as they haue done rest vpon him, in
whom they shall see neither warrant, power to haue
his fulnesse of power, nor any Christian-like modera∣tion
to vse the same: And as for the other sort, they
will finde no cause for them to crake of their consci∣ence,
when it shal appeare to the world, that it is not
vpon any sure ground, neither staied vpon any good
foundation. For doubtlesse, if a good conscience doe
giue vnto Caesar that that is Caesars or belongeth to
him,Mat. 22. 21 whether obedience, tribute, or any thing else, as
Christ commaundeth: If it make subiects to subiect
their very soules to the higher powers, as S. Paul bid∣deth,Rom. 13. 1.
and frameth vs to submit our selues to all maner
ordinance of man for the Lordes sake, as Saint Peter
willeth:1. Pet. 2. 13. And if these dueties of inferiours towardes
their superiours, must bee performed for conscience
sake, as the same Apostle exhorteth vs, and S. Paul al∣so,
Rom. 13. 5. I pray you what conscience can there
bee in denying their obedience to their Soueraigne,
and giuing it to another? or in preferring him whom
their selues haue made their prince and king, that Ro∣mish
priest, before such as God hath set ouer vs?

doubtlesse, if in conscience wee bee bound to obey
God, then can no man haue so much as a shewe of
conscience, so to robbe Gods magistrates of that au∣thoritie
that he giueth them, as doeth the church of
Rome. Men sometime will make conscience where
none is, as these men do, in tying themselues to keep
other lawes then God hath giuen them. And if their
sinne were no greater then so, yet should they haue
no more thankes at Gods hand, then the Iewes had
for such will-worshippings, who when they looked
to merite by such works,Esa. 1. 12. it was said vnto them, Who
hath required these things at your hands? But seeing
the iudgement wherein we and our workes must bee
tried,Rom. 2. 16. shall bee according to the Gospel: that must
bee the touch stone, the rule and the square to
prooue vs, not our good intentions, deuotions, or the
doctrines of men whatsoeuer.Mat. 23. The Pharises made
conscience in washing before meate, and many such
like things: but they are reproued of Christ, because
they were so carefull to keepe those their owne tradi∣tions,
so little regarding Gods commaundements;
and yet their clensings might seeme to be some imi∣tation
of Gods law. But with what forehead can the
church of Rome pretend any conscience in doing
that which is expressely against that honour which
God commaundeth to bee giuen to magistrates, and
contrary to the humble duetie that good bishops of
the purer age did alwayes performe? It is not there∣fore
conscience carefully setled on Gods word, that
any of them doeth suffer for: but for their doings that
are expresly against the same. For howsoeuer the an∣swer
to the English Iustice (as also other their words
and writings) would seeme to iustifie that Catholike

crew,Answere to the English Iustice. cap. 1. as if they dealt nothing in matters of 
the euidence that hath bene sufficiently and plenti∣fully
giuen, and proued against them, do plainely de∣clare
their vnnatural treasons. Yea and that recon∣ciling
which themselues confesse to be the principal
worke of their Priest among vs, and whereof the wri∣ter
of the forenamed answere, sayeth that it can no∣thing
at all, touch or trouble the quiet of our Coun∣trey:
yet because it is a vniting (of them that are re∣conciled)
vnto the Pope: (who is not onely a speciall
enemie to our most gratious Soueraigne, but also a
tirannous tormentour of all such as will not holde
their kingdomes of him, as many Stories doe proue)
it is therefore a withdrawing of them, from their du∣tie
and obedience towards her Maiestie, whensoeuer
the Pope shall so commaund. Yea one whom them∣selues
trust in great matters (called Bruise I suppose,Among the let∣ters taken with Car the Hispa∣uiolised Scot.
for the booke I haue not by mee) writing to the Duke
of Parma, and reporting of the labours of such Semi∣narie
Priestes as were among them in Scotland, shew∣eth
that as they conuert the soules of such as they
deale withall so euen then in the same instant they
doe affectionate them to the Catholicke King. What
plainer words can there be to shew to what end this
reconciling tendeth? You see Poperie and treason
must bee taught together, they must bee as twinnes,
they must grow together, and go together, foote by
soote. Yea now a dayes it is not right Popery, vnlesse
it bring forth some treacherie. What hath their Ca∣tholicke
K. (a gulfe that wil neuer be satisfied) to doe,
with them that are subiects to the King of Scots?
yea I would saine knowe what Allen himselfe and his
brother Parsons doe meane by these words (vntil that

Day?) For in a letter of father Will.William Allen his letter. Allens, which I
haue to shew (written I suppose with his owne hand)
to father D. P. Rectour of the English Colledge in
Rome, hee reporteth that M. George Gilbert came into
Fraunce, by the reuerend father Robert (Parsons) and o∣ther,
to kepe himselfe vntill that Day. What meane
they by that Day? What meaneth Allen to write it
in great letters, as a thing that should bee especially
noted, and did perchaunce good to him and such o∣ther
viperlike traitours, to thinke of it? It was doubt∣lesse
no other day then that, which they hoped, the
rebellion in England, the troubles in Ireland, the
Spanish fleete so long looked for, and so much spoken
of, should haue brought vnto them. Against such
dayes of mischiefe they seeke to praepare men before
by their reconciling, as that letter of Bruise before
mentioned, and many other vnanswerable proofes
doe teach vs. And therefore seeing that vnder prae∣tence
of reconciling men to God, they doe in deede
by all meanes possible deuote and tye them to serue
the Pope, and that insatiable tirant, who haue a long
time, by many wicked and Popelike practises, shewed
themselues vtter enemies to our estate and Prince:
what reason can be yeelded, why Princes may not by
most seuere punishments, preuent the perillous pur∣poses
of such secret conspiratours, and knowen ene∣mies?
May Popes vse pollicies to get authoritie,
which by no right they can claime, and to keepe it
when they haue obtained it, (as in this treatise it will
appeare they did:) and may not Princes prouide for
the safetie of their persons, the establishing of their
kingdomes, and the maintenance of their ancient
and lawfull dominions? May vsurpers keepe that

which wickedly they haue gotten, and may not law∣full
Kings and Queenes defend their true and right
inheritance? Or must they suffer such serpents with∣in
their kingdomes, such snakes as it were in their bo∣somes.
Wee cannot let such fugitiue traitours, as
seeke the ruine of their natiue countrey, to wish also
that such ready meanes to effect their desires, might
not be hindred. No we cannot hinder their attemp∣ting
of the same, by their seditious pamphlets. But
wee hope that all Christian princes, that knowe these
their lewd practises, not trusting the songs of those
Syrens, will before it be too late, seeke to preuent the
meanes that they vse to bring them to passe. Nei∣ther
need they who cal themselues (though vntruely)
Catholikes, and maintaine the Romish religion with∣in
their Dominions,Cap. 4. feare so to doe. For Allen him∣selfe
(if that bee his answere to the English Iustice)
dare not say it is a matter yet defined, but disputable
onely, whether the Pope may excommunicate or de∣priue
a Prince in case of haeresie or apostacie, and
consequently to absolue his subiects from their othe
and obedience to him. If this be a case yet not ouer∣ruled
in the Popes Consistorie, or at the least in any
general Council; then euen Popish princes need not
bee afraide to withstand by all meanes that they can,
such dangerous deceiuers as come in sheepes cloth∣ing,
making shewe of Religion, but are in deede raue∣ning
wolues, secretly working treason. In so much as
they who fauour but too well the Romish Religion,
beginne now to know and detest these rouing runna∣gates,
whose counsels are mischieuous, whose doings
are treacherous. And because the very ground of
this their brag, that they suffer for conscience sake,

is this supremacie of the B. of Rome, and his power o∣uer
all, not Bishops only, but Princes also: which they
would haue to be an article of religion, & so to touch
the conscience, whereas it is in trueth, but a matter
of Popish pride and ambition: for this cause haue I
indeuoured in this treatise, to proue that it hath no
warrant in the word, or in the writings of the appro∣ued
and auncient fathers. Neither can al the Iesuites
and Seminary priestes in Rome and Rheimes, bee able to
shew the article of the Popes supremacie, to be a Ca∣tholique
doctrine, and therefore it is not to be recei∣ued
by their own rules. And because it bringeth not
a litle light vnto the trueth, to know by what practises
they are become so great, and to what ends they haue
bent, or how they haue imployed their power which
they haue gotten by craft and shifts: I haue therefore
pointed vnto such meanes as they haue vsed to ad∣uance
their seat, and to some of their doings. where∣by
it doeth most plainly appeare, that their only care
hath bin to make themselues great and rich, nothing
at al regarding the glory of God, or ye good of Christs
flocke, which they say is committed to them. And
this I haue done by ancient or their owne histories,
seldome standing vpon the credit onely of our owne
writers, vnlesse it bee in report of the actes of the later
Popes, which cannot be reported by any but such as
were in, or after their dayes. But if I had more relied
then I doe, vpon the reportes of Protestant writers, I
should haue the example of our aduersaries for my
defence. This treatise I set forth vnder the defence
of your honours name, to whom I acknowledge my
selfe especially bound in many respects. Which to
do I am the rather moued, that to that inward witnes

of a good conscience, whereby I knowe your L. is in∣cited
with a continual care, and vigilant eye, to pre∣uent
the perilous practises of those busie brokers for
that Catholique king (as they call him) & other ene∣mies
to this Common wealth, might also bee added
that outwarde testimonie of trueth, confirmed by
proofe and practise of the purer times, to incourage
you with a constant increase in godly zeale, to dis∣charge
stil the duetie, that God (who hath called you
to that honour) hath layde vpon you, and requireth
of you, to the seruice of her Maiestie, and safetie of
her subiectes. Most humbly I craue you to take in
good part this simple token of a sincere affection,
and slender pledge of my vnfained heart. And thus
committing the happie successe of this my traueile
to Gods good blessing, to whose direction and de∣fence
I also leaue your Lordship in all your doings,
I humbly take my leaue at my house at Ryton
in the Bishopricke of Durham.
[❀]
