



IF the children of Ruben and Gad, Numb 31.21, 2  might not setle thēselues to rest & ease til the Lord had cast out his enemies frō his sight, but that they should sinne a∣gainst the Lord, and their sinne should finde them out: (for it is great reason, that they that haue one inheritance promised, should take paines together to get the same, and put from it their common enemies) then how much more shal God finde vs guiltie, if so many and mighty ene∣mies, seeking by al meanes possible, to keepe vs and our brethren from the possession of the trueth here, and so from that spiritual Canaan, and heauenly Ierusalem else-where, we seeking our qui∣et estate, and contenting our selues with our owne happy life, do not our indeuour to scatter and confound according vnto our place and calling, the common enemies to our saluation. When the children of Ruben and Gad, Iosh. 22.1  and the halfe tribe of Ma∣nasseh, had builded them an altar in their countrey, for a re∣membrance that they were to be accounted Israelites, although Iordan parted them from the other tribes, and the rest of Israel had thought that they had builded it to offer sacrifices vpon the same, the whole congregation of the children of Israel ga∣thered them together at Shiloh to warre against them: For they thought it to be euery mans part, to oppose thēselues against Gods enemies, and to be forward in defence of his glorie. Seeing
 the fore a common cause requireth common help, and they that  he not keepe a good watch in the place that is appointed vnto them, and in their calling, doe as much as in them lieth, betray the cause: Matth. 25.30. and such as doe not occupie their talent, shalbe Cast into vtter darkenes as vnprofitable seruants: I haue thought it good, according to my slender skill, and simple talent, to op∣pose my selfe against our aduersaries, in defence of Gods glorie and the truth: euen against them, who are both the most dange∣rous enimies to our soules health and the continual disturbers of all common wealths. The first, they indeuour by their false doc∣trine: the other, by their most perillous and endlesse practises. Insomuch, as of the troubles that are this day in the world, the Cardinall of Loraine seemeth to haue made a true confession e∣uen in the councell of Trent. For our sakes, brethren (saieth hee) is this storme risen, therefore cast vs into the sea. Indeede not for their sakes onely, Gentil. exam. concil. Trident. sess. 22 lib. 4. but by their meanes, are these troubles come vpon this part of the worlde. Nowe the multi∣tude or malice of our enemies must not discourage vs from doing our duty: but how much more they increase in number, so much the more diligent should we be: and their crueltie and malice should increase our courage against them. But in vaine doe wee withstand them with our tongues and pennes, if the Christian Magistrates doe not put to their helping hand: who haue also their du y to do in the church of God, as wel as they, to whom the ministery of the word is committed Moses & Aaron, the prince and the priest were brethren, to teach vs what mutuall help the one of them must make to the other. Kings and Queenes (if they forget not their dutie) must be nursing fathers & nurces to Gods church. Psa. 49.23. They must cherish and norish it, they must loue and defend it. And as idolatrous princes, the slaues of antichrist, haue one mind,  ocal. 17.12, and shal giue their power & authoritie to the beast, and shall fight with the Lamb, 13 as we see it is come to passe in these our dayes: euen so should all godly Princes and Magi∣strates be ashamed, that, zeale of Gods glory, and loue vnto his trueth should not knit them as fast together, and make them as willing to maintaine the good cause: as superstition, ambition
 and malice preuaileth with the wicked, to make them so  bornly to striue against Gods vndoubted word. Such princes  in scriptures commended vnto vs, as haue beene ready to main∣taine trueth, set foorth Gods word, and regarded the sinceritie of the same: and haue on the contrary withstoode superstition, put downe idolatry, and compelled their people vnto the seruice of God, both according to the first and second table of the Comman∣dements. And on the other side, it is left as a staine vnto the me∣mory of others, that they did not take away occasions of idola∣try, and remoue such stumbling blockes out of mens wayes. If then we could in such a godly consent, as the Prophet Sophonie saith, serue the Lord with one shoulder, the ciuil magistrates, Zophon. 3.9. by the sword, we by the word: they by correction (if neede re∣quire) we by exhortations: they by punishments, we by threat∣nings, remembring that both the one and the other must one day make an account of our stewardship, and answere for our de∣faults: then I doubt not but God would blesse our godly labors, with great increase of knowlege and godlines. But, as in the end of this treatise, I haue made some exhortation vnto magistrates, to consider of their dutie in this point, so haue I also thought it my part to maintaine to my power, Truth against Falshood euen Gods word against mens inuentions. And for this cause haue I taken this trauell, to set downe the summe of that that we teach, especially in such matters as are principally in question amongst vs: and on the contrary, what our aduersaries teach concerning the same. Which I thought to be necessary, because our doctrine is many times by the aduersaries slandered, especially before such as are ignorant, as though it were far otherwise than in truth it is. And that the truth more easly may appeare, what is taught by them and vs, he that listeth may see with little labor, euen as it were at one view both our opinions. Neither do I vndertake to set downe all that we teach concerning those articles, but onely the points that doe especially belong to the controuersies that are betweene vs. Then also haue I set downe the principall argu∣ments whereby they confirme their doctrines, and indeuour to confute them. Wherein especially I alleadge M. Bellarmines reasons (though not alwayes) because he is accounted learned a∣mongest vs, and also commeth after others, so that he hath seene
 what others haue, and hath taken out of them what he liketh. And as in all this treatise, my endeuour is to proue (I trust with some good effect) that the doctrine of the church of Rome is not catholike, so that it may the better appeare, I haue towards the end set downe an abridgement of Vincentius Lyrinensis, whereby I trust the meanest that seeth it shalbe able to iudge, how they make an vniust claime to the catholike religion. And al∣though I know my own wants, and could rather submit my selfe to be a scholer vnto many, than a teacher almost of any: yet be∣cause (I know not how) my minde giueth me, that this manner of writing may do some good, especially among the vnlearned that are desirous to be taught, I thought my duetie forced me to take this in hand, though I want many helpes and meanes that other haue. And, to whom should this my labour (such as it is) be due rather than vnto you, next after that place where I did sucke as it were my first milke of learning, and laid almost the founda∣tion of that knowledge (such as it is) that God hath indued mee withall? By your good liberalitie, I confesse my selfe to be the better inabled to do any good (be it neuer so little that I can do) in the church of God. To your Worships therefore I confesse this my trauell to be due, as a simple token of my sincere heart, which would haue yeelded a better remembrance, if my abilitie could haue affoorded it. And the rather do I dedicate this Booke vnto your W. Company, that you, seeing the meaning of bestowing your exhibition (which is to bring vp Labourers in Gods har∣uest, teachers in his church) to be in some part performed in me, who first in Oxford receiued your liberalitie, as I doubt not but you haue seene much more plentiful fruit in many other you may the more willingly continue your godly course, and not be weary of your wel-doing. Accept in good part (I pray you) this simple gift, and if you see in it but my desire to doe good, giue glo y to God, to whose good grace I commit you and yours, and my selfe to your good prayers. From my house at Ryton in the Bishoprike of Durham.
 Anno 1595.
