



THE materiall temple at Ierusalem, Reue∣rende Father, al∣though it were very stately and sumptu∣ous, yet was it so ar∣tificially framed, that whē the buil∣ding came to the setting vp,1. Kin. 6.7. there was neither hammer, nor axe, nor any toole of yron heard in the house while it was in building, because the stone was hewen perfectly alreadie, before it was brought thither.
Wherein, although wee haue in great admiration the wisedome of Solomon, by whose direction the building was taken in hand, the cir∣cumspection
 of the Lordes, which ouer sawe the worke, the cunning of the masōs, which squared the stones, and the plentie of stones, which suf∣ficed so huge a building, yet must it needes bee graunted, that the office of those, which caried the stone, and transported the same, from the place, where it was framed, to the place, wher the tēple was erected, was great¦ly necessarie, and to very good pur∣pose in this gorgious work. The like proportion is obserued in the buil∣ding of the spirituall temple of God,1. Cor. 3.16 & 1. Cor. 6.19. 1. Pet. 2.5. which is euery faithfull Christi∣an,Mat. 16.16. & 1. Pet. 2.7. builded by faith vppon Iesus Christe,1. Cor. 3.11 beeing the only foundati-of the same. For Christ, being the wise Solomon in deed, directeth the worke by his holy spirit, good chri∣stian Princes by wholesome lawes, like good ouerseers, take order that the work may go forward, lerned &
 godly preachers, as cunning masons, continually square plenty of stones, that is, make many godly Sermons, & write sūdrie learned bokes perfect¦ly agreeing with the square of gods worde,Gala. 6.16. the only rule of spirituall builders, which beeing translated from tongue into tongue by the di∣ligence of interpreters, the porters or cariers in this spirituall worke, it commeth to passe, that God his e∣lect are builded vp by little and little into a spirituall temple for GOD him selfe to dwell in, with great quietnesse of conscience, whiche although it bee sensibly felte in∣wardelye by the faithfull belee∣uer so builded, yet is it not per∣ceiued outwardly by the wicked ra∣ging worlde, which is no part of this building. Howe greatly the auncient Israelites ioyed at the erec∣tion of the materiall temple,Gala. 6.16. the
 many oblations,1. Kin. 8.61 &c. which Solomon offered to the Lorde, and the so∣lemne feast, which hee and all the people helde, most manifestly doe declare. How muche more then ought wee to offer vp vnto GodRom. 12.1. the oblations of a godly life, and to ioy continually in our heartes, considering that it hath pleased him in Iesus Christe to builde vs vp by his holy spirite for an holy tem∣ple vnto him selfe? Nowe forso∣much as it is the dutie of euery chri∣stian man in his calling, and ac∣cording to his habilitie receiued of the Lorde, to further this ioyful worke, I, (acknowledging other∣wise mine imbecillitie,) haue tran∣sported by painefull trauell into mine owne Countrie three seuerall stones, wel squared in a foraine land by that godly and learned builder master Henry Bullinger Minister of the Churche of Zurich; by tran∣slating
 into English: first foorth of Frenche a godly Sermon of the Lordes Supper, then foorth of La∣tine, a learned treatise touching the worthinesse of holy Scripture, and lastly forth of the same tongue, this present worke insuyng. What mooued mee to translate the two firste treatises, I haue sufficiently shewed in mine Epistles dedicatorie prefixed before the same. It resteth therefore that I declare my purpose in this my presente interprice. I rest in hope, that those my cuntrey∣men, which haue diligently reade ouer my seconde trauayle, (that I say nothing of the profect, which they may gather of the first,) I meane the discourse of the autho∣ritie of the Scripture &c. haue lear∣ned thereby to haue due regarde of Gods holy worde, as of a moste ex∣cellent treasure, wherby God sitting
 in heauen vouchsafeth to talke with vs dwelling vpon earth: and that they are thereby effectually moo∣ued with a feruent desire to reade the Scripture. Wherefore follow∣ing my purpose, whiche is accor∣ding to my duetie to profite my countrey, and to forder the Lordes building. I haue translated present∣ly for the helpe of the vnlearned in reading the Sriptures, The summe of the foure Euangelistes, wherebie we may learne not onely the gene∣rall ende of the Gospelles, which is, that Iesus is Christ, the onely, and sufficient Sauiour of mankinde, but also the perticular purpose of euerie Chapter, yea almost of euerie verse. By this direction the vnlearned are not ledde, as are superstitious pa∣pistes, into the labyrinth of obscure schoolemen, to be deuoured by that
 monstrous Minotaurus the Ro∣mane Antichrist, but guided in the pathway, that leadeth to life euer∣lasting, to the knowledge of Iesus Christ, by whom wee are deliuered from the tyrannie of the Diuell, and restored to the fauour of God. And that the diligent reader might re∣ceiue by the reading hereof no small profecte, I haue noted in the mar∣gent, by the direction of the Alpha∣beticall letters, those verses of the text of the Euangelistes, from chap∣ter to chapter, wherevnto euerie part of this Summe is answerable, besides other notes, (profitable I trust) whiche there also I haue put downe. Much about the tyme, that I finished this my simple tra∣uell, reuerende Father, your Lord∣ship was elected by God his proui∣dence
 Bishoppe of this Diocesse. Whereupon, not hauing determi∣ned to whome I might dedicate this worke, I resolued with my selfe to offer it to your Lordeshippe, as a present, wherewith God hath a∣bled mee beeyng one of your dio∣cesse, to bidde you welcome into our cuntrey. I doubt not, but as it hath pleased GOD to make you among vs the chiefe patrone of his cause, so will you vouchsafe fauou∣rably to accept these my labours tending onely to the aduauncement of the same. GOD long preserue your Lordeshippe in good health, increase his gracious giftes in you, and of his infinite mercie so assiste you with his holy spirite, that you may carefully looke vnto vs your flocke, and prosperouslie pro∣ceede in all your good doynges, to
 our comforte, and to his glorie. From mine house in Bilston the fourth of Iune. 1581.

