



SOme are desirous (right
Honorable) to store vp
those things to their fur∣ther
benefite, which be∣fore
they haue heard to their present
comfort, like the good men of A∣thens
which sayd to Paul, We will
heare thee againe of this matter, Act.
17. At the request of such men I haue
yeelded to the publishing of those

Lectures which I made vpon the
Lords Prayer: notwithstanding the
labours of other reuerend & excel∣lent
men, which haue both trauailed
farre, and waded deepe in this argu∣ment.
And if any man looke for any
new matter at my hand, he doth but
loose his labour: for I must confesse
that I haue walked by their lights, &
trode their steps for the greatest part
of my iourney: neither haue I taken
vpon me to performe any thing by
my self more then others haue done,
but to ioyne with others in the buil∣ding
of the spirituall temple, where∣vnto
I haue brought such as I had.
And for my owne part, I thinke my
selfe most highly bound to praise his
heauēly Maiestie, that hath vouchsa∣fed
me (the most vnprofitable of al) a
place amongst his builders, though I
bring but lime & morter to the buil∣ding,
and a place amongst his soul∣diers,
though I doe but now & then

strike a stroke, or carrie their armour
after them, and a place amongst his
skilful Archers, though my selfe doe
but giue aime at the marke as it were
in respect of them that haue pearced
it, and gotten the victorie: they are
gone before with the vintage, I come
after with the gleanings, which may
bee as acceptable to some as the har∣uest
is to others. And seeing as the
Lord blesseth whom he will, and by
whom he will, I knowe no cause of
discontētednes to remaine vnto any,
seeing it is lawfull for euery one to
doe what good he can, both by spea∣king
and writing, especially in these
dayes wherein Sathan beareth such
sway, and by his seruants laboureth
by all meanes possible to hinder the
growth & thriuing of Gods church,
to destroy the faith of Gods childrē,
to hold al men in miserable blindnes
& ignorance: yea, and if it were pos∣sible,
to bring to passe that God shuld

haue no true worship, yea no wor∣ship
at all done vnto him amongst
the sonnes of men. I am bolde my
good Lord to offer this small treatise
vnto your Honor, both in respect of
my bounden duetie, as also for the
worthines of the matter handled
therein, which sheweth both the
matter of prayer, and also the right
order and maner of calling vpon the
name of God, amongst all estates, at
all times, in al places, & for al wants,
which is such a poynt of Gods wor∣ship,
as who so hath attained vnto
the true knowledge, & right practise
of the same, hath obtained a great
matter, if not the greatest of al in this
life. For such a one may haue free
accesse to the throne of grace, and
stand in the presence of the almigh∣tie,
when another shall flie from his
presence: such a one may batter and
beate downe the walles, the cities,
and the holdes of mightie enemies,

when other shall not dare to come
neere them: he shall breake the pri∣son
doores, and make yron gates to
open of their owne accord, when o∣thers
shall lye by it: he shall doe as
much with one man, as others shall
doe with a hundred, and more too:
for he shall be able not onely to pre∣uaile
against men, yea though they
bee many, and mightie, and craftie,
but he shall preuaile with God him∣selfe
like Iacob, vntill he hath pre∣uailed
against Sathan, and all the po∣wer
of hell, and gotten the masterie
ouer himselfe, euen to the deniall of
himselfe, for the trueths sake, which
is the greatest victorie that can bee
gotten: he shall haue power & skill
to tame his owne affections, which
is more then the taming of wilde
beasts: he shall finde patience in ad∣uersitie,
and thankfulnes in prosperi∣tie,
and contentation in euery triall:
he shall see the mountaines couered

with heauenly souldiers for the de∣fence
of Gods people, as Elisha did:
he shall raise he dead, and water the
earth with aboundance of raine, as
Elias did: he shal stop the mouthes of
the hungrie lions without any vio∣lence,
as Daniel did, and quench the
flames of fire without any water, as
Shedrach and his fellowes did. In a
word, the effects of prayer are won∣derfull
and infinite: for what may
not he haue and effect, that shall but
aske and haue?
Who were euer more honoured
of men, then they that haue giuen
most honour vnto God? And who
doe more honor the Lord, then they
that doe truely call vpon his name by
prayer? who more renowned, and
beloued then the godly, and zealous
in true religion? And what godlines
or religon can there be without the
true knowledge and right practise
of prayer? who were euer more vali∣ant

in warre, more milde in peace,
more cherefull in prison, more sober
in libertie, more painefull in health,
more comfortable in sicknes, more
godly in their life, or more happie in
their death, then the faithfull? And
who were euer faithfull without
prayer, which is the chiefest fruite of
faith, & borne with faith, both borne
together like twinnes? To whome
doth the Lord giue his grace and fa∣uour,
but to the humble and lowly?
And who were euer truly humbled,
but those which by prayer vnto God
in the bitter feeling of sinne, haue
most confessed, and acknowledged
their wantes, their weaknesses, their
imperfections, and al their iniquities?
Where did euer the manifolde
graces of God meete and dwell, but
in the soule of the faithfull, which
haue still beene conuersant in calling
vpon the name of Iehouah? For hee
that hath the spirite of prayer, hath a

speedie messenger continually in a
readines, at all needes, to trauell for
him betweene heauen and earth, and
sometime bringeth with him liuely
faith, and true repentance, sometime
ioy in the holy Ghost, sometime pa∣tience
in affliction, sometime assu∣rance
of Gods eternall fauour, some∣time
deliuerāce out of danger, some∣time
wisdome and discretion, some∣time
zeale of Gods glory, and loue
to the brethren, sometime one grace,
and sometime another, & sometime
it causeth all these graces of God to
meete together in one man, where
they doe reioyce one in another, and
one embrace another, like friendes
mette at a feast, but the partie that
doth entertain them is euer the great∣est
gainer. The heauenly art of pray∣er
(if I may so call it) is an arte of all
artes. He is counted the best Orator
that can best perswade, & most moue
the affections of men, but hee that

hath learned to praye well, shall per∣swade
not men perhaps, but GOD
himselfe, and moue him that is the
mouer and perswader of all mens
heartes and affections. Philosophie
searcheth out much by argumentes
and demonstrations, but all groun∣ded
vpon naturall reason: but prayer
seekes out those thinges that reason
doubteth, yea and despaireth of, be∣cause
it is grounded not vpon reason
but vpon faith, which is farre aboue
all naturall reason, and is then most
busie, & liuely in working whē natu∣ral
reasō is at her wits end. Grammar
teacheth to speake well, but not the
language of Canaan, that is, the holy
language of God, as prayer doth. A∣rithmeticke
helpeth a man to num∣ber
many thinges: but by the arte of
prayer we may learne to number our
dayes as Dauid desired, which is to
apply our heartes to true wisedome,
and that is the best numbring. The

best Arithmetician cannot number
that which is infinite, not by all his
wit and skil compasse all to himselfe
that hee hath alwaies numbred: but
he that hath learned the arte of pray∣er
may comprehend by faith (which
doth accompany his prayer) the infi∣nite
mercies of God, and appropri∣at
thē to himselfe. Geometrie mea∣sureth
out landes and Lordshippes,
countries, and kingdomes, and the
whole earth: but what is that to pray∣er?
which measureth out heauen and
earth and the land of the liuing, but
yet no more then faith perswadeth
her to bee her owne. Astronomie
looketh aloft, and yet no hyer then
the starres, measuring out the causes
and effects of thinges by the course
of nature: but the faithfull which
haue the spirite of true prayer, looke
vp to God himselfe which is exalted
farre aboue the starres, and iudgeth
not of thinges by the course of na∣ture,

but by the grace, and gracious
promises of God, which doe ouer
rule all nature. As for Musick, though
it bee excellent, and delighteth the
mind, yet is it not to bee compared
with the hea arte of praying,
which helpe  faithfull soule to
true comfort in  middest of the
greatest distresses and agonies that
can bee. The studie of the scriptures
and the knowledge of God, and of al
other heauenly thinges, of all know∣ledge
is the most excellent (I speake
of illumiation, which is without
sanctification) for that it causeth the
minde to mount vp aboue the earth
vnto the contemplation of diuine
thinges, which other artes and scien∣ces
do not, whose matter and subiect
is altogether of the earth, and earth∣ly,
and leadeth but to the earth: but
he that hath the true knowledge, and
the right practise of prayer (ioyned
with the former) shall enioy God, &

in him all true happines, which is
more then to knowe it, or to see it.
In a worde, a man may bee a good
Grammarian and speake wel, a good
Philosopher and dispute wel, a good
Rhetorician and perswade well, a
good Arithmetician & number wel,
a good Astronomer and coniecture
well, a good Musitian and play well,
a good Politician and liue well, a
good Linguist and interprete well,
and a good Diuine and preach well,
and in all these excell, and yet goe
to hell when all is done: but they
that haue these, and the spirit of san∣ctification
and grace to teach them
the right practise of prayer, are most
happie: for they haue the key that
openeth the doore of Gods liberali∣tie,
which will bring them to the
full possession of happines. Therfore
my good Lord, sith prayer is an exer∣cise
of the soule, so princely, so ho∣norable,
so heauenly, so mightie, &

euery way so excellent, and renow∣ned
as it is, what could I commend
vnto your Honour that might better
testifie a discharge of dutie in me, or
better fit your Honors religious dis∣position,
whose heart the Lord hath
sanctified to the zealous embracing
of his sacred worde and Gospell, and
the aduancement of his glorie, in
furthering the building vp of his
Church. And nowe (hoping for
your Honors fauorable acceptance
hereof) I commend your Honour
vnto the most gracious blessing and
protection of the Almightie.

