


Worthy Sir,
NEuer any man attai∣ned vnto Honour, but Enuy folloued him close at the heels: and those Actions, which before were not onely plausible, but com∣mendable, are now subiect to mis∣construction. I know not else ho
 it should come to passe, that that Reuerend Diuine, whose worth all Learned men know, and your selfe in particular haue often extolled, should come now to bee taxed through the preposterous zeale of some men, for publishing to the World that Truth, which bee hath beene alwaies knowne to mainetaine; and should be thought to fauour that errour, which no man euer more masculinely opposed. The haynous Crime which is layd to the charge of that worthy Bishop, is this, That he is of opinion that the Church of Rome, not∣withstanding her manifold and deplorable Corruptions, cannot yet be truly said to bee all Errour, no Church. An af∣sertion (as you know) not infre∣quent in the writings of other
 learned men: but if it chance to fall from the Penne of a Prelate, hee is straight-way making a Wicket to let-in Popery. But is the truth so? Surely no: but as the Doctor of the Gentiles was accused to teach that which ill-disposed men did gather by his Wri∣tings; euen such is their case, whose words shewing the right vertuous contentednesse of his minde, Through Honour and Dishonour, are a most fit Episco∣pall Emprese. It was an acute Hook. Eccles. Polit. lib. 3 §. 1 demand of one, who for his pro∣found Wisedome and Iudgement was second to none that liued in the Age with him, Whether if an Hereticke were persecuted to the death by an Infidell for his Christian Profession sake, we could deny such a one the
 Name of a Martyr. Now who knowes not, that Martyrdome▪ is an honour peculiar to he Church of God▪ From whence, if all Pa∣pists (as some would haue it) be quite and cleane excluded, to what end doe wee spend so much time in disputes with them about Chri∣stian Religion? Why doe we trou∣ble our selues more with them, than with Iewes and Infidels who are altogether Aliens from the Church? Or why doe wee ra∣ther take the Workes of Bellar∣mine than the Alcoran to con∣fute? But wherefore doe I anti∣cipate, seeing this is the subiect of the ensuing discourse, but that the vertue of the Cause yeeldeth Ar∣guments more than now? For mie own part, I entreat your self & the World to excuse me, that I could
 bee o longer patient, when I se him whose meekenesse  such; that although he desire Peace with ll men, yet disclaimes Peace with Rome, who hath written such serious dissasues from Poperie, who hath sent comfort to some n that Inquisition, sand heartned them  Martyrdome, who be∣fore the Reuernd Assembly of the Clergie in the Conuocation, gathe∣red together all hi powers of Elo∣quence to perswade them to set themselues against that Tyberine Monster (so ee calleth Poperie) Concio ad Cleum. I say, when I see him traduced as  that would helpe Poperie 7. Vialls pag. 28. ouer the stile, and censured as one whose Charitie without zeale, without sound Iudgement. pag. 33. Charitie is told, whose Iudgement nfound, I must creae pardon, if my  within me worke a little, though from Viru∣lency
 of speech. I promise to ab∣staine: which, as my disposition ab harreth; so it cannot better my Nunquam me∣luem causm fcit dicetis petulatia, sed epè peiorem. l. our Val. Anti∣dot in Pogium. Couse: and hee for whom I am entred into the Lists, will not so bee defended, who had rather put vp iniurie; than eyther offer or requite any. Now (Reverend Sir) if this imputation, layd vpon the learned Bishop, were the exception of one alone, my labour might seeme superfluous: for why should not one man dissent from another, so that still the vnitie of the Spirit bee kept in the Bond of peace? But the case is now other∣wise: for you are not ignorant; that from him it is deriued to the People, to whom the worthy Pre∣late is made odious, and who thinke his Works vnworthy to be read any longer. Neither is it needfull to vse
 force of reason to the Common st: for what is wating in the weight of ens speeches, is supplyed in the apenesse of their mindes, to receiue whatsoeuer is but probably tendred them against their Saperious; and they account such men to carry sin∣gular freedome of minde, whiles thse that shall but vndertake their defence, must encounter with many heauy preiudices rooted in mens mindes, that they are, Men-pleasers, and Time-seruers. Yet  all thi deterr not from prsuing that which I haue taken in hand: neither (as I hope) shall I  any thing to the offence of any godly minded, if (besides the Rea∣sons; I alledge to fortifie the Cause it selfe) they be pleased to consider what Reasons dced me to stirre in this Maer: which are these;
 The Truth suffrs while  obtruded, and  are vrged  embrace it in stead thereof: The Church suffers  her chil∣dren re presented with  opinion in stead of her  Teets: Who though she  condemned all the rrours of  Church of Rome, yet  contmlious against the Church it selfe. The Reuerend Bishop suff, who  his grat deferning  Church our Mother,  not oby to be  the same day is Aduersary is spoken of. And lastly, d Lned  suffer▪ whose  fall  conled  Iudgment. The Vindication of all these ( great ) , th  of many▪ haue vnder en, and 
 umbly offer it to your Worships Patronage, to whom I am so well nown, that what I am I made ot tll you, not my other infor ou: what are my abilities, and what my weakens, is not hid from you. Besides, such is your loue towards me, that with a Fa∣therly affection you baue alwaies prosecuted mee (as all know that know vs both) Vt nihil à me tam Laurentius. Valla. Epist. ad Iohannem Tortellium. exiguum proficeaur, quod non tuo, nscio iudicio dicam an amori magnum esse videa∣tur. To your selfe therefore of right doth this Worke belong: to whom though lowe more, yea what∣soeuer I am able to doe; yet desire I to present this as the first token of my Thankefulnesse, for that Countenance and Fauour which you haue beene pleased to shew
 towards mee. For the Labour i selfe, all that I can promise is this I he Cause is good, I hau not made it worse. If th Stile be horrid and harsh, there∣in let my Youth pleade for mee, for the rest, let Cato come in, and see, and censure.

