



MADAM,
VVHen I had seriously be∣thought my selfe, in what Doctrine especially to im∣ploy my Ministerie, in the place in which the Lord had by so strong and strange a prouidence settled mee: Amongst other things, I was vehemently incli∣ned to study the Cure of the Feare of Death; both because it may be vsually obserued, that the most men are in bondage, by reason of these Feares; as also because I am assured, that our liues will become: more sweet,

yea, and more holy too, when the feare of death is remooued. And the rather was I incited hereun∣to, because I haue obserued some defect about this Point, in the most that haue written about Death. I am not ignorant of the censure which many may giue of this proiect, as accounting it an impossible thing to bee effected: but my trust is, that godly and discreete Christians will re∣straine censure, when they haue throughly viewed my reasons.
My vnfained desire to doe ser∣uice vnto Gods Church, in relie∣uing such Christians herein, as are not furnished with better helpes, hath emboldened me to offer this Treatise also to the publike view. I haue presumed in your Honors absence to thrust forth this Treatise vnder the pro∣tection of your Honors name: and withall, I desire heartily to testi∣fie my thankefulnes for the many fauors shewed vnto me & mine,

while your Honor was pleased to be my hearer. I should also much reioyce, if my testim my (con∣cerning the singular graces God hath bestowed vpon you, & the many good workes in which you haue abounded in the places of your abode) might adde any thing either vnto your Honours prayses in the Churches of Christ, or vnto the establishment of the comfort of your owne heart in God, and his Sonne Ie∣sus Christ.
I haue not made choyse of your Honour in this Dedication, for any speciall fitnesse in this Treatise for your Honours condi∣tion, in respect of your age, or absence in a place so far remote; for my earnest trust is, that God will adde yet many yeres to your happy life on earth: and besides, I haue had heretofore occasion to know how little you were a∣fraid to dye, when the Lord did seeme to summon you by sicknes.

That GOD, which hath en∣nobled your heart with heauenly gifts, and so made you an instru∣ment of so much good and con∣tentment vnto that most excel∣lent Princesse with whom you now liue; and towards whom, you haue shewed so much faith∣full obseruance, and dearenesse of affection, and carefulnesse of attendance; euen the Father of mercie, and God of all consola∣tions, encrease in you all spiri∣tuall blessings, and multiply the ioy of your heart, and make you still to grow in acceptation, and all well-doing.
Humbly crauing pardon for my boldnesse herein, I commit your Honor to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which will build you vp to eternall life: resting

Isleworth, July 14. 1618.
