



GRatious Soueraine, this small treatise humbly pleades your Royall Patronage by a double title: the one, from the Author of it, your old seruant, who oweth all he is to your Maiesty; the other, from the worke it selfe, being a defence of the Morall Law of God against the Antinomian Libertines in these daies, who deny to beleeuers any more vse thereof. And what one subiect can more iustly clame your Maiesties protection, then this of the Morall Law, sith you are not only by a pro∣per title, Defender of the fayth: but by a common trust committed to Kings, keeper of both Tables? The discharge of which trust as it tends much to the
 honour of the great Lawgiuer, who hath made you his Vicegerent to see his Lawes well executed: So it is the maine propp and pillar to support and se∣cure your royall Throne. The consideration where∣of, (when I saw these sonnes of Belial thus vn∣dermining the Kings Throne) hath prouoked my zeale both to God, and to your Maiesty, to write this simple Treatise. For to deny the Morall Law to be of any more vse to belieuers, or to be so much as a rule of conuersation, or that they owe obedience vnto it in poynt of duety and conscience: this strikes at the very root, and cutts in sunder the kot, not onely of christian charity, but euen of all ciuill so∣ciety, and happy vnion and communion betweene King and Subiects, Head and Members. For first, the rule of Gods true and vnmixed worship, com∣manded in the first Table, is taken away: Secondly, the rule of all christian and ciuill duties betweene man and man, in whatsoeuer relation they stand, of equality or inequality, Commanded in the second Table; and all this with one stroke of cutting off the Morall Law from belieuers. And particularly, these Antinomians cut off all dutifull and conscio∣nable obedience to Princes, grounded on the fift Commandement, wherein they being principall Parents, namely of our Country, all due honour and
 obedience in the Lord is commaunded to bee giuen them in the first place, as of children to their Fa∣ther. Againe, on the other side, they breake downe the bankes, that God himselfe hath pitched to con∣fine the course of Kings, whose hearts in the Lords hand, like the riuers of waters, keeping within their bankes, refresh the Land on euery side with their sweete streames: but being without the bankes of Gods sacred lawes, how soone might they ouerflow and drowne all? Therefore it was the care of the wise and good God (to the end he might pro∣uide for the hapy welfare both of the King and People) to leaue it in charge to the King of Israell that he should haue a coppy of the Law alwaies by him, to reade therein day and night,Deut 17.18, 19, 20. to learne thereby to feare the Lord his God, to walke hum∣bly among his brethren, to doe iustice and iudge∣ment, to the end hee may prolong his dayes in his Kingdome, hee and his Children in the middest thereof. But these Lawlesse Antinomians, enemyes to God, to Kings and States, would robb Christian Kings of this blessed Booke of Gods Law, that soe; if they could strippe them of the grace and feare of God in their hearts, letting loosse the reynes of all honestie and con∣science,
 they might vsurpe a gouernment after the lust of man, not after the law of God, and so pre∣cipitate ineuitable ruine to Princes and Common∣weales. For take away Gods Law, and what law of man can bynde the conscience, eyther in poynt of obeying, or of commanding? For though it hath euer beene a Maxime among the very heathen, that humaine Lawes, and such as were ra∣tified by solemne oathes and couenants betweene Prince and people, they held sacred and inuiola∣ble, as that Law of the Medes and Persians, the Kings writing and seale, &c. Dan. 6.16: Yet the maine ground that bore vp all the rest, was the conscience they had, by naturall instinct, of Gods eternall Law written in their hearts, accusing or excusing; knowing that God was an auenger of the breach of lawes, oathes, couenants, such as were agreeable to his Law. This then being the strongest ligature to combine the Head and Body politicke in a firme society, whereby it becomes in∣uincible, perpetuall, and glorious: these sonnes of Belial would dismember all. Wherein they plaine∣ly shew who is their syre,  that lawlesse one, whose Motto is, Volumus et iubemus, wee will and command; which style Platina notes to be first taken vp by Boniface the third, who first vsurped
 the Papall Headship ouer the Church; So as casting off all lawes of God and man, hee became that great Beast described in the Reuelation, whom no law or reason can bound or limit; accounting it a disparagement to his tyrannicall greatnesse, to bee confined within the lists of any lawes, oathes, vowes, couenants, though neuer so iust and sacred. Now the Lord Iesus so blesse your Maiesty, that tram∣pling this Antinomian Anomian heresie, both syre and sonnes, vnder your sacred feete, you may long and happily raigne ouer your people, as a tender father ouer his children, while your chiefe care is first for the mayntenance of Gods pure worship without mixture, and for the execution of iustice and iudgement; these two being the summe of both the Tables, and the supporters of the Kings Throne, which the Lord euer defend from all Antinomian Anomian spirits.
In this Treatise also J haue occasionally pro∣ued the diuine institution of the Lords day, our Christian Sabbath, denyed by some. And as your raigne hath beene honoured with a pious law, for the due obseruation of this great Holy∣day of Christ: So, I trust, that this my vin∣dicating of it to its owne right of diuine institution
 will not a little helpe to the better execution of that your Christian law. Which that it may be more reuerently and religiously obserued both in Court, City, and Country, to the purging out of profa∣nesse, and to the increase of all christian graces in your Maiesty, and vs your people; it is, and shall bee the daily and dutyfull prayer of

