



Right Honourable,
THe Almighties gracious acceptation of such oblations as are brought to him, en∣courageth sons of men to offer their Sa∣crifices on the Altar of his Grace. Like ground of encouragement have I to lay this Oblation on the Altar of your Ho∣nours patronage. Of your gracious accep∣tation thereof these reasons assure me: 1. This Impe now presented to your Honurs, is a twin to that Posthumus which was heretofore presented to, and accepted of your Ho∣nours. 2. This, together with his other brothers, was by their owne Father, while he lived, devoted to your Honours: to di∣vert them otherwaies would be plaine plagium. 3. Your Ho∣nours did many waies manifest a very good respect to the fore∣mentioned Father of this Orphane. 4. This Impe it selfe is a goodly Impe, and giveth assured hope of doing much good to Gods Church. 5. Your Honours high esteeme of all good and faithfull Ministers, of their function, of their labours and works, is well knowne. 6. Your Honours mutuall entire af∣fection, and sincere and sweet conversation and carriage one towards another, is a lively representation, and evident demon∣stration of the truth of that doctrine, concerning Husband

and Wife, which is principally handled in this Treatise. 7. Your Honour (my good Lord) hath all your dayes beene a valiant and faithfull Champion for the Church, maintaining her safety and liberty with the perill of your owne life; where∣in (though Communis Mars, bellique casus sit incertus, yet) successe hath oft crowned your valour: instance, among o∣ther famous victories, the incomparable conquest by your Ho∣nours more than ordinary courage obtained in New-port∣field. Can now doubt be made of your Honours favour in countenancing this child of the Church? 8. Your Honour (my good Lady) was a diligent frequenter of his Ministery who preached these Sermons; and hearing the distinct points when they were first out of the Pulpet uttered, so approved them, as oft you desired the publishing of them: for they were Cygnean songs, the last and sweetest of all. 9. As the sacred Scriptures, so good Commentaries thereon, such as this is, are a solace to your Honours, in reading whereof you have mani∣fested much delight. Finally, many and great are the favours and kindnesses which from time to time your Honours have done to the Publisher of this worke; which, as in duty hee is bound, be willingly taketh this occasion in all humility, & with all thankfulnesse to acknowledge. The premisses considered, the said Publisher confidently resteth upon yur Hnours pa∣tronage, and boweth his knees before the Throne of Grace for a mercifull Remembrance, and bountiull Remuneration of that Goodnesse which your Honours have done to the Church of God, to the poore members and faithfull Ministers thereof, and in speciall to the Author of this Commentary, yea and to the Publisher thereof,
Black-Friers London, 25. Ian. 1625.

