



AT length I haue pre∣sumed, (which I haue long purposed) to offer vnto your Ho∣nors, some poore to∣ken of that duetie which bindeth me vnto your H. while life lasteth. Hoping that you will accept of it as fruite in season, although it be of two yeares growth and more. After I had yel∣ded vnt the publishing of these few Sor I thought with my self of whō I might mke choise, to become a patrone, & a refuge 

so poore, and simple meditations: that vnder the shadow of their fauourable acceptaunce they might finde some rest, and reliefe, and when I thought of your Hh. I set downe my rest, boldly presuming, yea fully assuring my self, that this small testimonie of dutie (what∣soeuer it be) should be no lesse acceptable thē my selfe haue bene alwayes welcome vnto you, & to your whole houshold. And indeede my good Lord, they doe belong vnto your Hh. in many respectes.
First, in regard of those manifold fauours and honorable, kindnesses, which I haue al∣wayes (although vndeserued) founde at your Lordships hands. Secondly, when I was as a dry roote remoued, and vnlikely to finde a place to grow in, your Lordship did receiue me, and (vnder God) a was speciall meanes to preserue me frō such stormes and tempestes as did then threatē to annoy me. Further, by your Lordshippes good meanes a way was made, & a place was prouided, that I might exercise my talēt to the gaine of the Church. At my departure, your Lordship also furni∣shed me with bookes out of your Librarie, & with other helpes, more then euer I looked for, or deserued: and in all these, your onely

care and desire was of my good, & the good of Gods Church. Reason therfore requireth, that your Lordship should once in 2. yeares space take a tast, at the least, of some of that frute, which (through the blessing of God) the soile of your Lordships fauor & kindnes, hath yeelded. But principally in regard of the matter it selfe, this treatise (If it be worthie of such a name) belōgeth to both your Hh. and to your whole houshold, whose chief delight with your Hh. was alwayes (during my a∣bode in your Lordships house) in the holy ex∣ercises of religion & pietie. And I doubt not but that your Hh. godly zeale, and Christian care that way is still as great as euer, if not much greater then euer it was.
As for the matter subiect of this treatise (I meane the assurance of Gods fauor, and such things as belong vnto the same) I am perswa∣ded, it is so heauenly, and comfortable in it self, that nothing can be vnto your Hh. more deare and precious, then to be conuersant in the same: for I know you are already perswa∣ded therof, and sufficiently confirmed therin: yet as the Disciples said (when the Lord Iesus shewed what a happy thing it is to eate bread in the kingdome of heauen) Lord giue vs e∣uermore

of that bread (the very hearing therof did so please them.) Euen so your Hh. hauing heard, and felt in your soules, how blessed a thing it is to be assured of Gods fauor to eter∣nall life, you will say, let vs still heare of that matter. For all things sauing this, do in time cōsume & become tedious: but this is of that nature, that the more is spent of it, the more it increaseth, like the widowes oyle, and the longer it is fed vpon, the sweeter it is vnto the soules of the faithful, like the water which Christ turned into wine, that who so euer drinketh thereof, may say as his mother said, (when all seemed to be gone) Lord thou hast kept the better vntill now, and the best is yet to come. If it shall please your Hh. to vouchsafe the perusing herof, and to measure the com∣mendation therof vnto the glory of God, but by the liking and feeling of your own hearts, I haue what I desire, and my paines are more then sufficiently recompenced. Thus humbly crauing pardon for my boldnes, I commend both your Hh and it, to the gracious blessing of the most high.

