



MADAM,
IT was most truely said by the Apostle of the Gentiles: Godlinesse is great gaine; Importing thereby, that if a man would be inci∣ted to the care to get any thing, for the profit might come thereby, it should bee godlinesse. No skill in the world being comparable to that skill of beeing able to lead a godly life, for the sure





and speedy, and matchlesse gaine it will bring vnto a man. For (besides that it only hath the promise of a better life) godlinesse were to bee desired, and with all possible diligence to be sought after, for the very gaine of it in this life. For (to omit the consideration of the fauour it breeds with God, and the vnspeakeable treasures of the grace of Christ, which al∣wayes goe with it) it were to be desired for the immediate effects it workes vpon men in it selfe. For if men loue themselues, what should they desire more then that which tends to make them∣selues perfect? What should it aduantage a man to haue all things good about him, if himselfe bee ill and vile? If

men, that were onely guided by the light of nature, could (some of them) see clearely, that nothing was so good for a man, as to liue well (when yet they knew no other li∣uing well, then what was prescribed in their naked and naturall Ethickes) then how much more happy must it be for a man to liue a Religious life, by which he is brought more neere to God himselfe, and farre aboue the condition of any naturall man? Yea if there were no more to be had by it, but the peace and rest it brings vnto a mans heart, it were aboue all outward things to bee de∣sired. For no man walkes safely, that walkes not reli∣giously; nor can any actions of men produce any sound

tranquillity and rest of heart, but such actions as are pre∣scribed by true Religion. What shall I say? If for none of these, yet for it selfe were a godly life to bee had in singular request. For if men, with much expence of outward things, seeke but the skill of diuers naturall and artificiall knowledges, and thinke it worth their cost but to be able to attaine these skills; how much more ought man to bee at the paines, yea and cost too (if it were required) to get this admirable Skill, to liue a reli∣gious life? This most gaine∣full subiect is intreated of in this little Volume. I may truely say, that almost euery sentence in this little Treatise leads vs to much and rich

treasure, if the promises be∣longing to each dutie were annexed thereunto: And therefore no Christian that loues his owne soule, should thinke much of the paines of learning or practising these Rules.
I shall not need to exhort your Ladiship to the hearty care of those things you haue beene taught of God (long since) to profit, & haue learned Iesus Christ, as the truth is in him: your sincere profession and practise hath many witnesses; and since you beleeued the Gospel of Saluation, and were sealed by the Spirit of promise, you haue a Witnesse within your selfe, which will not faile in life or death to plead your aboundant consolation.

When I intreate of pietie, righteousnesse, mercie, and temperance, I intreate of things you haue aboue many profited in.
I haue presumed to dedi∣cate these Directions to your Ladiship, and not without reason: You haue heard the preaching of them with spe∣ciall attention, and haue bin a principall perswader to haue them published for the common good. Being many wayes bound to acknow∣ledge your Ladiship amongst my best hearers and friends, I cannot but beseech your Ladiship to accept of this small testimonie of my vn∣fained obseruance of your many prayses in the Gospell, and as a pledge of my thankefulnesse of all your

workes of loue to mee and mine.
The God of Glorie, and Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, make you abound yet more and more in all the riches of his grace in this life, and fill you with the comforts of the blessed hope of the appearing of Iesus Christ.

