



MOst Noble Senate, blessed
be God the Authour, and
our Ioshua, his blessed
Instrument of this your
happie assembling. And,
what word Mordecai sent
to Hester in that deplored
estate of Gods people, let
me be bold to transferre to you, in the like case:
Who knoweth, whither you are come together for
such a time as this? The Mite, which here I pre∣sume
to offer into the rich Treasurie of your
graue wisdomes, is Israels Fast; A poore Medi∣tation
(conceiued formerly, but brought forth in
this Season, I hope, in a good howre) which
though it bee out of my penurie, for want of
better meanes of Expression, yet springeth it
from the superabundance of my Zeale, and
heartie well-wishing. And this Fast being per∣formed
by Ioshua, and the Elders of Israel, vpon

Israels discomfiture: I knew not to whom more
fitly to recommend it, then to You, our Royall
Ioshua, and Noble Elders of Israel, now assembled
in one intire Body representatiue of this goodly
Church and State. All this Fast was about the
trespasse of one Achan: But if our Israel haue
many Achans in it, the more need is there of
Israels Fast. Yet not a Fast alone. It is but the
Preparatiue to the Purgatiue Potion, as here; nor
as Iezebels Fast, to deuoure Naboths Vineyard:
But Israels Fast, to preserue Gods Vineyard, by
purging out the Troubler of Israel. This troubler
was Achan, but vnknown to Ioshua & the Elders,
till found out by Diuine Lt. And are the Trou∣blers
of our Israel so concealed, as wee need
Diuine Lotts to discouer them? Yet if so, God
wants not his Diuines, those of his Lott, such, as
of whom the good King Iohoshaphat said to his
people,2 Cron. 20. 20 Belieue his Prophets, so shall ye prosper.
I am the least, and vnworthiest of all Gods Pro∣phets.
And some must speake, least the crying of
the senselesse Stones should conuince vs of vn∣faithfull
cowardise. Nor are we to looke after
extraordinarie Commissions, as the Prophets of
Old, vnlesse we had extraordinarie Inspirations.
The Word is neere vs. Out of this Word is my
Message directed to you, O Ioshua, and Elders of
Israel. And this Word it is, which must direct you
at this time in the finding out of the Troublers of
Israel. Now Achan troubled Israel in two speciall
respects:Iosh. 7. 12. First, * In diuiding God from Israel:

Secondly,Iosh. 7. 3. com∣pared with ch. 8. 1. where the diuision is made vp again in a full March * In diuiding Israel from themselues.
Thus all Diuiders are Troublers of Israel. And to
these two Heads may all the Achans, Troublers of
Israel, bee reduced. Now forasmuch as they are
many, and a mightie Confederacie: our Ioshua,
and the Elders of Israel now assembled, and fast
ioyned together, are onely all-together able to
cope with them. Nor shall it be any preiudice to
your graue wisedomes to take a Precedent, for
your easier Processe in this maine Businesse, out
of Gods holy Word, and from the King and Peo∣ple
of Israel. King Asa, and his People being
about a great Worke of Reformation, for their
better God-speed, They enter into a Couenant to
seeke the Lord God of their Fathers with all their
Heart, and with all their Soule: That whosoeuer
would not seeke the Lord God of Israel, should be
put to death, whither small or great, whither man
or woman: And they sware vnto the Lord with a
loud voyce, and with shouting, and with Trumpets,
and with Cornets: And all Iudah reioyced at the
Oath, for they had sworne with all their heart, and
sought him with their whole desire, and he was
found of them: And the Lord gaue them rest round
about. This worthy example I onely name to
your apprehensiue wisdomes, praying from the
bottome of my heart, that you would put it in
speedy execution, as the ground-worke of what∣soeuer
good wee may hope or expect by the
meanes of this Noble Meeting. Thus vpon such
A solemne generall Couenant sealed by particular

sacred Oath of each Member of the Three Estates
in Parliament, the King, the Nobles, and the House
of Commons, either no diuiding Achans will bee
found lurking among you; or if any, they will
the more easily be discouered, and so discarded.
Then in Gods Name goe on, and prosper. Onely
let Ioshua, and Israels Elders goe inseparably to∣gether;
Let not the Achan-faction, by their pri∣uie
whisperings, diuide them, by working dis∣affections.
For if Achans may but come between,
they will put both into extremities. For as Da∣uid
said to Ioab and Abishai, Ye are too hard for
me, ye Sonnes of Zeruiah: So the Achan-faction
may proue too hard for our Dauid, for our Ioshu∣ah,
without the ioynt assistance of you the Elders
of Israel. Like the Guisian-faction in France, who
were too hard for King Henry the Third. In
such a case then it is necessarie, that the Elders
sticke close to Ioshua, to free Israel out of
Hucksters hands. It is Solomons aduice, who was
the wisest King,Pro. 25. 4, 5. Take away the euill from the King,
and his Throne shall be established in righteousnesse.
And the Wicked there he compareth to the Dross,
which being taken from the Siluer, there shall
come forth a Vessell for the Finer. This Drosse, these
Wicked, are the Achans, who so long as they are
before the King, it will be hard for his Throne to
be established in righteousnesse. Now to take them
away (I say) the helpe of you the Elders is ne∣cessarily
required. And doth not the King call
you The great Councell of Vs, and of our Kingdom?

And your Councell, was it euer more necessarie,
then now, wherein the Troublers of Israel haue
almost gotten the vpper hand?
Good God, what powerfull Inchanters be
these Achans, that presume they can perswade
the World, they are Ioshuahs faster friends, when
they would most diuide him from the Elders of
Israel? To perswade, they loue the Head, when
they seeke to pull it from the Body? To perswade
they are for the King, when they seeke to strip
him of his Subiects? To perswade, they are for
the Sheepherd, when against his Sheepe? To
perswade, they honour the Father, when they
would set him against his louing Children, and
loyall Family? What a Paradox is This?
Wherein did Hushai more approue himselfe the
Kings Friend, then by his prudent frustraiting of
Achitophels traiterous Counsell, and so, reconciling
and reuniting the reuolted Subiects to their true
Soueraigne? What needed posting, and packing
of Parliament-Elections, if all they that falsely
pretend as faithfull Seruice to the King, as Hushai
did laudably to Absalon, were as faithfull Ser∣uants
and Friends to the King, as Hushai was to
Dauid? Are any afraid, least the Kings Liege
people should chuse such as are Popishly affe∣cted,
or of factious Spirits? But such will stand
most for the Kings supplyes. They pretend so.
But who doe more hinder or preiudice the King
in his necessarie and Royall Subsidarie Supplyes,
then such Factours? The Lord Iesus seperate

such factious Factours, and miscreant Merchants
both from the King and Kingdome of Israel, that
so this Noble Assembly of Ioshua and the Elders,
may giue and receiue reciprocall and mutuall
Supplyes interchangeably: Ioshua the Head, re∣ceiuing
from the inferiour principall Parts plen∣tifull
nourishment conueyed by the Naturall and
Vitall Spirits: And Israel the Body, receiuing
from Ioshua their Head a due motion preportio∣nable
to the capacitie of each Member, conuey∣ed
by the Animall Spirits, sweetly gouerning,
preseruing, and protecting, that so the Whole to∣gether
may increase with the increase of God.
There is a Fountaine of an exhausted Golden
Mine in the Bowels of all True-heartedEnglish
Israelites, which, as the Kings fauour, like the
Sunne-beames, begets it in them, so vpon all fit
occasions they will be ready in Golden streames
abundantly to supply their Noble Ioshua. Hee
needs no American-Slaues to digge and force it,
nor the Romane mercilesse Sword to rip it, as once
out of the Captiue-Iewes Bowels: But it will
freely flowe from Loyall Israel to their Royall
Ioshua. And now, O Noble Elders of Israel, I
know the Bees come not more loaden with Ho∣ney
to the Hiue, then you at this time with in∣larged
affections to minister abundant supply to
your Ioshuah. Doe it on Gods Name brauely,
and like your selues. I am a poore Schollar, and
am ready to sell my richest treasure, my Bookes,
rather then Ioshuah shall want. And doe it so, as,

by Gods blessing vpon Ioshua, & you the Elders,
and so vpon vs all by you, many Parliaments
may be called, wherein you may testifie (if oc∣casion
require) the copious and perennious
Treasure of your loue and loyaltie in the like
kind. How is that? I meane not, Sparingly, but
as Arannah like a Prince gaue to King Dauid. For
Vera liberalitas fundum non habet. But I meane
(pardon my Zeale, which makes me thus bold
to speake) in the genuine and naturall Genius of
your tender loue and care for the safetie and se∣curitie
of our Royall Ioshua, of the Crowne, of
the Kingdome, of Religion, and of Vs all. But your
liberall Subsidies are giuen for that end. True.
But alas (pardon still my redenesse; I speake
not as a States-man, to aduise such a graue Senat,
but as a poore Minister of Christ, and Watchman
of Israel, to petition rather) What can either Mo∣ney,
or Men, or Munition doe, so long as Achans
trouble Israel? There is an accursed thing in the
midst of thee, O Israel (saith the Lord) Thou canst
not stand before thine enemies, vntill ye take away
the accursed thing from among you. Till this hee
done Isael must not looke to prosper. We need
no better warrant, then Gods owne Word for it.
It is your Wisedome to follow it, least the Canaa∣nites
preuaile ouer vs. And the vtmost extreami∣tie
of the state of things calls vpon you to doe it
instantly; It drawes a circle about your Assem∣bly,
as that braue Romane did with his Staffe about
King Mithridates, not to stirre, or steppe ouer it,

till Ioshuas and Israels danger, the accursed thing,
be remoued. It is impatient (I speake no more,
then what you all know farre better then I) to a∣bide
the expectation of another Parliament: you
see all things are in such a Precipice, and Israel
so dangerously sick, as if you the great Colledge
of Physitians depart without curing of it, all will
haue occasion to deeme the case desperate, and
irrecouerable, already drawing on a pace to a
Dissolution, vnlesse the Great Physitian doe mer∣cifully
and miraculously put to his Omnipotent
hand. For the Achans, the Troublers of Israel,
hasten the ruine of all.
But who might those Achans be? Your wise∣domes
cannot be ignorant of them: yet because
they are a mysticall knot of Iniquity, and haue
exceedingly insinuated themselues into the good
opinion of many; I humbly craue leaue, that by
the diuine Lot of Gods word, I may a little dis∣couer
them. All Achans (as I said) are Diuiders:
first, betweene God and Israel: and secondly (as
a consequence thereof) betweene Israel them∣selues;
and that especially, while they mainely
labour to diuide the Head from the Body, Ioshua
from the Elders of Israel. And (saith Christ) A
Kingdome diuided against it selfe, cannot stand.
These Achans, which trouble our Israel, are of
sundry sorts: as first, Iasuites and Seminary
Priests. These are the ring leading Achans: Of
such the Lord saith in Deuteronomy, that because
they seduce the people from God, they shall be

put to death. These, as they diuide God from vs
hi seruants, so they diuide the Subiects from the
King. This was wont to be Treason, but now a
dayes it would passe for good Religion.
The second kinde of Achans troubling Israel,
are Idols; f Achans wedge, and Babylonish gar∣ment
troubled all Israel, as an accursed thing:
how much more Popish Idols? shall wee halt
betweene two opinions? betweene God and Baal?
Either goe after the Lord onely, if indeede he be God:
or if Baal be He, goe onely after him, said Eliah.
King Asa spared not his owne Mothers Groue,
and Idol; but brake them downe, yea & for their
cause deposed her from her Regency. Oh for the
like zeale for God! But certainly if these Idols
and Masses, Images and Popish Trumperies be
not speedily abolished, thou canst not prosper, O
Israel, nor stand before thine Enemies. Downe
therefore with Popish Idols, O Ioshua, and the
Elders of Israel, which cease not to cry of our Ie∣rusalem,
Downe with it, downe with it, euen to the
ground. Spare not these Brats of Babylon, that
dare perke vp so neere to Gods Arke, threatning
to shoulder it out of doores. But you know what
befell the Philistins Dagon; and you may remem∣ber
what befell the Romish Dagon in the Black∣friers
vpon their fift of Nouember. So iealous is
our God, Hee cannot brooke a corriuall. But
some, hauing beene Protestants formerly, in
which Religion they were baptized, comming
afterwards to be inueigled to Popery, and there∣upon

making a solemne vow, sealed (as they call
it) with the Sacrament of the Altar, neuer to alter
this their new couenant, make such a conscience
hereof, as if it stood not with faith and honesty
to breake it. But doe they not know (vnlesse Po∣pery
hath altogether blinded their eyes) that
any such couenants or vowes ought neither to
be made, nor much lesse to be kept, which haue
any commerce, or relation to Idolatry? Doth
not our Precontract to Christ in our Baptisme, to
forsake the Diuell and all his workes, frustrate and
make void all second contracts with Antichrist,
for the setting vp of Idolatry, one maine worke of
the Diuell? Nothing therefore ought to im∣peach
our Christian Resolution and zeale, in the
casheering of these Troublers of Israel.
A third sort of Achans are Neutralizers; but
so, as the Bias of their affections, wheeles and
swayes them round to Popery. These are so much
the more pernicious plagues to Israel, in that
vnder the seemely vale and masionlike habit of
the Church of England, they labour to bring in
that old Babylonish strumpet hoodwinkt, that we
should all reacknowledge her for our Mother.
As may appeare in a certaine Booke of Priuate
Deuotions (so called) published by Authority: the
maine scope thereof all along, being to reduce
vs all to one Church, and that none other, but
(forsooth) the holy Catholike Church of Rome.
But the whole Mysterie of iniquitie folded vp
therein, would require a more particular vnfol∣ding.

These Neutralizers, or Popish Arminians,
or Arminian Papists, or what ye will, vnder the
name of the Church of England dare vent any
Arminian haeresie. As in a Booke lately printed
by Authority too, there is this most blasphe∣mous
Arminian heresie, that there is a goodnesse
obiectiue in the Creature, which in order of Nature
is precedent to the Act or exercise of Gods will;
thus, by necessary consequence making the Crea∣ture
a God, hauing a selfe-being independent, but
onely vpon Gods bare Prescience, vpon which,
and not vpon that suprema causa causarum, Gods
will, he hangeth the being, and well being of all
the Creatures. And this sort and confederacy
of Achans haue gotten such a high hand, that no
Booke may be set out, if it be directly against
Popery and Arminianisme; nor against Popery
in speciall, but with some qualification, or In∣gredient,
such as this: That the Church of Rome,
though she haue many errours, yet is a true Church.
And by this deuice they doe, like Balaam, migh∣tily
preuaile, and that with great ones, Scholars
and others, to draw vs to some friendly com∣merce
and correspondence with that Whoore.
And they are growne so much the more confi∣dent,
becaue they haue Authority in their hand,
either to approue, or prohibit, what Books they
list. Whereas, if the way were open, as former∣ly,
freely to print Bookes by Authority against
Popery and her confederate Arminians, their
Neutralizing Achans, as so many Owles, would

fly into their darke Cels, as not able to behold
the sunbeames of the Truth. But we hope and
pray, that Ioshua and the Elders of Israel will take
such order, that instead of Popish and Arminian
Bookes, Orthodox bookes may be freely publish∣ed
by Authority. And suffer mee to speake, O
noble Sages of Israel (I am for God, & my King,
for Religion, and my Country) if you O Ioshua,
and the Elders of Israel purge not out these pesti∣lent
Acans, or close clip their wings, they must
needs bring vtter confusion vpon this state, ere
it be long. They daily creepe into high fauour
in Court; they preuaile mightily by their plausi∣ble,
insinuating, intoxicating flattery. They goe
about (as the Prophet Osee speakes) to make the
King glad with their lyes. Their Theames and
Theorems are, that Kings are partakers of Gods▪
owne Omnipotency; though this be a diuine At∣tribute,
incommunicable to any Creature: That,
iustice can be no Rule or Medium, whereby to giue
God, or the King his right. As if right were not
grounded vpon iustice, as the Rule of it. Take
away Iustice, and where is Right? Or as if the
seruice, which we performe to God, were not
bounded vpon Gods Lawes, which are holy,
Iust, and good. Yea, God neither commands,
nor accepts any other seruice at our hands, but
such as his Law prescribes. And thus our seruice
becomes iust and reasonable. Yet with such like
glosings they thinke, that Principibus placuisse
viris non vltima taus est.

Great Potentates thus to applaud,
They reckon it no little laud.
Nor doe they blush not onely to preach these
things to the face of the Court, but dare also
publish in Print this their shame to the open
view of the world, not without great dishonour
both to God and the King.
Now the Lord Iesus deliuer our good and
gracious Ioshua from these Achans, that his sweet
disposition may not be inchanted with their Sy∣ren-songs.
Herein the ioynt courage and zeale
of you the Elders of Israel is required. Take away
these Achans from the King, and his throne shall be
established in righteousnesse.
Many other branches of the Achan-faction
there are, whom your wisdomes can more easily
find out. But the master-peece of your wisdome
is, to find out (if any such Monster be to be found
in Rerum natura) where the maine Root and Head
of all these branches and members lurketh. That
must be digged and stockt vp; else if it be but
pruned, it will but sprout the thicker. If they
goe on thus, Gods fearefull iudgements must
needs fall heauy vpon this Land: If we be luke∣warme,
and haue no courage for the truth, the
Lord will spue vs out of his mouth. But God for∣bid,
that base cowardise should suffer Gods
Truth, Religion, King, Crowne, Kingdome, Church,
euery mothers sonne of vs, to be by a packe of
traiterous Achans (and so many worthies in Is∣rael,
descended of the magnanimous bloud of
the heroicke true-bred English, to looke on with

their thumbs vnder their girdles) betraid into the
pawes of the Beast, & cheated & nosewiped euen to
their face, that the whole state, as one man, may take
vp that saying in the Poet, Prudens, sciens, viuus, vi∣dens{que}
pereo. And that (I say) by traiterous Achans.
For whosoeuer are traitors to Gods Truth, and the
Religion established, whereon the Kings▪ Throne is
firmely established, whether they be direct Traitors
to the State, I leaue to your wisedomes to iudge:
but this I dare boldly affirme, Traitours they are by
necessary consequence, betraying vs into our ene∣mies
hands, by making God our Enemy, as too ma∣ny
disastrous instances haue proued, and as Achans
instance in this Booke will plainly show.
In the name of God therefore, O ye noble wor∣thies
of Israel, quit your selues like men: God hath
now put a precious opportunity into your hands;
The Lord strengthen you to lay fast hold vpon it,
and so to husband it, that the issue may be to his
glory, to the preseruation of our royall Ioshua, and
you his loyall Counsel, and of all the Israel of God.
Not to importune your wisedomes further (vn∣lesse
for pardon of my importunity; wherein yet
your noble propensity will not easily brooke to be
importuned to pardon errors of zeale and true af∣fection)
I will onely craue leaue (for conclusion)
to apply S. Aug. prayer in the siege of Hippo. Noueri∣tis
me hoc tempore nostrae calamitatis Deum rogare,Posidon. de vita Augustin. ve
aut hanc ciuitatem ab hostibus circundatam liberare
dignetur, aut si aliud ei videtur, suos seruos ad praefe∣rendam
suam voluntatem fortes faciat, aut certè vt

me de hoc saculo ad se accipiat. Which I English
thus: My prayer to God in this time of Israels cala∣mity
is, that either it would please him to deliuer and
free this Church and State from circumuenting A∣chans,
or if otherwise he see it good, that he would in∣courage
his seruants to preferre his will, by standing
vp couragiously for the truth to the very last, or else
that hee would receiue mee to himselfe out of this
wretched world, that I may not liue to be a miserable
spectator of the wofull wracke of my sweet natiue Coun∣trey.
Yet I hope better, and the best things, while
Ioshua and the Elders of Israel ioyne sweetly toge∣ther
in a mutuall and inseparable sympathy for the
weale or woe of Israel, imitating Ioshua and Israels
Elders here throughout, as followeth in this insu∣ing
Tract.

