


Worthie Ladies,
LAmentable are he ruines, into which the na∣tures of men are generally fallen by their sinnes: which appeares especially by the waies men take in the bu∣sinesse of their soule. The most men are cleane out of the way to heauen, and walke in by wayes

of their owne, which are cal∣led in Scripture, The waies of the wicked; The waies of their owne hearts; Peruerse waies; Darke and slipperie wayes; The way of iniquity. All mee∣ting in that broad way that leadeth to destruction, being wholly ignorant of the way of life and peace, yea, the most of them speake euill of the good way of God, and persecute it. Some there are, that are so farre enlightned, as not to like the common roade way of the multitude; and after some enquirie haue found them out wayes that seeme good in their owne eyes; and they are wonderfully well pleased with their course, but the issues of these wayes are death too, as well as the former. And the more is this

danger increased vpon men, because the way of life is but one, and it is a narrow way, and hard to find, and may be sought by many, and yet not found. Yet this hope is left vnto forlorn men, that there is a way to heauen and hap∣pines: A way of righteousnesse and peace, a way of mercy and truth, a way of wisedome: A way that men may securely and safely walke in; a way, in which Christ will guide thē, God the Father will keepe them, and the holy Ghost leade them by the hand, and direct them in all the passa∣ges thereof. Onely it concer∣neth vs to aske the way, with all importunitie, of God, and to attend vnto the directi∣ons of the Word of God, & apply our hearts, and suffer

our selues to bee disposed a∣right, that our eyes may see the saluation of God. And in particular wee must looke to three things: First, that if the Lord shew vs that mercy, to direct vs in the way, we must take heede that wee neglect not, or despise notthe care of walking in the way. Second ly, that with all diligence we auoide going about, and make straight stops to our feet. And thirdly, with all feare watch our selues, that we fal not off with the errors of the wicked, from the good way of God, and so our latter end be worse then our beginning.
I haue vndertaken by the assistance of God, and the direction of this, blessed word, to single out the choi∣sest things I could finde in

the Scriptures, concerning the entrance into the way of God, and those first path: which are called Holy. Th substance of these directi∣ons I haue digested into the Treatise following: which I dedicate vnto your Ladi∣ships, as a testimonie of my thankfulnesse, for the respect you haue shewed vnto my Ministerie, both in your constant resort vnto it in the weeke dayes, while you li∣ued in a neighbour Parish; and in that two of you are pleased to come to liue amongst vs, and so are be∣come a part of my charge. As also to manifest to the world my obseruance of your Ladiships, for the good report you haue amongst the godly for the grace of

Iesus Christ, and your vn∣feigned loue of the truth. Beseeching your Acceptation, Perusall, and Patronage of these, I take my leaue, and commend your Ladiships to the God of Mercie and Truth, who guide, comfort, deliuer, sanctifie, and preserue you all vnto the day of Iesus Christ.

Febr. 12. 1619.
