



Excellent Peere,
LIttle did I ima∣gine, or your Lorship ex∣pect, to see my name come vnder the Presse;
which as yet is to me a won∣der, so likewise it must needs bee to your Honour a mira∣cle, that knowes both my life and breeding, to haue nei∣ther language, Latine tongue, nor, vpon my salua∣tion, the helpe of any co-ad∣iutor; but as it is written those things which appear vnpossible to mans appre∣hension,
Mar 10.27. are nothing to God vnsearchable wisedome. O∣therwise your Lordshi might suspect the Authour for I mistrusted my selfe, vn∣till
I had reade the saying, that God is able to make the dumbe to speake,
Luk. 7.22. the blind to see, and the lame to goe; wherein he hath shewed the splendor of his diuine proui∣dence on me base and vn∣worthy creature, to see more clearely through my match∣lesse offences; for that now I constantly beleeue, there is no forgiuenesse without true repentance, nor no true re∣pentance without confessi∣on, contrition, satisfaction, and amendment; which
made me presume to patro∣nize the first fruits of my re∣tirednesse vnder your Lord∣ships name; as a legasie of my loyall dutie to your ho∣nour, preuention of others, and in my obedience to that good God,
. 5.16. who requires an open confession, for a pub∣lique transgression. VVhere∣in if I shall verifie our Saui∣ours words to giue Caesar his due,
at. 22.21. I must acknowledge vnder God your noble rela∣tion of a monasticke life, was the greatest inducement I re∣ceiued
from mortalist to∣wards my regeneration. So that if I haue mounted too high in sheltring my weake aboures vnder your Lord∣ships vertues; let me beg a fauourable censure, and attri∣bute rather forgetfulnesse to ngratitude, than my for∣wardnesse to presumption: for beleeue me (honoured Lord) had I not fortunately ist your faire hand before departure, my zealous fide∣itie was so mixt with the regs of mortalitie; that cer∣tainly
vpon my companion reuolt,
Pro. 26.11. I had fallen like a do to his vomit and ruinated my owne soule. But thanks b to the diuine prouidence, by a shorter cut I haue met with contentment, ended my tra∣uels, discarded my pleasures and circled the earth. Fo Christ knowes my ambitio was neuer higher then  poore remote Caue or de∣sert Cell, where if these illit∣terate-deiected lines should reflect a likeing in you Lordships iudicious rea∣ding;
I am confident by Gods assistance, future en∣eauours might edifie o∣ers: especially when my eregrination shall vnder∣tand of your religious ap∣robation, whose honoura∣le opinion I esteeme more en mortall creature; not for at your noble apprehensi∣n exceedes all men; but by eason your internall fidelitie quals the best of men; which ccording to my simple udgement carries a greater enediction and clearer re∣uelation
of Gods fauou then all other vertues: how soeuer if the tributary praie of a sinfull Beadsman ca encrease your Lordships im∣mortall glory. I am confi∣dent God multiplies you honours daily.

