




IT is a dignitie in
actiue Nature,
(Right worship∣full)
that Agens
agit, vt assimu∣let
sibi Patiēs:
that is, to make
the passiue like∣wise
actiue. It were an easie (though
a tedious) taske, to note in euery one of
Natures actions, Re-action. But that

great labour may be greatly lessened by
arguing A Minoie: by instance of the
lesse actiue Eliments. For who seeth not
(but he that doth not see) that he seeth
his own face in the water, no otherwise,
then by reference of the offered shape or
species of his obiect countenance? Nay
the most (if not meerely) passiue Earth
returneth notwithstanding, euen to the
middle ayre, those splendent beames
which formerly the Sunne conferred on
it. If the sencelesse and lifelesse Eli∣ments
can thus react it, then reasona∣ble
man, hath much more reason to be
conformable vnto those that worke his
good. We to whom your Worships exhi∣bite
your bountie, are those same waters
on which the wise Salomon biddeth
you cast your bread; in whom you see
your faces, the shape and Image of your
selues: for we are also men as yee be.
Then (according to your worships won∣ted
affabilitie) graciously embrace that
conformable reaction, which your owne
most hounteous fauours haue begotten

in me. I haue bene passing desirous some
way to intimate vnto your worships, that
I am not senseles or vnmindfull, though
vnworthy of your kindnesses. And ther∣fore
finding my selfe vnable to requite
your greater fauours. Quod quimui
quando quod volumus, non. In Item
of that great good cheare I haue often
bad with you, both at London and in
Yorke-shire, I do semblably inuite you
both to a Schollers Dinner. But where,
or whither, I may not (for I cannot) tell
you. Your Worship Sir, well remem∣breth
that solemne inuitation at Cam∣bridge,
in Vesperijs Comitiorum;
and therefore will easily let passe this
fallacian without Elench or reprehen∣sion.
Neither can I hope for, at either of
your hands, any vngentle or discourte∣ous
censure. It is an other kind of guest,
an vnkinde guest, vnbiaden, and as bold
as welcome, whom my minde presa∣geth,
some Gentleman, Sewer to some
certaine Gentlewoman Semster, who
more nice then wise, picketh a quarell
with the order, or disorder rather (as

he weeneth) of my Dinner; stoutly a∣uerring
him that scrued in the courses,
to be both ignorant of fashions, and void
of all good customes. What? (quoth he)
Fruite in the first course? Then Flesh,
Fish, White-meates, and at last come in
salt and spoones, spice and sauce, when
all the meate is eaten? Nay more? Ta∣bacco
after all, vpon a full stomack. Fie,
fie: Dyets Dinner? a most grosse ab∣surd,
and preposterous banquet. May
it please your Worships, this challenge
must of force be answered. Therefore in
vshering these my seruices, I professe
my selfe a verie preuaricatour of this
Ages fashion: and do follow the order
of vniuersall time, by consequence and
succession.
FruitesThus much all we know, our grand
parents at first sed on the fruites of E∣de.
and some merrily say, Adam rob∣bed
Gods Orch-yard.
Hearbes. fter their exitement, they fell to
Hearbes and Rootes, and (as seculer
 witnesieth) we liued a long time
(like Hges) with Mast or Accornes,

till age taught Tillage.
Flesh.But all either could not or would not
be husbandmen, therefore some went
forth on hūting, some at home kept sheep
and cattle: so came we to finde sauour
in Flesh Which (probably) we did long
afore we tasted Fish,Fish. since of the two,
Flesh is more obuious & easie to be had.
As also Fish by good reason preuēted
white-meates, for the simple is afore the
Compound, and the Naturall afore the
Artificiall.
White-meates.Therefore after Fish follow White-meates,
requiring the helpe of art, and
bumane inuention in tract of time.
Spice.Neither did our infinit appetite here
consist contented with things necessary,
but something yet was wanting to adde
voluptuous delight. Wherefore wanton
appetite growing weary of Natures
bare and simple Ordinary, gan glycu∣rously
to banquet with all sorts of Spi∣ces
and Aromatique delicates.
Suse.But eating Honny with a Ladle, it
was soone cloyed with the excesse of
sweetnesse: so that tart Condiments &
sauces, seemed requisite to prouoke and
reuoke loathing and lost appetite.
Tabacco.
Thus proceded wee by degrees, from
simplicitie and necessitie, to varietie and
plentie, ending in luxury and superflui∣tie.
So that at last our bodies by surfee∣ding,
being ouerflowne and drowned (as
it were) in a surplurisie or deluge of
a superfluous rawe humour, (common∣ly
called Rheume) we were to be anhe∣led
(like newe dampish Ouens, or olde
dwelling houses that haue stood long de∣solate).
Hence is it that we perfume
and aire our bodies with Tabacco
smoake (by drying) preseruing them
from putrifation.
May your Worships be fully satisfied
with this reason of my extraordinary
Dry Dinner (to whom both it and my
self are purposely deuoted) the first dish
of it (I meane a Figge) for the rest.
Ʋntil I haue in readinesse some other
matter more worthie your countenance
and Patronage, I most humbly take my
leaue.

