


NOt in vaine doth our Sa∣uiour Christ cal his father an husband∣man:Iohn 15.1 For when he per∣ceiueth, that his trees doe not beare fruite kind∣lie in one place; he translateth thē

to see if they may be more fruitfull in another,Verse 2. as a husbandman doth. Some he purgeth, saith Christ, (al∣though they beare fruite) that they may bring foorth more fruite, as a husbandman doeth: And some he supplanteth also, as doeth the hus∣bandman: some for euer, some for a while; for what causes, it is best knowen to his vnspeakeable Maie∣stie: sometime for their owne vn∣fruitfulnes,Mat. 3.7. Mat. 21.43. sometime for the bar∣rennesse, and for the vnworthinesse of the ground where they grewe: and sometime for neither, but for some other secrete cause, best kno∣wen to himselfe in his infinite wis∣dome. As the man in the Gospell was made blinde,Iohn 9.3. neither for his owne sinnes, nor for the sinnes of his Parents, but that the workes of God might be shewed vpon him.
The trueth whereof doeth suffi∣ciently appeare by the late, and yet

daylie experience, both of my selfe, and some others of my brethren. But to speake onely of my selfe (of all the most vnprofitable) when as the lord might vtterly, and yet iust∣lie haue supplanted me, he hath in mercie onely remooued me, that I might hereafter labour, which haue as yet but loytered in his haruest. The Lorde in mercie laye not my negligence to my charge.
Now, when as by your Lord∣ships meanes and appointment, I was placed where I am, for the buil∣ding vp of the Church of God in this Citie: I thought it most conue∣nient, first, to lay this foundation of the knowledge of God, that so the rest of the building might goe the better forward. The which (as my first fruites) I haue presumed to pre∣sent vnto your Lordship, for two especiall causes: First, that hereby I might witnes my thankfull mind to

your L. for the exercise of my mini∣stery, & the ministery of my brethrē in our places, which we enioy vnder your L. gouernment. And besides that (which I may in no wise for∣get) that fauour which you shewed me: which, as it was altogether vn∣deserued, and vnlooked for, so it was not (as some haue vntruely re∣ported) conditionall; but only, with desire that I might employe my en∣deuour to the Lords greatest aduā∣tage in feeding his people, cōmitted to your care & ouer sight, with doc∣trine most necessary for that people.
Secondly, that your Lo. might rest satisfied concerning some com∣plaintes which haue beene offered (by certain vnderminers) touching the confirmation of some pointes herein conteined.
And thus leauing my present endeuours to your Lordships due consideration, I humblie take my

leaue. The Lord almightie graunt encrease and continuance of your godlie care ouer that people, which Iesus Christ, the great Shepheard of the flock, hath bought with his blood, and committed to your charge: so that in the great day of account, you may be free from all their bloods, & receiue that crown of righteousnesse, and immortall ioy, which shall then be giuen to all that haue fought a good fight, and haue kept the faith in a good conscience vn∣to the end. Amen.

