



MY GOOD LORD:
STeddily and happily go∣eth the Arke of God, when it is drawne by Peace and Holines tied together (Heb. 12.14.) as those two milch kine keeping the high way, and turning not aside to either hand. Belial hateth this Yoke; and
(seeing his Image falleth, where the Arke standeth) striveth either to kill or sever, yea, by severing to kill these blessed yoke-fellowes. He hath a bridle for Peace, to draw her backe from Holines, and a Spurre for Holines to gallop away from Peace. Needs must he therefore maligne your Lordship, as his professed enemy, both in your person and government. How doth hee fret to see in your brest the sacred fire of Devotion, so guarded with a pious mo∣deration, that he cannot reach it either with his Water, or his Gunpowder? How doth it gnaw him to heare your Ʋisitation charge, so vehemently bent with equall severitie against his two darlings, Faction, and Prophanesse; & to see your carefull weeding out the Tares of Schisme, without pulling up any Corne of true Piety? With what
indignation doth he feele for the present, and feare for the future, the prevalent successe of your milde sun-shine, beyond the force of a blustring wind? no wonder then, if while you breake his head, he bite at your heele; traducing both your holy peaceablenesse, as not enemy enough to Rome, and your peaceable holines, as too much friend to Factiō. But how could Integrity be better cleared, then by be∣ing thus accused? No fairer testimonie of an impartiall arbitrement, then the repining of both Parties; and it is the common lot both of Vertue and Veritie, to be buffeted on both cheekes by the two extreames. What pitie it is, that men should put asunder those whom God hath coupled together? and cast such iealousies betweene these two Daughters of Ierusalem, that whosoever is a Suiter to the one, is suspected & censured of neg∣lecting, if not contemning the other?
I was willing to step in (though perhaps with as little thanke) as Moses betweene the two striving Israelites: Sirs, ye are Sisters: why should iealous distracti∣ons set you at variance?
But finding my selfe too weake, I en∣treated S. Paul to interpose, a man be∣yond exception, deeply and equally in∣teressed in both parties: who more peace∣able? pleasing all men in all things; yet who more zealous? not seeking his owne profite, but the profite of ma∣ny, &c. That it now is preached on the house top, which lately was spoken in the eare, is but in prosecution of my text, seeking the profite of many, that they may be saved. The successe I commend to the God of peace and holinesse, Vn∣der whom I covet to be and approve my selfe

