



MADAM,
BEing destitute of a better gift to bestow vp∣on your Ladi∣ship, to testifie my thankefulnesse or obser∣uance, I present this little Treatise vnto you. It may haue more vse then it shewes for. For if things shine more

cleerly when their contra∣ries are set by them; then may this description of the estate of a wicked man by Signes, serue much to esta∣blish the godly in the point of Assurance, when he seeth himselfe freed from those fearefull & forlorne markes. And if men vse to make much of all those directions, by which any gaine or trea∣sure may be certainely com∣passed, then ought the Di∣rections not to bee despised, that shew how the Spirit of God and the Graces thereof may bee attained: For by these directions, both those that want the true graces of Christ, may here learne how to get them; and such as haue them but in weake measure, may by the same

Rules learne how to increase them.
I haue beene induced to thinke of your Ladiship in this Dedication, partly in acknowledgement of the great respect due to the Fa∣mily out of which you came, as it hath beene a prin∣cipall meanes of causing the light of the Gospel for many yeeres to shine in those pla∣ces where the people had sitten in darkenesse and in the shaddow of death: And partly drawne by the many praises I haue obserued in your Ladiships, since the time of your noble soiour∣ning in the noble Familie you now liue in. Your great respect of my Ministery, and your constant paines to em∣ploy your selfe about religi∣ous

duties, deserue from mee more acknowledgment then so meane a gift as this can discharge. Madam, you are happy aboue many, that God hath inclined your heart to beare the yoke of Christ in your youth, and discerne the glory of the spi∣rituall kingdome of Iesus Christ. Your meeknesse as∣sures me libertie to beseech you to goe on in the good way of God, and to cleane fast with all heartie affection vnto the Truth, as you haue learned Iesus Christ. It shall bee a great increase of your glory, to increase in the knowledge and grace of Christ, and (in sound deniall of your selfe, and contempt of the world) to fashion your selfe to all the courses, by

which you may bee pleasing in the eyes of God, whiles multitudes in the Gentri of the land, of both sexes, by following foolish vani∣ties, forsake their owne mer∣cie.
Now the God of peace sanctifie you throughout, & so prosper his owne worke in you, that your whole spi∣rit, and soule and body may bee preserued blamelesse vn∣to the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ, March 9. 1618.

