



FOr as much, as your Maiesty and Parliament, doe stand for the
maintenance of the Religion wherein you are borne, and for the
same, doe most zealously persequte, with fyer and sword: I haue
thought it good, and also my dewty (most Royal soueraigne) to en∣forme
your Maiesty and Parliament thereof. In al humility therfore, I
give you to vnderstand, that no Prince or People, cā possible attaine that
one true Religion of the Gospell, which is acceptable to God by Iesus
Christ, meerely by birthIoh. 3. 3 for Christ saith Except a man be borne againe, he
cannot see the Kingdom of God. Also the Apo: Iames saith.jam. 1. 1 Of his owne
wil he begat vs by the word of truth. And the Apo: Peter saith.1. Petr. 1. 3. 23. Being borne
a new, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word of God, who liueth & en∣dureth
for ever.Matth. 28. Therfore Christ commanded this word to be preached to al
nations, that thereby they may attayne the new birth.Marc. 16. By which your
Maiesty and Parliament may perceaue, that the one true Religion of the
Gospel, is not attayned by natural birth: for the all Princes and peoples,
in all nations, shold haue that one true Religion of the Gospell, the which
you see and grant, they all haue not, yet many of them also wil defend
theyr Religion (wherein they are borne) by fyer and sword, as if it were
theyr natural and earthly inheritances: or had with fyer and sword been
gotten, and therfore wil with fyer and sword maynteyne and defend it:
But your Maiesty and Parliament, may please to vnderstand, that the
Scriptures doe teach,2. Cor. 10. 4. that the one true religion is gottē by a new birth,
then by the word and spirit of God, and therewith also, it is onely mayn∣teyned
and defended.Ephe. 6. 17 For the word of God is liuely, & mighty in operation,
& sharper then any two edged sword,Heb. 4. 12. & entereth through, even vnto the deviding
asunder of the soule & the spirit, & of the joynts & of the marrow, & is a discer∣ner
of the thoughts, & the intents of the heart. Seeing then the one true Re∣ligion
of the Gospell, is thus gotten: and thus defended and mainteyned,
namely, by the word preached onely, let it please your Maiesty and Par∣liament,
to be entreated, to revoke and repeale, those Antychristian, Romish
and cruel lawes, that force al in our lād, both Prince ād people, to receaue
that Religion, wherein the King or Queen were borne, or that which is
stablished by the law of man:Mat. 28. 19 and in steed thereof, enact and publish, that
Apostolick. Christian,Mar. 16. 16▪ Gentle & merciful law of Christ, viz: Goe teach al nations,
preach the Gospell to every creature,Act. 8. 12. that is, Christ wil haue his ministers to
preach and teach the people of al nations,luc. 24. 4. 7. the things that concerne the
Kingdom of God,act. 8. 12. 37. & 2. 4. & the name of Iesus Mesiah, repentance & remision of sins, & to
baptise in his name, such as doe beleeve. And for as much also that the false ād

Antychristian religion did come by the spirit of error & doctrine of Devils, ād
not by fyer and sword:Rev. 16. 14 therfore by the spirit of Christ, ād doctryne of the
word of God, must it be driven out of the hearts and consciences, both of
Prince and People, and not by fyer and sword, as the false Bishops and
ministers haue and doe still perswade. Therfore may it please your Ma∣jesty
and Parliament, to vnderstand that (by fyer and sword) to cōstraine
Princes and peoples,Marc. 9. 38 39. to receaue that one true Religion of the Gospell, is
wholy against the mynde and mercifull Law of Christ, dangerous both
to king and State, a meanes to decreace the Kingdom of Christ: and a
meanes to increace the Kingdom of Antychrist, as these reasones follo∣wing
doe manifest: The which I humbly beseech your Majesty and
Parliament, carefully to consider, and that according to the word of god,
which shal judge every man according to his deeds:Mat. 16. 27 and perseqution, is a
worke well pleasing to al false Prophets,Rev. 16. 14 and Bishops, but it is contrary
to the minde of Christ,Luce 9. 55. 56. who came not to judge & destroy mens lives, but to save
them: And though som men and women beleeue not at the first howre,Ioh. 12. 47.
yet may they at theMatt. 20. 6. 7. eleventh howre if they bee not persequted to death
before: And no King nor Bishops can, or is able to command faith,Eph. 2. 8.
That is the gift of God, who worketh in vs both the wil & the deed of his owne
good pleasure, set him not a day therefore, in which, if his creature heare
not and beleeue not,1. tim. 1. 13 you will imprison and burne him: Paule was a blas∣phemer,
Act. 26. . and also a persequter / and could not be converted by the Apostles
and ministers of Christ, yet at last was receaued to mercy, and cōverted
extraordinarily by Christ himself,Iam. 5. 11. who is very pittiful & mercyful, & would
have no man to perish,2. Pet. 3. 9. but would that al men come to repentāce, but not by per∣seqution,
2. cor. 5. 19 but by the word of reconciliation which he hath committed to his
ministers. And as kings and Bishops, cannot command the winde, so they
cannot command faith,Iohn. 3. & as the winde bloweth where it listeth, so is every man
that is borne of the spirit. You may forcemen to Church against their con∣sciences, but they wil beleeue as they did afore, when they com there, for
God giueth a blessing onely to his owne ordinance,1. Sam. 15. 15. 24. and abhorreth Anty∣christs:
And kings are to thinck that they are men, as well as Kings ād
that Christ hath ordeyned the same meanes of faith for Kings which he
hath for subjects,Act. 9. 15. and that subjects are Christs freemen,1 tim. 2. 1. 2 as wel as Kings sub∣jects,
1. Cor. 7. 22. 23. & Kings that beleeve are Christs Servants, even as subjects are Kings
servants, and both are bought with a price, therefore both ought not to bee
the servants of men, in matter of faith & religion: but Kings shal giue a grea∣ter
account at the day of judgment, then their subjects: And to judge mē
now for religion, is to judge afore the tyme, ād also to sit in the judgement
seate of Christ,Rom. 2. 16 to whom onely it belongeth, yet not before the day appoin¦ted,
Act. 10. 42 how much lesse to Kings and Bishops. I read that Constantyne
the Emperor (called the greate) wrought to the Bishop of Rome, that he
would not force and constrayne any man to the faith, but onely admonish
and commit the judgment to God.Ioh. 18. 36 Christes Kingdom is not of this world

therefore may it not be purchased, nor defended with the weapons of this
world,Ephe. 6. 1 17. but by his word and spirit: no other weapons hath he giuen to his
Church which is his spiritual kingdom. Therfore Christ saith: He that wil
not heare the church,Mat. 18. 17 let him be to thee as a hethen & a publicane: he saith not
bur: ban: hang: or inpriso: him, that is Antichrists ordinance. And though
a man be an heretick,Tyt. 3. 10 yet ought he not to be bur: but to be rejected, after
once or twise admonition, that is cast out of the Church: but as in the chur:
of Rome people of al sorts are by perseqution forced thereinto by the Bi∣shops
and ministers therof: so it is in the Church of England also, which
sheweth that the Bs: and min: of Rome and Eng: are of one spirit, in ga∣thering
peopel to their faith and church, which is the spirit of Satan, who
knoweth wel that his kingdom (the false Church) wold greatly decay, if
perseqution were laid downe: seing himself cannot stand before the word
and spirit of God, much lesse his Bs: and mi: therfore he wil haue them,
for a name and shew, to vse the word of God, but indeed, if the false inter∣pretation
and alledging of the scriptures wil not help, then (saith he con∣strayne
them by fyer and sword: or els (if people haue liberty of consciēce)
they wil trye the spirits, which of them is of god, as the Apostle joh: tea∣cheth:
and then saith he:1. Iohn 4. 1 the Prince as wel as people wil try all things,
& keep that which is good, and wil also prove themselves (as the Apostle Paule
teacheth) whether they are in the Apostoliq faith or not:2. cor. 13. And as the Church of
Rome provoketh the Magestrats to peesequte to death, such as are excō∣municated
out of her, so doth the Church of England provoke the Magi∣strats
to persequte to death such as she excomunicate: And as the Bs.
and min: of Ro: wil perswade the prince and people, to heare ād read none
but themselves, so doe the Bs: and min: of Eng: also: But the Bs: ād min:
of the Apostoliq Church doe perswade al men, to prove & trye the Spirits
whether they are of God, which they cannot doe, except they heare and read
other mens doctrines, as wel as the Bs: ād their min: neither can they if
they would, so long as the Bishops have power from the King and state
to silence and imprison etc: al preachers, ād to burne al books, which teach
not their doctines. Your Majesty and Parliament shal vnderstand that
al those that confesse freely without compulsion, that Iesus is the Messiah the
Lord,1. Iohn. 5. & 1. Io. 4. and that he came in Flesh, are to be esteemed the Children of God and true
Christians, seeing such are borne of God, and no man can say that. Iesus is
the Lord,1 co. 12.  but by the holy Ghost, therfore not to be persequted.
And as Abel killed not Cayne, but was killed himself, ād as Isaack ād
Iacob did not persequte Ismael and Esau, but was persequted of Ismael
and Esau (who ād Caine were figuers of al persequters) so the beleeving
doe not persequte the vnbeleeving,Gala. 4. 29 nor the true chur: the false, but the be∣leeving
and true chur: are (as they have beene) most often persequted thē
selves, of whom Abel, Isaack and Iacob were figures, whose childrē are
al beleevers and free mē:Galat. 5. that stand fast in the liberty, wherewith Christ hath
made thē free, ād wil not be tangled with the yoke of bondage, no not with cir-cumcision,

much lesse with the discipline and doctrijne of the Church of Rome, whose
Bs: are able ministers of the fyer and sword, both to Prince ād people, as
many Historyes doe lamentably witnes, to theyr vtter infamy and
overthrow. Also, if the beleving should persequte the vnbeleving to death
who shold remayne aliue? then none but the beleeveing shold liue in the
world, and the vnbeleeveing shold dye in theyr vnbeleeif, and so perish for
ever: the Lord wil not that the beleeveing shold live, to the destructiō of
the vnbeleeveing, but vnto theyr conversion, edificatiō and salvation: And
by persequting of Prince and people to death, because they wil not heare
and beleeve, is no gayning of soules vnto God, but vnto the devill: And
whereas ignorant and wicked Bs. may thinck to wijn soules by killing
Prince and people for religion, they are deceaved greatly, for therby, they
loose many soules, viz: their owne and the vnbeleeving, their owne they
loose,e. 18. 20 because they wilfully breake the Lords Commandement, that saith:
Thou shalt not kill, meaneing such as are corporal malefactors: and the
others which dye in their vnbeleeif, they confesse themselues are eternaly
lost, except they (as som of their minist:) hold a redemption after this life.
And the Bs. shold know that error and heresy cānot be killed by the fyer
and sword, but by the word and spirit of God / that is the onely weapons
of Christs Bs. and Ministers, and such onely Christs Ministers doe vse,
whose liues and conversations are so harmlesse, holy ād gentle, that ther∣by / 
and by their deaths ād sufferings, they wynne many soules vnto god:
wherby, they are knowen fro al false Bs. and ministers, who like wolues
and beares (not like sheep and lambs) make pray, and devour both Prince
and People, that are not of their kinde, if they bee able to Master them.
Besides, may it please your Majesty and Parlia: to vnderstand, that
the beleeveing man that hath an dnbeleeveing wyfe, and the beleeveing
woman that hath an vnbeleeveing husband,Co. 7. 16 cannot liue together as the
scripture teachet, for the salvation of the vnbeleeveing, if they be persequ¦ted
to death: Indeed som therby are forced to comfesse with the mouth,
that which they beleeue not in heart, and so are made true dissemblers in
steed of true Christians, wherby many men and womē are deceaved with
dissembling husbands and wyves, as wel as the King and State are de∣ceaved
with dissembling servants and subjects: but the word of God (if
permission of conscience might be granted) would procure vpright, puer,
and vnfeyned husbands and wyves, servants and subjects, so that there∣by
neyther Prince nor people should be deceaved, for al good shepherds
wil devide and seperate, and not force, slay, and persequte, for if men and
women be found hereticks, they shalbe seperated from the Church: but if
they be vnbeleevers, they shal not be joyned vnto it, vntil they be conver∣ted
by the word of God, much lesse forced: Which conversion for ought
we know, may be at their death, if not afore, seing the Lord caleth som at
the elevent hower,att. 20. 6. so wel as at the first, and not at the King and Bs. plea¦sures.
Kings and Magistrats are to rule tēporal affayers, by the swords

of their temporal Kingdoms. And Bs: ād Ministers are to rule spiritual
affayers by the word and spirit of God, the sword of Christs spirituall
Kingdom, and not to intermedle one with anothers authority, office, and
function: And it is a greate shame for the Bs. and Ministers not to bee
able to rule in their Church, without the assistance of the King and Ma∣gistrat,
yea it is a greate signe they are none of Christs Bishops and mi∣nisters
of they were, they would not be afrayd nor ashamed of their faith
nor yet would they perswade Princes and people to persequte and force
one another to beleeve them, but would use onely the assistance of Gods
word and spirit, and therwith suffer their faith and doctryne, to bee exa∣mined,
proved, and disputed, both by word and writing.
And he is a true Bishop who is vnreproveable,Tyt. 1. 7. 9. 11. ād that is able to stop
the mouthes of his adversaries, by Gods word and Spirit onely, and
whose faith and discipline agreeth with the Prophets, Christ and his A∣postles,
and maketh no contracictiō, but al those Bishops that force Prin∣ces
and peoples to receaue their faith and discipline by perseqution, doe
(with Iudas) goe against Christ in his members, with swords, slaues ād
halberos, who seing Gods word wil not help them, betake themselues
with al hast and hazard, vnto the authoritie of the King and Magi∣strate.
I read that a Bishop of Rome would haue constrayned a Turkish Em¦peror
to the Christian faith, vnto whom the Emperor answered: I beleeve
that Christ was an excellent Prophet, but he did never (so far as I vnderstand) com∣mand
that men should with the power of weapons be constrayned to beleeue his
law: & verely I also, doe force no man to beleeue Mahomets Law. Also I read
that Iewes, Christians and Turks are tollerated in Constantinople, ād
yet are peaceable, though so contrary the one to the other. If this bee so
how much more ought Christians, not to force one another to religion: ād
how much more ought Christians to tollerate Christians, when as the
Turks doe tollerate them shal we be lesse merciful thē the Turks? or shal
we learne the Turks to persequte Christians? It is not onely vn merciful
but vnnatural and abominable, yea monstrous for one Christian to vex
and destroy another for difference and questions of Religion, and though
tares haue ouergrowen the wheate,Mat. 13. 29 30. 38. yet Christ wil haue them let alone
til harvest, least whyle you goe about to pluck vp the tares, you pluck vp also
the wheat with them, as your predecessors haue done, who thought they
had gathered vp the tares and burned them, but you see now that they
haue burned the weate in steed of tares. Wherfore in al humility ād Chri∣stian
modesty I doe affirme, that through the vnlaufull weedhooke of
persecution (which your predecessors haue used, and by your maiesty and
Parliament is still continued) there is such a quantity of wheate plucked
vp, and such a multitude of tares least behinde, that the wheate which
remayne, cannot yet appeere, in any right vissible congregation.

And now beloved soueraigne and Parliament,Act. 3. 17. I know that through
ignorance you doe persequte, as did also your predecessors, Amend your
lives therefore, and turne, that your sinns may bee put away, when the tyme of re∣freshing
shal come, from the presence of the Lord: who before hath shewed by
the mouth of his holy servant Iohn, that the woman (meaning the church) shold
fleye into the wildernes for a tyme,Re. 12. 14. tymes ād half a tyme, from the presence ād per¦secution
of the Serpent: And that the wynepresse shold bee troden without the
Citty,Re. 14. 20. vntil loud came out of the wynepresse, vnto the horse brydels, by the space
of a thousand and sixe hundred furlongs: and thus he hath fulfilled it.
Now therefore I humbly beseeth you, suffer not your Bishops and
ministers, any longer to perswade, to force your subjects or any others,
to their faith and Church by perseqution, neyther suffer them therewith
to defend their faith and Church, against their adversaries: if they have
not any thing from Gods word against vs, let them yeld and submit
themselves: if they thinck they have any thing against vs, let them be∣take
themselves onely to Gods word, both in word and wryteing, for
the whole Scripture is given by inspiration of God,2. tim. 3. 16. to that purpose, and is profita∣ble
to teach, to reprove, to correct, and to instruct, in righteousnes, that the Man
of God may be absolute, being made perfect vnto al good works. With which
Scripture (and not with fyer and sword) your Majestyes Bishops and
ministers ought to be armed and weaponed:Mat. 10. 14. 15. And whosoeuer shall not
heare the words of such Bishops and ministers: then such Bishops ād
ministers are commanded by Christ (not to to imprison:Marc. 6. 11 burne: ban: and
hang them but to shake the dust of theyr feete against them, for a witnes when
they depart from them, affirming that at the day of judgment it shalbee easier for
Sodom and Gomorrha,act. 13. 51. then for such persons: And this com: of Christ, did his
Bishops and ministers obey as you may read. By which and by that
which follow, your gratious may: and Princely, and honorable Parlia∣ment
may perceave, the will and mynde of our Lord and Saviour Christ
vnto whose mercy I commend you, and to the word and wisdom of his
grace, which is able to build further, and to give you an inheritance
among all them which are sanctifyed Amen.
 ther is one Furbusher a preacher in this lād.
Not Furbusher.
