



LEARNED MEN.
It may be, you will thinke strange, that I haue selected you from all others, to de∣dicate this small Trea∣tise vnto. I cannot expect your Patro∣nage heereof, in regard of the dispari∣ty of our Religions. My mayne Alle∣ctiue of this my Dedication, is, Be∣cause You, being placed vpon the stage of the Worlds Eye, and most dif∣ferent from me in Fayth and Religion, may by reading these few leaues, per∣ceaue with what disease of Contrarieties in Fayth, Protestancy (being your owne Religion) doth labour: A most dan∣gerous
 sicknes, and such as in tyme, through its violent Conuulsions, may threaten its owne future dissolution.
Heere you shall fynd, that the chie∣fest Protestants haue with their Pens, made infinit blots and blurs of Contra∣dictions in their Writings: So certaine it is, that the high swelling Riuer of Protestancy is fedde with the different (or rather most opposite) opinions of ech Professour of it. Therefore I pro∣bably assure my selfe (and the rather in regard of your presumed Integrity, Learning, and other good Parts) that after your perusall of this Treatise, you will euen blush, in your owne Bre∣threns behalfe.
For, is it not strange, and deseruing Admiration, to fynd men (otherwise reputed most learned) to be so flexu∣ous, variable, and of such fluctuating iudgments touching their doctrines, as that Andraeas Duditius (a literate Pro∣testant) doth in these words follow∣ing, euaporate forth his griefe, concea∣ued through his owne Brethrens dis∣sentions? InBeza in Epist. Theolog. epist. ad Dudit. pag. 5. re∣lateth these words of Dudi∣tius. what Religion (sayth he) do they agree, who impugne the Roman Bi∣shop? If you examin all from the head to the
 foote, you shall almost fynd nothing affir∣med by one, which another will not affirme to be wicked &c. Their deuines do daily dif∣fer from themselues &c. (menstruam fidem habent) coyning a Monthly Fayth. Thus we see, how Duditius strikes his owne Religion, euen in its mayster-Veyne; Who notwithstanding is called by Beza,Beza vbi supra, pag. 1. Clarissimus & ornatissimus Vir, and saluted by him, by the name ofvbi supra, pag. 2. Frater.
And the Learned Melancthon com∣playneth in like sort of this point, say∣ing: QuosThe authour of the Trea∣tise intitu∣led; A mirrour for Mar∣tinists, printed, 1590. pag. 24. rela∣teth these words, as spoken by Melan∣cthon. fugiamus, habemus, (mea∣ning the Papists,) sed quos sequamur, non intelligimus. In so much as he fur∣ther writeth in one of his Bookes: Nul∣laMe∣lancthon in Concil. Theolog. part. 1. pag. 149. res aquè deterret homines ab Euan∣gelio, ac nostra discordia. Thus (Learned Men) you see, that the Sphere of Prote∣stancy (euen in the iudgment of its owne Mathematicians) turneth vpon the Poles of Dissention in doctrine.
I presume, that you haue made great progresse, not only in the study of Di∣uinity, but also in humane Learning, and Philosophy. Call then to remem∣brance, How God in his Creation of the World, and the parts thereof, may
 seeme euen zealously to affect Vnity & Concordancy Non1. Cor. 14. est dissentionis Deus, fed Facis For first, do we not see, how the seuerall Spheres in Heauen, in their continuall rotation and mouing (both in respect of Primum Mobile, as also of their peculiar Motions) do, notwith∣standing the diuersity of them, still moue without any hindrance, or cros∣sing one of anothers Motions, in that sweet temper, as that some of the Phi∣losophers did ascribe a pleasing and Musicall Harmony to such their Mo∣tions?
In like sort, to contemplate vpon the Elements. How hath that supreme Workman made them to conspire and agree togeather, through force of their symbolizing qualities? In so much, as by this meanes there is a Transelementation among them, one turning it selfe into another. Againe, how wonderfully (by the hand of the same Diuine Proui∣dence) do the Inferiour Causes in Na∣ture humble (as it were) and subiect themselues to the Higher Causes, with∣out the least Reluctation or Contradi∣ction? In the proportion of Mans body, and the Faculties thereof, what Mira∣cles
 of Vnity and Concordancy are found; one member thereof becom∣ming seruiceable to another; and all of them Vniting the forces (without any mutiny, as I may say) for the keeping of the whole Body in a gratefull repose of Health?
Yf then God, who hath created all things in Numero, Pondere, & Mensura; Who is euer working, yet euer quiet; more radiant & shyning in his Works, then all Light; more high, then all su∣blimity; and yet more low, then any depth: Being aboue all, in gouerning of things; Vnderneath all, in suppor∣ting of things: Finally internall in all things, by his penetration; externall to all things, by his comprehending them within his large Circumference: If then (I say) this most wise Intelligence, or Spirit (SpiritusIoan. 4. est Deus) be so solli∣citous in the structure and manner of creating, & preseruing of things crea∣ted, and this with a most stupendious and conspiring Symmetry, Proportion, and Consonancy, not brooking in them the least iarre of Diuision; how can it be thought, that he would institute a Religion for the sauing of Mans Soule
 (for whom all other things are crea∣ted) which consisteth of such Hetero∣genious and different doctrines (as Pro∣testancy is found to be,) exhaling and breathing nothing, but Enormity in Manners, Simulties, Oppositions, and manifest Contradictions in Fayth; the Professours thereof tearing asunder ech others reputation & honour, with their violent Philippicks, and declama∣tory Satyrs? It is not probable; It is not credible; It is not possible. The true Church of Christ is charactred in sacred Writ, with the stampe of Vnity; & therefore it is stiled:Ioan. 20. One sheep∣fould,Rom. 1. One Body,Cant. 6. One Spouse.
These things then (Worthy Men) being thus explorate, and euident, let not the fruition of temporall Prefer∣ments and Opulency of state; neither the Applause of Men, (being but a poore wyndy purchase of Ayre) nor any other humane and transitory Res∣pects (since all these are but glorious and guilded Miseries) seele vp your Iudgment and Will, from acknowled∣ging, and practizing the truth of Reli∣gion.Matth. 10. Quid prodest homini, si vniuer∣sum mundum lacretur, Animae verò suae
 detrimentum patiatur?
O remember, That euery thing is short which is measured with the yard of Tyme, and Eternity only long. Striue therefore in a Christian contempt of Tempora∣lities, to say, in zeale of spirit, with S. Austin: FecistiL. 1. Confess. c. 1. nos Domine ad te; & inquietum est cor nostrum, donec requiescat in te: And assure your selues, that what thing soeuer is (as I may say) out of God, soone breedeth a fastidious saciety: .
Thus forbearing further surplusage of Words, I commit you to his Holy Protection, of whom (through the boundles sea of his Mercy) it is said: If anyApo∣calyp. . Man will heare his voyce, and open the Gate, he will come into him, and suppe with him. I beseech his Diuine Maiesty, that you may auayleably interest your selues in this most comfortable Inui∣tation.

