



DEare Christian, bought with a price, most happy in this that thou art not thine owne; for thy sake I have undertaken to answer this Treatise; to thee, doe I Dedi∣cate it, who mayest of right challenge all that I am or can. Thou, whether noble, wise, mightie, learned, unlear∣ned, weake or meane, neare or farre off, art interessed in all that maketh for the Truth, and in all that is done against it. Paul, Apollo, Cephas are thine,1. Cor. 3. all thine; for thou art Christs, and Christ is Gods. In the broaching of Heresies, thou art woun∣ded, in the making of schismes thou art racked, in eve∣ry lie thou art layed at; nothing commeth against a painefull Minister, but reacheth to thy heart through his sides; nothing from a laborious Minister, but aymeth at thy setling, stablishing, comforting, per∣fecting, Wert thou the meanest that ever lived, who can thinke this too much for thee, seeing God with∣holds not himselfe as a Father, his Sonne as a Redee∣mer and Brother, his Spirit as sanctifier, Comforter, and the Spirit of Sonne-ship in thy heart, and thy ve∣ry
 body also, hee ownes as his Temple? For a recom∣pence bee inlarged: give thy selfe to God, receive no∣thing against, but all that is for the Truth: Let the reproaches wherewith Christ and his Ministers, are reproached fall on thee; owne the Ministers gifts and labours, as thine, reigne, but not without them, be honourable, but not when they are despised.
When I first received this booke intituled, A lear∣ned Treatise of the Sabbaoth, a little before No∣vember last, though I was utterly ignorant of any such controuersie to haue passed betweene my Brother, and Master Edward Breerwood; and had not yet cast mine eye on the base language of the reply in the end of that Treatise; yet the very noveltie and dangerous vilenesse of the Doctrine, without any reference to things personall, strucke me. My spirit was stirred in me, when I saw the whole right of the Law for the time of Gods worship alleviated; the consequence whereof must needs be this, the whole kingdome wholy given to Atheisme and prophanenesse. The zeale of Gods glory and thy good began to eate upon me: I throw my selfe into the open field, that thou mayest be nourished; I resolved what I was, or am, or may be; should be (Christ strengthning mee) Gods and thine; that God the Lord of Heaven might have his Royaltie untouched, man his dutie laid out; Superiors directed to stand for God and Men, in the things of God, and Inferiors be Gods, while mens; and mens, in and for God.
Now knowing that there are none but are flesh, as well as spirit, and that the unregenerate part will catch at the most excellent truths, to sucke thereout advantage
 to it selfe, by tearing a sunder things inseparably united, and taking to things hand over head in a wrong appli∣cation, fearing thy miscarriage, I could not but adver∣tise thee a little, in that part that concernes thy duty.
The superiour or master may conceite his power in∣trenched upon, the inferiour or servant may suppose some unwarranted liberty granted him, all may thinke of an over-rigid construction of the unchangeable pre∣cept. This Dspute yeelds none of those, neither preju∣dice to the master, nor occasion of liberty to the servant, nor other then a received and allowed sense, to the ne∣ver-failing law, as will appeare to him that thorowly peruseth it. But for prevention of over-hasty conceits in all, behold thy way-markes, before thou reade or receive any thought to fore-stall thee, take what I set here before thee, which hath beene seene, and heard, and allowed and received, Blessed be Gods holy Name, and I doubt not but shall be, maugre the malice of con∣tradicting spirits. For I admonish thee of no other things then what are already received, in the printed Bookes of Mr. Nich. Byfield. Consider, I say, what that Master of Assemblies hath left, in his writings as stakes to bound out the way of both master and ser∣vant, superiour and inferiour, in running the race of this fourth commandement, and as goades to quicken thy heart in the embracing of that divine Law.
For the Doctrine of the Sabbath he thus explaineth himselfe in two places,
First, God hath provided by his unchangeable law that one day in seven, servants shall rest from their la∣bour. M. Byf. on 1 Pet. 2. 18. pag. 723.
Secondly, Servants must shew their feare of God in
 their callings, by carefulnesse to doe Gods service, as well as their masters, not onely by spending the Sabbath in the duties of religion, but in redeeming the time in the weeke dayes (as may bee without hinderance of their worke or offence to their masters) to imploy themselves in prayer, reading, conference, &c. And the reason is, because as servants must doe their masters worke, as they are servants: so they stand bound in the common obligation, to do Gods service, as they are men; and no man but is subject to the law of God; who hath given all his commandements to servants as well as to masters. Byf. in 1 Pet. 2. 18. pag. 734.
For the servant he layeth downe these godly and sa∣vory limitations, as Caveats:
First, the subjection of servants is of Divine insti∣tution, to which God hath bound them by the fift Commandement, and so is a morall and perpetuall or∣dinance, in 1 Pet. 2. 18. p. 721.
Secondly, no faults in Superiors, can free inferiors from their subjection, in matter or manner, in 1 Pet. 2. p. 742.
Thirdly, if the matter bee onely inexpedient and unmeete, thou must obey, in Col. 3. 23. p. 130.
Fourthly, thou must bee sure that it bee sinne that thou refusest, if thou must needs doubt, it is better to doubt and obey, than doubt and disobey, Id. ibid.
Fiftly, thou must in unlawfull things yeeld to obey by sufferings, Id. ibid.
Sixtly, the servant must avoide inquisitivenesse, the servant knoweth not what his master doth, Ioh. 15. 15. in 1 Pet. 2. p. 735.
For the master he giveth these heavenly admonitions▪

First, the master must give account of all hee doth to God, though he be not bound to doe so to inferiors, in 1 Pet. 2. p. 737.
Secondly, good masters not onely license, but teach their servants to keepe Gods Sabbath, and worship him. Commandement 4. Gen. 18. 19. in 1 Pet. 2. p. 736.
Thirdly, masters doe not onely wickedly in re∣straining their servants from the meanes of their sal∣vation or comfort, but doe foolishly also, in hinde∣ring them of that meanes that should make them good servants, in 1 Pet. 2. p. 725.
Fourthly, they may not make their servants breake Gods Sabbath, to satisfie their wils, in Col. 3. 23. p. 130.
In these Aphorismes, that faithfull servant of Ie∣sus Christ being dead, yet speaketh; unto which let me adde a word or two, that thou mightest on all hands be leftready to duty in this behalfe; Remember (if thou be a servant) that in workes of holinesse, mercy and necessitie, the masters power is to be obeyed in sub∣jection to his commands; for in those is he under God, for God, and over thee. Then it is thy praise to followIsa. 41. 2. him in the lawfull use of his power, at his foote.
Lastly, the well-ordered houshold of that worthily praised Centurion, should be the platforme for fami∣lies that intend their welbeing, When hee bad his servant goe, he went; and come, he came; and doe this, and he did it: if thou bee a master, and hadst such servants, wouldest thou, couldest thou serveIer. 43. 9. thy selfe of them? I am perswaded there is not the most covetous and prophane Atheist, but hee hath so
 much sense of a deitie, and so much conscience yeel∣ding and heart giving, and relenting, that he would sometimes in a moode, proclayme to his houshold the Lords libertie. Is it so indeede? my prayer shall bee for thee, that of this deede thou mayest never repent and pollute Gods Name, with those wretched Isra∣elites, lest it should hasten desolation on thy house and name; thy repentance may bee farre better be∣stowed, upon the remainder of other sinnes, against other the Holy Lawes of God. To which worke I leave thee and all others that know, that Repentance to∣wards God, and Faith towards the Lord Iesus is that which summeth up Christianitie among those that follow the Truth in Love; the Lord an∣swere us all with strength in our soules, that al∣wayes we may labor fervently one for another in prayers, that wee may stand perfect and com∣pleat in all the will of God.

