



RIGHT HONOVRABLE;
THe Almighties gracious accep∣tation of such Oblations as are brought to him, encourageth sons of men to offer their Sacrifices on the Altar of his Grace. Like ground of encou∣ragement have &, to lay this Oblation on the

Altar of your Honours patronage. Of your gracious acceptation thereof, these reasons as∣sure me. 1. This Impe now presented to your Honours, is a twinne to that Posthu∣mus, which was heretofore presented to, and accepted of your Honours. 2. This, toge∣ther with his other brothers, was by their owne Father while he lived, devoted to your Ho∣nours. To divert them otherwaies, would bee plaine plagium. 3. Your Honours did many waies manifest a very good respect to the forementioned Father of this Orphane. 4. This Impe it selfe is a goodly Impe, and giveth assured hope of doing much good to Gods Church. 5. Your Honours high esteeme of all good and faithfull Ministers, of their function, of their labours and works, is well knowne. 6. Your Honours mutu∣all entire affection, and sincere and sweet conversation and carriage one towards ano∣ther, is a lively representation, and evident demonstration of the truth of that doctrine, concerning Husband & Wife, which is prin∣cipally handled in this Treatise. 7. Your Honour (my good Lord) hath all your daies been a valiant and faithfull Champion for the Church, maintaining her safety and liberty

with the perill of your owne life; wherein (though Communis Mars, bellique casus sit incertus, yet) successe hath oft crowned your valour: instance, among other famous victories, the incomparable conquest, by your Honours more than ordinary courage obtained in New-port-field. Can now doubt be made of your Honours favour, in countenancing this child of the Church? 8. Your Honour (my good Lady) was a diligent frequenter of his Ministery who preached these Sermons, and hearing the distinct points when they were first out of the Pulpet uttered, so approved them, as oft you desired the publishing of them: For they were Cygnean songs, the last and sweetest of all. 9. As the sacred Scrip∣tures, so good Commentaries thereon, such as this is, area solace to your Honours, in rea∣ding whereof you have manifested much de∣light. Finally, many and great are the fa∣vours and kindnesses, which from time to time your Honours have done to the Publisher of this worke; which, as in duty he is bound, he willingly taketh this occasion in all humility, and with all thankfulnesse to acknowledge. The premises considered, the said Publisher confidently resteth upon your Honours patro∣nage;

and boweth his knees before the Throne of Grace for a mercifull Remembrance, and bountifull Remuneration of that Goodnesse which your Honours have done to the Church of God, to the poore Members and faithfull Ministers thereof, and in speciall to the Au∣thor of this Commentary, yea and to the Publisher thereof

Black-Friers London. 25. Ian. 1625.
