


TO You onely, vvhose Vnder∣stādings, throgh your Grand ma∣sters vvicked in∣doctrinating of you, are corru∣pted; but Wils good & sincere, do I dedicate this smal Worke. My Pen hath heere purposely descended so lovv (not only in style, but euen in Matter) as to accommodate it selfe to such of you, vvho are vnlear∣ned, as indeed most of you are.

The contēts of this vvorke is of that facility and easines, as that it best may suite to such of you as be illiterate & defectiue in the Elements, & mayn Prin∣ciples of Learning For though the matter here handled, be of such vveight, as that it is able to conuince the iudgment of the most learned Aduersary: yet touching the Methode vsed in the deliuery hereof, it is facill; seeing you shall not need here to spend the tyme in searching after the sense of produced pla∣ces of Scripture; or in reuol∣uing the Ecclesiasticall Histo∣ries of the Church; or in pon∣dering & vveighing the places of the Ancient Fathers; all
 vvhich do stand subiect to many difficulties.
But it vvill suffice, if so you do but read the many Positions & Tenets of Puritanisme, (the Fayth, vvhich I presume your selues professe) and the liues of the first teachers of them, most ansvverable to the said Posi∣tions; In all vvhich you shall fynd (& this from their ovvne expresse Testimonies,) That the very End, or as it vvere, the Ter∣minus ad quem, Puritanisme in Doctrine, doth finally propend, & incline to, is impurity in man∣ners, and dissolution in life. And therefore the greater commi∣seration I haue, that many of you, I presume (vvhose vvills
 and endeauours are vpright & plaine) are infected vvith the said impious doctrines.
The first inducement, vvhich importuned my penne to vn∣dergoe this labour, is the late discouery in London, of a com∣pany of Sodomiticall Persons; (vvherof some are apprehēded but diuers fled,) in number a∣bout fourty, or more; in state competent, and some of very good meanes; in Religion all Puritanes; and in entercourse among themselues (a thing vvonderfull to be reported) so linked, as that they made a pe∣culiar Society or Body, hauing a common designed place for their publike meetings: So iust
 reason I haue to say a litle be∣fore,Ierem. 18. Interrogate Gentes, quis audiuit talia horribilia?
Novv, seeing these prodigi∣ous Monsters (being so many staines to Nature; for Sodomitae pessimi erāt, & peccatores coram Domino nimis)Ge∣nes. 1. are all Puri∣tans in faith, & hould themsel∣ues far more illuminated in the Lord, then the more moderate and learned Protestants; of vvhich nūber of learned Prote∣stants, most do vvholy aban∣done & disclaime from the o∣thers Puritanicall Doctrines; And further seeing, that they may make shovv to vvarrant this their Sodomiticall State frō their ovvne Principles, admit∣ting
 them for true: Therfore I haue thought good at this present, to set downe all such Theoricall Positions of Purita∣nisme, vvhich do euen iustify Sin, and confidently teach its Proselytes, that the greatest Sin vvhatsoeuer, cannot become preiudiciall to the saluation of any of the faythfull; of vvhich number, all the foresaid por∣tentuous Wretches (as being Puritans) euen by their ovvne Principles and Doctrines, are taught to be.
I vvould not haue the mo∣derate and more learned Pro∣testant to thinke, that I do in∣simulate him in the ranke of the Puritans in generall; seeing
 I vvell knovv, that most of those temperate and sober Pro∣testants do disavovv, and reiect diuers Puritanicall Theses, in∣sisted vpon heereafter by me. No It is only the Hypocriticall Puritan, vvho can vaunt, and brag of his Enthusiasmes, & Il∣luminations from the Lord, vvho depresseth & betramples all Vertue, & exercise of pious Workes, & vvho doth blāch & exalt Vice, against vvhom my Pen is at this time sharpned.
I vvell knovv, that those, vvho did first stampe most of the doctrins of Puritanisme, as Luther, Svvinglius, Caluin &c. vvere not vulgarly called Pu∣ritans; Because in those firster
 times of Protestancy, the name of Puritan, vvas scarce heard of; But novv this denomination is peculiarly applied to such Protestants, vvho belieuing certaine most damnable do∣ctrines expressed in this Trea∣tise (& first taught by the for∣mer eminent Protestants) do differ by such their beliefe, frō the more graue & learned Pro∣testant, vvholy denying them.
Well, My simple, and vp∣rightly-meaning Puritan; for I presume diuers of You to be such; (vvhose Iudgement is vvronged by giuing assent to thy more learned, but vvithall more vvicked Brethren) I vvill remit thee to the perusuall of
 this ensuing discourse; vvhich vvhē thou hast maturely vvei∣ghed, & found (and all, by the confessions of the Aduersaries themselues) that the most fla∣gitious Liues of the first tea∣chers of Puritanisme, vvere in practise most conformable to their ovvne exitiall doctrines therin; their vvicked conuer∣sations thus seruing, as a Com∣ment to paraphraze their vvic∣ked Positions.
Then I hope thou vvilt cast off all thy Puritanicall doctri∣nes, hitherto imbraced by thee; or at least vvilt haue iust rea∣son, to censure vvith greater indifferency, both of the do∣ctrines, & of the first Authours
 thereof; and then thou maist cal into thy remembrance our Sauiours vvords; vpon vvhich sentence be bold securely to anchour thy Iudgement:Math. 7. Do men gather grapes of thornes, or figs of thistles? And vvith this I cease.

