



(MADAM,)
I Publish under the fa∣vour
of your name a
History, which hath
passages in it very
admirable, but (veri∣ly)
can have none
more happy, then
the comfort of your
protection. This was a labour designed
for you before its birth, and should I de∣ny
it your Greatnesse, yet were I bound
to yeeld you it by Iustice: For it hath
fallen out that a person worthy of all re∣spect,
to whom the habit I weare, and

pen I handle acknowledge infinite obli∣gation,
having discovered this piece in my
hands, which I had heretofore onely
rough-hewed, drew it from the Tombe,
wherein I obscured it, vrging me to give
it stile and day-light, with a purpose to
present you therewith. I almost for a
whole yeere resisted his powerfull im∣portunities,
my Genius transporting mee
rather into discourses of manners and
faith, then Histories. But he persisting
to intreate me when he had (as it were)
his soule on his lipps in a sharpe sicke∣nesse
which surprised him, I with good
reason gave way to his authority; his
rare vertues and singular friendship con∣spiring
and consenting, both by mouth,
heart, and pen to honour you.
(MADAM) You know who it is I
speake of, the choyce you have made
of his person, thereon to conferre an
affection so celestiall, plainely shewes
hee must needs bee beloved of Heaven:
I forbeare his name, to spare his hu∣mility,
which desireth here, no other

notice, but that which hath eclipsed
him in your lights. Notwithstanding
I ingenuously confesse that if I were to
passe thorow all the splendors, and
pompes of the World to meet with
you; my pen could not reach you: but
since God hath inspired you with a life
which taketh its flight above the tracks
of the Sunne, and Time, your good∣nesse
faileth not to render you commu∣nicable
to all the World. I therefore
willingly replenish my writings with a
name most lovely, to serve at this day
thorough all France as a Sanctuary for
vertue, and a safe conduct to piety.
MADAM, I dare assure you, I
have had a very sensible comfort to be∣hold
you in this glorious lustre of a
Princesse, daily to despise by election,
what must at the last day bee left of ne∣cessity:
To see how you trample the
World under foot even in your owne
house, how you shake the foundation
of this Hiericho, of this City of the Moon
and Roses, where inconstancy is everla∣sting,

and beauties but momentarie, where
men live by opinion, sinne by precepts, a∣mend
not but thorough impotency of of∣fending,
and (as it were) never die, but by
sodaine surprisall.
I take part in your contentments, when
I so often see you shut up in those fortu∣nate
Ilands, where (to speake with the
Apostle) you live in spirit, and conuerse
with spirits, which have nothing mortall
about them, but the vaile of their soules,
where you taste sweetnesses of Manna,
whereof the greatest delights of the
world's devotion hath but the tenth part,
and into which you enter, as into most de∣lightfull
Labyrinths, to loose your selfe
with God, that so you may never loose
your selfe.
If most violent afflictions must be pas∣sed
thorough to arrive at so wished a port,
ought you not justly to adore the divine
providence, which hath sanctified your
sufferings? as also to remember that the
most resplendent vertues spring from
sharpest tribulations, as the purest flames

of the Sun (according to the sayings of
those ancients) are enkindled from brac∣kish
waters.
Courage Madam; Confidently shew
your selfe to future times, by the better
part of your selfe, make us daily behold
the most beautiful humility in the bosom
of greatnes; make of your manners, a cen∣sure
of vices, and of your life, examples of
piety, that so those who would prepare
Images for vertue, may boldly plant the
Basis thereof on the foot-steps which you
shall imprint. It is the wish
Madam

