



Right Worshipfull:
AFter prayer to GOD, that these first fruits of my labours in this
 kinde offered to the glo∣ry of his Name, for the good of his Church, may be acceptable to him, be∣ing sanctified by the Ho∣ly Ghost: I present this ensuing Treatise to your worthy selues, as to a most excellent Theophilus, and an elect Lady. It had indeed its birth in ano∣ther place, but its poli∣shing, (if yet it may bee tearmed polished) vnder your supportation. I would therefore it should in the entrance, ac∣knowledge for it selfe,
 and for mee those large fauours both I and it doe enioy. But while it speakes, let none impute the folly of flattery or acceptation of mans per∣son: for should I so doe, my Maker would soone take me away.
Three things shall make your name, your memory, sweet and sa∣uory in the Church of Christ, and among the Saints.
First, your free be∣stowing of that ecclesia∣sticall preserment the
 Lord intrusted you with, without so much as suite or seeking on my part, or any on my behalfe; who yet was a stranger to your Noble selfe, fa∣mily and kindred: respe∣cting nothing but the discharge of your consci∣ence, the good of the people, and the glory of the Lord Christ: which was abundantly shew∣ed when your Worship was pleased to require at my hands these three things alone: residence, like paines as I had be∣stowed,
 where bands of duty were lesse, and plaine teaching, with the pressing of the law throughly, to prepare for the Cordials of surpas∣sing grace discouered in the Gospell: What Chri∣stian that knoweth this, will not say, Remember him O my God, for good, concerning this, and wipe not out this good deed which he hath done for the house of his God
Secondly your vnwea∣ried attendance on the ordinances of Christ
 with reuerence, on the Lords day, and on the weeke dayes: entring the assemblies with the first, abiding there with the last; so that your deeds speake effectually in Iacobs phrase: surelyGen. 28. 16. 17. the Lord is in this place. How dreadful is this place? This is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heauen. The Lord, the God of Iacob, the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, shew you in that place for euer, Iacobs Ladder; and the Angels
 of God ascending and descending on it, and himselfe standing aboue it, and giuing Oracles from the top of it.
Thirdly, your life led, in this wanton proud age, in such a way, as is free from all the vices of our times. Others of our Gentry spend their dayes in Hawking, Hunting, Bowling; in Carding, Dicing, Bowzing, while you seeme alone among many, to haue learnt that which God hath made, the calling of a Gentle∣man.

Goe on still, Noble Sir, to make a further escape from the corruptions that are in the world through lusts: it shall be your immortall praise, to distinguish in deedes be∣tweene Gentility and ef∣feminatenesse, Genero∣sity and prophanenesse, frugality and couetous∣nesse, lberality and pro∣digality, grauity and va∣nty, power and shew of godlnesse.
Speake I this to exalt you in your thoughts a∣boue measure, or speake
 I it not to mooue the hearts of our Gentry to consider it? In as much as God hath set me thus in my place, I magnifie my calling, if by any meanes I might prouoke all Patrones to emulati∣on: and might saue them from their iniuri∣ous practises, and ill of∣fices done thereby, to the house of God. By whose Gehizing hands, Symoni∣zing Wolues prey vpon themselues, and make a prey for Sathan, thou∣sands of soules.

But what seeke I here∣in to my selfe? surely this, that as oft as I looke on these lines, I might fetch a renewed strength for the improuement of my Talent to the good of your godly family, of this people, ouer which the Lord hath placed me (though vnworthy) an ouerseer, and of the whole Church, accor∣ding to my line and mea¦sure. And that if I should bee negligent, I might haue many say to mee, that which Paul charged
 the Church of ColosseCol. 4. 17 to say to Archippus: Take heede to the Mini∣stery, which thou hast receiued in the Lord, that thou fulfill it.
For the Treatise it selfe: you shall haue matter, but words are not to bee expected from him who profes∣seth not himselfe a master of speech. The matter is intended for the through furnishing of a Christian in onely necessary things, to all turnes, at all
 times: large I confesse is the promise, what is performed, reade and see. I shall the meane while pray for both your Worships in∣crease in grace and all gifts of the spirit, with length of dayes, to see your sweet Children, (the Lords reward, your chiefe riches) flourishing and sprea∣ding into families, with grace and fauour from GOD and man: that the few dayes of my pilgrimage, ma▪
 also bee made thereby the more comfortable and happy, who am

