



):(
YOV Knowe right well (right honorable & my very good Lorde) that I accordinge to my dutie giuinge attendaūce vpō your Lordshippe in the tyme of Christmas laste past, was ap∣pointed by your honour to preach be∣fore you in your Chapple, at newe∣parke, the second of Ienuarie, at which tyme I entreated of this text of Sainct Paule. Rom 13. [Id{que} perspecta oportu∣nitate quod videlicet tempestiuū iam sit nos a somno expergisci,] & so forth vnto the end of the chapter: according as it pleased God at that time to mini∣ster vnto me matter, and to giue vnto

me the spirit of vtteraūce. Which Ser∣mon finished, I was immediately called vnto your honor, & by you earnestly re¦quested without delay to set downe in wryting, such lessons and instructions as I had in your presence, & before cer∣tain gētlemen of worship, vttered with my mouth. And herewithall it pleased your honor, not only to require a copie of my Sermon, but also to giue me to vnderstand that you would send it vp to London to be Printed, to the ende that the thinges which I had vttered before a fewe at home in your house, might be further published abroade to the vse and behoofe of many. Which when I perceaued, I must needes con∣fesse, that I was very loth, & altogether vnwilling to deliuer to that ende into your Lordshippes handes any copy of that which I had preched. First bicause my dooinges are so simple, and my skil so small, that they deserue not to come abroade into the sight of the world. Secondly, many are so fine and daintie, that nothing can please & content thē, vnlesse it flow and swim with store of

eloquence. Thirdly, and last of all, bi∣cause I feare that when many haue read it▪ I shall by my playnnesse procure to my self more misliking for publishing of it, then I had lyking of your honor for preaching of it. Howbeit your ho∣nors great goodnesse diuers times shew¦ed towards me, & your benefits bestow¦ed vpon me, which are yet greene & a∣byding fresh in my remembrāce, to my great releefe and comfort, & wherby I liue at this present a great deale the bet¦ter, haue ouercome all lettes and impe∣diments, & enforced me to satisfie your godly desire herein. Chosing rather to be mislyked for my doinges of a great many others, & to be reproued for my want of skil, then to shew my selfe not dutiful towards your honor in this be∣halfe, or to seeme slack to do any thing that may cōtent your noble mynde, es∣pecially whē it pleaseth your Lordship so earnestly to require it of me: who am so much bounde to your honor, that I must nedes acknowledge my self to be ouermuch vnthākful, if mi pore seruice wer not alwaies redi at your cōmādmēt Wherfore seing that it plesed your .

to accept so well of this Sermon, when it was preached, I am thereby embold∣ned to craue patronage of you now it is Printed and further published abrode, especially bicause it now hathe more neede thereof. Most humbly desiring your honor to take it in good part now as you dyd then, and to continue your good will to the faithfull Ministers, & Preachers of the word, & to seeke euer more and more to promote the honor and glory of our good God: so that it may appere vnto al men that you haue in vtter hatred & detestation, the lying false doctrine of Antichrist, as well as it is knowne to me and others that dayly haue experiēce of your honorable dis∣position herein. The Lord of Lordes euermore enflame & direct your noble hart with his holy and gratious Spirit, increase all heroicall and godly vertues in you, with prosperitie and encrease of honor in this lyfe, & graunt that in the end you may so dye, that you may after wardes lyue for euer.
At Moberley the. viii. of Februarie. ¶ 
