


WHen I fyrste tooke in
hande this lytel Trea∣tise,
concernynge the
Popes vsurped prima¦cie: I mynded nothing
lesse then to publishe
the same, that it might
come into the handes of many I had so
little affiance in my selfe, and so symple
an opinion of myn owne doyngs, that
I thought them vnworthy to be red of
any other. But after that I had recey∣ued
no smalle courage by your gentyll
and frendly exhortations, wherein you
willed me to haue respecte to the cōmo∣ditie
that myght ensue to other, whiche
being ignorant of the Greke and Latin
tong, may attain somwhat herby, both
to the increase of knowledge, and also

of iudgemente in matters of religion:
I nothynge doubted after long delibe∣ration,
to make that commune to other
which at the fyrst, as a priuate exercise,
I thought to haue kept to my self Ther¦fore as the readers hereof, yf they re∣ceiue
any commoditie hereby, ought in
that behalfe to yelde all thankes vnto
you, by whome to their profyte, I haue
been encouraged to attempt this bolde
enterprise: so I in some parte to shewe
my selfe not altogyther ingratefull and
vnmyndful of your exceding fauor and
great gentilnesse to me wardes: haue
thought good to dedicate vnto you this
my simple endeuour, and first fruite of
my laboures, as vnto one who after a
sorte may seeme, as in your owne right
to chalenge this kynde of duetie at my
hande. For vnto whom shulde I offer
this Treatise of the Popes primacy, or
whom shuld I make patron therof, but
one who hath ben long exercised in this
and the lyke matters of controuersye,
who also by vse and experience is well
practised in defendyng and puttynge a∣way
the strokes and weapons of suche
as are ennemies to goddes euerlastyng

truthe? Suche a one haue you declared
your selfe in your bokes and sermons,
not onely in bearynge of the dartes of
wyly Antichrist, and his stout army of
arrogant priestes (as Gregory termethGrego. li. 4. Epi. 48.
them) but also in beatynge downe that
monstrous Hydra, with the myghtye
strokes of the spirituall sworde, so that
both he and all his proude army of pre∣sumptuous
prelates, are fayn coward∣ly
to tourne theyr backes, and dare not
once shewe their faces in open battalt
agaynst you. Wherfore I moste hum∣bly
beseche you, accordyng to your ac∣customed
gentylnesse, to take in good
worthe this my bounden duetie, and to
receue vnder your protection, this wor¦thy
archebyshop, who lyke a straunger,
farre from his owne countrey, now se∣keth
entertaynment at your handes.
Whiche yf ye vouchesafe, ye shall per∣ceyue
this lyttell Nilus, so stoutly be∣haue
hymselfe vnder your banner, that
he shall lyke a myghty champion strike
of the head of this aniichristian Goly∣ath
with his owne sworde, and lyke a
valyant conquerour, set it on his owne
speare, to be seene of the whole host, of

all true englyshe Israelites. So that I
doubte not, but all english men that er∣nestly
professe Christ, shal playnly see,
that the lambe and his host, haue geuen
the serpent an ouerthrow, and haue put
to flyght all his ignoraunt armye, with
their blynde capitains. Yea all englishe
men, as I trust, shall perceaue, that he,
which fighteth on our syde agaynst the
olde bawde of Babylon, and cacolike
whoore of Rome, is moste myghty and
stronge, yea that he is a lorde valiant in
battaile: he shall fyrst vanquishe them in
this life, with the mighty breath of his
mouth, in the ministers and true prea∣chers
and folowers of his holy worde:
scatteryng them as the duste from the
face of the earth: and after this lyfe, the
terrible iudgement of the Lorde of ho∣stes
shal condemne them for euermore:
when the iuste shall reigne in heauen,
in ioyes that by no meanes can bee ex∣pressed.
The high shepeherde and pastor
our Lord Iesus Christ, encrease you
with all abundant plentye of his
grace and plentyfull abundance
of his holye spirite. Fare ye
most hartily well in
Christ.
From Oxford
