


MADAM,
ALthough both obligation, and duetie should require no lesse (than the De∣dication of these
 most matchlesse Meditations of the Soule) from mee to your Honour: yet verie Reason it selfe, guarded with loue, vrgeth mee to it: For I borro∣wed them from you; I had them one∣lie from you, being nothing heerein, but your owne: Therefore in testi∣monie of my duetie and thankeful∣nesse, Reason now would, I should re∣turne that publickelie vnto you, which privatly you daigned your self to lend mee. Physitians haue manie approued Recipies for the bodie, but these be the verie quintessence of hea∣venlie recepies for the Soule. I know they shall be welcome againe, because you haue a speciall care to that health; I am perswaded, that as itherto I haue offered some wholesome Physick for the bodie, So now, I hope, no worse yea, rather better for the Soule. If th naturall hath profited any thing for
 the body; I pray God, these that are spirituall may doe more. You were well acquainted with them before: but they would be ruminated againe: For herein shall your Honour finde ease, when you are wearied: Companie, when you sit most alone: Comfort, whē you are most sad; and gaines, when, casting vp your accompts you finde that you haue receiued greatest losse. There is beere Musicke for the minde, Physick for a sicke soule; and Divine nourishment to feede them both. Sr Philip Sidneys Arcadia hath ma∣nie faire and recreatiue discourses for Ladies; a faire Field in deede to feede on, for young and fond Lovers. The Countrie it selfe, is a fresh and plea∣sant Soile in the middle of Pelopo∣nesus, a ground that floweth of manie delicates, fyne pasturages for flockes, and pleasant Rivers. But this is a
 spirituall Arcadia: It is your Ho∣nours litle Arcadia. For heere is a spirituall foode for wearied Soules: Heere are Pasturages for the Flock of Christ; Heere raineth downe Manna in aboundance in this little plot of ground: Heere it floweth with Milke and Honey. And heere is that Rocke out of which run the rivers of waters of Life. Gather this Manna; feed on such Physick, eate this Milke and Honey, and taste of these Waters, & doe not onelie taste them, but drinke freelie of them. The flocke of Arca∣dia doe ruminate, and chow their coode: So should wee Christians doe after prayer by meditation; For pra∣yer is a disposing of our Soules to me∣ditation, and meditation is the spiri∣tuall chawing of the Soule, which sup∣plieth matter to our prayers, both giue life and strength the one to the other.
 The Countesse of Pembrokes Arca∣dia is for the bodie; but the Coun∣tesse of Marre her Arcadia is for the Soule. The author of the first, was a worthie and Noble Knight, the au∣thor of the other, was a sincere and de∣vote Pastor, a man knowne to your Honour, to bee in his life, holie; in his doctrine, pure and vncorrupt; still con∣stant in his calling, not after the rudi∣ments of the world, but voide of all af∣fection to novelties. His words were godly, his workes and deedes heaven∣lie, (for all his labours were in Gods Vine-yard.) Hee was the principall Shepheard of this little Arcadia: So by such Arcadian pasturages, you may learne; how hee tendered his Flocke; in a worde, his life was answerable to that which be taught: A Preacher while hee liued vpon earth; and yet still a Teacher whilst his bodie lyeth in
 the graue. Your Ho. receiued them of him, as a Present, vse them now as a precious Iewel, weare them as a wed∣ding Garment, and keepe them as a Treasure: Nothing resteth then, but that your Ho. would vouchsafe your favourable acceptation of them, pro∣tect, allow, and defend them, I meane with a liberty to passe vnder the pro∣tection of your worthie name, and fa∣vour; since they thus pertaine vnto you, and framed of purpose for you; I earnestlie craue, that your Honours godly disposition will not suffer these heavenlie consolations of the Soule to bee blamished in the hands of Zoylus Sycophants, which (as Socrates saith) bee but obscure persons, busie bodies, such as haue no pith, nor sub∣stance in their actions, going about carping at everything, to purchase fame, & credit vnto themselves, by dis∣praising
 others. I confesse the Title is mine, whereat (perchance) if your L. take offence for my presumption, in not first frequenting your Ho. therewith, I must craue bumble pardon of your selfe, since the offence (if any bee) can offend none, but your selfe, who knoweth that I haue of long time giuen proofe of mine honest service and fide∣litie, werevpon I had a sure confi∣dence, that the meek disposition of your owne Nature, and of your wonted kindnesses towardes mee, will accept my good meaning with lenitie by im∣puting such an offence rather to the infirmitie of affection, than either to base flatterie or seducing hypocrisie, so that mine honest minde beeing euer interpreted to the best sence, I may with boldnesse of a good conscience te∣stifie the trueth of what I haue obser∣ved and seene with mine eyes amongst
 the many Noble Ladies of this King∣dome, your Ho. to bee a true Paterne of modest Pietie, a perfect mirror of feminine gravitie, & a liberall suppli∣er of the necessities of the poore, yea, in time of dearth, and scarsetie: And as his Majestie long since, in his Booke of Poesies, called your Noble Father the Phoenix of al the Nobility; so may the world esteeme your Ho. to be ano∣ther elect Lydia of that same Noble qualitie. Receiue then (most Noble Ladie) in protection these Divine ejaculations of the Soule, that your verie countenancing of them, may not onelie adde vnto their goodnesse, but also may procure a good estimation amongst many that are as religiouslie affected as your selfe. They were of before knowne but to a few, now are they made legible to the world, they were once in hazard to bee lost, but
 by mee they are enrolled to bee kept in the Printers Register. But least (being carefull to eschew that despite∣full vice of ingratitude, for your con∣tinuall vn-deserved favours) some thinke I may perchance fall in offence by the prolixitie of many idle wordes: I will therefore end, in commending my selfe vnder the assurance of your H. pardon, committing these heavenly meditations as most cordiall restora∣tives for the Soule to your daylie pra∣ctise, as afore; and thus my good inten∣tion to your favourable censure, wish∣ing alwayes your Hon. not to think it amisse, althogh it agreeth not so much with my professiō, as in respect of others more beseeming, that I should exhort your Ho. as you haue begun to bee con∣stant in your religious dueties, althogh I know it was not needfull for mee to remember you of those things you haue
 beene taught of God, because I know the sinceritie of your profession and practise hath so many witnesses, since you beleeued the Gospell of Salvation, and was sealed by the Spirit of pro∣mise, you haue a witnesse in your selfe, which I am perswaded will not faile in life or death to plead your aboundant consolation. Now thus with due ac∣knowledging of the manifold kindnesses I haue receiued, both from your selfe, and from my right Honourable good Lord & Patron, I commit your Ho∣nours and your most Noble Familie to the mercifull protection of the Almigh∣tie who mot without ceasing multiplie his graces vpon you, and crowne you with all kind of blessings. The God of mercie and Father of Glorie (who hath abounded towardes you, not only in outward happinesse of vnstained Nobilitie; grandour, greatnesse of
 meanes, and favour with the highest on our earth; but which is greatest of all, in the vnsearchable riches of Iesus Christ: in the largenesse and eminen∣cie of manie singulare gifts, and abun∣dance of all good workes) make you perfite to doe his will, and worke in you an increase of all that is pleasing in his sight. That yee may see many good and happie dayes in this life, and end them with comfort, and immortalitie in the life to come, I rest.

