



WE see (right wor∣shipfull) that a great nūber (bles∣sed bee God for our happy peace, and this sweete me so long continued) haue at∣ed some knowledge of God by  preaching of the Gospell: yet  few I feare, haue truly learned d knowen Christ:Ephe. 4.19.20. for the wordes Iohn are, He that sinneth,1. Iohn. 3.6. hath neither

seene nor knowne him. And Gregorie saith truly;Gregor. Pa∣storal. cur. 1. pars. cap. 2. Viuendo conculcant, quae non opere sed meditatione didicerunt. Looke what knowledge is attained by bare speculation, without experience of faith, and practise of life, it is but a dimme light soone quēched. Light is good, & the first step to life, dark∣nesse is euill and daungerous, and the way that leadeth vnto death, & yet most men loue darkenesse more then light,Iohn. 3.19. because their deeds are euill. VVher∣fore to helpe forwards this kinde of men, which do but sip and tast but litle of holy religion, I haue spent some houres to translate this little treatise, which will giue the willing mind in a very small time a synopsis or short view of the whole bodie of Gods holy truth,Three times published in tin. the pure worship and seruice of God. It hath done

uch good, no doubt in Latin, and rust it shall by Gods blessing and oodnesse, profite some in English.
The same reasons which moued the author to commend this booke hat good, old, & reuerēd father  Beza (his age, his place and cal∣g, his speciall loue and affection wards him) were motiues also vn∣me (right worshipfull) to recom∣mend the same vnto you: for your Christian care, & fatherly loue and ction towardes me, I find to be h, not in words but in deeds, that ay and must nothing doubt of r fauorable acceptation. Next  the gift (the booke I meane) it is  same: for the outward coate and lours are onely changed, but the staunce and matter is the same. nd as for my loue towardes you, I

can no way testifie it as I would, but vnto God onely in prayer for you: The Lord God cōtinue your good health, and graunt you the good comfortes of his holie spirite, the peace which passeth all vnderstan∣ding in this life, and an euerlasting rest in the kingdome of glorie, by and through Iesus Christ our alone Sauiour and redeemer. Amen. The yeare of Christ. 1596. Maij. 18.

