



FOR no other is this intended: not
for him that readeth not, but casteth
it by, or cloaseth his eies least he see
trueth, judging of things controver∣ted
by his ovvne conceits, or upon re∣port,
and not upon tryall. Neither
for him that is either so Antichristian, that he hath
not the patience to reade on page vvritten against
Prelates and their Hierarchie, or that is so unchri∣stian,
that his earthly designes are his highest inten∣tions,
& esteemeth all motions about religion that
crosse him, or comfort him not in these, to be either
seditious commotions, or nothing but idlements
of indifferencie. But for him vvho aboue all things
loues to see the trueth, & aboue all things loueth
the trueth, vvhen he hath seene it, that is euen for
thy selfe (Christian Reader) haue vve entred into
this Comparison of the Pastor and Prelate, and at
thy hands do vve exspect the performance of tvvo
christian duties: one is for thy ovvne good; That
thou vvilt labour vvith thine heart for more feel∣ing
novv, then thou had faith at the first, vvhen it
vvas often foretold from the vvord of God, and
the vvoefull experience offormer times, That this
transcendent Hierarchie of Lordly and lording Prelates,
brought in upon the Kirk of Christ without precept or ex∣ample
from himselfe, would proue at last the ruine of Reli∣gion.
Novv may be seen vvhat vvas said before, that
Perth assemblie Preface. the government of the Kirk and the vvorship of
God are like the tvvinnes spoken of by Hippocr.



and that the one of them dvvyning avvay, & dying
amōg us, the vvhole face of the other looketh pale
and pitifully proclaymeth (if the crye of our sinnes
vvould suffer us to hear) that religion her self is sick
at the hart: for vvhat are the dayly encrease of old
papistrie, the spreading gangrē of nevv heresies, the
scoffing at holines in stead of imitating, the laugh∣ing
at sin in stead of lamentation, but the unsepa∣rable
effects of this prelacie, and the ordinarie pra∣ctises
of our Prelats, the Symptomes of the sicknes
of Christian religion, and the causes of this cloude
of vvrath, that so long hangs and hovers aboue us.
Consider that (according to Bernard his observati∣on
of these blind vvynding staires that leade dovvn
to destructionQuid non ever∣tat consueiudo? quid non assiduita∣te duretur? quid nō usui cedar? Primū tibi importabile videtur aliquid, pro∣cessu temporis, si as∣suescas, judicabis nō adeo grave, paulo post & leve senties, paulo post nec sen∣ties, paulo post etiā delectabit. Ita pau∣latim in cordis du∣ritiam itur & ex illa in aversionem. Rernard. ad Eugen.) this Hierarchie vvhich in the be∣ginning
seemed a vveight so insupportable, that
they vvho tooke it upon them could not hold up
their faces for sin, and for shame, did appeare soone
aftervvard albeit heavie yet tollerable, of heavie it
became light, of light insensible, of insensible de∣lectable,
& of delectable it is at last become a mat∣ter
of gloriation. That vvhich vvas a glorie is be∣come
a shame, and that vvhich vvas a shame is ac∣counted
a glorie. Of late Ministers could not be
found to fill the voyd places of prelacie: novv pre∣lacies
cannot be found to fill the voide hearts of
the ministers: so farre haue vve turned from that
vvhich vve euen novv vvere, and in so fevv yeeres,
that vvhich vvas nothing els but a rope of disgrace,
is vvonderfully changed into a chaine of pride.
As thou lovest Jesus Christ, and thine ovvne soule,
and vvould be loath to communicate in all the
sinnes, and to involue thy self into the guiltines of



all the evils that this Prelacie hath produced:
take heede that thyne eye be not dazeled vvith
the vernice and splendor that the vvorld hath put
upon it (for in substance it is the same it vvas at the
beginning, and in the fruits hath proved far vvorse
then at the first vvas feared) labour to keepe thy
judgement sound and affection sincere, still think∣ing
of the painfull Pastor and proud prelate, as
they vvere thought on since the reformation, and
praying to God, as good men did of old, in the cor∣rupt
times of the Kirk.Expurga Domin Vineam tuam sen∣tibus undi{que} & la∣bruscis oppletam: fac ut olim slagellū de funiculis & de templo tuo sancto nummularios ex∣pelle, vendētes èji∣ce, ementes extur∣ba, cunctos impios mercatore, nisi panitentiam egerint. Giezitas lepra percute, Si∣monitas altè volan∣tes, Satana{que} mi∣nisterioin excelsum elevatos illide, ac dejice, &c. Nicol. Clemangis. That he vvould put to his
hand, & purge his vineyard, That he vvould vvhip
buyers and sellers out of his Temple: That he
vvould strike Giezites vvith Leprosie, and that he
vvould bring lovv such Simonites as novv are so
high, being lifted up by the ministerie of Satan.
Another Christian dutie (Christian Reader) vve
expect at thyne hands, for the good of the
Kirk, That vvhatsoever be thy place, higher or
lovver, farther or nearer unto his Majesties
person, vvho gladly vvould acquainte his Ma∣jestie
particularly vvith the estate of the Kirk,
in his Majesties Kingdome of SCOTLAND,
as vvhat it vvas once, vvhat it might haue been
before this time, vvhat it is become of late,
and vvhat it is like to be ere long: But either
can not for vvante of occasion, or dare not
for avve of the Prelates, vvhose courting is
more to be feared then theire cursing: That
thou vvould doe vvhat thou may to make this
follovving Treatise come to his Majesties hands:
for vvee his Majesties loving people of Scotland
vvhoEphestion , Craterus.  both loue his Majesties person and Croune,



acknovvledging the dutie vve ovve to his Majesty,
commanded in the first Commandement after the
first Table, to come nearest unto that religion and
piety, vvhereby vve vvorship God himselfe,1 Tim. 5, 4. vvho
neither loue Schismes in the Kirk, nor vvittie re∣concilements
of trueth and error, but vvould keep
the trueth in peace, vvho neyther are Puritanes,
nor Brovvnists, nor Anabaptists, nor seditious, as
men calumniate: but Professors of the Religion as
it vvas at the first reformed amongst us, and as it
hath furnished unto us all the hope that vve haue
of eternall happines, vve vvould shevve his graci∣ous
Majestie, that according to the saying of Salo∣mon,
When the righteous are in authoritie the people re∣ioyce,
&c.Proverb. 29. 2. Our hearts vvere filled vvith joy, and
our mouthes vvith laughter, vvhen at the first be∣ginnings
of his raigne, vve did not onely heare the
fame of his princely Inclination to equitie & righ∣teous
judgmēt, but did perceiue the noble proofes
thereof, in trying the trueth of things controver∣ted,
vvhile his Majestie, vvith that vvorthy King,
kept still one eare shut for the other partie, & vvith
that vvyser King, vvhen he declared that the vvise∣dome
of God vvas in him to do judgment, vvould
haue both parties to stand before him at once,
that hearing both, they might speede best, and goe
out most chearfull from his Majesties face, vvho
had the best cause. By this vve vvere confident,
that his Throne should be established, the Nations
svveyed by his Scepter exalted, & our cause, vvhich
is no mans particular, but Christs ovvne cause,
should be heard at last, and righteously determi∣ned,
that everiething in the house of the God of



heauen might be done after the vvill of the God of
heauen, then vvhich there can be nothing more
reasonable, and vvhich is the summe of all our de∣sires.
Our adversaries upon the contrarie, out of
the experience they finde of his Majesties disposi∣tion
to equitie, & out of the conscience they haue
of the iniquitie of the cause that they maintaine,
onely because it maintaineth their greatnes, haue
used all meanes to prevent his tryall, haue stopped
so farre as may be, all vvaies of information, & (ac∣cording
to the craftie counsell giuen to Pericles)
not beingPericle dicente, non invenire se quo pacto ministery ra∣tionem redderet, at{que} ideo cōflictarie ergo inquit, Alci∣biades, quare potius quemadmodum ra∣tianem non reddas. Valer. Max. lib. 3. cap. 2. able to make account, haue done vvhat
they can, that thy be not called to account. When
Commissioners vvere to goe to his Majestie, they
vvould haue none but their ovvne, & vvhen some
that vvere not their ovvne vvere chosen by a meet∣ing
of the Kirk, they vvould not haue them to goe.
vvhich hath made us after long vvaiting in silence
and many essayes to resolue in ende, there being
no other vvay left unto us, vvith all submission of
minde, to send up our Pastor and Prelate in print,
vvho haue been impeded by the Prelates to come
together in person. Neither can it offend the Pre∣late,
that the Pastor speak the trueth this one time
for himselfe and the Prelate, since the Prelate so
many times hath spoken his pleasure for both. Our
silence and ceasing in the cause vvould giue great∣est
vvorldly ease to our selues, and greatest con∣tentment
to our adversaries, vvho novv crye no∣thing
but peace, peace, that is, a peaceable posses∣sion
of their honours and vvealth, and a cruell op∣pression
of their brethren.Si pacem non po∣test habere cum fra∣tre nisi subdito ostē∣dit se non tam pa∣cem cupere, quam sub pacis conditin vindictam. Hiero ad Theop. But vvithall vvould
proue us, to be unfaythfull, both to our God, and



to our King, for beside the obligation that is com∣mune
to us vvith other reformed Kirks, vve stand
bound by solemne oath, covenant and subscripti∣on,
published to the vvorld, to defend the doctrin
and discipline of this Kirk, and to oppose the Hie∣rarchie,
and all rites and ceremonies added to the
vvorship of God. Silence in such a cause may be
sinne to other Kirks, but to us it is perjurie in the
sight of God, and vvould also proue us unfaithfull
to our King. For hovvsoever the Prelates professe
in publick, That no Ceremonie no Bishop, no Bishop no
King, and doe suggest in secret the service that
they can doe to Monarchie; they doe but minde
themselues, and their ovvne Idoll. That govern∣ment
of the Kirk is most usefull for kings and king∣domes,
vvhich is best vvarranted by the Word of
God, by vvhom Kings reigne, and kingdomes are
established. The pillars of his Majesties Throne
are of Gods ovvn making, Religion upon the right
hand, & Righteousnes upon the left. The pompe
of Ceremonies, and pride of prelacie are pillars ar∣tificially
vvrought by the vvitte of man, for setting
up and supporting the Popes tyranny, No Ceremony
no Prelate, no Prelate no Pope. VVhen his Majesties
vvisedome hath searched all these creitis of this
controversie, let us be reputed the vvorst of all
men, let us all be censured, silenced, consined, de∣prived
or exiled, as some of us are, and haue beene
for a long time. If the cause that vve maintain shall
be found any other, but that vve desire that God
beserved, & his house ruled according to his ovvne
vvill, and if it shall not be found, that the Kirk of
God perfect in order, and office-bearers vvithout



Prelates and their ceremonies, may be governed up∣on
a small part of their great rents, vvith more ho∣nour
to God, vvith more heartie obedience to the
Kings Majestie, vvith greater riches and glorie to the
Crovvne, vvith greater contentment to the body of
the vvhole kirk & kingdome, greater peace amongst
our selues, and greater terror to Satan & all his traine
of heresie, prophanesse and persecution, as vve shall
be ready to demonstrate particularly (if this vvhich
follovveth be not sufficient) vvhensoever his Maje∣stie
shall be pleased to require: and vvhich vve are
assured his Majestie vvil perceiue upon small consi∣deration,
for a minde inclined by divine povver to
religion and pietie, vvill not at first sight discerne, &
be possessed vvith the loue of the heauenly beautie
of the house of God, they both proceeding from the
same spirit. God alsufficient blesse his Majestie both
in peace and vvarre, both in religion & justice, vvith
such successe, as may be seene euen by the envious
eye of the enemy, to be from the finger and favour
of God, and may also make his happie gouvernment
to be a matter of gratulation to the Godly, and to be
admired and remembred by the posteritie, as the
measure and example of their desires, vvhen they
shall be vvishing for a religious and righteous
King.
