



IT is not very long agoe since the famous report of your (Martial) affairs came vnto mine eares, and trea∣tise of defence vnto my han∣des. In deede as a yong schol∣ler (for so ye say ye are, and I by your vvorkmanship may vvell cōiecture) ye haue sayd for the Crosse so far as your skyl doth serue you, or as the honestie of the cause deser∣ueth. I suppose it had bene more honesty for you, and vvould haue furthered your purpose better, if eyther your vveake∣nesse, had vvrestled at the first on a better groūd, or so vveak a cause had got some sturdier champion to defend it. Novve that you fight more egerly than vvisely in a Crosse quarrell, ye lie so open to be crossebytten, that the cause it selfe and your poore credit go to the ground together. For though ye vse to face men vvithal, such termes and titles of estimacion, as rather of some be gotten by continuaunce, than giuen by desert: as Bacheler of Lavve and student in Diuinitie: yet if ye had ioyned more Logique vvith your Lavve, your reasons should not haue runne so lavvlesse (as they do:) or if you had remembred your olde humanitie, you vvould not haue stay∣ned your nevve diuinitie, vvith such slaunders and lies, such
 vaine supposals and idle tales, as I am ashamed to heare of a∣ny that challengeth to himselfe the name of learning. But mans lavve striketh so great a stroke vvith you, that Goddes rule & cōscience is excluded from you: and being so depe in your popish diuinitie, you haue forgotten al christian huma∣nitie. VVherefore the censure of S. Paul, vvhich in the be∣ginning I vsed as my vvorde, may iustly be applied to you: that in asmuch as ye giue no eare to the sounde doctrine,1. Tim. 6. nor cōtent your self vvith that religion vvhich accordeth to pie∣tie: ye are but puft vp vvith vaine glorie: ye seeke for praise of men: vvhich of the vviser sorte ye shall neuer purchas. Hovv vvell your poesy serueth against vs vvhom you vvold seeme to touch, vvhen the Apostle inueyed against the eni∣mies of the crosse of Christ, (vvhich you are and not vve) shal aftervvarde be seene in the discourse. But among you, the vvilful vvanderers, of one affection, of one bringing vp, the saying is verified vvhich Horace hath:Horatius in Arte Poe∣tica. Scribimus indocti doc∣ti{que} Poēmata passim. First came into our stage, a gaye disguised gest, a sodaine conuert (and I feare me greatly least an Apo∣stata) M. Doctor Harding: he, bicause he is right vvorship∣full M. Doctor, and hath othervvise some opinion of lear∣ning (vvordes in deede at vvil) he must needes be thought to say something. But hovv this somthing in effect is nothing, the Byshop of Salisburie aboundantly doth proue. Next to the Master, came the vvorthy Scholer: and yet vvorthy Man he gaue but a Dor. VVe doe easly see in vvhose forge he vvas framed: he sauours of the fier that flevve out before: and yet neither of them both for all their heate of railing, hath any vvarmth of religion. His proues I passe to the reproufe pub∣lished abrode already. Onely I am sory M. Novvell had not a more learned aduersarie. Then commes in M. Rastal, and puts in his Reioynder. All againste M. Ievvell. Alas I pitie the poore soule, he maketh his match so farre amisse. Dares
 Entellum. Nay. Hinnului Leonem. Yet he saith that he vvil but fight vvith a Penknife, He vvill ouerthrovv vvith a breath if he can. O noble courage. He leaueth the bloudy launces and terrible halbardes, for Hardy Harding: and Doughty Dorman: he himself vvil come after, and blovve his enimies afore him. If I should deale vvith this daungerous bugge, I vvould for all that, prouide my selfe of a longer svvorde, for belike he hath a very strong breath: and yet vvith a Bodkin he may be borne ouer. I vvill not touch this proud pecockes taile, I vvill leaue it at leasure to be pulled of an other. To make vp the messe, steps out M. Stapleton: he vvil not stand by, and be but a looker on: hauing therefore neuer a vveapō of his ovvne, he runs to a Ruffian, and borrovves his svvord. He hath put on a nevv scabbard on it: he hath varnished the hiltes. The blade it self is al to be hackt. It hath bene already in so many frayes, and borne avvay so many blovves, that it is novve scarcely able to scratch. This yong man therefore vvil sight vvith the scabberde. But if a man giue him a drie blovv or tvvo (as for his vvilfulnesse he vvell deserueth) vve shal see hereafter vvhat fence he hath for it. There is none of all these, but may vvith more ease make .xv. suche bookes as they cūber the Printers of Antvverp vvithal, than ansvvere xv. leaues of sound doctrine. The parties be knovven: their skil, their qualities vve are (God vvote) to vvell acquainted vvith, to be novv abused by Dogs eloquence. If your causes vvere better (as vvorse they can not be,) forsoth you should finde, of your olde acquaintance ynovve to match you: and vnlesse ye vvere sounder, to shame you to. This aduauntage ye haue (God be thancked for it) that ye haue nothing else to do, but cōmit to vvriting your pieuish fansies, and send them into England to set vs a vvorke vvithal. VVe our selues are occupied othervvise (as frēds to the flock of christ vvhich vve haue in charge) thā that vve can or vvill attēpre our doings,
 to the levvd desert of our contemned enimies: or mispende our time in ansvvering of that, vvhich in the eares of al indif∣ferent, carieth a sufficient confutacion vvith it. Notvvith∣standing least some more simple than other, may be deceued by you: and you your selues be fooded in your folly through to much forbearing and silence of ours: vve haue humbled oure selues beneath the honestie of our cause: vve haue for charities sake vouchsaued to say more than the cause requi∣reth, or all the colledge of your cōspiracy can vvith good rea∣son ansvvere. As for you (good sir) vvhich only come to make vp a number, and seme to do something, choosing to entreate of a plausible matter, (as your discretion doth take it:) if ye had helde your tong I might haue esteemed you somevvhat, and reputed you vvise. Ye remembre the Prouerb. Stultus si tacuerit.Proue. 17. Thus ye vvrite, al: some more, some lesse, learned, vnlearned, vvilfull, and vvitlesse: but mera poëmata, stale iestes or fables: and especially you, vvhom among the reste I may pitie rather than enuie. For, learning haue ye little, dis∣cretion lesse, good maners least of al. Your frends that most embrace your opinion, are ashamed of your proues vvhen ye speake of your selfe: so fond they are, so senslesse and vnsoūd. Nor I doe derogate so much from my selfe, but I vvould bee ashamed to ansvvere such a booke, vnlesse I thought good vpon this occasion of vnseasonable sovving of your rotten seede, to plant againe in the Lordes fielde, the seede of salua∣tion and certaine truth, to the comfort of the vveake, and cō∣fusion of the vvicked. VVherein I maruell not if the doc∣trine be higher, than your skill can reach vnto. For I knovv vvhat Doctor presented you: I knovv vvho made you start vp a vvriter. Magister artis ingenij{que} largitor venter. Your ex∣hibition belike fayled you, and therfore ye thought to pick a quarrell to the almes basket. But more almes it vvere vvith stripes ynovve to send you to schole againe, than to revvard
 you as a Schoolemaster to other. For this must I needes say, that eyther ye haue not vvell learned your Sophistrie, or else you thinke you haue to doe vvith fooles. For thre kindes of Paralogismes of false arguments or fonde cauils, are most fami∣liar vvith you. First, by inserting ofte into your vvriting, Non causam pro causa, taking that for a buttresse and defence of your cause, vvhich maketh nought to purpose. Then by arguing ab eo quod est secundū quid, ad simpliciter: making a ge∣neral consequent, of that vvhich in parte is true, an absolute rule of that vvhich vvas done, or spoken onely in some re∣spect: And most of all A consequenti, vvhen ye rashly gather, that doth not truely follovve. Ye may paraduenture bring vs into hatred by these sinister meanes, vvith them, that by preiudice haue a pleasure in your fansies: but your proues for all that, shal be nothing the sounder, nor our substanciall truth the vveaker. As for the vvhole drift and conclusion of your tale, vvhereby ye heape all mischieues on vs, deriue the cause of the plages of God, and our sinful liues, frō the spring of doctrine, vvhich in Christ vve professe: therin ye bevvray your vvilfulnesse and your ignoraunce. VVilfulnesse, in speaking against a knovvē truth: Ignorance in reasoning to ouerthrovv your self. For though vve deserue most euill at gods hands, being stil better learned, and not better liued, yet if ye remembre your self (M. Martiall) ther vvas neuer age so free frō miseries, specially in England, as since the preaching of the Gospel, this of ours hath bene: and sure a pitiful piece of vvorke it is, vvhen Papists in honestie shal contend vvith them, vvhome ye call Protestants. A slender point of de∣fence it is, vvhen you giue such a pricke, as makes your selues to bleede.
But ye may not be toucht, ye thinke, you haue dedicate your boke to the Queenes highnesse, ye craftely come vvith a faire vievve, commending hir Maiestie in apparaunce, but
 in effect, vvith a false profer (to your shame and confusion be it spoken) ye condemne hir. Thus trayterously ye seeke for defence at hir hands, vvhose person ye flee, vvhose doings ye impugne. You haue receiued from your Ioue of the Ca∣pitoll a Pandoraes boxe, to present (and God vvill) to our Prometheus. But she (God be thanked) is to vvise to credit you. Ye may seeke for some other popish Epimetheus, that accepting your offer, may set abrode your mischieues. I doubt not but the levvdenesse of suche hir enimies, shall vvoorke great aduaūtage both to hir highnesse, and to vs hir true sub∣iectes.Folio. 1. Ye call hir gracious and clement Princesse Elisabeth by the grace of God, Queene of England, Fraunce and Ireland. The rest of hir style, ye vvittingly omit. That vvhich is the chief praise in a christian Prince, to be Defender of the Fayth: ye abridge hir of: belike ye repute hir not to be such a one. That, vvhich your great god much like to Caiphas prophecy, vvas conten∣ted to giue to hir predecessor,Folio. 3. you louing subiecte and true bedes man, be loth to graunt hir, the true successor. That vvhich is the onely proufe of kinglike authority, vvithin hir ovvne realmes and dominions, to be the supreame gouernor vnder god of all persons & causes, ye deny to hir: & yet ye graūt hir to be the Queene. She to be Queene, & yet a subiect to other: you to be English men, and yet no subiectes to hir. In deede good cause you haue vvith al the rable of your peruerse cōfe∣derates & outlavves, to call hir gracious and clemēt princesse, if grace and clemency it may be called, vvhich suffring you to your self vvil, taketh not the svvord of vengeaunce in hir hand, but lets you run headlong on your ovvne destruction. Her grace might punish, vvhere she forbeareth: She might iustly pronounce the sentence of death, vvhere she remitteth an easy prisonment. Therefore clement she is. Ye say right vvell. But vvhether hir maiestie (gracious othervvise to al) be gracious vnto you, I doubt. For if it had pleased hir royall
 grace to haue brideled you, ere this, vvith shorter raynes, ye had not bene at this day, so headstrong as ye are. Many hun∣dreths of you (repenting your rebellious hearts) had bene cō∣uerted to Christ, and by seueritie learned that, vvhiche cle∣mencie shal neuer teach you. Novv is your insolēce grovven to such excesse, that ye abuse al other, and your selues to: that ye think men dare not for feare do that, vvhich for tēder hart and pitie they do not: that ye thinke vvith hipocrisie to de∣ceiue God, and vvith flatterie the vvorld. Ye threaten kind∣nesse on the Queenes maiestie,Folio. 1. b. saying that hir noble personage in al princely prowesse (for so ye terme it) and hir good affection to the crosse (vvhich is the matter ye treate of) moued you so presūp∣tuously to aduenture, so aduenterously to presume (I shoulde say) as to recommend your Treatise to hir highnesse. In dede vve haue a most noble Princesse (God for his mercy prosper hir, lōg to raigne ouer vs in despite of your malice, & increase of our ioy) such a one as is beautified vvith rare giftes of na∣ture, in vvisdome maruellous, in vertue singuler. Provvesse she leaueth to the other sexe. Subiectes she hath ynovve to practise it. As for hir priuate doings, neyther are they to be dravven as a president for all: nor any ought to creepe in∣to the Princes bosome, of euery facte to iudge an affection. This can the vvorlde vvell vvitnesse vvith me, that neyther hir grace and vvisedome, hath such affiaunce in the Crosse, as you doe fondly teach: neyther takes it expedient, hir subiec∣tes should haue that, vvhich she hir selfe (she thinketh) may keepe vvithout offence. For the multitude is easyly through ignoraunce abused: hir Maiestie to vvell instructed for hir ovvne persone, to fal into Popish error and Idolatrie. Novv for that vvhich follovveth, if ye vvere so good a subiecte, as you oughte, and framed your selfe to lyue according to the lavves, ye should see and consider, hovve good order is taken by Publique authoritie, not Priuy suggestions, that Roodes and I∣mages should be remoued, according to Gods lavve, out of churches, chappels, and oratories: and not so despitefully
 throvven dovvne in hie vvayes,Folio. 1. b. as you most cōstantly do af∣firme: the cōtrary vvherof, as by our lavv is established, so in effect is proued. For vve doe see them in many places stand, nor are at all offended thervvith. And doe not you giue vs a good cause to credit you in the rest, vvho in the first entrance of your matter make so lovvd a lie? But that your impudēce may be the more apparant, ye stay not so: ye stick not to fa∣ther, of the auncient fathers faith, such falsehodes and absur∣dities, as they neuer thought: good man neuer gathered. For, vvhere ye say,Folio. 2. by their authoritie, that euer since Christes death christen men haue had the signe of the crosse in churches, chappels, ora∣tories, priuate houses, hie wayes and other places meete for the same, it shall be euident by their ovvne vvritings (such as none shal agaynsay) that .400. yeare after Christ, there vvas not in the place of Gods seruice, any such signe erected. By the vvay I report me to that vvhich Erasmus a gret stickler in the crosse quarrell vvriteth. Vs{que} ad aetatem Hieronomi erant probatae religio∣nis viri,In Cateche∣si sua. Cap. 6 qui in templis nullam ferebant imaginem, nec pictam, nec sculptam, nec textam, ac ne Christi quidē (vt opinor) propter Anthropo∣morphitas. Vntil Hieroms time, there were men of good reli∣gion (vvhich is to be noted, least ye say they vvere heretikes) that suffred not in Churches any picture at all, eyther painted or graued, or wouen, yea not so much as the picture of Christ bycause of the Anthropomorphites. (as I suppose) Novv this vvas aboue .400. yeare after Christ:In {pro}aemio. 3. Cement su∣per Amos. for by Hieroms ovvn cō∣putacion, it must be after the syxt yeare of Arcadius Consul∣ship, vvhich falles out Anno .408. And Prosper Aquitanic{us} maketh it to be .422. yeare after Christ. But as much as this, the Fathers themselues shal be vvitnesses of, to disproue your vanity.Folio. 2. Then, that they worshipped the signe of the crosse, or coun∣selled other to do the same is as true as the other: yea a thing it vvas, vvhen vse of such signes vvas receyued in deede, most abhorred of them.Ep. li. 7. In∣dict. 2. Ep. 9. I appeale to your Pope, Gregory the great the first that euer defended Images. He found fault vvith Serenus Byshop of Massilia, for breaking the Images that he
 foūd in his church: yet he condēneth your doctrine for vvor∣shipping them, saying in one place. Et quid zelum vos ne quid manu factum adorari possit, habuisse laudauimus. And truely we cōmended you in that ye had a zeale, that nothing made with hand should be worshipped. Tua ergo fraternitas & illas seruare, & ab earum adoratione populū prohibere debuit. Therfore your bro∣therhead should haue preserued them, & forbydden ye people that they should not worship them. And this Gregorie vvas 600. yeare after Christ. VVhere then vvas the reuerēce done to the signe? VVhere gaue they the counsell to creepe to the Crosse? See you not hovve shamefully ye abuse the Prince vvith slaunders and vntruthes? As for the third substancial ground vvherevpon ye builde the buttresse of your cause, that no feare or mystrust of Idolatrie can be where the crosse is woor∣shipped, that position and more than Paradoxe,Folio. 2. is as true as the reste:2. Reg. 18. Num. 21. Ioan. 9. as true as the Ievves could commit no Idolatrie in vvorshipping the brasen Serpent, and yet that signe vvas cō∣maunded once: this signe to vs vvard vvas cōmaūded neuer. VVherfore since your vvare is no more vvorth (M. Martial) you like a pelting Pedler putting the best in your packe vp∣permost, I see not vvhere ye may haue vtteraunce for it, vn∣lesse it be to serue to sluttish vses. And that ye should rest in any hope, that the Queenes maiesty amidst hir great affaires, should haue so much vacant time as to take a vievve of your vaine deuises, is a miracle to me, and makes your folly to ap∣peare the more, the more ye cōceiue a liking of your self. The story that ye bring of Socrates report,It is Socra¦tis. lib. 5. Cap. 10. not truly quoted (for I think ye neuer red it) maketh smal for your purpose. VVhat though Sisinnius an heretike a Nouatian did giue aduise for appeasing of the Arrians heresy, that the auncient fathers should be called to vvitnesse? vvil you take example of one not vvell instructed, nor vvise, in this case as it appeared? VVere the auncient fathers suffisaunt to appease the cause? VVere they not enforced (that notvvithstanding) eche man to bring his opiniō in vvriting, and stand to a furder iudge∣ment
 and determinatiō? Reade ye the place. They neyther could, nor can, for imperfections that remayn amongst them, content the conscience in doubtfull cases, nor ought at any time to be iudges of our fayth. S. Augustine contra Maximinū Arrian. Epis. hath a goodly rule, better to be follovved & ob∣serued than yours. For vvhen in the like controuersie vvith the Arrians the counsell of Ariminum vvhere many Fathers vvere assembled, made for the one parte, and the Counsell of Nice confirmed the other: Augustine to declare that vve ought not to depende vpon mans iudgement, but vvholy & solely, vpon the truth of Gods vvord, sayde: Nec ego Nicenum nec tu debes Ariminense tan{quam} preiudicaturus proferre Concilium.Epist. lib. 3. Cap. 14. Nec ego huius authoritate, nec tu illius detineris. Scripturarum authoritati∣bus, non quorum{que} proprijs, sed vtris{que} communibus testibus res cum re, causa cum causa, ratio cum ratione concercet. vvhich vvords in En∣glish be these: Neither I muste bring forth the Counsell of Nice, nor thou the Counsell of Ariminum, as one to preiu∣dice the other. Neyther I am bounde to the authoritie of the one, nor thou restrayned to the determination of the other. But by the authorities of the Scriptures, (not peculiar wit∣nesses vnto eyther of vs, but common and indifferent vnto vs both) let one matter with an other, cause with cause, & rea∣son contende wyth reason. Then is it no outrage (as it plea∣seth your vvisedome to terme it) to refuse your order,Folio. 3. since most of the fathers, yea euery one of them haue had their er∣rors, as aftervvard more clerely shal appeare. Yet for al your dotages, vvherof peraduenture ye dreamed in some dronken frensy, for al your absurdities, I dare and vvil ioyn issue vvith you. Let the doctrine of the receyued fathers (for you make fathers of friers, & legēd lies lavves) decise the cōtrouersy that is betvvixt vs. If I bring not more soūd antiquitie to cōfirme my truth, than you cā auouch for maintenance of your error: If the self same fathers direct me not in the right vvay, vvhich you misconster for the crosse vvay: Let our Theodosia deale as she lusteth vvith me, the shame to be mine. Othervvise (if it be Gods vvill) the amendment to be yours. Amen.
