



CICERO (as in his seconde booke of Diuination appea∣reth) consideryng wherin he might best consume his time and studie to the profite of the Common-weale, whereof he was à member, findeth at the length, that he could not doe better, or bryng à grea∣ter commoditie, than to open certaine waies to his fellowe Citizens, wherby thei might become learned in the know∣ledge of good thynges. For my parte (honorable and moste bountifull Patron.) I see not wherein I can better spende my tyme, (till it shall please God t'appoînte mee too some other purpose) than in bringing sutch thinges into à vul∣gare tongue, whereby the ruder sorte of people may learne their dueties both towardes God, and man: whereby they may know that they are by nature men and not beastes, & by name Christians, not Infidels; and therefore should a∣uoyde bestlines and followe reason, and walke in purenesse of life, as it becometh Sainctes, not wallowe in wickednesse

like sutch as knowe not God.
And although I am not ignorant, that among the lear∣ned some (as among all sortes there bee, whiche, so them∣selues doe game, care not howe many bee vndone) both thinke and speake muche against the diuulgatyng of good thinges into a common tongue: yet sure I am that nothing is more pleasing vnto God, more profitable for his church, nothing more t th'aduancing of vertue, or to the roo∣tyng out of sinne than is the same after the preaching of his woord. Foras I graunt that VIVA VOX, or (as Sainct Hierome saide) the liuely voyce of man doth most forcea∣blie enter into the harte, and effectually perswade, so can it not bee denied but that the wrightinges of godly men, through the secrete working of the holy spirite, doe mar∣uelously moue, and many times conuerte euen from disso∣lute behauiour to honest conuersation, and from filthines of life to the feare of God.
This can they affirme to be true, which either in tyme of persecution could not, or in this prosperous and peaceable tyme of the Gospell, what through the grosse ignorance of some, or the too intolerable negligence of other Pastors, cannot be instructed, though greatlie they desire, and paie full deerely for the same. This can they affirme also (of a∣ny sorte, or calling) whiche make it their delight at idle tymes, to be conuersant in the holy Scripture, and to learn the counsaile of the Lord in the wrightinges of good men. And this can they affirme, which beyng sometyme in er∣rour, and abhorring the sight of godlie Preachers, yet (through the greate mercie of God) by readyng secretlie the workes of some, whiche they could neuer bee allured o∣penly to heare, haue been reclaimed to the flocke of Christ, and are the verie good seruauntes of God at this date. Whereby it is apparent, how iniurious they are to their brethren, how vngratefull to their countrie, how wicked

against God, whiche mislike, speake, inueigh against the bringing either of the worde of God, or the workes of good men agreable to his wil, into à common tongue. As though that either God could be too muche honored, or godlinesse of too many practised: as though vertue could bee too common, or for some kinde of men to be vertuous were not commendable.
But sutch dealyng of theirs, doth euidently declare of what Religion they be. Iulian the Emperour did straight∣lie forbid the workes of learned and good men to be peru∣sed of any Christian▪ But he was an Apostata, à re∣uolter from the trueth, an enimie to the Crosse of Christe, à blodie persecutor. The Turkes allowe no learning but their owne: But they are spoilers of good men, and sworne enemies to the truth. If these men were not either against true Religion aduersaries; or in conuersation, wicked, truely they colde well abide the light of the Gospell to shine ouer all. For there is no suche token of a giltie conscience as to shunne the light. And therefore they loue darknesse, because their deedes are euill. That policie of Iulian did more abolish the truth, than all his persecution: That pra∣ctise of the Turkes hath destroyed moe soules, than any crueltie vppon their bodies could haue done: This deuilish counsaile of Sathans lyms hath doen more harme to the Church of Christ in England and in other Countries, and may doe more, if it should be followed, than any feare, fa∣got, or force can bring to passe. But that Apostata Iulian being wounded to the death, could say at the length, Vici∣sti Galilaee, Christe thou doste preuaile: The Turkes for all their tyrannie haue not their will: And in spight of of the deuill, the Gospell doth and shall florish euerlasting∣lie. The truth may be oppressed; the mouthes of good spea∣kers may bee stopped; the beste Preachers may be lothed; Wolues and hirelinges may come in: nay, though there be,

in many places hirelinges in stede of true shepherdes, and good men (peraduenture for their owne synnes, or for the sinnes of the people peraduenture) bee lothed, though the mouthes of some through Mammon be stopped, yet will the promise and purpose of God take place, his seruauntes shalbe instructed, his enemies shalbee tolde their faultes, all shall knowe their dueties towardes God, their Prince, their betters, their equals, their inferiours, themselues, though not by wordes of mouthe, yet by wrighting: that both the godly may bee confirmed in the trueth, and the graceles conuerted in tyme and be saued. And therfore doth God in these daies, more than at any time, and in En∣glande (verie strangely if it be well considered) stir vp, and incense the mindes of some to wright, of others to trans∣late: whereby as wee enioie externall happines more than many nations about vs, so are wee blessed with the ritches of the soule more than all the world againe.
Hence it is (right honorable) that as other thinges I haue doen, so of late I translated, and nowe haue publi∣shed this Treatise against Usurie. A vice as horrible afore GOD as hurtefull to à Common-weale: and ther∣fore as necessarie to bee knowen, both of subiectes to shunne it, and of Magistrates seuerely to punish it, as may bee. A vice whiche none but infidels will vse, and no godlie men can abide. And yet à vice whiche In∣fidels detest, and Christians, so called, in deede no Chri∣stians, delight in. A vice whiche among the Turkes and Indians is not allowed: and so odious among the Iewes, as they vse it not, but towardes strangers. A vice so vnkno∣wen in tymes past, that to finde an Usurer in à Cittie was à woonder: and if any were so diuelishlie bent as to take Vsurie, he sware the giuer neuer to descriehym. If but a∣ny probable suspicion rose of à man to occupie that filthie trade, he was taken for à deuill in the likenes of à man: his

house was called the deuils house, all that hee had was counted the deuils: and therefore while he liued of all sor∣tes hee was abhorred: the Bayes in the streates would not come nigh hym, the men would not deale with him, the women feared hym, the Preestes barred hym from the ho∣lie Supper of the Lorde, and when he was dead, he was v∣sed like à Dogge, he had no Christian buriall.
But good Lorde, howe is the Worlde chaunged? That whiche Infidels can not abyde, Gospellers allowe. That whiche the Iewes take onelie of straungers, and will not take of their owne Countreimen for shame, that doe Chri∣stians take of their deere freindes, and thinke for so doing they deserue greate thankes. That whiche afore tyme men durst not vse but secretly, that in these daes is commonly vsed▪ That whiche afore tyme brought men to shame, that in these daes bringeth men to estimation. That whiche a∣fore tyme was vsed of verie fewe, that in these daies is practised almoste of all, and made an occupation. I feare mee that many occupiers in the world which can not liue by their law full trade and beare à countenance, do main∣taine themselues by Vsurie. I feare mee that many officers whose allowance is but verie small, and their liuing no∣thing at all besides, are iolie fellowes, and that by Usurie. I feare mee, that many gentlemen whose reuenues are but simple, can bring mighty things to passe, & that by Vsurie.
I would this were all (although that were intolerable). But I would that among occupieres many, whiche hauing good trades whereby they may liue well, yet for greedines of more gaine, did not leaue their lawfull callinges, and liue onely by Usurie: I woulde that among sutche as are called gentlemen, many whiche haue liuinges, and may keepe good houses, did not either sell all, or forsake their home to come into populous townes and liue by Vsu∣rie: I would that many whom God hath blest with rit∣ches

of this worlde, whereby they may procure good and commendable trades to liue by, refused not them to liue by Vsurie. And when I consider these thinges, I maruell with my selfe why suche enquirie is made for vagabondes, and none at all for these men, why poore wretches are straightlie examined how they do liue; and these fellowes come not into question: I maruell, and sure I cannot suf∣ficientlie maruell, why that Roages are burnt in the care, and Theeues are hanged, and yet these suffer no bo∣dilie punishment at all. Roages leaue honest waies of li∣uing, and that wilfullie, and so doe these: Roages liue by idlenes, and the sweat of other mens browes, and so doe these. And therefore being as bad as Roages, they well de∣serue the punishment of Roages. Yea, but Roages lacke  dwelling place, whiche Vsurers haue, and therefore more intolerable. But Vsurers lacke some honestie which Roa∣ges haue, and therefore more horrible. There is lightlie no Roage, but either his Raiment, or his talke, or his companie whiche hee keepeth, or some one thing or other, descerneth hym from an honest man: But an Vsurer is à Wolfe in à Lambes skinne, à Mermaide with à mans voyc, à Iudas among good men, and is sildome knowen till his bloodie purpose taketh place. Againe, thefte is vn∣lawfull, and Theeues by good politike lawes are put to death by hanging. Usurie is theeuerie (as out of the word of God, and the learned bookes of good men hereafter shal be proued:) and therefore Vsurers like theeues deserue to be hanged. And surelie that is to good for them. For if simple theeues, whiche robbe most commonly for neede, a∣gainst their wils, in feare, in out places, secretlie, straun∣gers, deserue suche à death, how should they be handled, whiche haue no neede, and yet will steale, and that impu∣dently without blushing, in famous places, openly, and from their freindes? Surelie these twoo are so like, that the one

in respect of the other may after à sorte, be pardoned.
And yet I would this were all, I would it rested one∣ly in particular men (although it should bee in none) I would it stretched not to whole companies, and Parishes. But I certainlie beleue (so farre is the Canker spred) if diligent and secrete enquirie were made, that the stocke of many Churches would bee founde out at Vsurie, and the poore releeued by that shamefull gaine: and that the common Treasure of some companies doeth yere∣lie encrease by this deuilishe trade; and yong occupiers, or other honest men fallen in decaie, whiche should accor∣dyng to the willes of well desposed persones freely bee hol∣pen, paie deerely for the vse thereof. A thyng so againste reason, and the Religion whiche wee professe, as, almoste, nothyng can bee more.
But what is the cause of all these mischiefes? Truely nothing els, but (as the honourable now for his auctoritie, alwaies for his vertue, learnyng, and loue of his countrie honorable Maister Doctour Wilson in his excellent di∣scourse vppon this matter saied) the lacke of penall statu∣tes. O that it would please your honour to thinke here of (as I hope you doe, and will) and consider how God hereby is dishonored; the glorie of this countrie obscured; honest men beggered; roages and theeues maintained; hospitali∣tie hindered; charitie extinguished, religion defaced, and withall consider vppon some notable punishementes for these rotten and vnprofitable members, your glory should bee greater in bryngyng that to passe, than euer was the glorie of Hercules for killyng the Monsters of his tyme.
It was an olde Prophesie among the Lacedemonians, that the loue of money should bryng the destruction of Sparta: and therefore to preserue that citie the better (as Erasmus noteth) thei appoincted that he should lose his life, that brought any money into that Common-weale.

Notwithstanding good lawes through wicked Magistra∣tes in tyme were neglected; good counsaile not regarded; couetousnesse crept in, and Vsurie was so common, as rich∣men thereby became beggers, and fre-men bondslaues. The which though many lamented, yet most of al greeued Agesilaus (a noble capitain among the Lacedemonians) and therefore complained vnto the Kyng, and by sute ob∣tained that the accoūt, or notory bookes of Vsurers should bee openly burnte vp: whiche was brought to passe. A no∣table punishemente for those coruorant Vsurers. Cicero thinketh (of whose opinion I am) that it is à Prophesie not for Sparta alone, but for all wealthy cities & Cōmonwea∣les: and it maie bee for certaine, that that state is not of continuance, where vice is embraced, and vertue bani∣shed; couetousnesse crepte in, and care of godlinesse caste out; Usurie allowed, and lawfull trades of liuyng not maintained. Now, Vsurie beeyng growen to suche a per∣fecte ripenes in Englande, as almoste there is no man, but, if he haue spare money, out it muste, whereby honeste men become beggers, and (though not in suche sorte as thei were at Sparta) the vertuous become, in effecte, bond slaues, to the veriest slaues by Nature, whiche thyng full many doe greuouslie lament, if it would please your honor (as noble à capitaine in Englande, as euer Agesilaus was in Sparta) to procure à redresse hereof, I doubt not, but as the realme should bee deliuered from à marueilous slaue∣rie in the tyme present, so it would bee à cause that GOD should blesse this lande exceadyngly in the tyme to come.
I wish not (honourable:) not that their bookes of ac∣countes should be consumed with fire, whiche the valiant mynde of Agesilaus brought to passe; nor that the princi∣pall should not bee repaied, muche lesse an ouerplus paied, whiche punishemente Plato did appointe; nor that they should haue à double punishment more than theeues had,

which the Romans did enioyne them; nor that their good∣des after their deceasse should be confiscate to the prince, as they were sometyme by Kyng Edwardes Lawes; nor that their bodies should bee banished, as thei were out of Asia by Lucullus; out of Cicilia by Cato; by Solon out of Sparta; and out of Englande by Kyng Edward the firste (all which were notable punishementes, and proue that Usurers bee no members to bee cherished in à Common∣wealthe) I prescribe no certaine punishement, it were pu∣nishable presumption in me, it becometh me not, only I wish that thei maie bee moste seuerely punished, the maner how, I leaue vnto your wisedome. And that maie well be brought to passe, if you once attempt the same: the poore Commons, the zealous Preachers, the better sorte of in∣feriour persones will assiste you, with their deuoute pra∣yers vnto almightie God; others, like vnto your self, will aide you with godlie policie; the noble and famous Erle of Leicester hath been already à fauourer of this cause, and no doubte will further it to the vttermoste of his power; the honourable Maister Secretarie Wilson hath moste learnedlie to the vewe of the worlde, and to the greate profite of many, depainted these fellowes in their liue∣lie colours, and would reioyce, I am pers aded, excea∣dingly to see as faire à riddaunce of them out of England and the Queenes dominions as, God bee thanked, there is of Wolues by the meanes of King Edgar; finaly, her ma∣iestie, praised bee God therefore, hath been and is vertu∣oslie enclined, and will graciously allowe, what soeuer your wisedome, with other of her Counsaile and Nobilitie shall thinke meete to bee established for the profite of her peo∣ple, and the glorie of God.
Now that it mae bee knowen, that, as Philosophers through the force of reason; and the Prophetes, with o∣ther godlie men, through the Spirite of God, in all ages

haue condemned Vsurie: So the Preachers in these daies cannot, and good Protestantes will not allowe the same, I haue been moued once againe after many learned and zealous men, to publishe this treatise in our Englishe tongue. And besides that the wicked, and obstinate Vsu∣rers hereby (knowyng bothe how greeuously thei offende God, and hurte their Countrie, and yet persistyng in their obstinate impietie without repentaunce) shall encrease their paines in the pitte of hell: I doubte not, but as many as haue any sparcles, or fire of godlinesse within them, whiche shall reade this booke, euen for the onely feare of displeasyng God, whiche hath foretolde that Vsurers shall die (he meaneth thei shalbe damned) Ezech. 18; that they shall not dwell within his tabernacle (thei shalbe excluded from the ioyes of heauen) Psalme. 15; that thei must lende freelie, Luke. 6; though no punishement were appoincted by the Magistrate, will from their hartes repente them, if thei haue been Vsurers, and vtterly abstaine from it them selues, and reproue it in others.
And because many, whiche delight in Vsurie, would auoide the same, did thei knowe the lawfull vse, from the wicked abuse of ritchesse, I haue thought it as necessarie for me to declare, how that ritches maie bothe vertuous∣ly be gotten, and vsed Christianly, as to shewe how shame∣fullie thei are abused by the impietie of Vsurers. For whiche cause I haue annexed hereunto another short di∣scourse, and haue entituled the same The Lawfull vse of Ritches. The whiche though it bee not a translation alto∣gether, as is the former parte concerning Usurie, yet haue I taken the same in effecte (whiche I thinke good to ac∣knowledge, that the auctour maie haue his deserued praise) out of the learned Commentaries of the famous diuine Nicolas Hemingius.
Whiche treatises, bothe to shewe à publike testimonie

of a gratefull mynde to your honour warde, by whose en∣couragement I tooke them in hande, and what els soeuer I haue, or at any tyme shall goe aboute: and also of good will to many, I humbly present vnto your ho∣nour, hopyng that you will accept them in as good parte, as you haue doen other thynges of myne, not generally so pro∣fitable.
