



RIght Reuerend Father: I humbly craue your Pati∣ence, to take notice of the Causes, and Manner of my writing; and your Patronage to countenance it.The occasions of my wri∣ting. 1 Particular. I euer ac∣counted it a great blessing of God, and it is still the ioy of my heart to record, that in my stronger yeeres I was thought worthy to be employed in the tray∣ning vp of some Nobles, and many other yong Gentlemen of the best sort (whose names here to insert might happily be censured ambition in me) in the Learned Tongues, Mathemaci∣call Arts, Musicke, and other both Diuine and Humane Learning; and that Many of them haue since risen to great places and dignities in our Church and Common wealth. And it was afterwards my great griefe, to heare, that any of them, or of their Parents (by mee
 much honored) should be seduced or drawn to embrace the present Religion of the Papacy, and to separate frō our so excellently-reformed Church. The falling away of persons of so Noble birth and place, & after such education, likely also to be means by their examples and reputation, to draw others to the like defecti∣on, made a deepe impression of sorrow in my soule, and wrought a desire to seeke their reco∣uery.1 More gene∣rall. I saw also a generall inclination of many sorts of people to returne againe to the Old Religion (as they called it) vpon a strong per∣swasion, that the Protestants Religion was new, and but of yesterday: although we daily cry downe all nouelties in Religion, and pro∣fesse to embrace nothing which is not of the ancient faith,Iude verse 3. once (or first) deliuered to the Saints. These considerations excited and vrged me, by that bond of loue and duty, wherewith I feele my selfe bound, both to my late dearely beloued yong Nobles and Gentlemen in parti∣cular, and to our whole Church and State in generall,The purposes and ends of my writing. to addresse my selfe to writing, to re∣collect and perfit that, which I had long pro∣fessed, obserued and taught: both to put those former in mind of such grounds of sound Reli∣gion, which in their youth (both by pulicke
 Sabboth-dayes Sermons, and by priuate Schoole-Catechizings on Frydayes, and by o∣ther Conferences) they had learned of me; and to confirme those grounds with Inuincible Reasons and Allegations: And also to im∣proue my Talents (such as they are) to the best seruice of the whole Church, our Graci∣ous Soueraigne, the State in generall, and eue∣ry particular soule, for their eternall and tem∣porall happinesse; by instructing the Ignorant, confirming the right beleeuers and good Subiects, reducing the errant, staying the weake and waue∣ring, or confounding the obstinate: and thereby (so much as in me lyeth) working a happy peace, loue, vnity, and vnanimity amongst all. To which purpose,An obiectio answered. though many haue written most learnedly and excellently already: yet I thought good to follow S. Augustines aduise,Augustin. libro 1 De Trinitate cap. 3. Vile es plures à pluribus fieri (libros) di∣verso stylo, non diuersa fide, eti∣am de quaestioni∣bus sdem, vt ad plurimos re ipsa perueniat, ad alios sic, ad alios autem sic. who wisheth, where heresies are busie, that all men which haue any faculty of writing, should write; though they write not onely of the same things, but the same reasons in other wordes, ei∣ther that hereticks may see multitudes against them; or that of many bookes written, some at lest may come to their hands, as it happily fell out in the time of the Arrians.
And for the manner of my writing,The manner of my writing. I ende∣uoured
 to fit it the best way to the Persons to whom I intended it; and to these times. I saw, that bookes of all sorts are infinitely multipli∣ed in the world: and that neither men of great place, nor many others, haue time afforded from their necessary affaires to read many bookes, or any large discourse. I thought it therefore (though the most painfull, yet) the most profitable course, diligently to collect, and faithfully to relate, with all possible breuity and perspicuity, the substance of that which former learned Authors, Fathers, and Histories haue de∣liuered: what the Romish Doctors haue proba∣bly obiected, and Protestants (especially English) haue substantially answered, (so much as con∣cerneth my purpose and the points which I handle) that the Reader might haue in one view and volume, the Pith and Substance of the best bookes written on both sides, touching these matters, as an Epitome of them all. And withall pointing to the bookes, chapters and sections,By marginall notes for the most part. or pages of them all, as an Index, re∣ferring the vnsatisfied where he may read of eue∣ry point more at large. I find (to omit all others) the late most learned Lipsius in humane know∣ledge,Iusti. Lipsij Poli∣tica. See his Prefaces. hath taken this course, without any dis∣grace to himselfe, but rather with the great com∣mendation
 of his diligence and learning: wri∣ting to the Emperour, Kings and Princes (which haue no leisure to read great bookes) briefe A∣phorismes methodically deliuered by him, but e∣uermore in the most learned Authors owne words, and quoting their bookes. Vt quae optima sunt, aut per me cognoscatis, aut mecum recognosca∣tis, saith he to those great Estates, That either by me yee may know these excellent things, or with me call them againe to minde. And herein (saith he) Verè dicere possum, omnia esse nostra, & ni∣hil. All things (in the booke) are mine, and no∣thing. Because the matter was the Authors (whō he cites) the whole inuention and order was his owne. And Bellarmine in diuine Controuersies, is esteemed to haue done the greatest seruice to the Church of Rome, by collecting the substance of the learned large writers of Controuersies into one body, cōfuting (as he could) what was against, and confirming what was for that Church. I haue followed these great wits, though longo interuallo, a great Way behind them, in the manner, not in the matter of their writing. I know it vnfit for me (yea, vnfit for a Christian, and I hate it in my heart) to bean Author or Inuenter of new opinions of Religon. We must learne of S. Iude,Iude v. 3. onely ear∣nestly to contend for the faith which was once (that
 is first) deliuered to the Saints. Therefore the Mate∣rials of my building I create not, but fetch them from the Garden of Eden, (the holy Scriptures) and the large Forests and rich Quarries of others: but the choice of all the Timber and Stone, the squaring, ioyning, forme and frame of the worke is mine; which I haue set together without any impairing of the strength or beauty (I hope) of any peece. Such graue and holy Authors words (as vndeniable witnesses) add waight and authority to my discourse, more then from my selfe it could haue, and it will be a great ease to the Readers (as Iudges) to haue the whole pleadings abridged, and laid in one  (or short view) before them; with the witnesses names annexed to euery Ar∣ticle, whom they may more fully examine vpon euery occasion. This I haue aymed at, how neere I haue come vnto the marke, I must leaue to o∣thers to Iudge. The first part of this worke I now publish, which concerneth the generall ex∣ceptions against our Reformed Church (which I hope I fully cleare and satisfie in this small. Vo∣lumne.) The second part, which handleth the particular doctrines controuerted, I am compelled to put off to another time. Those my labours, I am bold (or rather indeed I am bound) to dedi∣cate vnto your Honour.
1 As to my most bountifull Patron, furnish∣ing me with increase of meanes, both to liue in better sort without want (and thereby without contempt) and especially to furnish me with ma∣ny vsefulll bookes of all kindes and sides: in per∣using, examining, and extracting the quintessence whereof, is my daily labour, and my greatest worldly contentment. The honour and fruits whereof, are due debts vnto your bounty.
2 As to our Reuerend Bishop, and generall Father of the Clergy in this your Diocesse of Lin∣colne: appointed according to the order of christs Apostles deliuered in Scripture,As app∣reth by the subscritions of the second Epistle to Ti∣mothy, in the O∣riginall Greeke, . To Timo∣theus, ordained the first Bi∣shop of the Church of the Ephesians. And the like to Ti∣tus, ordained the first Bi∣shop of the Cretians And by the Text, Tit. 1.5. & cap. 2. & cap. 3.1, 2, 8, 9, 10, &c. To gouerne part of Gods Church; not onely for theOrdination. Tit. 1.5. 1 tim. 4.14. & 5.21, 2. & 2 tim. 2.2. Ordina∣tion of Ministers () in euery Congregati∣on, but also forIurisdiction 1 Tim. 1.3. & 4.11. & 5. per tot. & 6.3, 4, 5, 20. & 2 tim. 2.14. tit. 1.10, 11, 13. & 3.10. &c. Iurisdiction or power or ouer∣fight, that they teach found doctrine, and liue without scandall.
3 As to a most eminent and excellent buil∣der of Gods Spirituall house, by your diuine wis∣dome, learning, preaching, and writing.
4 And yet further, To the most Noble and famous builder of Gods externall and visible houses: by yourThe beauti∣full Chappell at Lincolne Colledge in Oxford: a mag∣nificent Libra∣ry at S. Iohns Colledge in Cambridge (the mother and rse-place of of his lear∣ning) another at Westminster, (his Dignity) built and fur∣nished by his cost, (as also another at Lin∣coln, his Bisho∣pricke) with store of excel∣lent bookes. Founding also ew Fellowes and other Stu∣dents with yeerely main∣tenance for e∣uer in Cam∣bridge, with many other workes of Pie∣ty, and abun∣dant charity, Oxford, West∣minster, Lincoln, Leicester, and other places. materiall buildings, enriching, beautifying, and amplifying Churches and Col∣ledges, with Chappels, Libraries, Fellowships and Schollerships in both the Vniuersities, and else
 where, and furnishing them with the most excel∣lent and necessary bookes that can bee gotten. Which (With other your most pious and Noble works) draw the hearts and tongues of all men which I can heare mention your name) to glori∣fie God for you, and you for glorifying God and our Church and Nation, with such worthy Mo∣numents of your Piety, Cost and Labours. In re∣gard of all these, I could not hold, my hart would breake, if I did not in some sort vent the fulnesse thereof, and honor your Bounty, your Father∣hood, your spirituall Graces, and your materiall magnificall Beneficence, by the best meanes I can, with this dedication of my poore labours. And (let me adde that which all men will easily conceiue) 5 To receiue honour from you, by prescribing your much honoured name before my labors And finally, as in these many respects I am bold and bound So 6 I doe most willingly and humbly offer my labours to your Father∣hood, to be viewed, Iudged, approued, or censu∣red by your graue Wisedome, Learning, Piety, and Authority. For the continuance and en∣crease whereof, and of all your temporall and eternall happinesse, I shall dayly pray: as becom∣meth,

