



CAesar, whose brain contriv'd at once the fate
Of his great self and of the Romane State,
With mightie action caus'd, where-ere he stood,
The trembling place to sweat forth humane bloud.
Who tam'd rebellion so, as in that sinne
His own contrivance had the traitour bin.
How nimble-ear'd! and with what piercing sight
He could discern advantage! and then fight.
Cold, waves, winds, hunger, watching, labour, warre
Were accidents through which he oft did dare.
How patient for his ends! How quickly he
Unthought of could defeat his enemy!
Whose expedition, as an engine hurl'd
Him from one side to th'other of the world;
Whose way of victory begot the fame,
That he but went, and saw, and overcame.
Dark stratageme, quick action, and the all
Of him built up a mighty Generall.
And to make wonder gaze more, he could be
Th' Historiographer and th' Historie:
As if his mightie acts to vanquish men
Had been on purpose done to trie his pen.
Oblivion so threw dust upon what he
Most fairly wrote unto posteritie.
And thou, brave man at arms, great Roan, hast tane
His lively portraict out of Mars his fane,
And arm'd thy self by him: yea, shown to all,
Thou knew'st to write, and be a Generall.
See with what art the Chymist deals, and how
Spirits from bodies he extracts, so thou.
How smart he gives his stratagemes, and where
Their hidden vertue lies he makes appeare!
Mark with how curious hand he those doth trie
And fit unto our times, and so apply.
The Grecian tacticks Cesar brought to Rome,
And this brave Duke to us, as from their tombe.
What weapons and what forms may fit again
He well revives which seem'd before but vain.
If e'r Pythagoras were right to hold
A transmigration, he doth it unfold.
But view his own directions, quick and wise;
He makes towns strong, but strangely doth surprise:
He rouzeth lazie minds, and seems to write
Men into field, and teach them how to fight.
Mirrour of manhood, that art here, though gone;
Then Vertues self a better tombe there's none.


And Thou, my Friend, that freely dost discover
So rich a jewel, and hast brought it over,
Merit'st no mean applause. Me thinks, I see
Each noble mind admire thy industrie,
And cherish thy rare worth; since few there are
That for the publick undergo such care.
Mount still in thy endeavours, and shine bright:
His glorie's great that lends to others light.

