



GOD requireth of euerie man in his calling (prudent Senators,) both a knowledge & a setting forth, a con∣fession & a protection of the truth especiallie beecause nothing is more excellent than the trueth, and no∣thing more pernicious than falsehode. Wherefore in as much as out of the word of God I haue learned, what may be thought of the exacting of Vsurie, I haue labo∣red for my calling sake diligentlie to teache, and faith∣fully too admonishe men, that they take heede of the same. For nothing is more hurtfull either to our state in this world, or to our soules and bodies for euer; no∣thing is more against the state of Common-weales, or sooner bringeth them to decaye. And for that I per∣ceiue, that, in these latter, and most perilous times of the worlde, in whiche all thinges are inclined to deuou∣ryng and scrapyng together, men are so blinded, that notwithstandyng the wonderfull cleerenes of the Go∣spell, contrarie to so many, and so euident testimonies of holy scripture, contrarie to so many sentences of the

reuerend Doctors, contrarie to so many lawes both of countries, and of nature, yea & contrary to the opinions of the very Pagans, they allowe, exercise, and contende that the profite by Vsurie is lawfull gaine: I haue pro∣ceeded so far in this matter, that in my confession now extant, I haue by euident testimonies of the Scriptures, of godly fathers, and of the Lawe, proued, that Vsurie as a thing which bringeth to the soule infection, to Com∣monweales destruction, to mankind the wrath of God, and maketh them subiect to the tyranny of Sathan, and eternall miserie and destruction, is greatly to bee re∣prehended, and to be forbidden. Which my exhortation how it hath been taken, is so wel knowen to al your ho∣nours, or at least to the moste of you, that I neede not at this tyme to mention the same. In the defence of which confession (whiche when tyme shall serue we will giue out) this matter shall more copiously be handled.
And that all wise, godly & learned mē may perceiue, that in the reprouing and condemnyng of the moste fil∣thy, shamefull and pestilent exactions of Vsurie, I shun not the light (howsoeuer the iudgementes of men wilbe of this libertie) therefore, as once I published my opini∣on of Vsurie in the Germane tongue, so now I doe the same in another language, in the whiche, either Ger∣mane, or as it is, if any find whiche doeth mislike him, let it onely be shewed, and we will aunswere him truelie and with Scripture. To reprehende, or, more truely to speake, to cauill is no harde thing, but to shewe the er∣ror, that is troublesome.
And for that both we ought to profit our country,

and the rumor spread of the Confession is well knowen vnto your honours, I haue supposed it most expedient to publish the same vnder your mightie protection, that it may bee knowen vnto you, both vppon what founda∣tions I stande in this cause of dispraising Vsurie, and that I feare neither the authoritie, neither the subtilty of arguments. For the holy Scripture serues me better to victory, than the plausible sentences of all the world. I trust this my dedication wilbe gratefully accepted of you all, because it was first begon, and is now finished for the profit of my countrie, and for the propagation and defence of the trueth.
The discourse of barganing I haue therfore preter∣mitted, which I would haue the discrete reader to vn∣derstande, especially because this matter of Vsurie tou∣cheth our profession, whiche I would take vppon mee to handle with wisedome, deliberation, and iudge∣ment. For, as the learned knowe, to entreate of bargai∣ning is peculier to another facultie. Notwithstanding I allowe all lawfull contractes agreable to the worde of God, according to the lawes written, and of nature, in∣stituted, ordained, profitable, and necessarie to the con∣seruation and maintenance of this present life. And who shall defende the contrarie thereunto, hym let all the wise and godly accuse of filthy and damnable here∣sie. Now if I shall perceiue, this my doing to be gratefull to your wisedomes, as I hope it will, if by any meanes when opportunitie shall serue, I may pleasure or profit your honours, nothing of my part, God willyng, shalbee wanting to the doing of the same. And I doe counsaile

and beeseech you in the feare of God, that you haue the trueth alwaies in greate estimation, and that ye abhor, and punish all falshod and lying, euen for his sake which is the author of trueth, and the hater and reuenger of lies, and opprobrious talke.
Here I commend your Lordships into the protecti∣on of almightie God, whom I beseeche to graunt you so to repent, and to gouerne in this life, that hereaf∣ter you may raigne for euer with Christ in the world to come. At Go∣tingham in Saxonie. Anno. 1569.

