



ALBEIT (RIGHT HO∣norable) that the difficultnes of this praesent worke, considering mine owne want of experience not only in matters of war, but also in diuers other things wherof this history entreateth, did dissuade & in maner discourage me frō enterprising the trāslatiō therof yet not¦withstanding forasmuche as I perceiued it to be a worke, for the pleasure and profitablenes therof much desired of many, and that suche of my simple trauels, as I haue heretofore besto∣wed in like matters, haue bene well accepted at your hand, as well boldened by youre fauo∣rable encouragement: as also remembring that earnest endeuor ouercometh al thinges: I Went

in hand therewith. Not entring at the first be∣ginning of the History, but about the middes of the fifth booke where master Brend (whose Copie from your honor came to my handes) preuented by death did leaue. The which lat∣ter part at such time as I had finished, and was come to perusing it ouer & correcting it with my friendes, there were of them that counsel∣led me to begin the worke new againe from the first beginning, and to put it out wholy in mine owne name wherunto although I could not willingly be persuaded at the first: yet af∣terward when I had somwhat more depelye weyed the reasons that they alledged: conside∣ring with my selfe how I had sufficient ley∣sure, and that I had ouercome a pece of no lesse difficultye alreadye, than the former part was: least I mighte haue semed to seeke excuse of slouthfulnes, or to refuse paines of wilfulnes, rther than o defend my selfe by vnablenesse: I agreed to their aduice, And therevpon laying aside maister Brendes copie, to vse it rather as a counseller whan the thing was done, than as a praesident in doing▪ I haue begonne the whole worke new againe, and accordinge to the first

Authors meaning (as nere as I could) translated it throughout. wherin how mi doings may be liked of others I know not. This I most hum∣bly desier your honor, that you will take my paines & trauel in that behalf in good worth. For I haue not done it, bicause I thoughte my self of more skill and experience than maister Brend (which I confesse miyeres geue me not) neither bicause I wold in defacing his glorye, (which were a point of lewdnesse) go aboute (as the latin prouerb sayth) to pricke oute the crowes eyes. But I haue done it, partly moued by the persuasions aforesaid, and partly bicause I was defirous to haue the body of the whole Storye compacted vnyforme and of one stile throughout. For so I thought it shuld be both more allowable among such as are of know∣ledge, and also more acceptable to the reader, when neither part of the worke might be an eye sore to the other. Furthermore forasmuch as it is knowen vnto many, that the said Copy was committed vnto mee, I haue forborne to build vpon that foundation, least I might haue ministred occasion to such as loue cauilling, to say I had eyther hatched other birdes egges, or

els praesumed to finyshe the pycture of Venus that Appelles left vnperfect. The whiche my doinges I submit vnder your fauorable protec∣tion: not doubting but that youre Honour of your accustomed goodnesse and gentelnesse to wardes me, will pacientlye beare with myne errours where any happen, and so regarde my paynfull trauell, as that my boldnesse maye no whit offend you. At Powles Belchamp the .xxi. of October. Anno. 1565.

