


I Remember, that three yeeres agoe, when wee communed familierly be∣tweene our selues, of the best kinde of expounding the Scripture, that reason which pleased you greatly, was also at the same time before all others approued of mee. For wee were both of this minde, that the principal point of an interpreter did consist in a plaine briefnes. And tru∣ly seeing this is in a maner his whole charge, to shewe foorth the minde of the writer, whom he hath taken vpon him to expounde: loooke by how muche hee leadeth the readers away from the same, by so much hee is wide of his marke, or rather after a sorte wande∣reth out of his boundes. So wee wished that amongst them, which at this day seeke to further the studie of diuinitie in this kinde of labour, there might some one bee found, that both studied for faci∣litie or easinesse, & also gaue his diligence not to trouble those are desirous of learning, aboue measure with long commentaries. And although I know all men are not of this minde: and they which are not of this minde, haue also their reasons which induce them to iudge so: yet notwithstanding I cannot bee drawen from the loue of compendiousnes. But seeing through that, varietie is graffed in the mindes of men, some thinges please some men better then o∣thersome: let euery man heerin vse his owne iudgement, so that no one man couet to bring all other men vnder his rules, So it shall come to passe, that neither we, who are more delighted with breui∣tie, shall refuse, or contemne their labours, who are more copious and large in expounding the holy scriptures: and they againe shall beare with vs, albeit they thinke wee are briefe and short. I coulde not choose but make a tryall what good I might doe heerein to the

church of god. Not as though I had alreadie obteined that, which then seemed best vnto vs: either thought when I beganne that I could obteine it: but I indeuoured, so to order my stile or forme of writing, that I might seeme to apply my minde towardes that ex∣ample. How much I haue profited herein, because it is not my part to iudge, I leaue that to you, and suche as you are, to be esteemed. Sure I am many will condemne my pollicie, in that I durst make a tryall, chiefly in this Epistle of Paule. For seeing so many men of excellent learning, before this haue taken great paines in the interpreting heereof, it is to bee supposed, there remaineth no place for others to better that they haue alreadie done. And I must needes confesse, that notwithstanding I was persuaded my worke woulde bee of some value, yet this cogitation at the first did terrifie mee, for I feared to incurre the reproch of rashnesse, if after so many cunning workemen I should lay hand to this worke. There are many Commentaries vpon this Epistle, both of the elder, and latter writers. And surely surely they coulde no where better haue bestowed their labour: seeing if a man vnderstand it, he hath a certaine way opened vnto him, to the vnderstanding of the whole Scripture. I will speake nothing of the olde writers: who for their pietie, knowlege, sanctimonie, and antiquitie, are of such authoritie that wee ought to contemne nothing, which hath proceeded from them. And name by name to recite all those that liue at this day were to no purpose. Therfore I wil declare my mind touching those who haue bestowed speciall paines heerein. Philip Melancthon according to that singuler knowledge, industrie, and dexteritie, Whereby hee excelleth in all kinde of learning aboue those whiche came foorth before him, hath giuen great light. But because as it may seeme, his purpose was only to discusse the principall things: whiles hee stayeth in them, wittingly hee passeth by many thinges, which may greatly trouble a simple wit. After him commeth Bullinger, who also for his merites hath gotten great prayse. For he had an easinesse coupled with his learning, wherein hee greatly approued himselfe.
Finally, Bucer hauing set foorth his trauailes, did (as a man would say) make vp the matter. For that man (as you know) besides the hidden learning, & abundant knowledge of many things, besides the sharpnes of wit, great reading, & many other vertues, wherein

hee is almost inferiour to none at this day, to be compared but with fewe, and excelleth many: is chiefly to bee commended in this, that none in our time hath vsed more exact diligence in expounding the scripture then he. Therefore as I doe confesse, it were a token of too impudent emulation, to contend with such men, so it was neuer in my minde to take from them the least part of prayse. Let them haue that fauour and authoritie, which by the confession of al good mē they haue deserued. Yet notwithstanding (as I hope) this wil be graunted vnto me, that there was neuer at any time amongst men any thing so absolute, in polishing, garnishing, or setting forth wher∣of, there was not place left for the diligence of those came after. I dare say nothing of my selfe, but that I thought this my labor would not be vnprofitable: whereunto nothing els did euer moone mee, then the publique benefite of the Church. Moreouer, I well hoped that in a diuers kinde of writing, I should not bee pressed with anye spite of emulation, which thing I was chiefly to take heede of. Phil∣lip hath obteined his purpose, which was to open the principall points, wherein whiles he bestowed himselfe, he let many things slip, which are not to be neglected, not forbidding others to declare those also.
Bucer is both larger then that hastily hee may bee read of those, are tyed to other businesse: and also higher, then that easily he cā be vnderstood of the simple, & those are not very circūspect. For what argument soeuer hee taketh vppon him to intreate of (through that plentifull wit, wherein he passeth) he hath such store of matter, that hee knoweth not where to leaue of. Seeing therefore the one of them hath not pursued all, and the other is more large then that hee can bee read in short time: mee thinke mine attempt hath no shew of emulation. Yet I doubted with my self a good while, whether I were better make (as it were) certaine gliemings after them, and others, wherein I might gather those thinges whiche I thought profitable for the meaner sort: or els shold make an whole Comment, wherin of necessitie I must repeate many thinges, which eyther of all, or at the least of some of them had beene saide before. But because they many times varie amongest them selues, whiche thing, greatly troubleth the simple reader, who doubteth to whe∣ther of them he might the rather leane vnto: I thought also it were

not amisse, if by shewing the best interpretation, I did ease them of the paines of iudging, who of themselues are not sufficiently able to iudge aright: specially seeing I determined to comprise al things so briefly, that the Readers shoulde not spende muche time, to reade those things with mee, which are contained in others. Finally, I had great regard, that no man shoulde iustly complaine, there were many superfluous things heere. Concerning the profitablenes heereof I will say nothing: and yet perhaps the godly, after they haue read, will confesse that they haue gotten more heereby, then modestie will suffer mee in wordes to promise. And whereas I doe sometimes disagree from others, or rather am somewhat con∣trary vnto others, therein I am to bee excused. For verily the worde of God ought to bee of such reuerence with vs, that thorowe the diuersitie of interpretations, it might not bee drawen asunder of vs, no not one haye breadth. For so the Maiestie thereof is (I cānot tel how) diminished, and so much the more if the same be not done with great choyse, and sobrietie. For if it bee a sinne to pollute any thing that is dedicate vnto God: surely he is not to be suffered, which doth vnreuerentlie handle that thing, which of all other thinges are in the earth is most holy.
Therefore it is abominable boldnesse to vse the scripture at our pleasure, and to play with them, as with a tenis ball: which manye before this haue done. Yet a man might see at all times, howe that euen those, who haue godly, religiously, and soberly handeled the mysteries of god, haue not alwayes agreed amongst themselues. For God at no time hath voutchsafed his seruants with so singuler a blessing, that euery of them, shoulde bee indued with a full, per∣fect, and absolute knowledge. And it is not to bee doubted but hee doth it partly to the end hee might humble vs, and partly to reteine vs in the studie of brotherly communication. Wherfore seeing it is not to be looked for in this present life, albeit it were greatly to be wished, that there were a perpetuall consent amongst vs in expoun∣ding the places of scripture: we must doe our indeuour, that neither stirred with desire of innouation, nor compelled through lust of de∣faming others, or moued by any hatred, ne yet tickeled with anye ambition: but onelie constrained thereunto of necessitie, seeking nothing els then the publique profite of the Church, wee departe from the iudgementes of those were before vs: and againe that

the same bee done n the positiō of the scripture: for concerning the points of religion, wher chiefly God would haue his to bee of one minde lesse libertie is to bee taken. The Readers shall easily finde in mee care of both these. But because it is not seemely for mee either to iudge, or pronounce of my selfe, I doe willingly per∣it this office to you: to whose iudgement if all men attribute much, there is nothing which I ought not to attribute, Wherein you are throughly knowen vnto mee by familier conuersation, which notwithstanding it many times diminisheth the reputation of others, it hath greatly augmented yours, which otherwise is famous with all the learned.
Farewell.
At Argentine the 15. of the Calend. of Nouember. 1539.
