



IF that (right Honorable) I shoulde prefixe anie long and tedious Preface before this woorke in commendation of your Honor, I should of some be suspected of flatterie: If in praise of these learned Com∣mentaries, it shoulde seeme a thing superfluous, seeing they sufficiently commende them∣selues: If in excuse of those faultes whiche are by mee in translating hereof cōmitted: some censuring Cato would condemne mee, because I would take in hand a worke so weightie, being not able to be without fault, and by cra∣uing pardon for faultes, lay open my follie. Omitting thefore these thinges which might carrie with them such inconueniences, I hasten vnto that whereof I am chieflie to speake: namely to lay open the causes mouing mee to dedicate this my simple translation vnto your Honor. Your deserts of Gods church, your singular zeale, your vnfaigned faith, your syncere profession, your especiall care to aduaunce Gods glory, and to roote out papistrie, your faithfulnesse towarde your Prince haue been suche, that this Realme generally, but my countriemen in the North parts, my natiue soyle specially, haue & shall haue
 great cause to prayse God for you in the day of their vi∣sitation, euen when it shall please God of his great mer∣cie to behold them with fauourable countenance, and to take from them in greater measure that blindnesse and superstition, wherein they had been long time nousled, and being fast bred by the bone, is not yet (through want of meanes) gotten out of the flesh. Seeing all these ver∣tues are in you to be found: seeing both this church and countrie haue found you so beneficiall, whom ought not these things to prouoke to shew all thankfulnesse toward your honor? Againe, when this historie of the Acts of the Apostles was first penned in Gr by Luke, it was dedi∣cated to noble Theophilus: When M. Caluin did the se∣cond time publish his Commentaries thereupon in La∣tine, he presented them vnto one who was in minde a no∣ble Theophilus. Least therefore this worke nowe publi∣shed in English, should by dedication bee any whit deba∣sed, I haue made choyse of your honour, being no lesse a noble Theophilus than those before mentioned. Ano∣ther thing which is not so much a cause as an encourage∣mēt, is that courtesie which your honor sheweth to those, which present vnto you any exercises of learning howe simple soeuer they bee; whereof I haue had full good ex∣perience, euen in my tender yeeres: namely, at such time as I was trained vp in the citie of Carlile, vnder that man in his calling painfull, and to the common-wealth profi∣table, M. Hayes, whom for that dutie which to him I owe, I name. At which time though those exercises which vn∣to your honour wee then presented were simple, yet were they so courteously of you receiued, that the re∣membrance thereof doth euen nowe encourage mee to presume to offer vnto you some weightier matter. The last, but not the least, is, the consideration of that great & vndeserued kindnesse, which all my friendes in generall, but especially, my brother your Honors seruant, haue found at your hands, which to rip vp at large, would bee too tedious. In their behalf therfore (right Honorable) as
 also in mine owne, as a small testimonie of a thankefull heart, I present vnto your honour this worke; simple, if you respect the translation, but moste excellent if you consider the matter. And thus humbly crauing pardon for my boldnesse, and much more humbly beseeching the Lorde to blesse you in the reading heereof, I con∣clude, fearing, prolixitie. The Lord of heauen blesse you, and graunt that as you haue been heeretofore a good Theophilus, so you may continue to the glorie of God, the increasing of his church, and the profite of this com∣mon wealth.
From Maighfield in Sussex this 12. of Octo∣ber. 1585.

