


WHeras I haue made mention of the names of those kings vnto whom I had dedicated these my Com∣mentaries: least the change incurre the crime of lightnesse among certaine vnskilfull men, I must brieflie render some reason thereof. For although both the remembrance of the father who is dead, doth retaine that reuerence with mee which it de∣serueth; and I doe also as becommeth mee reue∣rence the sonne: yet the importunatenes of certaine did inforce me to put out their names in this second edition, who being incensed against me with a furious hatred and feare, least the maiestie of kings doe pur∣chase some fauor to my writings, do boast abroad that they did conceiue sore displeasure, that their name was mixed with the doctrine of the sa∣craments which they them selues disalow. I leaue it indifferent whether that be true or no, neither doe I passe: forasmuch as I did neither hunt after anie priuate gaine, ne yet seeke to win fauor. But because it seemed to me an vndecent and filthie thing, to enforce those bookes vpon men which are vnwilling to entertaine them, which doe find willing readers inough, it was worth the declaring now, that I neuer did think any thing lesse: but that I did hope for more courtesie than I found. In that trulie there can be no offence, if withdrawing my selfe from the contempt of those who loath my dutifulnesse, I suffer them to enioy those delights of theirs which they desire, and wherein they delight. Of you (most fa∣mous prince) haue I made choise not without good cause, whom I might put in the place of two: both because I thinke you most worthie, to haue your name appeare in the spirituall building of Christes temple: neither doe I feare but that my booke shall finde the same friendship at your handes, which you did vouchsafe to declare towardes mee in your most gentle letters. But omitting at this time the respect of priuate good will, I will stay in another thing. Moreouer I may full well applie vnto you that speech which I had before with another. Neither am I deter∣mined in this place to commend those most excellent vertues wherwith you haue purchased great authoritie & singular fauor with the king of Polonia: I am rather bent vnto an exhortation, the summe wherof shall be this, that with the like readines & ioifulnes wherwith you haue at the beginning receiued the pure doctrine of the Gospell, that with the like stoutnes of courage wherwith you haue hitherto indeuored to maintain the true worship of God, you do with the same cōstancie prosecute this course vnto the end. It was surely a point of rare vertue, that wheras you did know that many did hae nothing more then, than the frank profes∣sion
 and free studie of godlines, yet so soone as the truth of the Gospell of Christe did once shine and appeare vnto you, you did not feare by gi∣uing your name to prouoke their hatred against you. Neither doe those offices and good turnes deserue small prayse, which you did not cease to bestow vpon the cherishing and increasing of the first beginnings of the Church: although this your diligence did purchase vnto you great enuie amongest manie noble men, which did not allowe the same. But because you haue no lesse harde straites to passe through, you must of∣tentimes stirre vp and encourage your selfe to ouercome them all, vntill you haue finished the last act: And so much the more carefully, because manie princes, although they see the estate of the Church filthily cor∣rupt, yet dare they attempt no remedie: because that daunger which they feare will proceede from innouation, when euilles must bee driuen out of their olde and quiet possession, doth hinder and keepe them back from doing their dutie. Other some thinke it to be an absurde and foo∣lish thing, to touch or set hande to diseases which are vncurable. Other some (I cannot tell through what frowardnesse) doe flie from and ab∣horre all manner of reformation. But to intreate of those lets where∣with you are enuironned on euerie side, it were superfluous, especiallie seeing you knowe them well enough: Yet howsoeuer Sathan doeth as∣sault you, and with what combats soeuer he doth exercise you, you can not without great wickednesse bee wearie of this holy warfare, which you haue professed vnder Christe his banner. Furthermore, although you bee forwarde enough of your selfe: yet I hope it will neither bee troublesome, neither yet vnprofitable for you to haue your prosperous course of your earnest studie, holpen and furthered with this help which God doeth offer vnto your handes by mee. So often as wee see thinges tossed to and fro, and as it were turned topsie turuie in the world, there can no more fit and sure proppe bee found to establishe and stay our weake consciences, than when as setting before our eyes the kingdome of Christe, as it doth nowe appeare, wee consider what hath been the estate and condition of the same from the beginning. When we speake of the kingdome of Christ, wee must respect two thinges: the doctrine of the Gospell, wherby Christ doth gather vnto himselfe a church, and whereby he gouerneth the same, beeing gathered together: Secondly, the societie of the godly, who beeing coupled togeather by the sincere faith of the gospel, are truly accounted the people of God. Both which things howe liuely they are expressed by Luke in the Actes of the Apo∣stles, it is better to knowe by the reading of the whole book, than to be∣leeue either my commendation or the commendation of anie man els. For although the sonne of GOD hath alwayes reigned, euen from the first beginning of the worlde: yet after that beeing reuea∣led in the fleshe, hee published his Gospell, hee beganne then to e∣rect a more famous Tribunall seate than before, whence hee doeth now appeare most plainely and to be also most glorious. If we turne our eies hither, they shalbe fedde, not with a vaine picture (as Virgil saith of his Aeneas) but with the sound knowledge of those things from which we
 must fetch life. And to the end I may returne vnto that whereof I deter∣mined to speak; this is the best refuge for the conscience of men, where they may quietly rest amidst these troublesome tempests, wherewith the world is shaken. Finally, this meditation alone shall bring to passe, that that shall neuer befall vs, which too too many experiments do proue to haue ben truely spoken by Ennius in times past of the more part of men, that wisedome is driuen away so often as the matter is handled by violence. For if in the greatest and most vehement heat of combats, the sweete har∣monie of instruments was of such force amongst the Lacedemonians, that it did aswage that furiousnes and fearcenes which was ingendred in that warlike people, and did temper that violence, which doth then out of measure rage in those natures, which are otherwise vnpatient: how much more shall the kingdome of Christ do this, by the heauenlie pleasant tune of the holy Ghost, which doth not onely tame most cruel beastes, but maketh also Lambes of Wolues, Lyons, and Beares; which turneth speares into hookes, and swords into ploughshares? Therefore seeing that (most noble Prince) I offer vnto you such kinde of tempera∣ture as the necessitie of times requireth, I hope that this duetie of mine shall not be vnwelcome to your highnes: so that indeede you shall per∣ceiue this kind of confirmation to be very profitable & fit, to looke in∣to the beginning of the Church, as it is described of Luke, wherein ap∣peareth both wonderfull power of God vnder the reproch of the crosse, and also most valiant patience of the seruants of God, vnder the huge burden of troubles, and the successe it selfe vncredible to the iudgement of the worlde, bringeth forth most plentifull fruite of both. But that I may omit other things which you had better set out by reading of Luke himselfe, I will touch one thing which is proper to earthly princes, and the chiefe gouernours of kingdomes and countries: To wit, that seeing that (the power of the whole world gainesaying, and al men which were then in authoritie being armed to oppresse the Gospel) a few men, ob∣scure, vnarmed and contemptible, trusting onely to the aid of the truth & the spirit, did labor so stoutly in spreading abroad the faith of Christ, did refuse no paines nor danger, did stand stoutly against all assaults, vn∣till at length they gat the victorie: there remaineth no excuse for Chri∣stian nobles, who are of any dignitie, seeing God hath furnished them with the sword to defend the kingdome of his sonne, vnlesse they bee at least as constant and bold to take vpon them such an honorable office. Furthermore, it is not my part to declare how faithfully and vprightlie I haue behaued my selfe in interpreting this historie. I hope surely my labour shall be fruitfull to all men. And as for you (most worthie prince) I must againe request and beseech you, that you doe both priuately ad∣dict your selfe wholy vnto Christ his gouernement, as you haue of late happily begun: and that you woulde also become not onely a faithfull helper, but also a most stout & valiant standerdbearer in furthering the kingdome of Christ, vnto so manie noble men, whom not onely the re∣nowme of their stocke and linage, but also the excellencie of their ver∣tues doth commend. God hath vouchsafed to bestowe vpon the realme
 of Polonia a singular priuiledge of honor, that the better part of the no∣bility bidding adue to wicked superstitions, which are as many corrupti∣ons and pollutions of the worship of God, should desire with one consent a true forme of godlines, and a well framed and reformed order of the Church. It is well knowne that these men were not a little aided by your authoritie. But there remaine more cumbats both for you, and also for them, than that like ouerworne souldiers, you should giue your selues to idlenesse and rest. First, although no forraine enimy trouble you, you shal haue busines inough to withstande those euils which are at home with you. You haue sufficiently tried with how many sleights Sathan is furni∣shed, that he may worke some pollicie to ouerthrow that holy concorde amongst brethren, wherein consisteth the safetie of the Church. That befalleth you which is common euerie where, for troublesome men to thrust in themselues when things are out of order: who whilest they see a few, and those weaklings troubled by a great multitude, and that they do with much adoe defend the trueth, which is couered with the thicke clouds of false accusations, they doe more easilie come vpon them vna∣wares. And by this subtiltie doeth that chiefe worker of all disceite and guile, seeke the ruine of the Church, not onely by cutting, mangling, and pulling in pieces the vnitie of the faith, but by burdening the name of Christ with false enuie: because the companies of the godly amongst whom these wicked knaues mixe themselues, seeme to bee certaine re∣ceptacles and sinkes of all filthinesse. So whilest that Stancharus, a man of a troublesome nature, doth through that ambition wherewith hee is wholelie set on fire, spread abroad amongst you his dotings, hereupon brake out that contention which threatneth some scattering abroade: and you were laide open vnto the slaunders of many, because it was thought that his sect did spreade it selfe farther. Beholde on the other side a certaine Phisition called George Brandata worse than Stancarus, be∣cause his errour is more detestable, and because hee hath in his minde more secrete poison. For which cause these also are the more worthie to be reprooued, at whose hands the vngodlinesse of Seruetus hath found such fauour of such a suddaine. For although I am perswaded, that they are farre from those peruerse and sacriligious opinions: yet they should haue taken better heede and not haue suffered this foxe craftilie to creepe into their companie, because such plagues wil neuer be wanting; neither will Sathan euer cease to bring abroad into the forefront such champions as haue giuen ouer themselues to serue him, that hee may trouble the beginninges of the Gospel, it is for you to bee continually in a redinesse: and to the ende you may preuent greater euils, you must set downe a right and godly manner of gouernment, which is the faith∣full keeping of holie peace. For as it is manifest that puritie of doctrine is the soule of the Church: so wee may full well compare Discipline vn∣to the Sinowes, wherewith the bodie being bounde and knitte togither doth maintaine his strength. Now on the otherside the vngodlinesse of other enimies ought to sharpen your studdie and earnestnesse, I meane the preachers of Antichrist of Rome, who to the end they may
 disceiue the ignorant doe continually with shrill voice sounde out the name of the Church. There is no controuersie amongst vs about the Church, but all graunt that the authoritie thereof ought to bee reue∣renced of all the children of God: saue onely that they vnder false co∣lour of honor do make the shadowish name of the Churche, subiect to their lustes: we do so reuerence the Church from our heart, that we ac∣count it great wickednesse to prophane the sacred name thereof. That I may omitte other godlie ministers of pure and sound doctrine, I my selfe haue againe and againe heretofore in manie places handled this question: when mention is made of the Church, whose heade is the sonne of God: and which he, who is the fountaine of life eternall, doth alwayes quicken by his spirite: how ridiculous a thing it is to bring forth a bodie without an heade, and secondly a deade carkasse. The hireling flatterers of the Pope, doe crie out that they haue the Church. But we can knowe by no meanes better, whither this be true or no, than when wee looke vnto the heade. As for that, it is manifest, that it is cut off by their sacrilegious violence. For how shall Christ retaine the place of the heade, being dispoiled of all his power, throwne downe from his go∣uernment, depriued of his dignitie? Vppon this condition hath the heauenlie father made him the heade of the Church, that he may go∣uerne all men from the greatest to the least, by the doctrine of his Go∣spel: that hee may bee the onely priest, to reconcile the father conti∣nuallie, as hee hath once appeased his wrath by the sacrifice of his death: that his death may continuallie purge our sinnes: that his blood may be the only washing: that his obedience may be a perfect satisfacti∣on: that hee may be a continuall and sole intercessour, through whose meanes our prayers may be hearde: that hee may be a faithfull defen∣dour and tutour, that hee may by his aide defende vs: that (the vices of our fleshe beeing tamed) hee may refourme vs vnto righteousnesse and holinesse: that hee alone may beginne and finish in vs a blessed life. If the Papistes haue left him any of these thinges, let them haue the Church on their side. But if the Pope oppressing mens consci∣ences with his fearce and more than cruell tyrannie, haue disanulled and taken awaie Christ his gouernement: if hee haue brought in a forme of gouernement, altogither contrarie to the doctrine of the Go∣spel: if hee haue inuented a newe and straunge priesthood, that hee may thrust in himselfe being but a mortall man, to bee the media∣tour betweene GOD and the worlde: if hee haue forged daylie Sa∣crifices, that hee maie put them in Christes place: if hee haue in∣uented a thousande satisfactions for sinnes: if hee haue brought fai∣ned washings from the lake of hell, to make drie the bloode of the sonne of God: if hee haue put in his place infinite patrons: if he haue torne in a thousande peeces that righteousnesse which must bee set whollie from him: if in steed of the holie Ghost he haue erected mans freewill: it is without all question that the true Christ is banished farre from papistrie. For this cause haue I saide that the Papistes make boast of a deade carkasse in steed of the liuelie bodie of Christ,
 because though they haue extinguished the Doctrine of the Gospel (which is the true soule of the Church, & which duly doth quicken the same) yet they do greatly boast of a shadowish & trifling kind of church. Wee make it full well knowne howe corrupt the puritie of doctrine is a∣mongst them, yea with what monstrous errors it is polluted. They doe not onely couer all their corruptions vnder the shadow of the Church: but also complaine that we doe great iniurie to the Church, because we say that the same doeth erre. But they shoulde first haue examined the doctrine, that the Church might thereby be knowne. These iust and ho∣nest iudges wil haue the feigned title of doctrine to haue sufficient force of preiudice to couer and suppresse the difference, and that not to dis∣ceiue men. For with what sleights and leigerdemaine would they assaie to bleare euen daseling eies in so great light? But because they ac∣compt this libertie of lying a part of their tyrannie, they thinke they reigne not as they woulde, vnlesse they reprochfully mocke miserable soules. That wee may fet an example no farther, wee haue seene in our times, sometime the Tridentine Fathers, sometimes the Fathers of Bo∣nonia, who although they were euen at daggers drawing among them∣selues, yet did they fome out their vaine Canons on both sides. And surely if men assent to their principles, the triumph shall be prepared on both sides. There sit there I cannot tell how manie Bishops, and Abbats peraduenture an hundred horned beastes. If the most fine flower of all the nation should shine there, yet should it be nothing else but a wicked conspiracie against God. And nowe after that the Pope hath gathered togither the branne and chips of his vncleane and filthy rotten flocke, shall the representatiue Church suddainly appeare there? And are they not yet ashamed to cal that, an holy, general, and lawful Councel which doth not deserue so much, as to be called a vaine and Comicall visure of a Councel? But as for vs to whom the promise is made, that Antichrist, who sitteth in the temple of God, shall be destroyed with the breath of the Lords mouth: let not vs (I say) cease to refute this filthie and who∣rish impudencie, with that most sacred worde, which they so boldlie mocke: that al men may see what difference there is betweene the chast spouse of Christ, and the stinking whore of Beliall: betweene the san∣ctuarie of God, and the Brothelhouse of Satan: betweene the spirituall house of the godly, and the stie of hogges: and finallie betweene the true Church, and the court of Rome. There can no more certaine or plaine demonstration be brought concerning this matter either by Eu∣clide, either yet by Archimedes, then if the Church, as Luke describeth it, be compared with the popish Synagogue. Neither am I so streit, that I would haue that confused lumpe, being altogither repugnant vnto the order of nature, and manner of humanitie, to be agreeable in al points to the rule of the Apostles, which is Angelicall and heauenlie. If they can shew any thing wherein they are like vnto them, they may triumph for me. But for as much as all things are contrarie, & althogh the more part of men become blind willingly: (at leastwise seeing the whole hea∣uens doe allow vs) we may not onely contemne their braine sicke pride
 without any feare, but also freely speake euill of the same. In the meane season we haue no small consolation to support vs: that howsoeuer the Papists doe set against vs with sterne countenance, the name and title of the Church, yet we know that we fight onely against the professed eni∣mies of Christ. We ought aboue all thinges to desire, that the most re∣nowmed king, who according to his wisedome hath long agoe spied out the subtile sleights of the Romish court, commanding those vain Buls to auoide, wherein the Councel boasteth a farr off, may at length more freelie applie his minde vnto the earnest and perfect restoring of the Church. Yet ought no lingering to keepe you back, but euery one of you must with might and maine indeuour to enlarge and spreade abroade those beginnings which are begun to arise so happilie.
Farewell most excellent Lord, and right renowmed Prince: The Lord alwaies gouerne you with his spirite, amplifie by all meanes your dignitie: and blesse your godlie enterprises euen vnto the ende.
At Geneua, the first of August, 1560.
