

TO THE RIGHT VVOR∣SHIPFVLL M. RICHARD MARTIN MAISTER OF HER Maiesties mints, and Alderman of the most famous citie of London, grace and peace.
THE institution of Christian religiō written by Iohn Caluin seemeth to me to chalenge to it selfe by good right (right worshipfull) that which being vttered by men most wise and of singular experience, is common almost in euery mans mouth, that good things must be repeated againe and againe. For seing that in things necessarie and profitable the same things are spoken againe & againe: or things ten times repea∣ted do please, neither is that spoken & repeated too oft, which is neuer sufficientlie learned, vndoubtly all those which are studious of sound diuinitie, doe acknowledge long ago that the commodities of this writing are diuerse & manifold, not onlie to learne but also to teach: & not only to the sowing, watering & new digging, but also to gather in the fruit of the fild of the Church. And for these causes, when at such times as the haruest began to waxe white in France in times past, I was called backe from the course of phisicke which I had alredie ended, ad∣dressing my self to the practise thereof, vnto the en∣trance of diuinity, and to take vpon me the ministe∣rie, I made choice of that worke especialy, next to the holy Bible, to be read & remembred by me. And

as those which go into a garden bedect with infinit varietie of floures, are wont to make a nosegay of all those which either their sight or smell shall most al∣lowe, that it may resemble and represent vnto thē the garden after they become out of it. So I feeling in that pleasant garden of diuinitie, wōderfull smels of heauenlie thinges, gathering out of euery section of the chapters, as from the knottes and borders of paradise such things as did best like me, haue framed this Abridgement, that it might neuer suffer so great pleasure to depart from mine eyes, minde, and re∣mēbrance. And seing there be alwayes slaues of Sa∣than readie, whereby he goeth about to corrupt the trueth with falshood, and so consequentlie to thrust her out of her place, & in her seat to set lying whose Father he is, I haue set downe most short answeres, which are set against the obiections of the aduersa∣rie, wherby the Christian champion may know that the dartes which the enemies of christians do shake & bend against the most strōg fortresse of the truth it selfe are but blunt and britle: and that he may pro∣ceede not only out of this treasure howse garnished with most precious gemmes, being more wealthy, to enrich those which are desirous of heauenly pearls, or out of this storehowse being better furnished to feede the flocke of Christ: but also as out of an Ar∣morie, being better armed to discomfite all the ene∣mies of the trueth with whome he shall meete, and to beate downe the Monsters of heresies. And seing that this my labour such as it is, seemed in the iudg∣ment of some godly pastours neither to be misliked, ne yet to be vnprofitable, or vnworthy of the light, but that it might come abroad for common profit, I thought good not to be against it: especiallie seing fruites not to be repented of, may be hoped from

thence without anie mans hinderance. But if anie man think that this litle gardē is cast in lesser knots and strayter alleyes then is meet, I let him not but that he may freelie, when he will, walk in the broad field at his pleasure. And wheras (Right worshipfull) I haue platted a garlād of the dignitie of your name for the head of this litle booke, that it might allure the readers to vewe and peruse the whole worke, these reasons did especially moue me: First because, I would haue this simple testimonie of my thankfull minde to be extant for that your vnwearied studie in bestowing benefites, which I haue often tryed. A∣gaine seing that you will haue your gorgeous howse to stande open to all the godlie as a common Inne, seing that you make that authoritie which you haue gotten by vertue, more firme, by brideling the euill, by releeuing the oppressed, by exercysing iustice: & seing that your most louing wife, a most excellent woman, whose bountifulnesse manie do trie, of whose curtesie manie mo do speake, at whose godli∣nesse all do wonder, is readie as it were at your el∣bowe happelie to attempt so great thinges: finallie seing that your whole family doth breath out a smel of Christianitie: I say seing these thinges are so, if I seeke to this your Inne as to a refuge for my labours I seeme to ascribe that to my self, which is most pro∣per to the thinge it selfe. Accept therefore I beseech you (Right worshipfull) this most assured pledge & token of a thankefull minde. God in rich with his most liberall hand both you and all yours with his gifts, and preserue you long in safety to the Church and common wealth. At London the 18 of Februa∣rie. 1583.

