



IT may bee (right honoura∣ble & my very good Lord) that men will maruayle, whye I shoulde publishe these  excellente Ser∣mons of Maister Iohn Cal∣uines, the Argumentes whereof bee not so fitte and agreeable (as they thinke) to these times: seeing GOD in mercy hath geuen vs peace, and set vs at libertie from that Romish yoke, suf¦fering the beames of his glorious Gospel to spread far and wide, to the great comfort of many, and his owne euerlasting glory. These benefits, as they are acknow∣ledged by me: so I beseech God to make vs all more thankfull then we haue beene, that the litle fruite they haue brought foorth amongest vs, the common igno∣rance that is yet vpon the face of the whole lande, the small preparation to the crosse and bending our backs too beare it with Iesus Christe our head, doe not prouoke him too geue vs ouer too followe our owne wayes, to haue no conscience nor care of any religion: as I feare me the worlde is too to ful of such, the more
 is the pitie. For who seeth not, that the cōmon sort are so far from being instructed, hauing plaide the Tru∣antes in Gods Schole these twenty and odde yeeres, that they haue not yet taken out this one lesson, to bee of minde when God shall trie them, too separate them selues from the cursed fellowship of Antichriste. For they haue not yet learned too make any difference of religion, but bende them selues too serue all times: come there falshood or trueth, light or darknesse, re∣ligion or superstition, the Gospell or the Masse, Tur∣cisme or Christianisme, al is one too them, so that they may liue at ease, they are at a point: no Scripture so strong, or testimonie so euident, that can conuince them, too make them stand fast too Gods euerlasting trueth, the seale of eir adoption. Though Christe haue pronounced that whosoeuer denye him before men,Matt. 10.33.38. hee wyll denie him before his father which is in heauen: though he say playnely that hee that will fol∣lowe him must take vp his crosse and followe him, and that he that is ashamed too confesse him before men,Apoc. 18.4. he wil deny him before his heauenly father: yea although we bee commaunded too come out of Ba∣bylon,Apoc. 13.3.11. and it be plainely saide that the red Dragon will powre out his waters as a riuer to ouertake the womā with childe, and that the victorie of the lambe muste be by his own blood, & by the word of their testimo∣nie, who loue not their liues vntoo the death: yet can not all this mooue them to seeke too be grounded and prepared, calling vpon God that they may stand reso∣lute through his grace, to beare testimonie to his glo∣rious name, who hath bestowed so many blessings vp∣on them. If they may haue Christe with case, wealth, honour, with the peace of the worlde and fauour of
 men, if they may inioy him with their pleasures and proceeding on in sinne, they wil be content with Pha∣risees a litle to entertaine him, that they make a mock of him. But if in the entertaining of him, he shal neuer so litle touch their botch and pinch theyr pleasure: if hee shall come neare their purse and endanger theyr least commoditie, if he shal require mortificatiō with obedience & sanctification, then either they wil come by night like Nicodemus, or else they wil pray him to be packing with the Gergesites, or too conclude they wil lay violent hands vpon him,Iohn. 3.2. Mat. 8.34. Mat. 26.3. Iohn. 11.47. Mark. 11.10. Mark. 14.64 15.12. and naile him fast to the crosse with the proude Scribes and Pharisees. As for the common sort they that yesterday receiued him as a king, with osianna in excelsis, they wil to morow cry out Crucifige, with the high Priests, that they may liue in securitie. These sermons therefore as for their wor∣thinesse they haue been translated long agoe into other tongues, and (as I vnderstoode, when I had almost fi∣nished them) out of the Latine into ours also: so my labour being past, they being also by authoritie allow∣ed: and I especially following maister Caluines owne french copie, so what differing frō the other: I thought they coulde not but be very profitable, at the leaste too prepare vs against the time to come. For God hath geuen vs long peace, and our rest hauing bred rust, gro∣wen vp euē to the height of the contēpt of his graces, must needes prouoke him to punish the wicked with wonted plagues & to correct vs with the fire of aduer∣sitie, that we may be purged frō our foule corruption. Our cold starued Papistes, I cannot tel what warmeth hath drawē thē out of their holes, but now they begin a litle to shew thēselues, they loke big, & their hāging looks shew what malice lurketh in their cākred harts:
 But our God liueth and therefore wee will not feare, we know that all powers both in heauen and in earth are subiect to him: and we nothing doubt though our sinnes haue strengthened the handes of his aduersaries, that they shoulde be heauy vpon vs, yet our God will in our punishmentes geue them an euerlasting ouer∣throw and an vnrecouerable confusion. Though there be many Newters which haue made a couenant with their owne heartes rather to be of all religions, and to serue al times, then to endure the least danger, yet there are an infinite number of true Christians, that by his grace to die for it, will neuer bow the Knee too Baall, will neuer pertake with the table of God and the table of deuilles,1. Kinges. 19. will neuer draw in that vnequall yoke to∣geather with such Infidelles. These shal neither the swoordes of Hazael, nor of Ichu, or of Elisha once touch, for they are marked of the Lorde. And if the woorde of God be sure as him selfe, and hee haue ioy∣ned himselfe as head too vs his members, why shoulde we feare? If our head liue we shall liue, if he be ascen∣ded, we his members shalbe drawen vp vnto him. Our blood shalbe of strength too breake all their cheines. The shame, slaunder and reproche that they lay vpon vs, shalbe our greatest glory, and our innocency laide to theyr crueltie, shalbe strong enough to set the seale of true happinesse vpon vs for suffering for righteous∣nesse sake, and of wretched confusion vpon thē, that so rage against such as haue done thē no harme,Matt. 5.10. and whō they ought too haue most esteemed of, as for whose sakes they haue & possesse al those temporall blessings that god in his mercy hath geuen thē. We wil there∣fore in the name of our God, likewise Marriners, in this calme time prouide against stormes and tempests.
 We are not ignorant what the order of nature setteth before vs: there is no sommer but bringeth a Winter, no day but hath a night: nor any professed trueth that bringeth not a tryall. Health is alwayes ioyned with sicknesse, and the bodily life is subiect to death: so the peace of the Church is seldome without aduersitie: & GOD forbid that we shoulde not prepare, euen to the powring foorth of our blood, to striue for the trueth of our God, yea too death it selfe, if God so appointe. If they be (as Chrysostom saith) not onely betraiers of the trueth that speake lyes in steede of the trueth, but also that doo not freely vtter the trueth: God forbid that wee shoulde not be ready in time and place when he willeth, both to vtter it freely, and to stande too it valiauntly and constantly for the glory of his name. And one thing I doe assure the Papistes of and all of Caynes progenie, that the more they kil and persecute the children of God, the more wil Christ & his Gos∣pell floorish. Our blood wilbe a fructifiyng & multi∣pliyng seede, they haue seene it and knowen it true by long experience, & herein they be but the instruments of hastening vs too our happinesse. Not when they will, for we are not subiect vnto them. The Deuil him selfe their Father and all hellishe furyes are sub∣iect too our God, and cannot touch one heare of our heades, tyll he haue geuen them leaue and that for our good and tryall. Let the sonnes therefore of seruitude in the pride of bondage ieare neuer so muche against the sonnes of libertie,Gal. 4. yet a day shall come when their righteousnesse shall breake foorth and appeare more glorious then the Sunne and all the Starres: when as too them (what pleasures soeuer they shall vsurpe in this world) shall belong nothing but perpetuall
 shame, ioyned with an euill name too all posterities, and an euerlasting death in the ende worlde without ende. Wherefore (good my Lorde) I am bolde too offer vp these sermons vnto your honour, rudely tran∣slated by me, beseeching your honour in the behalfe of Gods Church to accept of them. I will say nothing in their commendation, they are able and of sufficient age to speake for themselues. Onely I thought good to shew this humble duetie towards you, by this pub∣lique testimonie. And I beseech God the father of all mercies to strengthen you in that happy course of the Gospel, wherinto of his singuler goodnesse hee hath drawen you: that you may be as a bright starre in his Churche comfortably shining forth in constancie and maintenance of the same trueth, too the stirring vp of many: that not onely it may be geuen you (as the A∣postle saieth) to beleeue in him, but also too suffer for him. For this is true honour too suffer for righteous∣nesse: The cause is it that must comfort all that are af∣flicted, and herein we haue wonderfully to reioyce, when it is for his name sake, herevnto also, wee must (as I haue said) prepare our selues. For it is impossible that Christe and his Crosse shoulde bee sundred. The worlde muste loue her owne, and in the worlde wee shalbe troubled. Christ in his members must be cruci∣fied til he come againe in his second & glorious com∣ming to subdue all his enimies. The remainder of his afflictions must bee borne in our bodies, not because hee hath not suffered fully, but because wee muste bee made conformable vnto him, till wee bee fined from the drosse that is in vs, too detest it and wholly too loue his righteousnesse. Wherfore we muste detest all those Libertines, who count themselues the Fami∣lie
 of Loue, and the Atheistes of the worlde, who o∣uerthrowe all confession and profession of the Faith of Christe, beeing indifferent for all religions: that tread vnder their feete the blood of all Martyres, and account them but for fooles. Nowe the God of all patience and comfort, blesse your ho∣nor togeather with my good Lady, that you may feele and possesse that comfort that none can take from you. A∣men.

