



DIomedes a prince of the Grecians (Right hono∣rable) as Homer in his Iliades recordeth, embol∣dened by Pallas, feared no whit at all the force of the Troianes, nor the strength & multitude of their confederates: but valiantly for his Countries safety, hazarded his life amids his enimies. And my selfe hoping of your honors fauourable protection, not regarding the curious carping of a great sort in these daies: for the benefite of many haue yeelded my selfe to be censured of all. For as to encourage & animate a Captaine there can be none fitter thā Pallas, to whom the ancient writers haue ascribed both wisdome in giuing counsel, & couragiousnes in fight: so for your great loue of godlines, & singular zeale in furthering of religiō, there is none more fit than your honor to whom this godly commentary of maister Caluine, discoursing of many excellent points of our religion, might be presented. For here is set out the condition of the godly, how the Lord in this life hū∣bleth them by afflictions, and after receiueth them to eternall glory. Here is set out their assurance of Gods fauour, their ioy in greatest dangers, and their contented minds in all estates. Here is set out the benefite that commeth by preaching of the gospell, and the malice, practises, and confusion of false teachers. Here is set out the fruite of humility, the necessity of vnity and agrement among the faithfull, free iustification by Iesus Christ, the heauenly conuersation of Chri∣stians, and how they must continue stedfast in godlines vnto the ende. And although I offer these being another mans laboures, vnder my owne name: yet neither enuiously to derogate any thing from the due cōmendation of so worthy a person (as Homeromastix did) nor pre∣sumptuously by another mans trauels to seeke my own praise as that vaine-glorious Poet, who presented Virgils verses, as if they had beene his owne, vnto Augustus the Emperor. But considering that
 a good thing the more common it is, the more commēdable & better it is (especially being requested therevnto) for the comfort and profit of all true English christians, I haue made that common to all, which afore was priuate, but to a fewe. We say in our common prouerbe that good wine neede no Iuie bush, & a naked truth barely vttered with∣out any filed phrases of fine eloquēce, is of it self sufficiently cōmenda¦ble. And this worke (how simplie soeuer I haue translated it, yet not∣withstanding faithfully) being written by the holy Apostle inspired with Gods spirit, & expounded by so notable a father of the Church, cannot but carry with it amongst all good men sufficient credite. I haue therefore presumed, not only to present it vnto your honorable view, but also vnder your name, as a sufficient shielde against al in∣iuries to publish it vnto al. Most humbly beseeching your honor with your accustomed fauour to accept these first fruites of my trauels▪ & not to measure the simplenes of the gift with the worthines of your owne person: but rather to respect the good will and willing desire I had in most humble maner by al dutie possible to gratifie your honor. So shall I not only be encouraged, to the vttermost of my simple skill to employ my selfe to the profit of others: but also as afore by generall dutie, so now by particular benefite I shall be bound to pray for the preseruation of your honor in health, and increase of dignitie, godli∣nes, vertue, and all heauenly happines. The Almighty mul∣ply his graces vpon you, and grant you as many pros∣perous yeares, as vertuous & godly properties (and both infinite) that here you may liue long to his glory, & hereafter liue for euer, to your owne euerla∣sting comfort.

