



THE Church (right honorable and my good Lorde) hath ne∣uer doubted at any time of the author of this epistle: but as the inscription therof plainely te∣stifieth, so the godly haue al∣way constantly beleeued, that it was written by that greate doctor, and worthy Apostle Paul. Of whose prayse though Chrisostome and diuers others haue said very much: yet if it bee compared with his desert, it is eyther nothing or els but a litle.Act. 9.15. For with what praises shall we sufficiently set him forth, whome the Lord himself immediatly after his conuersiō so high∣ly commended: Calling him a chosen vessell to beare his name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel?2. Cor. 12.2. with what speeches shall we accordingly aduance him, whome the Lorde lift vp vnto the thirde heauen?
And with what ornamentes shall wee decke him, whome the Lorde did so richely adorne? by kinred of the race of Abraham, by person naturally vehement, indued with singuler dexteritie, and of a noble cou∣rage, by callinge an Apostle of Iesus Christe, immedi∣atly

called of the Lord vnto the ministery of the Gospel. As he testifieth to the Galath. Saying,Gal. 1.1. Paule an Apostle, (not of men, neither by man, but by Iesus Christ, & God the father) &c. immediatly taught from aboue. As it is written,Gal. 1.11. Now I certifie you, brethren, that the Gospell which was preached of me was not after men. For ney∣ther receiued I it of man, neither was I taught it, but by the reuelation of Iesus Christ. By the visible gift of the holy Ghost inuested into his ministerie & Apostleship. And finally by great signes & wonders confirmed in the same.Act. 9.3. Act. 19.6. By which things as the dignitie & autoritie of the holie man is confirmed vnto vs, so all men are taught with what reuerence they should heare and receiue what so euer hath proceeded frō him. For seeing hee speaketh vnto vs in yt stead of christ, bringeth a celestial doctrin, & such as is mixed with no error, we ought to heare & be∣lieue him as the voice of God from heauen. Knowing as∣suredly that hee is of the number of those of whome it is saide, he that heareth you heareth me, and he that despi∣seth you, despiseth me, &c. And therefore they commit most horrible blasphemie against God, whose impudent mouthes are open against the apostolicall authoritie of so excellent an instrument of the Lord. But no doubt suche miscreates & rebellious wretches, doe feele the efficacie & light of his apostolicall doctrine, whereby their wic∣ked studies are manifested & reproued, according to the saying of Christ, because their deedes are euill, they hate the light, & seeing they hate it, but yet can not extinguish it, they do what they can to discredite it. Yea and that which of all others is most abominable, they goe about by peruerting holy Scriptures to mayntayne and defend their diuelish doctrine.
Whence it commeth, that by abusing the testimonie of

of Peter, they labour to perswade the vnlearned, that the Epistles of Paule are harde to bee vnderstoode and obscure: Yea such as minister causes of errores vnto the vnskilfull, and therefore are not to bee read of the com∣mon forte, but rather to bee restrayned, and forbidden. The woordes of Peter are these: And suppose that the long suffering of our Lorde is saluation,2. Pet. 3.15. euen as our be∣loued brother Paule according vnto the wisedome gi∣uen vnto him wrote to you, as one that in all his Epistles speaketh of these things: amōgst the which some things are hard to be vnderstoode, which they that are vnlear∣ned and vnstable, peruert as they doe all other scriptures vnto their owne destruction. Which woordes doe so muche make for the commendation of the Epistles of Paul, that they must needes be very impudent, and blin∣ded with extreeme malice, which wrest them to the ob∣scuring of his doctrine. For first these woordes giue vnto Paul a celestiall and heauenly wisedome. Secondly they testifie that he wrote his Epistles according to the same wisedom, and that he wrote the same things, & to ye same faithful people to whom Peter himselfe wrote. But it is added, amongst the which some things are hard to be vn¦derstood. VVhat then? shall all the writings of Paule bee taken away from the people & Church of God, because of the difficultie & hardnes of some certayne places? or rather were it not meete those obscure places shoulde bee faithfully, & sincerely expounded, that the simple might vnderstand thē. By the same reason let the epistles of Pe∣ter also be inhibited & taken away, for in them there are many things hard to be vnderstood. As may appeare in his first epi. cha. 3. & 4. And in his 2 epist. 2. But they are wrested (quoth they) of the vnlearned and vnstable.
Wherefore it were better they were taken from the vn∣learned, & reserued onely for the reading of the learned. By the same reason also all holy scripture may bee taken away. For Peter testifieth of them, that they are peruer∣ted of the vnlearned, & those are vnstable. What more reason is there why the vse of holy scripture should bee forbidden all men, because some by peruerting of them haue fallen to destruction, thē that the vse of fire & water should be debarred al mē, because many haue perished by thē. Did the apostle write his epistles to the Bishops & o∣ther ministers of Christ only, & not rather to all faythful christiās were at Rome, Corinth, Galatia, Ephesus, Col∣lossa, Philippos, Macedonia, &c? Did he write of suche things only as apperteined vnto the learned, and not ra∣ther of such things as are necessarie to be knowen of all, and concerne the saluation of all? if he wrote to the lear∣ned only, why saith he? to all that be at Rome, and not ra∣ther to you learned Christians be at Rome. If he wrote of such things as concerne the learned only (& yet wrot the gospel or glad tidings of saluatiō in Christ) why saith he?Rom. 1.5. I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God vnto saluation to euery one that beleeueth, &c. But if both the holy man directed his writings vnto all, & also the thinges conteyned in them doe appertein vnto all, why rob they the vulgar & common people or laitie (as they terme them) of that the holy ghost hath giuen vnto thē? I meane the light of the Apostolicall doctrin & reading of the holy scriptures. Contrary to the minde of Chriso. Who vehemenly exhorteth all christians,Vpon the epi. to the Collos. Hom. 9. and specially the laitie, that they should get them Bibles, or at the least the newe Testament. Contrary to the minde of the holy Apostle, who saith, to the Colloss. Let the worde of

Christ dwel in you plēteously in al wisedom,Colloss. 3.16. Iohn. 5.39. teaching & admonishing your own selues &c. Yea contrary to christ himself, who saith search the scriptures, &c. And yet they blush not, (how contrary soeuer they be to the pure doc∣trin of Christ & his apostles) to boast thēselues for the on∣ly catholikes of the world, & successors of Christ & his Apostles. But this is no newe thing, for vice hath alway delited in the cloake of vertue, superstition in the name of religion, and heretikes in the name of catholiks. How truly this is said of the romish prelates at this day, we shal not need to seeke far for profe: onely it shall suffice to cō∣pare them in their nowe and newe professed doctrines with the ancient & sincere doctrin was at the first taught and receiued amongst the olde and true Catholike ro∣manes.
The sūme & substance of which doctrine is registred by the holy ghost in this Epistle: whereat they doe chiefly storme besides all other the writs of that good man, be∣cause it doth in a speciall sort, detect their Apostasey, con∣uince their heresey, & bewray their superstitious hypo∣crisie. Howbeit the Church of God is not more bound vnto the Lord for any portion of scripture, then for this most excellent & worthy epistle.
Wherein is cōteined a cleare & compendious Epitome of Christian religion, as may easily appeare by the places therein discussed: namely, of naturall knowledge, ciuill duties, the lawe of Moses, the Gospel, iustification, origi∣nall sinne, grace, election, predestination, excaecation of the Iewes, and their restitution, of the sacrifice of Chi∣stians, of Magistrates, and subiectes, of bearing the weake, and auoyding offence, &c. So that if a man

vnderstand it, he hath a certayne way open vnto him, to the vnderstanding of the whole scripture. VVherefore in my iudgement (and I am not of that mind onely) the godly can no where better bestowe their labour to their edification in true godlinesse, then in reading, studiyng, yea and committing to memorie this notable Epistle.
VVhich is not therefore put in the first place as though it had bin written first, neither (as the Romaynes per∣haps would haue it) for the dignitie and worthines sake of the Romane Church, wherunto it was dedicated: but for the maiestie, and excellencie of those things are hand∣led in it, specially for the doctrine of grace and iustifica∣tion: which is so plainely and diligently handled in cer∣tayne chapters, that the whole epistle deserueth to be read euery day, and learned without booke of the faythfull. Yet heere I woulde haue all christians admonished, see∣ing the Lord requireth humble and reuerent hearers of his word, as it is written, to him will I looke (saith the Lord) euen to him that is poore,Esa. 66.2. and of a contrite spirite, and trembleth at my wordes: that with meeke hearts and due reuerence they handle, heare, & reade the holy scrip∣tures of God, alway remembring that watchworde of the Apostle,1. Cor. 2.14 Ioh. 3.4. the naturall man perceiueth not the thinges of the spirit of God. &c. And continually for profe ther∣of bearing in minde the example of Nicodemus, who by the dexteritie of wit, and all the helpes of art were in him, could not atteine vnto the meaning of the words of our sauiour Christ, and that in a common principle of religion, namely regeneration. Wherefore let no man throughe vayne arrogancie contemne the labours of o∣thers, neither through folish presumptiō trust too much to himselfe.
Vzziah king of Iuda reiecting the priests,2. Chro. 26.1 teaching him that he should not offer incense cōtrary to the law of the Lord, & thinking that he knew the law better thē they al, for his arrogancie and presumption was smitten with a leprosie. But on the contrary the Eunuch of Ethiopia, acknowledging his own weakenesse and ignorance,Act. 8.27. say∣ing, Howe can I vnderstande, except I had a guide, and humbly crauing the helpe of Phillip, receiued a blessing from the Lorde. Thus hee scattereth the proude in the imagination of their hearts, he putteth downe the migh∣tie from their seate, and exalteth the humble and meeke. Hee filleth the hungrie with good things: and the riche hee hath sent emptie away. No maruaile then why so fewe at this day profite accordingly in reading the scrip∣tures, seeing the greatest part of people, holy Commen∣taries and expositions of the godly beeing neglected, ha∣uing their eyes blinded with selfe loue, comment vppon them according to their owne sense, whereby both er∣rours increase and are maintained, and also the Oracles of God most vnreuerently prophaned. Which thing as it commeth to passe in other bookes of sacred Scrip∣ture, so principally in this Epistle, wherein without all controuersie there are many thinges hard to bee vnder∣stoode, which the vnlearned and those are vnstable may easily peruert to their owne destruction. For preuen∣ting of which euils it is meete not onely that godly and faithfull interpretations bee deliuered vnto the people, but also that they be diligently exhorted, reuerently too imbrace them, as the good helpes of God giuen for their edification in pure and vndefiled religion: and seriously to reade, heare, and marke them, as the meanes whereby it pleaseth the Lorde to illuminate their mindes with

the true knowledge of his heauenly mysteries, alwaye keeping themselues with in the compasse of their capaci∣tie. Knowing that it is a good part of learning for a mā to vnderstand his owne ignorance, for hence commeth the studie & desire to bee taught. And this is (right hono∣rable) the onely cause hath moued mee to set foorth this translation vpon the Epistle to the Romanes: whiche thing perhaps will seeme vnto many needlesse and vnne∣cessarie, considering that the Commentaries of master Peter Martyr were alreadie in English vpon the same mat∣ter. Howbeit if those men diligently weigh with thē∣selues, how the Commentaries of the said reuerende fa∣ther are higher then that easily, they may be reached vnto of the simpler sort, and larger then that they may hastily be read ouer of suche as are drawen away by other af∣fayres, I doubt not but they will soone graunt this my labour is not altogether needles and vnnecessarie. For besides that none hath dealt more sincerely in expoun∣ding the holy scriptures, and more faithfully in drawing foorth the true sense of deepe mysteries, then M. Caluine, hee hath this as peculier to himselfe, alway to match his faithfull sinceritie with a plaine briefnesse. So that men may without any great losse of time find that with him which would cost them much seeking in others. And this is not onely a gaine of time, but also a notable helpe for memorie, As it is said.
Quicquid praecipies,Horace esto breuis, vt citò dicta,
Percipiant animi dociles, teneant{que} fideles.
Finally, the reasons which haue moued mee to dedi∣cate this my simple worke vnto your honorable Lord∣ship, are in number three. First, that godly zeale in re∣ligion, and tender care for the vulgare people (in suche

places as apperteine to your Lordships patronage) that they should not be clogged with an Idoll, nor destitute of a guide, which I haue alway since my first comming into your Lordships acquaintance noted in you. For who is more meete to bee a Patrone vnto that, which tendeth vnto the profite of the common sort, then hee who wisheth nothing more, and studieth nothing so much. Secondly, that knowledge of the latine tongue, wherewithall, amongest other qualities whiche make you truly honorable, God hath richly indued you. And whereby you are able to iudge what sinceritie & faith∣fulnes, I haue vsed in this kinde of labour. Thirdly, that bountifulnes and liberalitie which your Lordship hath lately shewed towards mee: which presseth mee euery way (seeing I am by no meanes able to make satisfacti∣on) to shewe my selfe thankefull. And I knowe your Lordship doth not looke for any other recompence.
Wherefore humbly crauing pardon for my bolde∣nes, and earnestly beseeching your honour to accepte in good part my poore Newyeeres gift, as a pledge of my good will towardes you. VVhich notwithstanding it commeth somewhat after the time, yet I trust not out of season. I commit you to the tuition of him who hath loued vs, and washed vs from our sinnes in his blood, and hath made vs kings and priestes vnto God euen his father. At London the 11. of Ianuarie. 1583.

