



BEing desirous to testifie my duetifull minde towardes your good Lordship, I thought there could be no better meane in all respects, than the dedication of this present worke; which containeth a large exposition of the whole Lawe of God, and of the practise thereof in the Commonweale of Israel: wher∣of the onely reading with due consideration, may iustly com∣mend it many wayes, euen to such as are of greatest lear∣ning, wisedome, authoritie and vertue. For if we haue an eye to the author of the groundworks thereof; it is God and not man. If to the Lawemaker; it is the Lawe of the Iudge of the whole world, the lampe of light, the welspring of wis∣dome, the touchstone of truth, the rule of right, the ground of goodnesse, the bond of blessed∣nesse, the loadstarre to life, the opener of our vnderstanding, and the gouernour of our wits: the faithfull following whereof is the way to welfare, the procurer of peace, the path of true pleasure, the entrie of immortalitie, and the harbourer of happinesse. Or, if we haue an eye to the maner of the deliuering thereof; it is most woonderful, accompanied with many great my∣racles, signes, and tokens, and honoured with the glorie and maiestie of Gods owne presence. If to the intent of the Lawegiuer; it is the repayring and reforming of man according to the I∣mage of his maker, in true holinesse and righteousnesse. If to the end of the Lawe, it is to driue vs vnto Christ, that by him wee might be saued. If to the obedience which it requi∣reth; it is altogether spirituall, holie & euerlasting. All which things are not onelie great, but the greatest that can be, and fuller of maiestie and glorie than can be expressed or concei∣ued by man. Againe, if we haue an eye to the partie by whose seruice and ministery this law was published; hee was a man peculiarlie chosen of God, indued with most excellent giftes, ful of the holy Ghost, such a prophet as neuer had his like, (Christ onlie excepted) a figure of Christ, familiar with God, a perfect paterne of a good gouernour, and a verie father of his Commonweale. Or if we haue an eye to the parties to whom it was deliuered; they were a people whom God had purposely chosen, redeemed, and deliuered from most miserable thral∣dome, to the intent to be their King, and to dwell among them, and that they should be vnto him a holie people and a royall Priesthoode for euer: which things are surelie most excellent and singular prerogatiues. And as for the Preacher of these Sermons, by whom the sayde things are laide foorth, and expounded to the better vnderstanding of the Reader: it is well knowen, that for the manifold talents and excellent gifts which God had bestowed vpon him, and for his diligent and most painfull imploying of the same to the beating downe of I∣dolatrie and superstition, to the winning of folke vnto God, and to the edifying of Christs flock: he was in his lifetime, and yet still is, a man of great reputation and renowme. As for mine owne trauell in translating this worke, I humbly submit the iudgement and censure thereof to your Lordships fauourable acceptation, the obtainement whereof shall greatlie increase my gladnesse in that I haue done any thing whereby the Church of GOD is or may bee any whit edified. Written the xxj. of December, 1582.

