



BEing now about a yeare pas∣sed (Right honorable) in cō∣pany with a godly Gentle∣man, my good friend, wo entring into some speach with me concerning the loosenes and dissolutenes of this age: in the end, af∣ter long dispute and reasoning betwene vs, e concluded, and verely thought, that a reat part, euen of such as beare the name of Christians, doth suppose the soules of men to be mortall: and thereupon, wished me, to take the paynes to translate into En∣glish this pamflet of M. Iohn Calvin, trea∣ng of the IMMORTALITIE OF THE SOVLE, which he bele∣ed to be most necessary to be vnderstood of the greater number of our Countreymen.

whereupon, after I had perused it, and throughly considered thereof, his iudge∣ment seemed to me, to be both good and sound. For, at the tyme that Maister Caluin wrote this booke, it should seeme by his preface ensuing, that there were many gre∣uously infected with this monstrous opinion. That the Soules of men dyed together with the bodies. Which soule and hellish error, I feare, hath possessed and poysoned at this day, the hartes and mindes of a great num∣ber, here at home within this land, not onely of the godlesse, and ignoraunter com∣pany, but euen of too too many of some of those which make a great and glorious glit∣tering outward shew, of being fauourers o the glorious Gospell of our Sauiour and re∣deemer Christ Iesus, as by their monstrous pride, detestable Ambition, miserable co∣uetousnes, cruell extortions, filthy glutto∣nies, cankred malices, and most beastly vn∣cleanes now reigning, manifestly appeareth.
Wherefore, seing this pamflet, was a that tyme necessary to be published, for the confuting of all such Atheistes, Epicures and belly Gods, as then lyued, I thinke i in my poore opinion, that this present mos necessary and needefull. But here, me thin∣keth I heare some men say, that it is impos∣sible for any, in so great light of the Gos∣pell to be of this minde: whome I feare I may with griefe of hart iustly aunswere
 that there are too too many such. For, if a man, throughly looke into the lyues and cō∣uersation of the multitude, yea, and that euen of the outward pretended professors of the Gospell (for I doe not see how they are to be more fitly termed) we shall then finde it to be ouertrue: of which detestable hipo∣crysie the Lord God in the fulnes of tyme, will without all doubt, be terribly and fearefully aduenged, if it be not spedely, and earnesty repented of, and all peruerse and crooked wayes eftsoones, reformed and amended. And questionles, seing Satan in those dayes so lustely bestyrred him selfe, surely, he now, most terribly roareth, and rageth to deface the word of the Lord, (which as the Apostle witnesseth) is the power of Saluation, to all those that in trueth beleue it: And he in very deede the earnestlyer, and busilier trauelleth herein, because he perceiueth that his lease is by many yeares, neerer at an end, then at that tyme it was, and therefore goeth about hand ouer head (as we commonly say) to make hauock of his Lordes enheritaunce, as vsually all wicked leasees doe, a little be∣fore the expiration and full terme of their yeares.
wherefore (right honorable) at the god∣ly motion of that my friend, I tooke vpon me to english this Treatise, for the bene∣fit (I trust) of all those my Countreymen
 of this our English nation, which shall di∣ligently reade the same. And for somuch, as I am of necessitie enforced to seeke for ayde of such a Patron, as I might assure my selfe to be of some singuler towardnes of perfect wisedome (I meane not of such wis∣dome as worldlinges dreame of, but of that true wisedome, which is the knowledge and obedience of and to the Maiestie of the word of God) whereby, this Argument might finde such one as were of power able, in knowledge wise, in zeale and affection willing and forward, to withstand the aduersaries of this pestilent Doctrine, in which wisedome, cōsisteth the very strēgth of the young men, and the right vnderstan∣ding and honor of the aged: I haue at this present takē bouldnes to choose your Lord∣ship out from amongest the residue of the Nobilitie of this noble realme of England, to addresse this my poore trauell vnto: as∣suring my selfe that you will be most wil∣ling to suffer the same to march vnder your ensigne, agaynst all the enemies thereof. And therefore, if the worthynes of the mat∣ter herein conteyned, and handled by Mai∣ster Caluin, may so excuse the vnworthynes of my simple stile in the translating hereof, as that your honor vouchsafe to accept the one with the other, and beare with the one for the other, your noble curtesie shall the rather confirme all the true professors of the
 Gospell in that vndoubed opinion which they haue already conceiued of you, by rea∣son of the good beginnings of your godly proceedings, already in this behalfe, in the ewe and open sight of the world manifest∣ly declared, and geue thē occasion, continu∣ally to glorify God for so vertuous and gra∣tious Nobilitie, and incessauntly pray vnto his Maiesty, for the good encrease & long prosperitye of all such: and I my selfe also hauing good cause to thinke my trauell most blessedly bestowed, will acknowledge my duety alwayes bound vnto your good Lord∣ship for the same.
And besides, there is no doubt, but that he which hath begonne this good worke in you, will lykewise performe it, vntill the day of Iesus Christ: so that, your perseue∣raunce therein, will afourd you a most firme and sure ground worke, for the vpholding and continuing of your noble house, in a prosperous and florishing successe, without the which perseueraunce, vnto the end, and in the end, there is no acceptation with the Lord of all our doings whatsoeuer: For as it is sayd in the 18. of Ezechiell his prophesie and 26. verse. When a righteous man con∣tinueth not in his righteousnes, but turneth away from it, and committeth iniquitie, he shall euen dye for the same: he shal euen dye in his iniquitie which he hath done. Thus humbly crauing pardon, least I haue
 troubled your Lordship ouerlong, I leaue you to the protection of the most high. London, the second of Iune. 1581.

