



HAuing finished these col∣lections of Augustin Marlorat, that reuerend Diuine vpon the two last Epistles of S. Iohn, I haue attempted right Venerable Ladie, (according to my purpose, when I first tooke them in hande, though not greatlie knowne vnto you) to publish them in your name: being perswaded that they wyll so much the sooner of the godlie be read and wel liked, as they shalbe accepted of you, whose vertuous life deserueth no lesse commendations in this your countrey, then did that Ladies life to whome the Apostle directed these E∣pistles. The volume I confesse is not great, but the matter therein contained is delectable,Eras. lib. 4 Aroth. Aelian lib var. Hist. and not disagreeable to your Ladishippes state and profession. Lisander king of Sparta tooke in good part the selie wrytings of the poore Poet Anti∣lochus, hauing no better present to geue: Augustus Caesar grat∣fullie receyued the Greeke verses which a poore scholler of Greece gaue him. Artaxerxes thankfullie, and with great curtesie tooke a handful of water which a poore subiect of his, Sinaetes by name, gaue vnto him hauing none abilitie to geue any greater gifte. Alfonsus king of Arragon, louinglie embra∣ced as a great iuell, a small booke of the Decades of Liuie, geuē

to him by Cosmus the Phisition. Ludouicus the Emperour ioy∣fully imbraced the bookes of Dionisius the Areopagit, which he wrote de Hierarchia: May it please you therfore right vertuous Ladie to accept also, these two Epistles of S. Iohn, being expoū∣ded by Caluin and others, and brought into one booke by Marlorat:Sigeber. and geuen vnto you by me, not being such a gift as I would, but as presētly I could present vnto your Ladiship: & to defend the same frō the venemous darts of sclāderous tōgues which are more readie to carpe then to correct, more prone to find fault with other mens works, then either to amend them, or to publish any thing of theirs. VVherein (Madam) you shall immitate the best sort of men in humanitie, and nothing degenerate from Gentilitie. And as it seeketh to be shrowded vnder your name, so vouchsafe to harbor, and shielde it. Con∣sider that, a simple Sparowe sometime, to auoyde the griping talents of a tirannous Sparhauke, pursuing her, fledde for suc∣cour vnto the bosome of Artaxerxes king of Persea, being in campe, where she laye panting for feare of death, and weari∣nesse of flight, vnto whome the King sayde: As I wyl defende thee, thou lyttle sparrowe from death, because thou flyest to me for succor, so wyll I do to those that repose them selues vp∣pon me. The lyke fauor, good Ladie, if this my booke maie finde at your handes, I haue the thing in this case that I desire: And I assure your Ladishippe that, Cum meliores nanciscantur Aues: VVhen more precious byrds be hatched, as sayd Zenod: I wyll not (God wylling) forgette that you disdayned not to grace so small a Pamphlet as this. God the fountaine of all goodnesse, graunt vnto your Ladishippe continuall loue to the Gospell, with perfect faith in Christ Iesu. From Ridborne this .26. of March. 1578.

