



THE first view of this small booke may mooue you right honorable Sir, to deeme the same of small price if you me∣sure (as the common forte of men do) the inward excellen∣cy by the outward appearāce. Which thing I confesse, at the first did some thing stay me from either the publishing or the exhibiting therof vnto anye manne: much lesse durst I presume to pre∣sent the same vnto the sight of anye honorable per∣sonage. But when I more deepely considered the wis∣dome of godly men in our age, which iudge not the conscience all together by the coate, nor the booke by the bynding, I then endeuored without casting any moe doubtes, to make that common to others, which first I priuately red for mine owne commoditie. And truly if there be any thing that first moued me thereto, the ignoraunce together with the vanitie of many of our own people was one, who being vtterly vnskilfull of God and godlines, do yet apply their myndes to the vaine delightes of this flattering world, quite forget∣ting

both the iustice of God which daily hangeth o∣uer them, and death which continually followeth and sodainly striketh them, yea, and eternall destruction which gapeth wide for them, and hopeth in the ende to swallow them. It grieued me to see what baites are layd for them by the world, death, and hell, (as pride of lyfe, and contempt of gods worde) of purpose to en∣tangle both their soules and bodies. As touching pride of life, I nede not speake much thereof, it is to manifest. What man eeth it not?Esai. 1. Mich. 3. Rom. 8. who is he almost that is not infected with it? what nation is voyde of it? doe not heauen and earth and all creatures grone and grieue at it? do not all good men bewayle it, preachers crye out of it, and God redy to punish it? yes verily. As for con∣tempt of gods word, is it not in most places found. Are not the ministers contemned, their preachings discre∣dited, and their ministery skorned by papists and Ruf∣fians, and olde cutters, called lusty and tall fellowes, who can sweare out a matter at a pinch, and blaspheme the sacred name of God most horriblie? Are not pro∣phane Comedies and tragedies (most of them beyng monstrous lies) with great pompe celebrated, when the holy worde of God the foode of our soules (being preached) ought with reuerence to be heard?Amos. 8. Mat. 4. it is cer∣tainly true. We haue right honorable in many places the tables and tennis in steede of the Testament, the cardes in steede of the Catechisme, the boules in steede of the Bible: yea and that more is, men think they haue made a very good change. We see some men bestowe their time in writing, some in printing, and mo men in

reading of vile & blasphemous, or at lest of prophan & friuolous bokes, such as are that infamous legēd of K. Arthur (which with shame inough I heare to be new∣ly imprinted) with the horrible actes of those whore∣masters, Launcelot du Lake, Tristram de Liones, Ga∣reth of Orkney, Merlin, the lady of the Lake, with the vile and stinking story of the Sangreal, of king Peleus, &c. some agayn study the liues of Huon of Burdeaux, and king Oberon, the king of the Fairies, of Valentine and Orson, and the lady Cleremond, with the Iuggler Paccolet and king Trumpert, and the giant Ferragus: and the liues of the foure sonnes of Aymon, with the worthy actes of Oliuer and Rouland, Guichard and Richard: some are expert in Beuis of Hampton that notable man, with the death of Boniface, Arundel and Trunchifice: some in the court of Venus, some in the Iestes of Skoggen the kinges dizzard: some in the sub∣tleties of Howleglas, and Garagantua: some agayne (and to many) in the pestilent pollicies of that Ma∣hound Matchiauile: in the puddle of pleasure, and Fo∣list of histories, and such like, which doe manifestly shew that gods word is either shamefully neglected, or despitefully condemned. For if any good booke be writen, it lieth in the printers handes, smally regarded, seldome enquired after: so that the printer is scarce pai∣ed for the paper that goeth to the booke. And this ma∣keth many printers which seeketh after gaynes, to take in hande rather those thinges that are profitable to the purse (though thei be ridiculous) & so satisfie mens hu∣mors, then to printe without profite those bookes that

be godly: which being once printed, serue for nothing els but for waste paper, acceptable to very few. It could not therefore but grieue me, to see those enemies of mankinde, the World, Death, and Hell, so preuaile by their flattering illusions, that they haue drawen after them the most parte of the people at this day, yea and sought in time past, euen in my yongest yeres, to haue taken me in those their nettes together for company. Whereupon,Ephe. 6. I determined amongest others, to geue them one blow more with the sword of the spirit, the word of God, according to my duty, calling, & professi¦on, and to ring the Alarum bel together, with al godly preachers, vnto our sleepie country men, aduertising them of the approching of our deadly foes long agoe descried by the sermons and writinges of the Martirs. Once before this time I attempted by mine own booke lately published, to abandone the securitie of this our nation: the Lord graunt that it hath any thing awaked them. But now the second tyme I haue caused that Di∣uine Doctor of the Church, Iohn Caluine, the Lordes vigilant watchman, euen in our owne tongue to sound the trumpe, if by this meanes eyther he or I may geue them warning before their fall, to eschew these baytes of wily Sathan, who knoweth whether the Lorde by this meanes wil open the eyes of some men to see their owne sinnes and to be sory for the same? But if they be neuer the better, but rather the blynder, my conscience is discharged, and these few lines shalbe vnto their con∣sciences a witnesse, that they are from henceforth with out excuse before the throne of God: And I feare there

will bee denounced agaynst them the iudgementes of God,The things that may in this booke be founde. that it shall be more easie for the land of Cathaa at the last day, then for them. For in this discourse they might see:
First, the sinnes of Niniueh, and in it their own sinnes. 2 Againe, the mercy of God in sending Ionas vnto the Niniuites, being haynous offenders, and thereby see that the Lord is also mercifull vnto themselues, that he warneth them of their fall by his preachers.
3 Then the disobedience of Ionas and his punishment,To what end God punisheth his Childrē. and thereby may they see a liuely image of the fall of Gods children vnto sinne, and Gods iustice euen vp∣on his seruauntes, to the ende to reclaime them, and not to condemne them.
4 Also they might see here the working of gods spirite in Ionas, being in the bottom of the sea, and his deliue∣ry, and thereby might they learne, that God by puni∣shing his seruantes, maketh them more strong, and tri∣eth their faith, and when they cry vnto him, he deliue∣reth them out of all their troubles.
5 And so agayne might they see how seuerely Ionas preached vnto the Niniuites, (hauing no commission to entreat of Gods mercy vnto them) and yet that kind of preaching wrought in them repentaunce, beyng the very ende why God sent Ionas vnto them (although Ionas considered it not) and also gods mercy in pardo∣ning their sinnes. And by this might they learne, that though God speake angerly vnto vs, yet he neuer spea∣keth so, but for our profit, and will surely pardon our iniquities, if we from the hart repent vs of the same.
Lastly they might see how Ionas beyng once forge∣uen, yet eftsoone offended more grieuously, yea, and murmured agaynst God, and yet God vanquished him with reason, and of his great mercy forgaue him also that his sinne. And by this might they learn how fraile the children of God are, if they be not still gouerned by gods spirite, and how mercifull God is vnto those that be his, with many other things most necessary for all men. If they therefore neglect or contemne these things, let them know that they neglect the very word of the lord and their saluation, and so purchase to them selues eternall death. The lord therefore for his mercy sake, heale their blinde eyes, and helpe their vnbeliefe. Now right honorable, if I be asked what mooued me to dedicate these my labours vnto you: I must needes answer that the sweete and comfortable matter therein conteyned, (whereof I know your honour will be a willing partaker) and the good liking that you haue had alwayes of M. Caluines workes, together with my duetifull remembraunce of your honours friend∣ship to me sometyme shewed, would haue forced me (if I had bene of my selfe vnwilling) humbly to haue submitted this worke vnto your honourable tuition (being the Lectures of M. Caluine most nere his ser∣mons) vpon the prophet Ionas, by me now (at the ear∣nest sute of some of my dere friendes) turned into our English tonge. The gift I confesse is but small, but I de¦sire your honour to accept it in good part, as the gift of him that remaineth still (notwithstanding this) bound vnto you. And as touching you, right worshipfull

knightes and Christian gentlemen, many causes there be, why you also shoulde be partakers of these fruite∣full sermons or lectures. The one is to the ende, that sith the moste parte of you haue hearde my lectures or readinge vppon Iosua, Daniell, Ionas and Malachie you might also by readinge this booke, call to remem∣braunce, to youre comfortes, some of the thinges which then you hearde at my mouthe. Another cause is, that excellent doctrine of the prophet Ionas not vn∣meete for your callinges: and agayne the great studie which you haue to further and promoote the glory of god: And further your manifoulde frinshipes vnto me declared at sundry times, as wel in defending the trueth by me vttered, & in studiyng to benefit me both in your wordes and deedes, as also your daylie desires to doe me good, as wel openly to me protested as secretly in∣tended, I omitte now other causes contentinge my selfe with these fewe, which certainelie ought to binde a∣ny Christian that knoweth you, and is like ease bound vnto you as am I, (and againe is of abilitie) to dedicate his laboures vnto you alone▪ which thoughe I haue not donne, yet am I parswaded that you will (accor∣ding to your good natures) take the matter well, as it was by me mente, to this ende, that sithe you are ioyned together in this worke with a man of honor (whom I know both you loue & honor in the Lord) you wil also ioyne together with him in folowing the gospel, and defending the same, at al times when it shal haue neede, & also make accounte of me to be alwayes redie, when the Lorde shall geue me occasion, to testi∣fie

with all humilitie and reuerence of your worship∣full good willes, vnto me shewed, as well in other of my workes, as in this. Thus therefore Right hono∣rable and worshipfull, for this time I ende, making my praiers vnto God for you, that as he hath by his proui∣dence caused your names by me his seruant to be men∣tioned in the preface to this one booke, so he will also vouchsafe, to linke you all together in perfect frinship the bonde of perfection, and increase his graces in you, mainetaine your estates and blisse your callinges, houlde vp your houses and aduance your seates in this Israel of god, to the benifit of the church, to the ioye of the Queenes most excellence maiestie; (who as god longe continewe amoungst vs) to the terror of the wicked, and the encoraging of the godlie, and finally to your owne eternall comfortes Amen. From my house in Ridborn this 22. of Ianuarie. 1577▪

