



MY very good Lord,
forasmuch as it is the dew∣tie
of all them that publishe
things too the world, whe∣ther
as first authors, or as
translators, too deale in such
sort as most folke may reape
profite and commoditie by
their dooyngs, specially in
matters of Religion, the
knowledge or ignoraunce
whereof, concerne the bene∣fite
and welfare, or the hinderance and perill, not of a fewe,
but of all men: I humbly beseeche your grace, that with your
clemencie, fauour, and well liking, which I haue alwayes hi∣thertoo
through your goodnesse inioyed, I may indeuer too
benefyte others (specially the simple and ignorant sorte, for
whom my care is, & ought chiefly to be) by the things which
I haue gathered and conceyued to myne owne comfort, part∣ly
out of these present Sermons of M. Caluins, and such other
readings, but specially out of the very woord of God it selfe:
that they may bee as a briefe abridgment of this whole work,
and as an enterance too the ryght conceying of the doctrine
of Election and Predestination, which being the chief ground∣woorke
of this Epistle to the Ephesians, minisrtrh mee iust
occasion to say somewhat concerning the order and ryght vse
therof: not that I intend too take vppon mee too discusse the
particular poyntes therof, or too answer the seuerall obiecti∣ons



and blasphemies which the heathenish Atheists or world∣lywise
scorners are wont too cast foorth in derogation of that
heauenl octrine, bycause their- fleshly reason cannot atteine
too it: (for I confesse that too bee a matter too hygh for mee
too meddle withall, and it were more than needeth, conside∣ring
how much is sayd therof in these Sermons:) But onely
too shewe the gentle reader what way he may safely take, too
deale therwith to his benefyte and comfort. Wherunto I am
the rather moued, bycause it commonly falleth out, that the
vnseasonable and vnaduyzed dealing therewith, (partly by
such as of a certeine vaynglory doo aduenture too speake the
things which they know not, and partly by such as beyng o∣therwise
godly and well mynded, doo notwithstanding enter
deeper sometimes intoo that profound doctrine, than com∣mon
capacitie (yea euen of good and sound Christians) can
well reache vnto, or ordinarie skill can well wade out of agein,
or the present state of the hearers well beare:) dooth often∣tymes
shake, and sometimes also wellneere ouerthrowe the
faith of the weaklings, whom Gods woord willeth to be ten∣dered
with all myldnesse and modestie, and for whose releefe
and edifying the things that are set downe there are cheefly
written. Wherfore keeping as euen a hand as I can, that no∣thing
may scape from mee vnawares, wherby the aduersaries
of the Gospell may take occasion too slaunder the doctrine,
or the simple sort, occasion to bee offended at it, or to shrinke
from it, or the perfect sort, occasion to find iust fault with me:
I will no longer trubble your grace with delayes, but (by Gods
leaue) proceedeforthwith too the matter.
The substance and ground of this Epistle to the Ephesians
is this: That beyng once throughly instructed and rooted in
the fayth of Iesus Christ, wee must (for full confirmation and
stablishment of our consciences in the louing kyndnesse and
fauour of our God, ageinst all assaultes and temptations both
of body and soule,) stye vp in mynd aboue the world and all
worldly things, too the beginninglesse loue of God, wher∣through
he choze vs too saluation, Tim. 1. 9. or endlesse welfare in his



onely begotten sonne, before the foundations of the world
were layd, freely of his owne mercy, without respect of any
desert, worke, or worthinesse of our owne: In consideration
wherof,1. Cor. 6. 20. it is our dewtie on the other syde, too glo God
both in our bodyes and in our soules,1. Tim. 1. 5. by leading a holy and
vertuous lyfe proceeding from a pure and sound hart:1. Pet. 1. 21. 22. 23. which
acceptable obedience, togither with the fayth from whence
the same springeth, is bred and brought foorth by the one∣ly
woorking of Gods holy spirit in our myndes, for Iesus
Christes sake.
This doctrine then belongeth not at all too the carelesse
worldlings,1. Cor. 6. 9. 10. which welter still in the dregges of the old Adam:
that is to say,2▪ Th▪ . 8. which bee not yit come vntoo Christ, nor haue
heard of his Gospell:Titus. 1. 16. or which beyng come in name and pro∣fession,
doo fyght still ageinst him in lyfe and conuersation.
Of which two sortes, these latter (if they amend not vppon
dew admonition) are rather too bee left vp too the iust iudg∣ment
of God, than too bee perswaded by reason, which they
themselues abuze, or too be confuted by Gods woord, which
they will not regard, vntill they feele it cutting sharper than a
two edged sword: and the other sort are too bee taught first
too knowe God and his sonne Iesus Christ, before they can
bee made parttakers of the riche treasures of Gods wisdome,
ryghtuousnesse, and redemption, layd vp in Iesus Christ for
none but such as beleeue in his name.Hbr. 5. 12. 13▪ Nother belongeth it
properly and immediatly to the weaklings and Nouice (if I
may so terme them) which are but newly trayned to the ∣pell,
or are but of slender vnderstanding and feeble beleefe:
bycause their myndes beyng yit vnable too discerne so hygh
mysteries for want of experience in matters perteyning too
God,1. Cor. 3. 1. ▪ haue neede of milke still, rather than of strong and sub∣stanciall
meate. And surely there needeth no better nor fur∣ther
proofe of the infinite and incomprehensible profound∣nesse
of this doctrine, than that euen the Apostle himselfe be∣ing
after a sort astonished at the exceeding great hugenesse of
it, was fayne to knit vp his discourse therof with this exclama∣tion,



O wonderfull depth of the riches of Gods wisdome and
knowledge.Rom. 11. 33. How vnsearchable are his iudgmentes, and his
wayes past finding out?Hb. 5. 14. But this doctrine belongeth too such
as being growen vp too some rypenesse in Christ, and hauing
gathered strength in the knowledge of matters of saluation,
haue through the longer working or greater measure of Gods
holy spirit, obteyned light of vnderstanding aboue the com∣mon
and ordinarie rate, and by the same spirit subdewed their
owne wit and will, too the beleefe of God and his woord, that
is too say, roo a right and stedfast perswasion of mynd concer∣ning
God and all his sayings and dooyngs, without any mis∣trust
or doubting of the same. I call that onely a right per∣swasion,. Pet. 1. 19.
which is grounded altogither vppon the Canonicall
writings of the old and new Testament, and throughly war∣ranted
in all poyntes by the same. And lyke as that tree may
well and iustly bee sayd too stand fast, not which hath bin vt∣terly
vntasted or vntouched of any storme, but which hauing
borne out the brunt of all wyndes and weathers, continueth
vnblowen downe through the violence of tempests, haue sha∣ken
off all the leaues, broken off some braunches, sliuered dy∣uers
bowghes, riuen the bark, yea and inforced the top of it
too stoope now and then too the ground: euen so that fayth
or beleefe, is too bee counted stedfast and well settled, which
continueth vnuanquished too the end, though in the meane
time it haue bin neuer so sore shaken and battered with the
assaultes of temptations, aduersities, and crosses both of body
and mynd. They therfore which haue atteyned to this groun∣ded
growth in Iesus Christ, may safely and comfortably deale
with the doctrine of Election and Predestination without
guyde: & such may haue neede of exhortation, admonition,
warning and incoragement, by reason of the naturall fraytlie
which alwayes followeth, and oftentimes ouertaketh euē the
strongest, but not of instruction, otherwise than by the woord
it selfe:. Iohn. 2. 27 for (as sayeth S. Iohn) the inward anoynting (that is
to wit, the inlightening of the holy Ghost) teacheth them all
things. But as for the other sort, which are yit but as new



borne infantes in Christ, whether it bee in respect of yme, or
in respect of knowledge, or in respect of both: forasmuch as
this doctrine is of such nature as it cannot bee learned by any
preceptes or perswasions of wisdome, vntill the knwledge
and loue of God in Iesus Christ, be first well felt and through∣ly
digested by fayth in the bowels of mens hartes: they haue
neede too bee both cherished and trayned foorth by degrees,
and as it were by parcelmeale, too the right conceyuing and
vnderstanding of so great a mysterie. For although Gods free
Election and Predestination, according too the purpose of his
owne good will, euen before all time, bee in very deede the
first cause and onely originall welspring of our saluation or
endlesse welfare, and of all the things that further or accom∣panie
the same: yit is it not the first poynt in doctrine wherby
too bring men to saluation, nor the first Loadestarre that men
must looke at, as soone as they bee entered intoo the way of
saluation. Which thing appeereth sufficiently by the conti∣nuall
order of teaching vsed throughout the whole holy scrip∣ture,
where both the Prophets and Apostles and Christ him∣selfe,Hebr. 6. 1. 2.
doo alwayes begin the ministration of saluation at the
preaching of repentance, and so proceeding too fayth and free
forgiuenesse of sinnes, too newnesse of lyfe, and the right vse
of Sacramentes, too the rizing agein of the dead, and the euer∣lasting
iudgment: doo finally deliuer foorth the doctrine of
Election and Predestination as a sheeld ageinst all assaultes, to
make me perseuer and hold out to the end in the way of sal∣uation,
through all aduersities, tormentes, and temptations,
as shall appeare more plainly hereafter. This doctrine then
is (as yee would say) the roofe of Christianirie, which beyng
orderly, substancially, and workemanly reered vppon the rest
of the building, is as a couering and safegard too the whole,
defending it frō all iniuries & anoyances of wynd & weather,
and giuing it continuance with perpetuitie: so that what∣soeuer
is added afterward, may well make too the adorning
and beautifying of it, but not to the safetie and strength of it▪
And therefore if it bee set vppon a false or ouerfeeble founda∣tion,



or while the building is yit greene and vnperfected, b∣fore
the stones bee well clozed, settled and dry: the weyght of
it beareth downe the whole house to the ground, to the great
losse, and (but if the more grace of God bee) too the vtter and
vnrecouerable vndoyng, both of the buylder and of the buil∣ding.
What then, will some man say? Is it not too bee taught? Is
it not to bee learned? Yis verily: and that with all earnestnesse
and indeuer of mynd: howbeeit, not at al aduenture, not in
haste, not rashly, not presumptuously: but with singular cir∣cumspection,
reuerence, warenesse and humilitie, as al the god∣ly
haue vsed to doo: least whyle wee take vppon vs too swim
without a bladder, before wee haue learned too beare our bo∣dyes
vppon the water, wee bee caryed away with the violence
of the streame, or sink for fayntnesse ere wee can recouer too
land agein: or least (which worse is) whyle wee bee ouercuri∣ous
in medling with the secretes of Gods Maiestie, wee bee o∣uerwhelmed
of his glory. How then may wee wade safely in
it too our benefite? Euen by seeking of our selues in Iesus
Christ. Let vs see if wee can fynd our selues there. For the
scripture assureth vs,Actes. 4. 12 that there is no saluation but onely in
Christ Iesus, nor no damnation to them that are in him. Now
therefore,Rom. 8. 1. like as too knowe the originall cause of our death
and damnation, wee must not raundge beyond the fall of our
first father Adam,Rom. 5. 12. bycause that by him sinne entered into the
world, and by sinne, death: so to fynd our recouerie and sal∣uation,
wee must not seeke elswhere than in Iesus Christ, by∣cause
he is ordeyned to bee the onely propitiation and attone∣ment
for our sinnes,Iohn. 2. 2. &. 4. 10. and there is not any other name, (that is
to say, any other person or meane) giuen vs wherby to bee sa∣ued,Actes. 4. 12.
than the onely name of Iesus. For he is the way,Iohn. 14. 6. the
the truth,Iohn. 8. 12. &. 9. 5. and the lyfe: He is the lyght of the world:Iohn. 11. 25 He is
the resurrection and the lyfe: God is in him reconcyling the
world vnto himselfe:2. Cor. 5. 19. In him dwelleth the whole fulnesse of
the Godhead bodily:Colos . 9. God hath made him our Wisedome,
Rightuousnesse,1. Cor. 1. 30 Holinesse,Hebr. 10. 14. and Redemption: And he through



his once offering vp of himselfe vppon the Crosse, hath perfec∣ted
them for euer which are to bee sanctifyed,Hebr. 5. 9. and is become
the author of euerlasting saluation too as many as obey him.
Inasmuch then as Iesus Christ is both God and man,Hebr. 1. 1. 2. 8. 9. and hath
all power both in heauen and earth,Math. 11. 27.  Iohn. 3. 35. and all knees must
bow before him: whosoeuer seeketh saluation out of Iesus
Christ, dooth but wander away after his owne deceytfull ima∣ginations,
neuer to fynd the thing that he seeketh, bycause that
(as sayeth Saint Iohn) he that hath not the sonne,1. Iohn. 2. 23. & 5. 12. hath not the
father,Ephe. 2. 12. and he that hath not the father, is a straunger too the
couenauntes and promises of saluation, without hope and
without God in the world, and so consequently in stead of the
substance he ketcheth but a shadowe or a dreame or rather
nothing at all. Nay rather he ketcheth euerlasting damnati∣on,
according to this saying:Iohn. 3. 28. 3 He that beleeueth not in the
sonne, shall not see light, but the wrath of God abydeth vppon
him.Iohn. 3. 1. And agein, this is damnation (that is to say, the cause of
damnation) that wheras light is come into the world, (which
lyght is Christ) men haue loued darknesse better than lyght:
that is to say, they haue loued the blynd imaginations and in∣uentions
of their owne ignorant mynds, better than the light∣some
truth of Christes Gospell.
Wherefore putting away all flatterie and soothing of our
selues,Hebr. 4. 1. and taking to vs the touchstone of Gods word, which
is quick and effectuall, and sharper than any two edged sword,
entering in to the diuiding asunder of the soule and the spirit,
and of the sinewes and marie, and sifting out the thoughts and
conceytes of the hart:2. Cor. 13.  let vs examin our owne consciences,
whether wee bee in Christ, and Christ in vs, or no. Our owne
consciences (at leastwise if they bee not blynded with igno∣rance
or hypocrisie) will certifie vs of the truth in that behalf.
And if any man haue not the record thereof in himselfe, he
wanderh yit still in errour, and knoweth not whyther he go∣eth,Gal. 4. 6.
no i what cace he standeth. For they that are in Christ,
haue Christes spirit in them,Rom. 8. 16. and that spirit assureth their spi∣rit,
that they bee the children of God. Now let vs see if wee



haue this warrant in our selues: wee shall discerne it by these
markes following,. Cor. 5. 17. and such other lyke. The scripture telleth
vs, that those which are in Christ Iesus, are become new crea∣tures.Colos. 2. 7.
That they bee rooted, buylded, and setled vpon Christ
by fayth:1. Iohn. 2. 6. That they walke as he walked, fashioned themselues
after his example:Eph. 5. 22. 23. 24. & Gal. 5. 16. & Coloss. 3. 5 That they haue put off the old man, (that
is to say, their owne naturall disposition) which is corrupted
with deceitfull lustes: and beyng renewed in the spirit of their
mynd, (that is to say, in the inward working of their hartes,)
they haue put on the new man,Gal. 5. 22. & Col. 3. 12. & Ephe. 5. 9. (that is to wit, a new disposi∣tion
of mynd, which is shaped lyke vntoo God in true rightu∣ousnesse
and holinesse:Rom. 8. 1. That they walke after the spirit, and
not after the fleshe, that is to say, that they liue not after the
lyking of their owne wit and will, but in obedience to the wis∣dome
and will of God:Colo. 3. 5. & Gala. 5. 24. That they haue mortifyed their earth∣ly
members, that is to say, ouermaystred and subdewed their
sinfull lustes and lykinges: That they bee crucifyed too the
world,Cal. 6. 14. and the world to them, that is to say, that they bee no
more intangled with the fond loue and sinister affection of the
world and worldly things, than if they were already dead, and
had no more neede of them at all:1. Pet. 2. 24. And finally that they bee
dead vnto sinne, but alyue vnto rightuousnesse. Of all which
sayings, and of a number mo tending to the same purpose, the
pith and effect is this, consisting of two members: Namely,
that such as are rightly and vnfeynedly in Christ, haue vtterly
renounced their owne wit, will, wisdome, strength, reputa∣tion,
and rightuousnesse: yea and quyte and cleane forsaken
themselues, togither with the world and all worldly things,
and haue giuen ouer themselues (as it were in bondage) all
wholly vnto Christ, taking him for their onely God, Lord, Sa∣uiour,
Father, Mayster, Teacher, Guyde, Defender, Stay, Light,
Rightuousnesse, Holinesse, Redemption, Wisdome, Strength,
Reconciliation, Sacrifize, Alter, Temple, high Priest, and all in
all: and therefore depending alonely vppon him in all things,
putting their whole hope, trust and confidence in him, way∣ting
vppon him as the seruant vppon his Mayster, or as the



handmayd vppon hir mistresse, or as the chyld vppon his fa∣ther:
seeking his onely honour and glory in all caces, conten∣ed
to beare the crosse with him in suffering all manner of
harmes, wrongs, losses, despytes, reproches, myseries, and tor∣ments
for his sake, that is to wit, for the truth of his Gospell,
and for the rightuousnesse of his kingdome: and finally ma∣king
full account that as they on their part lyue not in them∣selues,
but in him, nor to themselues, but to God, so he on his
part will most plenteously and bountifully reward their la∣bours
beyond all that they can hope or conceiue, and neuer
fayle them or withdraw himself from them euen in this world,
at their neede. Out of the which roote of trew and liuely faith,
springeth foorth this fruite (which is the second part or mem∣ber
that I spake of) to the full confirmation of our conscien∣ces,
& to the open warranting of our beyng in Christ: namely
that for the loue of him, wee imploy our whole lyfe to glorify
God by indeuering continually to edefy, profit, and comfort
our neyghbours both in word and deede, earnestly, faythfully,
and cheerefully, without respect of our selues or of our owne
commodities, ase, profit, pleasure, yea or lyfe, which is in dede
the perfect charitie. If wee fynd this disposition of mynd
throughly rooted in vs: then may wee boldly and certeinly
conclude,Gala. 2. . that wee bee in Christ, and Christ in vs: that the life
which we lyue as now in the fleshe (that is to say, in this world)
wee lyue by beleefe in the sonne of God, or rather that it is not
wee that lyue, but the sonne of God which lyueth in vs, that
wee bee led by Gods spirit, and consequently that wee bee his
children and heyres of his blessed and euerlasting kingdome
with Christ, as chozen and predestinated therto in him before
all worlds.
Howbeit, forasmuch as wee carrie the old Adam continual∣ly
about vs, who cannot bee put quyte and cleane away but by
death.Gal. 5. . And the flesh not onely lusteth, but also wrestleth and
fyghteth so myghtily ageinst the spirit, that oftentymes it
weakeneth, woundeth, ouerthroweth, yea and (as sayeth Saint
Paule) leadeth vs captiue to the lawe or seruice of sinne:Rom. 7. 2. Inso∣much



that there is not so stout a souldyer in Christ, but he is
compelled to say with the same Paule,Rom. 7. 19. The good that I would
doo, I doo not, but the euill which I hate, that doo I: by reason
whereof the greefe and anguish of his mynd inforce him too
cry out (at leastwise in his hart,)Rom. 7. 24.  that I am, who shall de∣liuer
mee from this body of sin. The weake conscience of
the frayle sinner, fynding how farre he commeth short of the
trew effectes and fruites of perfect Christianitie heretoofore
described, is stryken in great heauinesse, and dwelleth in doubt
whether he bee yit in Christ or no. By meanes wherof, he not
only taketh no comfort in the doctrine of Gods eternall elec∣tion
and predestination: but also is the more abashed and dis∣mayed
at it. In this cace wee must not resort for remedie too
fleshe and blud, that is too say, too the perswasions of worldly
wisdome, or of mans owne natural reason and vnderstanding,
but too Gods holy woord, which beyng the very foode and
healthfull salue of our soules, alonely is able to pacify the vex∣ed
conscience, and to cheere vp the drooping and dying hart.
This, besydes other comfortes, wherof mo shall bee reherced
hereafter in place more conuenient, telleth vs that there are
ages and degrees in Christ and Christianitie,1. Cor. 13. 11.
and that our lyfe
is a continuall warfare,Iob. 7. . wherin wee must mainteyne battell, not
onely ageinst the trubbles and aduersities of this world, but
also ageinst our selues, that is to say, ageinst the vices and af∣fections
of our owne corrupt and sinfull nature,Gala. 5. 17. yea and (as
sayeth Saint Paule in this present Epistle too the Ephesians) a∣geinst
principalities and powers,Ephe. 6. 14. ageinst the Lordes of this
world, which are the rulers of the darknesse of this world, euen
the wicked spirites that are aboue. To bee sort, wee must in∣dure
continuall conflict ageinst the world, the flesh, and the di∣uell.
And this warfare is to be susteyned and borne out, not
by our owne strength and policie,Phil. 4. 3. & Rom. 8. 37. but by the power and wis∣dome
of Christ in vs. Agein, the scripture telleth vs, that as
long as wee lyue in this world, (bee wee neuer so foreward,
willing, and circumspect in our doyngs) our knowledge is vn∣perfect,1. Cor. 13. 9. 20. 11. 12.
our loue vnperfect, our fayth vnperfect, and all our



ryghtuousnesse is as a defyled cloth:Esay. 64 7. so that euen the godlyest
 holyest men that euer were, are, or shalbee, must bee faine
 confesse with Dauid,Psal. 32. 1. & Rom. 4. 7. that onely those are blissed whose
 are forgiuen, and whose iniquities are couered, and too
 out with the Publicane,Luke. 18. 13. God bee mercifull too mee wret∣ed
sinner:Psal. 103. 3. alwayes yeelding him this prayse, that it is on∣
he which forgiueth all our sinnes, and healeth all our infyr∣ities.1. Iohn. 1. 8.
For if wee thinke wee haue no sinne, or that wee may
ee quyte and cleane rid of sinne, so long as wee beare the
arthly tabernacle of this frayle body of fleshe and blud about
: wee deceyue our selues, and the truth is not in vs. There∣fore
wee must hold fast the foundation too the ende, which
foundation is the free forgiuenesse of sinnes through Iesus
Christ, beleeuing and hoping to bee iustifyed, (that is too say,
to bee accepted for innocent and ryghtuous, and to bee in∣dewed
with power of the holy Ghost,) not by the deedes of
the Lawe, nor by our owne workes or inuentions, but by the
obedience and ryghtuousnesse of Christ. And therewithall,
vppon assured trust of his strength and assistance, wee must
fyght manfully ageinst our owne lustes, and ageinst all maner
of temptations and crosses, with the weapons of Gods word,
continuall and hartie repentance, feruent prayer, often fasting,
and earnest indeuer of amendment, so as wee suffer not sinne
to ouermayster vs,Rom. 6. 12. and too reigne in our mortall bodyes, by
our fulfylling of the lustes therof,Rom. 7. 22. but delyght in the lawe of
God with the inward man, that is too say, vnfeynedly with the
whole hart,Psal. 51. 6. for as
God requyreth truth in the inward partes,
so hateth he the deceytfull man.Psal. 5. 6. So then, wee must nother
finne wilfully and presumptuously, nor despayre and shrinke
away from God when wee haue sinned: nor play the hypo∣crites
in iustifying our selues towardes God or the world. But
lyke as wee must continually pray God to keepe vs from pre∣sumptuous
sinnes,Psal. 19. 13. and beware in any wise that they get not
the vpper hand of vs: so when wee haue offended, by what
meane so euer it be, or how often so euer it bee, (as who is he
that sinneth not?Psal. 19. 12. Or rather who can tell how oft he offen∣deth?)



Wee must ryse agein continually by repentance and
fayth: so as although our sinnes seeme neuer so greeuous and
heynous in our owne eyes, yit must we yeeld God the honour,
as well of faythfulnesse and mercy in pardoning our often ma∣nifold
and greeuous falles, as of ryghtuousnesse in sanctifying
vs with the fruites of true godlynesse, and of strength in vphol∣ding
and mainteyning vs by the mighty power of his spirit, or
of Iustice in correcting and punishing vs for our misdeedes
and offences.. Iohn. 2. 1. 2. For wee bee sure that if any of vs doo sinne, wee
haue a faythfull aduocate with the father, euen Iesus Christ
the rightuous, who is the attonement maker for our sinnes,
and not for our sinnes onely, but also for the sinnes of the
whole world. Insomuch that if it were possible for one man
to haue in him the full gilt and greeuous burthen of all the
particular sinnes of all men: yit ought not the same man too
despayre, or to doubt of the cleere forgiuenesse and vtter re∣lease
therof, vpon his hartie repentance and vnfeyned amend∣ment,
so long as Christ lyueth and sitteth at the right hand of
God, making intercession for vs. For lyke as God himselfe
is infinite, so is his mercy infinite also, towardes all such as take
hold of it by fayth in Iesus Christ. And too the intent wee
should take hold of it, he assureth vs of it with an othe, saying:
as truely as I lyue I desyre not the death of a sinner,Ezech. 18. 21. 22. 23. but rather
that he should turne from his wickednesse and liue: and in
what houre so euer he repenteth him of his sinnes from the
bottom of his hart, I will put all his wickednesse out of my re∣memberance,
sayeth the Lord. Moreouer, although we inde∣uer
to keepe a cleare conscience towardes God, and to leade a
blamelesse lyfe through charitie towardes men, according to
the prescript rule of Gods lawe: yit our so doyng must not
be with intent too purchace grace, fauour, or ryghtuousnesse
therby at Gods hand, (for that belongeth onely vnto Christ,
and no man liuing shall be iustifyed by the deedes of the lawe)
nor to glorify our selues to the worldward, (for whosoeuer see∣keth
the glory of men, is destitute of the glory of God, and
hath receyued his reward already,)Math. 5. 16 & but onely to glorify God



 shewing foorth the myghtie woorking of his spirit in vs,1. Pet. 2. 12. o
 benefite of our neyghbours, to th stablishing of our owne
sciences in the faith, and to the confuzion and shame of
 duersaries, which doo slaunderously misreport the doc∣
of saluation which wee professe.
 wee deale after this maner, then dooth Gods woord put
 of all doubt,Rom. 6. 14. that sinne shall not get the vpper hand of
 bycause wee bee not vnder the lawe, but vnder grace. And
 continuall mainteyning & renewing of the battell ageinst
, the world, and our owne flesh, assureth vs, that although
 bee neuer so full of infirmities, yit are wee graffed intoo
hrist,Rom. 6. 4. 5. 6. and growen into him by resembling his death, in that
 haue crucifyed, and dayly labour to crucifye the old man
 him:Rom. 6. 5. by meanes wherof wee growe vp agein intoo the
enesse of his resurrection, through newnesse of lyfe to the
ory of God for euer. Finally, it warranteth vs that wee bee
 grounded and setled in Gods Election, so as wee cannot
 any wyse perish. For Satan is not diuided ageinst himselfe:
 worldlinges hate not the world,Math. 12. 26. nor the things therin:
esh and blud mislyke no the corruption of the old Adam:
other can any man come vnto Christ, except the father draw
. Now then, seeying that to striue ageinst sinne, and too
 continually by repentance after the maner afore mentio∣
ed, and to doo all things of mere loue, commeth not of our
, (for the naturall man is not obedient to Gods will,
no∣er can bee:)Iames. 1. 17. but of God the father of all mercy, comfort, and
, from whom euery good and perfect gift commeth, who
 of his owne free goodnesse worketh in vs both the wyll
 the performance therof by the power of his spirit:Phil. 2. 13. And
eyng that the sheading of his spirit after that sort into our
rtes (beyng the earnest penny of saluation, and seale of our
 option, to strengthen our weaknesse, and to warrant and
 vs ageinst all temptations) is a sure and infallible proofe
 Gods loue towardes vs,1. Iohn. 4. 1.
according to his saying of S. Iohn,  doo wee know that wee dwell in him; and he in vs, that
 hath giuen vs of his spirit: theruppon followeth an argu∣ment



grounded vppon the nature of God, which leadeth vs
directly and comfortably to the poynt of Predestination, and
is the very knot and conclusion of that matter.Imes. 1. 17. For inasmuch
as God is vnchaungeable, so as there is no alteration of mind
or purpoze in him, too fancie one thing to day, and another
too morrowe, or too determine and repeale agein, and so con∣sequently
too hate and loue by turnes and fittes:Rom. 11. 29. (for Gods
giftes and callings are such, ashe cannot repent him of them:)
it must needes follow, that he loued vs before all worldes, and
that the same loue of his caused him too chooze and predesti∣nate
vs too saluation before wee had any beeing, yea euen e∣uerlastingly
before all tyme: and also that the same loue shall
neuer leaue vs, vntyll it haue brought vs too the endlesse fru∣ition
of his heauenly glory, bycause that whom he loueth, he
loueth to the end,Rom. 8. 11. and bycause that forasmuch as the spirit of
him that raysed vp Iesus dwelleth in vs, he that raysed vp Iesus
will also quicken our mortall bodyes, through his spirit which
dwelleth in vs▪ For when wee bee come so farre forward as
to fynd our selues in Christ, & by Christ to take hold of Gods
free loue, and by his loue to clymb vp to his eternall election:
then resting vppon the foresayd argument of the vnariable
and vnchaungeable nature of God, (which not euen the hea∣then,
I meane the wyser sort of them, did euer deny, or in ma∣ner
doubt of:) wee knit the eternitie to come with the eterni∣tie
past, and conclude determinately in our selues, that there is
now no damnation to vs that are in Christ Iesus.
Yea and out of this conclusion springeth such inestimable
comfort and inward ioy of mynd, as inforceth vs to burst out
into this bold, but yit most godly boasting on Gods behalfe▪
which Saint Paule describeth in the eyght too the Romanes,
saying: I am fully perswaded, that nother lyfe, nor death, nor
Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present,
nor things to come, nor heigth, nor depth, nor any other crea∣ture
can separate vs from Gods loue, which he beareth vs in
Iesus Christ our Lord. And seeyng that God is on our syde,



who shalbee ageinst vs? Seeing he hath not spared his onely
sonne, but hath giuen him for vs all: how should he not giue
vs all things with him? Who shall lay any thing to the charge
of vs whom God hath chozen? God hath acquitted vs, who
hen can condemne vs? Christ hath dyed for vs, yea and is
rizen agein for vs, and also sitteth at Gods ryght hand and
maketh intercession for vs.2. Co. 5. 15. Now if he dyed for vs, then are
wee sure that wee dyed all in him, and lykewyze that as he is
rizen,Rom. 6. 8. so wee are rizen agein with him, neuer to dye any more,
for death hath not any more power ouer him,Rom. 6. 9. but forasmuch
as wee bee his members, wee doo sit with him already in the
heauenly places by hope, only wayting for the day of his com∣ming
to iudgment,Coloss. 3. 3. 4. at the which tyme, our lyfe which as yit ly∣eth
hidden with him in God, shalbee shewed openly, and wee
shall appeere with him in glory.
And this assured perswasion or beleef of Gods loue, groun∣ded
vppon his eternall predestination, kindleth in vs as it were
a counter loue towardes God, and a contempt of all world∣ly
thinges, bee they neuer so sweete or sower, pleazant
or peynfull: wherethrough wee doo cheerfully answere on
our owne behalfe accordingly as is set downe in the foresayd
eyghth Chapter to the Romans: Who shall plucke away
our loue from Christ? Shall oppression, or anguish, or per∣secution,
or hunger, or nakednesse, or daunger, or swoord,
according as it is written, for thy sake are we slayne all the day
long, and accounted as sheepe appoynted to the slaughter?
No surely: in all these things wee be more then conquerours
through him that loued vs, that is too wit, through God
woorking in vs.Hebr. 12. . And therefore hauing our eye fast set conti∣nually
vppon the foreleader and finisher of our fayth Iesus
Christ, who for the ioyes sake that was set before him, did
willingly abyde the Crosse, and the reprochefull misusages
which he was most spytfully put vntoo:2. Cor. 4. 1. 17. 18. wee doo not faynt or
wexe cold, but although our outward man bee consumed, yit
our inward man is dayly remewed, insomuch that we reioyce
uen in tribulations, knowing that tribulation brdeth pa∣cience,



pacience breedeth experience, experience breedeth
hope, and hope maketh not ashamed. For wee bee sure that
our induring of affliction for a short tyme, will yeeld vs an in∣comporable
weyght of vnspeakable and euerlasting glory. In
respect whereof wee make no more account of all the aduersi∣ties
of this world, than of fleabytings, and therefore wee looke
not vppon the things that are seene, but vppon the things
that are not seene, bycause the things that are seene, are
transitorye, but the thinges that are seene, are euerla∣sting.
Now then, the summe of the things aforesayd, is this. That
wheras there is no saluation, no election, no fauour, no bles∣sing,
no benefyte to bee had, hoped, or sought for at Gods
hand, but onely in and by our Lord Iesus Christ: it is shewed
for the comfort of the weaker sort, that in this spirituall bat∣tell
ageinst the world, the fleshe, and the diuell, those are not
counted to be out of Christ, which beyng Baptized into him,
and professing themselues to bee Christians, doo notwithstan∣ding
fall through simple ignorance and infirmitie of nature,
or are violently borne downe, wounded, or caryed away at
tymes by the force of ouermightie tēptations: but eyther such
as hauing their conscience seared or benommed, doo welter
in sinne without feeling of any remorse: or which feeling the
sting of sinne and hartbyting of the lawe, doo neuerthelesse
make such account of the filthie pleasures of the fleshe, the va∣nities
of the world, and the fulfilling of their owne wicked
willes, that they continew in sinne wilfully and wittingly, or
rather maliciously and presumptuously, euen ageinst the con∣tinuall
testimonie and exclamation of their owne consciences:
or else which through a cerrein feintnesse of hart, and coward∣ly
misbeleefe, by reason of ouermuch mynding of their owne
weaknesse, and of the horriblenesse of their sinnes without
the remedyes that God hath ordeyned for the same, doo vt∣terly
castaway their armour and weapon, and eyther out of
hand giue ouer, and as it were betray themselues too the ene∣mie
of mankynd without any resistence: or soone after for∣sake



the feeld vppon despayre of victory, without returning a∣ny
more into the battell, or without crauing the helpe and
ccour of their Captein Christ, as who would say, they looked
 get the vpper hand, and to stand by their owne strength at
eir owne appoyntment, and not at Gods appoyntment,
rough his power and mercie in Christ.
Of which kynd of people the cowardlinesse is so much the
more shamefull and blamewoorthie, bycause God hath gi∣uen
them such a Sauyour & Captein, as is both able & willing
too minister strength too them bee they neuer so weake and
feeble, health, bee they neuer so sicke or diseazed, soundnesse,
bee they neuer so sore wounded or maymed, corage, bee they
neuer so faynt and weery, victory, bee they neuer so much op∣pressed
and ouermatched, ryghtuousnesse, bee they neuer so
sinfull and wicked, yea and euen lyfe though they bee dead.
For Christ himselfe beeing the Phisition of our soules, our
health, our welfare, our lyght, our resurrection, our lyfe,
and the very truth it selfe, which cannot lye nor deceyue, (to
the intent wee should bee willing too resott vntoo him, and
haue assured warrant of hope and comfort,) calleth and allu∣reth
vs in this wyse vntoo him:Mth. 1. 28. Come vntoo mee all yee that
are weery and ouerloden,Iohn. 16. 33. & and I will refreshe you: Bee of good
cheere, I haue ouercome the world, and so shall you also by
fayth in mee:1. Iohn. 5. 4. 5. Although your sinnes bee as read as scarlet, I
will make them as whyte as snowe:Iohn. 6. 37. 39. 40. I will refuze none that
commeth to mee, but though he bee dead, yit shall he lyue,
for I will rayze him vp at the last day:1. Tim. 2. 12. If yee suffer with mee,
yee shall also reigne with mee in glory:Iames. 4. 7. & Math. 16. 18. Resist the diuell, and
he shall flee from you, so that the verye gates of hell shall not
preuayle ageinst you:Math. 18. 19. & Iohn. 14. 13. 14. & 15. 16. Aske what you will of my father in my
name, and it shalbee done vntoo you: Aske and yee shal haue,
seeke and yee shall fynd,Math. 7. 7. 8. & Luk. 11. 9. 10. knocke and it shalbee opened vntoo
you, possesse yee your soules through pacience. Besydes this,
he putteth vs not too the dooing of any thing which he him∣selfe
hath not first doone for our sakes, to giue vs the more
comfort and incoragement by his owne example. If wee bee



tempted,Math. 4. & Hebr. 4. 15. so was he. If wee bee smitten for our sinnes, so was
he: for he bare our infirmities,Esay. 53. 4. 5. and the penaltie of our trans∣gressions
was layd vppon him. If wee be tryed and nurtured
with correction of the crosse, so was he: insomuch that al∣though
he was the sonne of God,Hebr. 5. 8. yit learned he obedience
by the things that he suffered. If wee bee abaced, so was he:
insomuch that wheras it was no robberie in him to bee equall
with God,Phil. 2. 6. 7. bycause he was in the shape of God, yit abaced he
himselfe by taking vppon him the shape of a seruant, and that
so farre,Psal. 22. 6. as he cryeth out in the Psalme, I am a worme, and no
man, a very scorning stocke of men, and an outcast of the peo∣ple.
If the terrour of Gods wrath for sin doo abash our harts,
so did it abash his: and that so sore, as he was fayne too crye
out,Psal. 22. 1. & Mth. 27. 46. O God my God, why hast thou forsaken mee? If wee
suffer want and penury, so did he: for he had not whereon
too rest his head. Finally he became lyke vnto vs in all things,
sauing onely in sinne,Heb. 5. 15. 16 to the intent that wee hauing a Hygh
priest which could bee touched with the feeling of our infir∣mities,
might boldly preace to the throne of grace, to obteyne
mercy and fauour,1. Pet. 4. 13. 14 to our releefe and helpe in dew time. Assu∣ring
our selues that if wee fashion our selues lyke vntoo his
image in sufferance, in patience, in humilitie, in fayth, in hope,
in loue, and in resistence of sinne, wee shall also bee made lyke
vnto him in glory.
Wherefore let vs take his yoke vppon vs,Mah. 11. 30. for it is sweete:
let vs sticke to him in weale and wo,  he will not forsake vs:
and let vs fence our selues aforehand with the armour and
weapons that Saint Paule speaketh of in his present Epistle,
that wee may bee able to stand fast in these euill dayes, wherin
Satan the old serpent leaueth nothing vnattempted that may
destroy or impayre our fayth: and that wee may bee able to
beare out the brunt of afflictions which God iustly may, and
(I feare mee) shortly will cast vppon vs for our carelesse hea∣ring,
and more carelesse, slowe, and negligent following of his
word so plentifully preached among vs, if wee conuert not by
speedie amendment. Let such as are yit weake, learne to grow



from fayth to fayth, from knowledge to knowledge in Iesus
Christ.2. Pet. 1. 5. 6. Let them (as sayth S. Peter) indeuer by all meanes to
adde too their fayth, strength, to their strength, knowledge, to
their knowledge, stayednesse, to their stayednesse, pacience, to
their pacience, godlynesse, to their godlynesse, kynd harted∣nesse,
and to their kynd hartednesse, Loue. And whyle they
bee proceeding too perfection by those degrees: I counsell
them in the meane season too reuerence the mysteries which
God hath not yit reuealed vnto them, nother despayring of
their owne saluation for want of deepe and exquisite know∣ledge,
(for to whom much is giuen, of him much shall bee re∣quyred,
and to whom lesse is giuen, of him lesse shall bee requi∣red:)
nor refuzing too learne, least they fall intoo the sinne of
contempt: nor grudging at thoze too whom God hath giuen
a greater lyght of vnderstanding in such misteries: nor yit dif∣faming
the doctrine it selfe, which is vttered by the holy Ghost
for their comfort, if they could conceyue it aryght. Agein,
on the other syde, I coūsell the stronger sort (euen for Christes
sake, who beeing the Lord of al power, became weake for our
sakes) too trayne foreward the weakelings with all myldnesse
of spirit, not with disputing, but with gentle exhortation and
incoragement,Hebr. 12. 12. 13. and too cheere vp the faynt handes and fee∣ble
knees, eche bearing so with others infirmities, and helping
too guyde their feete in the ryght pathes, as God may bee
gloryfyed on all handes through Iesus Christ. And as for the
vnreuerend and wicked wilfull scorners, wee may let them a∣lone
vntoo God,Math. 7. 6. without casting of our pearles before swyne,
or wihout giuing of our holy things vnto Dogges, least Gods
name bee blasphemed and rayled vppon by our occasion. But
yit ought wee (of christian charitie) too pray for them, if
peraduenture the goodnesse and long sufferance of God may
win them too repentance,2. Tim. 2. 10. 25. that they may acknowledge the
truth, and scaping out of the diuels snares wherein they bee
hild prizoners, come too their ryght myndes, and performe
the will of God. For wee our selues also bee compassed a∣bout
with innumerable infirmities, and haue neede of conti∣nuall



mercy at Gods hand, nother is there any of vs all that
standeth by his owne strength, or that can assure himselfe too
hold out one minute of an houre, but by the helpe of God
through Christ. Therefore let euery one that calleth vppon
the name of Christ, (that is too wit, which professeth him∣selfe
a Christian) depart from iniquitie. Let him that see∣meth
to stand,2. Pet. 1. 10. 11. take heede that he fall not. And finally let
vs all indeuer to warrant our calling and election by good and
godly conuersation, and so shall the way bee layed open for
vs to enter into the euerlasting kingdome of our Lord and Sa∣uiour
Iesus Christ, to whom bee all honour, glory, and domi∣nion
for euer and euer. Amen.
Thus much haue I (presuming vpon your graces good fa∣uour
and sufferance) aduentured to wryte of this deepe, but
yit moste comfortable poynt of Christen doctrine, so farre
foorth as myght beseeme the breefnesse of an Epistle, and as
too my poore skill hath seemed necessarie too giue the simple
reader an enterance into the substance of this booke, that he
myght the eazlyer conceyue, and the better vnderstand and
digest the doctrine of this Epistle, and of the Sermons written
vppon the same. And therfore I haue had a speciall care to set
downe the matter as playnly and comfortably as I could, hol∣ding
my selfe alwayes to the present cace, without stepping a∣syde
into any bymatters, and without auouching anything
which is not warranted by Gods expresse woord. Agein, I
haue bin the sparer in woordes and sentences of myne owne,
bycause of the greate profoundnesse of the diuine doctrine,
which cannot bee handled with too greate reuerence: the ra∣ther
bycause I see that the more godly and skilfull men are in
matters of Religion, the warer and circumspecter they bee is
dealing with the foresayd doctrine, eyther in familiar talk &
conference, or in giuing it forth in their Sermons & writings.
And as for the author of these Sermons, I shal not neede to cō∣mend
him to your grace, bycause that you, whose study is im∣ployed
in matters of diuinitie and good gouernment of the
Church, are better acquaynted with him thā I, & therfore can∣not



be ignorant of the goodnes of his writings, wherof this is
not the first part, nor (I hope) the last that hath and shal be put
forth both by mee and others, (I trust) to the benefyte of our
common country. Wherefore omitting too trubble you any
further in that behalfe, I beseech your goodnesse to beare with
my boldnesse, and also with myne ouersyghtes where any haue
scaped mee in this translation, and to further this my trauell
with your fauour, as you doo the lyke proceedings that tend
to the aduauncement of Gods glory, by the edifying of his
Church. Surely my purpose and desyre was that it should haue
bin a first fruite, or at leastwise among the first fruites, of such
maner of presents as were offered your grace, at your returne
into the South, to welcome you to your See of Caunterbury, if
the time would haue serued to haue had it conueniently prin∣ted:
for it was fully translated and deliuered out of handes a
good while afore. Neuerthelesse, my trust is that a woorke so
beneficiall to the Church of God, shall not bee the lesse accep∣table
to you, though it come not with such speede as I glad∣ly
would it should haue doone: which thing I beseeche your
goodnesse with all reuerend humilitie too graunt, praying
God too power vppon you such abundance of his heauenly
grace and holy spirit, as the place of high preheminence wher∣in
he hath set your most reuerend fatherhood, requyreth: that
wee may long inioy your furtherance, to the continuall bene∣fyte
of his Church. Written at Clare in Suffolke the .vii. of
Ianuary. 1576.

