



DEARE SIR,
The intimacie of my euer and all bounden dutie, which I ac∣knowledge, as tributarie due vnto you, with the ardent zeale and desire, of your speedie auersion from these broken cisternes of heresie, and your penitentiall conuersion vnto the liuing waters of e∣ternall life, which are no where contai∣ned but in one Holy, Catholique and A∣postolique
 church, haue moued mee of∣ten times, to commend some litle trea∣tise vnto you, therein to lay open before your eyes the grieuous threatnings of almightie God against sinnes, and to admonish you in
, of the dangerous state wherin you liue, hoping by th s, to disburthen my selfe of the obligato∣rie duties which I acknowledge as boūd by nature▪ but considering▪ that tou∣chinge this subiect, many bookes, haue beene learnedly written (tha kes bee gi∣uen to God) by diuerse good Catholi∣ques, and faithfullie translated into our English toung, I desisted to proceede in so worthy an enterprise, till at length mine enflamed zeale & filiall dutie, it such sort burned a fresh within mee, that I could no longer quench it, by the insurging waues of the seas, nor de∣ferre the aduenturing with this present, to make the same knowne vnto you.
I am nor ignorant, how farre the mouthes of many Gentlemen of your
 rancke, and neighbourhood, are out of tast, and much more affected to the flesh parts of Aegypt. (Exod. 16.3.) then to the bread of Angells; I meane rather to the reading of prophane, then spiri∣tuall bookes, taking greater delight in perusing strang pleasant histories, ther∣in to solace and recreate them selues, then in the pious workes and whole∣some exhortations of deuout, and reli∣gious men, who intend nothing but the saluation of your poore sinfull soules: But as the Prophet Dauid.
(Psal. 4.3.) sayeth. O yee sonnes of men, how long are yee of heauie hartes? why loue yee vanities, and seeke after lying? Did they but know what profitt, and fruite they may reape thereby, doubtlesse they would paint euerie little sentence in the r hartes, and mediate vppon them morninge, and eueninge, and binde them for a signe on their handes, writ∣ting them in their entries, and on the dores of their houses, that so they might
 alwaies haue them in their sight, and remembrance.
Deuteronom. 6.6.7.8.
Truly Deare Sir, I haue endeauored in dressing this meate, to prouoke your ap∣petite. (Gen. 27.9.) and laboured, to sett forth this doctrine in such a stile, that it may moue you, diligently to read the same, which if you doe, I hope by the grace of God, you shall finde that wonderfull chaung in your soule, which others in former ages most happilie haue had, and as that, allmost euery day haue, who by the means of spiri∣tuall bookes, haue vtterly detested their former licentious liues, and with great feruour and zeale, begunne anew in Gods holie seruice.
Call to minde the treasurer of the Queene of Aethiopia, who was reading I say the Prophet in his chariot, when God almightie conuerted him, by Saint Philip; (Act. 8.30.) Remember like∣wise, that those soe notable, and famous  workes, which King Iosias did in all his kingdome, proceeded from the rea∣ding of an holie booke, which Helchias the Prophet, gaue vnto Saphan the scri∣be. (4. Regum 22.13.) and S. Augu∣stine relateth. (confess. lib. 8.) how three noble courtiers walking abroad in the euening with Theodosius the Empe∣rour into the fields, two of them went a litle aside vnto a Monkes cell, and there finding a booke, wherein was written the life of S. Anthony, one of them be∣gāne to read it, & behould in a moment he felt his hart so enkindled with an ho∣lie loue, and moued with such a reli∣gious shame, that hee, together with his other companion, being in a great ago∣nie with themselues, put off their secu∣lar apparell in the verie same place where they stood, and bidding farrewell vnto courtlie pleasures, beganne to erect a spirituall building, and did forsake all thinges of this world, desiring no∣thinge more then to follow their Lord  and Sauiour Iesus Christ. Such admi∣rable chaunges and notable alterations, haue holy bookes procured, in these persons, who with due attention consi∣dered them.
Accept then (Deare Sir) this small guift, and first fruites of my poore ende∣uours, which may be a means (as I hope) to call you into the path of a good life, and induce you forthwith (by Gods gra∣ce) to make profession of the Catholi∣que faith, which faith vnlesse euery one keepe holy, and inuiolable, without doubt he shall perish euerlastingly. (S. Atha. creed.) Come therfore speedily into the foulde of Christ, if you will be preserued from the raueninge wolues. (Ioh. 10.16.) Haue recourse vnto Noahs arke. (Gen. 6.18.) if you will be sa∣ued from drowning; Be a member of the Catholique, and vniuersall church, which according to the Apostle is, Co∣lumna & firmamentum veritatis. (1. Tim.
3.15.) the pillar and ground of  truth. And be no longer seduced by the fallacies and deceipts, of death bringing heretiques: Now at the last, as you ten∣der your owne soules health, confesse your sinnes with the Prophet Dauid. (Psal. 50.) crie aloud vnto God for mer∣cie, with Saint Marie Magdalen. (Luc. 7.) wash the feete of our Sauiour with tears of true contrition: Goe out with S. Peter. (Math. 26.) and weepe bit∣terlie. For now is the acceptable time, now is the day of saluation: The night will come when it will be too late to worke; (2. Cor. 6.2.) True it is, that the theefe was saued, and found mer∣cie at the last gaspe, but God forbid (as a right virtuous sonne said in the like case to his owne Father) that wee should vse such preposterous pol∣licie, as, when our senses are asto∣nished, our wittes distracted, our vnderstandinge obscured, when both bodie and minde are tormented with the gripes of mortall sickenes, that  then wee should beginne to thinke of the weightie matters of our saluation, and of the suddaine to become Sainctes, when we are fearce able to behaue our selues like reasonable creatures▪ No; no, deceaue not your selfe, take time while you may, when it is once past, it is im∣possible to recall it, according to the old prouerbe: post est occasio calua: feare not persecution, or lsse of goods, feare not them, that kill the bodie, and are not able to preiudice the soule, but rather feare him, that can precipitate both body and soule, into the infernall abisse of hell. Math 10.28.
Is it not a most lamentable case, that men who professe themselues to be Chri∣stians, should haue a greater care of their worldlie pelfe, honours, and dig∣nities, then of the health, and saluation of their owne soules? Wee read in pro∣phane authours, that when Crates be∣ganne to studie philosophie, hee cast all his monie into the sea, saying;
Malo  te perdere, quam vt tu me perdas, I had rather cast thee away, then thou shouldest cast away mee: intimatinge thereby, that riches are not to be estee∣med, but vtterliy to be renounced, and contemned, when they cannot bee kept without the losse and hinderance of ver∣tue. I omitt to speake of Bias and Dio∣genes, the one whereof being admoni∣shed to saue something for himselfe, his answere was, Omnia mea mecum porto, all my substance I carrie with mee; meaning his vertues: The other made choise of pouertie, & rather to liue in washing of rootes, then with Ari∣stippus to enioy courtlie pleasures, and by flatterie to be in fauour with Prin∣ces: Alas shall these heathen philoso∣phers (which knew not God) despise treasures, contemne riches, and embra∣ce pouertie, onely for the loue of morall vertues, and shall wee, which professe our selues to be Christians, bought with the pretious blood of Iesus Christ, res∣pect  transitorie vanities before the sal∣uation of our soules? Shall the blessed Apostle S. Paul. (Phil. 3.8.) count all thinges detriment, and esteeme them as dunge, that he might gaine Christ? And shall we like children be delighted with toyes, and with Esops cocke pre∣ferre a barlie corne, before a rich gem∣me? shall we dissemble with our con∣sciences for the worlde, for feare that otherwise we should loose our credit? Woe be vnto vs if we doe so, seeing our Blessed Sauiour hath sayed. (Math.
10.33.) He that shall deny me before men, him wil I denie before my Father which is in heauen: And in an other place, hee sayeth, If any man will come vnto me, and hateth not his Father, and mother, wife, and children, Brother, and sister, yea and his owne life, he cannot be my disciple. Luc.
14.26.
God forbid that we should delay our conuersion, and with the foolish Vir∣gins haue our oyle to seeke for our lam∣pes,  when the bridegroome cometh vnto the marriage, left afterwardes knoc∣king and calling to be receiued in, we be sent backe againe with a, Nescio vos, I know you not, S. Iohn Baptist, when he was in the wildernesse, shew∣ed that his commission, and embassage was to preach pennance vnto the world, how that the axe was now layed to the roote of the tree; and euerie tree that bringeth not forth good fruite, to bee cut downe, and cast into the fire; And that his life might bee conformable to his wordes; he executed in pennance the greatest austerities, his meat was locust, and wilde honie, the food which hee found in the fieldes, his apparell a gar∣ment of camels hayre, girt with a rough girdle, and his chamber and lodginge, a caue of some craggic rocke, his boul∣ster, and bedde the hard ground, bea∣ringe with great patience, the colde, heate, hunger, and thirst, and other common iniuries of the ayre: But why  did this blessed and glorious forerun∣ner of our Sauiour Christ endure all this? not in punishment of his sinnes, hee beinge sanctified from his Mothers wombe, but to preserue himselfe the bet∣ter, euen from the least offences, to tame his flesh, and bring it in subiection to the spirit, and to dispose him selfe the better to receaue the guifts of heauen, which are not ordinarilie obtayned, but by such painfull austerities.
Why then should not wee imitate this Saint and conforme our selues vnto him, wherein hee is imitable? Why should not wee embrace corporall auste∣rities, as much as wee may, chastising our flesh, and offeringe it as a liuelie hoste, holy and acceptable vnto God al∣mighty in satisfaction for our sinnefull liues past? (Rom. 12.) This path haue all these holie and iust men of the old and new testament formerly trodden; For in the written law the Apostle af∣firmeth, how they went in sheeps skin∣nes,  in goates skinnes, wandring in de∣serts, in mountaines, in dennes, and caues of the earth: and in the law of grace, wee plainlie see, that the whole life of our Blessed Sauiour, the most per∣fect mirrour of all virtues, was nothing else but a continuall acte of penaunce, spent wholy in watching, praying, fa∣sting, hunger, thirst, and colde, with other like necessities wherunto we are subiect, suffering shamefull ignominies, and reproaches, and all for our exam∣ple, as witnesse his owne wordes, say∣ing. Ego dedi &c. (Ioan. 13.15.) I haue giuen you example, as I haue done so do you likewise: His prayers were so long, that S. Luke writeth, that he went forth into the mountaine, and there passed the whole night in prayer. (Luc. 16.12.) and that the example of this vertue was not left vs by our Lord for speculation onely, but for our pra∣ctise also, this place of scripture maketh it plaine.
(Marc. 13.33.) Take heed,  watch, and pray, and againe, watch yee therefore, for yee know not the houre in which the Lord of the house cōmeth. He fasted fortie dayes, and fortie nightes, in the desert. (Marc. 4.) and one Euan∣gelist addeth. (Luc.
4.2.) that he did eate nothing in those dayes: neither doe we euer read expresselie, that he did euer eate any flesh in all his life, vnlesse the Sacramētall flesh of the old law, which was eaten for deuotion, & not to satisfy hunger, wheras of fish, & bread made of barly, and of drinking of water, māy te∣stimonies are not wāting: Besides al this, he was derided▪ scorned, mocked, coūted a foole, and when he did any wonderfull miracles, they would presētly say (Mat. 13.55.) Is not this the carpenters sonne? do we not know all his pedegree, how basely he is descēded? a mā that is a glut∣ton, & wine-drinker (Math.
11.19.) a friend of publicans & sinners? After our Sauiour Christs most bitter death, and passion, consider how the Apostles passed
 their liues, in much fasting, long wat∣chings, hunger, thirst, cold, heat, & na∣kednesse? And since their time, all these which haue safely passed the troublesom sea of this miserable world, and are now arriued at the thrise happy hauen of e∣ternall felicitie, they haue all done the like; To auoid prolixity, I referre you vn∣to infinite exāples in Egisippus & Euse∣bius and others; that haue written the liues of Saints in those ages, as also in S. Athanasius, of the life of S. Paul the first Eremite, and of S. Hilarion & the like, you may see in Ioānes Cassianus, Palla∣dius, Ioānes Climachus▪ & other holy & authētical authors, which haue recorded things of admiration, in this behalfe: all with most rigorous asperities of life in these ancient Christiās, which intended only the mortifying of their bodies, the subduing of their flesh, and sensual tie, repressing the vnlawful motiōs of their concupiscence, that they might stād more secure in this conflict of resisting sinne.
Is it possible then, that wee, knowing and hearinge these thinges, should, as holy Iob sayeth, drinke vp sin∣ne, as beasts doe water? where are our witts, reason, and iudgement? when we heare Christ saying. (Mat. 16.26.) what doth it profit a man, if he gaine the whole world, and suffer detriment of his soule? And we like swine, wallow our selues in the filth, puddle, & sincke of all iniquitie? shall we be kindlie in∣uited to the mariage dinner. (Math. 22.4.) and refuse to come, for some base commoditie, that is complacent vnto our sensualitie? Certainly such proceeding would argue want of faith in vs, that we should not beleeue, that the diuine iustice will punish sinne, with perpe∣tuall bannishment, out of the celestiall paradise of endlesse blisse, and with euer∣lasting paines and torments, in the hor∣rible fire of hell.
Let vs then (as the Apostle aduiseth) (Heb. 12.12.) shake off from vs, all  weight and clogg that may hinder vs, let vs by patience and long animitie, run∣ne and make hast vnto the combat of∣fered vnto vs, with our eyes fixed vppon the authour of our faith, and principall cause therof Christ Iesus, who setting before him the ioyes of heauen, and con∣tēning the confusion (or worldly shame that thereof might ensue) sustained the bitter death of the Crosse, and thereby hath obtained to sitt at the right hand of the seat of God his Father.
Lastly, as Gods vnworthy Legate, & your dutiful sonne, I admonish you with the Prophet. (Psal. 47.13.) that out of hand, you compasse Sion (the Catho∣lique Church, and embrace her) that you build in her towers (by considering her fortresses, the holy Doctors and Fa∣thers, which watch, and defend her Walles) that you sett your hart on her strength (resting assured of all matters of faith vpon her (the pillar and foun∣dation of truth) that you distribute her  houses (by obseruing and marking dili∣gently, how many particular churches were speedilie founded into the world) tht you may declare that, in another generation by teaching thē to hould fast the same faith, or to returne vnto it, if they be relapsed; or to receiue it, if they be estranged from it: Because this is God our God for euer, & euer; Christ God in∣carnate that worketh al this, is our ve∣rie God and Sauiour, not for a few yea∣res, as an hundred, six hundred, a thou∣sand, or millions of thousands, but for e∣uer and euer; He shall rule as a King, & consequently haue a kingdome, his Ca∣tholike church, euermore to endure vnto the end of the world: which church must be your Mother, if you will haue God for your Father: For it is an infallible rule with S. Cyprian and S. Augustin.
Non habebit Deum patrem, qui nolit habere Ecclesiā matrem. (Cypr. simp. prelat.) he shal not haue God for his Father, who wil not haue the church for his mother.
It may be you shal haue your Scrip∣turarum fures. (Origen. in 2. ad Rom.) theeues of the scriptures, your presumptuous heretikes fly through the whole b ble, quoting the Psalmes. Pro∣phets, Gospell, Epistles, very readily vnto you, as Vincentius Lirinensis sayth such mens fashion is, but take heed of them, for they giue you the bare text, wthout the true meaning, and as the Diuell did vnto our Sauiour, they come vnto you, with a, Scriptum est. (Math. 4.6.) couering themselues ouer head & eares with scripture as with the wooll, and fleese of simple sheepe: Beware of such flse Prophets which are inwardl ra∣uen ng wolues.
(Mat. 7.15.) worke out your saluation with feare & trembling, remembring that none shall be crow∣ned, which doth not lawfully fighte. (2. Tim. 2.) Now therfore make ioy∣full all the Angels, and court of heauen, with your conuersion strike the stroake with God, say with the Prophet,
Nunc cepi. (Mal. 7.6.) now I haue begunne  in Gods blessed seruice. Doe you with S. Hierom, although your Mother much lamenting, should show you her brests, with which shee gaue you sucke, and your Father should weepe on his knees before you, hereby to keepe you from the sweet repose and tuition of the Catho∣lique church, runne ouer your Father, cast your Mother aside, and make hast to the standard of the Crosse:
Solum pie∣tatis genus est in hac re, esse cru∣delem, this is the greatest kinde of pie∣tie aboue all other in this point, to shew your selfe cruell: I humbly implore the diuine Maiestie, and lying prostrate at your feete, do begge with teares, that he would so moue and mollifie your hart, that at the sound of these summoning Trumpets, all impediments being incon∣tinently cast aside, you may attentiuely harken to their dreadfull echoe. Sweet Iesus out of his infinite mercy, and by his bitter death and passion, blesse, di∣rect, and confirme you with his princi∣pall
 spirit. (Psal. 50.) that when he shall be pleased inwardly to moue you with his diuine inspirations, he may gratiously inuite you to tast of the hea∣uenly waters of his most sweet, and our holy mother, the Catholike church. Cō∣tristate not any longer the holy Ghost. (Ephes. 4.30.) by hardning your har∣te, but thankefully receaue and enter∣taine the same, with submission, reue∣rence & respect towards so great a ma∣iestie, and without delay make profes∣sion openly of the Catholique faith, and religion of our auncient holy Christian forefathers, that so you may raigne with our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, and with them in heauē, participating there of such ioyes, as neither eye hath seene, eare hath heard, nor euer hath ascended into the hart of man to conceiue. (Cor. 2.9.) to which, God of his infinite mer∣cie bring vs, who hath so dearly bought vs, that we may there raigne perpetual∣lie in glorie with him, for euer.
Amen.


