



OCcasioned, Right
Honourable, to consider
certeine of M. Caluins
Sermons in the Frenche
tongue, vpon the lawe of
God and his hestes, and
finding them (though ga∣thered
and set forth by o∣thers,
yet) aunswerable to their makers labour,
to bee godlie, learned, and profitable, I was the
bolder to aduenture the deliuerance of them into
our mother language, and most bolde to present
your Honour therewith: the beginning of small
abilitie, such as they bee, yet due to your Lord∣shippe,
vnto whom I owe all thankfulnesse and
humble duetie. Your Honours good procure∣ment
of her Maiesties gratious fauour, whereby I
first became a Scholer in Winchester Colledge,
afterward to bee remoued to the New Colledge
of Oxford, whereof at this present I am a poore
member, I could neuer since forget, or burie so
good a benefite in such great obliuion. Some sig∣nification

therefore of a gratefull minde is herein
sought, together with the profit of many the sim∣pler
sorte, which the rather may be atteined to, by
your Lordshippes honourable name, fauourable
countenance, and protection, which being vouch∣safed,
will be sufficientlieable to counteruaile the
contrarie endeuours of such euill disposed persons
as seeke euen vnder the colour of greatest truth, to
pull out the eyes of knowledge, and to bring a
palpable darkenesse vpon the face of the earth, a
darkenesse to be brought in by the grosse mist of
deuout ignoraunce as more perillous, so more la∣mentable
than the temporarie darkenesse of Ae∣gypt.
For that is the pretence which they vse,
when as they seeke no other thing than to entrap
men by diuelish Sophistrie. What need the lawe
(say they?) We haue the Gospel. What neede we
written expositors? We haue the liuelie voices of
Preachers sounding in great plentie euerie where.
Of which two speaches, the former is vaine, the
latter parciall, and both of them are wicked. Truth
it is, that the strength and sting of the lawes domi∣nion
to condemnation, concerning the faithfull,
is weakened and cleane plucked out: that the fire
is extinguished wherewith the mountaine smo∣ked,
that the stonie tables are softened, that the hea∣uie
yoke is lightened, that grace hath superaboun∣ded,
and an horne of strong saluation is erected
and declared through the administration of the
spirite. What then? Shall we therefore welter in
sinne, and wallow in the lustes thereof, because of
these things? God forbid. Nay rather, as the lawe

schooleth vs, to seeke for grace at the bodie of
Christ, so the gratious Christian is taught to re∣paire
againe to the booke of the lawe, to liue ther∣after:
in deede now, without seruile feare, being
deliuered from bondage, to serue in freedome of
an vpright, holie, and sincere conscience. But as
the Bee that hath in her honie, hath also a sting: so
the best men indued with the grace of GOD, a
thing incomparablie better than honie, haue not∣withstanding
certeine remnantes of the staine of
Adam, as a sting of corruption to their mortall
bodies. Whereof to put vs in mind, that we may
plucke out this sting, and as it were weed the gar∣den
of our consciences (who as the purest ground,
yet bring forth some weedes of imperfection:) the
lawe of God is most behoouefull and necessarie,
and M. Caluins trauelles thereon, most fruitefull
and profitable, who striketh euer at the originall
and roote of sinne, and bringeth the commande∣ment
to his olde, first, and true meaning, from the
corrupt and common vnderstanding. For hee
groundeth the exposition of the law, vpon the na∣ture
of the Lawgiuer, who, because he is a spirit,
will be serued in spirit and truth. And because he
searcheth the reines, & soundeth the depth of the
heart, will be serued with euerie affection and mo∣tion
thereof, in all holinesse and sinceritie: so that
no man can safelie feede or flatter himselfe in the
smallest of his owne faultes or follics. And now,
what need there is of this knowledge in England,
all men see, and others can better saie, than my selfe
declare, how thinlie, scant here and there, such ex∣cellent

vnderstanding groweth. Which thing in
more wordes to lament, were an ouerlong detei∣ning
of your Lordship from your greater af∣faires.
The Lord of Lordes, and God al∣mightie
garde you euer, and guide you
with his holie spirit, to the benefite
and commoditie of our coun∣trie,
and to the profite of his
Church, with increase
of honour, to his ho∣nour
alwayes.

