



YOur Lordships great good∣nesse
diuerse times shevved
tovvards mee, abiding still
fresh in my remembrance, to
my no small comfort, calleth
vpō me continually to shevv
some token of thankfulnesse
for the same. For needes I
must confesse that it hath vt∣tered
it selfe many and sun∣drie
vvayes, and that, (if I
may vvith your Lordships
good leaue say as I think,) not vvithout a certaine freendly
or rather fatherly care of my vveldoing, specially in that lōg
cōtinued sute of mine in the Exchecquer, vvhere your iust
fauour (I meene in respect of the iust cace, and not of any
desert of mine) procuring mee credit and helpe to the fur∣therance
of my matter, hath bin the very maintenance and
safetie of my right, vvhich else had bin troden vnder foote
by the ouer mightinesse of mine aduersaries. And heere it
behoueth mee also too acknovvledge, the vpright admini∣stracion
of Iustice extended vvith fauour in that so intri∣cate
cace, both by the Iudges and Chauncelour, and by all
other the Queenes maiesties officers of that Court. For

after many heerings of the matter vvith great patience and
circumspection, and vvith shevving of suche recordes for
both partes, as vvere knovven or thought to make for the
manifesting of the cace: at length vvhen the matter could
not grovve too speedie end by reason of certain difficulties
and incidents falling thereinto: about the first enterance of
your honour into the office of high Treasurer, it vvas by
consent of the Court put in cōprimise to such persones as
both parties are very vvell contented vvith. By meanes
vvherof being discharged of my former continuall cares,
trauels, expenses and troubles, I had the freer libertie to fol∣lovve
this mine accustomed exercize of translating, vvhich
mee thought vvas too mee a singular benefite. And my re∣hersing
of these things is not to diminish the thank vvhich
I ovve to your honour, by interlacing of other mens do∣ings:
but to shevv to hovv many I am beholden through
your goodnesse, and that I am loth to be vnmindfull of my
duetie tovvardes you or them, so farre as oportunitie may
vvell serue to vvitnesse the same. Novv then, to the ient
I might the better accōplish this my desire tovvardes your
honour, I bethought me of the counsel of the vvise Philo∣sopher
Seneca in his bookes of Benefiting, the effect vvherof
consisteth chiefly in these three poynts: namely, that the
thing vvhich is done or bestovved too vtter thankfulnesse
vvithall, ought to be very good, very durable, and very ac∣ceptable
to the partie that is to receiue it. That the tvvo for∣mer
poynts are in this vvorke, vvhich I (vpon trust of your
Lordships former goodnesse and accustomed fauour) do
take vpon mee to dedicate to your name, and that the third
poynt also shall accompanie it: the reasons that persvvade
mee are these. The things that of their ovvne nature tende
only to the vvelfare and benefite of man, must of necessitie
be very good: and of the things that are good, those are al∣vvaies

best, vvhich may redound to the cōmoditie of most
persones, and vvhich being once possessed, cannot be taken
avvay against the vvill of the possesser: Seing then that the
foundation of this vvorke is a parcell of holy scripture, and
that (as sayeth S. Paule) all Scripture giuen by inspiratiō of
God is profitable to teach,2. Tim. 3. d▪ to reproue, to amend, and to fur∣nish
men vvith rightuousnesse,Rom. 1. b. that they may be perfect
and forevvard to al good vvorkes: in somuch that it is the
povver of God tending to the vvelfare of all that beleeue,
both Ievves and Gentyles: and therevvithall conteyneth
promises not only of this present life, but also of the life too
come: it cānot but be of the self same nature, propertie and
operation that the rest of the scriptures are, bicause (as say∣eth
S. Peter) the scripture came not by the vvill of man,2. Pet. 1. d. but
holy men of God spake as they vvere moued by the holie
Ghost. And herevpon springeth another cōmendacion to
the proofe of the goodnesse of this vvorke, that the Author
therof is God the souerain goodnesse it selfe, and not man.
To be short, the same reasons may serue also to proue the
durablenesse thereof.Esa. 40. b. For besides that God him selfe prote∣steth
that his vvord shall indure for euer,1. Pet. 1. d. and that the very
heauens shal perish before any one iote of his sayings take
not effect: in asmuch as this booke cōteyneth not vvorldly
vncertaine and perishing, but heauenly, assured and euerla∣sting
benefites: nor things auaylable to fevve, but profita∣ble
to all vnlesse they thēselues be to blame: and moreouer
that God is the Author thereof: it must by all likelyhood
needes continue vvith other of the same sort, at leastvvise
among the godly, not for a day or tvvo, but so long as men
shall haue neede to be edified and strengthened in Christ.
VVhich thing vvill appeere yet more plainly, if besides
these generalities vvhich it hath cōmon vvith all the residue
of holy scripture, vve consider the vvorke more peculiarly

and neerly in it self, vvhich consisteth of tvvoo partes, too
vvit, of Text, and of exposition of the Text. The substance
of the text of this vvhole Epistle to the Galathians, is this:
that vvhen God hath once voutchsafed to inlighten men
vvith the true knovvledge of his gospell, it behoueth them
to stand stedfast in the truth vvhich they haue imbraced, &
to shevv by their godly conuersation that they be the chil∣dren
of light, so as they nother turne backe againe as re∣negates
or as svvine to the myre, nor be caried too and fro
vvith euery blast of doctrine like vvauering reedes, or like
little children that are soone vveerie of the things that they
haue, and fond of euery nevv thing that they see. Hereout∣of
spring other more particular poynts, concerning free
iustification by fayth, concerning Christen libertie, concer∣ning
the abolishing of Ceremonies, concerning the force
and effect of the lavv, and concerning the pure conuersatiō
of christian lyfe. For the order vvhich the vvriters of holy
Scripture obserue vvell neere in all their Preachings and
exhortations, is first to lay the foundacion of faith in our
Lord Iesus Christ, and aftervvard to build vp the vvorkes
of charitie and true holinesse of life, vvithout the vvhich,
faith is not onely naked, but also dead. Thus much con∣cerning
the Texte and the contents of the same. The ex∣position
vvhereof being vttered in Sermons by that lear∣ned
and godly minister of Christ Maister Caluin (vvhose
ovvne doings tending alvvaies too the benefite of Gods
Churche, may yeelde him farre more credite than any
commendacion of mine can doo) containeth not any di∣uerse
or contrarie matter, but the same things layde forth
in more ample and plaine maner, applied to common ca∣pacitie,
euen of suche as are of meanest vnderstanding:
by meanes vvhereof a greater number may reape profite
and commoditie by them. In respect vvhereof they bee

right necessarie too bee set before our eyes, and to be beaten
intoo our mindes at all times, and chiefly in these dayes,
vvherein it is to be seene that many, yea, and vvhich is the
more pitie, too manie, being after a sort ouerglutted vvith
the long continuaunce of the heauenly Manna, begin too
loth the svveete foode of their soules, and to long againe af∣ter
the flesh pottes and garlike of Egipt. In somuch that
some thinking it ynough to be bare heerers or idle profes∣sers
and disputers of the Gospell, vvithout yeelding any
frute beseeming their profession, verifie the saying of the
Prophet Esay in honoring God vvith their lippes, vvher∣as
their hart is farre of from him, and shevve themselues
to bee but sovvers vnto corruption, as sayeth S. Paule in
this present Epistle. Some not professing onely, but also
glorying in Papistrie, the sinke of all sinne and vvicked∣nesse,
thinke themselues vvell apayd that they may bee
enemies in hart and religion, too God and all godlinesse
and godly men: And othersome being as it vvere of no
religion, and therefore imagining all things too bee lavv∣full
vvhich they like of, are caried headlong intoo all ma∣ner
of loocenesse by their blinde and vnbridled affections,
and like brute beastes coulde finde in their heartes that
all cleannesse of minde and bodie (vvithout vvhiche, no∣man
shall euer see God) vvere so vtterly abolished, as the
verie name of it might neuer bee herd of: vvhereas in the
meane vvhile those fevve vvhom the feare of God and the
desire of heauenly immortalitie dravveth too a more
heedefull vvarenesse of efchevving the things that may
impeache Gods glorie and the free proceeding of his
Gospell, or hinder and offende their neighbour, are in the
eies of some persones not onely despized but also blamed:
verily as vvho shoulde say it vvere a faulte too inde∣uer
too bee faultlesse. For asmuche therefore as this

vvorke (like as all other of the same authors) tendeth to the
benefite of the Christen cōmon vveale, by putting vs in re∣membrance
of our duetie both to God and man, the conti∣nuall
minding and practizing vvherof is the ground of all
good order, and the very path vvay too perfect felicitie: I
doubted not but it should be the better accepted of your ho∣nour,
vvhose vvhole care and trauel is cōtinually imployed
to the vvelfare of this Realme, through the maintenance of
sound Religion and the conseruation of publike tranquil∣litie,
by the protection and appoyntment of our moste gra∣cious
soueraine Ladie Queene Elizabeth, vvhom as God
hath made the Moother of his Church amōg vs, the com∣fort
of all Christendome, and the very piller, life, and soule
of our English common vvealth: so I beseeche him that
vvee and our posteritie may long inioy hir blissed reigne.
To the furtherance of vvhich things I haue heere present∣ly
bestovved (and by Gods grace shall not ceasse hereafter
to bestovve) my faithfull trauell, that the vvauering sorte
may in all goodnesse be confirmed, the vveaklings streng∣thened,
the ignorant instructed, the negligent vvarned▪ the
forevvard incoraged, the slouthfull pricked forth, the cor∣rigible
amended, and the vvilfull and stubborne sorte lefte
vtterly vvithout excuce. And so praying too God or the
long and prosperous continuance of your good Lordship:
and of all other noble Counsellers and men of Honour, by
vvhom God aduaunceth the glorie of his Gospell among
vs: I referre this labour of mine vvith all humblenesse too
your fauourable acceptation.
VVritten at my lodging in
the forestreete vvithout Cripplegate the. 14. of Nouem∣ber.
1574. 
