


BEholde my moste deare Sister Magdalen, the spouse of Christ cruci∣fied, once as blacke as the tents of Cedar, (Cant. 1.) but afterwards as beautifull as the courtaines of Salomon, portresse of loue, and patronesse of all sin∣ners, now blessed with celestiall glorie, beholde I say, I haue fini∣shed a little booke, entituled by
 mee, The Seauen Trumpets, ex∣citing a sinner to repentance; And because I haue written of thee, being assisted with thy holy prayers, not any that I could find, might with such equitie challen∣ge the patronage of this booke, as thy selfe; For to whom might I with more conuenience present this little worke, out of which, proceedeth such a sound, that terrifieth the greatest malefac∣tour, and awakneth the securest offender, thē to S. Mary Magdalē a sinner? To whom, I say, rather then vnto thee, should I the most abiect and vnworthiest of all sin∣ners, dedicate this booke, that treateth of the saluation of sin∣ners? To thee therfore my sister Magdalen, I commend it, that thou beeing a daily assistant ther∣of, mightest cause it to bringe forth its intended frutes, which  is the safetie, health, and happi∣nesse of all distressed, wretched, and sinfull soules. Remember, oh blessed Magdalen, that thou wast once a loste sheepe, farre strayed from the folde of Christ, and if our deare Sauiour Iesus the care∣full shepheard of thy soule, had not called thee vnto him, thou hadst beene deuoured of the ra∣uening wolfe: thou knowest that our Iesus did vndergoe death for the life of soules. Christas venit in hunc mundum &c. (1. Tim. 1.15.) Christ Iesus came into the world to saue sinners, of whom I am the cheefe, and Christ himselfe saith,
Non est opus valentibus medico, sed ma∣lè habentibus. (Math 9.12.) They that be well neede not the phisi∣tian, but they that be sicke, and thou art not ignorant of that which is written of him, in the Gospell of Saint Luc. Hic peccato∣res 
 
  recipit &c. (Luc. 15.2.) This man receaueth sinners, and eateth with them: Oh therfore Magdalen, let thy eyes of pittie be euer watch∣full ouer miserable sinners, inter∣cede for the conuersion, and sal∣uation of so many soules, which are running headlong into the a∣bisse of eternall perdition; Thou seest and knowest, moste deare Magdalē, what a number of sou∣les doe daily and hourely descēd into the bottomlesse pitte of hell: succour, aide, and stretch forth thy helping hand therfore to the perishing & languishing soules: remember, oh Sister that all those soules were redeemed and bought with the pretious blood of sweete Iesus, the Sauiour and Redeemer of vs both: Thou knowest right well, the inexcogitable sufferings of our louing Iesus vpon mount Caluarie, for all vs rebellious  wretches: I am certaine thou well remembrest that pretious blood which whilest he hāged vpon the crosse, thou sawest distill and run∣ne downe from his sacred bodie, vpon the earth. Remember, oh Magdalen; the anxiety of his sou∣le, when as thou didst behold him yeelding vp his spirit with such bitter paines vpon the holy wood of the crosse: procure by thy in∣tercession, that these soules which were redeemed with the pretious blood, which did so abundantly flow out of his diuine head being prickt, and goared with an vn∣heard-of crowne of thornes, may be deliuered from the power of sinne, and brought into the glo∣rious liberty of the sōnes of God: succour those poore soules, which are bought with such an abūdan∣ce of blood, running like a tor∣rent from the most sacred hands,  and feet of thy Master Iesus cru∣cified, obtaine by thy holy pray∣ers that those soules may be pre∣sented pure before God, which were washed with that blood and water that issued out of thy Iesus his side, euē vnto his most bitter death; Thy prayers, oh Magda∣len which are enflamed with the burning loue of thy dearest spou∣se, are of no small virtue to pro∣cure the helpe of the Angel of the couenāt, to put the diseased sou∣les of miserable sinners into the all curing waters of Bethsaida. Ioan. 5.4.
To thee therefore in the name of our gratious Iesus, & his bles∣sed Mother, he a louing Father, she a tender Mother of al sinners, I present & offer this litle worke, which I acknowledge to be thine; In the name of the moste holie Trinitie, Father, Sonne and ho∣lie
 Ghost, in the vertue of the name of Iesus, and the B. V. Ma∣rie, together with thy helpe, oh Blessed Magdalen, these my Sea∣uen Trumpets are come to bee sounded abroad, which by the ef∣ficacie of the blood, death, and passion of Christ, who is Sonne of God, and also him selfe true God and man I implore, beseech, and desire, that they terrifie, con∣uert and reduce to repentance an innumerable company of soules, which lie demerged, ouerwhel∣med, and plunged in the pitt, of sinne, and iniquitie: Amen: In the name of the Father, Sonne, and holy Ghost, Amen.
Let thy benedictiō oh my Mag∣dalen, descend vpon the soule and bodie of mee, and all other sinners, which shall peruse this booke, by the vertue of the pre∣tious body and blood of our Bles∣sed
 Iesus which is cōtained in the most holy Sacrament of the altar,
Amen: Pray for mee:
From Rome: our place of S. Fran. Transtib.
Iun. 14. 1612.

