



RIght Honourable: The holy Prophet Ieremiah (accor∣ding to the diuers subiects he had to worke vpon in his ministeriall function) is for∣ced sometimes with Isaiah, his fore-runner,Isa. 58.1. to lift vp his voice like vnto a Sonne of Thunder; and eftsoones, with the same Prophet a∣gaine, to altar and change the same, into the still, and soft voice of a Sonne of Consolation: wherein,1. King. 19.12. as Gods faithfull messenger, hee carries himselfe faithfully. For as a Sonne of Thunder, he sharply in∣ueyes against the sinnes, and sinners of his time; boldly denouncing Gods iudgements against them: and as a Sonne of consolation, (for their sakes whom the Lord had appointed to bee heires of saluation) hee sweetly preacheth Christ: mixing
 often with the terrible threats of the Law, the sa∣uing promises of the Gospell. That if any came by the ministery of the one,Act. 2.37. to be pricked in consci∣ence, and humbled: he readily, like the good Sa∣maritan, powreth in the mollifying and healing oyle of the other, to cure and reuiue them. And thus as a wise disposer, and dispenser of the mani∣fold secrets of God,Psalm. 101.1. his song (in a maner) through∣out his Prophesie (like Aarons Bels) soundeth forth iudgement and mercy:Exod. 28.33. preaching iudge∣ment to such as were,Isa. 33.14. & would be sinners in Sion, and mercy to such as he saw to to be mourners in Siō.Isa. 61.3. In which respects he may serue as a liuely pat∣terne for all Preachers to follow, in their ordinary course of preaching. These Sermons of his (ma∣ny of them) doe notably sute to our times; and therefore ought to be read, and read againe, of all estates, high and low.
But for as much as in reading the Prophets, sundry difficulties are met withall, which euery one hath not the skill of himselfe to dissolue; it would (as I thinke) be very beneficiall for such, if they had an holy helper, such an one as this, ready at hand:Iob 33.23. An interpreter: One (indeed) of a thou∣sand; that might helpe to dissolue their doubts, and vnloose their hard knots for them: That so vn∣derstanding what they read, they might (by the blessing of God) with the more ease come to pro∣fit by their reading.Act. 8.34.35 This hath our Philip faithfully performed (according to that light of vnderstan∣ding wherewith the Lord had extraordinarily en∣dowed him) throughout the Prophets: and pity
 it is, that so great light should after a sort lie bu∣ried in darknesse, from many well minded Chri∣stians; onely because they are not (as they might be) turned into our owne natiue language.
Not many yeeres since, a Lampe (if I may so speake) began to be kindled, for giuing them some insight into the harder passages of the Prophets; by translating this Authors Commentaries vpon the Prophesie of Isaiah into English: but much more cleere would the light haue now shined, if thereunto had been added the translation of all his Lectures vpon the Prophesie of Ieremiah also. For mine owne part, seeing sufficiency of oyle hath failed me, to furnish out this second Lampe vnto the end; I haue for the present proceeded onely through the fiue first Chapters.
The which (Right Honourable) as a testimo∣ny of that seruice and duty I owe your Honours; I haue presumed (as one ouertaken with Ahimaaz his hast, somwhat abruptly I confesse) to dedicate vnto you. And if in token of your fauourable ac∣ceptance thereof, you shall be pleased to suffer the same to passe, vnder your Honourable names, and patronage; many may be occasioned thereby to blesse God for you: and my selfe still to pray, that the blessing of him who was ready to perish, may come vpon you.

