



BEcause I can not (my very good Lord and La∣die, whom the Lord I say by the professiō of his glorious Gospell hathe made right Honorable) by anye other meanes testifie the dutie that I owe you, but in such poore sorte as this is, I most hum∣bly beseeche you to accept of it. Looke not vpon it as it is in it self: but value it according to the hartie affectiō of the giuer, who with all duetie protesteth his humble ser∣uice towards your Honor, to the vttermost that he shall be able for the aduauncement of your knowledge, en∣crease of godlines and spiritual gaine, in the true practise of Gods blessed & holy trueth, the greatest benefit that euer God in mercie could haue bestowed vpō you. I am sorie that my skill is no better, to helpe you forwarde in that so excellent a woorke: but forasmuch as God ac∣cepteth vs according to that measure we haue receiued, I hope you of your Honorable curtesie, will likewise take it well, that I shewe this remembrance of you in presen∣ting such a present as he hath bestowed vpon me. And this I will saye: though in respect of my labour it bee
 homely, yet in respect of the matter it is most excellēt: a work of one of the rarest instruments whō god hath rai∣sed vp, in these last tymes to giue light amidst our great ignorance, & to draw many to that blessed knowledge, which I beseech God we may both thankfully accept of: & also diligently cōforme ourselues with all obedience, to liue according to it: that the Lord do not either take this blessing from vs, or els bring vpon vs seuere iudge∣ments, for abusing so excellent a treasure. I know some vnthākful wretches, puffed vp with pride & a vaine opi∣niō of them selues, wil hardly endure that I should speak thus either of the woork, or of this singular instrument of God. For the nature of mens corruption is such, and specially of such as seke to be magnified one of another, that they tread vnder their feete Gods glorie: and being behinde others in giftes, they powte and swell against them whose shoe latchets they are not worthy to loose: Besides that they are so corrupt, either being open Pa∣pistes, counterfeite professours or manifest heretiques, that they cā abide no sinceritie. Of the first sort I wil not say much, because nowe I minde not at large to dispute with thē, as being the open & hopeles enimies of God (I meane the obstinate ones) who set thēselues not only a∣gainst his seruants, but against his holy word. For what should a mā say to such, whō nothing can please, but that they haue receiued either frō their own brains, or els frō their sottish doctors, who are destitute of al truth & god lines? what they tell thē, be it neuer so sillie, nay so false, they wil receiue with al griedines: No Legende so lying, no opinion so grosse, no motiue so light no life so vilai∣nous, as they wil not accept of, maintain & defend, both with tooth & nayle, if it come frō themselues & frō their own polshorne generation. But a lack it should be other∣wise, if they would be content to haue all things tried by that vndeceiuable touchstone that god hath appointed: If the euerlasting word of god which of right (proceding frō god) ought to haue his prehemīnēce of perfection to
 iudge al) did beare the bel, as also god hath appointed it shuld do, this matter would be soone at an end. For what soeuer building should be found, either in the one or the other, that had not his foūdation therin, it should quick∣ly vanish, & euery mans work should appeare. But if men wil come with preiudicate minds, to be admirers of mens Persons, & wil only look to a personal & local succession and bee caried away with the emptie & bare titles of their names and professions, without examination of that they bring, men shall easily offende both in the one and in the other. Let all men therefore be examined, let the word of God discusse according to her prerogatiue: when God speaketh let all men hold their peace, and if he teach, let all flesh be confounded. In matters of faith and religion, let that word onely be heard which is the true iustructer, hauing bin set down by men as writers, yet by the holy ghost the true inditer, who came not to suggest a peece, & so to leaue an imperfect work, but to lead vs into al truth, & to teach vs whatsoeuer was nece∣ssary for our saluatiō; not leauing things doutfully to be receaued frō hand to hād by way of traditiō, but plainly written to remain to all the sonnes of God as gods suffi∣cient & perpetual Testamēt. Fy vpon these blasphemous mouthes that wil accuse God of infidelitie, of crueltie of lack of care to his Church in prouiding for his: that like high traytors dare clippe & adulterate his coine, wring∣ing the scepter of his kingdom out of his hand, & boun∣ding his gouernment to some one people, citie & coun∣trie, as did the Donatists: chalenging to them selues with the olde Chatarists, and new Anabaptists and such as are of the Family of loue, that they cannot erre, when the moste of their Popes (and specially such as followed him that proudly to shewe him selfe Antichrist, chalen∣ged the name of vniuersall Bishop) were Sorcerers, Con∣iurers, Whoremongers and incestuous lyuers, Here∣tiques, Murtherers, Sodomiters, couetous Harlots, and cruel blapshemers in all their doings. I stand not to cite
 the places out of their owne stories, they are manifest, and all the worlde may knowe them. And as for their Councelles they were nothing but wranglinges and repeales one of anothers Lawes and Canons: their customes drawne from mennes errors, and therefore (as Cyprian sayth) beeing without trueth, though they were neuer so olde, are but olde errors. And yet wee leaue the fountaine, and goe too the stinking puddles that they haue digged vnto them selues: we must leaue the light of God, and goe to the darkenesse of men: the instruction of the holy Ghoste, & rest vpon these Dun∣ces, that knowe not what they say, nor whereof they af∣firme, The word of God must be drawen in and out by them as they thinke good, and therefore they speake moste despightfully of it. They call it a deade letter, a nose of Waxe, a Shipmans hose, a Schoole mistresse of error, darke, harde, insufficient of it selfe, and I cannot tell what. And yet as I saide, if any thinge come from their Dunces, they receiue it and neuer distrust it. The name of a Catholique is inough to authorise vnto them any thing be it neuer so false, absurde, peeuish and con∣trary to the knowen and expresse trueth of God. They cry the Church, the Church, no otherwise then craftie strumpets that wil moste scolde for their honestie, when they neuer came where it grewe. And then they brable with vs about the translation, O it is corrupted, it is not according to the Hebrew text, & to discredit that which maketh most against them: besides that, they forbidde the people the reading of it, they beare the worlde in hande, that they haue obserued so manye and so manye faultes, when all men of learning and iudgement knowe that the time wherin their errors were most palpable & rife, all kind of good learning was worne out, the know∣ledge of tongues decreased, they whom they most spited were the lighters of their Candles before all the world. For to themselues Hebrewe letters though (as they say)
 they were as bigge as Okes, yet they were Pitchforkes and staples: and as for Greeke, they were so farre from vnderstanding of it, that not one amongest a thousande coulde reade it. I speake not of the latter times, for now good learning beeing brought to light, with the know∣ledge of the Gospel many of them haue tinded their Candles at our lights, and many (thankes be to God) are conuerted, and more should be, had not God in his iustice for their wicked Rebellion made the meanes fruitlesse, reseruing them to a farther iudgement.
But let vs see, where they euer amended any thing they blamed. Their common translation hath bin amended by vs, to which yet so obstinate they are, that all vppon payne of the blacke curse in their conspiracie of Trent, must be bound onely to holde them selues: when as in many places for their liues, they are not able to make a∣ny cōstruction or sense of it. But the obscurer it was, the better liked of them, and the more to their profite: and therfore they kept it vnder & forbad the reading of it, lest the light thereof should discouer their faultes and filthy corruptions. And this is the principall cause that Caluine and such notable men are so yll liked, and with such violence condempned amongst them. But what should good men looke for other of these blinde Bala∣mites, but such condemnation? The other sort are those, that hauing once tasted of the sweete doctrine of the Gospel, are yet through an indisciplinate kinde of life, beeing also deuoyde of true humilitie, caryed away from the sinceritie of the trueth, some slugging still in darke ignoraunce, and foding them selues in their owne per∣swasions, beleeuing nothing but that which they can compasse, & receiuing nothing but that which standeth to the lyking of their humors & graueled consciences, following like Swine their owne beastly and carnall ap∣petites. These men would be awakened. And when the Lord shal open their eyes, they shal see that the professiō
 of the gospel of God, consisteth not in a bare cōfession, they shall finde that the councell of God in parte reuea∣leth it selfe, by our vocation: which also is from him, & then they shall knowe them selues to be effectually cal∣led, when they finde sanctification as a continuall com∣panion in them: which is approued and knowen by mortifying the olde Adam in vs, and by quickening the inwarde man, in that dayly reparation that maketh vs as deere Children too resemble our heauenly father. In∣deede we shall come shorte in the perfection therof, but he that is perfect shall supply our wantes, bothe streng∣thening vs to will and performe what soeuer is good, & also perfecting in himselfe that which is imperfect in vs. These men would be warned not to abuse the Gospel of grace, and the glad tydings of their euerlasting saluation too their owne perdition: who whilst they speake of Christ should indeuour to knowe him as he is: that his bare name deceaue them not, too lull them a sleepe in sinne, and whilst they seeke to comforte the oppressed, should likewise take heede that they strengthen not the wicked, to continue in their cursed securitie and fleshly libertie. It is very true that in Christ we haue all things, but Christ withall his riches onely belongs to his chil∣dren, and to them hee is applyed with all his benefites, through a true and liuely faith: and he hath sundrye of∣fices, to which, his must submit themselues. They muste acknowledge his kingdome to be ruled by his word, and they must be subiect to his lawe, who hath thorowly and continually prouided for their gouernment. They must rest in that which he teacheth, because he is their onely Prophet, their onely Prieste, in whose onely sacrifice the father is pacifyed and well pleased. And Christe is the marke to whome the lawe leadeth, the end and perfecti∣on thereof, that they in him should walke in obedience. The last sorte which are as ill as the worst, I meane either open or else close and craftie Heretiques, they can as ill
 brooke the sincere worde of God as any of the others, bleating also againste his gouernment and discipline, because it restrayneth, correcteth and bridleth their he∣reticall opinions and manners. They alledge ouer∣much seueritie, continually abusing his mercie, and like fantasticall wretches, because they would be left to them selues to spew out their heresyes, they continually barke against this wholesome correction and holy obedience. These fellowes pick many quarrels, making it subiect to the inconstant willes of Popes and ignorant Princes, as though it were a Shipmans hose, to be altred and chan∣ged at their pleasure. But alack they doe but catch the winde in a net: For it must needes be that Christes scep∣ter bruse them, and it preuayle. And specially they can∣not abide such men as this good Caluine was, because hee rubbed them on the gawle, and brake euen the skull (as I may say) of their hereticall corruptions. For some of them are Arians, other some Anabaptists, and Seruetians, Dauidians and Syluanists, Pelagians, & Freewil men, Libertines and of the Familie of Loue, ioyning with them infinite heresies, and secretly in this securitie of the Church, disperse their poyson, which I feare me, wil one day so breake foorth when we least thinke of it, too the trouble of the whole Church of God, that it will bee a long time or euer it be purged and appeased. I would to God there were none in England, I woulde to God they had fewer fauourers, and wee more iudgement and zeale too defende the sincere trueth of our God, then should they not giue such euident tokens of the venim that is within them, in defending Seruetus that Dogge that hath renewed all the olde heresies of the Arrians, that somuch troubled the Church in time past: neither would they them selues in their own fantasies with such impudencie condemne the deere seruants of God, for procuring and calling vpon the magistrate for his lawful execution against Heretiques and empoysoners of the
 Church. They would not make a mash & hotchpotch of the ciuill and ecclesiasticall state, and so iumble them togither. They would not deny the power of the magi∣strates sword, committed to his ministers not in vaine, but to be vsed in cutting off the rotton members therof, for the preseruation of the whole body. They would not bark so like Dogges against the euerlasting predestina∣tion and election of God, the most cōfortable doctrine that can be, being the foundation of all the rest, where it is wisely taught according to the worde, and learned within that sober cōpasse that it is prescrybed: ioyning and iumping so neere with Anabaptists, the sprituall illuminate, Pelagians, and other merite mongers, who howsoeuer they differ in some particular markes, yet are birdes of one and the same fether. This shall alwayes be found true that they followe the corruptest men of our age in all these matters. But whatsoeuer they say, Gods trueth is of sufficient power to ouercome all their here∣ticall blasphemies. Moyses rod shall deuour their Sorce∣rers serpentes. Dagon shall breake his neck where his trueth is receiued. And this sunne arysing shall scatter all their darkenesse. These excellent instrumentes shall liue when they shalbe forgotten, vnlesse it bee in immortall shame & opprobry. Let vs not therfore be discouraged but holde fast the trueth of our good God, & with feare and reuerence, let vs seeke after those things he hath re∣uealed vnto vs. There can be no daunger if we keepe our selues within the cōmpasse of the holy Scriptures. For this doctrine of Gods eternall election and Predestina∣tion is moste comfortable. O, but say they with the olde Heretiques, if I be elected and predestinated, what neede I too auoyde euill woorkes, they shall neither fur∣ther nor hinder mee: God is sure and what neede I tor∣ment and vexe my selfe to doe well & to leade a straight and a godly life, wee like not these pepered consciences! Such heretiques there were long agoe that so wrote and
 taught that occasioned Saint Augustine too write that excellent worke of the Predestination of Gods Saintes, confuting such caytifes as these. Saint Augustine there∣fore annsweareth them, that this doctrine is a moste comfortable doctrine, necessary to be knowen, too bee published and preached to the people in his due time and place. For it is that same euerlasting and vnchange∣able decree of GOD, whereby hee hath vndoub∣tedly determined in the time that hee him selfe best knoweth, to cal his elect to the knowledge of his trueth, that his mercie and glory might bee declared in them. And this hath the Scripture confirmed Rom. 8. verse. 30. Whome he hath predestinate those hee hath called, and whom he hath called those he hath iustified. And againe in the first Chapter to the Ephesians, wee are elected be∣fore the foundations of the worlde, and in the 9. to the Romains speaking of Esau and Iacob (of whome these Sermons especially intreate) he saith that one was elect∣ted and the other reiected before they had doone either good or euil. The foūdation heereof, is only the purpose of his wil: not forseeing (as the Papists say) any worthy∣nes or vnworthines of man: but for iust causes known to himself, & in himself not in vs in which without further inquirie we ought to rest, acknowledging him to be on∣ly good, wise▪ & most righteous, who is & shalbe blessed and iustified for euer. Now for them that are either reie∣cted or elected, we wade no farther to iudge of thē then may appeare by the effectes, neither doe we iudge abso∣lutely of them, but with condition vnlesse vppon those peculiar loste ones of whō God himself in his word hath pronoūced. Read Ephe. 1. & 1. Pet. 1. Now if any Potshard wil reason with the potter, which not resting in his will, would wade further to know the secrete causes of this, we say vnto him with the Apostle: O wretched man who art thou that disputest with God. Shal the thing formed say to him that formed it, why hast thou made me thus?
 For further satisfaction in this question, I referre al Chri∣stians to the Bookes that are written heereof, & namely to these excellent Sermons: M. Knox hath learnedly an∣sweared the obiections of the aduersaries in a Booke printed at Geneua. Wee haue also home writers, that haue delt fully and plainly therein, as Veron of Predesti∣nation, and M. Crowley in his booke againste Cerberus, rightly so called for his barking blasphemyes, againste this most comfortable and excellent doctrine: others that are learned may further satisfie thēselues, with those learned answeres of M. Beza against that impure Apo∣stata Castalio.
And nowe to returne to your Honours, I most hum∣bly beseech you to acccept my poore labours, which I offer vnder your Honours names to the whole Church of God. And I beseech your honours, as God hath cal∣led you to the knowledge of his glorious Gospel, which is a token of your election, so goe forwarde more and more in the grouth therof: that the Gospel being true∣ly rooted in your hearts, it may bring forth sanctificati∣on, the true seale of your adoptiō, that you may feele his goodnes in the assurance of that euerlasting and blessed inheritance. God hath called you to high honor, not so much by your places & calling amongst men (which yet is somwhat, because it is a great benefite of God) but in that he hath made you his adopted children, it is that you should shewe obedience, in that hee hath made you heyres with his sonne, and Citizens with his Saintes, it is that you should looke vp to Heauen and haue your ioy there despysing this worlde, and liuing to righteousnes and true holynesse. And this will the Lorde in mercie bestowe vpon you, thereby sealing your election, if you seperate your selues from the corruption of the world: I say not that you should go out of the worlde, but that you should departe from euill, and be followers of God as deare children, walking in loue, euen as he hath loued
 you. Beware of these twoo Cankers that corrupte the whole worlde, and is moste likely to assayle No∣bilitie, I meane Pride and Couetousnesse, Let them not once bee named amongest you as becommeth Saintes. A day wyll come, when the Lorde will fulfill your hope in better thinges then all this worlde can geue you. Stand fast in his trueth in these slipperie daies, and aboue all thinges let his glory, and the aduaunce∣ment of his woorde, bee deare and precious vnto you. In Gods matters, let his will bee the rule thereof, and not your owne wisedome and affections. Examine your selues often by it, and neglect not holy exercises. Let o∣ther Gallantes of this worlde, followe theyr foolish and fadyng pleasures, delight you in his lawe, and be good examples to others. Care not for the contempt of the worlde, but holde fast a good conscience that you may be approued before GOD. The Lorde Iesus blesse you both, that as he hath knit you togeather, so you may drawe on forwardes in one yoke to∣wardes his kingdome, that that may bee your aime and mark in all your deedes, woordes, and thoughtes. A∣men.
October 25. 1579.

