



WHEN I (Ryght woorshipfull and Honorable) enter into a deepe cōsi∣deratiō, not one∣ly of myne owne particular grieuous offences, but also of the generall sinnes & trans∣gressions of the whole lande, con∣tinually committed against God and good men, I am wonderfully cast downe in my selfe, and ouer∣whelmed (as it were) with heaui∣nesse, for those great iudgementes that by the reason of these our ini∣quities
 wee haue, as it were with gable ropes, pulled from God a∣gainst our owne soules. But when I throughly weigh what slender meanes are vsed to bring men too God, and vnfeigned repentaunce, frō their former euill wayes (that so the plagues hanging ouer our heades, may be vtterly remooued from vs and our countrey, or at the least so lessened, that we be not swalowed vp of the same) I am almost as a man altogeather past hope, that wee can bee set free or deliuered from those iudge∣mentes and punishmentes, which the Lorde by manyfest signes and tokens from heauen, and by conti¦nuall threatnings and outcries, of his faithfull ministers, hath nowe a long time denoūced against this proud and thanklesse generation. For what between idle and Idoll
 ministers on the one side, & blind, wilfull, and superstitious people on the other side, iniquitie is grown to so great a height, that as men make little or no conscience at all of committing sinne, so they seeme to be sunk deepe in their re∣bellion, and are growne as a man woulde say, senselesse of their trās∣gressions, insomuch that men can hardly tell what to pronounce vn¦lesse they shoulde say thus, that by our deedes wee alow that, which by woordes in popery, we doe iu∣stly condemne, to wit, that blind∣nesse and ignorance is the mother of deuotion.
Is it not both straunge and pitifull, and yet in my perswasion, I take it to bee for the most parte very true, that after twenty yeeres publique preaching & professing of the Gospel vnder our gracious
 Soueraignes raigne, the people are verie litle, or no whit at all edified in the knowledge of fayth, & lesse builded vp (if lesse can bee) in the fruites of obedience and holy life? Not that I deny the Gospell, to haue taken good roote in sundrye mens hartes: but this I meane, that that number is very smal, yea euen as it were a cottage in a vineyarde, or lyke a Lodge in a Gardeyne of Cucumbers, or like a besieged Citie.Isaiah. 1.8. If any man would doubt of the trueth of this, the matter it self is more manifest, than that it nee∣deth to bee prooued: for if a man woulde but make his eyes and his eares, witnesses (as it were) of this matter, howe can he pretend igno∣rance? Who passeth thorowe any place of the lande that beholdeth not, & heareth not, generally and in the greatest number, pestilent pride, mischieuous murthers, wic∣ked
 whoredomes, open othes, beastly blasphemies against God, commō contempt of magistracie and all goodnes, besides a thousād such like abominations? So that a man may perceiue not a window onely, but a wyde wicket, or barne doore rather, set open to all maner of licentiousnes and naugh∣tie behauiour. And surely if these faultes were in the meanest onely, they were very grieuous before God and man: but what are they then, when the handes of the grea∣ter mē be the chiefest in these ini∣quities? Be it farre from vs to be Stoickes, who thought all sinnes equall. Christians shoulde know (and the rather because the Lorde also hath reuealed the same in his worde) that some sinnes bee more grieuous, than other some are in his sight: yea that one and the self same sinne, is verie much aggraua∣ted,
 & made more heynous, euē in respect of the circumstaunces, as tyme, place, person, manner of do∣ing, &c. And what I pray you is the cause, of this so great disorder and licentiousnes? Is not ignorāce and negligence in Priestes (as they call them) and people, the mother and nurse of all these and such like wickednesses? If wee might tho∣rowe Gods especiall blessing once haue the pointes and principles of Christian religion, diligently and purely propounded, and the mat∣ter of maners, sensibly and sincere∣ly set foorth, and by the meanes of our Magistrates, Gods own disci∣pline, for the better fructifiyng of his worde, allowed of and establi∣shed amongst vs, & our posteritie, we should, no doubt, see, not one∣ly these grosse iniquities vtterly banished, but also the very intice∣mēts
 & prouocatiōs to euil, quite and cleane remooued: but till then wee may not looke for any better fruites than these that we haue al∣ready reaped and rehearsed. True it is, that God can bring light out of darknesse, and make his glory shine forth in our shameful falles: but none ought therefore to loue darknesse (nay wee muste haue no fellowship with the vnfruitfull works of darknsse,Ephesia. 5.11. but reprooue them rather) or delight in sin,Heb. 3.13. but rather take heede that our heartes be not hardened through the de∣ceitfulnes thereof. If any will of∣fende that grace may aboūd,Rom. 6.1. Luke 12.47. their condemnatiō is iuste: and he that knoweth his maisters wil & doth it not, shall bee beaten with many stripes. He that cānot lie, hath spo∣kē this, & therfore no reason at al why we shold doubt of it: and he that doth what pleseth him both in
 heauen & in earth wil in time per∣fourme it (without speed in an vn∣feigned repentance) vppon vs all both hygh and lowe, which also should hasten our turning.Amos. 6.3. Wee see then that we haue no cause at al to dally and delaie, and to put the euill day farre from vs, as the wic∣ked do,Rom. 2.4. but rather while the Lord in long suffring forbeareth vs, cal∣ling vs to amendement by his fa∣therly visitations, that euerie one of vs should in time thinke of and vse, all the meanes of our earnest and hartie conuersion vnto him,Hebr. 3.13. and while it is called to day, reue∣rently hearkē vnto his voice, spea∣king vnto vs out of his word, least otherwise wee bee shut out of his heauenly rest: for mine own parte (how vile so euer I bee) I may (I thanke my God for it) in singlenes of heart protest thus much, that it grieueth me to the heart, to see the
 great defectes and wantes, that I know in that behalfe: And that I haue some care (though not so great, as many other good brethrē haue, neither I able to doe so much as they) by trauaile in writings of mine owne, & translating of other mens labours, to helpe forwarde, the increase of knowledge, iudge∣ment, and practise, that so Gods glorie may be aduaunced, and his Churche furthered in the way of life and saluation. Amongest the testimonies whereof (besides that which I haue alreadie published to the view of the godly) I would haue this my simple & smal tran∣slation accompted also: wherein what I haue perfourmed, though I my selfe would say nothing, yet other men might both iudge and report, specially if they were able and woulde conferre it, with the French copie. This they shall assu∣redly
 finde, that where as fewe or almost no places of scripture were quoated therein, I haue added a great number, setting besides in the margēt some shortnotes which do serue, both for the clearyng of some darke places, and also com∣prehend the summe (as it were) of the whole matter. All that I haue done whatsoeuer it be, I offer vnto you (right worshipful & Honora∣ble) & in you, to the whole church of God in this lād, beseeching the Lord in mercy to remoue all my sinnes, and so to make it profitable both to you and all those, into whose handes it shall come. The considerations inducing me, to of∣fer it vnto you, are indeed particu∣lar, as first to testifie the vnfeigned good will, which I beare towards you in Christ, in whome (to bee short) I haue a mynde cheareful∣ly to trauayle, what in melyeth,
 and by al the meanes that possibly I can, to builde you vp in sincere knowledge, sound zeale, and care∣full obedience of Gods blessed trueth, though the meanes and a∣bilitie that I haue to performe the same be very small and slender.
Secondly to set out my duetifull thankfulnesse, for sundry kindnes∣ses and good turnes receiued from you, which I confesse to be more than I am able to requite the least part, leauing the full recompence thereof too the Lorde (who hath faithfully promised in his woord and therefore will assuredly per∣form it, plētifully to reward it, euē in this life, if he see it so good, but speciallly in the resurrectiō of the righteous) and yet thinking it meete and cōuenient to shew my self at the least thankful in words,
 by such weake presentes as I am a∣ble to yelde.2. Cor. 8.12. Wherein I take this to be no small comfort vnto mee, that I deale with them in whome I am persuaded, this part of Gods image amongest the rest, shineth foorth very clearely: to witte, that you accept of mee, and the thinges that come from me, according to that I haue, and not according to that I haue not. But the causes which haue led mee to publish the same for the benefite and behoofe of Gods Sainctes are as generall, so many, but chiefly three. First, that thereby I myght giue some light of knowledge, to the poore ignorant people of our land, who knowe not, (because I feare mee they haue seldome or neuer hearde the same) sundrie excellent points of doctrine here propounded, and namely these great articles of our religion, to wit, the vnitie of the
 Godhed, & the trinitie of the per∣sons: the inseparable vniting of the two natures in the persō of our sa∣uiour Christ, from the tyme of his conception in the wombe of his mother: his offices, of kingdome, Priesthoode and prophesie: Gods euerlasting election, and his free iustification of vs in Christ, with such lyke. If any man thinke these pointes ouer hygh for our rude people (as I knowe there are some men otherwise greatly to be reue∣renced, which stand muche vppon that) I would wish them to consi∣der not onely this, that the Lorde hath reuealed these pointes in his word, to the ende that they should be taught vnto the people, but also to weigh howe that without the sound knowledge therof, it is im∣possible for men euer to attain sal∣uation. So that they which stande so nicely vpon these matters, doe
 not onely bewray, great, either ignorance, if they can not preache them, or vnfaithfulnes, if they doe not vtter them,Acts. 20.27. because they keepe backe some part of the most neces∣sary pointes of Gods counsell, but also testifie what little hunger and thirst they haue, for the salua∣tion of their brethren, who ought to bee as deare vnto them as them selues.Iohn. 17.3. Doth not Christ him selfe say, that this is lyfe eternall, that men knowe God to bee the onely very God, and him whom he hath sent Iesus Christ? And doeth not Paul pray,Ephes. 3.18. that the Ephesians may knowe, the breadth, length, depth and height, that is all perfection if it were possible? Oh but it is not yet tyme to propounde them, say they.Hebr. 5.12. Surely then I know not whē it wilbe tyme. I feare me, least that may be iustly verified in vs, which the Apostle speaketh of the Iews,
 that whereas in respecte of time we ought to haue been teachers to others, yet wee haue neede, againe to haue the first principles of the woorde of God laide amongst vs, and are become such as haue need of milke, and not of strong meate. Is it not a shame to be children al∣wayes? and are not those nurses much to be blamed, that either cā∣not or will not in xx. yeeres space teach their chyldren to speake rea∣dily, and to goe strongly? Would to God wee might once set aside the doctrine of the beginning of Christe,Heb. 6.1. and be leade forwarde to perfection. And yet in all this I a∣lowe not of their curiositie, that with vnwashen handes, and voide of reuerence (to the end they may be thought profounde, and deepe in iudgement amongest men) wil enter into vaine speculations con∣cerning these & some other points
 of which sorte are the Popishe Schoole Doctours, yea and many amongst vs that to much do tread in their steppes. There is a meane (if we coulde see it, and GOD woulde geue vs grace to embrace and vse the same) betweene fan∣tasticall curiositie, and beastly blindnesse. It behooueth all, but specially those that professe god∣lines, as on the one side to know & proue, what that good accepta∣ble & perfect will of God is,Rom. 12.2.3 so to take heede on the other side, that they presume not to vnderstand a∣boue that which is meete to vnder stand, but that they vnderstand ac∣cording to sobrietie, and as GOD hath dealt to euery man the mea∣sure of saith: and seeing secreate things belōg to the Lord our God to leaue thē to him alone,Deut. 29, 29. least o∣therwise entering into the curious searching of them out, we be ouer
 whelmed of his glory: and again seeing that the things reuealed be∣long to vs, and to our children for euer, in care and conscience to la∣bour all the dayes of our life to a diligent perfourmāce of the same, rather then to entangle our selues with fables, genealogies and fri∣uolous questions, which breede contētions and brawlinges, rather than godly edifiyng,1. Tim. 1.4. which is by faith.
Secondly, that by this meanes I might stopp (if it were possible) the mouthes of brawling and con¦tentious Papistes, who stande ve∣ry muche vpon that Fable of Pe∣ters being at Rome (the principall bullwarke of the Popes suprema∣cie) and that same diuelishe do∣ctrine of mens merites, tendyng to the great dishonour of almighty God and the woonderful disgrace of our sauiour Christes obedience
 both whiche and sundry other pointes in controuersie betwixt vs and the  these speaches large  ficientlie handl  is be∣halfe of , who either  e∣nough alredy  these pointes: or else woulde  them through forgetfulnesse too die out of theyr remembraunce: For the first sort, may easily be con¦futed, by the pitifull practise & la¦mētable experience, that the Lord hath shewed vs, & daily doth shew vs to the contrary: a better proof we cannot haue in my poore opi∣nion, than that accursed rebellion in the North, Cutbert Maines pra¦ctises in the west, the cōtinual sen∣ding ouer of Buls and Bables, be∣sides a woonderfull number not onely of old subtil foxes and cruel wolues, which lie lurking in their
 holes, waiting for the darke night of ignoraunce and blindnes, wher in they may rauine to the ful, as heretofore they haue done, but of young cubbes also, sundry of them little aboue twentie yeeres olde (a woefull thing to behold) who are not ashamed, priuately in corners, and openly in great assemblies (as r maiesties Commissioners for ca Ecclesiastical, I am sure can well reporte) boldly too speake for, and stifly to defend after their beastly maner, sundrie points and principles of that popishe reli∣gion. And as for the other who woulde haue Poperie weare a∣way, without naming of it, I saye that they offende doubly: first in that they fight directly against na∣ture. For let a man sow what good and wholesome seedes hee can in his garden, and haue not a care for
 the cleane keeping thereof, as that it may be throughly weeded, whē the time and season requireth, no doubt, but that (as experience also teacheth vs) it wyll in shorte tyme be cleane ouergrowne, & become (as we say) a Wildernesse or For∣rest, if not altogeather past hope of recouery, yet dangerous and chargeable to attempt the re∣dresse thereof.
Secondly in that they doe not enter into a deepe consideration, of the corruption of mans nature, and Satans cunning in this sub∣till shift.Iohn 3.19.20. That man is inclined to loue darkenesse, and to hate the light,Gen. 6.5. Gen. 8.21. yea that he deuiseth & doth all the meanes wherby he may continue therein, is more plaine then needeth to stande vppon, be∣cause that al the thoughts and mo∣tions of his hart are euill, and that euery day, yea euery houre of a
 day, and euerye moment of an houre, from his youth vpwarde. And what Satā meaneth hereby, they that are acquainted with the depth of his assaultes, may easily perceiue, to wit, still to keepe mē in the possessiō of their old Idola∣trie and superstition. This rather resteth in my iudgement careful∣ly to be forseene vnto, and diligent¦ly to be performed, that is, that as the doctrine of trueth, shoulde bee more often sounded into the eares and heartes of the poore ignorant people, and that Romishe religion soundly & with autority confuted by the Ministers and preachers of the woorde: so all the Magi∣strates, are humbly and earnestly to bee intreated, and that on Gods behalfe and the peoples, to drawe out the swoorde of iustice, and execute the same vppon the diso∣bedient rebellious, and obstinate sort:
 which if it might bee, yet now at the length practised, no doubt but it woulde somwhat delay the heate of these lusty bloodes (as you would say) that spare not to broch and spreade abroade deceaueable errors (which the auncient among them, supposed great clarkes and gray headed men, dare not openly and in plaine termes aduouch for feare of some punishment) and bewray the hardhartednesse, can∣kred malice, and cursed hypocri∣sie, of that horned generatiō, who then, either for feare of due pu∣nishement, would renounce their religion, though it were but dis∣semblingly, or else declare their want of wit, and wilfulnesse, in yeelding theyr bodies a sacrifice to Satan, as Story, Felton, Maine and some other haue doone,
The third & last reason is, that
 I might in Christ comfort some, whō I know to be sore pressed & beaten downe, with the fearefull feeling of the weight, of their own greeuous iniquities & transgressi∣ons, and so in charitie reache out my hande, to helpe them what in me lyeth, out of the clawes and clouches of sinne and Satan. It is very true that the Authour doeth not of purpose handle in these dis∣courses, that most sweete pointe: and yet notwithstanding, shall the afflicted conscience finde herein, many notable sentences tēding to that ende, which if they bee well weighed, & rightly applied to the soule, will no doubt be both com∣fortable and profitable too them: cōfortable, in that they will serue to raise them vp in spirituall ioye, and assured hope, of the free pardō and full forgiuenes of all theyr
 sinnes, thorow Christes death and blessed obedience: and profitable in this, that they shal instruct them to walke, with greater care & con∣science of perfourmaunce, both of generall & speciall dueties, before God and their brethren, than here∣tofore they haue done. Nowe be∣cause this number is very smal (for Satan and sinne hold the most part of men Captiues in senselesnes of their euill) I thinke it good in this place to adde this warnyng: that my meanyng is not heereby to worke carelesnes, in the harts and heads of any whatsoeuer dissolute persōs, (who I know are ouer rea∣die, to snatch that to them selues, which doeth not belong vnto thē, and vnder that pretence to abuse Gods goodnes,Iude. 4. and to turne his grace into wantonnes:) but to mi∣nister comforte of conscience ra∣ther, to those that are cast downe,
 with the true taste and feelyng of their filthinesse, and the wrath of God agaynst them for the same: whose case though for a whyle it be miserable in respect of thēselues, and lamentable and pitiful to thē, that are truly touched with Chri∣stian charitie, and vnfeigned good will in the Lord towardes them, yet is the state of it selfe profitable, because that thereby, as it were, by a bridle, the Lorde withholdeth his from running ryote, with the rest of the world, and shalbe in the ende (assuredly) comfortable, be∣cause that being exercised in that schoolehouse of God, and feelyng the ioy and comfort of him, that is the father of mercyes, and the God of all comfort,2. Cor. 1.3. they shall bee able, not onely to comfort them selues, but to comfort others also which are in any afflictiō, by that comforte, wherewith they them selues are comforted of hym.

So that, so farre of should we bee, from disliking either in our selues or others, this feeling estate of our owne wretchednes and miserie, that wee should rather esteeme of it, as one of the speciallest blessings that can come vnto vs in this lyfe: as whereby indeed Gods glorie is greatly magnified, his mercy mer∣ueilously manifested, wee oure selues rightly instructed, in care & conscience to walke before him, and others which are afflicted, in vs & by vs Christianlie comfor∣ted thorow Christ. But touchyng this point, and the particular con∣solations, that God hath left vs in his worde, to cheare vs vp, when we shalbe so cast downe, I shal say more hereafter God willing, in a seuerall treatie that I haue begun (if the Lorde strengthen me to fi∣nish it) of that question and argu∣ment. In the mean while, I beseech
 all Gods children, and amongest the rest, you (Right woorshipfull and Honorable) as most deare vn∣to me, to accept of that louingly, which I haue presētly don & pub∣lished vnder your names, whatso∣euer it be: Wherof, this is all that I minde to say at this tyme, that as the Authors worthie name & iust credite, can not but commend the matter: So these fewe lines that I haue writtē (as my bodely weak∣nes, & inwarde grieues would suf∣fer mee) touchyng some pointes (wherein I might haue bene long and large I confesse) will bee suffi∣cient I hope, to stirre vp the Chri∣stian Reader, the better to loue and lyke, and the more willingly and diligently to read and peruse, this presēt treatise, that so he may pro∣fite in sound knowledge and bles∣sed obedienee: which if it shall please God in mercy to graunt, I
 shall haue that which I greatly de∣sire, and so shall thinke my poore paines well bestowed, besides all that, I shalbe thereby incouraged, to goe forwarde with some other work (as occasion shal serue, & the Lord shal inable me) either of this excellent mans, or mine own. The god of al grace blesse you both, & al yours, with the whole houshold of faith wheresoeuer, making vs al thorow the single sight, of our spi∣ritual & bodily wāts whatsoeuer, in assured persuasiō to repaire vn∣to him, who hath a plētiful supply for all distresses, that so we may in the end truely magnifie, the riche grace and mercy of this our good God in Christ. So be it. At Lon∣don, the 20. day of this Decem∣ber. 1579.

