


MOST Vertuous, Reue∣rend, & Learned MEN; To whome should I rather addresse this my small labour, then to yourselues, who are partly interessed in the Person, whose Worke is here translated, since you are all members of that Societie, in

which he dyed: partly, in the Cause with him, since you haue deuoted yourselues to the propagation of that Religion, for which he dyed? In which Combat no doubt he well re∣membred (though in a diffe∣rent sense) those words of a holy Father: August. l. 1. Confess. c. 5. Moriar, ne moriar.
The Worke, which at this present receaues from me, an English tincture and dye, is in its Originall of such worth, that I neede not to marchandize and stall forth the valew of it, seing your owne Iudge∣ments can best censure there∣of. For I presume, that di¦uers

of you haue (I will not say, read, but) euen studyed the Booke it self. Only this I will maintayne, that the Au∣thour hath here in discoursing of the supreme Mysteries of the Catholike Fayth, inuested (as it were) and cloathed them in such roabes of speach, as best sorte to their Reuerence & Maiesty; since a Man is able to glasse in this small Trea∣tise, the full perfection of Elo∣cution and Oratorie.
His Vertues, Learning, Christian feruour, and Reso∣lution, I will not here endea∣uour to display; for I grant, I am not able to pensill them

forth; Who was in his owne time reputed (by his enemies) euill, because he was remarka∣bly good; And whose Centrall cogitations were euer fixed vpon the gayning of Soules, for which (as aboue I intima∣ted) he dyed the death of Saints: Who now ioyeth, in that he then lamented; and laugheth, in that he wept: Ps. 125. Qui seminant in lachrimis, in exultatione metent.
Now for my more peculiar dedication of this my Trans∣lation (besides the reasons aboue sett-downe) my owne respectfull affection towards your Order inuiteth me there∣to:

Which affection is not grounded without iust cause. For you are the Men (I meane your Order) designed to re∣payre & re-edifye the decayed Walls of the Cittie of God: you are the Men, whose pro∣uince and charge is not only to re-estate the Catholike Church in such Countries, out of which she in former ti∣mes hath beene vnworthily exiled; but withall (to speake in the Idiome of the Prophet) to Esay. c. 54. enlarge the place of her Tents, and spreade out the cur∣tayns of her habitation, euen amōg the Gentils: you are the Men, whose function in Catholike

Countryes is so to organize (as I may say) the Soule of youth, as that it may receaue the In∣formation of Learning and Pietie: you are the Men, who doe indoctrinate your Peni∣tents and followers (howsoe∣uer Hresie and her Attendāts barke to the contrary) in true Allegiance to their Tempo∣rall Soueraignes; And there∣fore not vndeseruedly was that worthie Souldier, the old Prince of Parma (once Gouer∣nour of the Low-Countryes) accustomed to say, That for keeping of a Towne in dutie and Loyaltie to the Ciuil Magistrate, he had rather haue it fortifyed

with a Colledge of Iesuits, then with a Garrison of Souldiers; since by the one (sayd he) Obedience is procured chiefly through seruile feare of man, by the other through feare of God, and of their Soule's perdition: To conclude, you are the Men, who not only by Inherencie, but euen by Production, may be iustly stiled Literate and Vertuous; since you no lesse plant these Qua∣lities in others, then you enioy them in yourselues. So desi∣rous you are to spreade and fructifie in all worthie and charitable Actions. But what is here your remuneration and Reward? Giue eare vnto the

Prophet, & exult: Daniel c. 12. Qui docti fuerint, fulgebunt quasi splendor firmamenti; Et qui ad iustitiam erudiunt multos, quasi stellae in perpetuas aeternitates.
I would not be thought by anie, as if I were perswaded, that besides yourselues, the Church of God were not fur∣nished with manie others, who most painefully labour in the Vineyard of our Lord, much enriching and cultiua∣ting it, by their pious endea∣uours. No. God forbid, my Affectiō should so farre trans∣port my Iudgement. For I (euen with ioy) acknow∣ledge, that there are through∣out

all countryes of Christen∣dome, (and euen among my owne Ranke of Priests in England) manie others, most learned, most zealous, most religious, most laborious in the spirituall good of their Christian Bretheren; & who would be readie to engage their bloud for the Saluation of Soules. For here we must rest assured, that as in the Celestial, so in our terrestrial Ie∣rusalem, Ioan 14. Multae mansiones sunt, there are manie different sta∣tes and Professions of men; yet all (though by seuerall wayes and courses) leaueling at one and the same Marke.
Only this I say (most Worthie Men) & this at all times I wil say: The Church of God hath receaued that comfort & be∣nefitt by your Order, as that Luther and his broode (for Truth and Falshood euer moue about one and the same Center of Religion) had made farre greater incursions through∣out Europe, had they not beene withstoode and beaten back by Perswading, by Prea∣ching, by Writing, by Prayer, by exemplarie liues, and by diuers other forcible meanes of Men of your Profession. This then being a veritie vn∣deniable, the lesse is anie one

to marueile, why I doe dedi∣cate this my small worke to you, since I see, you so pecu∣liarly dedicate yourselues to God. And thus humbly besee∣ching you to vouchsafe (now and then) your charitable re∣membrance of me, in the ti∣mes of your chiefest Deuo∣tions, for the expiating of my maniefold sinnes, I cease euer continuing.

