


riers. There is a graunt giuen of a hiden Manna: but to such as fight, as fight law∣fully, as ouercome. There is a blessing, a crowne, a crowne of life promised: but after tryall by temptatiō. Heauen is our Land of Pro∣mis, yet if we be not fedd with some consolation we runne hazard to faile in the way.
This booke, a SPIRI∣TVALL COMBAT; A TRYALL OF A FAITHFVLL SOVLE; or, A CONSO∣LATION IN TEMPTA∣TION; (for which of the

three is most proper, the Au∣thour makes doubt) seemes voluntarily and without con∣straint to referre vnto all these. As it exhibites a SPI∣RITVALL COMBATE, we may learne the posture, the defense, the comportment of a Spirituall Combatant; in a word, to fight, to fight law∣fully, to ouercome, to beare away the hidden Manna. As it expresseth A TRYALL OF A FAITHFVLL SOVLE, we may discouer in it, our owne defectes, our disordered fighting, our weaknes, want

of courage; thence endeuour to correct; to order; and as it conteynes CONSOLATION, to reuiue, solace, and reinforce our decaying courage. This is the whole scope & end. And, MADAME, though I know, that what is here in precept, is your Honours in practise; nor can I doubt, but that your noble, obedient, and ver∣tuous Daughters, knowing S. Iames his counsell, did then make prouision against temptation, when hearing the diuine inuitations, and seeing his goodnes, they in∣clyned

their eare to his E∣uangelicall Councells, forgott their people, friends, fauo∣rites, fathers Familie, to be∣come Spouses to that hea∣uenly King, who coueted their beautie, to walke a∣mongst the lilies of chastitie in the forsaken wayes of the Heauenly Hierusalem. Yet can I neuer thinke, that too much water can be brought to the extinguishing of so common a flame, or too much skill atchiued to fight with three so powrefull, and guile∣full enemyes, the world, the

flesh, and the Diuell. Your Honour will voutchsafe to patronise this poore peece, and propose it to your pious childrens viewes. I will not dare so much to distract you in your more serious affaires, as to inuite you to become a spectatrix of this Battell, since there is in it no feate you alreadie know not, yet this I dare promis, that if leasure permit you to cast an eye vpon it, you shall not faile to draw comfort from it, while you speculate that in the aduise of a Pious and

learned Bishope, which you haue so long, frequently, and happily practised; such ap∣probation giuing assurance; such assurance dilating, and as it were, blessing your mynd: a mynd full of prime nobilitie, pure Religion, solide pietie, prudence, candor, and natiue goodnesse. A pen that had a designe to praise, could not but ioy to addresse vpon so rich a subiect, where the most flourishing rethoricke would fall short of a due expression: where nobilitie wonders to see it selfe gott to

the toppe of perfection: perfe∣ction ioyes to be inshrined in so goodly a case, seated in so noble a heart. Where, in fine, euen enuie it selfe finds not what to dispraise, with any specious show of truth. But what I cānot speake, my strife shall be not to spoyle. I would not my pronenesse to please, (not seconded with performance,) should offend the respect I beare, and homa∣ge I desire to doe, to vertue in your Honour, which, I doubt not, will ingage some more able pen to register it in a

fixed monimēt for Posteritie. While I, liuing in admira∣tion of what I haue seene, but cannot say, may be numbred amongst

