



MADAME,
This FIRST DRAVGHT  Lineament of the BLESSED
and ACCVRSED ETERNI∣TIE, which hath the reputation of a Maister-peece of one of the prime & master-pēcills of that flourishing and well spoken France, seemes to me nether vnworthy, nor vnfitt to be presented to the veiwes and thoughts of our English Catho∣likes. The subiect is most soueraigne to remoue contentions, and moue to wholsome thoughts, thoughts of Peace and not affliction. The Authour a Bishope. Worthy to be heard for his Reuerence. Sweete withall, and peaceable, and pleasing to euery one. And as powerfull, so pious in speach. If I should instile him a wonder of knowledge. A milken flood of French elo∣quence.
Renowmed for inno∣cencie of life and pietie. The inuention were not myne. If I should demand, who could euer comprehend the greatnesse of the wonders with which this fa∣mous Bishope doth dayly in∣rich the world, since euen the nūber of his workes will shortly waxe incomprehensible, being an vndraynable fountaine of inuentions, whence all the world doth quench its thirst, making whole volumes of his thoughts, MONSIEVR DE LA SERRE that renowmed Histo∣rian of France, would glorie to be the authour of the demand. If I
should tearme him a flood of elo∣quēce flowing this day through all France, in the multitude and varietie of his sermons and noble writings; and speake of the happie sallies of the incompa∣rable fulnesse of witt which e∣uerie one admires in him; that honour of France and of Bishops SALES (whom a straight spiri∣tuall consanguinitie made him re∣pute and call his Father) would esteeme the speach but spareing. Daigne then, MADAME, this smale worke with the protection of your Honorable name, and permit it to passe out vnder the same, as a poore testimonie of your Charitie's
manifold obligations to many, A DRAVGHT of whose worth, I must confesse, I had a respectfull ambition, to haue made a light and grace to my weake endeuours therin; yet feared indeede, how so vnskilfull a pencill, and in so great a distance, could take to life so gra∣cious a Prototype: I know, the Sunne communicating its heate and light to Regions furthest remote, makes men of meanest skill pro∣mise themselues abilitie to set it out in its true colours; while yet they, whom a sound knowledge hath placed neerer vnto it, laugh to dis∣couer the poore painters errours. I am not ignorant, that as in faces, so
in graces of the mynd, the most ex∣quisite and peerlesse doe most intice Art to attempt, and yet doe most labour, and furthest out-goe it. T'is a hard taske to take the true picture of Charitie. Especially that which (according to our Sauiour's coūsell) is exercised in secrete; at least, in the secrete of a hart, which a pious intention lockes vp from all touch of vanitie, or humane respect. But this point I know also, your Ho∣nour's Goodnes will easely permit me to passe ouer, yea her vertue will impose silence vpon me. I will therfore obeying, draw Tymant's vayle ouer this inimitable visage, this beautie and life of all your per∣fections:
and will leaue that marke of myne owne insufficiencie, a testi∣monie, to after-ages, of your vn∣speakable worth. Licence in the interim, my pencill, such as it is, rudely to essay the expression of that, which the honour and happe, I had some tyme to see your Ho∣nour, left deeply imprinted in my hart, wherof the Idea's are yet, and euer shall be fresh and liuely. A truely Catholike ZEALE to see IVSTICE and PEACE kisse. A singular GOODNES OF NATVRE obliging and engaging all. The law of CLEMENCIE, (an ormament as goodly as rare in that hight of honour) in your
tongue, shining together with a heauenly PIETIE, in all your words, in all your actions. A BOVNTVOVS HAND open to the needie; and palmes streched out to the poore. In fine a truest marke of noblenesse, a richly pious CONTEMPT of nobilitie and riches. My Table is too litle, my skill too slender, to comprise, or set out in any iust proportion, those troopes of vertues, which, in your hart, doe waite vpon their soue∣raigne Queene, CHARITIE. Madame your Bountie would giue a large field to a skilfull hand. But our profession and practise being not to prayse, but to pray: we
will euer pray for your Honour's prosperitie, and leaue your workes to prayse you, in the gates of the heauenly Hierusalem.

