


THE chiefe and Principall thing (most Noble Earle,) appertaining to euery Ho∣norable Personage (which thing it is good to see that your Honor doth well con¦sider) is to walke in the Garden of Humilitie, and the highe or directeEcclesia. 11. waye to the same, is to passe by the gate of Ver∣tue, whose foundation is ancred and linked to the feare and loue of God: for as by the one isEcclesia. 1. couered the multitude of sinnes, so by the other is obtayned blessednesse, wisedome, and know∣ledge. Dauid that noble king and prophet, af∣terEcclesia. 25. that hee had long trauailed and had passed thorowe the gate of vertue, entred the faire and pleasaunt garden of humilitie, And hys wal∣king and continuaunce therein, so much pleased God, that God saide of him by the mouth of his

Prophet. I will set vp thy seede after thee, which2. Kings. 7. Psalme. 89. shall proceede out of thy body. Which sentence most worthy Earle (although not spoke of your Noble parentage) in your honor may be appro∣ued, which I doubt not your honor considereth. Knowing therefore moste honorable, the great loue and effection which your honor euer hath and doth beare to Vertue and good Letters, I was thereby moued the more boldly after I had gathered togither this small handfull of floures (named the Alphabete of Prayers) to dedicate the same to your Honor, as the fruites of my la∣bours, nothing doubting, but that it shall moste acceptablye come into your fauourable and sure protection. And for so much as Prayer is the key that openeth to Vertue, I thought good moste honorable, to set forth to the open shew of the world and to thencrease of Vertue, thys little Volume or Treatise, most humblye beseeching your Honor to accept it as my good wil, crauing your pardon if any thing haue escaped mee for want of Learning. And I according to my boun∣den dutie, shall call daily (with my most hum∣ble and hearty Prayers) to Almighty God to fi∣nishe that he hath begon in you, with prospe∣rous preseruation of your health, long to liue in Honor, loye and Felicitie. Amen.

