


WHEN this yeare past, by my chosen institution of life, and commaund of my Superiours (Most excellent Men) I returned into this Iland, I did finde stormes much more boysterous and rugged vpon the coasts of England, then those, which I had lately escaped in the Brittan Ocean. After I had entered into the hart of the Realme, I saw no∣thing more vsuall then vnusuall punish∣ments;

nothing more certaine, then vn∣certaintie of danger. I closed myself to∣geather, as well as the present state of things would permit, being mindefull of the Cause, mindefull of the Times. And for feare, that perhaps I should be appre∣hended, before my entrance-in was ru∣moured, I presently did set downe in wryting, Who I was, that was come; What I sought after; What manner of warre, and against whome, I did pro∣claime. The first draught of it, I eue kept about me, that, if so I were taken, it also with me might be taken: A Copie thereof I deliuered to a friend, the which (truly without my intention and priuitie) was made knowne to manie. The Aduersa∣ryes doe with great indignitie and atroci∣tie entertayne this Wryting being di∣vulged; And among other things, they most maliciously insist vpon, that I being but One, dare in matter of Religion send

this Challenge to them All; Although it is certaine, that I should not be alone in this Combat, if the disputation might procede by publike Warrant. Hanmer and Chark haue shaped an Answer to my Demaunds. What was it at the length? Most idle and friuolous. For not anie answer sorting with their honours, but one they giue, which one they shall ne∣uer giue: We embrace your challen∣ge, the Queene promiseth open se∣curitie, make haste, and fly ouer to vs. In lieu hereof, these two blotters of paper crye out, with a multitude of ob∣streperous words: Fye of thy Sodalitie, thy seditious molitions, thy arro∣gancie, thou art a Traytour, doubt∣lesly a Traytour. Ridiculously! Why do Men, as if scarse they enioyed but their fiue senses, make such profusion and waste of labour, charges, and their owne repu∣tation? But as concerning these two (of

which the fist out of Religion vastly runneth vpon my said Wryting; the other euen breahing malice, rudely tumbles & tosses it vp and downe) there is latey pu∣blished a small Treatise for them to pe∣vse, which discourseth (so farr forth, as is thught conuenient) of our Societie, of the iniuryes offeed vs by these kinde of men, and of the function, which we vn∣dergoe. Now to me it remayned; (be∣cause I see, the chiefe Protestant Doctours prepare for me the rack and gallowes, not the Schooles) to warant with you the cause of this my proceeding; and to poynt out those branches and heads of Matter (harbingers of my desired future Dspu∣tation) which haue distilled into me so great confidence and securitie: And fur∣ther I would hereby wish you, who are more peculiarly bliged thereto then others to espouse you seruiceable dayes chiefly to tis incumbencie and labur; since

CHRIST, the Church, the Common∣wealth, and your owne Soue's wellfare exact thus much from you. If I, as en∣ioying pregnancie, learning, art, reading, memorie, should prouoke anie one skilfull and experienced Aduersarie, I might iustly haue thereby bewrayed in me a swelling ventsitie and pride, as neither rightly balancing myself, nor them: But if I looking vpon the Cause of Religion with a dispassionate, vnpreiudging, and single eye haue thought myself able enough, to demonstrate this Sunne to shine in its Meridian, your Ingenuities ought not to rest disedifyed thereby; but freely to grant to me (being imbarked in so great an Action) this seruour, which the Ho∣nour of IESVS CHRIST my King, and the impugnable Truth haue produ∣ced. You well know, that Marcus Tul∣lius in his Oration for Quintius, when Roscius did  to obtane the

Cause then controuersed, if he could but euict, that seauen hundred miles could not be runne in the space of two dayes, did not only litle regade the elocution of Hortensius, but neither of those, whe excelled Hortensius in his Art, as the Philippies, the Cottae, the Antonies, te Crassi, whoe ree countenāces were full of Retorike, & to whch men himself ascribed all perfection in Oratorie, and stoare of fyled wrds; For there is as c∣taine Truth of that radiancie and splen∣dour, that no impostures either in gallan∣trie of speach, or in the matter itself can ouerclowde it. Now this, which we here vndetake, is more cleare and illustrious, then was the Thesis or Subiect of Roscius. For if I can but make good, that there is a Heauen, that there is a God, that there is a Fayth, that there is a CHRIST, I do come of victorius. May I not then be hee courageous? may

I not here shew an inexpugnable confi∣dence Certainly, hangd, drawne, & quartered I well may be, ouercome I cannot be; Since I ancker myself on those Doctours, whome that Spirit did istruct, which is neither vanquished, nor deceaued; How then can I here loose the honour of the day? I humbly beseech you, that you would be but content to be saued; this is the Butt ob my desires; which one request if I may obtayne, I shall be farre more hopefull in all the rest In the meane-time render yourselues wholy vp to this solicitude and Warrfare, batter at the eares of CHRIST with your incessant payers, become breathlesse in your diligence and labour herein; And then doubtlesly you shall finde the matter to stand, as (abstracting from all Circum∣stances) it is in itself; that is you shall finde our Aduersaris o vse strange tergi∣uesations of distrust and despayre; and

vs (as being securely grounded) readie to expect and wayte for this field of Com∣bat, with all composed seenitie of minde, and spirituall resolution. I here forbeare to spreade myself in more words, since in the rest following I direct further speaches to you.
Fare you well.
