


This Noble Princesse's Father was Thomas Lord Howard, created Vis∣count Bindon, by Queen Elizabeth, the first yeare of her raigne, second son to Thomas Duke of Nor∣folke.


This Duke of Norfolke, the Duchesse of Rich∣mond and Lenox's Grand∣father, had two wiues; the first, was the noble Prin∣cesse Anne, Daughter to King Edward the fourth; by which he had issue, a young Prince, who died young: The other was the Lady Elizabeth, daughter to Edward Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, by whom he had issue, the Lord Henry Hward, whose son succeeded to the Dukedome of Norfolk (which Dukes eldest son, Philip Howard was by Queen ELizabeth alo created, and summoned in Parliament where he sate as Earl of Arundel, being the primary Earledome of England, in the right of his Mother, sole daughter and heire to Henry Fitz-Allen, Earle of Arundell. He was this Noble Earles Father) Thomas Viscont Bindon, and a Daughter, who was Du∣chesse of Richmond and Somerset, Countesse of Nottingham, Aunt to the now Duchesse of Richmond and Le∣nox: This said Duke of Norfolke, after a long sicknesse, tooke his iourney peaceably to Heauen, at his Palace in Kinninghall in Norfolke, the first yeare of Queene Mary.





This Earles grandfather Lord Edward Seimor, son to Edw. Duke of Somerset, was resto∣red to his honours & patri∣monie by Queene Elizabeth, who created him Earle of Hartford, and Baron of Beau∣champ, in the Tower of Lon∣don, the second yeare of her raigne. This noble Coun∣tesse's grandfather, also was created Earle of Essex, &c. by Qu. Elizabeth, the 14. of her raigne, he died in Ireland, 1575. and was magnificent∣ly buried at Carmarden in Wales, where he was borne.



This illustrious Earle and honourable Ladies grandfa∣ther, was a most prudent and learned man, for his heroick deserts and Princely descent from an ancient and true noble blood, was created by Q. Elizabeth, Baron of Buck∣hurst, next by her Maiestie enstalled in the royall order of the Garter, one of her in∣timate priuy Counsellors, & Lord High Treasurer of En∣gland, &c.
Chancellor of the Vniuer∣sity of Oxford. Hee died in White-hall 1608.



Anno 1572. Edward Lord Clinton, Lord high Treasu∣rer of England, was created Earle of Lincolne, by Queene Elizabeth, for his Noble merits, and faithfull seruice to his Soueraigne Lady. The same day her Maiesty created Sir Walter Deureux, Earle of Essex; He died the eighth day of Ianuary, Anno 1585. and was with great solemnitie buried at Windsor
To this right Honorable Lord, Theophilus Earle of Lin∣colne, he was great Grand-father.



This worthy Earle (second sonne to Thomas Howard, the last Duke of Norfolke) by his martiall valour, was Prince∣ly vertue, and by Queene Elizabeth created Lord Howard of Walden, and tooke place in the high Court of Parliament, among the Peeres, as Baron of Walden. And Q. Elizabeth, partly to requite his warlike exploits, (for shee imployd him in sundry Sea-seruices, to his immortall honour and commendation) made him Knight of the Garter.



Anno 1597, The 23. of Octob. the Lord Charles Howard, for his Princely desert, and illu∣strious birth, was created by Q. Elizabeth, Earle of No∣thingham: Likewise for his worthy seruices done to his Prince and Countrie, in generously repelling Spaines in∣uincible Nauy of 88, being Lord High Admirall; As also for his Martiall valiancy, in the sacking of Cadiz, with the Earle of Essex: her Maiestie honour'd him with the Gartet, the noblest order of Knighthood.



This Noble Earles Father, Sir Thomas Egerton, Viscont Brackley Baron of Elsemere, Lord high Chancellour of England, was a Noble man of admirable parts, excellency well seene in the Lawes of England, industrious in State affaires, which mou'd Q. Eli∣zabeth to choose him her Maiestie Solicitor, Anno 1583. And for his other deserts, Anno 1593, she Knighted him; Next she made him Master of the Rolls; and finally, Lord Keeper of the great Seale of England, Anno 1594.




Sir William Cecil, for his graue wisedome, and excellent ver∣tues, was by Q. Elizabeth cre∣ated Baron of Burghley, he was also one of her Maiesties Priuy Councell, Lord High Treasurer, and Chancellor of Cambridge's Vniuersitie. He was these two Noble Earles gra father: both issued of two of his Sonnes.



This noble Earles grandfa∣ther, Sir William Compton, wa for his worthinesse, created Baron Compton by Queene Elizabeth.






HENRY CARY, Lord Chamberlain to Queen Elizabeth. His cousin (for he was the sonne of William Ca∣rie, Esquire to the body of King Henry the eight, by the Lady Mary Bullen, his wife, sister to Queene Anne Bul∣len, the mother of Qeene E∣lizabeth); this Henry was by Queene Elizabeth, created Lord Carie, Baron of Huns∣don: Also, by her Maiestie, made Knight of the Garter; one of the Lords of her Priuie Councell, and gouernour of Barwicke. To this Noble Lord Henry, Viscont Rochford, hee was Grandfather; and this Illustrious Lady Barkley, was his only daughter and heire.



Peregrin, the Father to this generous Lo: Willoughby, was restored in his ancestors Ho¦nors by Qu. Elizabeth, who created him Baron Willoughby of Eresy, the 14. of her ragn 1582. (before thee sent him with the Garter to the King of Denmarke) being the son of the Duchesse of Suffolke, sole daughter and heire to the Lo: Willoughby of Eresby.
Also, Sir William West (This Lord de la Warr's grand Sire) was created Baron de la Warre by Queene Elizabeth, being Nephew to Thomas West, Lord de la Warre, and knight of the Garter, in King Henry the eight's daies; who died without issue, Anno 1570.



Anno 1594. WIL∣LIAM POƲLET, this Noble Lord's Grandfa∣ther, was (in the time of his Father, IOHN Lord Marquesse of Winchester) by Queene ELIZABETH made a Petre of England, and sate in that High Court of Parliament, among the Barons and Peeres of the Realme, as Baron Saint Iohn of Basing. He died the first day of Ianuary 1598. and was sumptuously buried by his predecessours, at Basing.



Sir Christopher Wray, for his great deserts, & the noble fa∣mily, from whence hee was deriued, was by Qu Elizabeth Knighted; and for his rare wisedome, being expert in the Law, was aduanced (to his great Praise, and immor∣tall fame) to diuers Honou∣rable dignities in this King∣dome: First, he was made Lord Chiefe Iustice of En∣gland, and then Lord Keeper of the Priuy Seale. He was one of her Maiesties most prudent Counsellours, and Father to this Religious Countesse, Dowager of Warwick: Also Grandfather to these Noble Brothers, Sir Iohn Wray, Knight; Edward Wray, and Nathanaell Wray, Esquires. Anno 1572. Sir Henry Norrice, was for his Noble worth, created by Queene Elizabeth, Baron Norrice of Ricot. He was this Noble Ladie ELIZABETH WRAY her Grandfather.



Anno 1594. Roger Lord North, Baron of the ancient Baronry of Kirtling; for his Vertues and Prudency, was in gracious fa∣uour neare Q. Elizabeth, who re∣specting him much, made vse of his faithfull seruices, in diuers honourable affaires of impor∣tance. Anno 1574. he was, by her Maiestie, sent Ambassadour Extraordinary into France, to giue King Henry the third good Counsell, and to condole with his Maiestie, after the death of K. Charles the ninth. And although this Noble-man, was not created Baron by Q. Elizabeth, yet I haue erected these lines to his noble and immortall memory, for his Vertues sake▪ and for the duty and humble seruice which I must euer owe to his illustrious Grand-Children; The Lord North, Sir Iohn North, Captaine Roger North, Gilbert North, and the noble Lady Conningsby.



This worthy Knight was the last which her Maiesty Knigh∣ted.
Also, this noble Esquires Fa∣ther, Sir Thomas Sadleir, son to Sir Ralph. Sadleir, was the last knight banneret, of England, Chancel∣lour of the Duchy of Lancaster, and Priuy Counsellor▪ to King Henry the eight, Edward the sixt, Queen Mary, and Queene Eliza∣beth.


