



IT is the maner of most writers (Right worshipfull) in dedicating of their bookes, to praise and extoll the ver∣tues and no∣ble qualities of such men as they choose to be the patrons of their works, whereby to winne some credit and countenance to themselues: the which thing I see to be doone by a great number of writers (as well strangers as countreymen) who haue set out the praise and commendati∣on of your noble gifts: I am therefore at this time to direct my stile the rather to admonish

you how to emploie and vse the same, to that end that they are bestowed vpon you, than o∣therwise vainelie with suspicion of flatterie to speake of them. And first I would haue you to consider with your selfe, that you haue recei∣ued all the good gifts you haue at the hands of almightie God, who is the giuer of all good∣nesse, for the which your dutie is to render most humble and hartie thanks vnto his di∣uine maiestie. The end also for the which they are giuen vnto you, is at no time to be forgot∣ten, that is, the setting foorth of the glorie of God, & the benefit of your countrie. Call al∣so to remembrance, that they be talents deli∣uered vnto you of credit to vse for a time, for the which you must render an account when∣soeuer it pleaseth the owner to call you to it: the more you haue, the greater your account will be; for he that hath receiued fiue talents is further to be charged than he which hath re∣ceiued but one; and he that hath receiued ten, deeper than he that hath receiued but fiue. Vse them therefore and hide them not in a napkin, for they are the better for the wearing; the more you vse them, the more they will in∣crease; the more you laie out, the richer you shalbe. Haue alwaies before your eies the

glorie of God, neuer forget the same in anie thing you doo: seeke the weale publike of your countrie, labour to doo it good in anie thing you may, while you haue time so to doo: for you haue but a while to remaine heere, a∣waie you must go after the common course of nature. Let the remembrance of your account when your stewardships is ended, be neuer out of your mind. These be the cheefe points leading the right path to true nobilitie: these you shall find set out at large in that booke, wherewithall you are most delighted.
For the putting of these things in practise, I am to laie downe two examples for you to imitate, the which (because they are domesti∣call) ought to mooue you to be the more wil∣ling to follow them. The one in your own no∣ble father, who alwaies hath beene and yet is more inclined and bent to doo good to his countrie, than to benefit or inrich himselfe, as Wales and Ireland, beside his owne can beare him witnesse. The other in your honorable fa∣ther in lawe, Sir Francis Walsingham, hir Maie∣sties cheefe Secretarie, a man for his zeale of Gods glorie, and loue towards them that feare God vnfainedlie, well knowne to the world. Follow their steps, with the remem∣brance

of that noble house, out of the which you are descended by your honourable mo∣ther, and then you cannot doo amisse. Labour by the example of your father to discouer and bring to light, the acts of the famous men of elder times, who with conference of the estate and gouernment of all ages, will bring you to the perfect experience of those things that you haue learned out of Aristotle, Plato, and Cicero, by your trauell in philosophie. Your father, with his great expenses and la∣bour, hauing procured & gotten to his hands the histories of Wales and Ireland (which countries for manie yeeres with great loue and commendation he gouerned) commit∣ted vnto me this of Wales, to be set foorth in print, with direction to proceed therein, and necessarie bookes for the dooing thereof. And although I was vnsufficient for dooing of it, yet I haue doone mine indeuour, and now doo present the same vnto your worship, as by good reason due to the sonne and heire of him that was the procurer and bringer of it to light: desiring you to accept it with as good will as the same is offered vnto you, and so fol∣lowing the godlie zeale, loue of the common wealth, and care to doo it good, of so noble

and worthie parents, to beare countenance and fauour to the countrie of Wales, which hartilie wisheth you honourable preferment in the feare of God. The Lord increase his gifts in you to his glorie, the benefit of the commonwealth, and your end∣lesse comfort. From my lod∣ging in London the 25. of March. 1584.

