



MY GOOD LORD, I can geeue nothinge moore agreable to your minde, and my fortune, then the willinge performance of such seruice as it shall please you to cō∣maunde mee vnto. And therefore rather to obeye then boaste of my cunninge, and as a newe signe of myne olde deuocion, I doe presente the booke your Lordeship so longe desired. VVith assu∣red hope that how so euer you mislike or allowe ther of, you will fauourably conseale myne imperfections which to your Lordshippe alone I dare discouer, be∣cause most faithfully I honor and loue you. My long discontinuance of study, or rather the lacke of groū∣ded knowledge did many times discorage me, yet the pleasure I tooke in the matter did counteruaile all dispayre, and the rather by encouragement of you L. who (as you wel remember) vnwares to me foūd some parte of this worke, and willed me in any wy to procede therin. My meaning was not to haue im∣parted my trauayle to any, but your honour hath  to countermaund myne intencion. Yet I  hūbly beseech you either not to make any pertakers
 therof, or at the least wise those, whoe for reuerence to your L. or loue to mee, will willingly beare with myne errors. A nedelesse thinge I know it is to cō∣forte you, whom nature and fortune hath not onelye not iniured, but rather vpon whom they haue boun∣tifully bestowed their grace: notwithstandinge sith you delighte to see others acquited of cares, your L. shall not doe amisse to reade some part of Cardanus counsell: wherein consideringe the manyfolde mise∣ries of others, you may the rather esteeme your owne happye estate with encrease of those noble and rare vertues which I know and reioyse to be in you. Sure I am it would haue better beseemed me to haue takē this trauaile in some discourse of Armes (being your L. chiefe professiō & mine also) thē in Philosophers skill to haue thus busied my selfe: yet sith your plea∣sure was such, and your knowledge in eyther great, I do (as I will euer) most willinglye obeye you. And if anye either through skill or curiosity do find fault with mee, I trust notwithstāding for the respects a∣esaide to be houlden excused. From my lodginge  first of Ianuarye. 1571.

