


IOb the man of God, (most Reuerend Fa∣ther in God) entring into the meditation of the care, labor, danger and deliuerance that we find in this present life, compareth it for danger to a warfare; for care and trauell to the dayes of an hireling:Iob. 7. 1. which estate as euery member of the Church fin∣deth in this life, so the same is much more apparant in the whole Church, which for the time of her war∣fare here, as she is, so is called, militant. As this as∣sured

and expected warfare from the beginning hath kept the Church in continuall exercise and watch against many and strong aduersaries: so to∣ward the end of this warfare, that is toward the end of this world, the aduersaries growing more skilfull, more bòld and desperate then before, the warfare must of necessitie bee made more daunge∣rous. The greatnesse of which daunger may draw the gouernours of the Church to a more sensible ap∣prehension of their duties, who according to the daunger of the Church, cannot but vnderstand that their care, industry, vigilancy, and courage must be increased for the preseruation of the peace, and good of the Church of God which they gouern: so that the malice, industrie and desperate at∣tempts of the aduersaries, are to them so many pro∣uocations stirring thē vp more carefully to watch.
Which care hath singularly appeared in your Grace, who as a Generall in this warfare haue gi∣uen no rest to your selfe, but by preuenting the pur∣poses of the enemies by espying their secrets, by an∣swering their present incounters, by incouraging inferiours, haue declared your carefull seruice in this warfare setting the battel in order and incou∣raging euery souldier in his proper standing, and place: vnder this conduct haue I vndertaken this peece of seruice for the opening the truth of urisdi∣ction

of late so much oppugned, defaced, and con∣founded by the aduersaries. Wherein as I can not promise any worth of my seruice, so I shall bee able with a good conscience to challenge the reward of faithfull and sincere dealing.
The question I confesse, requireth a man as skil∣ful in distinguishing this confused masse of Iurisdi∣ction, which they now haue cast vpon the Pope, as Archimedes was in examining the gouldsmithes fraude, who hauing receiued a certaine Weight of gould of Hiero King of Sicily to make a gouldenUitruuius lib. 9. cap. 3. crowne which he would offer to his Gods; stoale a∣way much of the gold, and put siluer in the place thereof, rendring to Hiero his true weight againe. To examine this fraud without melting of the crowne, was a worke to exercise the great wit of Archimedes himselfe: such is this masse of Iuris∣diction, wherin fraudulent workmen (as they who confound gold, siluer, coper, and brasse together) haue taken the Iurisdiction of the Church, and of kings; and mingling both together, adding much of their owne drosse thereto, haue made it as a de∣ceiptfull crowne to offer to their great God, to set it vpon his had. To distingush this confused mase, & to giue to each his own right, was a thing wher∣in I foūd the greater difficulty, because none of late yeeres hath troden this path before me, whose foot∣steppes

might haue directed me. For the question of the Supremacy is handled learnedly & worthi∣thily by others, who though they haue giuen some light to this question of Iurisdiction, yet they doe it but in some passages, not handling the question fully and purposely, but by occasion sometimes fal∣ling into some parts thereof. Wherefore I thought it would be a necessary seruice to the Church, if this thing might be truely brought to knowledge, and the fraudulent confusion of tis crowne of Iurisdi∣ction standing vpon the proud head of the Pope examined & distinguished, the siluer seuered from the gold, and the drosse from both.
As Iurisdiction lay thus confounded by those false workemen of Rome, so at the first triall of it, when it was examined by vnskilfull and deceitfull triars, who fet the rules of their triall not from the truth but from ambition and adulation, they ta∣king vpon them to be triars of truth, made things as bad or farre worse by their handling then they were before: and so wrapped this question in newe difficulties. For when Henrie the eight tooke this title of supreme head of the Church of England, though the sounder and more iudicious part of the Church then vnderstood the words of that title so, as no offence might iustly rise by it: yet they that were suddenly brought from their olde opinion of

perie, not to the loue of the truth, but to the obser∣uance of the Kings religion; retained a grosse and impure sense of those words, as most cōmonly by such is retained to this day. For when Stephen Gardi∣ner Bishop of Winchester was at Ratisbon in Ger∣manieCaluin in A∣mos 7. vpon the Kings affaires, he there taking oc∣casion to declare the meaning of that title, supreme head of the Church giuen to king Henrie the eight taught that the King had such a power, that hee might appoint and prescribe new ordinances of the Church, euen matters concerning faith and do∣ctrine, and abolish old: as namely that the King might forbid the marriage of Priests, and might take away the vse of the cup in the Sacrament of the Lords supper, and in such things might appoint what he list. This manner of declaring the Kings Iurisdiction, did so much offend the reformedCaluin in A∣mos 7. 13. Churches, that Caluin & the writers of the Cen∣turiesPraefat. in Centro. 7. doe much complaine thereof, and worthily, For the Bishop of Winchester sought not like a cu∣rious triar of mettals to seuere the gold from the siluer and drosse from both: but as hee found this massie crown of Iurisdiction vpon the Popes head, so he tooke it with gold, siluer, coper, drosse and all: and set vpon the Kings head: So that the thing which procured so much offence, was not the title, but the Bishops false and erronious declaration of that title.
If any obiect against me: what then? will you take vpon you to handle this thing, better then such a learned and prudent Prelate? I answer, the Bishop wanted neither wit nor learning for the opening of this point, but onely a loue to the truth: which loue when I shall bring to this question, I finde my selfe therby so supported, that neither the perfecti∣ons of other men, nor mine owne imperfections can daūt me so much, as to cause me to giue ouer the de∣fence of the truth. True it is, that a more skilfull Archimedes might haue beene set on this worke, to distinguish the things that haue lien so long con∣founded in this question; or the common helpe of many might haue beene combined, wherin our ad∣uersaries are now growen wiser in their generati∣on then the children of light. And though it seeme to be true, that an euill cause hath more need of helpes: yet there is no reason that they who haue the handling of a good cause, should in confidence of the cause neglect any helpe, that possibly they may attain vnto. Albeit we must confesse that the arme of God hath wonderfully declared it selfe by weak meanes against great.
For if a man should looke vpon the meanes on both sides with an eye of flesh, he would thinke as Vzziah did, When the Arke was shaken, that the2. Sam. 6. 7. Church could not possibly stand vp by so weake

meanes: For on the one side the Pope sheweth him∣selfe with the riches of Saint Peters great and potent patrimony, with the helpe of so many great Princes, with the councell and policie of his Cardi∣nals, with the armies of his Canonists, Priests secu∣lar and regular, but especially in these later years, of his Iesuites, who glorying so much of their lear∣ning, and filling the world with their vaunts, be∣ing supported by wealth and policie, abounding with all worldly meanes that their hearts can de∣sire incouraged by preferments, march like armed troupes entring a battell: On the other side a com∣pany of poore men, Luther, Bucer, Zuinglius, Ocolampadius, Martyr, Caluin and such like, vterly contemned of the Iesuites, bringing no o∣ther furniture with them, sauing a good conscience, learning, and a loue to the trueth, seeme to make a poore shew without force, without glory. If Gods truth were to e vpholden by humane meanes, or if the seruants of the truth were drawne to speake in the Church, as Lawyers are for their fees at the barre: then what hope could wee haue to stand a∣gainst the Iesuites the Popes Lawyers, who by in∣uincible clamours, facing and obstinacy, make not truth, but victory the end they aime at.
But as there is great oddes in the meanes on the one side, so there appeareth no lesse difference in the

successe on the other side: For by these weake and contemned means the world is subdued vnto Christ, deliuered from the bondage of superstition, wisdome is iustified of her owne children, and the truth tri∣umpheth in the sincerity and godlinesse of weake meanes, against the malice, policy and strength of her prepotent aduersaries.
Which successe compared with the meanes on both sides, doth manifest the arme of God to be in the cause, that groweth so much against the expecta∣tion of the world and meanes. For what other po∣wer could make so weake meanes preuaile so much, against so great policy and strength, but the same power (though not in the sam measure) which by a company of poore Fishermen (despised in the world) subdued the whole world vnto the obedience of Christ? As this successe and blessing by the presence of God, hath beene hitherto apparant in this cause: so the Iesuites take order that the same successe and blessing may continually hereafter follow our cause, vntill it hath rooted out all the aduersaries that make opposition against it: for what greater strength or aduantage can bee giuen to our cause, then the wickednesse of our aduersaries doth giue? How often doth Moses declare to the Church of Israell, that the fauour of God was so much decla∣red towards them, not for their owne righteousnes,

but for the wickednes of their aduersaries? So that if we should stand still and looke on, and holde our selues in patience, our aduersaries will worke the meanes, by their owne strange cruelties in their In∣quisitions, by their prophane and vncleane conuer∣sation, by their grosse Idolatry, by their horrible treasons and conspiracies against the liues of Prin∣ces, by their diuelish deuises for subuersion of whole States at one blow, by their hypocrisie, falshood and aequiuocations, and by that most admirable and ex∣quisit villany that euer was inuented, in deprauing, corrupting, altering and chaunging all auncient writers: by these, and the like practises of wicked∣nes, they themselues will worke the meanes of our successe, and of their owne destruction. And if the Prince of this world, and his first begotten had not blinded their eyes, and their hearts, they could not choose but see, and acknowledge the experience of Gods fauour and protection mightily declared from heauen vpon our cause our Prince and State; and of late much increased and made apparant to all th world by their owne wicked practises.
Then the difference being so great in the meanes and in the successe, so great also betweene our con∣uersation and theirs, must needes declare a great difference betweene our hopes and theirs, our Re∣ligion and theirs: they haue raised the Princes and

armies of the world against vs, when they pretend∣ed peace: wee neuer vsed deceit or wrong against them: they haue by barbarous deuises attempted to procure our vtter subuersion, we desire hartily their conuersion to God: they curse, reuile, and baspheme vs, wee pray for them: this difference may shew, where truth and Religion is; and might if they en∣tred into the serious consideration of things, drawe them to cease from all wicked attempts, to follow and embrace one trueth, and to worshippe one God with vs.
But if there be no remedy, but that Princes and States must be oppugned by a perpetuall league of Conspiracy from Rome: if nothing can satisfie them but the blood of Kings, then what remaineth but that the Princes of Christendome prepare them∣selues to that great battel, which S. Iohn saith shal be fought in the plain of the earth against Gog and Magog. When God shall raise the spirits of prin∣cesApoc. 20. 8. 9. to that worke, he will open the way and giue the successe: for fire shall come downe from God, out of heauen, and deuoure the enemies. Vnto which ser∣uice there is nothing so effectuall to animate the princes of Christendome, as is this new and strange claime of the popes Iurisdiction ouer princes: which thing because it is so much pursued by the Popes and their flatterers, and onely by them, as the great

marke whereunto they addresse all their attempts; and the very summe of all their Religion: therfore I haue endeuoured to open the whole, to distinguish the parts, and to set this question in such a light as I could, if not to satisfie all, yet at least to giue an oc∣casion to the iudicious. I was desirous to leaue no part vntouched, that all might come to a triall, and am ready also withall, to bring my selfe to the triall, willing to learne and to amend any error, after that it shall be manifested by the truth to bee an errour: for which cause, I submit all to the iudicious and godly censure of the Church.
My care was also after my seruice to God, to performe herein a true seruice to his Maiesty, by o∣pening the Iurisdiction of Kings: which I haue done, not as they vse to doe who serue the Pope, re∣specting no other rules of that seruice, then his plea∣sure and their adulation, but I haue disputed the Kings right with a good conscience, from the rules of Gods word, knowing that the noble disposition of his Maiesty will admit of no seruice, whereby God or the truth is preiudiced. All which as I commend to your Graces fauour and protection, to whom God hath committed the care of his Church here, so with my hearty prayers, I commend your Grace to the fa∣our and protection of God; who inrich your heart

with his plentifull graces, that as for your proper comfort and direction, you may enioy them, so you may vse them to the glory of God, and the comfort of his Church through Iesus Christ.
Your Graces to be commanded in all duety,
GEORGE CARLETON.
