



IF externall actions may any way witnesse our internall affections; thē verily I haue like a Herald, fitly placed your Ladyship amongst the chiefe mourners; euen amongst those whose hearts bleed, and whose eyes gush out with riuers of teares, to see the abominati∣ons of these our latter and worser daies.
Christ wept ouer Hierusalem, and often would hee haue gathered her together as a
hen doth her chickins, but shee would not: Matth. 23.37.
Good Christians do the like, they mourne and melt into teares, to heare, to see, to vn∣derstand, how God is prouoked, his holy name blasphemed, his word neglected, his Sacraments contemned.
O how sinne raigneth, how the diuell ra∣geth! neuer was the soule of iust Lot more vexed amongst the Sodomites, then are the consciences of Gods children grieued to see Demas forsake God to follow the world; to heare the blasphemies of Rabsaketh; to ob∣serue the little faith and truth amongst the sonnes of men; to marke the open wicked∣nesse, and secret practises, the lacke of chari∣tie, and the height of hypocrisie, when men doe sinne, and thinke they are not seene.
These and the like enormities doe cause the holy ones of Israel to open their spiritual sluces, and to empty themselues in prayers and teares, in grones and lamentations for the sinnes of the people.
In which number (vertuous Lady) I haue been bould to reckon you, and for
such a Principall, as that I cannot say who may haue more right vnto mourning weeds then your selfe in this kind.
For mine owne particular, it may grow questionable, vpon what acquaintance I haue offered this poore treatise to your pro∣tection.
I answere, that in this I am vpon a good ground; for the fruits of your religion hath led me forward, and I am ready to iustifie this commendation. We haue met together often in the house of God, where I alwaies noted you feruent in prayer, and diligent in hearing.
You haue with your worthie Knight al∣so giuen testimonie of your loue vnto Gods Ministers; and in particular, vnto vs who were the Lecturers of the place, where you sometimes make your abode.
Therefore seeing this was deliuered by me in that place, and that it was for the good of others to see the light, I knew no per∣son or persons so fit in that Auditorie, as your selfe to send it vnto.
Vouchsafe therefore (good Madam)
to take notice of it, and let it haue place a∣mongst those tokens of good will, that the world hath cause to present vnto you.
Whilest I betake my selfe to prayer for you and yours, with al the rest of your Chri∣stian familie; whom with your selfe I now recommend vnto the throne of Grace, with a desire to be esteemed,

