



THere are extant allready so many bookes in the defence of our cause,Our A∣pologie. Mr. Bar. refutation of Mr. Gif∣fard. A treatise of the minist. of the Church of England. Mr. Ro∣binsons Iustifi∣cation of Separ. Mr. Penry of the mi∣nistery of England. An answ. to Mr. Stone. (which never yet received any answer) that it hath been in my thoughts a long time, not to enter publickly the lists of contention about it with any man; but to imploy that smal portion, which I have in the knowledg of holy things, more peaceably otherwise; Not with standing perceiving of late, the general fame, which was given forth of Dr. Ames his booke, and namely in his answer to the point betweene the Nonconformists and us, as that it was so learnedly and absolutely done, that it gave all men satis∣faction (the Separatists only excepted) and that no man would ever be able to make any sound reply therein vnto it. I thought it requisite, to take a thorow view thereof; which, when I had so don, and saw the sleightnesse of it, (to say no worse I mean only in the point of Separa∣tion, for in other things he bath an∣swered. D Burg. fully, and laid him flatt on the groūd.) I conceived with my selfe, that this common bruit must need arise, either from some ignorant people, who can∣not judge of things which differ, or from such as have mens persons in admiration, and so like the shadow will follow them where ever they goe, be it right or wrong.
It is knowne to those, which know the controversies be∣tweene the formal Protestants in England, and the Re∣formists, that the Principles of the later, by the former are

said to be the direct and plaine grounds of Separation; sundry arguments and reasons they allege for it, as the rea∣der may see in their several treatises.Hooker Eccles. Pol. pref. p. 34. Whitg. 2. Treat. c. 1. div. 2. p. 81 Sutclif. treat. of Disc. c. 15 p. 165. D. Bils. perpetual Goverm. ch. 15. p. 339.
Bancr. Surv. of Disc. c. 33, p. 430, 431, 432. Loe Quaerimon. Ecclesiae. p. 59 60. Answ. to the Petition by the Vice Chanc. & Heads of Oxf. p. 15. D. Morton, D. Burg. This thing by the o∣ther is not only denyed, but withall they proclame themselves the main refuters of the Separatists, and doe affirme, that theyRepl. to D. Mort. Sect. 14. p. 31. Defence of Petition to the K. p. 103. never saw any Prelate to confute their opinions any otherwise then by rayling words; But how wel they have confuted us, it will appeare in the following dispute, un∣to which I referre the reader: Only I thinke good in breefe to give him here a sight of most of their weapons, which they draw out vsually against vs, and whereby they indeavour to conquer and quel us quite.
1. Vile calumniations, and bitter scoffes, proclaming us to the world, to be Schismaticks, Brownists, Donatists, &c. and matching us many times with the most notorious Here∣ticks Dayr. Treat. of the Ch. p. 41., and blasphemers Mr. Ni∣chols plea of the in∣nocent. p. 33, 34, that they can thinke vpon, of purpose to make our persons and profession odious to all men. 2. Raysing up many manifest lies & untruths The scurrulous Libels, pu∣blished under the names of Lawne, Fowler, Bullard, &c., & gathe∣ring together the faylings of some particular persons, which had walked with us, & casting the same as dung in our faces. 3. Braggs and boasts of victorie; a notable instance for this we have, in a certaine preface, made to Mr. Hildersh. booke on Ioh. 4. the author of it, tels his reader there, that Mr. Hild. had the best in the controversie, betweene him and Mr. Iohnson, notwithstanding it is well knowne, he never made any reply to that which the other had published against him, although he was by divers earnestly desired to doe it; and this I write

from the report of honest and faithful witnesses, who are yet alive, and will not (I am perswaded) willingly relate any thing but the truth. 4. Grosse contradictions, in seeking to justifie against us, the very things, which by sound arguments and reasons, in their writings against the Hierarchy, they prove to be evil and vnlawfull; and this we have manifested in the answ. to Mr. Bradsh. book. 5. And in a word, falsisications of our positions, cōtinual begging of questiōs, larg proofs, for what was never doubted of, but no proving of the main point in questiō, either by scriptures, reasons, or any ancient & sound writers.
These, and such like arguments, have they used hitherto against vs; And it is no marvel, that they are such: for what better should we exspect from them, who seeke to put out that light againe, which hath beene by themselves cheifly revealed vnto many, I know what I say, and have good ex∣periēce of this thing; for there is not ten of▪ an hundred, which separate from the Church of England, but are moved first thereto, (I speake of outward meanes) by the Doctrines of the Nonconformists, either in word or writing, taught to the people: And indeed, vpon their grounds, how can any one doe lesse then separate, if his heart be tender against every sinne, seeing they confidently affirme, that their ministery, worship, and discipline, is from Antichrist, and in their Church are swarmesSerm. on Rom. 12. p. 65, 66. of Atheists, Papists, Erroneous, & Hereticall Sectaries, Witches, Charmers, Murtherers, Theeves, Adulterers, Lyars, &c. Moreover, All PoperySold. Bar. (say they) is poyson, the roote, stalke, and branches; and we cannot be said sincerely to have repented ofAbridgm. p. 23. the Idolatry, or superstition, whereby we or our fore∣fathers have provoked the Lord, unlesse we be ashamed

of, and cast away with detestation all the instruments and monuments of it. Againe, whosoever partakesCartw. Catechis. p. 315. 316. in the sinnes of Rome, are also under the same curse: So that we cannot in any sort communicate with them in their errours, unlesse we will beare them company in their destruction also. These are their owne testimo∣nies, and we know they are true; and therefore in obedience to God, and care of our pretious soules, we have left our vn∣sanctified standings in their Assemblies, and through the Lords mercy to vs, doe walke in the holy order of his Gospell, although dayly sufferers for it, of manifould afflictions;Rev. 16. 15 Notwithstanding all these things offend us not: for we know whom we serve, and are most certaine, if we watch, and doe Christs worke still in his owne way. We shall have a sure reward for it at the resurrection of the just.
And to speake now a word or two vnto such as are com∣monly stiled Professours of the Gospell; whether vncon∣formable, or not; The thing truely, which I most wish vnto them, is, tender consciences, and that the Lords house, and his ordinances may be deare to their soules, and that they may be able to deny the profitts, and pleasures of this life: for if these things be in them, and abound, my hope is, that by their judicious reading-over of this treatise, there will follow much reformation. When some men take a little Phisick, they have their health by it soone restored: but if the same, and a great deal more, be ministred to others of an other con∣stitution there followes not the like effect: It is even so in the cause of the soule, such as vnfeynedly desire to know the truth, and have a conscionable resolution towalke in it, doe receive much profitt by the fruitfull counsell, which is given

them, either by word or writing. But on the contrary: Those which seeke the truth with no better affection than PilateIoh. 17. did, neither purpose to obey the same more then did the dis∣sembling Hypocrites in Ieremie: Certainly good adviseChap. 42. & 43. given to them, is but as Pearles cast before swine and dogs; therefore my desire is, that the former sort may be viewers only of these lines; and to them I say, in the words of the A∣postle: consider what I say, and the Lord give under∣standing in all things.
The following Principles (touching a true Church, Mi∣nistery, Worship, and Government, as also hew quite contrary hereto the English is,) are not taken out of our wri∣tings, but from the Nonconformists, yea even from the cheifest of them, which for learning, Zeale, judgement, holi∣nesse of life, &c. have ever held that cause. Moreover they are not barely affirmed, but sufficiently confirmed; and therefore it standeth every one vpon, to take them the more to heart; for else, not one, but many of themselves, even Prophets of their owne, will condemne them.
I know, the devill vseth many meanes, to keepe people in cursed ignorance; and among other, one specially is, by dis∣swading them from hearing such persons, and reading such books, which might shew vnto them their evil & sin; and this he doth vnder a pretence of doeing good vnto them. Oh! (saith he he speaks thus by false mi∣nisters.) you must beware of false Prophets, and not hearken to that counsel, which causeth to erre, avoyd the companie of all deceivers, and not once looke into their books, &c. Now, by such Syren songs, the crafty Ser∣pent keepes them fast asleepe, till he have brought the poore soule into the pitt of endlesse perdition▪

We would thinke that man to be sencelesse, who (taking his enimies counsel) would shutt all his doores & windowes, in hope to get the more light into his house thereby. The devil dayly makes many thousand worse fooles in the world, in cau∣sing them to shutt close their eyes against the saving light of the Gospell, in exspectation that their soules by this meanes shalbe filled with the more wisedom and spiritual vnderstan∣ding. It is not my meaning, that any one should beleeveProv. 14. 15 things suddenly & rashly, but I would have him as Salomons counsell is, to looke wel to his going; and as we take gould by weight, Corne, Cloth, &c. by measure, so to receive the doctrines of every man by due examination; And this is onely the thing which I doe request of thee (good reader) whosoever thou art, be thou but pleased to put the Principles & infe∣rences here written, vpon their proof, & to hold that only fast, which (after good triall by the scriptures) thou findest to be good and it is sufficient, and I have my desire of thee to the full.
One thing more I desire others to take notice of, namely, That I judge not my self bound so much, to justifie their Principles, as our Inferen∣ces from them. Jf therefore any shall deny them to be true, my purpose is to give place to such, whome it more nearly concerneth to write in the defence thereof.Yet we beleeve their prin∣ciples to be true, & is there be no Nonc. that will defend them, we will. But if any shall oppose vs in the Conclusions, I would have them (leaving all by matters) to follow the truth in love, without gall and bitternesse, that so things may come to a happy and speedy issue. It is wel said of a Heathen man,Magis veritas e∣lucet, quò▪ saepius ad manū ve∣nit. Senec. lib. de ira. the oftner truth com∣meth to hand, the more the l ght therof appeareth. I hope this wil∣be verified in the point now in controversie: for howsoever I doubt not, but we have said here enough, to justifie the matter undertaken; notwithstanding much more I could have alleged from their writings, concerning these things, but for the present I content my self herewith, till there be a further just and necessarie occasion given thereof.

