



SIR;
AS the great Workes
of God ought to be
had in remembrance
of all men, so this du∣tie
is more required
of Princes then of o∣ther
men. Because
their charge is greater then the charge of

other men: for they must answer both
for the government of themselues, and of
others vnder them. Wherefore having
observed the Workes of God in delive∣ring
this Church and State from the cruell
plots of the Adversaries, from the begin∣ning
of Queene Elizabeth to this time:
I found my selfe most obliged to present
this to your Highness; both because my
service, next to his Maiestie is most due to
your Highness; and because the remem∣brance
of the great Workes of God is a
Glasse fit for a Prince to looke on. For your
Highness may be assured that the Adver∣saries
will not change their disposition,
vnlesse either we were reduced to their
blindness, or they drawne to imbrace the
truth with vs. I haue made this Collection
that by examples of things past, We may
better iudge of things to come. My labour
herein is nothing. For I make not the
Story, but take it of others. And when I
light vpon the best Narration, as that of
the Gun-powder treason, I haue set it downe
as I find it without alteration. Because as
that cannot be mended, so to set a worse

Narration in the place thereof, were no
lesse then to abuse the Reader. I leaue
the honor entire to them that haue made
the Story, I take no part thereof to mee.
Onely my care hath beene to obserue vp∣on
those great deliverances the Workes of
God, that God may be glorified, and the
cause iustified which God hath maintai∣ned
from Heaven. SIR, I suppose it is
hard to finde a Narration containing
more miraculous Protection of Gods
Church, since that time wherein God
shewed his Miracles in protecting the
people of Israel. Which consideration
may serue to fasten your Highness to the
loue and service of that great God, that
doth so strongly maintain his servants. That
as hitherto you haue had a gracious ex∣perience
of his grace and goodnesse to∣wards
you, so your noble heart may
grow every day more and more in the
loue and obedience of the truth. We are
all charged by Gods Word to pray for
Kings and Princes. That charge which
God hath layd vpon vs all, no man can
put off: But when your Highness hath

effectually made knowne your singular
care and loue to the common good, to
the rejoycing of all faithfull men; this
must needs draw the hearts of all faith∣full
men nearer to your Highness. And
this is a part of your happiness; for the
feare of God and loue of Subiects is able
to make Kings and Princes strong against
all their enemies God giue his iudgements to
the King, and his righteousness to the Kings sonne,
and therewith, all blessings; grace and ho∣nour
here, and glory hereafter.

