


IT is not vnknowne to all that know me in England, that for these many yeares I had my health very ill. And therefore hauing from time to time vsed all the meanes and medicines that England could afford. Last of all, by the aduice of my Physitions, I made it my hum∣ble sute vnto your Maiestie, that I might tranell vnto the Spaw for the vse of those waters, purposing with my self, that if I could be well, I would goe from thence to Hey∣delberg, and spend this Winter there. But when I was gone from the Spaw, to Aquisgrane, and so to Colin, I found my self rather worse then better then I was before. And therefore I resolued with my selfe, that it was high time for me to settle my thoughts vpon another world. And seeing I was out of hope to enioy the health of my body, at the least to looke to the health of my soule, from whence both Art and experience teacheth me, that all my bodily infirmities haue their beginning, for if I could by any studie haue proued Catholike religion to be false, or by any meanes haue professed it to be true in England, I doubt not but the contentment of my soule would haue much helped the health of my body. But the more I stu∣died the Scriptures and most ancient Fathers to confute it the more I was compelled to see the truth thereof. And the more I laboured to reconcile the religion of England thereunto, the more I was disliked, suspected, and con∣demned as a common enemie. And if I would haue beene either ignorant or silent, I might, perhaps, with the plea∣sures and commodities of my preferments, haue in time

cast off the care of religiō. But seeing my study forced me to know, and my place compelled me to preach, I had no way to auoid my griefe, nor no means to endure it. I haue therefore apprehended the oportunitie of my Licence to trauell, that I may withdraw my selfe for a while from the sight and offence of those in England which hate Catho∣lik religion, and freely and fully enioy the presence of our blessed Sauiour, in the vnitie of his Catholike Church, wherein I will neuer forget at the daily oblation of his most blessed bodie and bloud, to lift vp my heart vnto him, and to pray for the admission of your Maiesty there∣vnto. And in the meane time I haue thought it my dutie to write this short Treatise with mine owne hand, wherein, before I publish my selfe vn∣to the world, I desire to shew to your Maiestie these two things:

1. The meanes of my conuersion vnto Catholike Religion.
2. The hopes I have to doe your Maiestie no ill seruice therein.

I humbly craue your Maiesties pardon, and will rest euer
 Liege Decemb. 12. 1613.
