



MOST Noble Lords, may it please your good Lord∣shippes,
to be put in remembrance how the holy
Ghost calleth and entituleth the Princes of the
earth by the name of Gods. By which so rare and
admirable a style, so high & supereminent a title,
men of your estate, cōdition & qualitie be taught,
that as your names are, so should your persons be, Gods by name & cal∣ling,
therefore every way such maner of persons, as the most high God,
the God of Gods, hath commaunded you to be.
That is to say (as Iob sayeth) Deliverers of the poore and father∣les,Cap. 29.
when they crie, and there is none to helpe; eyes to the blind, & feete
to the lame; diligent in searching out things you know not; breakers of
the chawes of the Lyons, and the pluckers of the pray out of their teeth.
That so you being covered with Iustice, as with a Robe, and with a
crowne, the blessing of them which are ready to perish, might come
vpon you, and the distressed beeing succoured, might have cause to
prayse you.
And (most Honorable Lords) by so much the more have we pre∣sumed
to tender vnto your Lordships favorable examinatiō, these con∣siderations,
by how much the more your fame, prayse and honour may
be sounded, and resounded throughout all the Churches, when you shall
be well pleased to become humble intercessors vnto our most gracious
and Christian Lord and King, for a more temperate, mild, and cha∣ritable
course, by the Diocesans and other ordinaries, hereafter to bee
held against the Ministers; vntill they shall defend their late censures,
penall proceedings and sentences, for omission of rites, ceremonies, or∣namentes,

&c. to be in every due regard and circumstance answera∣ble
to the Kings ecclesiasticall Lawes and Statutes.
In the meane season, that more rigour and severitie of law hath of
late bene vsed in some of their Consistories, then was meete, these consi∣derations
with their reasons drawen from the lawes, statutes, and Ca∣nons,
which them selves professe and practise (if rightly they were ap∣plied
to their proceedings) may sufficiently witnes. For by these groūds
and reasons, if inquisition or information had ben made, or taken, sen∣tences
of grace and absolution, rather then of disgrace and condemna∣tion
ought (in our iudgement) to have ensued.
If we should be demanded, what colour of law or reason they can
pretend, for their forme and maner of proceedings, we might rather
have cause to wonder, then be able to yeeld any reasonable aunswere to
such demaund. And therefore as they be old inough, so good leave shal
they have from vs, to make answere for them selves.
Only thus much we might be able, reasonably to defend, that a good
government being lightsome, can not brooke the darksomnes of that
which is evill. And on the other side, that an evill governement, be∣ing
darksome, can not but flie the lightsomnes of that which is good.
If the government then of the Church by Diocesans, & other ordina∣ries,
had bene lightsomnes, and not rather darksomnes, it could not
have come so to passe, as it hath done, that the Moone, as it were aba∣shed,
and the Sunne, as it were ashamed, should flye before the obscuri∣tie
of most grosse darknes: That lampes of pure oyle, and candlestickes
of fine golde, standing and burning day & night in the temple, should
be removed and put out: and that in steed thereof, both woodden can∣dlestickes,
and lights of bulrushes, should be brought in, and set vp.
Nay, if we had not seene it with our eyes, & heard it with our eares,
it would have seemed a wonder, altogether vncredible vnto vs, that not
one (so farre as we can learne) among 2. or 3. thousand Ministers (some
whereof are notoriously knowne, to be ignorant & vnlearned, some idle
and non resident, some common bibbers & taverne haunters, some dy∣cers
and gamesters▪ some fighters and quarellers, some wanton & adul∣terous,

some simoniacall and vsurious, some pompous and ambitious,
some greedy and covetous, some swearers and swaggerers, and some pro∣phane
and voyd of all honestie of life) should so much as once in twoo
yeares, for any of these grosse impieties, bee publickly admonished, or
marked with the least note of disgrace, for not conformitie to the holy
lawes of God: And yet notwithstanding, that a third or fourth part of
three or foure hundred painfull, discreet, learned, grave and godly mi∣nisters,
within lesse then sixe monethes, should be suspended, deprived, or
deposed some from their offices, and some from their benefices; not for
commission of the least of the grossest of these sinnes, but only for omissi∣on
of the least of the commaundements and traditions of men. If wee
say we had not both heard and seene, and knowne these things, wee could
never have beleeved them to be true.
Nay if we had not heard it, and knowne it, how incredible might it
be, that sundry learned and godly Ministers, vowing, protesting, & of∣fering
to testifie vpon their corporall othes, that they abstayned from the
vse of ceremonies, for none other cause, but onely for feare of offendinge
God, wounding their owne weake consciences, & scandalizing their bre∣thren,
could not for all this, by the Diocesans be accepted, but comman∣ded
away and put to silence.
Now alas (Most noble Lords) if such a course of Iustice, and such an
hand of iudgement, by your Lordshippes, or other the Kings Iustices &
Officers were held in the civil governement of the common weale, what
out-cryes would there be made in all the corners of the land, yea & with
what swarmes of disordered and riotous persons, would the Kings Do∣minions,
in short space, be oversflowen and pestered?
It is true (my Lordes) we confesse, that non relatione criminum,
sed innocentia rei purgantur. And therefore to excuse any Minister
wherein he may iustly be blamed, is farre from our minde and purpose.
For we graunt that every one must beare his owne burthen, and that
every man ought by his owne innocencie, to purge himselfe, bee other
mens offences never so great, or seeme his owne, in his owne eyes, never
so small.

But we have therefore balanced the toleration of scandalous and
vnlearned ministers, with the molestation of learned and godly Mini∣sters,
to the end your Lordshippes vnderstanding the number of sinnes
and impieties every where daily abounding, by the multitude of the for∣mer,
and the scarcitie of godlines in every place to be seene, by the paci∣tie
of the later, your Lordshippes by your wisedomes might foresee, and
by your authorities prevent that pestilent contagion of ignorance of
Gods revealed will, which by this preposterous sufferance, of the one, &
violent progresse against the other, is ready to infect the whole Church,
and by consequence, to lay wast the common weale, as a pray to the po∣pish
faction.
For is there not by this menes a way prepared and made ready for
the greatest part of the people, to revolt from the Gospell to poperie? and
so from their naturall and Christian Lord and King to a forein & an∣tichristian
Pope? For let the booke of God be once sealed vp from the
people in English, as in time of poperie it was sealed vp, vnto our fathers
in Latine; and let the people by example of the wicked & scandalous life
of Ministers be drawne along in their owne naturall corruption, who
will not be ready to assist every Iesuite & Seminarie, whē he shal preach
poperie, the very mistris and mother of all corruption & rebellion?
The wearing of a whit Surplice, and the feyned making of an ayrie
crosse in Baptisme, how litle the popish faction, by the same wilbe quieted
and kept in awe, the late outragious starting out in Wales, and their
madd combynings in other places, may be a good caveat for your Lord∣shippes
to consider: whether their driftes bee not rather to enterprise a
more publike disturbance, then to continew them selves within the listes
of that obedience wherevnto they were constreyned in the raigne of our
late Soveraigne of blessed memorie, Queene Elizabeth.
Your Lordships therefore could not but performe a most acceptable
service, first vnto God, and his Church: secondly vnto the King & his
Realme, if your Lordships would be pleased to bee petitioners vnto his
Maiestie, that by his Regale and Supreame power, there might bee an
healing of the former errour, and vncharitablenes of the Diocesans and

other ordinaries. For it can not be denied but that by their manner of
proceedings, they haue sinned against God; in this, that they have aequal∣ed,
nay rather in some things preferred their owne Canons & Decrees,
before the commaundement of God. And therfore it cannot be but that
they have herein, as much as in them lay, provoked the wrath of God
against the King and his whole Realme, if by the Kings zeale, this their
so grosse a sinne be not reformed. My Lordes, we are well advised what
we speake herein before your Lordships, for we speake nothing but what
we prove thus:
Whosoever for not wearing a Surplice, or for not crossing
in Baptisme, suspendeth or depriveth a Preaching Mini∣ster,
otherwise vnreproveable for life and doctrine, and
not suspendeth, nor depriveth, but tolerateth an vn∣preaching
minister, scandalous in life, & ignorant of do∣ctrine,
the same person preferreth in this thing, the ob∣servation
of his owne Canon and Decree: before the
commandement of God.
But some Diocesans and ordinaries, for not wearing a sur∣plice,
& for not making a crosse in Baptisme, do suspend
and deprive preaching Ministers, otherwise vnreprova∣ble
for life and doctrine, and yet doe neither suspend,
nor deprive, but tolerate vnpreaching ministers, scan∣dalous
in life, and ignorant of doctrine.
Therefore some Diocesans and Ordinaries in this thing,
preferre the observation of their owne canons and de∣crees,
before the commandement of God.
We could heape argument vpon argument, vnanswerable to this
purpose, but we should then passe the boundes of an epistle, and become
over tedious vnto your Lordshippes. Only therefore we most humbly be∣seech
your Lordships in the behalfe of the faithful Ministers of Christ,
with patience to heare thus much▪ viz. that for their dissenting in mat∣ter
of ceremonie, from the Diocesans, they ought no more by the Dioce∣sans

to be traduced for factious sectaries, or seditious scismatickes, then
the Diocesans them selves ought to be traduced, for such maner persons,
by their owne dissenting from the Cardinals and Popes of Rome.
For there being as litle difference betweene a sect, and a scisme, as
there is betwene a besome & a broome, & there being also as smal oddes
betweene faction and sedition, as betweene an edifice and a building,
it followeth, the Ministers dissenting from the Diocesans of England, or
the same Diocesans dissenting from the Cardinalls and Popes of Rome,
if neither of them be seditious scismatickes, that neither of them can be
factious sectaries.
When Paule was accused by Tertullus, that he was found a pestilent
fellow,Act. 24. and a moover of sedition among all the Iewes thorough all the
world; the Apostle answered that they neither found him in the temple
disputing with any man, neither making vproare among the people,
neither in the Synagogues nor in the Citie. Art not thou (saith the chief
Captaine,Act. 21. 38 speaking to Paule) the Egyptian, who before these dayes ray∣sed
a sedition, and led out into the wildernes, foure thousand men that
were murtherers? By which places it appeareth, that a seditious or fa∣ctious
person, by the holy scriptures, is adiudged to be such a kind of per∣son,
as who boasting himselfe, rayseth, leadeth, or draweth away much
people after him, and vnto whom much people resort and obey: yea and
by the civile law,Act. 5. 36. 37. not every one that omitteth some duetie commanded,
but such a one as gathereth people together, or stirreth thē to make a tu∣mult,
and shall drawe him selfe and his followers, to some place of safetie
to defende him selfe and them against an evident commandement,Cod. de se∣ditio li. 1. and
publike discipline, only such a man, I say, by the civile lawe is to be puni∣shed,
as a seditious & factious person. For these kind of mē only are pro∣perly
said, seorsum ire, & partes facere. Seditio then being quasi
seorsum itio, and faction quasi partium factio, yeaGlos. lind. de heret. c. 2 verb. sectam a sect also, being
sic dicta, quia fit quasi sectio, vel divisio: and aGlos lind. de Magis ca. 1. verb. scis∣matum. scisme, being illi∣cita
divisio, per inobedientiam, ab vnitate Ecclesiae facta, vel il∣licita
dicessio eorum, inter quos vnitas esse debet: it followeth,
that whosoever by inobedience, or tumultuouslie goeth not a part, or ma∣keth

not a part from the vnitie of the Church, but either in doing, or
suffering, quietly submitteth him self to the lawes, that he can neither be
factious sectarie, nor seditious scismaticke.
And indeed (my Lords) from hence is it, that the Diocesans and
whole Clergie of England (ever since they made a separation from the
vnitie of the Church of Rome) have falslie bene named, and reputed se∣ctaries
& scismatickes, as though they had without cause devided them
selves from the vnitie of the true church of Christ. Whereas in trueth,
the Church of Rome by hir Apostasie, having cut hir selfe from the vni∣tie
and vniversalitie of the doctrine and discipline of the true and mo∣ther
church of Ierusalem, is hir selfe become the most notable and prime
sectarist and scismatick of all the world. And of whose schismes our Di∣ocesans,
so farre as they partake with hir, can not be but guiltie. Vnles
then the Diocesans can approve them selves, touching their vse of cere∣monies
and Diocesan governement, to stand in vnitie with the true &
new Ierusalem, in these dayes repaired & departed from the old scismes
and sectes of Rome; we assure our selves that they shall never bee able to
prove those ministers which stand not in vnitie either of iudgement, or
practise with them, but be conscionably and so lawfully divided in these
things, from them, for such division, to be sectaries or scismatickes? For
it must be an vnlawful discession, by inobedience, from the vnitie of the
first and mother church of Ierusalem, and not a lawfull departure, vpon
conscienc, efrō the vnitie of the daughterchurch of England, that ma∣keth
a sect or scisme. For otherwise, ought not all other Churches stande
in vnitie of ceremonies and governement with the church of England?
or vnlawfully dividing them selves from the church of England, must
they not become scismatickes & sectaries? And how then are not almost
all the christian and reformed churches in the world, not onely almost,
but altogether scismatickes and heretickes? For have they not divided
them selves from all those rites, ceremonies and ornaments, yea & from
that maner of Diocesan governement, which are yet reteyned in the

Church of England?
My Lords, I confesse that brevitie and perspicuitie are two commen∣dable
graces of the toung and of the penn; & such as in all mens speeches
and writings, are much to be affected. But yet how long or tedious soe∣ver
already I have bene, I most humbly beseech your Honorable Lord∣shippes,
to licence me to passe on one steppe further, especially the matter
being of such importance, as the same may not well bee passed over with
silence.
It hath pleased Sir Edward Cooke Knight, his Maixsesties Attornie
Generall, with all candor and charitie, to confirme and satisfie by demō∣strative
profes, all such as were not instructed in these points following;
First, that an ecclesiastical Iudge, may punish such Parsons, Vicars &c.
as shall deprave, or not observe the booke of common prayer, by admoni∣tion,
excommunication, sequestration, or deprivation, & other censures
and processe, in like forme as heretofore hath beene vsed in like cases by
the Queenes Ecclesiasticall lawes, though the act of primo Eliza had
never insflicted any punishment for depraving, or not observing the
same.
Secondly, seeing the Authoritie of an Ecclesiasticall Iudge, is to pro∣ceed,
and to give sentence in ecclesiasticall causes, according to the eccle∣siasticall
law, that the Iudges of the common law ought to give faith &
credit to their sentence, and to allow it to be done according to the eccle∣siasticall
law, when the iudge ecclesiasticall hath given sentence in a case
ecclesiasticall, vpon his proceedings, by force of that law. For (saith he)
cuilibet in sua arte perito est credendum.
Now then, as these two pointes bee plainly taught and demonstrated
vnto vs, so also even by the same demonstrative reasons, it is cleere, that
there must be, first, a depraving, or not observing of the booke: secondly,
that every sentence given by an Ecclesiasticall Iudge, in a case of depra∣ving,
or not observing of that booke, must be given, according to the ec∣clesiasticall

law, and vpon his proceedings by force of that lawe in like
forme, &c.
From whence it followeth, that all sentences touching depravation
or not observatiō of the booke, be either voyd sentences by reason of nul∣litie,
or no good sentences by reason of iniquitie and iniustice, if by the
Iudges Ecclesiasticall, vpon their proceedings, the same sentences have
not bene given by force and according to the same lawes, in like forme
as heretofore hath bene vsed in like cases by the Kings. Ecclesiasticall
Lawes; or if the factes charged vpon the Ministers, by the iudges eccle∣siasticall,
by the letter & intendement of the law, be no depravations, or
not observations of the same booke. And therefore to the end all questi∣ons
touching these two poyntes, might hereafter vtterly cease, and bee
quite buried, your Lordshipps could not performe a more acceptable ser∣vice
to the King, the Church, and Realme, then by an humble importu∣ning
his Maiestie, to have it explaned by parliament; both who (by the
letter and true meaning of the Statute) bee depravers or not observers
of the booke, and also what lawes Ecclesiasticall, may, and of right ought
to be called, indeed and trueth, the Kings Ecclesiastical Lawes. For vn∣lesse
aswell touching these pointes, as touching the former pointes of Sir
Edward Cooks, it be throughly decided, what is the binding and assured
law, how should the Ministers, or others, content and satisfie themselves
with an vndoubted trueth?
And that this maner of controversie about the invaliditie of sen∣tences,
of deprivation, given by ecclesiasticall Iudges, is not a controver∣sie
now first moved, but that the same hath bene long since handled and
discussed, is a matter yet remayning (I doubt not) vpon publike record.
For whereas sentences were given in the tyme of King Edward the
sixt, for the depriving of Steven Gardener, from the Bishoprick of
Wincester, Bonner from the Bishopricke of London: Heath from
the Bishoprick of Worcester: Day from the Bishopricke of Chester:
Tunstall from the Bishopricke of Durham: Vessay from the Bishop∣ricke

of Exeter: wherein many grave and learned commissioners were
imployed: as the Archbishop Cranmer, Ridlie Bishop of London:
Goodrick Bishop of Elie; Sir William Peeter, and Sir Thomas
Smith, the Kings Secretaries: Sir Iames Hales, one of the Iudges of
the Law: Maister Gosnell, Maister Goodrick, Maister Lisley,
Maister Stamford, men notably learned in the common lawes of this
Realme Mai. Leveson, and Mai. Oliver, Doctors of the Civill Law,
nevertheles the same sentences, were in the tyme of Queene Mary, re∣voked
and disannulled without Perliament, within the space (as myne
Authour sayth) of three dayes, by vertue of other Commissioners, for
faultes found in the processes, viz. that the former Commissioners had
proceeded ex officio, without authoritie, contrary to the Kings Eccle∣siastical
Law: sometimes quod iuris ordo non fuerit servatus, &c.
sometimes that the Interrogatories were ministred to divers persons
without knowledge of the defendants, &c. sometimes that some of the
witnesses were examined privately without oath: sometimes that their
exceptions and appellations, were not admitted, but their persons com∣mitted
to prison, pendente appellatione, &c.
And therefore (most honorable Lords) it is to be considered, if the
like, or greater and more notorious defaultes and enormities, bee to bee
found in any sentence of deprivation, given ex officio, by a Diocesan
governour at this day, whether the same sentence ought to be maintay∣ned
as good and iust, or rather whether the same ought not (as the
Kings law requireth) to bee reversed and disannulled, as evill and er∣roneous?
And thus I leave and commend vnto your most honorable care,
circumspection, and vigilancie, the hearkening and spying out, by all the
possible wayes and meanes in your highest wisedomes, you can best de∣vise,
how the good lawes, statutes & Decrees of the Church & Realme,
being duly executed, a learned, vertuous, paynfull, and godly Ministe∣rie
may be nursed and suffered to grow vp. And how on the other side,

an Idle, Ignorant, Scandalous, and godles ministerie may (as worthily
it deserveth) be cut downe, and troden vnder foote: The one by a perpe∣tuall
Decree and ordinance of God, hath establishment from heaven,
and therefore without sinne & offence to God can not be neglected: the
other springeth from below, and is much like to an evill herbe, or weed,
which if it be not speedily rooted vpp, but suffered to spread, will soone so
over-spread the gardens of God, with vice and impietie, as there will
scarce be any roome left, for vertue and pietie, the one by vse, and exe∣cution
of the Kings ecclesiasticall lawes, may easilie be cherished: the o∣ther
without abuse and contempt of the same law, can not in any sort bee
tolerated.
It was said vnto Shebna, the Steward of the house of King Heze∣kiah:
What hast thou to doe here? and what hast thou here,
that thou shouldest hewe thee out a sepulchre, as he that hew∣eth
out his sepulchre, in an high place, or graveth an habitati∣on
for him selfe in a rocke?
But, oh, you most noble Lordes, are not as Shebna in the house of
Hezekiah,Isa. 22. 11. but you are vnto King IAMES, and his house, as was
Eliakim vnto Hezekiah, and to the house of King David. As the
key of the house of King David was layde vpon the shoulders of Elia∣kim,
so is the Key of the house of King Iames, laid vpon your shoulders.
If you shall open, no man shall shut; if you shall shut, no man shall open.
Would your Lordshippes then bee fastened as a nayle, in a sure place, as
Eliakim was? And would you desire to be the throne of the glorie of
your Fatbers houses, as Eliakim was to his? You must then hee clo∣thed
with the garmentes, and strengthened with the girdle of Eliakim:
yea and you must be Fathers, to the inhabitantes of Ierusalem, and of
the Cittie of God. Yea Shebna, though he were in mans iudgement so
fastened, as though he should never fall, yet must his face bee covered,
and he him selfe rouled and turned like a bale in a large lande. Yea hee
must be driven from his station, destroyed out of his dwellinge place,

and bidden to departe. Nay the burden that was vppon him, must bee
cutt off, that the Chariottes of his glorie, may bee the shame of his fa∣thers
house.
These thinges, most honorable Lordes, if you accomplish and bring
to effect, you shall approove your selves vnto the great and mighty
GOD, to be such little Gods vnder him, as you may not bee ashamed
at his glorious appearance, but may reioyce and be glad, that your wor∣thie
and divine actes, have beene aunswerable to your divine and
worthie names. And thus the God of power, and Maiestie, confirme,
strengthen, and stablish your heartes faithfully and couragiouslie to doe
the worke of God, and of his King.
