



IF it may become a Seruant, to make ten∣der of his dutie vnto his Lord and Master, then may your Grace vouchsafe to patronage this poore
present, notwithstanding, it comes thus meanely apparelled. My offering is but little, and lesse then euer was of∣fered to so great a personage: yet let it not perish, but find such acceptation, as may giue testimonie of your most heroicall disposition.
When first I had leaue to call you Lord, it was in my heart to doe some∣thing: but neuer had the heart till now, & now too soone, for I may tru∣ly acknowledge to your Grace, that this hoc aliquid nihil est, this is a ve∣ry something nothing, that is produ∣ced.
And yet great Lord, I doe not, nor I dare not, speake meanely of my cal∣ling: but my gifts, with ioy, with con∣fidence, and I hope with conscience, I may ioyne with our Apostles saying, that I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ,
Rom. 1.16. because it is the power of God vnto saluation, to euery one that belee∣ueth: so that in this respect, although
the Lord hath made you great, yet if you were greater, and the greatest vp∣on the face of the earth, yet know it is the word of God, of that glorious God, who is the Creator, and the Kings and Princes, Dukes and Nobles are but his creatures as other men: vos estis domini terrae: indeed you are the Lords of the earth,
Psalm. 82.1. and yet your selues are but (Terra domini) euen the earth of the Lords, as other men.
O therefore let a seruant speake, if you would double and trebble Honors vpon your head, let the Word of God be the lanthorne vnto your feete, and the light vnto your pathes,
Psalm. 119. you shall see the way that leades vnto life euer∣lasting: verbum est via, the Word is the way: haec via ducit ad vrbem, this way leades vnto the hauen: yea vnto the heauen prepared for those that loue, that heare, that reuerence and obey this word of God, there shall you chāge your Dukedome for a King∣dome▪ for he crownes his children.
Reuel. 5.10.

 If then the eminent Lords would raise their houses, let them raise vp their hearts, and set them vpon righ∣teousnesse, for them, saith God, that ho∣nour me, I will honour them, but they that neglect, or despise the Lord, shall downe to the ground.
Be pleased therefore most Honora∣ble Lord,
1. Sam. 2.30 in respect of him whose word it is, to looke vpon this small Expositi∣on, although in respect both of my weakenesse and vnworthinesse that doe present, it may fall to the ground.
Plutarch. in vita Artax.
Be vnto me in this kind a Princely Artaxerxes, he receiued a handful of running water from a poore laborer, be as gratious noble Lord, in receiuing this from me a poore Scholler, whilest I according to my beūden duty, pray to my God for your increase of honor and happines, internall, externall, eternall, and so rest,

