



TO you Both, as partners in losse, and la∣mentation, I tender this Treatise, and yet I am to speake vnto you two, who are but one, apart,
concerning this businesse.
Sir, he called you Father, by a course of Law, and yet with conscience declared himselfe a very childe.
For if obedience, reue∣rence, and daily diligence might beget loue, then needs must he be a beloued Sonne, who was all this to you for conscience sake.
To you, (his deare Mo∣ther) hee was a right Bar∣nabas; which is by signifi∣cation, a Sonne of Consola∣tion, of which you had no small measure, both from his life and death.
He honoured you, you lo∣ued him; he comforted you,
you tendered him; and this was the mutuall intercourse betwixt you, vntill GOD tooke him from you.
As for my selfe, who at his Funerall read the Le∣cture of our mortality, be∣sides the many bands of Christianity, wherewith all the faithfull are linked and conioyned together, there are other especiall motiues to make you and yours neare and deare to me.
For first you were a good Instrument vnder GOD, both to comfort and coun∣sell mee in that calling whereunto the Lord hath
appointed mee.
Secondly, you, and that worthy Gentleman, my Brother, Master Creswell, who is falne asleepe, were not wanting to mee and mine, but made your house vnto vs, as the house of Onesiphorus was vnto Paul, a place of great refreshing, 2 Tim. 1.16. Now as the Prophet saith vnto the Sunamyte, who had prouided a Chamber, a Table, a Stoole, and a Candlesticke for the man of God, 2 Kings 4.13. thou hast been careful for vs, but what may I do for thee? so say I, what shall
be done for you by mee? Surely, vnlesse it be in the course of my calling, to pray with you, and for you, and sometimes as God offers occasion to present some part of my poore la∣bours vnto you; loe this is all, I can doe nothing else.
Wherefore let mee pay my debts vnto you after this manner; and the ra∣ther, for that you both, with diuers others haue desired, that this Sermon, Preached at the Funerall of this faithfull seruant of God, and deere Son of yours might see the light.

Yet let mee not robbe you (louing Brother) of your desires in ma∣king this your especiall request, that hee whom you had imprinted in your heart, might be put in Print at your in∣stance; which is done by way of Dedication to you, and her who is a part of you, my deere Sister.
Here shall you take a view of the Saints, and of their condition, who are the precious Iewels lockt vp in the Casket of this Scripture.
Doubtlesse your Childe was one of these, a rich
Diamond, whose ground being Christ, must needes haue the light both of grace and glory.
Remember therefore, (Iobs giuer and taker) which Text hee quoteth in the case of Children, God giueth, saith he, and God taketh, blessed be the name of the Lord, Iob 1.21.
If you will blesse him, he will blesse you; our least submission, brings great consolation.
Yeeld Sister, yeeld; and God grant you the true comfort of those branches yet in being.

God blesse them, and make his face to shine vpon them, that they may liue to doe worthily in Ephrata, and be famous in Bethe∣lem, Ruth 4.11.
Amen, Amen.

