



I Am not ignorant (Right worshipful) that worldly wittes doe desire to heare rather Eliphas,Iob. 2. Bil∣dad and Zophar, the Themanite, the Su∣hite and the Naamathite, to paynt forth a bad matter eloquently: than patient Iob, to handle a very good cause with playnnesse and simplicitie. To whose curious heads and itching eares, mine harrish harmonie deuoyd of learned method, vtterance & grace, may seeme
 altogether vnpleasant. Howbeit, I am not, for all that, all vnwilling (vpon iust occasions) now to publish that, which before I neuer ment to make publicke, otherwise then by worde only. For I perswade my selfe of the goodnesse of my cause, and aduenture to promise it, both profitable and godly. Besides that, the candle once lightened is not for the Bushell, but for the Table: the talent ta∣ken in hand, is not to be hidden, but to be employed. And the light that a Chri∣stian man hath in him, must so shine on euery part, as thereby the name of God may be glorified, and the godly edified. Neither ought a Christian to bee asha∣med of Christ and of his word, seeme it vnto worldlings neuer so contempti∣ble. Finally, to commit that thing to perpetuitie, which is for the benefite of the brethren any way, is as commenda∣ble as it is profitable, and oftentimes commaunded to bee done in the word of God, as an especiall helpe for mans
 minde, which (being as water that so∣dainly loseth any impression) without such memorandums, doth very quick∣ly forget things memorable and most necessary. Therefore the Lord doth not only write his commandements in two tables of stone: but also commaundeth Moses, and after him the Prophets, and lastly his seruāt Iohn, to write the things which they had seene, and heard, being (as Dauid sayth) profitable for the poste∣ritie, and (as Paule confirmeth) for our learning, that we which be the Lords, may therby be the sooner furnished and prepared to euery vertue. These things considered, might sufficiently haue per∣swaded the penning of these two Ser∣mons, touching that notable memoran∣dum, which our Sauiour gaue to the Iewes, Remember Lots wife: yet calling to minde with what a diligent eare and attentiuenes your selfe listened to the matter vttered (by your owne confes∣sion) with the good liking and sembla∣ble
 commendations, wherewith ye beautified the same at that time, (besides some desires of others, thereunto, estee∣ming the argument and matter right re∣quisite for this time) it prouokd me to resume my pen with the more dexteri∣tie & readines, to gather vp (as it were,) into a store basket the fragmēts of that spirituall banquet, which were scatte∣red abroad, as iustly as I could, to bee and remayne to and for the vse of them that had before tasted of the same: ho∣ping that they which liked it before, will not loath it now: & nothing doub∣ting by the grace of God, but that it will be to his glorie and the benefite of his Church, the only marke which I haue aymed vnto. In respect whereof wee may not sticke (if wee bee the Lords) to hazard all the credit that wee haue, yea and rather wish with Moses and Paule, to be as Anathema among them of this world, then that we should hold backe, or thrust to obliuiō any thing that maie
 be to the aduauncement of the one, or profite of the other. Hauing therefore preserued by pen, & noted these words in a Booke, I both commit and com∣mend them to the Church of Christ, and among the true members of the same, especially to your Worship, by whose often courtesies to me, I am mo∣ued to thankfulnes, and by whose hap∣pie choyce of good Mary her lot, I am stirred vp to gladnesse: the token & sig∣nification whereof my good-will vtte∣reth vnto you in this my present, which (though so simple in shewe) is for the matter as pretious as pure gold tryed in the fire. Therefore I pray you to accept it gladly, to reade it at your conuenient leisure, and repose the profite thereof in your breast, that therby ye may both be comforted your self with Mary: and al∣so may the rather (as otherwise ye are well able) (God be thanked) perswade others, not only women, but also men, to follow Christ in faithfull zeale, god∣linesse
 and vertue, without wearines or fainting. The Lord God graunt, that the hearers and readers of this Booke, may not only thereby the sooner tend to the right vse of memorie therein taught them: but also learne to go foorth from Sodom, to proceed, and to hold on with iust Lot, towards the goale of euerla∣sting life: & on the other side, with wis∣dome to eschew the horrible sinnes and faults of Lots wife, by the consideration of the fearefull iudgements of God on that vnhappie woman. And euen thus, I commend both my good Lord and your selfe to the Almightie Lord, who blesse, preserue and keepe you vnder the wings of his mightie prote∣ction.
From London the 28. day of Iune. 1588.

