



THE COMMON COVRSE OF MANS life (most venterous and no lesse wor∣shipfull Knight) and their daily dealings doe manifestlye declare, how variable they be, how wandering, how wauering, how vncertaine and insolent, if Fortune or rather God (to speake Christian like) by blessing them as abundantly, so extraordinarily: and raising them, Tanquam é puluere & luto, aduaunce them to promotion. And no mer∣uell though this be incident to the manners of men, seeing that nature hir selfe in this point offendeth. For what is he, vnles he be mortified, that is not naturally of an aspiring mind: imitating heerin the propertie of the Iuie, which ne∣uer ceaseth climing by degrees, Donec ipsam summitatem attigerit, till it be come to the very top.
This fault being generall, and as generall so hatefull, in the iudgment specially of the wise, might seeme so much the more tollerable, if that men placed in preeminence, and sitting like Hils, ouerlooking the Vallies below, with their high calling & stately authoritie, had agreeable heartes. But some, notwithstanding their state be singular, and in∣deede such, as that they may sit downe, take their ease, and say, Hic terminus esto, doe carie so base a minde, as that if I should compare them to Aesops Cocke, preferring a barlie corne before a pretious pearle, I should not doe amisse. There is none but by diligent obseruation, may see this to be an vndoubted truth.
In the taxing of which English, and outlandish fault, (for it is as common as the world is wide) I should shewe my selfe no cunning Archer, to ouershoote the marke of your deserued commendation. For although you haue had Fortune holding the bason, whiles you washed your hands, & cast the best chaunce of the Dice: yet for all that, such is your contentment, you hoist not vp the loftie saile of selfe-loue, to swell with the winde of vainglory, as vaunting of any exploit which you haue atchieued, Per tot Cyclopea saxa, per mundi scopulos, Scyllam, vastam{que} Charybdim. But as you went out, so you are come home, familiar with your friend, courteous to your acquaintaunce, remembring all, forgetting none, still of one minde, will and affection, the prosperous euent of your daungerous voyage notwithstanding.
Some one, hauing passed a Sea of sixe daies sailing, (or lesse, if lesse might be supposed) is so far in loue with him∣selfe, & so vndiscreetly doteth ouer his owne doings, at his returne, that he maketh his trauell ordinarie table talke, ag∣grauating the matter so mōstrously, as if he had endured the very labours of olde Hercules. Another, Et terris iactatus & alto, hauing seene the mightie workes of the Lord, & his won∣ders in the deepe, & as it were measured with a paire of Compasses (be it spoken without offence) the globe of the whole world, Post multa discrimina rerum, arriueth in his natiue soyle meruailously blessed from aboue, and yet discouereth not the multitude of dangers, or rather deathes, wherewith he hath encountred. Which of these iudge you deserueth the trumpets plausible sound?
I cannot therefore sufficiently wonder at the equalitie of your worships minde, which, notwithstanding so many tempestes of perturbations, and sharpe surges of inwarde motions, continueth calme. And it doeth me not a little good, first to see you so fortunate: & secondly, though that were enough to make you insolent and disdainfull, the credite which you haue gotten (deserued no doubt) euen with the very best, that yet you contemne not the compa∣ny, the acquaintance, the familiaritie, & conference euen of

such, as by many degrees are your inferiours.
This among other considerations of your curteous dispo∣sition & friendly nature, being a mirrour in a Gentleman in this our proud & arrogant age, like a right Loadstone drew me an yron lumpe, hauing in my hands a notable worke, in∣tituled, The voyage of the wandering knight, to ouer-runne the same according to my superficiall skill & slender knowledge, to polish and burnish it, to restore & make it perfect in some such lims, whereon it seemed to halt, that it might with so much the more grace Proripere in publicum, & in hominum manus innolare, for their larger delight: and in deed to procure the printing & publishing thereof, that well disposed people might thereby reape some benefit.
Which worke so perfected & brought into a reasonable good forme, as my litle lerning & lesse lesure gaue me leaue, I am bold vpō the request of the Translator, being absent, to make dedicatory vnto your worship, & haue added this Epi∣stle of mine own, as a testimony of the vnfeined affectiō & hartie goodwill which I beare you (without presumption be it spoken:) not doubting how it shall be receiued, seeing the former presentation thereof was so well liked. Beseeching God to blesse you, & the good Ladie your wife, & all yours one with an other: to prosper your proceedings, to further all your affaires: & that as hetherto you haue had Vertue your forerunner, & Fortune your follower, so you may haue them still euen to your liues end, Vt magis at{que} magis tua gloria crescat: & that after you haue sailed euen to the very straights of death, which no mortal man can auoid, you may arriue in the port of peace, I meane Abrahams bosome, euē the king∣dome of heauen, the appointed hauen for all true Christian Nauigators.

