



SIR: Your worth shineth in so high a Sphere of dignity, being now the worthily honoured high Sheriffe of the County; that if I should in∣deuour to hold foorth a Candle to any, to behold the brightnesse thereof, I might iustly bee censured of folly or flattery. But I haue no such proiect: and in truth, it is not your annuall acquired greatnesse, and eminency of office and place, but your continually inspired goodnesse, and life of grace appearing in your practice of piety, charity, and hospitality farre beyond many of your ranke and quality; which hath as it were by a secret forcible influ∣ence drawne me vnto you; and this discourse
 of a Conscionable Christian, from me. Which as it resembles you much, so desires to honour you long; & so much the more to honor you, as you shall the more desire and indeuor to resemble it, and proceed in some competent proportion, to expresse and represent the lines, limbes & linea∣ments thereof in the future course of your life and conuersation. Wherof I conceiue no small hope, hauing been an often eye-witnesse of the manifold graces of God shining in you, and oc∣casionally inforced to take notice of your ex∣emplary integrity, in the faithfull discharge of your publike Magistracy heretofore; and at this time, in managing wisely and worthily this important Office, whereunto your vertues haue aduanced you; from which (I doubt not) but you will come off commendably and comfor∣tably, without any gash or galling of your con∣science. Which that you may the better doe, giue me leaue (whom you haue chosen at your seuerall Assises to be a Monitor to many) to bee also now a Remembrancer vnto you, that you put your soule to that noble imployment of re∣flecting vpon it selfe, and recollecting the parti∣cular knowne-passages of your well-neere ouer∣past Magistracy, with an vndazeled and vndis∣sembling eye, that so thorowly trying & discry∣ing what you haue done, and finding, vpon seri∣ous examination of your wayes, words and workes, that as another Moses, and Samuel, you haue wittingly and willingly done no man wrong, neither been voluntary Agent, nor for∣ced
 instrument in the doing of any thing vn∣iustly; you may hereupon rest assured, and se∣cured of this, that you haue carefully and con∣scionably accomplished your Office and duty: Whereof the Countrey makes thankfull re∣port, and I cannot but heere to my knowledge giue publike testimony thereunto; being also desirous, that the tender of this poore Paper∣present should be, if it may be, a perpetuall ac∣knowledgement, how much I stand bound to you in generall, for your many Christian fa∣uours vouchsafed to mee in particular: I haue long (I confesse) run on the score, so that the interest of your loue, exceeds the principall of my abilities: But yet, if verball payment may satisfie for reall benefits and goe for currant, I hope hereby at length to strike out some part of my debt. At this present let it please you to accept this little monument of that great re∣spect which I deseruedly beare vnto you: what propriety you iustly haue, both in the worke, and in the Author, it is well known to all which know vs. I need say no more but this, At your instance and intreaty these Sermons were prea∣ched; by your best deuotion they were atten∣ded; and in testification of my dutifull loue to∣wards you, they are now published. You were the chiefe meanes and motiue to bring these meditations to the hearing of many; and ther∣fore cheerfully they runne to your hands, and are bold, vnder your name, to offer themselues to the view of all.

And so humbly commending them to your gentle acceptation, and heartily committing you to the Almighties gracious protection, and to the Word of his grace, which is able to keepAct. 20. 32. you from falling, to build you further, and to giue you an inheritance with them that are tru∣ly sanctified; I rest euer prest to be proued,
 Loxford the 20. of Septemb. 1620.
