



SIR, when I consider that it is the common manner of all, that write any Bookes in this age, to Dedicate the same to one or other of great place, I bethought me to whome I might offer these my trauels: and at last resolued with my selfe, none to be more fit, then your Worship; both in regarde of your zeale to Religion, because you doe giue to diuers Congregations in this land, Milke without siluer, and bread without money, which not many other Pa∣trones doe; as also for your loue vnto Schollers, who though in this vnthankfull age of ours, men wonder at vs, V pueri Iunonis auem; and wee won∣der againe at them, because they doe so litle for vs, yet my selfe, and many others now of some place in the Church neuer departed discontented from you. Many other respects as well publike as pri∣uate, doe naturally beare this small discourse to

the very point and center of your Worships onely Patronage.
Concerning the matter of this discourse, you shall finde in the Preface: and concerning the ma∣ner, there is no great matter of learning or ingeni∣ous inuention, onely a simple relation of a simple truth; yet somewhat there is, which may happily concerne the learned, and giue some satisfaction to an indifferent Reader, when hee vnderstands, how two of the most mightie and most warlike Princes among the Barbarians, the great Turke and the Persian, are now in armes one against the other; stirred vp thereunto by two of our Country-men, Sir Anthonie Sherley, and Master Robert Sherley his brother.
A warre not onely like to be long and bloudie, but also very commodious and of great oportuni∣tie to the Christian Commonweale: for that it doth gaunt and giue leasure to diuers parts of Christen∣dome to refresh themselues, and to increase their forces, much weakned, both by the Great Turkes warres; and most of all by their ciuill dissentions at home. For Cortug-ogli the Turkish Pirate, in his perswasiue Oration to his great Mast. Solyman, The Magnificent, to besiege Rhodes, could say vnto him, And now dread Soueraigne, if it please you to vouch∣safe but to looke into the matter, you shall see that there is a diuine occasion by the procurement of our great Pro∣phet Mahomet, presented vnto your most sacred Ma∣iestie, for that the Christians of the West are at discorde and mortall warre among themselues. And to say the truth, the discords and dissentions of Christian

Princes haue laide more Countreyes to the en∣richment of the Great Turke, then euer his bowe or Shield could haue purchased. In the dayes of Mahomet the second, these polluted Sarazens had gleaned out of Christendome like scattered eares of corne neglected by the owners, Two hundred Ci∣ties, twelue Kingdomes, and two Empires, and still as a canker running on, before the Persian tooke the field against them, they euery yeere did fret and eate into Christendome.
Finally, I might haue added many worthy col∣lections, as well out of sacred as prophane writers, that haue written of the most stately and magnifi∣cent Empire of the Medes and Persians in times past, and so haue compared it, with the moderne and present estate thereof; which hath scarce a shadow of the antique Gouernment, wherewith it was then ruled and gouerned. But the matter would haue proued too long, & made this volume too great: and therefore for those aduertisements, I purpose to put them forth, when God shal make me strong and able. In the meane time, whatsoeuer is here penned, I leaue it with your Worship, be∣seeching you to giue it entertainment. And so I do most humbly take my leaue, commending both your selfe, your vertuous Lady, and your whole family to the best mercies of the Lord Iesus. 
From mine House in Southwarke, this 18. of October. Anno Dom. 1611. 
