



THe olde saying is: None so bolde as blynd Bayard: nor anye so readye to vndertake, as the leaste able to performe: Euen so (right Worshipfull) it nowe fareth with me, who (at the requests and earneste solicitations of diuers my very good frends heere in Oxforde) haue vndertaken this translation, wher∣in I holde my selfe farre inferiour to many. Howbeeit, forasmuch as that seruaunt was of his Lord and Maister most highly discommen∣ded, whiche hiding his Talent in the grounde, had thereby profited nothing: my selfe being very loath to incurre the same faulte, and so to become worthy the like reprehension, haue the rather aduentured to translate this parte of Nauigation, whiche (I assure my selfe with other mens trauel and diligence) may be an occasion of no smal com∣moditie and benefite to this our Countrie of Englande. And heerein the more to animate and encourage the Englishe Marchants, I doe onely (for breuitie sake) propose vnto them the infinite treasures (not hidden to themselues) whiche both the Spaniardes, the Portugales, and the Venetians haue seuerally gained by their suche nauigations and trauailes. Nowe (right Worshipful) when I had well considered with my selfe, that hir Maiestie hathe deemed your Worship a very meete man for that aucthoritie wherein you nowe presently remaine, I my selfe coulde not but accompt your Worship (for the present) the fittest man within the shire, to patronize and defende this my simple labour, whereby any benefite maye either happen to hir Maiesties person, or commoditie, to hir highnesse common weale: and if the wealthe of a Prince be any cause of the safetie of his person, (which, who doubteth? it may be (and not vntruly) saide to be bothe. But to the ende your Worshippe haue not altogither so muche cause to con∣demne

me for this my bolde attempt vpon no maner of acquaintance, I thought it not vnfit vnto you, that I haue the rather herevnto pre∣sumed, vppon the request and warrant of my deare and welbeloued friend Maister H. Leigh, who (no doubt) is a man verie mindfull of al your Worships courtesies from time to time shewed toward him.
Thus not willingly desirous to be herein more tedious than is re∣quisite, I cease from troubling your good Worship, hartily praying the Almightie, to encrease the same, with abundaunce of all other vertues, to his good wil and pleasure: and withall, wholly committe my selfe vnto your Worships good disposition. From Oxenford the 25. of Iune. 1580.

