



PTolomeus Philadelphus, king of Ae∣gypt, (Right Reuerend Father) asking his frend, whom he had inuited to his Table, what was the greatest glory of a Man: recei∣ued of him this answere: Timan tòn theòn: To honour God: that not so much with gifts and sacrifices, as with the Pietie of minde, and a godly purpose. Which saying, not onely Ptolomaeus (being a right wise & learned Prince) well approued; but also those Philosophers which frequented his Presence, with great constancie, both published and praised. Like∣wise, among the diuine Oracles of the wisest Graecians, this was celebrated for a Principle, Epoū Theô; Imitate God: as that whereby men might be incited to acknowledge, to loue, and to worship the highest Maiestie. As the former hath an affinitie with that godly Affixe of Sa∣lomons last Solace; Feare God, and keepe his comman∣dements. And the latter, a resemblance of S. Pauls
 exhortation: Bee yee followers of God, as deare children: so, in either, that heroicall grace (I meane Pietie) is highly aduaunced, and no lesse commended vnto men, and that con∣dignelie: for beeing the daughter of the hea∣uenly Lógos, a right soueraigne Princesse, and of beautie, incomparabiliter pulchrior, quàm Helena Graecorum, (as Saint Augustine saide of the Veritie) shee is also (after Platoes defi∣nition) the perfect knowledge of the diuine worshippe: also the beginning, the middle, and the end of mans life: tollerating the things before spoken of, hoping for that which is promised, teaching that which is comman∣ded, mittigating the enormities of this world, wherein a man hath his Crosse; and leading him to eternall life, wherein is his Crowne. This is the same (after Saint Pauls affirmati∣on) which is to the Diuines the greatest my∣sterie: to the contented, the richest treasure: to men of most vtilitie, and that which (indeede) hath all the promises both of this life, and of the life to come. Neither is the greatest wisedome in all the world, which hath not anie combination with Pietie, of higher esti∣mate, then that Religion which hath no wise∣dome:
 for as the one among men is meere su∣perstition (as that zeale which hath no knowledge): so is the other before God, ve∣rie foolishnesse, and euermore liable to the sense of that resolute iudgement perdam sapi∣entum sapientiam. Finally, this is that soue∣raigne Seede of the highest Power, without the which, there is placed no certaine diffe∣rence betweene a man and a beast. Haec e∣nim sola (saide Lactantius) differentes homines à belius facit, & quam, qui non admittit, alienus à na∣tura hominis, vitam pecudum sub humana specie vi∣vit. Therefore, Pietie being in nature so good, in beautie so excellent, in mysterie so high, in price so inestimable, in vse so profitable, in request so necessarie, and in the ende so glo∣rious; shee hath not onely enamored her friendes, and furthered her followers: but at this time perswaded these, and semblable pro∣ductions, so correspondent to Veritie, against the synister oppositions of the maleuolent foes.
Moreouer, for that Pietie is that soueraigne Seede, appointed by the decree of the most Ho∣ly, to be sowen in the heart and minde of man, cōparable to that ground, which without the
 help of the Plough & manuall industrie, is nei∣ther fit for the seed, nor apt to beare fruit, for the desire of which good effects, the causes should not be neglected. I haue thought it as necessarie, as it is profitable, & no lesse my duty, not only to affect this kind of Georgy with the spiritual good husbād▪ but also with the Plough-wright to assay the framing of such an Aratre, as wher∣by my Lords field in this seed time, may be the better cultured, manured & prepared: the which I resolued might the sooner bee performed by placing (in a meet Antithesis) the image of Impi∣eties Plough, & manner of husbandry opposite to the same: so that, as vertues are best discerned by the consideration of vices, & the cleare light esteemed in respect of vgly darknes the wicked Hag Kakia might be abandoned, in the due re∣gard of noble Eusebia, worthy to be honoured. And that being done in this form & frame, and my self prest to expose the Plough (by Gods help) to the Lords Land, I presumed to dedicate the same to your good L: and at this time to presēt it, as a grateful gift of this new yeere, the which I wish to be prosperous vnto your L: and the whole Church. And herevnto was I iustly mo∣ued (in my cōceit) as for many others: so chiefly
 for these 3. causes: First, for that, as I considered your L: high calling and like place in this parti∣cular part of the Church, ouer which the Holy Ghost hath made you Ouerseer: ye are beyond many others so much the more excited to re∣gard the good directiō of the Plough, the which is then best performed, when respecting rather Onus, thē Honos, with that good Elder, who in lieu of the first, deserues well the second: ye vrge on the Lords worke, for the benfit of the Church, the example of others, & the praise of the right Lord of this land. Secōdly, I was willing in this sort (though ouer audatious) to expresse, as my gratefull mind & duty: so my heaty good will towards your L: whose fauors I haue so often enioyed, as well for others, as for my selfe: the which, seeing it was not so easie for me to ob∣tain that wherwith to requite, as to desire it (as Nazian also said in the like) I was willing to of∣fer, thogh not gold with the wise Magi: yet with Peter & Iohn, such as I had. Thirdly, of all other my labors in the Church, I was the sooner mo∣ued to commend this Georgie vnto your L: be∣cause, when sometimes it pleased you to yeeld me audience in the assembly of my brethren at your visitation, I then briefly intimated that in
 effect, which I haue sithence conceiued & thus broght forth: hoping that as it was on that oc∣casion well meant of my part, and not disliked either of your L or any other learned and then godly hearers: so eftsoones, these fragmēts col∣lected, with some others of semblable nature, subiect and qualitie in this method disgested, wil seeme neither harsh to your hearing, nor to your presence vnpleasant. It may therefore well please your wisedome to accept of my good meaning, to pardon my defect, and admit my present, and Pastor like to protect this Spirituall Plough, as wherby the Lords land may be well tilled, the husbandry furthered, the worke desi∣red, & the highest glorified. In this hope, I hum∣bly take my leaue, committing my present to your Lordship, and the same with that right worshipfull and vertuous Matron (Mistris Cotton) and al yours to the heauenly Landlord, who be blessed for euer.
Norleigh in De∣uon. this first of Ianuary. Anno salutis. 1606.

