



FOR thee O London I lament,
And wring my hāds with mourning chere
Because that thou wilt not repent,
Seyng thy destruction draweth nere.
If it be true as scriptures tell:
Thy synnes will sincke thee doune to hell.


The vices whiche in thee are vsed,
To tedious are for me to tell:
Thy noble fame is sore abused,
By those whiche in thee now doe dwell.
Whereby I see thy greate decaie,
That God doeth threaten thee eche daie.


The vice of pride hath tane suche place,
That it can not be rooled out:
And hath continued so long space,
That of Gods ire thou hast no doubt.
And suche a place pride doeth supplie,
That from thee it will neuer flie.


For like a weede it vp doeth spryng,
It is not set nor sowen at all:
The whiche good herbes & fruictes will bryng
Ere thei be ripe vnto a fall.
To cut it doune it is no boote,
Except ye cleane plucke vp the roote.



For where this wéede doeth spring & grow
Good fruictes can not there prospere well:
Because that cruelnesse so doeth flowe,
That verteous herbes it doeth excell.
Whiche weede we maie cōpare to pride,
That causeth vertue awaie to slide.


So likewise Pride in London now,
Doeth florishe in suche goodly sorte:
That thei muent whiche waie and how,
Thereby augmented it might be.
And nothyng doe regarde at all,
That Pride in the ende will haue a fall.


Consider well that Pride hath been,
The fall of many cities greate:
And Sodom sonke for suche like synne,
As sacred scriptures doeth repete.
Gomorrha eke came to decaie,
Because that Pride did beare the swaie.


And Alexandria in like cace,
Whiche was a citie strong and greate:
Pride would not let them purchase gracer
Nor yet for mercie would intreate.
Because that Pride so muche did flowe,
It was destroied and lies full lowe.



And Niniuie like cause I finde,
In the ende for Pride was cleane destroied,
For Pride so muche did puffe their minde,
That God was cleane forgot and voide.
In Pride so muche thei did delite,
That God the same destroied quite.


Ierusalem that citie strong,
Pride would not let them God to knowe,
In whiche Pride thei contined long,
As Iosephus the same doeth showe.
Till Titus did destrote the same,
And did accuse their pride with shame.


Ensample take by noble Troie,
The like for pride was neuer sene:
With warres the Grekes did it destroie,
Bothe wall and house the threwe doune clene
Because that Pride did beare the swaie,
It came to ruine and decaie.


Therefore, O London, now take heede,
For thou wast called Troic sometyme:
That suche decaie doeth not procede,
For to reuenge of Pride the crime.
Therefore repent, from Pride refraine,
Lest as Troie did, thou feele some paine.



For God doeth threaten thy greate fall,
By signes and tokens many waies:
The whiche vnto thee happen shall,
Shortly Christ saieth, and that in fewe daies,
Therefore his power diuine to please,
Repent, his ire thou shalt appease.


O London, thou hast cause to weepe,
For to consider thyne estate:
Thou art in synne now drounde so deepe,
That from hell mouthe thou caust not scape.
Except repentaunce thou embrace,
At Gods hande thou shalt finde no grace.


To practise pride thou doest delight,
And fonde deuises for to gaine:
Whiche is estemed all in Gods sight,
A thyng moste friuolous and vaine.
Yet thou doest seke the same to vse,
Whiche doeth thy noble fame abuse.


Let this a reformation be,
For thee, that thou in tyme repent:
Whereby thou mightst haue grace to flee,
From Pride, the Lordes will to content.
Reuolue in mynde what happen shall,
For Pride in the ende will haue a fall.

Finis.

