




THere is nothing in
this Continent, or
within the Content
of the vast world,
that hath not in it
some quality which may benefit other
creatures; The ayre yeelds fowles,
the water. fish, the earth fruits.
Much more may it bee verified of
persons than of things; of creatures
intelligible, than of insensible; of
learned men, more than ignorant: who
may edifie aud profit many by their
owne knowledge. The Author here∣of
was unto me both a Tutor, and a
neere affine: somewhat therefore
may, much ought not (without en∣trenching

on the bounds of modesty)
be said of him. Hee was a Micro∣cosme,
a little world within the He∣misphere
of this greater, that seemed
for his naturall endowments of know∣ledge,
reason, judgement, wisedome,
and all supernaturall gifts, to out∣strip
many of his equall-contempora∣ries,
and superiors both in age and
place. He it was whom Oxford so
much admired for industry, ingenui∣ty,
rationability, and judicious soli∣dity
in things pertaining to the libe∣rall
sciences; And the Church at this
day in Achitophel the wicked Poli∣titian
(composed by this Author)
stands stupified and amazed, won∣dring
at the subtility and pollicy hu∣mane,
together with the knowledge
and speculations divine, which the
God of Heaven exhibited unto him
in such an exuberant and aboundant
measure. Disastrous occurrents at∣tempted
often the stifeling hereof be∣fore
the birth: for had not a kinsemans
(Io. Ca.) friendly hand given it safe

conduct over the Surges of the Oce∣an,
in all likelyhood it had perished on
the Netherland shores, (as his indefa∣tigable
labours, witnessed by his in∣dustrious
vigilancy in the Opticks;
made shipwrack in the Irish Sea, the
irrecuperable losse whereof is much to
be deplored. Well, I'le welcome this the
more, objected to my view, & peruse.
Now having read it, & perceiving by
the stile thereof, as also by the testi∣mony
and certaine approbation of
that famous and learned Divine Mr.
Matthias Stile, the Authors most in∣deared
and intimate friend, that this
is not any adulterate and illegiti∣mate,
but genuine and naturall brood,
his off-spring; (to speake in the Poets,
& Apostles phrase) I thought my selfe
(by a blessed enjoyment of tuition and
instruction from him) not more by
gifts enabled, than in duty and con∣science
obliged; to endeavour to illu∣strate
the good parts of him, whose
fame (maugre malignity) will with
great designements contend for per∣petuity.

This Sermon, or rather two
dayes worke; preached before the lear∣ned
Vniversity at St. Maries in Ox∣ford,
being afterwards reviewed, and
contracted, was intended (as may be
supposed by the passages therein) for a
Pauls-Crosse Sermon: And had not
deaths properation and dismall ap∣proach
in a strange land prevented
the Authors preparation, and antici∣pated
a seasonable opportunity, it
would not at this time have stood in
neede, of a Schollers, friends, or kinse∣mans
helpe and assistance, eyther to
have fitted, or furthered it for the
Presse. Now although the vast vni∣verse
might present unto my conside∣rate
choise, many renowned worthy
Patrons that would receive this Or∣phane
to house, and give it habitati∣on,
countenance, and protection; yet af∣ter
consultation, and some deliberati∣on,
I humbly dedicate these Excogita¦tions,
and divine oratories of my
kinseman and Allie the Author, unto
your learned selfe; which I should not

(to confesse ingenuously) have done, had
not your Schollership, soundnesse, sinceri∣ty,
and integrity bin more eminent than
your Deanry or dignity. That I have
prefixed your name, was it because
sometimes your Worship was of the same
Colledge with the Author, and contem∣porary
with him, and consequently
might be thought an approoved instru∣ment,
if not to propagate, yet preserve
this off-spring? Or was it a fond sup∣posall
of adding ought to your (not more
desired than deserved) exaltation? No∣thing
lesse: but of gaining somewhat
from your selfe unto the worke, that be∣ing
so inscribed, it might carry with it
some shew of innate worth, which shines
so apparently from the splendor of your
learned bosome. Let the eminency of
your place and person give it lustre, re∣putation,
and authority: so shall not af∣ter-ages
finde a grave to bury it in the
darkenesse of oblivion. Anspiciously
regarding it, be you a patron and guard
unto it: imitating the goodnesse of
the all-sufficient-and-efficient-blessing

and preserving essence; who unto his
beloved ones, though not meriting fa∣vorites;
is a Sunne and a Shield; a
Sunne to comfort, and a Shield to pro∣tect.
So I commend you to God, and
to the word of his grace, which is able to
build you up, and to give you an inhe∣ritance
amongst all them that are
sanctified. The God of heaven perpe∣tuate
not onely your present exaltation,
but improve it to your further advance∣ment
here: The Lord guide you by his
Counsaile, and after that receive you
to glory.

