



Most Reuerend Father in God,
MY best endeauours, long since engaged to your Graces seruice, haue neuer yet found them∣selues sopropitiously befriended by occasion, as to make the World the witnesse of their sinceritie: my deepe apprehension of your Gra∣cious fauour, which first inuited mee into those parts, seconded by my inbred disposition, more ambitious to expresse a thankefull heart than directed to priuate ends, could not sleep with∣out some publicke acknowledgement. But it is the greatest vnhappinesse of thankefull in∣dustrie, to entreate no better Orators to pleade in

her behalfe than the tongue or penne; both of which oftner subiect themselues to the command of sycophanticke Parasites, than obseruant friends, and suffer themselues sooner to be armed against worth, than drawne in defence of inge∣nuitie. But with me the case stands otherwise; as with one whose words or writings can neuer sufficiently enable themselues, eyther to com∣mend the sinceritie of mine owne affection, or flatter the eminencie of your deseruing. The one beeing set aboue expression: the other of enuie or adulation. Sorry I am, that this deformed childe of my industrie, presuming rather on the precedencie of birth than worth, should before others of his brethren (worthier in my choyce) ad∣uenture to aske your Graces patronage. But op∣portunity in this can challenge an aduantage be∣fore worth, in that shee can as well improue the worst as crown the best. Could I haue proportioned this poor present eyther to your Graces Iudicious acceptance, or my affectionate obseruance, it had cast it selfe into another mould than the modell of this slender Treatise, readier to shrinke from his patrons learned censure, than able to stand out in the Authors approbation. But such as it is, I hum∣bly present with my selfe vnto your gracious ac∣ceptance; wishing it no other destinie than my

selfe, whom you since my cōming hauing cheri∣shed in your fauour, haue confirmed your grateful Votarie. The subiect I here offer to your view containes the pith and matter of three Sermons, presented heretofore to my Mother the Uniuersi∣ty of Oxford, in whose name they will no doubt find an easier passage into your Graces protectiō. Not that I hold these riuelets worthy so copious & sweet a fountain whence they sprung; but that your Grace hauing often honoured our ancient Mother, as well with your acceptable presence as learned exercise; cannot but cast an indulgent eye vpon her vnworthiest children. The scene, wherin I haue bounded my discourse, presents vnto your censure a sacred Tragedy, consisting of four chief Actors, viz. Dauid an anointed King: Absolon an ambitious prince: Achitophel a wicked politi∣cian, & Chushai a loyal subiect: a passage of hi∣story for variety pleasant, for instruction vseful, for euent admirable. If the pen-man climbe not the height of such a subiect, I shal not I hope fall below the measure of your gracious acceptance. In which confidence I shall find my ambition a∣bundantly satisfied, and rest,

