



HE dishonesteth himself, and so much as lyeth in hym diffameth his maister, vvho hath bin prentise seuen yeares, and at the ende of those seuen yeares, neyther vnderstandeth his arte, neyther can shewe any reason therof, neyther is able to profite himselfe or others.
Are not we al bound, yea do we not al promise in our baptisme, and are commaunded of God, to shew out the glories and vertues of him, that hath brought vs out of darkenes into light? But it is to be feared that a nomber of vs that professe Christ, (thoughe wee haue bin prentice to him seuen yeares, perhappes seuen, seuen, and seuen, neither haue so much knowledge as to instruct our selues, neither to defend our maister Christ against the Turke, Iewe, here∣tique, and antichrist. VVill the Turke admit any man to his religi∣on, that neither can, nor will defend Mahomet? VVill the Iewe re∣ceiue any that is not furnished with the Scriptures falsely interpre∣ted against Christ? VVill Heretiques accept any man that is igno∣rant in their erronius opinions? VVill Antichrist allowe any man which will not maintaine his Idolatry and supersttion? VVe pro∣fesse Christ in woords, and outward shewes, notwithstanding we are not able too defend him in the middest of his enemyes. Lacke of knowledge causeth many to hold their peace. Ignorance is the root of errour: the contempt of the study of Gods word, is the high way to perdition. VVho can please him whose will he knoweth not? VVho can proceede in his Princes affaires, that knoweth not his comission? How can he execute his commission, if he neyther reade it, nor vnderstand it? Is he a Gramarian that cannot speake congrue Latine? A Logician that cannot reason probably? A naturall Philosopher that knoweth not the generation and cau∣ses

of Raine, VVinde, Snowe, and such Meteorologicall things? Is there any Surgen that hath not read Iohannes de Vigo or Alex∣ander benedictus? Or Phisitian that is ignorant in Hippocrates, or Galen, or Celsus? and shall ignorance who is condemned of all arti∣ficers commend a Christian? I therfore the least of all the members of Christ, hearing dayly Antichrist and his artificers (I meane the Pope and the Papistes) so cunning in the Cannon lawe, and Po∣pish doctours, that there is nothing in them that they do not both exactely vnderstand, and also vtter, to the maintenance of their head the Pope, thought it necessary somewhat to say and too refel theyr errours. Emong the which this is not the least that the Papistes go about, to proue the Pope to be head of the Church, which vnreaso∣nable errour, being plainely in these twoo little treatises confuted, I haue thought good to dedicate the same vnto your Honour, whose desire (as I am throughly perswaded) is too see the vtter confusion of Antichrist, and the perfect establishement of Christes Religion. And therfore the bolder to set those things forth vnder your Lord shippes protection, which may please Christ, displease Antichrist, be acceptable to all Christians, greuous to all Antechristians, plea∣sant to all professoures of Christ, bitter to al his aduersaries. And as I truste a plaine ouerthrowe of the Romishe Church.

