


Thy Galateo (Peterson) doth shrowd him selfe to long,
What? shall it sleepe Endymions yeares? thou dost thy countrie wrong.
She hath a childs parte, Plato saies, and with the Author cries,
That both thy toile, and this her gaine, may reare his skill to skies.
What thoughe thou thinke thy present small, for view of gallant ones?
This litle Diamond, shall out prize, a quarry full of stones.
And Noble Cyrus (Man) will daine cold water in Sinaetaes hand:
Then fray not, if thy booke, in pure, vnfiled termes doe stand.
Translatours can not mount: for though, their armes with wings be spread,
In vaine they toile to take the flight, their feete are clogd with lead.
This faith, that makes the Authour, speake his owne in language new:
Renoumes the more, then if thou blazdst it out, in painted hew.
For, serpents lurke in greenest grasse, and with a garishe gloze,
The Strūpet pounts in pride, where matrones marche in comelie clothes.
Go publishe it, and dreade not scowling Momus poisond spite.
And though Archilochus Iambes fly, or Theons taunts doe byte:
Thinke, winds doe haunt the gallauntst trees, and Enuy things of state.
And lightning checks, Cerauniaes tops, whome no hils els do mate.
The best haue borne the bob, and Zoiles brutes durst geue the charge:
But Zoile hangs, and Callisthen keepes in cage for talking large.
And yet, wordes they be winde: but as erst Plinies Draconite
No toole could pierce or carue: or as the gemme Chalazias hight,
Keepes cold, though it in Aetna frie, or Adiantons flowers
Drawes not a drop, though skies distill downe euerlasting showers:
So good desert, doth chalenge good reporte by reasons rate,
Though oft they beare the checkes and taunts, they cānot take the mate.
Yet seeke Mecaenas wings to shroude thy toile: Virgilio
Found his Augustus: Ennie thou maist finde thy Scipio.
This trump shall sound thy praise. Syr Phoebus goldē rayes shall turne
To foggie mistes, and seas that beare their ysie crust, shall burne:
And lumpish lowte, with country shares shall salte Sea ome diuide,
And sowe his graine in Afrik Syrtes that wallow euery tide,
Before this worke shall die: which neither loues thundering threate,
Nor fierie flames shall waste, nor rustie, cankred age shall freate.
Nolo Persium nolo Laelium.

