


Most mightie and most gratious Soveraigne Lorde
IT is certaine, that neither King Solo∣mon so passing wise and famous, nor anie his wordes recorded in Canonicall Scrip∣ture, so prudent, pithie and full of pietie, need the helpe of humane hand, much lesse of my poore penne, for the defence of th'one or the authoritie of th'other, having so long sithence (by the best iudgement) purchased that credit and approbation, which nei∣ther the serpents envy, nor mās malignity hath or shalbe able to anihilate or empeach. Howbeit, seing that some  partly of malice, partly of ignorance, blush not to obiect & ex∣cept against either, condemning the one, as profane and dam∣ned, and contemning th'other as polluted and perilous. Wherat many remaine suspensive of both, & others (with my selfe) wo∣ful for both, as that so soveraigne a tree should be blasted & her wholsome fruit reiected: I thought it good, and my dutie, aswell for the stopping of those mouthes, as for the better resolution of the doubtfull, the solace of the pensive, the instruction of the ignorant, the honour of the worthie and the glory of the Al∣mighty, to advēture the framing of this Apologetical Dialogue or conferēce, entituled Schelomonocham, or K. Solomons

solace, and the same vnder the divine feare and your Graces pardon, to dedicate to your sacred Maiestie. Howbeit, this my rash enterprise (most gracious Soveraigne) first in attem∣ting a worke so waightie: then in addressing it to a personage so mightie, convinceth me (in some censures) of audacious arrogancie: when being farre poorer then Gedeon, & much slower tongued then Moses without comparison, I should with the former have acknowledged my great impotence, and with the latter have distrusted my small eloquence, but with neither of them both have presumed on your Maiesticall presence. At the least I should have followed that counsaile of Aesope to Solon approaching before Craesus King of Lydia to speak . Those conceites (indeede) might have daunted mee, had I not found strong reasons to perswade mee. For first beeing a Minister of Gods truth (which as I reve∣rence: I shoulde also defend to my power) and hearing those and other like obloquies divulged not onely in common confe∣rences, but in publike Sermones, I should with them have con∣sented, and so sinned had I longer pawzed, expecting from o∣thers the miraculous birth of those great bellied Mountaines. Secondly, having accomplished the worke, and perpending (as the vsuall manner is) to whose worthinesse it should of right be commended, I remembred that saying of King Alexander when a little before his death, beeing asked, to whome the Em∣pire should remaine after him? hee answered:  To the worthiest: yea I gladly recorded that ready resolution of our late right Christian Queene of blessed memorie, concer∣ning the successe of this most famous Monarchie; which she said should in right descend and come to King Iames then of Scot∣land; her naturall and lawfull successour, and the most worthie. Wherein I also resolved and presumed, knowing

well that as your princely power is best able to protect: so your royall person is most meete to enioy King Solomons Solace: for that (not only after the philosophers) rule, and your Kingly advise in that learned,Arist lib. Mor. 8. Plato. de Leg. 8. godly and sententious  but after the Axiomes of divinity,  as is the person, so should be the present: the Ar∣gument so properly fits the same, having for the principall sub∣iect, that most wise, most divine, most maiesticall, and most fa∣mous King Solomon the sonne of King David, the same whome Iehovah his God had both promised, nominated and appointed to the kingdome of Israel before that he was concei∣ved and borne, made most prudent, royall and glorious in his throne, and set foorth in all thinges as a meete figure of the true Melchisedek, and Melchisalem, many yeeres ere hee came into this worlde. Neither might this prerogative bee well transferred to any other (in regarde of the subiect) with∣out some iniurie to your highnes, disgrace to the thing, and blame to my selfe. Thirdly, as I was very willing in this sort to manifest the acknowledgement of my deepest debt; namely dutifull love and true alleageance, to your high Soveraignety: so was I no lesse encouraged, when I considered that I should pre∣sent my selfe & these my labours, not before an Egyptian Pha∣rao, as did Moses, nor before a Lydian Craesus, as did Solon but (which I vtter with a most ioyfull heart) before the Lords annointed, a right Christian King, who with King David (a man after Gods own heart) vouchsaveth sweet audience to the prophet Nathan, though he speak without a parable for the pre¦ferment of yong Solomon, and for Israels cōmon good, who al so with K. Iehosophat is desirous to know the wil of God, thogh by the simple ministery of poore Micheas, & finally which with K. Solomon is contented to heare in his own royall person, the

pleading of 2. women, though of base cōdition. But now because that godly modestie (though in the habite of princely magnani∣mitie) admits not in presence any speeches displaying such your apparant worthinesse, I lay my hand on my mouth yeelding ma¦ny thinges to vnwilling silence, the which neverthelesse, the most loving affections of all your true-hearted subiects cannot but acknowledge, & willingly proclaime. For we are truly per∣swaded, that as Iehovah graced Noah the righteous with ma¦ny perfections, wonderfully blessed David his annointed with an excellent spirite and adorned K. Solomon with ma∣nifold graces, as wherby (changed into other men) the first was miraculously preserved in the great deluge, which drowned the olde world, that he might be made the happy originall of the new: the second powerfully rescued from the Lyon, the Beare & the hurtfull sworde, that he might feede the Lords people and Iacob his inheritance: the 3. beautified & blessed with an ad∣mirable peace that he might build the L. house, keep the Lords watch, & do equitie & righteousnes in the midst of his people: so hath your high excellēcie found & enioyed the like frō the L. that being protected & preserved by his holy Angels and esta∣blished on the Throne of your kingdome, ye are with that pro∣vident Ianus who behelde all thinges  made worthy the original of a new & prosperous peace, with the sweet Psalmist, ordained a feeder of the L. inheritance after the dis∣cretion of your hands; & with that lovely Laemuel, appointed a builder of that holy house, a keeper of the watch, and the Executioner of righteousnesse and iudgement in the middest of your people. And as this is the end of your advancement the Glory of your Throne, the peace of your kingdome, and the ioy of your people: so in the same, shall yee truely confirme the love of GOD to your selfe, declare

your thankefulnesse to his Almightines, perform the duty of a most Christian Governour, assure your good Sub∣iects of your vnfained amitie, embrace their love, retaine their loialty, and publikely expresse your right Princely Pietie, for the honour of God, the comfort of his Church, the ioy of your people, the peace of your heart, the safetie of your place, the praise of your vertue, and the salvation of your soule: for this is that which (as saith the Apostle) hath all the promises both of this life, and of the life to come. All the which therefore, we dayly desire of God in our heartie praiers to be confirmed, encreased, established and continued in your sacred Maiestie, with the abun∣dance of blessings so long as the Sunne and the Moone en∣dureth. Thus farre therfore have I adventured on your high person and presence! Moreover, seeing your Ma∣iestie is not wont to blame your obsequious servant for pro∣fering the stay of your stirrop, although ye are well able and willing to mount your faire Palfray without any his help, I hope that yee will not much blame mee, if in this happie accesse to your royal presence (after th'example of wise Zoro∣babel speaking before King Darius and the three Princes of Persia (according to my bounden dutie) I onely remem∣ber you of that promise and vow made to the King of hea∣ven in the day of your Coronation, concerning the building of Ierusalem, and the reparation of the Temple. It is well knowne that our late deceased Noursemother, so well learned and approved in all princely pietie, did not only re∣paire and garnish the Lordes house, which before her time lay ruinous and defaced (as King Hezekiah and other an∣cient benefactors had don in their daies) but having a right

good opinion of the faithfull Pastours and painefull Ministers of the worde, as sometimes the noble Su∣nemitish Ladie had of Elisha the man of God, shee was wonderfull careful that they shoulde be enhabled to live of the Gospell, which they preached in their due ho∣nour, and therefore shee builte (or at the least repai∣red and appointed) not onely one little Chamber, but many large houses for them to turne into, compas∣sed with strong walles to bee secured in, and furni∣shed with beddes to rest on, Tables to eate on, stooles to sit on and Candlestickes to put light on, with all other meete provision and furniture for their stu∣dies, functions and fare: the which also had hap∣pily continued without great breaches vntill the day of her death,.Plat. lib. 1. Aristoph. a∣pud Suid. had not some (more expert in Simoni∣des Songes, then in Davids Psalmes) deceived her trust. But as devouring time decayeth houses most strongly built, and both estates in all ages, by occasions, wax blunt: so the Lordes house which shoulde first be respected, and those Cham¦bers in the next place which should not bee neglected, were so empaired, that as the former needed the regard of the right owner to support it: so the latter the wisdom of the cunning Artificer to edge it. Now, for that the highest Power hath not onely appointed your royall Maiestie next him∣self  the principall overseer and chiefe Artificer of this great worke: But also hath already moved your sanctified minde to consider so religiously of the same: wee cannot but acknowledge this

divine and gracious benefit, with thankefulnes to his high Maiestie, and a faithfull hope in holy invocation, that your Maiestie may not onely continue zealous and regard∣full of that howse, but also vouchsafe, that those cham∣bers may from time to time bee truely survaighed, kept and repaired with the preservation of their pristine and laudable rightes (according to the purporte of your mind of pietie therein well declared) not for Gehezi the Seller, nor for Simon the Buyer, nor for the vn∣worthie hireling: But for Elisha that holy man of GOD that so the glorie of the LORDE may fill this house,2. Chro. 7.1.3. and that the people may bow downe their faces and praise the God of Israel.
* Finally, for asmuch as with the regarde of the former, the true  and man of mercie for∣gets not the Poore,Neh. 5. Isa. 57. Act. 4.35. Gen. 1.8. let not my LORD bee angry if after Abrahams example (pleading before the Iudge of all the worlde) I speake yet this once, sup∣plicating for the Poore, first for the Poore negle∣cted: Secondly for the Poore oppressed. A∣mong the former it may please your highnesse with Elisha's hearte to thinke on the honest Widowes, the fatherlesse Sonnes,1. King. 41.2. and virgine daughters of the deceased poore Pastours, who in their life time ap∣plying their functions and studies in Divinitie, might not so conveniently provide for their owne fa∣milies, as other men accustome to doe: that thereby, the first of them by some christian contribution may be relieved,

the second in Schooles of learning preferred: and the third for meete Mariages endowed: the which in every part may easily by your Princely providence bee timely com∣passed. Among the latter, those your poore Subiects may be considered, who are iniuriously beaten by them which make your publike authority in their handes a staffe of pri∣vate revenge: that those poore may yet freely plead for them∣selves with meete audience (especially then when the case toucheth their life, their landes, their gooddes, or good names that so King Solomons complaint Eccles. 4.1. may not iu∣stly be renued: but in regard of your Kingly piety, so well ap∣proved in thinges past, apparant in the present, and hoped for in the future (as a right imitator of the King of Glory) King Davids sweete Song may be dayly modulated: Hee delivereth the Poore, when hee crieth: the needy also, and him that hath no helper. Psal. 72.12. These thinges beeing remembred, the King of mercie shall respect and thinke on your Noble Grace in goodnes.
Thus, most humbly acknowledging mine owne audaci∣ous attempt, I here prostrate my selfe with my labours at your highnes feete, imploring and craving your most gratious par¦don and princely protection, that, for my selfe this, for my present: that in regarde of my faithfull good meaning and dutifull alleageance, this, for the honour of the Subiect so worthie estimate: and both this, and that of your heroicall Spirite and godly good nature. And I dayly pray vnto the Almightie in the name of his holy Messiah, by the sweet influence of his Spirite, bountifully to blesse, gratiously to preserue, powerfully to defend, and mercifully to maintaine your royall maiestie, together with your most lovely (our So∣veraigne

Lady) Queene Anna, the most noble Prince Henry of excellent hope, and all your most Ho∣nourable Progenie, to liue, raigne, florish, and prosper in the feare of the Highest, and in the highest felicitie for ever more. Amen.

