



HOnourable Sir, the importunate curiositie of men hath at length ouercome my purpose, which would not suffer neither this an∣swere, nor the Epistle that gaue the occasion of it to keepe priuate with other scroles in the desks of the owners. As for me, how vn∣willing I haue been from the beginning and euer since to haue it published, both you well know, and others of worth can witnesse, who haue earnestly requested that of me, yet did not preuaile. But now seeing so great a man forced to yeeld vnto other mens desire, let none marueile that I also haue done the same. And although this Answere was not written to the end that it should be published; yet if they into whose hands it shall come, be equall and moderatly minded, not seruile to affections, there will proue no cause (I trust) that I should repent of publishing it, or they of reading it. It shall be knowne to honest men, and such as be

desirous of publike agreement amongst Christian people, (as I haue obserued the most to be on both sides, that are good men, and intelligent in matters Diuine) that they haue his excellent Maiestie of GREAT BRITAINE, ioy∣ning with them in their most holie wish, yea, with most ear∣nest desire. Who although he haue iust cause to be perswaded that his words, his writings, & his actions heretofore haue made manifest to the whole Christian world the excellencie of his minde in this behalfe; yet he thought good not to de∣spise this occasion happened also of declaring the same. Who is there so void of al sense of piety, which doth not embrace, and admire this affection in so mightie a Prince? Who so sauage and barbarous as otherwaies to interpret it, or to make doubt whether this answere of the King did proceed from a vehement desire of concord? Religious and wise men shall further vnderstand what manner of peace, and concord in the Church this most pious Prince wisheth: and vpon what termes and conditions his Maiestie is readie to make couenant. For this answere is tempered with such moderation, that the zealous endeuour by all good meanes to make vp peace, appeareth not to be inferiour to the Zea∣lous endeuour of defending the truth. And this surely is the Kings opinion, this his firme sentence, that it is but vaine for such men to thinke, or talke of the peace of the Church, which are not afraid to separate and disioyne this celestiall chariot, which ought in no wise to be discoupled. That in vaine therefore doe they vaunt of the truth of their opinion, who maliciously interpreting all the sayings of other men, and deducting thence such absurd conse∣quences as they list, giuing bad example of such peruerse  industrie, doe proue themselues destitute of charitie, which is the mother of vnitie. That in vaine also doe they vsurpe

the golden names of Charitie, and Vnitie, which are not willing to admit of Truth, which is the foundation of pie∣tie that is sincere. It was of old excellently spoken by S. Hi∣larie: Beautifull is the name of peace (saith he) and faire is the opinion of vnitie; but who may doubt, that that only is the peace of the Church, which is the peace of Christ? The peace of Christ, which alone is taught by this most holy father to bee approued off in the Church, it is that, by which the doctrine of Christ, which he taught his Apostles, and his Apostles taught the primi∣tiue Church, doth remaine safe defenced, and vnshaken. Let those to whom it belongeth, who challenge the princi∣pall places in the Church, offer vnto his Maiestie such a peace, and straightway the discord is ended. Let them in∣geniously and faithfully separate humane matters from di∣uine, things superstitious from things religious, nouelties, and late-borne deuices from such matters as be truly an∣cient, lastly, the nothing or lesse necessarie, from the neces∣sary: and I say againe, and I crie aloud, that all may heare, on his Maiesties part, and for the Church of England, the discord is at an end Now, to come vnto so great a be∣nefit, there lieth but one Kings streete, as it were, which from the entrance of the Church hath been beaten by our ancestors, namely the free celebration of a Generall Councell: wherein the complaints of all Nations may be heard, wherein controuersies may be determined, and peace for the time ensuing, by Gods mercie bee esta∣blished. For the rooting of bad opinions out of mens mindes, and for the reconciliation of nations diuided by dissention, the Church in all ages knew no other course but this, nor vsed other but this; they vsed not violence nor armes. But seeing by reason of the generall sinnes of vs all,

there appeares no hope of a Generall Councell, yet it would be some ease of this euill, if the great libertie, or rather vn∣bridled licence of daily writing and publishing bookes of Diuinitie, were by seuere lawes on both sides restrained. For now what hope can remaine, when throughout all Eu∣rope euery where, euer now and then, new writers come abroad, such as be readie to powre oyle into the fire, rather then by casting on water to extinguish the flame. Grego∣rie Nazianzen, that admirable Diuine, could not endure in the men of his time, the curiositie in disputing of diuine matters: and in diuers places of his writings hee affirmes that the only cause almost of the euils which that age suffe∣red, not vnlike to ours now adaies, was this: because men, void of Gods spirit, commonly and promiscuously did dis∣pute of spirituall things, and conuert Theologie into tech∣nology, that is, make no other vse of Diuinity but as a mat∣ter . of learned, or artificiall discourse, as they talke of other arts and sciences out of humane reason. From this licence, which now almost euery where beareth sway rise so many new tearmes, and such diuersitie of formes of speech, and . sentences which daily more and more breed dissention in the Church of God. Away then with this libertie of pro∣phecying, which is so pleasing vnto some of these times, if they vnderstand thereby a licence of broaching new deui∣ces, and departing from the doctrine which hath been re∣ceiued by consent of all men in the ages of the primitiue Church. What should I tell here of those vnsauourie, and vnlettered writers, which are scarcely perfit in the first ele∣ments of Christian religion, which daily come foorth of those places especially, where, without any difference made of good or euill demeanours, without respect of knowledge or ignorance, to the hurt of the common good, rewards are

propounded, vnto any one that being growne impudent can set out a booke against the aduerse part, though it be full of rage, and emptie of all learning. But what good can be hoped for from such, as make the knowledge of Diuini∣tie a trade of liuing, a helpe or way to get money? whom neither the glorie of God doth moue to write, nor the loue of truth, nor the edification of the Church, much lesse the desire of godly and holie peace: but reward only, and base hire, or the tickling of vaine glorie? Here it will be good to blaze the impudencie of one amongst many of the scrib∣lers . of this garbe, of whom I will let you know what is his Maiesties iudgement. He whom I meane, whom I am ashamed to name, such is the basenesse of this new Do∣ctor, is a common vagrant Peltmonger, an idiot, an illi∣terate fellow, that neither hath Greeke, nor Latin, without science and without conscience, borne to trouble honest men, and to spend sustenance, and nought else good for. He, because amongst women he is held a petie Master, and well tongu'd in his mother language, hath taken vpon him of late to censure all the writers of both sides. Which he hath vndergone more willingly, because two yeeres agoe be∣ing deeply indebted, hauing got a pension of seuen hun∣dred Crownes, that he might wipe off the old debt, and haue annuall pay (I speake nothing but truth, and what he himselfe told me) changde sides, and fled vnto the ad∣uerse part. So he, which amongst those whom he forsooke, liued in famous for suspition of being an Atheist, hatefull to all honest men that knew him neerely, now, forsooth, must needs approoue the feruour of his new Zeale to those to whom hee hath fled, that is, whom hee hath deceiued. Wherefore Pelt: being now a Doctor of his owne or eating, daily writes, or rather vomites out new bookes. First, two

yeeres since hee laid the rudiments of his new profession, when hee put foorth a booke against the Preface of his ex∣cellent Maiestie, that most learned Prince, himselfe being the basest of petifoggers, an vnlettered book-maker, the ve∣ry  dregges of ignorance: in which booke (if you except a very few things) there is nothing but triuiall stuffe, vtte∣red a thousand times before, nothing but what is drawne out of the lees. And as for those few things excepted, there is no learned man in Paris but knowes, and I am certaine from whom hee stole them. For we are not ignorant vn∣der whose table he gathers those crummes which furnish out his dishes. This Pelt: hauing some few moneths since assaulted a man of great fame, and nobilitie, vouchsafed me also the honour to be thought worthie of the censure of this new Aristarch, this pillar of wisedome: but by the way, and as it were passing by, lest if hee should haue done otherwaies, some honour (beleeue it) had accrewed vnto my name from the worthinesse of so great an aduersarie. I published not long before an Epistle written to Fronto Ducaeus, a Diuine of the societie of Iesus, wherein was contained a true historicall declaration of some things done in this kingdome by certaine of that Societie. This Epistle Pelt: in his booke aboue mentioned refuteth not, (how could he?) but stabs it with one sharp censure: after that conuerting his speech vnto his Maiestie, requests him not to beleeue any of those things which he beheld with his owne eyes, which the whole kingdome saw, which are laid vp in the publike records, which the vniuersall world now knoweth to be most true. All these things my Pelt: dare call false, and fained through flatterie; yea, and saies it to the King: as if the most gracious and clement Prince were one, whose eares lie open for such information as may de∣stroy

the innocent. What halter, or what gallowes are con∣digne punishment for this crime? When his excellent Ma∣iestie read those things, and shewed me them, who had not seene them before: I saw him heerein detest the strange boldnes and impudence of this Pelt. And whereas hee would haue me thought a cunning flatterer, herein he wrongs egregiously the King, rather then me.
—
,
.
—for sooner downe
Shall the starres fall, and the earth clime vp to the skie,
Then I meete any man with tearmes of flatterie.
Further, Pelt saith that when I wrote that Epistle I was led with a spirit of giddinesse. I wondred then what hee called the spirit of giddinesse: for he which makes a true relation of things done, or rather transcribes them out of publike records, who will say that hee is carried with the spirit of giddinesse, but such a fellow as himselfe, which is possessed with the spirit of errour. But afterwards, some . three daies agoe I light vpon another booke of Pelts, writ∣ten against a very learned man, in the end whereof hee hath another blow at me, and saies that I am led with the spirit of reformation. So the spirit of reformation, and the spirit of giddinesse are one, and the same, as this mischiefe would make them. Then all those men of diuers ages past, which haue earnestlie desired the reformation of the Church, and haue left vs many bookes for witnesses of their desire, all were giddie. What? were the Fathers of the Tridentine Councell led with giddinesse, which make so often mention of reformation? In the same booke Pelt: warnes me to take heed of writing any thing that may dis∣please

him: otherwaies I shall smart for it, he will runne me thorow. O zealous man for the house of God! which shootes foorth his zeale as farre as things that are not. Happie I; if I may fall by the hand of this great Aeneas. Only this scruple troubles me sore: how will he doe to con∣fute my writings, who is not able to vnderstand them? for I write not bookes for the women of France to reade. Well, I will giue Pelt: one aduice, which will free both me and him from this scruple. Let him remember the old precept; Quam quisque norit artem in hac se exer∣ceat: Let euery man practise that art, wherein he is skil∣full. Therefore, which thing only he hath learned, wherein only he is able, curet cuticulam, let him care for his pelt, and leaue these learned conflicts vnto those that haue lear∣ning. Neither let him be so high minded, as to thinke that I will euer make any other account of him then of a bar∣king dogge, or a wincing asse. I am not wont to be so pro∣digall of good houres, that he may hope I will euer turne the point of my stile vpon him. You see (honourable Sir) what kinde of Diuines spring of late, which like to Mu∣shroms grow great in one night, whom therefore the Greek Diuine wittily tearmeth sowne Diuines, and worthilie . debarreth from the handling of sacred things. But I re∣turne to this Answere, which hauing found published cor∣ruptly in the parts beyond sea, I reutewed it, and corrected it. And this I send to you for a testimonie of my loue, and seruice, which I know will be welcome to you.
London, Aprill 10. MDCXII.
Farewell.
