



THis Booke (Right Worshipfulls) conteineth certain verie pleasant, delightfull, and profitable Simi∣lies: that is, when two things or moe then two, are so compared, resembled, and conferred toge∣ther, that they in some one pro∣pertie seeme like: Wherein not onely sundrie, and very many, most horrible and foule vices, and daungerous sinnes of all sorts, are so familiarly, and so plainly laid o∣pen, ripped vp, and displayed in their kinds, and so pointed at with the finger of God, in his sacred and holy Scriptures, to signifie his wrath and indignation belonging vnto them, that such as are Christians in deed, being seasoned and indued with the spirit of grace, and hauing God before their eyes, will bee verie feareful, euen in loue that they beare to God, to pollute and defile, their hearts, their minds, their mouthes, or hands, with any such forbid∣den things; as also many very notable vertues, with their due com∣mendations,
 so liuely, and truly expressed, according to the plaine meaning of the word of God: that the godly Reader, (being of a Christian inclination) will be mightily inflamed with an earnest li∣king, and a loue vnto them. Ouer and besides, it containeth the ex∣playning, and plaine opening of many grounds and principles of Christian Religion, so manifestly decyphered out, that euerie one (euen the very simplest and ignorantest Reader) may easily and plainely vnderstand the true and right meaning thereof, as may bee for the increase of knowledge and godlinesse, euen in all de∣grees of men, and for their better vnderstanding therein. For ma∣ny times that thing, which cannont bee perceiued or vnderstood of Readers of Bookes, and hearers of Sermons, by a simple pre∣cept, may yet by a Similitude or plaine example; bee attained vn∣to. So that if any be desirous to compare a thing from the lesse to the greater: Similitudes will helpe him greatly in this behalfe, &c.
And that there is a necessarie and profitable vse of Similies, we may easily gather, for that the holy Ghost hath so often vsed them, both in the old and new Testament, as amongst many, these few quotations doo shew. 2. Sam. 12.1, 2, 3, 4. & 14.6. &c. & 23.4, Iudg. 9.8. &c. Psal. 103.12. & 123.2. Iob. 15.33. Prou. 27.8, 9, 10, 21. Esay. 5.7, 24. & 55.10, 11. & 61.10, 11. Iere. 2.26. & 33.22. Math. 13.4. &c. & 18.23. &c. Mark. 4.29. &c. Luk. 15.4. &c. & 17.7. &c. Ioh. 3.14. & 15.1. &c. Rom. 5.12, 18, 19. & 6.4. & 7.2. &c. 1. Cor. 12.12. & 14.11, 12. & 15.40, 41, 47. 2. Cor. 11.3. Gal. 4.1. Ephe. 5.25.
So that this worke, in my simple opinion, for the choyse of the Argument, rarietie of the matter, & profit of the circumstance, de∣serueth to be aduisedly read, attentiuely considered, effectually ru∣minated, and perfectly digested, because that it will breede and increase in all degrees, no small skill in knowledge, wisedome, and vertue. For I know no estate of men for whome this Booke is not necessarie; for Princes it is prettie, for Preachers profitable, for sage Counsellours it is singular, meete for Magistrates, lawdable for Lawyers, a Iewell for Gentlemen, a staffe to leane on for stu∣dents, good to further godlinesse, and therefore apt and profita∣ble for all men.

The Prophets of God were moued (as their writings do mani∣festly prooue) to fetch from plants, hearbes, and other naturall things, many right apt and fine Similitudes, and proper com∣parisons, to adorne their Sermons, & garnish their speeches with∣all, to make the same by such familiar meanes the easier to be con∣ceiued, and the readier to be belieued.
And although in euerie other kind of learning, humaine disci∣pline, and Phylosophie, there be many singular ornaments, and peculiar garnishments, effectually to delight the minde, and to draw it by example, and imitation, to vertue and honestie; yet for the true and perfect attaining, and fuller bringing to passe of these things, there bee none of greater, nor yet of like force and effica∣cie, to those that are vsed by the holy Prophets in their diuine wri∣tings and prophesies: So that to him that is any whit reasonably seene, either in the workes of nature, or in heauenly contemplati∣ons, it may easily appeare, how that their writings and prophe∣sies are not barren, rude, ignorant, and vnartificiall; but profita∣ble, fruitfull, learned, and eloquent. For the holy Scripture being giuen by inspiration from God, fully and sufficiently instructeth the minde, and furnisheth the conscience and soule, with most sweet foode, & wholsome nourishment. Which thing the writings both of the Prophets in the old Testament, and also of the Euan∣gelists and Apostles in the new Testament, do plentifully declare.
Now for that there be very fit Similitudes, borrowed from ma∣ny kindes, and sundrie naturall things, both in the olde and new Testament, diligently noted and found out, as well by ordinarie practise and course of life, as also by obseruing of the nature, effect, and vertue of things. I haue thought good at this time to take some paines, and to bestow some labour in this Booke to set down the same, with others, vnto the view and consideration of the di∣ligent and studious Reader: Whereby he may see what a rich trea∣sure of knowledge and wisedome, there is laide vp in the holy Scriptures: which affoordeth vnto the industrious and painfull Christian, store enough of matter, both pleasurable and profita∣ble, delightfull, wholesome, and comfortable. Neither is it possi∣ble for a man to reape any the like benefit of plentiful knowledge,
 and store of learning, nor to taste such plentie of necessarie foode, both for soule and conscience, out of any workes written by Phy∣losophers, Oratours, or Poets, as hee may out of the plentifull storehouse, and aye lasting fountaine of Diuinitie, and out of those Books, which were indighted and penned by the holy Ghost, and written by heauenly inspiration. So that whosoeuer shall adui∣sedly consider, and attentiuely discusse, the deepe misteries & pro∣found knowledge laide vp in the Scriptures, and therewithall al∣so, what surpassing wisedome lodged in their minds, which left be∣hinde them such diuine instructions and wholesome documents, cannot choose but most plainely perceiue, by how many degrees, diuine learning, and sacred studies, doo incomperably surmount all prophane skill, and humane knowledge, and how farre things heauenly and eternall, doo excell things earthly and transitorie.
That the holy Prophets were not onely most exactly seene in the peerelesse skill of Diuinitie, but most exquisitely also furni∣shed with the entire knowledge of all things naturall: and not ig∣norant of any kind of learning or discipline: may by the discourse in this Booke bee sufficiently prooued, and manifestly gathered, for that in their writings, they vse many Similitudes, and make so many comparisons of things, fetched off, and from the very secrets and bowels of nature: as namely, from wilde and tame beastes, foules, wormes, creeping and swimming creatures; Hearbs, Trees, the Elements, fire, water, earth, ayre, riuers, brookes, welles, Ce∣sternes, Seas, stars, pearles, stones, lightning, thunder, raine, deaw, heate, drowth, cold, winds, blasts, haile, snow, frost, yce, Corne, seede, salt, leuen, nets, snares, and likewise from the humours in a mans body, as bloud, milke, women in trauaile, in child birth, drosse, Iron, Gold, Siluer, and innumerable other things, where∣with they learnedly beautifie their matter, and (as it were) brauely garnish and decke out their termes, words, and sentences, with tropes, and figuratiue phrases, Metaphors, Translations, Para∣bles, Comparisons, Collations, Examples, Shemes, and other or∣naments of speech, giuing thereby vnto their matter, a certaine kind of liuely gesture, and so consequently, attyring it with light, perspicuitie, easinesse, estimation, and dignitie, stirring vp there∣by,
 mens drowsie minds, and awaking slouthfull, negligent, care∣lesse, sluggish and retchlesse people, to the consideration and ac∣knowledgement of the truth; and to the following and imbracing of vertue and godlinesse.
Hereby as they doo labour to deterre and withdraw the wic∣ked from their wicked wayes, by laying downe before them Simi∣litudes, tending to such purpose: So doo they no lesse stirre them vp to vertue, to true happinesse, to perfect felicitie, to sound assu∣rance, to the feare of God, and trust in his mercie. Finally, they each way seeke to winne them to the knowledge of God, and of themselues; and leaue no way vnattempted, to allure and bring them to the truth, and perfect blessednesse.
And as touching the godly, which feare the Lord, and frame their liues accordingly, they cease not to encourage, confirme, strengthen, and establish them in their vertuous doings; by earnest exhortations to persist in their well begunne exercise. They doo (as the Apostle Saint Paule also willeth) Admonish such as walke inordinately; and liue out of course, being vntractable, and vnruly,2. Thes. 3.11. 1. Thes. 5.11. to remember their dutie, & to acknowledge their fault, they gent∣ly reprooue them, and mildly seeke to recouer them: they comfort the weake, and cheare vp the mourneful; they strengthen the fee∣ble and broken hearted, they reuiue the sorrowfull and heauie spi∣rited, they raise vp them that are throwne downe: they vse lenitie, mildnesse, and compassion towardes all men in generall: they are slow to anger, slow to reuenge and violence: they heale the bro∣ken and brused consciences, they preach deliuerance to the cap∣tiues, sight to the blind, libertie to the imprisoned, comfort to the afflicted, ioy to the distressed, health to the sicke, recouerie to the diseased; and to the miserable releasement from the thraldome and tyrannie of the Diuel: all these and many other, they notably, and elegantly, set forth in their writings, by most apt Parables, for∣cible Comparisons, and effectuous Similitudes.
Christ in whome are hidden all the treasures of wisedome and knowledge,Mat. 13.3 (saith the Euangelist) spake all these things to the mul∣titude by Parables, and without a Parable spake he nothing vnto them, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet,
 who said: I will open my mouth in Parables, &c. To the which Tertullian in his fourth Booke against Marcion, dooth very fitly a∣gree, saying: Neither is the forme of Christs speech new, when he obiecteth Similitudes. Also Origen, cap. in Math. 13. writeth, that Christ spake nothing to the companies of common people, with∣out Parables (which are a kind of Similies) but to his Disciples, to whom it was giuen to know the mysteries of the kingdom of hea∣uen, he did not so. Therefore a Similie is most fit for a Preacher, because it reasoneth from things confessed, and very manifestly, and wonderfully layeth the matter euen before the eyes. So that the vse of a Similie reacheth very farre: for it is vsed for ornament, for delight, for plainnesse, & for grauitie. Nothing bringeth more grace, pleasure or dignitie. Neither is it to bee couered in silence, that Chrysostome & the auncient Church men, did commonly be∣ginne with a Similie agreeing to their argument. And the same in their Exordiums, yea in all parts of their speeches and writings, did the Princes of wise eloquence, and eloquent wisedome vse: as Ter∣tullian, Origen, Cyprian, Nazianzen, Basil, Iohn Chrysostome, Hierom, Ambrose, Augustin. But of the great vse of Similituds, we may read more largely in the Homely of Io. Chrysostome, vpon the 33. of Ioh. and his Homely vpon Gene. 13. And in Origens Homely vpon Leuit. 10. And in Augustine, in the very beginning of his second Booke, concerning Christian doctrine. And D. Gregorie in the 36. cap. of his third Booke of Morals. And to conclude, in Agrigola his first Booke of Logicall inuention. cap. 25.
Seeing therfore each one of the Prophets (among whom, many were Kings, & descended of royall bloud) haue discoursed of these things, and inserted and spoken of the same in their writings: seeing likewise our Sauiour Iesus Christ and his Apostles haue practised the same, and shewed foorth the like kind of doctrine; as also the learned writers haue done: I thought my labour should bee well imployed and bestowed, if I should in this Treatise, plainely shew what store of excellent learning, profound wisdome, hidden know∣ledge, and exact skill of nature: what zeale likewise of aduancing true Religion, and of banishing all Idolatrie and superstition there rested in those men, that by diuine inspiration haue left and deli∣uered
 vnto vs such worthie and wholesome matters, in such sur∣passing knowledge, by drawing into their Bookes (for the greater ornament and setting out of their speech) the whole store and fur∣niture of nature.
Now calling to mind (Right Worshipfulls) not onely the ma∣nifold curtesies and benefites, which I found and receiued, now more then thirtie yeares agoe, (when I taught the Grammer Schoole at Okeham in Rutland, and sundrie times since) of the Re∣ligious and vertuous Lady, Lucie Harington your Worships Mo∣ther, & my especial friend in the Lord: but also the great kindnesse and fauourable good will (during my long trouble, and since) by both your Worshippes, towards me extended. In consideration whereof, least I should seeme altogether vnthankfull (which com∣priseth and containeth in it selfe all vices, both towards God, and men) I am therefore euen prouoked in some small measure of du∣tie, to shew my selfe some wayes thankfull vnto you. And where∣as at this time, euerie gratefull person doth not onely in word, but also in deedes, with their presents and giftes, shew some signe and token of this their thankfulnesse: Euen so I also, out of my simple Garden, haue chosen and gleaned a handfull of Flowers, as it were a Nosegay (the best present I haue) to Dedicate & offer vnto you.
Thus humbly desiring your Worships to accept this my sim∣ple present, most earnestly beseeching the Lord in mercie to blesse you both, and all yours, with his holy spirit, with increase of long life, and much faith in him, to his glorie, and the benefit of this our Countrie, and in the world to come, of his vnspeakable mercie, to crowne you with euerlasting glorie. I most humbly take my leaue.


