



REader, to whom shall I direct my pen
But unto striplings young, the sonnes of men?
To you I send my verses in this booke,
For you to meditate thereon and looke
Where you therein matter of worth shall finde
To please your will, and satisfie your mind.
To you alone, and none but you I write,
Others may read, but yours it is of right.
Acc,pt you then my labours and endeavour,
And I shall be oblig'd to you for ever.
For these my lines are of too meane a strain
To elevate my thoughts or entertaine
Higher preferment then with it agrees.
My booke's too barren for tall Cedar trees▪
Children may busie here themselves at fits,
Its not for deeper, and more solid wits.
Step then into this Arbour and there walke
Where you may meditate, discourse and talke
At idle times when leasure you shall find,
To ease the lymbes, and recreate the mind.
Learning no burthen is to any one,
The sweetest study is when we alone
Keepe close unto our books with silent voice
Reading such things as doe our hearts rejoyce.
Then study you that live in grammar schooles
And knowledge get, and be no longer fooles.

It is not wealth will make you wise or rich,
A dunce is poore, though he bave nere so mich.
This is the counsell J to you will give
And ever shall so long as I doe live.
Were I as able as I could desire
With moveing arguments for to inspire
The inward zeale to learning youth should beare
I would therein spend all my pains and care,
To spur you forward, but alas my skill
Is nothing comparable to my will.
Yet in a word thus much observe from me,
He that this wants, cannot true noble be.
Learning doth helpe to purchase all mens fame,
So truely learnd doe more renowne their Name.
Some men there be, learning doe not desire
But like the swine delights more in the mire.
The blockish idiots learning cannot prise
But hate even those, that are by nature wise,
And sottish fooles at learning will repine
So long as puddle shall delight the swine.
Oh then sweet children, marke with heedfull care
Whats for your good, and doe no labour spare
To get this precious jem of so great worth
That makes you noble, though but meane by birth.
Ile say no more, bnt onely this, farewell,
He is most wise, in learning doth excell.


