


MADAM,
It is now long since that my hart hath had, not only a verie inward compassiō of your miseries, but also a vearie earnest desire to present vnto you some godlie Treatise, which might both be con∣solatorie vnto you amidst your discomforts, and a patterne for your conformitie vnto the life of Christ. Knowe you therfore, that amongst all the vertues which can shine in a
 perfect and constant Christian, the forsa∣king of worldly riches, and the patient sup∣porting of tribulations, are two most noble and incomparable vertues; Which doctrin was set foorth by our Sauiour him selfe, whē he willed the young man in the gospell; first, to forsake all that he had; and next, to take vp his crosse and to followe him.
Vnto this contempt of worldly riches (especially when there is question of the honor of God, or zeale of vertu) many ex∣amples, not only sacred but prophane, doe plentifully exhort vs. Bias one of the seauen Sages of Greece, seeing his cuntrie all in fire and flames, and euery man gathering of moueables and riches to carrie with him, beeing admonished by one to doe the like, said. Truly so I doe, for all myne I carrie with me (meaning his vertues). Crates the Philosopher, hauing cast all his monie into the bottom of the sea, said. Malo te perdere, quam vt tu me perdas. I had rather cast away thee, then that thou should cast away me. Aristippus coming to Diogenes, and fin∣ding him washing his rootes, said vnto him; Thou bening a wise man, and a Philo∣sopher,
 if thou vvouldest credit me, thou shouldst not neede to vvash rootes, but shouldst remaine in the court of a noble Prince with me. To whom Diogenes ans∣wered; and if thou, quoth he, wilt credit me, and vse meane pouertie, thou oughtest not with flatterie to lie to Princes.
To applie these examples vnto our selues; That of Bias doth teache, that vertu is the only iewel which a wise man should seeke to preserue before al worldly riches. That of Crates: that riches are to be cast from vs, & to be renounced, when they can not be kept without the hinderance of vertu, or offence of God. That of Diogenes: that the vertu of pouertie with peace of conscience, is far to be perferred before a princes fauour, when for the same we must flatter or dis∣semble against our conscience. And thus you see in these heathen Philosophers which knewe no God, what riches they contem∣ned: what treasures they despised: what ho∣nors they refused: & what pouerty they em∣braced, only for the zeale of morall vertu.
But alas so passing greate is the cor∣rupted and abused iudgment of many in
 these our dayes, that no man is deemed hap∣pie, but he that is in honor: no man wise, but he that is wealthie: no man wretched but he that is in wantes: nor no kinde of punishement like to worldly pouertie. How many are there who expose their soules to euerlasting perill, thorough the inordinate loue of their worldly riches? And how few are there, who like vnto the mariners, when they see any stormes or tempestes arise at sea, doe cast out of their ship their ri∣ches and marchandise to saue their liues? This caused holie S. Bernard to crye out and say. O Vtinam congregata perirent, & non congregator eorum. O would to God the thinges gathered might only perish, and not their gatherer. This caused holie Dauid to crie out and say. Cadent à latere tuo mille, & decem millia à dextris tuis. There shall fall a thousand on thy left side, & ten thousand on thy right side. By the right hand spiri∣tually, is signified riches and prosperitie, and by the left pouertie and aduersitie. In both these men are mightilie assaulted: many fall, and many are quite ouercome: but without comparison far greater slaughter
 is made in the time of prosperitie, wealth, and pleasure, then in the time of aduer∣sitie pouertie and miserie. And this cau∣sed S. Gregorie to say, that the seruantes of God in his world, are more a fraid of prosperitie, then they are of aduer∣sitie.
For this respect our mercifull Lord, out of his tender loue to his elect, and fore-knowing to what hurt and danger their riches may turne them, if they should beare an inordinate loue vnto them, by sundrie meanes, doth take them from them. Imitatinge herein the cunning hunter; who hauing espied out the tree against the which the Elephant vseth to leane when he would sleepe, doth saw asunder the tree: wherunto he thinking to repose, falleth downe, and so is ta∣ken. Euen so doth God; from some, by cutting a sunder the liues of their frendes: from others, by taking from them their temporall goods, vnto which they leaned more then to him: and vnto others, by touching them with sundrie kindes of tribulations. Which yet he
 doth, not of any hate, but of a speciall loue which he beareth vnto them. In fi∣gure whereof, Isaac said vnto Esau, gen. 27. Come neere me that I may touch thee, and that I may proue if thou be my sonne. And S. Gregorie, askinge the question, what was wanting to Iob that he should be afflicted, seeing he was adorned with all vertu; This, saith he, that he might knowe to giue thankes in aduersitie. For as the Apostle S. Paul saith; Vertu is perfi∣ted in infirmitie. To vvhich purpose, vvhen a certaine person besought a holie man, that by his praiers he vvould deliuer him of his sicknes; the holie man hauing heard that he vvas better and deuouter in his sicknes then in his health, ansvvered; I beseeche our Lord to keepe thee in that state, in vvhich thou art best. For vvell he knevve that our Lorde hath a vvonderfull care ouer such as he suffe∣reth to be afflicted. Vnto vvhom he is, as the phisitien is to the patient, vvho fighteth not against the man, but against his disease. Vnto vvhom he speedely run∣neth as to a hurt member of his bodie,
 and vvith a most speciall care and pro∣uidence doth looke vnto him, and povvre into his soule most plentifull store of heauenly grace and diuine consolation.
Novv Madam, for as much as you haue voluntarily depriued your selfe of the ri∣ches and pleasures of this vvorld, for the honor of God, hovv may you not ioy∣fully reioyce vvith our Sauiour Christ and say. Nunc venit princeps mundi huius & in me non habet quicquam. Novv the prince of this vvorld cometh, and in me he hath nothing. And hauing like∣vvise so paciently supported so great tri∣bulations, hovv may vve not al vvith vvon∣der say. Venite & videte opera Domini, quae po∣suit prodigia super terram. Come and see the vvorkes of our Lorde, vvhat vvonders he hath put vpon the earth. For as Sampson being demanded vvherein his great force and strenght consisted, confessed it to lye hid in most vveake haires: so truly vve may rightly cōfesse & say the like, that God hath hidden in a most vveake sex, most vvorthie valor, victorie and inuincible courage. You may vvell be confident in the goodnes
 of him, who neuer permiteth any to be tempted aboue their abilitie. For our Lord dealeth with the iust, as he which casteth, a pretious glasse vp on highe, and suffe∣reth it to fall vntill it come neere the ground, and then catcheth it and saueth it that it be not broken: meaning the∣reby not to breake the glasse, but to shew his art, that he knoweth how to saue it, euen when to others it seemeth to be vtterly lost.
Wherfore, good Madam, nether let your longe afflictions seeme tedious vnto you, nor account that lost which you haue left for Christ. If we cast water about the roote of a fruitfull tree, we doe not thinke that water lost, because we ex∣pect great aboundance of fruite: euen so, that which we forgoe for the loue of Christ, is not lost, for we shall gather of that tree, the fruite of eternall life. Rather reioyce herein, that by this your patience and sufferance you preserue your soule in the grace and fauour of almigh∣tie God; Which such as this world would be if the sunne were taken from
 it, such is a soule when it is depriued of the light of grace. Againe reioyce for that you are made herein a true imitator and follower of Christ: who as S. Au∣gustine saith, did him selfe contemne all earthly goods, to shew that they ought to be contemned; and likevvise suffered in him selfe all earthly euills, vvhich he commandeth vs to suffer; that nether in the one should be thought felicitie, nether in the other should be feared in∣felicitie. Againe reioyce for that there is laid vp for you a copious revvard in the kingdome of heauen. For if to him that had employed his fiue talents and made them ten, so great a recompence vvas assured, vvhat a vvonderfull recom∣pence shall you receiue for more then ten hundred poundes a yeare vvhich you haue forsaken for the loue of Christ? Hovv shall not our Sauiour say vnto you. Well done good and faithfull seruant, because thou hast bene faithfull in litle I will set thee ouer much, enter into thy Masters ioy. Againe reioyce for that you haue so vvisely defeated the diuell, and
 and escaped and auoided his craftie snares, whose sutteltie and meaning was, by disposessing you of yours, to haue posessed him selfe of you. For the Diu∣ell when he depriueth vs of our worldly substance, doth it not for the loue there∣of, for that such thinges, are not so pre∣tious to him; it is our soule that he would gayne, all the rest he nothing regardeth. For so he tooke from Iob, his substance, his children, and the health of his bo∣die, but chiefly intended to destroy his soule.
Now therfore, for as much as it is per∣seuerance which bringeth euery vertu to his perfection, you must euer be furnished with perfect Fortitude, the only vertu of all others insuperable; for all the world can not ouercome one man in whom is true Fortitude. And as Seneca saith. It is more easie to ouercome one whole na∣tion, then one such man. For what can all the enimies and persecutors in the world doe, when they haue done the vtmost of their malice, but that which euery litle ague, or any other litle disease
 can doe vnto you as well as they? Yea if al men and diuells should bend their forces against one man alone, what grea∣ter hurt or euil can they woorke him, then to deliuer him out of this vale of mi∣serie, and to send him the sooner into the cuntrie of heauen and company and socie∣tie of the blessed Saintes? Wherfore, if besi∣des all the troubles you haue all readie su∣stained for the loue of Christ, you should further be threatned vvith a thousand euils, arme your selfe to surmount them all with this only ansvvere, recounted by Cassian in his Collations. Who telleth, that an Infi∣dell outraging vpon a day an holie Hermite asked him. Quaenam miracula, & prodigia, tuus Christus in mundo edidit? What mira∣cles and vvonders hath thy Christ done in the vvorld. To vvhom the good Hermite made ansvvere saying. Vt his ac maioribus in∣iurijs non mouear, nec offendar minis. That I be not moued vvith these and vvith gre∣ater iniuries, nor am feard vvith threat∣ninges. Yf yet further you should be threat∣ned vvith a thousand deathes, ansvvere
 as Seneca ansvvered the like obiections vvhich he made to him selfe, saying. Thou shalt dye. One this condicion, quoth he, to goe from hence, I came hither. Thou shalt dye. It is the lavv of all nations, to restore againe vvhat one hath borrovved. Thou shalt dye. It vvere foolishnes to feare vvhat can not be es∣chued. Thou shalt dye. I am not the first nor shall not be the last. All haue gone before me, and all shall follovve after me.
Finally, let not I beseeche you, the exā∣ple of such as flinch, or goe back in the time of affliction, be any offence or trouble to you; True it is, that it is a great scandall vnto the vveake, and a great dis∣comfort & griefe to the seruants of Christ. But Madam, remember that of such it is said, that they departed because they lo∣ued more the glorie of the vvorld then the glorie of Christ. They be of those, vvho vvere present and follovved Christ vvhen he entred into Hierusalem in glorie and triumphe, but forsooke and left him at the time of his passion. Men that
 vvould haue a Iesus of silke and veluet. Svvallovves, vvho are present at the be∣ging of summer, but depart in vvinter. But you (vvoorthie Ladie) haue begun∣ne a glorious combat for the loue of Christ, you haue honorably entred the same, you haue patiently pursued, you haue victoriously sustained, Prospere pro∣cede & regna, perseuer that you may be crovvned. Shevv your selfe to be that happie mother of the Machabes, vvho by hir vertuous and constant example, ex∣horted hir children to endure all torments, yea death it selfe, rather then to violate the lavv of their God. Which constancy & blessed perseuerance, vvoorthie Madam, I chiefly vvishe vnto your selfe, and next to your selfe, vnto your Sonne and heire, and to those good gentlevvomen your daughters, vvhich haue remained vvith you in your tribulations. And for the rest of all yours, vvhich are seperated from you, from the verie bottom of my hart I humbly pray for their conuersion.
Good Madam, so iudge of the hart vvher vvith this vvorke is consecrated and de∣dicated
 vnto you, as if it had bene in his povver, the selfe same hart vvould as gladly haue presented you a vvedge of gould; With the vvhich as you might haue bene more enriched: so are you by this more honored, by hovv much the praise of vertu, is to be preferred before all the treasure and vvealth of the vvorld. The continance and encrease vvherof, I euer vvish both to you and yours.

