



THe wise Mar∣chant, that af∣ter long trauel vvith much searching and aduenturing, dooth thinke that he hath found som rich trea∣sure, although he doe much re∣ioyce in it, yet will not trust him∣self; but will vse all meanes of trial of it, by the most skilfull and ex∣pert, before he will aduenture his

estate, vpon an vncertaine com∣modity, or offer any way to vent the same. Blame mee not then (my reuerend and dearest Bro∣ther) if after triall of this kinde of translation, by my selfe and others, I craue of you to bee in stead of many, for bringing it vn∣to the touch; to trie, whether it be in all things, according to the worth, which I haue conceiued of it, for carrying-on the little ones in so plaine and so pleasant a way to all good learning. For, whom can I finde more meet then your selfe? And first, in regard of that right noble Hope, to whom I haue Dedicated my first assay in this kinde, being as yet vnable to iugde thereof; considering your louingest affection so duely and publikely testified to that hono∣rable House. Secondlie, in re∣gard

of the generall sort, to whom you haue not more ap∣proued your loue, in your pain∣full and woorthy labours, then they in their glad imbracing of the same. And for me, Who hath euer witnessed more true and sound affection, first in comfor∣ting and supporting your faith∣fullest sister, in that her long and weary combat of so many yeeres together, against the manifolde terrours, assaults and tortures of the bloody Enemy? and that not only priuately by your tenderest Letters, but publikelie in that most sweet Epistle, which hath been for the comfort of many a fainting soule. Wherein, you did not leaue her destitute of your brotherlie consolations, vntill the Lord who strengthned her, to be faithfull vnto the death, had

vouchsafed vnto her a most glo∣rious victorie; and translating her into his throne, from all the malice of the Dragon, gaue vn∣to her the Crowne of life. Also for mine owne selfe, sith, as I haue acquainted you, and some other of chiefe note and place, with all my Schoole-trauells, from the time that I thus sette my selfe more earnestlie vnto them, so with this kinde of Grammaticall translation in par∣ticular, from my verie first en∣tring into them; and more speciallie of late with the contro∣uersie concerning the same: so that you are fulli able to satis∣fie any, as I hope; and by your wisedome to compose it in peace. That thre may bee still a ioynt vnion in this labour, which I trust will proue so pro∣fitable

to all. And moreouer, for that you haue not refused to put-to your helping hand to the vvorke, perusing, and ad∣ding some of your owne expe∣riments; and haue also seene some little triall of my begin∣nings, and by all meanes in∣couraged mee heerevnto. Last∣lie, for that you haue now vouchafed to grace my weake indeuours, with your louing though vndeserued testimonie. VVherefore, my kindest Bro∣ther, as you haue witnessed all this loue; so let mee intreate you especially, amongst others, in these and all other my stu∣dies for our poore Counrey∣schooles, to help (as your grea∣ter occasions shall permit) to seuer all the drosse, that no∣thing may remaine, but one∣lie

that vvhich is pure and will abide the touch; That in the ende, that which is approo∣ued maie come footh as the gold, vvhich hath seuen times passed the fier. The Latine Commentarie of Corderius, which I latelie mett withall, hath much confirmed mee in the course; though the English translation, ioyned to it, doth verie oft translate the exposition, not the text. Notwithstanding, Feare least I should deceiue my selfe or any other, or least I should faint in the way, leauing the work vndone, together with the good experience of your tender loue, so carefullie suppor∣ting me, and so brotherlie censu∣ring and directing in such milde∣nesse, and also accepting my wil∣lingnesse, makes me thus to pre∣sume.

The fruit, I trust, shall be for yours, amongst others. And in this hope, that you will esteem of so meane a gift, according to mine affection, not the worke, I commend it vnto your loue, and to the blessing of our most wise and holy GOD whose it is; remai∣ning euer,

