



SEyng the dignitie, & excellency of euerye knowledge standeth in the woorthynes of the subiect, or matter whereof it entreateth: therfore is this know ledge worthy all reuerēce, which betwen your vnfrendly abusers, and vs your vncredited frends, is so diuerslie handled with con∣trary iudgemente: because the subiect or matter thereof, is our iustification, & reconciliation in∣to the fauour of God agayn. But alas, thoughe the knowledge be sure, and can not be changed, se∣yng

there can be but one truth, yet to the searche of the same our wayes doe so differre, that the one beyng settled, the other is subdued. Whereof briefly to exa∣mine the principall passages: can not be vnworthy of diligent tra¦uell. The matter is weighty: for therein consisteth the glorye of God, and saluatiō of our selues: Enquire of your teachers, from whence they would haue you to seeke for the truth: if they say frō them selues: you are not so sim∣ple to thinke them sufficiēt to di∣rect your fayth: you will looke at theyr handes for some further authorities: if they say from the fathers: yet try or you trust thē, for feare they deceyue you. The fathers are many, theyr reasons are diuers, they felt theyr infir∣mities: their writynges do smell

of it: wherfore vpon theyr opini∣ons onely, to repose the iudge∣ment of the truth it can not bee possible: to great is the diuersi∣tie of theyr seuerall assertions: though great were theyr giftes, and they worthy reuerence, yet ech felt hys lacke: whiche some∣tymes appeared in dissentyng from hym selfe, by latter reuo∣kynges of former opinions: by earnest reprouynges of other their fellowes. Hierome writyng vpon this place of the 23. of Ma¦thew, where Christ charged the Scribes, and Pharisies with yt innocent bloud, that was shed from Abell vnto Zacharye the sonne of Barachye: affirmeth that some of the Fathers dyd thinke it was Zacharye the fa∣ther of Iohn Baptist: Touching the credite of whose opinion hee

thus writeth. Hoc quia ex sacris li∣teris Hierome. Matth. 23. authoritatem nō habet, eadem fa∣cilitate refellitur, qua probatur. Seyng this sayth hee, hath no authoritie oute of the Scriptures, it maye as easely be denyed, as affirmed. Here by it appeareth, what authoritie this father hym selfe attributed to the fathers, where they bryng any thing not warranted by the Scriptures of God: & touchyng the authority of the fathers, thus writeth Augustine. Noli ergo fra∣ter Aug. ad Vin¦cent. episto∣la 48. cōtra diuina tam multa, tam clara, tam indubitata testimonia, colligere velle calumnias ex Episcoporum scrip∣tis, siue nostrorum, siue Hilarij: primò quia hoc genus literarum ab authorita∣te canonis distinguendum est. Nō enim fic leguntur, tanquam ita ex eis testi∣monium proferatur, vt contrà sentire non liceat, sic vbi fortè aliter senserint, quàm veritas postulat &c. Broother seeke not agaynst so many, so clere

and so assured testimonies of the scriptures, to gather wrāglyng mat¦ters out of the Bishops writynges, whether it bee out of myne, or out of Hilaries: first because this kind of writyngs, is to be deuided from the authoritie of the Canon: for they are not so read, as thogh itwer not lawful to thinke cōtrary to the testimonies gathered out of them, where they happe to meane other∣wise, thē the truth requireth. Thus you see within what limites, or boundes the good fathers enclo∣sed the authoritie of theyr owne writynges, submittyng them sel∣ues alwayes to the iudgement of the Scriptures. Agayne the same Augustine disputyng with Hierome aboute Paules repro∣uyng of Peter, mentioned in the seconde to the Galathians, doth appeale from the authoritie of the fathers, which Hierome al∣ledged

vnto the Scriptures. Thus you see the fathers condē∣ned all doctrine, not confirmed by the Scriptures: And I dare boldly affirme it, that your tea∣chers them selues, on whom ye repose you (if they be well awa∣ked) will not so aduaunce the fa¦thers that in them alone you should repose the directiō of your fayth: if that be theyr meanyng, they do but decayue you, & deale nothyng playnely. The fathers dissented, howe should they then direct you? some held open er∣rours whiche they must nedes cōdemne: will they haue you be∣leue with Origene that onely the father knoweth hym selfe, and that the sonne knoweth not the father, neither the holy ghost the sonne, neither ye angels the holy ghost? with whiche errour they

well know that Origene is char¦ged: wil they haue you with that good father beleu, that al men shalbe saued, and leaue no subiect matter for the triumph of Gods iustice? They dare not so teache you: will they haue you with Irenaeus, Victorius, Papias, Lactan¦tius, Methodius, and many other of the excellent learned fathers subscribe to the heresie of ye Mil∣linaries? I know they will deny it: Will they haue you with Au∣gustin diffinitiuely iudge all infā¦tes dying without baptisme to be dāned, & that the Sacrament should be ministred to infantes? They wil neuer alow both: Wil they haue you with Cyprian, new christen all such heretickes, as were baptised out of the Churche, if afterwardes they be conuerted? They do not so teach

you: Will they haue you with Hierome condemne all seconde mariages, for whoredom? What soeuer they thincke, they dare not affirm it: Wil they haue you with Denice at the buriall of the dead, to annoynt the corses with oyle? Them selues do not vse it: Wil they haue you to follow the example of Benet, who com∣maunded the Sacrament to be put into the mouthe of a dead Nunne? They will not confesse it. And to conclude, because the Fathers many times say true, they abuse theyr names, to lead you to error. Your leaders them¦selues in substaunce of truth dis∣sent from the Fathers, and lead you to mischiefe, with some of theyr errors. You see howe the greatest had faultes full of dain∣ger, which must nedes make you

feare to hange your faythe vp∣pon them. That grounde is to sclender for so weighty a cause, you see howe they erred, yee ought to be carefull, seing therby you haue cause to knowe they were but men. If you tell this to your leaders, and require at theyr handes a moe certayne ground to builde on your fayth, they will sende you to the Coun∣celles, for they can not erre: the pope is theyr warrante: because they affirme it, they would haue you beleue it, but be not to hastie to wage them wt credite. Take these for exāples, that Councels may erre: The Councell of Are∣mine consented to the heresie of the Arrians. The secōd Councell of Ephesus did leane to the here∣sie of the Eutychians. And the Calcedon councell woulde haue

geuen to Leo Byshop of Rome, the name of vniuersall byshop, if the good father (being absente) had not vtterly refused it. But thys your blinde guides do hold for sound doctrine. But no for∣mer Coūcel would euer so iudge it. The Councell where Cyprian was chiefe, did consent to the re∣baptising of hereticks. And did not the Councell of Constaunce breake the institution of the sa∣crament of the bloud of Christ, in withholding the cup from the laitie, which no Councell before woulde haue allowed? Thus in the Councels you see open error, and that they alwaies teach not a constant truthe. But Salomon affirmeth that a true mouth is e∣uer constante, but you see the councell not so: and therefore by these wordes of Salomon subiect

to vntruth, wherby it appeareth that they containe not the foun∣taine of truth, wherupon to ga∣ther the direction of your fayth, and what authoritie the fathers them selues attributed to the Councels, may easely be iudged by these wordes of Augustine, a∣gainst Maximine, an Arrian by∣shop: Thus he writeth: Sed nunc Aduersus Maximinū lib. 4. nec ego Nicenum, nec tu debes Arimi∣nense tāquam praeiudicaturus proferre concilium: nec ego huius authoritate, nec tu illius detineris: scripturarum au thoritatibus, non quorumcun{que} pro∣priis, sed vtris{que} communibus testibus, res cū re, causa cū causa, ratio cum ra∣tione concertet. But nowe neyther may I alledge the councel of Nice, nor you the councell of Arrimine to others preiudice, neyther stande I bound to the authoritie of thys, nor you to the authoritie of that:

but by the authoritye of the Scrip∣tures, which are witnesses proper to neither of vs, but common to vs bothe, let matter bee compared with matter, cause with cause, and reason with reason. Thus you may see your leaders abuse you: theyr stuffe is but feeble: they flie from the rocke, and builde vpon sande: theyr groundes bee vn∣constant, ye ought to forsake thē theyr hope is still doubtfull: their faythe is vncertaine: their sute without comfort: Refuse them, for the better: and geue eare to him that cryeth, I am the way, the truth, and the life. Know you who spake it? He that neuer told lye: he in whose mouth was no guile: he that liueth in truth, in equitie, and righteousnes: he at whose anger the mountaines shall melt: euen the Lorde Iesus

Christ him selfe, he it is that spea¦keth it vnto you. If he wished not your saluation, he would not teach you the way. In that he sayth he is the way: haue ye not warning enough that there is no other way besides him? Why then do ye stray into pathes of perdition? returne, & heare him, his word is a light vnto the feet of the righteous. Thy word (saith Dauid) is a light to my feete. Thē folow the light that ye may bee sure to see whether ye goe: at the presence thereof al darknes doth vanish: desire you to be blessed? I know you desire it. Then put on the badge, whereby to be knowne: put on ye delight, which they that be blessed, are furnished withal: His delight (saith Dauid) is in the law of the Lord, and in his law, will he exercise him selfe both

day and night. The scriptures be that light, that whosoeuer folow¦eth, can not walke in darkenes: whereby not onely the fathers, and Councelles, but the whole worlde shal also be iudged, as Christ him selfe witnesseth: The Iob. 1. worde (sayth he) which I speake shal iudge in the last day. The ma∣iesty whereof, the fathers had in due reuerence, as partly ye haue heard, in that they acknowled∣ged the same onely iudge of all councelles, and writinges. And touching farther confirmation hereof, thus writeth Hierome: Omne quod loquimur, debemus affir∣mare In psal 98. de scripturis sanctis. Whatsoe∣uer we affirme we must proue it by the holy scriptures. And agayne Chrisostome speaking of these Aduersus Valentinij script. li. 2. cap. 50. wordes of Abraham, in the para∣ble of the ritch glotton, that, If

they would not beleue Moses and the prophetes, neyther would they beleue him that should come from the dead. Writeth thus: Haec autē Chrysost in epist. ad Gal. cap. 1. Christus ipse inducit in parabola lo∣quentem Abraham, declarans se velle plus fidei habendam esse scripturis, quā si mortui reuiuiscant. Paulus verò (por∣rò cum Paulum dico, ipsum Christum dico, hic enim erat qui eius mentem a∣gebat) etiam Angelis è caelo descenden∣tibus praeponit scripturas, id{que} valdè congruenter: Siquidem Angeli, quàm∣libet magni, tamen serui sunt, & mini∣stri. Coeterum omnes scripturae, non à seruis, sed abvniuersorum domino Deo venerunt ad nos: Christ him selfe, in the parable bringeth in Abrahā to speake this: to declare that he would haue more credite to be ge∣uen to the scriptures, then vnto the dead, if they should reuiue agayne. And Paule (when I name Paule,

I name Christe, for hee it was that directed hys mynde) Paule I say, preferreth the Scriptures before the Angels, though they should discend from heauen, and that very aptly: for although they be mighty, yet be they seruantes and ministers: but al the scriptures came vnto vs, not from seruantes, but from the Lord, and God of all thinges. And agayne, Augustine, August. de doctrina Christiana, lib. 1. ca. 37. Titubat fides, si diuinarum scriptura∣rum vacillat authoritas. If the autho¦ritie of the holy scriptures wauer, then doth fayth stumble.
Agayne Augustine in his 157. E∣pistle In epi. 157. hath this sense: Sine Scriptu∣rarum authoritate, nihil desiniendum: Nothing is to be affirmed, without authoritie of the Scriptures. Thus you see ye good, and holy fathers in the Primative Church, gaue the whole preheminence, and

iudgementes of all truth vnto the holy Scriptures. Wherefore in forsaking your blind, and vn∣frendly teachers, and following the example, and counsel of these reuerend fathers, apply your sel∣ues to the study thereof, and ye shall soone finde out infallible rules, to be wray the treachery of your guilfull deceauers: this is one of the easiest, and it can ne∣uer faile, it is gathered out of Paul to the Romanes (as a sure touchstone) to discerne truth frō errour: his wordes bee these: But nowe is the righteousnes of Roman. 3. God, declared without the law, ha∣uing witnes of the lawe, and the Prophets. By which wordes this rule is plainly gathered, that the righteousnes of God hath al∣waies the witnes of the lawe and the Prophets, what soeuer

is truth, the lawe and the Pro∣phets, that is to say, the Scrip∣tures will euer acknowledge: and what soeuer doctrine they geue not witnes vnto, is false∣hoode, and errour. Now if your blind teachers would make you beleue that the search of ye scrip∣tures belongeth not vnto you, Christ him selfe doth teach you the contrary. And whether it be more right to follow him, or thē, iudge your selues. Search the Scriptures (sayth he) for those are they that beare witnes of me. Ye see how Christ him selfe doth fol¦lowe the rule, he claimeth wit∣nes of the law, and ye Prophets, he geueth the Scriptures for the discerner of truth. And in an o∣ther place, where he teacheth the cause of errour, he sheweth the same to bee ignoraunce of the

Scriptures. Ye erre (sayth he). Matth. 22. because ye know not the Scriptu∣res. Wherefore if your blinde teachers seeke to witholde you frō the Scriptures, you see they deceaue you, for these be they on∣ly, that can witnes ye truth. How greatly in the Actes of the Apo∣stles are they of Berea commen¦ded? where the reason is geuen of their great readines in recea∣uing the Gospell: for they dayly searched the Scriptures, whe∣ther those thinges were so: you see that ye Scriptures, the law, and the Prophets are onely the witnes, and auouchers of the truth. These men went not to the fathers writings to enquire, whether the Apostles sayd true: but they went to ye Scriptures, as to the piller of trust, whose witnes they were sure could ne∣uer

deceaue them. Thus where your seducers would make you beleue that the Scriptures be∣long not to you, they falsely de∣ceaue you, as now they may see the text beareth recorde, yt these of Berea were both men, & wo∣men, and that not a fewe. Chry∣sostome in his Homely of Laza∣rus, and the riche man, exhorteth all men to the reading of ye scrip∣tures: and specially by name, oc∣cupiers, marchantes, and house∣holders, alledging that they can neuer attain saluation, without continuall trauell in the Scrip∣tures: affirming that they haue more neede to read the Scrip∣tures, then holiermen: for that they continually passe their life in greater danger. Thus vehe∣mently doth this good father ex∣hort all mē to the reading of the

Scriptures which your vncha∣ritable teachers, aboue all thin∣ges forbid you, and yet you see both out of Paul, and Christ him¦selfe this rule confirmed, that all true doctrine hath the witnes of the lawe, and the Prophets, that is the witnes of the Scriptures. Whereby you must examine the truth of your fayth, and vtterly condemne all maner of doctrine, that hath not this witnes: he geueth to the Galathians this absolute decree: If we (sayth he) or an Angell from heauen preach Galat. y. vnto you, otherwise thē that which we haue preached vnto you, let him be accursed. By these rules examine ye counterfeite doctrine of your faithles deceiuers: search the bottome of their Masse, or propitiatory sacrifice: & say iustly vnto them, it hath not the wit∣nes

of ye lawe and the Prophets, no witnes of the Scriptures: They bring a newe doctrine, ye muste holde them accursed. Likewise for theyr praying to Saintes, their Purgatory, their pilgrimages, theyr holybread, theyr holy water, theyr ringing, their senssing, their worke of the worker, their executed workes, their vndewe workes, their lyf∣tynges, theyr crossinges, theyr breathynges, their bendynges, theyr dombe shewes, their wa∣shyngs, their annoyntings, theyr shauynges, their reliques, and a thousād such follies: you may iust ly say to them, they haue not the witnes of the law and the Pro∣phets, no witnes of Scriptures they preach a new doctrine, you must hold thē accursed. If they (gentle Reader) ment to deale

playnely with you, they could easely tel you, that their doctrine can not abide, to be examined by ye Scriptures of God, they could tell you that ye greatest indeuour and study of the chief pillers of their fayned Religion, is clerely to deface, and discredite ye scrip∣rures, but they will neuer tell you that, for thē they be sure you will credit them no farther. And because you may know, that I tell you the truth, I will in hys owne wordes rehearse the sen∣tences of one of their owne Car∣dinals concerning ye same. Thus writeth the Cardinal Cusa, Certè hoc te non moueat, quòd diuersis tem∣poribus Epist . de vsu commu nionis ad Bohemos. alius & alius ritus sacrificio∣rum, & etiam Sacramentorum stante veritate, inuenitur: Scripturásque esse ad tēpus adaptatas, & variè intellectas ita vt vno tempore secundum currentē

vniuersalem ritum exponentur, muta∣to ritu, iterū sententia mutaretur. Tru¦ly let not this moue thee, that with diuersitie of tyme, there is founde diuers formes both of sacrifices, and Sacramētes, the truth neuer∣theles remaynyng, and that the Scriptures are framed to the tyme, and diuersly vnderstand: so that one tyme they must be vnderstand accordynge to the vniuersall cu∣stome, and when that custome a∣gayne is chaunged, the meanyng of the Scriptures agayne must be chaunged. Gentle reader marke this opē blasphemy, for the word of God abydeth for euer. That is to say, is euer one, & the same. And Dauid sayth, that it is an vn∣defiled law. But if this man say true, no doctrine can be more fil∣thy: for what greater corruption can be attributed to any, then to

be inconstant, & vncertayne, still mutable wt time, but beare him yet further: Thus sayth he in an other place, to confirme the same doctrine. Quare nec mirum si praxis Epistolae 7. de amplctē∣da te Ecclesiae ad Bohemos. Ecclesiae, vno tempore, interpretatur scripturam vno modo: & alio tempore, alio modo. Intellectus enim qui cū pra∣xi cōcurrit, est spiritus viuificans. It is no merueile if the practise of the Churche, interpret the Scriptures at one tyme, one waye: and an o∣ther way, at another tyme: for the meanyng whiche goeth with the practise, is a quickenyng spirite. If this to a Christiā cōsciēce be not horror, then what may offend it? Truly (gentle reader) if thou be∣long vnto God, thy hart can not but tremble, at such fearefull blas phemy, and yet is this one of the principall pillars of that bewit∣chyng Synagoge, wherevpon

your teachers would haue your faith grounded: if you knowing, and seyng, wil runne to destruc∣tion, ye worthely perishe, but I hope better of you. This haue I sayd to make you know them: & what they would tell you, if they durst vtter all: Nowe touchyng this treatise, I haue therin offred no doctrine vnto you, but that which is witnessed by the lawe, and the Prophetes: Namely, by the Scriptures, vnto euery part wherof, after the same is confir∣med by the Scriptures, I haue added ye fathers sentēces, which were of the sounder iudgement, to shew that both they, & we, do acknowledge one truth, where∣unto I haue added ye shameles, and subtile shifts of some of your false teachers, captains I meane. Some of the head Papistes and

principall Scholemen bewray∣ing their trechery, wherin (gētle reader) this onely I craue at thy handes to read with patience, & examine by the rule of S. Paul, and Christ him selfe: which of vs soeuer hath not witnes of ye law, and the Prophetes, & the Scrip∣ture of God: thinke he bryngeth a new doctrine, & holde hym ac∣cursed. The Lord (if it be his holy will) open your eyes that you may perfectly see, and constantly confesse hys victorious truth, in the will of his onely begotten sonne Iesus Christ, before whom (in that great day) shall truth be crowned, and errour cōdemned, to the glory of hys name, and endeles felicitie of all the e∣elect, amongest whom, the Lorde place vs, to whom be all glory and prayse for euer.
Amen.
