



MASTER Francis Mason hauing (as he saith) receiued from you direction and encourage∣ment, in making his booke of the consecra∣tion of the Bishops in the Church of England, doth therefore present you with it, as due vnto you: And it seemeth to haue bin to your content∣ment, as sufficiently performing that, which he preten∣deth therein. For (as I haue heard) you conuented diuers Catholique Priests (whom you wrongfully kept in prison) to testifie, that they had seene such regi∣sters, as he citeth for the iustifying of your ordination; esteeming (as may appeare) that nothing else wanted for the full clearing of that matter. VVhich sole action vvas the first occasion, that made me thinke of the dis∣proofe thereof. For perceiuing thereby, that you and your assistents, made reckoning of the booke, as of a full iustification of your calling, I thought it labour nei∣ther idly, nor ill bestovved to make you see, (sithence you either did not, or vvould not see it before) how farre short it commeth of that marke. I addresse there∣fore this Treatise vnto you, to the end that compa∣ring it vvith M. Masons Apologetical Dialogue, you may
 iudge vvhether he hath indeed performed that, vvhich he so confidently affirmeth in the first face of his booke: to vvit, to haue iustified the consecration of the Bishops of the Church in England, to containe nothing contrary to the Scri∣ptures, Councels, and Fathers, or approoued example of Primi∣tiue antiquitie. You may peraduenture maruell, that I should put the trial of this matter to you, knovving you so farre interested therein as you are. But the reason is, because I hold the negatiue so euident, that I am per∣svvaded you cannot, vvithout forfaiture of your iudg∣ment, determine the contrary.
If you had not hindred the publication of the booke vvritten not many yeares agoe, of this subiect, by inter∣cepting the vvritten copy, vvhich, (knovving belike that it cannot be ansvvered) you still retaine, I might and vvould haue spared this labour, or haue other∣vvaies bestovved it. But seeing you are not content, only to hinder the discouery of your no vocation, but doe set others on vvorke to maintaine and bolster it vp, to the preiudice of the truth, you cannot iustly com∣plaine, if by this occasion, that be laid open to the view of the vvorld, vvhich you desire should remaine vn∣seene, and vnknowne.
If you finde your selfe proued here to be no Bishop, but a meere Vsurper of that title, I vvil desire (though I cannot greatly hope) that you should either depose it, or at least make your selfe capable thereof. But if you thinke there is no such thing here performed, I vvill expect that you should encourage either M. Mason, or some other, to satisfie the arguments heere proposed to proue the same. If not, your silence shal be interpre∣ted an acknovvledgement of that vvhere vvith you are here charged, that is, of your no lavvfull ministery and
 ordination, and consequently of your no Church, no Faith, no meane of saluation. All vvhich important con∣sequences euidently follow, of your vvant of lawfull calling and ordination. And so vvishing you vvith all my heart, as much loue to the Ctholike truth (vvithout vvhich your soule shall neuer see vvith ioy the face of Iesus Christ) as you shevv hatred against it; I leaue you to his holy disposition, who would haue all men saued,1. Tim. 2.4. and to come to the knowledge of his truth.

