



YOung Ladies and Gentlewomen that are studious of reading good Bookes, (such as your selfe oft converse withall) when they finde their eyes waxe dull and weary, put their booke from them; and for their better refreshing and diver∣sion, change the Sceane, and breathe themselves a while, till their spirits being thereby revived, they turne to their wonted strength and vigour. I have seene some of your Sexe, (especially such as have beene gentily bred) when they have

wrought hard with their Needle upon some cu∣rious Worke, have laid that aside, and ta∣ken a Lute in hand, or some other musicall In∣strument, and playd a Lesson or two thereon, to recreate themselves therewith, and anone af∣ter fall to their worke afresh: So naturall is it to all sorts of persons whatsoever to take delight in Variety. To harpe alwayes on one string, is harsh to the Eare. To feed still upon one Dish, doth but glut the Stomacke. Your wi∣sest and learnedst Men both in Church and Common-weale, will sometimes leave off their more serious Discourses, and entertaine them∣selves with matters of harmelesse Merriment, and Disports. Such are these Stories I present unto your view. I will not promise any great pro∣fit you shall reape by reading them: but I promise they will be pleasing andd elightfull; the Sceane is so often varied, the Passages so pretty, the Ac∣cidents so strange; and in the end brought to so happy a Conclusion. Here, though one bit (as we say) will draw downe another, you shall not cloy your selfe. These are but a few of running ban∣quetting dishes: Take (as you like) here and there a little of each sort: which will but whet your Sto∣macke, and set an edge on your Appetite, against you come to feed your Vnderstanding with meats more nourishable and substantiall. If you shall

but kindly accept, and take in good part (which the sweetnesse of your Disposition cannot otherwise choose) this poore Pittance, you will encourage me to invite you to a more solemne Feast, worthier your selfe, and him, who shall ever love and honour your Vertues and Goodnesse.

