



My very good Lord:
TIs the vsuall fashion and custome among vs that be Preachers, (and 'tis as commendable as common) to commit our thoughts to the safe custody of Paper, that they may not die; and vpon occasion, from the Paper, to award them to the Presle, that the dead may liue. This fashion haue I followed, and yet tis my first aduenture this way; and as my aduenture, so my mis-hap; that with Crassus Sonne, I should stand dumbe all my life long, till now that I haue seene my Gracious Master strucke dead before mine eyes, and with Elisha forst to cry out after him; My Master, My Master, the Chariots of Isra∣el, and the Horsemen thereof. Time I see is enui∣ous, and her Sickle so sharpe, and keene, that it threa∣tens
 ruine, not onely to the being and life of man, but his Memory also. This was it that made me put on; if not to raise and reuiue the one, yet at leastwise, some∣what longer to propagate the other.
They be the fluctuant and wandring excursions of a few broken, and interrupted houres; some of these herbae agrestes, wilde herbs of the common Field, which with the Child of the Prophet, I humbly tender to your Honours hands, and make bold to strow on your Noble Brothers Hearse! I well hop'd ere this, to haue seene some fairer and sweeter floures presented from his owne Garden, such as might haue drown'd the odour of these; but I perceiue some haue learn'd (with Pytha∣goras Schollers) as well to be silent, as to speake. Nec vox, nec verba supersunt. I am sorry to see the world as full now of Ingratitude, as 'twas once of Infidelity: but 'tis neither wonderfull, nor new, that though many Leapers were cleansed, yet but one should returne to giue thanks.
For my part, my friends will conceiue perhaps, that as he with the very feare, lest he should breake a Chrystall glasse, brake it:
Frangere dum metuit, frangit Chrystallina: So I (the least of all the least, Minimorum minimus, as Bernard speakes) may be iudg'd to haue shipwrackt that small credit I haue with the Liuing, out of feare to be thought vnthankefull to the Dead. But herein I bid adieu to all these respects; none of these things moue me, as counting nothing deare to me,Acts 20.24. no not mine owne life, as Paul said, that in any wise, I might be hold seruice∣able to the bleeding memory of my deare, deare Master.
I know none fitter to owne any Remainder of a Bro∣ther, then a Brother, the sole Inheritor as of his Ho∣nours,
 so of his Fortunes; Let me craue then, if not your patience to read, yet your acceptance to receiue these poore weake lines, deuoted to his neuer-dying Memory. I haue entitled it, His Memoriall; that if any things in him were honest, if any things iust, if any things pure,Phil. 4.8, 9. if any things louely, if any things of good report, (as many such there were) in remembring Him, you may not forget to thinke on them! In Gods name, those good things which you haue both learned, and receiued, and heard, and seene in him, those doe; and the God of blessing and peace shall be euer with you.
My Lord, let me take the boldnesse to tell you, that the eyes of the World are fastned on you; you cannot bee hid, your actions are not done in a corner, notice will be taken of all your Counsels, and your Counsellors, men are big with the expectation of you; and blame them not that they should be so, especially of you, who (besides o∣thers of your Illustrious Stocke and Linage well known) haue had so pious and religious an Aeneas to your Bro∣ther, and so famous and valiant a Hector to your Vnckle.
Et Frater Aeneas, & Avunculus excitet:
Let the Fiety and goodnes of the one, and the valour and Cheualry of the other, serue as so many siluer Watch∣bels in your eares, to awaken you to all Honourable and Noble atchieuements. Miltiades Trophees would not let Themistocles sleepe. Neither let the matchlesse Trophees and Monuments of their glory, suffer your eyes to sleepe, or your eye-lids to slumber: but bee rather as spurres to set you forward in the couragious prosecu∣tion of all good causes for Gods Glory and the Church. O bee not idle in the Imitation of them, whose Image you not onely beare, but whose part also you are; so shall
 not After-ages in the Storing of their glorious Annals, shut vp yours, with a Degenerem{que} Neoptolemum.
You liue in the face of a glorious Court, where your eyes, are daily fill'd, as with Magnificence, so with Va∣nity; yet you shall doe well, otherwise, to cast them aside from such Gorgeous Spectacles, and sticke them in the shrowds and winding-sheetes of the dead. Nothing shall more humble you then this, and so nothing lift you neerer Heauen then this! We vse ashes for the cleansing of our Garments and doubtlesse there is nothing better to cleanse the soule from sinne, then a frequent Medi∣tation on the ashes of our Predecessors. For if wee sift these ashes well, we shall beat them into dust, and from dust boult them into that nothing, out of which we were all at first taken. By remembring our beginning, wee shall seldome doe amisse: but by remembring our latter end, neuer, if the Wise-man say true. Dauid accoun∣ted one day in Gods Court better then a thousand other∣where; and surely (my Lord) you will one day find, vp∣on your death-bed, one houre spent in Gods seruice this way, more worth then ten thousand, worne out, in empty and indefinite agitations. None is your Peere now, but your Peere; yet the time shall come, when you and I shall be fellowes; in the common bag of mortality, the Rooke is Checke-mate with the King.
Therefore, among those multitudes, and throngs of employments that stuffe the soule with distractions, and wherewithall men of your Place are often taken vp: I pray leaue one void corner, for this wholesome thought of your Mortality; that you also shall die, suddenly it may be, as he hath done before you; certainely, it must be, as all haue, and shall doe hereafter. Though they be esteemed happy that stand before Kings, (and such hath
 your happinesse beene to stand in fauour, before two most mighty Monarks,) to heare and obserue their sayings and actions, as the Queene of Sheba said: yet let me put you in mind of a greater happines then this; and that is, at the last Day, to stand (rectus in Curia) before the King of Kings. O, bee as studious of this, as you are of that! You goe in and out before a most Religious and Gra∣cious Soueraigne, such as the Sunne hath seldome seene his like! yet that you may see the weakenes of all earthly dependances, the Spirit of God whispers you in the eare, with, Trust not in Princes, nor in any Child of Man; they may leaue you, or you them, ere you be aware. The Theaters and Scaffolds of the greatest eminency, whereon you great Petentates, and Grandees act your seuerall parts, either stand leaning and reeling on the quick-sand of Mutability, and Inconstancie, or else lie open and obnoxious to the wind of Disfauour, and Disgrace.
It is the Staffe and Rod of Gods feare and obedience that must sustaine you, when happely the Staffe of your Honour, like that of Egypt, may breake, and runne into your hand. If your Counsell be of God, (as Gamaliel said) if you make him your foundation, assure your selfe, your House shall stand, you shall see your Childrens Children, and peace vpon Israel. If you misse of your Ground-worke here, you can expect nothing but ruine; Tectum will be Sepulchrum, your House shall bee your Graue, as that was to Samson.
As at first I crau'd your patience to accept; so now I sue for pardon to acquit my ouer-great presumption with your Lordship; As the Nouellists said of some short eiaculatory Praiers in our Liturgie, that they were rather good wishes, then Praiers; My desire is, I should be so vnderstood of your Honour, as if my counsell were
 rather taken for direction, then instruction, and for my honest well-wishing, to your House, and Family, the my bold aduice. The God of all blessing continue his Blessings towards you, and multiply his Graces on you, and yours, your Honourable Lady, with the rest of your most hopefull Posterity, to the Worlds end.

