






where must be not only good plants for fruit and lear∣ning, but also good and battle ground for nourish∣ment. Lastly, great paines and heed taken in pruning and trimming that which hath beene well planted. As if also you regarded nothing more then that the chil∣drens bread be not giuen to dogs: the honie to drones: nor the good ground and paines employed vpon vn∣fruitfull plants, or scroiles and wiledings; but such as may flourish in the house of God, and bring forth more fruit in their age. If others, who are both in con∣science bound, and in dutie ought, would but ioyne with your Hoour in this so godly a care, how would religion and learning flourish at this day? Nay far∣ther, Si duo praeterea tales Britanna tulisset terra viros, that is, if all England would afford but two mo such, what might wee not then hope for, or rather what might we not haue had long ere this? For well know∣eth your Lordship that of the Poet to be most true,
Sint Maecenates non deerunt Flacce Marones, and that, Virtus laudata crescit. Insteed of which now that rather most true, Virtus laudatur & alget.
I will not heere fall to lament and deplore the state and condition of this age, which I might both easily, & iustly do, but to your Honor at this time I dare not, least I should be too tedious. Wherefore to continue that which I haue in hand, all mens eyes are vpon you, all mens faces towards you, expecting that you will hold on, that you will not bee wearie nor giue ouer, though it can not be, but that you meete with manie discouragements in so good a course: but from you men looke that you should not faint at ordinarie and common encounters, remēbring still that of the Poet,
Tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentius ito. But I should too much forget my selfe, and worthily incurre the censure of Sus Mineruam, if I venture to ex∣hort you, as if I doubted anie whit of your vpright and constant course, though exhortations in this and such like cases are not so much signes of doubt and distrust, as notes of incouragement and approbation, accor∣ding to that,
Qui monet vt facias, quod iam facis, ipse monendo,
Laudat, & hortatu comprobat acta suo. In this way of supporting and succouring good let∣ters and learning, you haue shewed a mind so free from that base corruption, which is the bane of all now a daies, neither practising it your self, nor suffering it in others, that you may worthily heare that of the Poet, Est tibi animus vindex auarae fraudis, & abstinens ducentis ad se cuncta pecuniae. For this so honorable, or rather he∣roicall protection, and patronage in so dangerous times, both the present age shall praise, and posteritie shall adore you. And although praise and popular applause be not the thing that you aime at, yet be∣cause it is due to so great vertue, you must be content to beare it, neither can you well auoyd it, considering how true that is, Fugientem gloria sequitur. And in my conceit that of Horace is not vnfit,
—aut virtus nomen inane est,
Aut decus, & precium recte petit experiens vir. Neither is this, as comming from a Poet, to be taken as a fiction, for euen great philosophers hold the same: namely Tullie lib. 3. de Rep. Vult plane virtus honorem, nec est virtutis vlla alia merces. If this be wel taken it may be well said: for God will honour them that honour him.
 As for praise and glorie here, I will now say nothing, least I may seem to play doting Phormio before valiant Annibal. Only my humble sute & petition at this time is, that these my simple labours may present them∣selues vnto the world, & passe vnder the safe conduct of your most Honourable protection. Which thing if I may obtaine, though I be none of them that attribute most to the starres, yet shall I thinke my selfe borne vnder a most happie starre. So crauing pardon for my too much boldnesse, with hartie prayer for your Lord∣ships Honor, that here it may be such, as hereafter may be seconded with the true honour of Saints in the life to come, I most humbly take my leaue.

