



MOST puissant and renowmed King, albeit my qualitie and gifts are of meaner sort and worth, then that I should thereupon presume thus often to solicite your Maie∣sties acceptation of my foretimely and vndigested fruits: yet sith this businesse was by your Maiesties appointment first commaunded, and one part thereof is alreadie become sacred vnto you, the remainder could not in dutie be recommended to anie other then to the same most benigne and fosterous aspect of your Royall Grace. In the former part I haue indeuored to cleare those mists and clouds which Doctor Bishops maleuo∣lent breath, out of the foggie vapours of their Romish fil∣thie lakes, had blowne amongst vs in his Epistle Dedicatorie to your Highnesse, whereinto he had contriued in a ge∣neralitie very many malicious and blind cauils, whereby he would perswade your Maiestie, that the Religion by your
 lawes established is not consonant to the auncient and first approued truth. In this latter part I haue laboured the exa∣mination and confutation of his whole booke, wherein as he hath taken vpon him more particularly to oppugne the doctrine of our Church in diuers and sundrie points which are questioned betwixt vs, so I haue studied accor∣ding to the talent which God hath giuen me, to make it plainly appeare in the same points, that the cause which he maintaineth hath very slender and weake support, that his fortifications of defence are but earth and clay, and his of∣fensiue weapons but as strawes and rushes, and that he had more care to write a booke, then conscience to weigh the force and truth of that he wrote. Which that it may not be imputed to any inhabilitie of his, but to the badnesse of the cause it selfe, he himselfe professeth that he giueth to his Reader thereinPreface to the Reader. the marrow and pith of many large volumes, hauing indeede transcribed the greatest part thereof out of Bellarmines disputations, who is now become their com∣mon oracle, and the chiefe fountaine whereat they all draw. Which may well be wondered at in Doctor Bishop, that he being a secular Priest, and with the rest lately caried with that importunate furie against the Iesuites, and hauing bene in that cause a principall vndertaker aboue the rest, should notwithstanding now be content to grace them so farre as to furnish himselfe out of their armourie to fight against vs. But it hath well enough appeared, that their quarell was but to serue a turne, wherein failing of their purpose, albeit they haue discouered the Iesuites to be so wholly composed of fraud and villanie, as should iustly cause all men to shunne and detest them, yet they haue yeilded to be gathered with them againe to the feathering of one wing, and though haply they be no otherwise tied together but likeIudg. 15.4. Samsons foxes, taile to taile, their rancor inwardly continuing such as
 that they can hardly one with good countenāce behold the other, yet they agree together to carrie fire betwixt them to burne and consume the heritage of the Lord. Which fire notwithstanding we hope by the mercie of God, through your Maiesties religious and godly care, shall be but as the fire of gun-powder against the wind, returning vpon the fa∣ces of them by whom it was kindled. For although the en∣deuours of these malignant spirits seeme apparently to tend to the detriment and danger of the Church of Christ, yet that God who in the beginning2. Cor. 4.6. commanded the light to shine out of darknesse, and when he had made all things very good, and nothing but good, yet gaue way to sinne and euill, that thereout he might draw some further good, the same God euen now turneth to the good of many, that which they in∣tend for euill, it coming hereby to passe that the Scriptures are more diligently searched, the truth more instantly prea∣ched and defended, the Pastors of the Lords flocke occasio∣ned more carefully to stand vpon their watch, the desires of many people inkindled to find certaine resolution of the things which are so greatly questioned; and though some fal away, who being butTertull. de praescr. Auo∣lent quantum volent paleae leuis fidei, &c. chaffe of light beleefe, haue but wan∣ted winde to blow them out of the floore, yet many more by the displaying and laying open of the trecheries and de∣ceits of such impostors are confirmed in the faith, and do learne the more deeply to detest the mystery of iniquitie, whilest they see the poysoned and deadly fruites that grow out of that ground. Which since they haue bene growne to so full and perfect ripenesse, could not but haue their time to fall, and the fall thereof hauing bene hitherto so happily begunne, we hope shall vnder your Maiesties gouernement much more prosperously succeed, and that God wil go for∣ward to shake offDeut. 32 32, 33. the bitter and cruell grapes of the vine of So∣dome, that men may no longer gather thereof to their owne
 destruction. In the meane time your Maiesty hath seene and must expect yet further to seeApoc. 12.7. the dragon and his angels figh∣ting against Michael and his Angels, andver. 15. out of his mouth as it were out of a brimstone lake, casting out malice & slander as flouds of water, to drowne the woman and her seed, and so much the more enraged, because he conceiueth in likelihoodver 12. that he hath but a short time, and that the day is at hand which the Lord hath promised, which shalIere. 51.6.11. bring vpon Babel the venge∣ance of the Lord & the vengeance of his temple. The Lord make good his word; the Lord hasten his work, that we may see it, that thatApoc. 17.4. purple harlot first founded in bloud and paricide, and hauing since by an vnquenchable thirsting after bloud made her self the slaughter houseIbid. 18.24. of the Saints and Martyrs of Christ, may of her owne children drinke bloud her belly ful, thatver. 20. the heauens may reioyce and the holy Apostles & Prophets, seeing the iudgement of God vpon her, casting her with vio∣lence into the sea, neuer to rise againe. And you, most noble King, in whom God hath turned the period of time which threatned alteration and danger to our state & gouernment, to the further strength and establishment thereof, and hath lifted your throne far aboue the thrones of your royall Pro∣genitors, and hath made you in a manner the ballance of the Christian world, consider that it is vndoubtedly for some great work that in his prouidence he hath so disposed it, and thereto apply those singular ornaments and endowments of the mind, wherein you excell all that haue bene before you. God hath made your Highnes able to espie and discerne the conicatching deuices of those bastard Catholik seducers, & we assure our selues, that in your self & in your royall poste∣ritie it shall be found, to the great aduancement of the faith and kingdome of Iesus Christ. Wherein that our hope may not be frustrate, we most humbly beseech almighty God to put into your Maiesties heart not to be too secure of them
 who account it a martyrdome to die for the murthering of Christian Princes, and in the shedding of your sacred bloud would think themselues to haue gained the one half of their desires, content perhaps by instructions for a while to tem∣porize, and to make shew of meaning no harme, till the me∣mory of their late villany being somewhat ouerblowne, they may be the lesse suspected, but hauing already giuen to vn∣derstand what your Maiestie shall looke for at their hands if oportunitie should second their designes. The Lord auert and turne that iudgement from vs, and1. Sam. 25.29. bind your Maiesties soule in the bundle of life with the Lord your God, that your eies may long behold that noble Impe of grace, the branch of our hope, together with the other branches of your royall line, growing before the Lord to the further dismay and ter∣ror of your enemies, and the greater securitie and assurance of the church of Christ. As for the seruice which according to your Maiesties commandement I haue here performed, albeit it be far from that perfection which the weight of the cause requireth, yet I doubt not but it is sufficient to shew on whether part the truth is to be found, and to iustifie the proceedings of your Maiesty against the cauillations of wil∣full men, desperatly shutting their owne eyes, that the light of the Gospel may not shine vnto them. Whatsoeuer it is, it most humbly craueth your Maiesties acceptance and royall protection and fauour, whereto with all loyall duty I recom∣mend it and your Highnesse selfe to the protection of the most high God, whose cause it is that is defended thereby.

