



SIR, I now send you your long since promised
Celestina, put into English cloathes; I shall
intreate you to giue her a friendly welcome,
because she is a stranger, and come purpose∣ly
out of Spaine into these parts, to see you,
and kisse your hands. I would not accompany her with
my letters of recommendation, whereby she might finde
the better reception. For, I must ingeniously confesse, that
this your Celestina is not sine scelere; yet must I tell you
withall, that she cannot be harboured with you, sine vtili∣tate.
Her life is foule, but her Precepts faire; her example
naught, but her Doctrine good; her Coate ragged, but her
mind inriched with many a golden Sentence: And there∣fore
take her not as she seemes, but as she is; and the rather,
because blacke sheepe haue as good Carcasses as white.
You shall finde this booke to be like a Court-Iack, which
though it be blacke, yet holds as good liquor as your fairest
Flagon of siluer or like the Rod that Brutus offred to Apollo,
which was rough and knottie without, but within, all of
furbusht gold. The barke is bad, but the tree good.
Vouchsafe then (gentle Sir) to take a little of this coorse
and sowre bread; it may be, your stomack being glutted
with more delicate Cates, may take some pleasure to restore
your appetite with this homely, though not altogether vn∣sauoury
food. It is good plaine houshold-bread, honest
messeline; there is a great deale of Rye in it, but the most
part of it is pure Wheate.
Our Author is but short, yet pithy: not so full of words

as sense; each other line, being a Sentence; vnlike to many
of your other Writers, who either with the luxury of their
phrases, or superfluity of figures, or superabundancie of
ornaments, or other affected guildings of Rhetorick, like vn∣discreet
Cookes, make their meats either too sweet, or too
tarte, too salt, or too full of pepper; whence it hapneth,
that like greedy Husbandmen, by inlarging their hand in
sowing, they make the haruest thin and barren. It is not as
many of your Pamphlets be, like a tree without sap; a
bough without frut; a nut without a kernell; flesh with∣out
bones; bones without marrow; prickles without a
Rose; waxe without honey; straw without wheate; sul∣fure
without Gold; or shels without pearle. But you
shall find Sentences worthy to be written, not in fragile pa∣per,
but in Cedar, or lasting Cypresse, not with the quill of
a Goose, but the feather of a Phoenix; not with inke, but Bal∣salmum;
not with letters of a blacke tincture, but with
Characters of Gold and Azure; and deseruing to be read,
not only of a lasciuious Clodius, or effeminate Sardanaplus,
but of the grauest Cato, or seuerest Stoick.
All which, though I know to be true, yet doubt I not,
but it will meete with some detractors, who like dogges
that barke by custome, will exclaime against the whole
worke, because some part of it seemeth somewhat more
obscene, then may sute with a ciuill stile: which as I not de∣ny;
so sithence it is written reprehensiuely, & not instructi∣uely,
I see no reason why they should more abstaine from
reading a great deale of good, because they must picke it
out of that which is bad; then they should refuse Pearle, be∣cause
it is fisht for in a froathy sea; or contemne Gold, be∣cause
it is drawn from a dirty myne; or hate honey, because
it is hiued in straw; or loath silke, because it is lapt in soul∣tage.
Which kinde of men I can liken to none better, then
those of whom Plutarke complainth, who are of so nice a
delicacie, that they will not drinke a wholesome potion,
vnlesse it be giuen them in a Golden cup, nor weare a win∣ter
garment vnlesse it bee wouen of Athenian wooll.

The Lacedaemonians, who were as strict liuers, and as great
louers of vertue, as any Nation whatsoeuer; would make be∣nefit
euen out of vices. But these Criticall companions, be∣ing
of a depraued disposition, and apt in themselues to be
euill, I can compare to nothing better, then the Scarabee,
who ouer-flying the most fragrant flowers, chooseth ra∣ther
to settle in a Cow-shard, then to light vpon a Rose▪
or Noahs Crow, which flew forth of the Arke, and preying
vpon carrion, returned no more. Howsoeuer therfore these
rigid reprehenders will not sticke to say of Celestina, that she
is like a Crow amongst so many Swans; like a Grashop∣per
amongst so many Nightingales; or like a Paper-blurrer
amongst so many famous Writers; yet they that are learned
in her language, haue esteemed it (in comparison of others)
as Gold, amongst metalls; as the Carbuncle amongst
stones; as the Rose amongst flowers; as the Palme amongst
trees; as the Eagle amongst Birds; and as the Sunne amongst
inferior Lights; In a word, as the choisest & chiefest. But as
the light of that great Planet doth hurt sore eies, and comfort
those that are sound of sight: So the reading of Celestina, to
those that are prophane, is as poyson to their hearts; but to
the chaste, and honest minde, a preseruatiue against such
inconueniences as occurre in the world.
And for mine owne part, I am of opinion, that Wri∣ters
may as well be borne withall, as Painters, who now
and then paint those actions that are absurd. As Timomachus
painted Medea killing her children; Orestes, murthering
his mother Theo, and Parrhasius; Vlysses counterfaited mad∣ns,
and Cherephanes, the immodest imbracements of wo∣men
with men. Which the Spectators beholding, doe not
laudare rem, sed; artem not commend the matter which is ex∣prest
in the imitation, but the Art and skill of the worke∣man,
which hath so liuely represented what it proposed.
In like sort, when wee reade the filthy actions of whores,
their wicked conditions, and beastly behauiour, wee are
neither to approue them as good, nor to imbrace them as
honest, but to commend the Authors iudgement in ex∣pressing

his Argument so fit and pat to their dispositions.
Nor doe I see any more reason, why a man should proue
a Villaine by reading of other mens villanies, then a man
should grow hard-fauored, by looking Thirsites in the face,
or a foole, for viewing Will Summers picture: But might
rather grow as the Lacedaemonians did by their slaues
drunkennesse, to a detestation of so foule a sinne. When
therefore thou shalt reade of Celestina, as of a notorious
Bawd; of Sempronio and Parmeno, as of false seruants; of
Elicia and Areusa, as of cūning queanes and profest whores;
of Centurio, as of a swaggring Ruffian, and cōmon whore∣master;
of Calisto and Melibea, as of vndiscreet and foolish
Louers. And so in the rest, learne thereby to distinguish be∣tweene
good and bad, and praise the Author, though not
the practice; for these things are written more for re∣prehension,
then imitation. And the minde that comes so
instructed, can neuer take harme; for it will take the best,
and leaue the worst: But he that reads all things alike, and
equally entertaines them in his thought, that Reader shall
easily shew himselfe obnoxious to many vices: And it
shall happen vnto him, as it did vnto those who imitated
Plato's crookednes, or Demosthenes stammering. But when
a Reader shall light vpon vnworthy lines, I would haue
him cry out as a Philosopher aduiseth on the like occasion;
Male hoc, & inconuenienter. But when he meets with good;
Rectè hoc & decorè. As the Bee feeds vpon flowers, & the Goat
on the tops of herbs; so would I haue him that reades Celesti∣na,
graze like a horse on that which is sweet and whole∣some
grasse; and not like a hungrie dog, which snatches and
bites at euery thing that comes in his way. Socrates, when he
saw a dishonest woman, would either turne his head aside,
or couer his eyes with his cloake; taking whores to bee
like coales, which either blacke or burne. Indeede, it was
the wisest way for Socrates; for though he were a Philoso∣pher,
yet withall he was a wanton: and therefore, for such
as cannot looke, but must offend in viewing of the loose
Lines, I would haue them imitate the Lightning, which va∣nisheth,

before it scarce appeares; or your Abortiues, which
die, before they be borne. But for as those that are truely ho∣nest,
and of that perfit temper of goodnes, that nothing can
make them decline from the rule of vertue, I would wish
them to do with some pieces in this booke (yet to reade all,
and where they finde anything vnseemly) as the Priests of
old were wont to do, who in their sacrifices vnto Iuno, took
forth the garbage of their beasts, and threw it behinde the
Altar. If any phrase sauor of immodesty, blame not me, but
Celestina. If any Sentence deserue commendation, praise not
the Translator, but the Author; for I am no more to be re∣prehended,
or commended, then the poore Prrat, who ac∣cents
but other folkes words, and not his owne.
If there be any, that is either a Parmeno, or a Sempronio,
an Elicia, or an Areusa, a Celestina, or a Centurio, I would haue
them to behold themselues in this glasse; not doubting, but
that as Narcissus, viewing himselfe in that pure cleare Foun∣taine,
wherein he saw his own most beautifull Image, dy∣ed
ouercome with a , or selfe-loue; so these men will
either die, or their vices in them, through an , or hate
of themselues; at least make other mens miserable ends,
serue as so many sea-markes, that they may not run them∣selues
vpon the like rocks in the sea of this life; wherein all
they are miserably drowned, who strike against them.
But to leaue Celestina to a fauourable censure, I must now
come to intreate some fauor for my selfe, who am so farre
from pleading my excuse, that I must wholy submit my
selfe to your fauourable interpretation; for I must ingeni∣ously
confesse, that I haue in the vndergoing of this transla∣tion,
shewn more boldnesse then iudgement. For though
I doe speake like Celestina, yet come I short of her; for she is
so concisely significant, and indeede so differing is the Idi∣ome
of the Spainish from the English, that I may imitate
it, but not come neere it. Yet haue I made it as naturall,
as our language will giue leaue, and haue more beaten my
braines about it in some places, then a man would beate a
Flint to get fire; and, with much adoe, haue forced those

sparkes, which increasing to a greater flame, gaue light to
my darke vnderstanding; wherein if I haue been wanting
to giue it it's true life, I wish, my industry heerein may a∣wake
some better wit, and iudgement to perfect my im∣perfections,
which as I shall alwaies be willing to acknow∣ledge;
so I desire to haue them mended by some better hand;
nor am I any whit ashamed that any worke of mineshould
not be absolutely perfect. For it is the Statute and Decree
of Heauen, that euery composition heere beneath, as well
framed by the hand of Art, as fashioned by the helpe of Na∣ture,
should sustaine some imperfection: For Glasse hath
it's lead; G it's drosse; Corne it's chaffe; Helene her mole;
the Moone her spots, and the Sunne its shade. My expres∣sion
is but like a picture drawne with a coale, wanting
those liuely colours, which others more skilfull might giue
it; and might better it as much, if they would vndergo the
paines; as bad faces are bettered by painting, and vnsauory
meates mended by their sauces. But I am too saucie in my
desire; howsoeuer, I will notwithstanding shew my
selfe a good Christian; that though my workes doe not
merit any reward, yet my faith and assurance is such in you,
that I make no question, but my workes shall be well ac∣cepted
by you. In requitall whereof, I will euer loue you,
and rest

