



Worthy Sir,
THE many and ma∣nifold
kindnesses
which I have re∣ceived
from you
(as reall addita∣ments
to my wel∣fare)
like the offi∣cious
Servant in the Comedy, or like an∣other
Cynthius, aurum vellet, stand vp as
so many Monitors, bidding mee take
heed of that detestable monster Ingrati∣tude,
which so venemously hath stupifi∣ed
the sences of most, so generally lesso∣ned
and taught in the Academie of the
vnthankfull World; Therefore to shun

those detested shelves, I have made bold
out of a truly (though not sufficiently)
thankfull heart, to Dedicate this weake
Embryo of my newly teeming braine
vnto your selfe: I might indeed take
notice, that there are Scyllean Critickes,
but Scylleos Canes obturata aure transibo,
Ierom. That there are left-handed Benja∣mites
casting stones at an haire-bredth,
Iudg. 20. 6. Demea solus sapit: that a Pa∣per
vessell may easily miscarry, as the
Travailer betwixt Ierusalem and Iericho;
Yet will I venture vnder your Worships
patronage, (as little Teucer vnder the
Buckler of Ajax) to passe into the glassie
Sea of the world, having still more in∣couragement
from Plinius secundus, beati
quibus Deorum munere datum est, aut facere
scribenda aut scribere facienda. And it is gi∣ven
to Adamantius Origen. Ne erubescas
primum recte facere, quae non potes bene, melius
erubescas male facere quae potes bene, Euseb.
eccles. Hist. lib. 6. And though the manner
of the handling of the Divine matter be
weake and imperfect, the very Image of
the Author as you know, yet the Subject

of it is the Psalmodicall Hallelu-jah of
Princely DAVID, rowzing vp and goa∣ding
the vnthankfull masse of Mankind
to Praise-giving, teaching them the Ho∣sanna
of Obedience here, and their Halle∣lu-jah
here, and hereafter, that they are
ABRAHAMS sonnes who doe Abrahams
workes. Etiam fertus fecit mihi Iesum fra∣trem
Abrahamum patrem. Orig. hom 8. super
Ezech. & in Rom. c. 4. And that there is
Spuria pietas as well as Spuria febris, a pie∣ty
which goes with Iucobs voyce, but
Esaus hands, masked in the colours and
shewing forth the Symptomes of true
holinesse, which I desire to passe thus
vnder your tutelarie Name, and leave
you and yours, your actions and occasi∣ons,
to the All-guiding hand of Heavens
protection and providence, and rest

