



IT is an exceeding rapture of delight in the
deepe search of knowledge, (none knoweth
better then thy selfe sweet Mathew) that
maketh men manfully indure th'extremes
incident to that Herculean labour: frō flints
must the Gorgonean fount be smitten. Men
must be shod by Mercurie, girt with Saturnes Adamante
sword, take the shield from Pallas, the helme from Pluto,
and haue the eyes of Gra (as Hesiodus armes Perseus a∣gainst
Medusa) before they can cut of the viperous head of
benumming ignorance, or subdue their monstrous affe∣ctions
to most beautifull iudgement.
How then may a man stay his maruailing to see passion-driuen
mē, reading but to curtoll a tedious houre, and alto∣gether
hidebownd with affection to great mēs fancies, take
vpon them as killing censures as if they were iudgements
Butchers, or as if the life of truth lay tottering in their ver∣dits.
Now what a supererogation in wit this is, to thinke skil
so mightilie pierst with their loues, that she should prosti∣utely
shew thē her secrets, when she will scarcely be lookt
vpō by others but with inuocatiō, fasting, watching; yea not
without hauing drops of their soules like an heauenly fami∣liar.
Why then should our Intonsi Catones with their pro∣fit-rauisht
grauitie esteeme her true fauours such question∣lesse
vanities, as with what part soeuer thereof they seeme to
be something delighted, they queimishlie commende it for

a pretie toy. Good Lord how serious and eternall are their
Idolatrous platts for riches! no maruaile sure they here do
so much good with them. And heauen no doubt will gro∣uill
on the earth (as they do) to imbrace them. But I sty this
spleene when I remember my good Aa. how ioyfully of∣tētimes
you reported vnto me, that most ingenious Darbie,
deepe searching Northumberland, and skill imbracing heire
of Hunsdon had most profitably entertained learning in thē∣selues,
to the vitall warmth of freezing science, & to the ad∣mirable
luster of their true Nobilitie, whose high deser∣uing
vertues may cause me hereafter strike that fire out of
darknesse, which the brightest Day shall enuie for beautie. I
should write more, but my hasting out of towne taketh me
from the paper, so preferring thy allowance in this poore
and strange trifle, to the pasport of a whole Cittie of others.
I rest as resolute as Seneca, satisfying my selfe if but a few, if
one, or if none like it.

