



YOV had from mee (which you desired) the Sermon preached at Exeter in comme∣moration of the Citties deliue∣rance, or at the least you receiued the very summe & substance there∣of, which I supposed might haue contented you, and the zealous Gentle-woman your wife, with∣out further adoo: but finding you and hir greatly inclined to vulgar profit, and to make common vnto many which was then vttred vnto
fewe, that so the benefit of it might redound also vnto many: & know∣ing you both to bee such as truely, and sincerely loue and fauour the holy Gospell of Iesus Christ and the Ministers thereof, and seeing your request to stand with so good reason and Godly purpose, and that my Office and function bin∣deth mee to doo all the good I can to the Church of God,
. Pe. 5, 2 and that willingly & of a ready mind (to sa∣tisfie your honest desire and chari∣table meaning) haue suffred that poore Exercise to bee published which I doe presente vnto you as a simple New-yeares-gift. Of which if any take benefit, let them first praise God, and next thanke you, that (according to the rule of Christ) will haue the meanest ta∣lents and graces of God, bee they fiue,
Mat. 25 15. or two, or one; many or few, more or les, deliuered his seruants
for the worke of his seruice, to bee well and profitably employed and occupied, that gaine and increase may come thereby,
Luk. 19.10. and not to bee laid vp in a napkin, or hidde in the earth to the good of none. And so beseeching the Lorde to kindle daily more and more in you and in your good wife many such holy motions of his blessed spirit, and to establish you in euery worde and good worke, I wil commend you vnto him and to his might, who is able both to fulfill whatsoeuer wā∣teth in you throgh his riches with glorie in Iesu Christ, and also of power to keepe you that you fall not, to the very day that you shall be presented faultles and without blame before the presence of his Maiestie with ioy.
In the meane while, quench not the Spirit, grieue not that holy of God by whome you are sealed
to the day of redemption. I will pray alwaies for you that GOD may settle and confirme you, and make you worthy of his calling, that the name of the Lorde Iesus may be glorified in you, and you in him. Pray you also for mee: for I trust that through your praiers I shall the sooner be giuen vnto you againe. The Lorde bee with you, London the first of Ianuarie: 1594.

