



ACcept this pamphlet (Chri∣stian
Reader) view, and
peruse it with discretion,
and hedefulnesse. No trifles are ther∣in
conteined worthy to be contēned,
nor pernicious fantazies deseruyng
to bee condemned. But contrariwise
in this pretie plot may holsome hear∣bes
of admonitions for the vnwarie,
and carelesse, and soote flowers to re∣create
the wearied senses, be gathe∣red.
For on thone side the cleare sight
maie espie the ambushmentes, whiche
Sathan the secrete woorkemaister of

wicked driftes, hath placed in moste
partes of this realme, either by craf∣tie
conueighaunces, to creepe into the
conceiptes of the simple, or by appa∣raunt
treacherie to vndermine and
spoile the states of suche as God per∣mitteth
him to haue power ouer. And
on the other side the eye that is wim∣pled,
may hereby be aduertised of the
darkenesse, wherewith his vnder∣standyng
is ouercast, and puttyng of
the veile of vanitie, maie reclaime
his concept, and esteeme of the impie∣tie
of the offendours and vilanie of
their actes, accordyng to the woorde
of God, and waightinesse of the case.
And if in tyme past he hath escaped
their Sorceries, let hym not the lesse

feare the harmes that maie hereaf∣ter
ensue. For the Deuill by the suf∣feraunce
of almightie God, is as well
able to plague the persone, that moste
presumeth of safetie, as any haue bin
who in this treatise are mentioned.
Some with muche adoe cā be awaked
out of their drousie dreames, though
thei bee tolde that their neighbours
house is on fire. But when their owne
walles are inuaded with like flames,
thei shall finde that it had bin better
to haue come an hower too soone, to
quenche those forrein fires, then to
haue risen one minute too late to ex∣tinguishe
the same, creepyng into
their owne chambers. If therefore
thou be assured that thy neighbour,

either in bodie, familie, or gooddes is
impaired by damnable witchcrafte,
or perceiuest by information, or other
wise ought of suche deuises, intēded
to be practized, or likely presumption
of suche Deuilishe deedes contriued,
for Charitie to thy Christian bro∣ther,
and tender regard of thine own
state, preuente or stop the mischief by
all possible meanes. And for thyne
owne parte with praier, and assured
faithe in the merites of Christ Iesus
shield thy self, so shal neither the
Deuill nor his Angelles
haue power, ouer
thee, or thine.
Farewell.
