



IT is very well knowen, and ve∣ry woorthy to bee considered, how the transgression and brea∣king the commandement of Al∣mightie God by our first parent Adam, in Paradise, did so vehemently dis∣please the Lord through disobedience, and so greatly infect al mankinde with sinne, that A∣dam lost thereby, not only his Angelical estate of innocencie, but also the most blessed ioyes of paradise, from the which he was driuen out in∣to this worldly vale of miserie, therein to get & eate his foode with the sweate of his face,Gen. 3.19. as
 God did him commaund. Whereof it came to passe, that his two first naturally begottē sonnes of Eua his wife, the Elder named Caine, & the younger Abel, being the two first brethren in this world, who therfore should most singularly and intirely haue loued ech the other aboue al other creatures: yet the infection of their Fa∣ther Adams sinne wrought so, that because Abels oblation to God dutifully made, was of him well accepted and Cains oblation was not regarded, Caine therfore did so much hate & enuie his brother Abel, that when they were in the fielde,Gen. 4.8. he maliciously fell vpon and did wilfully murther him, of whom he neuer was offended. This malice and sinful enuie of Cain, hath euer sith that time so cleaued to mans nature and infected all mankind, that no ex∣cellent worke or deede can be lightly done by any man, but some other straightways are rea∣die through enuie to despise it, and speake re∣prochfully of it. Yea, not so much as the singular and famous learned in diuinitie, or in any other knowledge of commendable artes, can set his penne to the booke for the deuising or setting forth of any worke to the aduancement of the glorie of God, and benefite of his Churche, but some there are, who moued with malice &
 enuie, by writing or speaking will hinder & de∣praue it to the vttermost of their powers, as by plaine experience in all Christian kingdomes hath beene, and is shewed, dayly, too mani∣festly, to the whole worlde. How greatly then, right honorable, ought I, beeing not brought vp in any Ʋniuersitie, nor instructed in the artes of Logike and Philosophie, be abasshed to take vpon me to set downe in writing this my simple collection out of the Scriptures, and other lawes, and histories: to be thereby made by some others a mocke and a gasing stocke to euil disposed persons? Wherefore, had not your honour so earnestly required to haue a copie of it, whereof my promise beeing past I might not denie it: otherwise truely it should neuer haue gone further, but haue still remained in my owne handes, for the onely putting of my selfe in memorie of the thinges therein gathe∣red, as it may appeare by the simple doing of it. But to present it to you, this also made me the bolder, that I know your Lordship is of so No∣ble a nature, & courteous conditions: that you wil be a patrone and defender of it against all malicious and enuious persons, which here∣after shall endeuour them selues by worde or writing to defame and slaunder it. I pre∣sent it therefore vnto your Honour, ac∣cording
 to my promise: committing it wholy to your honourable protection, as vnto one moste worthy of it, for your true fauoring of Gods ho∣ly word, for setting forth of his glorie, for main∣teyning the doctrine of his onely sonne our Sa∣uiour Iesus Christ, & the suppressing of the Ro∣mish vaine and superstitious traditions and a∣buses. The which your godly vertues are ioy∣ned together with singular affabilitie, iustice. clemencie: specially in forgiuing of iniuries. Which appeareth by that you haue not sought or wrought reuengement, or hinderance of any body for any wrongs don, either to your own per∣son, or to your noble progenitors, at any time sith you haue ben in great authority vnder our prince, and right able to haue reuenged them: but gently & quietly haue borne al such things with great mildenes, and without opprobrious rebukes and rehearsals of them, made to any person, as farre as euer I could heare of, or learne. Wherein your great modestie, and mag∣nanimitie, hath so much redounded to your im∣mortall fame and honour, that I may right wel therefore compare you with the right noble Germanicus Caesar, Lieutenant vnto the Em∣perour Tiberius ouer all Italie. Who during the time of his Lieuetenantship, did behaue him∣selfe so gently and vprightly to all men, that he
 seldome entered into the Citie of Rome with out great peril & danger of his life, by reasō of the throng & presse of the multitude of people, which gathered about him, for verie loue and desire they had to see, and welcome him to the Citie. These excellent giftes and qualities of that noble man Germanicus Caesar, I say, can no more staine or blemish your most noble ver∣tues before touched: then the burning candle is able to dimme or darken the cleare bright shining sonne, at the noone day: whereof I my selfe (in the time of my great aduersities, tho∣rough most iniurious vexations and troubles of some enuious persons) haue felt and tasted, to my great comfort and reliefe, as I can not but remember as long as I liue. For the which I can but pray, as I doe heartily, to almigh∣tie God, and wishe vnto your honour the same blessing, that he promiseth to the iust and righ∣teous man, by his holie prophet Dauid:Psal. 91.16. Longi∣tudine dierum replebo eum, & ostendam illi salutare meum: Which blessing of long life & assurance of saluation from almightie God, how heartily I wish vnto your honour, I haue giuen testimonie by presenting vnto you this my little worke, set forth for the vtter rooting out of the vsurped Romish Supremacie out of all the Church of Christe, chiefely out of this
 Church of England: and also for the declaring of the most true perfect equal authority, giuen by our Sauiour Iesus Christ, to al his Apostles, his Bishops, and godly ministers of his word & sacraments, within his true Church, wherof he is the only head & chiefe corner stone. Which thinges I my selfe haue bene ignorant of, vntil it hath now within these three yeares pleased God to giue me his grace to read his holy scrip∣tures, and other good authours, and Doctours of his Church, to my great comfort and conso∣lation. Whereby I was stirred vppe to gather, in this little treatise, these thinges which moued me to see and know the trueth: that if it were Gods will they might doe some good to the in∣struction of others also, to the only glorie of his sonne our Lord and Sauiour Iesus Christ, who haue your honour alwayes in his gratious protecti∣on.
May. 1580.

