



SEING it hath plea∣sed GOD (deare bre∣theren) to make mee an Instrument, wher∣by to declare his ho∣ly worde vnto you, I thought it very need∣full to present this little Booke, wherein I entend not to teach any newe matter, but to put you in mind of your saluatiō, which you haue of long tyme knowne, and doe daily heare, to the end, it may be the better rooted in your hearts. And so much the rather, seeing by this you haue at all tymes such meanes to reioyce, and comfort your selues in God, whereby we may gather very many good instructions in Gods schoole, if we bee certainly per∣swaded of his grace, and indeuour our
 selues, both to obey him, and to amend that, we finde to be amisse in vs. Also we shall cōtinually lift vp our harts towards him, that we may be partakers of his fe∣licitie, & bountifulnesse, the very ground of our saluation. After which maner, doe the children of God truely exercise them selues in meditation, & looke throughly into the vnspeakable goodnesse of him, by whome they are saued through Iesus Christ, euen with an vndefiled thought and hope. Also it is requisite, that there bee a true amendment of life, agreeable both to the seruice, obedience, & honor, which we owe vnto him, and to cal vpon him vnfaynedly. All which are the chie∣fest points, comprehended in holy Scrip∣tures, and here summarily spoken of, for the confirmation of our faith, and hope: the full assurance wherof is as it were the foundation of all others, cōsisting in the certaine perswasion, which we ought to haue of the forgiuenesse of our sinnes, to which end also principally the preaching of the Gospell doth attende: by reason whereof S. Paule calleth it, the ministrie of reconciliation. How happeneth it thē, that the Cleargie men in our companie
 by an holie, and religious custome, euery Sonday in morning prayers, declare the grace of God, that is to say, the forgiue∣nesse of sinnes to all true penitent Chri∣stians, beeing necessarie for euery one to knowe? Certainly, principally for this cause, that all may bee perswaded, that their offences bee forgiuen them before God: and that they bee reconciled vnto him, and receiued into his grace, what i∣niquitie soeuer they cōmitted. And this certaine perswasion ought to be stedfast, and deepely rooted in our hearts, chiefly in the tyme of Calamities, and great af∣fliction, whereunto the children of God are continually subiect, hauing the obsti∣nate, and peruerse worlde their enemie, which will neuer agree with them, being set forward, and inflamed by him, which from the beginning is a murtherer, and an aduersarie to all mankinde: and neuer leaueth in rest those, that giue themselues to the true seruice of their god, but doth procure vnto them all hinderances and lets, that he can, and continually assaults them with mortall warres, compassing them with euilles roūd about, & strange∣ly oppressing them, when they doe pro∣tract
 tyme. It may seeme then, that for a tyme God doth giue them ouer, and that he is very angrie with them, and that he would vndo them, and that they be lost: but they hauing this ful knowledge, that by his infinite bountie and clemencie, he doth receiue them into his mercie, and quiet orders: See how they are reuiued, and comforted, and their consciences in rest. And to this end, is the worde of sal∣uation giuen vnto them, by the which God doth promise to be mercifull vnto them: If then such a simple promise bee sufficient to make them certaine of his loue towards them; how much more will it be, when al other promises doe aboūd? It is therefore for this cause, that I haue gathered here a certain number of most singuler notes of the holie Scripture, which consequently are added, & which are taken from one, and the selfe same spring, which shalbe like towers, & strōg places most high to defend vs against the terrible and perilous assaults of the de∣uill, and to put off from vs, all increduli∣tie and mistrust. That, which I present vn∣to you, welbeloued brethren, I dedicate it to witnesse the good affectiō, that God
 hath giuen me towards you, wishing that more and more you may be stedfast, and conformable in the faith, and certaintie of the fatherly goodwill of our God. We cannot but alwaies hope well of such a gentle and gracious father, which haue looked on vs a long tyme, with his owne eyes, and hath visited vs, as his owne, on∣ly by the true & happy light of his word, and by excellent Shepeheards (of which some are already receiued into perpetual rest with the Lord: others serue him yet happely in other places) he hath establi∣shed the ministrie of his Gospell among you, which you inioye at this present, by his inestimable bountie: although the blustringes of the tempestes lately past, haue brought into many and diuers pla∣ces some straunge troubles and calami∣ties. This good God neuerthelesse, hath alwaies care to preserue you in such ex∣tremities, that you haue continuall occa∣sion to giue him thanks, the very tokens, and witnesses of your faith, which may appeare in that, that you neede not gre∣uously to seeke for the nourishment of your soules three long myles, farre from your houses, neither in painfull and sor∣rowfull
 waies. Continue alwaies therfore in this zeale, for the glory of God, and in the confidence of his goodwill, and mer∣cie towards you vnto the ende. I desire those which bee slouthfull to come into the pasture of the Lord, to consider what he sayth in this place, when he sayth: that his sheepe follow him and doe heare his voyce.Ioh. 10. And what he sayth in an other place: He which is of God heareth Gods worde.Ioh. 8. I doe warne them therefore with my brothers and fellowes, to be most affected in it, & not to bee giuen so much to the loue of the world, & to their vanities: to the end that they maye not depriue themselues before they be aware, from the celestiall goods and riches which are euerlasting. Deare brethren, I pray to our God & fa∣ther, that in houlding you alwaies vnder the shadowe of his winges, he may cause you to profite more and more in his ho∣ly knowledge, and continually to fortifie you in his seruice, and to replenish you withal the gifts of his holy Spirite, to his honor and glory, & to your consolation.

