




MAy it please your Grace to remem∣ber, how al∣most twenty years now
 pas∣sed, I presumed to present you, with this locke of goates haire (as then I tearmed it) offe∣red for the use of the Lords tabernacle;Exo. 35.23 glad thereby to testifie mine unfained ioy; for your Lordships happy ad∣vancement unto that e∣minent place, which now for so many years since, your Grace hath (through Gods mercy) with honour held; for the singular good of this our Church and state.

The motives invi∣ting and emboldening me thereunto were; first, in your Lordship the singular love you had e∣ver shewed to the pains of preaching, having beene your selfe there∣in forward, and exem∣plary in the several pla∣ces, both of Ʋniversitie & City, through which you had passed labou∣ring; secondly, more concerning my selfe, that duty of thankful∣nesse, wherein I stood obliged for the favou∣rable
 respect which it had pleased you, even from the time of my first comming unto the Vniversitie to vouchsafe unto mee. Besides a third incitement was a respect unto my kindred and country men, over whom your Lordship having beene first (for a while) Bishop, I was willing the rather un∣der your acceptable name and gracious pa∣tronage, in a more espe∣ciall manner to recom∣mend unto them this
 (as I conceived, for the times and age) usefull treatise.
And now being a∣gaine set forward, to revise, and revive these labours which (chiefly through mine owne backwardnesse) have beene so long buried in the dust of silence; and (not by any addition of materialls, or change of methode, but by a par∣tition (as hath been de∣sired) of the whole into chapters with contents prefixed) to give some
 small light thereun∣to and encourage∣ment thereby unto the Reader.
I reioyce once more humbly to present and offer the same unto your Grace, with an acknow∣ledgement of a yet fur∣ther debt of thankful∣nesse, for your well wi∣shing and (I may say truely) furthering of me unto that place and preferment in the Church, which it plea∣sed his late Royall and renowned Maiestie at
 the alone mediation of his dearest consort, my most gracious & much honoured Lady and Mistresse, Queen Anne of ever glorious and hap∣py memory, fourteene yeares full now passed, graciously to conferre upon me.
VVhich, being in the place where for divers yeares from my first lea∣ving the Vniversity, I had laboured, not with∣out some hopefull fruit (through Gods bles∣sing) and good accep∣tance,
 I rest therewith, heartily thanking God, well content, without travaile to look higher; desiring (as hee who knoweth the heart, can witnesse) ability rather,Mat. 20, 11. to doe more worke, then any way envying those, who entring on the woke later have re∣ceived a more plentiful reward.
But God I trust will accept the willing mind,2. Cor. 8.12 and that measure of strength which him∣selfe bestoweth. And if
 your Grace shall bee pleased againe in these your elder yeares, to ac∣cept this same which was presented you in the times of fresher strength; your Lord∣ship shall obliege mee the more, as to praise God, for (which for∣merly hath beene beg∣ged) your prosperous continuance so long in that so high and hono∣rable watch-tower, in which himselfe hath set you; so to redouble my vowes and suites
 unto the same gracious Lord, that yet, (through his bounteous good∣nes) yeares many, and happy may be added to your dayes, that like to that old & honourable Iehoiada,2 Ch. 24.16 you may stil do good in Israel both towards God and towards his house:Psa. 92.12 flourishing as the palme-tre planted in Gods courts, and bringing forth fruit in old age, still more, and the best, last: untill having run your race and held fast the (or∣thodoxe) faith once given2 Tim. 4.7.
 to the Saints,Iude 3. and having finished all the worke which God hath ap∣pointed for you here; you bee brought with honour in a full age to the grave, as a shocke of corne is gathered in,Iob 5.26. in his (ripe and due) season. And even so craving pardon for this boldnes, I will remaine,

