


GEntlemen and good-fellowes, (whose kindnes hauing christe∣ned mee with the name of Kind∣heart, bindes me in all kind course I can to deserue the continuance of your loue) let it not seeme strange (I beseech ye) that he that all daies of his life hath beene famous for drawing teeth, should now in drooping age hazard contem∣ptible infamie by drawing himselfe into print. For such is the folly of this age, so witlesse, so audaci∣ous, that there are scarce to manye pedlers brag themselues to be printers because they haue a bun∣del of ballads in their packe, as there be idiots that thinke themselues Artists, because they can English an obligation, or write a true staffe to the tune of fortune. This folly raging vniuersally, hath infired me, to write the remembrance of sundry of my deceased frends, personages not alltogether ob∣scure, for then were my subiect base, nor yet of any honourable carriage, for my stile is rude and bad:

and to such as Iit belongs not to iest with Gods. Kind-hart would haue his companions esteeme of Estates as starres, on whome meane men maye looke, but not ouer-looke. I haue heard of an elo∣quent Orator, that trimly furnished with warres abiliments, had on his shield this Motto Bona for∣tuna: yet at the first meeting of the enimy fled with out fight. For which being reprooued, he replied. If I haue saued my selfe in this battell by flight, I shal liue to chase the enimy in the next. So Gentle∣men fares it with mee, If enuious misconsterers arme themselues against my simple meaning, and wrest euery iest to a wrong sense. I thinke it policy to fly at the first fight, till I gather fresh forces to re∣presse their folly. Neither can they what uer they be, deale hardly with Kind-hart, for e onely de∣liuers his dreame; with euery Apparition simply as it was vttered. Its fond for them to fight against ghosts: its fearefull for me to hide an Apparition: by concealing it I might doe my selfe harme and them no good; by reuealing it, ease my hart, and doe no honest men hurt: for the rest (although I would not willingy moue the meanest) they must beare as I doe, or mend it as they may. Well least ye deeme all my dreame but an Epistle. I will pro∣ceed to that without any further circumstance.
