



My good Lord, it is nowe full two yeeres since vpon a pur∣pose to reuiewe some part of those exercises which I per∣formed in the citie of Worce∣ster, I extracted these fewe Sermons to serue for introduc∣tion to the rest. Vpon dispatch whereof applying my selfe not long after to another matter of greater waight, and being thereby as by other occasions hin∣dered from any conuenient leisure to deale by my selfe for the publishing of these discourses, they haue sithence lien a sleepe, till of late opportunitie seruing, I found the meanes to tender them to his hands which hath thus brought them into open light. Since which time being by your Lordship motioned to doe that which I had thus begunne to doe, and hauing your opinion that therein I should do a seruice bene∣ficiall and profitable to the Church, I was the more com∣forted
in that I had begunne, and presumed the rather as before I had intented to commend vnto your Lordships good fauour the first fruites of these my reuiewed medi∣tations. And theerein I account your Lordship to haue some speciall interest, both in regard of the place where they were performed being your owne Cathedrall Church, as also of my selfe; who hauing founde that Honourable re∣spect at your Lordships handes since your first comming to that place, cannot but holde my selfe alwaies bound to yeeld a due acknowledgement and confession thereof. Which I coulde not tell better how to doe then by a gift of inke and paper, which yet doth rather craue another fauour for the accepting of it, then yeelde any recompence of the former. But I hope this my labour shall not bee vnfruitefull vnto them who at the first were hearers of these Sermons. Who if they reaped any benefite or comfort at the first by hea∣ring, may nowe renewe the same by reading, and more firmely imprint in minde what they then conceiued might serue for their edification and furtherance towardes God. And although I doubt not but if their regard in hea∣ring were answerable to my care in speaking, they still re∣taine the taste of those wholesome wordes that were deli∣uered vnto them, yet to giue them the more full and per∣fect apprehension thereof, I will endeuour as opportunitie may serue to present vnto their eies the thinges which did once affect their eares, and to make others also partakers of the same. if at least these small beginnings doe finde that comfortable entertainment both with them and others, as may giue encouragement to the rest to folowe after. Wherein I can promise to my selfe no more then the con∣dition of these times will affoorde, in which their reigneth a nice and wanton humour which delighteth to bee tickled with the entising wordes of humane wisedome, and more
respecteth how finelie wee speake to please the care, then how faithfully to touch the heart. But for my part as in prea∣ching, so in writing, my care hath alwaies beene rather to edifie the conscience of the godlie, then to feede the fan∣cie of the curious, and not to delude men with emptie wordes, but onelie by conuenient wordes to impresse and enforce the matter that I haue had in hand. And more then this the Reader may not expect either in this Treatise or anie other that heereafter happily may come from me. Which I know shall be pleasing to your Lordship, whose tra∣uels haue alwaies entirely tended to the sauing of soules by implanting them with true faith and instructions of god∣lie life, and by seeking passionately and effectually to enter into the harts of them to whom you haue spoken. Where∣in as God hath blessed your labours in other places, so I doubt not but hee will also in the place where nowe you are, as I hartilie wish and praie for, as willing to expresse mine affection to that citie wherein I haue bestowed the greatest seruice of my life, and wherein I assure my selfe that a fewe names there are at least, I hope many that shall be my crowne and reioycing at the daie of the Lord Ie∣sus. Of which ioy I enuie not that any man should be par∣taker with me, but rather desire to heare of a successour in my place, by whose good meanes they may be yet fur∣ther increased and stablished in the grace of God. Which how necessarie a care it is, I thinke there is no man but seeth, that inwardly waigheth and taketh to hart the state of our daies wherein we are so setled vpon the lees of those corruptions which are vsually bredde by long prosperitie and peace, as that much worke it is, not onely to waken them that are asleeepe, but also to keepe men from slee∣ping, when they are once awake. The due consideration whereof if it were admitted woulde perhaps stirre vp the
deuotion of them whom it concerneth to be mindefull of their owne good. Which I knowe manie of them are, and God I hope by your Lordships good meanes will mooue the rest. With which hope I recommend these remembrances to your Lordships fauourable acceptation, beseeching God so to blesse your endeuours and courses as that they may yeeld glorie vnto God, and profite to his church, and comfort to your owne soule at the com∣ming of Iesus Christ. Amen.

