


DEceit is in the heart of them that ima∣gine euill, but to the Counsellers of peace shall be ioy. It is the saying (most excel∣lent Prince) of the wisest Prince: that euer liued; and it is the vnspeakable hap∣pinesse of vs that liue vnder the gratious gouernment of your renowmed Father,

that he doth not onely approoue what he sayd, but practise it too, and in the whole course of his gouernment findes it to be true: for peace he counselleth, and ioy, and peace, and content he enioyeth: nay, it is by his wisdome and prouident care that we are all at peace with the whole world, and the whole world with vs: a blessing that few Kingdomes of the earth do truly enioy; and the greatnesse where∣of we know not because we enioy it. Jt is an Argument vnto my selfe of that in∣ward peace that his Highnesse hath with God and his owne soule: for, Pax a no∣bis incipit, quia dum lex carnis re∣pugnat legimentis, non modò alte∣ri sed nec nobis possumus esse paci∣fici: sed postquam intus spiritus im∣perat vt totus homo spiritui seruiat, tunc pax ad alios deriuatur, vt pa∣cem cum omnibus habeamus. And

he that neuer spake but wisely sayth, When the wayes of a man please the Lord, he will make all his enemies at peace with him. Euer may all his ene∣mies be at peace with him, and he with his enemies: and let all that loue the peace of our Jerusalem say, A men. This peace (right excellent Prince) whose nature it is to turne swords into mattocks, souldiers into husbandmen, (for as much as my education made mee not fit for that) hath turned my sword into a penne. Then my profession was armes, and J fought for peace; which since we now enioy, J thought J should dishonour so honourable a profession too much, to be idle, and abuse so excellent a blessing as peace is, by making it the mo∣ther of so vntoward a childe. Heerup∣on J hung vp my sword to rust in the scabbard till good occasion might draw it

forth againe; and long J had not thoght with my selfe which way I might serue my King and my Country in these peace∣able times, but this booke fell into my hands; which when I had read, I thoght woorthy the translation: and though I had no reason to thinke the translation worthy your Highnes protection, yet the matter fittest for a Prince, and your Princely clemencie to others in the like kinde, haue emboldened me to become humble petitioner to your Highnes, that you would be pleased to honor the excel∣lencie of the worke with your patronage, and protect my infirmities. The subiect of this worke is Wisdome: And what fit∣ter for a Prince? If you honor it, it will honor you as it hath done your royall Fa∣ther, whom it hath crowned with honour as with a garland, made the mirrour of Princes, and the woonder of the world.

Long may you liue an heire apparent to his virtues and to his Kingdomes, and when God shall haue turned his earthly crowne into a crowne of glorie, long may you reigne a glorious Sonne of so glorious a Father.

