



REuerend Fathers, it may seeme perhaps some presumptiō in me, to be thus bold to vse your LL. names for the counte∣nancing of this Pamphlet, which neither for the matter of it, nor for the occasion, may seeme worthy of the notice or sight of so graue and learned Fathers. Not∣withstanding being drawne to the pub∣lication hereof, partly by the importunity of aduersaries, part∣ly by the desire and expectation of friends, I thought it very requisite both in respect of the cause it selfe, and in respect of mine owne priuate dutie, to offer these my simple labours to the protection of your LL. The matter hereof in the begin∣ning was only priuate betwixt my selfe and a Romish Priest, one Paul Spence, deteined as then in the Castle of Worcester, now, I know not vpon what occasion, liuing at his libertie a∣broad. But when by speech and report it was drawne to occa∣sion of publicke scandall, the aduersary bragging in secret of a
 victory, and others doubting what to thinke thereof, because they saw not to the contrary, I iudged it necessary after long debating & deliberating with my selfe, to let all men see how litle reason there was of any such insolent tryumph: suppo∣sing that it might be turned vppon mee for a matter of iust re∣proofe and blame, if my concealing hereof should cause any disaduantage to the truth, or any discredite of that Ministery & seruice which vnder your LL. I execute in the place where I am. Now I must professe that my thus doing, is only for the Citie of Worcester and others thereabout, for their satisfaction in this cause, wherein I know many of them haue desired to be satisfied. Your LL. are both by speciall occasion affectio∣ned to the place. I know my paines shalbe the better accepted with them, if it shall be vouchsafed your LL. gracious and fa∣uourable acceptation. Moreouer, the fauour which I haue re∣ceiued of both your LL of the one, in commending mee to the place where I am: of the other, in yeelding me speciall pa∣tronage & eountenance therein, hath bound me to yeeld vnto you these my first frutes, though but as a handful of water, yet a testimony of my dutifull and thankfull minde. And if it shall finde no other cause to be liked of, yet in this I doubt not but it shall be approued that it is a iust defense of truth against the vaine cauillations of error. The speciall drift of my writing, is to approue concerning the matters that are heere in hand, our faithful & vpright dealing in alleaging the Fathers against the doctrine of the church of Rome. Whose proctors for a time vsed the name of the catholick church, as a fray-bug to terrifie al mē from speaking against them. But when they were perforce vr∣ged to the scriptures, they cryed out that wee expounde the scriptures amisse, and otherwise then the auncient Fathers did vnderstand them. Being further pressed with the testimonies and authorities of the auncient Fathers, they stil notwithstan∣ding exclaime that wee abuse them also, and alleage them to
 other purpose then euer they entended. A strange matter that the plaine words both of the scriptures and of the Fathers, be∣ing so expresly for vs, yet their meaning and purpose, as these men pretend, should be altogither against vs. But whilest they endeuour to iustifie this, either open exclamation, or priuie whispering, it is strange to see how strangely and madly they deale. Eccl. 19. 24. There is, saith the wise man, a subtiltie that is fine, but it is vnrighteous: and there is that wresteth the open and manifest lawe. Verily there is nothing so euident, nothing so manifest, but these men haue a speciall facultie to turne it out of the way that it would goe, and by a distinction of this maner and that maner, to set a meaning vppon it which neuer came into the meaning of him that wrote it. In which practise and occupa∣tion, it falleth out with them which Ireneus sayd of the here∣tickes of his time: Iren lib. . cap. 1. There is none perfect amongst them, but such a one as doth not ably cogge and lye. Indeed lyes cannot be defen∣ded but by lying, and false gloses must serue to maintaine false and erroneous assertions. Which is not a litle to be seen in this libell or pamphlet which I haue here to refute, the Authour whereof taketh vpon him lyke a cunnyng Alcumist, to turne euery thing into what he list, & as if he supposed vs to be men bewitched and transformed into beastes, sticketh not to make such constructions of the scriptures and Fathers sayings, as no man that hath but the common reason and vnderstanding of a man, can but see to bee leaudly and vnreasonably deuised. Wherat I should the lesse maruell, if they were only this mans deuise: I would impute this folly to him onely. But now hee hath taken the most of them out of their learned Treatises for∣sooth, to which he oft referreth me, as if they were the Oracle of all truth. So that the spirit of this phrensie and madnesse go∣eth through the heades of them all, whereby it commeth to passe that they take delight in those things which they cannot but know to be absurd. That their maisters know so much, it
 seemeth to vs apparant, for that they forbid their scholers and followers to be acquainted with any of our writings wherein theyr absurdities and falshoods are layd open: and wheras we in answearing them, propose both theirs and ours indifferent∣ly to all men to be iudged of, they giue their pupils some liber∣tie to read their bookes, but it is damnation for them to touch any of ours. Such schollers would be suspicious of such mai∣sters, but that they are maruellously blinded with preiudice and selfe will. Now as many other by other occasions, so I the least of all by occasion offered to me, haue taken vpon me for this present matter, to shew I will not say how vainly & fond∣ly, but wickedly and vnshamefastly they deale in peruerting (they call it answering) the testimonies of the ancient Fathers. What I haue atteined vnto herein, I leaue it to be esteemed by the wise and godly reader, whose will and conuenient leysure doth serue to be exercised in such readings. Whatsoeuer it is, I commend it to the fauour of your good LL. Humbly cra∣uing that my willingnesse and care may be allowed of, how∣soeuer my ablenesse be not so fully answerable to the weighti∣nesse of the cause. The God of all grace multiply his graces and blessings vppon your LL. and so direct you by his holy spirit in all faithfulnesse and care for the feedyng and guyding of his Church, that in the end you may receiue that incorrup∣tible crowne of glory, which Iesus Christ shall yeeld vnto his faithfull seruants when he shall come to iudge the quicke and the dead.
Amen.From Worcest. Ianu. 7. 1593.

