



WHEN first true intent of bounden dutie and entire zeale had quickened and pricked me forward to pre∣sent your Ladishippe with the dedication of this smal volume (Right honorable and my verie good Ladie) I grewe full of doubtes in my selfe, whether to proceede and go for∣warde, or els to surcease and reuoke my presumed enterprise. And abiding some∣time in this vncerteine and vndetermined conclusion, one while adaunted and sup∣pressed with the vnworthinesse of the woorke, in respect of mine owne labours, beeing an vnlearned translation, an other while animated and encouraged by the godlinesse of the matter comprehended and included therein: then pulled backe, and in manner put to silence by many doubtes of presumptiō, rudenesse, or rash∣nesse,
 eftsoones againe imboldened and harted on, partly by duetie to vnfolde and shewe my willing minde, partly by cer∣teine knowledge and dayly report of your Ladiships good inclination to vertue and godlinesse, wherevnto adioyned the great fame of your singuler humilitie & mani∣folde curtesie, leaning at length onely to this staffe, I wounde in time out of this doubtfull Laborinth of inconstant passi∣ons, and became plainely resolued in the processe and going forwarde of this mine enterprise: wherevnto I was yet the rather and more easely induced, for that as with∣in the hard and vntoothsome bone, is in∣cluded the sweete marrowe, and as the vnsauorie shell, comprehendeth the plea∣sant kirnell: so vnder the rough and vn∣smothed grace of mine vnlearned stile, is shrowded much wisdome, vertue, & godli∣nesse, and in the simplicitie and plainnesse of my translation, many profitable exam∣ples and holesome lessons conteined, wor∣thy to be embraced and followed of all men. It came vnto my handes (right ho∣norable) in the French, and is entituled, A Christiā Discourse vpon certein points of Religion. Which title draue mee first to the ouer∣running
 of the matter, and then finding the whole summe and contentes, so well agreeing with the nomination, I thought if I could put him on an Eng∣lish abite, I might thereby pleasure and profite diuers of my natiue countrie men studious in the Scriptures, to the conten∣tation (I trust) of many, & to the offence of no vertuous and well disposed person. May it therefore please you to admit the same into your fauourable acceptance: and that vnder your ensigne it may haue safe conduct to enioye publication and free passage. This request beeig graunted & allowed of your good Ladiship, Let capti∣ous Zoilus cauill or finde fault. Let hate∣full hereticke with all his forcible inuec∣tiues, subtil argumēts, & straunge reasons, diswade and seeke to oppugne, impaire, or discredite the matter. Let proude Papist with all his authoritie, abiure, curse & con∣demne, both booke & author to the fire. Our immunitie, protection & defence, re∣steth in almightie God the high Iudge of all. And for the cleernesse of this matter, we referre vs vnto his most holy and pure woorde and sacred Scriptures. Wherefore trusting the sinceritie and trueth of the
 matter shal counteruaile the plainnesse of the interpretation, and that the conside∣ation of my zeale and bounden duetie aboue rehearsed, shal abanndon all suspect of arrogancie and rashnesse. I leaue for this time to trouble your Ladiship, besee∣chinge the Almightie to blesse you with longe and manie happie yaeres in this life, and the reward of Vertue in the life to come.

