



Right Worshipfull and worthy,
TO dedicate Books,Luk. 1.1, 2, 3, 4 spe∣cially such as concern the Gospell, is both ancient, common, and commendable, in the Churches of Christ. The ends thereof are, the Authors shewing respect to the Patron, and the Patrons giving countenance to the Authors Work:

and the meane to attaine unto both these ends, is relation in some kinde or degree betwixt them both. In which respect, having penned a Treatise concerning the Faith of the Gospell, and upon request printed it, I made bold to dedicate it unto your Worships, as beeing the fittest persons to bee Patrons thereof; not onely because you were the first in my consultation, and the last in my resolution about the de∣dicating of it; but also, and chiefly, in respect of some relation betwixt your Worships, and the matter and Author of the Booke. In respect of the matter, I presumed you would countenance it, because the Subiect thereof, is generally a point of Di∣vinitie, whereof some of you are Doctors, many Batchelors, most

Preachers, and all Students (I hope) more or lesse, specially it is that point of Divinity that is Faith in Christ, which (as Protestants) you all professe; and more particularly it concernes that point of Faith that is Tryall, which (as Christi∣ans) I trust you doe all practise. In regard of the Author likewise, I thought you would protect it, be∣cause as hee is now a Minister of the Church, so was he once a Stu∣dent and member of your House. Vouchsafe therefore, I pray you the Head and Superiour members, to looke downe upon an inferiour part of your body, bending it selfe to doe you reverence and obey∣sance. Amongst you I received the first seeds of Divinitie; unto you therefore I offer the first fruits of

my Ministerie for the Presse, not doubting but that you will taste, rellish, and well digest the same. My purpose herein is, not to reade you a Lecture of what you know not: but to render you some account of that little I know in this point, which may be a Remembrancer unto you of what you haue already learned. Neither yet do I tender it, because I thinke, it doth in it selfe deserve, to be a Present, but that it may in time serve to bee a President unto others, who may testifie the like duty, upon the like occasion. In hope of your free favour herein, I humbly submit my Tryal of Faith, to your Tryall and Censure; and heartily commit your persons, and studies, to the protection, & directi∣on of God, who giue unto you all,

the comforts of a saving Faith in this life, and the end thereof, at the end of this life, by Iesus Christ.
From my house in Old-Fish-street, London.
April 20. 1622.

