



Right Reuerend and Honourable,
MY very good Lord; It was well said of old, Let Baal plead Iudg. 6. 31. for himselfe: And it may be said as wel now, Let Babel plead for her self: yea let him be blessed that dasheth Psalme 137. 9. her little ones against the stones;

And let it be done to her as shee hath done to others; And let all Reuel. 18. 6. the people of God say Amen.
Neuerthelesse, herein (if in any thing in the world) great arte and skill is to be used: For it is not for every fresh water souldier to fight against Babel. The Poet saith,

In vitium ducil culpae fuga si caret arte. The want of skill to shun a shame,
Doth bring a man to mickle blame.

And it is a true saying that God loues Aduerbs better then Adiec∣tiues, so as if a man doe good things, and doe them not well, hee is an offender notwithstand∣ing; so is it in this case: he that will make warre against Babel, and will not do more hurt then good, had need to bee well prouided, and aduised. Plutarch makes re∣port

of one, who vnaduisedly ca∣sting a stone at a dogge, hit and hurt his owne mother; and so many there are who ignorantly and inconsiderately contending against Babel, doe grieuously wound the Church of God, and (as your Lordship saith truly) do more wrong to their cause, then to their aduersaries: If any man be ignorant how this may be, and bee willing to learne, you haue well informed him in your last Book of the Old Religion; wher∣in you make it plaine, that though Rome bee Babel; yet so long as she is Babel, she shall haue a peo∣ple Reuel. 18. 4. of God in her: so that as Saint Paul said, They are not all Israel that Rom. 9. 6. are of Israel; so may wee in this case, They are not all Babel, that

are in Babel, and communicate with Babel. If then a man haue not a spirituall eye, to distinguish betweene Babel, and the people of God in Babel; how much mis∣chiefe may hee doe in quarelling with Babel? I would wee had not too much experience hereof in some, who make good your Lordships too just censure, that Zeale transports them to such a detestation of the Romane Church, as if it were all error, no Church, and so that no soule can be saued therein: A fearfull and heauie doome; of which a man may say, as Saint Bernard said in another case, Solo auditu contremisco: I trem∣ble at the very hearing of it.
Now your Lordship (as a good Souldier of Iesus Christ, and one

of the Colonels of the spirituall Armie of the Lord of hoasts) en∣deuouring amongst other errors to reforme this, and to bring all into right and perfect order; that is, to traine all the souldiers vnder your regiment according to the old discipline; which is, to entend to cure Babel, and not to destroy her before the time, (that it may truly be said of them, as well as of others, We would haue cured Ba∣bel, Ier. 51. 45. but she would not be cured, the time of curing being not past, so long as it is called to day.) Heb. 3. 13. There are risen vp, I know not what hot-spurres, and bold Brag∣gadochioes in the Campe, who mutinouslie doe turne their wea∣pons from Babel against you; as if you were therefore become

their enemy because you tell them Gal. 4 16. the truth. And amongst others, one Master, Henry Burton, hath publikely taken the quarrell vpon himselfe in the name of all the rest; who being otherwise a man of good parts (as it should seem) and hauing a good meaning to doe Gods Church some seruice, yet ouerweening himselfe, and forgetting his place, hath giuen the common aduersary too much aduantage against vs all. For be∣ing defectiue in Logick (our best engine, after the word of God) and trusting to nothing but meer sophistry, and failing in the truth, or true meaning of all his allega∣tions; he hath not onely shamed himselfe, but put vs all out of or∣der, hindred our good procee∣dings,

weakned our owne for∣ces by diuision, and strengthned the enemy.
Whereupon (it being not any way conuenient that your Lord∣ship should enter into the lists with him;) vpon an incident oc∣casion of speech about this matter in the beginning of September, it pleased you to accept an offer of my seruice in this businesse; al∣though vpon beare-say onely at that time, and not otherwise, I had notice of his misbehauiour.
Here therefore, I tender vnto your Lordship some testimony, not so much of the old innocent familiarity, which almost from the cradle hath beene betweene vs; as of my readiness to performe all parts of that Canonicall obedi∣ence,

which being due to all my Diocesans; I am most joyfull to yeeld vnto you aboue, and before all the men in the world.
Accept then (I beseech you) and protect, this vnworthy seuē daies defence of your worthy cause; protect it (I say) thogh not as your owne (being vnworthy) yet for your owne, in respect of the wor∣thie cause which is your owne; And so I shall be encouraged to performe all offices not onely to my ancientest, nearest, dearest, and greatest friend; but also to my Bi∣shop, Lord, and Gouernour: and euer rest,

