



Right Worshipfull, and Worthy:
THE DE∣dication of bookes vn∣to persons of place and qualitie, is
 to manifest a seruice∣able respect and reue∣rence vnto them; and to supplicate a fauoura∣ble aspect, and accepta∣tion from them.
According to these fayre endes, I haue ad∣uentured to deuote this my Treatise, which doth need the one, to your Worships that are worthy of the other.
You are worthy of my Dedication in two respects (namely) as Ci∣tizens, and as Lether-Sellers
 of London.
1. As Citizens, be∣cause I wrote it in the Visitation of the City; and for the comfort of Citizens, in the Visita∣tion thereof.
2. As Lether-sellers, because you are that Company, whereof my deare Father was, Mr. Iames Chibald, (of sweet memory I hope among you) who a∣bout the yeere 1595. was Master, & head of your Body, euen as his
 eldest Sonne, my lo∣uing Brother, is a li∣uing member of the same at this day.
It remaynes, that your Worships would be pleased, by accep∣ting the seruice of this Dedication, to Patro∣nize the Booke: The rather, seeing the Au∣thors ayme in dedi∣cating it to you, is, but to honour you that are liuing, by my deare Parent that is dead: and to honour
 the memory of him that is absent, by you that are present, which as Brethren of one Company, and Parents of Children, you cannot but ap∣proue.
That you may the more freely grant my request, I pray you to take vnto your consi∣deration further, the subiect matter of the Booke: which is Spiri∣tuall Physicke. For it prescribes you, first, a
 Cordiall: Secondly, a Dyet.
The Cordiall hath a twofold nature. 1. To preserue your bodyes from infection or death by the Plague (if the Lord see it good for your soules, and as Christians you should not desire it otherwise.) 2. To keep your soules from fainting, with immoderate Griefe or Feare for your Friends, or your owne Visitati∣on by the Plague.

The Dyet is, to teach you that suruiue, how to liue to GODS glo∣ry, by learning to bee thankefull to God for your own preseruation, and for Gods wonder∣full and mercifull stay∣ing of the sicknesse a∣mongst vs. Both which as men, and Christian men, you haue rea∣son to looke after and learne.
In hope of your free fauor herein, I humbly take my leaue, with my
 heartie prayer vnto God, to blesse the rea∣ding of my Treatise to your Corporall and Spirituall health in Iesus Christ, in whom I am

