


IT is long since this Dis∣course of Duells was made. The Publication hath been hindred for im∣portant causes: they cease now, and here it is come into the light. One of the occasions that brought it forth, was the death of two Gentlemen of the Court, who were killed in single Combate, the 3. of Ianuary 1602. That rauished me with impatience to this worke. They were both full of merit, of Honour, of reputation. I lamented their losse, especially of Sieur de VILLEMOR, whom I knew, whom I honoured for his vertue. Hee feared God, was courteous, wise, charitable, adorned with all Christian Vertues, especially with those, which are altogether repugnant to the last act of his life. The occasion of their Quarrell was

feeble, and very little sutable to so many faire qualities, as all those of this time be. Their ru∣ine is to be lamented, it is deplorable, the Com∣monwealth hath lost thereby. They were able to doe a great seruice by their Valour, whereof they had rendred so many good testimonies, in iust occasions. Their courage was worthy to haue been reserued to some better seruice, then that which rooted them vp. Now my intention in this worke is altogether Christian, without ostentation, without vanity. The end propoun∣ded is, that it may serue. It is indifferent to me whether it be pleasing or not: That is not my reach. If it be profitable to France it will be an vnspeakeable contentment vnto me, it is my onely desire. It was made for you. I speake vn∣to you with all freenesse. This shall testifie my zeale, and my affection, to your good. Receiue it with a good heart, if you thinke good: I doe not regard your tast which is sicke, but your profit. There is nothing in all the world, for this regard, so rash, so blinded, so transported, as the Nobility of France. Hee that doth not know it, let him come see here the picture. The designe, is the ruine of soule, body, and goods: the action is inconsiderate ambition: the pro∣portions impatience: the lineaments rashnesse: the shadowes false iudgement: the shortnings

presumption: the liuely colours doe shine by furie, and by despaire. Take heede of it, none haue so much hurt by it, as you: If you know it not, I aduertise you of it. They doe in euery place deride your frensies. They which haue charges and gouernements are protected, and play the Romanes with your furies, doe as they doe, be wise: they fight not, and yet haue ne∣uer the lesse courage. If you thinke to receiue Honour thereby, to be the sooner Dukes, and Peeres, Officers of the Crowne, Knights du St Esprit, Embassadours, or gouernours of pla∣ces. I tell you that you are very farre from your accompt; you know not why you runne so light∣ly to death. At what good leisure you are, to precipitate your selues to so many mischeifes, without receiuing any aduantage, Honour, or profit thereby: either death, the ruine of your houses, or a perpetuall quarrell, be the ordina∣ry fruites which hang ouer your heads. There is all the glory you haue thereby: See if you bee not in great heate: Though you bee not asha∣med of your rages, at the least pity the losse of your soules, you cannot doe better. To con∣clude, imitate them which doe not fight, you shall bee the more perfect. God be with you.
