



ALL divine truths and duties are therefore worthy to be knowne, and practi∣sed by men, because they have beene worthy to bee revealed, and mman∣ded by God: But of them all, the heavenly truthes of Gods service, and Mans salvation; & the holy du∣ty of seeking after both, are most worthy of their
knowledge and practise.
For if those things be chiefly to be sought after, that are best wo thy of our seeking: If those things be best worthy of our see∣king, that doe most neerely concerne us. And if Gods service and Mans sal∣vation doe most neerely concerne us; because the one most neerely concernes our dutie to God, and the other our happinesse from God: then ought Chri∣stians chiefly to seeke after Gods service, and their owne salvation.
The rather: Partly be∣cause all other Divinitie doth but serve to further
Christians in seeking after these two: and partly also, because all other without these, will never make them wise with that wise∣dome,
Psal: 111.0 2 Tim: 3 15. The beginning whereof is Gods feare, and the end their owne sal∣vation.
Vpon these and the like grounds, (my dearely belo∣ved people and Parishio∣ners) I have endeavoured to instruct you in these two points, and what I have taught you concer∣ning them in my Sermons, I have now put into a lit∣tle booke, with some addi∣tions; to the end, your eyes by reading, as well as
your eares by preaching, may witnesse how unfei∣nedly I desire you should serve God,
Rom: 10.1. and he saved.
The booke is but little, (it is the fitter to be carri∣ed in your pockets, & kept in your memories.) And it is framed in a Dialogue, or familiar conference be∣twixt my selfe and one of you, hoping to drawe you, better to like of the mat∣ter therein contained, by my friendlie manner of handling it.
Though the Dialogue and conference be betwixt but one of you and my selfe: yet is it in the name and for the benefit of you
all; upon whom it is be∣stowed for a New-yeares gift by him, who hath be∣stowed himselfe upon you these many yeares,
2 Cor: 12.15. & who will yet hee spent upon you (to Gods pleasure) for the furthering of you in the service of God unto your salvation.
What remaines, but that as I have made my labors yours, by publishing them for you, and dedicating them unto you; so you would endeavour to make them your owne, by peru∣sing them, and labouring to benefit your selves and families, by reading them together, by conference a∣bout
them, and prayer to God for his blessing upon them to your edification.
I have heretofore made and published other bookes (besides this) for your learning: but how you have used and perused them to this end, is better known to God, your selves and Housholds, than unto me. If you have endeavou∣red to build up your selves in grace by them, I shall be glad to see the fruites thereof: But if you have only contented your selves with this, that they were made for you, given unto you, and that you have them lying on your shelves
or in your chests, I will re∣joyce to heare of your a∣mendment in using this booke better;
Ios. 14.15. if now you and your houshold will seeke to serve the Lord, and to be saved.
You shall doe this the better, if you will observe these Directions.
1. I would have you to reade it often, because the subject matter of it, is of such necessary, ordinary, and excellent use.
2. I would have you (as you reade it) to examine & consider, how you have knowne the truthes, and practised the duties taught therein, concerning Gods
service, and mans salva∣tion, that so you may see cause, either to repent of your ignorance, and negli∣gence herein for time past; or to grow in your know∣ledge and diligence con∣cerning those points in time to come.
3. I would have you to call to minde, and use, the severall duties that are pe∣culiar to Gods Attributes of greatnesse, or goodnesse, or to Gods workes of mer∣cy or justice, as by Gods providence they shall come into your thoughts, or fall out in the world: and spe∣cially that (before you goe to any holy Ordinance of
God, appointed for his publike service) you would looke into this booke for the particular duties which belong unto them several∣ly; to the end you may ad∣dresse your selves to per∣forme those Ordinances, with those duties accor∣dingly. The like direction I give for the reading o∣ver my booke of the Lords Supper, before you goe to the Communion. And this is the greatest recom∣pence that I will require of you for my love, and it is the least requitall you can make me for my labour.
2 Chron. 30.18.
The good Lord di∣rect and encourage every
one of you, to set your hearts to seeke God, the Lord God of your fathers, (that is) to seeke to serve God, while you live on earth; that when you dye, you may be saved in heaven by Iesus Christ: in whom I am

