


GOod Madame as my boldnes may be re∣buked for this wilfull presumption, (in set∣ting forth Verses of so vertuous a Knight whose value my knowledge cannot vtter) So ye forwardnes of my goodwill (if any offence happen) may be pardonable & make a free passage to the wofull Epitaph of your Ladishippes worthie Husband. But so excellent a Personage, (beau∣tified with such noblenesse and learning) ought not to bee described and handled with the ignorant pen of so simple a writer. For who should speake of Achilles praise but Ho∣mer: yet good Ladie, in the bare & plaine phrase, of a meane writer, true things may be couched, and from weake and base words, some stately and hie matter may be gathered. For as out of Chaffe good Corne is sifted, and fine golde is drawne from the grosest Drosse: so out of little Flint stones men strike out great sparkes of Fire, and from ma∣ny a small trifle great wealth & treasure doth arise. What needeth this Florish to bring in good liking and credite my sillie knowledge? or to what end serues these drie dis∣courses in so flowing a world? where the sweete Foun∣taine and moysture of the Muses in this most fruitfull tyme, findes Tydes and seasons so replenished with wa∣ter springs, that no soyle nor peece of ground in our land, but hath taisted & felt the gracious dewe of the Heauens:

I meane the bountie of this age (touching the quicknesse of sharpe sperites) is so beneficiall to thousands who haue reaped the chiefest Corne, that there is left no Seede nor Graine to no such an infortunate Gleaner as my selfe: Their workes, their Bookes, & their learned arguments in sondrie maners, doth shewe they haue happely gotten and gathered ye first crop of knowledge into their Barne: so that they which shall come after must either lose their labour, or bee driuen to walke peaking about the feelde to picke vp such forgotten eares of Corne, as the Reapers haue unwillingly left, or the ouersight of the world did carelesly looke vnto. The consait of these causes hath al∣most astonyed my muse. For the matter I treate on hath bene before both learnedly and sententiously spoken of. What course then can I holde, or compasse can I keepe? for both our speeches attends but to one purpose: which is but to shewe the life and death of one onely Parragon and renowmed Knight of England. When the substance of a true tale is at the first throughly conceiued, I can find no inuention to perswade a beleef of a second trueth to bee vnderstood. And when an other man hath tolde as much as I can imagine, my silence were as seemely as my fur∣ther dispute of the matter. But yet by the way (vnder fa∣uour be it spoken) though at one present instant, two seue∣rall Mothers haue brought into the world two sondrie Children yet neither in nature, shape nor cōdition the one proueth like the other: it may so fall out of these two Epi∣taphes (written on Sir Phillip Sidney) whose varietie, and inuentions, by strangenes of style may moue many Rea∣ders to consider the better of the matter penned. This my worke presented to your good Ladiship craueth that

credit, that as it may bee looked on, So it may passe as a memoriall, of such a worthie man, as it maketh mention of. I write not to renue any sorrowe (where there is to much sadnes alreadie) but to reuiue the heart with hope and gladnes, when it shall call to remembraunce, the ge∣nerall loue and affection of the people towardes this rare Gentleman: whose noble inclination and forme of life, is as well seene & heard by the common report of the world, as though we sawe him aliue againe amongst vs. What greater ioye can a good wife haue then the hearing of the honorable report of so worthie an Husband? What Pic∣ture or Image can set forth any such presentatiō (to please either the mynd or eye) as true penned Uerses both voyde of flattry or any vaine respect? Or what can touch so nere the worthinesse of man, as the Pen that searcheth the se∣cretes of nature, gropes the inward motions of the mind, and sets forth the hidden giftes of grace. If Appelles were aliue, he could but with his Pensell paint out the fauour and proportion of your Ladiships most well beloued: but an honest true Writer with his Pen, explayneth and set∣teth open al the vertues belonging to a noble Personage. So as farre as my poore knowledge and cunning may reach, I haue stretched my iudgement and opinion, of one in deede of the worthiest that euer I knewe borne in our tyme. Trusting that your Ladiship will giue good coun∣tenance to my labor, and doubting no whit but the world enbraseth my trauaile. For the generall consent of many multitudes procured my Pen to set forth this work, as knoweth God, who possesse your Ladishipp with peace rest and blessednesse.

