



LYke as there be manye and sondrye disea∣ses (most gra∣tious Soue∣raigne) which chaunsing to a mans body, so sore manye times trouble and vexe the same, that they not

onlye put it in great perill and daunger of death, but also at lengthe kill and destroye it al∣together: So in a realme or common welth (whiche maye well be compared to a mans bodye) there are manye sore sicknesses, that oftentimes so greuously noye the same, that yf remedye be not founde out betime, they not only put it in great daunger of perishynge, but also in conclusion worke the vtter ruine and destructi∣on thereof. And as when the bodye is sicke, Phisitions by frendes are diligently sought for, and medicines to cure the sicknes be with all spede pre∣pared: So in a realme or com¦mon welth, that is with anye sore sicknes infected, euerye

one that fauoureth the same, is bounden to seke remedye therfore. For yf frendes for a priuate mans sake, wil (when his bodye is diseased) gladlye take paynes bothe to learne what disease he is troubled with, and also to gette ome good Physycke for him, to thintent he may be deliuered from his disease, and restored to his helth agayne, muche more all those, that loue their countrye & the cōmon welthe thereof, whensoeuer it is with anye troublesome sicknesse a∣noyed, ought earnestly to tra∣uayle: first to know what the sicknes is, and then to prouide some holsome medicines to put it away, yea and to seke al meanes possible clearely to de¦luer

their countrye from all perill & daunger thereof. We reade in the excellent Histori∣ographer Herodotus,Herodot. in his bo∣e called Clio, whych is the firste booke of his story. howe that the Babilonians made a lawe, that whensoeuer anye man fell sicke amonges them, he shuld be caried into ye mar∣ket place, and there lye, to thin¦tent that he might demaunde of euerye one, that repayred thither, whether they hadde bene troubled with the like di¦sease, & how they were cured & made hole, so that the sicke man lying there, might by the same meanes, that they had vsed, be deliuered frō his sick∣nesse, and recouer his helth a∣gayne. And by that lawe also euery man that came thither was bounde bothe to aske the

man, what sicknes he had, and also to shewe him. yf he knewe any remedye, that were good for it. By the example where∣of euery one, that hartelye lo∣ueth his countrie, & earnestly tendereth the helth & welthe of the same, whensoeuer he se∣eth the body thereof (which li∣eth open before al mens eyes) with any kind of disease infec∣ted▪ & hathe learned what the sicknesse is, and eyther by ex∣perience, or otherwise can tel, what is good for it, is bound in conscience to declare it, to thende that his coūtry which is so vexed, may find some re∣liefe, and fare the better by it. For he muste consider, that in relieuing the whole bodye, he relieueth him selfe to, beyng a

membre thereof. For lyke as when the body is sicke all the members be partakers of the griefe and payne, that it suf∣freth: So agayne when the body findeth any ease, the mē∣bres to find great reliefe ther¦in. Wherfore I for my parte because I playnlye se, that the bodye of my countrye (which I do greatlye lamente) hathe bene lately sore troubled with ye greuus sicknes of rebelliō, and as yet perhappes hathe some seditiouse folkes in it, thought it my moste bounden duetie to set forth in writynge suche a poore medicine for the relieuing of the same disease, as I iudged mete & cōuenient therefore. And albeit there be many remedies▪ which be no∣ted

of learned men & good wri¦ters, whereby this grieuouse disease is wont to be cured:Remedi∣es against rebellion. as diligent inquisition, that no vnlawful assembles be gathe∣red: as graue and wise coun∣seile, that when such are made they may be shortly by policie dissolued: as reasonable cōdi∣tions for the dissoluing therof to be offred: as force of armes when as no other meanes wil serue: as due execution of iu∣stice vpon all such, as be offen∣ders therin: as taking awaye of the causes, whereof rebelli∣on commonlye groweth: and as that al suche, as haue rebel¦led, be spoyled of theyr har∣nesse, wherewith they defen∣ded themselfes in the time of rebellion. with diuerse other

suche lyke remedies, yet in mine opinion no more fitter remedye can there be founde, then that seditiouse mens har¦tes by gentle exhortatiō maye be throughly persuaded: firste that in rebellyng they mooste grieuously offende their lord God, & so putte their soules in ieopardie: secondarely yt they go aboute thereby to destroye theyr bodies, which shal ther∣fore be put to a moste vyle and shamefull death: thirdly that they shall loose al yt they haue, by meanes therof, vndo theyr wiues and children, & disfame all their posteritie: laste of all that they shal be occasion, that their countrie shalbe most mi∣serablye spoyled, and come to vtter ruine: For no man is so

farre from al reason (I truste) or so blinded with malice, that will not eyther with the feare of Gods plages, or with the daunger of his soule, or wyth the death of his body, or wyth the care, that he taketh for his wyfe and children, or with the losse of his goodes, & his good name to, or with the destructi∣on of his countrie be moued to take hede alwaye, and be well ware, that he neuer auenture for any cause at all to rebell a∣gaynste his prince, whome he is by God cōmaunded mooste hūbly to obeye. And we reade in good writers, that many re¦belliōs haue bene appeased by the good & discrete exhortati∣ons of wise and learned men. For the people of Rome, whē

they were gathered together in a hyll,Cicer. de  ora. called the holye hyll, neare vnto ye riuer of Aniene, thre myle frō the citie, & were fully minded to make rebelli∣on agaynst their rulers, Marcus Valerius by a wise & an eloquent oration that he made, brought so to passe, that theyr heartes were by & by so well pacified, that they quietly departed e∣uerye one home to theyr hou∣ses. The lyke dyd Lucius Valerius Potitus at such tyme,Cicer. de ar. orat. as the peo∣ple of Rome had cōspired the death of ye senators: for by his graue & discrete exhortation, yt he made vnto thē, he so hand¦led the matter, yt their furious rage was out of hande not on¦ly abated, but also throughly aswaged. Was not the souldi∣ers

likewise of Publius Scipio,Liis decad.  lib. 8. whi∣che made a sore rebellion in their campe, quieted onely by an oration made by the same Scipio? Therfore this remedye of exhortation haue I prepa∣red to relieue the sycke bodye of my countrye, whych is not yet throughlye recouered of the disease of rebellion, but hathe (I feare me) euen styll some rebelliouse hartes with∣in it, whiche haue nede of such a medicine to cure them: most hartely beseching al my coun∣trye menne to take it in good parte, and accepte good wyll, where as lacketh habilitye. For although there be manye learned men in thys realme, who for theyr excellent know¦ledge and wysedome coulde

muche more connynglye haue made this medicine▪ then I, & so haue tempered it wyth the goodly pouders of perfyte e∣loquence, that it shoulde per∣happes haue wroughte much more effectuously in the pati∣entes bodye, and bene more a∣ble to haue cured the dysease therof, yet none is there, that for the feruente loue he bea∣reth to his countrye. woulde eyther more gladlye haue at∣tempted it, or more wyllyng∣lye to hys power accomply∣shed the same. Wherefore my sure truste is, that bothe your hyghnes (mooste gratious so∣ueraygne) to whome I offer thys my lytle treatise, and all other youre graces louynge subiectes, for whose be hofe I

haue wrytten it, wyll gentely accepte my paynes bestowed therein. And yf it so come to passe, that my laboure not on∣lye be allowed of youre grace, as I doubte not, but also worke in the readers hartes thereof suche an effecte▪ as I wishe it may, then shal I think that I haue receaued a wor∣thy recompence for myne en∣deuoure. For neyther gayne, for whyche (God knoweth) I passe not, nor commendation, for whyche I loke not, moued me hereto, but only the harty affection, that I owe to my countrye, & my bounden due∣tie vnto your highnes, who of youre bountefull goodnesse where as I was destitute of all ayde and succoure, hath so

liberally prouided for me, that nowe I maye withoute care serue God, go to my booke, & do my duetie in that vocation, to which God hath called me. Which I beseche God I may do to his glory, and your gra∣ces honoure, for whose quiete and prosperouse raygne I shall not cease moste earnestlye to praye my life enduring.

