



AS custome and continuaunce of tyme, bredes a lawe in Nature, and cōuertes mannes mynde to many a laudable excercise, so moste honourable, the good will of men is neuer vnoccupied, if either honest labour, or stdious diligence, maie please those greate personages, that af∣fection and duetie commaundes vs to honor. And as it hath bin (through tyme out of mynde) an auncient maner in the beginnyng of a newe yere, to present vn∣to freendes (and sutche as we beste fauour) some signe of freendshipp by waie of newe yeres giftes: so I trust the maner so mutche commended emong the wise, and so long vsed with all sortes of people, (for the purcha∣syng of good liking) shall excuse my ouer greate bold∣nesse, and make my simple gifte accepted. For as I vnderstande, and my betters farre haue reported, it is not the valewe of the presentes, nor the ritchnesse

of the Iewels that makes our giftes welcome, and brin∣ges the giuer in the good opiniō of the worthies in this worlde: but it is the vertuous intent of the minde, that maketh free passage to that whiche is presented, and causeth as well little trifles to bee estemed, as greate treasure to bee made of. If otherwise the worthinesse of thynges were to be iudged, my triflyng booke might blushe in my behalfe: and the vaine verses therein would rather argue my disgrace, then further my good fame. And therefore my good Lorde, since euery mans gift is receiued & waied, accordyng to the good will of the giuer: I haue this present new yeres daie, presented vnto your good Lordshipp good Chaunce, and so with this good Chaunce salutyng your honor, (with all ser∣uisable dueties,) I honor your Lordshipps vertues, & procede to the purpose of my matter. The people of this worlde (whose sondrie wittes and iudgementes, lookes deepely into the deuises of the writers in our age) if thei would straitly and narrowly beholde, how busie I haue bin in settyng out bookes (and printyng of pam∣fletts) might paraduenture make a wonder of my wea∣risome woorkes, for that many woordes hath bin spent to little profite, either of my Countrey, or commoditie to my self, because my small learnyng and capacitie, could neuer reche to any greate knowledge, nor searche out the ground of any profounde seeret or science. But

how so euer my woorkes maie bee construed, my penne hath kept me from slothe and Idelnesse, and little hath bin loste by my studie and labors. For freendes and fa∣uourars hath bin gotten through diligence: and tyme hath bin entertained in muche contentation of minde. And though it was my Chaunce to light on a pleasant disposition in making of verses: (whē others happened by Fortunes election on a multitude of benifites,) yet blessed is the Chaunce that breedeth merrie thoughtes, and vnlodes the harte and hedde of a nomber of hea∣uie cogitations. For though small abilitie & simple cal∣lyng, bryngeth no greate reputation and credite: yet it sitteth free from the bitter blaste of Fortunes tempe∣stes. VVhen the mindes of the mightie are shocked, and shaken with the blusteryng stormes of worldes vnsta∣blenesse. And though my Chaunce was to trauaill a∣broade to seeke after Fortune, whiles others at home found themselues happie: yet beyng so smally prefarred by Chaunce euery where, I am neither troubled with her mutabilitie, nor driuen to giue her thankes, for any good tourne she hath doen me. And yet my Chaunce is indifferent, that bothe in warres and peace (possessyng my little portion) I haue seen thousandes depart from this worlde, and sodainly taken from their abondance. My chance is to be in court well knowen, and mutche made of, though smally considered or aduaunced. My

Chaunce is to liue awhile and write Epitaphes, Sonets and sedules on many a worthie personage: whiles my life and footesteps, drawes the bodie to his long home, and leades the restlesse daies to the quiet graue. And so as Chance hath fallen out, and alotted me by a bond of causes (through the originall & ground of all good∣nesse) the pleasure of penne and the pain of studie, euen so in like maner I gladly plaie out my part on the stage in this toilesome, and tragicall pilgrimage, where no∣thyng easeth our labours so mutche, as the sweete con∣tentatiō of minde. But to what purpose trouble I your honourable iudgement and grauitie, with the rehersall of trifles, or why doeth rashenesse in so bolde a maner, dedicate sutche a woorke (scarce worthie the looking on) to sutche a worthie Magistrate, whose wisedome maie disdaine the reading of so simple a discourse. The trothe is my right good Lorde, this present is offered as a peece of a meane, to passe awaie the tyme, amid great affaires, and weightie causes, whiche with light mat∣ters findes recreation, & by the inuention of pretie de∣uised sportes: the studie and care of commonweale, see∣meth lesse tedius and troublesome. For the minde wea∣ried with ouer long labours, and sadde motions of the spirite (that through continuaunce, maie dull the sen∣ses) is sharpened and made better at commaundement, when chaunge of pastymes, with some pleasaunt exer∣cises

hath eased the bodie, and refreshed the memorie: My verses God wot, are voide of sutche deuine ver∣tue. And I wantyng the grace of Mercurie, or Pipe of Appollo, presumeth to farre to please the eares of Mi∣nerua, with the rashe sounde of rusticall Musicke. But though the harmonie be not so sweete and delicate, as is to be wished, the desire to doe well, is the instrument onely, that maie bryng suche delite, whiche maie for e∣uer purchace good acceptation. And for that to the art of Musicke and harmonie, belongeth seuerall sortes of partes, to make good concordance, I haue tuned all my notes and songes worthie the hearyng, into one kind of voice and order. Meanyng that where many a peece of descant is to bee seen (and some iarres maie happen by misliking of discordes) yet a nomber of partes soun∣dyng together, maie couer the faultes and imperfectiōs of an ignoraunt Musition. And because in the sweete soile of Salop (in whiche parties your Lordshippe was nourished) whiche seate I honour of nature, and toke some sauor and taste of Science in, the gladder are my muses to reuerence with verses, a speciall sparke and spectacle of the countrey I was borne in, either with Musicall melodie, or Poeticall pastymes and passages, delated for pleasure and delite, and dedicated where I desire my duetifull good will maie be embraced. The matters I treate of, are written of sutche sondrie hu∣mours

and subiectes, that thei are more to be redd for the varietie of woordes, then for the goodnesse of the verses: and the cause why and wherefore I dedicate sutche a matter to your Lordship, is for that I would be sorie that my daies and yeres should bee spent, with the losse of tyme, and that my labour and studie well ment, should be forgotten and caste in a corner, for wāt of the printing. The strange motions and maner of the writyng showes nothyng but the nature of mans fan∣sies, that neuer continueth in one kinds of consait. The occasions of so many seuerall discourses, rose but on the innumerable deuises of the hed, that euer in one pointe or other, by imagination is occupied. And the whole somme and substance of that whiche is written, is but to publish to the worlde, that ill is better to be meanely exercised in honest pastymes, then basely bent and gi∣uen to barraine slothe and Idelnesse. Thus trustyng your good Lordship will take in good part, a part of the portion that from the heauens is giuen me: I presente vnto your handes this newe yere, some of mine old la∣bors & studies, Printed al bound in one newe volume, for sutche as pleases to buye them. And so as beste be∣commeth me (and duetie commaundes) I remaine a well willer to your honour duryng my life, moste willyngly at commaundemente.

