


ENFORCED
by affection (that
leades the mindes
of men to a mul∣titude
of causes)
I stood studying
howe to requit a
good turne recei∣ued,
and confes∣sing
that no one
thing is more mō∣strous
in nature than an vnthankefull minde, I saw
my self in debt, & bound either one way or other to
pay that Iowe, but not in such degree as I receiued,
but in such sort as my abilitie serueth, & as a man
might say to make a cunning exchange, in steed of
due payment, to offer glasse for gold & bare words

for friendly deedes. In good truth (my honora∣ble
Frend) if my creditours will so stande conten∣ted,
I am readier to depart from wordes, and
discharge debt therewith, than to promise trea∣sure,
and offer that I haue not. For if free har∣ted
people (fortunate in the worlde) through
bountie of minde (towarde my sutes or prefer∣ment)
bestowe manye speaches to doo mee good,
where grace is to bee gotten: I can but yeeld one
ordinarie thanke, for a thousande benefites, ex∣cept
they ransacke my storehouse of vaine inuen∣cions,
and finde some pleasant papers, bepain∣ted
with verses, or pollished Pamphlets (beblotted
with barraine matter) where both verse & prose,
shall make but a bad restitution for the goodnesse I
haue stollen by fortune or borrowed by frendshippe.
Yet waying how little Fortune hath done for mee,
and howe fewe creditors I haue, that haue either
lent me anie porcion of preferment (or procured me
but a peece of anie certaine liuing) I thinke my self
somwhat able with the little talent God hath giuen
me, to repay all the debtes that euer I could bring
to perfect remembrance, sauing one a most honora∣ble
Personage, that I dedicated my booke of Choice
vnto, who got me two great Seales (besides com∣mon

courtesies manie) to shifte withall a season.
And furthermore, your selfe 6. yeres past bestowed
good speaches to the Q. Maiestie in my behalfe, by
the which I got some comfortable recreation, to
quicken my spirites & keepe me in breath. And yet
loe a matter to be mused at, I haue sixteene seue∣rall
bookes printed presently to bee bought (albeit
they are but trifles) dedicated in sundrie seasons
to seuerall men off good and great credite, but to be
plaine not one among them all, from the first day of
my labour and studies, to this present yeere and
hower, hath anie waye preferred my sutes, amen∣ded
my state, or giuen mee anie countenaunce, I
hope I am not much indebted to those, nor fallen
so farre in their dangers, but may easely get out,
though I yeelde them no more, but a customable
good will. So finding my Muses franke and free
from their seruitude, I addresse this woorke of
vnfeyned friendshippe to your good considerati∣on,
which worke showes the value and woorth
of frendes (whose loue is necessarie about all E∣states)
the flatterie and finenesse of foes, and
the dayly dissimulation of a cunning worlde. And
if the world meruaile why I treat of that which is
so commonly knowen, and often put in practise,

I answere not those wondring wits, but shoot what
bolts I thinke conuenient, at the bad behauiour of
transformed people, that beares but the shapes of
tame men, & showes the maners of wilde monsters:
and if the worlde say (as I knowe it is talkatiue)
I show a kinde of adulation to fawne for fauour on
those that are happie. I answere, that is a point of
wisdome, which my betters haue taught me, and I
haue read in a great booke of latine (printed 400.
yeres agoe) that one of your owne Ancestors cal∣led
Sir VVater Ralegh, had more fawners & fol∣lowers
than you haue: for he was L. chiefe Iustice
of England, and so farre in credit with his Prince,
(his learning was such) that he made lawes & e∣dicts,
the which the Prince confirmed & allowed. I
take an example from the fish that followes the
streame, the fowles that comes to the couert from
the windes, and the brute beastes that auoydes a
sturdie storme, vnder the sauegard of a strong and
flourishing tree. Their craftie forecast though they
want reason, may succor the simplenes of any rea∣sonable
creature, & the defence and prouision they
make to escape open danger, may set to schoole a
great companie of ignorant schollers. But I leaue to
speake of their examples (because they are brute)

and follow the grauest sort of sage & wise persona∣ges,
that will not blush nor thinke scorne, to learne a
lessō of their forefathers, that got al their good for∣tune
by following the flood, where we fish for prefer∣ment.
Thus honorable friend, as my affection (&
other good causes moues) bad me go forward with
this my deuice & Present vnto you: so beginning
the same in health, and falling sodainly sicke, I fea∣red
God would haue cut me short from my purposed
enterprise: but his goodnes called me vp, from the
bed of sorrow, (where despaire had almost dispat∣ched
the life) and set me afoote to go and ende my
first determination, and brought me in hope you wil
accept my good will: which may encourage me to a
further labour and studie, that may purchase more
greater fauor & thanks. So resting yours in al that
my small power may stretch vnto, I take leaue, and
wish you what goodnes you can imagine or desire.
London, at my lodging the 8. of March.

