



I Knowe not my good lorde, whe∣ther my boldnesse and presum∣ption be greater, then the base∣nesse of my matter herein pen∣ned, and I mynde to presente: consideryng the worthinesse of the personage, to whom I dedi∣cate my booke, and the weakenesse of my wit, that pre∣senteth vaine verses, where vertue of the mynde aboundeth. But for that I treate not of mere trifles, (nor meane to corrupt sound senses, and good maners with wanton wordes or leude rime) I am partly per∣swaded this myne Newyeres gift, shall giue your lord∣ship delite, and purchace to my self the desired than∣kes, that euery honest writer deserueth: Because the substance and effect of all my inuentions, are shadowed vnder the sheld of good meanyng: And a matter well meant (by the courtesie of true constructiō) maie passe

the muster & good opinion of the people, emong the best assemblies that looketh on the furniture I bryng, and ablenesse of my penne. And albeit some weapons want to beate backe the thompyng boltes of euill tongues (in my defence be it spoken) yet the Armour of right, and Target of trothe shall bee sufficient to strike doune the blowes, that hautie hartes with threatnyng thwartes can offer. And who so euer hastely or vnaduisedly through malicious wordes, hinders the credite of any honest workes, maie be thought both a rashe and a par∣ciall speaker, & a busie medler in matters, thei neither mynde to amende, nor nor will suffer that the worlde shall speake well therof. But now farther to procede, & enter into the cause of this my boldnesse, the troth is in callyng to remēbrance à promes that I made, touching some verses. And honoryng in harte the Erle of Sur∣rie, your Lordshipps graundfather, & my master (who was a noble warriour, an eloquent Oratour, and a se∣cond Petrarke) I could doe no lesse but publishe to the worlde somewhat that should shewe, I had lost no time in his seruice. And finding an other of his race and to∣wardnesse, who hath taste and feelyng in the good gif∣tes of Nature, and noble vertues of his auncestours, (the hope of whiche graces, promiseth greate perfecti∣on to followe in tyme to come) I thought I might de∣dicate

a booke vnto your Lordshippe, named by myne owne liking Churchyards Charge. But now right no∣ble Earle, the worlde louyng change and varietie of matter, waxeth awearie of freuoulous verses (because so many are writers of Mieter) and looketh for some learned discourse, by whiche meanes my barrain boo∣kes maie remaine vnred, or misliked, and so lye on the Stationers stall, as a sillie signe of a newe nothyng, nei∣ther worthe the buiyng, nor the regardyng. To that I maie aunswere (vnder pardon and correction) that the grounde whiche of Nature yeldeth, but Thistles or Brambles, maie bryng forthe no good Corne of it self, contrary to his operation and kinde. Nor a man that is accustomed to treate of trifles maie, not meddle with the deepenesse of graue argumentes. For as it pas∣ses the searche and capacitie of a simple witte, to se in∣to any matter of importaunce, so it is necessarie that a pleasaunt and plaine companion, should alwaies be oc∣cupied about pastymes, and namely at Christmas, whē little short tales, driues out a pece of the long nightes, and rather with mirthe to procure a laughter, then with sadnesse prouoke a lowryng: and he that sturreth vp the heauie myndes to light some consaites, is more welcome in euery place, then he that ouerthrowes the weake senses of common people, with curious imagina∣tions,

and burthens bothe bodie and mynde, with wor∣des of greater weight, then common iudgement can cō∣ceiue, and be able to beare. A tale or a toye mirrely de∣liuered, pleaseth moste mennes eares: and an earneste sadde argument, either rockes a man a slepe, or maketh the hearers a wearie. And the nature of Rime is to re∣uiue the spirites, or moue a smile, when many a one is scarce pleasauntly disposed. A Rime goeth on sutche feete, standeth on sutche ioyntes, and rappeth out sutch reasons, that wisedome taketh pleasure in, and follie will make a wonder of. The woordes by inuention hits a thyng so iompe, and kepes sutche a decorum and me∣thode, that bothe order and measure is seen, in the cun∣nyng conueyance of the verses, especially if the swete and smothe sentences bee sifted, from the sowre rough Branne of needelesse babble and vanitie. A sensible witte hauyng the pennyng of the matter. But loe my good Lorde, in shewyng the nature and qualitie of a good verse, how my hoblyng is seen, and perceiued by the badnesse, or bare handelyng of the thynges herein written: yet now I haue ron so farre in ouerweenyng, that either I am forced to goe forward, or remaine in the midwaie discomforted, and without remeadye. VVherefore, albeeit I shall shewe but a bondell of drie deuises, I must open my fardell, & make sale of sutche

stuffe, as my hedde hath been stuffed withall: Euen like the poore Peddlar, that trudgeth with his packe to a Faire, and there vnfoldeth emong some newe laces & odde trifles, a greate deale of old ware and little rē∣nantes, that for lacke of quicke sale, hath laine long in a close corner. I neede not to seeke out a patron to support them: for thei are neither worthe the readyng, nor the buiyng, yet hauyng no better, am compelled to vtter the thynges I haue lefte. Prouidyng that my nexte booke maie shewe somewhat emong the rest that goeth before: for that it shall be dedicated to the moste worthiest (and towardes noble man), the Erle of Ox∣ford, as my laisure maie serue, and yet with greate ex∣pedition. Thus beyng ouer tedious and bolde, in stret∣ching out a short and sorie Epistle (that had been bet∣ter knit vp in fewe lines) I wishe your Lordship ma∣ny newe and happie yeres, long life to your liking, to the honour of GOD, and encrease of good fame: and a peece or portion of eche goodnesse can be named. From my lodging nere to the Courte the first daie of Ianuarie. Your Lord∣shippes alwaies at com∣maundement.

