



IN rememberyng of courtesies vvhiche I founde in Flaunders vvhen your honour vvas Lorde Embas∣sadour there, I thought my selfe more bounde, than able to requite, and so searchyng the storehouse of my sub∣stance, I savve nothyng so readie to spare as the exercise of my Penne in parte of payment of that Iovve: yet thinking therby no peece of duetie dis∣charged. For the memorie of a good-tourne

is a sufficient cause to a honest minde, euer to be thankefull in all ser∣uiceable manner, and neuer to forget a benefit receiued.
And especially in this scrupulous age and season, vvhen good tournes neither goe a begging nor can not bee gotten for greate crauing and much a∣doe. And yet some men of themselues are so noble and apt to doe good, they can bestovve many pleasures frankly and freely, vvhere no hope of recom∣pēce is to be found or looked for, nor in a maner our deseruyngs are occasiō of.
Among the cheef of that sort is the honorable syr Francis VValsingham, a singuler Proppe and Piller, vppon vvhom all our most feeble Souldiours doe leane, and from vvhom comes

but fevve suters discontented, or not reasonablie satisfied. The voyce ther∣of is so generall, that vvithout any kinde of adulation I may report it. Albeit my fortune is not much amen∣ded, nor my luck vvas neuer to light so farre in his fauour as to fasten a simple book of my making in his hands.
For here I must confesse to your ho∣nour, this little treatise (for that hee fauours Maister Forboyshers Iorney) vvould gladly haue bin supported by his honourable countenance. But as a Boule in a smoth Alleye may get a iob, and yet proue to be a good sauyng cast vvhen the game is in triall, so this my vvork neither found free passage nor acces to his noble iudgement, nor is not as I hoep vtterly voyd of a

good Patroen to giue it some credit, and yet the better by his meanes it shalbe accepted.
And the more is my hap that so ho∣nourable a parsonage as your self shal vouchesafe to reade it, and let it pas to the veaue and liking of the vvorld.
Not that I presume that the vvri∣ting thereof doth claym any commen∣dation, but that by my boldnes and studie, the vvorthines of trauelars may bee vnderstoed, and sutch as haue sovven the seed of painfull labor and exercies, shall reape the fruit of good fame, and possesse that honest re∣port that belongeth to their vvel∣doyng. My learning is not so great as to treate of hye matters, vvherefore I haue chosen familier thinges too

vvrite vpon. And so presenting to the people that vviche they are beste a∣quainted vvithall, I shall not vveery them vvith a straunge and statelie style, nor ouercharge their iudgements vvith farre fetched vvordes or vveightie deuises. Yet blushe I to blot my booke vvith fancies and fa∣bulls (vvhich the folly of youth in for∣mer dayes ledde me to.) And reioyce the more in findyng any occasion that may vvin good men renoume, & make me put the idell pen to paper. And so this small vvoork of myen keepes but my Muse occupied, and makes my frendes remember mee, and shoes no∣thing but a cōmendation of those that loue not to liue vnprofitable mēbers: and vvithall cares not for the ha∣zarde

and daunger of death, so some knovvledge rise to their Countrey by their paynes and practises. Thus ouer tedious in settyng foorth a triefle, and somevvat bolde to trouble your good consideration vvith so badde a dis∣course, I staye and keepe silence till my seconde booke (promised long since to Maister Uyez Chamberlayne) com∣meth out, and shall bee published in print. Of the vvhich booke I mynde to make you a present, and in the mean season I vvishe that euerie good gift of grace may encrease in your honour. From the Courte the laste of Aprill.

