



IN remembring many curtesies, good turnes, rare fauor, and friend∣ship flowing from your Honorable disposition in this ebbing age, I vowed being found in seruiceable maner to requite: but sicke, am for∣ced to write the opinions of many Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen (captaines and cheefe∣taines of great charge) touching the court and the wars. And for that I serued vnder them, I set downe the words I heard many of them speake of those two honorable points, and discourses. First at Lawndersey sir Thomas Wyet, Wallop, Bellingam, & many more knights there. Then at Bollain the Lord Poynings, sir Rafe Elderkar, sir Iames Crofts, and other knights there. The Lord Gray at Giens, sir Harry Palmer, sir Lewis Dyue, sir Richard Bray, & many more there. At Hams the Lord Dudley, and many gentlemen there. At Callis the Lord Haward, sir William Drury, sir Anthony Ager, sir Thomas Corn∣wallys, and a number of knights and gentlemen there. In Flaunders sir Anthony Sturley, captaine Matson, Sy∣byll, Horssey, Ieynks, Plonket, Hynde, and many more captaines there. At Metts in Lorraine captaine Farnam, and in that towne the Lord Admirall that now is, I be∣ing without with sundry English Gentlemen there. In

France captaine Krayar, Sutton, Twytty, Blunt, Dry∣uar, and numbers of captaines there. In Scotland where I was taken prisoner, sir William Winter, sir William Woodhouse, and many knights and captaines there: the Lord Clynton our Admirall then. At Burty Cragge sir Iohn Luttrell. At Dondee captaine Marry Church, and sundry gentlemen there. In Haddington sir Iames Wilford, sir Arthur Manering, and many other knights and captaines there. In Lawtherfort, sir Hue Wyllowby, captaine Colby, captaine Hales, and many more there. In Ireland sir William Bellingam, sir Anthony Sellen∣ger, sir Henry Sydney, sir Iames Crofts: all these then deputies, and many knights and captaines there, at their commaundment. In Anwerpe after these things my selfe the chiefe captaine there then. In Brabant, Zeland, and Holland vnder sir Thomas Morgan, sir Humfrey Gylbart, and sundry knights, there seruing a great sea∣son. In Scotland before vnder the Lord Gray at the siege of Leeth, where sir William Pellam, sir George Haward, sir Andrew Corbet, and a number of knights were, be∣sides many captaines and gentlemen of good woorth. In Gyens when it was lost, a captaine my selfe, and ta∣ken prisoner vnder the old Lord Gray, sir Harry Palmar, master Cripps, and other captaines there. In Ireland againe vnder sir Harry Sydney, where sir Harry Har∣rington, sir Edward Moore, sir Nicholas Bagnall, and a great company of knights and captaines were, from whom I went to the noble Earle of Ormond. In Garn∣zey, with sir Thomas Leighton in good credit and charge a good while. In Anwarpe againe, when sir Iohn Norrice, sir Thomas Morgan, sir Edward Hobby, and a number of honorable personages brought ouer Moun∣sior

thither. Thus making those seruices and many more a benefit to my knowledge, & gathering some od notes and sentences among those Honorable and marshall people, I bethought me thereof now in my last sicknes peraduenture, and willing not to smoother them vp in silence, haue published as followes in verse, what the opinion of many dead and aliue hath been both of ho∣norable Court and Warres: dedicating the whole iudgement thereof to your good consideration, bicause you are Knight Marshall of England, and knowes much of marshall causes. After whose good liking I do com∣mend the work to the whole world, humbly desiring you to reade with good will, iudge with milde discretion, and rather commend than condemne: not thereby crauing better credit than it may merit, nor lesse thanks than an honest writer looketh for: though not finely written yet faithfully meant in plainest termes, bicause cunning phrases sauour of the schoole, where seldome I haue sto∣len any great learning, nor robbed good schollers of their bookes. If God freely gaue, I haue frankly bestowed it, neither a niggard of my verses, nor sparing of my words, but spending my muse and matter as plentifully as though I had good store thereof: take it in good part so the writer stands pleased, God so knoweth, who en∣crease you in honor and durable credit. 
From my cham∣ber in Richmond, this new yeeres day. 1596. 
