



RIght honorable, for∣asmuch since the comming foorth of the Postill of Hemingius vpon the Gospelles in English, the good liking of his wholesome doctrine, and his well handling thereof too the playne vnderstanding, euen of the simple and too the profita∣ble edifying of al sortes, haue cau∣sed many too reade the same with great willingnesse and diligence: The partyes that were the procu∣rers of that benefite too their Countrey, haue with like good meening requested me to adde some Postill or exposition vpon the Epistles also to the intent that the well disposed Reader might haue more full in∣struction in those partes of scripture which are most vsually & conti∣nually red in the Christen Churches. In performance wherof, (vppon the speciall good report and commendation of such as are lerned) I haue translated this Postill (or, as the Author himself termeth thē, these disposements) of Dauid Cythraeus, conteyning in ground and substance of matter, the selfsame things that the other worke dooth: Howbeit, handled and disposed after another sort. For neyther vseth he so many subdiuisions as dooth Hemingius: and besydes that, hee conueyeth his matters intoo the manner of Sermons methodically, disposed after the order of Rhethoricke, instructing the Reader too

frame the partes of his oration aptly, and too enlarge the same plentu∣ously, according as oportunitie of tyme, persone, and matter shall re∣quire. Also in such places as haue any darke phrases or hid sense, he expoūdeth the woords grāmerlike, opening the propreties of the tūgs and the figuratiue speeches, wherby he giueth great light to the text. Agein, in diuers cases he draweth the matters into forme of Argu∣ments after the manner of Logicke, too the intent the Reader should looke throughly intoo the matter, and wey it accordingly. In whiche respects although this woorke may seeme more necessarie for the ler∣ned (or at least wyse for such as bee well entered in the liberall artes, and foreward in knowledge) than for the simple and meaner sorte: yet notwithstāding there are other respectes also for which euen the sim∣plest that is of any capacitie may fare the better by him. For like as the termes of art in setting down and disposing of matters according too art, are somwhat darke to such as are not acquaynted with them, which is not a thing so greatly materiall too bee stumbled at: So his discoursing and setting foorth of matters perteyning too fayth, religiō, doctrine, and amēdment of maners (which are the cheef poynts that al men should looke for) are very playn, orderly, manifest, and vtterly voyd of all obscuritie and darknesse. Yea and he so euidently and ef∣fectually beateth into his heerers heads, the right sense and meening of the holy scripture, that it may seeme he had a singular care and re∣gard too bee vnderstood of all men. And not in these Epistles only, but also in many other partes of holy scripture both of the old Testa∣ment and of the new, hath he trauelled right paynfully, lernedly, and godlily, to his own great cōmendatiō among the skilful, & to the great cōmoditie and furtherance of the christen cōmon wedle. Wherfore, I am the bolder to match this translatiō with the former of Hemingius (as it were the forme with the matter) and to dedicate it to your ho∣nor, trusting that you will of your accustomed goodnesse giue mee leaue to shroud my simple dooings vnder the shadowe of your fauoure, which thing I most humbly request. For I thought it an vnmeet and vnseemly thing, yea& ageinst reason, to separate those works in dedi∣catiō, which are al one insubstāce of mater. And therfore submitting myself & it to your good pleasure, I cease to trouble your honour any further. Finished at Powles Belchamp, the last day of March▪ 1570.
