



A Greater boldnes cannot be committed (Right Honora∣ble) than to present Pam∣phlets and Poetrie to noble Counsellors that gouernes a publike state, though in all ages reasonable writers, that kept an orderly compasse, were suffered in verse or prose (so their inuentions were not farced ful of vanitie) to shew good will in the dedication of some honest labors, to such honorable personages, as was woorthie of any good volumes, or in the woorth of vertue, excelled the waight and value of numbers, that neither merits lauda∣tion, nor shew no sufficiency to be saluted with a booke. But what I see and the world reports

of your Lordship, makes me somwhat hardie to offer a present, yet simplenes of spirit and want of profound learning, hath so muffled my muses, that they dare not speake, nor I pre∣sume to write, neuertheles thinking on your twenty fold honorable father (my great good Lord) matchlesse in our world, that caried in his breast the feare of God, and wan with his life the loue of men (so noble was his minde) I stood nothing discouraged, bicause a sol∣dier like noble sonne of his is left aliue, to follow the steps of so stately a father, and to shine aboue and beyond the course of thou∣sands in this time, or is likely to come after this age. To treate of particulars in that be∣halfe, I should presume too far, and vnadui∣sedly come too short of matter fit for this cause. Wherefore I am to leaue those deepe considerations, and drop into the shallownes of mine owne studies, that brings foorth a booke of the coldnes of charitie, bicause a great noble man, told me this last wet som∣mer, The weather was too colde for Poets. On which fauorable words, I bethought me

that charitie in court and all the world ouer, was become so cold, that neither hot sommer, feruent fire, nor heate of sunne could make warme againe, in that comfortable sort as our forefathers haue felt it: so my good L. follow∣ing that onely theame of cold weather (being apt to take any theam) to write on, in as sweete a phrase and termes as I may deuise (putting in the praise of Poets withall) I smoothly passe ouer (without bitter speeches) the corruption of this world, and disguised maners of men, riding by the new fanglenes of a multitude, and not dashing any ones infirmitie, with blot of disgrace, or blemish of credit, hoping the best sort shall stand pleased with, howsoeuer the woorst (happily may be touched) do of meere malice, wrest awry the honest meaning of a plaine writer. For the dutifull regard, to∣wards the purchasing of your L. fauor hath so sifted euery word and sentence, that no one verse or line shall bee offensiue to a sounde iudgement and good construction. And for that now (by reason of great age) my wits and inuentions are almost wearied with writing

of bookes (this being one of the last) I tooke this taske in hand, at large to dilate somewhat of Charitie, which would to God I had as great power to reuiue, as the world hath occa∣sion to remember. Thus ouer-bold to trouble your L. so long with the reading of so simple an Epistle, I proceed vnder your honorable supportation, to my purposed matter, wish∣ing your L. euerlasting fame, credit, and ho∣nor, most humbly at commandement,
THOMAS CHVRCHYARD.
