



THe great zeale of good King Iosias,2. King. 22. and the sin∣guler care he had in repai¦ring the Temple of God, & maintaining true ho∣lines, was not onely prophesied by Id∣do 300. yeeres before his byrth, but is now remēbred many hundred yeeres after his death, as a most worthy presi∣dent for all godlye and well affected mindes, for in him was first found ly∣berality, in disbursing money toward the building therof, then wisedom in appointing godly ouerseers to see it well doone, and last of all care, in ha∣uing skilfull workmen to doo it, the which godly disposition of his, ex∣pressed
 the very fruits of a good mind in asmuch as he wold willingly haue the place erected, wherein the name of God myght bee glorified, and hys lawes & statutes read and exercised, and the people of God taught and in∣structed: such dispositions are the ve∣ry badges and shewes of a feeling con∣science, and a godly setled minde.
I may think no lesse in you (right worshipfull) but as a seconde Iosias, haue endeuoured your selfe very care¦fully for the erecting of gods glory in the Towne of Dorchester, my na∣tiue towne, in that you haue not one∣ly ben willing for the exercising of preaching in the same towne, but haue offred your liberality for the fur¦thering, continuing, and establishing, thereof, to the great comfort of the towne, & no les ioy to the borderers. By occasion whereof, I was not onely moued with a comfortable minde for my natiue country, to see the prose∣cuting of so good a purpose, but was
 also bent vpon the same argument to preach these two Sermons following, which as well in thankfulnes for your proceedinges, as in signification of mine vnfained goodwyll, I humbly present vnto your worship, beseech∣ing you to allow of the slender gyfte, and to couer the vnwoorthines ther∣of with your accustomed clemency. And therein, as I shall think my pains cased, my works bettered, and my tra∣uell well bestowed, euen so shall I per∣swade my self, to be much bound vn¦to your worship for your louing ac∣ceptation. And for the same shal con¦tinue mine vnfained hart in faithfull prayers vnto GOD, to blesse your dayes with the increase of his bene∣fits, to whose mercifull tuition I com¦mend you.
 VVritten in Froome zel∣wood, the xii. of December. 1585.
