


THe long liking and good wyll with the fast frendship I finde in you (good maister Hatton) procures my penne presently to performe that I promised, no smal time since, touching a booke of al my English verses in miter. The offer wherof came from my selfe, not for the goodnes of the matter, but for the parfitnesse of ye persone to whom I mēt to dedicate my woorke. And albeit your valeur may not bee seen in so simple a glas, yet I hope this my woorkes shall not hinder your deserued renowm, nor breed occasion to mislike my vnbridled boldnes. And for that from my head, hand and penne, can floe no farre fatched eloquence, nor sweete sprinklyng speaches (seasoned with spiced termes) I call my workes Churchyardes Chips, the basnes wherof can beguild no man with better opinion, than the sub∣stance

it selfe doth import, and in deed if any other tietle had bene geuen to my trifles, than the pro∣per name of chips, men might haue hoped for gra∣uer matter then the natuer of my verses can pro∣duce. VVherefor I prepared a title aunswerable to the weight of the worke, misdoubting not but that you will of cortesie behold what blaes of good wyll these my Chips will vtter to the worlde. Assuring my selfe and my friendes, that herein is no kinde of sparke, neither hurtfull nor vncomly. But as the world may iudge, among many chips may be sun∣drie woodes, so the worst of them all makes but a crack, consumes with the coales, and turneth vnto sinders. VVhat fier can be made where neither smoek can be seen, nor hissing of stickes maye bee hard? And yet those two properties agree in ye end to one flame, effect and purpose. I write of seuerall thinges, whose sondry foundations might leade me to diuers subiectes, but each of them in deede ser∣ueth to one mans cogitacion and duetifull dealing towardes God and my coūtrey. And none of them hath any humour or disease, but sutch as eury body may broke, disgeste, and embrace, (bearing any graine of fauour to the wrytter) whiche I hope makes the reddier passage to that which I caused

to be Printed. My first booke hath but few things in it, but such varietie of matter as shall breed to the Reader rather pleasure than painfulnes. And the second shall contain a nomber of things I trust of no lesse pastime and commodity, waying mirrely the meaning of my Imaginaciōs. Thus making my choice of a sufficiente patroen, for a farre better woorke than my cunning can performe, (and cre∣ping vnder the target of your protection) I weery you no further in reading of this my plain Epistle, committing to the Almighty, your worship, good naem, and most desired felicitie, with increace of wished fortune.

