



MOST Redoubted and Royall Queene, that Kings doe feare, Subiects doe honour, strangers seeke succour of, and people of speciall spirit acknowledge (as their manifold books declare) I least of all, presume to farre, either in presenting matter to be iudged of, or to ad∣uenture the cracking of credite, with writing any thing, that may breede mislike (presents not well ta∣ken) in the deepe iudgement of so high and mightie a Princesse. But where a multitude runnes forward (forced through desire or fortune) to shewe duetie, or to see what falleth out of their forwardnes, I step∣ping in among the rest, am driuen and led (by affec∣tion

to followe) beyond the force of my power or fee∣ling of any learned arte. So being thrust on with the throng, I finding my self brought before the presence of your Maiestie (but barely furnished of know∣ledge) to whom I must vtter some matter of delight, or from whom I must retourne all abashed with open disgrace. Thus Gracious Lady, vnder your Prince∣ly fauour I haue vndertaken to set foorth a worke in the honour of VVales, where your highnes aunce∣stors tooke name, and where your Maiestie is as much loued and feared, as in any place of your high∣nesse dominion. And the loue and obedience of which people so exceedes, and surpasseth the common good∣will of the worlde, that it seemeth a wonder in our age (wherein are so many writers) that no one man doth not worthely according to the countries good∣nes set forth that noble Soyle and Nation. Though in deede diuers haue sleightly written of the same, and some of those labours deserueth the reading, yet except the eye be a witnes to their workes, the wri∣ters can not therein sufficiently yeeld due commen∣dation to those stately Soyles and Principalities. For which cause I haue trauayled sondry times of purpose through the same, and what is written of I haue beheld, and throughly seene, to my great con∣tentment

and admiration. For the Citties, Townes, and goodly Castles thereof are to be mused on, and merites to bee registred in euerlasting memorie, but chiefly the Castles (that stand like a company of Fortes) may not be forgotten, their buyldings are so princely, their strength is so greate, and they are such stately seates and defences of nature. To which Castles great Royaltie and liuings belongeth, and haue bene and are in the giftes of Princes, now pos∣sessed of noble men and such as they appoint to keep them. The royalties whereof are alwayes looked vn∣to, but the Castles doe dayly decay, a sorrowfull sight and in a maner remediles. But nowe to come to the cōditions of the people, & to shew somewhat of their curtesie, loyalty, & naturall kindnes, I presume your Maiestie will pardon me to speake of, for of trueth your highnes is no soner named among them, but such a generall reioysing doth arise, as maketh glad any good mans hart to behold or heare it, it proceeds of such an affectionate fauour. For let the meanest of the Court come downe to that countrey, he shalbe so saluted, halsed and made of, as though he were some Lords sonne of that soyle, & further the plain people thinks it debt & duetie, to follow a strangers Stirrop (being out of the way) to bring him where

he wisheth, which gentlenes in all countries is not vsed, and yet besides all this goodnes and great re∣gard, there is neither hewe nor cry (for a robbery) in many hundreth myles riding, so whether it be for feare of iustice, loue of God, or good disposition, small Robberies or none at all are heard of there. They triumph likewise so much of fidelitie, that the very name of a falsifier of promes, a murtherer or a theef, is most odious among them, especially a Traytor is so hated, that his whole race is rated at and abhord as I haue heard there, report of Parrie and others, who the common people would haue torne in peeces if the lawe had not proceeded. And such regard they haue one of another, that neither in market townes, high wayes, meetings, nor publicke assemblies they striue not for place, nor shewe any kind of roysting: for in sted of such high stomackes and stoutnes, they vse frendly salutations and courtesie, acknowled∣ging duetie thereby, & doing such reuerence to their betters, that euery one in his degree is so well vn∣derctood and honored, that none can iustly say hee hath suffered iniurie, or found offence by the rude & burbarous behauiour of the people. These vsages of theirs, with the rest that may be spoken of their ciuil maner and honest frame of lyfe, doth argue there is

some more nobler nature in that Nation, then is ge∣nerally reported, which I doubt not but your High∣nes is as willing to heare as I am desirous to make manifest and publish: the hope whereof redoubleth my boldnes, and may happely sheeld me from the ha∣zard of worlds hastie iudgement, that condemnes men without cause for writing that they know, and praysing of people before their faces: (which suspi∣cious heads call a kind of adulation) but if telling of troth, be rebukable, and playne speeches be offensiue, the ignorant world shall dwell long in errors, and true writers may sodaynly sit in silence. I haue not only searched sondry good Authors for the confir∣mation of my matter, but also paynfully traueiled to trye out the substance of that is written, for feare of committing some vnpardonable fault and offence, in presenting this Booke vnto your Highnesse. VVhich worke, albeit it is but litle, (because it trea∣teth not of many Shieres) yet greatly it shal reioyce the whole Countrey of VVales, whē they shall heare it hath found fauour in your gracious sight, & hath passed through those blessed hands, that holds the rayne and bridle of many a stately Kingdome, and Terrytorie. And my selfe shall reape so much glad∣nesse, by the free passage of this simple labour, that

hereafter I shall goe through (GOD sparing life) with the rest of the other Shieres not heere named. These things only taken in hād, to cause your High∣nesse to knowe, what puysance and strength such a Princesse is of, that may commaund such a people: and what obedience loue and loyaltie is in such a Countrey, as hereunto hath bin but little spoken of, and yet deserueth most greatest lawdation. And in deede the more honorable it is, for that your High∣nesse princely Auncestors sprong forth of the noble braunches of that Nation. Thus duetifully pray∣ing for your Maiesties long preseruation, (by whose bountie and goodnesse I a long while haue liued) I wish your Highnesse all the hap, honour, victorie, and harts ease, that can be desired or imagined.

