


EIghte yeeres a∣goe (Right Ho∣norable) some parte of these my poore La∣bors escaped my handes, and rashly (by peecemeale) passed the Printers Presse, not wt∣out some blemishes and Eyesores: which, as my meaning was then to haue repolished and brought into order, so the poastinge speede and shufling vp of the same, without my presence, consent, and knowledge,

quight defeated my purpose, and dashed my determination. But si∣thens things passed be irreuocable, I haue thought good (vpō request) to take that direct course in the se∣cond edition thereof, which seemed best to breede the Readers profit, and soonest to salue myne own cre∣dite. And thereupon haue I pul∣led all asunder agayne, and aduen∣tured the same anew, adding ther∣vnto one Booke more thē before I had done, because ye whole VVorke beeing by that meanes fully suppli∣ed, shoulde come foorth vniforme, and in one maner of Style and or∣der. VVhich being now throughly finished, I humbly present & offer vnto youre good L. not a whitte doubting of your honorable accep∣taunce,

if not for anye workeman∣shippe of myne, which is (God kno∣weth) verye rude and vnsauerye, yet for noble Cicero his owne sake, the Author & first writer hereof: whose onely name (much more hys learned workes) you haue (as they are well worthye) in reuerent esti∣mation. For which verye cause, I deemed no worthier Counsay loure could be found to defend and pro∣tect so noble a Senatour, then your H. whom in the watchful cares of the Common wealth, profounde VVisdome, graue aduise, and poli∣ticke gouernmēt, he so neerely and liuelye resembleth. My part of tra∣uaile in the Interpretatiō of whose Sayings, I hūbly submit vnto your Honourable censure, beseechinge

God to continue and encrease hys blessinges spiritual and temporall vpon you, your honourable Lady, and Children, to the aduaunce∣ment and setting foorth of his glo∣rie, the weale of this your Coūtry, & to your own ioye & consolation.
From Butley in Chesshyre the. 4. of Maye. 1577.

