



RIght honourable: when
as, partly, by the counsel
of them that might com∣maund
me, and partlye,
by mine owne consent,
I left the vniuersity: and
began to apply my selfe to the studye of
the common lawes of this realme: I
felt my selfe chiefelye hindred therein,
with the entermedlīg of those studies,
the which, not without great delight,
I had afore time vsed. The whych, be∣cause
I was lothe to continue, to the
defrauding of the expectation of those,
with whom to trifle it had bene impie∣tie:
I minded, to take my farewell of
some such part of philosophye, as, both
might be most profitable to the quiete
leading of my life, to whatsoeuer trade
I should giue my selfe: and also should

be so pleasaunt, that it might euen cloy
me with delight. Whiche my desyre to
satisfye, when I sought many bookes:
yet found I none more meete, thē this.
Which whiles I redde, I must needes
confesse, that I was neuer more de∣lighted
with any worke, except it were
the sacred volume of the holye Scrip∣tures.
Wherfore, when I had perused
it ouer, and founde suche profyte, and
pleasure therein, as it were not possi∣ble
to finde the like in anye Ethnike
wryter: I wyshed all men the lyke de∣lyght,
as the reading of it brought vn∣to
me. And because I coulde not mys∣doubt,
but the learned had already tri∣ed
into thintente, that the vnlearned
also, might haue some fruicion therof:
and, that our coūtrey, might at length
flowe with the workes of philosophye:
I endeuoured my selfe, althoughe not
eloquentlye, yet playnely, to translate
the same into our englishe tounge.
And considering, that there was none
more meete, to haue the protection of
so graue and learned a worke, thē your
honour: remembring also, that the first

attempte, of the same parte of philoso∣phye,
translated by maister Grimoald,
passed forth vnder the protectiō, of one
of that honourable vocation, to the
whiche also, it hath pleased god, after
sondry troubles, to call you: I thought
it my dutye, in respecte of manye bene∣fites,
by your lordship on me bestowed,
to dedicate vnto you this my simple
trauayle. Thinking yt nothinge coulde
be vnwelcome to your honour, that sa∣uoured
Tullie. Whom I am not igno¦raunt,
howe much you were wonte to
esteeme. Wherfore, I hope, that, lyke∣as,
your lordshippe was wont to be de∣lyghted
with the Romane Tullye: euē
so, this englishe Tullie (although not
adourned, with like eloquence by the
translator, yet varieng nothing in sēse)
you wil not disdayne. Knowynge, that
this simple scolers gyfte, contayneth
the signifyeng, of as hearty good will
towardes your honoure: as those grea∣ter
presentes to, whyche craue requy∣ting.
Thus, lothe to trouble your lord∣shippe
any longer, wyth a vayne num∣ber
of wordes (because manye wordes

ofte cause many trippes) I commende
vnto your lordeshippe, the fauourable
iudgemente of this my simple tra∣uayle:
to be perused, at such time,
as it shall seeme best, both for
your leasure and pleasure.
Written frō the inner
temple the .xiiii.
of Iuly.
