



YOur in-bred loue of knowledge, e∣qualiz'd with able industrie; and your ap∣plause, and furtherance of a publicke benefit, brought vs ac∣quainted.

In that an office free∣ly done to any peculiar person, is very laudable; but exten∣ding it selfe to an vniuersality; obliegeth, and vniteth all men. For, as the mutuall participati∣on of particulars, and their vse, and faculties in a body naturall: So breedeth it, a louing harmo∣ny, and perpetuity, in that which is politicall: harmony of minds, through vniting courtesies; perpetuitie of being so, by an af∣fectionate acceptance, and grate∣full acknowledgement. Where∣upon, there is not onely an ex∣change of fauours, out of the en∣dowments of fortune: but from th'elaborated experience also, of such as are not enuious, pro∣ceedeth a willing demonstration of all, either infused, or acquired sciences; euer binding, by reite∣rated offices, the receiuer to a

new addition of thankefulnesse, and the giuer to partiipate through a former deseruing gratitude. And this was the mayne occasion that I, (true friend) breaking the ice of my long concealed blessings, and in∣uentions, laid open to your view those christall, and abounding fountaines, which, who so tast∣eth, so instantly be-deweth his vnderstanding, with so recrea∣ting a Balsamum, that it spring∣eth in the coldest Winter, and is euer fruitfull. This powerfull and celestiall water, is (as you beheld) enuironed with a guard of auncient Authors, of the most admired perfection in all pro∣fessions; and such, as from the riches of their wisedomes, haue left rules, precepts, and autho∣rities; as legacies, regalities, and prerogatiues; by which all after-ages,

conditions of men, and do∣minions; haue beene, and must be instituted, maintain'd, and gouerned. All these, though they bewray'd a willingnesse, to embrace you, and graunt you ac∣cesse vnto that fountaine: yet through an auncient familiari∣tie, begunne in childhood, be∣tweene your selfe, and Cicero, which was one of them, you sought this courtesie rather from him, and hee gaue rather way thereto, then any other. And as he was euer of an affa∣ble disposition, & had beene well read in the conditions of all men, and, delighted to be fre∣quented, by the most illumina∣ted vnderstandings; hee so ta∣sted your inclination, that, cal∣ling me from clensing, (as my custome is) and purifying that fountaine, he requested me, in

token of his affection, to present you with one volume of his E∣pistles. I ask't him which? Hee answered; the Familiar. In what Language? English. Whereat I blush't, and smiled. Hee gathering, mine inward thoughts by mine outward car∣riage, sayd; Blush not to bee made a Translator of so ordina∣rie Bookes as mine Epistles; In that, things the more ordinarie they are; argue the more vni∣uersall acceptance: and besides, men of greater shew, haue held their translations of lesser mo∣ment, for their greatest orna∣ments: But blush to thinke that Cicero, whose letters bewray his conuersation, and whose conuersation was with Consuls, Kings, Imperator's, Praetors, Quaestors, Tribunes, Generals, and friends of his owne ranke,

Caesar, Pompeius, Lepidus, Antonius, Brutus, Cassius, Cato, Plancus, Lentulus, Deiotarus, Octauianus, and such great Potentates; and at that time when all the world was subiect vnto one domini∣on, and himselfe in it a chiefe Commander; I say blush, to conceyte that he, should reduce such Epistles into Volumes, one∣ly for little ones. And wrong not thine owne iudgement so farre, as to imagine, that euery man of thy Nation, and Coun∣trie, which is desirous, and worthy to read mine Epistles, is able to vnderstand them in their originall: goe on then; for those that ruled all men haue beene rul'd by me; be thou then ruled; and goe on. When I heard this, my shamefull blush was turned to a daring bold∣nesse;

which made mee replie, Commaund: but, thou art the whole worlds greatest Orator; and I, when these are ended, shall be but a young Translator; Let me bring thee a Sydney, a Great L: Chancellor, or a Sandys; that can parallel thy Latine, with our English Lan∣guage. No, sayd mine Author; they haue done; doe thou. With that, I asked him, how? Hast thou forgotten, sayd hee, that, Epistolas quotidianis verbis exere solemus? Here I grew silent: but not so silent, as pre∣sumptuous; For, hence came these Epistles. Neither did I forget a French Doletus, and Italie's Manutius, who had dared as much, and were ap∣plauded. But when I was al∣most at an end, and met with, aliter scribimus, quod os so∣los

quibus mittimus, aliter quod multos lecturos puta∣mus. I was absolutely deter∣mined to commend my former labours, to the secretest of all friends, a fire. But you, at that very instant, sent by destinie, repriued them: and requested my patience once more to reade them, and returne you them. 'Tis done, and by these you shall receiue them. Send backe your censure; and Farewell.
