



AS my prison∣ment and aduersi∣tee, most honora∣ble lady, was of their owne nature ioigned with great and sun∣drie miseries, so was the suffe∣rance of the same eased, by the chaunce of diuerse and many commoditees. For thereby founde I great soule profite, a little minde knowlage, some holow hertes, and a few feith∣full freendes. Wherby I tried prisonment of the body, to be

the libertee of spirite: aduersi∣tee of fortune: the touche stone of freendship, exempcion from the world, to be a contempt of vanitees: and in the ende qui∣etnes of mind, the occasion of study. And thus somewhat al∣tered, to auoide my olde idel∣nesse, to recompense my lost time, and to take profite of my calamitee, I gaue my selfe a∣mong other thynges to study and learne the Frenche tonge, hauyng both skilful prisoners to enstruct me, and therto plen∣ty of bookes to learne the lan∣guage. Among whiche as there were dyuerse notable, and for their sondry mattier woorthy readyng, so none liked me a∣boue this Tullius booke of

freendship, nor for the argu∣ment any with it to be compa∣red. The whole wherof whan I had perused, and saw the goodly rules, the naturall or∣der, and ciuile vse of freend∣ship, where before I but liked, than was I rauished, and in a certaine wonder with the hea∣then lernyng, which chiefly for it selfe I phantasied, and for my state I deemed good to be embraced, as a glasse to dis∣cerne my freendes in, and a ci∣uile rule to leade my life by. These causes moued me to thinke it mete for moe. Wher∣apon I (as I coulde) transla∣ted it, and though not so liue∣ly, nor yet so aptly, as some wold loke for, and many culd

doe, yet I trust thei will rather beare with my good will, then rebuke my boldnes, for that it proceded more of a good mind than of any presumpcion of knowlage: and so my enter∣prise is to be enterpreted rather by freendes, as a treatise of frendship, then by lerned clerk{is} in an argumēt of translacion. Well, how so euer it shalbe li∣ked of the learned, I hope it shalbe allowed of the vnlati∣ned. Whose capacitees by my owne I cōsider, and for lacke of a fine and flowyng stile, I haue vsed the plaine and com∣mon speache. and to thende the sence might not be chaunged, nor the goodnes of the matter by shift of tounges, muche mi∣nished,

I caused it to be con∣ferred with the latine auctor, and so by the knowen wel ler∣ned to be corrected: after whose handelyng me thought a new spirite and life was geuen it, and many partes semed as it were with a new cote araied, aswell for the orderly placyng and eloquently changeyng of some woordes, as also for the plainly openyng and learned∣ly amending of the sence, whi∣che in the Freenche translaci∣on was somewhat darkened, and by me for lacke of know∣lage in many places missed.
¶Thus whan the thing was perfected, and I behelde the fame of the auctor, the nature of the treatise, and the clere∣nesse

of his teachyng, I coulde not iudge to whom I shoulde rather offre it, than vnto your grace, whom the freendelesse dayly find their defence, and the helples repaire to as a re∣fuge. This did I not to teache you, but to let you see in lear∣nyng auncient, that you haue by nature vsed: nor to warne you of ought you lacked, but to sette forth your perfection: the proufe wherof the deade might witnesse, and their of∣spring hath iust cause to know¦lage it, as mo can record it, then can requite it. And suche your freendly stedfastnesse de∣clared to the deade, doth asser∣taine vs of your stedfast frend¦linesse toward the liuyng, whi∣che

many haue felt, and di∣uerse doe proue, and few can want. Of which numbre your grace hath made me one, that neyther leaste nor seldomest, haue tasted of your benefites, both in my trouble and also li∣bertee. Wherfore your grace in my sight is of all other most worthy this smal fruite of my prisons labour, as a fitte pa∣tronesse to the honour of such a worke, and a trew example, in whom it is fulfilled. Thus the lord of trueth preserue you in freendship, encrease your frendes, and defend you from enemies.

