



Right Worshipfull,
IT was the Fare∣well-clause of HER Letter, (who is the Honour of

this Country, the Praise of her owne Sexe, and the Glory of your No∣ble family, Mistresse ANNE AYSCOVGH, Martyr,) Mr Foxe Acts mo∣num. vol. 2. pag 578. col. 1. lin. 41. Pray, Pray, Pray: and in another Letter written to IOHN LACELS, (Sacrificed with her in the same fire, for the Word of God, and for the Testi∣monie Rev. 6. 9. which they held) Fox ibid. col. 2. lin. 32. Farewell & Pray. This hath beene the practice of all the Saints. Bishop Latimer is fa∣mous to Posteritie for

his three Grand-petiti∣ons, (Pref. be∣fore his Sermons.) which God most graciously granted. Ma∣ster Luther, not lesse po∣werfull with God by Praying, than prevai∣ling with Men, by his Preaching, daily breathed his soule herein, (Nullus abit dies quin t mi∣nimum tres ras, eas{que} studijs ap∣tissimas in orationm poa▪ &c. Vi. Theo∣dor. ad Me∣lanc. Vid. Acts & monum. vol. 2 pag▪  col. 1.  55.) like Iacob wrastling with God, and not letting him goe without a Blessing: and thus the Captaine of our salvation, our blessed Saviour, conti∣nued all night in Prayer to God, Luk 6. 1 and in the dayes of his flesh offe∣red

up Prayers and Sup∣plications with strong crying and teares unto him, that was able toActs 9. 11. Isay 38. 16. save him, from death, and was heard—as the Apostle tells us. Heb 5. 7.
PRAYER doubtlesse is the very element in which the Soule liveth; the very aliment by which it subsisteth: Saint Paul as soone as converted, Behold hee Prayeth—O Lord by these, men live. Innocen∣tius ex ad∣voct. vicar. prfectur. misr lab∣ns morbo, ula & c∣pit orare quibus mo∣dis, quo af∣fectu quo motu animi quo luvio lachrymarū quibus gemi∣tibus atquè sgultibus-Domine quastuorum reces ex∣ as ? nihil enim mihi viebatur addi jam posse  exiraret orand qui miraculose à Deo sanaba∣tur ab illon let hali morbo. Aug. li. 22. de civit. dei c. 8. As

well may a fish live out of Water, or a bird without Ayre, as the Christian without Pray∣er, 'Tis the vitall breath of Faith, stop it, and take away Spirituall life. And though at sometimes, hee breathes short, and hardly, and insensibly in his deliqui∣um animae, fits of Spiri∣tuall desertion, and temptation, yet his life is still in him as in Epi∣lepticks; & the man pos∣sessed with the dum be Spirit, Mark. 9. 26. who

was as one dead, yet when Christ takes him by the hand, he ariseth. Sinne prevailing, may tongue-tie him a while, that hee chatters not with Hezekiah, yet when his lips move not, nor his voyce is heard, his desires will beate strongly upward, his heart works, and pants, and grones, and sighes, and breathes, and breakes in its longing, and looking towards Heaven. O thinks hee, that my sinnes—such, and

such—were Pardoned! ô that I had more grace to serve my God! O that I could master such, and such, a prevailing Lust! O that I could more a∣bound in fruits of righ∣teousnesse in my con∣versation! thus his heart is fired alway, thus fix∣ed.
And who can mar∣vell that the children of God, are so much here∣in, seeing all the bles∣sings of this, and the hopes of a better life, are assured and conveyed

unto them hereby? yea,ooker Eccles. po∣licie lib. 5. and that the whole ser∣vice and worship of God is in Scripture, sti∣led a calling upon the name of the Lord: the Church a house of Prayer, and God himselfe a God that heareth Prayers, O thou that hearest Prayer, un∣to thee, shall all flesh come, Psal. 65. 2.
Vpon this sacred sub∣ject, is the ensuing trea∣tise, which though but now presented to you Right Worshipfull, long since was intended; in

that mournefull and praying time, when Gods chastening was upon the City of my habitation, the space of, almost two whole yeares together. Your noble house, Klsey. was then the Zoar, whither I was invited, whereto I fled, where I was (a∣bove my deserts) freely entertained. Those and many other your fa∣vours, before, and since, challenge my Prayers and best services. Ac∣cept of this I intreate

you, as a testimonie of my thankefull obser∣vance towards you: yet not as mine, but as it hath received spirit and life, from the word of life. 'Tis Holy Incense for the Censers of the Saints, dropping from the Tree of Life, smel∣ling sweetely in the coales of the Altar, hearts enkindled with true devotion, flaming, and blazing upward.
Prayer will make the face to shine as Mo∣ses talking with God in

the Mount. The more time we spend herein, the more heavenly is our life on earth. God∣linesse hath the promi∣ses; 'twill make your names to live and flou∣rish, when other Mag∣nifico's, whose portion is in the huskey profits, frothie pleasures, win∣die honours, &c—emp∣tie shadowes of this life, shall bee written in the * earth and rot. AndIer. 17. 13. though now it bee un∣dervalued, and the price beaten downe as a mer∣chandize

not worth the owning, much lesse of buying at any low rate, yet it will quite for cost, and be of high esteeme in another world, a pearl of price, that good part, and that one thing ne∣cessary.
You are happy (Right Worshipfull) above ma∣ny, in that God hath gi∣ven you a mind to know him, a heart to love him. Presse on still to∣ward the marke: study which way to honour God most, and to live to

him, this will bring you peace at the last. 'Tis not a forme of godli∣nesse (which even the civill gentry affect, here∣by gilding over their baser courses, rotten practises) but the power of it in a sanctified life, which before God is much set by. Goe on in that good way, you have begun, count all things Galcacius Caracciolus sonne and heire appa∣rent to Ca∣lantonius Marquesse of Vicum in Naples, bred, born, & brought up in Pope∣rie, a Cour∣tier to the Emperour Charles the 5. nephew to Pope Paul the 4. being mar∣ried to the Dake of Nucernes daughter, & having by her sixe goodly children, at a sermon of Pet. Mar∣tyrs, was first touched: after by reading Scripture and other good meanes was fully converted: laboured with his Lady but could not perswade her. There∣fore that hee might enjoy Christ, and serve him with a quiet conscience, he left the lands, livings, and ho∣nours of a Marquesdome, the comforts of his La∣dy and children, the pleasures of Italy, his credit with the Emperour, his kindred with the Pope, and forsaking all for the love of Christ—came to Gene∣va, and there lived a poore and meane, but yet an humble and holy life for fortie yeares together. And though his Father, his Lady, his kinsmen, yea the Emperour and the Pope did all they could to re∣claime him, yet continued he constant to the end, and lived and died the blessed servant of God, leaving behind him a rare example to all ages—Hee lived vvith his vvise till the yeare 1551. and then forsooke all—His le was translated out of Italian into La∣tine, by Beza, and englished by Mr. Crashaw. 1608. but dung, that

yee may winne Christ, and bee found in him Take up the crosse which lies in the waies of God. Deny your selves: This doe, and you shall cause the bles∣sing to rest on your house, and posteritie af∣ter

you; and those O∣live plants about your table, shall become trees of righteousnesse, the planting of the Lord; for so long as you hold you fast by him, you shall, you cannot but prosper, and grow as the Lilie, as the Olive-tree, as the Vine, and spread out your branches as the Cedars in Leba∣non.
Thus praying to God for a blessing on these my prayers, and on you both, I commend my

selfe and them to you,Reading & meditating in this word hath beene the practise of all gods saints, Mar∣cella nun∣quam Hie∣ronymum ip∣sum conve∣niret, quin de Scriptu∣ris aliquid interrogaret tantamquè sibi eruditi∣onm com¦pararet ut si in aliquo testimonio scripturarum esset aborta contentio ad illam judicem pergeretur Chamier. de canonis usu lib. 10. cap. 4. Sect. 18. you and yours to God, and to the word of his grace,  which is able to build you up further, and to give you an inhe∣ritance, among all them which are sanctified, by faith in Christ Jesus. In whom he resteth, that is,
Lincolne May 6. 1634.

