


ALbeit mankinde, by the stinge of originall sinne, be deadlye wounded in body & sule, as spoyled of immortalie & all diuine graces, broughte into a wofull state of all miseries, & naturallye inclyned to doe euill, to the greater encrease of his owne damnation: yet the grace & mercy of God, haith not altogether a∣bandoned nor forsaken vs, but (with∣out any our good desert) haith lefte vs in this exile & vale of woes, diuers helpes, remedies, & meanes, where∣by we may attayne to his graceous fa∣noure agayne, & (after this transitorie lyfe) be aduaunced to high glorie and the eternall ioyes in heauen. These meanes are his holy graces & vertues by which we may be moued & made able to serue him, & to conforme our selues to his will in all thinges. Oure perfect sanctity & frendshipp with god standeth in this pointe, that we be of
same spirit with him, in euery thing we doe. And though he be a most gra∣ceous & bountifull Lorde, & excee∣dingly desireous of our eternall happy estate: And haith moreouer abundant∣ly prouyded whatsoeuer may be ne∣cessary or conuenient for our welfare: yea & through the excesse of his di∣uine loue, haith lefte nothing vndone that might helpe or doe vs good: yet haith he lefte it in our owne choyce, & free libertie, whether we will ac∣cept and vse his graces, endeuour to gett perfect holines, & serue him as he desyreth for our good, or noe. Great ruyne and destruction of all good, is made in oure soules by sinne, but it is in our owne power to repayre again this losse & calamitie, and to obtayne perfect holines, which we may doe, if (cooperating with goddes grace) we suffer our selues to be moued in all our actions onely by goddes holy spirit & will, as S. Paule saithe his children to be.
To instruct this, many deuout bokes & Treatises haue bene writen by lear∣ned
& holy men in all ages, teaching what we ought to doe, discoursing at large of the natures of all vertues & vyces, & yelding sufficient matter for all sorts of holy Meditations touching the ma∣iestie, goodnes, & other perfections of god: Touching heauen, hell, Iudg∣ment, death, sinne, vertue, and the rest: Perswading to good lyfe & ter∣rifyinge from euill: All commodious woorkes & commendable trauells of good men. But amonge them all I neuer founde hitherto any comparable to a litle booke, deuulged by a religi∣ous man named Alphonso, in the Spa∣nish tonge. In which goulden Trea∣tise, he geueth vs an exacte & perfect way, how we may repayre againe the ruine & wofull state of our soules, by sinn: & by rightly seruinge God, at∣taine to the perfection of true holines & loue of him. This Author leauethe the large & goodly discourses of ver∣tues & vyces, their reasons, examples, perswasions, & allpoynts of Medita∣tions, (as all beinge sufficientlye Taughte and handled, by others in∣numerable
and to be founde euery where,) and breefely touchinge the ende for which God created and placed vs on earthe, what bounde & dutie we haue of ser∣uinge him: what abiection & miserie our soules & bodies are brought vnto by sinne: He sheweth a breefe, yet a most exacte way and manner, how by the instrumentes and powers of oure soule, namely our vnderstandinge and free will, helped by godds grace, we may put in practise and execution, to his most holy honour, and our owne greatest profitt, whatsoeuer is taughte & conteyned in other bookes, how we may repayre our state againe, caste of all wicked customes, expell all vitious habitts, enryche & bewtify oure selues with all vertues, make all our woorks most preceous, acceptable, & meri∣torious, in goddes sight, becom holy chaunge our selues owt of poore, na∣ked, & abiect persons: into most glo∣rious & diuine creatures: And finally be vnited to God in most perfect man∣ner of frendshipp & loue.
This preceous Iewell, I sende you,
as a token of my good affection, to∣wardes your spirituall welfare, which I haue translated owt of latin, not yel∣ding woord for woord, but (cullinge owt the principall poyntes & pithe of euery Chapter) haue reduced it into the forme of a Dyalogue, thereby ma∣kinge it more easye & playne, for the capacities of the simpler sorte, whom also I wish, may take commodity ther∣of, as I assure my selfe, your La. and euery one may doe, that reade & di∣ligently practise, what is taught there∣in: without which practise, all know∣ledg is vnprofitable and vayne. It is not writen for vitious persons, suche as delight to lyue & wallow in sinne, without regarde of God or their own soules health, for these will take noe benefite hereof, but the Author haith prepared & directed this woorke, for the great good of vertuous soules who are resolued to serue God: & standing in battell against the worlde, the flesh & the deuill, haue a sincere defyre, to liue well & woorke their owne salua∣tion. This good euery one that rea∣dethe
it, may reape: that knowinge thereby their owne poore & imperfect state, & behoulding how farr of they are from that degree of perfection they should & might arryue vnto; They may abase them selues in their owne conceyte, carry an humble mynde be∣fore heauen & earthe, of their owne imperfections & vnworthines, which is a good stepp to further vertue: and be moued now & then, to work som particuler acts after the manner hereof which assuredly will be most pleasāt to God, & most meritorious to their own soules aboue all other woorkes they shall doe.
Now in your afflicted state where∣in you are tossed too and froe daun∣gerously, by the enemies of godds ho∣ly churche, for your constancy in the catholick Faith: Alphonso will teache you how to fraught your shipp, with all sortes of vertues, more preceous then the Indian Treasures, that you may come well loaden to the porte, when your Lord shall ende your voyage.
How also to endure patiently, the ra∣ginge
& furious stormes of Godds e∣nemies: And how finally to keepe a∣low sale, and an humble conceite of your selues in all the good you doe, & to referr all the honour & prayse ther∣of vnto God the owner & geuer of all good giftes. For it is a most certaine way to losse & shipp-wracke of all, to impute any good to your selfe, or to carry a high conceit of your owne well doinge.
Many vertuously disposed soules, de∣light greatly in varietie & chaunge of their spirituall Exercises, & imbrace with greate affection euery noueltye, seking to know many wayes to serue God: & euer think that to be prefer∣red as the best, which is straunge and vnknown to them, & that which they throughly know and haue vsed, they either loath or litle esteme, such is the inconstancye of our nature. But this new-fangled mutabilitye, exceeding∣ly hindreth all spirituall good and the progresse in all vertue. And with out comparison better it were diligently to kepe & practise one (thoughe it be a
meaner) then to be either negligente in the best, or to be allwayes incon∣stantly flitting from one to an other: for so should a man neither goe for∣warde, nor grow perfect in any.
Be familiar therefore & stay youre selfe with Alphonso (good Madam) for so shall you profitt greatly. And beware you be not content with the vertue you haue allready gotten: For our Lorde & God was made man, & vouchsaifed to dye, for to aduaunce vs to a higher & perfect state of holines in this lyfe: For this same ende also he would that Angells shoulde mini∣ster vnto vs: And finallye for the same ende he haith guen vs the vse of hea∣uen & earth with all his creatures in them. Remember me I beseche you in your deuotions. And thus I com∣mitt you to God.

