



IT hath pleased the Almighty, by the goodnes of his providence to con∣ioyne you together in one earthly family,
 that by relation, and bond of kindred, and af∣finity, you should all cal the same man, your fa∣ther: and according to the riches of his grace, to vnite you together in one heauenly family that by vertue of Adop∣tion, and spirituall child∣hood, you should all call the same God, your fa∣ther, and so more truely become brethren or sisters, each one of you to others in the Lord. For this cause, & diuers
 other reasons, I am in∣couraged to make choyse of you for my speciall, & selected Rea∣ders, (so farre I presume of your favour, & kind∣nes) and ioyntly to sa∣lure you, in publike, as professed friends to the cause wherein I deale, and Religious obseruers of that sacred Ordinance of God, for which I con¦tend: for that, I confesse is a great part of my businesse in this briefe discourse ensuing, a∣gainst
 the adversaries of the Sabbath. And yet I humbly intreate both you, and all other good Readers, not to regard the Sabbath the lesse, be∣cause there is contention about it, nor suddenly to censure the act of contending, vntill you be acquainted with the causes, and circum∣stances of it. There are divers Texts of Scripture, indeed, which in shew, & appearance do seeme to condemne
 it, as that to Timothy. The seavant of the Lord must not striue, but must be gentle toward all men. 2. Tim. 2. 24. And that to the Corin∣thians, I beseech you brethren, by the name of our Lord Iesus Christ, that ye al speake one thing, & that there be no dissensions a∣mong you. 1 Cor. 1. 10 And that to the Romans If it be possible, as much as in you is, haue peace With all men,
 Rom. 12. 18. but none of these, nor any other that can be produced, do absolutely prohibit al maner of striving. To striue for error, and sinne is vnlawfull: to striue about things that be doubtful, and vncerten, is vnlawfull: to striue a∣bout curious, and needles questions or matters ten∣ding to no edification, or profit, is vnlawfull. And so is striuing vn∣lawfull when carnall corruptions, as make-bates
 be the mouers of it, or stirrers in it; as when through pride, we seeke our owne vaineglory; or through malice, and enuy we depraue our brethren. In these, and such like cases, is conten∣ding forbidden, but not simply: for then would not the Apostle IudeIude 3. haue exhorted the god∣ly with earnestnes to con∣tend for the faith: neitherIsa. 59. 4. would the Prophet Isaiah so sharply haue taxed the people of his
 time, for not conten∣ding for the truth. Paul was a peaceable man, and yet he stroue against the false Apostles and Se∣ducers: and Christ is the perfect peace-maker, and author of peace, & yet he mightily opposed the rabble of Scribes, & Pharisees. And now to pleade for my selfe, and my brethren, which ei∣ther by writinge, or preaching, haue trauel∣led in the same subiect, have as I done, we are
 not meere voluntaries in this controversie, but necessarily vrged thereto, as prested soul∣diers: we begin not the quarrell, as As∣sailants, but onely iu∣stifie the truth of our doctrine, and cause, as Defendants; our Bookes, and Sermons, being particularly op∣pugned, although (I trust) more sound, & Or∣thodoxe, then can be con¦futed. We are far from Innovations, & Novel∣ties,
 in our positions, and tenents: we wish all good to our Oppo∣sites, with a desire, rather to informe them, by arguments and reasons, then to disgrace, or provoke them, by taunts or invectives. The ex∣perience of your wis∣domes, loues, and gene∣rous dispositions assure mee, that you will be easily perswaded of the veritie of mine Ap∣pologie, and therefore I
 shall not neede with multiplicity of words, to enlarge it, neither doe I thinke it decent to taske you with rea∣ding of other imper∣tinent matters, which neither necessitie re∣quireth, nor conve∣niencie approoueth of; especially, seeing there is as little Decorum kept in prefixinge a long Preface before a short Treatise, as in making a wide dore for a narrow building. And
 therefore to spare both you, and my selfe from further labour, I briefly conclude, and with due respect, re∣commend you to the protection, grace, gui∣dance, and blessing of the most High, and remaine

