


REformists in England caried of erst with true zeale for reparing the walls of Ierushalem, the praise of the whole earth: they in the heat of their la∣bour ouer-caried in som speach (as, Such & such ecclesiasticall functions, ordinatios, administrations &c. they are merely Antichristian, badges of the beast) others theyr zealous hearers herevpon (and in the fore-front of such, Mr. Rob. Brovve) taking such asser∣tions for sound Theologicall arioms, do conclude thus: Then not only that, but all flo∣ving from that, it must also be meerly Antichristian: for a bitter fountaine can send foth no svvet vvates, as is the roote such is the braunches. Wherevpon fearing the iudgment de∣nounced against the Beast his people Revel. 14. 9. 10. 11. they seperate not only from vi∣sible euell, but also from visible good ▪ as all Anti-christian. Having thus confusedlie seperated from Confusion▪ it remaines they begin all anewe, wherevnto Minister must be no ministers vntill they have a newe Ordination from such separists, allead∣ging all former election, and ordination to be meerly Antichristian from the abuse of such scriptures, Math. 7. 16. 2 Cor. 14. 15. 16. vvith 2 Thess. 2. 3. &c. wherevpon (which Donatus diest not attempt, nor yet Rob. Br.) Iamen (abusing Nomb. 8. 10. thereto) must Iay on hands, and so contrarie to the Ghospell his Canon Heb. 7. 7. they wold without all contradiction have the Greater to be blessed of the Iesser: for theyr publi∣ke gathering togither vnto this action it causeth them not cease being lay men, no mo∣ve then theyr hands publikely baptising or administring the Io. his Supper doth cau∣se them therin to be anie more then lay-people. Others go on furder saing, Is it possible to receive laufull baptisme, a laufull foundation of faith from the Ministers and apostaci of Anti-christ, alleadging therevnto the former scriptures: and so seke out newe baptis∣me, newe foundation of faith, reiecting frely and voluntarily the former: so  I feare that horible syn, which I make the argument of the sequell.
Yow haue learned I hope, that the Aduersarie 2 Thes. 2. 4. is not only adverse vnto manie good things, but also to the very foundation of the Ghospell. The word there is Anti-eimenos which is adverse▪ foundationed. Nor can that Head or Body be such, that is not an holder or cliuer to another foundation then that Iesus Christ layd. When Iohn hath taught Euery man to haue syn in him, then, that he vvhich synneth is of the Devell, we do not thereon inferre. Therefore euery man of the devell: because we expound synneth or committeth syn by Syn raigninge essentiallie in the committer, as in the Devel who synneth from the beginning: so, neither though euerie sowle is in som∣things against Christ, do we therefore say, Euerie sowle is Anti-christian: but only that sowle in whose membtrs syn domineers: nor onlie that, but also is one in the founda∣tion of faith opposit to Christ: for Antichrist is Ciuil or spirituall, and it is the spiritu∣all whereof all the controversie is: who is Keimenos (foundationed) Anti, asmuch as ok , full-but to Christ his foundation: and therefore not for separable Acci∣dents called the Man of syn: which in english valueth. A lump of syn, or essence of syn. The not being Cathechized in this one poore begining of Christ, it hath caused Many eachers to lay false grounds, wheren others buildinge, there is no end of wandring. Som onninge not onlie into Mr Br. first course, but also further▪ and worse then that further: yea so far, as diuerse I feare haue committed the horible syn against the holy Ghost, Heb. 6. and 10. That I labour to proue in the sequell, which I incommend vn∣to your Brotherhood for a igne to the Catholike Church of my soules syncerity: as al∣so for a meanes to keepe you waking and watchfull to the holy way god hath placed yow in. So much for that: now to the Argument.
