



HAuing collected and finished this Treatise ensuing, and deui∣sing verie carefully with my selfe to whom I might dedicate the same: at length I resolued, that none were meeter to vndertake the patro∣nage thereof, then some such meetest persons, as did alreadie, (in some good measure) practise within their seuerall Charges, the seuerall poynts and duties contained therein, and so would fur∣ther prosecute those other necessarie parts, which
 they haue yet in some part pretermitted. Where∣vpon, calling to minde the holy exercises daylie vsed and exercised in all your houses: I was mo∣ued for two causes, to make you all ioyntly Pa∣trones hereof. First, for that I acknowledge my selfe beholden and indebted vnto you all diuersly, since my first acquaintance with you, & therefore (least I should deserue the blame of vnthankeful∣nesse for benefits receiued) I am bold vnder your names, to offer to the whole Church of God, these my simple collections. Secondly, for that as you are all ioyned and linked in kindred by reason of ma∣riage: so also you are, and haue beene a long time inseperably knit in a zealous & sincere profession of Gods word and religion. And for so much as I may not (for many respects) accomplish what good I willingly would: yet least I should be thought to spend the remainder of my yeres in an idle condi∣tion, or to hide my tallent in a napkin: I haue been no lesse careful, then willing, to labour otherwaies to doo what I may to glorifie God, and profit his Church. Neither will these my labours be vtter∣ly vnprofitable, if my purpose therein be rightly conferred with the purport of my writings. For such Householders, as pretend to be great prote∣stants, and sound professors of the Gospell, may long inough talke of discipline, and stil complaine of the want of Church-gouernment, but all in vaine, and to no purpose, vnlesse they will begin this most necessary discipline in reforming their
 own houses, according to the direction handled in this Treatise, and so to suffer the holy religion of God, to take place amongst their families at home, otherwise they shall trauell much, and pro∣fit little. For although there bee neuer so good lawes in Cities: neuer so pure order in Churches, yet if maisters of families, do not practise at home catechising, and discipline in their houses, and ioyne their helping hands to Magistrates, and Ministers: they may in trueth, (but vniustly, as many haue done) complaine that their children and seruants are disordered, and corrupted a∣broad, when in trueth, they were disordered, and are still corrupted, and mard at home. And there∣fore it cannot be, neither is it to be hoped for, that either the father of his children, or the husband of his wife, or the maister of his seruants should looke for that obedience, that reuerence, that faithfulnesse, and that dutifulnesse, which they of right ought to haue, and the other in conscience, and of bounden dutie are bound to performe, vn∣lesse they do now at length endeuour to see these orders and duties hereafter mentioned, to bee practised within their seueral Households. For if Parents and Householders shal performe no fur∣ther dutie to their children and seruants, then to prouide for them, meat, drinke, and apparell, and to pay them their wages: then Papists, Atheists, yea, Turkes, and Infidels, do yeelde this dutie as well as they. And seeing all men be carefull, that
 their horses and bullocks, should haue sufficient fodder and prouender, to the end they may haue their labour in lieu and recompence thereof, it doth consequently follow, that therefore a chri∣stian Householder ought to haue ouer his chil∣dren and seruants, a much more christian care, then he hath ouer his dumbe & insensible beasts, that so he may take a singular comfort from the daylie contemplation of their encrease in spiritu∣all graces. Oh what a sweete and comfortable thing shall this be to the soule and conscience of such an Householder, as when he hath been so di∣ligent and carefull in the trayning and bringing vp of his children and seruants, in the obedience and waies of the Lorde, that hee may rightly de∣serue to haue this worthie report & commenda∣tion giuen vnto him, from the mouth and penne of the godly: namely, that he hath a church in his house: that is, a company of sound and faithfull Christians, such as feare God indeed: As the like report was giuen by the Apostle, to those godly House-keepers, Aquilla, and Priscilla his wife: Rom. 16.5. 1. Cor. 16.19. As also to Philemon.
Phil. 2.Therefore all Parents and Householders, are (in the Lorde) to be exhorted, that they would be carefull to bring vp their children and familie, so as they either (by some good tokens) may see them the children of God, and heires of the coue∣nant, or at least, they may be comforted in their owne consciences, notwithstanding their children
 and seruants (for some cause vnknowne to them) do refuse their counsell and instruction, seeing they to the vttermost of their power and abilitie, haue vsed all good meanes to bring them vp well, and haue rightly offered them to the Lord.
Now if parents and maisters haue iust cause to bewaile and lament, when (thus trauelling in good education and information) they cannot yet see good effects, and godly fruites, in their chil∣dren & seruants: how much more cause of griefe may they haue, when they haue vsed and bestowed no labor at all (either by themselues, or others for them) to bring them vp in the nurture and feare of the Lord? And yet, alasse, many will be grieued for the one, that will not be any thing mooued for the other. Wherefore let all parents and maisters of families know, and learne, that if they will con∣uay God his blessings to their posterities, then they must do, and performe the duties belonging there∣vnto: yea let them (if they be loth to conuey God his iudgements to their children) carefully a∣uoyde the meanes vnto it.
And surely,Luk. 2.2. as it is a blessed thing in the houre of death, with Simeon to depart in peace, leauing their wiues, children and seruants, members of Christ, spouses to Christ, children to God, and ser∣uants to the Lord: so in the extremitie of death, no one thing wil bee more greeuous vnto Parents and Householders, then (the Lord hauing giuen them the charge of so many soules to be furthe∣red
 to saluation) that their own tormented cōsci∣ences shall presse them, who in as much as they could haue helped their children and seruants forward to their damnation, & so (which is more fearefull) they shall haue them spewing and fo∣ming out on their faces, continuall curses in hell, accusing them for euer to be murtherers of their soules, and cut throats of their saluation.
Is it any maruell, if Householders many times finde small obedience, and lesse dutifulnesse, and faithfulnesse, at the hands of their children and seruants, seeing they omit and leaue vndone the performance of these so christian duties towards them herein expressed, and inioyned of the Lord? For so doth God often leaue manifest tokens of his wrath, in punishing disobedience, with disobedi∣ence.
How can any maister of a Household, whoso∣euer he bee, looke to haue his familie trustie and faithfull vnto him, and yet he himselfe is faith∣lesse to God? Doth he maruell, that his children and seruants feare not him, whereas hee himselfe feareth not the Lord? Will he maintaine his au∣thority ouer those vnder his charge, and he him∣selfe doth not yeelde obedience vnto the authori∣tie of God his Creator?
Moreouer, it is manifest, that the goodman of the house, by planting Gods religion in his fami∣lie, shall not a little aduance and set forward his owne priuat profit and commoditie. For wicked
 and vngodly seruants, are, for the most part, loy∣terers pickers, and deceitfull: whereas on the o∣ther side, godly seruants are iust and faythfull, whom in his absence he may trust to doo such businesse and worke as hee willeth them to doo.Gen. 30.30. and 39.5. &c.
If maisters of families be carefull and desirous (as in conscience they ought) that their wiues, children & seruants, should reforme themselues, and endeuour to practise such duties as do apper∣taine and belong vnto them, then they must like∣wise be diligent and carefull to reforme them∣selues, both inwardly & outwardly, in such poynts and duties, as hitherto they haue left vndone: otherwise, they may iustly say vnto thē: Phisitian,Luk. 4.23. and 22.32. Rom. 2.21. heale your selfe: or, why doe you wil vs to doe that, which you do not practise your selfe? For as one candle cannot light another, if it selfe be out: euen so a maister of a Household shall not reforme those of his charge, and inflame them with the loue of God and godlinesse, if he himselfe be voyd of the same.
Let euery master of a Household therfore, say and performe with Iosua: I and my familie will serue the Lord: Iosua. 24.15. And likewise let euery christian adie, Mistresse, and Dame, say with Hester: I and my maides will doo the like: Hest. 4.16. And so no doubt, God will poure his blessings on them, and theirs, in this life, and euerlasting happinesse on them in the life to come.

Touching the booke it selfe, I will not say any thing to the commendatiō thereof, but onely this: That I am assured, that (if such duties as are mentioned therein, were dulie and carefully pra∣ctised of al such as are named in it) thē (no doubt) vertue and godly religion would greatly florish, to the aduauncement of God his glory: and also sinne and wickednesse would then decrease and fal downe, to the vtter subuersion and ouerthrow of Sathans kingdome.
This Treatise I confesse is not garnished with eloquence, not full of great cunning, nor beautifi∣ed with flower: of mans wisedome, neither yet doth it discourse or treate of high or darke things, neither is it stuffed with subtill questions, and ar∣guments: nor indited with Rhetoricall and elo∣quent stile, as those commonly be, which are pro∣pounded and set foorth to the world, rather for boasting, and vaine-glorie sake, then for any de∣sire to edifie, and to do others good. This booke is plaine,The profit of this booke. and without any great gaynesse, but yet so ful of good, necessary, and wholesome instructions, that whosoeuer readeth, and maketh it with a right disposed minde, and willing to practise it, without respect to any other thing, then God, the reformation of his life, and the saluation of his owne soule, (which is the onely marke that chri∣stians must leuell at) hee may reape singular pro∣fit thereby.
Good bookes as ladders to climbe vp to heauen.And vndoubtedly it may well bee saide, that
 vnto true christians, good and holy bookes are as ladders to climbe vp to heauen: as sparkes to kin∣dle the heate of the spirit, when it is quenched, or waxed colde in them, and as proppes to stay vppe their faith, that it may increase.
Praying therefore your worships, to accept of my dutifull good will, and to pardon my boldnesse, I cease to adde any further thing: beseeching God of his endlesse mercy for his Christs sake, to strengthen you still in that good and happie course of his word, and all other good learning: to fur∣nish you all aboundantly, with all spirituall and heauenly knowledge, to the carefull practizing of the same, in the fruites of your most holy and bles∣sed callings, to the aduancement of the glorie of our God, and to your owne euerlasting comfort in Christ Iesus. So be it.

