


HAVING HAD OPOR∣tunitie, (most gracious and mightie Princesse) since my last seruice in the Lowe Countries, I thought it good to betake me to my penne, in setting forth this approoued order of Martiall Dis∣cipline. And for that your princelie loue and good will, hath alwaies beene great and fauourable, to all true and faithfull Souldiours and Seruitors: it hath the more imboldened me, to present to your most gracious view, this little labour, best befitting to come from a Martiall mind. The circumstaunces verie necessarie to be considered of by those which are in authoritie. And although commonlie, euerie man (most worthie and renowmed Soueraigne) seeketh speciallie to commende and extoll the thing, whereunto hee feeleth himselfe naturally bent and enclined. Yet all such partialitie and priuate affection layde a∣side: it is to be thought, that for the defence, maintenaunce, & ad∣uauncement of a Kingdome, or Common-weale: or for the good & due obseruation of peace, and administration of iustice in the same, no one thing to be more profitable, necessarie, or more honourable,

then the knowledge of seruice in warre or deedes of Armes. Consi∣dering the ambition of the world is such, that it is impossible for any Realme, Kingdome, or Dominion, long to continue free in quietnes and sauegard, where the defence of the sword is not alwaies in a rea∣dinesse. For as Valerius Maximus saith, the safe keeping of this blessed peace, consisteth in the knowledge of warre, and deedes of Armes.
Plato praysing the arte, commaundeth that children shoulde learne it so soone as they were able. Cyrus said it was as necessary as Husbandry. Augustine and Bernard, both graue Catholique Doc∣tors of the Church, doth approoue the same. Manie more, and in∣finite examples might be alledged, and all against those which disa∣loweth of this most famous and honourable exercise of Martiall dis∣cipline, and renowmed orders of the Lawe of Armes, which hath alwaies heeretofore beene the purchaser of Empires: Kingdomes hath beene enlarged: Princes preserued: iustice maintained: good Lawes protected: and the Common-wealth defended. So in laying aside the exercise of warlike weapons and Martiall discipline, how many Kingdoms hath beene ouerthrowne, how many Countries ru∣inated, & how many florishing Citties sacked and beaten downe flat to the ground.
But as your Highnesse, hauing most sufficiently furnished euerie part of your Realme, with all manner of warlike prouision, in such sort, as neuer any of your Predicessors hath heeretofore come neere: euen so could I wish in hart, that Englande were as well furnished with Seruitours of experience and knowledge, in this most honoura∣ble exercise of Martiall discipline. But the starres run their course contrarie to the world, and the learned iudge otherwise then the Idi∣ote. The Cranes, when they flie out of Cicilia ouer the Mountains, carrie in their mouthes a peble stone, least by their chattering, they should be seazed vpon by the Eagles: which byrds, (most gracious and renowmed Princesse) teacheth mee silence, least my ignoraunce be perceiued by your most excellent and learned minde. The consi∣deration of the which, droue me first into doubtfulnes, whether it were best to write, and so shew my good will, or to suspend my penne, and so to hide the same.
But then I considered, that the stone Perites burneth not the fingers, except it be broken: nor the loue and hartie affection of the minde, is not knowne, except by words that be opened. Iupiter hath not made mans bodie like a Lattesse, that the hart might be seene through the holes: but hath shutte vp the same close, that the tongue and penne might be the organes and instruments of the thought. I hauing serued your Maiestie in Irelande and in the Lowe Countries these sixteene yeeres, yet not worthie the fauour of so mightie and gracious a Princesse.
Thus most humbly crauing pardon for this my presumptuous enterprise, most humbly beseeching your Highnesse, so to accept my labour heerein, as the first fruites of a poore Seruitours studie, who to the vttermost of his small power, in the seruice of your Maiestie, and his Countrie, will at all times, according to his bounden duetie and allegeance, resolutely and willingly yeeld himselfe to any laboure, trauaile, or danger what soeuer shall happen. Praying in the meane season the Almightie God, to giue your highnes a long and prospe∣rous raigne ouer vs: and as hee hath heeretofore wonderfully pre∣serued you, in most magnificent & princely regalitie, in the despite of all your enuious foes: so he to haue a mercifull and louing eye conti∣nually vpon you, to the great comfort of all your louing Subiects: and against all your enemies, most happy and ioyfull victorie.

