



MOST gracious and renowmed PRINCE, such is the malice and fury of Anti∣christ,Greg. lib. 4. Epist. 38. and his army of Priests as Gregory calleth them, in oppugning the religion and faith of Christ, as gi∣ueth
 cause to vs that fight for Christ, to stand continually  our guard, and to be ready still in armes, to entertaine the assaults that are continually made against vs. They carry themselues now towards vs the more eagerly and angerly, for that they see themselues deceiued of the prey which they long hoped for, imagining before this time out of the troubled waters of this State, to haue fished somewhat for aduantage to themselues▪ Which expectation be∣ing by the mercy of God wholly fru∣strate, they imitate the Dragon in the • Reuelation, casting out of theirReuel. 12. 15. mouthes, by calumniations and slan∣ders, and all outrage, and importunity of malicious contradiction, euen flouds of waters to carry violently away, and to drowne, if it were possible, the
 woman, euen the Church of Christ a∣mongst vs, that hath escaped their cruel and bloudy hands. But thanks be to God, that hath giuen vs meanes to set mounds and banks against these raging flouds, that howsoeuer they threaten, yet they hurt vs not, nor endanger any, but such as rashly aduenture to swimme in vnknowne waters, or being desirous of curiosity and foolish humour, to see their owne shadow in the riuer Tyber, whilest they admire themselues, cast themselues head-long to bee drowned therein. Now in that seruice of the Roman Antichrist Doctor Bishop, our Countriman, hath very industrious∣ly done his part, and hath laboured, if not to excell, yet to equall almost any of his fellowes, in the subuerting of way∣ward and vnstable soules, and in ani∣mating
 of men to obstinacy against the truth of God. Who hauing to the Kings most excellent Maiesty disgor∣ged against vs, the venome and poison of his corrupt and wicked heart, and be∣ing by me duly chastened for his disloyal and traiterous attempt, to delude by false suggestions, his Liege and Soue∣raigne Lord, seeing his impostures and fraudes most plainely discouered and laied open, hath since added drunken∣nesseDeut. 29. 19. to his thirst, and sought to fill vp the measure of his former iniquity, by wilfull railing at those things which he knoweth to be true, and hauing no other way to reuenge the impeaching of his credit, greatly touched, as he conceiued, by the answering of his booke, hath in a latter booke runne vpon mee furiously, and loden me, so much as in him lieth,
 with odious imputations of abusing, fal∣sifying, misconstruing, misapplying, both Scriptures and Fathers, like the vngracious Thiefe at the barre, who conuicted by most cleare and apparant euidence, yet still impudently cryeth out that all is false. But by an Ad∣uertisement written for the time con∣cerning that booke of his, I haue made it manifest that that cry of his is but a cry of course, the breath of an obdurate and euill conscience, by which he stan∣deth condemned in himselfe, despe∣ratelyTit. 3. 11. bent against his owne knowledge to peruert, to forge, to face any thing to serue his turne; which plainly appea∣ring so to be, little reason had I to trou∣ble my selfe to giue any further answere to it. Neuerthelesse, because the fur∣ther answere of the chiefe part of it,
 hath fallen within the compasse of my intention; of describing the true anci∣ent Roman Catholike, and no diffe∣rence there is but that whereas I might otherwise haue walked at mine owne li∣berty, I now tie my selfe to follow him, I haue yeelded so much to him, that whereas by comparison I formerly shewed that the new Church of Rome in faith and religion, is farre estranged from the old, it may now more fully appeare that so it is, and that M. Bi∣shop contending for the contrary hath done it only for his belly and for his cre∣dits sake, hauing made the deceiuing of soules his occupation to liue by, and be∣ing ashamed at these yeares to confesse that he himselfe hitherto hath been de∣ceiued. Which worke I most humbly desire, may goe forth vnder the prote∣ction
 of your Highnesse, whom accor∣ding to that eminent wisedome and knowledge wherewith God hath endu∣ed these your younger yeares, I make the Iudge of this quarrell, and therefore the first part thereof I now tender at your Highnesse feete for a testimony of my loyall and dutifull affection, and for acknowledgement of my deuotions vnto almighty God, for the preseruation of your Highnesse, and the continuance and increase of his graces and blessings towards you, that your Princely name may more and more grow great, and may be a terrour to that selfe-exalting Kingdome and Monarchy of the great Capitolian Priest, at length to worke the vtter ruine and confusion thereof. Which as we beleeue not to bee farre of, so we hope that in that glorious
 reuenge of the cause of almighty God, your Highnesse shall haue a chiefe and an honorable part, and that God will strengthen your arme, and giue edge to your sword to strike through the loines of all them that are the supporters of that Antichristian and wicked state. Which with all other additions of ho∣nour and renowme, both with God and men, I will neuer cease to further by my prayers vnto almighty God, so resting al∣waies,

