


MOST remarkable and learned Academi∣ans, in whose due prayses I could willingly here insist, were it not, that I loath all show of oylye assentation. You may be here aduertized, touching the ensuing Treatises, that I haue made choice to set them downe rather in method of Dialogues, then in any other forme of style: Because in this ony delicate & fastidious age (which is quickly cloyed with any thing, not accompanyed with Variety) it is obserued, that interlocutory Periods, and vicissitude or alternation of turnes in speech, are more gratefull and pleasing, then any long, wearisome, continued, and vn∣interrupted discourse.
Though the subiect of these Treatises be seuerall mayne points and Controuersies in fayth (and consequently, Points of Religion and Diuinity) yet I presume, none of you is eyther so froward, or

so ignorant, as to depraue and calumniate the Methode here vsed; by saying, that we are not to inuulgar the Mysteryes of sacred Di∣niuity by way of Poeticall fiction of Dialogues, in forging that to be, which indeed is not. Which aspersion of any such Critick is easily wyped away, by the warrantable examples in this kind of S. Ie∣rome, Theodoret, S. Gregory the Great, and others: who were not afrayd to treate of the highest matters of fayth, in forme of Dialogues. Againe, such an inconsiderate assertion must needs condemne Poetry in generall (seeing Dialogues are a kind of Poe∣try) which how great an errour it were, might easily appeare, in that Poëtry is masked Philosophy; Philosophy Natures true History; Nature Gods seruiceable Agent or Handmayd. Be∣sids, I am of iudgment that the Body of any long Discourse (like an vnformed Chäos) is best brought into an Orbe of forme and Order, by help of interlocutions. And lastly, admit this kind of Wryting were strange and vnusuall, and chiefly sorting to subiects of lesser importance; (as indeed, it is not) yet here we must remem∣ber, that a Phantastike often begins a fashion, which graue Men (not to be thought Phantasticks) are in the end content to follow.
Now to approach neerer the seuerall subiects, handled in all these Dialogues. In the first is disputed a Controuersy, much a∣gitated and tossed betweene the Catholiks and the Protestants; to wit, touching the change of fayth in the Church of Rome.
The Interlocutours are Cardinall Bellarmyne (that Heresi∣mastix) Michaeas, a learned Iewish Rabin, and Doctour Whi∣takers of Cambridg. The place of this conference I haue made to be the great citty Cosmopolis in Vtopia; since an imaginary place best sorteth to an imaginary disputation, in respect of the per∣sons feigned. The Cardinall iustifyeth the Catholiks position; vi∣delicet, that no change in fayth and Religion hath bene made in the Church of Rome since the Apostles dayes: Which Position is in∣deed the iuncture, without which the whole frame almost of all o∣ther Controuersies hang loose. Doctour Whitakers vndertaks to proue the Contrary; In whom rather, then in any other Protestant, I haue peculiarly (and ex professo) made choyce to personate all

the speeches and arguments, vsed to proue this supposed change in the Church of Rome; principally, because there is no Protestant wryter (that I know) who hath so much prosecuted this presumed change, as Doctour Whitakers hath done; as appeareth in his Bookes agaynst the Cardinall himselfe, agaynst Father Campion (that blessed Saint) and cheifly against Duraeus, where the Do∣ctour vndertaketh to instance diuers examples of this imaginary Reuolt. Yet here you are to conceaue, that I haue not so dwelled in the only wrytings of Doctour Whitakers, as that I neglect what other Protestants haue also written in maintenance of this change: for I assure you, I haue omitted nothing of Moment, which I could fynd in their Bookes, to be obiected in proofe thereof; though Do∣ctour Whitakers is introduced to deliuer or speake it. And withall I haue made speciall references to their Books, where such their sentences or authorities are to be found; And yet (learned Men) notwithstanding all that, which can be vrged by any of them in this behalfe; sooner shall they prooue, that the fixed starrs haue changed their postures & situations in their Orbe, then that Rome hath changed it fayth: So true are those words of an auncient Fa∣ther: Nazi∣anz. in car∣mine de vi∣ta sua. Vetus Roma ab antiquis temporibus habere rectam fidem: & semper eam retinet. What sentences, authorities, or instances of change Doctour Whitakers hath vsed in any of his Bookes by me alledged; the same I haue set downe with citation of the Books, and in a seuerall Character from that, which he speaketh at large, in the person of a Protestant; and this to the end that the Reader may seuer the Doctours owne words, from the words of a Protestant in generall: In like sort, what intemperate speeches (euen loaded with malice and rancour) the Doctour seth against the Church of Rome, are not by me forged and fathered vpon him; But are (especially, those which are most virulent) his owne words, yet extant in his Bookes: and accordingly they are printed in a different letter, with the Latin words set in the mar∣gent: So carefull I am not to wrong the Doctour, by vniustly ob∣truding vpon him, any scurrilous and vndecent Inuectiues, or Pasquills.





The Conclusion consisteth in retorting that vpon our Aduer∣sartes, where with they here charge the Church of Rome; I meane, in demonstrating, that it is the Protestant, who hath made in fayth this change and innouation, from the auncient fayth of the Apostles; And thus by comparing these two contrary fayths & do∣ctrines together, and the antiquity of the one, and innouation of the other, you shall find, that errour is best knowne by truth, as death is knowne bylife.
Now here your ingenuities are to suppose for the tyme, that Cardinall Bellarmine and Doctour Whitakers are at this pre∣sent liuing; In like sort, that the Cardinall hath read all bookes written either in Latin or English, which are in this Dialogue alleadged: Which like supposalls you are also to make in the other subsequent Dialogues, touching the Persons in them produced; as that they are now liuing, and that they all liued at one tyme &c. All which imaginations are fully iustifiable in the true methode of Dialogues; since in this kind of writing, the Persons (you know) are forged for the matter, and not the matter for the Persons: And thus much touching the first Dialogue.
Now to descend to the second Dialogue; The subiect wherof is to demonstrate, that the visibility of the Protestant Church can∣not be iustifyed from the Primitiue Church, (much lesse from the Apostles dayes) till Luthers reuolt: And which is more, that not any one Man, during all that long Period of tyme (nor Luther himselfe) can be truly insisted vpon, for a perfect & absolute Prote∣stant; and such as the present Church of England can, or will ac∣knowledge to be a member of it. Which point being once euicted, How deadly it woundeth the Protestants, may easily appeare; in regard of the euer necessary and vndeniable visibility of Christs true Church; whose expansion, enlargment, and vneclypsed radi∣ancy at all tymes, is much celebrated in Holy writ: Esay. 60. (Her sunne shall not be set, nor her Moone hid) as will more fully appeare bereafter in it due place.
The interlocutours are the foresayd Michaeas, the Iew; O∣chinus, who first (in King Edward the sixt his dayes) did dise∣minate

Protestancy at least, seuer all points of Protestancy, here l England; Doctour Reynolds of Oxford, and Neuserus, chiefe Pastour of Heidelberg in the Palatinate. Why Ochinus & Neu∣serus are brought in, as speakers in this Dialogue, the Argument prefixed therto will show.
I haue presumed to incorporate most of what can be vrged for the visibility of the Protestant Church, in Doctour Reynolds; as a Man, who was best able in his dayes to support his owne Church from ruyne; And sutably herto the supposed place of this disputa∣tion is Oxford. I haue in no sort wronged the Doctour, whom I well know to haue bene a blazing Comet in your Euang elicall spheare; & to whom (as being of good temperance in his writings, in respect of his brother Doctour Whitakers) I am vnwtlling to ascrybe too litle; only I wish, his fauorits had not ascrybed to him too much.
If any of you shall muse, why in these Dialogues all the Pro∣testants (being otherwise presumed to be most learned) do reply so sparingly eyther to Cardinall Bellarmyne or to Michaeas their ans∣weres and arguments, as here you shall find them to do: you are to conceaue, that it is agreed in the begining of the two first Dia∣logues among all the Interlocutours, to stand indisputably to the freqrent Confessions of the learned Protestants, vrged in behalfe of any poynt controuerted. Now both the Cardinall and Michaes (for the most part) do auoyd the other Interlocutours reasons and instances, by the contrary acknowledgments of diuers eminent Pro∣testants; as also do produce their owne arguments in defence of their Catholicke articles, from the like acknowledgments of the learned Protestants, speaking in those points agaynst themselues, and in be∣halfe of the Catholickes. Which method being chiefly houlden throughout these Dialogues, how then can the Protestant Interlo∣cutours continue any new reply, agaynst the Caidinall, or agaynst Michaeas?
But to reflect vpon the subiect of this second Dialogue: And here I do auouch, that to maintayne, that Protestancy was euer before the breaking out of Luther (though euen then it was not in

it perfection) is no lesse absurd in reason; then to maintayne, that, the byrth of any thing can precede it conception; and the effect the cause.
True it is, that in diuers former ages there haue bene some se∣cret (and indeed blind) Moules, who working vnder the founda∣tion of the Roman Church, haue labored to cast vp some earth of innouations and noueltyes, comparting perhapps in some one or two points with the sectares of these dayes: But to iustify in those men the visibility of the Protestant Church, or that they were Prote∣stants) which is at this present the poynt only issuable) I hould it impossible; Except we will dreame, that those persons did pertake of the nature of the planet Mercury; which euer participateth (as the Astrologers teach) of all the influences of that other starre or planet, with which it is in any sort in coniunction.
Be it then, that some Innouatours in seuerall Centuryes haue contumactously defended some one or other Theoreme or principle, without which the entyre frame of Protestancy cannot subsist; Will any of you from hence conclude (and yet many Protestants do so conclude) that such Mens Religion was perfect Protestancy? By the like reason you may inferre (to insist in similitudes within your owne spheare) that Vnity is a Number; a Poynt, Quantity; & an Instant, Tyme: Wheras you know well, that these are only be∣ginnings or Elements of Number, Quantity, and Tyme; and without which these later can haue no being. In regard then of such want of visible Protestants, informer tymes, It is lesse woun∣der, that some Protestant wryters haue thought good to Idëate & frame in their mynd a certayne mathematicall and airy Church, within which a number only of supposed inuisibilities are compre∣hended. Thus much touching this second Dialogue; to the which I haue thought good to subnect (as an Appendix) a short view, taken of an Anonymous and froathy Pamphlet entituled: A Treatise of the perpetuall visibility and succession of the true Church, in al Ages; written some few yeares since and set forth (as is suppo∣sed) by Doctour Featly.
Now in this last place, to come to the third and last Dialogue;

The subiect whereof is to manifest, that the Protestants (by many degrees) stand more iustly chargeable, both with the doctrine and practise of disloyalty, agaynst their lawfull Princes, then the Catho∣liks do: And that the Protestants haue therefore small reason (and lesse policy) to vpbrayde in their pulpits, and writings (as it is their accustomed Scene to doe) the Catholicks with any such hate∣full cryme. In this last Dialogue are also seuerall insertions of some small Treatises, in defence of diuers Catholike doctrines.)
The Interlocutours in this Dialogue are the right Honorable the Lord Cheife Iustice of England (to whom all dutifull com∣portment is borne throughout this Discourse) Michaeas, the former Iew, and M. Vice-Chancelour of Oxford. That the Vice-Chacelour is therein introduced to be partly malignant agaynst Michaeas (as charged by him besides with other offences for being a Catholike Priest) is not strange; considering how splenfull some Vice-Chancelours of that Vniuersity haue borne themselues, towards certayne Priests, there heretofore apprehended.
Thus farre particularly of the different subiects of these ensuing Dialogues; Which point is more largly set downe in the Argu∣ments of euery one of them.
Now (most illustrious Men) I haue presumed (and I hope this my presumption will in your fauourable construction be warran∣table) to dedicate this whole worke to your selues; not for your pa∣tronage thereof, for that only it owne worth (If any be in it) must effect; but partly because you are best able to iudge of the argu∣ments produced on eyther side; and partly, in regard I haue selected out of eyther of your Vniuersities, one of the most pryme and choysest men in their dayes to be speakers in these Dialogues; I meane (as aboue is sayd) Doctour Whitakers and Doctour Reynolds. I could wish, you would not sleight it, through a cold seuerity, procee∣ding from a forestauled iudgment against the Catholike fayth in generall; but peruse it indifferently, and weigh the authorityes and reasons withall Candour and impartiality. Touching my owne sin∣cerity, vsed throughout this labour; know you, that if I haue purposely and deliberatly detorted from it true meaning, but any

one authority here produced by me; then let my forhead be publikly seared with an indeleble Stigma or print of shame and Confusion. No. He is not Religious, who handleth Religion with fraud and impostures. And I am so free and guiltles herein, as that I dare vaunt my selfe to be in this respect a a dye or any foursqua∣red thing: Tetragonon; cast me vp what way you will, my demeanour (in this case) will proue eauen & squared.
Do not expect any Oratory here, but what the force of vnauoy∣dable Demonstrations can perswade; And in this sence (I trust, I may, without vanity say) you shall find Oratory; Since Truth is euer eloquent.
But now (most celebrious Academians) giue me leaue to turne my pen more particularly to your selues, and pardon this my boldnes; it proceeding solely out of my charitable affection, and out of my desire of aduancing your spirituall Good: for you are 2. cor 3. Our Epistle, written in our harts. Well then, you are learned, and therefore (if grace assist) the more able to transpierce through any difficulties of Fayth, now questioned. Suffer not then your Iudge∣ments to be enthralled to the iudgments of some few men among you, more eminent, then the rest; they being Byrds, whose Aery is but in the high Cedars of the pretended reuealing Spirit; since through their assumed priuiledge therof, they are not ashamed to reduce the construction of Scripture, and the weight of all authori∣tyes whatsoeuer, to the Tribunall of their owne Censure; scornfull∣ly contemning whatsouer passeth not vnder the fyle of their owne ap∣probation.
But to proceed forward. It is a thing wounderfull (and indeed deplorable) to obserue the the exorbitancy of most Schollers procee∣dings (and perhapps of diuers of you) in these poynts; I meane, to see, what labour and toyle they bestowe in humane studyes, and how remisse they are in search of true fayth. I assure my selfe, that ma∣ny of you haue indefatigably spent much tyme in seeking to know: Whether the Opinions of Copernicus touching the Mo∣tion of the Earth and standing still of the sunn and Primum Mobile, can be made probable? Whether a Concentrike Orbe

with an Epicycle, or an Excentrike Orbe alone, can better salue the Phaynomena and irregular Apparences of the Planetts▪ Whether ech Orbe be moued a Propria Intelligentia, or ab in∣terna forma? Whether, supposing Infinitum to be in Rerum na∣tura, One Infinitum can be greater, then an other? Which poynt some Philosophers exemplify in the infinit reuolutions of the Sunne and the Moone; the Moone performing her course twelue or 13. tymes in that space, in which the Sunne doth but once: And yet both their reuolutions must be infinit in Num∣ber; if one will grant with Aristotle, that the world was ab aeterno: Whether Corpus Sphaericum tangit planum, only in puncto? What is the cause, why the Sea keepeth a different course in it ebbing & flowing in different Countreyes; though to those seuerall Countreyes the Moone beareth one and the same aspect of it light? Whether, when the loadstone draweth iron vnto it, this be effected through a naturall Sympathy of these two Bodyes, or only through the proper forme of the loadstone? And Whether the turning of the irons point to the North (being touched with the loadstone) is to be referred to some huge supposed mountayne of loadstone in the vttermost Northparts; or to any one place of the Heauens neere to the Northpole; or to the intrinse call forme of the loadstone it selfe? Whether Algebra be a distinct Art from Arythmetyke; or but the same, aduanced to it height and perfection? Whether in the miracles of Christ and S. Peter, exhibited in curing of cor∣porall diseases (and the like may be demanded of all true mi∣racles of this nature) God did for the tyme infuse a Physicall quality (for example) in the skirt of our Sauiours garment, & in the shadow of S. Peter, which per potentiam obedientialem (as the Scholemen speake) did worke vpon the diseases, and so cure them; Or els God himselfe did immediatly worke these supernaturall effects, ad praesentiam illorum, at the presence of the skirt and shadow, which in their absence otherwise he would not worke? And finally (to omit diuers others such nyce and abstruse speculations, and but to touch a little vpon Diuinity)

Whether Communicatio Idiomatum, flowing from the Hy∣postaticall vnion in Christ, is reall in respect of the different na∣tures in Christ; or with reference only to the Hypostasis of both the Natures?
In these (I say) and many such like curiosities (for so I may tearme them; this last only excepted) diuers of you haue no doubt spent (and perhaps with great commondation) many howres by perusing with your owne eyes seuerall Authours, & by di∣scussing the arguments brought on all sides to fortify their different opinions: And yet it mattereth litle, on which syde the Truth lyeth in most of these speculations; But wheresoeuer it is found in them, we may equally and indifferently breake forth with the three Children in praysing of God, for his Omnipotency and Wisdome, discouered in them; saying, Dan. 3. Benedicite Omnia o∣pera Domini Domino.
If then you haue bene so industrious and breathles herein, and so absorpt in the delight of these lesse necessary studyes, O with what a spirituall Leithargy are such of you possessed, who in mat∣ters of Religion (the truth or falshood wherof concerns your soules interminable and endles happynes or misery) shall runne on head∣long, till you come to your graues in an vnexamined and yet resol∣ued opinion agaynst the Catholike fayth, with a supine resignation of your iudgments in all poynts of Religion (without further tryall) to the wrytings (for example) of Caluin and Beza; whose pestife∣rous Scripts many make their Catechismes? Men charged (euen by their owne Caluin is charged with So∣domy by the publi∣ke records of the Cit∣ty of Noy∣on in Frā∣ce, yet ex∣tant; And by Con∣radus Slus∣senberg (a Protestāt) in Theol. Caluin. printed 1594. l. 2. fol. 72. Beza is charged with the same cryme, by the foresaid Slussenberg, vbi supra, and l. 1. fo. 93. By Titilmannus Heshutius (a Pretestant) in his booke entituled: Verae & sanae confessionis. And the same is cōfessed of Beza by D. Mortō, (though most falsly excused) in his Apolog. Ca∣tholica, part. 1. l 2. c. 21. Brethren) with the execrable cryme of Sodomy: And remember you not, that we Math. 7. gather not grapes of thorns, nor figs of thisles?
But herewith (most excellent Academians) I will end; and craue pardon for this my fulnes of speach, entreating you to call to mynd those words: meliora Prouerb. 27. sunt vulnera diligentis, quam

fraudulenta oscula odientis. And thus remitting you to the peru∣sall of these following Dialogues, I will with my incessant prayers solicit the Highest, (who is Iac. 1. Pater luminum; and from whom, Omne datum optimum, & omne bonum perfectum descendit) so to enlighten your iudgements in your studyes and courses; that after this life, you may be as truly beatifyed with the Intuitiue knowledge of all things, in the most happy vision of God; As now here vpon earth, you labour to enrich your mynds, mith all commendable Discursiue knowledge.

