




BRrother Kempe, as ma∣ny alhailes to thy person as there be haicocks in Iuly at Pancredge: So it is, that what for old ac∣quaintance, and some other respectes of my pleasure, I haue thought good to offer here certaine spare stuffe to your protection, which if your sublimitie accept in good part, or vouch∣safe to shadow with the curtaine of your countenance, I am yours till fatall destiny

two yeares after doomes day. Many write bookes to knights and men of great place, and haue thankes, with promise of a fur∣ther reward for their paines: others come of with a long Epistle to some rufling Courtier, that sweares swoundes and bloud as soone as euer their backe is turnd, a man can not goe in the streetes for these impudent beggers. To auoide therefore as well the worthlesse attendance on the one, as the vsuall scorne of the other, I haue made choise of thy amorous selfe to be the pleasant patron of my papers. If thou wilt not accept of it in regard of the enuy of some Citizens, that can not away with argument, Ile preferre it to the soule of Dick Tarlton, who I know will enter∣taine it with thankes, imitating herein that merry man Rablays, who dedicated most of his workes to the soule of the old Queene of Nauarre many yeares after her death, for that she was a maintainer of mirth in her life. Marry God send vs more of her making, and then some of vs should not liue so discontēted as we do: for now

a dayes, a man can not haue about with a Balletter, or write Midas habet aures asininas in great Romaine letters, but hee shall bee in daunger of a further displeasure. Well, come on it what will, Martin and I will allow of no such doinges, wee can cracke halfe a score blades in a backe-lane though a Constable come not to part vs. Neither must you thinke his worship is to pure to be such a swasher, for as Sci∣pio was called Africanus, not for relieuing and restoring, but for subuerting and de∣stroying of Africa: so he and his compani∣ons are called Puritans, not for aduancing or supporting of puritie, by their vnspot∣ted integritie, but of their vndermining and supplanting it by their manifold here∣sies. And in deed therein he doth but ap∣ply himselfe to that hope which his holi∣nesse the Pope and other confederate for∣riners, haue conceiued of his towardnesse. For comming from Venice the last Sum∣mer, and taking Bergamo in my waye homeward to England, It was my happe soiourning there some foure or fiue dayes,

to light in felowship with that famous Francattip' Harlicken, who perceiuing me to bee an English man by my habit and speech, asked me many particulars, of the order and maner of our playes, which he termed by the name of representati∣ons: amongst other talke he enquired of me if I knew any such Parabolano here in London, as Signior Chiarlatano Kempi∣no. Very well (quoth I,) and haue beene oft in his company. He hearing me say so, began to embrace me a new, and offered me all the courtesie he colde for his sake, saying, although he knew him not, yet for the report he had hard of his pleasance, hee colde not but bee in loue with his perfections being absent. As we were thus discoursing, I hard such ringing of belles, such singing, such shouting, as though Rhodes had beene recouered, or the Turke quite driuen out of Christendome, there∣withal I might behold an hundreth bone∣fiers together, tables spred in the open streetes, and banquets brought in of all handes. Demaunding the reason of him

that was next me, he told the newes was there (thankes be to God,) that there was a famous Schismatike one Martin newe sprung vp in England, who by his bookes, libels, and writings, had brought that to passe, which neither the Pope by his Semi∣naries, Philip by his power, nor all the ho∣ly League by their vnderhand practises and policies could at any time effect: for wher∣as they liued at vnitie before, and might by no meanes be drawne vnto discord, hee hath inuented such quiddities to set them together by the eares, that now the tempo∣raltie is readie to plucke out the throtes of the Cleargie, & subiects to withdraw their allegeance from their Souerayne: so that in short time, it is hoped they will bee vp in armes one against another, whiles we aduantaged by this domesticall enuy, may inuade them vnawares, when they shall not be able to resist. If ory to heare of these triumphes, coulde not rest till I had related these tidinges to my coun∣trimen. If thou hast them at the second hand, (fellow Kempe) impute it to the

intercepting of my papers, that haue stay∣ed for a good winde, euer since the begin∣ning of winter. Now they are arriued, make much of them and with the credit of thy clownery, protect thy Cutbert from Carpers.

