



IN the Sermon following, there are lapped vp (right Worshipfull) some twelue points of diuine inspiration, which are most needfull in this corrupt age wherein we liue, of all mens due and deepe considera∣tion. The first is, that Christ and his Church are contracted together in a thrise blessed marriage, The second is, that the Church doth beare a tender & hearty loue towards Christ her bridegrome. The third is, that the estate or condition of Gods childe is the best estate or condition in all the world. The fourth is, that Chirst himselfe is there teaching of men, where his word is tru∣ly taught & deliuered vnto men. The fift is, that the fruit & benefit of Gods word is imparted onely vnto the Saints. The sixt is, that the best that are, are to be taught and schooled in the wayes of God. The seauenth is, that Christ doth loue his Church and people well. The eight is, that the Church of God is faire and beautifull in the eyes of Christ. The ninth is, that holy Christians need not the mediation of Angels or Saints departed this life, for the oblation of their prayers vnto the Almighty. The tenth is, that the spouse of Christ is some∣times too carelesse of Christ, and falls a sleepe in the bed of carnall delights. The eleuenth is, that Christians must not continue in their sins, but arise from the same & leaue them. The twelft and last is, that all that doe belong to Christ, must leaue this world & goe after Christ. These points are handled, seauen of them more at large, ex¦professo, by way of doctrines, but the other fiue more succinctly vp∣on certaine accidentall occasions. At your leasure (I pray you) consi∣der of them, I doubt not, but that you haue your portions in them. The text from whence they are drawne may well be applied vnto you, for euery word therein doth fit you well. One part of it you may
speake (with the Church) of Christ: and the other part of it you may heare (with the Church) from Christ. And as some things in it may comfort you, so other things also in it may excite you. The Appellations may be your consolations, and the exhor∣tations may be your excitations.
In the world there are many euils, yea in the congregation of the righteous there are too many infirmities. Our loue to Christ is too cold, it must be kindled. Our attendance at the gates of wised me is too seldome, it must be doubled. Ourfailing in our duties is too great, it must be lessened. Our sight in seeing the loue of Christ towards vs is too Diuine, it must be cleered. Our beauty in the inner man is too small, it must be increased. Our drowsines in good things is too heauy, it must be lightned. Our continuance in sinne is too long, it must be shortned. Our cleauing to this world is too strong, it must be weak∣ned. Finally our following afte Christ is too slow, it must be hastned. To further this heauenly work this little booke may help vs, for most of the things therein are touched, and vrged vpon vs with forcible reasons of perswasion: In token of my good will, and the vnfained loue which I beare vnto you both, I here present it vnto you both, & con∣secrate it to your Worships. The God almighty giue it a blessing, & and make it effectuall vnto the soules of men. I will not trouble you with many words, but draw to an end. As you haue begun well, so proccede, & let your good works be more at the last, then at the first. Be still for God in all his wayes, and God will still be for you in all your wayes. Aduance him and hee will aduance you, protect his Saints, and shelter them: refresh the deare members of Christ and nourish them; so shall you heare this sweet sentence pronounced vp∣on yount the last: Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit ye the kingdome prepared for you from the foundations of the world. And so I end and commit you and all yours to the grati∣ous protection of that good God, that doth watch ouer you; beseech∣ing him so to multiply his graces vpon you, that you may see many good and happy dayes in this wretched world, and enioy euerlasting blessednesse in the blessed world to come.

