



SIR, hauing been certaine yeeres since, more prest, and forward to offer our selues to be doing then duly considerate what a burde∣nous taske wee should vndergoe, one of vs vndertook the explication of the Prouerbs of Salomon, and the other to further the same by inspection, and assistance in diffi∣cult & doubtfull places, when need should require. But we found it a matter of greater trauell, and longer labour then we thought of, and haue met with such interruptions as we had iust cause to looke for, but did not sufficiently foresee: for (besides that the book is wholly sententious, and the vnfolding of sentences requireth breuitie, and perspicuitie, with ruth, and soundnes, which cannot be attained vnto without mature deliberation and studie) the Lord himselfe did stop our passage with his owne hand, for a sea∣son, by visiting one of vs, euen him who was to doe the worke, and sustaine the burthen of the businesse, with such defect of health and sight, as did actually prohibite our course of proceeding. But now (by his good hand) that let being remoued and his assistance ministred vnto vs, we at the last haue waded thorow the booke, or rather haue swomme ouer it: for it is so profound and deepe with perfect excellencie, that neither we, or any man else can diue to the bottome of it. Salomon himselfe was farre too low of stature, and not tall enough in vnderstanding, euen (when he knew most) to stand in it, and hold vp his head aboue the mysticall waters of
 admirable wisedome, although his tongue did speake it, and his hand penne it. We haue by due consideration with our selues, and iudicious aduice from our wise and learned brethren, proceeded in a course different from our beginning, labouring only to make the text as plaine and conspicuous, as wee could in so few words, without our former additions of Doctrines and Vses. For we saw the time would be long before we could finish the worke: the prin∣ting would be chargeable, if wee should liue to bring it to the presse: the booes would be deare to such as should buy them: and the paines would be tedious to those which should reade them: and albeit some might haue more benefit by so large a volume, yet more may haue some benefit by this compendious contriuall: for the very knowledge of the right sense of the Scriptures (which in this marke we chiefly aime at) is very commodious in sundrie re∣spects, and the ground-worke of all pietie. That maketh Mini∣sters to be fruitfull Preachers: that maketh priuate persons to be profitable hearers: that yeeldeth matter of wholesome medi∣tation to the minde: that putteth vigour of good affections into the heart: that ministreth store of vsefull speeches to the lippes, and that prepareth a way for faith, for repentance, and all inter∣nall graces and externall obedience to the whole man. The want hereof is the cause why the words of God are so much by some per∣uerted publikely to such purposes, as the holy Ghost neuer inten∣ded, both presses, and pulpits (which is with teares to be lamen∣ted) sending out so many erroneous writings, and sayings, for the confirmation of seperation, superstition, iniustice, sensuall lusts, and all manner of licentiousnes: and why being by others sound∣ly alleaged they are so greatly mistaken, and worke no better ef∣fects in those to whom they are preached. For this cause wee haue not been altogether remisse in searching out, and sounding the sense of euery sentence of this booke, or in pondering the force of euery word which may seeme to carrie some weight, so farre as our knowledge, or meanes would extend: but if the learned of better iudgement shall any where finde vs failing, let them bee pleased to make it appeare vnto vs, and wee doe promise not to stand wilfully, or peremptorily in any error, but to be attentiue to their reasons, and reformable in our opinions. What wee haue
 done herein, we thinke it our dutie to recommend as a testimonie of our loue to your Worships patronage, not doubting but that you will diligently reade, and wisely iudge of it, as you doe of other bookes of this nature, notwithstanding your manifold and weigh∣tie imployments otherwise. Wee rest assured of your charitable minde, that without offence you will beare with our homely kinde of writing, although it be deuoid of all polishment, and elegancy, considering that we make but an exposition to informe the iudge∣ment in the meaning of the Scripture, and not a discourse to work vpon affections: it is sufficient that the foundation stones lying in the ground, bee firme, and stable, although not beautifully he∣wen, carued, or grauen. The sentences which we explaine are ex∣cellent as well for matter, as manner, and defectiue in nothing that may giue satisfaction to the best qualified, and most compleate Christian in the world. Wise readers therefore (we doubt not) will be intreated to content their eyes with the bright and shining beames thereof, that they may not neede to require any exact per∣fection in this our dimme and duskish Commentarie. A plaine iron key will serue for good vse, to vnloce the doore of a golden treasurie. The marke that we aime at herein is the glorie of God, and the edification of his seruants, and not our owne praise and commendation for eloquence. And thus with remembrance of our dutie, referring the whole worke to your wise and louing con∣sideration, wee commit you and your gracious yoke-fellow to the blessed protection of God Almightie, beseeching him daily more and more to multiplie all his graces and mer∣cies vpon your selfe, and yours. Draiton this 10. of May 1615.

