


THree mightie men, bringing of 2. Sam. 2.16.17. Beth∣lehems waters vnto Dauid, he powres it foorth before the Lorde (not quen∣ching bodies thirst therewith) because it was purchased with liues hazard. Vn∣to your Lordship I humbly present a moitie of waters drawne from mysticall Beth-lehem (the house of Bread, the Church of Christ Iesus) and they not purchased with lesse then the hazard of my bodie and soules saluation. If your Lordship shall deeme it good they be powred forth before the Lord for eru∣dition to the soule, it is that I couet, and which some thirstie soules desire with great appetite. Dutie calleth me to offer it, and the experience I haue of your Lordship, tendring my good, it embol∣dens my presentation.
Pythag. in his golden E∣piks: the very exordium.Pythagoras hauing instituted his Puple in the first place to worship () the immortall God; he in the second place inioyneth that he reuerence () preexcelling He∣roiks. Which Heroicall Personages are of auncient Hesiode couched in his fourth age (Hesiod in his opera and Die. after them of Golde, Siluer, Brasse:

but before that of yron obdured) and determined for such, as had care of executing iudgement and Iustice by Land and Sea: maintaining and vpweilding the same by magnanimious and martiall valour: for the which they are tearmed there, Semi-Dijsts: but in sacred writ, Psal. 82.1.6.7. Gods: because his word is Iohn. 10.34.35. com∣mitted to such in his Church.
When I remember the vnion of your Lordships house with that of the right Woo. Moon-suns (a family to whom I haue owed much from my young yeares) I then methinks see Wis∣dome and Warre conioyned: without either of which, no com∣mon wealth can endure: and by the continuance of both which, my simplicitie hath been sheltred, and my innocencie shielded. So that I (if any) haue cause to auow allegiance (not Tam Marti quam Mercurio, but) to the Christian subiects of Wisdome and Valour. The schedule I present, it is an exposition of that Mat. 13 24. &c. Parable of Tares, propounded by our Lord and Master Christ Iesus. Wherein is considered, first, the glorious estate of the New-testaments Church, first planted throughout the world by the Ministerie of the Apostles: then secondly, the corruption thereof through Ministers sleepie negligence: yea, the corrupti∣on so deeply setled therein, as well it might be in these latter times Reformed, but neuer quite purged of visible euill (nor Re∣planted) vntill the Sonne of man in his great day of haruest, doe that by the ministerie of his Angels. A doctrine so necessary, as without the knowledge thereof, a man shall either rush on the error of the right hand (through desperate vn-bridled Zeale) or on that on the left hand, through a frozen cold securitie.
Such being my dutie, and such my presentation, I humbly so remaine

