



RIght honourable and my very good Lord, hauing receiued so many bountifull rewards, with an infinite number of good words, for other of his writings, the which it hath pleased your good Lord∣ship so fauourably to accept, is not thereby onely encouraged nowe once againe, to betake himselfe to his penne, but also he is emboldened, to present to your L. view this his small labour, which containeth the approoued order of Martiall Discipline. And as it is the common opinion of all worthy men, (right honourable & my very good Lord) that among all things that is to be preferred, warre is the one: and that because whosoeuer behaueth himselfe honourably in the exercise thereof, representeth the true Image of the most great and omnipotent God, because among the high titles at∣tributed according to his will and diuine Maiestie in the olde and holy Law, hee hath alwaies beene content to be reueren∣ced and called by the name of the GOD of hostes: so if this worthy exercise of Martiall Discipline be vsed, and had in practise for the glory of God, and the defence of Christ hys Gospell, or for the defence of a Kingdom or Common-weale,

no doubt there is, but that the great GOD of Hostes is our chiefe Generall, and most worthy Captaine.
And as your honour, being not inferiour to any in the ex∣ercise heereof, not onely for your owne honour and magnani∣mitie, but for the better vpholding of Christes Gospell, for the defence of our gracious Soueraigne, her Lawes and louing Subiects, for the exercising of warlike weapons, and the often vsing of them breedeth peace, but if warlike weapons should be layd aside, and Martiall discipline forgotten, then would it be with vs, as it was with the Romans. For as Scipio saith, after the Romans layd aside the vse of theyr warlike weapons, and Martiall exercises, they fell into great idlenes, outrages, ryot, and wantonnes; for more hurtfull was this time of peace to Rome, then during the whole course and season of the warres, for that whilst they had enemies in Affrick, they knewe not what vices and inordinate ryot ment in Rome.
Wherefore, may it please your good Lordship, in this time of peace, there must be had speciall regard, to see these warlike weapons vsed and practised, and not that euery common fel∣low be sette in authoritie, but those which be men of experi∣ence & knowledge, for what profiteth these Companies heere in England with all theyr muster and traynings? May I speak it without offence, there is not in conscience two Companies among twentie, which hath men of experience to instruct them in the exercise of theyr weapons. For it is not sufficient to haue store of Armes, weapons, Munitions, and furniture, but also to haue men of experience to vse them, and good Go∣uernours in the knowledge of Martiall discipline to lead thē.
The Realme thus gouerned with men of experience and knowledge, there is no doubt but it will continue and florish. For as Varro sayth, exercise of warlike weapons, and rumors of warres, breedeth peace. And for that your Lordship, beeing a most loyall and faithfull friende to her Maiestie, and a most worthy and famous Generall, best befitting your honourable estate, for the better safe keeping of thys little England, I haue thought it good, for to discouer this briefe discourse of Mar∣tiall

discipline vnto your good Lordship, hauing not any bet∣ter thing to bestow of you whereby to witnesse my good will, for if I had, I would with all willingnes impart the same. And for that your Lordship knoweth, the earth which yeldeth salte beareth no other thing, and the ground that hideth golde, will beare no kinde of grayne, so from a slender wit, exercised in Martiall discipline, your Lordship will looke for no gyfts, but fruites of a most willing minde. And albeit they are many, who allured by your manifolde vertues regarde you, and mooued through your true noblenesse of minde to honour you, yet as one not inferior in affection to any, but in good wil surmoun∣ting many, thus I boldly presume, leauing it to your honoura∣ble humanitie: as a personage most meete, and bulwarke most sufficient, against the barking impes of the enuious, and blunt hastie bolts of the foolish, whose eyes beeing sore, cannot be∣holde the Sunne, and theyr wits so weake, are not able to pe∣netrate the subtiltie of Martiall experiences: and therefore as slothfull neglect them, or as malicious, wholy contemne them. But proceeding too farre in these speeches, peraduen∣ture I may be misliked, and therefore least I should seeme en∣tred so farre, that I cannot find the way out, I will conclude.
Thus beseeching your good Lordshippe to pardon me in discharging my duetie, and to receiue with cheerefulnesse, de∣fend with willingnes, and to reade with friendlines thys rude worke which I offer to your good L. as an outwarde signe of my inward good will. Thus beseeching God, most earnestlie to blesse and prosper, both you and yours heere on thys earth, with health, and increase of honour, and magnanimitie, and send you in heauen most assured happines.

