



THe Learned of the Gentiles (be∣ing
to that peopleTit. 1. 12. Prophets, as
S. Paul stileth them) they by
Parables (as Iotham by his
Trees holding Parlie) did vn∣der
some shadowing-speach, both
prayse Vertue, and pursue Vice.
And had they not been as lampes
to their Ages, for explaning the Morall dueties of the
Decalogue (steps whereof remained in mans nature, euen
after his Fall) the Gentiles had run away with smooth
excuses. By which in-written Law, as they did the things
of the Law, as the Apostle telleth the Romanes; so, they
came to haue notice of the out-written Law, giuen of
GOD to Moses in two Tables.Orpheus in hym. de deo. For so Orpheus (liuing
in the time of Israels Iudges) writeth:
—
.
Euen as theMeaning Moses. Water-borne described hath
From God to Man, two Tables of the Fayth.

Giuing therefore Fooles leaue to blatter against Know∣ledge,
(as if Gods reason in his Works, should be against
the reason of his Word,) let mee proceed.
To Argus they attributed 100. eyes; as to Briaceus
100. handes: not properly, but figuratiuely (euen as Sa∣lomon
saying:Eccles. 10. 2. The heart of a wise man is at his right
hand, although his proper seate be in the middest of his
Breast, depending a litle towards the left side) they there∣by
implying, that the Prophane (with Argus) need many
eyes or watchmen, for securing such a skittish companion,
as was Samsons Heifer: as also, that Combaters with
Diuine powers, haue need of many hands to helpe them.
But all in vaine, seeing the eyes of the first, will be put out;
and the hands of the second, wilbe broken: much like to
the iudgement which Zechary signifieth to come vpon
the Idol-shepheard,Zech. 11. 7. namely, a Sword vpon his right Eye
and Arme; insomuch as his Arme shalbe dried vp, and
his right Eye darkned. In the assurance whereof, I con∣tinue
my opposition to fanatique, phrenetike spirits.
The Gentile-artists, did many times vnto men, giue
the title of God, (as the Scriptures giue vnto Statesmen)
and so they did vnto Hercules, for his 12. famous ex∣ployts;
which may be reduced to two kindes: First, for
his conquering of deuowring Beastes; which indeed were
Men as sauage as Beastes, tyrannicall Vsurpers: Second∣ly,
for his sweeping away of much Doung with a Torrent;
which was, an expulsion of euill Manners and Customes,
by the clearenesse of good Counsaile and holsome Lawes.
Many we haue, that will say, how by their place they be
Gods: but very few that shew themselues gracious and

beneficial to Church & Common-wealth, as Gods should;
but Diuels will not: Many claime the Tearme, but few
walke worthy the tearme,Horat. ep. ad Quintium. Tu rectè viues, si curas esse
quod audis. Iustly therefore shall the heathen Hercules,
rise vp against such in iudgement.
The office of Priesthood among the Gentiles, was of
such great respect, as oftentimes the Kingdome was vni∣ted
vnto it:Fenestella ex Virgil. Rex jdem hominum, Phaebi{que} sacerdos.
When Famine pinched the land of Egipt, to the forcing
of all sortes, to set sale of all for Bread-corne, there was
due prouision made for the Priestes. For these that there
doe turne Cohanim Princes, doe it (in my iudgement)
not onely against the very heart of the words proprietie,
but against the consonance of all Storie. And were the
Heathen, euen by Nature so led, to preferre their Mini∣strie?
The doctrine of Grace, doth teach it much more.
But a number, as if they were not onely deuoyde of Grace,
but also depriued of good Nature, do so cast their cardes,
as if any starue, the Minister shall: and if any amongest
Clunchpokes and Swaggerers, be thrust downe to the
tayle of the Table, it must be the Minister. But as the
Heathen in this point also, shall arise vp in iudgment a∣gainst
such: so, I pray you, from whence ariseth this euill?
Sat scio, and let me speake plainely.
This euill ariseth sometimes from our selues, when the
greater hath small respect of the lesser:From whence the contempt of Ministers ariseth. for that noted of
the vulgar, is as a document for hauing such in lesser esti∣mation.
Secondly, this base estimate of Ministers, ari∣seth
also, from the consideration of their pouertie; and
their pouertie is the more, by reason some Nouelistes haue

taught Ciuill Gouernours, to spoyle Mother-church of her
Dowrie, saying; that the same is an Idolothyte and Anti∣christian.
And hereupon it was, that the Separists did
at first in their secret Conuenticles, appoynt their Dea∣cons
to stand at the Chamber dore, at the peoples out∣gate,
with their Hats in hand (much like after the fashion
of a Play-house) into the which they put their voluntary.
But comming beyonde seas, where a man might haue
seauen Doyts for a penny, it fell out, howsoeuer their vo∣luntary
(at the casting in) did make a great clangor, the
Summa totalis ouer seene, the maisters of the Play, came
to haue but a few pence to their share. Whereupon, a broad
Dish (reasonable flat) was placed in the middest of their
conuention, that when the voluntarie was cast in, o∣thers
might obserue the quantitie. But this way serued not
the turne, for a few doyts rushing in vpon the sodaine,
could not easily be obserued, of what quantity it might be.
Vpon this, the Pastor gaue out, that if (besides giftes
from others abroad) they would not make himWho was Micahs Leuit now? Tenne
pounds yearely at least, he would leaue them, as vnwor∣thy
the Gospell. Then they stickle, for feare of a fall;
and Holder the Glouer must giue sixe Styuers a weeke
for his part: George Cl. the Bricklayer, more Styuers
for his part, by reason that he had good doinges: and so
others accordingly. The Glouer complaines of the great∣nesse
of the Cesse, and therefore sayd; that hee would for
England. &c. But to leaue their giddie deuises: At
home we haue had too many, that haue been willing
(howsoeuer maintenaunce beFor this poynt, see my Manuall on Leuit. Morall, and the quantity

and qualitie thereof be Iudiciall) vnder the colour of
clearing the Church of Idolothytes, to shaue the Church
as cleane, as Dionysius did Esculapius. To the Mini∣sters
it would be vnholy, but to the Church-robbers it
would bee very holy, when they may haue it wholy.
Papè; Haue wee found out an Hypocrite, worse then a
Papist?
A third cause of the Ministers contempt, hath
arisen from our Syncerians, who haue made it a very
small matter, to preach vpon the Scriptures: holding
euery howers talke, a Sermon: Insomuch as, a number
would not goe to meate (if a few were present of their
faction) but there must be a kind of Sermon.
Maister Barrowe himselfe,H. ar. then in the Fleete. euen to my selfe (tel∣ling
him that Maister Peny did vse that fashion of
Preaching,) did exceedingly dislike it; saying of that,
and of some Pin-sellers and Pedlers that then were put
to preach in their Thursedayes Prophecie, that it would
bring the Scriptures into mightie contempt.
Maister Henry Smith in his Sermon vpon Des∣pise
not Prophecie, did taxe in his time, that addle∣headed
discoursing, saying: that it was the readie way
to bring into contempt, both Prophet and Prophecie.
But Vzzah hath been smitten of God,Allusion to 2. Sam. 6. for so touching
the Lordes Arke, that whosoeuer runnes by, may read
(as in great Capitall letters) Perez Vzzah: and there∣fore
I leaue it.
But what speake I of Contempt of Ministers? Actum
est de capite, the whole bodie of the Church is accused
for an Harlot; yea, for such a one, as neuer was betrothe

vnto Christ, but prostitute vnto spirituall fornication (a
cunabulis) from the very swadling cloutes. Minxerit in
patrios cineres Schismaticus ille. To whom I say with
Agur;Prou. 30. The Eye that mocketh the Father, and despi∣seth
the instruction of the Mother, let the Rauens of
the valley picke it out, and the young Eagles eate it.
The premisses considered, it remayneth, that with
Nehemiahs people, we doe the worke of the Church with
the one hand, and with the other we hold the Sword.
With the Cranes,Arist. de animal. 1. 9. let vs watch by turnes, & rest by turnes.
Let no man seeke his owne, but euery-one anothers good.
In being one, against such as will not be at one, we shall
(as in the Parable) compell them to come in, or force
them to silence.Isoerat. pane gyric. Controuersias, aut jus aut vis, finit.
And so casting my selfe into your brotherly armes,
with reference of these my labours to our Churches iudge∣ment,
I humbly bid farewell. Norborne in East-kent
the 6. of Aprill, Anno Domini 1609.
Your Brother in the
worke of the Gospel,

