



RIght honourable, according to the saying of Cicero, writing in the commendation of Histories, he auou∣cheth M. T. Cice∣ro, in Epist. ad Plane. them to be the Treasure of things past; the patterne of those that are to come, the picture of mans life; the touch-stone of our actions, and the full perfecter of our honour. And Marcus Varro saith: They are the witnesse of Times, the light of Marcus Varro in Lib. de Hist. Cap. 16. Forsan & aeolim misse iuuabit. Truth; the life of Memorie; the Mistresse of life; and the Messenger of Antiquitie. And in very deede (Noble Lord) Histories cause vs to see those things without danger, which millions of men haue ex∣perimented with losse of their liues, honour and goods: making many wise by others perill, and exciting imitation of precedent mens ver∣tues, only to reach the like height of their vnconquerable happinesse.
Wisdome wonne by experience, proues oftentimes very perillous, and (questionlesse) is so long in the comming, that a man may die be∣fore Reading of Histories are the en∣structers to true happi∣nesse. hee can come neere it: so that a second life were necessarily requi∣red, and all in imployment only about it. It is therefore to be hastened forward, by the search of passed examples, where of Historie affor∣deth the greatest plentie.
Warranted then by so worthie presidents, but more especially, by an honourable Ladies earnest importunitie, for these two labours by mee vndertaken, and now (after longer delay then was intended) fully con∣cluded: I am bolde to present your honour with these two Bookes, or parts of Amadis de Gaue, the Third and the Fourth, neuer extant before in our English, and which long since had been with your Honor;

but that I had a purpose (according to my promise to that most Noble Ladie) to haue published the whole first five volumes together, where-of three haue formerly (though very corruptly) beene translated and printed, but these not till now.
May it please your Honour to accept these two in the meane time, and, to make amends for so long iniuring your worthie expectation: in Michaelmas Terme next ensuing, the two former parts, the First and Second (somewhat better suted then before) will come to kisse your Noble hand: And then the Fift and Sixt shall immediately followe, with all the speed conueniently may be vsed, and so successiuely the other volumes of the Historie, if time will giue leaue to finish them all.
So, humbly crauing pardon of your Honour, for this my present boldnesse, and, but such kinde acceptation of my good will, as may en∣courage mee to goe on with therest: Among them that are fairliest af∣fected to your continuall Noble and flourishing happinesse, and wish it to eternall perpetuity:

