



AMong all the giftes that e∣uer God bestovved on mā∣kind, vvisedom excelleth: vvhich is not only by King Salomon and his vvritinges sincerely vvitnessed, but also by good gouernment & orders of diuers Princes, rulers, coun∣sellers, and states of common vvelths, from time to time in euery age confir∣med. And although the bookes of the olde Testament named Sapientiall, set forth directly neither lavv, prophesie nor hi∣storie, yet doe they plainly expresse mat∣ters of vvisedom, and arguments inci∣dent thereunto. And vvhen as for my ovvne instruction I had of late collected
 the chiefest sayings to the order of com∣mon places, I did consider that they pub∣lished might somevvhat profit others, being applied to proper intents and pur∣poses. And thereupon vnderstanding of your speciall zeale to good learning, and singular imitation of the fruites contei∣ned in the said bookes, haue thought good to present these my labours vnto you as a patrone conuenient for such a vvorke. For myne ovvne parte I acknovvledge that by reading the bookes aforesayd, I haue obtained more vnderstanding euen in vvorldly affayres, then my yong yeres by experiēce haue taught me, or my tra∣uels at Oxford in the study of profane au∣thors directed me. And no maruell, for vvho in vvisedom either is or hath ben at any tyme like vnto Salomon, is it not vvritten in the third of Kings & third chapter, that vpon prayer made by Salo∣mon for an vnderstanding heart, God sayd vnto him, because thou hast asked this thing, and hast not asked long life, neither riches, nor the liues of thine e∣nemies:
 See I haue done according to thy petition, and beholde I haue geuen thee a vvise and an vnderstanding heart, so that there vvas none like thee before thee, neither after thee shall any arise like vnto thee. And againe in the tenth chapter of the same booke: that the Queene of Saba came to Ierusalem from the vttermost coastes of the land to heare and see the vvisedom of Salomon, and in summe that king Salomō exceded all the Kings of the earth in riches and vvise∣dome, that all the vvorld resorted to Sa∣lomon to heare his vvisedome vvhich God had put in his heart. This being true of vvhom then may vve better learne vvisedom then of the vvisest? VVhose sayinges because they be also of the holy scripture, ought vvith more heede to be marked, and vvill doubtles in euery good mans heart be the deeper imprinted. For the sayinges of the vvise and vnvvise are not vvith vvise men of like autho∣ritie, neither are the sayinges of the sa∣cred scriptures and of other vvriters
 likevvise to be valued. But other mens sayings so farre allovved as by scripture they may be confirmed. Then although Thales, Solon, Chilo, Pitachus, Bias, Cleo∣bulus, Periander, vvhich vvere named the seuen vvise men of Grecia: If Pytha∣goras, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Theo∣phrastus and many moe, both vvise and learned Philosophers haue vttered sun∣dry sayinges and sentences inducing to vertue and vvisedom. Yet are not their sayings likevvise to be regarded as the sayings of Salomon or Iesus Syrach, nay in respect of Salomon they vvere all but fooles: neither vvas their vvisedom true and perfect vvisedom, because they vvanted the feare & right knovvledge of God. VVherefore such learned men as haue translated their sayinges into Eng∣lish, and set them forth togither vvith the sayings of Salomon, and other out of the holy scripture, as they are to be pray∣sed for their diligence, vvilling to pro∣fit others that can not vnderstande the Latine tongue, so are they not to be pray∣sed
 for mingling Sacra prophanis, vvhether it be touching doctrine, or con∣uersation. Notvvithstanding I graunt many of their sayings to be good, and to leade a man to vvisedom, neyther doth the one take avvay the other, but ought as they be in deed so to be estemed. Ther∣fore to cōclude, although it vvell appeare that all these sayings are and haue bene knovvne to you longe since, for that you haue traueled for triall of doctrine, and quieting of your conscience thorough out the holy Byble sufficiently, yet may these common places, (vvhich is the commodi∣tie of abridgmēts) bring you in mind of many thinges red before. But they are not gathered for your better instruction or others, vvhich be vvise and learned, and able of them selues to gather much better & in better order, but for the rude and ignorant, vvho though they can read, yet haue not iudgement to discerne and to disseuer sentences. And as tou∣ching the name geuen to the booke, it is taken out of the eighteene chapter of the
 Prouerbes, vvhere I reade it vsed in like sense, videlicet, the vvords of the vvise mans mouth are like a full streame. And againe in the first of Ecclesiasticus, Gods vvorde in the height is the vvell of vvisedom. God graunt therefore that out of this vvell vve may dravv plentiful∣ly both true vvisedome to guide vs in do∣ing, and true doctrine to direct vs in be∣leuing, that in the end vve may fully tast of him vvhich geueth all true vvisdom, vvhich is the very fountaine of life Christ Iesus, and here most hartely I de∣sire you to accept this dedication in good part as a perfect signification of beneuo∣lence in him that vvisheth you increase of felicitie, and all vertuous actions thorough the benefite and rule of vvisedom. From Oriall college in Oxford, the xx. of August. anno 1573.

