



My very good Lord:
IT is not without cause that the Apostle spea∣king of good Workes, breaketh forth into this Epiphoneme, , and this I will that thou affirme, that they which be∣leeve in God bee carefull to maintaine good workes; and afterward, let ours learne so to doe: and that St. Iohn the Divine ioynes with him, ratify∣ing the same from the infallible testimonie of the Spirit, when mentioning the blessed
 estate of them that die in the Lord; addes withall, that their workes follow them. For where the effect is found, there, and no where else, the cause undoubtedly is in place, which is a lively, saving, and iustifying faith. Nei∣ther can they be denied to be Via regni, si si∣ant non timore, sed amore: non formidine poenae sed dilectione iustitiae: Which is that St. Augustine re∣quires for the inside: but, because that is knowne only to the Searcher of all hearts; we must in caritie goe no further, then to what is outward: and esteeme good workes as they are; good, and profitable for men, . And the truth is, it redounds greatly, to the discredit of the professors of the Gospel: especially to those of eminent place, to bee , without fruit: our neighbours of New Windsor, and their posteritie are excee∣dingly bound to your Lordship, for your most gracious and liberall contribution for the better ornament of their Church and market place, as also for the maintenance a∣mong them the perpetuitie of that mor∣ning watch of divine service to the great honor of God, and stirring them up to holy devotion. The remembrance whereof,
 together with your Lordships right Chri∣stian disposition, to the daily and continu∣all practise of charitie was a speciall motive of this my Dedication. VVe all admire his vertue, who was able to say,Iob 21.15. I was an eye to the blind, and a foot to the lame; I was a father to the poore, and his loynes have blessed me. In these barren and frozen dayes of Hospitalitie, who doth not admire your Lordship, from whose gates the poore never depart with an emptie bosome. Blessed is hee,Psal. 41. as the Psal∣mist speakes, that iudgeth wisely of the poore. St. Laurentius that holy Martyr, Archdeacon to Sixtus Bishop of Rome, when the tyrant Decius sought the spoile of the treasures of the Church, cried out, Horum manus (mea∣ning the hands of the poore) thesauros eccle∣siae in coelum deportaverunt. For these are truly the treasures in which Christ remaines;2 Cor. 4.7. we have this treasure in earthly vessels ac∣cording to the blessed Apostle, and it is written, I was hungrie, and yee gave me meat, I was thirstie and yee gave me drinke, I was a stranger, and yee tooke me in. Afterward punctually, what yee have done to the least of these, yee have done to mee. For this cause our holy Father him∣selfe
 witnessing it,Offic. l. 2. c. 28 sold the very goods of the Church, the sacred vessels themselves, namely to redeeme the captives being in extreame and miserable servitude, wonder∣full compassionate was hee to the poore: and in that your Lordship rightly resem∣bles him therein, being an acceptable piece of service to God, worthily is it presented indeed to your Lordship, and published in your name. Take therfore for your Lps ever∣lasting comfort, what that divine Father hath,August. in Lu∣cam. Serm. 3 5. Qui sunt qui habebunt tabernacula aeterna nisi Sancti Dei? & qui sunt, qui ab ipsis accipiendi sunt in tabernacula aeterna, nisi qui eorum indigentiae serviunt, & quod eis opus est hilariter serviunt? In the meane time receive this my travell of translation, I most humbly desire your good Lordship as a. pledge of my ancient love toward you, and true affection to honour that speciall grace of Commiseration so emi∣nent in your Lordship. And thus with my heartiest petition to the God of all goodnesse for your Lordships long life, and much happinesse, to the further benefit of Church andMunisicen∣tissimus Epis∣copus tam pa∣ter est Patriae quàm Eccle∣siae. Common-weale, I rest,

