



RIGHT Wor∣shipfull, and Reuerend Di∣uines, I am not igno∣rant
 how dangerous a thing it is to present a∣ny worke to the curi∣ous eyes of the world, or to speake any thing vnpolished in open audience; such is the delicacie of mens eares, as experience teacheth; and so censorious are the tongues of the en∣uious, that they are rea∣dy to condemne be∣fore they vnderstand,
 and to iudge of men and their actions, not as they are indeed, but according to their own preiudicate opinions. I know and must needs confesse, that it were good reason, nothing should come before your presence, but that which were most per∣fect, and excellent; How may I then (which am neither
 sound PHILOSO∣PHER, eloquent Ora∣tor, good Poet, nor learned Diuine) pre∣sume to present to your iudicious cōside∣rations this meane and illiterate Treatise, inti∣tuled, The Worldlings Looking-glasse, whose rudenesse, both for matter and method, is farre vnfit to weare the liueries
 of your names; yet Commasculaui frontem pudoris limites transili∣re, I haue put courage into my bashfull na∣ture, and haue so farre presumed vpon your curtesies, as that you will pardon my pre∣sumption in venturing so farre vpon your ma∣nifold fauors, as to de∣fend my poore paines by your patronage.
 And the rather, be∣cause the subiect is of so great importance, and so not vnworthy your best considerati∣ons▪
Touching my own insufficiency to han∣dle a point of so great moment, I haue the wise Heathen ready to plead for me, Not whoNon quis, sed quid di∣cit attendi∣t▪ Sen. is the speaker, but what he saith ought to be regar∣ded.
 Yet I could wish, I could act the Rhetori∣tians part, docendo, dele∣ctādo, flectendo, in teach∣ing, delighting, & per∣swading: yet seeing the first is a worke of ne∣cessitie, and the latter of victory and delight▪ I shall reioyce if I can performe that which is necessary, leauing the rest to those which excell therein, because
 our words must ratherNon dele∣ctent verba vestra, sed prosint. Seneca. Melius est vttell∣gnt popu∣li, quam vt commen∣dent gram∣matici. Amb. bring profit, then delight. Therefore it is a sure rule which the Father giues, that it is better so to speake, that the mean∣est may conceiue, then for to gaine the learneds commendation; because in graue and Diuine sentences many times it proues true: That while men adde an elo∣quentDum name∣ru adda∣tur, pondus detrahatur. forme of words;
 they detract from the substance of the matter. But the best affectedVerum ma∣gis amant in verbis, quam ver∣ba. Aug. doe rather looke to the truth deliuered, then to the curiositie of the manner of deliuery.
Concerning this present discourse, let it condemn or commend it selfe, for great words cannot better it, nor disabling speeces much impaire the worth of
 it; gold is tried by the touch, and good bookes by the worth; the wise are not so skil∣full in the one, but iudgment makes them as capable of the other. But how euer it bee, it is the first Budd that grew in my garden; & if it giue not that fra∣grant smel, that others more ful grown do; yet I doubt not but that it
 may giue some small sent, if the diligent Reader come not like Dinah, rather to feed his fancy by gazing on the lines, then to gaine by the matter. And though Elijah and E∣lisha2 Kin. 2. 12 be the Chariots of Israel, & the Horsemē therof, yet I doubt not but the footmen may doe some seruice in the battle: And Apollos
 without offence may water where Paul hath planted. And though I am not able to hold way with such strong & able laborers as you are, nor worthy to be accounted in the nū∣ber of good workmen; yet I doubt not but that by Gods assistance I may some way ad∣uance his glory, and benefit his Church.

The consideration hereof hath made mee not to regard the nip∣ping checks, & scorn∣ful speeches of Momus, and Zoilus, and all the rabble of censorious detractors, which will like of nothing but that which is framed in their owne braines, knowing no other way to grace themselues, then by their taunting
 tongues, which they imploy to disgrace o∣thers; and as they are carelesse to doe any good themselues; so they are ready to dis∣courage those which are carefull and willing to imploy their talents to their masters profit: like the enuious Jews, who would not buildEzra 4. 4. the Tēple of the Lord themselues, nor were
 willing that any other should; but when the godly did begin to im∣ploy themselues in the worke, they scoffed,Neh. 4. 2. mocked, and discoura∣ged them, fearing be∣like that GOD might haue too much glory: yet for al this, the godly were not discouraged, but for all their reproa∣ches ceased not till they had finished the
 Worke of the Lord, whose practise shall teach mee not to bee discouraged, but with the strength of my GOD to arme my selfe with patience to endure the cen∣sures of all men. For as in all good acti∣ons,Difficile im impo∣ssibile est placere om∣nibus, nec ana vn∣tu, qu▪ ta senten∣tirum di∣uersias est. Hieron. so especially in publishing of bookes it is hard to please all men: for there is not
 lesse varietie in mens countenances, then there is their iudge∣ments; and therefore nothing can be so wa∣rily spoken, but enui∣ousNihil tam circumspec∣t dici po∣test, quod non rapia∣tur ab im∣probis vel in alquam calumni∣am vel in ansam peccandi, vt vix tutum sit quicquid recte mone∣re. Era. ad Vol. men may find one thing or other to cauil at, if they bee disposed to depraue; though perhaps if they were put to amend, they would shew more cri∣ticisme then abilitie;
 yet for all this theyOptima queque ma∣lant on∣temnere quam discere. Pn. thinke it better to de∣spise those things which are good, then to learne them. But as the scope & aime of all my actions shall bee to please God, and dis∣charge my owne con∣science; so I will not trouble my self to please such mens humours; for if I should, I feare I might spend my time
 to as little purpose as he did that would fashionPlutarch. a Coate for the Moone: Neither doe I intend in this present discourse by adulation to praise your Wor∣ships, nor my selfe by ostentation, nor my worke by admiration: the first I leaue, lest my words should im∣paire your worth; the second I conceale, be∣cause
 I finde nothing in my selfe that de∣serues praise; and the last I refraine, for if my labour can but gaine your fauourable ac∣ceptance; and that you will be pleased so farre to countenance it, as that it may appeare to the world vnder your names, I haue that which I desire: and then,

Non ronchos metuam, non vani scommata vulgi,
Censores treticos, gram∣maticasue tribus.
No gleering scornes Ile feare, nor spite∣full gibes,
Nor crabbed Criticks, nor Grammarian tribes.
And thus crauing
 pardon for my bold∣nesse, with a thankfull acknowledgement of your many vndeser∣ued fauours extended towards me, I com∣mend you, and yours to the protection of the Almightie, and this present Discourse to your fauourable cen∣sures, and my selfe to your seruice and com∣mand, resting alwayes
 bound in dutie, and e∣uer deuoted in loue,
From my study at Low Layton in Essex. Ianuary 1. 1630.

