



THe art of Physick (right honourable) by the judgement of the lear∣ned, hath two princi∣pall parts:Two principall parts of Phy∣sicke, preserva∣tive and cura∣tive. the one de∣claring the order how health may bee preser∣ved, the other setting forth the meanes how sickenesse may be remedied. Of these two parts (in mine opinion) that is more excellent, which preserveth health and preventeth sickenesse. For as much as health is the most perfect state of mans body in this life,The end of Physick is to maintaine health. and the onely end or marke whereunto the Physician directeth all his doings; which state to continue, which end to enioy, which marke to hit, is much better then after we are fallen and erred, and missed, eftsoones to re∣cover the same. Even as it is better to stand fast still, than to fall and rise againe; better keep still a Castle or City, than after we have suffered the e∣nemy to enter, to rescue it again. For as the Poet

saith, Aegrius eijcitur quam non admittitur hospes. And for this cause (as I thinke) Asclepiades that famous Physitian, leauing in a manner the use of medicine, bent all his study to the order of dyet: As though diet were of such force, that by it dis∣eases might bee cured better than by medicines. Or, as Cornelius Celsus saith: Quia omnia fere medi∣camenta stomachum laedunt,Cor. Cel. li. 5▪ mali{que} succisunt. And no doubt but that meane and temperate dyet, in the feare of God, is more commendable than all the delicate fare in the world, and ought of the god∣ly to be esteemed as a thing that best contenteth nature, and preserveth health. Which is not onely confirmed by Salomon in his Proverbes,Ca. 15. ver. 16. & ca. 27.17. Daniel▪ 1.12. Eccle. ca. 31.1. and by the example of the Prophet Daniel, but most manifestly by Ecclesiasticus in these words. How little is sufficient for a man well taught and thereby he belcheth not in his chamber nor fee∣leth any paine. A wholesome sleepe commeth of a temperate belly. Hee riseth up in the mor∣ning and is well at ease in himselfe. But paine in watching and chollericke diseases, and pangs of the belly are with an unsatiable man. And againe, he saith: Be not greedy in all delights, and be not too hasty upon all meates:Eccle. ca. 37. ver. 28.19.30. for excesse of meates bringeth sickenesse, and gluttony commeth into cholericke diseases. By surfet have many peri∣shed: but hee that dieteth himselfe prolongeth his life.Whether diet may prolong life. But some will say: may diet prolong a mans life? Why, Iesus Sirach saith so. And it is a common case defended by the Physitians, that

Medicina vnam prorogare potest. Because Physicke is the ordinary meanes that God hath appointed for the preserving and recovering of health, and con∣sequently for the prolonging of life so long as his good pleasure is.Eccle. ca. 38 to the 13, verse. And though Phisicke cannot make a man immortall, nor surely defend him from all outward harmes, nor assure him to live out all his dayes, yet it maketh us sure of two things (as Avicenna saith) in that it keepeth the bo∣dy from corruption, and defendeth that naturall moysture bee not lightly dissolved and consu∣med. But it is a common saying: Qui medice vivit,The force of Phisicke. misere vivit. And a great punishment it is for a man to refraine his appetite. As, for your youth to for∣beare fruit: for one that hath the gout, to forbeare wine and women. Whereunto I answer,To keepe a good diet is great happines that to live after the rules of Phisicke is to live in health. And to live in health is great happinesse: for health and strength is above all gold (as saith Iesus Syrach.Cap. 30.15.16.) And a whole body above infinite trea∣sure: so that for the inestimable commodities of health, some have supposed that Vletudo is Sum∣mum bonum, as Aristotle declareth in his Ethiques.Lib. 1. cap. 4. Now what a reproch is it, for man whom God hath created after his owne likenesse, and en∣dued with reason, whereby hee differeth from beasts, to bee yet beastlike, to bee moved by sense to serve his belly, to follow his appetite con∣trary to reason? for as much as by the very order of nature, reason ought to rule,Reason ought to rule appe∣tite. and all ap∣petites are to bee bridled and subdued, as the

Philosopher notably teacheth in these words: Vt enim puer ex pedagogi praescriptione,Ethic. Lib. 3. c. 13 sic vis haec concu∣piscendi convenienter rationi debet vivere: Quocirca debet in moderato viro ac temperante, rationi congruere ea pars animi, quae cupiditatum est sedes: utrique enim propositum est id quod deceat. Nay, if a man bee naturally inclined (as the most part of men be) to one thing or other contrary to reason, yet hee should strive against that inclination, and doe as they doe, which would make crooked things straight, that is, to bend them as much as may bee to the contrary. For, as the Poet Ovid saith:
Ethic. Lib. 3. ca. ult.Est virtus placidis abstinuisse bonis.
and
Fortior est qui se quàm qui fortissima vincit.
Whereof wee have a worthy example in the Philosopher Socrates,Eras. in apo. Socrates a sin∣gular example of abstinence and continence who of set purpose often∣times exercised and enured himselfe to endure hunger and thirst: which bee more hard to suffer than to feede moderately, and to forbeare that which reason forbiddeth, although our appetite desire it. And when he was demanded why hee did so, that I may not accustome my selfe, (quoth he) to follow my sensuall appetites, lusts, and de∣sires. Also the same Philosopher affirmeth, that such as had well broken themselves to virtuous living and temperate diet, did perceive and take of the same, both much more pleasure and lesse paines, than such as with all high care & diligence did on every side make provisiō to have all things of pleasure. And I my selfe have knowne some that have taken as must delight in drinking of

small drinke, as others have by drinking of the strongest. And no marvaile,Vera voluptas quid. for true delight is best perceived, when appetite is ruled by reason, and not contrariwise, as the Epicures imagine, who make voluptas summum bonum. As that Philo∣xenus Erixius in Aristotle, who wished that nature had made his necke longer than the necke of a Crane,Ethi. Lib. 3. Cap. 12. Philoxenus the Epicure. to the end that he might have felt a long while the sweetnesse & pleasure of meat & drink going downe the throate. But hee that hath the Gowt will say, as I have heard many Gentlemen say ere now: Drinke wine, and have the Gowt:Whether or no keeping of a dyet doe eas our maladie drinke none, and have the Gowt. As who should say, that it maketh no matter what a man eateth or drinketh, for all is one so his stomake be to it. But this opinion is both repugnant to reason and common experience. For who so hath commonly an aking head, if it proceed of a hoate cause, shall feele that by drinking strong drink, the pain will be encreased. And who so hath a hoat stomack or inflammation of the Liver, shall plainly perceive that by hoat wines & spices it will become worse. And who so hath a wound or sore to bee healed, shall find that by eating fresh Beefe, Goose & gar∣lick, Pigeons and Eeles, & such like, the cure  not come so fast forward, as otherwise it . What meaneth this, but that meates and drikes doe alter our bodies, and either temper thm or distemper them greatly? And no marvaile seeing that such as the food is, such is the bloo▪ and such as the blood is, such is the flesh. Wherefore

I say to the Gentleman that hath the Gout: (for poore men seldome have it, because for the more part it groweth through excesse and ease) I say that although the forbearing of wine and women,Surfet and ease great causes of the Gowt. and other things noysome in that disease doe not utterly take away the Gowt, yet it will a∣bate, qualifie and abridge the paine, and make it much more tolerable. And so I thinke of all o∣ther diseases whatsoever. And to prove that good diet may preserve a man from sicknesse, I need to use no other example than of Galen himselfe, who by the meanes of his temperate diet, (as he witnesseth) after he passed the age of 28 years untill the time of his death,. 5. cap. 1. de  good  of diet . he was never grieved with any sicknesse, except the grudge of a Fever of one day, & that happened only by too much labour, and lived, as Sipontinus writeth, 140 yeares, and dyed only through feeblenesse of na∣ture. His dyet stood chiefly in three points, which I will here declare, that such as would live long in health may endeavour to follow it. The first point was, Nunquam ad satietatem comedere aut bibere. The second, Crudum nunquam gustare. The third, Odorificum semper anhelitum spirare. hese three points,Galens dyet stood chiefly in three points. whosoever will carefully , if hee be of a ound constitution, may live  in perfect health. I say, if he bee of a ound constiution, for some are so corrupt from their , that if Esculapius (as Galen speaketh) were ever at their elbow to advise them in their dyet, ye could they not live out halfe their daies.

And some that bee of a ound constitution by na∣ture,Intemperancy corrupteth the originall complexion. doe yet through intemperancy so corrupt their complexion, that either they live not untill they be old, or else their old age is most fulsome and lothsome. Whereof hath risen that saying not so common as true, Intemperanter acta inventus, effaetam parit senectutem. In this number chiefly be Courtiers, Lords, Ladies, Gentlemen, and Gentlewomen, though not all, yet many moe than of the common people. For these common∣ly live not so long as the inferior sort. As for lear∣ned men, (if they be Students indeed) through rest of the body, and immoderate musing of the minde, they are not commonly so long lived (the more it is to bee lamented) as the vulgar sort. Wherefore that noble Philosopher Theophrastus,Cice. 3. Tus. Theophrastus complaint of nature. when he dyed, is reported to have accused nature, for that shee had given long life to Ravens and Crowes, whom it nothing availed, and had gi∣ven but a short time to men, whom it behoved to live much longer, to the end that mans life might be perfectly instructed with all manner of arts and disciplines. But I trust your honour being chiefly moved by a speciall gift of Gods grace, and partly following these and such like advertisements, will so diet your selfe, that you may live long to the glory of God, to the bene∣fit of the common-wealth, and to the comfort of your friends: which God grant according to the good pleasure of his will. And so I end, be∣seeching your honour to take this my dedication in good part. And although the worke bee most

unworthy of so worthy a Patron: yet because it is an exercise of learning, whereof your honour hath beene alwaies a speciall favourer, my trust is that you will vouchsafe to give it your protectiō, and the rather for that it is the fruit of your owne soile, I meane the testimony of a dutifull minde of the tenant towards his Lord and Master. 1584.

