

¶ To the ryght honorable lorde Henry erle of Surrey.
John̄ Clerc, wysheth contynuall helthe.
ALbeit this worke (right honorable lorde) is in the Frenche entyt∣led as aforesayd, & onelye dysposeth of suche lyght matyer of folysshe Loue, as by a longe season rey∣gned betwene Atnalt and Lucenda. Yet neuerthe¦les thynkynge assuredly your Lordshyp shall fyn∣de that herein with perce, the same shal mysse in some others. And knowyng by lōge experyēce, not onely the great wysdom and synguler iudgement er th God the dysposer of all thynges▪ hath moste abundantly endowed you. But also the ex∣cedyng great paynes and trauayles susteyned by your selfe in traductions aswell out of the Laten, Italien as the Spanyshe. and Frenche, wherby your Lordshyp umoūteth many others, not one¦ly in knowledge. but also in laude and cōmenda∣cyon, lyke as I distrust not the same, wyll rather prudently accordynge to your accustomed fasshy∣on regarde and consyder the wytty deuyse of the thynge, the maner of Locucyons, the wyse senten∣ces and the subtyll and dyscret answeres made on bothe parties, in my power opynyon not vnwor∣thy to be noted than otherwyse without  ge the same, wyllengly reic it. So I thought cō¦uenyent by these to sygnyfye that in this traducti¦on I haue not estemyd the order of the wordes in  other tonges, as it is seen some haue done i sōdry places of theyr trāslacions, wherby it is not only thought they publysshe theyr owne folye, but al∣so vndoubtedly certayne that they by the same in the place of lybertie submyt themselfes to seruy eu

e without hauyng rese to thoseruacyn of that thyng whiche in this case o moste specyally , wherby the sence of the Aucthour is oftē deproued, and the grace ne perfection of tho e other tonge dewly expressed, but vnderstandynge that euery tonge hath his {pro}perties, maner of Lo∣cucyons perticuler vehemēcies, dignyties, and ry¦chesses, I haue arrested my self onely vpon the sen¦tēces & maiesties therof so curyously as I fyrmely trust thineuciō of thauthor is truely expressed i  declaratiō wherof, lyke as I humbly beseche your Lordshyp to take thyse my lytell laboures & great good wyll in acceptable yt & as ye monumēt of my power herty affection alwayes borne to the same So hauyng most fyre confydence in your great bountie I dystrust not the same, wyll take for sa∣tisfaction, not that I do but that I desyre▪
wryt∣ten at Lambythe the .xvii. daye of Marche. 14.
