



COmpetency (most Reverend Father in God,Maximè sae∣cerdoti hoc convenit, or∣nare Dei tem∣plum decore corgruo, ut e∣tiam hoc cultu aula Domini resplendeat: Ne restrictio∣rem erga cleri∣cos, aut indul∣gentiorem se prabeat. Al∣terū enim in∣humanum, al∣terum prodi∣gum, si aut sumptus desit necessitati eo∣rum, quos à sordidis nego∣tiationis aucu∣pijs retrahere debeas, aut vo∣luptati super∣stuat, Ambros. Offic. l. 2. c. 21 and Right Ho∣norable) for the suf∣ficient maintenance of the Clergie, to whom the Cure of Soules is commit∣ted;
 is neither the last nor the least, of your Graces godly cares and en∣devours. For which pious intention of your Graces, my selfe amongst many others of my Brethren, stand in no small degree obliged and en∣gaged: To your Grace, I say, and to the Right Honorable my ever hono∣red good Lord, the Lord Keeper; and the Right Honorable Sir Francis Windebanck, Principall Secretary of estate unto his Majestie. All your Honors great favours, paines, and pie∣ties: I were most unthankefull not to acknowledge, as bestowed upon my selfe; in your endevours (upon my petition) to induce some Improprie∣taries whom I lately had to doe with∣all, to an enlargement of my poore maintenance. Which, though for want of devotion, perhaps, in some of
 them, it tooke not the effect desired: yet is my selfe and familie, and in me, all of my Ranke and profession; ne∣verthelesse beholding unto your Honors, for your noble encourage∣ment to our studies. Seeing there∣fore that thankefulnesse is ever more testified by Tokens then by words: I advised with my selfe how to make the best expression of it. But finding my greatest Riches, to be my Paines: I here make bold most humbly to present it to your Honours; And that in a better mans performance then mine owne: even of the most holy and admired St. Ambrose. This hath beene the prime motive to mee (most Reverend, and Right Honora∣ble) to present this my Translation; first to your Honors; and by you, to the rest of Gods people. And your
 Grace, verely, in this your most pru∣dent Government, joyned with un∣daunted courage for Gods cause: is (mee thinkes) the neerest resem∣blance of this most renowned Bi∣shop. And whereas hee also was a Lieutenant of the Citie of Millane, a Consul, and principall Officer of the Emperours in his time; I hope hee shall find the fairer entertainment: and if you please, imitation too, with your Honors. The matter is of Chri∣stian Offices and morality: of Iustice, Magnanimitie, Prudence and tempe∣rance joyned with pietie: great stu∣dies and practises of your Grace and Honours. Now most humbly desi∣ring my poore performance in the Translation, may both bee excused and accepted: I in all humilitie and thankfulnesse, make tender of it to
 your noble hands: desiring leave that under the patronage of your much honored and beloved names, it may bee recommended unto the people. For which Second Favour, I shall ever remaine, the daily Orator for

