



RIGHT HONOV∣RABLE,
To dye is the course of Na∣ture, to dye well, of Christian
 Art: that is common to men with beasts; this proper vn∣to Gods seruants alone: Om∣nes2. Reg. 14. morimur (said the woman of Thecua vnto Dauid) & quasi aqua in terram dilabimur: we all do dye, and like water fall v∣pon the earth: few dye well, and therefore make a further fall. The Philosopher will haue Science to stand in spe∣culation, Art in worke; the one in knowledge, the other in practice: and the more ex∣quisite the Art is, and hath the more noble obiect, by so much the greater labour and industry is required: the Art we speake of hath a most emi∣nent
 end, and of such difficul∣ty, as it requireth for labour, our vttermost endeauour, for tyme our whole life. Art ey∣therArist. . Physi. tex. 79. perfits nature, or doth i∣mitate it. This for imitation hath nothing, because death is nothing but the corrupti∣on of Nature, the defect and priuation of life, the diuorce and dissolution of our essen∣tiall parts; and the death of the wicked is tearmed by S.Bern. serm. 26. in Can∣tica. Bernard, the mother of sor∣row, the enemy of glory, the gate of hell, the entrance to perdition: none will imitate, which most abhor. Art ther∣fore must perfit this deformi∣ty
 more truly in the maske wherewith it comes couered thē in the thing it selfe which is without horrour, vnles it be of such as our selues cast vpon it. This art of perfiting nature all should learne, but most neglect; many precepts are deliuered, but all inclu∣ded in one, to wit, a constant good life, which makes this rough passadge plaine, this dissolution easy, this defor∣mity amiable, this diuorce most delightfull: non habemus (saith Saint Ambrose) quod inAmbros. de bono mortis cap. 8. morte metuamus, si nihil quod ti∣mendum it vita commisit; there is nothing that we need feare
 in death, if our life haue com∣mitted nothing that is to be feared.
Of this argument all spi∣tuall books doe treat, and in particuler that vvhich pur∣posely was written of this art by Cardinall Bellarmyne, & vvas the last that euer he vvrote: but for that wordes where workes are wanting do blush, as Tertullian sayth, andTertul. lib. de Patient. Leo serm. 1. de San. Laurent. Saint Leo validiora sunt exem∣pla quaàm verba, & plenius est o∣pere docere, quàm voce: Ex∣amples are of more force to moue then wordes, and more effectuall it is to teach with reall actions then verball dis∣course;
 therefore vnto the doctrine of the Cardinall in this behalfe I will adioine his Example, that the one may confirme the other. And al∣though, omitting his life, (which others are now in hand to write) I relate only his last sicknes and death; yet from the one we may con∣clude of the other, because as S. Ambrose testifyeth, MorsAmbros. ibidem. vitae est testimonium, death is the testimony of our life: and sel∣come we see a saintlike death to follow after a synfull life; the priuiledge is rare, the ex∣amples few; the common stile as Saint Augustine noteth
 is otherwise, to wit, that MorsAug. de Ciuit. Dei lib. 13. cap: 2. in fine. bonis bona, malis mala; a good death befalls to the good, & an ill to the wicked: wherfore the death of this Cardinall being so notable as it was, wil not only confirme what he vvrote in his booke of this art, but also testify for his for∣mer life, and shew that what he there sayd, came not so much out of his great lear∣ning and reading, wherein he was singular, as it did ex abun∣dantiaMatth. 12. Luc. 6. cordis, out of the inward habituall vertue wherwith he was endewed.
And for that his doctrine and example do shew & con∣firme
 one and the selfe same thinge, I meane the great sanctity of the man, they shal not be separated in the dedi∣cation that in the argument doe agree. Wheras therfore his Doctrine in our tongue came forth in your Name, his Exāple may not passe in any other; in which alone you may as in a glasse behold how liuely the Child repre∣sents the Father, the worke the workeman; so far truly, as the Art he wrote may seeme to haue beene nothing else, but an artificiall description of his owne death that was to ensue. Some will take vpon
 them to teach others to dye, vvho vvhen they come to it themselues are to seeke a mai∣ster; and such a one may tru∣ly say, that which Saint Gre∣gory,Greg. in Pastor. ca. vltimo. out of meere humility, sayd of himselfe, when he had in his booke called Pastorale, described an excellēt Pastor: Pulchrum depinxi Pastorem Pi∣ctor foedus: I haue painted a fayre Pastour, being my selfe a foule Painter: I haue taken vpon me to teach that which I neuer learned to doe, and therefore all his teaching as Saint Chrysostome well noteth,Chrysost. hom. 16. in Matth. serueth to no other end then to condemne the teacher: but
 contrariwise vnto the renow∣ned Cardinall we may very fitly apply the wordes of ourMatth. 5. Sauiour; Qui fecerit & docu∣erit, hic magnus vocabitur in Reg∣no caelorum; He that shall doe & teach, shall be called great in the Kingdō of heauen: his doctrine you haue already seene in his book; the ensuing narratiō which I now present you will particulerly declare how in his last sicknes & death he did correspond threunto: to which further I add his fu∣neralls, buriall, and some o∣ther remarkeable euents, few in number out of many, but so warrāted for truth, as grea∣ter,
 in thinges of this nature, cannot be required.
And heere I doe sincere∣ly affirme, that in this Relati∣on I follow no vncertaine ru∣mours, no doubtfull asserti∣ons, no flying reportes with∣out ground or subsistence of truth; much lesse am I mo∣ued by any partiall affection to exaggerate or extenuate a∣ny thing: but faythfully put downe what I saw my selfe, or vvhat other eye-vvittnesses haue seene, what vpon their owne knowledge and con∣science they haue affirmed; many, yea most things I haue taken from an Italian letter
 of this subiect written by Fa∣ther Iames Minutoli, a graue, learned, & vertuous man, to Cardinall Farnesius; and I vse the more willingly his testi∣mony, both for that I know his integrity, and for that by the appointment of the Ge∣nerall he continually remay∣ned with Bellarmyne, frō the beginning of his sicknes till the last gasp, and set down no more then what he saw in any particuler: others somtymes I alleadge, but of such singu∣lar credit as they are beyond exception, or else I would not haue so much relyed on their vvordes. Who they are, for
 the most part I name, when I set downe any thing of mo∣ment vpon their attestation. But least this Epistle seeme to long for so short a Relation, I will heere conclude it with my prayer, that the death of this famous man may serue to put you in mind, with the beginning of the new yeare, not to forget the end of your owne life. This last of De∣cember 1621.









