



IT is now, R. Honorable, thirty yeeres since I pre∣sented to your L. and the late Earle of Leicester my Lord and Master, the historie of COMMINES rudely translated into our vulgar toong, the which of later times at the request of the late Lord Chauncellor sir Christopher Hatton, I perused anew, and enlarged with such notes & pedegrees as seemed necessarie, as well for explanation as (in some few places) for correction of the historie. Since his death, certaine gentlemen to whose hands the booke happened to come, tooke so great pleasure and delight therein, that they determined to put it to the presse, supposing it a great dishonor to our nation, that so woorthy an historie being extant in all languages almost in Christendome, should be suppres∣sed in ours. Notwithstanding their resolution, they forbare of curtesie to put in execution till their purpose should be made knowen to me. And al∣beit that I alleaged many reasons why in my conceit bookes of this na∣ture, treating of Princes secrets were vnfit to be published to the vulgare sort, the rather bicause the Author in some places seemeth to be of that opinion himselfe: yet none of my reasons could preuaile, but they conti∣nued in their former determination: adding thereunto, that others besides my selfe had taken paines in this historie, and though I of peeuishnes would suppresse my labors, yet they would not suppresse theirs. So that would I nould I to the presse the booke must go, being already warranted by publike authoritie thereunto. I seeing the matter aduaunced thus far, thought it no time to draw backe any longer, but in the end tooke the bur∣then vpon my selfe, doubting if I had done otherwise, both the blemishing of the historie, wherein I may boldly say, that I haue more trauelled than any man that hath entermedled therewith; and also that the worke should

be presented to some patrone that had no interest therein. Wherefore hauing againe examined it, and freed it from some faults that me thought fit to be reformed: I haue presumed to publish it vnder the protection of your Lorships honorable name, to whom of right it appertaineth in many respects. First, bicause the author thereof was a noble man, one of your owne cote, the wisest, and the best acquainted with all matters of state of any man in his time. Whereunto I adde, that he continued a Counsellor successiuely to so many French Kings, that he was reputed one of the an∣cientest Counsellors in Christendome at his death: wherein your Lord∣ships fortune is not onely correspondent, but hath also surmounted his. Secondarily, your Lordship hath the aisne title to it, and lastly the right of suruiuor casteth it vpon you by course of common lawe. Wherefore all these circumstances well considered (my particular duties also notforgot∣ten) I thought it a kinde of sacrilege to suffer your Lordship to be robbed of your right. May it therefore please you to receiue this historic into your honorable protection as your owne, as well in regard of the Author, being a man of such condition as aboue is rehearsed; as also of the worke, treating of that subiect wherewith your Lordship at this day is better ac∣quainted than any man liuing: and lastly, in respect of your owne title thereunto. Which no whit doubting but that your Lordship will most wil∣lingly vouchsafe to do, beseeching the Almightie long to preserue you to the great stay of this flourishing estate, most humbly I take my leaue this first of Nouember 1596.

