



THe excellēcie of the calling (most Reuerend Father) that God hath promoted your Grace vnto, by the vn-erring hand of his sa∣cred Deputie, to be their Agent, in causis maioribus, to the Churches of this King∣dome, may iustly challenge the labours of as many as handle the pen with discretion in our daies; but mine (if J be ought) af∣ter
a more especiall manner: whom, the continuance of your fauour, for no fewe yeares, shining vpon my poore studies, hath made wholly pledged to your seruice; and some employments also vouchsafed from your Grace, haue kept from being altoge∣ther idle. So that if my meannesse should euer bee exalted to bring forth any thing worthy publication (which your Grace ra∣ther construeth ouer-fauourably of this Pamphlet, than it any way deserueth) J haue long since consecrated it to the honor of your Grace, as one that hath both coun∣tenanced alwaies mine endeauours, and also directed, after a sort, my courses. Howbeit, this small worke, such as it is J now present vnto your Grace, not so much in lieu of receiued kindnesse (which you haue multiplied vpon me and mine, euen when your name hath beene concealed) as inuoking patronage against the oppug∣ners.
For, lata porta, but aduersarij multi, as S. Paul said to his; 1. Cor. 16.9. and As concerning this way, wee knowe nothing, but that it is euery where spoken against; as they said to S. Paul, Act. 28.22.
J speake the truth in Christ (most Re∣uerend Father) I lie not, the holy Ghost also bearing witnesse with my conscience; that J grieue vnspeakeably, night and day, whithersoeuer J chaunce to looke, at the malice of Satan (how transfor∣med soeuer) and the disaster of our times. And as our Sauiour sometimes, in the dayes of his flesh, wept in compassion o∣uer the great Citie, diuining the ruines of it: so mine eyes gush out with wa∣ter, to see there is no religion amongst menne for the most part, but that which is tainted with a spice of facti∣on.

 But to let-go complaints, and to leaue that to him which will purge his floore in a due time, as one that hath his fan already in his hand, and lets the yellow weedes to shoote vp but in a policie, to exercise our patience, and to magnifie his wisedome in the latter end: as for the Booke, my com∣fort is, that whom the reuerence of your Graces mildnesse and temper, most befit∣ting Moses, and the aduancement of his chaire, shall not represse for shame; him the edge of your iudgement, long since tri∣ed and renowmed for the most accurate perusall of these causes and controuersies, aboue all the Church-men of our Nati∣on, shall daunt perforce.
And with that very hope J end for this time; humbly recommending the pro∣sperities of your Grace, and the good e∣state of the Church Christian, to the Lord Christ: that vnder your auspicious and
happie gouernement (which God of his mercy graunt may be most most long) our Nazarites may bee whiter than the snow, & our Priests purer than the Sap∣phires.

