


WEll doth that Father, and vvithout doubt diserueth praise, vvho having a daughter a Virgin dravvne by the guile of panders into some levvd and dishonest house, and there trimmed after the vvhorish guise doth presently rescue her thence and bring her home

to his ovvne house before shee be utterly spoyled. But the same Father (if he be vvise) thinks it not enough for the safty of his daughter, and the honor of his house, that he hath brought her home agayne, vnles he take from her vvholly vvhatsoever he knovves to be accounted in those houses a vvhorish attyre.
Neyther doth he inquire vvhence such attyre came first: but iudgeth it dishonorable to himselfe, and so un∣vvorthy his daughter and vvhole family, that any such thing at all as strompets haue vsed for dressings in their houses, should appeare in his.
Neyther doth hee giue eare to their persvvasions, vvho beare him in hand that all things are to bee Estee∣med according to the Fathers mynd in his ovvne house; and so thinke that the Fathers approbation can make that honest, in his ovvne house, for his daughter, and vvhole family, vvhich in another house, is most disho∣nest, for any daughters that regard their ovvne credits: ascribing so much to the Fathers prerogatiue, that vvhat soever he approues, must be of others vvell li∣ked of, so farre as it concernes his ovvne house. For he knovves full vvell, that although all those things vvhich he hath authorized in his ovvne house be there vvell thought of, yet that is not enough, synce the honor of his daugh∣ter, and his vvhole Family, must not only hee cared for

vvithin his ovvne house, but also throughout the vvhole Citie, that he may remoue all evill suspicions from his family among all his neighbours; and is heedfull that the panders haue not the least occasion left them, of chal∣lenging or laying clayme to the sayd daughter, as hauing some of their vvhor-house-marks upon her.
Even so in the Church of God, as in a city, Magistra∣tes and Ministers are in place of parents, having the pure and right Administration of the Sacraments com∣mitted unto them of God, for to be tended, and tendered as their ovvne daughter. It is therfore very commen∣dable in these parents of the church (as vvee may ter∣me them) if they rescue the lavvfull & pure Admini∣stration of the Sacraments from the violence and ty∣rany of the Romish Panders, by taking it into their ovvne care and Custody.
But heer they ought to remember (Especially they vvho are called by the holy Spirit, Eminent Ministers of God, and Nursing Fathers of his church I.E. Chri∣stian Kings and Monarchs, that it is not enough for them, thus to have brought this daughter out of the Pa∣pists stevves, home into their ovvne care and keeping, unles they also put of from her, all that dressing, vvhich they knovv to be vvhorish in the sayd stevves, that no such thing may be seene vvith them, vvhich may be

accounted vvhorish: Especially in that citty vvhere there is great Variety of judgments, the ouerruling vvherof by mans Autority is not to bee expected, and vvhere there are so mamy hucksters for the stevves re∣mayning.
Nor let them heare the delusions of those vvho sug∣gest, that such kindes of dressing from vvhence soeuer they bee taken may bee made good & honest by Autho∣ritye. For vvell they knovv, they are not set ouer the vvhole church of God, but only one part of it, as a Fa∣mily in a Citty, and that therfore though they could bea∣re out such things at home by their Authoritye; yet it is their dutye (as they regard publike Chastity and hone∣sty) to procure the honor of their daughter and fami∣lye not only vvithin their ovvne vvalls but alsoe throu∣ghout the vvhole citty; not suffring any thing to be seene vvithin their house, vvhich they knovv to be held, urged, and maynteyned by the Romish stevves and their instruments as their proper vvhorish stuffe.
Last of all they must bee vvary, least any signes or tokens bee left upon their daughter, by vvhich shee may bee questioned agayne by these panders as one of theires.
Novv (if it please your Excellent Majestye) you are one of these nursing Fathers of the Church of God bles∣sed bee his name therefore: and in this high calling (by

Gods providence) you haue this Ministery of the Sacra∣ments rescued out of the popish Brothells, and brought into your ovvne care and keeping: Here therfore bee plea∣sed to set before your eyes the foresayd example of a good Father in those things vvhich yet remayne to be per∣formed, I. E. in prouiding for the credit of this your reduced daughter and so of your vvhole Family, not only in this your Flourishing Kingdome, but also in the Catholike Church of Christ vvherof you are a cite∣zen, unto vvhom a principall part therof as an honora∣ble familye is Committed in trust.
This is that which all the Godly throu∣ghout the Christian world doe expect from your hand, and that the more earnest∣ly because they know that God hath enri∣ched you with such excellent gifts, & placed you in so high a place almost aboue all o∣thers; euen to this very end, that you might remoue from the Ministery of the Sacra∣ments all those popish trinkets, wherewith it hath bin fearfully prophaned, & restore unto it agayne that virgin-like attyre,

wherwith it was of old adorned by the high King of Kings, and lawgiver Christ the Lord in his holy Institutions. So shall your faith and fidelitye bee famous throughout the Christian world: and the Church of England grow more honorable under your Gouernment.
The Latyn vvords of Iohannes Alasco himselfe.
