



EXcuse mee I pray, (which am now the hand of my
deceased friend) that I commend these his Reli∣gious Instructions, vnto your Patronages and Embracements. The long time of your ac∣quaintance, honest mu∣tuall traffique, and for∣mer pious conuersation, may iustly challenge it, both of the Author, and my selfe: Yee often haue taken and built your cre∣dit on his word, in your bought Wares, which
the effect hath confirmed to your profit. Once more beleeue him, and buy these his Meditatiōs, on his word, the price is but your acceptance, read∣ing, and application. And if thus you will vse, and trie these his last Marchandizes, they will prooue vnto you, of infinite worth, and price, for by them you shall obtaine that precious Pearle and hidden trea∣sure,
of which the Go∣spell mentions. It was your charitable & Chri∣stian loue, that accom∣panied his mortall body to his last home, and it was his louing care, here to direct those that fol∣lowed him, and others to the graue, lest they should too long make their aboade with the Gaderenian, among the tombes. The graue is but a passage, not a dwel∣ling
place. It doth but preserue the pledge of our bodies vntill the day of resurrection. There∣fore those that truly fol∣low deceased Christians, follow them not onely vnto the dore of death, and entrance of the graue, but through death vnto life, through the graue vnto heauen. And lest death, the way to life, should seeme too terrible, and rather af∣fright
from the way, then inuite vnto it. This our friend and charita∣ble Author shewes and proues here, that in re∣spect of the body, the soule, the world, the last Iudgement, it properly is not to be feared. And further to embolden the weake faith of a trem∣bling Christian, hee vn∣maskes and vnarmes death, hee so describes her, and prepares our bo∣dies
to embrace her, that death is no more death, but victory: no more the obiect of feare, but de∣sire. Wherefore hauing thus farre set in a word the description, of her description, before you, I dare no longer detaine you from the victory of her: If you please but to follow either the pre∣scription, or example of this our louing friend through death vnto life,
through the graue vnto heauen. J dare promise, that you will attaine my wish, all happinesse here, and eternall glory here∣after. Jn confidence whereof I rest,
London this 10. of Iune, 1629.

