



IT may seeme somewhat strange
vnto your Ladiship, that I should
thus presume to publish this my
poore & Penitent Publican, vnder
your Honorable protection: yet
in regard of your Ladiships Inte∣gritie
of heart vnto God, manifes∣ted
by your most vertuous life, and zealous loue
vnto true Religion. I am animated to aduenture
him in the worlds view, being shadowed vnder the
shield of your sacred vertues, which (like the bright
beames of Phoebus) may Illustrate, and giue a long
life, to this my illiterate, & litle-worth labour, which
(wanting your fauorable reflection) might with∣out
regard. For (Madame) I am not ignorant,
that Enuie attends vpon all good attempts: Ismael
will scoffe, and mocke at Isaack, euen in Abrahams
house, and Shemy will reuile Dauid to his teeth, and

therefore the godlie in these dayes, may well say
with holy Iob, my soule is cut off, though I liue. Iob
the 10. and 1. verse. The righteous as the prophet
speaketh, are most despised: for let Elisha, goe vp to
Bethel, and euen the little children will call him
Bald-pate: and so he that labours to liue vprightly,
and to keepe the true path, he is accounted precise,
and called a Puritan: the consideration whereof,
makes manie men that would be feruent, to be
fearefull; and like Peter, to follow a far off, and rather
to denie him, that died for vs; then to the face of his
enemies, affirme that we knowe him: such is the
times impietie, and our infirmitie, that we are easily
intreated to retire from any godly action, or good
intention. And with Demas, quickly drawne to
abandon God, and imbrace the world: yea euen
this vild & vaine world, which many excellent wise
and worthy men, haue most fitly compared vnto a
sea of glasse, of the which S. Iohn speakes, Reuelat.
the 4. and the 6. verse, for it is both so slipperie and so
vncertaine; so full of troubles & tempestious waues,
one wallowing vpon the necke of another, that it is
high time for vs to say with the Disciples: Maister
saue vs, or else we perish: Mathew. 8. and, the 25. verse,
for so small is our faith, that we soone faint: especi∣ally
in Gods affaires.
Yet wee seeme vnto men, as though wee were
both so constant and so confident in God, that we
might say with Iob, Though he kill mee, yet will I trust
in him. Iob. the 13. and the 14. verse. But (alas) if
we do behold but a litle persecution, lay hand vpon

our profession, for feare of the one, wee are readie
to flie from the other. Forgetting the charge that
Saint Paul giues vnto Timothie, Fight the good fight
of Faith, and lay holde of Eternall life. Timot. the 6.
and the 12. verse: Wee are not onely cold in loue,
but also carelesse in Religion. For like the readie,
(yet recanting) sonne, some say, they wil come into
Christs congregation, but come not: & others say,
they wil not come, yet they do: but it is at the end of
the day, before they will drawe neere; And long
doth Wisedome crie in the streetes, before she can call
them together, to goe to the Tabernacle, and returne
to the Lord, who by his Prophet Ezekiell, makes this
proclamation: Ezek. the 18. and the 23. verse. Haue
I any desire (saith hee) that the wicked should die? or
shall hee not liue, if hee returne from his owne wayes?
And againe, in the 31. verse of the same chapter, he
saith, Cast away your trangressions, wherewith you haue
transgressed, and make you a new heart, and anew spirit,
for why will yee die, oh yee house of Israel? Nay more,
hee promiseth by the same Prophet, in the 34. and
the 16. verse, I will seeke that which was lost, and bring
againe, that which was driuen away, and builde vp that
which was broken, and will strengthen the weake;
wherby we may see, that the Lord would haue none
to be lost, but with the penitent Publican, to con∣fesse
our sinnes, and to reforme our selues, and ac∣cording
to the counsell of Saint Peter, in his 2. chap.
and 1. verse, laying aside all maliciousnes, all guile,
and dissimulation, all Enuie, and euill speaking, as
new borne babes, let vs desire the sincere milke of

the word: that wee may growe thereby, from ver∣tue
to vertue, and from grace to grace, vntill we be
come perfit men in CHRIST IESVS; which wee
can neuer be, vnlesse with the Penitent Publican, we
doe truely humble our selues before the Almighty,
and vnfainedly craue mercie and remission.
The which, that we may the more be animated
vnto, I haue here (though but in a homely habit) set
him, to be a patterne of true penitence, to all such
persons, as haue any desire to imitate him, in pray∣er,
and repentance: by whose example, if any be in∣cited
(as I hope there shall) to confesse their sinnes,
and craue pardon for the same; let them first giue
glorie vnto God, by whose holy aide I did indite it,
and then thankes vnto your Honour, vnder whose
protection I haue presumed to publish it, that it may
thereby (as with a buckler) be defended from the
venemous tongues of the Enuious.
And thus with my most humble and hartie prai∣ers
vnto the Almightie, for your Ladiships
long life, and prosperitie, I ende,
this 6. of Iulie. 1610.

