



MAny can witnes (deerely beloued in our Sauiour) how willing I was to surcease, and did in deede breake off, when I had composed the one halfe of the treatise ensuing, holding then, the proceeding therein a labour and charge needlesse, because foure of our brethren were go∣ing to Rome for his Holines decision, and end in the controuersie. But in this suspence of minde, and intermission of the worke, our Arch-priest on the 26. of Ia∣nuary last, promulgated the Popes Breue of the 17. of Au∣gust next before, after he had kept the same three months or longer in his hands, as it is sayd. In which Breue, both we were demaunded what cause we had, why we did not obey the Cardinall Protectors letters erecting the subordination, & iudge∣ment therein giuen: That doubtlesse, we ought to haue obeyed, and admitted the authoritye. Which demaund and iudgement, beside many other places in the Breue, were euident argu∣ments vnto vs, that the same was graunted vpon wrong in∣formation, and Ca. si 15. de fil praesb. li. 6. & ca. si motu proprio de praebend. li. 6. consequently of no sufficient force to bind. For had his Holines or the Cardinall Praefect of the Breues, bin truly informed of the case, neither his Holines, nor the Cardinall would without peraduenture euer haue made such a demaund, or giuen like sentence against vs. And as litle would either of their sacred persons, haue omitted to comprehend the Iesuites vnder the censure of the Breue,
 or letted to reproue their fault, had they knowne that the Ie∣suites were the prime authors, the only stiffe maintainers, and reuiuers of the crime against vs. Moreouer, at the very time of the promulgation of the Breue, there came forth first the Apollogie and then the Appendixe with licence of our Archpriest, as written by the vnited Priestes in due subordination vnto him: books that most sharply inueigh against vs, for not receiuing the authoritie at first, vpon sight of the Constitu∣tiue letter. For which causes, and for that sundrie persons of good place, haue of late affirmed, that Fa. Lister could and would defend his position of our schisme against any scholler in the world, and also because certain▪ fauorites of the Ie∣suites hold opinion, that the Breue doth not cleere vs from schisme, but leaueth it doubtfull and vndecided; and finally, for that some of their most deuoted, are so ful spirited, as they sticke not to report, that the cause why the Pope declared in the maner he hath done for vs, was not for that our cause was iust, but vpon a prudent consideration of not giuing discon∣tentment to the king of Fraunce and our State: I say for these causes and some other like, & to giue satisfaction to all parts, who vpon anie of the former grounds or colours haue con∣ceiued amisse of it, I thought it my bounden dutie (especially my brethren most earnestly importuning me) to resume and finish the poore labours which I had begun and layd aside.
When the Cardinal Protectors letters were shewed vnto vs for institution of the authoritie, we tooke our selues vn∣bound, before God and man, to subiect our selues thereunto, his Grace not sending with the Letter Constitutiue any re∣script of his Holinesse, or other Canonicall testimonie for proofe of such his iurisdiction in our countrey: and we rested the more confident, and secure in this opinion, both in re∣spect it appeared most manifest vnto vs, that the authoritie was procured by false suggestion, and by a man much disliked
 of our Prince and state, and who sought to rule & command our Clergie: and also for that it was propounded vnto vs by M. Blackwell with apparant falsities, and with orders directly tending to tyrannie, namely that we should not discusse the Pro∣tectors authoritie, nor the institution of our Superiours, nor make any secret meetings for aduising one the other, when as the con∣dition of our state embarreth vs to meete publikely, nor write letters to any beyond the seas, without his priuitie. For these rea∣sons, and for that the authoritie it selfe was most strange, ne∣uer heard of in the Christian world, meerely penall, without mixture of any benefite to our selues, Church or countrey, of most absolute soueraigntie, without tye in the procee∣dings to any forme of law, other then the arbitrarie pleasure of the Archpriest: and the receiuing of the sayd authoritie, (the same being a superiour prelature) expresly, and vnder heauie penalties forbidden Extu. Iaiuncl. c. Bulla 2. Iulij 2. & Iulij 3. constit. 34. by the constitutions of holie Church, except the partie preferred thereunto, do shew the Letters of the Sea Apostolicke (such as the Cardinals were not) for proofe of his promotion.
Notwithstanding all these exceptions and iustifications of our bearing off to admit the subordination: we neuer∣thelesse offered to obey Maister Blackwell in the meane, though not to receiue him to our Superiour, till such time as the Pope should make forth his Breue, or otherwise confirme him in his place, and likewise protested vnder our hands, that no sooner should any such Breue or confirmation appeare, but that it should find vs readie most absolutely to receiue the authoritie. But this was not deemed sufficient, nor ought could satisfie, but our present submission. Which because we deferred to make, and did not yeeld to acknowledge him for our Superiour vpon testimonie of the Cardinals letter, father Lister diuulged his condemned Treatise against vs; his Supe∣riour father Garnet, and M. Blackwel approued the same. They
 taught, that our company was to be shunned: that our facultiesIn Fa. Listers treatise, and in Fa. Gar∣nets letter of the 7. of March. were lost: that our selues were excommunicated: that none vnder mortall sinne could inuite vs to say Masse: and those that did par∣ticipate with vs in Sacraments, made themselues also partakers of our wickednesse. Which inflaming matter of dissention, and vntollerable reuiling against vs, lasted some moneths: and when at last the Popes Breue arriued, we were content not∣withstanding the sharpnesse of the premisses, to forgiue all for peace sake, and receiued the Subordination in as large maner as it was proposed.
Presently vpon this atonement and remission of the former defamations, Father Iones raised another paradox, farre more strange and absurd then that of Father Listers, and our Arch∣priest soothed it to be true, vidz. that whosoeuer did stiffely maintaine, that we had not incurred the crime of schisme by the prorogation of our refusall to receiue M. Blackwell for our lawfull Superiour, he himselfe ipso facto for such his main∣tenance incurred the censures of holy Church. At this time also M Blackwell published a resolution, which (he said) he re∣ceiued from our mother citie, declaring the refusers of the appointed authoritie were schismatikes, and commaunded that none should absolue vs in confession, vnlesse we did first acknowledge so much,In his Letter to Master Clearke. and likewise menaced, that if we did perseuere in the contrary opi∣nion, he would deale with vs as a Prelate for appeasing the same. Vpon which order, and threate of our Archpriest, and as well for satisfaction of our ghostly children, as to make a finall end of the controuersie, we offered to dispute the question with the Iesuites, the authors of the Calumniation: but being de∣nyed this iust request by our Archpriest, we sent (compelled thereunto) to the Vniuersitie of Paris, with humble petition to that venerable companie of the Sorbons, that they would vouchsafe to deliuer their opiniō & censure in the case. Who freeing vs from schisme and all sinne in the nature of the act,
 our Archpriest made foorth eftsoones a decree, prohibiting29. of May 1600. vnder grieuous penalties either directly or indirectly, the said cen∣sure of the famous Vniuersitie. And within short time after, his18. of Octo∣ber. 100. Reuerence published another decree, wherein he by vertue of his authoritie iudicially declared vs to haue bene truly disobedient to the Sea Apostolike, and rebellious against his office, for not ad∣mitting the subordination at first, and forbad vs vnder present losse of all our faculties, and of being ipso facto suspended and inter∣dicted, neither to presume our selues, nor any other for vs, to defend our former disobedience any maner of way by word or writing. Yea his Reuerence enacted further in the same decree, that we (as§. 5. if we had bin boyes in some Colledges vnder the Iesuits, and that it behoueth also, that some iealousie were cast abrode of our demeanure) should not haue any secret meetings, or communi∣cation together, saue such only as tended to the increase of pietie and hospitalitie, or of humanitie and peace. A law of that qualitie, notwithstanding the smooth pretext, as the christian world neuer heard the like to be made for Priests and Pastors, sent by the sea Apostolicke for reducing others to the Catholicke faith. By which, and some other of our Archpriest his de∣crees following in the discourse, the reader may iudge, both what an vnworthy and seruile bondage he and the Iesuites, (whose counsell, or direction) he exactly followeth in all things) haue, and would more, of all likelyhood haue brought vpon vs ere this day, if we had not appealed and wrote to his Holines, and also whether there remayned any other refuge vnto vs then to appeale and try the accusations before that Tribunall, vnto whose iudgement both they and we must stand.
Further, we haue seuerall times sued for peace at the hands of our aduersaries, euen vpon vneuen conditions: namely, before the first Breue, before and after our appella∣tion, and before our brethrens preparation to Rome: but they
 of the other side euermore reiected all our offers, nor would accept of any conditions, wherein our vtter discredit, and their victory (though in vnrights) should not appeare to the world. The holy Ghost writeth, and the words are true as wellEccle. 41. touching the spirituall as carnall parent: the children com∣plaine of their wicked father, because they liue in reproch for him. And S. Thomas 22. q. 73. art 4. ad. 1. & quodl. 10. q. 6. art 13. with all other schoole Diuines teacheth, that a man is bound to defend his good name, when the wrongfull deprauing thereof turneth others to detriment. Likewise the same Doctor 22. q. 72. art. 3. c. writeth, that one may be bound to purge his good name, euen in respect of doing good there∣by to the defamer, viz. when through the checking and re∣pressing of his boldnes, the party is learned to be more wary and temperate. Which is also the commaund of holy writ, answere a foole according to his foolishnes, least he seeme wiseProverb. 26. to himselfe.
We trust by the litle which is said, that both the necessitie, and iustnesse of our defence appeareth: & so much the more, by how much the wrong testimonie which our Archpriest lately gaue on the ninth of May 1602. concerning the Popes declaration in the matter of our imputatiue schisme, rebel∣lion, and disobedience, was iniurious vnto vs, in that his Ho∣linesse cleering vs of the three foresaid crimes, M. Blackwell in a publike Letter vnder his hand and name, denieth the same, and maketh his Holinesse and the two Cardinals, Burgesio and Arragone to speake much otherwise: yea his Reuerence in an other Letter bearing the same date, & addressed to the Priests of our countrey, reneweth all his former decrees and prohi∣bitions, continuing the censures & penalties before annexed vnto them. Whereby, if the like oppressions, exceeding the boundes of his iurisdiction, and contrary to the law of God, nature, and man, (as is proued in the Discourse) did or could bind, alas what infinite turmoile and harrowing of conscien∣ces
 do follow, when so many Priests of the Realme were sus∣pended, and depriued of their faculties, from the first time,In his decree of the 17. of Ianuar. 1599. that they either diuulged any booke set out since the yeare of our Lord 1597, by which the fame of any clergie Catholike person of our nation may be hurt by name; (of which quality the Treatise a∣gainst the factious, the Apollogie, the Appendix with some other, must needes be accompted by the selfe Letter and te∣nor of Decree) or directly or indirectly maintained in word orIn his decree of the 29. of May. 1600. In his decree of the 18. of October. 1600. writing, the censure of the Vniuersity of Paris: or presumed in like maner to defend their disobedience to the Sea Apostolike, and rebel∣lion against the office of the Archpriest, who did not at first subiect themselues to the Subordination, vpon the arriuall of the Cardinall protectors Letter Constitutiue. Which seuerall Decrees, each of them bereauing the offender ipso facto from all his faculties, haue (if they be of force, as our Archpriest now againe the 9. of May affirmeth they are) so intangled the Priests, as of likeli∣hood few, or not many, retaine their faculties, and conse∣quently, their penitents bound (ô the perplexitie and horror) to iterate their confessions made since that time vnto them.
Father Parsons shewed his nature, when plotting the au∣thoritie, he made the taking away of faculties the branch of the Archpriests iurisdiction, and our Archpriest in my opi∣nion, could not deuise a more pregnant meane, howe to dis∣quiet the spirituall repose of thousands (a thing which Pre∣lates should most of all shunne, as being most oppositely con∣trary to the end of all Ecclesiastical lawes) then to annexe the losse of faculties to his Decrees in the maner he hath. Nor can I conceiue the reason why his Reuerence at this time re∣ualidateth and inforceth the penalties of his Decrees, sith he hath often annexed vnto them the censure of Interdict, a power which is not expressed in his authoritie, and which if he do take, as he saith he doth, à iure communi, in that he is constituted Archpriest, then were the sixe Assistants very vn∣aduised,
 and whosoeuer gaue allowance thereunto, in wri∣ting to his Holinesse Nuncio in Flaunders, for his Grace to be a meane to Cardinall Fernesio our Protector that the Arch∣priestIn their Let∣ter of the 2. of May 1601. A charity well sorting with their most sclaunderous information. might haue authoritie from the Pope to excommunicate some foure or sixe of the maister ringleaders of the faction. Because if he haue authoritie à iure communi by vertue of his Nauar in ma. ca. 27. nu. 159. & 168. office, to suspend or interdict, he hath also authoritie to excommuni∣cate. But these points are treated in the Discourse at large, where I hope the Reader shall find enough to acquiet all scru∣ples, that may this way arise. For taking leaue, we heartily request the Reader, and our fellow brethren chiefly, to peruse our Reasons and proofes with indifferencie, and as their vn∣derstanding shall then direct, so to speake for vs in pla∣ces where they heare truth and our actions expugned.
