


DEare Countreymen and seduced brethren, I religiously protest, I honour some of you; and loue all of you. Grieuing in my very soule: that you, and I, acknowledging one and the selfe same true God, can∣not hit vpon the worshiping of him after one and the selfe same true manner: Oh that I might liue to see the day wherein we might agree in one! But I haue small hope to see it, as long as you suffer your Priest, to bring you in bon∣dage, to deuoure you, to take your goods: as the 2. Cor. 11. 20Co∣rinthians suffered the false Apostles to ferue them.—Por, as the Esay. 9. 16.leaders of the people caused Israel to erre: and their Ie. 0. 6shepheards caused them to goe astray, & turned them away to the mountaines: so it is your Priests that haue misled you; and that they may make mer∣chandize of you, as the false Prophets (who in 2. Pat. 2. 1▪ 2▪ 3St. Pe∣ters dayes taught damnable heresies) made of them, who followed their destruction, it is your Priests who doe hinder your returne into the right way. To alienate your affections from vs, they tell you: That we teach, Campin. rat. 8

All sinnes are equall. Rhem. Annot at. marg. in Luk 6. 1. & 1. Pet. 3. 19All Scripture is very easie. That we maintaine the heresie of the Bell. de nt. i.c. chlib. 4. c. 9.Simonians, which was: that men might bee saued by the grace of Si∣mon Magus: and the heresie of the ibid.Eunomians, which was: Austin lib. de hares. 54.That whosoeuer beleeued one especiall point of doctrine which they beleeusd, viz. That the Son of God is altogether vnlike the Father: and the Ho∣ly-Ghost vnlike the Sonne: could not possibly be dam∣ned, how damnably soeuer hee liued. They report wee maintaine the her esy of the ibid.Repusians, which was: That women might be Priested: and one of the heresiesof ibid.Iouinian, which was: That a man truely baptized could sinne no more: and another of the same mans, which was: ibid.That the Virgin Mary at the time of her child-birth lost her virginitie. They report wee maintaine, that heresie of Vigilantius, which was: ibid.That Clergy men ought of necessity to be married. and that of the Pelagtans, viz: ibid.That the children of the faithfull are not tainted with originall sin: and that of the Graecians, viz: Idem lib. 1. de funct beatit. Cap. 2. ct 4.That iust men shall not see the face of god before the day of dome: and that of the Pseudo apostoli, which was N. D. in his 2. part of 3. conuers chapt. 2. sect. 14.That onely faith is sufficient to saluation without workes: and that of the chapt. 3. sect. 6. 1 ibid.Nouatians, which consisted in dening the Church∣es power to forgiue sinnes: and that of the Aérians, to wit, That solemne fasts are not to be appointed by the Church. They would make you beleeue, Rehm. Annot. Heb. 7. 17.we plaine∣ly deny Melchizedech to haue ben a Priest, That we teach, Annot. in Mat. 19. 16.God can doe no more then he hath done, or will doe. That Annot. in Mark 1. 8.water in Baptisme is not necessary. That Annot. in 2. Pet. 1. 15.we abhorre the prayers of the Saints. That Annot. in 2. Pet. 2. 18.we take away pennance, fasting, chastity, keeping

of vowes, necessity of good workes, obedience to Ecclesiasticall persons. Gagge of the new Gospel. Nu. 16.That it is not in our power to choose euill. Idem. Nu. 26.That the Angels cannot helpe vs. Idem. Nu. 27.That no saint deceased hath afterward appeared to any in earth. Idem Nu. 40.That fasting is not grounded vpon scripture: no Idem Nu 46.nor blessing. and in briefe (to passe by many other) some of them are not ashamed to say, we be∣leeue Rossaus lib. de iusta Reip. Christ in reges impias t haret autho∣ritate cap. 4. Nu. 6.the soules of men are mortall: ibid.and that there is no resurection: and Cope deal 6. c. 21.that Christ Iesus is not come in the flesh, from all which errors, heresies and blasphemies we are as farre as they are from truth & ho∣nesty. On the other side, to win your affections to thē, they See the booke pag.beare you in hand, that the Scriptures, the Fathers, the Counsels, are all yours: that Campian. rat. 10.Heauen: yea Hell: the gates of Cities: the glasse-windowes in Churches: res et reculae, giue testimony to your Religion. Whereas yet they dare not referre the iudgement of such differences asare betweene vs, either to Scripture, or Fathers, or Counsels: but onely to the Greg. de valent Analys. fid. Ca∣thol. lib. 5. cap. 1. pag. 18.present Church, which is all one in effect, as if they referred it vnto themselues, or to your Pope: they being, in their opiniō, the Church re∣presentatiue: the Pope being the Church virtually, Idem lib. 7. Assertio proban∣da.who only hath power to iudge of controuersies. Now doe you not smell there is some pad in the straw by their diuelish slaundring of vs: and their cogging with you? I passe by their restraining you from reading any of ourbookes, especially the Bible of our translation, though Gagge of the new Gospel. preface to the Catholicke Reader.one of them of late assures you, That our condemnation is so expresly set downe in our owne Bibles, and is so cleere to all the world, that nothing more needs hereto, but onely that you know to reade, and to haue your eyes in your heads at the opening of our

Bible: which might giue you occasion to suspect some falshood: for if our condemnation bee so expressely set downe in them, why may not you for your greater comfort reade them? Onely I wish you would be pleased to consider seriously, whether it be likely they had any honest meaning in making their Indices Expurgatorios: & forbidding you to reade books writtē by your owne frends, till they had patched something into them, which might make for you▪ and torne out of them, whatsoeuer they thought did make against you. Mee thinks (considering your many good morall parts) you should not be so stupid, as not to per∣ceiue: or so blinde, as not to see there is some my stery of iniquity in it, that you may neither reade what your friends, or foes haue written. Quidam senex &c, A cer∣taine old man (as Discip. de Tēp. ser. 121.one of your owne writers) being as∣ked by one who had a purpose to betake himselfe into a Monastery, how he should carry himselfe after his admis∣sion, answered him in good earnest▪ Tuet Asinus vnum estote. Carry thy selfe like an Asse, refuse no burthen that is laid vpon thy backe. Doe not groane at it. For my part I feare they would make Asses of you all. They would haue you to receiue hand ouer head whatsoeuer they reach you: to beleeue (without search) whatsoeuer they tel you. But as some of you are Noble Gentlemen, o∣thers of you good fellows; be not Asse▪fied by them. Re∣member that you are men, men of vnderstanding, and a∣ble to iudge of reason when you heare it. Beleeue none of your Priests vpon their bare words, without proofe: but especially take heede how you lightly beleeue your ordina∣ry Masse-Priests: for in truth, the most of them are igno∣rant Sir Iohns, not much vnlike the Seo Fox AcsBishop of Dunkel∣den, who thanked God, he neuer knew what the old

and new Testament was. The most of them are not & Mon. in Hen. 8. Treatise of the persecution in Scotland.much guiltie of learning. Take hearts vnto you (beloued Countreymen) and reade our bookes, and our Bibles: my soule for yours, you may doe it with good consciences, and with much profit to your selues. But if you cannot be per∣swaded thereunto: yet let me intreate this of you, that you will forbeare to censure either our bookes, or our per∣sons, vpon your Priests bare information. For their words are no Gospel: their tongues no slaunder. And that you would remember that of g Tertullian, Quid q Apologet. Cap. 1.iniquius quàm vt oderint homines quod ignorant; etiamsi res mereatur odium. Tuncenim meretur, cum cognoscitur an mereatur. Vacante autē meriti notitia, vnde odij iustitia defenditur, quae non de∣eventu, sed de conscientia probanda est? with which I end, wishing to you all as to my selfe, a comfortable life, and blessed death.
Leeds in Yorkshire May 20. 1625.

