




RIght Worshipfull, and deerely be∣loued,
in our best beloued Christ
Iesus: Vouchsafe, I pray you, the
reuiew of these Meditations: which
as they were conceiued, especially
for your sakes, so they are of all other most ne∣cessarie
for the well ordering, and comfort of
those Callings, wherein God hath placed you.
For seeing man consists of a reasonable soule
and body, both which must be so prouided for

in their order and measure; as may tend to the
well being of either in this life, and to the eter∣nal
happines of both in the life, to come. What
so necessarie, as that one thing which indeed is
onely necessarie, euen by the iudgement of him
that must saue or condemne the same, namely,
the welfare & safetie of the precions soule? And
yet seeing that God hath placed vs on the earth
and that wisely, in seuerall Callings▪ and condi∣tions:
that so by our holy managing thereof, we
may lay vp a good foundation against the life
to come.
How necessarie is that knowledge, which
may enforme vs rightly herein? most vsefull,
and so acceptable that skill must needes bee,
whereby we shall be so enabled to commerce
with worldly things, as not thereby to hazard
our eternall happinesse. Yea, so much the more
is the direction necessary; because, as it is a My∣sterie
concealed from Nature, which knows not
the things of God, neither indeede can know
them, because they are spiritually discerned,
when as its chiefest wisedome is enemy against
God and it owne happinesse: as appeareth by
the ordinary ship-wrake of the most, through
the ignorance thereof: So it is the speciall gift
of God to reueale the same vnto vs, as without
which, it is not possible to secure our future e∣state,
in passing through such manifolde and
slipperie occasions of our present Callings.
And surely if wee consider that Axiome of Sa∣cred

truth; that we cannot serue God & Mam∣mon,
and compare therewith that damna∣ble
conclusion of the world, as subscribing to
the trueth of God out of the conscience, of it
owne vtter inabilitie, and sottish dotage on it
owne shadowes: that conscionable Seruice of
God, is an hinderance to worldly thrift; impos∣sible
to get riches, and keepe a good consci∣ence,
as implying a contradiction in those
things, which by right vse are subordinate to
each other. Is it not then, more then necessa∣rie
to know such a way, whereby wee may so
thriue in the world, as that withall wee may
thriue to heauen, that we may find out and pra∣ctise
an holy subiection to the worde of God,
and so discerne that to be possible with God,
which is impossible to men. Oh, how true is it
which our blessed Sauiour speakes in this case,
that it is impossible for a rich man to enter into
heauen; meaning, such a rich man, as wanting
this heauenly wisdome, to vse the world aright;
sets his confidence in riches, and rests on such
slipperie foundations, forsaking the God of his
strength, and rock of his saluation. And it is also
most true for our eternall comfort: that though
these things are snares to the wicked, to entāgle
and drowne them in euerlasting perdition: yet
we may take such a curse in the gayning and
vse of these dangerous Wares, that if we first
seeke the Kingdome of heauen, and the righte∣ousnesse
thereof, these shall be cast vpon vs

without any great care or labour, if we make
purchase of the great gaine, which is Godlines,
we shall finde it profitable as well for this life,
both to order our worldly affaires, and also to
prosper them vnto vs; as for the life which is to
come. And therefore as it is a brand of pro∣phanenesse,
to renounce our birth-right in hea∣uen
for a Messe of pottage, or any earthly hap∣pinesse
whatsoeuer: as if these could not well
sort together; so on the other side, it is a marke
of vnbeliefe to distrust God for the well being
of our bodies, seeing we haue trusted him for
the happinesse of our soules. Here then is wise∣dome
to bring both ends together; so to learne
worldly thrift, as that withall we may thriue to
heauen. This wisedome is best attained by Ex∣perience;
& Experience, which is the Mistresse
of Fooles, is then most comfortably gained,
when we can be warned by others harmes.
This is my purpose in the ensuing Treatise.
Wherein I endeauour to set before the eies of
your minds, as in a cleare and true Mirrour, the
fearefull estate of Worldlings; aduenturing, and
working out their owne damnation, by their
vnsatiable and deceitfull hunting after worldly
profit. Here you may take notice of an ordina∣ry
Bargaine, betweene the god of this world,
& earthly minds; as willingly exchanging their
eternal soules, for the enioying of the pleasures
and profits of sinne for a season. Here you may
see, that our destruction is of our selues, in that

our corrupt, and greedy desires do entice Satan
to chaffer with vs, and to preuaile for this Bar∣gaine.
Here you haue the policies of Satan
liuely discouered, whereby he drawes vs on to
the Bargaine, and holdeth vs to the same; that
so we may preuent his subtill snares and delusi∣ons.
Lastly, you haue here the censure of the
Bargaine, euen by our Lord Iesus Christ him∣selfe;
who onely can truely iudge of it, and shall
most righteously iudge for the same; that you
may wisely looke before hand into the yssue
thereof, and so fore-warned not to enter into a∣ny
such couenant. This is the summe of these
Meditations, which I doe most zealously com∣mend
vnto your best considerations, as those
that by your Callings may make good vse ther∣of.
Which that you may vnfeignedly doe▪ I fur∣ther
promise what here you haue not; That my
requests shall be dayly manifest, at the Throane
of Grace for your Worshipfull Societie: Yea,
whatsoeuer I am, or may be, shall be deuoted
to the good of your Companie: that the Lord
would mercifully make vp the Breach among
you; or sanctifie it more graciously, to your
more sure vniting to his Maiestie: that hauing
experience of the ficklenesse, and contentious
spirits of men; you may be carefull to builde
your foundation vpon the Rocke, which may
endure all counter-blasts. Labouring your
peace with God, by the attonement of his glo∣rious
Sonne, blessed for euer: That so seeking

first, the kingdome of heauen, and the righte∣ousnesse
thereof, these outward things may en∣crease
and be sanctified vnto you; that so you
may continue without offence, as you haue be∣gun
& proceeded hitherto, in all fruitfull boun∣tie
and mercifulnesse to the Houshold of faith:
to the happy fealing vp of your saluation in this
life, and to the hastening and accomplishing of
the same in the life to come. And thus hum∣bly
requesting your Worships to accept of
this liuely Touch-stone to try your Estates, by
walking contrary thereto; with my euer vn¦feigned
acknowledgement of your loue to¦wards
me; I heartily take my leaue, commen∣ding
your Worships, and all yours, to the
Grace, and Mercie of our blessed God, through
Iesus Christ our Lord; In whom I rest.

