


WHen I first made entrance into this worke (you know wor∣thy Brother) that there was no speech made in the Citty or Subburbes, of Plague or Pestilenc: But when I had almost finished it, the Plague began amongest vs. Then was both speech & complaint too in an vncessant manner? So I least of. Inited by you in the heate thereof to finish it, (least dying and leauing it an abhortiue, it should vtterly fayle and come to ruine.) But what auailed it mee to write of warlike tratagemes and Policies, to oppose, opugne, repell an humaine Enemie in the field? when tht Lord God of Hosts great in powr, (whom none could resist) was entred the field, destroying Thousands on his right hand, Ten Thousand on his left hand, and all the Kingdome in generall, had not his mercy exceeded his Ivstice.
Then it was for mee not to write, but to pray: not to forcast where to flie from the sword of the Lord, but how to submit my selfe to the sword of the Lord, which when the Lord saw, he manifested his power to me, preseruing me, that I might hereafter trust in him, and declare his goodnesse to the Sonnes of men.
Thus the Presse of the Lord went forth, it tooke away whole families; it contynued many Moneths together in the Subburb in be Citty.
The Citty was almost desolate (yet not desolate) because she had a graci∣ous God with a flaming sword, purging, not consuming her? A blessed Sa∣uiour interceding for mercy not Iustice: A King on earth (as Hezekiah) weeping and praying in secret for her; calling vpon his Lord pirituall and Temporall, on all the Moyseses, and Arons in the Kingdme to ioyne with him in Prayer (as they had in fasting) & to crye mightily vnto the Lord, to spare this Citty, the holy Citty, the Citty where his name was cal∣led vpon.
Nay shee had a carefull Magistrate in her, whom diuine prouidence did preordayne to that place to do hr good,Sr John Gore was then Lord Mayor of London. And Alderman Heylyne, and Alderman Parkebust, were Shriefes. who went in person to visite her, relei∣ning her relinquished members readie to starue for want of foode: Sending his two worshipfull Brothers the Shrieues to doe it for him, if his Lordship was otherwaies imployed.
These two good Samaritans came into the Suburbes among the poore Trino∣bantes of Saint Sepulchers, inquiring their number, their estate, their wants, their greiuances, finding them great (past their expectation) they re¦turned
 with melting hearts, condoling their miserie, and informing the Lord Mayor of it, who by them (& through their meanes) sent instantly a supply of Fourteene Poundes for their reliefe: commanding information weekely to be giuen of their wants, & they should be relieued. Which was done by me, and performed by them, euen till the sicknesse was mightily decreased, & our Gentlemen returned home, so they left off: being seconded by M. George Allington Esquier, (and one of the Maisters of the Pipe office) who sent them Fortie shillinges, as formerly he had done at other times weekely. This money was truly distributed, though it came not to my hands: The money that came to my handes (from the Lord Mayor, Sheriffes, and Churchwardens) was Twenty Fiue Poundes Ten shillinges. So when all this was discharged, and the plague quite ceased, and thankes rendered to Almighty God for our deliuerance: I betooke my selfe to Penn and Paper a∣gaine, to fininsh what before I vndertooke; which by Gods helpe I haue ef∣fected; and would not haue published it to the world, had not some Low Country-like forced, You brotherlike perswaded; Now if any good come thereby, let such as reape it thanke you, who would not let me rest till I had finished, then printed it: If none at all, then let them blame me, not you, if not, excuse me thus: he had a good intention, but hee failed of the execution, in this I rest: and resting rest

