



ALthough (Right Honora∣ble) it seeme much better to heare, yea, euen to the best learned, rather thē to write of suche argument, as by rugged enemies hardly can bee wel digested, whose sharpened toongs inable to further hurte, as burning coales doe seeke to scorch the godly: yet considering that in so honorable a place I had pronounced the Sermon following, and by so manye earnest and godlye persons eftsoones desired
 to penne the same, I rather consen∣ted at last, to abide a presente brunt, (sheltered vnder mightie protection) and to discouer in part the Popish ad∣uersarie, for the benefit of many: then cowardly for feare of some Romish storme, to thrust so bright a cādle vn∣der a darkening bushell. And bethin∣king (as conueniency asketh) on whō to craue a second shield for this my so spent time, your Honour first came vnto minde: to whose goodnes I am not smally bounde, for that benefite, which earst by your honourable mea∣nes I did attaine. In regarde whereof, though farre vnable to render satis∣faction, or approching measure ther∣vnto, I rest, not debarred of former purpose, to present such short pay, in parte of aunswere to further debt, al∣lured the rather by the well knowne godlinesse in your lowly brest, which can and doe content your selfe many times with a Mite, from a well min∣ded Widowe, though muche store of treasure cannot ballaunce your de∣sert. My will is much, but my wealth
 is small, yet sometimes small pearles for their purenes, are accoūted worth some greater stones of more glorious shewe. A twofolde suite to your Ho∣nour I haue for this, to say: that your wisedome woulde not onely accom∣panye your good liking of this my bold enterprise, but also to vouchsafe your godlye ayde against such Romish Riots, as may percase conspire by con∣sulte, against this simple truth. For though their shows be not all vnseem lie, yet their deedes do approue those of them which that way be absolute, to bee in this most horrible murther and sacrylege, by such Sauage Treason, more then Resolute. And therefore ought to bee censured with Esay the Prophets sentence.Esay. 26.10. Shewe mercie to the wicked, yet he will not learne righteousnes, but in the lande of vprightnes hee will doe wickedly, and will not consider the great & mightie hand of God.
And of whose craftines to deceiue, we may not (God graunt that we bee not) by ouer-seeing them (not with insight necessary) be drawne secure of
 our safetie,Iosu. 23.13. while they harbour in our bosomes. For Salomon doth sommon our suruey of suche with sharpe con∣ceipt,Prouerb. 26.24.25. saying: He that hateth, will coun∣terfeite with his lippes, but in his heart hee layeth vp deceite. Though he speake fauou∣rably beleeue him not, for he beareth seuen abhominations in his heart. But yet heere is comfort: Hatred maye bee coueredly deceite: but the Malice thereof shall bee discouered in the congregation. No better witnes can be of Gods truth for this, amongst so many honourable Con∣cellors, then your Honor, as to whom (for the discouerie of the present dis∣sembling hate in the Catholike Ro∣maines) (bent against the sacred state and person of the Lordes annointed, our Soueraigne Elizabeth) the Lorde from aboue hath allotted you the height of such honour, and the paine of this Pleasure, to sound the depth, & by seasonable search surely to finde out, aswell the chiefe of the deepest dooers in this their most bloudy at∣tempt: as wisely to weigh vp the huge bulke, and holde Ancker of all their
 traiterous Conspiracies. And as our heartes are inflamed with heapes of praises vnto God for this (as many as fear the Lord, & loue their own safety) so were it impossible to suppose, that such faithfull Subiectes, could bee re∣strained frō continuall praier to God, in our sole mediatour Christ, for the day∣lie increase of godly wisedome, grati∣ous honour, and heauenly felicity, to the borde and bodies of such seaso∣ned Senators, whose Honours deepely regarding the daungers imminent, brought in this perillous storme, so wisely by diuine Councell, laide pre∣sent hande vppon the helme of our stately shippe, as by the still and most sweete pirre of coelestiall windes,Eccle. 10.20. shee speedilie (but miraculously) cut tho∣rough the Roaming loftie Seas, so ma∣ny waies crossing, in suppose to sound and sinke the same. But by his fa∣therly prouidence (in these honora∣ble Mariners diligence) our shippe of state, with her owner of high Maiesty, yea & her whole fraught of Christiā peace and cōmon tranquillity, floteth aloft
 with singular honour (the Lord ther∣fore bee eternally praised) and in the prime of their wished tide, hath put the Bul & his Briggets to flight, which were prepared for her decaye. Nowe may Israel say, and that truely: Except the Lord had bene of our side, we had sure∣ly perished. But this is the Lordes owne doing, and let it bee still marueilous in our eies.
And herehence English Israell praye thou to God hartily, and turne effec∣tually to the Lorde thy God,Hosea. 14. trust no more in Ashur, nor in thine owne strength, for doest thou not see, that death & thy destruction was entered the Presence, where neyther barbed horse, or Cannō shot could haue pre∣uailed? watch & pray, for Satan is not ead, & the Pope with his, do yet hun∣ger to preuaile. Open your gates, ye Prin∣ces, and lette the king of glory enter in: so shall you bee safe in your Courtes, and your in-sight shall bee bright as the Sunne, and then you shall see, and bee bolde to say with the Prophet, that thse wicked Ro∣uers
 of Rome by sea and lande (the Iudas Iesuits & their reconciled) which counterfeite the forface of fined sil∣uer, are in truth by Touch, not better mettall, then the rust of yron: Euen rebellious Traytors, walking craftely, Brasse and yron. They are all destroyers. The bil∣lows are burnt, the lead is consumed in the fier. The founder melteth in vaine:Iere. 6.27.28.29.30. for the wicked are not taken away. They shall call them reprobate siluer▪ for the Lord hath re∣iected them.
Let the sage headed soūd the depth of the popish profession, and recorde their precious practise from first till now. And hereto adioine the clemen∣cie of the Prince, the labours of the preachers, the loue to win by pollicie in the Counsell, and forgette not the prayers of the iust, for their conuer∣sion, which still seeke our confusion and say as thou seest (if thine eye bee cleare) whether our Absolute Papistes, be not Resolute Rust, as before is said? For surely our most gracious Foun∣dres Elizabeth, with her pitifull Cle∣mencie, cannot melt, their sacrylegious
 malice against her long suffering per∣son, but euen now after so many bles∣sed benefites from the Lord, by her Maiestie bestowed vpon thē, & vs in common (were it but our long pos∣sessed peace) the degenerate brattes of this fertile soile, doe with eagre moode hunt in hungre, the innocent bloude of her sacred bosome: whose Romishe thirst, cannot bee quenched except their Romulus, drinke carowse in her guiltles bloude. The blowing bellows of gods holy spirit, & worde (the godly preachers) cannot make pure that which is but drosse: & ther∣fore they spende their liues in their labors, al in vaine, vppon these Roma∣nists: Or hath the apt matter by skil∣full art, more speedely to melte the mettal, to say: the godly pollicy of the most honorable Councell with these so wicked menne any better successe: For in recompence of their honours good pollicie to procure these: they may happely find (could they possibly lend them hearing) that the rust of these Romanists, woulde rather seek to
 win a Ioab in Dauid his Court,2. Sam. 14.2.30. to pro∣cure thē still fauour & sparing, then by any their possible power they can sim∣ply be brought to Christiā obediēce. But still these Catholiques labour to harden some, but to hinder moe, & they allure many (not of the worst calling) to draw away the faith of the most from God, and loyalty from her Maiesty, if so they could, and therfore our Recusants refuse their presence, to the holy word and sacraments which is the prefixed purging fornace, from a forced drosse, whatsoeuer. But now at last perceiuing all their hope to be at end, they bend their ouerbold bat∣tery in wickednes against her Maiesty & this her highnes lād of vprightnes. Certes, in respecte of our purpose to∣wards them the lande is vpright, & in comparison with them and their Antichristian gouernement, it is the Lande of righteousnes: where the Gospell is sincerely Preached, the Lordes Sacramentes in substaunce soundly administred, and the seate of holy  (ecclesiastical & ciuil)
 in all christian sorte erected and esta∣blished. But yet when we consider our Case with Gods Iustice, wee acknow∣ledge great cause of cōtrouersie, with the whole lande, as did the Prophet Hosea,Hosea. 4.1.2.3. for the inhabitants thereof. In whose time muche wickednesse, great ignoraunce, and wilfull contempt of knowledge did ouerflowe the coast. Carnality and bloudgiltines bare a mighty sway, with an heaping togea∣ther of sinnes, euen bloude touched bloud. viz. No spare of kinred, or cease from horrible crueltie. O Lord, farre be this blott from thy chosen nation of Englande. But in respecte of your Romishe reconciliation, wee confesse very many by you are made lame, and wickedly halt (which ought not once to limpe) before God, and to her Ma∣iestie, whose wickednes doe cause our dread of an heauye Censure, and the more: because your present practise is a threat from the Lord, of a direful daye, if our speedye Repentaunce, and faithfull prayers, stand not in the gap before him.Psal. 106.23. But  ∣lice
 (yee forraine and domestical Ro∣mains) we firmely hold not Dauid and his subiectes. The Lorde will protect his Annointed,Psal. 20.21. Psal. 2. and conserue her per∣son and state vntill the day of his de∣cree, and shee shall with increase in muche honor, continue the last mo∣ment, of that day, maugre the moun∣tains of your might, the Stratageams of Satan, and the furious sonnes of perdition, by him sent: her to destroy. And also Christs holy word, with her sacred seat, and this most honorable Regiment shall in England still abide till the same day of his determinatiō, though Resyn & Romeliah,Esay. 7.3.4.5 6.7.8.9. in wāhope for the future Tabeall. hunt now to make a breach in our Hierusalem, & thereto persist to doe their best. Against all their wicked and most pestilent pur∣poses. O Lorde of hoastes, and father of Councells,Psal. 20.9. saue thou our Queene Elizabeth, and heare vs for her, when∣soeuer wee call vpon thee: O eternall father, let thy holy spirit dwell in her (our head vnder thee) so shall wee her true and louing members, in godli∣nes
 and peace, long enioy her: which is the heart of all our desire. And di∣recte O Lorde our heartes and pow∣ers as mourning Doues, to keepe vs Innocent from this great offence: But make vs wise as Serpentes, to bende our backes to her in godly o∣bedience: Our bodies and our best to her defence: Our Soules, and selues to sing and sounde thy praise, for this thy miraculous preseruation of her Maiestie, and this thy Church and Realme, in Christ our Lorde wee beseeche thee. And here right Honorable I cease to deteyne you crauing pardon to this, and pati∣ence for this, and protection as it may stande with godlinesse, and the safety of your Honour, that my labour maye more boldely aske the Consult, of all Satannicall consorts. Why doe you gentyles rage &c. God that is Eternall, Almightye, mer∣cyfull, and onely wise, signe your Honour with your allotted propor∣tion, in these his Fatherly graces, and stall you longe in honour and
 godlinesse, to liue a Godly gouer∣nour with others lyke, vnder her Maiestye, whose lyfe the Lorde prolonge to her and our felicitye in him, Amen.
 London Septem∣ber, 30. 1586.
