


THe Actions of vertue (worthy Gentlemen and Souldiers) should so much affect the beholders, that they should pre∣sently not onely admire them, but indeauour to follow them.Plutarch in the life of Ju∣lius Caeasar. Iulius Caesar reading the braue acts of Alexan∣der the great fell (saith Plutarch) a weeping, and was angry with himselfe, to thinke how Alexander a young man (iust about his age) had notwithstanding conquered the whole world, whereas he as yet had done nothing worthy the name of a Generall: From this Princely Emulation he fell to Action, and became so excellent, that Plu∣tarch himselfe paralells him onely with Alexander. I make no doubt, but that setting before your eyes the braue exployts of your Ancestors you haue beene mooued to practize Armes, by which you haue gayned great applause, (and worthy of it) because you haue done good seruice to your King and Country.
The greatest seruice that men can doe, is to saue their Country frem dan∣ger. The Romans gaue him a crowne that saued one Cittyzen: then how many crownes deserueth you, that helpeth to saue a number.
They vsed to make a Coyne for his commendation with this inscription: The Senate and people of Rome for Citizens saued.
You saue the liues of men by teaching them the right vse of their Armes, whereby they saue themselues from danger. Would to God that all would follow you, as you doe follow the vertues and Actions of the Romans and Grecians.
The Grecians were the first, that out of varietie of actions and long ex∣perience reduced the knowledge of Armes into an Art, and gaue precepts
 for the orderly mouing of a battaile, and taught, that the moments of victo∣rie rested not in the hands of multitudes, but in a few men rightly instructed to mannage Armes, and trayned vp in the obseruation of the dicipline of the field. In which regard they had Schooles and Schoole-maisters called Tac∣ticks, which deliuered the Art Militarie to such as were desirous to learne. Out of whose Schooles issued those chiefs of Warre in number so many,Captayne Bingham. in Skill so exquisite, in Vallor so peerelesse, in all vertues beseeming great Gene∣ralls so admirable, that no Nation of Europe euen to this day hath been able to match, much lesse to ouer-match their same and glory. The braue Romans cm farre short of them: yet the Romans following their ordi∣nances both haue kept in vse, and also set forth in writing the rules of Martiall policie or discipline: And you haue Schooles wherein you teach this Martiall policy or discipline to such as are desirous to learne. The one is called the Artillery garden, the other the Millitary-yard.
The first of these was erected by the Vertuous Gentlemen of London. The second by you the no lesse vertuous Gentlemen of Midlesex: out of these two Schooles as out of the former, haue issued men of worth taking their de∣grees: As Captaynes, Lieuetenants, Antients, and Sergeants, so that all the trayned bands in London & Midlesex, are furnished with able & sufficient Officers out of both these Schooles, to your honours that were the Founders.
I, the last in degree (of inferior officers) had my first egresse from the Artillery Garden.
In that Schoole I spent Foure yeares compleat, to gayne the little know∣ledge which I haue, neuer presuming to shew my skill, much lesse to contend with others in it: vntill the Scollers of another Schoole (Low-Country-like) banded together for tryall of skill, vrged me thereunto. Then for the honour of my Schoole (put on by my owne Schoole fellowes) I entred the List to play my Schollers Prize: And I haue now done it, but whether I haue per∣formed it ill or well, resteth not in me the Scholler to iudge but in you the Maisters of Science, most skilfull in the Art Military. Iudge then and Censure,

