



RIght Worshipfull, and dearely be∣loued in the Lord, whom I loue also in the truth; and not I onely, but they that haue knowen the truth, for the truths sake which dwelleth in vs, which is professed and maintained of you, and shall abide with and preserue vs for euer. Blessed be God, euen the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, who hath reuealed his sonne vnto you, and hath giuen you a large heart towards his Saints, that your delight is the Law of the Lord, and your affections are to the ex∣cellent that are on earth, to consider wisely of the cause of the afflicted, and to minister comfort to the distressed soule. And blessed be the name of his Ma∣iestie for euer, who hath respected the base estate of his seruant, and made mee a witnesse both of your loue vnto his word, and his afflicted members. In

consideration whereof, as I can doe no more then te∣stifie my thankfulnesse vnto our gracious God, for his mercies bestowed on mee, not only in deliuering mee from a most desperate sicknesse, but in casting mee graciously on such feeling members, who ministred so abundantly towards my recouerie: so I must doe no lesse then to doe my vtmost indeuour, that the me∣moriall of the iust may liue for euer, and their righte∣ousnesse may be had in euerlasting remembrance, to their more comfortable assurance that their reward is with God; when all will-worship and presumption of merit shall be confounded: and to the prouocation of the Saints in these daies, wherein charity is growen cold, that they bee not weary of well-doing, as being assured that in due time they shall reape, if they faint not. And the rather doe I finde my selfe obliged at this time to this Christian dutie, because the Lord ha∣uing inabled mee in my great weaknesse to bestow a spirituall gift vpon the most of your worships, being graciously by Gods holy hand brought together to such good ends: it pleased his good Maiestie, so to af∣fect your hearts with that heauenly treasure, as not only to hearken with all reuerence and attention vn∣to the wholesome word of life, but for the further e∣stablishing of your iudgements, and triall of your hearts thereby, that it might appeare your holy pur∣pose was to cleaue vnto the Lord in the obedience of his word: our gracious God, in the riches of his mer∣cie, inclin'd some of your hearts (I doubt not, for the behoofe of all) to desire a briefe of what had beene publikely taught, thereby to trie the spirits with the men of Berea, and so to hold the truth in constancie of well-doing. And could I doe better then, accor∣ding Act. 1. 7.

to my poore strength and memorie, then to leaue such generall and short notes with you, which might in some sort testifie my desire to build you for∣ward in Christ Iesus, howsoeuer they could not satis∣fie your desires for the full resoluing of your consci∣ences in so principall and profitable a point as is the triall and recouerie of our first loue?
And ought I not then to indeuour the further kin∣dling of such smoaking flax, such holy and gracious desires? May I not iustly take occasion in paying a debt vnto you, to make the Church of God become my debtor for this paines, now published for the ge∣nerall good, and so ingage my selfe in a further and more generall debt; both of praier, that the Lord would giue a blessing to these poore labours; and of further paines, as God shall minister health, occasion, and libertie? And shall not the Saints also become debtors vnto you, by whose holy desires it is, that they now also haue this glasse, to discerne aright their estate in grace, to recouer their decaies, and grow to perfection? And is not the Lord indebted vnto vs all, to crowne his owne graces, and recompence the faith∣full imploiment of his talents? And hath not our glo∣rious Matt. 25. 28. 29 2. Cor. 12. 8. God thus brought light out of darknesse? Will he not perfect his power in weaknesse, and wisdome in humane infirmitie? Shall not the dead men liue? Esay 26. Zach. 3. Shall not they awake and sing, which haue sate in the dust, yea in the shadow of death, yea haue beene euen swallowed vp of the nethermost hell? Shall not the brand be pluckt out of the fire, and the prey out of the teeth? That the glory may be vnto our God, and not vnto men. Behold (saith Iacob) I had not thought Esay 49. Genes. 48. 11. to haue seene thy face; and yet the Lord hath let mee

liue to see thy seed. This is the Lords doing, and it is maruellous in our eies. Accept therefore (right worshipfull) some fruit of your desires, and euidence of Gods power in this weaknesse of his seruant: which the more it appeares, let our God the more haue the only glory both of your desires and my indeuours, in blessing both with conscionable practise in this life, and crowning also both with competent perfection and glory in the life to come. This is the fruit of our labours; and for this, is, and shall bee, the scope and summe of my praiers vnto our God for you, that ac∣cording to his promise he would make you perfect in euery good worke, to doe his will on earth, that his will may be done on you for euer in heauen; to raigne with Iesus Christ in that glory, which neuer fa∣deth. And so I humbly take my leaue.
From my poore house at COVEN∣TRY, this 10. of April, 1610.

