


SIR,
AS shape beautifies an Image, so good acti∣ons commend a man. That which did com∣mend Lucullus most, was this, Plutarch in the life of Lu∣cullus.Hee would ra∣ther deliuer a Roman Ci∣tizen from the hands of his enemy, then win all that his enemies had in their power. Lucullus in this did conquer himselfe; as Alexander did in containing from Darius his most faire wife and daughters; and Caesar, in spa∣ring

to punish his greatest enemies. To whom Cicero said, that in other Victories, Fortune, Policy, & Souldiers, might claime a part, but in this, he alone should haue all the glorie.
Glorie, Thirst of prey, and loue of Country, were the three things that set all the Ro∣mans vpon admirable action. The first is counted but a August. de Ciuit. dei. li. 5. cap. 3.Ʋice; the second, no better then Theft; the third, is the Ʋertue Heroicall. In this Ʋertue Cicero excelled the other three, and therefore was honoured with this Epitaph, Pater Patriae.
He was called Father of his Country, be∣cause he kept it from decay.
All those that in their Consultations doe seeke the benefit of their Country, doe deserue the like like reward and praise. You then Sir, are to be praised and honoured of all men, whose Consultations tend to the benefit of the whole Kingdome: hauing obtained a Conquest of your selfe (being a Christian) far aboue that of Lucullus and Caesars. Ther∣fore you shall attaine a most sure triumph, the guide of whose Chariot shall be Grace

giuen from aboue, and Glory, that shall ne∣uer faile you.
It is reported of Roscius (the Tragedian) that men durst not aduenture to Act in a Tragedie in his sight, because of his ex∣cellencie in that facultie. And shall I dare to discourse of Warre (or any other sub∣iect) before so great a Statesman, so learned, exquesite a Mathematician as your selfe? Behold I were blanckt, and should stand as Queene Hester did (dead in all mens opini∣on:) did not your Septer of benignitie giue me life, and tell me that you are a Fauoror of Arts and Armes.
Therefore I take courage, and prostrate this my poore labor to Kisse your Honora∣ble hands, not as any addition to your vn∣controleable and approued knowledge, but as a weake Fabrick, which onely wan∣teth the support of your much admired goodnesse. Pleaseth it you therefore to accept my Booke, to peruse and allow of the same, that it may the more safely come abroad, and thereby deserue the better fa∣uour and acceptance of all the Readers

thereof: as allowed of him, whose Noble acts as well within the Realme, as without, haue alwayes from time to time, so well appeared. So I shall be the more boldned, and encouraged to take the like paines hereafter, if good and meet occasion, may serue there vnto.

