



I Must needes with Saint Paule knowledge my selfe debter to all yt cal vpon the name of our Lorde Iesus Christ,Roma. i. but to non more thē to you most dearly beloued both be∣cause of such louynge frendship as I haue found in you, and most of al for the Christian loue, that some time be¦yng your Curate I founde amonge you, & that I trust continueth among you stil, not onely toward me, but to al that love the Lorde Iesus Christe, wherfore now consideryng the tyme of trial to be come,Mat. xxiiii i. Pet. iiii. ii. Tim. iii. i. Iohn. ii.iii.iiii. that both our Sa∣uor Christ, and al his holy Apostles warned vs of, I haue thought it my part wt this Epistle to cōsort you, not mistrusting, but you al are strengthe∣ned and comforted dayly with the cō¦fort that is of God: and do nowe ear∣nestlye

accompt with your selues the price of the buylding of your tower,Luke. xiiii. least if the foundation and beginning be layde and the worcke not finished, your enemies beginne to laugh you to skorne, and to sai: these men began to builde, but thei were not able to fi∣nishe. I trust you are not builte vpon the slippery sandes or grauels,Mat. vii. where euerye waue that beateth shall shake the foundation, and cause it to fal, but you are built vpon a sure groūd, depe digged,i. Cor. ii. and your foūdation layde vp¦pon the foūdation of the Apostles, & Prophetes,Ephe. ii. vpon the corner stone Ie¦sus Christ, in whom euery buildinge knitt and coupled together, groweth vnto an holye Temple for the Lorde,
For al though the builders refuse and cast away as a thyng of nought,Psa. cxvii. this stone Christ, whiche at this daye thei do,Mark. xii puttinge out of the Temples Gods holi word in the mother toūg,i. Pete. ii. to set vp a Latine vnknowne tounge, and in it to maintaine their olde Ro∣myshe beggery, Yet shal that stone be the principal corner stone, to you that

beleue elect, and precious. And who∣soeuer beleueth in him, shall not be a∣shamed. And doubtlesse the vnbele∣uers and vnfaithful must nedes fal & stomble vpon this stoone,Esa. xxviii. be broused and vtterlye destroyed at the laste, al∣though for a time the Lorde vseth thē as the rodde of his furye,Esay. x. to chasten our wāton and tomuch worldly vain liuing, which in a manner had forgot¦ten God, and mere to muche cooled from that ardent loue that Christ wil¦led to be among his. Wherfore oure heauenly father doth mercifully call vs again to suffre afflictions with his sonne Christ, and so to tri and examin our fayth, that it beynge foūde more precious thē gold or siluer, myght be to the praise and honour of his name
Let vs therfore take this correction with al mekenes of heart and submi∣ssion vnder the hand of God,i. Pet. v. that he may exalte vs when it shalbe his god¦ly pleasure. We cal him our father, & our sauior Christ hath warranted vs so to do,Math. vi. Luke. xi. wherfore let vs knowe hym to be in deede a father, not onelye in

king Edwardes daies, when we had al welth & quiet with his holye word: but also now in these perillous daies, when the angels of the depe, holde & stoppe the windes of Christes Gos∣pel,Apoc. vii. that they should not blowe vpon the earth to make it fruitful, nor vpō the seas, to make them aboundaunte with fishe for the Apostles to catche, nor vpō the trees, to make thē bryng furth their fruites in due season. I sa euen now the Lord is our father, and y• he correcteth vs, it is of very loue, and not of crueltie, of mercie and py∣tie,i. Cor. xi. and not of seuere iudgement. We are corrected saith Saint Paul of the Lord, that we should not be damned, with the world. Wherefore as obedi∣ent children, we must submit our sel∣ues, and sai with Dauid. O Lord thou art righteous,Psa. cxviii and righteous are thy iudgementes. It is good to me that thou hast hūbled me, yt I may learne thy iudgementes. The lawe of thy mouth is more dearer to me, thē thou sandes of gold and siluer. I trust dear brethren, that you al do nowe studie

how to stand stedfast in Gods word vnto the ende, that you may optaine the promisse as the Lord sayth. Thus sayth the first and the last,Apo. ii. which was dead and liueth, I knowe thy works and tribulation, & pouertie, but thou art rich, and I knowe the blasphemy of those, that cal them selues Iewes, and are none: but are the sinagoge of Sathanas. The Lord calleth thē rich,Math. v. i. Tim. vi. that habounde in the ritche spirit of God, & in al good workes, that gods spirite moued theim vnto, as stedfast fayth, sure hope, ardent loue and cha∣ritie, diligent, often, and feruent prai∣er, tamyng of the flesh with his lustes and appetites, which you may reade Galath. v. liberal almes to the poore and nedie, especial to the houshoulde of faith, and al other good dedes com¦maunded of God. But the other al∣though thei bost neuer so much yt thei ar Iewes, yt is, confessors of the Lor∣des name, men of the church spiritu∣altie, yea Gospellers if thei wil to, yet the Lorde calleth theim blasphemers and of the sinagoge of Sathan.
Be not a bashed therefore wyth names, titles, or dignities, as Lorde, Duke. &c. or byshop, doctor. &c. for e∣cept he bring the worde of God, and Christes Communiō with the main¦tenaunce of it, doubte not but by the fruites knowe him, and geue him his name that ye Lorde geueth him. A bla∣sphemer, of the Sinagoge of Satha∣nas. And though persecutiō com vpō the, yet remēber what he saith that is first, & last, whē no tiraūt shal remain. Be not afraied of none of those thin∣ges that thou shalt suffre. Behold the deuil wil cast some of you into prison that you mai be proued. You se dear∣ly beloued,Iob. i.ii. that it is the deuil that rai¦seth vp these stormes against vs, but doubtles at Gods permission and su∣fferaunce,Math. vii yt we may be proued, whe∣ther we be Christians in dede as we confesse in word. Manye of vs thin∣keth our selues strong, but tempcati∣on declareth,Mat. xxvi that we are but weake, Euen as Peter saide. Lorde I wil go with the into prison and death. But the knower & searcher of hertes sayd:

Truly or the cocke crowe, thou shalt deny me. And so it came to passe. Ne∣uertheles, after he waed strong and ouer came that infirmitie and knewe, yt to fal we haue of our selues, to stād we haue onely of God. So is tribula¦tion profitable to the strōg and migh∣tie, for it bringeth them to the crown of glory, it profiteth the weake, for it, openeth their minde and maketh thē to seke to the Phisition and curer of our soules,Psalm. v and to cry with Dauid. O Lord heale my soule, for I haue sinned against the. Let vs therfore labour to ouercome our weakenes, & to accom¦plishe that the Lorde commaundeth.i. Cor. iiii Be faithful vnto the death, and I wil geue the a crowne of life. You se the Lorde requireth faithfulnesse both in the stewardes that preach his worde and in the seruintes that heare it. Death is the ende of al fleshe, as well of Kinges, and Quenes,Esay. xl. Dukes and bishops, as of poore men. For al flesh is grasse, and al the glory of fleshe as the flower of grasse. Whē the winde of the Lorde goeth ouer it, it falleth &

fadeth: but the Lordes word abydeth for euer, and those that doth the wyll of the Lorde, abide also for euer. Hap∣pye are those to whom the Lorde ge∣ueth that crowne of lyfe, and to loose it, is a greater losse, then either Em∣perour, King, or Quene, or an Angel from heauen can either restore or re∣compence. Stand therfore faithfullye to gods word, beleue his promis. He that hath eares to heare, let him hear what the holy Gost saith to the chur∣ches. He that ouercōmeth shal not be hurt by the seconde death. The fyrste death is of the body as the Lord sayd to sinful Adam.Genes. iii. Earthe thou art, and into earth thou shalt returne agayne, But the secōd death, is it that Christ admonished vs to flie, saying: I sai to you my frendes,Luke. xii. be not afraid of thē, which withe body, and after that thei haue nothing more that they can do. I wil shew you whom you ought to feare: Feare hym, that after he hathe slaine the body, hath power to cast in∣to hel fyre. Trulye I say to you feare him. Let not the feare of man so ouer∣come

v, but that the fear of god may alway be ruler in our hartes, so shall we attaine the croune of life prepared for those that loue the Lorde and hys word vnfeinedly.
I haue not written this, as to those that are ignoraunt of theyr dutye, or vnable to strēgthen both them selues and others, but as to my moste deare brethren in the Lord, trusting y• Gods spirit that is among you, doth dayly moue your harts now, to the highest perfeccion of godlines, euen to denie your liues for Christes sake, & to take vp your crosse, and to folow him.Mat. xvi. Yf any haue in times past bene negligēt in the wai of godlynes: I prai, besech and exhort the same in the Lord Iesu,Esay. lix. to turn vnto the Lord with his whole hart,Iosu. vii. and not by his euyl and wicked liuing prouoke the Lordes wrath any longer, nor to bring plages vpon the whole congregacion for his wicked∣nes. Brethren,ii. Esdr. Thre. i. fal to praier dayly eue∣ry man for him selfe and for his Chri∣stian brethren. Fal to weeping wyth Nehemias & Ieremye, to see the wall

of Ierusalem broken, the city destroi∣ed with sweard and fire, and the tem∣ple burned.Math. ix. Fal to fasting, for now ye daies are come that our swete & deare Bridegrome Christ is taken from vs. I certeinli beleue that our to to much negligence in praier, and our slouthe∣ful and seldome cōmyng to the holye Supper of the Lorde,Ioel. ii. are twoo of the great causes, why the Lord hath thus plaged vs. Let vs therfore earnestlye turne vnto the Lord, that he mai turn to vs,Mat. vii. cal, that he may hear, aske, that he may giue, seke, that we may finde, knocke,Luke. xi. that the Lord may open vnto vs. If euer we shewed our selues true Christiās,Ephes. iiii let vs now shew it, in god∣lines of conuersacion, and lyuinge, in quietnes,Col. iii.iiii in patiēt suffering, in meeke bearing of wronges, & doing of none to other, in forgeueing our enemyes, and praying for them, in feedyng the poore and needy Saintes of God, in pitying al men, and in praying for all men. And dearelye beloued praye for vs, that God of his mercy strengthen and cōforte vs in these troubles, that

he nowe layeth vpon vs, and that the Lorde leaue vs not to our selus, but uer hold his handouer vs, and kepe vs vnto the ende. For truly I know without his grace and mercyful help, no man is able to withsand Sathās vyolence, therefore for Christes loue pray for vs, as we shal not faile dayly to do for you.
Here haue I (gētle Reader) setforth the Confession and Faith of certaine learned men, that as they haue writtē it in theyr exile for thy cōfort: so mai∣est thou giue god the praise, and helpe to stop the mouthes of suche blasphe∣mers, as haue nothing in theyr mou∣thes, but Heretickes Heretickes. But I dout not, that when thou hast read it with iudgement, and cōferd it with theyr doctrine, that they now preach to thee: thou shalt se which sort ar the Heretickes. Thou mayest see that all theyr struglynge is to brynge thee to theyr stynckyng Romyshe puddels agayne. Thus I commende you all dearelye beloued in the tender mer∣cies of Iesu Christ, vnto the tuitiō of

the liuing god, which is the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, beseching him to send his holy Gost among you, & to bestow his ritch grace and blessing vpon you, that you al may be cōstant and perfect in Gods wayes, and vn∣moueable in Christes faith, constant∣lye pereuering vnto the end. Amen. Grace be with you & peace frō God our Father, and from our Lord Iesus Christe, who tread down Sa∣than vnder our fete shortly. Amen.
