


THe holy Apo∣stle sayth, thatRom. 15.4. whatsoeuer thinges are writtē afore time are written for our learning, which sen∣tence (reuerend father) as often as I do remember, by the hand leadeth mee deepely to consider with reuerent re∣gard what I read in the holy Scrip∣tures, and vrgeth me by feruent pray∣er, to craue of God, the geuerIac. 1.17. of all good giftes, in Christ, the true vnder∣standing of the Scriptures sense, and theMath. 13.5 hidden treasures therein com∣prised. And so hath it pleased the lord
 of life to open the windows of heauen, (his name bee euer praised) and from thence by his spirite, most familiarly to speake vnto mee by his written word: So that to his great prayse, and my endlesse comfort I see that no iot of his Law is voyd of most excellent comfortes to the heart, that simply in integritie of soule seeketh to quench his thirst in this fountaine of health, the Gospell of God.
In this word I find the knowledge of God & Christ his sonne, with pro∣mise of his holy spirit shall in all his elect open their hartes, and write in them the true vnderstanding of his lawes. Ezec. 36. The which most ex∣cellent gift by the learned books, since the time of the Apostles, and penned trauels of sundrie godly fathers in the Church, (aswell before our times as in these our dayes) doth appeare to be e∣uē now most florishing in the church
 of God, his name be alwayes praysed therefore.
And wherefore did the Prophets by his spirite speake? or Christ and his Apostles preach? or the godly Fathers before vs? or these our learned writers in this age? VVherefore I saye with hart, mouth, and penne, haue they tra∣uailed? But to vtter the testimonie of gods gift, & confesse his name to the people of the earth, to the life of the e∣lect, & the inexcuse of the reprobate. So will the Lord haue his spirite euer resiant in his Church, to the end of the world.
To follow these Fathers as they fol∣lowe Christ, I accompt it my part, ha¦uing for further example amongest the many worthy workes of our wri∣ters now, your L. profitable worke lately set forth, to the better tast of Gods good wil, in his expressed word in the appoynted Lessons at common
 prayer. Of which worke I cease to speake further, and seeke to follow as I can such good examples to the ende before touched. VVhat if my Mite be not much worth? Yet as it com∣meth from the Lord of heauen, so shal it no doubt profite thither to his ha∣bilitie, and that is my whole desire. Let the learned eares accept as in in∣ferior place this my small coyne, yet good currāt siluer (I trust) tried by the touch of truth, and geue him licence to passe, to the lesse learned and poore countrey people, whose state requi∣reth yet mornings milke, not all able for solidate questiōs or deepe digested misteries. Their soules are precious in the sight of God: their liues ought to be deare in our consciences: their wounded hartes require some soue∣raigne medicine of gentle digesture, and quiet operation: yet so, that their ignorance & weaknes may be remo∣ued,
 which God for his mercies sake in Christ, vouchsafe them richly in his loue. This is not the least cause why I haue stirred vp the small gift of God in me, to exercise the same vpon this Hymne vsed in and at the mor∣ning prayer. Iudging, as by order through vse the wordes are readie at the lippe to vouch the Prophetes speech: So if their tender hartes had some helpe to open therto the hidden cause of ioye in that holy letter, no doubt (I say) the same of them shuld both with hart and mouth ioynd in one consent of grateful harmonie, crie out the praises of the Lord in the tem¦ples of the holy Ghost, which is theEph. 5.19.20. song that deliteth only the musical eares of Gods maiestie.
Assuredly al other chaunting notes and changing keys, seeme they neuer so pleasant in the eares of men, are far estranged from the good like of god,
 al if set vp in his house of prayer.Esay 29.13. Math. 15.8. Marc. 7.17. This people worship me (saith God) with their lippes, but their hartes are farre from me. In vaine do they serue me. &c. And albeit I cannot touch the stile worthie so high a matter, or set downe such deepe doctrine as the na∣ture of the place requireth, or yet ap∣proch such the hidden treasures as are here layd vp, or the finenes of this our age expecteth: yet, nay the lesse, the wydowes MyteLuc. 21.2. is my boldninge comfort: And on the other part the sorowfull lookes of the slothful Miser to whom the Lordes TalentMat. 26.24. was imparted, maketh me afraid to quēch the spirit, or stay the firie word kind∣led in my hart (if I may vse Ieremies wordes) at this present.Ier. 20. But be it that I should blushe to present my simple skill, to the scanning of the wise and sharpned sight of the loftie learned & deepe Doctors of our time, knowing
 that my owne weaknes, is to sundrie of them knowne also inable to this ex¦ploit, in respect of infinit others▪ yet I ioye at this refuge, my conscience beareth me witnes tofore GOD and men, that the onely end and scope of this my pen is chiefely to promote Gods glory, then to vse rightly my loned penie in dutifull sort to the ho∣ly Church of God, here in this our state and Realme by his great mercie, firmely set vpon the foundation stone1. Cor. 3.11. Christ Iesus. This Ancker is to me a staye, and frayeth all feare from me, so that I (as I can) seeke to helpe forwardes the Lords labours, though wants in me, do force the wish of lear∣ned frame, and eloquēt phraise to help my willing mind and godly purpose. But I accept with thankfulnes, that which God hath vouched safe to giue (being because of my many sinnes, vn¦worthy of that in him I haue) I onely
 desire of God in Christ, that his spirit of truth may guide my ragged rowes and simple stile, and that the lesse lear¦ned (for whom chiefely I presume these presents) may something here∣with be profited.
The matter that I exhibit to your L. is An Exposition with an ample & true applicatiō of that Hymne which by order of the constituted Lawes of England is now appoynted to be vsed at Morning prayer: which Hymne cōmonly is called BENEDICTVS. Not at all purposed to controll, much lesse to condemne the minds of some of our bretherne, whose Censure hath exiled his vse at the Common praier: Or yet to lend my like to phantasies lust, where sound warrant hath no place. And waighing with my selfe, that neither they may by their priuate power, or can with the quietnes of Gods Church in England, (which
 ought necessarilie of all Christians to be had in most regard) to take from her that and those thinges which by Law she hath established. Further∣more reuoluing my cogitations, that this Hymne (howesoeuer of some it be disliked to his appoynted vse) is tho, a part of holy scripture. I thought it better (to that I could) to open some of the hidden treasures layd vp in the same for the Church of God: then to feede some forren phantasie, or to pol∣lute my pen in contending to pull downe that which may well enough stand, and nothing abate the beautie of Gods house.
Yet do I not thinke this Hymne so necessarily set in the order of prayer, as without the same it were blemi∣shed, for that were more than friuo∣lous: but because the matter therin cō∣tained (indifferently looked into, and well weighed) doth enstruct, comfort,
 and also administreth light to our spi∣rituall sences, and vnderstanding of Gods mercies, in his promised Christ to vs geuen, and long sith commen in the Flesh, (which matter in time of prayer is expedient.) I can not yet learne or be of other minde, then that the said Psalme as it is appointed, is both tollerable and profitable to all godly heartes. And were these my weake labors worthy by their valor, to force the fauor of christian frend, & to refell the fury of Popish foe, to your good L. of right I ought to dedicate the same: not only because you are my lerned godly Ordinary, who can with good iudgment, discerne the doctrine therin contained, if either sounde or contrary, (that so in stead of milke the meate for babes, I powre not out poy∣son to infect the well growne vp chil∣dren in Christ, for that God graunt e∣uer to be farre from me:) but also for
 that in respect that I should not loy∣ter, but labor in the vineyard of the Lorde, your goodnesse at the request of the right honorable my singuler good L. and Master (as you know) did commit vnto me a speciall flock with in your Diocese, to foster vp in Christ their soules, which he hath purchased with his most blessed bloud. Let this little booke beare witnesse of my dili∣gent care (therfore my good L.) that I beare, both to the same my peculiar charge, amongst whom, and of whose labors I reape my portion and liuely∣hode, and to the whole church of God elsewhere, where these my low lines, with others godly woorkes, may fruc∣tify by his holy grace and spirit, in the apt soyle of their poore harts, had they store of godly teachers.
Finally I beseech your L. that my poore pen may passe the raging Seas of curious censure, vnder the harbor
 of your protection: So shall it with much more quietnes arriue in the port of the poore mans hart, desirous not to cauill, but to catch earnest holde of such plaine doctrine, as truly, though simply, teacheth him the way to life. This if I may of your good nature ob¦taine, it will encourage me, the further aduenture of godly study in the sa∣cred Scriptures, if so it may please the almightie in his Sonne Christ, to be∣stow a greater porcion of me, that I may still bring foode into the church of God.
The Lord God of mercy, loue, and peace, send to this our church, her ma∣iestrate our godly Queene, state and people, the peace of Christ vnfainedly in our hartes for his names sake, and to your L. encrease of godly know∣ledge, like zeale, and perfect strength to cōtinue with godly care, euer more and more profitable to his Church,
 by the power of his spirite, whose de∣fence be euer yours, and you with all vs that inuocate truely the name of God, for euer his, in Christ our Lord.
 From Medborne this 15. of Ianuary. 1573.
