



RIght worthie Ladies: As there is nothing that better becommeth the righteous, then to bee thankefull vnto the Lord for his great mercies bestowed vpon vs. So I am perswaded, in nothing more hath our gratious God aduanced his wonder∣full goodnesse vnto our sinfull nation: Then in that great deliuerance of our Prince and people, from that hellish

plot of the Gunpowder Treason. For as the Redemption of mankind by the pretious blood of Iesus Christ, hath therefore the priuiledge to be of all o∣ther benefits the most excellent, farre exceeding our Creation or any other blessing of God, because thereby man∣kind was restored to a more excellent estate then it lost in Adam: so how soe∣uer the Lord in mercie vouchsafed vnto this Nation, as it were a new creation: by the Ministerie of good Queene Elizabeth of happy memory who restoring vnto vs the glorious Gospel of Iesus Christ, we were there∣by euen pluckt out of the fiery fornace of Antichrist, and new borne again to the hope of eternall glory: yet because we haue not receiued the loue of the truth, and did not gloryfie our blessed God, in our obedience therunto: ther∣fore did we iustly forfate our right in that great blessing, and so deserued vtterly to bee depriued thereof. And was not this our general fere, in those dayes when the Light of our eys grew dimme, and the sunne of our happines was set in these parts, that together

therewith the light of the Gospel also should haue bene taken from vs: sure∣ly if the Lord had not them beene on our side, when the arme of the flesh failed vs. If hee had not reserued an ly seed to stand in the gappe, wee must needs haue bene as Sodome and Gomorrha.
But blessed be the name of our God for euer, that in his eternall mercie had reserued a Ioseph for vs, euen a royall Branch of that holy seede to renue and maintaine our glorious light: And haue wee walked worthie of so great saluation, surely if there were nothing else to condemn our vn∣thankefulnesse for so great a blessing: Euen that accursed Powder Plot in steed of all other arguments is suffici∣ent hereunto. For as the vnthankeful∣nesse of the Papists was here nooi∣ously discouered, that hereby intended the subuersion of the state, which had so gratiously vouchsafed lfe and peace vnto thē. So did this also conuince the vnprofitablenesse of the Protestant, who, for the abuse of his Talent, was hereby summoned to his account, and

in his owne desert must needes haue beene ouertaken with this iudgment: And therefore was it not the free mercie of the Lord that wee were not vtterly consumed.
Were wee not plucked euen as a brand out of the fire? were wee not wonderfully redeemed euen by the mightie power of God, from that hor∣rible pit? Did not the Lord thereby raise vp a mightie saluation for vs, euen by his owne immediate arme that he alone may haue the glory? And shal we not thē take vp the cup of sal∣uation, & giue thanks vnto the name of the Lord. Surely as there remaines no more sacrifice for sin, for such that do treade vnder foote the blood of the Son of God. So I am perswaded that if we shall despise so great saluation, and forget this wonderfull worke which our God hath done for vs, we shall in vaine hope of the like deliue∣rance. The Lord will do no more such great workes among vs because of our vnthankefull and vnbeleeuing hearts And therefore seeing the gratious Lord as he sanctified that deliuerance

vnto me his vnworthie seruant by a speciall deliuerance from the malice of vnreasonable men, which in the ve∣rie instant of our reioycing had layde a snare to entrappe my soule: so hee hath hitherto giuen me my life for a pray from many other extremities.
Can I do better then I haue begun so still to imploy it in the meditation of Gods great mercies? Ought I not do my vttermost to awaken this secure age, and prouoke the Saints to an ho∣ly entertainement of so great salua∣tion? Can I do lesse then take occasion hereby to testifie my thankefulnesse vnto those that haue bin instruments for the maintenance of my life and studies? Surely, deare Christiā Ladies, as I must acknowledge my selfe here∣by bound for euer vnto your Honours so accept I beseech you this vnfained pledge thereof, and bee prouoked herby to a wise redeeming of the time, that so you may be prepared to a bles∣sed eternitie. Take these holy rules herein contained, as a true guide to leade you safely in all occasions thereunto: and make account of

my best deuotions and endeuour here after to further to the same. And so I commend your Ladiships to the grace of God in Iesus Christ. Resting in him.

