



THough I vse not (more thē briefe notes) to write my sermons (yet right worship∣full) for that of some of your godly religious chil∣dren, I was more then earnestly entrea∣ted to set downe this Sermon, my simple newyeares gift (bestowed in comon a∣mongst you) I after lōger sute then there was great cause, graunted, and haue pen∣ned downe the same, so neare as I can
 call to my memory the manner of my speche. The order and disposition I haue exactly obserued, and not omitted any note or authoritie of scripture by me then alledged. And as it is vnpossible for him that penneth not his Sermons, to set them downe, euen so, and with the selfe same words in all places as he spake them: So to all my possibilitie haue I performed as neare as may be my order and speech. And some thing haue I ad∣ded in some place, which want of tyme trained me from at that present. And if any lesse ye nowe lyke then when you herde the same, consider then the diffe∣rence betwixt reading & preaching the selfe same truth, and matter. Gods grace did thē assist the preachers spirit, voice, gesture and disposition, & likewise your hartes by his spirite were made to hun∣ger this holy bread. And now you haue the liuing wordes, (but seuered from the lyuely voyce) which neuer can bring like profit to the godly hartes, vnles greate thirste of the matter, cause the resem∣blaunce of the maner howe, to stande as freshe before your eyes. The Lord graūt it to profit as much as my good will is, &
 then shall my small labour be fully re∣compensed. I haue ioyned here to the forme of prayer which I gaue to your worship (good Sir William) at Holme Patricke in Irelande, very good for all such as passe the seas, as our selues haue tasted by good proofe, the comforts re∣ceiued in our late ariual the lord be prai¦sed therefore. Take the small gyft with the geuer, all yours (as he may) in the Lorde: to whome (vvith dayly thanks for your great curtesie to me in Irelande), I in my prayers commende you & the rest vnfained∣ly.
Ian. 3. 1575.

