


To the honorable and ver∣tuous Lady Scudamore, attendant vppon hir Maiesties most excellent person in hir priuie Chamber, Anthony Anderson, Preacher of Chri∣sts holy gospell, Subdean of hir Maie∣sties Royall Chappell, wisheth all honorable encrease, and heauenly felicitie.
ALthough (Honorable Madame) the matter herewith tendred, be of small worth, to some men, & lesse esteemed with many, yet sure I am the right vse thereof, may aduaile moe, then make ac∣compt of it. If in the daies of health & prosperitie, wee thinck it duetifull to pray the Lord, to continue the same, how much more ought wee, in affliction and aduersitie, to practise sound petition, which godlinesse hath this riches, that the faithfull by it in Christ from God, doth re∣ceiue, both temporary good, and eternall comforts. Wee in this Realme, are vnder the rod of affliction, and who doth pray, but those which are taught of God, to vse it. Amongst the number of whome, for that in my knowledge, with many others in Court, your Ladiship doth dayly vse and desire it, and my selfe for your good opinion and Christian kindnesse conceiued and bestowed on mee, to you greatly boūd, I am bold to patronize my poore indeauors present, vnder your Godly protection, assured that

both in Court & country, it shalbe the more in vse, which vndoubtedly will counteruaile their paines, if they pray in faith. The cause mouing this my bold∣nesse, to present the Church here with, is, my dutie to the same in general, & especially, next to the most honorable Court, (whereof I am a poore membre, in hir Maiesties goodnesse,) to my comfortable charge at Stepney, a people of great import, for Ma∣ryne seruice, cheefely zealous in God, loyall to hir Maiestie, well deseruing of the whole Realme, and now vnder the rod of this smart visitatiō, for whom, I humbly besech all them, which may or shall feele any comfort by this poore tender, that in their fer∣uent prayers, they will effectually commēd vs to the Throne of Gods mercies in Christ. And to you good Madame, with the rest of the honorable and godly Ladies and others at Court, I humbly com∣mend mee, beseeching God, to graunt vs mercifull deliuerance of this his louing rod, that wee hir Ma∣iesties seruants, may thether returne to our boūden dutie, as apertaineth, and so humbly I take my leaue.
August 1. 1593. Stepney.

