



RIght worshipfull, and dearely beloued in the Lord Iesus: It is the mercie of the Lord, that wee are not vtterly consumed, because his compassions faile not. Hath not our long prosperitie hardened our hearts, and lulled vs in secu∣ritie? And when we say, peace and safety, may not a sudden destruction come vpon vs, as the trauaile vpon a woman with childe, and we shall not escape? Doe not our impudent and desperate sinnes, daily call downe for vengeance against vs, in that we put the euill day farre from vs, that wee may still approach to the seat of ini∣quity, hardning our hearts yet more and more that we cannot repent? And is not the enuious man busie to sow tares, now wee are asleepe? Are not our aduersaries watchfull and dil gent in their malicious and bloody practises against the Church of God, practising daylie the ouerthrow thereof? will any thing serue their turne

but to roote cut and destroy, and are we generally any better then such trees as are able to bee hewen downe, and cast into the fire? Hath this vnprofitable fig-tree for all this dressing and fencing, for all this lopping and donging, yet brought forth fruit worthie of repen∣tance? Surely though we should neuer so much stand v∣pon our iustification with Saul, that wee haue fulfilled the Commandements of the Lord, that we are an holy people, the Lord shall finde no iniquity in vs, &c. yet the bleating of the sheepe, and lowing of the oxen: the sparing of Agag. and reseruing of his offals, is a noto∣rious euidence to conuince our hypocrisie. And there∣fore, though we flatter our selues with Agag, that the bitternesse of death is past, because happilie the Lord in great patience hath yet waited vpon vs, and put off many desperate blowes, that might haue light heauilie vpon vs: yet certainly when hee sees a conuenient time he will execute vengeance, and wound the hairie scalpe of all those that goe on in their wickednesse. And is not this a speciall euidence, that we goe on in our sinnes, and intend not repentance, because we either hate to be re∣formed, and haue cast the word behinde our backes: or els heape vp teachers according to our own lusts, which may prophecie of new wine and strong drinke, to mor∣row shall be as to day, or much more aboundant? And is it not a fearefull argument of the wrath of God, rea∣die to seaze vpon vs, in that wee haue chosen and em∣braced the world, that thirsts after our blood, and haue cast out that sword which should stand in the gappe, to turne away the vengeance? What then is the reason that we are not vtterly consumed that our aduersaries the Papists, haue not had their desire? Surely they shall

not say, where is now our God? because they shal not blas∣pheme that great & glorious Name of our God, which is called vpon of vs: And therfore, not vnto vs oh Lord, not vnto vs, but vnto thy Name giue the glory, euen for thy truth & righteousnes sake. Thogh we are not wor∣thy of the least of Gods mercies, thogh we haue deserued to be ouerwhelmed with all his plagues, yet the Lord is worthy of all praise and glory: and therefore he hath de∣liuered vs, that we might glorifie him: and shall not the Iudge of al the world do right? wil he punish the righte∣ous with the wicked? must not Lot be taken out of So∣dom, before the vengeance be inflicted? shall not euen one be a means to spare the Citie for his sake? Behold, here another ground of the patience of God, euen the holy seed that yet remaines the Lord hath a litle flocke which is as deare vnto him, as the apple of his eye: this hath hee chosen it vnto him in Iesus Christ, before the foundations of the world were laid. This he hath made glorious through his beautie, which he hath set vpon it: this he hath promised to bee with vs to the end of the world & can any thing be against vs if the lord be with vs? shall not he make our enemies our footstool? shal not the lord tread Satan vnder our feet? blessed be God in Ie∣sus Christ, that hath made bare his mighty army in the sight & acknowledgment of our enemies? Did not the papists once acknowledge that God was become a luthe∣ran? do they not feel to this day, that he that keeps Israel doth neither slūber nor sleep? hath not our God watched ouer vs, when wee haue slept in security? hath not hee foght for vs, when our carnal weapōs haue bin confoun∣ded? hath he not got himself the glory of al our deliuerā∣ces, that so we might at length giue him the glory of his

free mercies, that so we might not be afraid of any euill tidings, that still we might feare, and depart from euil while the wicked rage, & are careles? surely howsoeuer the pit is digged for the wicked, and the consumption decreed shall passe ouer to the confounding of hypocrites howsoeuer sinner in Sion shalbe afraid, and feare shall take hold of the hypocrits, when Gods wrath approcheth yet shall the vpright heart then lift vp their heads be∣cause their saluation draweth neere. The purging of the Church of hypocrites shalbe the preparing thereof to greater glorie and safetie, and the anointed of the Lord shall gaine more honour and securitie, when the Lord Iesus shalbe more aduanced vpon his holy hill of Sion. And are not our enemies hastening hereunto? hath not the patience of policie enraged them more and more, and doth not their wickednesse so breake out, that it can no longer be endured? Is it not time together with the safety of our soules, to prouide also for the securitie of our liues and states? Blessed bee the Lord for the vigi∣lance and courage of the state. Oh, blessed bee our God for his watchfulnesse ouer vs, were not all our building and watching else in vaine? And is it not then more then time to keepe our God waking by our prayers and teares? Is it not his time to awake out of securitie, that so we may make our peace with God, that he may stil for his glory preserue the peace of his Churches, that he may still preuent and confound the enemies of his Church? And could I now hold my peace in this day of good ty∣dings, when the Lord hath euen againe giuen vs our liues for a prey, and pluckt vs as a prey out of the teeth of the deuourer? Haue I not vowed a yeerely remem∣brance, for that great deliuerance from the gunpowder

Treason? and doth the glorious Lord still giue new oc∣casions to reuiue that great deliuerance? Are not his mercies renued euery morning vnto his, so great is his faithfulnesse, and shall not we renew our thankfulnesse by renewing our repentance? Shall wee not remember from whence wee are fallen, by remembring from whence we haue been deliuered, that so we may iustifie the free mercie of our God in our great deliuerances: and renewing our right in Iesus Christ that so we may recouer our first loue, and be enabled to walke worthy of the mercies of our God, in strengthening the things that are readie to die, and continuing with all patience and perseuerance, that no man take away our Crowne from vs? Are not our earthly Crownes often shaken, that so we may bee sure of the heauenly inheritance, which cannot bee shaken, that so we may hasten from this prison, to that citie which is aboue? And hath not our gratious God giuen vs euen Eagles wings, that we may mount vp from the loue of this world, that we may flie away from the entising vanities theeof, & so come to that eternall rest? May we not liue by faith in the experience of these so strange and vnexpected deliue∣rances: that he which hath deliuered, doth all still deli∣uer vs, yea for his Names sake will deliuer vs from all vnreasonable men, yea from euery euill worke, that so we may be made meet for that glorious inheritance? And shall not this litle sparke yeeld some light hereunto, till the depth of mischiefe being further discouered, the candle may be lighted, and set vp vpon the hill, to direct all to come out of Babylon, to further the Saints in their iourney to the heauenlie Ierusalem: surely as it pleaseth God to lend oportunity and libertie, so shall I

not be wanting by Gods grace, from that light, to kindle such a torch, that may either burne vp all the stubble of Popery, or else may sufficientlie warne vs to auoid the danger thereof. Meane while I haue thought good to take this occasion, to maintain the soundnes of our spi∣rituall standing and recouery out of any decayes there∣in, that so wee may bee thereby fitted to those further mercies which the Lord hath in store for vs. And see∣ing it hath pleased God to make you instruments (belo∣ued) of my setling in the Citie, and exercise of my cal∣ling, I haue accounted it my duetie to consecrate these first fruits of my setled labours vnto you: beseeching the Lord to giue you vnderstanding in all things: and to preserue you blamelesse and vnspotted in these e∣uill times, vnto the day of Iesus Christ, to whose gratious protection I doe most hartily commend you, resting in him.

