



Right Worshipfull:
THe occasions that hath
moued mee to treate of
this subiect of true Be∣neficence
in these latter
dayes are First, to propose
it as a liuely Touchstone
for the triall of our holy entertainment of the
glorious Gospell of Iesus Christ: Secondly, to
confound hereby the vaine confidence of
this deceitfull generation, which seeme to be
somewhat herein, when indeed they are no∣thing;
deceiuing themselues, euen as clouds

without water, in their false liberality. And
so to conuince the Atheist, that saith, where is
the promise of his comming? seeing this very
decay of true loue, is among other, one of those
pregnant signes, that the day of the Lord Iesus
is neere at hand, that so the wise in heart may
see the plague, and hide himselfe. And seeing
he that is comming will come quickly, with
his reward with him, to giue vnto euery one
according to his work, yea, will come sodainly
in an houre, that no man knowes of, ought we
not alwaies to haue Oyle ready in our Lamps,
that so we may enter in vnto our masters ioy?
Surely were there nothing else to moue vs
hereunto, but the commandement of our hea∣uenly
Master, this should prouoke vs to loue
one another, this should adiure vs to abound
in Charity, that so we might auoid eternall
vengeance, seeing all the commandements are
fulfilled in this, that we loue each other, & to
faile in one duty is guilty of the breach of all.
But behold what loue the Father hath shew∣ed
vs, that, what was impossible to the com∣mandement
in regard of the transgression,
whereby sin reuiued & became  of mea∣sure
sinfull: and so the hatred increasing, we
had no hope, but were as water spilt vpon the
ground, that we could not be gathered vp

againe: Our God which is rich in mercy
through his great loue, wherewith he loued
vs, supplied by a most gracious and wonder∣full
remedy, namely, the pretious bloud of his
deere sonne, as of a Lambe vndefiled & with∣out
spot. This is that bloud that hath spoken
better things for vs then the bloud of Abel,
not only stopping that loud crie of Vengeance
which our sinnes called for, but opening vnto
vs the gates of righteousnesse, and enabling
vs to walke in the similitude of the death
and resurrection of Iesus Christ, that so we
might be partakers with him of eternall glo∣ry.
And this is that blessed Lord Iesus, who
hath not beene a stranger vnto vs, or soiour∣nour
with vs for a season, but hath beene
liuely described in our sight, and euen cruci∣fied
among vs, in the glorious and constant
publishing of the Gospell of Peace. And could
greater loue be shewed to vs by any then that
the sonne of God should lay downe his life
for his? And if the Lord so loued vs, ought
we not to loue one another? Is not this our
euidence that we loue God whom we haue
not seene, in that we loue our brethren whom
we see daily? Is not this our warrant that we
are translated from death to life, because we
loue the brethren?

Behold then our triall of the right enter∣tainment
of the Gospell. And haue wee
brought forth this fruit to repentance and
amendment of life?
Surely we must needs acknowledge that our
glorious God can truly iustifie him against
vs: What could he haue done vnto vs which
he hath not done? Enquire we, in the name
of God, of the dayes that are past, which were
before vs, since the day that God created
man vpon the earth, and aske from one end
of heauen to the other; if there came to
passe such a great thing as this, or whither
any such like thing hath beene heard: What
nation is so great vnto whom the Gods come
so neere as the Lord our God is neere vnto
vs in all that we call vnto him for?
Had euer nation the Gospell of Iesus
Christ so long continued with such constant
outward peace and prosperity for the better
entertainment thereof? Was euer nation de∣liuered
out of so horrible a pit, as was the
Gunpowder treason? Thus may the Lord
iustifie himselfe against vs, but how haue we
iustified our God in a conscionable embra∣cing
of so great saluation, bringing forth fruit
answerable thereunto?
That we haue a name to be aliue, who

may deny vs? Is not yet the Gospell preached
in our streets? Doe we not draw forth with
ioy out of these fountaines of saluation? How
is it then that we bring forth wilde grapes?
are we not for all this euen now dead, and
pluckt vp by the rootes? Yea, if we may be
beleeued our selues, we say that we are rich,
and encreased with goods, and haue neede
of nothing? But is not this because wee
know not that we are poore, and lame, and
blinde, and miserable? Are we not willingly
ignorāt of the truth of our estates, iudging of
the same by false rules, as Opinion, Custome,
Estimation, Multitude, and such like: and so
are deceiued in our imagination, esteeming
our selues to be somewhat, when we are no∣thing,
at leastwise nothing to what we should
be? Haue we brought forth fruit answerable
to the time of our visitation?
Surely, if there were nothing else to con∣uince
our barrennesse & vnprofitablenes in
the entertainment of so great saluation, the
very bleating of the Sheep, and lowing of the
Oxen; the cries and complaints of the poore,
ringing daily, and piercing the heauens for
their contempt, and deslations: the diuisions
of Ruben, should cause great sorrow of heart;
this might iustly challenge a great decay of

vnfained loue. Is not Ephraim against Ma∣nasses,
and Manasses against Ephraim,
and both against Iuda? Hath not the abun∣dance
of selfe-loue eaten out all hearty and
true affection to each other, while euery
one seekes his owne, and not that which
may concerne the common good: nay, with
the generall wracke of the publike weale?
And if wee thus bite and teare one another,
shall we not be deuoured of each other?
Learne we hence, in the name of God, to
see the plague, and hide our selues. Is it not
already begunne; shall I say in the vtter∣most
part of the hoast, or not rather in
the hoast and eyes thereof? And is not the
Kite ready to seaze vpon both? The Lord
giue vs vnderstanding in all things. Is not
this the day of Iacobs trauaile? Doth not
the Iudge stand at the doore? Will not the
Master come in an houre which that ser∣uant
dreameth not of, and giue him his por∣tion
with Hypocrites, where shall be wee∣ping
and wayling, and gnashing of teeth?
Surely, were it not that the Lord had re∣serued
a remnant of the holy seed among
vs, we had long since beene as Sodome
and Gomorrha: And is not the righte∣ous
daily taken from the euill to come? Is

not Ezekiell daily made a signe to the
house of Israell? And is not the hand of
the Lord stretched out still? Who so is wise
let him vnderstand these things, and to
whom the Lord shall reueale them; for the
wayes of God are holy and righteous, and
the iust shall walke therein, but the w∣ked
shall fall in the same. Must not the
Gospell be a stumbling-blocke to the Iew,
and foolish to the Graecians? Doe any of the
Rulers beleeue in him? nay, is it not an of∣fence
that the poore receiue the Gospell? And
shall not the Lord stay his hand till Lot
be remoued out of Sodome? shall not the
Gospell be continued till the remnant be ga∣thered
in? And may we not daily obserue
a great Haruest abroad, euen the barraine
and desolate corners of the Land, hun∣gring
after the Word, and catching the
Kingdome, with all holy violence? And
why then stand wee idle in the Mar∣ket-place?
Why helpe wee not the Lord
against the mighty? Is not the Canaa∣nite
yet in the Land? Hath hee not en∣creased
by our contentions and securi∣tie?
Why ioyne wee not together against
the common enemy? Doth he not beast

of false liberality? Doth not the harlot begin
to encroach vpon vs by her offerings of Peace
and pretences of reconciliation, by her glori∣ous
shewes, and sugred greetings, entending
more desperately to kill, when she kisseth and
croucheth, that heapes of men may fall by
her might? Can we euer forget that hidden
Mine? Shall we not euer suspect such faw∣ning
Absalons, and deepe Achitophels?
Is not this the age of complements, and
formalities, vanishing meerely in shewes and
bodily worships? Was euer deadly hatred car∣ried
more cunningly vnder sugred words,
and fayned deuotions? Is not our friendship
turned into flattery, our hospitality to stately
houses, and gay cloathes, our Beneficence to
vaine boastings, and cold words: Nay, to euill
deeds? Witnesse our enclosures and turning
out of our brethren from their ancient habi∣tations,
and placing in their roomes heards
of beasts: Were it not better to be such Gen∣tlemens
sheepe then their Tenants? Were it
not better that such great ones had not a foot
of the earth, then that hereby they should en∣danger
the losse of heauen? What shall wee
thinke of that innaturall encroaching and
vndermining of each other in their callings
and liuelihoods? Tradesman eating out

Tradesman, Merchant supplanting Mer∣chant,
one Brother vndermining another, the
common wisedome and misery of the times?
Doe not they argue that both conscience
and charity is dead among vs? And ought
we not then to strengthen the things that are
ready to die, that so wee may recouer our
first loue? Surely what these poore labours shall
come short of herein, that shall I not fayle to
make vp with my best desires: All which I
doe here, with whatsoeuer I humbly com∣mend
vnto your Worships good acceptance in
Iesus Christ, as acknowledging hereby my
selfe, and all mine deepely indebted vnto your
Worships for your fatherly loue vnto vs in
our afflictions, and binding my selfe hereby
in all hearty affections and endeauours, at
least to take away iust imputation of vn∣thankefulnesse.
And thus commending your
Worships to the grace of God in Iesus Christ,
I euer rest:

