



DIuerse, and verie weighty haue been the motiues (right Worshipfull) to induce mee to the Dedication of these my Labors in this kinde vnto your Wor∣ships.

The first is, because my first calling from the Vniuersitie, to employ my Ministerie for the e∣dification of the Saints, was by the Gouernors of your famous Citie, to succeed that painefull and profitable Teacher Maister Harrison, who was thence called by the Kings most Excellent Maiestie, to be one of the sixe Teachers to those barren and needefull places of the Country of Lancashire. And therefore, hauing both kind intertainment among you; and by some of you beeing furthered to a more set∣led Pastorall Charge in that Countie, I could not but leaue some memoriall of my thanke∣fulnesse vnto you herein.
Secondly, my free admission to that Pastorall Charge, toge∣ther with the singular proui∣dence of God, in directing my

Ministerie for the informing and reforming of that ignorant People, who neuer before en∣ioyed any constant Ministerie, as also his admirable protection and deliuerance of me from vn∣reasonable men, that vsed all their force and cunning to hin∣der the proceedings of the Go∣spel of Christ.
As these are specially, which I can neuer sufficiently remem∣ber and glorifie Almighty God for, so haue I thought it good to leaue this Testimonie vnto you of my thankefull remem∣brance hereof; who were, ma∣ny of you, acquaynted with the good hand of my God vpon me in this behalfe; especially seeing by an especiall occasion at the North-wich, by a child afflicted by the power of Sathan, and (as it was conceiued) through the

confederacie of some Witches thereabout. It pleased the Lord to minister some experience vnto mee, both of Sathans me∣thods and stratagems in decei∣uing vnstable soules, and also of the power of God confounding the wisedome of the world, and taking them in their owne craf∣tinesse, did I not then vow to communicate my Experience for the good of the Church? and hath not the Lord giuen this gracious occasion thereun∣to?
And shall not this mercie of my God bee had in euerlasting remembrance, That whereas I come from the Vniuersitie, al∣though furnished happily with some outward helpes, and not without some true desire of sa∣uing soules. It pleased God to turne the oppositions of Satan,

& contradictions of men to the bettering of my knowledge, and quickening of my zeale for the common good, though in great weaknesse and corruption: shal not this be a perpetuall memo∣riall of my thankfulnes to those worthie Magistrates, M. Warbar∣ton of Arly, M. Marburie of the Meare, & others of that parish, to quicken and incourage them in their zeale and loue vnto the Gospel?
And seeing it pleased God lately to call mee againe into those parts, & to employ me by means of some other Worthies in that shire in this special argu∣ment of the discouery of this My∣sterie of Witch-craft; could I doe lesse then satisfie their iust de∣sires heerein? and are not they fittest to haue some of the fruite (whatsoeuer it is) of my Labors

and obseruations heerein, who were speciall occasions and fur∣therers thereof.
These are some of the mo∣tiues (Right worshipfull) which haue preuailed with mee at this time, hauing now leasure and opportunitie (by Gods mercie) to publish my poore endeuours in this kinde, and so to dedicate the same vnto your Worships. For other speciall reasons in∣dearing me hereunto, I referre your Worshippes vnto the first chapter of the Treatise ensuing.
Beseeching you not to stay in the Porch and Entrance, but to take the pains to view the whole inward buildings, and furniture of the house. And if you finde any thing therein to informe your consciences in the truth of this Doctrine. Let it be a pre∣seruatiue against the secret A∣theisme

that fretteth like a Gan∣grene, and threatneth to care out the life and power of Reli∣gion, and to direct your iudge∣ments in the sifting and punish∣ment of this mischiefe.
If you finde the subtilties of Sathan any whit herein discoue∣red, who in the afflictions of the bodie hunts after the destructi∣on of the soule, and by this tam∣pering with Witches, to afflict the outward man seekes to en∣throne himselfe in the heart and conscience aboue all that is cal∣led God: let this also be a means for the better securitie of your Soules, in the discouerie of the good Witches, and renouncing their dangerous helpes: Let it prouoke you in generall, as you 2 Booke. are taught heereafter to labour by all meanes the planting and the countenancing of a setled

and powerful Ministery among you, that thereby Satan may fall like Lightning, his power and policies may be discouered and confounded. For the effecting whereof as my heartie Prayers vnto the Almightie shalbe dai∣ly made manifest at the Throne of Grace for you and yours: so I doe most heartily commend you all vnto his gracious prote∣ction in his sonne Christ Iesu. In whom I rest

