



Right Honourable,
KIng IAMES of late and blessed memory, knowing the mysteries of Popery better then many of his predecessors, how by it God was robd of his honour, by Invocation of Saints, vowing to Saints, beleeving in Saints, sacrificing to I∣mages, adoring of a breaden god, and Re∣likes: and how Kings and Princes were spoi∣led of their soveraignty, by the Popes ex∣empting of all Clergy men from obedience to them, and absolving their subiects from the Oath of Allegiance; and how Inferiour Magistrates were hindred in the execution of Iustice, by the doctrine of Aequivocation; and the common people inveigled and mis∣led, to the endangering both of their bodies
 and soules, by the doctrines of blind-fold o∣bedience, and that faith and truth is not to be kept with heretikes: he was not onely willing, all the time hee did reigne over vs, that we should pray to God, as we did in the dayes of Great ELIZABETH: That he would keepe vs from all Papistrie: and that he would preserue vs from the Pope, as well as from the Turke; in as much as the Pope laboured to dethrone Christ, as well as the Turke did: but hee required further of vs,In the prayer to be made Nove. 5. in remem∣brance of our deliverance from the Gun∣powder▪ Trea∣son. That wee should pray God to strengthen his handes, and the handes of his Nobles and Magistrates in the Land, to cut off the Papists, and to roote them out of the Confines and limits of the Kingdome: pro∣testing in one Parliament, That hee could not permit the increase and growth of Poperie, with∣out betraying the liberties both of England and Scotland, & of the Crown in his posterity. And in another, That his heart bled when he heard of the increase of Popery: And that his griefe was such, as if thornes had beene in his eyes, and pricks in his sides: avowing earnestly, That if he knew any way better then another, to hinder the growth thereof, hee would take it. Which courses and speeches of his, argued no small dislike of
 Popery and of Papists also: though some of them gaue out in Germany,Meruri ∣lo. Belg. ad An, 1623. yea, and in S. Lu∣cies Iland, not long before his death, that he was turned Roman-Catholike.Purh Pil∣grimage lib. . cap. 3. p. 831. Now in as much, as the causes which wrought in his Royall heart such a detestation of Poperie, are the same still, (if not greater) which they were in his time: I cannot but thinke, that Charles his sonne, our present soveraine Lord and King, carries the same opinion of the same profession, and professours, which his blessed Father did. And hereupon it is (Right Noble Sir) that I being perswaded, it is the duty of every good subiect (according to his place and meanes) to labour the effecting of that which hee conceiues his Soveraine intends, for the preservation of Gods glo∣ry, and his owne authority: and for pro∣curing the quiet and safety of his peo∣ple; I haue reviewed and inlarged a little Treatise which I published in King James his time, wherein many grosse doctrines, and vile practises of the Papists are discovered: as namely, that it is lawfull to eate their God, to kill their Kings, to cozen their neigh∣bours, &c.
 Which I humbly pray may passe in your Honours name, as a lasting testimony of my vnfeigned thankefulnesse vnto your Ho∣nour, and to your Honourable father, by whose onely meanes (vnder God) I haue what I haue▪ for which, next vnto God and the King, I professe I honour you both: and will never forget to pray for you, and yours: remaining alwayes

