



IT is lamentable to consider how many starres are fallen of late from heauen, how manie Goddesses on the earth haue departed from the faith, and giuen heed vnto the spirit of errors, and doctrines of slan∣derers, to wit, the Papists. Yet me thinkes it is no matter of wonderment, because we reade, That if men receiue not the loue of the truth,2. Thess. 2. 10, 11 that they might be saued, God in his iustice will giue them strong delusions to beleeue lies, that they may be damned: for few, or none, of these late Apostataes, for any thing I can learne, were euer in loue with the truth. Among vs they were, but they were not of vs, as now appeares
 by their departing from vs; for if they had bene of vs, they would haue continued with vs; doubtlesse they would neuer haue falne to Poperie. For though Poperie be managed after the most politicke manner, yet in it selfe it is a grosse Religion: and the Perfiters there∣of, as shamelesse men in auowing manifest vntruths, and denying knowne truths, as e∣uer set pen to paper. All which it is as easie to proue, as to obiect, against them. But my purpose at this time is, to lay open their shame in denying knowne truths: which though it may be shewed by diuers particu∣lars, as namely byN. . in his wanword to S. Franc. Hastings wachword, n∣counter. 1. ca. 2. Parsons andIn his re∣proofe of D. Abbats defence o Mr. Pers. Preface to the Reader. p 10. Bishops denying that they call their Pope their Lord God: byApolog ad lib. Iacob. mag. Britann regis cap. 15. p 208. Bellarmines denying that any Ie∣suite had any hand in the powder treason: by theirBell . Ba∣ron. P ghius, &c generall denying that Pope Honorius the first was an hereticke, and by such like: yet most apparently their impudehcy ap∣peares in denying the report of Pope Ioane, which is proued by a cloude of witnesses in this discourse (which I make bold to present vnto your Grace:) for they are driuen to feigne, to forge, to cogge, to play the fooles, and in plaine English, to lie all manner of lies,
 for the couering of their shame in this. Onu∣phrius, Harding, Saunders, Cope, Genebrard, Bel∣larmine, Bernartius, Florimondus, Papyrius Ma∣so, Baronius, Parsons, and diuers others, who haue ioyned hand in hand, with purpose to carrie this cause away by strong hand; are so intangled in it, that it is with them, as with birds in the lime twigs, which sticke the faster in, by how much they flutter the more to get out. VVhich if your Grace vpon perusing (at your best leisure) shall find true, my humble desire is, that you will giue me leaue to pub∣lish it vnder your Graces name: partly, that by it the simpler sort (for I write not for the learned) may haue a tast by this of the hone∣sty, or rather the dishonesty of Papists in hād∣ling of points in controuersie: and partly, that it may be a testimonie of that reuerent respect, which I acknowledge due to such Church-Gouernours as your Grace is, who giue attendance vnto reading, which the1. Tim. 4. 13. A∣postle willed Timothy to do: and after the ex∣ample of the ancient Bishops, preach often: drawing on others, not by words onely, but by example also, to performance of like exerci∣ses. Hereafter, if it please God, that health, and
 meanes of bookes serue, I shall light on some more profitable argumēt. In the meane while, I pray God strengthen your Graces hands to the finishing of the Lords worke, in the Pro∣uince wherein you sit, as one of the seuen An∣gels in the seuen Churches mentioned in the Reuelation: that by your Graces meanes, the Epha, wherein Popish wickednesse sitteth, may be lift vp betweene the earth and the heauen, and caried out of the North, into the land of Sinar, and set there vpon his owne place.

