



RIght Christian Ladies, whome I loue in the
truth, till IESVS CHRIST be perfited in
you. It hath pleased the LORD of glory, by
a long, yet mild and fatherly visitation, of
late to summon me, his vnprofitable seruant to make ready
my Account: In the casting vp whereof finding my selfe
indebted vnto your Ladyships, for many christian and ex∣traordinary
kindnesses conferred vpon me, a dispised brāch
and out-cast in the world: I haue indeauoured in these my
poore laboures to make acknowledgement of my debt, not
with any purpose to clear the score (for how should true mē∣bers
of Christs body not be euer bound to each other) but ra∣ther
with intent to prouoke to a further debt: because the
debt of loue, as it ought alwaies to be payd, so it must alwaies
be due, and the more it is paid the more the debt is increased.
Til it be at length perfited, and so fully recompenced in
heauen. Whether seeing it pleaseth my god very mercifully
to hasten me by keeping me through many tedious and ling∣gring
infirmities; in an earnest hungring and fainting af∣ter
my deliuerance; therfore haue I rather hastened to per∣forme
this duty vnto your Ladyships, as to whom in regard
of your places such mementos, from a withered branche

cannot be vnseasonable: and most seasonable on his part, to
bee preformed, who while hee hath tyme, and can doe
no other good, yet hath obtained mercy of the LORD,
to pu his seruants in mind of his wonderfull mercies tow∣ards
them; that the memoriall thereof may hold them in due
thankefulnesse vnto so gratious a father, that so their hap∣pinesse
in this life may be a pledge vnto them of that glori∣ous
crowne which remaines for the Saintes in that blessed
Kingdome: These are my heartes desire vnto our gratious
GOD for you. And that you may be happily furthered ther∣to,
and haue a true and liuely glasse to behold the bounty of
our GOD, I haue bin bold to committe to your remembrāce
that wonderful deliuerance of our Church and State,
from that horrible plot of poulder-Treason; Wherin eue∣ry
true hearted Christian and Subiect may take a full view
of al GODS former mercies towards him, and if he do be∣leeue,
may see in the same a ful assurance of whatsoeuer
blessings of GOD are yet laid vp in store for him. The
greatnesse whereof, howsoeuer I haue heretofore endeauo∣red
once and againe to measure, and so commend my scant∣ling
therof, to the due consideration of a thankeful heart
yet seeing the measure of that blessing is like the waters of
the sanctuary, which the more they were measured, the more
vnmeasurable they did appeare, till at length they became a
deepe, that could not be passed ouer. Therfore I haue bin glad
to take this oportunity of my dayes yet lengthned out, once
againe to measure this great deepe: And by an history of
a like wonderful deliuerance, to reuiue the dead memory
therof in the cares of a secure and vnthankefull world. That
so I might both pay my vowes vnto my GOD for my life
of late renued me as a prey, and as neere as I may
haue my conuersation in heauen, imploying the small residue of my
wretched life in meditations of GODS wonderful mercies

which is the onely seruice that the saints performe in hea∣uen.
Oh what a glorious thing it is to be thankfull, when by
dooing this duty we come nearest to the Saints in glory! And
how wil this wonderful deliuerance teach vs to be thanke∣full?
How is this deliuerance of the Iewes from Hamans
malice a most liuely glasse to behold our deliuerance from
the bloody Papists. And may not the LORD lengthen out
my threed vntill I hae finished this story. This that I now
tender you is but onely the gate into the cittie, if it please
GOD that I may go through the Citty (as Ionas did) who
knoweth whether by that time Niniue may repent and
turne, and so the LORD may repent him of the euil, and
reuiue the good that is ready to dye. The patient abiding
of the righteous is ioy, and he that beleeueth maketh
not haste: yet If we beleeue, we shall see greater thinges
then these, and blessed are wee if we see a farre off. A
lesson which for a farewell I do heartily commend vnto
your Ladyships, not onely to see into the present, but to be∣hold
a farre off, to looke vp to Moses to the recompence
of the reward, and not to esteeme to be accounted the sonne
of Pharoahs daughter, if we see not the present blessings
how can we see a farre off? And yet we may so doate on the
present, as not to desire to see a far off, and if we desire not,
is not the Lord iust to giue vs our present desire, and send
leanesse into our soules. Behold therefore your present
happinesse in that wonderfull deliuerance, yet looke vp with
Moses, and see therein also your future happinesse. And so
I heartily commend your Ladyships to the view of this
glasse, and therein also to the mercy of the almighty, who
giue you wisdome to redeeme the time by seeing your faces
often herein, and hauing viewed, not to forget what Iacob
did gratiously remembr,Genes. 32, Luke, 17. 12. and what our Sauiour wished to

be remembred of his Disciples: So shall you preuaile with
GOD, and find fauour with men: your age shall bee a
crowne of glory, and your posterity shall be blessed: They shal
be of you which shal build the old waste places & shal be
called the repairers of the breach: the stōes of the field
shal be in league with you & the beasts of the field shal
be at peace with you: you shal laugh at destruction &
death and shal not be affraid of the beasts of the earth.
GOD hath and shall deliuer you from all aduersity, and you
shall see the felicity of the chosen: these blessings the
LORD of glory increase vpon your Ladyships, to your full
perfection in IESVS CHRIST. To whose blessed pro∣tection
I most heartily commend both you and yours.
From my house at Couentry
Ianuary 1609.

