



Right Honourable, Right Worshipfull, And dearely beloued in our Lord Iesus.
IT is the holy commandement of our blessed Sa∣uiour Christ Iesus, vnto his seruant the Apostle Peter, that hee beeing conuerted, should strengthen Luk. 22. 33 his brethren And it is the dutie of euery faithfull Seruant vnto his heauenly Maister; Hereby doth hee approue himselfe a liuing mem∣ber of Iesus Christ, euen to teach the ways of God vnto the wicked; that sinners may bee conuerted Psal. 23. 8. &c. vnto him, that the wayes of God may be knowne vpon earth, his sauing Ps. 51. 15. 16. health emong all Nations; Accordingly heerevnto, it was, that the blessed Apostles after the glorious Resurrection of the Sonne of GOD, when they had receiued theyr Commission, and were furnished with gifts accordingly: First tendred the Gospell vnto their Brethren in the flesh, the Nation of the Iewes, as beeing sent vnto the lost sheepe of Math. 28 the house of Israell; And when they had put it from them, and did account themselues unworthy of eternall life, Loe they turned to the Acts, 2. 3. 4 Acts, 3. 4. Gentiles: and so the barren & desolate became fruitfull, & hath had moe children then the married Wife. Thus by the ministerie of Apo∣stolike Acts. 13 Esay. 54. 1 men, was the Gospell first published to this Nation. And after

manie fearfull and yet most righteous iudgements iustscted therevpon, for the contempt of the sme, together with the outward setling of the State, in the revniting of those Royall houses of Lancaster and Yorke, The glorious Gospell also of Iesus Christ was restored vnto vs: that so wee might be constantly setled in the favour of God. And propagate the sme, to our posteritie and brethren, the Nations farre  utill the great day of the glorious appearāce of Iesus Christ. To this ende was it, that the Lorde of the Haruest did not onely water this precious seede, with the blood of the Mtirs aboundantly, that so it might take rote downeward, but very gratiously also cherished the samewith a most glorious sun-shine of long peace & prosperitie: that so it might bring  fruit vpward to amendment of life. And notwith∣standing our continued vnthankfulnes for so great saluation: for which we had deserued, that when the light of our eyes was taken from vs, the lit also of the Gospell should haue bene remoued: Yet still hath it plea∣sed our graciou. God to visite vs from on high, with his sauing health: and by the ministery of our gracious Soueraigne, lames (whom the Lord in mercie proster in this holy worke, that he may enlarge the bounds of this glorious Kingdom farre and neere:) By this blessed nursing Father are we not only now vnited into one gouernment, and so the great occa∣sions of Inward hostilitie mercefully quenched; but further also, by his gratious Authority it hath bene, that the barbarous and desolate places of the Land are now replenished, with the power-of the Gospell. Yea, the rude & sauadge nations farre & neer, in Ireland and Virginia, haue had this blessed light conuayed and enlarged vnto them. And who are they that haue bene forward to help the Lord against the mighty? Who haue enlarged themselues for the enlarging of the glorious Gospell of Christ: Surely, as the Lord hath enlarged himselfe aboundantly, vn∣to this honourable Citie, aboue all the places of the Land, both in the fitnes of the earth, & the deaw of heauen, euen in all outward benefits, and spirituall blessings, in heauenly things: So blessed bee the name of his Maiestie for euer, that hath hereby sanctified these portios vnto you (Right Honorable, worshipful, & my deare Countreymen) that your hearts and purses are enlarged plentifully, to the furtherance of this great and glorious work of the gathering in of the Gentiles: that the plantations in Ireland & Virginia, are much furthered by your indu∣strie. And haue you not already receiued the first fruits of your labours in Virginia? Is not a Virgine lately married vnto Iesus Christ, and

become one with you in the Houshold of faith? Hath not the Prince of our peace hereby established an inuiolable league betweene those Nati∣ons, and our Colonies; that so we may not doubt of good successe, in those enterprises? In the name of God, therefore (Right Honour: Right wor:) goe on in this glorious worke: Can you doe God better seruice, then in promoting his Kingdom, and demolishing daily the power of Sa∣than? Can you doe better seruice vnto your selues, then not only to ease the Land of that ranke blood, which threatens some great sicknes: but especially, to prouide some retiring place for your selues, of so be the Lord, for our vnthankefulnes should spue vs out? And if that the Lord shall hereby translate his Gospell from one nation to and here or rather, as we hope, shall prouoke vs by such Foolish for lorne Nations, to a greater zeale vnto the Gospell, to hold fast that which we haue, least no man take away our crowne from vs; shall wee be any loosers hereby▪ if wee exchange some of our transitorie Blessings which wee haue forfeited by our abuse, for the establishing and recouery of durable riches, that they may not be taken from vs. Surely, if my poore endeuour can auaile ought herevnto: As I haue heretofore, and nowe in this Blessing of Iapheth) done my endeuour to approue vnto your wisedomes, the iust vndertaking, & performing of so holy a worke; So by the grace of God, neither shall my poore prayers, nor any future industrie bee wanting; that so I may strengthen the things that are readie to die at home, and nourish the things, that are newe-borne abroade. And thus I hum∣bly intreat your Honor, and your worships, to conceiue of mee, and to accept graciously these Meditations, as a true pledge of my loue vn∣to this honorable Citie, wherein I was borne, and bred vp: and a seale of my labours for the furthering of what soeuer may tende to the aduancement of the glorious Gospell of Iesus Christ. To whose blessed protection, I doe most heartily commend you all: and doe rest in him.

