



RIght Worshipfull, and the rest, I little
thought when I preached this Sermon,
(the rude and undigested meditations
of some few houres) that it ever
should haue gone further then where you
found it, God is my witnes, I haue
ever beene so conscious to my selfe, of so much weak∣and
disabilitie, of making any thing of mine owne pub∣licke,

that I haue ever held it true, benè qui latuit, benè
vixit, he liveth contentedly, that liveth retiredly, accoun∣ting
my selfe happie enough if I could but giue content to
them by my private labours, by whom I liue and haue my
meanes, and maintenance.
From the Pulpit it is now come to the Presse, and had
not some of my good friends at home; and other loving ac∣quaintance
abroad, earnestly pressed and importuned me for
the publication of it, it had seene no Sun: but being vnwil∣ing
to denie many a thing so reasonable, and hoping it might
be profitable for many, and especially for him, who that day
was the cause of so great a concourse and conflux of people) I
haue adventured to present that vnto your hands and eyes,
which at the first I, onely intended for your eares; though
mine hopes haue failed me, and the successe I expected, giue
me but small incouragement, or comfort in it.
You haue heard I perswade my selfe, since I preached
the Sermon, how vildly and vncivilly I haue beene traduced
by him: the thing that I feared is fallen vpon me, I could
looke no better fruit from such à Crab: Men doe not gather
Grapes of Thornes, nor Figs of Thistles: Who can expect
sweete water, from an vnwholesome fountaine, or a plea∣sing
Odour from a stinking Dunghill? but regium est ma∣lè
audire, and my comfort is the testimonie of mine owne
conscience with mee, and for mee, that what then I did or
spake, was intended for his good, both for his humiliation
and for his comfort.
But as the best meates, received into a foule stomack,
turne rather to corruption, and putrifaction, then vnto good
and wholesome nutriment: so is the word pabulum ani∣mae,
the food of our soules, to feede us, and fit us for the
kingdome of heaven; when it is entertained into a wicked
heart: The Bees sucke hony out of common and course flow∣ers,
when Spiders, and Toads, gather nothing but payson
out of the best and sweetest. The word of God is alijs odor
vitae ad vitam, alijs odor mortis ad mortem, as the Apostle

tels us, 2. Cor. 2. 16. unto some the savour of life unto
life, and unto others the savour of death unto death: I am
heartily sorry it wrought no kindlier, or no better with him.
And as for my selfe, whatsoever his basenes and unbefit∣ting
behaviour hath since beene unto mee, I thanke God,
I can as easily contemne it, as he obtrude it, with Socrates
answer onely, as Laertius reports it, who being reviled made
no other answer, nor was further moved at it, but with be∣nè
loqui non didicit, he had not yet learned to speake well;
I know his tongue is no slander: why then should I be mo∣ved,
or discontented at any thing invented, or vented by
such a man? Philip being told, that the Graecians spake e∣vill
of him, notwithstanding the much good hee had done
them, and therefore being sollicited to punish them for it;
mildly replyed, what would they doe, if I should doe them
any hurt? Ego verò sic vitam instituam ut nemo illis sit
crediturus: but I will so order my life, that no man shall be∣leeue
them, what soever evill they shall speake of me: I say
no more, for my selfe, or of him, but Father forgiue him,
and Lord lay not this sinne unto his charge.
What my life and conversation hath beene amongst you,
for now more then twentie and foure yeares, you best know,
in whose eyes I haue ever lived: who, I presume, will easily
vindicate my reputation from all malevolent and scandalous
aspersions. I appeale vnto you all, how vniustly, and vnde∣servedly
he hath defamed me. I comfort my selfe with Da∣vids
answer to Abishai, concerning Shemies rayling and re∣viling
him: Let him alone, it may be the Lord will looke
on mine affliction, and that the Lord will doe mee good
for his cursing this day: 2 Sam. 16. 13. and I am confi∣dent
of that truth of the wise man; The curse that is cause∣lesse
shall not come. Pro. 26. 2.
We use to say, they runne farre that never returne: all
were not called into the vineyard at the first houre of the
day; Some at the third, some at the ninth, and some at the
eleventh. Mat. 20. 3. &c. I hope that this Prodigall may

come home againe into himselfe, and that by the goodnesse
and mercie of God unto him in Christ, hee may be more
carefull of his owne salvation, and conscionable of my good
name and reputation: which God grant. The Lord knoweth
that I neither thought nor meant him ill, in all I said or did:
If I dealt plainely, and and to purpose with him, it was the
good of his soule, and the discharge of my conscience to God
and men, that I onely aimed at: and if for this I shall
be either evilly thought of, or spoken of, blame me not if I
be a little moved, pardon me this passion, and pittie my dis∣grace,
and saue mee what you can, from the lash of lewd
and slandering tongues, we are both sufficiently knowne vn∣to
you and what our liues haue beene amongst you; Iudge
and spare not, which of us two haue most offended.
I haue thus farre presumed of your loue and favour,
(my kind and loving neighbours) to dedicate these my poore
and plaine labours unto you, and unto none but you: for unto
whom should I, or could I giue both my selfe and whatso∣ever
that little (that Christ enabling me, I shall be able in
the worke of my ministery) next vnto God, then unto you,
amongst whom for these many yeares I haue lived, as com∣fortably,
and as contentedly, (I blesse God for it) as any poore
Minister in this Cittie?
I presume you will not deny the Patronage and protecti∣on
of this worthlesse worke of mine: you haue somewhat suf∣fered
through the sinne of him that suffered that day, that
condigne shame and punishment. I would it had never beene
told in our Gath, nor published in the streets of our Aska∣lon,
or that so bad a Bird had not defiled so sweete a nest. I
did my best to free you all, from either concealing, or conn∣tenancing
of the sinne, and gaue them their due that did
their best to haue it punished; whose paines to that purpose
may iustly callenge a thank full remembrance from us all:
Refuse not to countenance his paines, that did what he could
to maintaine your honour.
I haue hitherto blessed God, and reioyced in your libera∣lity:

your many favours, from many of you in private, from
most of you in publicke, shall ever oblige mee unto you all,
in all thankefull loue and observancie: Adde I pray unto the
great heape of your former beneficencie, a favourable ac∣ceptance
of these few leaues of my weake labours; It is a
Childe that was both begotten and borne in your Parish, I
hope it shall not find the lesse favour for the Fathers sake.
You haue beene I am sure, and still are (as I thinke)
at this time also, at the care and cost of keeping some poore
mens children: what this may cost you I cannot tell: how∣soever,
I perswade my selfe, you will not see it starve in
the streetes. Silver and Gold haue I none, but such as it is,
it is onely yours; and so is hee, that living and dying resol∣veth
to be an humble petitioner unto the throne of Grace,
for the happines and prosperitie of you all, here and here∣after.
Now the very God of peace sanctifie you wholy,
and I pray God your whole Spirit, and Soule and Body,
be preserved blamelesse unto the comming of the
Lord Iesus Christ; so it becommeth him to
pray, who is your servant in the worke
of his Ministerie, and heartily de∣sireth
the continuance of
your loue and favour,
and to remaine.

