


RIght Worshipfull, two causes there are which haue moued me to put forth these plaine and vnpolished meditations: the one is the generall good which we haue all receiued from the hand of our graci∣ous God in this late great deliuerance of Prince and people, Church and com∣mon-wealth, from that bloudie and hel∣lish practise of our desperate aduersaries: the other is that particular good which I haue receiued from you, since my com∣ming among you. Concerning the common good which we haue all beene partakers of: surely it hath beene such, and so great, as that if we should holde our peace, the very stones would speake. And therfore that they may not be a witnesse against me, I haue in your hearing spoken of this deliuerance. And because it is required that we should not onely declare the worke of God, but commend it also by writing vnto the generations to come: ther∣fore haue I taken this further paines, to commit to writing such notes as I haue obserued concerning this great worke, that they may be trials of our present thankefulnesse, for the blessings receiued, and furtherances also to strengthen our faith, and e∣stablish our posteritie, that they may waite vpon the Lord in the affiance of the like mercies.
And the rather haue I beene incouraged herevnto, by that particular good which from time to time, since my comming among you, I haue receiued from you, that so it might be some pledge of my thankefulnesse vnto you for the same. I may well say you haue comforted my body, and my soule: not onely my

outward man, when I was a stranger to you, and by reason of the visitation of my familie, in some affliction. A kindnesse which by Gods mercy I shall not faile to leaue recorded to posteritie, when opportunitie shall serue: but specially my soule and inward man: in beholding your Order and loue vnto the Gospell. Which though it hath made you stincke in the Nostrels of the common aduersarie: yet hath this sauour of your oyntmens, caused the Saints to loue you: yea the hatred of your enemies hath the Lord recompenced with such extraordinary pledges of his fa∣uour, As that you haue not onely your liues & liberties giuē you for a prey, but further also the Lord hath honoured your Cittie with the presence and protection of a gracious Princesse: not onely by making your Cittie an harbour for a season vnto that royall branch, but thereby in mercy opening a way (if you shall accept it) by so comfortable a protection, to the strengthening & continuance of your holy libertie in the waies of God, And surely if you shall not vse your libertie as an occasion, to the flsh: if the dead flies of hypocrisie, and luke-warmnesse shall not cor∣rupt that pretious ointment: but you shall strenghen that which is ready to die, and doe the first workes, and continue therein: you shall vndoubtedly be a sweete swelling sauour in the nostrils of the Lord, and so not onely haue your Cittie blessed with the dew of heauen, and fatnesse of the earth, but by the mercie of God, you shall be lead forth in your most holy faith, to receiue the ends therof euen the saluation of your soules: Which, as I do heartily sigh and long after, so haue I to this end thought fit to stirre vp your pure mindes by these meditations: that you might haue somewhat of mine with you, as a pledge of my thankeful∣nesse vnto you, for your loue towards me: and a Spurre to pro∣uoke and continue our thankefulnesse vnto God, for his wonder∣full mercies, renued and continued vnto vs, in this great deli∣uerance: and that herein I may free my selfe from imputation of vanity and negligence, which may happily arise from the strangenesse of the Title, and plainenesse of the matter, giue me leaue (I pray you) to yeeld you reasons of them both.
Concerning the Title, my purpose is therein to discouer the nature of our aduérsaries, who would haue done vs so great

euill. A very cursed generation, and full of deadly poyson, ex∣treamly cruell where they can preuaile: and yet by the Iustice of God, breeding their owne bane, when their sinne is full, euen bursting a sunder with the poyson thereof, and iustly confoun∣ded with their owne malice. So is the Spider, Yea as the Spi∣ders Webbe is cunningly Wouen, and quickly broken, so are and shal be the deuises of our aduersaries: they shall not be esta∣blished by their iniquitie: but their owne cunning hath and shall be their confusion. And let this satisfie you concerning the Title.
As for the plainenesse, and rudenesse of the matter, if you doe duly consider the rule of my direction. I trust you will ac∣knowledge, that the power of the spirit is best seene in weaknes: and that plaine lines, doe best answer a straight and euen leuell: the euidence of the spirit, is best seene in plainenesse. You see I haue informed my selfe in these meditations, by the most per∣fect Paterne: a Psalme of that Princely Prophet Dauid, that man of afflictions: when his life was indangered by the subtiltie and violence of his close and trecherous enemies. To be deliue∣red from these, he flies vnto his God in prayer: and the rather to preuaile, he layes before the Lord the desperate practises of his enemies: thereby implying: that vnlesse the Lord stood vnto him, hee iustly feared that they would swallow him vp. This feare of his, is the rather confirmed: because he saw them sod∣daine and fearelesse in their mischieuous practises: And why they should be thus fearlesse, he discouers in the next words: be∣cause they did by many sorts of incouragements meet with this feare. And here begin our meditatiōs: deriued as you see frō this pure fountaine: and watered all along with the streames ther∣of. If this heauenly treasure hath so shined in this earthen ves sell, that the excellencie of that power, may appeare to be of God, and not of vs: giue God the glory in the treasure, and be humbled in respect of the vessell. If the vessell hath receiued that honour from this beauenly treasure, as not to haue handled it craftily and deceitfully: but in declaration of the truth shal∣be approued, to euery mans conscience in the sight of God.

Then if our Gospell be hid, it is hid to them th ish. But I perswade myselfe better things of you, euen su company saluation. And let this be your triall, that you are contented to heare the same things againe. So accepting these paines according to the entent thereof, you shall happily ease yourselues of the Mother and the Daughter, forget∣fulnesse and vnthankfulnesse: and burthen me wil∣lingly with further paines, for the further build∣ing of you vp in Iesus Christ. To whose pro∣tection I commit you. I pray you to beare with the faults escaped in the printing, and correct the grosser of them as followeth.
Pag. 19. lin. 11. for rest, read cost. ead. lin. 21. for that may, read that we may. ead. lin. 1. for we, read he. ead. lin. 29. for bloudie execution, read for the bloudie execution. pag. 22. lin. 30. for Rhamaes, read Pharaoes. pag. 23. lin. 5. for perpetuall, read externall. ead. lin. 8. for framing, read foaming. ead. lin. 30. for so Satan, read superstition. pag. 29. lin. 30. for thing, read change. pag. 34. lin. 28. for saue, read some. pag. 35. lin. 24. for life restored, read life are restored. pag. 43. lin. 28. for meane, read mayne. pag. 44. lin. 28. for the, read these.
