



THey that write vpon any serious Subiect (right Hono∣rable and most noble Lord) whether it be of Peace or Warre, commonly doe dedicate their Bookes to No∣ble persons: to the end, that what they haue ef∣fected by Labour and Study, may by their greatnesse be protected from Maledictions and Enuie: and they chose such, whose eminent vertues (exempt from Riualles) is of all admired, by all obserued, and withall beloued, where the choycest witts shelter their chiefest workes. Hence I take my imitation, and in all humi∣litie prostrate this my poore labour to kisse your noble hands, not as any adition to your vncontrolable and approued knowledge, but as a weake Fabricke which onely wanteth the support of your much admired goodnesse.
In former time, if any were longheaded, as Pericles, crooked no∣sed as Cyrus, foretopped with his hayre growing vpright as Alex∣ander; he had fauour shewed in all Courts, and in euery company he came in: Such respect did they giue to their outward shapes, who it may be had not any of their Habituall vertues; Oh then what loue, what respect ought euery one (in what degree or place soeuer) to giue you, that haue the Habit of their vertues, onely want their blemishes.
Pericles loue to his Country. Cyrus (the elders) care of his Souldiers. Alexanders vertues (not vices) are pregnant in your honour, the world sees it. Demetrius, Nero, and Caligula, (not setting their Empire aside) are not to be compared with your ho∣nour: yet let me lay Gold to copper, that the gold may appeare the more glorious.

Demetrius care was more for an Astrologicall Cloake (thereby to hang the world on his backe,) then for his Kingdome or people. But your honours care is for the Kingdome, to doe good to euery member thereof, Mentally, Actually, to your power.
Nero the Tyrants care was for new inuented Garments (dayly) to weare none twice: your care is that euery man haue good Armes to grace the Kingdome dayly.
Caligulas care was to weare Sacras Deorum vestes, to set forth the greatnesse of his authority. But your care is the Habit of a Souldier, shewing power in your command that all may obey.
These Noble parts being eminent in your honour, are powerfull inducments for me to sue euer for such a Noble Patrone, therefore to you, and onely to your honoured selfe, I humbly dedicate this Booke. The Booke deserues more your honours censure then prayse; for like Phormio it seemes to reade a Lecture of warre (to an Ha∣niball) who for it was reproued, but if I escape from your honour vn∣chekt, I will impute it (not to desert in me) but to your honours suf∣ferance, vsuall Mildnesse, passing by my presumption. Thus com∣miting the Booke to your Noble patronage, you to the Almighties protection, and my selfe to your honours command and seruice, I euer rest

