




Right noble Lord,
THought Water bee but a wairsh and tai∣stles
subject, whereof manie lyke litle to
heare, far less to taist; yet is it of great
worth and so necessare an element, that
without it the most eminent could not
Well consist. The great Emperour of Per∣sia
welcomed hairtlie one of his meane sub∣jects,
who in his progresse propyned him with a drinck of cold wa∣ter,
having no other riches whereby hee might acknowledge his
Prince. And I hope your L. as willinglie will accept from
your owne servand not a drinck, but a discourse of that rare
water, which long hide, hath beene of lait discouered for the
good of manie. But perhaps I haue vndertaken a warre when
I this way aduentured to thrust my selfe into a Printers presse,
ad praelum quasi ad praelium, a plaine discouerie, perchance,

of my owne ignorance. For to speake in Print is to vndergoe a
publick censure. Yet I hope that such as mislyke it, shall either judge
fauorablie, or produce a better as speedilie, Why may not meane wits
in their folies haue equall paines with learned Clerks in their
fancies? Apollo yeelded Oracles as well to poore men for pray¦ers,
as to Princes for their propynes▪ starres haue their lightes
and Heires their shadowes; And meane scholars haue even
high mynds, although low fortunes. But being loath to wearie
your L. with a long letter, I am thus emboldned to recomend this
vnworthie pamphlete to your Honours patronage. For that a
greater motiue then that you are your selfe, needeth not to en∣courage
mee to this dedicatioun, so far is my loue engaged to
your L. most honourable & auncient house. If it appeare presump∣tioun
in mee to show my loue, my duetie vrgeth mee to it. But
setting a part neidlesse feare, and resoluing couragiouslie vpon
your wounted and vndeserued fauour, I would euen but request
your L. to receaue that which is not, for that which I would
it were, letting my insufficiencie bee measured be my goodwill: that
so weghing the mynd and not the matter, my simple abilities
may thryue vnder your L. protectioun, and happilie lead mee
on to some worthier attempt. Take it then my noble Lord, in
good pairt; it being from one who honoureth your worth, oweth
you his loue, and hath altogidder so resolued, and vowed him
selfe to doe your L. and all yours, true seruice all the dayes of his
lyfe. And thus from my hart wishing your L. and your most noble
Ladie a great portion of Methusalems yeeres for this lyfe, and
after it, eternall lyfe. I humblie rest
From my house at Edinb.
the 8. of October 1618.

