



SO greatly were esteemed the inuentours of certayne Artes and Sciences in auncient time (as wryteth Saint Augustine in hisThe fyrst inuentours of Artes. bookes De Ciuitate Dei) that they tooke them not for mortall men, but honoured them as immortall gods.Isis. Isis arriuing in Egypt, ordeyned common weales with iust gouernaunce, gaue them lawes, and kowledge of letters, and taught them also the vse of Flaxe. In consideration whereof, she was honoured of such as then knewe her, and reuereced of them that came after her: In so much, that they establshed a capitall penaltie or punshment of death, against all such as eyther in sport or in earnest affyrmed her to be an earthly woman, and not rather a duine Goddesse.Ceres. Ceres beyng of lyuely wit and cleere vnderstanding,The Ci∣cilians. beholding in the Cicilians humane similitude and shape to the outward apparance, and inwardly the fiercensse of bruite beastes: brideled their customes, and refour∣med them with newe Statutes, teaching them to tame Oxen to beare the yoke, to sowe Whete for their great commodtie, to grinde in the Myll, to kneade in the hose, and to bake in the Ouen. In recompence whereof, they made sacrifice vnto her, and builded many sumptuous Temples in honour of her. Saturnus comming from Creta,Saturne gaue Lawes to the Latines. gaue lawes vto the Latines, whereby they might gouerne them selues, and rscrbed them maners of lyuyng, tea∣ching them to Tyll and Manure the ground,Tillage of the ground. and sowe Corne, and to geather ripe frutes in due season. And if Saturne were profi∣table to those natons, and they not vthankefull vnto him, in that they builded him aulters, celebrated vnto him festiuall dayes, and accompted him in the number of the heauenly Goddes, naming him also the father of the Gods. And (if I say) he was to them so profitable, and that world iudged so happy and prosperous for ha∣uing

so valiaunt a King, and so iust a Lawe geuer, that it was therefore by the mouthes of all men called, The Golden World,The glden worle, and aigne of Saurn. The woorty factes of Charles the fyth. Sicilia. and Raigne of Saturne: Certes, except I greatly deceyue my selfe, this our time is nothyng infriour to that. For we knowe certaynely, that your Maiestie hath beene more profiable to Spaye, then euer was Saturne to the Latines: and also a more excellent Lawe geuer, in manner to all Europe, and further, to the newe World, lately dscouered, then he that gaue lawes but onely to a lttle corner of Italie. Whereby I consider, that th felicitie of your Maiesties time, hah been o lttle commenda∣tion to your dooings, in that you haue banished vce, honoured vertu, punished offendours, ad fauoured innocente: so that the quiet haue thereby lyued more peaceably, the vnquiet restrayned, the good exalted, and the euyll chastsed: In so muche that nowe, by reason of iust ministration of good order in yor Maiesties d∣minions, they that walke in the nyght, goe in safete, whreas we knowe, that in other Prouinces, such as walke in the day goe in daunger and peryll. And therefore in th most happie tyme of your Maiestie, it appeareth that Spayne is renewed,Spayn re∣formed. not onely in the excellencie of Mechanicall or handy craftes, but also in the know∣ledge of letters, and discipline of warre: In so much, that she that sometyme lacked her selfe, may now abundantly minister to her neighbours that haue neede. And whereas to your imperiall Ma∣iestie, it shoulde not suffice to ordeyne lawes, if power and armes shoulde fayle to defende and punyshe: who, comparable to your Maiestie,The triumphs and victoies of Charles the fyth. enioyeth the one, and wanteth not the other, hauyng tryumphed ouer Kyges and Kyngdomes, enlarging also the name of Spayne in many vnknowen and barbarous Landes and Na∣tions? Greater duetie therefore owe your Subiectes vnto you, then euer dyd the Egyptians to Isis, or the Cicilians to Ceres, or the Latines to Saturne, for as muche as they haue receyued of your Maestie more common and profitable benefytes.
It is not long since your Maiestie hath forbydden and abo∣lyshed the vse of Mules,Mules. and restored agayne the exercse of Armes, so log out of vse, that the one wth the other, hath been no small profite and commoditie to your Subiectes and Domini∣ns. For by taking away the vse of Mules, is so encreased the

umber of Horsses and Horssemen,horses and horsemen. that suche as before neuer durst or coulde in manner lyght vp vppon a Horsse, can nowe easi∣ly and aptly manedge them. So that you seme to haue reuiued the dyes of Belleophon the sonne of Kyng Glaucus,Belleropho. and lykewyse the tyme of Saturne, when men had fyrst the know∣ldge howe to make Horsses to abyde the brydle, and to bryng them vp to serue for dyuers vses and necessite of men. And ryght sure I am, that by reason of suche laudable Statutes and Ordinaunces in your Dominions, shall fayle neyther Horsses nor Horssemen, as well for the Courte, as for the Campe.
Who knewe in manner howe to grde a Swoorde,Wearing of weapons and armour. bfore that your Maestie permitted Weapons and Armour to bee worne, euen in your Courte, and that else-where all men myght doo the lyke? before whche tyme dexteritie fayled, where cou∣rage abounded. Ouer and besyde the profite and commoditie that hath rysen heereof, what honour you haue obteyned by the same, is manfest by Frauncis the Frenche Kyng,Frauncis the French king taken priso∣ner. who by your Maiestie beeyng taken prsoner in the Parke of Pauia, was brought to Madrid, in the yeere a thosand fyue hundred twentie and fyue, where seeyng many young men in manner without beardes, and yet laden with Armour and Weapons, sayde, O happie Spayne, that brygest foorth and nouryshest men of VVarre. In your most happie dayes also, the Christian Fayth is amplyfyed,The Christian faith nlarged. and in manner whole Spayne florisheth dayly more and more in sumptuous buyldyngs,The sumptu∣ous buyldings and riches of Spayne. and is abundant∣ly enryched in treasure brought from your Indes, farre sur∣mountig the ryches of Solomon brought from Ophir. Yea, and to say the truth, consyderig the Nauies of Golde and Syl∣uer,The Indies nauies of gold and syluer. which haue been ordnarily brought from thence to your Ma∣iestie, thys tyme may rather be called the golden age, then that of Saturne. Not omitting aso, that by your prosperous attemptes, haue beene discouered so many Landes and Ilandes,New landes and Ilandes discouered. heeretofore so vnknowen to the Cosmographers, Geogra∣phers, and Historiographers, that they neuer hearde of theyr names. VVhiche neurthelesse, ae now so well knowen to your Subiectes, that they haue troden them with theyr feete, and mea∣sured them by pases. VVho before thys tyme euer hearde any

menton of the ryche and large Prounce of Peru,Peu. or of the straights of Magalianes,The straights of Magaa∣nes. or of the ryuer of Syluer, called Rio de la Plata. They in times past seemed to haue doone no small thyng, when they had knowledge of the fortunate Ilandes,Rio de la Plata. the whch, since they were conquered by your Maiesties Graundfather, haue beene called the Ilandes of Canaria.The fortunate Ilande, or Canaries. And f it be, and hath been much to discouer and subdue this newe worlde: it is doubtlesse no lesse glory to your Maiestie, not onely to possesse ad enioy it, but also that you dayly procure to send thither Iudges to gouerne with Lawes,Religion in the Indies. and Preachers to instructe in Doctrine, to bryng those Indians to the knowledge and honouring of the true GOD. And therefore consyderyng your Maiesties godly desyre ad purpose, as touching these Nauigations, and the daungers of such as goe to discouer this newe worlde (although it be not newe to the Spa∣niardes to trauayle into farre Countreys,The Spaniar∣des haue euer trauailed into fr countries. for as much as in the dayes of Caius Caesar, the sonne of Augustus, were founde bro∣ken peeces of Spanish Shyppes, lost in the Gulfe of Arabie, as al∣so Celius Antipater affyrmeth, that certayne Shyppes of Spayne were accustomed to sayle for Merchaundize to the East partes of Ethiope) in consyderation heereof, haue I the more willingly pub∣lished these my trauayles, for the furtheraunce of all suche as shall hereafter attempt the lyke Nauigation.
The antiqui∣i of Naui∣gation.And heere doo I not say that Nauigation is not a thyng of antiquitie. For we reade that in olde tyme, the Argonanti say∣led to Colchos,Argonan∣ti.
Colchos. and Danaus brought the fyrst Shyppe from Egypt to Greece. But I saye, that I am the fyrste that haue brought the Arte of Nauigation into a briefe compendiousnesse, geuing infayleable principles,The Arte of Nauigation. and euident demonstrations, de∣scribing the practise and speculation of the same, geuing also true rules to Mariners,Things par∣teyning to nauigation. and shewyng wayes to Pilottes, by teachyng them the making and vse of Instrumentes, to knowe and take the altitude of the Sunne, to knowe the Tydes or ebbyng and flow∣ing of the Sea, how to order theyr Cardes and Compasses for Na∣uigations, geuing them instructions of the course of the Sunne, and motions of the Moone: teachyng them furthermore the ma∣king of Dyalles, both for the day and for the nyght, so certayne, that in all places they shall shewe the true houres without default:

and haue likewise declared the secret propertie of the Lode stone,The lodstone falsly called in English Ada∣mant, is in La∣tine called Magnes. with the maner and cause of the Northeasting and Northwesting (commonly called the variation of the compasse) with also instru∣ments thereunto belonging. And that, that which I shall say or doo, be not accompted to be presumpteously done or spoken, I ac∣knowledge that whatsoeuer I haue well done or written, it is from aboue by the helpe of the diuine grace, and by the fauour and pros∣perous fortune of your Maiestie. And thus shall they that now liue, and likewise they that shall succeede vs, see and perceiue, how much more the world oweth and is behoulding to your Maiestie, then were the auncient Egyptians to their Isis.Charles the 5. greater then the hroes of olde yme. Vniuersall b∣nefites.
Comparison with the an∣tiques. She gaue them letters to reade, but your Maiestie hath geuen rules and orders to sayle on the Seas. The profite of Isis was onely for one Prouince. But the commoditie that ensueth of your doings, is vniuersall for all Pro∣uinces and Nations, and for all Seas, aswell to go to places discoue∣red, as also to discouer Lands and Regions yet vnknowen.Plinie. If they of auncient time had reached that we haue obteyned,Nauigation of old tim. the Indies had not now been to discouer: neyther should it be esteemed a mi∣racle vnto vs, as at the tyme when Carthage florished, that one Agnus went foorth from the Baye of Cadiz, and sayled to the end of Arabie. Neyther would Cornelius Nepos haue written it for so famous a thing, that a certayne man flying from King La∣tinus, came from the gulfe of Arabie: Whereby it is manifest, that aswell Nauigation, as other Artes, doth from day to day in∣crease, and by litle and litle is come to perfection. For in those daies they had neyther compasse nor carde of sayling whereby to gouerne them selues.The perfecti∣ons of artes at this day. They lacked the consideration of the Starres, vntil the Phenitians found the knowledge thereof, and were the fyrst tha vnderstoode (that to such as should trauayle by sea) i should be ne∣cessarie to lift vp their eyes to heauen,The rudeness of the anti∣quie. and consider the motions thereof. They that sayled to the Iland of Tabrobana, (whih in old time was called Antitono) caryed for their voyages lyuing byrds.Aug∣rium. And when they thought good, let certayne of them flee: nd by the flyght of their wings directed the hlme and sayles of their Ships. They sayled onely three monethes in the yeer. To them therefore it was necessarie to obserue  the tyme, vntill they found it to srue with a for wynde. They kew o how  hlp

themselues with the bowe lye, or syde winde: neyther sawe they the North Starre,The North Starre. or sought it, or had ay knowledge thereof. Ad I beleeue veryly that this was the cause of so long a voyage which the Shyppes of Solomon made,The voyage of Solomon to Tharsis and Ophir. saylyng to Tharsis ad Ophir, wherein they spent three yeres: although in deede that was no short voyage which they mad compassyng about da, and may other Prouinces. And whereas before I sayd, that Nauigaton by litle and litle came to perfection, I fynd by auncient hystories, that Tipho fyrst found the Gouernale or Rudder,The first in∣uentours of igation. Dedalus the Maste and Shrowdes, and Icarus the Sayles, the Thirreni found the vse of the Aker of one graspe or stooke, and Palaminus brought it to perfection, adding the other. And thus may it manifestly appeare, that in these prosperous and fortunate dayes of your Maiestie, it hath pleased God to bring the knowledge of Nauigation to perfec∣tion, with this my breefe discourse as touching the same, aswell profitable and necessarie for them that trauayle by land,Commodities & difficulties of nauiga∣i. as by Sea. What can be a better or more charitable deede, then to bring them into the way that wander? What can be more difficult, then to guide a shyp engoulfed, where only water and heauen maybe seene? One of the foure most difficult things, whereof Solomon maketh mention in his Prouerbes, is the voyage of a Shyp by the Sea. The which Galfrede expounding, sayth, that in humane things, none is more fearefull or more daungerous, then to aduenture life in a thinne and weake peece of wood, or for a man to commt himselfe to the rage of furious windes, among the tempestes of the Sea, and there to hazard that be loueth so well. O how much more should the same seeme difficult to Solomon, if at these dayes he should see that fewe or none of the Pilottes can scarsely reade,The igno∣nce of Pi∣lot. and are scarse∣ly of capacitie to learne? And whereas in the fyrst Chapter of this Booke,The goue. I haue made mention, that the gouernall or sterage ought to be comitted to expert men, and of good vnderstanding, he should see, that now adayes, the ignorat presume to gouerne other, which were neuer able to rule or gouerne themselues. I most humbly desire your Maiestie; to receiue in good part this my poore seruice, which, although it be litle, yet being dedcate vnto th greatnesse of your regall person, it shall be much more the great. The profite ad commoditie thereof  notorious, and the bnefite

that thereby may be receyued, is vniuersall. If therefore, when your Maiestie shall finde your selfe released from greater affaires, it may please you to feede your eyes with these my trauailes, you shall fynde therein many new, delectable, and witty things, with also many profitable and certayne rules, both to reade and vnderstand. To conclude, I eftsoones make humble petitions to your Emperiall Maiestie, not so much to consider what I wryte, as to re∣spect the intent of my wrytyng: and not the gift, but the affection and good will that remayneth in mee to serue your Maiestie.
