


HONORABLE, Noble, Wor∣shipfull, you may justly aske, whence this sight comes? I must excuse it a great deale, from im∣portunity. But what is
 the present? A cup of cold water to good Dis∣ciples of Christ: and you know that brave commander who did accept of as low a pre∣sent, from as poore a man as my selfe. It will bee rejected; be∣cause there is too much of that already: Charity and Iustice are too much watered, they are growne cold, they have waded so long that they are be∣nummed, and lesse apt for use. I hope better
 things. They may bee dwarfed in some, like those three bones in the head of a man which Anatomists call Malle∣olus, Incus, and Stapes, which are as bigge in a child as in a man▪ but the lesse the body is in this (I hope) the more is the heate, the more vigorous the spirits: & it may be this may wa∣ter by an Antiperistasis may make this heate greater, but cannot les∣sen it in those that are so full of goodnesse.

Your worths are wel knowne to others, and are beleveed by me: go on still to doe worthi∣ly in Ephrata, and to be famous in Bethlehem. Doe worthily in piety, do worthily in private charity; and doe wor∣thily in publick Iustice. Wee have an age made up of too much sinne, prophane swearing, and brutish profaning of the Lords day, drun∣kennesse, and malici∣ous quarrellings cover too much christians
 ground amongst us. As it is with the sea, there goes that Leviathan, and creeping things innu∣merable; so is it with the land; there are too many master sinnes, and untellable other sinnes, which wound single, but oppresse by heapes. A King wee have by Gods blessing never better; lawes ne∣ver wiser, and provisi∣ons never more wary: but to make all right, as the oratour magnified pronunciation, so doe I execution.

Many hands make light worke: and your hearts will set them on worke; up and be doing. I neede not provoke your willing mindes: yet may I shew you what you do, or should, though I presse you not to what you doe not.
A poore oppressedSurius in vita S. Basil. woman did observe Saint Basil to have some credit with the governour of his place. Shee solicits him to write to the govenour in her behalfe. The
 good Bishop presently tooke pen, inke, and pa∣per; and wrote to this effect. This poore woman came unto me saying, that my letters have great weight with thee: If it be so, heare her, and shew it. The woman carried it, the governour read it, and writes backe this againe. Holy father; for thy sake I would have had pitty upon this poore woman, but I could not, except shee pay all that is required of her. The good Bishop writes a∣gaine
 (once more) thus. Seeing thy will is ready but thy power is wanting, it is a tolerable excuse: but if thou couldest, and wouldest not, Christ will make thee so poore, that where thou wouldest, thou shalt not be able. These words were propheti∣call to this unjust gover¦nour: for not long af∣ter he fell into the Em∣perours displeasure, was cast into prison, and expected punish∣ment. But then he re∣membred Saint Basil,
 whose intercession he sought, and obtained, and by that meanes, his liberty. Hee then came to Saint Basil, called to minde the poore woman, sent for her, and restored to her the goods, hee wrongfully withheld, twofold. Hee would not hazard a second punishment for an act of Injustice unrepented of.
My observations upon this story are these; It is a great ho∣nour
 to be in authority, it makes the Saints of God on earth to sue un∣to them. It is a mise∣rable place to bee up∣on earth, oppressions may bee done to Gods poore servants. It is a fearefull thing not to relieve the oppressed when it is in our pow∣er; it casts the mighty from the throne, and brings them to shame. It is a brave thing to doe Iustice at first: but better late then never, better of love
 then when it is whipt outwith strokes▪ It is glorious too, not to refuse to doe right at last, when at first wee have done wrong as hee: for not one of a thousand meets with such a day.
You will bee plea∣sed ever to bee better presidents of Iustice then that Iusticer, and not to stand in neede of his best part, his late repentance, whereof you are not sure. And thus, the
 eyes of the Lord will bee upon the just, and his eares will bee open to their prayers: His eyes will bee upon the iust. As hee that hath made a goodly picture, looks upon it againe and a∣gaine, that hee may supply to every defect at last: so God deales with the godly that are just. His eares are open to their prayers. When they call he will heare, when they cry, he will say Ecce ad∣sum, behold here am I,
 nor behold I wil come because hee is hard at hand to comfort them with blessings, who comfort others with upright Iustice.
I cannot teach the meanest amongst you in your way: onely I have presumed to pre∣sent this story, and withall to offer to your eyes (if you please) what you have heard with your eares, The Assize of God, and The Assize of Nature. If these may stand you in
 the least stead to shew you what you are and doe, and put you in minde what you must continue, it is all the hearty wishes, & hum∣ble prayers (upon this occasion) of him that is, and will be

