



RIght Reverend, and right Hono∣rable; many men are willing to cast in some of their superfluity into the Lords treasurie, the poore widow was willing to cast in
 all, yet little. It is a wonder that shee should bee commen∣ded above all those that had fuller hands. But when Christ lookes to the giver, a poore widow, and not to the gift, two mites; to the plen∣tie in the heart, not to the pe∣nurie in the hand, the wonder ceaseth.
My present gift is like the widowes, from my poverty; yet should I bee an unthank∣full liar if I should say, it is all I have. God hath vouchsafed mee a double calling: from himself, insuch gifts as have made mee willing according to my abilities; and from the blessed church (wherein I humbly thanke God, to bee borne, brought up, and lve) in such power to exercise the
 ministerie which I have re∣ceived, by reading, doctrine, approbation, and impositi∣on of hands.
Whatsoever I have by both, I heartily desire may bee for Gods uses, and the service of the Church of God amongst us. I cannot commend them as they are acted by mee, it is by a weake body, and a weaker soule. As Saint Augustine complayned of old, heimihi! quam contrarius sum ego∣met mihi; ego in spiritu, et ego in carne: so more iustly may I. I have a long time beene trayned under fightings within, and without and e∣ver and anon, am ready to bee over-powered with sinne, or greife. But as the ramme in fight drawes backe, not to
 quit the field, but to gaine a course, to give the greater bruise at the next shocke: so doe I desire to bee in my infir∣mities. I seeme sometimes to my selfe to faint, and al∣most to faile, and to beare about mee a dying spirit e∣very day. Quocunque o∣culos converto, video docu∣menta meae aetatis, said Seneca of old, and so say I.
Yet looking to what I have received, some strength yet, to worke, and a con∣science to keepe mee within my traces, I presse hard fore∣ward, and finde that I loose not too much ground, tho∣rough him in whom I am able to doe what I doe.

This holds mee up in my worke, and keepes mee in canonicall obedience to my calling, that I may say at last with blessed Augustine, liberavi animam meam, yea, and sometimes also (though more to satisfie o∣thers then my selfe) scri∣bimus indocti, doctique, I staine paper with my pen.
How unable am I for a∣ny great taske, no man knowes better then your ho∣nour, who from my youth have beene a stay to my waies, an helpe to my studies, and a comfort to my age, since by your Honours selfe I have beene accounted worthy to bee your Honours servant. But since I have not had a resolved face to deny my poore glea∣nings
 after the harvest, to bee brought forth to this learned light wherein we live, I hum∣bly pray that they may first rise or fall, by your honours censure.
This first presents it selfe, my labour that God may judge, in the judgements of men. Next to that, my desire that Nature bee not silen∣ced in her good law, when wee practise that wee call justice. And if any thing else followes helpe faith, and con∣science in our whole course, both publicke and private, whosoever have beene my friends, from whose motions these thoughts have beene drawne out, your Honour shall bee my first judge heere, and patron (if your Honour please,
 and neede require) to that which is with humblenesse confest to be unworthy of you. I need not plead reasons, I am your Honours for humble ser∣vice: it is a just debt from mee; and that due to your Ho∣nour now, and while I am. Due for your undeserved fa∣vour to my selfe. Due for your incouragement to my el∣dest son while hee was at Ox∣ford. Due for your exhi∣bition to my youngest sonne now hee is in Cambridge. And if this could bee a perpe∣tuall register of your Honours love and bountie to mee, and mine, I should heartily rejoice. But because mothes and time will eate this out, I shall hum∣bly desire to lay up a stocke of prayers, for your Honour, in
 heaven. This is all that I can doe, and this is all from mee that your Honour desires. Would I doe more, I could not, could I doe lesse, I would not. This I (by Gods Grace) can, and will; and so continue.

