


SIth contrarie to my desire and ex∣pectation this tre∣tise of horseman∣ship is happened into the Printers hand, I haue thought good to remember the readers, that albeit Xeno∣phon, Grison, Claudio, and others (men most excellent) haue prescribed sundrie rules and meanes how to handle horsses, & ride them with good grace and seemelines; yet if the same be not confirmed by vse and practise, it prooueth vnprofitable & to none auaile at all. I wish therfore that all Gen∣tlemen & others desirous of that knowlege, should not onelie read, but also exercise the rules in this booke prescribed. For as in all

other sciences demonstratiue, so heerein vse and experience surmounteth all conceipt & contemplation, which is apparentlie per∣ceiued in those that haue therevnto applied themselues.
And surelie I suppose (be it spoken with∣out offense of time past) that this art hath neuer beene (I meane within this realme) of that perfection it now is; neither were the horssemen of former ages, equall or compa∣rable to some now liuing, sith they wanting both demonstrations, and skilfull instruc∣tors, could not by possible meanes atteine therevnto. For, before M. Blundeuile, I find not anie that haue written in our toong: neither were the teachers of that time of much knowledge. Where now, cheefly with∣in hir Maiesties most prosperous reigne, (incouraged by the valorous disposition of so excellent a Prince) diuers haue aduentu∣red to write, & many vertuous Gentlemen

with singular commendation, atteine to great knowledge.
Ouerlong it were to reaccount the names of all Noblemen and Gentlemen, that in this age haue aspired to singular skill in horsman∣ship, which I impute cheeflie to the imitation of great personages. I wish therfore that they, and al other Gentlemen should (both for pri∣uat exercise & publike respect) applie them∣selues to the studie and practise of this art, fol∣lowing the example of that honorable person the Earle of Leicester, who among manie o∣ther vertuous qualities both of mind & body, hath indeuored to atteine so great excellencie in this art, as for his iudgment, cunning and cōlines in riding, he meriteth the prise of per∣fection. Which appeereth not onlie in his owne person, but also in his choise of the esquires & riders of hir Highnes stable, all men of great knowledge: and some of them of such excel∣lencie as may not be matched. I could also re∣cite

the names of diuers other Gentlmen very skilfull & commendable, which the rather to auoid enuie I omit. Yet may I not forget the praise due to those that be teachers of this art in the citie of London; for by their industrie and vertue, the number of seruiceable horsses & horssemen is dailie increased: & should be more, if other skilfull men would applie them∣selues to teaching in that maner.
Thus much I haue thought good to saie, as well to excuse my selfe (hauing written this worke onlie to satisfie my priuate friends re∣quest) as to admonish the Readers therof, in any wise to accompanie their studie and rea∣ding with dailie vse and experience, wher∣of assuredlie great knowledge and excellencie will ensue.

