


THat all humain actes ought to be measured by tyme, mooste excellent prince, and my moste redoubted soueraigne lorde, we are sufficiently taught by nature, by reason, by learnyng, and by experience. The first is declared by the ordinate course of the heauens, and the sterres, aswell fixed, as also the planettes mouable, in the same heuens placed, with their sundry disposicions: by whose dyuers operacions, the earthe bringeth foorth hir fruites of all kyndes in due season, whiche fyrst growe to a ripenesse, and than foloweth the de∣caie of the same. So that all thynges varie accordynge to the tyme. Nowe pleasaunt sommer, thanne wythered wynter. Nowe plenty full aboundance of thynges, an other tyme ba∣raine scarcitie. &c. Reason also affirmeth the same: in so mu∣che that wyse philosophiers put, that the generation of one thyng is the corrupcion of an other: and that nothynge maie longe endure in one state, but either encreaseth, or is empei∣red. Of learnyng we haue authoritees manifold. Emonge o∣thers Salomon saieth, that all thynges haue tyme. There is (saieth he) tyme of peace, and tyme of warre: tyme to be me∣ry, and time to be sadde. By experience also it is manifest, that who so doth not take tyme in tyme, and accordyng therto tem∣pre dispose and conueigh all his procedynges, shall noo more brynge theim to effecte, with prosperous successe, thanne the songe shalbe allowed, wherof the syngers kepe not theyr true tyme, but some dooe runne awaie therewith, makyng ouermu∣che haste, while some other dragge, comyng slowly after. The mutabilitie of tyme is so variable, it passeth awaie so swiftely,

and at length  suche violence, that olde poetes willing to descriue tie liuely, according to the veraie propretie ther∣of, dooe sette it foorth in the figure of a man, hauing wynges, wherwith to fligh, and hauing also a great sithe in his handes, to mowe or cut downe all thinges in their appoynted seasons. And as it deuoureth and consumeth all thynges by long pro∣cesse: euen so it manifesteth all thynges, be they neuer so hyd∣den and secrete. Wherefore VERITIE is called the dough∣ter of tyme, He hath also a sister called OCCASION, whom the saied sage poetes (vnder whose woordes, as vnder a vaile are hidden many depe misteries) wyllynge to descriue, dooe feigne to haue wynges on hir fete, to declare therby her swift passyng awaie. And also they feigne hir to haue all hir heare growing and hanging long downe on the forpart of hir hedde, the hynder part being smothe bare and alde: signifiyng ther∣by, that as she cometh towarde a man, he may take sure holde of hir, by hir longe heares. But in case he mysse to take than his holde, suffryng hir to passe by hym: than is there no holde to be taken of hir behynde, but that she runneth awaie with∣out recouerie. There is also iuigned vnto hir a compaignion called REPENTANCE, whiche is nothyng so lyght of foote as is the other, whom Occasion after hir escape from a man, leaueth behynde hir, to kepe hym compaignie. Whereby is ment, that if occasion be not taken, whan she offereth hir selfe to any manne: the partie that refuseth hir offre, shall after not ceasse, duryng his lyfe, to forthynke his folie, in suffryng hir departure. Wherfore sens it is apparent, that the obeiyng to tyme is so necessary, whā I behold the manifold iniuries, doen to your maiestee, and to your subiectes of this your realme, by your vnnaturall and vnkind enemies on sundry parties, diuerse & many waies, whiche ye haue longe suffred, and neuerthelesse dayly they are renewed: it is manifest and euident, that youre hyghnesse is dryuen to geat by the swoorde that, whyche by force is deteyned from you, and with power to reuenge wron∣ges wroughte of malice and vntruthe, onelesse ye shoulde be thought, not to regarde the honour due to the imperiall ma∣iestie of so high a prince, where Salomon in his booke enti∣tled Ecclesiastes, vpon consideracion (as I suppose) of suche lyke matier as this, saieth: There is tyme to loue, and tyme to hate, tyme of peace, and tyme of warre: whiche sentence

the saied wyse man, endued by god with sapience▪ would neuer haue lefte vnto vs, if warre had not in some case ben both lau∣full and expedient. Wherefore well ponderyng the tyme of warre to be nowe in hande, as a thynge so muche nedefull for many consideracions, I (for my poore part) thought, that I should dooe, not onely to your hyghnesse acceptable seruice, but also to all noble men, and ientilemen of the realme greate pleasure and cōmoditie, if gatheryng to gyther out of Titus Liuius, and other autours, the lyues, the policies, and the marciall actes of two the moste woorthie capitaynes, of the two moste renoumed empires of the worlde, that is to saie, of Anniball of Carthage, and Scipio of Rome, I woulde brynge the same into our englyshe toung: whereby, besyde the plea∣saunt bestowyng of tyme, in the readyng therof, men also may learne bothe to dooe displeasure to theyr ennemies, and to a∣uoyde the crafty and daungerous baites, which shall be layde for theim. The one of these capitayns, after many countreis of Spayne brought vnder subiection, to seeke honour, and to exercyse hym selfe, with his men, in feates of warre, passed the terrible mountaines to entre into Italy, through many pe∣ryllous streightes and vnknowen passages, there vexyng and spoylyng the countrey with contynuall warre, by the space of xvi. yeres. Duryng whiche tyme he had many noble victories sleyng many Romaine legions with theyr valyant capytaines. The other, that is to wete, Scipio the Romain consull, being a man of no lesse courage than his ennemie, leauyng hym with his power in Italy, sailed ouer into Affrica: where vanquy∣shynge many friendes of the Carthaginenses, at the laste he brought Carthage to suche extremitie, that the princes ther∣of were dryuen (for theyr onely refuge) to call Anniball home agayn to succour them: where in battaile sore foughten, Sci∣pio ouercame Anniball and all his power, put hym to flyght, & made the empire of Carthage to be vnder tribute to Rome. The one of these capitaines was crafty, politike, peynfull, and hardy: and by subtil traines wrought his enmies muche disple sure: The other was wise, chaste, liberall, and valiant: and by his vertuous courage, mixed with temperaunce, raisedvp the banner of fame & honour of Rome, which before was brought lowe, and almooste to vtter desolation. And as these notable princis, with many other men of noble hertes, haue hereto∣fore

trauailed, to seeke honourable renoue: euen so, many learned menne, wyllynge to auaunce theim to theyr desyres, haue in wrytyng sette forth theyr noble actes, to theyr immor∣tall fame, and to the comfort of all that shall here or rede the same. yea the peinters haue not forgoten nor omitted on their partes, to sette foorth before mennes eies, their noble actes, thereby to stiere and to enkendle the hertes and myndes of the beholders. For who is he, that doeth not muche reioyce, in beholdyng Hercules peinted on a walle, clthed in a lyons skynne, by his mighty hande spoyled, and drawynge after hym Cerberus that hell hounde, with iii. hydous heddes, whome he had brought from the dominion of Pluto? Who doeth not reioyce to heare the conquest of the golden fliece, by Iason in the Isle of Colchos? Thus it appereth, that who so doen vertuousely enbrace honourable trauaile, deserue to haue im∣mortall fame. Emong whiche moste victorious conquerours, although your moste excellent maiestee maie without all con∣trouersie or doubte most worthily chalenge and take the chief place, yet would not I, before your maiesties owne face, offre my selfe to be a setter out thereof, oncles the expresse veritee of your graces procedynges dyd so manifestly publysshe and declare the same, that I maie not by my so doing possybly en∣curre any maner suspicion of flatterie or adulation, as by com∣paryng the noble dedes of the forenamed great princis, vnto your moste woorthy actes, shall appere manifest. Anniball, by the helpe of the frenchemen, passed the mountaines, and after in Italie fought three or fower notable battailes, to the great ruine of the Romaines: but they were achieued rather by crafty sleightes and policies, than by strength. In theim also he had the assured ayde of the frenche men. The citie of Ta∣rent he wanne by treason. Capua, and many other cities, wyl∣lyngly yelded vnto hym, whose assistence after, was muche his auauncement. On the other part, Scipio arryuyng in Affri∣ca, founde there kynge Massanissa his olde frende, by whose helpe, valiantnesse, and conduite, he preuailed against the Car¦thaginenses, and subdued kyng Sypbax. These thynges see∣med than to men so notable, that emong others, my chief au∣thour Titus Liuius, to auaunce the renoume of them, wrote thereof a noble and goodly historie. But who so beholdeth the conduite of your gracis warres, in Spayne, Fraunce,

Britayne, & Scotland, and in euery of these more then ones or twise achieued without the aide of any forain prince, the dan∣gerous and stronge cities and castelles scaled, the power of Fraunce in one daie ouerthrowen: And about the same tyme a lyke victorie of Scottes inuadyng this realme, with theyr kyng slayné in playne fielde: shall fynde the triumph thereof muche more woorthy of glorie, thanne any that euer Liuius wrote vpon. For it is not vnknowen, that thynges nowe be muche harder to be achieued, than they were in those dayes: the artillary more perillous, the armour more sure, and the castelles more strong: In so muche that the winnyng of Ti∣wyn or Morlace, is muche more to be estemed, than the win∣nyng of Capua or Carthage. I wille omitte to reherse, that the emperour Maximilian, hearyng the fame of your hygh∣nesse power and excellence, desyred to be of youre maiesties bande, and vnder your baner in the fielde agaynst the frenche∣men. I wyll also leaue to reherse the wyse and woorthy con∣quest of the realme of Irelande, wherof at this present your maiestee weareth the Diademe. Neither will I tary to declare the sundry and moste lucky victories, that your hyghnes hath of late had agaynst the promisse breakers the double dealynge Scottes. Furthermore, partely for breuitie, and partely for that the thyng beeyng so lately dooen, neither the bruite nor the memory therof can not but be so freshe, that it were much superfluous here now to recite the same, I haue thought best wholly to omitte the long recitall of your late most noble, po∣litike, and myghty conquest of Bollayne, neuer heretofore by any prince subdued, no scarcely by any approched vnto, but lefte as a thynge inuinible, and therefore called the mayden towne, the hystory wherof requireth the lengthe of a longe volume, if it shall be fully chronicled. But sens of all others that euer wer, Hercules is accoumpted mooste woorthy the crowne of honourable prayse, as the chief daunter of mon∣sters: I will nowe with his conquestes compare your moste famous subduynge of the Romayne monster Hydra, whose heddes wer so many, and the lest of theim so pestylent, that it is to be thought, he could neuer (without the great assistence of the diuine power) haue been subdued. Those his heddes, by the moste circumspect wisedome and prouidence of youre highnes, be almost cleane cutte of, and mortified, the veno∣mons

styng of ignorance plucked awaie, and his power sup∣pressed: so that the walles of his denne of Rome tremble, beholdyng your cristall shielde of prudence: whiche conquest I maie well calle so muche more woorthie of renoume, than those of Hercules, by howe muche the soule of man is to be estemed aboue the bodie, or any earthly gooddes. Hercules onely delyuered countreys from the bodily vexation of mon∣sters and tyrantes: your maiestie dooeth ease your subiectes bothe in bodie and goodes, but chiefly in their soules, by the true knowlege of god and his moste holy woorde. So that in my hert I wyshe Liuius to be on lyue agayn, not doubtynge, but he that toke suche peyne to descriue the actes of your in∣feriours, Anniball and Scipio, would muche more nowe tra∣uaille, to blowe foorth your mighty magnificence and vertu∣ous enterprises with the loude trumpette of immortall fame and memorie. Furthermore the actes of Hercules be moste sette forthe by poetes, who (as it is thoughte) haue feigned many thinges more than the trueth was: but of your highnes actes, that r our english Hercules, no man doth or can doubt, they are so well knowen, euen of your ennemies to theyr pei∣nes. Wherfore I truste, whan tyme shall come, god will not faille to prouide an excellente chronicler, to sette foorthe the moste glorious actes of your roiall maiestie, that are his ve∣rie true champion: rewarding your worldly conquestes here, with perpetuall renoume and glorie, and after this lyfe (which almyghty god graunt for our benefite, to be veraie longe) remuneratyng your graces god∣ly mynde, intent, and trauailes in his cau∣ses, with the incorruptible crowne of immortalitie and felicitee eternall bothe of soule and bodie.
