



RIGHT HONOVRA∣BLE LORDS,
The Conceites of Men are so various, & the Guifts of Nature so vnlike, vvith the qualities of Climats so different, as that vve may by our Vnderstandings obserue, as great
 Variety in Wits and Manners, as vvith our Eies vve see in Faces, and Fauours. For some, as I may say, are so vnfortu∣natly borne, as hauing no reguard to true Honour and Nobility, vvhich is euer founded vpon true Vertue; they vvholly dedicate themselues and their daily endeauours, to the only gayning and enioying of such pleasures & pro∣fits, as may best please the Corporall Senses, or othervvise comply vvith the aduantage of Temporall Fortunes: no∣thing fearing any blemishes of Ho∣nour, vvhilest they may obtayne the foresayd Ends.
Yet others rising vnder a more pros∣perous planet, are so greatly taken vvith the desire and loue of true Honour and Renovvne, as that for the gayning or increase therof, all corporall Contents and temporall Cōmodities vvith grea∣test scorne they trample & contemne; and their dearest Lyues they ioyfully
 expose to greatest hazards.
It is true Honour, and celebrity of Name vvhich these men seeke to pur∣chase; Honour by Wisdome, Learning Fortitude, Magnanimity, Magnifi∣cence, and other such like Heroicall Vertues, vvhich as so many Potent Princes, create men truly noble. These are They, that gaue splendour to your right Honourable Progenitours, from vvhome by direct lyne you dravv your Nobility: and these are they vvho giue to your Selues a plentifull increase of all Honour, through your ovvne most vvorthy, and memorable deserts.
It vvere true Rusticity to say, that Children are not honorable in the Ho∣nour of their Parents. Do not theMat. 3.1. Luc. 3.23. Luc. 1.5. E∣uangelists describe at large the Genea∣logy of Christ our Lord and his B. Vir∣gin-Mother, as also of S. Iohn Baptist, thereby to proue that these greatest He∣röes, vvere truly noble in their Proge∣nitors?
 Doth not from the same roote S. Hierome deriue the prayses of noble Paula, affirming that she vvas noble in byrth, as being the issue of the Gracchi, the ofspring of Scipions, & the heire of Paul? Doth not S. GregoryOrat. de S. Cypr. & orat. de S. Basil. Nazianzen for splendour of their Stemmes, highly ex∣toll S. Cyprian and S. Basil, though o∣thervvise most renovvned for their le∣arning and sanctity? Yea thoseSalust. fa∣mous Heathen Nobles P. Scipio & Qu. Fabius, vvhē they heard, or read the glo∣rious gests of their Ancestours, or be∣held their Statues, they vvere greatly in∣flamed vvith the loue of their Vertues.
Iulius Caesar, but looking vpon the Image of Alexander the Great, vvas thereby excited to the vndertaking and performance of things truly great. And Alexander himselfe, remembring the Triumphes of his Father, they serued to him as the sharpest spurrs to pricke him forvvard to the gayning an Immortali∣ty
 of his ovvne Name? Wherefore my Honourable Lords, make right ac∣count that saying of Plato to be most true, and truly Yours, The vertues of Fathers are the Treasures of Children, in vvhich you may truly glory, and desire to imitate.
Yet must I humby make bould, to intimate this further vnto your Ho∣nours, that vvhē your Fathers vvorthes are increased and enriched vvith your ovvne Merits, then your Nobility is more complet, & more truly free from all maleuolous Exceptions. TheJo. 8.39. Ievves gloryed that their Father vvas Abraham, but Christ bad them if they be the Children of Abraham, to do the vvorkes of Abraham. Yea they raysed their Pedigree so high, as that they a∣uouched they had, but oneIo. 8.41. Father God himselfe; But Iesus therefore sayd to them, If God vvere your Father, verily you vvould loue me, for from God I pro∣ceeded
 and came. So that to make your Nobility, Firme and Immortall, you must adioyne your ovvne vertues: for no more can it subsist vvithout These, then Man vvithout Reason.
What did it auayle profane and sen∣suall Esau, that his Father vvas holy I∣saac? or rebellious Absalom, that he vvas Sonne to the most valourous King Da∣uid? Or foolish Roboam, that he had vvysest Salomon for his Father? nothing did this profit, but to augment their shamefull Infamy in this vvorld, and their Eternall misery and punishment in the next, by so fouly degenerating from so Noble Progenitours.
But so povverfull is Vertue, for the Creation of Nobility, as that many borne in a grosse ayre, of obscure paren∣tage, through the Glory of their merits and vvorthiest Actes haue shined to the vvhole vvorld, as so many starres, lea∣uing Honour to their Posterity, vvhich
 their Fathers vvanted. Tinne is extra∣cted from Siluer, yet is not Siluer; and Gold proceedeth from the base matter of Earth, and yet is not Earth, but pre∣cious Gold. It is much better, of an ig∣noble Race, through vertuous Actions to become Noble, then of a Noble Stocke, by base vices, to become con∣temptible.
Thare, Abrahams Father vvas an Ido∣later, and yet the Sonne for his admi∣rable vvorth had the Honour to be sty∣led,Rom. 4.11. The Father of the Faithfull, and him, in vvhose Seed, all Nations should be blessed, the Messias of the vvorld be∣ing to rise from thence.Ex. 3.1. Moyses &1. Reg. 9. psal. 77.71. Dauid, vvere by condition Shep∣heards, but through their noble Actes became renovvned Princes. Profane Histories are plentifull in these Exam∣ples, but I hasten to that vvhich giueth life and lustre, yea the last perfection to all Nobility.

This is Christian Nobility (vvorthy Peeres) vvhich vvill make you to be men truly borne of God, to haue him for your Noblest Father; and through the Influences of his Grace, to imitate, & in some, though imperfect, sort, to expresse in your Selues, his Purity, San∣ctity, Innocency, Wisdome, Iustice, Mercy, & the like; by these no lesse re∣presenting his Diuine Image, then Son∣nes do the faces and conditions of their carnal Parents. These are those true No∣bles, vvhich the Princely Eagle S. IohnJo. 1.13 describeth to be borne of God; not of Bloud. These are they vvhome the SacredIo. 1.12 Rom. 8.14.17. 2. Pet. 1.4. 1. Pet. 2.9. Io. 10.34 Scriptures do honour, vvith those glorious titles of being the Sonnes of God, the friends of God, Hey∣res of God, and Coheires of Christ, parta∣kers of his diuine Nature, Kings, Gods.
Novv to be linked vvith this kinred, and so to be exalted to the highest No∣bility, our heauenly Father requireth in
 his Children that by sacred vertues they seeke to glorify, and magnify his holy Name, for so himselfe promised, vvhen he said,1. Reg. 2.30. Whosoeuer shall glorify me, I vvill glorify him: and they that con∣temne me, shallbe ignoble. The Vertues vvherby God is chiefly glorifyed, and vvhereby Men vpon Earth do deriue their Nobility from the King of hea∣uen, are according to the beloued A∣postle, diuine Faith: for1. Iohn 5.1.4. Whosoe∣uer belieueth that Iesus is Christ, is borne of God. And, All that is borne of God, ouercommeth the vvorld, and this is the victory vvhich ouercommeth the vvorld, our Faith.
But besids Faith, is likevvise required Charity, for1. Iohn 4.7. Euery one that loueth is borne of God. As also Iustice, for1. Iohn 2.29. Euery one vvhich doth Iustice is borne of him. And lastly, filiall Obedience, and conformity to the vvill of our heauen∣ly father, vvhose eldest Sonne assureth
 vs all, that,Mat. 12 50. vvhosoeuer shall do the vvill of my Father that is in heauen, he is my Brother, Sister, and Mother. O ad∣mirable Honour! O incredible povver of vertue! Hovv many good Mothers, Brothers, and Sisters, vvould haue thought themselues most highly ho∣noured, if they might haue beene lin∣ked vvith Christ in these degrees of car∣nall propinquity. And yet, as S. Chri∣sostome truly teacheth,Hom. 45. in Mat. They are neerer of kin to God, vvho do his vvill, then those vvho are ioyned vvith greatest allyance of Bloud.
So that for a man to contract affini∣ty vvith God, and thereby to be made of the Bloud Royall, and to attayne to the highest degree of Nobility, he must of necessity haue his Soule adorned vvith those heauenly Graces of Faith, Charity, Iustice, Obedience, and the like. His Coūtry must be the supernall Hierusalem; his highest Honour the
 preseruation of Gods Image, and con∣formity to his Patterne, vvhich by Rea∣son, and Vertue are onely caused, and vvhereof at Gods Tribunall he must giue account. If he shall vitiously de∣fyle that sacred Image of greatest No∣bility, cut by the hād of God himselfe, and thereby introduce another forme, to vvit, of the Serpent; then, must he ranke himselfe to his euerlasting disho∣nour, amongst the spurious & ignoble.
Christian Nobility doth not accept Persons, and Conditions of men, but looketh into their Minds: From the manners she iudgeth a man to be ser∣uile or noble. The only freedome vvith God, is not to serue Sinne: & the grea∣test Nobility vvith him, is to be emi∣nent in vertues. Who amongst men in the sight of God vvas more noble then Peter, a poore Fisherman? And vvho amongst vvomen more illustious then blessed Mary the vvyfe of a Carpenter?
 And yet to that Fisherman the keys of the kingdome of heauen vvere giuen: and to that poore vvife it vvas granted to be the Mother of him, vvho gaue the keyes. Wherefore Christian vertues are they that must rayse a man to the height of Honour.
Novv, if he that is borne of a Regall Stocke, may iustly glory in Princely Nobility; much more he vvho truly de∣riueth himselfe from the King of Kings and Creatour of all things. With this dignity all the Iust vpon Earth are ho∣noured, being borne of God by a nevv Natiuity; and the Saintes in heauen do therby raigne, as puissant Princes in Eternall glory.
It is not vnvvorthy your remem∣brance, Noble Lords, thatHier. in Quaest. He∣braic. in Gen. ad Cap. 22. & in ep. 27. ad Eustoch. Genebrard. in psal. 68. Mount Sion hauing tvvo topps or Heads, vpon one vvas built a Temple for the Seruice of God, and vpon the other a Pallace for the seruice of the King: thereby to
 shevv, that these tvvo Honours must euer cohabitate, and not be separated, ech one giuing a peculiar Grace, and Splendour to the other.
The Romans also, as S.De ciu. Dei l. 5. c. 12. Au∣stine recordeth, erected tvvo Temples neere adioyning togeather; the one they dedicated to Honour, the other to Ʋertue: therby signifying that in vvhat place there is splendour of Honour, in the same must be the exercise of Vertue. Wherfore vvhosoeuer desireth to shine vvith Christian Nobility, and to deriue his Pedigree from the King of Heauen & Earth, a Father Almighty, he must ground his Honour vpon diuine fayth, and rayse it to the Height, by the exer∣cise of Charity, and true Religion.
But vvhen I mention Religion, it put∣teth me in mynd, that this King your Father espoused himselfe toEphes. 5.27. a glo∣rious Queene, one so beautifull, that she had neither spot, or vvrincle, or any such
 thing, but vvas Holy, and Ʋnspotted: and this vvas his BelouedEph. 5.25. Church, vvhome he affected so dearely, that he deliuered himselfe for it, &Act. 20.28. purchased it vvith his ovvne Bloud. This then be∣ing the Spouse of God, the Children of God, must needs be the Children of the Church, and she their Holy, and Vn∣spotted Mother. A truth so certaine, that the glorious Martyr and Bishop S. Cyprian, doubted not to auouch, thatDe Ecl. vnitate c. 5. August. tom. de Symb. l. 4. cap. 10. He cannot haue God for his Father, that hath not the Church for his Mother.
Novv, that this Mother-Church, is only the Catholike Roman Church, I shall proue at large in this subsequent Treatise: only be pleased in the meane to remember, vvhat a good old Bishop and Martyr said of this point:Lucius Ep. 1. ad E∣pisc. Hisp. & Cal. The Roman Church is Apostolicall, and the Mother of all Churches, vvhich is neuer proued to haue Erred from the path of A∣postolicall Tradition, nor depraued vvith
 Hereticall Nouelties to haue fayled, ac∣cording to the promise of our Lord himselfe saying: I haue prayed for thee, that thy faith fayle not.
This Mother-Church it vvas, and only this, that had all your Forfathers for her louing and dutifull Children. It vvas She, that brought them forth Christians by the Lauer of Baptisme, & aftervvards gaue them grouth, strength and increase by her other Sacramentes. In her bosome they sucked Sanctity during this life, and by her they vvere aduanced to the Court of Heauen, ray∣gning there, truly Noble in immortall Glory.
Peruse your Genealogies, looke in∣to the Chestes of your Euidences, vievv the Records of all Courts, behould the ancient Monuments in your Churches, read all Chronicles and Histories, they vvill all depose vnto You, that your Noble Ancestours, all of them before
 King Henry the eight his Raigne, and infamous Relapse, vvere all of them Catholikes truly Romane: The Sect of Protestancy, or the very Name thereof as then not being in Rerum Natura, & so neuer heard, or dreamed of by any of your Ancient Bloud.
And not only this, but many most noble Lords and Ladies, your glorious Predecessours, duely considering the vanity of things transitory, the vncer∣tainty of this present Lyfe, the innu∣merable dangers that therein occurre, the dreadfull Iudgment they vvere to vndergoe, and the finall Sentence of Ioy, or Misery Eternall, vvhich they vvere to receiue: these importāt points, I say, they seriously and prudently pon∣dering, vvith brauest Resolutions a∣bandoned the present pleasures, pro∣fits, or Honours this vvorld could af∣foard them, and betooke themselues to the safest Port of Monasticall, and Re∣ligious
 lyfe, therein to giue themselues to the Exercise of Pennance for expia∣tion of sinnes, to the Contemplation of their Heauenly Fathers infinite and vnspeakeable Perfections, for their i∣mitation of his vertues, & to the need∣full Preparation, and due Disposition for the gayning, and enioying Nobili∣ty and Honour, euer permanent & im∣mortall.
But if it vvere not to abuse your Honours greatest Patience vvith longer Discourse, in a matter so euident, I should easily present vnto your vvor∣thy vievves, many Kings and Queenes of our ovvne Country, for their singu∣lar vertues admired and honoured by all posterity, vpon the former Conside∣rations, to haue cast by their Crovvnes, to haue dethroned themselues of all ciuill Gouernement and Command, to haue resigned their Scepters into the hands of others, and to haue giuen the
 farevvell to all Earthly contents, and all this to retire themselues the better in Religious lyfe for the exercise of Vertue and the gayning of the Kingdome of Heauen.
These, Noble Lords, are the bright Starres you must delight to behould; these are the choyce patterns you must endeauour to imitate: Your vvorthy Spirits may, vvith much honour, emu∣late, their rarest Vertues, and thereby propagate to your ovvne Posterity the name and Honour, vvhich Kings and Kinred haue bequeathed vnto you. In these glory as your most Noble Proge∣nitors; in your Selues reioyce, vvhen as liuely Images, you represent their Goodnes.
To degenerate from these vvould be greatest dishonour. His fall is fouler vvho hath happily stood, and the same more dāgerous from the greater height it happeneth. What doth it auayle a
 covvardly Sonne, that his Father vvas valiant? Or a vicious Child that his Pa∣rents were vertuous? Certainly no o∣ther, but more cleerely, to blaze his greater shame, and most hatefull Igno∣miny. Your Noble Harts vvould not brooke the least aspersion to be layd vpō the Honour of your most renovv∣ned Predecessours, by any man vvhat∣soeuer, but vvith your vvisedoms you vvould cleere, and vvith Valour you vvould punish all offendours in that kind, as iustely thinking the Disho∣nour vvould rebound vpon your ovvn persons, if you should suffer such Indi∣gnity to passe vvithout Controvvle. Much more vvill your Lordships be truly carefull and precise, that the least stayne, or blemish do not fall from your Selues, vvhereby your Ancients splendour should by any vvaies, be ob∣scured.
O vvhat vnsufferable disgrace is it,
 for men ignoble and illiterate, not on∣ly to appeach your Noble Progenitors of ignorance, blindnes, and stupidity; but further to brand them vvith those blacke markes of being men Superstiti∣ous, Idolatrous, Antichristian; and so vndoutedly for euer damned. And yet these are the ordinary detractiōs vvhich come from the fovvle mouthes, and pennes of ignorant, and impudent Mi∣nisters.
But vvho, not a vvretched Atheist, can possibly endure to haue his Hea∣uenly Father most blasphemously cen∣sured, as a cruell Tyrant, imposing Lavves vpon his Children, and Sub∣iects, vvhich are impossible to be ob∣serued, and yet the keeping of them to be necessary to their Saluation? To de∣stiny and reprobate men from all Eter∣nity, before their Creation, vvithout all respect of their free vvorkes, to cer∣taine Damnation? To make the foun∣taine
 of all Goodnes (all eares do ab∣horre to heare it) the Authour, Cause, Counsailour, Commaunder, & Com∣peller to all Sinne. To make the Sonne of God, Christ our Sauiour, to haue bene borne vvith ignorance, to haue dyed vvith despayre, & to haue suffered the very paines of the damned. And yet these are Tenets, holden for good by your learnedst Protestant Doctours.
And vvhat Child legitimate can vvith Patience brooke, that his Mother most Honourable, Chast, & Faythfull to her Spouse, should be accused and iudged for an Infamous Adultresse? No very Minister so ignorant, but vvill ac∣knovvledge, that the Romane Church vvas the most chast & faythfull Spouse of Christ, vvhen S. Paul proclaymed thatRom. 1.8. her Fayth vvas renovvned in the vvhole vvorld: AndRom. 16.19. her obedi∣ence published into euery place: and the Romanes highly commended, for that
 they hadRom. 6.17. obeyed from the hart, vnto that forme of doctrine vvhich had beene deliuered vnto them. And yet novv our viperous brood of Ministers, vvil needs haue her to be the very vvhore of Baby∣lon;Apoc. 17 a harlot &c. vvith vvhome the Kings of the Earth haue fornicated: An Apostata from Christ her Spouse; a pro∣faner of Gods vvord and Sacraments and in briefe, vvholy Antichristian.
And I must not forbeare to put your Honours in mind, of the dishonoura∣ble disgraces that these nevv-borne Se∣ctaries, vvould put vpon your Selues, not onely as you are Nobles, but as you are Men, endovved vvith reasona∣ble Soules, vvhose principall Povvers are Vnderstanding, and Freevvill, the most Essentiall differences betvveene men and Beasts. Do not your Nevv Maisters generally teach, that God hath giuen to man only freevvill to sinne, but not to do good? When they do
 good, they are necessitated therunto, for as vvithout Gods grace they cannot do it, so the same being offered, they cannot resist.
O hovv dangerously doth this Ec∣clypse the shyning splendour of your ovvne, and your Ancestours most com∣mendable Acts! vvhat can be praisvvor∣thy, that includeth necessity? Or on the contrary blamable, that cannot be a∣uoyded? If it vvas not in the povver and vvill of your Selues, and your Forefa∣thers to do, or not to do those Heroicall Deeds, but vvhat you did, you vvere ne∣cessitated to do through the enforcing hand and Ordination of God; vvhat cause or colour can be imagined for the raysing of your Selues, vvithout all de∣sert, to such highest Honours, and to grace euen your Successours vvith such titles of Dignity?
Be pleased to heare vvhat Malleus Haereticorum, the learnedst S. Austine
 thinketh of this brutish Paradoxe:L. de duabus A∣nimabus c. 11. Neyther heer (sayth he, speaking of Fre∣vvill) am I to search obscure bookes, from vvhence to learne, that no man deserueth Dispraise, or Punishment, vvho eyther vvilleth that vvhich Iustice doth not pro∣hibite, or doth not that vvhich he can∣not do. Do not the Sheepheards sing these things in the Mountaynes, the Poets vpon the Stages, the vnlearned at their meetings, the learned in their Studies, Maisters in the Schooles, Bishops in Churches, and Mankind all ouer the vvorld? So that Shepheards, Poets, Ru∣stickes &c. do exhibite that Honour vnto you, vvhereof your ovvne Chap∣laynes vvould vvillingly depriue you.
Neyther is Enuy thus satisfyed but vvith greatest malignity pursueth euen your most laudable vertues, affirming that your best Deeds done for the Ho∣nour of God, his Church, your Coun∣try, or your Selues, are of all them, in
 themselues, & in the sight of God, Sin∣nes abhominable, mortall or deadly, vvhich depriue a man of Gods grace, & thereby of all Spirituall lyfe, vvhich de∣grade him of that chiefest Nobility to be the adopted Sonne of God, & heyre of Eternall Kingdome, & finally make him the very slaue of the Diuell, and a most vvretched Caytiffe, condemned to eternall Misery.
To vvhat end should you expose your dearest liues in the seruice of your King and Country to imminent dan∣gers? To vvhat end should you make your daily prayers, and vse other Exer∣cises of Deuotion, to the Honour of your supreme King, and your ovvne Soules good? Or giue your Charitable Almes to the Reliefe of the needy, if these deeds, payers, and Almes be all of them stayned vvith Sinne, offensiue to the Maiesty of God, and exceeding preiudiciall, being all of them sinnefull
 to your ovvne Soules? And yet these, and sundry other such nasty principles, the pretended reformed Protestancy doth proiect vnto you.
Avvake then, Noble Lords, and let your eies of Truth send forth their clee∣rest Raies, vvherby to dispell those dar∣kest Clouds of Errour, vvhich so dange∣rously obscure the brightnes of your Names & Nobilities. If these vnfortu∣nate tymes do threaten, or obiect any danger of loosing some temporall Ho∣nour, your Lops. may rest assured, that as the loosing of your liues for Loialty and Fidelity to your King and Coun∣try, doth nothing diminish, but greatly augment your former Renovvnes: So the losse of all trāsitory Glory for your Loyalty to God, for Obedience to his Church, for profession of the Catholike Fayth, for the gayning of a Heauen, is not to loose the least title of Honour, but vvith plentifull increase to enrich
 the same. To loose lands or goods in the same honourable quarrel, is a pious Vsury, only lending them for a tyme vpon securest Bands, of not receiuing ten for the hundred, but a hundred for ten. And I cannot thinke so vn∣vvorthily of so vvorthy Spirits, that vo∣luptuousnes, and freedome in sensuall delights, vvhich your nevv Diuines do so loudly teach, & liberally allovv, that these, I say, can any thing deterre you from the chast Embracements of pure Vertue, and Religion, these being the base baites, vvhervvith the vulgar and ignoble are only taken.
Wherfore to conclude this my hum∣ble Suite vnto your Lops. be pleased somtimes to reflect, that as you are tru∣ly carefull, and therein most commen∣dable, to continue in your selues, & to propagate in your Children, the An∣ciēt Nobility vvhich your fathers haue left you, liuely representing their vvis∣dome,
 Fortitude, Magnanimity, and other such most bright beames of true Nobility: so no lesse carefull that you be, in expressing their Noble Christiani∣ty, vvhich they, before many hundreds of yeares past, vvorthily purchased by profession of Catholicke fayth, by obe∣dience to Christes Church, by Commu∣nion vvith Gods Saints, by participati∣on of holy Sacraments, and by their o∣ther exercises of Religion and Charity. Whereas this last Century hath giuen the first, and ancientest Bloud vvhich Protestancy can challenge, or expect.
And seeing that vvherein your chie∣fest cares must euer be incumbent, is the labouring the Eternall Weale of your ovvne Soules, vvhich men de∣uoyd of diuine fayth, and floting out of the Arke of the Catholicke Church, amongst the vncertaine vvaues of Er∣rour and Heresy, can neuer attaine; therefore it vvill most neerly concerne
 you diligently to learne, vvherin that diuine Faith consisteth; hovv it is to be gayned; vvhat profession thereof neces∣sary; vvhich is that Church vvhich is the Arke of safety, the Spouse of Christ, the Mother of the Faithfull, the Pillar of Truth, and so infallible a Iudge of all Controuersies in Religion, as vvhosoe∣uer shall refuse to obey her Sentence, is to be reputed by all men, as a Heathen, and Publican.
This is the busines that importeth; the neglect vvherof is not losse of tem∣porall liberty, and imprisonement for life, or of large Renevves, and mines of Gold, or the fauour and grace of Prin∣ces, & esteeme in Court, or of Strength, Health, Beauty, and other such guiftes of Nature; but it is the losse Eternall of all Heauenly ioyes, and the Soule and Bodies burning in vnquenchable fyre for all Eternity.
O discusse vvith your Selues at lea∣sure,
 that deep question proposed by a Prince,Luc. 18.18. Mar. 10.17. ƲƲhat shall I do, that I may receiue life euerlasting? or in the vvords of anotherAct. 16.31. VVhat must I do, that I may be saued? Seeke, Search, Study, Meditate, Conferre, Read, neuer rest vntill you fynd a true Resolution of this vveightiest Question.
If you vvill take it from Christ our Sa∣uiour, he giueth it in these plaine vvordsMat. 19.17. If thou vvilt enter into lyfe, keep the Commandements. If you vvill haue it from your ovvne Doctour, the Doctor of the Gentils S. Paul, his ansvvere is,Act. 16.31. Belieue in our Lord Iesus, & thou shalt be saued. If you vvill haue then the full Resolution, giuen by those tvvo greatest Doctours, it is Fayth, and Kee∣ping of the Commandements, that vvill saue you. Whereupon the third & most renovvned Doctour S. Austine giueth the vvhole decision in these vvordes,De fide & operibus c. 15. I see not vvhy Christ should say, If
 thou vvilt haue lyfe euerlasting, keep the Commandements; if vvithout obseruing of them, by only fayth, one might be saued. Ioyne then these tvvo for your obtay∣ning of Eternall happines: and haue e∣uer fresh in your memories that sacred sentence of the Sonne of God,Mar. 8.36. VVhat shall it profit a man if he gayne the vvhole vvorld, and suffer domage of his Soule? And vvith this, I humbly kisse all your Lops. hands, and euer desire to remayne,

