


Right Honourable,
SInce the Flood of our Scottish Disor∣ders and Vproares have overflowed the banks of divine and humane Au∣thority, I have beene with Jeremie,Ier. 9.1. crying out in the bitternesse of my soule, O that my head were wa∣ters, and my eyes a fountaine of teares, that I might weepe day and night, for the mi∣series of my Countrey people: Whereof a fiery-zealous Faction, have from day to day waxed so insolent; that of equity they may challenge as their owne, that description
which Jeremie affords in the next words,Ier. 9.2. vers. 2. They proceed from evill to evill, and are an assembly of treacherous men. For His Majesties Clemencie hath been to them,Prov. 16.15. Prov. 19 12. as a cloud of the latter raine; and as the dew on the grasse; which should have produced many re∣turnes of thankfulnesse. But behold, he hath watered evill ground which bringeth forth briars and thornes the more abundantly.Mich. 7.4 3. The best of them is as a briar; the most upright is as a thorn hedge: they do evill with both hands earnestly; hunting every man his brother with a net. They are gone in the way of Cain, and run gree∣dily after the errour of Balaam, and stand in the gain∣saying of Core Amongst many passages to prove this, these their informations of warre are a most evident de∣monstration, which caused me continue Jeremies Elegie and sorrowfull Song: Oh that I had in the wildernesse a lodging of a way-faring man, that I might leave my people, and go from them. In the meane time, having purchased a copie of these informations, which with their Covenant now at last, with force and violence was to be thrust and pressed upon me, I returned this my Answer, whereof I was to make use with my Brethren at our next meeting (which was the seventh day after I had seen the co∣pie) that they might see that as hitherto I could find no rea∣son to Covenant w th them, so now much lesse, when it ends in open Rebellion. But being advertised of the cruell plot, and snares laid for me, I was forced to flie from the viru∣lent and violent fury of the Covenant, as from a Beare robbed of her whelps, and to seek friends to vertue among strangers: leaving my wife great with child, melting in sorrow; with foure young children, to take a proofe of their humanity. When I came to this kingdome of Ireland, I was
so ashamed that such treacherous doctrine should have been brought forth by my Countrey-men, to the great scan∣dall of the Gospell, and deepe wounding of our protestant Religion, and rejoycing of the adversaries, that I was pur∣posing to smother these their informations: But ere I was maturely thus resolved, I found the matter already spread abroad, and with my eyes have seene other copies. This did cut my resolution in the blade, so that I suffered these in∣formations with my answer to them, to enjoy the light. And that for diverse reasons. 1. Because some men (not knowing the Mystery of the Covenant, nor that old saying of Lu∣ther, In nomine Domini incipit omne malum) have thought it impossible, that such rebellious doctrine could be hatched by the Covenanters, and that it seemeth to be an invention of others, to make them the more odious. This I refute, by publishing the same. Secondly, that this do∣ctrine, whereunto I, one of the least of the Tribe of Levi there, have answered, may not be imputed to that Church and Nation, but to some factious spirits there, who have this houre and power of darknesse: For since the most part of them were compelled to subscribe their covenant, shall any man think that they will allow this doctrine of Re∣bellion? I know the contrary, and dare presume to affirme, that the best of that Kingdome for worth and number, espe∣cially of the Ministry, shall assent to that truth which I here maintaine, though now they be carried away with this inundation; and the lay-ruling-Bishops their Govenours keep them under. Yea, my charity is so enlarged, that I trust, that the chiefe Contrivers of these informations shall acknowledge their errour: for they have been trans∣ported with passions, whilst they were upon this worke, by their great swelling words, fully stuffed with calumnies;
whereof I hope they will repent in their cold bloud, when they forbeare to be as the raging waves of the sea, fo∣ming out their own shame.Iude 13. Esa. 32.2. Then the heart of the rash shall understand knowledge. So that I hope the number shall be few, as the grape-gleanings after the vintage, who defend this mad doctrine:Acts 28.19. And I, with Paul, shall have nothing to accuse my Nation of. But if any, after ripe deliberation, shall adhere to this rebellious doctrine, and when they should cry,
Nulla salus bello, pacem te petimus omnes,shall change it into
Tota salus bello, facem te petimus omnes,I shall be so farre from contradicting those who have cal∣led them all mad men, that I shall take up Pauls wish, I would to God that they were both altogether,Acts 26.29. and almost even as Paul, his bonds not being excepted; which bonds I wish not as a punishment, but as a remedy for their brain-sick malady: having withall their Camp∣sticks taken from them,Pro. 26.18. as being most dangerous in the hands of mad men, especially for themselves. And as for these Cynick and Lucinian railers, rather than preachers; such as that wiseman who made sport in the Pulpit of E∣denburgh, by riding Balaams asse: and that other mad∣cap who wounded the beast, these are wise enough for their new calling, let them be gone to them. Let the one learn bet∣ter to play the butcher with beasts, whose Physicke for man is naught: and let the other be an Asse-breaker, and if he did formerly thus preach, I am sure an Asse hath done more service to Christ than ever he hath done: an Asse caried Christ to lerusalem, but with his Asinine pratlings he hath brought none to Christ. And therefore I would not that any should brand our Church with such spots, fruit∣lesse
trees, wandring stars, and clouds without water: Let them beare their own shame. It cannot be dennyed, but our Church is now in a great Eclipse, and the mouth of our common adversary is open, and they triumphing over us, cry, Medice te ipsum cura: But,Mic. 7.8. Rejoyce not against me, O mine enemy, though I have fallen, I shall arise; though I sit in darknesse, the Lord shall be a light un∣to me. I hope to see our Church flourishing and shining in her former beauty, maintaining againe the Orthodoxe Doctrine toward Monarchy,1 Pet. 2.15. and putting to silence the ignorance of foolish men. And therefore, my third reason in publishing this Treatise is, that all our Orthodoxe Di∣vines may have these informations, as so many Theses, brought to their hands, who are more able to stop the mouth of the Gain-sayers.
Now, Right Honourable seeing I am a stranger in this Kingdome, and this my meane labour standeth in need of one (in these evill dayes) who is powerfull both for Place, and Learning, for its Patron: I have therefore presumed to lay it at your Lordships feet, begging your honourable Patronage, in whom both great Authority and Learn∣ing, Wisdome and Justice are met; whom this Church and Nation hath found a most gratious Patron.Acts 24.10. Whom I know to have been of many yeeres a governour unto this nation;Acts 26.3. and to be expert in all customes and questions of this nature, which concerneth the civill Ma∣gistrate, and especially the Monarchicall Government of great King CHARLES. And therefore, though the Au∣thor and the workmanship be but mean and rude, yet the matter which I defend, deservedly craveth such a high Pa∣tronage for its defence, as is your Lordship; who is as faith∣full David, among all the Kings servants, and honou∣rable
in his house;1. Sam. 22 14. Iob. 29.14. who hath put on Righteousnesse as a cloathing, and judgment as a robe and diademe; whom, when thy eare heareth, it blesseth; and when thy eye seeth, it giveth witnesse, as to one ready to de∣liver the poore that cryeth, and the fatherlesse, and him that hath none to help, and to break the jawes of the unrighteous, and to plucke the spoile out of his teeth. And this is no small addition to his Majesties hap∣pinesse,Psal. 101.6. to have one who walketh in a perfect way to serve him, which was Davids resolution. As Salomon speaketh of the vertuous woman,Prov. 31 11. The heart of her hus∣band doth safely trust in her, so that he shall have no need of spoile: So may I say of his Majesties trust in your Lordship, especially in these evill dayes, which brings to my remembrance the words of Nabal.1. Sam. 25.10. There be many ser∣vants now adayes, that breake away every man from his Master. To put confidence in such, is to trust to a bro∣ken tooth, and to a foot out of joynt.
May it please therefore your Lordship favourably to accept these meane labours, which for the Glory of God, Victory of truth, honour of our King, and good will to∣ward my distracted Countrey-men, I have brought to light; Humbly beseeching for the shelter of your L. protection, to this Treatise and its Author, who shall begin and remaine to bee

