


I Being (louing bre∣thrē and cuntrimē) to performe a cer∣taine pilgrimage, did heare there vvas a persecutiō intended in our cuntrie against
our catholick religion, as also a proclamation published against the priestes & professors therof. I thought good to aefer my pur∣posed tourney to those holie reli∣kes, and to recollecte my self in∣some place, that I may asvvell de¦clare my duetie to the catholick church, in these her troubles & persecutions, as also signifie vn∣to you my vnfained affectiō, & christian charitie in these your aduersities. and seeing it is a di∣uine precept to loue our negbou∣res, and being affirmatiue, it bin∣deth vs to put it in execution in
their destresses and in time of ne∣cessitie. I thought good to comfort you in your sorrovves, and to counsell you in your doubtes vvhich be vvorkes of mercie, & also to bevvayle your miseries so the apostle did,
2. Cor. 11. vvhen he said quis infirmatur & ego non infir∣mor vvho is sick or indisposed, and I feele it not? So also did Iob vvhen he said flebam super eum qui afflictus erat & compatieba∣tur anima mea pauperi the:
Iob 30. affli∣ction of my negbour did cause me to vveepe, and his poouertie mo∣ued me to compassiō. I send ther∣fore
vnto you this Mnemosynum or memoriall asvvell for your consolation in your troubles, as also for your resolution in your doubtes, I made it first in Latine and thought onlie to dedicat it vnto the priestes and religious of our nation, but being readie to go to the presse, I vvas persvva∣ded by certaine graue religious persons to translate it vnto En∣glish, being a language more vul¦gare and cōmon vnto you, hoping it may vvork some good effect in such as could not vnderstand it in the latine. and although my
onlie purpose is to spare no paines vvhere I may do the greatest good & dum tempus habemus bonum operari to bestovv the residue of my fraile life, and vncertaine daies vvhere J may do god & his church the best seruice, yet I found great difficultie to ha¦ue it printed in English for too causes, the one, vvas, vvhat I had to disraise my charges; I should bestovv it in the printing being a language altogether vn¦knovven vnto the printer, and therfore more charges and longer time should be required, the other
that I should be vvray my ovv∣ne insufficiencie therin, vvhich vnto me is not so natural asvvell for my birth, as for my bringing vp, but I hope a fault in the lan∣guage is not an offence before god, vvhich respecteth more the invvard intention of my hearte, then the outvvard characters by vvhich J declare the same. J de∣sire you let not the impropriete of the English therof, nor the faul∣tes, that did escape the printer vvhich vvas altogether ignorant of the same, giue occasion of loath sōnesse of the matter, vvhich I hū∣blie
craue at your handes to re∣ceaue vvith that deuotion and intrals of charitie, by vhich I offer it: and for my labour and charges bestovved therin, I be∣seech you as many as shall peruse it, to saye one Aue Maria, that you and I may die in the arcke vvith Noe, that vvee may be saued in the mountaine vvith Lott, that vvee may liue and continue in the catholick church and perse∣uere in gos fauour vntill the last moment of our liues, vvhich I beseech svveet Iesu to grant vn∣to you and me Amen; so fare vvell

from the porte of S. Ma∣rie the last of Aprill 1606.

