



LEARNED MEN,
This Treatise vvas for you chi∣efly first vnderta∣ken. The Ground-vvorke, vvhereupon the Systema, or Frame thereof is built, is a mixture of Philosophy, and Schoole-diuinity: Points, vvith
 reference to the more igno∣rant Protestant, being (as the Schoole-Dialect is) extra sphaeram Actiuitatis; that is, beyond the limited apprehē∣sion of their shallovv & nar∣rovv conceits. It is but small (you see) in Quantity; but I hope, it vvill hould out in vveight. The subiect of it, is vnusuall, and (to my knovv∣ledge) heertofore ex professo, not much vvalked in, or tra∣cted. It is also (no doubt) nauseous, and displeasing to you; seeing it attempteth to prooue, that your Religion is in it selfe a meere Non-En∣tity; Its Being consisting in a Not-being, and Essence, in
 vvant of Essence. That Reli∣giō of yours, I meane, vvhich at this day hath inuaded seue∣rall parts in Europe; vvhose high flight is mantained only vvith the vvings of certayne Princes, & Commonvvealths povver and greatnes; vvhich violently carries (vvhere it reignes) all things before it, vvith the impetuous streame of its ovvne torrent: briefly to vvhich for our not yielding obedience in our ovvne Coū∣try, so great & heauy mulcts and pressures are imposed vpō Recusants: though euen in al Iustice, the paying of Nothing is a sufficient penalty, for the not professing, of vvhat is
 Nothing. I confesse it is pain∣full to discourse vvell of No∣thing; as it is difficult to run a diuision of knovvledge, vpon the ground of ignorance. Neuer∣theles, since your ovvne lear∣ning vvill force you to giue assent to those Theorems of Diuinity and Philosophy, vpō the Arch vvherof, the vveight of the vvhole Treatise resteth; I am not vvholy in despayre, but that at the closure of all, your morning & more retired thoughts (as being voyded of preiudice) may perhaps en∣tertaine it vvith a more indif∣ferent, and impartiall Cen∣sure. If you heere demand, hovv can this great Attempt
 of mine be performed, (for great in your Iudgements, it must yet needs be thought) in shevving, that Protestancy is in its ovvne Nature, a Non-Entity, & that, its All, is No∣thing, as not hauing any rea∣lity of Being to support it to this I ansvvere, (omitting other reasons heerafter insi∣sted vpon) that since Prote∣stancy consisteth only in the denyalls and Priuations of Af∣firmatiue points of our Chri∣stian, and Romane Fayth; (vvhich denyalls and Priuati∣ons in their ovvne nature are Irreall, as heerafter vvill be euicted) that therefore it is vvholy disuested of all true
 Subsistence, or Being. For vvho obserueth not, that Protestan∣cy is a Religion, resting more in denyalls of Truths, then in defence of Positiue, and formall Errours? The veyle vnder vvhich Protestācy mas∣ked it selfe vvhen it first en∣tred vpon the stage, vvas the outvvard apparence of a gra∣tefull Reformation; vvhich vvord of Reformation, is by them vsed, as in opposition to a precedent Corruption; from vvhich the Protestants pro∣fesse to rescue and deliuer the Church of God. Which Cor∣ruption (they say) vvas first brought in by the Bishop of Rome,Sy∣mon de Voron in his dis∣course v∣pon the Catalo∣gue of Doctours. Epist. to the Rea∣der. VVho ouervvhelmed
 the vvhole vvorld in the dreggs of Antichristian filthynes, abo∣minable Superstitions, & Tra∣ditions &c. Thus did the first Protestants thinke good, to cloath their naked Religion in the fayre attire of a presu∣med Reformation; vvhich Re∣formation consisteth onely in an vtter subuerting, and de∣stroying of most of our Affir∣matiue Catholike Articles of fayth; and in lieu of them in introducing the Negatiues: so as by this proceeding the Pro∣testants may be said (to speake allusiuely) to trench ouer, neere vpon Gods Omnipotēcy, in attempting to exercise the tvvo Acts of Creation & Anni∣hilation,
 peculiar to his diuine Maiesty: for their ovvne Pro∣testant faith (as grounded on∣ly vpon Negatiues, and Pri∣uations) they haue dravvne out of an Abysse, and Infor∣mity of Nothing: and our Po∣sitiue and Affirmatiue Catho∣like fayth they labour (vvhat they can) by such their moli∣tions, to reduce to Nothing. And although the Protestants doe endeauour to enamell & guilde ouer their Negatiue fayth, vvith many detorted & misapplyed Texts of Sacred Writ, by the help of the Pri∣uate reuealing Spirit (their Oe∣dipus,) that so it may appeare glorious in an erring eye: ne∣uertheles
 certaine it is, that after such testimonies are tru∣ly ballanced and vveighed by the Authority of the vvhole Church of God; all such fa∣ding splendour of Protestan∣cy doth but resemble the light of a Glovv-vvorme, vvhich, the neerer one comes to it, the lesser it appeares, til in the end it vvholy vanisheth a∣vvay. But seeing, a short Pre∣face best sorteth to a short discourse, I vvill heer stay my Penn; remitting the learned Reader to the diligent & im∣partiall perusall of these ensu∣ing Leaues; & assuring him, that it impugneth the light of Reason (since God and No∣thing
 are incompatible) that he, vvhome the Philosophers for his greater Perfection of Essence, style, Ens Entium, should be truly honoured vvith a Religion, vvhich is, a Non-Ens.

