


TO give your Lordship a testi∣mony of my readinesse to obey you, I no sooner was com∣manded by you to translate this Poem than I went about it. And certainly your com∣mands gave life to the worke, which else despaire of performance, or the con∣deration to whom it must be presented, would ave stifled in its first birth. For how could I ope any thing from mine owne sufficiencie, eing little exercised in the French tongue, and

finding such a contumacy in their phrase to our manner of speaking; or how should I not feare such a Judge as your Lordship, who are not onley a perfect understander, but an exact speaker of both languages. So that what w with much labour compasse, is your daily exer∣cise. For if that which Augustus attributed to Vinicius, that he had Solus ingenium in numerato, can snit with any man, it does with your Lordship, whose wit we have so often seene ready told out, and fit for any emanation: and with which you have justly purchased every mans wonder and astonishment. It was there∣fore aptly and truly said by a noble man of your owne ranke and order, that when you spoke in any businesse you imposed oblivion on what was said before you, and silence on any man that should speake after you. It behooves me then (since I must feare your judgement) to flie to that sweetnesse of your disposition (the temper of your vertues) with which you use to receive the offers that come from a gratefull heart. Un lesse I should presume to thinke that your Lord ship cannot without delight survey the person of D. Roderigo in this play, with whom you life has held some proportion, for like him yo have ever preferr'd your honour to your affe¦ctions, and your King and Countrey to an thing besides: which you did not so much, be∣cause

the place you are in requires it, but out of an in-bred affection delivered to you from your Ancestors, who with their happy counsailes have no lesse confirm'd this kingdome than D. Diego is here said by his armes to have sup∣ported Castile. In fine, my Lord, I hope you will looke with more content upon this Peece, when you shall reade there some places of my Lords your sonnes translation, from whose at∣tendance, if I have borrowed this time, I must account it upon your Lordships setvice, from whom I have received all I have, which is the glory to be esteemed,
My Lord, 
