



SIr, I had rather you misliked my labour, than mis∣trusted my good will. And there∣fore being often pressed with your desires, I haue heere brieflie collected the rules of horsse∣manship, according to Claudio Corte in his second booke.
I haue not Englished the author at large, nor medled with his manifold digressions; neither haue I spoken of all things con∣teined in the said second booke: but onelie those that concerne the making of horsses for seruice. I haue also left that part vn∣touched,

which intreateth of bitting the horsses, bicause the same hath beene long since verie substantiallie handled by Mai∣ster Blundeuile.
And surelie, albeit in this hir Maie∣sties most prosperous and peaceable reigne, the Gentlemen of this land haue studied to make horsses more for pleasure than seruice: yet who so shall truelie consider to what end horssemanship tendeth, must needs knowe, that the principall vse of horsses is, to tra∣uell by the waie, & serue in the war: what∣soeuer your horsse learneth more, is rather for pompe or pleasure, than honor or vse. Yet doo I thinke it allowable and therewith commendable, that some horsses (cheeflie of Princes & great personages hauing store) should be instructed in those singularities, and exquisite motions for pleasure, as well to delight the lookers on, and make proofe of

the riders excellencie; as also thereby to shew the capacitie of the beasts.
By these few words you can conceiue the substance of my labour, which I haue taken in hand rather to content you, than acquit my selfe with commendation. For although some men suppose it an easie thing, to reduce the conceipt of anie author into an other language; yet am I assured it behooueth him not onelie to haue an exact vnderstand∣ing in that toong, wherein the author wri∣teth, but also apt words, and fit phrases in his owne, to expresse the same. Which is al∣so the more hard, if the matter be demon∣stratiue and artificiall (as this is) conteining diuers particular termes in our English not to be expressed.
It seemeth therfore, that whosoeuer shall, either by waie of translation or abbreuiati∣on, set downe the conceipt of this author, it

behooueth him to be fullie informed of his meaning, and well exercised in the Art of Riding: in both which I must confesse ei∣ther absolute ignorance, or simple know∣ledge. In respect whereof, I praie you re∣presse this booke when you haue perused it, or else preserue it at your owne perill. From the Court at Greenewich, this 18. of Maie. 1584.

