



AS THE BENEFITS OF GOD to this Nation (Right Reuerend) are mo then many, so aboue al are we bound to praye and prayse greatly the Lorde Omnipotent, by whose mightie hande, Satan is from vs bani∣shed in his olde Popishe pride, his chiefe In∣strument the Romishe Antichrist so fully slayne, by the daily breath of Gods holy worde, that neuer is he lyke in such sort with vs to be reuiued. The prouidence of God hath apoin∣ted this to be the time of our Christian translation,Colo. 2.13 and hir Maiestie (oure gracious Soueraigne Elizabeth) his Noble Nourse, to his English Church, taking from vs in one hower, both Pope, Cardinall, and persecuting Prince. And hath from the gates of death drawne her, and nowe set her chiefe among the princes of the earth: For the losse of her Graces Syster some Papistes doe sore lamente: but for the gaine by hir Maiestie now, both one and other may reioyce. For a∣gaine is verifyed the olde prophesie of Dauid:Psal. 68.11 God gaue the worde, and great was the company of the Preachers. Kings of the Armies did flee, they did flee, and shee that remayned in the house deuyded the spoyle. Though yee haue lyen a∣mong the Pots, yet shall ye be as the wings of a Doue, that is couered with Syluer, and whose feathers are as yellow Golde. For God hath giuen sufficient matter to hir, and to all other, to tell of our delyuerie from the innumerable Hostes of Po∣pishe Locustes, which in the pestilent dayes of late Popery,
 pinched vs in hir Noble Grace, and her Grace to the terror of vs. But are not these Armies and their Kings fled? they are by the mightie hande of our Christ scattred, banished and deade, that sought the desolation of our Englishe Israell, and our most godly Hester hath obteyned in mercy, hir selfe and christian subiects,Esther. 3.4.5.6 7.8 9.13.14.15.16. these presente Halcions dayes. From God by hir hande we enioy this most pleasaunt seedes tyme of the Gospell, nowe well neare full twentie three yeares. By her Maiesties faythful care in bounden duetye, oure decayed Ierusalem is mightily repayred: yea, though Sanballat and Tobiah spyte it,Nehe. 4. and seeke to hynder it, yet Noble Nehemias goeth on with all. GOD graunt vs hir louing subiects to ioyne with the Iewes in this, namely eche man in his calling to buylde to his power, in the house of the Lorde: that wee may be the Mansions of the holye Ghost, and to haue oure weapons ready in hande, and earnest hartes in true loyaltie to hir Maiestie,1. Cor. 3.16. &c. 6.19. to fyght against his and hir enimies, for her, and then our defence, wheresoeuer they shal assault vs. And let vs not be afrayde of our Popishe aduersaries, which is to them (sayth saint Paule) a token of perdition, and to you of saluation,Phil. 1.28. and that of God. Would God in these buyl∣ding dayes, we had not in authoritie in sundrye Shyres: yea, in the harte of this Realme, spyghting Sanballat, and me∣nacing Tobiah. But as the Gospell by suche, receyueth some hinderance: so I truste in the Lorde, that were they better knowne to Nehemias. As for her earnest zeale to his truth, shee cannot (by their surmised traynes and fayned fayth to her godlye growth in Christ) bee stayde from hys labours in hir heroycall harte, fyrmely planted to increase. So through her kingly power, shee woulde not admyt such the seates of Iustice for peace, which are sonnes of Warre to Gods Church, but contrary with God her Lorde, thruste these myghty from the bench to the Barre, and by Dauids example cut of the wicked,Psal. 101. or at least weede them out of
 the Citie of the Lorde. Yea, euen as manye as haue euill wyll at Syon, and that my diligence wyth others my Brethren may appeare,Mala. 27. at whose mouths people should aske and haue knowledge, and that also some at least hereby myght be pro∣fited, I haue to my possibilitie set Plough on gate, and furro∣wed this lande, that after followeth, as appeareth. And albeit many other could haue farre passed this my tyllage, yet per∣ceyuing the clowdes to houer towardes Haruest (God for Christes sake pardon our synnes, and preserue Elizabeth our christian Queene) and this fertyle ground so long to lye fal∣lowe, I after some vewe of my seedes, whether they woulde abyde weather, and well agree with the lande, sanctified my Plough with christian and earnest prayer, and haue layde o∣pen my labours, to the skilfull suruey of godly husbandmen. And doubt not that good fruite, and much encrease shall be fall to the Reapers. Which labour ended, I deemed best to shrowde my trauayling Plough, vnder your Lordships lear∣ned Shelter, assured that whatsoeuer frowning weather then shal assayle it, as nipping frost, carping cold, Romish rayne, hatefull stormye hayle, or other wynters wynde so euer can come, well hapt should my poore Plough be against al these, and where neede is at all oportunitie, the same in right to be defended. Another cause why I presume my symple Pen, to your learned L. is to offer hereby a token of my good wyll, and duety to your good L. and that from your olde Country man receyuing this little, by it your godly disposition maye be againe as it were desyred, to stretch your former hande, to helpe Gods house in Lecester shyre, but specially in Nor∣thampton shyre, where (God it knoweth) neede is both of sowing and weeding, I speake of experience. And if this my bold enterprise, your L. wil vouchsafe fauorably to accept: & if by your great skyl in Gods husbandry thought fyt for the lower sort (for whose sake chiefly I haue done it) you wil pub∣lishe the same, and alowe it for sounde, I shal account my selfe more and more bounde, and endeuour my hande to
 such godly further labours, as his holye wyll hath determi∣ned. The Lorde for euer blesse you wyth this olde Father Symeon, whose wordes followe, and giue you wyth Gods whole Church, his and our common consolation Christ our Lorde, that he may be yours, and you for euer his. Amen. From Medborne in Lecestershire, this 12. of December. 1580.

