



WHen I remēbred what great sin it is to be vn¦gratefull, I was angry with my selfe, to thinke (what a wretch I am) that haue had neither grace, abilitie, power, nor oportunitie, to shewe some duetifull token of thankefulnesse vnto you mine speciall faithfull friendes. These are therefore most humbly and hartily to craue parn of you, for this mine obliuiou  grosse ing ¦nesse, hauing found and felt both of you, right good and bountifull vnto me your dayly Orator: but being perswaded, that a faithfull liberall man is alwayes pos∣essed with charitie, & such neuer thin∣th any euill, and also with the mo¦b,
 royall shining pearle and preti∣ one liberalitie: which euer ouer∣ neth and disgraceth pride and pro∣digalitie, neuer expecteth either glori∣ous praise or recompence, for he is no∣hing kinne to the riche miserly coue∣tous carle Naball. And because you shal ot thinke that I am sufficed with the dayly remembrance of you in my pray∣ers: I haue presumed to dedicate vnto you this my rude vnlearned labour. Yet hoping very profitable both for parentes and children, masters and seruauntes, dayly to acquaint thē in the principles of the Christiā faith, & also from proph¦ning of the Lords day: And also keepe them in true feare and obedience, with∣out the which it is impossible to please God, for miserable and most vnhappie s the houshold or family, when the ma∣ster and parents are not able to teache heir children and seruants: to resolue them in the principles of the Christian aith. For such (sayeth the holy Ghost)  the mouth of the Prophet Dauid, ar
 no better then horse and Mule. And the holy Apostle S. Paul also affirmet them to be worse then Infidels, for the Infidels will prouide carefully for car∣nall prouision for their owne housholdes and families. So that those Christians that careth not to be furnished with spirituall foode, for their children and families are worse then the Infidels, and such loueth their beastes as well as they doo their children and families, for they will carefully prouide for their pampering to doo their businesse. Yea such Atheistes and Epicures there are too too many in these dayes, yea belly Gods, whose kitchin is their Church & belly their God, and glory end with shame and confusion, but God conuert them if it be his will, for such doo neuer any good to a poore Christian, except it be either for his glory, pleasure or pro∣fite, or else to win credite among Chri∣stians, for their faith and charitie is soone cold and frosen. Such the Prea∣chers terme winter Protestants, for in
 the sommer the pleasures of this worlde and the loue of the same, carrieth them farre from flocking to the Lectures, as they doo in the winter to saue their fire and candle, or else to keepe their cre∣dite. But the almightie that made the heart of man, sitteth and seeth their hi∣pocrisie, and will iudge if they repent not, vnto whom I commend both you and all yours this 20. of Iune 1585. beseeching the same almightie to in∣crease your faith health and pro∣speritie vnto euerlasting felicitie. Amen.

