



THe multiplicity of my duteous affecti∣ons towards your Lordship confounds my conceipt how to honour you in good sort, still dispurposing my wil of all especiall intended seruices, to make mee serue you as it were at randome. Wherfore, I haue now at last condis∣cended to the generalty, and doe here present your Lord∣ship these Wittes, Fittes, and Fancies, a large and vniuersall matter, which were they not fronted and suffused with an honest blush of Honour and Wisdome (your owne proper Cullours) I would not haue aduentured in so high a place: And if besides therin be any absurditie escaped, vnanswera∣ble to so great worth and Noblenesse as is in your L. I hope the generaltie of the matter, ioint that the Author is a stran∣ger, will, if not priuiledge such amisse, yet at least wise holde it excused in your fauour. It seemeth the Spaniard for his part (for so he was) did not baselie conceipt this matter, that did dare direct it to so high a State as Don Iohn of Austria, his Lieges brother. But how ere it were blameworthy or inno∣cence

in him I recke not, neither yet force I howe Don Iohn conceipted it, so your Lordship daigne it in gree. I did in∣tende it to your late sea-voyage, to the ende it might haue pleased you to passe away therwith some vnpleasant houres. But as it was not ripe ynough for that season, so now I pray God it come in due season to your good liking. Diuers of them are of mine own inserting, & that without any iniury I hope to my Authour: the which are easily to be discerned from his, for that they taste more Englishlie: Neither haue I vsed his Methode therein, but haue set downe one of mine owne, which I take to be better: Which both methode and matter, if I shall once perceiue your L. to daigne it in your fauour, I will not feare that any Gentleman will ea∣silie disgrace it, to whome next vnder your Lordship, I wish it currant and well accepted: For such (I knowe) is generally their deuotions to your woorth, that whatsoeuer matter, (all were it guilt it selfe) that is once refuged to your Vertues shrine and Sanctuarie, they will not rashlie rauish it to arraignment, and publike shame.
As for my Loues Owle in the latter ende, the trueth is, I can pretend it no outlandish priuiledge to your Honours fauour, and therefore doe rather leaue it to your pardon then good liking, as a follie of an idle vaine: Vpon which your said pardon of the one, and good liking of the other presuming; I will endeuour according to my euer vowed and bounden dutie to your L. to serue you (God willing) in some better worth hereafter. Hoping that what I haue heer done, may at least wise serue to put better wittes in minde to honour your Noblenesse aswell with their peacefull pens as others doe with their sea-paines.

