


RIGHT Worshipfull, to whom I am in ma∣ny respects beholden, it is nowe full three yeeres agoe, since by Gods prouidence and (as I beleeue) calling, and by your voi∣ces together, with the cōfirmation of the right Reuerend father in God, the Lord Edwine Sandes Bishop of Lon∣don, I was chosen to execute the office of reading the Diuinitie Lecture in your companies. In whiche time how great curtesie I haue receyued at your handes, it is not needefull to rehearse heere, for asmuche as the ende of your weldooing, is not to seeke perishing glory among men by the sounde of a Trumpet, but too haue it appeare be∣fore
 the eyes of Gods maiestie, by whose inspiration and grace they bee done, there to bee adorned with their due prayse and revvarde. Therefore leauing the setting foorth of youre friendlinesse tovvards mee, I vvill saye somevvhat of my dutie tovvards you, & of the office of teaching, in the exe∣cuting whereof the Apostle Paule wil∣leth his deare beloued Timothie too obserue these poynts.2. Tim. 2. and. 15. Indeuer (sayth he) to yeelde thy selfe a tryed vvorke∣man vnto God, such a one as needeth not too bee ashamed, and as deuideth the worde of truthe rightly. The Apo∣stle requireth heere (as I thinke) three thinges both in his shepheard whom he fashioneth, and in all the dealers foorth of the heauenly doctrine. The first is, that they strayne themselues to the vttermost, to yeeld thēselues tried workmen vnto God, euē in the maner of their teaching, in no wise coueting the perishing prayse of men, & muche lesse standing ouer fearfully in awe of the iudgemēts of ambitious teachers. Another is, that they sticke lustely to
 the work that is inioyned them, in no wise being ashamed of Christes Gos∣pell, but gladly and cherefully imbra∣cing the miseries that are laide vpon them, and the crosse which is wont to be the vnseparable companion of all Christes disciples, and specially of such as are called too the building vp of Gods church, and labour stoutly ther∣in. The third is, that they deuide the worde of truth rightly: that is to say, that as nere as is possible, they adui∣sedly set foorth & obserue a true Me∣thod or order of teaching, taken out of the holy writers, and fashioned like to the patterne and practise of the ser∣mōs of the Prophets. As touching the first point, Paul warneth Timothy, that he which hath the charge to instruct mē in the faith, must haue his eyes cast vpō god, & not couet to vaūt himselfe to the worldwarde. For witty men are wont to hunt more for the prayse of the people, thā for the edifying of the Churche. Therefore the effectuallest remedie of that leawdnesse, is to yelde profe of our selues, and of our seruice
 vnto God, with whome if wee thinke our selues to haue to doo, all desire of perking vp will bee gone, and we will bee muche more carefull to become faythfull stewards of Gods truth, than ydle disputers of it. Setting this war∣ning of the Apostles before mine eyes, I haue purposely (as neere as I coulde) absteyned from all contentious que∣stions and alterations, which are wont to haue more curiositie than profite. Agayne I considered howe yee haue very famous Vniuersities, full of excel∣lent lerned men, in which I know that if any poynt of Christian doctrine re∣quire more diligent opening, it is wont to be inlightned & made plaine by publike disputations: and there∣fore, to knit many and harde knottes, and to vnknitte them agayne, and to deuise curious questions, in the decy∣ding whereof there may appeare more worldly slight than heauenly light, in open assembly, where persons igno∣rante of holy matters, are oftentimes wont to intermingle themselues with the learned, I thought it was no discre∣tion
 at all. Neuerthelesse, leauing eue∣ry man free to his owne iudgement, I will make haste to the considering of the Apostles seconde precept. For he willeth vs to be workmen in buylding of the Churche, and to bestow our tra∣uell in suche sort, as the fruites of god∣linesse which our hearers shall bring foorth, may beare recorde of our dili∣gence in husbanding the Lordes vine∣yarde. And wheras he sayth that Gods seruaunts and workemen muste not in any wise be ashamed: it conteyneth a notable lesson, of the bearing of the Crosse, which is wont to accompanie Gods faythfull ministers. For it is not inough for them to apply their inioy∣ned charge day and night: but they must also with an vndiscouraged mind abide the hissings, raylings, & wrong-dealings of suche as passe by, yea and sometymes also the backbytings of those whose vineyarde they seeke to doo good vnto. The mynding of this precept hath brought agayne too my remembraunce, what a number of troubles and incombraunces I haue
 borne out, since the time that the lord called mee to the charge of teaching in his Churche. But to say the turthe playnly as it is, they for whose sakes I haue taken payne these full ten yeres, do more comber me with their priuie maner of dealings, than other that are at open defiaunce agaynst Gods ser∣uaunts and workmen. Wherefore lea∣uing the miseries & sorowes of mind, wherewith men of my calling are wont to be vexed, I will speake heere, but onely of those incumberaunces which haue made my crosse the gree∣uouser, added vndoubtedly and layde vpon me by their meanes, who (if I be not deceyued) ought rather too haue beene Iosephs of Aramathia, in hel∣ping mee to beare the burthen of my crosse, than to haue made it heauyer, I will not say importable by their at∣tempts. But to the matter. Although not with suche diligence as I ought to doo (for I am a man, and therefore thinke not my selfe priuiledged from any frayltie of man) yet too the vt∣termoste of my power I haue (too
 vse Paules manner of speeche) inde∣uered to make my selfe alowable be∣fore God, in discharging my dutie a∣mong you most deere Readers. In the meane while none of both the crosses, neither inwarde nor outwarde hathe wanted. Inwardly the changing of my function did long trouble my minde. And outwardly the misreportes that were spred abrode of me and my doc∣trine, did greeue me more than can be vttered. Of mine inwarde griefe, this was not the least part (for thereat will I beginne) that whereas from my very youth, all my studies haue amed at this marke, namely to incourage and exhort my owne Countreymen to the exercises of godlynesse, (For of all that ten yeeres space whiche I taught in Fraunce in the Frenche tung, mee thought I vvrought in another mans haruest, and therefore vvoulde ne∣uer bynde my selfe too any Churche there, but executed my charge al∣vvayes vvyth condition, tyll opor∣tunitie vvere oflered too doe ser∣uice too myne ovvne Countreymen)
 surely I could not but be greeued and sorie at the harte, in so sodaine chaun∣ging of my function. For I beseeche you, if we haue an eye but to humayne affections, what could happen more acceptable to me, after so many wind∣lasses, wandrings, and paynes susteined in the vprores of Fraunce and Flaun∣ders: than to haue found in Englande, not only a most safe and welremoued hauen from those streames, but also the readie occasion whiche I had vvi∣shed many yeeres afore, namely of ga∣thering a Church of mine owne coun∣treymen in some place, where I might both learne the pure doctrine of the Gospell by teaching it, and teach it in learning it? By the goodnesse of the Diuine Maiestie I obteyned the thing which I had long time, and with moste earnest prayer sought, and at London I gathered together my Countreymen that had forsakē the Realme of Spaine for the Gospels sake: and I began to teache the doctrine of the holy Scrip∣tures opēly, not without great anguish and nipping griefe of minde to the
 enuious sorte, but to the exceeding great ioy of the godly, and to suche as mind Christes glory rather than their owne commodities and estimation. This pleasure of minde and wished quietnesse, I could inioy no longer thā two yeeres. In which space, how much comfort, how much heauenly delight, and how great increase of doctrine I receyued, liuing right poorely in this Citie among my moste poore Coun∣treymen: none knowe but he who of his mercy bestowed those benefites vpon me, & I that had the experience of his goodnes. But ô the craftie con∣ueiance of the olde Serpent. There wanted not enuiers of this my happie state. What needeth many wordes? Satan vsing his wonted slightes, dyd both dissolue and put to wrecke the sayde congregation of outcaste Spa∣nyards, which had forsaken their owne Countrey for religions sake, and con∣ueyed themselues into forreine Real∣mes: and vtterly bereeue me of the quietnesse which I had scarse tasted of with the vttermost part of my lippes.
 Verily it stood mee in hand in this ca∣lamitie, to bethinke me ageine of the Apostles precept, & to beare this most cruel spight with a quyet mind: which thinge by the benefite of Gods grace I haue (to my ioy) performed so farre as mannes frayltie avoorded, verely vppon assurance of mine owne inno∣cencie, For as the Poet saieth.
In this behalfe becomme a brasen wall.
And nother feare, ne blush what euer fall.
Furthermore I could here iustly com∣plaine of the furtherers of this deede, and of the seconde causes as they terme them. But I thinke it better and more discretion, too passe ouer mennes vntowarde attemptes in thys behalfe with forgetfulnesse, and too mount vp too the prouidence of the diuine maiestie, and too beleeue that this ruine of the Spanish Church was made by his will, and that the same shall peraduenture fall out too grea∣ter profit both of mee, and my coun∣treimen than mans wisedome can es∣pie. Vndowtedly for mine owne part, I perceiue my selfe to haue reaped no
 meane fruits by this change, whereof I see it is not the least, that I haue try∣ed the intentes of them which with their mouthes doo continually pre∣tende the spreadinge abrode of Gods glory, when as by their attemptes and false accusations (I will not saye de∣ceytes) they goo about too hinder it. But of this matter, I shal peraduenture speake more at large heareafter. My specifying of these things at this time is partly too the intent that my coun∣trimen which are absent may knowe it was not long of mee, that the Spa∣nish Church, which was erected at Lō∣don, continewed not vnto this day, & partly bycause I would that this pub∣like writing of myne should beare re∣cord both of myne innocencie, & al∣so of the Gospell amonge myne owne countrimē. In the meane season, I be∣seche God that those men, which (too speake no rowghlier of thē) haue with their wyles presumed too cast downe that building, bace in deede too flesh∣ly eyes, as which is made (to outwarde
 apparance) of refuse stones, but moste acceptable and beautifull in Gods sight, may amende. Out of this foun∣tayne sprang also one other Crosse more, which was very greeuous to me: namely the alteratiō of the Language in teaching, which notwithstanding I bare vvith a metely indifferent mind, hovvbeit (to confesse the truthe) a∣gaynst my nature. Howe that came to passe I will tell you in fevve vvords. I am not so forgetfull of my bringing vp, as to be ignorant hovv vnable my shoulders are too beare the burthen that I haue vndertaken among you: neither am I ashamed to confesse how little I haue profited, bothe in the knowledge of humaine artes, & chiefly in the exercise of the stile, and in get∣ting the eloquence of the Latin tung: neither surely vvill I fall oute vvith them that shall call mee an olde Tre∣wand. For the Lorde knovveth hovve that I acknovvledge mine ovvne dul∣nesse and lacke of cunning, insomuch that I chalenge none other skill too me, than the knovvledge of mine own
 vnskilfulnesse. And too bee at fevve vvords, no large furniture of the Ro∣mane tung, no readings of many Au∣thors layde vp in store, no excellent knovvledge of Gods secretes, hathe made mee to yeelde to your election. For it vvas ynough, and more than y∣nough knovven to my selfe, how farre the abilitie of my vvit vvas vnmeet, for the charge that I tooke in hande specially in a Realme so plentuously replenished vvith excellent learned men. But vvhat shoulde I doo? Whi∣ther should I turne mee? You on the one side called me: and I on the other side vvished some fit meanes too ridde avvay the misreportes that were spred abrode of mee (euen by such as ought least to haue done it) and to vvipe a∣vvay the spottes of infamie that vvere sprinkled vpon mee. Therefore being vvelneere ouervvhelmed vvith slaun∣ders, I determined both to obey your vvill, and to satisfie mine ovvne desire, and I chose rather to shevv hovv little I haue profited by pouring out rude and vnfiled speeche in your company,
 thā to suffer those suspiciōs of vnpure and erronious doctrine, which myne aduersaries had blazed abrode of mee both openly and priuily, to take dee∣per roote by my silence and ceassinge from my function in the churche. At one woord, necessitie constrained me to followe your request. In goinge through wherwith, the shifting of the language was not the least part of my greefe. For whereas in the Spanishe tung I coulde after a sort expresse the meaninge of my minde: in the Latin tunge I am often tymes compelled too sticke, too stamer, and too bewray myne owne childishnesse. Howbeit, forasmuch as mine vnpolished speach is not vnacceptable vnto you, which doo rather wey the matter that is spo∣ken, than with how vvell fyled termes it is vttered: I am nother vvearie nor ashamed of the charge that I haue ta∣ken in hande. Nay rather I doo often thinke & bethinke mee of this saying of S. Austins, that happie is that neces∣sity vvhich driueth a mā to the better thinges. For this I may plainely con∣fesse,
 that of these manye yeares I ne∣uer led a meryer or happier lyfe, nor continued in my studies vvith more cheerfulnesse, and peraduenture frute also, thā since I began to execute the office of a teacher in your companye. And vvould God that mine olde ad∣uersaries dyd not ageine enuy this my happy state, and prepare nevv snares too incumber this my quyetnesse: of vvhose vntovvard dealing ageinst me I could heere say ouermuch: and truly the order of my promised partition, requireth that I shoulde recken vp here the false reports that are spred a∣brode of mee, and disperse them by shevving the truth: but it is better to passe them ouer vvith silence, than to speake to little of so wrongfull and long a matter. I wish no more but on∣ly this, that those men will gyue mee but so lōg truce, as to passe out of this life with a quiet & pesable mind. And when I am dead let thē gnaw euen the stones of my graue if they list. But if the thing I wish cānot hapē to me (as it befalleth not to mortal wretches to
 haue any thing happie in all poyntes) I vvill vvillingly in the meane vvhile both heare & imbrace the crosse that God hath prepared for me, and layde vpon me. And if the weight of it ouer∣lode my shoulders, I will rather call some Cyrenian too mee too beare the one halfe of the burthen vppon his shoulders with me, than cast it quite a∣way. But what Cyrenian shall I finde more friendly, or willing to ease mee of my burthen, than him that with his moste sweete wordes allureth all men to him,Math. 11. saying: Come vnto mee all yee that faynt and are ouerloden, and I will refreshe you. Therefore I beseeche Iesus Christ the only begot∣ten sonne of the liuing God, & sauiour of mankinde, to helpe me in bearing of my crosse, and so to holde & beare vp with his most mightie handes, the burthen of it, which doubtlesse is too me intolerable, as I may paciently & willingly beare it with him: and that he suffer not my harte to bee tickled with desire of reuenge, agaynst suche as stayne mee, defame mee, persecute
 me, & trouble me. The heauenly do∣ctrine commaundeth vs to loue our enemies, and not to pay them like for like by rayling vpon them, but rather to doo good to them that hate vs, and to wish well to them for the wronges that we haue receyued at their hands. Therefore folowing this rule, I besech almighty God the father of our Lord Iesus Christ, to gyue my backebiters the spirit of amendment, and a better minde towards me, that by seeking to deface me, they hinder not the course of the gospell, specially among myne owne countrymen, which may heere some vncerteyn reportes but not the reasons lykewise. God graunt at this my prayer & request, that the mindes of my persecuters maye one day bee bowed & turned. For, to speake with a good conscience what I thinke in my hart, I had rather contende with these men in the dutyes of charity, than by slaunderous Epistles, byting bookes, spitefull wrytings, raylings, tauntes, & such other (as I suppose) most vnseme∣ly weapons, which euē christian soul∣diers
 ought to abhorre, & much lesse can in any wise become the preachers of the Gospell. Therefore as long as I can, I will warde their iniuries with prayers, and vse modest defences, least I take harme in the meane vvhyle by holding my peace. But if I see them proceede in their vntovvard maner of dealing, I vvill not say maliciousnesse and rancour of minde: I will perad∣uenture desire the Lorde to helpe me with fitte and liuely colours, wherwith to peint out the image of slanderous∣nesse, as Apelles did, that I may disco∣uer their spitefull lyes, wherwith they go about to oppresse mine innocency. But heereof inough. Now I returne to the text of the Apostle. Paules thirde precept is, that the dealers foorth of the holy doctrine shoulde deuide the worde, of truthe aright. In the Greeke worde Orthotomein (for that vvorde ansvvereth to two Latin words) as I thinke there lieth hidde a most excel∣lent allusion to the Ceremonie of sa∣crifising in the olde Lavve. For as Mosesis Priest ought to haue a moste
 exact skill both hovve to cutte out the crifice, and hovve to deale it foorth: (nd the sleying & distributing of the crifice, did out of all doubte repre∣nt Gods onely begotten sonne, vvho became the sacrifice of propitiation or vs, to take away the sinnes of the worlde) so also the priest of the Gos∣pell muste bee skilfull and taught of God, that he may be able to cutte or deuide the worde of truthe, & knovve hovve to deale it foorth discretly and fitly. Setting this precept before mine yes, from the time that the Lord cal∣led me to this Ecclesiasticall function, I haue indeuered not onely to dely∣uer to my hearers a pure and sounde doctrine dravven out of the fountay∣nes of the holy Scriptures: but also to obserue that way and trade of tea∣ching which the holy writers were wōt to vse in their sermōs. For I am of opi∣nion, that an vntoward and disordred trade of teaching doth in manner no lesse harme to the hearers, thā the vn∣purenesse of doctrine, It is an old Pro∣erb, A good thing is euil if it be done
 out of season. For lyke as a Phisition maye minister good and wholesome medicines too his patient, and yet ve∣ry farre ouershot himself in this, that he neither considereth well the com∣plexion of the party diseased, nor ob∣serueth the fit oportunity of tyme: so also it falleth out often tymes in the dealing forth of the heauēly doctrine, that some man beinge touched with vnaduised zeale, steppeth forth vncal∣led of God, and thrusteth out the true things which he hath gleaned vp here and there out of other mens booke or sermons, without hauing any re∣spect of the persons of his heerers, or withoute any considering of the cir∣cumstāces of the time. But to mount vp yet higher, and to say plainly what I thinke. This moste excellent part of the holy ministration, that is too wit, this skill of diuiding & dealing forth, which sothly is the diuine logike that openeth the trade of teachinge the gospell, hath his originall of Gods cal∣ling. For euen he that maketh men fit ministers of the new Testament, that is
 to wit, not of the letter but of the spi∣rit, euen he himselfe (I say) gyueth the spirit of discretion to the dealer forth of his heauenly word, to know how to gyue measurable meale in due tyme, and also to haue wit to bring foorth both new thinges and old out of his storehowse, as a skilfull scribe in the kingdome of heauen. The not know∣inge, (I will not say despising) of this heauenly & diuine calling, is the cause that the world at this day hath, and in all ages hath had innumerable mini∣sters of the word, innumerable worke∣men, and innumerable (I say in their owne opinion) builders and master-builders, who peraduenture in Gods iudgement (by whom they were not sent, and yet they ronne) are but dirt∣dawbers (or to say more rightly) pul∣lers downe, ouerthrowers, & destroy∣ers. Howbeit, forasmuch as the know∣ledge, or if I may so terme it, the cer∣teintie of his calling, dependeth vpon the vvitnesse of the spirit in euery mās ovvne conscience: I vvill leaue the iudgment therof vnto god. It is more
 for our behoofe to knowe, and adui∣sedly to consider, what maner of dea∣ling foorth God teacheth his Pro∣phets, that we treading in their foote∣steppes, may on eyther side doo our duetie, the teacher in deuiding the worde of truth rightly, and the hea∣rer in partaking the apt and true de∣uiding of Gods word, rather than any of them both to disgrace them selues with curious and straunge sifting out of things for a brauerie of their wit. And for examples sake, let vs consider the calling of Ieremie, whome when God chose to take the roome of a tea∣cher in the Churche of Ierusalem, he instituted him with these words: See (sayth he) I set thee this day ouer Na∣tions, and Kingdomes, to plucke vp, and pull downe, to destroy and ouer∣throwe, to builde vp, and to plant, & so foorth. In which saying the euer∣lasting Godhead hath with most apte similitudes, and with a certein pithy contrary matching of words, shewed Ieremie the heauenly Logike, whiche teacheth that the first point of the mi∣nistration of the Gospell, is to rid the
 hearers minds from cōmon & false o∣pinions, that the heuēly doctrine may find mens consciences ready, & plante abundance of true spirituall fruite in thē. To speake more plainly. The lawe must first play his part in vs, before the seede of the Gospell be sowed. Novve vnto the duty of the law pertein those most pithie words of Plucking vp, pulling downe, destroying and ouerthrowing. And vnto the other part of the ministratiō, belong the other words of building vp, and planting. How much maiestie, grace, & vnespied learning, these similitudes borowed of husdandrie & buylding haue, the sermōs of the other prophets shew, but specially the sermō that is in the .xiij. of Ezechiell, which I will not put in heere, bicause I meane to bee short. You Gentlemē (if it please you) may reade it your selues, and wey tho∣roughly what the lord saith against the false prophetes, whiche with their for∣ged promises seduced the Churche dispersed and banished in Babylon for their wickednesse, and foaded them still in their errours, whereas
 they oughte rather to haue set open the vvelspring & fountayne of Gods vengeaunce before the captiue peo∣ples eyes, & to haue exhorted the sin∣ners to repentaunce. For in very deed it behoueth vs first too pull dovvne, ouerthrovv, and vndo the old things, that aftervvarde vvee may reere and build vp the nevv. But those false pro∣phets delt contraryvvise, vvhome the holy Ghost likeneth to euill builders, vvhich eyther for vvant of skill, or for couetousnesse, or being corrupted by some levvde affection, vndertake the botching vp of decaied howses. How∣beit forasmuchas the casting down & digging vp of foūdacions is not voyd of perill, and the laying of new requi∣reth much labour, and the rearing of them vp againe will aske expence of much tyme: those fellowes had leuer (ô builders most vnworthie of Gods worke) those felowes (I say) had leuer too botch vp vnhandsomely the rui∣nous foundacions which they fynde, and too parget them ouer, and so too set on a roofe and other by woorkes
 readie to fall againe within a while af∣ter, that they may seeme to bee buyl∣ders, than to begin their house at the rst foundations, or to speake more ightly, at the very digging vp of the uinous foūdations, as the right order of buylding requireth. But as tou∣ching this matter it is best for you to reade Ezechiell him selfe, that ye may the better perceiue hovv greatly God mysliketh the doings of suche as seke to commende their buylding in the Churche, rather vvith pargetting and botching, than vvith any right order of building. And the holy Ghost she∣weth how vnhappie end wayteth, not only vpon such buyldings, vvhich for all their whitelyming are ruinous still, but also vpon the botchers and vvhit∣lymers them selues. He that hath eares to heare let him heeare. Thus muche concerning the similitude of building and the duetie of builders. Novv let vs returne to Ieremie, and learne of him after vvhat manner our hearers ought to be manered in the knovv∣ledge of the holy doctrine, according
 to the maner of dealing in husbandry. He bespeaketh his Disciples in thi wise. Cut vp your layes (sayth he) an sowe not vpon thornes. Surely a ver fit and needfull order, first to pluck vp breers, and to stub vp thornes, be¦fore we sow our sede, lest we lose bot our labour and our cost, and in steed of corne reape but the straw & chaffe But it is best to heere Ieremie declar his ovvne similitude. Be yee circumc¦sed to the Lord, sayth he, and pluck a way the foreskin of your harts, lest hi fyrie wrath burst foorth, and burn vnquencheably, for the lewdnesse o your nature. The prophet Ozeas bea∣ting vpon the same similitude, techeth the same thing. Sow yee (sayth he) vn∣to righteousnesse, and yee shall reape according to the mesure of your god∣lynesse, breake vp your layes, vvhile it is time to seeke the Lorde, til he come and besprinckle you with righteous∣nesse. As nowe throughe your vnto∣warde maner of dealing yee plow wic∣kednesse, and reape naughtinesse, and therefore yee eate the fruite of lying,
 bicause yee trust to your owne man∣ners, and to the multitude of your owne souldiers. Thus muche concer∣ning the order of the prophets, which the teachers of the newe Testamente haue also hilde, as appeareth playnly by the sermons of Iohn Baptist the Lordes forerunner, who preached re∣pentaunce, and amendment of life, to the forgiuenesse of sinnes. The same way and maner of teaching was kept by the Apostles, who first exhorted men to repentaunce towards God, and then to beleue in Iesus Christ. Be∣ing led by all these examples, righte deere beloued Readers, the first yeere of my ministration in your company, I vndertooke the opening of the Epi∣stle of Paule to the Romanes, whiche in the iudgemente of all the Lear∣ned, conteyneth the summe of oure Christian religion, comprehended in so excellent order, that vvhether yee haue an eye too the truthe, or too the trade of teachinge, there can no faulte at all bee founde in it. For after that it hathe layde the




 foundation of true repentaunce, it teacheth the two chiefe poynts of our religion, namely the doctrine how to beleeue well, and howe to doo vvell. Vnto the which partition may all the writings both of the olde and nevve Testament bee referred. All whiche things (as I suppose) doo ame at this marke, namely of imbracing Gods truth with a true fayth, and of expres∣sing the beleeued truth in holy con∣uersation. And all these thinges both generally and particularly, as men terme it, are taught by the Apostle in this Epistle to the Romaines, the ex∣position whereof you haue heard of me this last yeere. And bicause that in the time of my reading, I haue gathe∣red many things heere and there, out of the Commentaries both of the olde and nevve Expositors, vvhiche haue inlightened this Epistle vvith their vvritings: I intended to set to∣gether this dialog out of that houge heape of my papers, and to offer the same vnto you: and that doo I for tvvo causes. First that the reading of
 this booke may bring the thinges a∣gayne to your remembraunce, which I haue handled more at large in my Readings: and secondly, that there may remayne some publike vvriting among you, as a record both to them that are absent, and to suche as shall come after, of the purenesse of my doc∣trine vvhich I haue taught in your cō∣panie, and how muche I abhorre the opinions of Sectaries, which trouble the Churches nowadayes with their errours. Also you are my witnesses, af∣ter what maner I cōfuted the froward opinions of the Pelagians and selfe iu∣stifiers, in the discourse of Iustificatiō. Yee knovve also with howe great dili∣gence I haue in the discourse of Pre∣destination, or of the calling of the Gentiles, vnfolded and confuted both the madnesse of the Stoikes, and chie∣flye the horrible blasphemies of the Manichies, that by my shewing of these breakneckes, you might keepe your pace in the kings high way with∣out stumbling, and imbrace the Apo∣stles doctrine as the only rule of truth.
 Finally to conclude, I beseeche you of your gentlenesse and curtesie, as to vvhome I thinke my selfe in many respects righte greatly beholden, too accept this my small trauell with lyke minde as it is offered vnto you, and where shall I finde anye thing in this writing that may stirre vp your minds too the loue of godlinesse, thanke al∣mightie god of it, who hath imparted these things vnto me to doe you good withall. And where any thing shall seeme rude and vnpolished, lay that all wholly vpon mee, vvho forasmuch as I am a man, doo vvell knovve my selfe to be ignorant in many things, and not able alwayes to expresse in fit vvordes the thinges that I knovve. Wherefore I beseech you haue respect of mans vveaknesse, and vvhere yee shall mislike anye thing, first admo∣nishe mee friendly of it, before yee conceyue amisse of mee for it. For as I confesse, I may erre, so I protest with good conscience, that I vvill not stand in any errour. Fare yee vvell, And I beseeche almightie God the geuer
 of all good things, to bee with yo, and to further your attemptes, that our studies maye not onely profite he common Wealth to yeelde euery an his righte by the knovvleege of our Lavves: but also be to the vvel∣are of the Churche, that true godli∣nesse, and the pure doctrine of the Gospell may bee furthered by them. Out of my Studie the last day of May. 1574.
