



Honourable Sir;
AMongst the many honourable
motions and worthy intentions
of the present Parliament, you
did great honour to your selues
in hearing the cries of so many
hundred poore prisoners, whose
bloud, and the bloud of their
Children, cries I feare, for iudge∣ment
mercilesse, against those mercilesse Creditors, that
value not the precious life of a man, at the rate of an Oxe
or a Horse: But for farre lesser summes, doe keepe many
able and actiue men in Prison, till they either dye, or be∣come
vnable to serue the Common-wealth. Heauie and
bitter are the lamentations, cries, and complaints, that are
daily brought to vs, the Preachers of this Cittie, by the
poore wiues and Children of those distressed prisoners, of
whom some lie in prison for a blowe giuing, some for a

word speaking, some for a quarters rent, some for a small
remainder of an olde debt, some for a debt paid already,
but the Bond could neuer be got out of the Vsurers hand,
some for a iust debt, but some small matter; some for no
debt of their owne, but onely other mens, and that for
which they would be content to strippe themselues of all
they haue, so they might but enioy their life and liber∣ties.
But what say many of these greedy cormorants, It
shall cost me more then my debt, but I will haue him; I
care not so much for my money, as that I may haue my
will of the villaine: Now I haue him, he shall lye by it, I
will haue his skin, I will make Dice of his bones? Such
vnmercifull and vnmanly words are vttered by these cru∣ell-hearted
men. We brag that wee haue no Gallies, nor
Gally-slaues: If it be a glory to our Nation, then woe to
them that make many a poore man liue so in prison, as
they had rather be a slaue in the Gallies. Wee boast wee
haue no Wolues in England; but if it be a blessing, then
pittie is it wee haue such woluish and wicked natured
men, that like hungry Wolues deuoure their poore neigh∣bours;
They say, that rauenous creature will dare to set vp∣on
a man, if he be alone, and will howle and yell to call
together his fellowes, that they may eate him amongst
them. So, if a decayed Gentleman come within their
clutches, or the honest Marchant (whose estate is lost by
Sea) fall within their danger, forth-with one of them
giues notice to another, like Wolues, one howling for
another, presently they all fall vpon him, and striue who
shall first haue his heart out, like so many Rauens, Vul∣tures,
Kytes, or Cormorants, that eate vp amongst them
and teare in pieces the silly dying horse, which happily a
little before carried the King.
You cannot better commend your selues to the pre∣sent,
and your memories to future ages: you cannot a∣mongst
temporall things more aduance the honour of

the English Parliament, then by taking away one of the
foule staines of this our Nation, euen by taking some wise
and godly order for the releasing of the poore prisoners
of this kinde. It is said by the wise, and I feare it is too true
an obseruation, that all Europe hangs not vp so many
proper men, nor keepes in bondage so many men fit for
imployment, for vniust or small debts, as England doth.
Deepe, and foule, and large, are these staines, they be dyed
in graine, nay alas, in the bloud of many thousands. Oh
happy, and to be honoured for euer, they that haue skill,
and will, and power together, to wipe off these vnworthy
staines from off the face of our State! Some rich ones
haue the skill, but want will, they know well enough how
this might be helped, but for certaine carnall and worldly
respects they would not haue it so. Some good honest
men haue the will to reforme this, but want the skill; they
know not how it may be done. Some learned, wise, and
godly men, haue both skill and will, but being priuate
persons, they want power. You of this high and thrice-Honorably
assembly of the Parliament, being so many
godly men, cannot want will; being so many learned and
wise, cannot want the skill; being the Councell of the
Kingdome, and hauing especially so wise and mercifull a
King to second you, you cannot want power; nay, the high
and Soueraigne power is in your hands. Put to therefore
your powerfull hands, for the furthering and effecting of
this worthy worke of God, and the Common-wealth, for
sauing the liues of some hundreds, and redeeming the li∣berties
of some thousands. How to saue the liues of so
many executed yearely in this Land, and yet to redresse
the euills, I will not enter, nor venter to set downe to them
that know better then my selfe; and now I hope haue
taken that consideration to heart afore this day; at least I
will reserue it for another, and happily a more seasonable
time. That which the present Subiect puts vs principally

in minde of, is the helping of those many poore priso∣ners,
that consume their best yeares in prison, for Debts ei∣ther
of an vngodly nature, or of a trifling quantity; for
such are they onely that here are spoken for, or else such
as being of moment, and iust also, and yet too cruelly
sought for.
I confesse there are an euill generation of such as care
not to get mens goods into their hands, and then take
prison, as a Sanctuary, and can pay well enough, but will
not; and others worse then they, that wilfully breake
when they need not, or take mens monyes or goods, when
they haue a purpose to breake, and consequently a pur∣pose
not to pay: These two sorts of people are plaine
theeues, and many lesser before God goe to Tyburne euery
yeare: Euen with the same breath, I begge mercie for
the former, I craue iustice and reuenge vpon those, as be∣ing
one of the worst kinde of Caterpillers, that eate out
the life of this Citties Common-wealth: Draw the sword
of Iustice against those, and spare not; let them be known
and vsed like great theeues, and robbers, as they are, and
much worse then many by the high-way: But pittie and
relieue those poore men, whom Gods hand, by fire or wa∣ter,
or the ineuitable misfortunes of Sea and land, haue
made poore, such as would gladly pay it if they had it, and
are well content to pay all they haue, or can make, nay,
would be glad to worke, and yeeld the benefit of their la∣bours
to their Creditors. That such honest poore men,
and some poore Gentlemen, should not in these cases bee
relieued, and either set at libertie, and put into imploy∣ment
(paying all they can presently, and more as they
may hereafter) or else those made to maintaine them that
keepe them in prison, let others consider how it stands
with ciuill pollicie and good gouernment; I am sure it is
farre from the rules of Christianitie, and (I take it) worse
then the custome and practise of other Nations.

You of this noble Parliament, that haue Power in your
hands, Mercy in your hearts, Experience before your cies,
and the cries of the oppressed in your eares euery day,
helpe forward this blessed worke: If they shall be so high∣ly
rewarded at the last day, that visite poore prisoners, how
glorious shall those bee that mooue a meanes to redeeme
them? If this Treatise may stirre vp your zealous and no∣ble
hearts, or set the least edge vpon your godly affecti∣ons
hereunto, I shall hold it a happie houre when I found
it amongst the writings of that deceased Deuine, that
good man that wrote it.
You, noble Sir, haue had a noble name for standing vp,
and opening your mouth in good causes and charitable
motions, at Sessions in Parliament, and other publique
meetings; Goe forward in the name, and with the bles∣sing
of the God of mercie; Adde this to the manifolde
honours God hath already layd on you, and to the loue
that thousands beare you: Thus shall you purchase the
prayers and praises of many hundred poore men, their
wiues and children, and hereby shall you gaine one poore
friend more, and euer binde me to remaine
White-chappell
Nouēb. 3. 1621.
Your Seruant in Christ,

