


IT is no great wonder though these parts of Africk which are vnder Torrida Zona, abound in many kindes of vnkindly monsters, seeing they are distempered with

such extremity of hea that their bastes prouoked by raging lust, mixe them∣selues with others, not of of their owne kind. But in this soile wherin the Snne of the world sends out his beames in most temperate manner, and the Sunne of Righteousnesse, shineth most fauourably: it may much more be admired to see so many, who looke like men, but indeed are mon∣sters. Of whom that may be spoken, which story records of Constantinus surna∣med Coprominus, Eum nec Christianum, nec Iudaeum, nec Paganum fuisse, that he was neither a Iew, nor a Pagan, nor a Christian: Sed colluuiem

quandam impietatis, but a certaine masse or heape of all impiety: with the Iewes they salute Christ as their King, and yet buffet him, they professe him with the Christian, and persecute him with the Pagan, at one word they blesse him, and at another blaspheme him. They are named Israelits and liue like Ethiopians:Amos. they speake with the voice of Iacob, but worke with the hands of Esau, and walke with the feet of Io∣ab, that any man may per∣ceiue, not by their coate, but their party-coloured condi∣tions that sundry parents haue begotten them.
The nature of man di∣stemperate with the heate

of vnrulie desires, and affe∣ctions, refuseth not the n∣lawfull ompany of any euil that will ome with it: for sinne is nothing else, but a childe gotten in a most vn∣happy and vnkindly con∣inction betweene Apostat spirits, and the corrupt na∣ture of man, whereof pro∣ceeds such manifold defor∣mities in the liues of men, that ye may see one and the selfe same man to be but a mixed monster, made vp, and mishapen of sundry sorts of vices. Hee is begot∣ten of Concupiscence, and hath ies of Adultery: hee is nourished and rocked in the cradle of Intempe∣rance, bee groweth vp by Couetousnesse to such ex∣cesse,

that his little finger is bigger then by iust measure his body should bee: his motion is from anger, his greatnesse from his pride, he is made strong to euill by his malice, hee waeth old with wickednesse, con∣sumed with lecherie, and worne with enuy. Thus hee ends worse then hee began, & in al these he is boulstred vp by hypocrisi, and shew∣eth himselfe as if hee were a Christian.Malac. And so co∣uers the iniurie vnder the garment of God: but they are deceiued, God will not bee mocked, Let them not say wee haue Abraham for our father, The answer our Sauiour gaue the carnall Iewes is

fitting for them, Yee are of your father the Deuill, for yee doe his workes. Partus patrem iudicat, the birth bewraies the be∣getter, and their image de∣clares they are not the ge∣neration of Christ.
But iudgements are prepared for scorners: strange sinnes will bee re∣paid with strange punish∣ments proportionable to them, They that sow the winde, shall reape the whirlewinde, they who sow to the flesh shall of the flesh reape corrupti∣on. They turne not from their sinnes to the Lord, and the Lord most iustly wraps them in their sinnes as in a windng sheet, which

cannot bee consumed, thus are they laid in the graue, and Their bones full of the iniquity of their youth. O fearefull, re∣compence, but yet rigte∣ous, their needes no more to plague them but that the Lord turne their own waies vpon their owne heades, and giue them to drinke of the cup themselues haue prepared. For howsoeuer wickednesse bee sweet in the mouth, yet in the bowels it turnes into gall. They shall know in the ende, it was an euill thing and a bitter that they forsooke the Lord. Oh that they who forget him, could consider this in time.
To waken them if it bee possible. I haue presented

to them heere a two-fold mirrour, in the one if they looke into it, they may see how miserable a man ma∣keth himselfe by departing from the Lord. In the o∣ther how gratious the Lord is, and ready to receiue such as returne vnto him. And this haue I published vnder your honourable names, who as yee liue in your selues Exemplars of a godly life vnto others: so I am sure it shall be contentment to you if by this treatise dedicate to you, others may be made better. Receiue it as a to∣ken of my best affection to∣ward you, for your louing acceptation of mee into the honourable fellowship of your Burgiship of Eden∣borough,

which howsoe∣uer by birth it was due to me, yet was it conferred by you with such willingnesse of minde, as bindes mee to account my selfe obliged to your fauours while I liue. So wishing the multiplication of the grace of Iesus Christ vnto you, I rest.

