


Most Honoured Gentlemen,
IT is a faithfull and true saying of that peerelesse Physition, and Philosopher Galen. lib. 8. de compos. Med. secund. Loc. sect. 4. Impossibile est invenire pharma∣cum ad plures affectiones optimum. Invenitur enim in vnaqua{que} ip∣sarum id quod propriè ipsis destinatum est praestantius esse. It is impossible to finde one, and the selfesame medicine equally the most excelling for many or di∣verse deseases. For it is by experience discovered, that that medicine which is properly and peculiarly desti∣ned vnto every disease, is the most fit, proper, and ab∣solute for it. The same Author in another place aver∣reth, Medicina sexties aut septies probata non facit vni∣versalem propositionem. One medicine or kind of me∣dication though oft approued, doth not notwith∣standing make good or assured any vniversall or ge∣nerall
 proposition or promise of his effect to be at all times the same. Dr Anthony his ignorance hereof in his Apologie is palpable, who because hee may hap∣ly haue imagined his golden medicine effectuall or succesfull in some kinds of maladies; he doth thence inferr an vniversall rash pronunciate thereof, that it is an vniversall medicine and most excelling in all ca∣ses. Th s is the vsuall deceaved rauociation of an Empiricke, trusting his owne partiall obseruation not calling vnto counsell therewith the auncient tried ruls of reason, knowledge, and iudgement,Non possibile est t alis rei faculttes exerientia cm∣modè explores, si non p is exate compertum ha¦buris affectum cui adb betur id quod exploratur, siue id potus sie cibs, siue par∣macum si. Gaend. 1. de A∣ln facultat. from all preceding learned times vnto men industrious, studious, and ingenuous, derived. This knowledge bringeth assurance from evidence of reason: observa∣tion or particular experience alone without knowe∣ledge bringeth vncertaine collection only or wave∣ring guessing; since to make pronunciates certaine or assured by one mans observations alone, requireth not only many dayes,M gnum de∣cus et & orna∣mentum ex eri∣e ia onals, se experientia doctrine at{que} ra¦tioni coiuncta. E verò quae si∣ne arte & d∣ctrina est, cum Hippocrate  & prici∣osu statuo. Crat epist. med d Henric. Her¦wart. patricium Augustanum. but yeares and ages. Vnto this effect sayth Galen in prorhet. 1. sect. 15. Qui speculatio∣nem medicinalem empircè congerit, is non centum sed mille annis opus habet. Hee that propoundeth vnto himselfe to compile an art of Physike, from his owne observation or experience alone, hath need of the allowance not of an hundred, but of a thousand yeares. And herein is evidently seene the plaine dif∣ference betweene the learned Physitian and the Em∣piricke. The learned Physitian by studious contempla∣tion and assiduous and select reading maketh prompt and diligent vse of all learned writers and authors, who as glorious lamps or lights thorow all ages
 haue brightly shone in tere guidance and direction vnto all succeeding times, and thereby enioyeth not only their time honoured knowledge, but the rich experience of all foregoing learned generations. The Empirck contrariwise trusteth cheifely his owne witt and private observation, and therewith serveth other mens necessities, with care of his owne gayne, but without conscience or sense of their inevitable deadlyFor this cause, ah Hi∣pocras, Api. . l. 1. . Emp∣rica perictatio perniciosa. wounds, by his as vnavoydable defects in want of knowledge. The reason why men generally are so insensible hereof, and of their owne secrett and hidden insnaring of their health and life thereby, is for that ever among all sorts and kinds of men, the fewest possesse the truest iudging. For this cause saith Galen de praenot. Si contingat vt apud pueros & impru∣dentes Medicus & Coquus ferat iudicium, Coquus non paulò plus suffragiorumferet. If among children or common iudging men, any meane affected Cooke should contend for prioritie by most voyces with the learned Physitian, their Childish sillie iudging would in suffrages haply preferre by many degrees the iollie Cooke. By this vsuall errour (to the perdi∣tionPerdre quo vul Iupter hos dementat. Seec. of those whome God hath blinded) oftimes do diverse sorts of men defectiuely or deprauedly learned, our ordinary Omnipotent Promisers, Vni∣versall vndertakers, wittie Proiectours, loude and endles Historians of their owne praise, and other learned bubles, halfe letteredHuiumo iho∣muncoes semi∣dogmaieoe∣mictoos appel∣lat Galen. lib. de Meth. Med. and lowly learned Practisers, prodigiously clime vnto a wondred and vndeserued height of popular fame and common e∣steeme. Divers kinds also of improvident idiotes, not
 secured by any safe conduct of likelihood or reason in their actions, nor provided by any forethought so much as in sense or reason to prevent the vsually daungerous sequele of their rash attempts, and blind∣ly only led by witlesse confidence in a causelesse hope of vndeserued good hap (as being merely ignorants senslesly welmeaning) do notwithstanding oft times grow largly noysed and (vnto the wonderment and amazement of reason) fame spread. Oftimes also e∣ven luglers, Fortune tellers, Figure casters, and Witches doe exceed all these kinds in spaciousnes of vulgar worship and largenesse of renowne. Thus blind, partial, & false,Contemne fa∣mam, fama vix vero fauet. Sen. Trag. 4. Tam fi∣cti praui{que} te∣nax quàm nun∣tia veri. Virg. Aeneid. 4. is fame, a factor for cousnage, a baud to deceit, the misgouerned brute, the impure aire & breath of the vnlearned, rash, & inconsiderate multitude, and therefore by generous worthy minds disdainfully valewed as vncertaine, giddie, vagabond. The iudicious report and true testimony of good men, solidly learned, vprightly iudging, and truely vn∣derstanding, is that true fame and glorie which the wisemanViri boni ha∣bere possunt glo∣riam, id est bono∣rum testimoni∣um suorum ope∣rum comitem, & bic in terris eo velut melle tem∣perare id quoq in virtute est ama∣rum. At vulgi famam & au∣ram quis sapiens aptat? Lips. Ep.  Ital. & Hisp. doth alone esteeme, which only gene∣rously and vertuously can be affected, and whereof solely vertue can be ambitious, wherevnto wisdome solely doth listen and iudgment giue eare; Whether then Dr Antony do by partiall and false fame vsurpe only, or among learned men by true worth in right possesse, that exalted high name which in his Apo∣logy he doth vaunt & chalenge; I do by this my Anta∣pologie present and offer vnto your truely iudicious, equall, and impartiall doome. I do in this cause ra∣ther appeale vnto your censure, then vnto my deare
 & honoured mothers sonnes, my reuerend brothers of that coexcelling, famous, and beauteous sister vni∣versitie of Cambridge: first for that the wrong im∣posed by Dr Antony is common vnto some of your selues together with me: secondly for that some of you are witnestes of the vniustnesse of the imputa∣tion cast vpon me by Dr Antony in his Apologie. As you are in your selues, so in a publique cause ex∣presse your selues, the noble true heires of the thrice excellent, auncient, and incomparable Prince and fa∣ther of learning Hippocrates, in generositie and li∣bertie of spirit, in loue of truth, and of your owne free ingenuous and honourable profession. The rea∣son why in this common prouocation I alone doe deigne to vndertake Dr Antony his iust castigation, by other learned men despised and held in deserued scorne, is for that the ridiculous, insulting, and vn∣checked insolence of some of his abettors more neer vnto me, hath more frequently presented it selfe vnto my view, and thereby hath galled me out of the same resolued contempt of opposing his senselesse and tri∣fling pamphlet. Since then I am thus compelled in∣to these lists, vouchsafe your iust eyes to behold me with prosperous vows, wherein as I can not feare, so shall I not be proud of the victory.

