


THe word (Right honorable) is in great trauell with much euill, & when she shall be deliuered he onely know∣eth who measureth al times with his hand, and before whose eye lieth open that bottomlesse aeternitie it selfe. The faces of Kingdomes and States ac∣cording to the prosperitie and aduersitie of the Church amongest them sometimes looke heaui∣ly and sometimes chearfully as refreshed with more good. Man whose Reason and Religion serueth to number these things feeleth in him∣selfe

a true diuinitie manifested by that pure ambition of being greater than hee yet can bee; whilest notwithstanding in the sence and feare of these things hee stoopeth as to a burthen that is too heaue. Religious and mature wisedome (the safest builders of true greatnesse) assureth men in prouidence to preuent the worst things or at least by foresight growing familiar with thē teacheth how to beare them with much patience; fewe Kingdomes there are which haue not ey∣ther more scarres in the Church not fully cured or else greater signes of greater insuing euils than our owne. I am loth to be thought to flat∣ter (a fault whereunto I am not vsually subiect and a thing needlesse, being the greatest hatred from the greatest loue which euerie beareth to himselfe;) but I may say truly, and I doubt not but what I say the world thinketh, the grea∣test part of this good (next our dread Soue∣reigne) is now (without enuie bee it spoken) your owne. The consideration whereof hath made me out of that infinite loue and duty which I owe to his Grace being dead, and your Honour yet aliue to dedicate these labours to you both,The late Lord Archbishop of Canterburie. in the defence of that Church, which truth, experience, & her aduersaries haue pro∣ued (for gouernment) the most absolute since the

Apostles time. That it is vndertaken by me is the greatest disaduantage to this cause; that it is continued and daily receiueth strength from authority is amongst infinite blessings the grea∣test and most vnspeakable of this Church. I haue dealt (as your Honour well knoweth) in this cause with a threefolde disaduantage, one, that it hath so fully beene handled by so many of great learning heretofore, so that at this time a defence was rather requisite to tell those that hope for alteration that our Church is still of the same iudgement, and spake not heretofore onely to please that State; a second is, that the things disliked are not differences of any great learning, seeing wee deale with aduersaries whose chiefest hope dependeth vpon the allow∣ance of vnlearned followers; so that Demon∣strations of reason are more requisite than proofes from authoritie. Last of all, they are a generation apt and skilfull to speake euill, I haue carefully and according to my naturall dis∣position auoided all occasion that might prouoke them to it, yet I looke for no other, neither by the grace of God (so that this paines may bene∣fit the Church) do I much care; the strongest ty∣rant of things and men is fancy; the truest go∣uernour Religion, hallowed follies when they

are vnmasked are but at the best the weake opi∣nions of simple men; of whom (notwithstan∣ding) if they had learned humilitie and obedi∣ence, this Church might haue much vse; your Lordship is (besides that particular duty and thankefulnesse which I owe vnto you) executor of his Testament and Inheritour of his vertues that was the true owner and pos∣sessor of these labours; which if it please your Honour to accept with their vnworthie Au∣thor into your more priuate and inward affec∣tion, It shall bee my happinesse to be your ser∣uant and their credit by your Lordships meanes to doe seruice to this Church. Thus in the assu∣rance of this hope crauing pardon for my bold∣nesse, I humbly take my leaue: desiring God to blesse you with all Graces fit for so high a place, and with contentment and long life to my sin∣gular comfort, and the especiall benefit of this Church. May 27. 1604.

