


RIght Noble Lord, that which in this Treatise con∣tayning the Anatomie of a true Christian, I haue publiquely proposed for the vse of many, I haue now particularly for many rea∣sons dedicated to your Ho∣nour, but in speciall because that which here is pointed out of the Christian, is in your Lordship

performed in a good measure, hauing by the grace of God learned so to gouerne your life, that hi∣therto in a most high and difficill calling ye haue liued si non sine peccato, if not without sine, (for that is not giuen to any man vpon earth, if we say we haue no sinne we deceiue our selues)1 Ioh. 1. 8. saltem sine crimine, at least without such offence of malitious wickednesse, as might make your Lord∣ship culpable before men.
For your life toward God hath beene religious, as the priuate exercises of godlinesse, customable to your Lordship by your selfe and with your fami∣lie, and the publique reuerence of the word, and obseruance of the Saboth in euerie place doth testi∣fie. Toward his Maiestie faithfull, from a most in∣ward affection, from whom yee haue learned to rule others, by learning to obey him: Optime e∣nim imperandi rationem tenent, quieam bene parendo didicerunt. In your selfe a rare exam∣ple, of humilitie in honour, of grauitie, tempe∣rance, and sobrietie in the middest of wealth, and that in all the parts of your Lordships behauiour. Which is not a small thing, if it be considered, that as men of honour, when they doe euill plus exem∣plo peccant, quam culpa, are more hurtfull by their euill example, then by their euill deede; so if they liue godly, they doe not so much good to them∣selues by well doing, as to others by their good ex∣ample. Toward euill men a iustitiar, not flexible

from equity for feare or fauour. Toward good men courteous. Toward all men conscientious, that in no part of the land is there any found to murmure, or charge your Lordship with vnrighte∣ousnesse, vnlesse it be such who in their blindnesse thinke the seruite of God according to his word a seruitude and bondage, not knowing quod sic ser∣uire Deo, est regnare. And esteemes the law of a lawfull King a tyrannie, who because they would doe all things per vim potius quam virtutem, by violence rather then vertue; whose pleasure is to liue controling all, vncontroled of any, like Nim∣rods, or the sonnes of Anak, therefore they grudge as Malecontents, that the law of the King is not, as Anarxexes spake of the lawes of Solon, like the webbes of the Ettercope, through which the greater Flyes may breake at their pleasure: where as among all reasonable men, it hath euer been receiued, as a principle, beatam esse rempub∣licam, in qualex dominatur, that the common∣wealth is happy, in which the law hath dominion.
But to returne to that which of all humane te∣stimonie is the greatest, the honorable estimation his Maiestie these thirtie yeares by-gone without repenting hath had of your Lordship, stands in the hearts of all his well affected subiects, as a great commendation of your qualities, for, The plea∣sure of a King is in a wise Seruant (said Salo∣mon) and the honour whereunto your Lordship by

his Maiestie is preferred, is esteemed most iustly so much the more honourable, for that the Patron of vertue, for vertues sake hath aduanced you to it. Thus by a right Marcellus, hath your way to the Temple of honour, beene by the Temple of vertue.
For this moderation of life so euident in your Lordship, as I haue said, euen among the naturall Philosophers was accounted for true wisedome, and learning. The practise of that golden pre∣cept Nosce teipsum, they esteemed to consist in the gouernment of a man his person, and actions according to the rule of vertue, this they called the matter of wisedome, without which others, were they neuer so learned, were accounted to haue had, but the words of wisedome, such as many now a dayes we haue among vs, with whom it fareth, as of olde with Thales Milesius, who going out on a night to his contemplation, while hee gazed on the starres, hee fell into the ditch. Many such Disciples I say hath he left behind him, who looke so high with their learning, that they take no heede to their owne feete, to gouerne their waies with knowledge, they thinke it sufficient to commend them, that they haue trauailed through many parts of the world, haue read much, and gotten some introduction to Sciences, when as in the meane time they neuer trauailed within themselues, neuer entred into their owne

hearts, neuer read the booke of their owne consci∣ence, and haue not learned to know, farre lesse to rule themselues by wisedome.
But leauing them, I trust your Lordship will still continue to seeke the perfection of true wise∣dome, and knowledge there, where ye haue got∣ten the beginnings, for as the beginning of wise∣dome is the feare of the Lord, said Salomon, so said he also, The end of all is, feare God, and keepe his commandements: this is the whole duety of man.
For this cause haue I here presented to your Honour this Description of a Christian, which not without great labour I haue collected these tenne or twelue yeares by-gone, out of the word of God, that in it your Lordship may see, what manner of man a true Christian is, how his heart is continually at his right hand, his minde vpon good things, his will waiting vpon his superiour, how a good conscience is his Paradise on earth, out of which hee will not goe, how his eye is in his forehead, vsing so the time present, that hee pro∣uides for the time to come, thinking on his end, and fore-seeing that wrath which is to fall on the wicked, that he may eschew it: how he refraines his speech, when time of silence is? how he speakes in season the words of knowledge, how he ponde∣reth his pathes, and ordereth all his way with equitie. In a word, how he is restored by grace

in the regeneration to the image of God, which was his most ancient glory communicated to him by his Maker in his first creation, as more particu∣larly will appeare in the Anatomie follow∣ing.
In reading whereof, where your Lordship findes a conformity with it, I am sure it will be the matter of your ioy, and thanksgiuing to God, for the beginnings of his grace in you, where not, I hope it will encrease your Christian care to pro∣ceede to a further perfection, vnto the which these prayers interiected betweene Gods precepts, and the Christians practise in euery Chapter, for your Lordships speciall vse, I trust in his grace shall be profitable for you. I haue knowne by occasion that your Lordship makes conscience of the exercise of prayer in priuate, and delights in it. I haue therefore taken the more paines to let your Lord∣ship see, how God in his word teaches his children to pray in the language of Canaan, that is, in such words as are dyted by his owne Spirit, and so comming from himselfe, we may be sure will be the more welcome, and acceptable to him againe, be∣ing offered in a golden censure, which is a heart purified by faith, through the mediation of Iesus Christ our Lord.
Accept therfore (right Noble Lord) this Chri∣stian Man, who as one, who being likest vnto that which you are, at least which through grace

would be, lookes for protection vnder your sha∣dow, and offereth himselfe ready to recompence your Lordship with some comfort and instructi∣on, at such time as your Lorship may haue the lea∣sure to conferre with him. Thus from mine heart praying vnto God for the continuance of his fa∣uour with you, which is the fountaine of all prospe∣ritie, both in this life, and in the life to come. I rest.

