



RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,
The rule is not more old than good,Ingenuum est fa∣tr per quem profcris. That it is an ingenuous thing to confesse by whom we reape profit. Hauing therefore by good proofe found your hands not to be sealed vp to me: though I beg no new fauours (because through Gods mercy I haue learned to want, and to abound, and in all estates to be content) yet I humbly beseech you to giue me leaue freely to acknowledge your loue vnto me. It was not wih∣out your charge that I came first to settle in this Coury: nei∣ther haue I here continued without the inlargement of my Li∣brarie
 by your Bookes bestowed vpon me. What therefore can I render vnto you (besides my publike Ministerie) but some such poore acknowledgment as this is? A plaine Sermon I con∣fesse it is, yet such an interpreter of my heart, that I hope you shall plainly see my honest desires to lay before you a picture of your (together with the rest of Gods peoples) gratious estates. It was a vse in rich mens feasts,Herodot. lib. 3. amongst the Aegyptians of old, to appoint one who should shew a wodden carkasse of a man liuelily cut out, to euery guest, and to say to this effect: So eat, drinke, and delight thy selfe as withall thou cast thy eye vpon this which sheweth thee what thou shalt be when thou art dead. It may be this spirituall anatomie (which I offer vnto you) may haue as good a vse to call backe our ouer-lauish loues from the delights of this world, by shewing vs either what we are, or what we should be. What though it be rudely cut; yet when I remember a worthy speech of your owne, (What care I for a young man who can talke of genus and species, and other logicall and philosophicall subtleties: giue me an experi∣enced Preacher who can speake to the heart;) I cannot doubt of your louing entertainment of this my homely worke. I know you neglect not any humane Arts, prouided they doe prepare and not imprison our wits from more noble imploy∣ments;Modo praepareat no detinct in∣gentum. it hath beene your glory to be well seene in some of them: yet when I doe consider what S. Augustine saith, if my memory faile not;Surg  &  &  or tr . The vnlearned arise and take heauen by violence, whereas great Doctors are thrust into Hell: and when I see that many thriue in grace, who haue no learning but Scripture, and no eloquence but what conscience doth dictate, I cannot but humbly pray to God, that you may alwaies be of that minde which you de d scouer in that gratious speech. I know right well that they are to be found in the world, who will lay other draughts of holinesse before you than you shall here finde. They will tell you of Masses, of haire-cloth, of whippings, of
 pilgrimages, and other penances; and were it not that God hath taught you already to discouer the hypocrisies of these, and to see that, to stop the mouth of conscience for a time, they may be practised by the wickedest wretches, they might haply pre∣uaile with you, being gilded ouer by the subtleties of Anti∣christ. But, blessed be God, your soules are from amongst Lions, and I hope you haue beene longer trained vp in Christs schoole, than to be so gulled with such impostures. My care and prayer to God for you shall rather be that yee may adorne the profession of the Gospell which yee haue vndertaken. There are too many in the world, who with Caius Curio are singularly eloquent,Lin. vitae ex vell. Patr. lib. 2. and wittily wicked: but how much better is it to haue a flower tongue, and a duller braine, with more true godlinesse and ho∣nestie? Goe on, I humbly beseech you, to be recluses from the world, and from the wickednesse of it. And because there are many who are like Copronimus, of whom it is said,Ne Christianū, nec Iudaeum, nec Paganum fusse, sed colluuim quandam impie∣tatis. that though he would be called a Christian, yet he was neither Chri∣stian, nor Iew, nor Pagan, but a very sinke and puddle of sinne: threfore how will it honour such persons as yee are, to redeeme the cedit of the Gospell fom obloquie, and to honour God by sincere and constant practises of pietie? They lay a kinde of dis∣grace vpon God, as well as vpon the Gospell, that would be accounted Christians, and yet are not good. If a King should send, with instructions for the presenting of his person and will to another Prince, such a messenger as could not execute it, did it not lay this disgrace vpon him, that he is not able to chuse a fit person to doe his businesse? So is it disgracefull to God to send such an one into the world in his name, and with the ho∣nourable title of his seruant, yea Sonne, who doth the errand of the world, the flesh, and the deuill, rather than of him whose name he beareth. That therefore the censure of the Cynick vpon the common people, who did highly extoll those that con∣temned money, and yet were very money-mongers themselues,
 may not fall vpon you, let it be your glory and your reioycing not onely to praise and countenance the vertuous, but also as you haue begun, to be of the same knot and blessed societie. I know that this must be effected by a spirituall death vnto the world and sinne: but if it were a comfort to be put to death with Phocion, because Phocion was innocent and well-deseruing of the Common-wealth; then how much comfort may it be vnto vs to haue fellowship in the death of Christ to our death vnto sinne, and in his resurrection to our rising vnto new∣nesse of life. This Sermon shall (through Gods blessing) a little helpe you forward in this gracious worke: in which respect my humble suit vnto you is, that you would be pleased to vse it as your owne. I was loth to let you passe amongst my publike acknowledgments of others loues (though I cannot at thi tie giue you what place you haue) and I would be lot that, now I doe shew my selfe vnto you, I should not giue you that content which I desire. To end in a word: SIR, let me put you in minde of that Axiome which was registred amongst the Ciuilians in the daies of Iustinian: That it wa nt con∣uenient for any man to looke after what was done at Rome, but to examine iustly what ought there to be done. Ths politike rule was mae to vphold Romes creit  Roms villanies. I would a little alter it vnto your Worship, and say, that it is conuniet for you to looke after what is done amn vs, and to examine iustly what ought to be done. This is the next way to giue you to see the idlenesse, drunkennsse, and o her dsorders that doe abound through Ale-houses, those cursed nurseries of villanie, which doe compass vs in on euery side, and prouoke you to vnshath the sword of iustice which God hath put into your hand.Cra nte nem  D  ∣st a∣ ∣quam inducre. Oh how well would it become you, how much would it honour God, and how would it cheere the spirits of the good, who are sadded with this burthen vpon vs! MADAME, let me put you in minde of that speech
 of Iohn to the elect Ladie, If there come any vnto you, and bring not the doctrine of our Lord Iesus, receiue him not to house, neither bid him God speed: and let your speciall care be that your children be found walking in the truth. To you both, I haue, as a Minister of the Gospell,Onus vel ipsis Ag somo. a fearefull bur∣den which lieth von me. God is my ortion if I shall vnder goe it with an honest heart. This shall also adde vnto my re∣ward if in your places you shall still carry your selues as the beloued of God. This therefore he prayeth for, who desires for euer to remaine,

