



COnsidering that this Ladder
was first framed and entitu∣led
The Ladder of Hell, by a
Papist, to the great disgrace
(as hee conceined) of our
Protestant Religion; I ima∣gine
that some of you (dearely beloued Bre∣thren)
will wish that it had been quite sup∣pressed,
and neuer seene light: yet, (in re∣gard
it containeth nothing but a collection
of certaine sentences set downe in the pub∣like
bookes of twelue principall Pillars of
our Church) I thought it not amisse to set it
forth, just as I found it, vnder your protecti∣on;
knowing well, that euery zealous Pro∣testant
can with the dexteritie of his refor∣med
spirit turne all, though neuer so plainly
seeming ill, to at least a seeming good sense:
as for example, wheras the Papist called this

collection of sentences, The Ladder of Hell
because in his judgement the beleefe and,
practise of it leadeth a soule directly to hell.
Yet one of our new learning (considering
that Ladders are made rather to helpe men
vpward then downeward) wil say it may be
called The Ladder of Hell, because the be∣leefe
and practise of it will lift soules out of
hell. And with reason may this be said, sup∣posing
one ground of our new doctrine be
true,Caluin. in c. 30. Isa. Hermonia ad cap. 3. Mat. v. 12. I. Instit. c. 25. n. 12. to wit, that Hell is (no such locall place
in which are fire and other torments, as is
said by the ancient Fathers, and the Scrip∣tures
themselues, to be prepared for the Di∣uels
and other damned creatures, but) only
a certaine terror and horror of an afflicted
conscience, the which may in some measure
be felt euen in this world, and is ordinarily
felt after sin commited euen by Protestants,
vntill by beleeuing firmely, and practising
freely the points of doctrine contained in
this Ladder, they come by degrees to con∣temne
all things, to wit, all Lawes of God
and man: and all scruple of minde and re∣morse
of conscience, and all feare of Death,
Iudgement, and Hell, which estate of mind,
it is like diuers zealous Protestants haue al∣readie
attained vnto, esteeming themselues
hereby to be not onely freed from hell, but

to haue attained a kind of heauen in earth:
Marry the doubt is, whether this their hea∣uē
wil last alwayes, as true heauen ought to
doe, or whether this hastie freeing thēselues
frō the hell of care, feare, remorse & sorrow
in this life, will not plung them into a most
bitter feeling of remorse in the houre of
death, and into intollerable torments of the
eternall Hell in the next life. The which
doubt being in the judgement of some, on∣ly
a Papisticall scruple, I will leaue to bee
discussed at better leasure: It shall suffice my
present purpose onely to declare the mani∣fold
vses, which for the present time may be
made of this excellent Ladder, both by
Papists and Protestants.
First, I finde that the Papists meane to
make this short Ladder serue for an answer
of many long discourses made by Protestant
Ministers in bookes or Sermons, in which
they obiect the ill liues of some Papists; the
which obiections the Papists doe retort
more strongly against vs Protestants, who
cannot deny, but that since the light of the
new Gospell was by Luther brought into
the world,Luther in Postilla supra E∣uangel. dom. 1. ad∣uentus. men are (as Luther himselfe
coufessed) more reuengeful, more conetous,
more vnmercifull, more vnmodest and vn∣ruly,
and much worse then they were in Pa∣pistry;

the reason whereof (say the Papists)
is for that the very doctrine it selfe of the
new Gospellers, doth not onely not afford
such effectuall restraints and remedies a∣gainst
sinne, as is in the ancient Catholike
Religion, but also hath (as appeareth by the
steps of this Ladder) diuers expresse princi∣ples,
which doe plainly open the gappe to
all licentious libertie of lewde life, far more
then can bee imagined to bee done by any
principles of the Papists doctrine. Where∣upon
the Papists conclude that the Prote∣stant
Religion, whose doctrine is so vnholy,
cannot be a holy Religion inspired by the
holy Ghost, but suggested (asLuth. de abroganda missa pri∣uata, edi∣tione pri∣ma. Luther the
first Author confesseth some part of it (to
wit, the deniall of the sacrifice of the Masse)
to haue beene suggested to him) by Satan
himselfe, the enemy of all true Religion and
holinesse.
The zealous Protestant not much regar∣ding
this, or whatsoeuer other arguments
made by Papists, find out other vses of this
Ladder: as for example. First, it teacheth
euery one of them to exercise heroicall acts
of theirI call it new foūd, because I finde not in Scrip∣ture or in the anci∣ent Fa∣thers that a man is made iust by confi∣dently beleeuing that hee is Iust, but rather by humbly ac∣knowledging ones selfe to be a sinner, as appeareth in the Parable of the Pharisee and the Publican. Luke 18. new-found Iustifying Faith, by

which they beleeue that they are just, holy,
and of the number of the predestinate, not
onely by hauing a good hope, (as the poore
Papists haue) when they see or feele some of
those things in themselues, which by the
holy Scriptures they learne to be signes of
true Iustice (to wit, repentance of sins past,
carefulnesse to auoid sinne in time to come,
diligence in doing good workes; &c.) but
also by infallible and absolute beleefe, as of
a chiefe article of their Christian faith, euen
at such times as they neither see, nor feele
any such signes, yea euē whē they euidently
see in themselues contrary signes, & name∣ly,
euen when they actually do those works
of the flesh,Gal▪ 5. of which Saint. Paul pronoun∣ceth,
That they who doe such things, shall
not obtaine the Kingdome of God. Zea∣lous
Protestants, I say, maugre this threat of
S. Paul, are taught by this Ladder to be∣leeue
boldly that they are Saints, and can∣not misse
saluation, notwithstanding they
commit neuer so many most horrible sins.
Secondly, this Ladder teacheth them to
cast away all feare of God, not onely in re∣spect
of his Iustice, in inflicting present or
future paines for sinne (which is called ser∣uile
feare) but also of separation from God,
which feare cannot stand with our new Iu∣stifying
Faith, in regard we must hold it ab∣solutely

impossible that we can bee separa∣ted
from God, and consequently wee must
cast away this fear, although neuer so much
commended in Scripture.
Thirdly, By this admirable Ladder, zea∣lous
Protestants may be deliuered from all
inward remorse of conscience, & may come
to that highest perfection of our new Gos∣pell,
which consisteth in a neglect of al con∣science,
the which cannot be attained on a
sudden, but must be gained (as Luther him∣selfe
gained it) by entering into a terrible
conflict, and fighting against ones owne
conscience; the difficulty of which combate
ariseth out of three heads.
The first is the letter of the written word,
which seemeth euery where to crosse thi
liberty of conscience, and to forbid the do∣ing
of any thing against conscience. But our
new spirituall man, who judgeth all things,
will oppose against this killing letter of
Scripture, which restraineth our freedome,
the quickening spirit of this Ladder, which
alloweth liberty of neglecting conscience.
The second is an old Tradition of the Pa∣pists
in fauour of conscience, which hath by
long custome taken a deepe roote in vs. But
the zealous Protestant, who accounteth
Papistry a great blindnesse, will easily defie
this among other Papisticall traditions.

The third is an inueterate opinion and
feeling of conscience engrauen in the very
nature and flesh of mans heart. But we new
spirited men do know old nature to be cor∣rupted,
and that the flesh profiteth nothing.
Thus my deare Brethrē, you may see what
vses may be made of this admirable Ladder.
It remaineth that in a word I also declare,
why I make choice to dedicate it vnto you,
and to put it in print vnder your protection.
The reason is, because the authors out of
whom these sentences were collected, were
all zealous Protestants. Secondly, because
none now adaies will (as I suppose) stedfast∣l
beleeue & endeuor to practise according
 these points, but only zealous Prote∣as.
Thirdly, beause none but such zealous
Protestāts, who frame their liues according
to this Ladder, can well vnderstand how it
is possible that this Ladder can be good, or
how it should deliuer one out of Hell, and
cōsequently, why it should be stiled in that
sense, in which I stile it, The Ladder of Hell.
It may be the Papist, which first framed
this Ladder, wil play vpon vs with his text,
Woe vnto you that call euil good, and good euill,
Isa. 5. 20. But wee care not for his text, for
we can cry as lowd, and say as fast, Wo vnto
him, and although the world will, witnesse
that he hath better reason to vse this text a∣gainst

vs, then we against him: yet it suffi∣ceth
that ourWhich whether it bee white or blacke, Zuinglius himselfe could not tell. new Spirit doth beare witnes
to our nullity of cōscience that we say true.
If the Papist take aduātage at my intitling
my self Minist. of the Word in Comberland,
saying that we Ministers comber the Land
with these libertine doctrines. I can reply &
tell him, that it is he & his Seminaries, who
comber our consciences with their contrary
doctrines, & with putting scruples into our
heads, by adding to this Ladder certain sen∣tences,
threatning hell and damnation to
sinners: for although we professe by our ju∣stifying
Faith, that we are sure to be saued,
and that we neede not feare to be damned:
yet I confesse, when I seriously examine my
guilty conscience, and by searching, find the
holy Scriptures themselues to pronounce
plainly eternall damnation to all ill liuers. I
cannot choose but be bodily afraid lest the
Papist say true, when he telleth vs that the
Libertine doctrine taught by our new Gos∣pellers,
& set downe in this Ladder, wil most
certainly lead the followers of it to their e∣ternall
ruine and destruction in hell; from
which I beseech the Lord to deliuer vs all.
Amen

