



SIR, The Apostle S. Paule, that
chosen vessell of God,Act. 9. 15. and his
ambassadour sent forth into the
world to bring in the house of
Iapheth into the tents of Sem,Gen. 9. 27.
hauing in his peregrination (vn∣dertaken
for preaching) from Ie∣rusalem
vnto Illyricum,Rom. 15. 19 seene
the most pleasant parts of the world, and in an extasie
transported from earth into the third heauen, seene also
the pleasures of Paradise,2. Cor. 12. as one who knew both, not
by naked speculation but experience, giues out his iudge∣ment
of both,Philip. 3. 8. that the most excellent things of this world
were but dung, in respect of the Lord Iesus, and that
whatsoeuer pleasure on earth,1. Cor. 2. 9. may delight the eye, or eare


they haue vnto others, it shalbe no small comfort vnto
me, and my greatest thankefulnesse shalbe declared in
my dayly prayers vnto the Lord God for your Maiestie,
that the name of Iacobs God may defend you from
all euill, and the Lord may send you helpe out of his
Sanctuarie in all your need,Psal. 20. 1. according as hee hath done.
O King beloued of God,Psal. 21. 1. hated of none but for Gods sake,
keepe still your heart in the loue of God, and his truth,
Reioyce in the strength of your God,Psal. 56 4. and feare not
what flesh can doe vnto you. Is it not the Lord, who
set your Highnesse on the throne to bee a feeder of his
people Israel?Psal. 18. 43 Is it not the Lord who hath deliuered
your Maiestie from the contentions of the people, and se∣cret
snares of your cursed enimies?Gen. 49. 23. though the Archers
grieued you, hated you, and shot at you, were not the
hands of your armes strengthened by the hands of the
mightie God of Iacob?Gen. 49. 25. Is it not the almightie, who hath
blessed your Maiesty with heauenly blessings from aboue,Psal. 21. 3.
with blessings of the depth that lyes beneath, with bles∣sings
of the breast and wombe?
Sir, let his liberall blessings wherewith the Lord your
God hath preuented you,Psal. 18. 50 be so many obligations binding
your Highnesse to honour the Lord,Gen. 12. 1 who hath honoured
you. Let his forepast manifold deliuerances be as so ma∣ny
confirmations, that if your Maiestie rest in him,Psal. 68. 20 and
not in man, he will still be a buckler vnto you. Let Abad∣don
the King of the Locusts that Romish vsurper rage,Reuel. 9. 11.
Vnto the Lord belongs the issues of death. Can Ba∣laam
curse,Numb. 23. 8 where God hath blessed? yea, can Sathan
hurt the man,Iob. 1. 10. who is hedged by the Lord? Let the

Ambassadours of new Babel more shamelesse than Sen∣nacherib
his Rabsache,2. Kin. 18. raile at good king Ezekiah ru∣ling
in IerusalemEsa, 37. 29. the Lord hath yet a hooke for his
nosethrils, and a bridle for his lips. Doe not the eyes
of the Lord behold the whole earth, to shew himself
strong with them that are strong,2. Chr. 16. 9 and of a perfect heart
toward him?Esa. 8. 12. Therefore feare not their feare, but sancti∣fie
the Lord God of hostes, let him be your feare, and hee
shalbe a Sanctuarie vnto your Maiestie.Psal. 69. 9. Count it a part
of your high glorie, and no small matter of your Maiesties
ioy, that with Christ you beare this peece of his crosse,Psal. 21. 7.
that the rebukes of them who rebuke the Lord, are fal∣len
vpon you; and trust still O King, in the Lord, and in
the mercie of the most High, and so your Maiestie shall
neuer fall. Long may your Highnesse liue and
raigne ouer vs, as a faithfull seruant to your
God, and a happie King of many
blessings to your people,

