



RIght noble and renowned
Gentlemen, it is now the tenth
yeares since the singular fauors,
loue, merite and tried worth of
my thriceSir William Tate. honored friend hath
first here detained mee in the
eye of your vse. In this short
space of quick time, as my pub∣licke
office hath bene truly deuoted vnto you all the
common right, so many your noble peculiar deserts
haue worthily challenged their speciall claime. In
pledge therefore of my loue and dutie vnto you all,
and in memorie of my trauels amongst you▪ (when
former vowes shall haply hence reall me) what my
time here passed hath brought forth, most rare or wor∣thy
vnto choice obseruation, I freely publish, and re∣ciprocally
here present vnto the countries good, and
together with generall caution and rule for safe and
wholesome medication, repay and dedicate. The mat∣ter
and subiect it selfe, vnto common reading, is of a

virgine fresh and as yet vndiuulged view, and no lesse
of necessarie and serious vse. The stile can neither be
so farre in loue with it selfe as to forget the matter,
nor altogether sauoureth of his oft interrupted & vn∣setled
leisure; and breuity doth not suffer the reading
to be any burthen. The paines and losse of secured
safetieNamque ta∣cere Tutum semper erit. Scalig. Constare gratis quin silentium possit. Martial. in silence are mine own, and the opportunity
euery mans that lusteth to censure, or to satisfie any
other more honest end: I haue thus freely exposed
my selfe in a proposed hope, that the hence deriued
good of many may make good my good desire vnto
all. Since thē this small sacrifise of my selfe to all your
happy healths (a mite answerable to my might) doth
therwith include a needful vse vnto a common good,
that after succeeding participation may enlarge the
benefite vnto all, or at least my poore paines awake
more ample merite in some others worth, vouchsafe
my free & honest labor in your friendly acceptance,
shrowded by the true splendor of your generose and
noble worthes, may dazle the narrow sight of base
obtrectation. Thus shal your euer deseruing loues and
now desired patronages, make both so much more
deserued loue your desirous seruant, and religiously
euer oblige my selfe in all true rights vnto your daig∣ned
fauours, perpetuall solicitor of humble, officious
and thankfull memorie.

