



My right worthy friends:
HOW can I be vnmindfull of you, who finde you still mindfull both of me and mine? My studies are much refreshed by you both: if then amid my studies, I, acknowledging others kindnesses, should be forgetfull of yours, my thankfulnesse would bee neere a wracke. Receiue therefore this my poore Preset: and if I cannot shew my selfe in what I would, I hope you
 will accept of what I can. Bookes were neuer more plentifull; as knowledge, they doe abound as waters of the Sea: yet there was neuer more need of good ones, as being one speciall meanes to pull downe sinne and Antichrist. I cannot commend mine to be such: yet, as Gods gifts, I can commend my desires to be forward (as I am able) to doe God seruice both by tongue and pen. I see the iustice of God giuing ouer some, who had no loue to the truth, to beleeue the lies of the Man of Sinne. And God hauing made me a poore Watchman in his Church, I would willingly warne mine owne sheepe of the danger, both by word and writing; yet, before it goeth to others, it doth come vnto you both, acknowledging your furtherances of it, and crauing your fauours both to entertaine and vse it as your owne. We poore Schollers doe wearie our bodies many waies: by writing amongst the rest. But a valiant man will not stand vpon the breach of his weapon, so he may get the victorie: nor we vpon the wearying and wearing of our bodies, if we may gaine what we fight for, to wit, the acceptance of our labours by them to whom wee doe intend them, together with the saluation of their soules. How-euer the successe may be, my hope shall lift vp my head amid all my faintings. Neither doe I feare, but that good people will giue approbation to what I haue rather la∣boured to doe, than done. My aime is but to striue for Religion, and for that Religion which will giue vs comfort before God. I haue considered many times the danger of Idolatrie: as first, that Idolaters are a sottish people, who, through Gods iust iudgement,Esay 46.6, 7, 8. Esay. 54.9, &c. withhold the truth in vnrighteousnesse, and will not walke in the light of reason. Secondly, that they are a cruell people,Dan 3. like Nebuchadnezzar, who garded his Idoll with a fiery fornace, and heat it seuen times hotter for the true worshippers of God; and like the ancient persecutors vn∣der the Romane Emperours, who put Christians vpon cros∣ses and stakes, who did teare and scratch their sides with nailes
 and clawes, who cast them vnto beasts, and burnt and broyled them with fire, and the like. Thirdly, that they are an alluring people, who haue their vermilion Images, like those that temp∣ted Ierushalem, and their great rewards like the Deuill,Matth. 4. All this will I giue thee (saith he to Christ) if thou wilt fall downe and worship mee: In which respects as Images or Idols are called Louers, so Idolaters, Whore-mongers, who will spare for no cost or paine to satisfie their lusts; like Ne∣buchadnezzar, who made his Image of gold,Dan. 3. and countenan∣ced it with varietie of musicke, to wooe the minds of the sim∣ple, and to stirre vp superstitious affections. And hauing laid vp these things with my selfe, and seeing withall that Poperie cannot (with all its subtill euasions) wash it selfe from deepe staine in this kinde; equalling, if not excee∣ding euen Heathenisme it selfe in varietie of Idolatrous lo∣uers, as we may see by comparing the multiplicitie of heathe∣nish and Romish Idols. When I haue considered, I say,Ʋide Wolfgang. Muscul. in Psal. 16. & Episc. Der. in diat. de An∣tichr. cap. 7. l. b. 3. cum multis alijs. that as the Heathens had protecting Idols for Nations, as Belus for the Babylonians, Isis and Osyris for the Aegygtians, Neptune for the Africanes, the Sunne for Rhodes, Iuno for Samos, Venus for Paphos, Apollo for Delphos, Quirinus for Rome, Minerua for Athens, and Diana for Ephesus: So Rome hath Saint Iames for Spaine, Saint Dennis for France, Saint Peter and Paul for Rome, Saint Ambrose for Millane, Saint Marke for Venice, the three Kings for Collen, Saint Lewis for Pannonia, and Saint Mary for Heluetia. And as the Heathens had guardians for the Elements, as Iupiter for the Heauen and Fire, Iuno for the Aire, Neptune for the Sea, and Pluto for the Earth: So Rome hath Saint Agatha for the Fire, Saint Nicholas for the Sea, and Saint Theodulus for Tempests. And as the Heathens had guardians for the Fruits of the earth, as Bacchus for Wine, and Ceres for Fruit: So Rome hath
 Saint Iodocus for Fruits, and Saint Vrbanus for Wine. And as the Heathens had guardians for their Cattell, as A∣pollo and Pan: So Rome hath Saint Wendaline for Sheepe, Saint Eulogius for Horse, Saint Pelagius for Oxen, and Saint Anthony for Swine. And as the Heathens had their protectors for Trades, Arts and Sciences, as Minerua for Learning, Vulcan for Smiths, Aesculapius for Physitians, Mars for Warriours, Diana for Hunters, Castor and Pol∣lux for Sea-faring-men, and Flora, Venus and Lupa for Harlots: So Rome hath Saint Catherine and Gregorie for Schollars, Saint Luke for Painters, Saint Cosmas for Phy∣sitians, Saint Maurice for Souldiers, Saint Eulogius for Carpenters, Saint Crispine for Shoo-makers, Saint Gut∣mane for Taylors, Saint Magdalen and Afra for Harlots. And lastly, as the Heathens had their guardians against Dis∣eases, as Apollo against the Plague, Lucina against the paines of Womens trauailes, and Hercules against the Falling-sicknesse: So Rome hath Saint Sebastian against the Plague, Saint Petronel against an Ague, Saint Marke against sudden Death, Saint Margaret against the paines of Womens la∣bours, S. Otilia against the diseases of the Eyes, S. Apollo∣nia against the Tooth-ache, and the like. The consideration of all these and many other obiects of Idolatrie (none of which were of Gods making) hath made me many times to search into the cause of Religion, and to striue both with my selfe and o∣thers, that all insinuating Idolatrie being laid aside and abhor∣red, the truth may take place both in our heads and hearts. I know that deepe decisions of controuersies are not so easily ap∣prehended in our ordinary assemblies. I haue sought therefore to bring the truth vnto the easiest triall, in remouing such ordina∣ry exceptions as it is subiect vnto by the wise men of the world. Whatsoeuer it be, I doe offer it vnto both your hands: desiring God that it may confirme you in the truth of our true Religion.
 It shall be my reioycing to see you and yours alwaies walking in the truth, and so humbly resigning your selues to the diuine wisdome of Gods word, both for the direction of your soules and bodies, that God may neuer haue iust cause to giue you ouer to Schisme, Heresie, Vanitie, or any other wickednesse what∣soeuer. Euen so humbly prayeth he, who hath some few yeeres had experience of your great loue, and who desireth to con∣tinue

