



Right Honourable:
AS Christ is said to bee the Author and finisher of ourHeb. 12.2.
 faith, so is he the pro∣per cause of all spiri∣tuall ioy and reioy∣cing,Ioh. 8, 5.6. Luk. 1.44. Christ alwayes brings with him all true health and happinesse.Ma. 4.. By Christ, Gods iustice is satisfied, Ephes. 5.2. his wrath appeased,1 The. 1.10. the curse of the Law abolished, Gal. 3.13 Sin,1 Cor. 15.55, 56, 57. Death, and Hell, vanquished, the De¦uill subdued, Heb. 2.14. and our selues,
 and soules, onely by Christ eternally sa∣ued.2 Tim. 1.10. Seeing Christ then is not ashamed to own vs, Heb. 2.11. wee should not bee ashamed to owne him, no not if neede be,Mar. 8.38. before an adulte∣rous and sinfull gene∣ration. But as in heart to beleeue in him,Rom. 10.10. so with mouth and tongue to confesse him: with our soule to magnifie him,Luke 1.46.47.
 and with our spirit within vs euermore to be vttering foorth of his most worthy praises. To this end, I presumed some yeers since, with the poore widdow, to cast in∣to the Lords Treasu∣rie, this small Mite, called None but Christ: the which howso∣euer it hath beene of∣ten imprinted, yet hitherto dedicated to none but vnto your
 Honourable Selfe. The causes moouing me hereunto, are not a few. Especially when I call to re∣membrance that vn∣fained loue, which at the first sprang to∣wards mee, from your deare Brethren, and my faithfull and worshipfull good friends, Mr William and Master Roger Cot∣ton (both well repor∣ted of for good
 workes) and euer since their decease, hath been most free∣ly and firmely roo∣ted and settled to∣ward mee in your worthie selfe. And not onely so, but for many yeeres really expressed; to the no little comfort of mee and mine. In lieu whereof, Right Ho∣norable, Lo here, by way of gratitude, and thankefulnesse, a
 little Balme,Gen. 43.11 a little Honey, a little spices, Myrrh, &c. of each (I say) a little, which out of my extreme pouertie,2 Cor. 8.2. I doe most willingly, ioyfully, and cheerefully pre∣sent your Honour withall, at your first initiation into your so great and weighty a calling: wherein, that as another hap∣pie Boaz you may carry your selfe wor∣thily
 in Ephratah, and bee famous in this ourLondon, a plentifull store-house, as of corpo∣rall, so of spirituall bread. Bethelem, there shall not bee wanting his poore prayers, who euer rests

