


RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL,
IF I may be bold to looke so high, I dare looke no higher than your selues in this my dedication. Were I able to bring forth a birth worthy of a higher countenance, to whom should I offer it but vnto my Lords Grace of Canterbury, from whom I haue receiued all my worldly mainte∣nance, vnder whom I doe enioy all my best earthly countenance, and at whose lips I haue
 receiued such most fatherly incouragements (both to take heed to reading, and to doctrine, and also to pray to God morning and euening, that God may be my God when I least dreame of him) as I hope I shall neuer be backward to acknow∣ledge, alwaies ready to make vse of, to the im∣prouement of those spirituall graces, wherewith through Gods gracious gift, I came into this Country. But I neuer yet could so ouerweene my owne abilities, as to thinke their fruit wor∣thie of such a patronage. If I seeme not too pre∣sumptuous in what I doe, (I hope) I neuer shall in what I might doe. It is my ioy and my reioy∣cing, that within mine owne circle God hath raised me vp such friends, as will not easily take in ill part my louing rudenesse towards them. Some few yeeres experience makes this good of your worthy selues, who haue so faithfully shewed your selues friends, so cheerefully audi∣tors, and so patiently giuen me leaue, both pub∣likely and priuately to stirre vp your willing minds, that I cannot entertaine the least doubt of your kinde embracings of this poore ac∣knowledgment of my thankfulnesse vnto you. I remember what Socrates did reply to Aeschines his scholler, when being poore he tooke it to heart that he was not able to gratifie him, his Ma∣ster,
 as others did:Annon intelligis quàm magnum munus mihi de∣disti? nisi fortè teipsum parvi aestimas. Doest thou not know (saith So∣crates) how great a gift thou hast giuen me? belike thou accountest thy selfe little worth. Implying that he accounted his gift (though poore) more preci∣ous than theirs who were rich; because they had giuen him of theirs, he had giuen him himselfe. Right thus doe I iudge the case to be betweene your Worships and my selfe: It may trouble me that I haue no better to giue, but I know it con∣tents you that I giue my selfe, to wit, my presence to your persons, my prayers for your estates, and my vttermost abilities in the execution of my weake ministerie for the eternall good of your, with all my deare peoples, soules. A taste of this I offer vnto you in these two Sermons, which were first made publike at two Assizes by the ioynt request of you both: next are made pub¦like in Print by mine owne offer, & desire of the good of Gods Church. God giue them accep∣tance in the eies of his people. I doe not looke that they should finde a like entertainment a∣mongst all. My aime is to warme the hearts of my deare Countrymen: whereto if the force of my poore sparke will not extend, my neerer aim is to doe good vnto my flocke: which yet if I cannot reach, my neerest aime is to shew my selfe thankfull vnto you both; and aboue all to
 set forth the honour of God in awaking consci∣ence, and wooing and winning desires to this his true Church. Busie are the aduersaries of our common mother (the Church of England) to gaine appetites and affections to Rome. Many words are thought too few, much eloquence too little, and the rowling of all stones not enough to this end. If therefore Croesus his dumbe sonne could speake when he saw one offering violence to his father,Homo, ne intersi∣cias Croesum. saying, O man, kill not Croesus: then no maruell if we, that are speaking sonnes of our deare Mother, doe plead her cause, and redeeme her credit from the slander of strangers, yea of her vnnaturall children. It was a militarie law of old, that the souldiers who had not killed an enemie should not be girded with a girdle but with an halter: and surely me thinks the law were good to be executed vpon them who haue not maintained the Church their mother as they are able. To auoid this censure I haue done my best, as I could, in a word: and if I meet with a heauier censure for doing what I haue, than if I had done nothing; my comfort is that I haue vsed my talent with an honest heart; and there∣fore am not altogether out of hope, that I may be a little blast in Gods mouth, a little to con∣sume the Man of Sinne in them that cannot
 search either more large or learned bookes. There is but one thing aboue the rest which breedeth preiudice in mens minds, and keeps them from making vse of our writings: and that is this, A politike perswasion by cunning leaders, that we preach a new doctrine, and walke not in the traces of our forefathers. But if either of these could be iustly fastned vpon vs, we should hate our selues, our doctrine, our course. As for our doctrine, we heartily confesse that it is impossible that sauing truth should be kept vp in a corner and not disclosed till latter dayes. It neither stands with Gods loue, who willeth that all men should be saued and come to the knowledge of the truth: nor with his truth, who hath promised to leade his Church, (so long as it is so) not by diuine vnction only, as others say, but by ordinarie meanes, into all supernaturall truths. Therefore as our blessed Sauiour put his doctrine vpon this triall, From the beginning it was not so; euen so doe we. It is true, that truth must stand though it haue no outward thing to com∣mend it, euen naked truth. When therefore we ap∣peale to the times before,Veritati credi∣mus, non quia cana, sed quia sana. we doe it not as if An∣tiquitie could make a truth, or as if we had no other cause to embrace it; for the Deuill was frō the beginning, though God was before him;
 (In which respect as Aristippus said to one who bragged of his swimming, Art not thou ashamed to boast of that which euery sprat can doe? so may we answer the great braggers of Antiquitie, that they may be ashamed to boast of that which the Deuils may claime as well as they) but we doe it as outwardly commending that which is al∣ready truth vnto vs. Now because our aduersa∣ries tell vs that the truth we boast of hath not this badge, but is of yesterday of Luthers and Cal∣uins hatching; I humbly beseech you but to in∣quire  into three points: First, whether that which is new be alwaies to be reiected?Vide Musc. h. comm. We can∣not affirme it, because it is not euill in it selfe, and in it owne nature: for who desires not a new house rather than an old, and a new gar∣ment rather than one consumed with age? I know there is difference betweene earthly and heauenly things, but euen in these things new∣nesse in it selfe is not to be disallowed. For Christ compares his doctrine to new wine;Matth 9. and saith, A new commandement giue I vnto you;Ioh. 13. and giueth a new testament,Luk. 22. whereof the cup in the Sacrament is a signe and seale. It remaineth then that we doe distinguish of newnesse, and finde out two kindes of it: The first we may call cursed Nouel∣tie, when, by intrusion of errour to those that are
 in the right way, truth and goodnesse are iustled out of the way:Deut. 32. as when the Iewes brought in new and strange gods which their fathers knew not, the false Apostles another Gospell,Gal. 1.6. and the like. The second wee may call gracious newnesse, when diuine truth is brought in to those that are in sinne and errour.1 Cor. 5. Thus those that are in the old leauen of sinne are prouoked to newnesse;2 Cor. 5. Eph. 4. Col. 3. Mar. 1.27. Act. 17.19. and our fathers who were in the old way of errour had the new doctrine of the Gos∣pell preached vnto them. Secondly, put case  that that which is new is alwaies reproueable;Illud novum est quod antea nec fuit unquam, nec visum est, nec au∣ditum hactenus, sed jam primùm coepit, & in lucem emersit. is the truth in our Church new? No surely: that did not then begin to be, when the fresh preaching of it was renewed. For it is that which the Pa∣triarchs, Prophets, and Apostles, haue taught and beleeued; and from thence we fetch it. We carry it along in that little flocke of all times, who, according to the measure of meanes which God vouchsafed, haue kept their garments in the midst of Popish tyrannie, and at the length af∣ter much corruption, contracted through the want of watchfulnesse in a secure & prosperous estate, we present it vnto the Church againe in that blessed manner wherein we now enioy it. As the Law of Moses was not new when it was published vnto Israel, but the renewed law of
 nature; and the Gospell was not new, when it was preached by the Apostles, but the re∣newed doctrine of faith: so the truth of our Church was not new, when it was published by Luther, and Caluin, and the other Worthies of God; but the renewed truth which appeared more gloriously after the desperate sicknesse of errour in the Church vnder the more preuai∣ling power of Antichrist. If you shall here say, that it did appeare new to the wise of that age; I yeeld it did so to the wise men after the flesh:  but (in the third place) through whose default was that? Surely through the default of our be∣guiled Fathers, who, being ouercome with glo∣rious titles, with outward splendor, with the mysterie of the abhominations in the golden cup, and with the custome of many yeeres which grew vpon them by degrees like rotten∣nesse at the coare of a beautifull apple, thought that our change brought in a noueltie. Hence it came that the ancient Apostolique truth was not acknowledged of her children. Euen as if a true mother should be banished from her house, and returning after a long season should not be knowne of her owne children: So truth, being banished by that vnholy chaire, and falshood admitted through the neglect of
 our improuident fathers, was scarce confessed of them that were her children at her returne. These three points being thus considered, we say,Act. 24.14. that after the way which they call heresie and no∣ueltie, we worship the Lord God of our fathers; but that our truth and doctrine is noueltie, wee leaue it vnto them that can to proue. Especi∣ally considering that we take but his libertie, who, being vrged with what a Father thought,Sed pater patrum Apostolus aliter sensit. Mihi antiquitas Iesus Christus, cui non obedire ma∣nifestus est & ir∣remissibilis inte∣ritus. said, But the Apostle the father of Fathers hath thought otherwise; and resolue with another, that Iesus Christ is our antiquitie, whom not to obey is apparent and irremissible ruine.
Now for the second part of the charge, that we walke not in the traces of our forefathers; may it please your Worships to consider thus much: First, that we hearken to the voice of God in the Scriptures, which doe blame Gods owne people for sticking too close vnto the examples of their fathers,Ir. 44.16, 17. Ezek. 20.18, 19, 30. where the word of God giues no warrant; and doe threaten them who follow their fathers who haue forsaken the Lord and walked after other gods;Ezek. 16.11, 12, 13. and doe charge them that they should not be as their fathers, vnto whom the Prophets said,Zach. 1.4. Turne from your euill waies, but they would not heare. Se∣condly, we haue tender and child-like affecti∣ons
 to our forefathers. And therefore wee cheerefully imitate their manifest vertues; we doe, in reuerence to their persons, burie their errors in obliuion; of their doubtfull actions wee doe admit of the most fauourable con∣struction; the blemishes of their religion wee wash from their vnderstandings, wills, and affe∣ctions, with remembring their miserable times wherein the key of knowledge was kept from them, and the blindnesse of their guides, who kept them in darknesse that they might the better make their owne games: and concer∣ning their eternall estate with God, we haue thoughts of comfort, both because their igno∣rance was ineuitable, as also because they pra∣ctised according to that Christian knowledge which then was attainable, and sinned not wilfully as we doe against that glorious light which God doth now offer in the ministerie of his most holy word. Thirdly, considering that our fore-fathers acts are no sufficient war∣rant for vs, wee, notwithstanding our reue∣rence vnto them, dare not sweare to their sayings, and admit of a blinde imitation of their actions without triall; but, with a holy anger against that cursed apostasie which mis∣led our deare predecessors, and brought them
 to some acts of superstition, we bring them to the touchstone of Gods word, and where∣in he will haue vs leaue them we follow God, and humbly thanke him for that reuelation; wherein he will giue vs leaue to goe with them, we cheerefully follow them; blessing the same God who made them such faithfull guides.
Thus (I feare) I haue beene too long in stri∣uing to root out the conceits of noueltie and vnnaturalnesse in those truths, which our wri∣tings will present vnto you. But hauing so good proofe of both your loues vnto me, I doubt not but either of you, and both of you, will spare so much time as may afford diligent reading and obseruation of what is written. As for the Wri∣ter, yee may haue a more complementall, not a more heartie well-willer. As for the subiect of my writing, as Terentius, a noble Captaine, in daies of old, when he saw his petition (which he put vp for the Christians) to be torne in peeces by the Emperor, gathered vp the tottered shreds, and said, I seeke neither houses nor lands, gold nor gaine, but a Church: So haue I wholly aimed at Conscience and a Church, the Church of God amongst vs. What shall I now say? To you (Sir) as Occham said to the Emperour in an∣other case and kinde, when he was vexed with
 the Popes ambition;Tu me defende gladio, ego te de∣fendam verbo. Defend me with your sword, and I will defend and second you by the Word, the Spirits sword. To you (Madame) as Paul to the Hebrewes, Pray for vs:Hebr. 13.18. for we are assured that we haue a good con∣science in all things, willing to liue honestly. To you both, liue to your selues, liue to yours, liue to the Church of God amongst vs. So shall hee with more cheare put vp your suits to God, who al∣readie is much, and desires to be more bound vnto your Worships, and shall rest

