



THat which the Apostle hath seue∣rally
deliuered in the two for∣mer
Discourses, dedicated to
your most Royall Parents, hee
now in this last Treatise collects
and conioynes in one, which ther∣fore
of right can appertaine to
none more then to you Sir, who
being by them both the happy fruite of heauenly proui∣dence,
and decrest pledge of their mutuall loue, and ioy,
may iustly challenge interest in the smallest good ouer
which their names are named. Sir, here is the way to
that Crowne of Triumph, which the more you know,
the more (I hope) shall you place your glory in it. Crownes

of earthly Kingdomes are indeede the gfts of God, but
such as bring not so much Honour as they breed vnquiet∣nesse.
O nobilem magis quam foelicem pannum (said
Antigonus.) If the cares which dwell in the Diadem
wre knowne, no man would stoope to the ground to
take it vp (said Seleucus.) And albeit, it be not giuen to
all to know this in their entrie to Honour, yet are they
all compelled to acknowledge it in the end. Seuerus Mo∣nrch
of the world, found his Crownes but comfortlesse
to him in death, ,
I haue (said hee) beene all things, and it profiteth mee
nothing. Not onely the teares of Xerxes, but the laments
of Salomon may witnesse to all the world, that the end
of the worme-eaten pleasures of this life, is heauie dis∣pleasure:
yea, the golden head of Babell had at length
worms spread vnder him, & worms to couer him. Esa. 14
For all flesh is grasse, and the glory thereof as the
flowre of the field: Onely, The word of the Lord en∣dures
for euer. By which that same God who hath called
you to be an apparant Heyre of the most famous King∣domes
on earth, doth also call your Grace to a more cer∣taine
inheritance of a better Kingdome in heauen, which
cannot be shaken: whereby aboue other Princes, and
Rulers of the earth yee are blessed, if so be yee answere
your Calling, endeauouring to be no lesse than you are na∣med:
Principem te agnosce neseruias affectibus. It is
vnseemely in any, but most of all in a Prince, to become
asruant, eyther to the corrupt humours of men with∣out
him, who creeping in into the Courts of Kings, like
wormes into the bosome of excellent trees, doe nothing

but consume them: whom Godly Constantine properly
called Tineas & Sorices palatij, subtile peruerters of
the good inclination of Princes in manners and Religion,
where they can preuaile: or yet to the disordered affecti∣ons
of his owne heart, which if they be not restrained
doe quickly turne the glory of a man into shame. What
did it profit Cham that hee was the Sonne of Noah,
the Monarch of the world, and Patriarch of the Church
in his time; or that hee was the Heyre of the third part
of the world?Chrisost. vitia siquidem voluntatis vicerunt pri∣uelegia
naturae, his owne vndantoned will bursting out
in contempt of his Father, brought vpon him that curse,
and shamefull name, A Seruant of Seruants, which was
neuer taken from him. Seeing God (as saith the Apostle)
is the glory of man, what honour can make that man glori∣ous,
who caryes not the Image of God, consisting in righte∣ousnesse,
and true holinesse? but especially a King, whom
the very Ethnicks called Animata Dei imago in terris,
should carefully keepe that Image which keeps his glory.
Naturally facilius alijs, quam nobis imperamus, but
in very deed he shall neuer be a skilfull Ruler of others,
who is not first taught of God to rule himselfe,Basil. decet
eum qui alijs praefectus est interiora sua decenter
adornare.
The best remedie against both these euils, is to embrace
that wholesome counsell giuen by God to the Gouernors
of his people, Let not the booke of the Law depart from
thee, but meditate in it day and night, that thou
maist do according to all that is written therein: turne
not away from it to the right hand nor to the left, so

shalt thou make thy way prosperous, and shalt haue
good successe. Beware of those Lucifugae, haters of the
light, because it discouers the darknesse of their errours,
Qui cum a Scripturis redarguuntur,Tertull. in accusationem
Scripturarum se conuertunt. As the wise men follow∣ing
the Starre, were at length led by it to Christ, so if
according to Peters counsell, yee take heed to the light
that shineth in darkenesse, not onely shall the day star
arise in your heart, but that cleare shining Sunne of
Righteousnesse (so named by Malachie) euer rising and
neuer going downe, shall illuminate you with his bright∣nesse.
And herewithall take to you the domestique exam∣ple
of your Royall Father, who stands before you as a
paterne of pietie, viuum omnis virtutis examplar: it
shall be no small proofe of your progresse in vertue, and
greatest praise among your godly Subiects, that yee be a
follower of him. And so praying Almightie God that your
happie deeds may exceed all that great hope which is con∣ceiued
of you, I humbly take my leaue.

