



HAuing drawne a verye briefe and small Catechisme (wor∣shipful M. Baileifes, and the residue of my deere Brethren) for the priuate instruction of the pe∣tites and families of this great con∣gregation, for the better preparing of them to the reuerent vse of the holy Supper of the Lord, and being required by your godly Pastor, and diuers other, to haue it published for the more easie helpe of the sim∣ple and ignoraunt. I, your vnwor∣thy Teacher, beeing ready to doo what duetie I can, for the furthe∣raunce of your saluation general∣ly,
 which I wish and long for, from my verye heart roote in Christ Ie∣sus: haue thought good to prefixe these fewe words in way of dedica∣tion of this small thing, to your worshippe, and the residue: presu∣ming vppon your Christian allow∣ance of my well meaning, hauing added heerevnto a certaine forme of confession, prayer, & thanksgiuing, though plaine, yet I hope necessa∣rie, and comfortable for the vse of the Christian Families of your con¦gregation. And sith God hath by his owne hand, sette your worships in the place of ciuill gouernment, in this your corporation, graunted by the noble progenitors of her Ma∣iestie, and continued stil, and vphol∣den by her gracious bounty. Let me bee so bolde with you, as in a word to put you in minde, and the residue of your worshipfull cōpany eligible to that office, what thinges are most necessary for you to looke vnto in that charge. God hath gy∣uen
 you a benefite and priuiledge of liberty, not common to all her Ma∣iesties people, that you might the better bee fortified with meanes to further Gods glorie in your charge: and because I perswade my selfe of the readines of you, and the residue of your Brethren, to set your hands and helpe to each lawful thing, ten∣ding to Gods glory, agreeable to his word, which you all solemnly pro∣mised at my firste entrie amongst you, and haue somewhat approued the same, by your electing both of faithfull & helpfull ministers of the word, as also of so wise and godlie a Steward among you, I resolue my selfe of the good successe of my la∣bours, & of your willing obeisance to the Lordes wyll propounded in his word. You must know that the burthen of this people lieth vppon your shoulders, and that their eyes looke at you, as those by whose ex∣ample the people either perish and fall, or are preserued and staied vp,
 for the fall and vprysing of manie dependeth vpon publique persons. Therefore in a Magistrate, first is required a religious minde, acquain∣ted with Gods counsel in his word, that hee exercising himselfe therein day and night,Psal, 1 2, might growe wyse in the Lords causes: for this charge is laide vpon you from the Lorde, to applie your selues to the worde of God, for so it is saide of the Magi∣strate, Deu. 17.Deu. 17 19, The word shalbe with him, and he shall reade therein all the dayes of his life, that he may learne to feare the Lord his God, and to keepe all the wordes of this Lawe to doo them. &c.Iosu. 1.8, Also Ioshua is straightly char∣ged: Let not this booke of the Lawe depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and night, that thou mayst doo according to all that is written therein, then shalt thou make thy way prosperous &c. So Iethro commaun¦deth Moses, to chuse men fearing God. Exo. 18.Exo, 18, 21 Prouide you among all the people men of good courage, fea∣ring
 God, men dealing truely, hating couetousnes, and appoint them to bee Rulers, &c. So as you see that Ma∣gistrates must be religious, and also men of courage,Iosu. 2, 7, Exo, 18 21, to execute iustice in all causes, not corrupt with gyftes, nor accepting the faces of menne, without foolish pittie, or faint-har∣ted feare, and without crueltie or re¦uenging affections, but of al meek∣nes & lenitie. They must performe all faythfulnes and truth with equi∣tie, as those that are members of the same bodie, appointed to see distri∣butiue and equall iustice to bee ad∣ministred to eache man according∣lie, for so Moses requireth, that they shalbe men dealing truely,Exo, 18, 21, so as they must not looke to men, but to the causes, taking heede of that caueat that Moses giueth. Exo. 23.Exo, 23 12, Thou shalt not receiue a false tale, thou shalt not follow a multitude to doo euill, ney¦ther agree in a controuersie to decline after many, and ouerthrow the trueth, &c. Neither must such neglect the
 execution of iustice against the of∣fenders, either for feare of reproche or rebuke, least they countenaunce sinne thereby, and beare the guylt of other mens fals.Eccl. 8, 11 For because sen∣tence against an euyl worke is not exe∣cuted speedely, therfore the hart of the Chyldren of men is fully sette in them to doo euill.Exo. 18 21. In all these thinges Co∣uetousnes must be shunned, the step∣mother and ouerthrower of all iu∣stice and truth, which throweth out the harts euen of the wise to manie noisome lustes, which drowne men in perdition:1, Tim, 6, 9, 10 verie daungerous to men of wealth or authority, and euer weighting vpō that degree of men. VVherefore I beseeche you, good my worshipfull Brethren, vouch∣safe the accepting of these instructi∣ons written in hast, with a minde vnfeynedlie wishing you all good. Be you presidents in godly & sober exāple to this great people, ouersee your own housholds first, that they may be patterns & lights of godlie
 discipline to others. Remember Io∣shua his protestation,Iosu. 2.4 I and my hous∣holde wyll serue the Lord. Remem∣ber Nehemiah,Nehe. 5. who enforced hys owne example and his seruantes, to perswade his brethren to iustice and loue.Act. 10. Remember how Cornelius and his houshold feared God. Nowe then beloued, as you loue the Lorde, as you tender your owne soules, and your charges, as you beare naturall affection to your common safetie, and happines, I beseeche you in the bowels of Iesus Christ, indeuour to these thinges, both small and great, that you may profite in the worke of your saluation, so shall you be fa∣mous in the church of God & com¦mon weale, you shal glad the soules of vs, that labor amongst you in the word, you shal bring glory to God, & eternal happines to your selus in the day of Christ Iesus. Let Gods boke be orderlie read with reuerēce, daily in your families, let prayer be exercised in your housholdes and
 vouchsafe to helpe them in this small Ca∣techisme, that they may be fitte for further instruction. Giue dilligence to harken to the word of lyfe, and to put in vre these fewe prayers in this little booke or other, with humili∣tie, reuerence, a liuelie sence and fee∣ling of your miserie, faith, thankful¦nes, hope, and with vnfained desire of profiting in all dueties, of fayth and loue towards God & your bre∣thren. For I liue if you stande in the fayth: and sith God hath vouchsa∣fed the blessed tidinges of saluation vppon you in the ministrie of hys word, embrace it with thankfulnes, and studie for all christian peace and vnitie among your selues, fearing God, furthering his holye religion, and all dueties of loue among men, that so our Towne may flourishe and prosper in all thinges, otherwise wee can hope of no blessing at the hand of God. There is great cause why care should bee hadde heerein. Your Towne bordering vppon the
 sea, is in perrill to forraine inuasi∣ons, and to be steyned with the cor∣rupt manners of other Countries, to drinke in iniquitie euen as water, therefore the more care to be hadde ouer it. Christ sawe such Townes bordering on the Seas to be in most daunger sundrie wayes, and there∣fore frequēted them most, & vouch∣safed his presence & doctrine chief∣liest amongst them. This is my sute to your worshippes, this is my sute to the whole company, to the whole congregation, yea to euery soule amongst you,Phil, 2, 1, If ye euer recei∣ued comfort in Christ, if euer you had loue to the brethren, if euer any felow¦ship of the spirit, if any compassion & mercy, that you fulfyll my ioy, Euen in this, to be of one minde in doc∣trine, of one consent in a godly and christian life, to apply all dueties of Gods worship, to haue care of your families, instructing, teaching, and calling vpon them to be catechised, to reade & heare the word, bee your
 selues forward therein, exercisyng prayer, reading and hearing of the word, in faith & good conscience, that so by christian exercises, your faith and obedience may be increa∣sed, your families reformed, your Towne happily gouerned, that o∣thers may take example by you, God may be glorified, all spirituall blessings may be heaped vpon you, and continued to your posterity af∣ter you, vnto many generations, your selues may in the ende receiue the possession of euerlasting life, with Christ Iesus in the kingdome of God: to whose blessed tuition I commend you, and yours, pray∣ing the Lorde to multiplye all hys graces, and mercies vppon you, and the whole people, to keepe you in safetie from the daunger of ene∣mies, to sanctify you in his trueth, to blesse you in your gouernment, the people in obeying, and to make you perfitte in all good workes, to
 doo his wyll, working in you that which is pleasant in his sight, tho∣rough Iesus Christe. To whome with the Father and the holy spirit be all prayse and honor for euer and euer. Amen.

