



AMong many most ex∣cellent graces wherwith your Princely Minde is beautified, your High∣nesses euer constant, and vndiuertable affection toward all your loyall seruants is not one of the least.
Principis est virtus maxima nosce suos.
Martial.
This emboldeneth mee to offer to your Highnesse patronage this little Treatise which first I dedicated to your Highnesse honorable seruant, of good memory, the Earle of Dunbar, and presented to himselfe in writing, while hee was here in this Country, but before it could be finished by the Printer, he was taken away

by bitter and vntimely Death. For so, after that memorable saying of Plinius secundus, iustly may I tell it. Mihi acerba semper, & im∣matura videtur esse mors illorum, qui immortale aliquid parant: Nam qui voluptatibus dediti quasi in diem viuunt, viuendi causas quotidiè finiunt, qui vero posteros cogitant, & memoriam su operis ostendunt, his nulla mors non immatura est, vt quae semper inchoatum aliquid abrumpat. But of this, what I might speake, (I doubt not) vvith your Highnesse approbation, and of such your Maiesties subiects as loue truth, and peace, I dare not:
————Nam vulneramentis Intempestiuè, qui mouet illa, nouat.
Yet when all is reckoned to the vttermost, our account in the end is, that we can lose nothing by the death of any, so long as we enioy the be∣nefite of your Highnesse life, which I pray God may be long and happy, exceeding all our dayes, who from our young yeares hath felt the sweetnesse of your Maiesties most wise, and peaceable regiment. For what he was, eyther for grauity in conuersation, or wisedome in go∣uernment, he was it by your Highnesse instru∣ction, as a Disciple trayned vp by your selfe: who out of the treasure of your Princely minde can imprint the like stampe of good things in others, which you did in him, if so be (which

I must craue pardon to speake) your Highnesse fore-gather with such another obiect, as hee was, whereupon to worke. For as the Sunne in the firmament suppose he shine alike vpon ma∣ny Palaces at one time, yet doth most illumi∣nate those, which haue most ample windowes to receiue his light: so that if any of them be not sufficiently lightsome, the fault is not in the Sunne, but in themselues, for hee is alike good vnto them all, if they were alike capable of his goodnesse, so is it with a King in the middest of his Nobles, Counsailours, and spe∣ciall seruants. But least I goe beyond my line, profering to stretch mine arme higher then my stature may carie it, I returne to my humble supplication, that seeing he who now translated to the Court of heauen, leades there a happy and blessed life, hath no other meane on earth, whereby to liue among men but by his good name. Your Maiestie who gaue him a wealthy and honourable life for his vertue, while he was in the body, will continue to keepe life to his name, when himselfe is gone. For thus euen in the estimation of Ethniques who had but Na∣tures light, is alterum patrimonium, which in this earth is the iust reward of a vertuous life;
Et memorem famam qui benè gessit, habet.
And for this cause that your Highnesse vvill

grant your fauourable countenance to this lit∣tle Treatise, which in token of my loue toward him for his vnfained affection toward your Highnesse seruice, I did first put forth vnder his name, and now humbly craues to be sha∣dowed vnder your Highnesse protection.


Prouerbs 10. 7.
The memoriall of the iust shall be blessed, but the name of the wicked shall rott.

