


THE singuler care (Right Reuerend) which your Lordship hath had in your owne Diocesse,1. Tim. 3.1. confirmeth the sentence of Saint Paul. That it is a true saying, if any man desire the office of a Bishop, he desireth a worthie worke; For the Church as Saint Bernard saith, hath beene troubled with three conflictes; from Tyrants, Heretickes, and Hipocrites. The first was incountered by the patience of Martyrs, which victoriously conquered the crueltie of those times.Mallei haereti∣carum. The second, with the vnanswerable lear∣ning of the ancient Fathers, many of them beeing (as they are called) the hammers of Heretickes. The last with the synceritie and diligence of Bishops, for what other re∣medie remaineth for the hypocrisie of these daies (if that may be tearmed hypocrisie which cannot lurke, by reason

of the aboundance, nor desireth not by reason of his boldnes) but the singuler integritie, and courage executing the disci∣pline of the Church in your Lordship & others of your place,Esto subiectus pōtifici, & quasi parentem ani∣mae suspice▪ Herom.
Sermo aedisi∣catio, vita lu∣stia, presentia grata, & me∣moria in Be∣nedictione. Be. to whom Saint Ierom (although sower in many things) wish∣eth vs to be subiect, and giue reuerence as to the parents of our soules. For in a true Bishop in deed, his words are edifi∣cations, his life righteousnes; his presence delightfull, and his memorie blessed. Thus shall your Lordship bring to passe, that those who are not, may be made wise; that those who are, may not be deceiued, that such as haue beene decei∣ued may be wise againe: that vnbeleeuers may be conuer∣ted vnto the faith, that such as were conuerted, may not be turned from it, that those who are, may returne vnto it, that men peruerted may be directed aright, that men sub∣uerted may be called vnto the truth, and that the subuerters themselues, may be conuinced with strong reasons, eyther to amend if it be possible, or if not, to loose their authoritie, that they hurt not others. Of these I may say as Saint Ber∣nard doth, (but I will speake to their owne vnderstanding) they are Canes ad scissionem, vulpes ad fraudem; and by your Lordships care, and the rest of the Bishops: aut cor∣rigendi, ne pereant, aut ne perimant coercendi. Now particulerly vnder your Honours fauour, I will expresse in few words, why the answere of this Apologie is directed vn∣to your Lordship, as to one to whom in many respects I am especially bound. First, it was thought fit, that seeing the reasons were giuen vnto your Lordship as an account of that obedience, which a Minister vnder your owne charge did owe vnto you, the answere (how meane soeuer) should be admitted to plead in the hearing of the same Iudge, which being finished long since, was by authoritie deferred, in hope that silence and time, would haue giuen satisfaction to all, who were not fully resolued in this cause. Heereunto I

add my owne particuler Motiues (I hope without offence) which are and shall be iust reasons to make me humbly ob∣serue your honour;Christ Col∣ledge, and Queens Col∣ledge in Cans. the nearenesse of the same soyle which gaue the first ayre vnto vs both, then the same two Colled∣ges which gaue furtherance to both our studies: and lastly, the entrance into my Ministerie, which with many fauours I receiued by the imposition of your Lordships hands, these all as they are, hopefull assurances of your pardon for this boldnes, so they are and shall be strong reasons to make me re∣maine in all dutie at your Honours seruice. Lambeth. Ianuarie 22. 1605.

