



SIR, The Apostle S. Paule, thatAct. 9. 15. chosen vessell of God, and his ambassadour, sent forth into the world to bring in the house of Iapheth into the tents of Sem,Gen. 9. 27. hauing in his peregrination (vn∣dertaken for preaching) from Ie∣rusalem vnto Illyricu, seeneRom. 15. 19. the most pleasant parts of the world, and in an extasie transported from earth into the third heauen, seene also2 Cor. 12. the pleasures of Paradise, as one who knew both, not by naked speculation but experience, giues out his iudge∣ment of both, that the most excellent things of this worldPhilip. 3. 8. were but dung, in respect of the Lord Iesus, and that whatsoeuer pleasure on earth may delight the eye or eare1 Cor. . 9.
 of man, is by infinite degrees inferiour to those, which God hath prepared for his children: and therefore passing by both the pleasures of life, and terrors of death, he fixed his eyes stedfastly vpon that prize of the high calling ofPhilip. 3. 14. God; forgetting all other things, he became carefull onely of this one, so to runne, and fulfill his course with ioy, thatAct. 20. 24. he might obtaine that crowne. This as hee had learned1. Cor. 9. 25. like a good disciple in the schoole of Christ, so like a faith∣full Doctor doth he here deliuer it vnto others, letting vs see, that the onely comfort of a Christian on earth con∣sists in this, to know that his name is written in heauen in the booke of life: which as in this treatise he confirmeth vnto vs by the inseparable commixion of the lincks of the golden chaine of saluation, specially of our calling, with our election, and glorification, so he endeuors to draw the hearts of all the children of God toward it, as that maine and onely point, wherein true peace and ioy is to be found, and without which all other comforts in the world; yea,Luke. 20. 20 though it were superioritie ouer all the Angels of darke∣nesse in hell, and all the bodies of men on earth shall beIob. 16. 2. found in the end but miserable comforters.
I may truly say, what I haue found in experience, that this the Apostles most comfortable treatise, to such as can Come and see, shall not onely be as the top of PisgahDeut. 34, to Moses, out of which hee saw the promised Canaan, but that also the man effectually called, shall heare in it, the testimony of the heauenly oracle, speyking to his heart, as cleerely as the Angel did vnto Daniel, that hee is aDan. 9. 13. man beloued of God, elected an heire of grace and glory. And therefore hauing resolued to make common for the
 vse of others, those comfortable meditations, which it pleased God, out of this excellent treatise to communi∣cate vnto me, I was also after long haesitation embold∣ned to present them to your Maiestie, not as of minde to bring by them any good vnto your Highnesse, but begging to them from your sacred name fauourable protection. For I humbly acknowledge, that from so base a minde as mine is, nothing can proceede worthy so great a Maiestie as God hath made you, not so much in regard of those fa∣mous Kingdomes ouer which your Highnesse stretches out your Scepter, as of those gifts of gouernment, by which ye rule. Your Highnesse hauing receiued from God cum Diademate, diuinum oleum, & cum Sceptro oculum. Kingly authoritie with Christian wisedome, sacred Maie∣stie with singular meekenesse, being so euident in your Highnesse, that by them the worst sort of your Maiesties subiects haue been wonderfully conuinced, the better sort confirmed to feare you as their King, to loue you as their Father: A conquest, aboue which no greater can be, Cum amari, coli, diligi, maius sit imperio. And this is it, which hath ouercome in me all contrarie feares, arising of the conscience of my weaknesse, that when yur Highnesse great wisedome, shall perceiue in these labours my great infirmities, yet your Maiestie of your rare meeknesse will fauourably censure them. Euen the starres which are obscured in presence of the sunne, are profitable in his ab∣sence to giue light to the earth, and howsoeuer any light that is in these discourses, shall vnder your Highnesse eye be indeede but darkenesse, yet if with your Highnesse fa∣uor they be allowed to giue such glimmering light as
 they haue vnto others, it shalbe no small comfort vnto me, and my greatest thankefulnesse shalbe declared in my dayly prayers vnto the Lord God for your Maiestie, that the name of Iacobs God may defend you from all euill, and the Lord may send you help out of his Sanctuarie in all your need, according as hee hath done.Psal. 20. 1. O King, beloued of God, hated of none but for Gods sake,Psal. 21. 1. keepe still your heart in the loue of God, and his truth, Reioyce in the strength of your God; and feare notPsal. 56. 4. what flesh can doe vnto you. Is it not the Lord, whoPsal. 18. 43. set your Highnesse on the throne, to be a feeder of his people Israel? Is it not the Lord who hath deliuered your Maiestie from the contentions of the people, and se∣cret snares of your cursed enimies? though the ArchersGen. 49. 23. grieued you, hated you, and shot at you, were not the hands of your armes strengthened by the hands of theGen. 49. 25. mightie God of Iacob? Is it not the almightie, who hath blessed your Maiesty with heauenly blessings from aboue, with blessings of the depth that lyes beneath, with bles∣singsPsal. 21. 3. of the breast and wombe?
Sir, let his liberall blessings wherewith the Lord your God hath preuented you, be so many obligations bindingPsal. 18. 50 your Highnesse to honour the Lord, who hath honouredGen. 12. 1. you. Let his fore past manifold deliuerances be as so ma∣ny confirmations, that if your Maiestie rest in him, andPsal. 68. 20. not in man, he will still be a buckler vnto you. Let Abad∣don the King of the Locusts that Romish vsurper rage,Reuel. 9. 11. Vnto the Lord belongs the issues of death. Can Ba∣laam curse, where God hath blessed? yea can SathanNumb. 23. 8. hurt the man, who is hedged by the Lord? Let theIob. 1. 10.
 Ambassadours of new Babel, more shamelesse than Sen∣nacherib2 Kin. 18. his Rabsache, raile at good king Ezekiah ru∣ling in Ierusalem, the Lord hath yet a hooke for hisEsa. 37. 39. nosethrils, and a bridle for his lips. Doe not the eyes of the Lord behold the whole earth, to shew himselfe strong with them that are strong, and of a perfect heart2 Chr. 16. 9. toward him? Therefore feare not their feare, but sancti∣fieEsa. 8. 12. the Lord God of hostes, let him be your feare, and he shalbe a Sanctuarie vnto your Maiestie. Count it a partPsal. 69. 9. of your high glory, and no smal matter of your Maiesties ioy, that with Christ you beare this peece of his crosse,Psal. 21. 7. that the rebukes of them who rebuke the Lord, are fal∣len vpon you? and trust still, O King, in the Lord, and in the mercie of the most High, and so your Maiestie shall neuer fall. Long may your Highnesse liue and raigne ouer vs, as a faithfull seruant to your God, and a happie King of many blessings to your people.

