



THe Lord our God (Right Ho∣norable)
who in great mercy
hath caused by his spirit, the ho∣lie
Scriptures to be written for
our learning: hath also com∣manded,
that all men shoulde
studdy therin both day & night:
that so by the helpe of the same
spirite, men might write them in their hartes. The ende
hereof is, that thereby they may recouer the Image of
that new man, which againe is created after the like∣nesse
of God in knowledge and holinesse.
And while the people of Israel obserued this: they in∣ioyed
peace throughout their borders, and great plen∣tie
within their Pallaces. And such feare God strocke
into the harts of their enemies round about, that none
durst stirre against them. But at what time they cast off
this, and chose new Gods, and made no account of the
knowledge of the true God, nor of the learned, that

should to them the same God teach: Then was there
warre in the gate, and no peace to any that went in or
out, but great troubles arose to all the inhabitantes of
the earth. For nation destroyed nation, and Cittie de∣stroyed
Cittie, and God troubled them with all maner
of aduersities.
This standing thus, and God remaining vnchange∣able,
I assure my selfe of all kingdomes (to whom the
worde of God is sent) this may be spoken. That they,
Elias, I meane, the men like Elias: Iosua, Samuel, Dauid,
Daniel, and such: whose delightes are in the law of
the Lord, are the Horses and Chariots of a kingdome.
O noble Sir, I beseech you therefore consider well
therof: and let those gracious words of good king Asa,
when ten hundreth thousand came against him: and
those of King Abiah, when eight hundreth thousand
came against him: and those of Ioab the Captayne,
when the Ammonites & Aramites came against Dauid,
be writ most sure in your noble hart: that so they may
proceede from your lippes, to the incouragement of
the common sort; whose hartes often fayle in rumors of
troubles. I know your Honor needeth not to be taught,
how Nobilitie giuen to the holy worde, must be the
strongest pillers of the Church. Israel through all ages
so stoode firme: but otherwyse fell.
Iosua being equall to a Prophet, conquered the land
through his constancie and courage in diuinity. But af∣ter
him great contempt of Religion arose: wherefore
much of their land againe they lost: and greatly trou∣bled
was that state, vntill the dayes of Samuel. For as
they often fell away, so the Lord often sould them into

the handes of spoylers: whereby in the ende that state
became Ichabod, no glory. For the glory of God the
space of seauen moneths departed from them: yet by
meanes of good Samuel, faithful in religion, was againe
setled in Israel: and so by him, the state was well helde
vp all his dayes: who although he descended from re∣bellious
Corah, yet is he for Leuy a conquerer of better
then Sichemites: and as he, so, or more, did that noble
and valiant Dauid, euen by diuinitie, recouer wholy
the land first conquered by Iosua: and Dauids title is
not so euident for a warryer, as it is for the pleasant in
songs to Israel. For to this day, most sweete is the
voyce of that sweete singer, to all that rightly vnder∣stand
his tune. But he that should vnderstand him to
the full, had need of the spirite of an Apostle. A true
patterne indeed (Right honorable) of true Nobilitie.
But yet full soone was this true patterne lost: where∣vpon
ten partes of that stately kingdome became in
short time, not onely Izrael and Loruchama, but Loam∣my
also. For full often did the Lord visit them with the
sword, aswell at home, deuouring one an other, as by
the enemy abroad: and in the ende suffered them to
be carryed quite away by the Kings of Asshur. And
God tooke no pittie: but euen as they had cast off
him from being their Lord, so he cast of them from
being his people.
Now as Ieroboam the sonne of Nebat, of the vertu∣ous
Ioseph, is set forth as a patterne for discommenda∣tions
to all that followed his wicked steps: so noble
Dauid of the house of Iuda, is the patterne set forth for
commendation to all that had care to walke his godly

pathes. Therefore no further in story for sample to true
nobilitie need I here to seeke.
Yet in so much as the fame of one of your owne
most noble progenatours soundeth in our eares to this
day, I trust it shall of none be thought amisse, yf I lay
him before your Honorable eyes, as an other example.
That noble Earle IOHN TALBOT is the man: who nei∣ther
liued as languishing in idlenes, riot, or excesse: nor
died as hauing surfited with vaine pleasures, and fonde
delyghtes: but of manly woundes receiued in open
feelde, after he had valiantly warred foure & twentie
yeeres in defence of his Princes right: a death and life
most honorable to them that are truely noble and va∣liant.
Euen so this worthy peere, togeather with his va∣liant
Sonne the Lord Lisle, in that sore battle fought
at Castilion in Fraunce, their sweete lyues did ende:
where a monument of the Earle remayneth vnto this
day, and this inscription folowing, ingrauen thervpon.
Heere lyeth the right noble Knight Iohn Talbot Earle
of Shrewsburie, Earle of Washford, Waterforth and Valence,
Lorde Talbot of Goodritche and Vrchingfeilde: Lorde
Strange of Blackmeare, Lord Verdon of Alton, Lord Crum∣well
of Wingfeilde, Lord Louetoft of Worsoppe, Lord Fur∣niuall
of Sheffeilde, and Lord Falconbridge, Knight of the
most noble orders of S. George, S. Michael, and the Golden
Fleece, Great Marshall to King Henrie the sixt of his
Realme of Fraunce, who dyed at the battle of Castilion neare
Burdeaux, Anno. 1453.
Now as this, and other your noble ancestors, haue
been alwayes at home most honorable for their fayth∣fulnes
towardes the Crowne of Englande: and for

their seruice both at home, and abrode against the
enemie, in so much that euen the very name of the
Talbot to them, hath been tirrible: so no doubt there is,
but that your selfe will shew your selfe, in all nobilitie,
as descended from such. A most noble warryer, and
faithfull subiect vnto his annoynted Prince was he,
whose example therein you follow. Therefore one
poynt more I beseech your honor, learne of that noble
Dauid your patterne. And as you and your honorable
fathers haue followed him in the other two most ho∣norable
quallities of true nobillitie, so let your selfe
surmount them all in the third.
The point desired, is, his great loue and zeale to the
Church & house of God: which was such, as no scoffes
of wicked contemners could stay him from preferring
of the same: but by how much more he seemed as a
foole, and vaine in the sight of such, for so doing, by so
much more cared not he, to become more vile, & low
in his owne eyes, if by such meanes, he might do good
thereto. Therefore if it might please your honor to
follow him in this, as you haue in the other: you shall
be sure that honour which he there speaketh off, will
follow you with great increase. And moreouer, then
shall that speech which good Abygall vsed vnto him
your noble patterne, take full effect in you. For the
Lord hath not onely promised to make my Lord a sure
house, because he is ready to helpe his noble Deborah
to fight the Lords battels, and because he is so faithfull
towards his annoynted, that no euill can be found in
him: but also for the third point, that which is much
more; euen the soule of my Lord shall be bound vp

in the bundle of life with the Lord your God, and the
soule of your enemies shall God cast out, as out of the
middle of a Sling.
Thus, being euery way ouer bould with your ho∣norable
patience, I craue pardon. I am no Scholler,
but a Draper: therefore not able to contriue my spea∣ches
in such sort, as willingly I would. My trust is, your
honor will the rather pardon me, and accept the affecti∣on
of my hart, and not weigh the rudenesse of my pen.
I was borne in Whitchurch; which, as I thinke, is one of
your honors principall Lordships: where my Ance∣stors
haue of long time beene poore well willers vnto
your noble Progenitors, as at this present my eldest
brother there, and we the rest of his bretheren here in
London, are to your honorable selfe. These things con∣sidered,
together with your honorable inclination to∣wards
good things, made me bolde to make choise of
you, to be the patron of this my smal worke of medita∣tion
against the enemy. I beseech your honor accept
thereof, according as the matter requireth, and not as
the skill of the writer deserueth. The matter is good,
though rudely handeled.
That God, who is able to do both for your Honora∣ble
selfe, and that vertuous Lady the Countice your
wife, far exceeding abundantly aboue al that I can aske
or thinke, giue vnto you both, all honour, with increase
thereof heere in this lyfe, and in the life to come, that
crowne of glory, which he hath prepared for all those
that loue and honoure him in Christ Iesus. Amen.

