



MY Lord; when I dedicated to the Earle of Dunbar, of good memo∣ry, my Treatise of the Anatomy of a Christian, I was then of purpose to haue presented to your L. this Holy Alphabet for Si∣ons Scholars; but could not per∣fit it till now. Ye liued together in his Maiesties most honourable seruice, like a paire of faithfull friends; louing and plea∣sant in your liues, and shall not be diuided in your deaths for me. As my other Treatise went forth for a witnesse of my fauour without flattery toward him (for the Dedica∣torie Epistle was printed after his death) so will I that this stand as a testimonie of my loue toward your L. partly for that which yee are▪ and partly for that which I hope yee shall be: Ille enim veraciter amat amicum, qui Deum amat in amico; aut quia est in illo, aut vt sit in illo. For he doth truely loue his friend▪ who loueth God in his friend: that is, eyther for the good which is in him; or else, that the good which he wants may be in him.
There are many in this age, with whom Satan hath coue∣nanted, as Nahash the Ammonit would haue done with the Israelites of Iabesh Golead, vpon this condition, That he put out their right eies. These men haue an eye to see, and a tong to speake of that, which is euill in another; but none to se▪ that which is good: compared properly by Nazianzen, to venemous flyes; who passing by the part that is whole, light vpon that which is sore, and make it worse then they sound it. For mine owne part, I neuer mind to be one of these. If I should praise you for the good which ye want, I knowe I should neyther please you nor prosite you; your vnder stan∣ding being more solid, then that shadowes in stead of sub∣stance, can content you: neyther yet also, on the other hand, will I so looke vnto that, which ye want, that I passe by the good which ye haue; vnder hope also that this shall make you better.
There are none who knowe your L. but haue marked an affection toward Religion so indiuertble, that no man con∣trary minded, durst euer attempt to alter it: which in this declining age deserues no small commendation. A heart in like maner toward execution of iustice, s inslexible, that ye haue preferred the lawe to the loue of men, who otherway haue bin most deere vnto you: for the which howsoeuer yee haue beene misliked of many; yet haue you proued a profita∣ble seruant to your Master in most difficill times: for By iustice the Throne is established. Your naturall iudge∣ment in discerning betweene right and wrong, may iustly be admired: specially sith your education hath not been by pre∣cepts of artes, in the Academie; but by practise of them in the Palace: where unto yee could also hardly haue at∣tained, if yee had not learned vnden such a King, as is not onely a patterns of vertue himselfe; but a solid Thealog and Philosopher, euer discussing to his Dome∣stiques of that which is good and euill, both in Religion, manners, and policie.
But my Lord; howsoeuer these be good things, and wor∣thy commendation, yet haue they need to be strengthenea with better: for all gifts, were they neuer so excellent, if they be not crowned with godlinesse, may well increase conuiction; but can render no consolation in the day of trouble. This is it therefore which now I haue to recom∣mend vnto your L. that yee growe in knowledge and in the grace of our Lorde Iesus Christ: whereunto, be∣side these common reasons that should stirre vp cuerie Christian; there are three which more particularly pro∣uoke you vnto it.
The first is, that GOD by your first generation hath brought you forth a man of honour in this earth: for in regard of naturall descent, your honourable Father, the Lorde of Baluaird, was a brother of the Earle of Tullibardin; whose house is as a noble stocke, from which hath sprung out, like branches, exceeding many honourable Families, all of the name of Murray, and hath continued in this Lande these fifteene hundreth yeares.
Your Mother, a Grahame, daughter of the right Noble Earle of Montrose; whose house hath continued with honour since the beginning of this Kingdome.
Your Mothers mother, a Keith, daughter to the right noble Earle Mershell; whose House and Family being long before honourable in this Kingdome, was sixe hundreth years agoe decorated with the Office of the Marshalship of Scotland▪ for their vertue and valour in batteil; where they continue vnto this day among the chiefest Peeres of the Realme. Your Fathers Mother, a Lyndsay, daughter to the right noble Lord, the Lord Lyndsay; whose Houe not inferiour to many in honour, may aboue many most iustly he commended for their earnest zale, and sincerr affection toward the aduancement of true Religion.
All these should greatly increase your care, that ye be no

found lesse honourable in Christ, then ye are in this world: For this world properly is compared to a Stage-play, wher∣in oftentimes Nobles are clad in beggars garments, and the beggar takes on the habite of a King; but when the guise is ended, and the maskes remoued, then euery one ap∣peares to be that which he is: and the man of base estate was not so much comforted with his temporall representa∣tion of an honourable man, as he is now grieued to see hee was but honourable in sport and shew, not in effect. Yet ma∣ny such are there in the world, who goe in the state of hono∣rable men, but shall be found in the end vessels of dishonour, To be honourable in both, is rare; yet such as may be obtey∣ned by godlinesse: for godlinesse hath the promise both of this life, and of the life to come.
The second reason; Ye haue serued his Maiestie, these eight and thirtie yeares: not as a Domestique onely; but as a Counceller and Officer of estate also: and that with so constant an affection, that ye haue not spared to incurre the displeasure and malecontentment of any whatsoeuer; so be it ye might procure pleasure and contentment to your Master. My Lord; at yee haue learned to serue most faithfully a King on earth, and for good seruice haue re∣ceiued the recompence of his Princely liberality: so thinke with your selfe how greatly ye shall be conuinced, if ye doe not learne to serue the King of heauen; whose wage to his seruants doth as farre exceed any thing yee haue, as the heauens are aboue the earth.
The third is; Ye are now striken in yeares, your Almond tree is flourished: these fiftie and eight yeares hath God spa∣red you, and not taken you away in your ignorances and sinnes, as he hath done many others, both at your right hand, and at the left. My Lord; the patience of God is called long, but his mercy euerlasting: the vse of his mercy toward his owne, is to beare with them, till they be deliuered into the hands of his mercie: then are they out of all dan∣ger;

for his mercy endures for euer: and whom once he re∣ceiues, he neuer casts away again. But wo is to the wicked: for they abuse Gods patience, to fulfill the measure of their iniquity; heaping vp wrath to themselues by the multipli∣cation of sinnes, as it were in a treasure against the day of wrath. Thus as the Fish of Iorden goe sprinkling and play∣ing in the streame thereof, till at length they fall into the Loch or salt Sea of Sodome, where they die: so are all the wicked, abusing Gods patience, carried on by their deceit∣full pleasures of sin, to a miserable end. For where in their young yeares they will not repent, in their olde age custome of sinne so confirmes them in euill, that they cannot repent; no more then a Leopard can change his spots, or a Blacke Moore his colour. Of this your may perceiue that God his long pattence, whereby he spares a man, is not a blessing, if mercy to pardon sins past, and grace to renne for the time to come, doe not follow it: yea, rather, quo diutius expe∣ctat▪ districtius iudicabit; the longer he tarie and spare, the sharper will he strike when he comes. Let this waken in your L. a care to redeeme the time, and a resolution to sa∣crifice the residue of your few yeares vnto the Lord your God.
For which cause it shall not be vnprofitable your L. re∣member these counsels: first, that ye examine diligently your by-gon life; No man knowes the things of a man, but the spirit of a man: this will tell you more of your selfe, then all the world can tell you. In this examination spare not your selfe, if you would haue God to spare you: iudge your selfe, accuse your selfe, correct your selfe, and GOD shall not iudge you. Remember when yee come to iudgement, there will be none to stand against you, if it be not your owne sinnes: so long therfore as you haue time, fall vpon them, fight with them, and doe all that ye can to vndoe them.
Where, if your L. would know how is it that a man may

vndoe the euill which he hath done; The answer is, that two manner of waies ye may doe it: first, if with good Eze∣chia ye recount your by-gon sinnes in the bitternesse of your heart; mourning for them euer when ye thinke vpon them▪ and with the eyes of faith looke to him, who being righte∣ous, died for our sinnes: sending vp strong supplications to God, that by the merit of Christs death your sinnes may be buried in the graue, and haue neuer place to stand against you in iudgement. If they be such as may be mnded by re∣stitution, faile not to do it, after the manner of good Zac∣cheus: if they be not of that nature, mend them by doing the contrarie good. This is that holie reuenge which the Apostle commends as a not able effect of repentance, That we should be reuenged of our by-gon euils, by doing the good which we know is most contrarie vnto them.
This being done for annulling of your by-gon sinnes; let your next care be to rectifie your life for the time to come▪ Salomon saies, The end of a thing is better thē the begin∣ning thereof. His meaning is of good things: for euill men waxe worse and worse; but an elect man by grace makes his latter end better then his beginning; and they who are planted in the Courts of the Lords house, flourish and bring forth fruit, euen in their olde daies.
And here againe I recommend to your L. a three fold duetie. First, remember how manie are the obligation▪ vvherein ye stand bound to the Lord your God: thinke vp∣pon that question of godlie Dauid; What shall I render to the Lord for all his benefits to me? Take an answer for it, out of these vvords of Salomon; My sonne giue me thine heart. Euerie morning offer vnto the Lord Pri∣mitias cordis, & oris tui; the first fruits of your heart and mouth: thinke vpon nothing before yee thinke on him; speake of nothing till first yee speake vnto him; be feruent and continuall in prayer. Si non semper precamur▪ sem∣per debemus habere paratum precantis affectu; f

we be not alway praying, we should alway haue readie a heart disposed to pray. The vessels of mercy should smell of mercie; and the Temples of God should neuer want the sa∣crifices of God: giue to the Lord both the thankes, and the seruice of all the good ye haue receiued from him. Many giue him verball thankes for his benefites, acknowledging themselues debitors to him for the good which they haue; who will not serue him with his owne benefites. Let these men know, that their thanks are not acceptable to him.
The second point of your care, I would haue entended to the poore and needy: as ye haue receiued mercy from God, or looke to get it, shew mercy for Gods sake to such as are vnder you. Salomon saith, The mercies of the wicked are crueltie; but the mercies of a righteous man extend euen toward his beast: how much more then will he be mercifull to his Christian brother? Remember what comfort Iob found in the day of his trouble, arising from this, That heIob 31. restrained not the poore of their desire, and caused not the eyes of the widdow to faile: that he did not eate his morsels alone, but the fatherlesse eat thereof: that he saw none perish for want of clothing, nor suffered the poore to be without a couering: that the loynes of the poore blessed him, because hee was warmed with the fleece of his sheepe. It is a great grace, where a man, not onely sets his owne heart to praise God; but hyreth the heart and tongue of others to praise God with him, and for him: therfore To do good and to distribute forget not,Heb. 13. for with such sacrifices God is pleased.
And with these, thinke it a peece of your honour to honor the seruants of the Lord. Beautifull, saith Esay, are the feet of those, who bring the glad tidings of peace: If their feet be beautifull▪ what should their face be? Looke not to their weakenesse; but for their Master and their message sake, esteeme them alwayesarorthy to be welcom∣ed. And sith they pray vnto God for your L. be loth to re∣fuse

them in their reasonable requests to you; remembring that reason which Ambrose vsed to Theodose the Em∣perour: Si dignus non sum qui à te audiar, nec etiam dignus qui pro te à deo exaudiar; If I be not worthy that I should be heard of thee when I speake vnto thee, farre lesse am I worthy that I should be heard of God, when I speake to him for thee.
The third is, that ye haue a continuall care of your selfe. Nature can teach you to care for those things which are yours: but it is grace must learne you to care for your selfe. Satan is a restlesse tempter; but yet so subtill, that he can frame his temptations according to the ages and states of men: he tempts not children as he doth young men; ney∣ther tempts hee young men as hee doth the aged; neyther tempts he the aged as he doth any of the other two. Hee tempts children with folly, and playes with them, as the Prouerb is, at the belly blinde; seeking no more of that age, but that it be passed ouer with foolish and friuolous things. Young men againe he tempts to wickednesse, many wayes, by the fury of their inordinate concupiscence: these are called by the Apostle, The noysome lusts of youth. Aged men most commonly he tempts them with couetous∣nesse, and excessiue cares of the vvorld. Omnia in homi∣ne cùmsenescunt vitia, sola iuuenescit auaritia: When all other sinnes waxe olde and feeble in a man, onely coue∣tousnesse waxeth young, and increaseth her strength. And who can tell how miserable that man is, vvho in his childe∣hood liued like a foole▪ in his youth vva filthy, in his olde age a vvorldling; vnlesse God by grace bring him out of that fearfull bondage?
I speake not this as if I for ba the vse of this vvorld, or id condemne all care thereof, or those lawfull pleasures your L. takes in building▪ planting; or other such  ver∣tues, wherein ye stand vnto all that are about you a pat∣terne of policy: but to warne you, that ye walke cere ∣spectly▪

vsing this world as if ye vsed it not. What-euer your actions be about it, set your affections vpon better things; knowing, as saith the Apostle, that the shape and figure of this world goes away. It is vvisedome to forsake this vvorld vvith our vvill, before we be forced to forsake it against our vvill: to leaue it euen when we do possesse it. Abraham liued not so long as did many of his fathers; yet when he died, it is said of him that he died full of dayes, be∣cause he desired no mo. Sith ye know ye must remoue, be prepared like Israel in Egypt, with their loines girded, and their staues in their handes, ready to march forward from Egypt to Canaan. Be content with the dayes ye haue got∣ten: line so, as not needing any moe; but vse euery day, as if it were your last day: after which, if God giue you another, take it as a super-plus, and be thankefull to him for it.
For all these causes which I haue premitted, and that the seed of godlinesse, which these many yeares I haue kno∣wen in you▪ breeding spirituall remorse with teares, and godly holy desires, may at length be cherished and brought forward, both to the flourishing and further fructifying; I hau here presented to your L. these Meditations, which I ordinarily deliuered to my people, in time of their euening Prayers; and haue  it, A holy Alphabet, or A. B. C. of godsinesse: so plaine in it selfe, that children may vnderstand it; and yet  plentifull in heauenly instructi∣on, that the mest ▪ godly, and auncient may euery day learne something by it.
Accept it, reade it, practise it, right Honourable: steppe forward in the godd course which now ye haue happy be∣gun: and these good conclusions, which I know ye haue  with your selfe, may  orth to ; that so the world may see by the fruit, that the tree growes euerth▪ longer the better. Such of your waies and workes, as your L. nowes haue  others,  now o amend them; that all rea  sa∣tisfaction

and such as before mistiked you for your euill, may now thanke God for your good; and you, by wel-doing bringing forth fruits worthy of amendment of life, may make sure to your selfe your calling and election. Which mercie the Lord more and more confirme towards you for Christ sake.
Amen.

