



RIght honourable Lords, where according vnto the
direction of good lawes, gracious Soueraignes no∣bly
rule, and loyall Subiects freely obey, there the
Common-weale, which is the common good of
both, produceth the most royall, happy and stable
Monarchy. If euer any Kingdome hath been fortunate, to giue a
true mirror and example of this happinesse, this famous Iland hath
been therein incomparable, wherein so many puissant Monarchs,
successiuely swaying this Emperiall Diademe, according vnto the
ancient Lawes and Customes of this Nation, haue so many hun∣dreths
of yeares gouerned this mighty people in peace and ho∣nour
at home, and victoriously led them in triumphant warre a∣broad,
as by the glorious trumpe of forreine and domestike fame
and Historie is not obscure. The splendor of this truth, the iniuri∣ous
aspersion of insufficiencie in our English laws, cannot without
shame or blushing guilt behold. Notwithstanding, since in some
few things to be wanting, was neuer as yet wanting in the most
exquisite lawes, policy and state that euer hath been, and since the
Lawe of God it selfe (though perfect in it selfe) through humane
imperfection in the true perfection was neuer yet seene, giue mee

leaue through all lawes and Countries in one particular to won∣der
at their generall defect. What Lawe or Nation in the dete∣ction
of Witches, and Witch-craft, hath as yet euer appeared
competent, or from iust exception exempt? How vncertaine are
among all people differing iudgements? Some iudge no Wit∣ches
at all, others more then too many, others too few by many,
in so opposite extremes, so extremely opposite: I doe not pre∣sume
to prescribe how a lawe may become more absolute or per∣fect,
I onely labour and enquire to learne. Among many gene∣rall
directions by different Authors, diuersly published, concer∣ning
the perfecting of particular lawes, (as farre as perfection is
possible vnto humane frailety) Demosthenes in his second Oration
against Aristogiton, in my thought doth seeme to equall (if not ex∣ceede)
the most exquisite. Three things sayth he (as may bee
plainely out of the forenamed place collected) doe concurre vn∣to
the vpright constitution of euery complete lawe, whereby it
may be held sacred and inuiolate. The first is, that it be , that
is, that it bee the ordinance and gift of God.
Secondly, that it bee , that is, the sage and
iudicious decree and counsell of the most wise and prudent. The
third is, that it bee , that is, the vniuersall con∣sent
of the whole state, City or countrey. Certainely, the true
cause of the forementioned generall lamenesse, and confusion of
Lawes in the proposed case of With-craft consisteth herein. First,
for that men haue not as yet sufficiently searched the holy Scrip∣tures
to finde out that , that is, what is the ordinance
of God therein. Secondly, for that men haue not seriously con∣sulted
with that wisedome and prudence, which by the light of
nature and reason Almightie God hath left discouerable and al∣lowed
to be iustly and truly deemed, , that
is, the sage counsell, determination and decree of the most iudi∣cious,
prudent and wise men.

When these two are met and are agreed; namely, the ordinance
of God, and the vpright & sincere counsell of the most holy, pru∣dent
and wise men, purposely studied, and without superstition ex∣ercised
therein: then wil the happy harmony of all mens hearts be∣come
easily tunable thereto, which is, , that is, the
common consent of Prince, People, and Countrey. Vnto this faire
worke and building of God: let it not seeme presumption, that I
offer this my moytie of desire, and good will. I know that in this
subiect, many ages of learned Authors, haue endlesly varied, ma∣ny
famous Writers haue been branded with infamous errors, ma∣ny
excellent wits haue runne themselues almost out of their wits,
and those who haue best deserued, their trembling pens haue nig∣gardly
dropped, and timorously pointed out any fully, or firmely
auouched certainty. It is notwithstanding no breach of rule of mo∣desty,
but by bounden duty, vnto the accomplishment and honour
of truth, to adde whatsoeuer in my vtmost endeauour may be con∣ducible.
Neither would my many conflicts, with difficulties in this
kinde, hold me excused, if so oft spurred, or rather galled, by so
frequent exercice, practice and conuersation, with persons in so di∣uers
extraordinary manners afflicted, and supposed be witched, it
should awake no answerable dispatch or display therein. Let it
then seeme no wonder, that a man (though lesse then the least a∣mong
men) who hath not onely as studiously as others laboured
the same particular, and as diligently therein obserued, but hath
farre more happily been fortuned then others, with frequent mat∣ter,
and occurrents worthy obseruation, and hath also beene more
plentifully gratified with opportunitie, to inrich his vnderstanding
with variety and worth of obiects, instructing his reason, and con∣firming
his experience: Let it seeme no wonder (I say) that a
meane wit, thus beyond others furnished thereto, may aduenture
amiddest so many doubts and ambiguities, wherewith so many
worthies haue been formerly intangled and perplexed, to auouch

and proue certainty, and demonstration. In this subiect of Witch-craft,
by better meanes aduantaged, if beyond former times or
Writers, I haue haply proposed a more direct and certaine mo∣dule
and methode of iudging therein, I doe not thereby arrogate
vnto my selfe, but attribute vnto the meanes, nor derogate from
others, whom if the like contingence of the same helpes, had as
freely and friendly affronted, and the like facilitie had opened as
ready accesse, I acknowledge in the guilty sense of my owne exi∣guitie
(whether in the outward beauty of words, or inward sub∣stance
of vnderstanding) it had been easie for any man to exceed
with so good meanes this so euil meanenesse of my performance.
Since then (Right Honourable Lords) the subiect it selfe, & a per∣tinent
and peculiar vse therein, doe point vnto your Honours the
propertie of this Dedication, vnto whose tribunall the lawes of
God and men appeale against that foule abominable sinne, let it
not bee censured pride or presumption, humbly to present vnto
your Lordship that consideration and resolution which beyond
my merit or desert, Occurrents haue freely administred vnto long-distracted
meditation. If there may appeare therein ought aduan∣cing
truth, or seruiceable vnto the common-weale, vouchsafe for
those good respects, it may be gracious in your eyes, acceptable
and worthy your noble fauours and protection, against the iniu∣ries
of aduerse obdurate custome, ignorance, enuy, and the vulgar
indignation of common receiued and deceiued opinion. In the
meane season, my deuoted heart shal deuoutly pray vnto Almigh∣tie
God for your Lordships long life, the multiplication of many
happy dayes, redoubled honour in your seruice of God, your King
and Countrey, and after this life, that life which euer lasteth.

