



IT is easie to gesse (honourable Lorde) why Schollars flocke under the patro∣nage of men in your place; their condi∣tion is so weake, that unlesse men truly honourable doe defend them, they are most of all in this age distressed. And yet (braue noble Lorde) ingeniously to confesse my true meaning) it is not that which mooued me at this time; but it is the height of admiration which my thoughts concei∣ued of your honours worth, that made me thinke all men bound to offer signes of loue and dutie, where both are deserued in so high a measure I take vpon me Englands person and speake like a Common-wealth. And therfore howsoeuer it were presumption in me to dedicate papers of so small moment, to a personage of so rare worth, yet (honourable Lorde) take them as your cuntries talke, vouchsafe to reade them stamped with her name, and so all shall be afraide to mislike them, beeing graced with yours. And yet I weigh not whether others mislike them or no; let but your honour for learnings sake (a thing which I know you doe) say you are content to accept of the meanest trifle, and grace it with a good looke, and

then I contemne what male-contented melancholy can speake against me. Your honour (be it spoken without envie) like Englands Cedar is sprung up to preserue with your shadowe, the humblest in all professions, from ha∣treds malice. The warlike and braue soldier thinkes him selfe (and that in truth is) graced, to be tearmed but your follower. The worthy and kinde passionate Courtier deemes (and worthily) this his honour, to be your fauo∣rite. The sober and devout student, that dispised doeth walke melancholy, takes himselfe (and not without cause) fortunate to be tearmed your schollar. Thus all relye no∣ble Lord, upon your favour. And I (who though I must needs honour) yet usually with so deepe affection am not devoted without cause) doe so in kindnesse and loue (if that be not a word too presumptuous) passe over the full interest of my selfe to your dispose, as in what kinde soe∣uer a schollar may doe his dutie, I am readie and desirous to be commanded by you: then accept (noble lorde) the willing mind of him that hath nothing else: and say, that that alone, is absolutely sufficient to content you. Read it, but (or if that be to much) doe but accept it, and so rest. where of not doubting in the middest of so many signes of a schollar-respecting honour, in dutie I kisse my hand, and humbly take my leaue.

