


Right Worshipfull, Reuerend, and beloued:
WHom our gracious God hath vnited in one common ser∣uice, I neither can in affecti∣on, nor could in Epistle at this time seuer; especially, considering that what I shall say to one is fitly appliable to you all. My request on∣ly is, that what I speak free∣ly to one, may with a louing and yeelding acceptance bee entertained of all, as the messenger of an honest heart, desirous to stirre vp the grace of God which is in you, and to prouoke your wil∣ling mindes. I remember what is sayd of the sacke of Beniamin by the way, when the sacke was opened,Sacco soluto re∣luxit argentum. the money appeared: which though I cannot apply to what I haue sayd in my Sermon, or shall say at this time; yet
 this I will say, that no packet shall be opened wherein you shall discouer more loue and intention of spirit to do your soules good. Mans good thoughts were not gi∣uen him for himselfe only, but for communication. For if they had, as the Gd of Nature would not haue taught the tongue to speake them; so the God of Art would not haue taught the pen to write them. This is the cause that what meditations God hath briefly put into my heart to warme my selfe, those haue and shall I more largely blowe and kindle to heate you all in that ministe∣riall course, in which God hath set you. I presuppose these two propositions to be Gods truth. First, that the Churches speciall seruants are of Gods sending. And se∣condly, that it is necessary that the people, to whom wee preach, should be perswaded of it. Is not Ierusalem which is aboue the Mother of vs all? VVhence then should wee expect all her seruitours not left free to her selfe, but from our fathers appointment? Yet what though we are called by God; will it euer be so comfor∣table vnto vs, if the people to whom we are sent do not know it? We would willingly that they should heare what we speake in Christs stead, not as the word of man, but as it is indeed the word of God: which yet they can neuer do, except they are perswaded that wee are sent of God.
It is therefore worth our marking, to see how the A∣postle labours the perswasion of this point: For himselfe, hee doth still vrge his mission; That the Gospell which he preached was not after men, but that hee was called by God. And for all others, hee calleth them Souldiers, as hauing receiued their presse from God; and Ministers, that all the world may know, that God keepeth the roy∣alty of his Office in his owne hand, and makes vs his Seruants, yea Cryers, to lend our good will and voyce to his matters to bee published. No doubt the holy Ghost foresaw the necessity of this perswasion, not only
 that the ministery might haue the greater attention, and respect giuen vnto it, but that Lydeas heart might be o∣pened, Felix might tremble, the Iewes might be prick∣ed in their very hearts, and made to crye out; Men and brethren, what shall wee doe to be saued! Yea, and the se∣crets of hearers hearts might be made manifest, and they may fall downe on their faces, and worship God, and say plainly; That God is in you indeed. Oh that now and euer God would giue vs hearts to liue like those that are sent. By the arme Physitians passe iudgment of the heart,Per Brachium fit iudicium de Corde. and the people of our Sending by our Actions.
If therefore your tender consciences do enquire, how yee may so liue? Oh that I could perswade you to satis∣fie them by obseruing these three rules: First, striue to be∣haue your selues like men of knowledge, by taking heed to doctrine & to reading; they that must diuide the word of God aright, and buckle with such cursed wits, as are in many places abroach to defend the waies of sinne, had neede be more then idle or Idoll Shepheards. They that must haue an eye (as far as they can) to discerne the state of their flocks, that they may encourage the strong, adde strength to the weake, and defend all (as neare as they can) from the priuy blames of their secretest aduersaries, had neede be such Messengers, such Interpreters as be∣seeme that glorious calling. Indeed,Vt prodeat, vt appereat os, vt finem faciat. if it would suffice a Minister, that he come vp into the Pulpit, and speake, and make an end, we might soone perswade our selues that we are sent; but I like Luthers iudgment well, who requireth three things in a sent Preacher; Prayer, Study, and Temptation: The first, to preuent and follow studie; the second, to practise prayer: and the third, to sweeten both. Wee must pray, that wee may studie profitable things: wee must studie, that we may doe answerable to our petitions, both towards our selues and others: and wee must finde by experience in the combats with the power of darknesse, that we being tempted against both,
 doe fight the good fight of Faith. Now, whether it bee thus with vs, I appeale vnto our soules, as in the sight of God.
Secondly, seeke your Masters honour: He is an An∣tichrist, who comes in his owne name; but hee that can say with Iohn Baptist; He must encrease, I must decrease, he is the man that is sent. How many times doe our ac∣cusing thoughts hit vs in the teeth with our seeking our selues? How did that speech become a dying Prelte: So the Church may liue and florish,Modo viuat ac storeat Ecclesia me moriente, ago non curo. I care not though I dye? And how would the speech of Ecebolius become vs (in a∣nother case) Trample vpon me vnsauory salt, so my God may be honoured? But alasse, as a false-hearted woer, who is sent to speake a good word for his Friend, speakes one word for his friend, and two for himselfe: so (I doubt) deale some of vs with God. For our Masters sake, whose Ambassadors wee are; for our soules sake, which we do pawne vnto God, thinke seriously vpon these things. And know this for a truth, that by how much more wee make God to appeare in his Treasure (hiding humane wisdome, and speaking by power from on high, in eui∣dence of spirit) and our selues to be but earthen vessels, by so much more we may perswade our hearts, that wee are sent of God.
If you aske me, what particular direction I propound vnto my selfe in seeking of my Masters honour? I an∣swer, the Sun is called in Hebrew tongue by three names. The first signifieth the warme Sunne, because nothing is hid from the heat thereof. The second doth signifie the glistering Sunne, because it being an excelling sensible dazeleth the eies of all beholders. The third signifieth a Minister or Seruant, because God by it doth minister light, heat, and precious fruits to all people vnder heauen. When therefore I doe consider, that Ministers are called Starres in Gods right hand; and withall, that this great Starre, which God sends out of the Chambers of the
 dust, doth thus declare the glory of its Maker; I thought my selfe bound euen so to seeke the honour of God by the light of Doctrine, by the heat of zeale, and by the fruit of a good life. The same direction I commend to you: the light of Doctrine must shine from you: the heat of zeale must shew in you: and the fruit of a good life must be brought forth by you.
First, neuer forget that you are charged before God, and the Lord Iesus Christ, who shall iudge both quicke and dead, to be instant in preaching the word: So that if the dignity of your Flockes, who are co-heires with Christ; or the price of their redemption which is the blood of Iesus; or the hungring of their soules for spiri∣tuall food, doe not mooue you to powerfulnesse, yet let Gods forenamed charge.O vtinam tam vigiles reperiren∣tur ad curam, quam alacres currunt ad ca∣thedram. I know that Bernards com∣plaint may fitly take place; Oh that men were as watchfull to discharge their Cures, as they are cheerefull to runne vn∣to their Chaires! But, though Israel play the harlot, yet let not Iudah sinne; though others be carelesse, yet be it far from you, euen from your thoughts and inclinati∣ons. Is it difficult? be strong in the grace that is in Christ Iesus, and not in your selues. Doth it exhaust your spi∣rits? care not to sacrifice your selues in the seruice of the Church, so your God may haue honour, and his people edification.
Secondly, what Christ saith to the Angell of Laode∣cea; Be zealous and amend: that would I say to you. For what more needefull? We dwell like men vnder the fri∣ged zone, our Parishes Friezeland, our people frozen into the mud of the world, and dregges of sinne; and will not you be hissing hot in spirit? When Paul saw the Idolatrie of Athens, his spirit was stirred within him: and shall we haue no pietie to God, no pitty to men? Our words in our owne cases manifest heat;Caro suscepit dig∣nitatem & ani∣ma perdidit ho∣nestatem. and shall we be in Gods key cold? Ah, let it not be said, That the Flesh hath wonne honour, and the Spirit hath lost honesty. I
 adde no more to this, but these few words; Let vs take heed, lest as luke-warme creatures, God doe spue vs out of his mouth, as a dishonourable burthen.
For the last, be carefull for a good life. Ambrose saith; that, Speech without life is not Gods. I will not say so, I know that God may speake out of a bush that is good for nothing but burning: Yet this I say concerning him who honoureth not his Master with the fruit of a good life, that I doubt whether he can assure himselfe that he is of Gods sending, when as his steps lead towards hell, though his finger point towards heauen. How frequent∣ly doth God presse the good life of a Preacher? Yea, I remember the godly care which the great Synderion a∣mongst the Iewes had to this purpose: They sate in a Chamber of the Temple, to trye and iudge the Priests, both for their Genealogies, and blemishes: by whom whatsoeuer Priest was found disallowable, was cloathed in black, and so went out of the Priests Court; and who∣so was found perfect and fit, was clothed in white, and accounted worthy. To what end should the care of God and man concurre in this, if it were not necessary? You haue learned how to apply deeper things: I will therefore end this rule, with that speech of Ierome to Nepotian;, sors. Talem se exhi∣bere debet, vi & ipse possideat do∣minum, & pos i∣deatur a domino. Ministers are therefore called Clergie-men, either because they are the Lords lot, or because the Lord is their lot and portion: Now he which either is the Lords part, or hath the Lord for his, ought to carie himselfe, that both hee may possesse the Lord, and bee possessed of him.
The last rule which I would commend vnto you to be obserued, that you may proue your selues to bee sent of God, is, to be in a readinesse to giue your Master an account of your seruice: For this is an argument of faith∣fulnesse, and faithfulnesse of a diuine Sender, who be∣fore he sends can try the heart and reines.
Put case therefore that now yee heard that voice of
 God; Arise ye dead and come to iudgement: that now the earth did vomit vp her dead; that Saint Peter stood vp with his conuerted Iewes, and Paul with his Gentiles; that Iohn came in with Asia, Thomas India, and Titus Creta, What would ye doe? What would ye do, I say? Could ye say, Lord, I tooke thy person vpon me, to feed thy Sheep, of conscience, not of couetousnesse, to build vp thy kingdome, not to inlarge my owne praise and purse: I haue walked before thee with an vpright heart in the middest of thine house; and now (Lord) behold I am ready to giue thee an account of my sinceritie, though not of my perfection? If it be thus (my Reue∣rend and beloued Brethren) giue me your hands, and let vs with comforts goe together and trade into heauen by prayer, studie, and meditation for the best commo∣dities, that in Gods stead we may enrich his people, and present such as belong to him as chast Virgins to God in the day of Christ. What shall I now say? I will hum∣bly beseech you to measure with loue what I haue said; and to supply some of the defects in particulars, with what I could say in the throng of my businesses in the Sermon following, wch I offer vnto your eyes, as I haue (for the most part) vnto your eares at our last Visitation, as ye freshly remember: and with it I present you with the prayers of my heart, that this my seruice may (in this kind) as it hath (in another) be accepted, and also that it may some way be profitable to prouoke against all Anti∣christian abhominations. So prayeth hee who desires e∣uer to rest,
From my Studie this 9th of May, 1625.

