



Worshipfull and worthy friends:
THIS Sermon hath beene some yeeres in both your hands. And I see in the re∣turne of it the good entertainment which it hath found, by the well-wearing of the Copie while it was in your custodie. It was the request of one of you, but it was, in the inioyment, common to you both: and I ioy that the word of God deliuered plainly, in euidence of spirit, can finde such fauourers.Psal. 45.12. Though the daughters of yrus with the rich of the people doe homage before the face of Gods Church with presents, and Egypt doe sometimes succour Christ,Matth. 2.












 yet ordinarily the poore receiue the Gospell. Oh how hard is it for a learned Pharisie, or for a Ruler of the people to yeeld to the doctrine of a crucified Sauiour.Puto multos po∣tuisse ad sapien∣tm prvnre nisi putassent se pervenisse. Many might haue beene wiser, if their breeding had not taught them to thinke that they had wit enough. To see therefore Heires of great Houses, and men and women of qualitie and fashion (as we say) to renounce their owne wisdome, and to become fooles that they may be wise, is a spectacle worthy the beholding. How glori∣ous an example doth History offer vnto vs in King Alfred, who is reported to haue diuided the night and day into three parts. Eight houres he spent in writing, reading, and praying: eight houres in sleepe, and other bodily prouisions: and eight houres in hearing the complaints of his subiects. Lay before your eyes, I beseech you, such excellent patternes: and by how much more rare and difficult it is (in the throng of so many temptations both at home and abroad) for eminent persons to be eminent in grace and goodnesse, and to appeare aboue others as the tops of the mountaines in the ebbing of that great Floud,Gen. 8.5. by so much shew your godly cares to striue to enter in∣to the strait gate, and, as they who are violent, to take the kingdome of heauen by force. There are two dangerous rocks in the course of Christianitie, which I pray God you may still auoid: the one is fruitlesse knowledge; the other is the mix∣ture of fleshly wisdome with the wisdome of the spirit. Many are like to the Athenians,Nummos habue∣runt ad nume∣randū, scientiam ad sciendum. of whom it is said, that they had their money only to tell, and their knowledge to know. Oh what a butter-flies life is this, who spends her time in pain∣ting of her wings (as some Naturalists haue said) euen a these men doe in gilding of their braines. Demosthenes was little the better, though when he went in the streets, the peo¦ple would say, There goeth learned Demosthenes: neither shall we be euer the happier, except our heads rule our hearts, hands, and feet, to loue and doe according to Gods will. If we
 know these things, we shall not be blessed except wee doe them: for the knowledge that bringeth blessing is compared to the waters of the Sea, which as they are plentifull,Es. 11.9. so they are brackish, yea and are conueyed vnto vs by the salt of the earth, to season vs, that our obedience may be better than sa∣crifice in the sight of God. As for the mixture of worldly wisdome, doe yee not see how it choaketh and smothereth grace? This is that god (Policie) which we worship, and of which we make more account than of God and Man. In this we hide our selues from simple honest men and fooles; and of this wee haue so high a conceit, that wee flocke to those Idols that most flourish with it as to an Oracle. It is our Pur∣ueyour to get, our Treasurer to keepe, and our Steward to spend: so that if we can get, keepe, or spend by policie, we ne∣uer hearken to the voice of conscience, we haue no feeling what God commands, nor any care what men say. By this, Kain spake peaceably to his brother Abel when he meant to murther him. By this,Gen. 4.8. Exod. 1.10. Pharaoh dealt wisely (as he thought) in the suppressing of Gods people. By this, the Politician in the Psalmes crowched and bowed,Psal. 10.10. when he meant that heapes of poore innocents should fall by his might. O cursed policie, whither wilt thou goe? How many Christian duties dost thou suppresse in others, and hinder in thy owner? Goe on (my deare and worthy friends) to gouerne your liues by godly wisdome, and to keepe out this monster. I contemne not the gifts of any man; but desire to see God in the meanest of his creatures: yet (so far as my muddie braine can pierce) the French Charrons Books of Wisdome, vnder smooth precepts of wisdome, giue too great way to principles of Atheisme; and so magnifieth this Idoll, that God loseth his honour, and nature is so lifted vp, that it cannot submit it selfe vnto the crosse of Christ. I commend therefore no precepts of wisdome but Gods, and doe humbly desire that Ie∣sus Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. He alone who
 is the wisdome of the Father, can make you truly wise: and to follow his imitable patternes and precepts shall be your wisdome and glory.Sir Walt. Rawl. hist. l. 1. cap. 9. §. 4. out of Charrons chap. of Nobil. Those that magnifie this Humane wisdome, haue considered three sorts of honours; Honour nturall, which comes by descent, and may fall vpon a true villaine: Honour in parchment, which is bought with siluer or fauour, and de∣pends vpon the fauour of Princes: and Honour personall, which depends vpon vertue and well-deseruing: and these men haue had so much wisdome giuen of God, as to account vertue the forme of honour, and that which giues life and being to it. To the end therefore that yee may be a little furthered by me to this true Honour, I doe offer this Sermon to you againe; intrea∣ting your perusall and obseruation. It was once heard by you with delight; yee may many times reade it with the same affe∣ction, if yee finde it worthy. The like power yee cannot expect, God will haue this honour in his ordinance, that the liuely voice shall leaue a more secret working in the soule than all written scrowles. This yee shall finde, that I haue not striued aboue my ordinarie straine, wherein I aime to speake to the hid man of the heart: for whom I haue prepared such diet, as I may com∣mend, if good meat be not marred in dressing. What euer they be, the defects are mine; what euer it be, the good is Gods, and for your, with other of Gods peoples, goods. Let God haue your praise, to whom it is due: let me haue your prayers, who need and craue them, that I may still continue

