


RIght Honourable Lords, where according vnto the direction of good lawes, gracious So∣ueraignes nobly rule, and loyall Subiects freely obey, there the Common-weale, which is the common good of both, produceth the most royall, happy and sta∣ble Monarchy. If euer any Kingdome hath beene fortunate, to giue a true mirror and example of this happinesse, this famous Island hath beene therein incomparable, wherein so many puissant Monarchs, successiuely swaying this Emperiall Diademe, ac∣cording vnto the ancient Lawes and Customes of

this Nation, haue so many hundreths of yeares go∣uerned this mighty people in peace and honour at home, and victoriously led them in triumphant warre abroad, as by the glorious trumpe of forreine and domesticke fame and Historie is not obscure. The splendor of this truth, the iniurious aspersion of insufficiencie in our English lawes, cannot with∣out shame or blushing guilt behold. Notwithstan∣ding, since in some few things to bee wanting, was neuer as yet wanting in the most exquisite lawes, Policie and State that euer hath beene, and since the Law of God it selfe (though perfect in it selfe) through humane imperfection in the true perfection was neuer yet seene, giue mee-leaue through all lawes and Countries in one particular to wonder at their generall defect. What Law or Nation in the detection of Witches, and Witch-craft, hath as yet euer appeared competent, or from iust exception exempt? How vncertaine are a∣mong all people differing iudgements? Some iudge no Witches at all, others more then too many, o∣thers too few by many, in so opposite extreames, so extreamely opposite: I doe not presume to pre∣scribe how a law may become more absolute or perfect, I onely labour to enquire to learne. Among many generall directions by different Authors, di∣uersly published, concerning the perfecting of par∣ticular lawes, (as farre as perfection is possible vnto humane frailty) Demosthenes in his second Oration against Aristogiton, in my thought doth seeme to equall (if not exceede) the most exquisite. Three

things faith he (as may be plainely out of the fore∣named place collected) doe concurre vnto the vp∣right constitution of euery complete law, whereby it may be held sacred and inuiolate. The first is, that it be , that is, that it be the ordi∣nance and gift of God. Secondly, that it be , that is, the sage and iudicious decree and counsell of the most wise and prudent. The third is, that it be , that is, the vniuersall consent of the whole state, Citie or countrey. Cer∣tainly, the true cause of the forementioned generall lamenesse, and confusion of Lawes in the proposed rase of Witch-craft consisteth herein. First, for that men haue not as yet sufficiently searched the holy Scriptures to finde out that , that is, what is the ordinance of God therein. Secondly, for that men haue not seriously consulted with that wisedome and prudence, which by the light of nature and reason Almightie God hath left disco∣uerable and allowed to be iustly and truly deemed,  that is, the sage counsell, determi∣nation and decree of the most iudicious, prudent and wise men.
When these two are met and are agreed; name∣ly, the ordinance of God, and the vpright and sin∣cere counsell of the most holy, prudent and wise men, purposely studied, and without superstition exercised therein: then will the happy harmony of all mens hearts become easily runable thereto, which is, , that is, the common consent of Prince, People, and Countrey. Vnto this faire

worke and building of God: let it not seeme pre∣sumption, that I offer this my Moytie of desire, and good will I know that in this subiect, many ages of learned Authors, haue endlesly varied, many famous Writers haue bin branded with infamous errors, many excellent wits haue run themselues al∣most out of their wits, & those who haue best deser∣ued, their trembling pens haue niggardly dropped, & timorously pointed out any fully, or firmely auou¦ched certainty. It is notwithstanding no breach of rule of modesty, but my bounden duty, vnto the accomplishment and honour of truth, to adde what∣soeuer in my vtmost endeauour may be conducible. Neither would my many conflicts, with difficulties in this kinde, hold me excused, if so oft spurred, or rather galled, by so frequent exercise, practise and conuersation, with persons in so diuers extraordi∣nary manners afflicted, and supposed bewitched, it should awake no answerable dispatch or display therein. Let it then seeme no wonder, that a man (though lesse then the least among men) who hath not onely as studiously as others laboured the same particular, and as diligently therein obserued, but hath farre more happily bin fortuned then others, with frequent matter, and occurrents worthy obser∣uation, and hath also beene more plentifully grati∣fied with opportunitie, to inrich his vnderstanding with variety and worth of obiects, instructing his reason, and confirming his experience: Let it seeme no wonder (I say) that a meane wit, thus beyond others furnished thereto, may aduenture amiddest

so many doubts and ambiguities, where with so ma∣ny worthies haue been formerly intangled and per∣plexed, to auouch and prooue certainty, and de∣monstration. In this subiect of Witch-craft, by better meanes aduantaged, if beyond former times or Writers, I haue haply proposed a more direct and certaine Module and Methode of iudging therein, I doe not thereby arrogate vnto my selfe, but attribute vnto the meanes, nor derogate from others, whom if the like contingence of the same helpes, had as freely and friendly affronted, and the like facilitie had opened as ready accesse, I acknow∣ledge in the guilty sense of my owne exiguitie (whether in the outward beauty of words, or in∣ward substance of vnderstanding) it had beene easie for any man to exceed with so good meanes this so euill meanenesse of my performance. Since then (Right Honourable Lords) the subiect it selfe, and a pertinent and peculiar vse therein, doe point vnto your Honours the propertie of this Dedication, vnto whose tribunall the Lawes of God and men appeale against that foule abominable sinne, let it not be censured pride or presumption, humbly to present vnto your Lordship that consideration and resolution which beyond my merit or desert, Oc∣currents haue freely administred vnto long-distra∣cted meditation. If there may appeare therein ought aduancing truth, or seruiceable vnto the Common-weale, vouchsafe for those good re∣spects, it may be gracious in your eyes, acceptable and worthy your noble fauours and protection,

against the iniuries of aduerse obdurate custome, ignorance, enuy, and the vulgar indignation of common receiued and deceiued opinion. In the meane season, my deuoted heart shall deuoutly pray vnto Almightie God for your Lordships long life, the multiplication of many happy daies, re∣doubled honour in your seruice of God, your King and Countrey, and after this life, that life which euer lasteth.

