



BEING at the last ouercome (right honorable) by the long and earnest request of diuers Godly and wel disposed chri∣stians, to yeeld my consent to the publishing of this to hom∣ly and simple a worke: I forth∣with was resolued in my selfe to dedicate the first fruits of my labour in this kinde of wryting vnto your honour, as to a most worthy MECOENAS and conuenient Patron both of all learning and good causes And albeit at the first blush it may seeme some what straunge vnto your honour,
 that I should presume to present you with so simple a gift being vnworthy the view of so honorable a per∣sonage, and wise. Yet because I do it, not as one ex∣pecting anye temporall benefite or preferment at your hand (as the maner of the worlde for the most part in such matters is): But as a token rather of my speciall good will, and duety towards you, and an ar∣gument of thankfulnesse vnto God for his graces in you, as also to minister some occasion of increase and going forwarde, with constancy and Heroicall spirite in so good, gracious and Godly wayes as you haue turned your feete to steppe in already: I per∣swade my selfe therefore of your facile and curte∣ous nature and good will in accepting of the same. And euen this small duety of wryting is one point of the honouring and gratifying of our betters, and those to whom we stand charged from the Lorde to perfourme duties of reuerence and honour. Especi∣ally when we see the Image of God by the seconde creation, to shine in them, as it doth breake forth in your honourable and vertuous brest, by many wor∣thy and commendable graces and vertues, with the plausible approbation fame and report, both of the wise and Godly. I speake not this as one that would fill the trompe of flattery, with the winde of vaine∣glorious praise, to seeme to speake for your honour to the worlde (for that is not my maner) sith your vertuous religious and Godlye wayes, speake for them selues, to your great commendation, and your euerlasting praise in Christe Iesus. But I speake of the worke of God in you (right honorable) that God might haue his iust glory in his owne worke, and your selfe might also be incouraged with com∣fort to proceede and increase in that good course, so
 as the worke of God which is begun might be per∣fited in you. For sure it is (my very good Lord) that the enemy of mankind seeketh to beset, as all men, so specially those, whome the Lorde beginneth to frame to him selfe; but chieflyest those, that are as it were ouer frayghted with the aboundaunce of the troublesome affayres of this present life, by reason of their great calling. For they whom God calleth to so great honour, riches and dignity are (as one wisely wryteth) set vpon the mayne sea of occasions, in daunger to bee drenched and swallowed vp of the tempestuous rages, and surging waues of diuers temp¦tations, if the Lorde doe not mightely by his grace support and vnderstay them. But when God stan∣deth by them, and frameth their heartes to the loue of his truth, then doth he reape great honour and glory at their handes. VVhich he highly priseth and reckoneth off, insomuch, that he hath honorably spoken of such by his Prophetes that they shoulde bring much glory to his Church,Esay. 49.23. & 60.16. and be nursing fa∣thers and nursing mothers therevnto, yea the glory of LEBANON (euen of great personages) shal come togeather to beautify the place of my sunctuary (saith the Lorde), for I will glorify the place of my feete.Esay. 60.13. For the seruice which such shoulde doe to his Church was not a seruile condition, but a beautifying of his Church, as it is there called, and a glory euen vnto him selfe. And vndoubtedly blessed are those Prin∣ces, Nobles, honourable and worshipfull, who them selues imbracing and obeying the truth sincerely, be∣come presidentes and examples in their owne per∣sons, to allure others to the fellowship of the church, to the loue of the worde and true religion. For the fall or vprising of many after a sort dependeth vpon
 the publique persons whom God hath lift vp in high places ouer others. Insomuch as the eyes of the multi¦tude are bene vpon the examples of publique persons: Furthermore wee see from time to time, howe the Church of God (not without great cause) accounted highly of such personages as those by whom they re∣ceiued speciall blessings from the Lorde. So the church of Israel,Psal. 21.6. made precious account of DAVID that worthy Prince, as one that was set of God as blessings for euer, Meaning as a benefite and testi∣mony of Gods fauour vpon his people. EZEKIAH, NEHEMIAH,Neh. 1. & 2. Hag. 1.14. Ier. 40. 2. Chr. 35.25 ZERVBBABEL, GEDALIAH. &c. were great blessings to the Church, who greatly lamented the losse of thē. Also IOSIAH, his death was lamented with a doleful lamentation of al the church of IVDA. And sure it is that our Church hath great cause to magnifie the mercies of God towards vs, in trusting vs with so gracious a IOSIAH as our Soue∣raigne Princesse ELIZABETH; as by whose gouer∣ment the church hath receiued many blessings. The losse of whome if our sinns should procure (which the Lord keep far from vs) would yeeld no lesse occasion for vs to complayne and say then the Churche of IVDA had,Lamen. 5.20 at the death of IOSIAH when they sayd, Our life & the breath of our nostrels, the annoynted of the Lorde, vvas taken in their nets, of vvhome we sayd vnder his shadow vve shall be preserued aliue, a∣mong the heathen. Herevnto god hath added further matter of ioy and thankfulnes vnto his Churche, in that many nobles & worthy personages of this land both learned, Godly and wise, (among whom your honour hath not the least roome) are faythfull Pa∣trons of the cause of Religion. And therefore if the church reuerenced, & highly accounted of such, if the
 godly teachers of the church commended such, and gratifyed them by wryting of some such duety, as the Apostle IOHN did the elect Lady, and HIEROM,2. Ioh. 1. that vertuous Lady LETA, & GAVDENTIA, to in∣courage them in the truth, & to shew their thankful∣nes for them vnto God: why may not we in our times likewise gratify our noble & worthy personages with some such duty? to shew forth our thankfulnes and re∣uerence towardes them: as also to minister occasion by such means as we can, of further proceeding in all religious and godly wayes with zeal to aduance gods glory in his church? For we should all step out for the defence and aduancement of Gods gospell & glory. For the true honor of al men standeth in this chiefly, that they imbrace the word which is the wisdome of God, sith without religion there is no true honour. Therfore Prou. 8, VVisdome layeth claime to all the honor & kingdom of princes,Pro. 8.15.16.18. as without whom they wanted al true honor. Yea she challengeth to her selfe al true wisdome, councel, vnderstanding, strength and honour, &c. Also els where SOLOMON a prince of greatest hono & wisdome, setteth down plainly,Pro 4.8. ver. 14. that they which imbrace wisdome shal haue great honor, & they which exalt her shal be exalted thē selues. For God crowneth them with honour which honour his word. But strippeth al such naked of honor & renoum before him, which do not honor his word. Therefore the gouernours of Israel, were charged to be alwayes conuersant in the booke of the law day & night, that they might learne to feare the lord their God:Deu. 17.19. adding a great reason, that by such meanes they should pro∣uide for their own safety, and for the good estate of their posteritie.Verse 20. Yea it was promised to DAVID as a speciall prerogatiue that so long as hee helde
 the Lord to be his Father and made him his God, by trusting in him and imbracing the testimonies of his word,Psa. 89.26. ver. 28.29. that the Lorde would not fayle him, but esta∣blishe his couenaunt with him, yea and with his seede for euermore. So that such as set their delight in the word of God, carry with them store of blessinges from the Lord, both for them selues and for their po∣sterity. And we see that the Lorde doth not other∣wise promise to prosper the affayres of men, then as they are carefull to know his will in his word. Here∣of it was that the Lorde promised the lyke successe vnto IOSHVA. For after he had incouraged him to obey his worde,Iosh. 1.7. & ver. 8. shewing that therein stoode all true prosperity, he addeth this exhortation. Let not this booke of the Lawe depart out of thy mouth, but meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest ob∣serue and doe, according to all that is wrytten therin, then shalt thou make thy way prosperous, and then shalt thou haue good successe. For the Lorde knew, that sith IOSHVA stood in great perill of temptation euery way, by the reason of the waightynesse of his calling and dignity, therefore also he sheweth that hee had greatest neede of the meanes to vnderstay himselfe, and to be acquainted with the Lordes priuy Councell, reuealed in his worde, to direct him in all his actions. So DAVID made the worde of God his Councellers,Psa. 119.24. without whom he woulde doe nothing. For he knew that it behoueth such to im∣ploy their honour, glory, estimation, riches, and cre∣dite as handmaydes to further Gods glory. And then no doubt they are to expect greate blessinges from the Lorde, with immortall prayse and euerlasting ho∣nour with Christ Iesus. I doubt not therefore (right honourable) but all these blessinges shall be accom∣plished
 vpon you as also vpon your posterity, sith you loue and imbrace the religion of the true God and the truth of his worde, who will not see you want that honour that he hath promised to his most excellent Saintes.
And now here I present vnto your Honour this poore Tallent of myne: which may it please you to accept at my hand, as of one that wisheth all happy∣nesse vnto you and yours in the Lorde, humbly cra∣uing that your fauourable wisedome would supply the wants of this thing, and that this so simple a gift as it is, may be accepted of you, rather for my good meaning in the thing and the ende wherefore I doe it, then for the vallue of the thing it selfe. Do∣ing your honour to vnderstande, that you are not to expect any flourishing speeches garnished with Rhe∣toricall flowers and figures, or any cunning sleightes of mans wisedome, or paynted eloquence with af∣fected wordes, but hauing an eye to the matter and not to the maner, to expect a simple and plaine hand∣ling of that which is intreated off. For my desire is not to be seen in the heighth, and intricate questions of mans wisedome, but in the basenesse and simply∣city of the Gospell that it may appeare in the power thereof. Thus (right honourable) surceasing from adding any further wordes of discourse, and remay∣ning ready to vndergoe all lawfull duetyes towardes your honour (which God any maner of wayes shall inable me to doe) I humbly commit your honou∣rable Lordship (with the right honourable that ver∣tuous Lady the Countesse your wyfe), euen to our good and mercifull God, who euermore preserue you and yours in al blessed safety both of body and soule, be present with you, gouerne and guyde you by his
 gratious spirite, and heape vpon you all heauenly blessings, and shew forth the riches of his grace vp∣pon you, that you may holde out with all constancy in his truth vnto the ende, so as you glorifying him in this lyfe, may be receiued vnto eter∣nal glory, and felicity with him in the lyfe to come, through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

