


THat which the Apostle hath seue∣rally deliuered in the two for∣mer Discourses, dedicated to your most Royall Parents, hee now in this last Treatise collects and conioynes in one, which ther∣fore of right can appertaine to none more then to you Sir, who being by them both the happy fruit of heauenly proui∣dence, and deerest pledge of their mutuall loue and ioy, may iustly challenge interest in the smallest good ouer which their names are named. Sir, here is the way to that Crowne of Triumph, which the more you know, the more (I hope) shall you place your glory in it. Crownes
 of earthly Kingdomes are indeede the gifts of God, but such as bring not so much Honour as they breed vnquiet∣nesse. O nobilem magis quam foelicem pannum (said Antigonus.) If the cares which dwell in the Diadem were knowne, no man would stoope to the ground to take it vp (said Seleucus.) And albeit, it be not giuen to all to know this in their entrie to Honour, yet are they all compelled to acknowledge it in the end. Seuerus, Mo∣narch of the world, found his Crownes but comfortlesse to him in death, , I haue (said he) beene all things, and it profiteth me no∣thing. Not onely the teares of Xerxes, but the laments of Salomon may witnesse to all the world, that the end of the worme-eaten pleasures of this life, is heauie dis∣pleasure: yea, the golden head of Babell had at length worms spread ouer him, & worms to couer him. Esa. 14. For all flesh is grasse, and the glory thereof as the flowre of the field: Onely, the word of the Lord en∣dures for euer. By which that same God who hath called you to be an apparant Heyre of the most famous King∣domes on earth, doth also call your Grace to a more cer∣taine inheritance of a better Kingdome in heauen, which cannot be shaken: whereby aboue other Princes, and Rulers of the earth yee are blessed, if so be yee answere your Calling, endeauouring to be no lesse than you are na∣med, Principem te agnosce ne seruias affectibus. It is vnseemely in any, but most of all in a Prince, to become a seruant, eyther to the corrupt humours of men with∣out him, who creeping in into the Courts of Kings, like wormes into the bosome of excellent trees, doe nothing
 but consume them: whom godly Constantine properly called Tineas & Sorices palatij, subtile peruerters of the good inclination of Princes in manners and Religion, where they can preuaile: or yet to the disordered affecti∣ons of his owne heart, which if they be not restrained doe quickly turne the glory of a man into shame. What did it profit Cham that hee was the Sonne of Noah, the Monarch of the world, and Patriarch of the Church in his time; or that hee was the Heyre of the third partChrysost. of the world? vitia siquidem voluntatis vicerunt pri∣uilegia naturae, his owne vndantoned will bursting out in contempt of his Father, brought vpon him that curse, and shamefull name, A seruant of Seruants, which was neuer taken from him. Seeing God (as saith the Apostle) is the glory of man, what honour can make that man glo∣rious, who carries not the image of God, consisting in righ¦teousnesse, and true holinesse? but especially a King, whom the very Ethnicks called, Animata Dei imago in terris, should carefully keep that Image which keepes his glory. Naturally facilius alijs, quam nobis imperamus, but in very deede he shall neuer be a skilfull Ruler of o∣thers, who is not first taught of God to rule himselfe, decet eum qui alijs praefectus est interiora sua decen∣terBasil. adornare.
The best remedy against both these euils, is to embrace that wholesome counsell giuen by God to the Gouernors of his people, Let not the booke of the Law depart from thee, but meditate in it day and night, that thou maist do according to all that is written therein: turne not away from it to the right hand nor to the left, so
 shalt thou make thy way prosperous, and shalt haue good successe. Beware of those Lucifugae, haters of the light, because it discouers the darknesse of their errours, Qui cum a Scripturis redarguuntur, in accusationemTertull. Scripturarum se conuertunt. As the wise men follow∣ing the Starre, were at length led by it to Christ, so if according to Peters counsell, ye take heede to the light that shineth in darknesse, not onely shall the day-starre arise in your heart, but that cleare shining Sunne of Righteousnesse (so named by Malachie) euer rising and neuer going downe, shall illuminate you with his bright∣nesse. And herewithal take to you the domestique exam∣ple of your Royall Father, who stands before you as a paterne of pietie, viuum omnis virtutis examplar: it shall be no small proofe of your progresse in vertue, and greatest praise among your godly Subiects, that yee be a follower of him. And so praying Almighty God that your happy deedes may exceed all that great hope which is con∣ceiued of you, I humbly take my leaue.

