



RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL:
I DOE not know whether those that doe aduenture to publish bookes, in these woefull times wherein we liue, doe goe too fast or too slow. I remem∣ber it was fained of old, that Aeolus hauing bestowed a bottle vpon Vlysses, wherein all the windes were inclosed, his seruants let them out, when hee was asleepe, to their owne hurt: so many times it falleth out, that wee doe emptie our owne poore withered bottles by the Presse, to our owne preiudice. Howsoeuer it proues, for mine owne particular, I doe humbly commit the successe to God, who only knoweth with what heart I doe it: and being drawne out
 by little and little to appeare in publike, I, being sensible of the many fauours, which, aboue my expectation or desert, I haue reaped both from you and yours, can doe no lesse than make you publikely to appeare also together with me your Pastour, who ioy in your loue, and shall more ioy in the increasing of your graces, and the further fitting of your soules and bodies for heauen and happinesse. I know not what benefit this poore Sermon can bring vnto you: yet (so farre as I can be mine owne carner) thus much I resolue, that whatsoeuer good shal arise by it, either to your selues or others, it shall beare your Worships names in the forehead of it, and thereby speake thus much, that the world should neuer haue seene it, if the loue of God, together with your kindnesses, had not drawne out from me (who can shew little other) such a kinde of fruit and acknowledgement as this is. I thought it was enough for me to preach vnto my owne, and now and then to lend the best dugge I had to a neighbours childe a∣broad. I well knew mine owne weaknesse, and the weight of a presses burthen. Yet considering how apt the weake mud-wals of my poore house are euery yeere to fall, and withall that it is not altogether impossible that I should doe some small good vnto my good people, euen when I am dead by some short Mementoes of what I haue formerly taught, I thought that it would be∣come me a little to write something, whereby the weake faith of me vnworthy thy Abel might speake being dead, and in the pub∣lishing of which, I might not be altogether vnmindfull of the kindnesses and fauours of my louing friends. Hence then com∣meth this Sermon to appeare; which though in respect of the manner, it be rude and homely, yet it hath matter which is worth our consideration. It presseth sobrietie, watchful∣nesse, and prayer, which are necessary and vsefull duties euery day: and it will stand vp as a little sea-marke, to point at those rockes of the Papacie, from which it hath pleased God hitherto to preserue you. I know that your temptations haue not beene
 small nor seldome; kindred and kinde opportunities haue giuen much aduantage to the tempters: but by how much more open you lay, by so much greater appeareth the glory of God in your weaknesses, which haue beene preserued from the defilements of the filth of Babylon. Long and euer may that gratious worke be continued vpon you and yours: And I humbly pray God, that (as the Aegyptians did vse to offer in sacrifice to their cursed gods of the fruit of the Peach-tree, which is not al∣together vnlike to a mans heart; and of the leaues of the same, which are like to a mans tongue; thereby teaching that God re∣quireth both tongue and heart: so) you may still continue and abound in offering vp the outward and inward man, in publike and priuate seruices to the true God. I hope that from sound knowledge you doe throughly hate the many lies, wherewith our aduersaries doe seeke to disgrace vs and our cause (as of the no∣ueltie, impuritie, and blasphemie of our Religion and the like:) and haue learned from the Persian Law, after the third lie, to enioyne a man perpetuall silence; or, if that be not in your power, yet neuer to beleeue him more. I know that as it is said of Aspes, they are of a skie colour, and hide their inuenomed teeth within soft gummes: so yee shall see, and haue seene, the Pro∣ctors of Antichrist veluet-mouthed, and like heauen in appea∣rance, mustering the Fathers, yea and Scriptures in such order and equipage, as if in the cause of Religion all were theirs: but I remember what we reade of Balme,Pozel. de Patef. Di. that Vipers are nourished with the iuice of it (which they turne into poison) and that they with their whole broods are delighted with the shadow of the leaues of it; yet the iuice of Balme is an excellent remedie a∣gainst their poyson: Euen so the maintainers of Schismes and Heresies doe feed vpon the Balme of Gilead (I meane the sa∣cred Scriptures and Fathers abused) and doe turne those whole∣some viands into poyson, and yet that very word of God and vnsophisticated antiquitie, are excellent remedies against all
 their impostures of false doctrine whatsoeuer. Let mee there∣fore beseech you, in the entertainment of any doctrine, to vse Gods spectacles still, that no false colours may deceiue you to the preiudice of your soules: and so to prouide for sobrietie and watchfulnesse in prayer in these perilous times, that yee may not be like to vnthriftie seruants, who hauing their allowance of candle, spend it out in gaming and riot, and at the last are faine to goe to bed darkling. This would be a wofull abuse of that light of knowledge which God hath giuen you. From this therefore euen the Father of our Lord Iesus Christ (who hath preserued your Worships hitherto) keepe both you and yours for euermore. Thus he humbly prayeth, who heartily desireth the well-fare of your bodies and soules:

