



RIGHT Honoura∣ble, our Aduersa∣ries amongst their many obiections against vs and our Religion, vse this
 for one, that if wee refuse their Church, and con∣demne their faith, wee con∣demne to hell all our fore∣fathers. But it followeth not: for in such fundamental points as necessarily con∣cerne saluation, as mat∣ter of merit, and meanes of Iustification, &c. our fa∣thers in former times were not of the Romish faith, but of our Religion: excluding, disclayming, & renouncing all their owne merits, and cleauing only to Gods mer∣cy, and the merits of Iesus Christ for their saluation. This was the faith of the an∣cient Church, &c. SaintBasillius in homel in Psal. 114. Basil saith. Eternall rest re∣maines
 for them which haue fought a good fight in this world, yet not for the merit of their workes, but through the rich mercies of God, in whom they trust.
Saint Hillary saith, ourHillarius in Psal. 51. workes suffice not to merit eternall life, but our hope is in the mercy of God for e∣uer and euer.
Saint Augustine saith,Augustinus concione 1 in Psal. 70. Tua peccata sunt, merita Dei sunt: supplici∣um tibi debe∣tur, et cum praemium ve∣nerit sua dona coronabit non tua merita. Sin is ours, Merit is Gods: Punishments are our due, but if rewardes come, God crownes his owne gifts, not our merites.
Gregory moral lib. 9. ca. 14.Saint Gregory (a Pope) saith, If I doe well, I shall haue eternall life, not by my merits but Gods mercy.

And long after euen inBernardus sermone. 15. in Psal. 90. the darkest times; deuote Bernard saith, A mans whole merit is to put the whole af∣fiance of his heart in him, that hath saued the whole man, and therfore in another place he concludes, My me∣rit is the mercy of the Lord.
All these Bellarmine can∣notSermone 61. in Cant. meri∣tum meum miseratio do∣mini. deny, and himselfe pro∣duceth some of them or all, but shapes such answeres to them, as it would satisfye an indifferent man euen to read him in that pont.
And this was not the faithBellar. to. 4. lib. 5. de lust. cap. 6. of the principall Fathers on∣ly, but by the mercy of God, it was deriued euen vnto the inferiour, and vul∣gar
 sort, not of the Cleargy alone, but euen of the Laity also.
If the monuments of elder ages were extant & vncorrup¦ted, it is more thē maruailous how cleerly this truth would shine: that our forefathers were not damned, though they beleeued, not as doth the present Romish Church: Nay further that they were saued by the same faith by which wee are at this day, though they were misled by some errours, and nusled in some superstitions; for which (being sinnes of in∣firmity, or rather of igno∣rance) we hope the Lord was mercifull vnto them, know∣ing
 that euen Dauid him∣selfe cried to God to clensePsal. 19. him from his secret sinnes.
But such hath beene the craft and malice of Popish policy, that partly the oldest bookes are embezilled and extinguished, and those that remaine are so altered cor∣rupted and depraued from that they were, that there now remaines not one of many of the testimonies, which the former ages yeel∣ded to this truth.
Notwithstanding the prouidence of God hath not failed his Church: for (do what they could) yet he who said the gates of hellMath. 16. should not preuaile against the
 true faith, hath taken order in spight of all plots to the contrary, that so many testi∣monies shall be preserued, as shall sufficiently witnesse to the world that our faith flourished in former ages.
My purpose is (if the Lord will) to gather vp such Antiquities though they be scattered and almost lost in these old worme eaten Ma∣nuscripts wherein they lye buried, which as Gods pro∣uidence hath deliuered from the force and fury of the in∣quisitors fire, so it is al Chri∣stians duties to preserue them to posterity.
I haue here begun with a Handfull, or rather a Hartfull
 of holy prayers & meditati∣ons worthy to be worne in the hand, and borne in the heart of euery Christian, by which it may euidently ap∣peare that the faith and Re∣ligion of the former ages, foure & fiue hundred yeares ago, was euen the same by which we looke to bee saued at this day.
Let this haue leaue (right Honorable) to come abroad out of the corners of obscu∣rity, into publicke view, in the light & lustre of your re∣nowned name, who are knowne to bee a reuerencer of Antiquity, a Mecaenas of learning, a practiser of piety, an enemy to the idolatry,
 superstitions, ambitious pra∣ctises, traiterous deuices, and Machiauellian plots of Ie∣suites: and a detester of such especially, who vnder a pretence of Religion, doe cloake and conuey impieties against God, and against his annointed.
The God of heauen con∣firme that blessed worke of his in your Lordship more & more, to the glory of his name, the benefite of this Realme, and to your owne saluation in Christ Iesus: So praieth

