



BEeing obliged in conscience, for the glorie of God, and edification of his People, to publish this my declaration of my returning to the true Religion, these reasons amongst others moued mee to dedicate the same vnto you, ho∣nourable and Christian People, and to you their reuerend Pastours. First, because my sinne in revolting from this Re∣ligion in my youthlynesse is so grieuous, (howsoeuer the Lord hath showne mercie to me, knowing that I did it in ignorance) that it becomes mee, as publickly as I can, to declare my Repentance: and this I haue thought the readiest meane for that purpose. Next, because I haue done wrong to my na∣tiue Countrie, and the Church in Scotland, so farre as I was able, in the matter of Religion, and speciallie I haue done my uttermost endeuour to haue weakned the hands of sundrie professing the doctrine of the said Church, and drawne them to the Romish Religion, wherewith for the time of that my ignorance, I was in conceite. And now beeing sen∣sible of my errour in some measure, the shortest course which I could see to repaire this wrong, was, that so to you some sort of satisfaction might bee giuen, and by you who are the most eminent and conspicuous and large Church in this Land, others who from all partes resort vnto you, might receiue the satisfaction in like manner. Thirdly, because your Pastours
 beene the speciall Instruments of GOD of my satisfaction in such scruples and doubtes of Religion, as I had and propounded to them, before I could renounce the groundlesse Religion of poperie, and the men who mette mee, when I was seeking home as a forlorne Sonne to my Fathers house againe, as iustly I may now call my selfe. You I say, right reverend, were the men that mette mee, and mecklie poynted out the way, and went along with mee, convoying mee on my way: in whose dealing with mee I might haue seene my heauenly Fathers readinesse to meete and embrace mee▪ sometimes I grant, I haue spoken of you, as others of the Romish Religion doe of you, and of all faithfull and learned Ministers, only for the Religions cause. But then I knew you not. Now I haue found that you haue both learning and Loue, and if you and others of your Calling were knowne, as I know you, I put no question many should bee nothing ashamed, but glad at their heart to forsake the puddle of humane Doctrine, and take them to the fountaine of the diuine Scriptures. Now then seeing you are Pastours to me, and I by this meanes as one of your Flock, if so it may please your flocke and you, to account of such a wandering sheepe as I haue beene. To whom could I offer this testimonie of my Repen∣tance rather than to you Honourable and Christian People, and to you their vigilant and reuerend Pastours, whose Chri∣stian disposition makes mee to hope that this my offer shall bee accepted in good part.

