



SIR, Hauing pro∣create, not with∣out some paine and labour, this little Treatise, when I bgan to view it, I per∣ceiued by the sirst face & coun∣tenance thereof, that of it felfe

willingly it made retreate to your Highnesse for protection, being in effect no other thing in regard of the matter, but a surcle of that stocke, or birth of that Booke, whereof your Highnes is the Parent, although the maner of handling it be so base and vnpolished, as that it be∣wrayes it selfe altogether vnlike any thing proceeding from your Highnesse. Yea, also farre inferiou vnto it (to vse the words of Clmens,Strom. 5. Alexandrinus, which he borrowes from Plato, comparing the giftes of Kings with other mens) as Brasse or Iron is inferiour to Golde or siluer. For there your Maiestie hath reated the present con∣trouersies of Religion, with such Learning, as in a Prince

may be admired, seasoned with such loue and mildnesse of Spi∣rit, as might mooue them, who are contrarie minded, if they were not drunken with the Cup of the Whoore of Bbl, and so had lost iudgement, and vnder∣stāding, to acknowledge that it is no turbulent humor, but the power of trueth, no desire of contntion, but the loue of all mens saluation, hath carried your Maiestie vnto it.
So hath it pleased God to be fauourable to this Ile, and by your Maiestie to blesse vs, that there nedes not now a Iustie, nor a Terullin to write Apolo∣gies of our Christian faith to a∣ny Antoninus or any other such like, Impie pio Imperaori; wee haue a most Christian King, a

pofessour of the Gospell with vs, a protector of vs with it, a Se∣mi-martyr, an Abimelech, A Fa∣ther King, an other Salomon, a Coheleth, such a king as is a Prea∣cher of that truth, whereof his Highnesse is professor, whose Palaces and Tables are (as was said of the Courts of Theodosius iunior) Schooles of Diuinitie, wherein ignorants are instruct∣ed, Apostates conuerted, good Christians daily confirmed, and as if this were yet too little, an open cōfessor before the world, a publicke patrone of the truth by Apologies learnedly pen∣ned, whereby his Highnesse reacheth to these, to whome by speech hee can not attaine, and so makes the light of the Gos∣pell shine to other Princes of

the World, who as yet mis∣like it, onely because they mis∣know it.
Neither can it be told, whe∣ther your Highnesse indeuour to propagate the truth of Chri∣stian Religion among such as haue it not, or to conserue it where it is already embraced, be greater, the care of all the Reformed Churches in Europe, after a sorte lying vpon your Highnesse. By your Authori∣tie they are protected, by your Learning instructed, by your Pieti cōfirmed, by your High∣nesse wise, godly and peaceable Councell vnited, where the sire of vnnecesary contentiō is sub∣tilly kindled by Sathan, for di∣sturbance of the Church, and disgrace of the Gospel. By your

Highnesse prouidence, happily, spedely and wisely it is quen∣ched, the benefit whereof, the Churches both of Fraunce and and Flanders lately haue found, and thankes God and your Ma∣iestie for it.
And if yet any further proofe of your Highnesse most intire affection toward Christ, and his cuse bee required of any man: May hee not see your Maiestie willingly bearing Babels indig∣nation for Ierusalems sake? Are not their raylings, threat∣nings, contradictions, trea∣sonable imaginations patient∣ly suffered for Christes sake? Is their not a sensible losse su∣stained for the Gospels sake? Is not alliance with Labans house, for Religions cause preferred to

the friendship of the most puis∣sant Princes of Canaan? But yet what speake I of losse, since losse for Christs sake can not bee, not indeede, what seemes a losse, shal bee found a vantage, for Where the wayes of man please the Lord,Gen. 14.13. Gen. 21.22. he shall make his enemies his friends, euen Mamre, Eschol, and Aner, Abimelech, and his Cap∣taine Phicol (Princes of Canaan) shall sue to Abraham for friend∣ship, and seeke to bee in coue∣nant with him, becaus they see that God is with him in all that he does. And if yet Ieroboam with his complices will be ene∣mies to Dauids Kingdome, then hath your Maiesty in readinesse the answere of Abah vnto them,2. Chron. 13 With you indeede is the mul∣titude, but with it yee haue the gol∣den

Calues, which you haue made for your gods, and shall be your de∣struction, but wee belong to the Lord our God, and behold this God is with vs as a Captaine, and his seruants with sounding Trumpets to crie an Alarum against you. For God from a∣boue hath indued your High∣nesse with his heauenly wise∣dome, which ath this annexed promise,Pru. 4.8. Exalt her, and shee shall exalt thee, shee shall bring thee to honour if thou embrace her, The Lord shall be thine assurance, and hee shall preserue thy soote from falling.
And with this great benefit of pure Religion, we enioy vn∣der your Highnesse most hap∣pie Gouernment, there is con∣ioyned such a peace, as no age

heretofore hath affoorded, no care of any Prince could effectu∣ate, for now by your Highnesse authoritie, the most Rebellious people are made peaceable, and the Scepter of Christ is reue∣renced there, where all sorts of violence, rapine, murther, villa∣nie did raigne before, so that now to your Maiestie most iust∣ly belongs that pise, which of olde was giuen to Constantine, and written in his triumphall Chariot, Liberator vrbis & sun∣dator quietis.Nazin. ad  pi 8 Or which Nazian∣zen gaue to Olympius. O negoti∣orum arbiter, & publicarum rerum corrector & vtrun{que} tii diuinitus concessum qui etiam hoc pietatis praemium acceisi, vtres tibi ex animi sententia fluant, sous{que} ea assequi possis quae omnibus alijs ne∣gata

sunt. Prudentiae enim & sortitudinis ductu imperium ad∣ministras, quarum altera, quae faci∣enda sut excogitat, altera quod ex∣cogitatum est, facile exequitur, huc quod maximum est accedit manus puritas & integritas qua omnia re∣guntur. An arbiter and decider of difficult controuersies, a cor∣rector of the publicke State, and both of these re committed to your Highnesse of God, from whome your Maiestie hath re∣ceiued also this reward of piety, that matters succeed vnto your Highnesse according to your hearts desire, and your High∣nesse onely hath attained to do that which is denied vnto o∣thers. And which yet is most of all, hereunto is ioyned the puritie and integritie of your

hands, whereby all things are ruled. Your Highnesse hath not liued like an Achab to spoile any Naboth of his Vine∣yard, nor like a Manasseh to de∣file the streetes of your Cities with innocent blood. Nor like an Herod, to take the Wife of an other. Your Maiestie might shake the lappe with Nehemiah against oppressours, in signe and token of innocencie. Your Highnesse might cast the first stone at adulterers, & in a good conscience could make purgati∣on with Samuel, if so it were that your Highnesse came to bee iudged of man, Whose Oxe or Asse haue I taken, or to whome haue I done wrong, If thre be any fault (for the best want not their own blemishes) it is vpon that ex∣tremity,

which is neerest to ver∣tue: Namely, in too great mer∣cie and clemencie, which of old was noted for an infirmitie in good Theodosius, Quod ex man∣suetudine in nimiam lenitatem de∣clinauerït, yet euen of this will I say with Nazian. Etiam haec est dei humanitas & Clementia. This also is a resemblance of the cle∣mencie of God, whose deputie on earth your Highnes are, for hee is gracious, slow to wrath, long suffering and ready to for∣giue. Many a time he bends his bowe to shoote at the wicked, the arrowes of his anger, but is ,Pisidae  slowe and loath to let them go: Yea, oftimes hee shoots & purpose∣ly misseth his marke, sparing yet for a time:

, his warnings are many, but where they worke not, hee strikes at length, and no more but once. : Thus euē the Lord whose mer∣cie is marueilous, meanes him to iudgement▪ where mercie is abused: It is no pietie but su∣perstition to spare, when time is to strike. And it is a cruell cle∣mencie, which is declared vpon one with the destruction of ma∣nie. The Pillars which vphold a Kingdome, are Mercie and Iu∣stice, since by them Kinges are conserued, Your Highnesse out of your rare wisedome, will haue a care to conserue them both, that neither Mercie make preiudice to Iustice, nor Iustice againe take away the praise of Mercie.
But to returne, as Sdesprima & vita ima, are most vnseemely; so is the dignity doubled, where the preferment is beautified with pietie: and herein also hath the Lord magnified his mercie toward your Maiesty, that as by an high calling he hath exalted your Highnesse a Head & Ru∣ler ouer this Mightie people, so hath hee made your Highnesse no lesse eminent by communi∣cation of his grace, then your Maiestie is by the Honor of the place, liuing in the eyes of all men a patterne of Vertue, yea an image of the heauenly King, walking so among the euill that you are not infected with their vice, and so with the good that the best are made better by your example. God make vs

wise to know what wee haue, for because the Lord hath lo∣ued his people, therefore hath hee set such a King ouer them, to rule them with equitie and righteousnesse. The Lord make vs thankefull for it, and long may your Highnes liue & raign a happy king of many blessings to your people, Amen.

