


RIGHT HONORABLE:
THe controuersies betwixt Gs Church and the Romish, haue been on both sides sufficiently debated heeretofore: on our side with that plainness & pourefulness that beseemes the truth; on the other, with such cunning and shiftes of wit, as falsehood needes: but on both sides with learning inough On our side by Luther. Zuinglius. Oecolampa∣dius. Caluine. P. Martir., especially in these later times. By this meanes the particular points in question, are now either opened suffici∣ently, or neuer will bee: for when two men goe to lawe, (as we and the Papists doe for our freehold, and title to the truth) if one de∣clare, the other answer, he again replie, and the other reioin; it is not possible but the matter will bee brought to a cleare issue, if it can haue a full hearing and an indifferent Iudge. Who should be
 the Iudge herein, but Gods Church, by the holy Scriptures? butBucer. Melanct hon. Iewell. Fulke. Whitaker. Reinolds. Zanchius. Beza. Iunius. Sadeel. &c. those the Pope refuseth. And then, how the Church, rather then in a free generall councel? but that the pope feares, as a theefe the Assises See his Bulla coenae which ye Pope himselfe denounceth in his own person on the euening before good-Friday: where he excommu∣nicates, first, all hereticks, as Caluinists, Lu∣therans, &c. Next, all such as appeal from the Pope to a general Coun∣cel, vid. Cōstit. pont. Rom. per Pet. Ma∣thaeum. pag. 883.. Til then, it is reason that euery man, as far as it cōcerns his saluation, be a iudge herein according to the measure of his knowledge: for man is a reasonable creature, & can iudge of rea∣son, when he hears it: so that vndoubtedly if the particular points (debated as they haue been) had but a full hearing, and an equall Iudge: the differences betwixt vs would soon receiue an end.
But our english papists are too blame in both: for first, they wilOn theirs, by Eccius. Pighius. Clictoueus. Hosius. Harding. Bellarmine. Greg. de Va∣lentia. Genebrarde. Stapleton. Heskins, &c. not heare both parties, nor reade our bookes, but onely theirs: (Here wants the full hearing). Secondly, if they do, it is with a preiudicate conceit, that whatsoeuer we saie, the other are in the right; and here wants an indifferent Iudge. Wilst it is thus, there will be no end of controuersies.
Hereupon, wise and godly learnedmen, haue vpon great and mature deliberation, thought it fit to spare the labour, (so often formerly spent in vaine), and to supersede for a time from ar∣guing any more, the matters so sufficiently already debated, but so insufficiently heard and iudged: and haue held it a better course, (both for their conuersion, and setling of our owne) to discouer the fouleness & manifold abhominations of poperie, both for doc∣trine & practice: which if many that be seduced, did but see in the true colors, surely they would strike themselues on the brest, & be ashamed; & hating this darkness, would long & look for light.
At this end haue I aimed in the course of my poor studies: and that I might be furnished with their own records, I haue spared no cost to get them, nor time to peruse them; and do protest vnto your Ho. & the world, the reading of their owne books (especially the latest of all) hath driuē me into a deeper detestation of popery, then any thing that euer I heard or read of it, out of our writers. wherof whether ther be cause or no, I dare refer my self to be iud∣ged by your Lp. or any of indifferency, vpon sight of these excepti∣ons I here make against them; which were for the most part deli∣uered at the Crosse before a reuerend & honorable audiēce: where hauing first discouered in the body of that religion xx. woundes, wide, and deep, & deadly, euen such as strike at the hart & life of
 a Church; the end I then droue at was to proue, that the Romish Babylon is not healed of these wounds, to this day.
This being done, it is strange to see how they spurned at it, and me for it; affirming openly, it was nothing but a heape of lyes and slaunders, that I am not able to proue what I sayd, nor dare stand to it, that wee are set vp to raile on them, and haue licences to lie on them, and make them odious before our people: and in the countrie they dispersed, I was call'd before authoritie for it, and censured, and silenced for slandering & rayling on the catholicks and that I was stricken by Gods hand, with a strange hoarcenesse after I began to raile on them; and could not speak, &c.
Therfore to honour the truth, and to cleer my selfe, but much more to shewe that it is no trick nor policy of our State (as it is in poperie A book was printed in english in the colledge at Rome, wherin it is affirmed that wee take Catholicks, and drawe vppon their legs bootes ful of hot boiling liquor, and vpon their feet hot bur¦ning shooes: and do put them into beares skins, and cast them to the dogs to be pulld in peeces: all this and many such other set down in pictures.), to set vp men with authority to raile and lie, therby to make our enemies odious; I haue bin induced to publish what was said & so to iustifie out of their own records what was affirmed of them. I ask them no fauor, I seek no corners, I refuse no triall; but let me be heard, and then iudged and spare not. If the particu∣larsFeuardent a lear∣ned Frier, yet li∣uing at Par wrot in latine 7. yeares agoe, that we re∣uile & reiect that praier to the holy Trinitie; Sancta Trinitas vnus De∣us miscrere nobis. Thus writes he in his Comment on 1. Pet. cap. 1. What will not he say, that dare say this? for, all our common prayer∣books, now, and those in Q. ELI∣ZABETHS, and K. EDWARDS times, doe testifie the contrarie. I lay to their charge be true, then how can they be the true Church? if they be false, I refuse no censure: and wil further say that if these 20. woūds be yet heal'd, or if they can find such in our religion, he that can shew me either of these I will be his Conuert.
To this end I haue presumed to present it first to your Honour, and vnder your honorable name, to the worlds viewe, not only as a testimonie of the loyaltie, loue and dutie I owe your Honour for your many particular honorable fauours; but especially, for that we to our ioy do find, and the Papists to their grief doe feare, that God hath hath raised vp your Honor, in these declining and des∣perate times (for so hath Poperie made them) to defeat their de∣uises, to countermine their plots, and to make them the instru∣ments of their own ruine; fit therfore and worthy to be the patron of that Treatise, which is a discouerer of ther spiritual impieties.
And surely (right Honorable) the churches hope ouer the Chri∣stian world is, that God hath ordayned his Ma. of England to be the means (by the aduise & assistance of your Hon. & others like you wherof God send vs more) to giue the whore of Babylō hir last blow, wherof she shall neuer recouer: which most worthy worke as
 God raised vp your honorable Father (of happie memorie) to be∣gin:Gretser{us} a Ie∣suite was suf∣fered to write within these 2. yeares that we rackt and tor∣tured Garnet, euen neere to death to make him confesse himself guilty of the powder treason, but he did not, & so we hauing no proof hāgd him onely for being a priest, and not for it. And that Ouē (his man) was puld in pieces on the racke, and when wee had so killed him, then wee gaue out hee had killd him∣selfe wt a knife: But for the 1. wee appeale to publicke re∣cords and the worlds know∣ledge: and for the second, there yet liue witnesses whose eies saw the woundes and bloudy knife, and whose eares heard him freely and penitently confesse hee did it with that knife, to escape the racke which hee sayde hee feared but had neuer ta∣sted. So hath he your Lordship, (paternarum virtutū, (cur non etiam & dignitatū?) ex asse haeredē) to accomplish and bring to perfection. The Father of mercie, and the Sonne of consola∣tion, be praysed for euer, for sending such a father, and such a sonne, to bee the Children of the Church of England. Go on, noble Lord with courage and constancie, and this worke of God shall prosper in your hand. To this end, the same God assist, strengthen, and protect your Lordship: and the blessed Father, for the blessed Sonnes sake, double vpon you his holy and blessed Spirit: wherto I am sure all good Christians will say, Amen, With
 Magna est veritas & praeualet.
