



MADAME:
HAuing neere at one time, brought out these two Treatises, like wo twinnes: the one intrea∣ing of Heauenly Mansi∣ns, the other of Patience.

The eldest of these two, I haue committed to the patro∣cinie of the right Noble La∣dy, the Countesse of Mar, the second for many reasons, doe I dedicate to your L. Grace hath ioyned your harts together in one holy band of mutuall loue in the truth, which I trust these Treatises may serue some way to con∣firme, no way to dissolue: for they contend not one with another, as did the two twinnes Iacob and Esau, in the wombe of Rebecca, but rather cherish one another; yea, without the one the other cannot consist.
The Heauenly Mansions

cannot be obtained without Patience: neyther can Pa∣tience be preserued without looking to the Heauenly Mansions. The practising f Patience now, leades vs o the full possession of the heauenly Mansions here∣fter. In these I am sure and your greatest comfort, without which all comforts f the world are but deceit∣ll vanities.
It is true, Nature hath ought you out Honourable  concerning this life, the ister germane of a right oble Lord, The Lord oxbrugh, the Spouse of  Honourable Knight,

Sir Iames Bellenden: but All the glory of flesh is as the flower of the field; Onely the word of the Lord endureth for euer. And herein is your greatest glory, that by the immortall seed of the Word, ye are made the daughter of the liuing Lord begotten againe to an in∣heritance immortall, vn∣defiled, and that fadet not away. This is one po which greatly magnifies th prerogatiue of Grace abou all the priuiledges of nature that the one euanisheth, th other endureth. All coniun∣ction on earth shall suffer dissolution, except onely th

coniunction of a soule with God in Christ. And this euen in your young yeares hath God taught you by sowre ex∣perience. It is now about ten yeares since death diuorced ou from your naturall hus∣and: yet in this time did ot the Lord forsake you: hrough his grace yee haue eene an Abigail to that ouse, whereunto your God did bring you, that is, a mo∣her to it, by wisedome more hen common to your sexe, rocuring the good thereof: nd haue liued like that wid∣ow ANNA, seruing the Lord, confessing him in his Temple, a diligent hearer of

his word, to the good exam∣ple of others who wait for the redemption of Israell. Which (with many moe) as hitherto they haue beene eui∣dent in you, to your great commendation before the world, so I pray God these, and all other graces of his Spirit, requisit to your eter∣nall saluation, may be multi∣plyed vpon you for your ap∣probation before the Lord. To whose mercy both now and euer I commend you And rests

