



GIVE mee leaue
Most gracious So∣ueraigne, in all
humble and sub∣missiue
manner, to present vnto
your Princely
view, or but lay
downe at your Royall foot, this Pledge
both of my seruice to God and his
Church, and of my dutifull and most
loyall affection to your sacred Maiesty.

Of whom more fitly might I seeke Pa∣tronage
for this Defence of Constantine,
then of him who is indeed the Great
Constantine of these latter Ages? Be∣twixt
whom, and the auncient Con∣stantine,
there is in all Eminency of
Honour and Heroicall vertues so great
and so faire a correspondence, that who
so looketh on either of both, may in
him as in a resplendent Glasse, behold
the full and liuely portraiture of the o∣ther.
Both descended of most Princely
Progenitors: Both borne and bred in
this most happy Iland: Both Inheritors
and Possessors of the Imperiall Crowne
of great Brittaine: Both by treacheries
of malignant enemies to the Gospell,
first in tenderConstanti∣nus iuuenculus detentus in cu∣stodia à Gale∣rio Aur. vict. in Constant. yeares, then in riperInsidiae contra illum comparatae se∣mel iterumque Eus. lib. 1. de vit. Colist. ca. 4. age, most dangerously assaulted: Both
by Gods only hand,Deus om∣nem dotum & fallaciam pate eat. Eus. lib. 10. hist. ca. 8. most gratiously
(and your Maiesty euen miraculously)
deliuered and preserued for those most
happy workes, which by your sacred
persons hee would effect: Both richly
beautified with Prudence, Iustice, Clemen∣cy,
Magnanimity, & all other Ornaments of

Regall Maiesty; especially with Piety,
which being the Fountaine and Foun∣dation
of all other vertues, shineth in e∣uery
part of the lines of both. Constan∣tine
his Loue to God such, that as him∣selfe
Eus. l. 2 de vit Const. ca. 13 preferred God before his very soule;
so he gaue this as hisIdem lib. 4 cap. 35 chiefest Instructi∣on
to his children, that they also should
preferre the knowledge of God, and his holy
Religion, before all worldly wealth, yea before
the Empire. His Loue to Gods Messengers
and holy Bishops such, that he hadIdem lib.  ca. 52. them
at his owne table, had them in his iourneies (as
GuardiansIdem lib. 2 ca. 4 of his soule, whersoeuer he went:
and looking on them not asIdem lib.  cap. 35. at men, but as
at Christ, whom he considered and beheld in
them, he most honoured those, who had
sustained most dishonour for Christ, as
he declared in B. Paphnutius, who ha∣uing
lost his right eye, and vse of his
left thigh for the name of Christ, yet
this blind and lame Paphnutius: WouldRuff. lib.  ca. 4.
he often call into his Palace, nor only most lo∣uingly
embrace him, but beleeuingTheol. lib. 1. ca. 11. that he
should (as no doubt he did) suck a blessing
from those blemishes, hee would with greedy

kisses cherish the disgraced place of that eye,
which was pulled out for the profession of
Christ. His Loue to Gods seruice such, that
both for Praying, hee bestowed wholeEus. lib. 4. ca. 57.
nights therein, and himselfe also, as a most
Quasi a∣cerdos quid am sacra faciebat. lib. eod. ca. 11. holy Priest, did with zeale and feruency,
offer vp that Incense of a deuout and religi∣ous
soule vnto God: and for hearing Gods
Word, his attentiue affection and reue∣rence
thereunto, was far more then or∣dinary.
Eusebius relates,Id. lib. eod. ca. 33 how while
himselfe preached before the Emperor,
he though being in dutifull manner
requested by Eusebius; not onely refused
to sit downe, but when Eusebius fearing to
be too tedious, intended abruptly to
breake off his speech, the Emperour
would not permit him so to doe, but
exhorted him to proceed to the end of
his Sermon▪ and when Eusebius the se∣cond
time entreated him to sit downe
and take some ease, the Emperour a∣gaine
refusing, with a sad and seuere coun∣tenance
answered, It is not fit, either with
negligence or irreuerence, to heare the Word of
God. His loue to the Churches and Houses

of God such, that almost euerywhereEus. lib. 3. ca. 47.
throughout his Empire, he either builded
new, or repayred & enlarged the decay∣ed
Churches, and that with such beauty
and Munificence, that hee sparedId. lib. 2. ca 44. no
cost in so pious a Worke. His Loue to
the peace of Gods Church such: that he not
onely tooke awayRuff. lib. 1. ca. 2. the occasions of
quarrels among Bishops, but to preuent
contentions himselfe satEus. lib. 3. ca. 10. in their Sy∣nodall
assemblies; yea sat there, as the
BishopId lib. 1 ca. 37 & lib 4. ca. 24. of them all, and by his vigi∣lancy
and prudence, reduced all both
to vnity in faith, and amity in affection.
As the like sincere Loue vnto God, to his
holy Bishops, and to the peace and prosperi∣ty
of his Church, is relucent in your
Maiesty, and by innumerable demon∣strations
made euident vnto all: So in
the manner and meanes of propugning
and propagating the faith, it may be truly
said, to the immortall honour of your
sacred Person, that neither Constantine,
nor any other Prince or Emperour is a
match therein. Constatine like Dauid, a
King of Warre, by the sword of battell

subdued the pride and rage of persecu∣ting
Tyrants, and so with the borders
of his Empire, enlarged the profession
of Christ: your Maiesty like Salomon, a
King of Peace, by that depth of diuine
and vnexpressable knowledge and wise∣dome,
wherewith the God of Heauen
hath filled your sacred brest, with the
Sword of Gods Spirit, subduing the
Pride, Idolatries, and Impieties of that
Man of Sinne, hath made glorious the
true faith of Christ, not onely in, and
beyond the bounds of your owne, and
the Romane Empire, but from Great
Brittaine, euen to the vtmost borders of
the Earth. Constantine for his great lear∣ning
and loue vnto it, is most highly
and most iustly renowned. His vacant
timesId. lib. 4. ca. 29. he bestowed in writing of most vse∣full
Treatises, which custome he continued
Id. ca. 29. euen to his last age. The excellency of
whose writings may bee easily discer∣ned,
partly by that one Oration, ad coe∣tum
Sanctorum, which demonstrates an
heart, fraught with all humane and di∣uine
knowledge: partly by that auidi∣ty

which wholelb. ca. 29. multitudes had, who
flocked to heare his Princely and di∣uine
discourses. But in truth, what are
these, to those so many ? to those
exact and neuer sufficiently admired A∣pologeticals
of the Faith? to those diuine
and inimitable meditations, to those innu∣merable
and mellifluous Orations, which
haue, and still doe flow from the vn∣emptied
Fountaine of your Maiesties
sacred tongue and pen? which euen en∣force
all iudicious and religious Hea∣rers
and Readers of them, to breake
forth into those patheticall admirations
of the Queene of Sheba. It2. Chron. 9. 5. &c. was a true
word which I heard of thy sayings and of thy
wisedome: but behold the one halfe thereof was
not told vnto me. Happy are thy men, and
happy are thy seruants, which stand before
thee alway, and heare thy wisedome. Bles∣sed
be the Lord thy God, which loued thee, to
set thee on his Throne, as King instead of the
Lord thy God Because thy God loued Israel, to
establish it for euer, therfore hath he made thee
King euer them, to execute Iudgement & Iu∣stice.
This Eminency of Piety, Knowledge

and Wisedom, as in all true Christian &
Religous hearts it hath, and will euer
most deseruedly purchase both Honour
and Admiration: So from the sonnes of
Belial, & enemies to the faith of Christ.
What else could bee expected, but the
bitter scoffes and scurrill Calumnies of
of their most virulent and venomous
tongues? In which kind of base and re∣uiling
Oratory, the Iulians, Zosimi, and
other heathen Maligners of Constan∣tine,
doe by many degrees, come short
of the moderne Pacentij Parsonij, and
Scioppij of this age: all whose names shall
rot and become as dung on the Earth,
when the vnblemished Honor and the
most blessed names of the two Constantines,
shall as an ointment of most precious
Spickrard bee powred throughout the
whole Church of God: For God himselfe
hath foretold1. sam. . 30. of both. Them that ho∣nononr
me will I honour: but they that despise
me shall be despised. What in this Treatise I
haue now said, either for the Honor &
Defence of the former Constantine, or in
discouery of that forged Romane Synod,

which abetting the calumnies deuised a∣gainst
him, was the first occasion of the
whole discourse, or of the Popes temporall
Monarchy, which vtterly subuerts the Im∣perial
Dignity and Rights both of Con∣stantine
and all other Princes; I do heere,
most Gracious Soueraigne, with al humility
both of mind and body, lay downe be∣fore
your sacred Maiesty; in few, but fer∣uent
words, beseeching the God of glo∣ry
that after a long and most happy Reigne
here vpon earth, your Maiesty not lea∣uing
but exchanging this earthly, with
an heauenly Diadem, may both reigne
here in your Princely and Most blessed Issue
so long as the World endureth, and be∣ing
crowned with Immortality, may shine
as the Sunne in the brightnesse of cele∣stiall
glory for euermore.

