



My Lord,
I Haue beene bold to pub∣lish
these Treatises, vn∣der
your Honourable
name, not for any light,
that by them can accresse to that trea∣sure
of knowledge, which is in your
Noble minde, but that (so farre as I
can) I might make euident to others,
for imitation, that grace which

God hath made so eminent in you.
I may truely say, there is no qua∣litie,
which in the iudgement either
of learned Ancients, or recents, hath
beene required, to complete Nobili∣tie,
lacking in you. Your honour
being not  onely, Noble by
birth; but  also, generous by
manners, such as retaine, yea, by ver∣tue
encreases, the honour of your ho∣nourable
Fathers. It passed among
the ancient wise men in a prouerbe,
: be∣cause
commonly it fals out, that chil∣dren
of worthy men, comming short
of their fathers vertue, derogates to
their glorie: aequat rara patrem soboles:
And therefore in them qui clariores
genere censntur, it was euer thought
an high commendation, maiorum fa∣mam
sustinere; like as no greater shame
can be to them of that ranke, then
when by their ignoble life, they
quench the light of their noble stock,
et generi suo dedecori sunt.
It is now twelue hundreth years

since your honourable name hath
beene famous in this kingdome: but
which is much more, and wherein,
in my iudgement, it is marueilous,
the first mention of your Tribe, in the
story, doth not record the rising ther∣of
from a small estate vnto an high∣er,
as it doth in many Peeres of the
land, who for their vertue also were
aduanced; but at the first sight, it pre∣sents
your worthy Predecessor stand∣ing
in the highest top of Honour,
wherein a subiect can be: for not one∣ly
was he then brother in law to king
Fergus the 2. but for his Wisedome,
Valour, & Manhood, by consent of
the Nobles, both Scots & Picts, then
gathered to battell, he was chosen, as
meetest Chieftaine, to demolish that
diuision-wall of Abircorne, stretching
from the East sea, to the West, built
first by Victorine, and fortified there∣after,
more strongly, by Gallio, both of
them Romane Lieutenants; but more
victoriously, first & last, broken down
by the valiant Graeme, in presence

of both the Kings, that so a way might
be prepared to their armies, to make
irruption vpon the Romans, for
which, vnto this day, the remanents of
that worke, beares the name of Graeme
his ditch, when himselfe is gone.
Facta ducis viuunt,Ouid. operosaquè gloria re∣rum.
Haec manet.
It is true, there are many honour∣rable
families in this land, who com∣municate
with you in the same name:
but that this is the honour of your
house, is euident, not onely by the
lands, bordering with that wall, pos∣sessed
as yet by your L. and was, as
the story recordeth, one of the mo∣tiues
why that waighty charge was
committed to your worthy ancestors;
but in this also that the remanant fa∣milies,
who come vnder the commu∣nion
of the same name, hold lands
of your house, from which, as from
a most ancient stocke, they as sproutes
and branches, haue growne and
sprung out.
And of this, as it is euident, that

your honourable house is more anci∣ent
then the Chronicle can declare,
so doth this greatly increase the glo∣ry
of it, that it hath continued in ho∣nour
euer since, euen to the daies of
your noble Father of famous memo∣ry,
who for fidelitie to his Prince, loue
to his Countrey, equity toward all
men, after he had borne many other
offices of honour, was in his olde
age honored to be his Maiesties high
Commissioner, and also great Chan∣cellor
of this kingdome: his house
like the open court of Ahasuerus his
palace, wherein hee banquetted his
people, euer plenished▪ and patent to
such, as pleased to resort.
In a word, no lesse honourable in this
Kingdome hath your Familie beene,
then the Tribes either of Leontis, or
Aeantis, among the Athenians, for
their feates of armes, and glorious vi∣ctories
atchieued in battell; or among
the Romanes, these fiue principall fa∣milies,
Vitellij, Fabij, Antonij, Potitij,
Mamilij, who for their most ancient

discent, were called Aborigines.
But howsoeuer these be great
things, yet are they not the greatest,
which doe commend you, Virtute de∣cet,
non sanguine niti. It is a miserable
pouertie, where a man hath no mat∣ter
of praise in himselfe, but must bor∣row
it from others.
Miserum est aliorum incumbere famae.
Yea, the more honourable the pa∣rentage
is, the greater is the shame
of him that degenerates from it, and
so becomes indignus genere.
Perit omnis in illo
Gentis hono,Ouid. cuius laus est in origine sola.
Here then is your greatest praise,
that as you are, ,
lineally discended
of so Noble, and ancient, a stocke (for
no writ, nor memory of man, can re∣cord
the interruption of your Line) so
are you the vndoubted heyre of those
vertues, which shined in them, Wise∣dome,
declared in doubtsome and diffi∣cult
matters: Manhood, tryed, as we

say, in discrimine: Truth, fit enim quod
dicitur, your words are sufficient war∣rants
to such, as know you. Noble
manners: Veram nobilitatem testantur
facies & mores: these are Insignia numi∣na
diuum.
And beside these, beautified with
other two rare graces, wherunto they,
in regard of their times, could not at∣tain,
at least, in the like measure, Pietie
and Erudition: your honour being
learned, not onely in the common
languages of the most famous coun∣tries
of Europe, but in the three most
renowned languages, whereby as yee
haue attained to the knowledge of li∣berall
Sciences, so doe ye stil conserue
and dayly encrease it, by diligent rea∣ding,
and conference with the lear∣ned:
who for learning are loued, and
honoured by you:
Nam quae mox imitere legis nec desnit vnquam,Claudian.
Tecu rataloqui, Tecum Romana vetustas.
That which the wise K. Salomon said
of Beauty without discretion, the like
may be said of Honour without Eru∣dition;

It is as a ring in a swynes snout:
and therefore hath the learned, ex∣pressed
Erudition,Aul. Gal. by the name of hu∣manitie,
both because the care and stu∣dy
of Sciences, is committed to man
onely, among all the creatures, and
for that man without Erudition, is li∣ker
a beast, then a man. Turpe est vi∣ro
principi parem dignitatisuae virtutem
non afferre.
And these two, Honour, and Eruditi∣on,
shine so much the more cleerely in
you, that they are both crowned with
singular and vnsimulate Pietie, both
professed, and practised, and that in a
time of reulting, & great defection:
yea, in most dangerous places, euen
there where Sathan hath his throne:
for this is no small argument of true
religion, deepely rooted in your
heart, that hauing trauelled through
Italy, Rome, and other parts of the
Popes Dominions, heard, and seene
all those allurements, which carrieth
away instable minded men, not roo∣ted,
nor grounded in Christ, after

the loue of that richly busked Babi∣lonish
Whoore, your Lordship hath
returned home vnspotted, neither
burnt with their fire, nor blacked
with their smoake: not vnlike those
three children, who came forth out
of Nabuchadnezzars fire, and had not
so much as a smell thereof on their
garments.
This Pietie, euen in the iudge∣ment
of them, who had no more but
Natures light, was esteemed the high∣est
matter of a mans praise, maiorem
virtutem religione,Plato in Epino. & pietate in Deum,
nullam in humano genere inueniri quis∣que
sibi persuadeat. The reason here∣of
is giuen by Diuines, illuminate with
the light of the word, to be this, that
by Pietie, and holinesse of life, we as∣cend
ad primarium illud bonum vnde
originem traximus:Nazian. Orat. 33. in laud. Hiero. and therefore the
same father speaking in the praise of
Cyprian, affirmes, .
And indeede, since we are the genera∣tion

of God made, to his image, what
greater glory can man haue then to
conserue that image, and be like vn∣to
him, to whose similitude hee was
made? Vna itaque nobilitas imitatio
dei.
Goe on therfore right Noble Lord,
follow the course, which yee haue
happily begunne; shew your selfe the
kindely sonne of so worthy Fathers:
aboue all, the Sonne of God, by the
new generation; his worke-manship
created in Christ Iesus vnto good
workes. Keepe in minde that warning
of our Lord, Much will be required of
him, to whom much is giuen: as the
double portion obliged the first
borne to the greater seruice, other∣waies,Chrisost.
. In all your waies looke vp
to the Lord, hee it is, that exalts them
of lowe degree,Luke 1. 52. and puts downe the
mighty from their seates,Hos. 4. 7. turning their
glory into shame, who vse not their glo∣ry
to honour him.
Pittifull proofes whereof wee haue

in this fearefull earthquake (as I may
call it) going through this countrey,
by which many Castles, Houses, and
Lands, spewes out their inhabitants,
shaking off the yoke of their ancient
Lords, and rendring themselues to be
possessed of their seruants, because
they haue also cast off the yoke of the
Lord their God, or at least not wel∣commed
his grace, offred in the Gos∣pell,
as it became them. The consi∣deration
whereof, I doubt not, doth
affect your Lordship, as it doth others
who are become wise through the
feare of God, and learnes by the losse
of others to gather their thoughts,
and make peace with him, whose
praise it is, that he buildes houses to
men,2 Sam. 2. and vpholds them: for by him
enterprises are established.
And herewithall remember Right
Noble Lord, that as trees, on tops of
hils, are subiect to the blast of euery
winde, so men in the height of ho∣nour
to great temptations; against
which they haue neede to be armed.

But least I seeme Monere memo∣rem,
,
more laborious then neede requires,
I end: Humbly praying your Lordship
to accept these small, and scarse-ripe
fruit of my labours, as a testimony
of my affection to your Honour,
till it may please God some bet∣ter
token come into my
hand, whereby to
declare it.

