



RIght Worshipfull, albeit no distance of place can dis∣ioynt them in affection, whō God hath conioyned by the band of one spirit: yet is it no small stop of that Christian conference, wherby eyther of them might happely edi∣fie, and be edified of others. I haue there∣fore taken mee to the next remedy, since I cannot reach towards you with my tongue, I haue endeuoured by writing to bestow vpon you some Spirituall Gift,Rom. 1. according to my line or measure, for recompence of that Comfort, which I

haue reaped of that Grace of God which is in you.
I know these colder parts of the Ile, wherein we soiourue, doe not vsually ren∣der such ripe fruites as those on which the Sunne beates more hotely; yet are they also profitable in their kinde for nou∣rishment, specially of such▪ who from their youth haue beene accustomed to feede vpon them. Neyther hath the Lord our God debarred vs from Communion of that which is the greatest glory of the Ile: the Sun of righteousnesse hath shined vpon vs also. The Lord hath made ourEs. 42. 16. darknesse to bee light, and lead vs who were blinde a way wee knew not. The Lord hath set his Standard amongst vs.Esa. 49. 22. Hee hath not onely sayde to the South, keepe not backe, but hee hath also com∣maunded the North to giue and to bringEsay. 43. 6. vnto him his Sonnes from farre, and his Daughters from the ends of the Earth. As the going forth of the Sunne, is fromPsal. 19. 6. the one end of Heauen to the other, ri∣sing in the East, and running on like a mighty man, his race towards the West;

so hath the Law gone forth of Sion, and the Word of the Lord from Ierusalem: the light of the Gospell through many na∣tionsEsa. 2. 3. hath come from them of the East, toward vs in the West, where now it stands more meruailously, then the Sunne stood in Gibeon in the dayes of Ioshua,Iosh 10. 12 till the fulnesse of the Gentiles in theseRo. 11. 25. parts, the remnants of Iaphets house bee brought into the Tents of Sem. How long it will so continue the Lord know∣eth.
Now the shadows of the euening are stretched ouer them of the East: the Sun is gone downe ouer their Prophets. Dark∣nesseMich. 3. 6. is vnto them in stead of Diuinati∣on. If our vnthankefulnesse prouoke the Lord to withdraw it from vs, woe in like manner shall bee to this Land, when GodHos. 9. 12. departs from it. There was neuer people before vs had any more but their day of Grace, some longer, some shorter, but as they had a Morning, so hath an Eue∣ning also ouertaken them. While there∣foreIoh. 12. 35 wee haue the light, let vs walke in the Light: Blessed shall wee bee, ifLuk 19. 42

wee know those things, which belong to our peace: for in our dayes, that pro∣mise which the Lord made two thousand and sixe hundred yeares agoe, is aboun∣dantly performed: that hee would giuePsal. 2. the ends of the earth to his Sonne for a possession: Happy are they among vs, who shall be found of that number, sought out by the Candle of the Gospell, as peecesLuke. 15. 8 of lost Money, and like wandring Sheepe taken out of the mouth of the Lyon, and giuen in a Gift to Christ, that hee may saue them: these are the Redeemed of the Lord, let them praise the Lord; and among them come yee in also, and giue glory to God: take in your heart and mouth with Dauid that Song of thanks∣giuing: The Lots are fallen vnto meePsal. 16. 6 in pleasant places: and I haue a faire Heritage.
It is written of Theodosius, that hee thanked God more, for that hee was a Christian, then for that he was an Empe∣rour; because the Glory hee had by the one would vanish, but the benefits hee en∣ioyed by the other hee knew, were to

continue for euer: and though it may be most iustly great matter of your ioy, that by the fatherly care of our Gracious So∣ueraigne, yee haue beene placed a Do∣mestique Attendant on his Maiesties most Princely Sonne, euen from his very Cradle (wherein hetherto you haue beene praised for Fidelitie, and I hope shall be so to the end) yet let this bee your greatst Glorie, that the Lord hath made you par∣taker of that blessing which commeth by the Gospell, and giuen you the earnest of that Inheritance prepared for them, who are sanctified by Faith in Christ Ie∣sus. For increase whereof in you, as I dai∣ly send vp my weake Prayers vnto the Lord, so shall I be aboundantly contentedAct. 20. 32 to know that these small fruits of my hs∣bandry, which haue growne this last Sum mer in the pleasant valley of Perth, not far from your natiue soyle, may be any way profitable to confirme and establish that which GOD hath wrought in you.  them therefore (right Worshipfull) come towards you, as those fruits which Iacob sent to Ioseph from Canaan Southward,Gen 43. 11

to more plentifull Aegipt; though not as supplements of your neede, yet as Testi∣monies of that loue which I beare toward you in the Lord, to whose mercy I commend you for euer in Iesus Christ.

