


The spirit of Wisdome, Truth Zeale, and vnity, be multipied.
IT is well knowne to the learned, and many your selues right Honorable, & Worshipful, that the Iesuits (the Popes best and dearest sonnes) haue not yet troubled the world a hundred yeeres: for the Pope that to his owne hurt excommunicated Henry the 8. & against his will called the conuentikle of Trent, established also the order of the Iesu∣its Paul the 3. in the yeare 1540. allowed and esta¦blished the order of the Iesuits, being begun by these 10. named in the Bull. Ignatius Loyal Petrus Faber, Iaco Laynes, Claudius Iai Pascha Broet, Francis Xauie, Alphon. Salmeron Simon Rodericus, Ioanne Coduis. Nich. Bobadilla. & restrained their num¦ber to 60. but 30. yeare after in another Bull h inlarged thē, to as m¦ny as they could get. what their order is, what their vowes be, and what their Religion, you may know out of the booke called the Iesuites Rule. What seruice they haue done their Master the Pope, all men guesse, wise men know, and all Nations in Christendome feele to their paine, more or lesse. And how sensible the Pope is of their seruice, apeares in that the first 5. Popes in their time, in recompence therof, haue be∣stowed no lesse then 36 See the book calle Regula Iesuitica• print at Rome, 1580. and sine at Lyons, and obseru wisely some of the rules, and you shall find that the present state, of a great part of Christendome is a large coment vp¦on the Iesuites rule. Buls or Charters of Priuiledges vpon the society (besides some which we shal neuer know of) euery one cōfirming or inlarging another, and the later yeelding more ample graces and fauours then the for∣mer: Now if in their first 40. yeres, (being the time of their infancy) they were able to deserue so well, what seruice may we thinke haue they performed, and
 how great thanks haue they receiued of the latter popes in these last 30. yeeres. of their age, when they are come to strength and ripenesse: for tho Sixtus 5. See the book called Literae Apostolicae, qui∣bus Institutio confir∣matio & priuilegia. soc, Iesu continentur: prin∣ted at Rome 1587. (being as wicked & wily as themselues) perceiuing their plots, and disco∣uering their deepest drifts; vsed them accordingly, and not only gaue them nothing he could keep from them, but intended also Watson in his quod∣libers, confesseth as much, but this matter▪ hath better proofe then Watson. the restrayning or rui∣nating of their order (had not they done as much for him, as he entended thē) yet he and Paul the 4. only excepted (for it was ill halting before 2. such cri∣ples) they can hardly name a Pope that liued a yeere of whom they receiued not such fauours, as may well testifie to the world the great account the Pope makes of them. And will you know the reason? their deuotion, their doctrine, &. their deedes, do merrit it at his hands: what their particular deuotion to the Pope is, appeares by the vow which they (aboue all other: Regulars) make to the Pope of present and absolute obedience See the book called Constitutiones Roma∣norum Pontif. per Pe∣trum Matthaeum, ug∣duni 1588, amongst the Constitutions of Paul the 3. in the third con∣stiution, pag. 305. there be the words of this vow to do whatsoeuer he should command them, to goe whethersoeuer he should send them, to Turkes, In∣sidels, Heretickes, without excuse, denyall or delay. Their deedes for the Pope are answerable to their deuotion towards him, for these 50. yeeres haue they vpheld Popery Solaue diuers Popes confessed in the pream∣bles of the Buls granted to the Iesuits, especially Paul the 3. in his third Bul anno 45. & in his 5. an. 49. & Iulius the 3. in his first, and Pius the 4. in his first, and others. as far as wit and learning, nay as farre as craft and cruelty can vphold it, which without them had vtterly rinated (as not∣withstanding it shortly will, and they with it, doe what they can) They haue pickt out the finest yong wits of the world, these be their words in the regula Iesuitica, cap. 3. reg. 4. Inepta turba ad institutum no∣strú admitti non potest. and so trained them vp, that the Pope shal neuer want instruments to kill Kings, to subuert states, to patch vp a peace, or to breake leagues as he thinks good: let but the Diuel deuise it, & the Pope command it, and forthwith the Iesuits will find him shall execute it.
Moreouer what they haue attempted for the Pope, in England, Scotland, Hungary, Bohemia, Venice, and the Low-Countries: what they haue perfor∣med for him in France and Poland: how they rule & raigne in Spaine & Italy, who so blind as sees not? Bu s this all they haue done? Nay they scatter themselues like Locusts ouer all the world; and with the Frogs of Hgypt creepe into great mens houses, and first seduce the silly women, and not so content, worke themselues into the fauours, at least into the Courts, Coaches, & coun∣sels of Princes; & diuing into mens consciences & counsels, by the stratagems of their confession, and after into their purses & estates, by benefit of their ab∣solution, many orders of Fri∣ers & many popish na∣tions haue complained of the Iesuites, in these espects. & lastly into the conceits of the Vulgar, by an hypocriticall au∣sterity and dissembled deuotion, they haue hereby gained more to the Pope their Lord and Master, then all the Romish Clergie in the world besides: But is this yet all? nay, that the Pope may seeme to haue a good cause, and not to do all things by a strong hand, they haue taken a course to make all writers in the world speake for him: (an attempt which the former ages suspected not, and the future will scarce beleeue) for some bookes they prohibite and extinguish and make it damnable to open them: the rest be they old or new, printed or manuscript, they alter adde and take away For the first see their ook called, Index li∣rorum prohibitorum, et out by authority of seuerall Popes. And for the second, see the books called, Indices librorum expurgandorum, printed in Belgia, Italy, and spaine, as also Gregorij. Capuccini, Enchiridion Ecclesi∣asicum, and Posseuine the Iesuit his apparatus sacer. till they haue
 suckt out the sweetenesse, and purged out all the goodnesse, and taken out all testimonies of the truth: insomuch as if they had not been warily watcht, followed by the footesteps, and taken euen in the manner, they had not left one booke allowed in the world, that had not spoken for the Pope: Such worthy workemen are the Iesuits, that those good & worthy men which prea∣ched and wrote against the Pope, whilst they liued, their Sermons & writings shall testifie for him, long after they are dead: But why doe I offer to discerne or or discouer Iesuites practises? alas, I am too silly and too shallow, I confesse I know them not, and yet I am sorry I know so much: my hope is that their beginning, their breeding, their feeding, their growth, their greatnesse, their rules and religion, their plots and practises, their murders and massacres (being such as makes England banish them, Denmarke detests them, Venice wil none of them, Italy, is weary, & France is sick of them, and Spaine it selfe is iustly iea∣lous of thē) My hope I say is, that a perfect discouery of all these will be attēp∣ted by some that may make perfect that small beginning & foundation, which in 2. little bookes is already laid in that kind Aphorismi doct. Iesuitie. De abstrusio∣ribus studijs Iesuitarum meane time for the better vncasing of this Foxe, and vnmasking this Hypocrite, let me come to that which is neerer to my Element, & consider a little of their doctrines, which is the third meanes by which they haue deserued so well of the Papall state: con∣cerning which, I will say nothing but what I know, and what I dare referre and do submit to your iust and iuditious censures, I say therefore that whereas the Romish Church is that scarlet whore, Reu. 17. 1, 2. &c. and her Idolatries and superstitions the spirituall abominations with which she makes drunk the inhabitants of the earth and that in this latter age her cup of abominations was almost drunke vp, and emptied euen to the dreggs: in this exigent and extremity these like Locusts flye out of the bottomlesse pit, to repaire the ruines of the Romish state, and to fill her Reuel. 9. 2. golden Cup with a new supply of spirituall fornications: to which end they haue first reuiued many diuellish doctrines, halfe dead and damned in the for∣mer ages, and what in former times were scarce muttered in corners by the worst of their Predecessors, is now by them preached on the house tops: And secondly, not so content, the better to fill her cup with the very quintessence of most refined abominations: they haue hatched many horrible doctrines and hellish opinions neuer heard of in the elder ages; which are such excellent and exquisite infections to a mans soule, that the purple Whoore hath willingly throwne away Popery is much al∣tred since the Iesuites both in their seruice, as may bee seene in their Missals & breuiaries: & in their ceremonies, as appeares in their ponti∣ficale and ceremoniale comparing the old and new together. a great part of her older druggs, to make roome for the new and more precious poysons confected by the Iesuites.
Of the first sort, and so of the second, I dare be bold to giue you a taste, though they bee mortall poysons, because I know you are armed with Anti∣dotes and precious preseruatiues against them.


1 That an Image of God or Christ is to be worshiped with , that is, with the same same worship as God himselfe: So teach Gretser & Gregory de Valent, and say it is the common & receiued opinion,
2 That God hath deuided his Kingdome with the Virgin Mary, keeping iustice to himselfe but committing mercy to her.

 3 That a man may appeale from Gods iustice to the mercy of the Virgin Mary. These two Biel and Bernardine de Bust doe teach and Posseuine the Iesuit, highly cōmends those very bookes.
4. That the Pope is superior to the Emperor, not only in spiritual but euen in temporall things, & ought to haue place and predence afore him o teacheth liber sa∣crarum ceremoniarum, Romane Ecclesie, which is highly commended by Bellarmine as Posse∣uinus also confesseth.

These and many others which scarce durst peepe out in former times, are now by the Iesuits made publike and plausible doctrines, and being almost bu∣red and forgotten, are by them againe reuiued.


1 That God hath made the Virgin Mary partaker of his diuine power and maiesty, So teacheth Hora∣sius Tursellinus a Iesuit. as farre as he may.
2 That a man shall oft time bee sooner heard at Gods hand in the media∣tion of the Virgin Mary, then of Iesus Christ. So teacheth Chriso∣stomus a Visit. a Cister∣tian, and is allowed by Posseuinus.
3 That a man may equiuocate before a Magistrate. So teach Azorius & Tollet and all Iesuits.
4 That Heresie makes a man vncapable of a Kingdome, and makes him an Vsurper, that is otherwise a lawfull King So teach Marianus Simancha, Bozius and others allowed by the Iesuits.
5 That the Pope hath power not only to pronounce what is heresie, but after that to depriue him of his Kingdome, and to dispose of it as he thinkes best. So teacheth Rosseus and others allowed by the Iesuits.

With many other, not conuenient heere to bee perticularized which the former times neuer heard of, at least in such manner as now they be holden,
But seeing they be all of two sorts, either touching the crowne of Christ himselfe, or the crownes of Kings his deputies on earth, I will desire you to be contented with one example of both sorts. Concerning not such Kings as make not themselues slaues and harlots to the purple whore: thus teacheth a Iesuit too well knowne in Eglnand.
See the book called Andrea Philopatris re∣sponsio ad Edictum Eli∣zabethae ann. 91. sect. 2 artic. 157. pag. 109. edi∣tionis aug. 1592. This man is Arthur Creswell the Iesuite. It is the iudgement of all Catholike Diuines and Lawyers, and it is certaine, and de fide: that what Christian Prince soeuer, doth apparantly fall from the Catholike Religion, and would also draw others with him, doth Ipso facto forthwith fall from all right, title, place and power of their King∣domes or Dominions, by force both of Gods and mans law, and this before any sentence be pronouced against him by the Pope: and that all his Subiects are free from the Oathes they haue made to him. And they may. nay they ought (if they be able) to put him downe and cast him out from all gouernment, as an Heretike, an Apostate, and an enemy of God and the com∣monwealth &c. And this doctrine is certaine, vndoubted and resined &c.
Alas that we should liue to heare such doctrine taught, especially by an Englishman I but whereas he stiles himselfe a Diuine and a Priest of Rome, wee thence conclude that he carried no such learning with him out of England, but found it at Rome.
Concerning Christ, that which I haue afore set downe is vile and wicked and such as the elper world and misty times of Popery would haue abhorred. But there is one impiety of late broched by one Iesuit, and approoued by all, so horrible and hainous, as I want words to expresse it. Clarus Bonarseius a Iesuit, writes it: Posse∣uine the Iesuit in the name of all other ap∣proues it. But this I can say, it is such as the world yet neuer heard of, such as the ages past feared
 not, and the future will not beleeue: nay such as we in these dayes would not beleeue of our very enemies, if the euidence of the fact made it not past all denyall and excuse: for would a man imagine that those who professe them∣selues the seruants of Iesus Christ aboue other men, should conceiue of him, speake to him, and play with him, as with a sucking child in his mothers armes? Nay that is nothing, they make him an vnderling to a woman, and not his Person only but his bloud and merits, & compare together his bloud and her milke, and vpon comparison finds them so equall, that they mixe them together, and in the mixture finds the milke so excellent, that they pre∣ferre it afore the bloud, as a thing more precious, and with which, they may not be so bold as with the bloud of Christ, and feare not to affirme that the corruptions of our nature, and sinnes of our soule are healed and holpen as well by her milke as Christs bloud. A blasphemy whereat the Angels will shrinke, and the very diuels tremble, and yet no doubt wee shall finde Iesuites will defend it.
Hauing obserued this blasphemy 2. or 3. yeeres agoe, I held my tongue, expecting it would bee discouered and reproued by some that could doe it with more authority, but fayling of my hope, I long conceal'd my labours till now, that the necessities of these euill times doth force it from mee: I there∣fore do heere discouer it, and am bold to send it abroad vnder the protecti∣on of your honorable names, that so all the world may know the state and gouernment of this honorable Citty, to be no approouers, but Censors and condemners of so horrible and hideous Atheisme.
I am therefore a suter to you all, in mine owne and the name of all my bre∣thren the Clergy of this City, that you looke well to the execution of the lawes, and yet rather against Popery then Papists: For it is the wicked Po∣pery that makes our men Papists, and ill subiects to God and the King: The men would be good enough if the grounds of their religion were not wicked. Therfore we beseech you haue care, that Iustice be so executed as rather the wickednesse of the Religion may bee rooted out, then the persons punished as in his stile, to be The defender and propogatur of the true Christian Faith.
Honourable and worshipfull, vouchsafe to heare vs in this iust & necessary request, being no lesse then your Religion craueth at your hands: The Clergy and Ministry of England are slandered by the Papists, that wee seeke their bloud, & exasperate the state against them: but they do vs wrong it is the ex∣tirpating of Popery, not the bloud of Papists, that we seeke and sue for: we pit∣ty their persons, and wish them rather all banished then any executed, but we hate their heresies, and wish them censured, condemned, and extinguished as as they deserue: This is the way fully to discouer Antechrist, and to hasten his confusion, for almost all Churches of Christendome haue pronounced him Antchrist, and his Religion Heresie: And this is the sure way to be free from treasons, conspiracies inuations, murders and massacres, from which (as you see) Denmarke by this meanes is defended, and many countries well freed as soone as they get free of Iesuits: and by the contrary we see the miserable
 accidents in France, to the amazement of the Chritian world: for when all the truth is known, & the whole account cast vp, the charge of those foule facts the murders of 2. Kings, & many more vnnaturall disasters, will lye vpon the vngodly positions of Popery: As Dauid said of Abner when he mourned for him, so may we much more of their last King, Know you not that a great man is fallen in Christendome? Surely one of the greatest many wayes that Chri∣stendome hath yeelded: It is full time to looke about you, when your neigh∣bours house is on fire, and the rather when Iesuites teach this doctrine to be defined, and to be de fide, that subiects not only may but ought to take away such Kings as he was, and ous (much more) is, and long may he so be: Nay long shall he be so if you take this and other courses for extipating Popery: When you and other the Magistrates Ecclesiasticall and ciuell shall begin seriously and effectually to do this, then Rome trembles, Popery shrinkes, Antichrist frets, and the Iesuits his darlings begin to looke pale, and hang downe their heads for their confusion is at hand: for though they haue continued but iust. 70. yeares (not the halfe of many other orders) yet they must know that bloud-thirsty and deceitfull men shall not liue out halfe their dayes. And if they be not guilty of these 2. faults bloud and deceit, wee will free them from all How bloudy the Iesu∣tes be appeares in that this is their maxime im¦printed. Nisi religio Lu∣therana, ferro & igne tollatur, Ecclesia Rom. acem & trāquilitatem habere non poterit See the booke called E∣pistolarum Iesuiticar. Libellus agab. Bariaco 99. in Epist. art 11. pag. 66. A great Image, whose glory was excellent) & fourme terrible, whose head was of fine gold, his brest and armes of uer, his belly & thighs of brasse, his leggs of y∣on, his feete part of y∣on, and part of clay. Daniel. 2. 31. 32. inc dubium non est ocietatem nostram vt ubito caepit, it a subito territuram qui quoti∣em peius ruit. faults: but if they bee, and that aboue all men, then take heede you Iesuites, that this your 70. yeare, be not a dismall and fatall yeare vnto you, and that our Dauid and Moses do not pronounce of you, the yeeres of your continuance are threescore and ten, and th y be so mighty and so crafty, you may hold out till fourescore, yet shall your life be nothing but sorrow and misery (as you haue deserued) and quickly shall ye be cut off and vanish away: and if this Prophecy like you not, take one of your owne. In the yeere 83.  Iesuite preached at Auspurg, and his text being, we are made a spectacle to God, Angels, and the world: in his Sermon he compared the Iesuites order to the Image, which Nabuchadnezzar saw in his aulo. Our Father Igatius (saith hee) is the golden head, together ith those that liued with him: but when the first 10. fathers were dead, others followed, nothing so good as the first, and these were the brests and armes of siluer. Then our society being inlar∣ged from 60. to many hundreds, it grew in greatnesse, but decayed in good∣nesse, and then most of them were idle bellies; and such whose God was their belly, and these are the bellies and thighes of brasse: and then still growing line number, and falling into more voluptuousnesse and carnalty, they were so drowned in pleasures, that their hearts were hardned against all good counsell and admonitions, these were the legs of Iron: and lastly many of vs are such as tho they liue in our golden society, yet they are altogether earthly minded men: and these be the feete of Clay. Hereupon (saith he) It is out of all doubt that as our society suddenly begun, so shall it suddenly come to nought, seeing it dayly falls from ill to worse: O my brethren saith he, such a spectacle are wee made! Now therfore least this Image of ours be broken in pieces (as that o∣ther was) we must goe to our father Ignatius, that good Alchimist, and learne of him how we may be transformed frō clay and yron into gold againe: let
 vs therefor goe into the furnace and purge our selues: Thus farre the Iesuites Sermon: But if their liues be lookt at for the 30. yeares since he spake, wee shall find that either they could not yet speake with Ignatius, or if they did, he was no true Alchimist, but a quacksaluer, and could not direct them, or if hee did, the furnace is to hot, for all the world can witnesse they are not purged from their ambitions, couetousnesse, treacheries, bloud, cruelty, deceitfulnes, & all carnalties, but haue grown on riper in all rottennes, and more fit to be driuen and dasht in pieces: but if the Iesuits wil follow their Allegory stil, and aske vs how they can be broken, for that Image was broken with a stone cut out without hands, I answere, seeing they haue found the Image, I can find the stone. (a) Christ is the great and chiefe corner stone who can and will grind to powder all that exalt themselues against him. And was cut out without hands, euen made man without the helpe of man.
But by and vnder him, his holy religion setled in this Iland: in England, vn∣der a woman, in Scotlād, vnder a child, is a stone cut out without hands; for it was the Lords doing, & was maruelous in the eyes of all the world: Morouer, his Maiesties comming to vs, and setling with vs, and vniting of vs, with our ancient Brethren and neighbours of Scotland, who but God could haue done it in that peaceable and blessed manner as it was: Sure it was a stone cut out without hands of man: It was the Lords owne worke, all the world excepting the mā of sin, the Iesuits, & their wicked adherents reioyced to see it. Know therfore you Iesuits, that this stone cut out by God, euen this true faith professed and setled in this Iland, and this gracious King whom God hath sent vs to be the zealous defēder of that faith, shal cast down the great excellent and terrible Iesuiticall Image. smiting him vpon the feete of yron and clay, and breaking them to pieces, till your yron and clay, and brasse and siluer, & gold, (if you haue any left) be broken altogether, and become like chaffe of the sommer flowers, and the winde shall carry you away till there be no place found for you. And then the stone that smote the Image, euen this holy Religion now professed & main∣tained in England, shall become a great mountaine, that is, shal be enlarged, and fill the whole earth which as we are assured will be true of our Religion (which is the glory of our land, and that which vnites vs to Christ the true corner stone) so we doubt not, it shall be also true of our Soueraigne and his seede, that they after they haue broken the Iesuiticall Image, shal against Gog and Magog, and Antechrist, and all his Adherents, become a great and strong mountaine, and fill the whole earth with the glory of their renowned deedes: and let earth and heauen say Amen, with the honorable religious and loyall Citty of London, and all good Christians: and with


