


MOst mighty Prince, Salomon be∣ing
but young, knew the God of
his FathersChron. 28. 9.; and Iosias being
but 15. yeares olde, set his heart
to seeke the Lord2. Chron. 34. 1. 3.: And bles∣sed
bee God, who hath put into
your royall heart to set them as
examples before your eyes, and to
follow them in the best things. For, to be Kings (euen
greater then theyNero Iulian, &c. hath befallen the wicked, whose
names now rot on earthPro. 10. 7.: and they in hell wish they
had neuer beene: But, to be a good godly, and religious
Prince, few haue attained it1. Cor. 1. 26. &c.: but those that did, were
made happy by it. Noble Prince, this is the waie to
bee honoured of men, blessed of God, and beloued of
both1. Sam. 2. 30..
In this holy path, you haue so happily begun to walk,
that your personall practise of Religion, and the religi∣ous
gouernment of your honourable houshold, may be a
patterne to all the greate families of these kingdomes;
wherin if Popery and profaneness found no better coū∣tenance
nor encouragemēt, then in the Princes Court,
it were happy for our Church and State.
Goe forward, Princely Salomon, and walke still in
the waies of Dauid, your kingly Father: so shall our Is∣rael
be happy and blessed by you: and all the world shall
praise God for you; for on whom are the eies of al Chri∣stendom
set, but vpon you & your fathers house? Sure∣ly,
the hope of the Christian world is, that God hath ap∣pointed
and annointed our gratious Souereigne, and
his royall issue, to hold vp his religion in these declining
daies, and to giue the Whore of Babylon that foil, &
fall, from which she shall neuer rise; euen that deadly
blowe, wherof she shall neuer recouer.
Now, somwhat to stir vp and prouoke your heroical
heart, and princely spirits to a yet farther detestation
of popish impietye; vouchsafe (hopeful Prince) the rea∣ding
and patronage of this discourse: the scope whereof
is, to discouer that those would but deceiue vs, who
speake or write that popery is now well reformed in
manners, & refined in doctrine, and therfore they and
we by a reasonable mediation might well be reconciled
A pernicious book was pub∣lished in frēch by that vnset∣led H. C. called Le Pacific{quod} examen, &c. tending to that end, & it was turned in∣to english by some papist.: for the truth is (if any man will search it out of
their owne records) Popery both for doctrin and man∣ners,
is (at least) as bad as euer it was.
This I affirming before an honorable audience at the
Crosse, the Papists gaue out, it was false, and I could not
prooue it, nor durst stand to it; but that wee may say

we care not what, that wee are set vp to raile on them,
and make them and their religion odious before our
people: and in the Country they dispersed, I was called
before Authority for it, and silenced, and censured for
railing on the Catholickes, and that I was striken by
Gods hand with a strange hoarcenesse after I began to
raile on them, and could not speake, &c.
Therefore not so much to cleere my selfe, as to honor
the trueth, and to shew that it is no tricke nor policie
of our State (as it is in poperieook was printed in eng∣lish in the col∣ledge at Rome, wherein it is af∣firmed that wee take catholicks, & draw vpō their legs, bootes full of hot boiling li∣quor, & vpō their feet hot burning hooes: & do put them into Bears skins, & cast thē to the dogs to be puld in pee∣ces: all this and many such other set down in pic∣tures.
Feuardent a fa∣mous Frier, yet liuing at Paris, wrote in latine 7. yeares ago, that we reuile and re∣iect that praier to the holy Tri∣nitie; Sancta Tri∣nitias  Deus misercre nobis.
Thus writes hee in his Commēt. on 1. Pet. cap. 1. What will not he say, that daie say this for, all our common praier-books, now, and those in Q. Eliza∣beths, & K. Edwards times, do testfie the contrary. Gretserus a se∣sue was suf∣fered to write within these 2. yeares, that we rackt and tor∣tured Garnet, euen neere to death, to make him confesse himself guilty of the powder treason; but hee did not: & so wee hauing no proof hāgd him onely for being a Priest, and not for it. And that Ouē (his man) was puld in peeces on the racke; and when wee had so killed him, then wee gaue out hee had killd him∣selfe with a knife: But for the 1. wee ap∣peale to pub∣like records & the worlds knowledge; & for the second, there yet liue witnesses whose eies saw the woundes and bloudy knife, and whose eares heard him freely and penitently confesse hee did it with that knife, to escape the rac which he said he feared but had neuer ta∣sted.) to set vp men with
authoritie to raile, and licence to lie, thereby to make
our enemies odious; I haue beene induced to publish
what was said, and to iustifie out of their owne records
what was affirmed of them: namely, that the deadly
wounds found to be in that diseased body of Poperie
many ages agoe, remaine rotting, rankling and vnhea∣led
euen to this day.
This I demonstrate in 20. or more particulars. Con∣cerning
all which wounds, if they be true as I haue laide
them downe; and being true, if yet they bee not healed,
then I hope your Highness, and al Christian Princes may
cleerely see, that seeing she is past hope of reformation,
there remains no more but that she is ripe for vengeāce
& destruction. Which as that Whore of Babylon hath
so long deserued: So God will put power into the hand,
and zeale into the hearts of our mighty King & noble
Prince, to reward her as she hath serued  & to giue
her double for all her iniquities: that so all the Kings
& Princes of the Christian world may rouze vp them∣selues,
& take example at the King & Prince of great
Britaine, to hate the whore and make her desolate, &
are her flesh, and burne her with fire; and that al

nations, who haue stood amazed hitherto at the pati∣ence
and long suffering, may now reioice and admire to
see the zeale, courage & constancy of our kingly Dauid
and princely Salomon.
The King of Kings, blesse this king and prince: and
the blessed Father, for his blessed Sonnes sake, double
and trebble the graces and blessings of the blessed Spi∣rit
both vpon the father, and the sonne: whereunto, I
am sure all good subiects at home, and all true Christi∣ans
in the world, will say Amen, With
Magna est veritas, & praeualet.

