



THE manifolde and waighty Ecclesiasticall affaires, where∣in your Lordshippe is daily im∣ployed, and many times wea∣ried; partly in aduancing the sincere profession of Gods ho∣ly truth, and partly in main∣taining the happy tranquility of this most renowned Church, haue often occasioned me to remember the words, & com∣plaint of that learned father S. Augustin. Though besides those Innumerabi∣les Ecclesiasti∣cas curas. Aug. lib. de oper. Monac. ca. 29. innumerable Ecclesiasticall cares which hee sustai∣ned, and of which he said, that almost none would beleeue them, but such as had experience of them, he was daily incumbred also with the iudiciall hearing of verie many secular causes, for which as he saith, Non de au∣ro non de ar∣gento, non de fundis & , pro qui∣bus quotidie sub isto capi∣te saluamur. vt disseniones hominum ter∣minemus. Aug Epist. 147. he was daily with al reuerence attended and saluted by the people; yet some in that age most vniustly blamed both him & other Bishops,

as being desidious, and like the Pharisees, tying heauie burthens on other mens shoulders, which themselues would not touch with their litle fingers (& who can pos∣sibly escape that censure, if the indefatigable industry & toile of S. Augustine could not quit him thereof?) He then with a most serious and solemne protestation answe∣red, Aug l. de o∣per Monac. cap. 29. I call Iesus Christ to witnesse vpon my soule, that I had much rather giue my selfe to reading, praying, and other spirituall exercises, yea to daily handy-workes, then indure the most tumultuous perplexities of other mens causes about their secular businesses, either (Vel idican∣do dirimen∣dis, vel inter∣ueniendo prae∣cidendis. ibid.) iudici∣ally to end them or by perswasion to preuent them.
The cogitation heereof, had almost perswaded me not to withdraw your Lordshippe, so much as to the viewe of these my slender labours, but that the seuerall bandes of duty which I owe vnto your Lordship, ouer-swayed with me heerein at the last. For hauing not onely beene called (as from little Zoar to Ierusalem) by that message which to me was no other then the voice of God, though some younger Samuels, may perhappes mistake it to bee Elias voice; but further also in that straitnesse of time, extra∣ordinarily encouraged by your Lordship to this seruice; the fruit of my labours therein (if it be any) I iudged it my duty to present to him, by whose Authoritie and appoint∣ment they were first vndertaken.
Againe, seeing my heartie and sincere desire heerein, was to testifie my vnfaigned loue, first to Gods truth, and then to the peace of our Ierusalem, in both which, I expect no lesse then the seuerest censures of two, in themselues op∣posite, and both of them very rigorous aduersaries, who contrary to the Apostles Ephes. 4, 15. rule, either follow not the truth, or follow it not in loue: I was emboldened in both these to

intreat protection vnder your Lordships name, as one who liuing vnder your Lordships, both publicke and Domesti∣call gouernment, haue, and do daily see manie assured ex∣periments of your Lordships zeal to the one, and prudence ioyned with great moderation in the other.
Besides, I must and do with thankefulnes acknowledge, which I haue often heeretofore gladlie recounted, a good part of that light with which God hath in mercie vouch∣safed vnto me, to haue bin receiued frō that faire burning lamp, which many years in our Vniuersitie, your L. verie often and happilie helde forth vnto vs: then especiallie, when in the last yeares of our late Soueraigne, & in those, as some thought, declining daies; wherein the children of Babylon, vpon some vainly conceiued hopes, I know not what, began somwhat insolently to insult. At which most needfull time it cannot bee forgotten, how the religious, constant & godly zeal of your L. being one most eminent in that place, did animate & incourage many others, my selfe among the rest, who then sat at the feet of Gamali∣el, and who by those words vttered in fittest time, by the tongue of the learned, found in our selues, how truly the Wiseman saide, Eccles. 12, 11 The words of the wise are like goads, and like nailes fastned by the maisters of the assemblies.
If in these respectes I present this small pledge of my dutie, to your Lordshippe, and with a willing heart offer this mite vnto the Lords Treasury, let me in excuse of the slendernesse thereof, vse those fit words of S. Ierom. Hier. Apol 2. aduers. Ruin. Euery man offers in Gods Tabernacle according to his ability; some offer Gold, and Siluer, and precious stones, others bring Silke, and Purple, and Scarlet, and fine lin∣nen, Nobiscum bene agitur si obtulerimus pelles & caprarum pilos. Howsoeuer it bee, I gladly submit

it to your Lordships graue wisedome, and to the Church of God, euen in those most submissiue words and maner, which I long since learned of the most learned S. Austen, and which (beeing heere expressed) in all my speeches and writings, I earnestly desire to be vnderstood; Domi∣ne (Aug lib, 15. de Trinit. cap. vlt.) Deus, Quaecunque dixi de tuo, agnoscant & tui, Si qua de meo, & tu ignosce & tui. Blacke Notley in Essex. May, 15. 1609.

