



MY LORD;
THIS Prophesie was properly cō∣pared by Prima∣sius, to a precious Gemme, or Ori∣entall Pearle, not found in the clifts of rockes, or shels of fishes but sent from Heauen for a Present to the Church on Earth, by Iesus

the splendor of the glory of his Father, and. Hebr. 1. 3. Luk. 1. 78. . that bright Orient, which hath visited vs from on high. He giueth it in a Loue-token to his Church, who for it gaue himselfe to the death. Doubtlesse it must bee some great Present, which is sent from so great a King, by the hand of that Seruant whom he lo∣ued best in the world.
This Iewell hath come in the hands of many, who being strangers, not acquain∣ted with Canaan, from which it came, haue out of wrong conception iudged it to bee adulterine. But all the Lords Lapidaries, who haue seene the precious stones, wher∣with the walls of Heauenly Ierusalem are garnished, haue easily perceiued this to be from heauen also; yea, and among all the rest, most admirable, for it partakes with all these, both in color and vertue, and ser∣ueth Saints, not for decoration onely, but declaration also of many secrets, which greatly concerne their state.
Of old, Vrim and Thummim were placed by God in that Pectorall of the high Priest, called by the Iewes, Hosen, by the Greekes

: but what it was, or how by it God gaue answere to his people Israel, many Di∣uines in that point are diuinators, speaking more out of coniecture, then certaine knowledge.
Iosephus records, that these stones byIoseph. Anti∣quit. lib. 3. c. 12. change of their colour, gaue signification of things to fall out; eyther aduerse or pros∣perous. Sigonius in his Treatise of the He∣brewesSigon. de re∣pub. Heb. lib. 5. Republick, seemes to haue followed him. The report that Suidas brings from an vncertaine Author, is as vncertaine as the Author, that if battell was imminent, the stones turned red; if death was fore∣told, they turned black; if no change of e∣state was to ensue, then the stones chan∣ged not their colour at all. One thing is sure, God by them gaue answere to his ser∣uants that sought him, as may bee cleared by many places of Scripture.
But of this booke wee may boldly af∣firme, that it is indeed a heauenly Oracle, foretelling in types, the truth of things, as they were to fall out to the worlds end: at the first it sheweth a white colour, impor∣ting

comfortable grace by the Gospell now, and immortall glory hereafter. In∣continent it turneth to a red colour, fore∣shewing bloudy persecutions which Saints must suffer, before they enioy the Crown. Then againe it appeareth with a blacke co∣lour, to declare that blackenesse of wrath temporall and eternall, which abideth the enemies of the Church.
In some parts it looketh darke, in others, cleare like the Christall, yet through all, more or lesse transparent, and therewith variable with sundry sheddes, among which most apparant are three seuerall rankes of Seuens, stretching themselues in most comely order through this Iewell, and wherein the Lord hath secretly inclo∣sed treasures of manifold wisedome. In the Seales vnsealed, secrets are disclosed: In the Trumpets, battels are denounced: In the Uials, plagues are powred out. The pur∣pose in these three is not one, yet by a comely proportion and correspondence, doe they answere one to another.
Many haue handled this Iewell, not to

finde it by their labour, (that were impos∣sible) but to finde themselues by the va∣lew of it. For that cause among others, I haue also looked vpon it, truely for none other end, but that I might learne from it; and now what I haue seene, I shew, sub∣mitting my selfe to the Church, for whose profit I haue taken these paines. If the light of the booke hereby be any way en∣creased, and comfort arise to the good Christian, the praise is the Lords, and vn∣der God thankes is due to your Lordship; for by your louing counsell & care, I haue beene relieued of many intricate matters of Law, and found the greater leysure and li∣berty both, to attend my studies. Thus hath your Lordship beene a Mecaenas to me indeed. Good men oftentimes are for∣ced to expresse great affections by small meanes, and so now it fareth with me; yet I trust your Lordship will esteeme of mee, not as I am, but as I desire to be on your behalfe.
But it is no reason I should requite deeds with words. I know, your Lordship doth

neyther like them, nor need them. Where Vertue giueth out her beames, euen her e∣nemies are forced to acknowledge her glory: yet thus much out of duty must I speake, that by many Coards of loue hath your God bound you to be thankefull to him. Vertue is weake without some ad∣uersity, neither can that felicity bee found on earth, that communicates not with some crosse. Some are raised to wealth, but the lesse regarded by reason of their base Linage: Some, Noble by parentage, but depressed with pouerty: many beautified both with Nobility and riches, who want the delight of children; others haue the comfort of children, but with the turning of a few yeares, they turne crosses vnto them; there is no estate so prosperous, a∣gainst which there is not iust cause of com∣plaint: Thus runneth the common cur∣rant of worldly courses here on earth.
But will your Lordship turne your eyes a little from others, and looke to your selfe; you shall see what cause your Lord∣ship hath aboue others to say with Dauid,

Many wayes hath the Lord beene beneficiall to his Seruant, beeing for Linage descen∣ded of a wise, and worthy Father, of an Honourable Family, famous among ma∣ny others of that most flourishing Trybe of Hammilton; Honourable also for the places of honour which you possesse, but much more for the vertue whereby you haue worthily deserued them; for it is a greater thing to deserue Honour, then to haue it, but where by Vertue it is obtai∣ned, by Wisedome encreased, and by good Gouernement reteined, (all which are eui∣dent in your Lordship:) What can be more? Your children (thankes be to God) no cros∣ses, but comforts, like branches of the Oliue,Psalm. 127. 3. promised to such as feare God, they stretch out themselues from the sides of your Ta∣bie, and without disparagement, are mat∣ched with the mighty Cedars of the Land.
For your selfe I haue nothing to say, but that which I know, no man can gaine-say: If quickenesse of ingine, vigour of ready witte, wisedome in words, discretion in deedes, secrecie in thoughts beseeming a

Secretary, fidelity in seruice of your Soue∣raigne; surety in friendship, modesty in all your behauiour: If education of your children in true Religion: If good exam∣ple in the obseruance of God his publike worship euery Sabboth: If indefatigable paines in your Calling, for the good of the publique State, wherein nothing can bee seene all the dayes of the weeke, but Ca∣tenati labores mutandi semper grauioribus; so that iustly it may bee admired how in so weake a body, such restlesse labor of mind may be sustained. If all these (I say) may commend any man, then hath your Lordshippe witnesses enow to speake for you, and needes not the testimony of o∣thers.
Loe now, what a heape of good things hath the Lord multiplied vpon you! what remaines, but that you consider with Dauid, What shall I render to the Lord forPsalm. 116. 12. all his benefites towards mee? Hee him∣selfe will giue you the answere; My well-doing extends not to the Lord, butPsalm. 16. to the Saints that are in the earth, and

to the Excellent, all my delight is in them.
Great cause had Dauid to loue Ionathan, hee could not get himselfe to requite his kindnesse, but hee enquired if any man were left of the house of Saul, that hee might shew him mercy for Ionathans sake:2. Sam. 9. 1. 2. and when hee vnderstood that hee had a weake sonne, Mephibosheth, lame of both his feete, he despised him not for his inabi∣lity, but aduanced him for Ionathans sake,Vers. 11. 13. to eat at his owne table, as one of the Kings sonnes.
My Lord; our Ionathan is the Lord Iesus: wee haue not himselfe, but for his sake wee are bound to shew mercy to his Mephibosheths; these are the Leuites, the Widdow, the Fatherlesse, the Poore, the Stranger, and the Oppressed. Let not the Leuite want the comfort of the Law in his righteous cause: Look with a tender eye to the vpright action of weake and impotent men; God is a righteous Iudge to all men, but he hath taken these aboue others, vnder his singular protection. Thinke it your

honour and happinesse also to be a Prote∣ctor of them. So shall your Lordship pros∣per still, and God shall stablish bles∣sings vpon you, and your posteri∣ty. I will pray to God for it, and so rest.

