



RIGHT HONOVRABLE,
IN all duty and submission I here present unto your Lordship a Treatise concerning the fift ge∣nerall Councell held at Con∣stantinople, the cause being the Controversie of the Three Chapters which for many yeares troubled the whole Church, and was at length decided in this Councell held under Iustinian that reli∣gious Emperour. This Treatise, now printed, was long agoe penned by one well known unto your Honour; your sincere affection to the truth of God and Gods cause, gives mee good assurance of your favourable accep∣tance hereof. I confesse indeed, that when I call to minde the manifold affaires wherein your Honour is daily imployed, the very thought hereof had almost per∣swaded mee not to interrupt your more serious affaires, by drawing your Honour to the reading or view of this

Booke: but when I call to minde those respects of love and duty, in which the Author hereof stood bound un∣to your Lordship, I was againe incouraged in his name to tender it to your Honour: And although I my selfe can challenge no interest in your Lordships favour to offer this, yet your Lordship may challenge some interest in the fruits of his labours, who was so truely (as I can truely speake) devoted unto your Ho∣nour. Among many other, hee especially acknowled∣ged two assured bonds of love and duty by which hee was obliged unto you, and your friends; the former a∣rose from that unfained affection which you ever bare him from your first acquaintance in the Colledge; that other, by which he was further ingaged unto you, and your friends, was, when in a loving respect had unto him in his absence, without any meanes made by him, or knowledge of his, he was called by that much honou∣red Knight Sir Iohn Levison his Patron, your Fa∣ther in law, unto the best Black Notley in Essex. meanes of livelihood he ever enjoyed in the Ministery, where spending himselfe in his studies, hee ended his dayes; during which time your Honour made your affection further knowne unto him by speciall expressions of extraordinary favours: In regard whereof I perswaded my selfe, that I could no where better crave Patronage for this worke, than of your Honour, that it may bee a further testimony of his love againe, who cannot now speake for himselfe.
And this I intreat leave to doe, the rather, because I doubt not but hee acquainted your Lordship with his paines and intent in this, and other Tractates of the Councels; See his Epi∣stle to the Rea∣der for the de∣fence of Iusti∣nian, printed Anno 1616. for when after divers yeares study be∣stowed

in this argument of Councels, hee was desi∣rous to make some use of his labours; his intent was, to reduce all those points into foure severall Bookes; 1. That the right of calling generall Councels; 2. That the right of highest Presidency in them; 3. That the right of the last and supreme Confir∣mation of them; is onely Imperiall and not Papall. 4. That all the lawfull generall Councels which hitherto have beene held, consent with ours, and op∣pugne the doctrines of the present Church of Rome. Some of these hee finished, the fourth hee could not so much as hope to accomplish, and there∣fore after the examining of some particulars there∣in, he desisted and weaned himselfe from those stu∣dies: And yet after some yeares discontinuance, being by some of his learned friends sollicited to communicate to others, at least some one Tract in that argument, consenting to their earnest desire, after long suspence he resolved on this Treatise, as being for weighty and important matters most delightfull unto him. That it was not then published, let it not seeme strange unto your Honour, for having long since finished the Tract of this whole Councell, it was his purpose, that it should have undergone the publike view and judgement of the Church; but when he came (as I can truely testifie) unto them, whose art and ayde is needfull in such a businesse, and found an aversenesse in them, for that it wholy consisted of controversall matters, whereof they feared that this age had taken a satiety, he rested in this answer, as willing to bury it.
After this, being upon a speciall

command from his Majesty, King Iames of blessed memory, made known unto him by my Lord his Grace of Canterbury, to addresse himselfe to Disensio Ec∣clesiae Anglic∣cont. Archiep. Spal. another worke, hee then desisted from his former intended pur∣pose, and in finishing of that last worke of his, he ended his dayes. Some few yeares after his death being de∣sirous to take a view of some of his Papers, I came to the view and handling of this boooke, a booke fully per∣fected for the Presse in his life time, the publishing whereof being long expected, and of many earnestly desired, it was my desire and theirs, to whose most grave and judicious censure I willingly submitted it, that it might be published for the benefit of Gods Church; and the rather, that it might give some light in the study of the Councels, and animate some of the Eccles 3.7. threescore valiant men that are about Salomons bed, being of the expert and valiant men of Israel, unto the at∣tempting and undertaking of the like: Now what his desire was in this, and other of his labours, surely none but the very enemies of God and Gods truth, can take it to be any other than to testifie his unfained love unto God and Gods Church, and to subdue the pride, idolatries and impieties of that Man of sinne, and to Iude Epist. v. 5 strive for the maintenance of the true faith. Now what allowance so ever it may finde abroad a∣mong our adversaries, it humbly craves your favoura∣ble acceptāce at home; and as it is published with no o∣ther intent than to gaine glory to God, and good to his Church, so I doubt not but that God, who 2 Cor. 4.6. causeth light to shine out of darknesse, will effectually in time bring to passe, that not onely their violent oppug∣ning

of the truth, but their fraudulent dealing also a∣gainst the same, wil, if not breed in themselves, yet in∣crease in al welwillers unto the truth, a constant dislike, nay, detestation of their hereticall and Antichristian doctrines, and for your selfe my earnest and continuall prayer to God shall bee, that you may ever continue your religious and ardent desire to advance Gods truth and honour here, which will procure your owne immortall fame in this world, and, through Gods mer∣cy in Christ, eternall felicity in that life, which, being unlike to this, shall neither have end of dayes, nor end of blessednesse.
Barton neare Bury S. Edmonds in Suffolke,
April 29. 1631.

