


IT is not vnknowne to some of you (deare brethren in the Lord) that for your sake chif∣ly I tooke paines, first to ga∣ther this breefe Sum: There∣fore willing now to set it out and make it common to others: I thought good to re∣commend the same to you againe in speci∣all, as a token of my good wil towards you all, and as a memoriall of my doctrine, and earnest labours, bestowed among you, and vpon that countrie, for the space of sixe yeares. Wherefore desiring to heare of your profit, & fruites of my labours, I can not, but of very loue and duety, exhort you not onely to take this my labour in good part: but also to vse it aright, least it bee a witnesse against you in the daye of the Lorde. It shall be verie comfortable and fruitful to you, if ye cause this short summe to be oft and diligently reade in your hou∣ses: for hereby ye your selues, your chil∣dren, & seruants, may profit more & more, in the principall points of your saluation.
 What neede ye haue of this continuall ex∣ercise in your houses, ye know your selues, and I by experience, can beare witnesse, of the greate and grosse ignorance of some a∣monge you: notwithstanding the cleare light of the gospell of long nowe shining there. In handling this matter, I haue stu∣died to my power, to bee plaine, simple, short, and profitable, not looking so much to the desire & satisfaction of the learned, as to the instruction and helpe of the ig∣norant. For first, I haue absteyned from al curious & hard questions, and next I haue brought the question and the answere to as fewe wordes as I could, and that for the ease of children and common people, who can not vnderstand nor gather the sub∣stance of a long question, or a long answere consirmed with many reasons. And yet if any will exercise their housholde in the common Catechisme, (the which thing I exhort all men to doe) this my labour can not hurt, but rather it shall be a great helpe to them, seeing I both gather the substance of the whole Catechisme in fewe wordes, and also follow the same order, except a litle in the beginning and in the ende, where certaine things are added, which all men (I hope) shall iudge to be verie profi∣table,
 and necessarie to be knowne. There are also some questions & answeres inter∣laced in sundrie places, but chiefly in the matter of the Sacraments, which serue greatly to the right vnderstanding of the matter in hand. But if men will bee both weary to learne the common Catechisme, and also this briefe Summe: I can not vn∣derstād, what good they wil haue to know the right way of their saluation. For certain and sure it is, that the reading or rehear∣sing (by worde) of the Beleefe, the Lordes prayer, the Lawe, and number of the holie Sacraments, can profit nothing to saluati∣on, without the right vnderstanding and liuely application of the same to our selues in particular: in the which onely doth the true Christian faith consist. Wherefore I maruell greatly of the brutishnes of many, who doe glory in Faith, and yet neyther haue they knowledge, nor feeling of the principall heades of our Christian saith, as their answeres doe testifie, when they are brought to any publike examination. But albeit the greate multitud perish in their wilfull ignorance, yet (I hope some shall profit by this my labour, taken for the Church of God, of the which I iudge you to be a parte. Therefore take heed to your  selues, and suffer no others to goe before you in this spiritual exercise: for great dis∣honour it shal be to you, if others shal pro∣fit more by this breefe summe, then ye, se∣ing for your cause it was first writtē, taught among you: and nowe lastly vnder your name come to the knowledge of others. Be not of those men to whome all kinde of good doctrine is eyther hard and obscure, or els ouer base and common: for as the one hath no will to learne, euen so the o∣ther would be fedde with some curiositie or newe doctrine. If any shal complaine of my obscuritie in these short answeres, let him consider how hard a thing it is, to bee both short and plaine, or yet to satisfie all mens desire & iudgement in lighter mat∣ters, then this is. Alwayes if dayes bee graunted, I minde with the helpe of God, to make this summe more ample, & more plaine, if the brethren shall iudge it need∣full. In this meane time, I desire all men to take this my trauaile in good part, & vse it to the edification of the Church, & glo∣ry of our God. To whom be all honour & praise, for euer aud euer.
Amen.
At EDENBVRGH, the xx. of Iuly, in the yeare. 1581.
