


IT is not vnkno∣wen vnto the hole world (most excel∣lēt Prince) yt your graces father a Kynge of mooste famous memorie of a feruent and

ernest godly disposition and ten∣der zele towardes ye settyng forth of goddes glorie, moste diligently trauaylled for a trewe & a ryght reformation and a quiet concorde in Christes religion thorowout al hys dominions, wherin vndoub∣tedly he brought many thynges to a godlye purpose and effecte, & dyd abolyshe & take away muche blyndnes and ignorance of God, many great errors, fonde and per¦nitious superstitions and abuses, that had crepte into thys churche of Englande, & Irelande a longe time. And I perceiuing that your magestie by thaduyse of youre moste dere vncle my lorde Prote∣ctor, and the reste of youre graces moste honorable counsel, is moste desyrous perfytly to finyshe and brynge to passe, that your father dyd mooste Godlye begynne,

do thynke that there is nothynge more necessarye, for the furtherāce hereof, then that it myghte be for∣seen, howe the youthe & tender age of youre louynge subiectes, maye be broughte vp and traded in the trewth of Goddes holy worde. For it is thought not to me onely, but to manye others, that neyther your graces father shoulde haue been inforced in hys tyme, to haue taken so greate paynes for the re∣formation of Christes religion, neyther yet youre hyghnes in thys your time shoulde nede with suche greate difficultie go about to fur∣ther goddes cause and hys trewe seruice, with so many lawes, iniun¦ctions and proclamations yf so greate negligence of theducation of the youth had not bene so much suffered, and the necessarie poyn∣tes and articles of our religion &

profession omitted of those whose office and bounden dewty was to haue moste diligētly instructed the youth in the same. Or yf the aun∣ciente and laudable ceremonie of Confirmation hadde continued in the olde state, and bene duely vsed of the ministers in time cōuenient, where an exacte and strayghte ex∣amination was had of all suche as were of ful age, bothe of theyr pro∣fession that they made in baptisme touching theyr belefe and kepyng of goddes cōmaundementes, with a generall solemne rehersall of the sayde cōmaundementes and of all tharticles of theyr fayth. Surely there can be no greater hope of any kinde of persones, other to be brought to all honest conuersation of lyuynge, or to be more apte to set forth and mayntayne all God∣lynes and trewe religion, then of

suche as haue ben from childhode noryshed and fed wyth the swete milke, and as it were the pappe of goddes holy worde, and brydled and kept in awe with hys holy cō¦maūdementes. For commenly as we are in youth brought vp, so we cōtinue in age, and sauer lon∣gest of that thynge that we fyrste receaue and taist of. And as a fayre table fynely pulyshed, tho it de neuer so apte to receaue eyther pyctures or wrytinges, yet it doth neyther delyte any mens eyes, nei∣ther yet profyte any thing, except the paynter take hys pensill, set to hys hande, and wyth labour and cunnyng replenyshe it wyth scri∣ptures or fygures as apertaineth to hys science, euen so the tender wyttes of yonge chyldren, beynge yet naked and bare of all know∣ledge thorow the grace of God be

apte to receaue goddes gyftes, yf they be applyed and instructed by suche schole maysters, as haue knowledge to brynge them vp & leade them forwardes therin. And what can be more apte to be gra∣uen or paynted in the tender her∣tes of youthe, then Goddes holy worde? what can lead them a rygh¦ter way to god, to thobedience of theyr Prince and to al vertue and honestie of lyfe, then the syncere vnderstandyng of Gods worde? whyche alone sheweth the waye howe to knowe hym, to loue hym and to serue hym. What can bet∣ter kepe and staye them, that they do not sodenly and lyghtly fall a∣gayne from theyr fayth? What can cause them more constantly to wythstande thassaultes of the de∣uyll the worlde and the fleshe, and manfullye to beare the crosse of

Christ, thē to lerne in theyr youth to practise the same? And verely it semeth no new thing that the chil¦dren of them yt be godly, should be thus instructed in the faythe and commaundementes of God, euen from theyr infancye. For doeth not God cōmaunde hys people to teache hys lawe,Deut. xi. vnto theyr chyl∣dren and chylders chyldren? Hath not thys knowledge continued from tyme to tyme, amōgest them to whome God promysed to be theyr God, and they hys people? Doeth it not appeare by playne expressed wordes of Paule, that Timothe was broughte vp euen from a chylde in holy scriptures?ii. Tim. iii. Hath not the commaundementes of almyghtye God, thartycles of the Christian faythe, and the Lor∣des prayer, been euer necessarelye (sence Christes tyme) requyred of

all, both yonge and olde, that pro∣fessed Christes name, yea though they were not learned to reade? For doutles in these thre pointes is shortlye and playnlye included the necessarye knowledge, of the whole summe of Christes religiō, and of all thynges appertaynyng vnto euerlastyng lyfe. In consy∣deration wherof in thys tyme of your gratious reformation of all vngodlynes, and the setting forth of Goddes trewe glorie. I know∣yng my selfe as a subiecte greatly bounden, (and muche the more by reason of my vocation) to set for∣ward the same, am persuaded that thys my smal trauayll in thys be∣halfe taken, shall not a lytle helpe the sooner to brynge to passe your godly purpose. For by thys lytle treatyse, not only ye youth of your graces realme, may lerne to know

God, and howe they maye mooste purelye and syncerelye honoure glorifie and serue hym, and may also learne their office and dew∣tie, howe they oughte to behaue themselfes, first towarde God, se∣condly towardes your Magestie, and so towardes all ministers vnder the same, towardes theyr fathers and mothers, and all o∣ther persones of what sorte or de∣gree soeuer they be: but also ma∣nye of the older sorte, (suche as loue God, and haue a zele to hys honoure and glorye, and yet in theyr youth throughe negligence were brought vp in ygnoraunce) may by hearyng of their children, learne in theyr age, that which pas¦sed theym in theyr youth.
And as myne intente and ende∣uoure is to profytte both, and ac∣cordynge to myne office, to bryng

bothe to the righte knowledge of God, so my most earnest and hum¦ble prayer vnto God contynual∣lye, shalbe that my good mynde and desyre maye haue good suc∣cesse, and take effecte accordynge to myne expectacion. Whiche thing I assuredly hope shal come to passe, yf it woulde please youre highnes, to suffer this lytle boke by me offered vnto youre Mage∣stie to be redde, taughte and lear∣ned of the chyldren of youre moste louyng subiectes, in whome is great hope of al grace godly∣nes & vertue.

