



WOrshipfull, and right dearely be∣loued: I haue often sought oppor∣tunitie to salute you ioyntly; ac∣knowledging my selfe your deb∣tor many wayes, & which is more; vnable to satisfie any: it was the griefe of Darius, that he should die indebted to his friend, which de∣parting he bewayled, as his last, not his least mis-hap, hauing receiued a courtesie, hee should not liue to requite it. if such an ac∣knowledgement
 may not goe in part of pay∣ment, I might despaire; hauing receiued ma∣ny from you, both while J liued neere you, as since my remouall at your motion, into these parts (distance of place hath not stopt the current of affection, nor absence begot obli∣uion) and yet find my selfe able to doe no more: onely this is my comfort, Good-will hath not beene wanting; if abilitie answered desire, you should find me as readie to pay, as to confesse: J would not faigne a debt; to en∣crease it, the propertie of insinuating flatte∣rie; neither would I denie it, where it is due, the guise of seruile basenesse; iudging it bet∣ter thus to publish my owne pouertie, then to be censured as vngratefull, or of my friends forgetfull.
Preaching at the Marriage of Mr. Iohn Berrie.Occasion lately directed my meditations vpon this subiect: wherein the mutuall hap∣pinesse of your choyce, did often present it selfe vnto my thoughts; the matter and man∣ner of handling;
(If the testimonie of an experienst friend
 may be thought impartiall) applying it selfe most fully & fitly to you both; that I could not forbeare to impart it as a messenger of thank∣fulnesse, no worke of worth; except you bee pleased by acceptation, to make it worth per∣using: here you may read your selues, and be stir'd vp to blesse God, the maker of Marriages, for his good prouidence in your meeting; here you may see that Wedding-ring, which you both put on, in conceit and resolution, at the Marriage-day; that Di∣uine Circle or heauenly round of heartie re∣flecting-loue, wherein you doe, and all mar∣ried persons should moue during life; to ac∣count of their owne vertuous mates, as ex∣celling others; am I deceiued? or experience hath taught mee what I haue written: no more: neither may I speake; what I haue seene and obserued, of your happinesse in this kind: liue long more happy; it is law∣full to pray, as Ioab for Dauid:2. Sam. 24.3. The Lord your God adde vnto it an hundred-fold, that your eyes may see it: the Lord increase
 your content daily, and double the portion of the sauing graces of his Spirit vpon you both: otherwise I cannot steed you; prayers you shall not want, while I re∣maine.
From my studie in Barstaple, Ianuary 1. 1630.

