



My very good Lord,
I Doe (not vnlike vnto bank-rupt-debters) pay what I owe with another mans purse. For
which, notwithstanding I could plead prescription from beyond the memorie of man, and deduce presidents for ex∣cuse aboue the low flats of necessitie: The greatest doe it; why not the mea∣nest? For the actions of superi∣ours be rules of action vnto in∣feriours, & virum magnum se∣qui est penè sapere, as the world goeth: yet this I dare professe vnto your Honour, the payment is in good and lawfull money, as good as any that goeth current with Merchants; and if the triall bee true, by touch or teste, farre beyond the alloy of ordinarie mintage. A coyner it had, whom Fame hath reported (for my selfe did neuer, de facie, knowe him) as skilfull a Master in this trade,
as our shoppes haue brought foorth anie. Who though hee verified that ancient by-word, that  are , yet hath he washed off from the walles of Lycoeum, that blacke aspersion of Petronius; Ego arbi∣tror adolescentulos in scholis stultissimos fieri, quia nihil eo∣rum quae in vsu habemus, aut audiunt, aut vident. The worke carrieth both parts of perfection: to Delight, and giue Profit. To Delight the affection with pleasing varietie, and indow the minde with excellent formes: which like the two handmaids of Queene Hester, should sustaine euery passage of learning, though it come not to the presence of royall A∣hashuerosh. To Profit, by the mat∣ter
discussed and cleered, which is, in part, the knowledge of our selues, that which the Poet sayd, Came from Heauen, a good meanes to ef∣fectuate that, which the Prophet de∣sired; Teach me O Lord to num∣ber my daies, that I may applie my heart vnto wisedome. To please in profit, which it selfe is Content; and also in the maner wher∣in it is caried verie perspicuous, and in good method, for which cause I haue not added anie marginall dire∣ctions, to stand, as Mercuries sta∣tues, in high-waies of old, pointing the finger vnto consequents. It came vnto my hands, vt è naufragio ta∣bula, and I return it to your Lordship as Lord of the soile whereon it was
cast. For vnto your Honor I owe my selfe, both in respect of priuate seruice, as also of that right-woorthy house, into which by mariage your Honor is inserted, whereto I stande obliged in my best indeuours. You haue it whole and intire, as it came vnto my hands, without anie purloining or imbeaze∣ling, a sincere transcript from the first originall, which I am informed was his own; I durst not aduenture, though happely I could, to adde anie thing at all vnto that table, in which A∣pelles pensill had beene. Thus cra∣uing the continuance of your Honor∣able respect, and acceptance of my ten∣dred dutie by proxey, vntill my owne meanes doe inable my sufficiencie, (which hitherto hath beene nipped in
the budde by the frosts of the night, or withered in the blade for want of moisture) I thrice humblie take my leaue, and rest your Honors

