



WYshing well to the Common weale of my nature Country, and to the Churche of Christ in this our English nation. I haue in my younger daies taken some paynes, & haue béene at some charges (and yet am) in the e∣ducation of some such young Schollers, as haue séemed to bée likely to prooue profitable members, in this Church, or Common weale of Englande. Amongst whome, one Samuell Debnam was one. Hys Father and Mother are yet lyuing, and doo by theyr honest labor su¦stayne theyr owne bodies, and according to theyr hability, they doo help to re∣léeue the impotent and néedy. This Samuell was theyr eldest and first borne Sonne, and their hope was that he should haue béene the staffe of their age. And because the mother was my seruaunt in the time of her virginity, my wyfe became Godmother to that young babe, and (as the custome of the Church is) vndertooke for him at the Fountaine of Regeneration: which mooued both her and mée to haue (together with his naturall Parents) an especiall care for his good education. Hee prospered in learning, and was like in time, to haue prooued a profitable member of the Englishe Common weale. Yea some gifts that he had receiued from God, séemed to be somewhat rare in one of hys yéeres: and that did puse him vp and make him proude. I did then beginne to feare, that which is nowe come to passe. For (as Sy∣rach hath written Chap. 10,) Initium superbiae hominis, apostatare a Deo: quo∣niam ab eo qui fecit illum, recessit cor eius. The beginning of mans pride, is to fall away from GOD: for his hart is departed from him that hath made him. This pryde was it that caused him to harken to such amongst you, as first enticed him to forsake his Parents, and other fréendes, in so vndutiful manner as he did, on Monday▪ which was the eyght day of Apryll. 1583. In aunswering Letters that his Mother caused to bee written to him the 28. day of August, 1585. Hée wryteth that he was lodged not farre from Lon∣don, the same night that he stept away from hys Father and her: and short∣ly

after, hée was (as he sayth) conueyghed by night, a myle of from London, where hée stayed thrée weekes. And on May day in the Morning, carely, hée was sette on horsebacke, and conueighed into Suffer, and so into Hamp∣shyre, where he had maintenaunce tyll the Euen of S. James the Apostle. &c. At his departing from London, good Gentlemen (as he termeth them) gaue him money, to the value of forty or fyftie shillinges, to bring him ouer the Seas. By these thinges it appeareth manifestly, howe vnfréendly you popysh Gentlemen are, to the Crowne and Common weale of Englande. Can you worke any greater displeasure, to the Crowne & Common weale of England: then to robbe them both of the younge frye, that is likely to bée the continuance of this, and the beginning of the next generation? This youth, béeing about the age of eightéene yéeres, was meete to bée imployed to that kinde of life, wherin he might haue béene moste like to doo best seruice to God, his Prince and his natiue Countrey. But sée what you haue doone▪ you haue caused him to be reconciled to the Romish Catholicke Churche▪ which is to bée a sworne enemy, to the Crowne and Common weale of thys his, and your natiue Country. You haue robbed our Prince of her Subiect, and seruice that she might and ought to haue had of him, as of one borne with in her dominions. You haue robbed a poore father and mother of theyr sonne and onely childe: the staffe of theyr age, theyr greatest treasure in this world, theyr onely hope of posterity, and of that gyft of God, which by natural Or∣der hath béene most pleasaunt and delectable to them, and should haue béene most profitable, you haue robbed mée, and the rest that haue taken paynes, and haue bestowed of our goods vpon him▪ in the nourishing and bringing of him vp, to that estate wherein you found him: and in making him able to doo some seruice in the Common weale of our Country: you haue (I say) rob∣bed vs of all this, & of that hope which wée had to sée him a profitable mem∣ber of the Church of Christ in England. you haue robbed hym of that be∣nefit, which a naturall English man, may▪ and ought to enioye within the English dominions. yea, & as much as in you may bée: you haue robbed him of that inheritaunce, which Christ Jesus hath bought for him, for you haue perswaded him, that not Christ Jesus, but the Romish Antichrist, is the way that leadeth into that inheritance. you haue taught him to leaue the study of the scriptures, and not to looke vppon. or to giue credite vnto those wrytinges, that men of sounde iudgement haue left behinde them, concer∣ning the true interpretation of the scriptures, but to beléeue all that the Romysh Catholicke Church beléeueth▪ holdeth, and teacheth: although he doo neither knowe what the beléefe of that Church is, neither howe it may bée warrented or defended by the scriptures, when it is knowne yea, al∣though it doo surpasse and excell mans vnderstanding: yet it muste be belée∣ued, onely because the Romysh Catholicke Church dooth beléeue it. Synt Peter was of an other minde, when he wrote thus: Dominum Christū sanc∣tificate in cordibus vestris, parati semper ad satisfactionem omni poscenti vos rationem, de ea quae in vobis est spe. Sanctisy the Lord Christ in your harts béeing alwayes prepared, to satisfy euery one that shall aske you a reason of that hope that is in you. 1. Pet. 3.
Our sauiour Christ sayde, Scrutamini Scripturas, Search the scriptures,

Iohn. 5. yea, and talking with two of his Disciples in the way toward Emaus He prooued the necessity of his death and resurrection, by the scriptures. Luk. 24. The Jewes which dwelt in Brrhaea, searched the scriptures dayly, to sée if that were true that the Apostles preached. Acts. 17. But you haue taught, this proselite of yours, to beléeue all that the Romishe Catholicke Church teacheth: although the same bée directly contrary to the scriptures. As to make and worship Images, to call vppon Angels and saints, to repose trust in the worthines of his owne workes, to make himselfe a Mediator in suf∣fering for the sinnes of his Parents and Country men, to haue an opinion of holines, in refrayning the vse of Gods good creatures, which are all holy, and to be receiued with thankes to God for the vse of them, to kisse and wor¦shippe the Reliques of saynts, to beléeue the reall presence of Christes bodie in the Sacrament of the Altare, to make that Sacrament a sacrifice propi∣iatorie for the sinnes of the quicke and the deade. &c. To conclude, if the Ro∣mysh Catholicke Church doo teach it, he must beléeue it, although both rea∣son and scripture doo denye it. Into this miserable blindnes▪ you haue (by your allurements and perswasions) brought many youthes, that myght, and were like to haue doone, good seruice to God and theyr Prince, in theyr na∣tiue Countrey. you haue caused them to shake of, all duetifull obedience to God, to theyr Country, to theyr Prince, to theyr parents, and to all that haue béene theyr fosterers and bringers vp, in learning, and in religious exer∣cises. you haue plunged them into the puddle of all popysh superstition, and counterfayted religion. you haue stolen them from our Captaine Christ, and made them souldiours to fyght against Christ, vnder the banner of that An∣tichrist of Rome. Thus your proselite hath reported, in the discourse of hys peregrination: that he was in Rhemes in Fraunce, 17. monthes together in company with two hundreth English men (almost) & lacked nothing: which argueth, that some good portion of your patrimony, is spent in the mainte∣naunce of such English youthes, as you haue conueighed thether, and to o∣ther places beyond the Seas.
I wyll charge you no furder. Take héede to your selues in time. Consi∣der that there is a God, that séeth your dooinges, and knoweth your intents. He wil not suffer such dooings vnpunished for euer. If you think that the re∣ligion that is now allowed of in this Realme, by law, be not Catholicke, séeke your resolution at the hands of such as are learned in the tongues, in the libe¦ral artes, in the writings of auncient fathers, and in the scriptures, and are your Countrymen, & occupied in the seruice of God, & this our cōmon coun∣try. Such are able, and wil be ready to conferre with you, and by their know¦ledge in the scriptures, Doctors, artes and tongues, to satisfy you: and vn∣doubtedly, if you wyll humbly craue it of God, ye shall bee satisfyed. Re∣member your duetye towardes GOD, your duety towardes your prince, your duety towardes your Country and Countrymen.
Repent purpose and endeuoure to amend that which you haue doone amisse. Helpe to bring home againe such as by your meanes haue béene occasioned to stray from Christes fold in this our natiue soyle. As you haue béene meanes to drawe them from Christ: so vse what meanes you can, to bring thē backe againe to Christes folde in Englande. If they shall perrish in that schisme,

whereinto you haue brought them (as vndoubtedly they shall, if they shall ende in it,) theyr blou shalbe required at your handes. When your Semi∣nary men tell you, that we are the Scismaticks, and they the Catholicks, beleeue them not, except they prooue it, by Scriptures and probable reasons. If wée doo proue, both by the Scriptures and by probable reasons, that the Church of England is Catholick, and the Romysh Church schisuticall: why should not you beleeue vs? Because they doo knowe, that if you shall reade our wrytinges, you must néedes yéelde to the truth, which you shal sée substantially prooued by vs: they put you in feare of curssing or excommuni∣cation, if you shall reade any thing that is written by any of vs, or if you shall giue attentiue héede to any Sermons made by vs, which argueth that themselues doo knowe, that the trueth is on our sides. You are Gentle∣men, and by naturall and ciuile order, you are Frée men: suffer not your selues to be ledde and commaunded (as blinde and bonde men) by these dol∣ysh hypocrites, which teach you to submit your selues to the decrées, pre∣cepts, and doctrines of men (which haue but a vaine shewe of wysedome) and not to regarde the wisedome of God, contained and taught in the holye Scriptures Collos. 2. Your calling and estate in the Common weale of this Realme is worshipfull▪ and your duety is to be ayding to your Prince, in the execution of the Lawes made for the preseruation of the state, and defence of the liberty of this English nation: and wyll you bée the ring leaders in the violating of those good Lawes, in suberting the state, and in turning the liberty into thraldome and bondage? God forbidde. Our good God in hys good time, vsed our noble King Henry the eyght (as his meane) by whome hée deliuered this noble and free kingdom, from the Babiloicall bondage of Rome: and wyll you bring your selues and the whole English nation, into the like bondage againe? The same our mercifll GOD, hath by the same Noble Prince, and by his Sonne Edwarde and Elizabeth his daughter, restored to this English nation, the bright shyning light of the Gospell, and wyll you bring vppon your selues and vpon vs, and vpon all our posterity, the palpable Egyptian darknes of Ignoraunce, the mother, nursse, and con∣tinuall fosterer of all errour and wiched life? God forbidde. You are English men, God giue you English harts, that may neuer yéelde to bee gouerned by forraine power. You be christian men: God giue you christian hartes, that may neuer yéelde to professe Antichristian Religion. Suffer not your selfe to be blinded by their colours of antiquity, vniuersality, and vniformity. For when theyr antiquity is compared with ours, it is found to be but of yester∣dayes hatching: where ours is prooued to haue had continuaunce from the time of the first man. Their vniuersalitye was neuer so large as the Ro∣maine Monarchie: but ours, hath alwayes béene, and styll is, and euer shal∣be, as large as the whole worlde. Theyr vniformity, is deuided, themselues doo scarsly knowe into howe many seuerall sects, whereof not any two can be founde that doo agrée in all poynts: but we béeing but one body and one spirit▪ are called in one hope of our calling, one Lorde, one fayth, one Baptis∣me: One God and father of all, which is aboue all, throughout all thinges, and in vs all. phe. 4. I pray you vouchsafe to reade with indifferent iudg∣ment,

that which I haue written in my Replication and answere, to that which Fryer John Francis of Nigeon in Fraunce, hath written to hys Father and Mother. And as he hath admonished in the margine of his let∣ter, no lesse then seauentéene tunes, Reade it thorough, or beginne it not: euen so haue I sette at the heade of euery page, Reade all: or reade nothing. I haue set down the Fryers wordes euen as he wrote them, and as I haue them to shewe, in that Letter which he wrote with his owne hand, not altering or leauing out, or adding (to my knowledge) one worde, sillable or letter. If any amongst the learned Romish Catholickes, shall vouchsafe to reade that which I haue written: and shall thinke himselfe able to disproue that which I haue doone: let the same deale with me as I haue dealt with Fryer John, and I hope I shalbe able so to reprooue his disproofe so, yt he shall (in the end) wysh hée had let my wrytings passe without disproofe. For Fryer John hath so quickened mine aged spirits, that I séeme to my selfe, able to trye thys matter by wryting, euen with the stoutest Champion that the Pope hath. And if Fryer John, or any of his Fraternitie, (yea if it bee the Pope Sixtus quintus himselfe, which as I heare, was a Franciscane Fryer) shalbe able to prooue by Scriptures and probable reasons, that the Romysh Rely∣gion (which nowe is professed in Rome) is Catholicke, and that the Religi∣on nowe professed in Englande is schismaticall: then wyll I créepe into a Minimes wéede in Nigeon, and whyppe my selfe with a discipline, as Fryer John doth nowe whyppe himselfe there. Otherwise, if any shall enterprise to disprooue my wrytinges, and shall not doo it substantially, to my disproofe indéede: I wyll doo what I shall be able to doo, in helping him to some whip¦ping chéere in our Bridewell, if euer hee may be caught in Englande. Fare you well, from my house without Creplegate of Lon∣don, the syxt of August. Anno Do∣mini. 1586.

