



SIR, I would not shew my selfe a∣mong the writers that abound at this day, hauing cōtented my selfe in priuate with the reading of the Orthodoxes, and contemned such as for the

most part doe nothing but vent their me∣lancholies vnto the world. I haue hit on this resolution, because I am a louer of a retired life, and of solitarinesse among my Bookes, taking pleasure to talke with the dead, wherein consisteth the chiefe iewell of my life. This age swarmeth in good Spirits, and as Africke is fertile in Mon∣sters, which it produceth daily, so in like manner we may say that it is a wonder and miracle in nature, to contemplate this exquisite knowledge in all sciences and tongues wherwith many are indued, that it appeareth that we haue paragoned that old antiquity: I say in science, not in con∣science. Who then hath marred this my silence? You, Sir: for as we were reason∣ing concerning heresie (a subiect where∣upon the seducers through their false O∣rations and writs haue long agoe beene baiting and hammering on the heads and hearts of their confederates, labouring to perswade them that those of thereformed Religion are defiled therewith) you thought it expedient, that through con∣trarie demonstrations, which should be

both solide and true, I should declare to the world that this imputation is wrong∣fully ascribed vnto vs. There is no parish Priest (how raskally soeuer he be) that hath not this word Heretike in his mouth. What will those great Masters in mateo∣logie doe then? If little puppies doe keepe such a yelling, what will be the effect of the barking of these great mastifs? It is the custome of whores to preuent honest ma∣trones, and to lay to their charge that, wherewith they are tached themselues. Those Iesuites, the buttresses of the Pop∣ish Religion, the creame and very quin tessence of Fryers, to speake no worse, doc in like manner. They are scabbie, and would perswade vs to scratch our selues as they doe, although our conscience be not defiled. Those that are attainted and branded by Iustice, desire nothing more then to haue many fellowes both in their iniquity, and their punishment. What shall we do here? Shall we betray our brethren and our soules? Shall we temporise, as if we had some fellowship with this spiritu∣all brothel-house? This would proue co∣wardlinesse

in vs. Wherefore, following your aduise, I haue thought fit to shew vpon the theatre of the world, that so ma∣ny heresies as we are accused of, are as ma∣ny calumnies and lies: and that it is the Romish Church, which is wonderfully disfigured & polluted, as we shall declare, God willing. The impatience of moderne Readers hath abridged my discourse, which I could haue inlarged. And who could euer be able to finish the task of the stable of Augeus? I offer vnto you this my little Essay, as vnto him of whom I re∣ceiue singular comfort in my peregrina∣tion, and in this strange Countrey. You shall take it, if it please you, in good part, as proceeding from him who is,
Sir,

