


SVpposing that all such papists as do refuse to ioyne with vs in the pro∣fession and exercise of religion (and are therefore called Recu∣sants) be of one & the same minde with that popish Offerer, that first wrote these Offers, and did publish them in print: I haue thought it a thing very meete, to request the same Offerer (if hee bee yet liuing) and all the rest that bee of his minde, to afforde mee so much fauour, as to reade ouer their owne Offers, and that answere that I haue made therunto I trust you will not deny mee this request: for your Offerer hath in the end of euery part of his Offer, vsed these words (or the like) prooue this, & then I will relent and recant, & not before I know that ther be many amongst you, that are worshipfull, wise, and learned: such (I hope) will not blemish their worship, wisedome, and learning, by fore-iudging ought that is or shalbe written in answere to any Offer that any of their minde hath or shall make, and require answere thereunto. I doo not require any of you to giue credit to that which I haue written: before you haue tried the same, and found it worthy of credit. And therefore I haue set ouer the heads of the pages of this my booke: this admonition: First trie, and then trust: If you shall finde that I haue sufficiently prooued all those thinges
 that your Offerer requireth the protestant to prooue: then I hope you wil redily performe, those Offers that he hath made. And if you shall finde any insufficiency in mine answeres: I hope, that some of the learned on your side, will vse some meanes whereby I may haue knowledge of that insufficiency. And in the word & faith of a Christian, I doo promise you, that what soeuer any of you shal write touching this matter: I will reade it deliberatly, and without all parciall affection, with earnest prayer to the almighty, for the direction of his holy spirite, whereby I may be stayed from straying out of the way of truth. I know that there is but one way to euerlasting life, & I doo know that Christ only is that way: if any of your sort therefore, can make it plaine vnto me, that your popish Catholique church dooth walke in that way, then will I leaue that way wherein wee protestants doo walk, and runne with you for I tell you truly, that none of you can haue a greater or more earnest desire, to enter with the Bridgrome Christ, then I haue, and (as I hope) shall haue to the end. My pen would gladly proceede, in paynting my paper with moe sentences to the like effect: but I haue thought good to stay it, for that I doo persuade my selfe, that you doo think the time longe be∣fore you can take in hand to performe that request that I haue herein made. Frare you well. From my house at S. Gyles without Creplegate of London. The Lord Iesus direct you in all that you shall doo. Amen.
Ianuarie. 16. An. 1587.

