



SIR,
THese being the daies fortold by our blessed Sa∣uiour, wherein men as in the daies of Noah & Lot,Luk. 17.26. &c. do eat
 & drink, buy and build, and plant, &c. vnmindfull of him, who is ready to come as a thief in the night,Reuel. 16.15. at what time he only shall be blessed, that wat∣cheth & keepeth close about him the wedding garmēts of faith and holines: J haue en∣deauoured in the opening and publishing of this part of holy truth, to awaken and stir vp my selfe and others, to prepare and wait for the cōming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
And because this Scripture (framed rather for an Ana∣tomy of the Church in her se∣uerall
 members, then, as some haue supposed, for an Historie of her generall estate according to periods of time) hath con∣cluded al, euen the elect in part, vnder this common disease of spirituall drowzinesse; whereby it may come to passe, that on the one side the Godly may be dis∣couraged for their partaking with the wicked, and on the o∣ther side the wicked may be em∣boldned, because they see Gods children charged with the same corruption, in which they feare∣lesly please themselues: I haue therefore further intended to
 take forth the precious from the vile;Ier. 15.19. by distinguishing the waking Sleeper, that is, the weake humbled Christian, who euen in sleeping waketh, from the sleeping waker, that is, the presuming Hypocrite, who seeming to be awake, is fast, yea dead asleepe.
J haue made bold to offer this my poore labor to the light vnder the shadow and shelter of your worthy name.
First, in regard of that light you hold forth of good example,Iam. 1.27. in the practise of that pure re∣ligion and vndefiled before
 God euen the Father, which approueth it selfe by your visi∣ting of so many fatherles and widowes in their affliction; a grace that infallibly accom∣panieth saluation,Heb. 6 9. & maketh you one of those few who doe stop the mouth of Popish ini∣quitie, blaspheming our do∣ctrine, and slandering our Pro∣fessors as abhorring from good workes.
Secondly, in regard of many particular bonds and coards of loue, whereby you haue tied me in thankefulnesse vnto your selfe; whereof therefore J am desirous, there should be extant
 this publike, and (if it may be) perpetuall acknowledgement.
And so, wishing that this may bee the beginning not of one, but of many good yeares vnto you, vntill it shall please God to translate you to date∣lesse and boundlesse life, I com∣mend you to his grace, who is not vnrighteous that he should forget your worke and labour of loue,Heb. 6.10. which you haue shewed to his Name, in that you haue ministred vnto the Saints, and doe minister; and rest.
Wrington Somers. Febr. 8. 1615.

