



Right Worshipfull and worthy Mi∣stresse More:
THe Church of God hath not onely be∣nefit by exact, and just treatises knit together in a Methodicall de∣pendancy of one part
 from another, but like∣wise of sententious in∣dependent speeches, that have a generall lu∣stre of themselves, as so many flowers in a gar∣den, or Iewels in a cas∣ket, whereof every one hath a distinct worth of themselves; and this maketh them the more acceptable that being short, they are fitter for the heart to carry, as ha∣ving much in a little.
This moved, this re∣verend man of God, to spend what spare houres his sicknesse
 would afford him a∣bout thoughts in this kinde. He was many yeeres Gods prisoner under the Gout and Stone, such diseases, as will allow but little liberty to those that are arrested and tortured by them. So fruitfull an expence of time, in so weake and worne a body is seldome seene, scarce any came to him but went away better than they came; God gave much strength of spirit to uphold his spi∣rit from sinking under
 the strength of such diseases. It were a hap∣py thing if we that are Ministers of Christ, would in all conditi∣ons and times thinke of our calling, that our office is not tyed to one day in a week, and one houre or two in that day, but that upon all fit occasions we are to quicken our selves and others in the way homeward, as guides to heaven. We read not of the opening of hea∣ven but to some great purpose. So it should
 bee with the man of God, he should not o∣pen his mouth and let any thing fall (so far as frailty and the necessa∣ry occurrences of hu∣mane life will permit) but what might mini∣ster some grace to the hearers.
The reason why I made choise of you to dedicate them unto, is not that I might dis∣charge mine own debt unto you with another mans coyne, but that I could not thinke of a∣ny fitter than your self,
 whom this ancient minister of Christ e∣steemed alwayes very much for eminency of parts and grace, and you him as a man faith∣full and one that main∣tained his ministeriall authority with good successe in his place; God allotting your ha∣bitation in your youn∣ger yeeres in that part of the countrey where hee lived, and where you first learned to know God and your selfe. In those times though those parts
 were in regard of theThe hun¦dreds in Essex. ayre unhealthfull, yet that ayre was so sweet∣ned with the savory breath of the Gospell, that they were termed the holy land. Here∣upon I thought meete to commend these sen∣tentious speeches by your name, to others. Which though (divers of them) may seeme plaine, yet what they want in shew they have in weight, as comming from a man very well experienced in all the wayes of
 God. The Lord fol∣low you with his best blessings, that you may continue still to adorne the Gospell of Christ in your place.

