



Most Gracious and Dread SOVERAIGNE:
WE here present to Your most Sacred Majestie, a booke of Sermons. We need not tell whose they are, the Sermons are able to speake their Author. When the Author dyed, Your Majesty thought it not fit his sermons should dye with him. And though they could not live with all that elegancie which they had upon his tongue, yet You were graciously pleased to thinke a paper-life better then none. Vpon this Your Majesty gave us a strict charge, that we should overlooke the Papers (as well Sermons as other Tractates) of that Reverend and Wor∣thie Prelate, and print all that we found perfect. There came to our hands a world of Sermon notes, but these came perfect. Had they not come perfect, we should not have ventured to add any limme unto them, lest mixing a penn farre inferiour, we should have disfigured such compleat bodies.
Your Majesties first care was for the Presse, that the worke might be pub∣licke. Your second was for the worke it selfe, that it might come forth worthy the Author; which could not be, if it came not forth as he left it. In pursuance of these two, we have brought the worke to light, and we have done it with care and fidelitie; for as the Sermons were preached, so are they published. When he preached them, they had the generall approbation of the Court, and they

made him famous for making them. Now they are printed, we hope they will have a generall liking of the Church, and inlarge and indeare his name, to them that knew not him.
We know there is a great prejudice attends the after printing of dead mens workes. For the living may make the dead speake as they will, and as the dead would not speake, did they live. And many worthy Authors in all professions, have had such unsutable peeces stitched to their former workes, as make them speake contrarie to themselves, and to their knowne Iudgement while they lived. As if they had seene some vision after death, to crosse or recall their Iudgement in their life. We would be loath to suffer under the suspiti∣on of this. And therefore in a full obedience to Your Maiesties Comman as we have printed all that we could finde perfect, and worthy his Name: so have we not added or detracted in the least, to alter or divert his sense. That so the worke may not only be his, but as himselfe made it. And the honour Your Maiesties that so carefully Commaunded it: And the faithfulnesse ours in our obedience to Your Maiestie, and our love to his memorie.
And now will Your Majesty graciously be pleased to give us leave, to com∣mend this worke to Your Protection, which would have needed none, had not Your Majesty commanded it to be publike. For, publike view is as great a search as many eyes can make. And many eyes can see what two cannot, be they never so good. And among many eyes, some will ever looke asquint upon worth, and maligne that which they cannot equall. And if ever any mans patience and temper could prevent this evill Eye, we hope his may: And yet, even whil'st we hope the best, we humbly begge your Majesty's pro∣tection against the worst,Eph. 5.16. because the day's are evill.
VVe have but two things to present to Your Majestie. They are the Person to your memorie; And this his worke to your eye. For the person, we can add nothing to him. To name him, is enough to all that knew him; and to read him, will be enough to them that knew him not. And though Vertue have but 'its due, when 'tis commended, yet we conceive not how praise may make vertue better then it is, especially when he person in whom it was, is dead to all encouragement or comfort by it. And yet though vertue cannot thus be bettered,Patec. Lib. 2. Hist. it may be righted thus. For, Vivorum ut magna admiratio, ita censura difficilis. Tis easie to admire the living, and we doe it, but 'tis hard to censure them any way. Both because there will be no preferring one before a∣nother without offence. And because, as we know not what may come upon them before death, so the censure may be so good, as they will ner'e deserve; or so bad, as though they doe deserve, they will not beare. Twas Bibulus-his case. The admiration of men had carried him up to heaven,Cice . ad A∣tic. Ep. 19. Bibulus homi∣num admira∣tione in Coelo est, nec quare scio. no lower place would serve him. Yet when it came to a wiseman's censure, he professed, he knew no ground for that admiration, and lesse worth in him for such a height. But when men have payd all their rights of nature to death, and are gone into their silence; then where admiration ceaseth, censure beginns. Now if the censure be heavy (as it is too oft upon the best) yet then it should be sparing for

humanitie's sake. For that humanity, which forbids the rifling of a grave; bidds forbear him that is shut up in it, and cannot answere. But if the censure be good, you may be bold with the grave: And you cannot prayse any so safely as the dead; for you cannot humor them into danger, nor melt away your selfe into flattery.
The Person therefore, whose workes these are, was from his youth, a man of extraordinarie worth and note. A man, as if he had been made up of Lear∣ning and Vertue. Both of them so eminent in him, as 'tis hard to judge, which had precedency and greater interest. His Vertue, (which we must still judge the more worthy in any man) was comparable to that which was wont to be found in the Primitive Bishops of the Church. And had He lived among those an∣cient Fathers, his Vertue would have shined, even amongst those vertuous men. And for his Learning, that was as well, if not better knowne abroad, then respected at home. And take him in his Latitude, we which knew him well, knew not any kinde of Learning to which he was a stranger; but in his profession admirable. None stronger then he, where he wrestled with an Adversary. And that Bellarmine felt, who was as well able to shift for himselfe, as any that stood for the Roman party. None more exact, more judicious then he, where he was to instruct and informe others. And that, as they knew, which of∣ten heard him preach, so they may learne, which will reade this which he hath left behinde him. And yet this fulnesse of his Materiall Learning, left roome enough in the temper of his braine, for almost all Languages learned and mo∣derne to seat themselves. So that his Learning had all the helpes Language could affoord; and his Languages learning enough for the best of them to expresse. His Iudgement, in the meane time, so commanding over both, as that neither of them was suffered idly, or curiously to start from, or fall short of, their inten∣ded scope. So that we may better say of him,Paterc. Hist. lib. 2. then 'twas sometimes said of Clau∣dius Drusus; He was of as many, and as great vertues, as mortall nature could recieve, or industrie make perfect. And since we are both taught, and see it by experience, that wise men also dye,Psal. 49.10. and perish togither as well as the ignorant and foolish, and though they leave their riches, yet cannot dis∣pose their wisdome to others: 'tis fit we should be conversant in the writings of wise and religious men, that we may in part learne that in their workes, which the dying Authors had not power to bequeath unto us.
These workes then comming from so Grave, Learned, and Religious an Authour, have but two things to do in their publishing to the world. The one is, to teach the world, what a treasure they have of them. And the other, to tell this Church, what a Iewell she lost, when she lost their Author. The worke is a Body of Sermons. To them he had been most bred, and in them he most excelled. And he was not a greater Preacher in his age, then he was both great and frequent, in his younger and stronger time. As for the body of the worke it selfe, were it not that we like not to disparage any mans indeavours by comparing, we would say, the Christian world hath not many such Bodies of Sermons, as we here present, under Your Majesties favor, to the view, and use of this Church. And if another Nation had them, they would as highly value them.
And heere we humbly begge leave to tell Your Maiestie, that these Sermons are in this, like their Author, mixed of Religion and wisedome. I is an excellent thing for a man to speake wisely, and eloquently, both at once: but where these perfections meet not, there saith Saint Augustine, Dicat sapi∣enter, quod non potest eloquenter. Let the Preacher (of all men) speak that wisely, which he cannot utter eloquently. And if Saint Augustine in his time found that fit, out of all doubt 'tis necessarie now, that men of our profession, set themselves to preach with more wisedome, then eloquence. VVith Christian and religious Wisedome;D doct. Christ. 4. Chap. 28. which alone knowes how to preserve truth and peace togither. For as all other Churches in the world, are most happy when these meete; so is this too. But too many among the people, choose rather to have their humor fedd, then their soules edified. And carry partiall eares even to the house of that God, who is no accepter of persons. To settle therefore the peace of the one, and to abate the humor of the other, nothing certainly under God,Act. 10.34. would be of greater efficacie, then Conciones sapientes, wise, and dis∣creete Sermons, which yet may be as zealous and devout as any other. For he that is zealous according to knowledge, is not lesse zealous for his knowledge sake. And true wisedome, which is not true if it be not Christian, carries no water about it to quench zeale, but onely to sprinkle it, that it may burn within compasse, and not fire that house which it intended but to warme.
VVe have neither purpose, nor Commission to step aside heer, and complaine of the Times. All times have somewhat amisse in them, els Preachers should have the lesse worke. And if these times have more then many others, which our Fore∣fathers have seene, we must needs be sorry there is so much worke for Prea∣chers: and more, if they which live by the Gospell of peace, should make any. For after the building up of the Faith of Christ, their chiefe worke should be, to beate down those strong Holdes, which any sinnes have built up in the hearts of men, to pollute or defame Christianitie. And true Preachers indeed are, as Saint Hierome speakes,in Thren. 1. Maxillae Ecclesiae, the Iawbones of the Church, which by preaching, beate downe the carnall life of man. Now all hatred, con∣tention, vaiance, all sedition and disobedience to Lawfull Authoritie is (as 'tis reckoned by the Apostle) among the workes of the flesh. And there∣fore since all Preachers are the Iawes of the Church, and the sinnes of the people are,Gal. 5.10. as it were, to be grownd inter Maxillas, betweene these Iawes, be∣fore the People themselves can be made fit to nourish the Church, or the Church them: How can this be done, especially done as it ought, if the Iawes be weake or fallen, and cannot doe their office?
But our hope is that God will so blesse Your Majestie in Your government, Your people in their loyalty, the Preachers in their wisedome added to zeale and diligence; that the hearts and hands of all sorts of men, shall be joyned to∣gither to preserve God's worship in truth, Your Maiestie's throne in honour, the Church in religious devotion, and all Your People in obedience and union, the onely meanes to make both Your Maiestie, and Your People happy in this life, and blessed in that which is to come. And we humbly desire men of all sorts

to thinke seriously of this; that if the Publike suffer either in Church or State, no mans private pleasure, or profitt can stand firme unto him. No mans. And Ci∣cero had reason enough to laugh at the folly of those men, Quiamissâ Repub:Lib. 1. Ep. 15 Piscinas suas fore salvas sperare videntur, which in his time seemd to con∣ceive such a windy hope, that their fish-ponds and places of pleasure, should be safe, when the Common-wealth was lost.
These Sermons when they were preached, gave great contentment to the re∣ligious, and judicious eares of Your Royall Father, of ever blessed memorie, the most hable Prince that ever this Kingdome had, to judge of Church-worke. And therefore we hope that the printing of them, shall be as acceptable to your Majestie, as the preaching of them was both to your selfe and him. We conceive, if your liking had not continued to them, Your Majestie would not have commaunded us the printing of them. And we assure our selves, since the Lines are the same, the Presse which hath made them legible, hath made no blot upon your gratious favours. Wee have beene only Servants, as we are many waies bound to be, to Your Majestie's Commaund, in making them ready for the Presse, but Authors of nothing in them. And we heartily pray, that the publishing of them, may be Honour to Your Majestie; Good to the Church; and meanes of Comfort and salvation, to them which read them. And in these, and all other praiers for Your Majesties long life, and happy Government, we humbly beseech You to conceive of us, as wee are, and shall ever be

