



IMmediatlye after you had caused your articles to be put in printe (beloued in Christ) I was stirred wyth the de∣syre to haue them confuted. Not for any displeasure that I had conceyned towardes you, or anye o∣ther, by whose meanes you shoulde be wil∣led or (as it maye be thought) required to set them abrod to the world: but onelye for the loue I beare to Christes trueth, whyche I woulde not (if my wit and knowledge were corespondente to my wyll) suffer to be hin∣dered by anye so blasphemouse doctrine of Antichristes schole, as are these Articles of yours. I call them yours, bycause you sub∣scribe to them, and set thē forthe vnder your name. But if I were required to say my cō∣science: I coulde not deny but I thinke them to be Wynchesters workemanshyp, because they agre so well wyth hys doctrine, & that
 chiefelye in the deuyl leishe detection of hys maister the deuylles sophistry, whych he set abroud shortly after these Articles of yours But woulde God you were as well confu∣ted by me, as he is answered by Anthony Gilbie. Wel, as I coulde so haue I done, bi∣cause I would not that so necessarie a thyng shold be left vndone. Not for the scarsitie of thē that be able to do it much better: but by∣cause none other hath takē in hande, neyther was it lyke that any woulde hereafter occu∣py theyr tyme in it, because the matter doeth nowe dayly more & more grow out of mind And because the copies of youre Articles be not communly to be solde: most men thinke them in maner extinguished for euer. And in very dede, had not certaine honeste men en∣fourmed me of the great numbre of thē that thorowe youre recantation were established in your erroures: I hadde not taken this en∣terprice in hande, nother yet finished it when it was begon. But whē I vnderstode what hynderaunce to Gods trueth, your Autho∣ritie, hath already and myghte here after do if your articles should remayne vntouched: I thought it to lesse then necessarye to spend some tyme in it, trusting that God wil geue the encrease boeth in youre herte and in the hertes of as many as are not obstinate blind vessels of Gods Ire ordeyned to destructiō.

If my wrytyng can not satisfie you, in a∣nye of your Articles: I praye you write vn∣to me (whether you shal thinke it beste) pri∣uately or apartly, that I may either enstruct you further, other els be enstructed of you.
And if youre age or other impedimente wyll not suffer you to declare youre mynde in all thynges concernynge youre Articles: yet let vs knowe what you wyll saye to the copy of your owne hande which you writte beynge in prison.
If you kepe silence and wryte nothynge agayne: then maye ye well thynke that we wyl iudge you obstinate and yet to haue no∣thynge to saye, for nowe is it fre for you to speake your consciēce, so far as the scripture wyl beare you. If you can by the scriptures defend youre Articles and proue them to be chatholyke and Godly: I shal wyth all rea∣dines embrace theym and reuoke all that I haue wrytten to the contrarye. Otherwyse I require you (euen in the name of Christe whome you professe in that you wyll be cal∣led christen) that you acknowledge your er∣rours, that suche as were offended by you, may haue occasion by you to ryse agayne.
I am not ignoraunte of your behauioure sence your recantataion, boeth in the citye of London and els where. Your priuate com∣munication (besydes youre sermons dashed
 ful of sorowful teares and depe syghynges to alure the people to the Romeishe waye a∣gayne) is openly knowen to all men. Men knowe also, howe you haue (vpon occasion geuē, to speake of persecution) affirmed the good byshoppes of Wynchester and Lon∣don, and such other, to be the onely sufferers of persecution in these dayes.
Blame me not therfore, thoughe I be ear¦neste wyth you, syth many men hange vpon youre wordes, and one of youre good by∣shops spared not euen in the presence of hys prince to declare hym selfe not to be al of the best. Whose emendemēt I most hertely beseche the Lorde Iesu graunt me to se. And yours also (maister Shax tō) if it be possible, that we may reioyce togyther after all thys discorde in opinions and matters of religion, The spi¦rite of the liuing God worke in you the thing I haue prayed for.
Amen.
❧ From London the .xxvi. day of No∣uēberin the yere of our Lord God. M. D .xlviii.
