



BEing by the Lord Maior (that then was) appoin∣ted to occupy the place of a better, in your Chappell at the Gilde hall, on that day wherin; according to your yearely custome you were gathered to∣gether to make choyse of one to rule your Citie, for the yeare then to come: I dyd bende all my speeches to the
 instruction of as many of you as were to geue voyces in that Election, and of him that was then to be elected. And al∣though I dyd not then so well lyke of myne owne doing that I could thinke it meete to be penned and published to the view of all that would reade it: yet I per∣ceiued afterward, that manye amongest you were desirous to haue it in writing, that it might remaine in memory, and be a rule for you and your posteritie to follow in yout yearely Elections. Being therefore requested by one (that seemed to mee most desirous of this common commoditie) to set downe in writyng that which I had then spoken: I could not deny that so honest and reasonable a request. But beyng then oppressed with manyfold exercises, I differred the doing thereof almost to long: euen tyll memorie began to be amazed, when she should make report to my pen of those wordes which she not before wylled to
 retaine. And then I began to feele, that age cannot easely do that, wherof youth maketh small accompt.
Yet notwythstandyng I caused my Memorie to searche out all her corners, and to bring forth that which she foūd? and so haue I penned (as my Memorie telleth me) almost the same wordes that I then spake, and in the same order that I then did speake them.
And because I thought that thys in∣struction might serue as well for al other Elections, as for that which then was in hand: I thought good to adde an Appē∣dix, wherein I haue applyed the whole matter of euery Election to be made, of any that must serue in any publike cal∣ling, either Ecclesiasticall or Ciuile.
If this my labour haue or shall do any good, the praise thereof is due to God, the doer of all that is wel done: who first moued the myndes of your Rulers to thinke me meete to occupy that place at
 that tyme, and my mynde to conceyue and vtter suche matter there, and the minde of him that first moued mee to conceiue it in writing, and the myndes of them that haue thought it meete to be imprinted.
To GOD therefore especially, I do dedicate this my labour, and generallye to all you, whom he hath herein vsed as his instrumentes: Beseeching his Ma∣iestie to accept of that which hee hath made me able to do, and to employ both it and mee to the commoditie of hys Church, and you to take at hys hande the fruit of this my labour, whom hee hath in this matter vsed as his instrumēt to instruct you how ye ought to deale, not onely in this one yearelye election of your Maior, but in all your other E∣lections also.
The Lord Iesus Christ (whose Ser∣uauntes we all do professe to be) direct vs by his holy Spirite: that in all our
 workes, words, and thoughtes we may seeke to set foorth the glorie of his (and by him) our heauenly Father. To whom, with the same his onely begotten sonne, & the holy spirit be al honor & glo∣ry for euermore. Amen.

