



IN September last,
I with others, was by suffici∣ent
Authoritie, appointed to
cōfer, with such of your sort,
as at that tyme, were in her
Maiesties prisons, of the Mar∣shalsey
& the white Lion, in
Sowthwark, restrained of ly∣bertie,
for refusing to con∣forme
themselues to that order of Religiō, which is now
publique in this Realme of England. And according to
our duety in that behalfe: Maister Henrie Tryp, and I, did
(as we were required) make our spedy repaire, first to the
one prison, and then to the other. And after some confe∣rence
had with certain that were close prisoners: we came
to confer with one Maister Thomas Povvnde Gentleman,
in the lodging where he then laye. And finding him al∣togeather
vnwylling to enter into any conference by
speaches, because (as he sayd) he feared to fall into daun∣ger
of Lawe therby: I aunswered, that he ought to haue a
better opinion of her Maiestie, (by whose appointment,
we were come to offer cōference) then to thinke that she
would send vs, to entrap him, or any other her subiects.
For she needeth not to seeke more aduantage against a∣ny
of them, then that which already by their disloyall
behauiour they haue giuē her. So that if she would pro∣ceede
against them in rigour of lawe, and not in mercie:
she might cut their heads from their shoulders, and make
no more to doo with them. But being desirous, by some
meanes to bring to passe, that they might become as o∣bedient
subiects to her, as she both hath and dooth shew
her selfe a louing Prince to them: she would not abridge

them of lybertie (which for good and iust, yea necessary
causes, shee is now enforced to doo) but that shee would
withal prouide, that by cōferēce with such as be learned,
they might either be drawn from their errours: or els be
found to be obstinate and wilfully blinde. But none of
these speaches could mooue maister Pownd to like of any
conference by speaches. Yet notwithstanding, he sayd he
was ready to confer by wryting, and offered so to doo.
Whereunto I aunswered, that we had no commission to
deale that way: but yet if he would write, I promised to
aunswer him in writing. Vpon this he pulled a Pāphlet
out of his bosome (the copie wherof I haue caused to be
set before mine aunswer) & called in such as he thought
meete to heare it read. And after he had read it: he deliue∣red
it to me to be aunswered. And this was done the. 7.
day of September. The ninth of the same month, I began
to shape him an aunswer: and finished the same with as
much conuenient speed as I could, being letted with busi∣nes,
besides that busines, enough to occupy som mā tho∣rowly.
But by Gods helpe, the time was not long before
the aunswer was finished. But in this meane whyle (I
know not by what occasion) Maister Povvnd, was remo∣ued
to another prisō, further of: so that I could not come
to delyuer mine aunswer to him, neyther did I thinke it
meete to be sent to him immediatly from me, because I
vnderstoode, that the right Reuerend Father the Lorde
Bishop of London, had commaunded him to be remoo∣ued
thence. I did therefore reade, in the hearing of as
many of your sorte, as I then found in the Marshalsey,
bothe the Reasons contayned in Maister Povvnd his
Pamphlet: and also mine aunswers to the same. Promi∣sing,
that with as much speede as I might, I would send
bothe to my sayd Lord the Bishop, with my Letters, be∣seeching
him, at his discretion, eyther to send mine aun∣swer
to Maister Pownd: or els to cause him to be brought
back againe to the Marshalsey, whether I might repaire,

to proceede in conference with him by writing. But my
sayde Lorde, being oppressed with other affaires more
waightie: and thereby enforced to commit this busines
to some other, that were not so carefull for the dispatch
thereof, as I would they had. And I my selfe also (not al∣together
vnoccupied otherwise) did not, (as in dutie I
ought) call vpon my sayd Lord, but supposing that mine
aunswer had beene shortly conuayed to Maister Povvnd,
(because I heard not of his returne to the Marshalsey) I
rested, looking to haue receyued some replie from him:
tyll at the last (euen in the Moneth of December last)
I heard that the Copies of his Pamphlet were made com∣mon
to many of your sorte, with great brags, that the
reasons therein contayned are vnaunswerable. Yea, and
some of our side, were required to aunswer them, euen as
Maister Povvnd had required me. Whereupon, repayring
to my sayd Lorde the Bishop: I receaued my sayde aun∣swer
againe the 4. of this Ianuarie, with his allowance to
publish it in Printe, together with the Copies of Maister
Povvnd his Pamphlet, and the breefe aunswer that Mai∣ster
Trippe wrote, after I had finished mine, as by the same
may appeare. And this was thought needefull to be don,
because the Copie of Maister Povvnd his Pamphlet is al∣ready
made so common: our annswers being as yet, made
knowne but to fewe. And that you may haue that firste
in sight that you like best: I haue caused the Printer to
place the Copy of Maister Povvnd his Pamphlet, immedi∣atly
after this short Epistle. Reade these Reasons for
your pleasure, and our aunswers for your profite. And if
you mislike with our aunswers, replie, if you can. You
shall finde them of our side, that will deale with you,
faithfully and freendely too. Be not obstinately, and
wilfully blinde: least you doo thereby prouoke (yea and
enforce) our mercifull Prince, contrary to her naturall
inclination, to deale with you in Iustice without mercie.

Though we haue great cause to thinke that you (all the
sorte of you) doo hate both: our Prince and vs, for that
Religion which bothe she and we do professe: yet I dare
assure you, that bothe she, and all the Honorable & lear∣ned
of her Realme, yea and all, of all estates, that doo vn∣fainedly
professe that Religion that you hate, doo vnfai∣nedly
looue you, and pray for the opening of the eyes of
your vnderstanding, that you may see and feele, and em∣brace
your saluation in Christe, and that being English∣men,
or inhabiting within the English dominions, you
may know and acknowledge her Maiestie, for your su∣preme
Gouernor in all causes, next and immediatly vn∣der
Christe, our onely vniuersall head. Fare you well.
From my house at S. Gyles without Creplegate
of London, the. 6. of Ianuarie. 1580. After
the accoumpt of the Church of Eng∣lande,
and in the. 23. yeere of her
Maiesties Reigne.
(∵)

