



WHen the Israelites, af∣ter the death of Iosu∣ah, demanded of God, who should first go vp for them against the Canaa∣nites,Iosh. 1.1, 2. the Lord answered, Iudah shall goe vp: but, when Moses,Exod. 32.26. in behalfe of God, stood in the gate of
 the Camp, and cryed, who is on the Lords side? let him come vn∣to mee; all the sonnes of Leui, gathered themselues vnto him, &c. Who seeth not then (Fathers, and Brethren) that, leauing the conduct of affaires of state to ano∣ther Tribe, in case of reformation of manners, it is our part, to rise vp first in the Lords quarrell, and to consecrate our hands vnto his ser∣uice; for as the Prophet saith, O ye Priests, this commandement is for you.Mal. 2.1.
Wee see the fruitfull weedes and thornes of prophanenesse and iniqui∣tie, who should root them out, but the Lords husbandmen? Wee see the wofull ruines of vertue and pietie, who should repaire them, but the Lords Builders? Wee see the troups of armed and audacious enemies, J
 meane sinnes, neuer so bold or so well backt, and the holds of selfe loue and custome in sinning, neuer so strongly fortified: who should at∣tach the battell, or attempt the as∣sault, but we, whom the Lord hath not only sworne his Souldiers, but selected as Captaines, and Centu∣rions, in this spirituall warfare?
It is our part to bee domi belli{que} duellatores, fighters at home, & fighters abroade,Cant. 1.6. keepers of our owne vines, and keepers of the cō∣mon vineyard of Christ our Salo∣mon.Cant. 8.11. Others haue a single, wee a double warfare, with others, and for others: with others, as wee are of the house of Israel; for others, as we are of the house of Aaron: for both regards, we are to take heed;Act. 20.28. for the first, to our selues: for the second, to al the flock, ouer which
 the holy Ghost hath made vs o∣uer-seers.
If wee neglect the charge of our owne vines, may not the Lord say, that from the Prophets,Ier. 23.15. wicked∣nes is gone forth into the whole land? For, how shall wee perswade others to fight against sinne, vnlesse wee can commend vnto them the same fight,Phil. 1.30. which they see or beare to bee in vs? how shall wee presse to kill our Lords Enemies in others, if wee nourish them in our owne bosomes; if wee resolue not, with blessed Paul,1. Cor. 9.27. that euen our owne flesh first, being sedes hostis, shall be sedes belli, and being sedes peccati, shall bee sedes supplicii? Leuies blessing consists of Thum∣mim,Deut. 33.8. aswell as Vrim, integritie, as sufficiencie: and on the skirt of Aarons Robe,Exo. 28.33. &c. there were not only
 Bells, but pomegranats, a type to be expressed in vs, Ministers of the new Testament, of whom the people must not only heare the sound, but see the fruit, or else our golden bell will be but as sounding brasse,1. Cor. 13.1. or as a tinkling cymball. In a word, as the sinne, so the reformation of the people beginneth in our Tribe. The Lord so purge and fine vs, sons of Leui, that wee first may bring offerings to the Lord in righte∣ousnesse;Mal. 3.3, 4. and then the offerings of Iudah and Ierusalem may bee acceptable to the Lord.
On the other side, if wee neglect our charge concerning the vineyard of Christ: If wee seuer the worke from the worship, the dutie from the dignitie. If we thinke our selues too good, or too great, to till our Lords ground, which (as one said of
 the arable of old Rome) reioyceth to bee turned vp vomere patritio. If wee bring no stuffe to our Lords building, or insteed of stone, tim∣ber, mettall, nothing but glasse, bright and brittle: If wee bee like Sauls Souldiers, without speare or sword in the day of battaile;1. Sam. 13.22. or hauing a sword (a gift) doe not vnsheathe it, or but vnsheathe it for shew, nor brandish it for vse. If we doe but muster, not fight, or flourish only, as Fencers, with a rebated edge, but neuer drawe bloud.Ier. 48.10. If we doe cauponari bel∣lum,2. Cor. 2.17. not belligerare; make mer∣chandize of our war, and boot-ha∣ling in steed of battaile. If we vain∣ly thinke to discharge our selues of the account of soules, committed to our keeping, because whiles wee had here to doe,1. Kin. 20.39.40 and there to doe (not
 idle but otherwise employed) they slipt away & miscaried without our knowledge.Ezek. 44.8. Jf we our selues keep not the ordinances of the holy things of God, but set others for vs to take the charge of his Sanctuarie. If such be our practi∣zes and pretences, Fathers, and Brethren, what shall we answere vnto that great shepheard and Bishop of soules,1. Pet. 2.25. at the dreadfull day of his oecumenicall visita∣tion?
True it is, the conflict is so great,Ier. 15.10. to striue with the whole earth; the labour so thanklesse, to vex them that dwell therein;Reuel. 11.10. the successe, oftentimes so vncomforta∣ble,Esa. 49.4. to spend our strength in vain and for nothing; that no maruaile if the best seruants of Christ, taking their hard taske to heart, bee readie,
 sometimes to bewray their frailtie, and to crie,Ier. 15.10. Woe is me, my mo∣ther, that thou hast borne mee, &c. and otherwhiles, to giue ouer, & resolue,Ier. 20.8, 9. not to make mention of the Lord, or to offer his word to the daily reproch, and derisi∣on of prophane men.
But this tentation cannot long preuaile,Ibid. if either we feele the word of God, as a burning fire shut vp in our bones, and forcing a vent, or see the Lord,Ibid. vers. 11. as a mighty giant, standing at our right hand, readie to rebuke,Zech. 3.1, 2. not men only, but also Satan,2. Cor. 2.14, 15 and to make vs alwaies to triumph in Christ, as a sweet sa∣uour vnto God, whether in them that are saued, or in them that perish.
Nay rather, if we be truly hum∣bled with the awe of Gods holy Ma∣iestie,
 we shall see and be waile, euen the best of vs, our owne share in the common corruptions; and crie out, with the Prophet, Woe is me,Esa. 6.5. I am vndone, for I am a man of polluted lips, and I dwell in the middest of a people of polluted lips, &c. that mourning, with Iohn Baptist, we may happily pre∣vaile with some to weepe after vs: and hastning the haruest of con∣version,Matth. 9.37. Reuel. 14.14, 15. wee may preuent the An∣gell, otherwise readie with his sharpe sickle to the haruest of de∣struction:Mal. 4.6. so turning the hearts of the Fathers vnto the children, and (that is,Luk. 1.17. of the disobedient to the wisedome of iust men) that the Lord may not come & smite the earth with cursing.
The Lord make vs such Pastors after his owne heart,Ier. 3.15. & 15.19. after his
 owne mouth; that we may both saue our selues,1. Tim. 4.16. and them that heare vs:1. Pet. 5.4. and that when the chiefe Shepheard shall appeare, being found so doing,Luk. 12.43. we may receiue at his hand an in∣corruptible crowne of glorie.

