


IF the Heathen (Right Honourable) haue said very wisely and truly, That we are not borne for our selues alone, but that our pa∣rents, our friends, our cuntrie haue their pe∣culiar and seuerall right and interest in our natiuitie and birth, so farre forth as any way we may be able to profit and doe them good: then much more ought Christians duely to weigh & consider, that accordingly as God diuersly bestoweth vpon them the gifts and graces of his holy spirit, so are they especially to imploy and vse them vnto the benefit and instruction of the Church and people of God, and not hide and burie them in the ground, as did the idle and vn∣thankfull seruant his talent, as we reade in the Gospell. The cal∣ling to remembrance of which most waightie and neuer to be forgotten parable, hath stirred me vp from time to time, as leysure hath bin offered from the duties of my publike charge, to be still occupied about some thing, whereby both the Church, and also the Common-wealth might in some measure be benefited and edified. And for both their sakes and common good, I haue also nowe againe bestowed no small paines and labour for the publishing of this briefe, plaine, and easie Commentarie and ex∣position of the profoundly read, and deepely learned Danaeus vp∣on all the twelue small Prophets (as they are commonly called) to
the end that hereby the godly minded Christians may be the ra∣ther induced & moued to the reading of the same, being by this helpe now made so familiar and without any hardnes to be vn∣derstanded. Now what I haue more performed in this my simple translation, then is to be found in the Latin coppy of the Author himselfe, I haue rather thought meete in a word or twaine to signifie in a short speach vnto the curteous & Christian reader, then here to be tedious & trouble son▪ vnto your HH. in setting downe at large the same. This my labour such as it is, I haue presumed to recommend vnto the fauourable protection of both your excellent Honours, towardes whome these many yeares I haue bin a faithfull deuoted seruant, and poore welwiller, and unto whom I willingly confesse that euery way I owe farre grea∣ter duetie, then any way lieth in my small abilitie to yeilde and performe. This worke as it is new, and neuer hath had the like heretofore published in our English tongue, so I suppose that in easie briefnesse there is not any of like kinde that can bring vn∣to the well disposed Reader, more store of Christian knowledge and profitable instruction, in which respect I trust it shall come acceptable vnto your HH. & also vnto as many of God his faith∣full children as shall vouch safe the buying and heedfull reading of the same. And hereby I my selfe also shalbe further prouoked and encouraged to goe forwarde hereafter in the like, or perad∣uenture of more importance for the behoofe and commoditie of the well affected and disposed Christians. So crauing your Ho∣nourable and gentle pardoning of this my boldnes, I most hum∣bly & earnestly be seech the Almightie for your prosperous pre∣seruation, to this glorie your owne comfort, & the great ioy and reioycing of his chosen Israel. Tunbridge this 20. of Iune. 1594.

