



Right Reverend and Right Honourable,
AS this Treatise was delivered to the most hospital Societie that I know, so must it be de∣dicated to the most hospital Prelate I can heare of: That as the Oratour waxen oldƲt in Catone. majore ad se∣nem senex de senectute, sic in hoc libro ad a∣micum amicis∣simus de amici∣tia scripsi. Cic. init. lib. De A∣micitia. wrote of old age to an old
 man, and of friendship to his much endeared friend; so I being a stranger may speak and write of the entertainment of strangers to persons given to entertain strangers.Tanta est haec Virtus, ut illam non semel Pau∣lus in Episcopo requirat. Pet. Marr. in Gen. 18.16. This Vertue, saith Martyr, is so great, that Paul doth more then once require it in a Bishop: And your practice of the same is so known, that for a fit Patrone of my Discourse thereof I need not have recourse to any other pattern of a good Bishop. Your love to the Colledge where I am, and to the Nation whence I come, and the favourable countenance You shewed me at my Ordination, make me hope that these my poore labours shall finde acceptance with your Lordship; though not for the worth of the work, yet for the worthinesse of the subject upon which it doth work. If your Lordship be pleased to turn this hope of mine into cer∣taintie and assurance, and to receive cheer∣fully so small a present from a mean stran∣ger, I shall be obliged to You for a great piece of hospitalitie, and will ever say con∣cerning your very worthy deeds most wor∣thily magnified by others, Long may You do so, as Vitellius congratulating Claudius his ap∣plauded works said briefly to him,Saepe facias. Sueton. in Vi∣tellio cap. 2. Oft may
 You do so. That great Shepherd and Bishop of our souls, whose Gospel You credit with your beneficence, blesse your Lord∣ship on earth with length of prosperous dayes, and make your reckonings cheerfull at the common Audit, with that unspeak∣ably sweet voice, Well done,Matth. 25.21. good and faithfull servant, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

