


MADAME,
LOng agoe hath Babylon,Revel. 16. 19
that Great Citie, come in re∣memberance
before GOD, and
since that fyft Angell powred out his
viall vpon the seat of the Beast,verse, 10 his
kingdome hath lost its former lustre by farre, which
it had before; which maketh them to gnaw their
tongues for sorrow:Revel. 16. 12. And those waters, whereon the
Whore (which their owne Iesuit Ribera expoundeth
to bee the Citie of Rome) doeth sit, and which the
Apostle interpreteth to be Peoples,Revel. 17. 15. and Multitudes,
and Nations, and Tongues, subject vnto her, (bles∣sed
bee GOD) they are dryed vp greatlie, and runne
now in a farre narrower Channell, than they were wont
of olde, when, lyke Nilus, they did over-flow their
Bankes. Which thing hath come to passe, to GOD's
Glorie,Revel. 2. 9. and His Servantes joye; because the Sunne of
that bright Light of the Gospell, which was darkened,

for a tyme, by the smoake that came foorth of the bot∣tomlesse
Pit, hath dissipated those foggie mistes of Er∣rour,
and shyned, now, a long tyme, most brightlie,
to all such who will fullie doe not close their eyes at mid∣day.
Revel. 18. 4 So that GOD's People, which were in Babell,
beeing fore-warned, to come out of her, haue obeyed
accordingdlie, and doe obey daylie.
Amongst whom, it hath pleased the Lord, ve∣rie
latelie, even in this present yeare of God 1637.
by that Eye-salue spoken of in the Word,Revel. 3. 18. to open the
eyes of a most learned Doctor of Sorbon, FRANCIS
CUPIF;Genesis 12. 1 that, as Abraham left Ur, and Paull his
Pharisaisme,Actes 9 & 12 so hee hath left that Idolatrous Profession
of Poperie, and Traditions of men; that hee might be
a member of the true Church of Christ, and here-after
follow onlie the voyce of that Great Shepheard;Iohn 10. 4. Choo∣sing
rather,Heb. 11. 25. 26 with Moses, to suffer affliction with the
people of GOD, than to enjoye the pleasures of
sinne for a season; and, esteeming the reproach of
CHRIST greater riches, than the treasures of
Aegypt, or anie thing that can bee had in the tents
of Iniquitie. Of whose conversion to the Trueth,
his olde Associates, with the Sorcorers of Aegypt,
may justlie acknowledge,Exodus 8. 19 that this is the finger of
GOD: and wee may truelie affirme with the Psal∣mist
of this worke of Mercy,Psal. 118. 23. that this is the LORDS
doing; and, it is marvelous in our eyes.
As the malicious Pharisees then spake of those
who believed in CHRIST,Iohn 7. 48. Haue anie of the
Rulers, or of the Pharisees, believed on Him, but
this people, who knoweth not the Law▪ So let not
the Romanists in lyke manner now saye, Did ever

anie of our learned Doctors convert, or turne
Protestantes? For loe, heere one, who hath done so,
brought vp at the feet of Gamaliell,Acts 22. and honoured
with the highest Title which that Facultie, or anie
famous Universitie, could conferre vpon him, in te∣stimonie,
and acknowledgement of his worth & litera∣ture.
The contrarie whereof (amongst other their in∣just
Aspersions) they doe not, nor dare impute vnto
him: and the proofe whereof, in his modest and short
Replie, hee doeth expresse sufficientlie.
Accept, then, (Noble and Religious Ladie) these
small payns, which I haue taken, in translating this en∣suing
Pamphlet: that so, the more generall notice may be
given to all,Psal. 110. 2 of the powerfull Grace of GOD, ruling in
the midst of His enemies,Revel. 2. 13 and where Satan hath his
throne; in pulling this Man, as a brand, out of the fire▪
and making him, with the Apostle, an elect Vessell, to
beare His Name before His People:Acts.  whereby all zealous
Professors may rejoyce, as the believing Christians did,
when they heard, that hee who made havocke of the
Church, was then preaching the Gospell; and, all
such who professe the Trueth, may bee confirmed in the
Fayth; and beseech GOD, more and more to adde daylie
to His Church; To the Glorie of His Grace, the joye of
His Sayncts, the confusion of His foes, and salvation of
Soules, in Iesus Christ, our Lord; in whom I am ever

