



NEW ENGLAND,
so call'd, not onely (to
auoyd nouelties) because
Captaine Smith hath so
entituled it in his Descrip∣tion,
but because of the re∣semblance
that is in it, of
England the natiue soile of
English-men; It being
much what the same for
heate and colde in Summer and Winter, it being
Champion ground, but not high mountaines, somwhat
like the soile in Kent and Essex; full of Dales, and med∣dow
ground, full of ryuers and sweete springs, as Eng∣land
is. But principally, so farre as we can yet find, it is
an Iland, and neere about the quantitie of England, be∣ing
cut off from the maine land of America, as England
is from the maine of Europe, by a great arme of the Sea,
which entreth in fortie degrees, and runneth vp North
west and by West, and goeth out either into the South

Sea, or else into the Bay of Canado. The certaintie
whereof, and secrets of which, we haue not yet so found
as that as eye-witnesses we can make narration thereof,
but if God giue time and meanes, we shall ere long, dis∣couer
both the extent of that Riuer, together with the
secrets thereof; and also try what territories, habitations,
or commodities, may be found, either in it, or about
it.
It pertaineth not to my purpose to speake any thing,
either in prayse, or disprayse of the country, so it is by
Gods prouidence, that a few of vs are there planted to
our content, and haue with great charge and difficultie
attained quiet and competent dwellings there. And
thus much I will say for the satisfaction of such as haue
any thought of going thither to inhabit; That for men
which haue a large heart, & looke after great riches, ease,
pleasure, dainties, and iollitie in this world (except they
will liue by other mens sweat, or haue great riches) I
would not aduise them to come there, for as yet the
country will afford no such matters: But if there be any,
who are content to lay out their estates, spend their time,
labours, and endeuours, for the benefit of them that
shall come after, and in desire to further the Gospell a∣mong
those poore Heathens, quietly contenting them∣selues
with such hardship and difficulties, as by Gods
prouidence shall fall vpon them, being yet yong, and in
their strength, such men I would aduise and encourage
to goe, for their ends cannot faile them.
And if it should please God to punish his people in
the Christian countries of Europe, (for their coldnesse,
carnality, wanton abuse of the Gospel, contention, &c.)
either by Turkish slauery, or by Popish tyrannie, which
God forbid, yet if the time be come, or shall come (as
who knoweth) when Sathan shall be let loose,Reu. 12. 14. 15 to cast
out his flouds against them, here is a way opened for
such as haue wings to flie into this Wildernesse; and as

by the dispersion of the Iewish Church thorow per∣secution,Act. 11. 20. 21.
the Lord brought in the fulnesse of the Gen∣tiles,
so who knoweth, whether now by tyrannie, and
affliction, which he suffereth to come vpon them, he
will not by little and little chase them, even amongst
the Heathens,Luk. 2. 32. that so a light may rise vp in the darke,
and the kingdome of heauen be taken from them which
now haue it,Math. 21. 43. and giuen to a people that shall bring forth
the fruit of it. This I leaue to the iudgement of the god∣ly
wise,Amos 7. 14. being neither Prophet nor sonne of a Prophet,
but considering Gods dealing of olde,2 King. 17. 23. and seeing the
name of Christian to be very great, but the true nature
thereof almost quite lost in all degrees & sects, I cannot
thinke but that there is some iudgement not farre off,
and that God will shortly, euen of stones, rayse vp chil∣dren
vnto Abraham.Math. 3. 5.
And who so rightly considereth, what manner of
entrance, abiding, and proceedings, we haue had a∣mongst
these poore Heathens since we came hither, will
easily thinke, that God hath some great worke to doe
towards them.
They were wont to be the most cruellest and treche∣rousest
people in all these parts, euen like Lyons, but to
vs they haue beene like Lambes, so kinde, so submissiue,
and trustie, as a man may truely say many Christians are
not so kinde, nor sincere.
They are very much wasted of late, by reason of a
great mortalitie that fell amongst them three yeares
since, which together with their owne ciuill dissensions
and blouddie warres, hath so wasted them, as I thinke
the twentith person is scarce left aliue, and those that are
left, haue their courage much abated, and their counte∣nance
is deiected, and they seeme as a people affrighted.
And though when we came first into the countrie, we
were few, and many of vs were sicke, and many dyed
by reason of the colde and wet, it being the depth of

winter, and we hauing no houses, nor shelter, yet when
there was not sixe able persons amongst vs, and that
they came daily to vs by hundreths, with their Sachems,
or Kings, and might in one houre haue made a dispatch
of vs yet such a feare was vpon them, as that they ne∣uer
offred vs the least iniury in word or deede. And by
reason of one Tisquanto, that liues amongst vs, that can
speake English, we haue daily commerce with their
Kings, & can know what is done or intended towards
vs amongst the Savages; Also we can acquaint them
with our courses and purposes, both humane and reli∣gious.
And the greatest Commander of the countrie
call'd Massasoit, commeth often to visite vs, though hee
liue fiftie myles from vs, and often sends vs presents,
he hauing with many other of their gouernours promi∣sed,
yea, subscribed obedience to our Soueraigne Lord
King IAMES, and for his cause to spend both strength
and life. And we for our parts, thorow Gods grace,
haue with that equitie, justice, and compassion, carried
our selues towards them, as that they haue receiued
much fauour, helpe, and ayde from vs, but neuer the
least iniury, or wrong by vs. Wee found the place
where we liue emptie,They offer vs to dwell where we will. the people being all dead & gone
away, and none liuing neere by 8. or 10. myles; and
and though in the time of some hardship wee found
(trauelling abroad) some 8. Bushels of Corne hid vp
in a Caue, and knew no owners of it, yet afterward
hearing of the owners of it, we gaue them (in their e∣stimation)
double the value of it. Our care also hath
beene to maintaine peace amongst them, and haue al∣wayes
set our selues against such of them as vsed any re∣bellion,
or trecherie against their gouernours, and not
onely threatned such, but in some sort payd them their
due deserts; and when any of them are in want, as often
they are in the Winter, when their corne is done, wee
supply them to our power, and haue them in our houses

eating and drinking, and warming themselues, which
thing (though it be something a trouble to vs) ye be∣cause
they should see and take knowledge of our la∣bours,
orders, and diligence, both for this life and a
better, we are content to beare it, and we find in many
of them, especially, of the younger sort, such a tracta∣ble
disposition, both to Religion and humanitie, as that
if we had meanes to apparell them, & wholly to retaine
them with vs (as their desire is) they would doubtlesse
in time proue seruiceable to God and man, and if euer
God send vs meanes we will bring vp hundreths of their
children, both to labour and learning.
But leauing to speake of them till a further occasion
be offered; If any shall maruell at the publishing of this
Treatise in England, seeing there is no want of good
bookes, but rather want of men to vse good bookes,
let them know, that the especiall end is, that wee may 
keepe those motiues in memory for our selues, & those
that shall come after, to be a remedie against selfe-loue
the bane of all societies. And that also we might testi∣fie 
to our Christian Country-men, who iudge diuersly
of vs, that though we be in a Heathen Country, yet the
grace of Christ is not quenched in vs, but we still hold,
and teach the same points of faith, mortification, and
sanctification, which we haue heard and learned in a
most ample and large maner in our owne country. If
any shall thinke it too rude and vnlearned for this curi∣ous
age,1 Cor. 2. 4. let them know, that to paint out the Gospell in
plaine and flat English, amongst a company of plaine
English-men (as we are) is the best and most profita∣blest
teaching; and we will study plainnesse, not curio∣sitie,
neither in things humaine, nor heauenly. If any
error, or vnsoundnesse be in it, (as who knoweth) im∣pute
it to that frayle man which endited it,Chap. 8. 2. which profes∣seth
to know nothing as he ought to know it. I haue
not set downe my name, partly because I seeke no

name, and principally, because I would haue nothing
esteemed by names, for I see a number of euils to arise
thorow names, when the persons are either famous, or
infamous, and God and man is often iniured; if any
good or profit arise to thee in the receiuing of it, giue
God the prayse, and esteeme me as a sonne of Adam,
subiect to all such frailties as other men are.
And you my louing Friends the Aduenturers to this
plantation; as your care hath beene, first to settle reli∣gion
here, before either profit or popularitie, so I pray
you, goe on, to doe it much more, and be carefull to
send godly men, though they want some of that world∣ly
policie which this world hath in her owne generati∣on,Luk. 16. 8.
and so though you loose, the Lord shall gayne. I
reioyce greatly in your free and readie mindes to your
powers, yea, and beyond your powers to further this
worke,Pro. 3. 9. that you thus honour God with your riches,
and I trust you shall be repayed againe double & treble
in this world, yea, and the memory of this action shall
neuer die, but aboue all adding vnto this (as I trust you
doe) like freenesse in all other Gods seruices, both at
home and abroad, you shall finde a reward with GOD,
ten thousand fold surpassing all that you can doe or
thinke, be not therefore discouraged, for no labour is
lost, nor money spent, which is bestowed for God,
your ends were good, your successe is good, and your
profit is comming, euen in this life, and in the life to
come much more; And what shall I say now, a word
to men of vnderstanding sufficeth, pardon I pray you
my boldnesse, reade ouer the ensuing Treatise, and
judge wisely of the poore weakling,Psal. 42. 1. and the Lord, the
God of Sea and Land, stretch out his arme of protecti∣on
ouer you and vs, and ouer all our lawfull and good
enterprises, either this, or any other way.
Plimmoth in New-England.
December 12. 1621.
