


DAEDALVS THAT EX∣cellent Geometrician (right ho∣norable) whanas with the eyes of knowledge, he did beholde that horrible Mōster Ignorāce, he therwith praesently concei∣ued suche intollarable griefe, that he daily sought occasion e∣ther how to banish hir his prae∣sence and companye: or els by what meanes to escape, oute of her lothsome Labyrinthe. At lengthe, perceiuinge she coulde not be banished, he praepared winges (throughe Science aide) and so did flye oute of hir mooste fil∣thy Prison: according to the pleasant Poëte.

Daedalus fabrifactis alis Coelum ipsum adiuit.
He made him winges wher with to flie:
Ascending to the Sterrye Skie.

Yea this Monster haue in all ages bene accompted so deformed and Vile, that those whose companye she frequented, were reputed not in the numbre of reasonable Creatures: but of brute beastes. For what doth man differ from a beast in nature, if he (leauing reasons rule) fo∣lowe his sensuall appetite as they do? Or wherein dothe he so neare approche vnto God in likenesse: as by Science, and Knowledge? for this thing is proper to God only, to know all thinges: and vnto beast to be in all things ignorant, except in such as ther senses and custome teach them. VVhich hathe ingendred such immortall hate towardes this lothsome wight, least man should lose his name and dignity, that he inuented all Artes, sought out all Secretes, and laboured throughe curiouse workes, to bring her into perpetuall exile. But nowe in these daies, lest she should returne againe (admonished by these examples) I though one of leaste strengthe and force, yet not of least good will, haue deuised this mirrour, or Cosmographical Glasse. In which, mē may behold not one or two personages, but the heauens with herpla∣nets and starres, th▪Earthe with her beautifull Regions, and the Seas with her merueilous increse. So that she shal not (if men be diligent) creape into anye of these places, withoute espyeng. Yet considering

with my self, howe that Ignoraunce hath left no small number of her frendes among vs, which seke to deface both science and her seruants, I haue no other refuge to kepe this my Glasse from perishing, then to be an humble suter vnto your honoure (which doth not only fauour Science, but also haue geuen her within your breast a reastinge place) that it may come forth vnder your noble protection: and be defended as Teucer was vnder the shield of mighty Aiax, against two sortes of men especially. Of which, th'one will dispraise and despise such thin∣ges as they neuer red, and are vtterly ignorante in. The other sorte will of mere arrogācy il report al mens trauailes, how exacte and per∣fite so euer they be, they them selues (like Dracns) remaininge with∣oute profite. As for the learned, wise, and modest, I am sure will not rashly geue sentence: but if faultes escape, eyther frendly admonishe: or els with penne spedely amende it▪ vnto whiche sute I am the more bouldened, remembring as well your excellent vertues, and giftes of nature, whiche for feare of suspicion of flatterye I ouerpasse, as to all men euident: as also your Lordshippes incoragement of me to know∣ledge, bothe in wordes and moost liberall rewardes. VVherefore, if it shall please your honore to take this simple worke into your tuiti∣on, and be Patrone vnto it: I shall be bouldened (God grauntinge life) to presente you also wyth other of my laboures, the Titles of whiche foloweth.

1 An Apologie Lib. ij.
2 A new Quadrat, of no man euer published. Lib. ij.
3 The Astronomicall Ring. Lib ij
4 Organographia. Lib. iij
5 Gazophilacion Astronomicum. Lib. xvj
6 Chronographia. Lib. xij
7 Comentaries in Hippocrates de Aëre, Aquis, & Re∣gionibus. Lib. iij

VVith diuers others, whose names I omit for sondry causes. Thus I leaue at this presente, to trouble your honor with my rude Letters, prayeng God to graunt you long life, continuall helth, increase of ho∣nor: and after this life, a place of Ioy, and comfort.

