


RYghte Honorable:
Callinge to remembrance
what streict accoumpt eue∣rie
Man particularlie at
the last generall Audite,
is enioygned to yeeld for time here bestow∣ed,
I haue somewhat in discharge of my duty
that waye, according to the rate and mea∣sure
of my small Talent, traueiled to
bringe to light for the benefite of my Cun∣treymen
this historicall Discourse of Sa∣racens,
Turks and other Reprobates of the
same stampe and Lyuerey, in hope that the
same to your Honour and others of rype
iudgement thyrstinge after such needefull
knowledge, shall bee deemed labour and time
not all together yll spent. Which matter al∣though
it required the cunninge hande of a
skilfuller Woorkeman, for the better polis∣shing
and bringing thereof into good frame

and order, yet the dilygent endeuoure of
suche as doe their vttermoste seemeth (in
the meane whyle) not to bee reiected. For
God bestoweth his Gifts and Benefites di∣uerselye
(some haue more and some lesse)
whiche although by Arythmeticall pro∣portion
they seeme very vnequall, yet beinge
Geometricallye examyned, respected and
waighed, they iumpe in a most euen equalyty.
Herein as in a Myrrour is set down, how,
when & by whom, this pestilent Generation
was first set abroche, what successe in their
Affaires euer synce they haue had, and if
wee wyllnot by others harmes take warning,
what curtesye is to bee looked for at their
hands, whē and wheresoeuer they can espye
any occasiō or oportunitie to put in practise
their bloudy tyranny. They were (in deede)
at the first very far of from our Clyme &
Region, and therefore the lesse to be fea∣red,
but now they are euen at our doores and
ready to come into our Houses, yf our pe∣nitent
heartes doe not the sooner procure at
the mercifull handes of God, an vnytie,

peace and concord among the Princes, Po∣tentates
and People of that litle porcion of
Chrystendome yet left, which through diui∣sion,
discord and ciuile dissention hath from
time to time enticed and brought this Baby∣lonian
Nabugadnezar and turkish Pharao
so neere vnder our noses. The pitifull state
wherof although your L. is not now to learn
yet for others sake, not so rype in Turkishe
garboyles, I know your Honour according
to the wonted generositie of your noble na∣ture
wil at my hands cherefully accept, as an
earnest peny of my loyal heart to your L.
most addicted: whō I besech God with
that moste vertuous and honorable
Ladie your wife to blesse with
all spirituall benedictions,
prosperous health and
daylye increase of
much Honour.
At London the xii. of May. 1575.

