



WHeras among other lear∣ned
and notable▪ Sermons
preached th Lent before the
Queenes most excellent Ma∣iestie,
and by hr grace highly
commended, I vnderstood by
those that were presente, that
hir Highnesse also liked very well, & commnded
most graciously that sermon whiche the learned &
reuerende father in God, the Bishop of Chiche∣ster
preached before hir Maiestie, in so much that
some noble Peeres, and many other desired a co∣pie
of the same. I partly to satisfie their desire▪
partly to signifie some sparke of my good will and
duetie towardes the author and preacher of thy
Sermon, my very good Lord (of whom I haue
receiued benefite) trauelled so frre wyth those
that could pleasure me in this behalfe, that I o
length not onely receyued notes▪ but almost the
whole discourse of that learned sermon, although
not altogither in suche sorte as it was by the re∣uerend
Father preached▪ yet as gh ther vnto as
could be remembred. And for the benefit of other
I haue heere publishe the ame, trusting that
this my labour wyll be no otherwise construed
than thus: tha whereas I my selfe can offer
as of my selfe very little or nothing at all to the
buylding of Gods Temple, I thoughte good to
bring therevnto a goodly and beautifull pyller
made by a cunning and noble workeman, which
I truste for the excellencie thereof will be of a

greate manye with plausible allowance ioyfully
receyued, to whome for the greater encreasing
of their ioy, I will say that which Aeschines sayd
vnto the men of Rhodes, who wondered marue∣lously
at the oration of that famous Orator De∣mosthenes,
beeing but sayde and recited by him
vnto them: Quid inquit Aeschines i ipsum au∣dissetis
sua verba resonantem? sentiens in De∣mosthene
magnum Demosthenis partem deesse, i
quae ipse dixit ab alio recitarentur: Doe ye mar∣uell,
sayde Aeschines, at this my rehearsall of
Demosthenes oration? what if you had hearde
him selfe sounding and pronouncing hys own
words? Meaning therby, that in Demosthenes
great part of Demosthenes was wanting, when
that those things which he spake were recited of
an other. I doubt not, but vnto all, this my little
trauell wil be acceptable: to them that were pre∣sent,
bicause they shall agayne be put in mynde of
that whiche they before heard, and so maye more
deepely consider the same: to those that were ab∣sent,
for that they shall heare that whiche before
they heard not, & so be made better learned vnto
saluation. And thus desiring thee good Reader▪
to be thankfull vnto God for this and other
good fruites of the laborers in his vine∣yardes,
I bid thee farewell, from
Westminster the .vj. of April.
1574.
