


THat saying of Tulli, if any other, (right worshipfull M. Bacon) is very notable and true,Tull. Offic. lib. 1. that nothing is more beautifull, faire, and amiable then vertue. The which, as in many others, so in you especially hath place and experiment. For whome doth not your religiousnes to God-ward, cause chiefely for to loue you? whom doth not your great towardnes of wit, whom doth not your courteousnes, the which receiuing from the right Honourable, and of most blessed memorie Syr Nicholas Bacon your father, sometimes the most wise Chauncelar of England, you especially haue increased, as a most excellent and singular part of inheritance of your fathers ver∣tues: whom doth not that your desire to learne the best things, to see the more famous countries, to please all good men, whom, I say, doe not these your vertues allure vnto you, and draw him in a manner whether he will or no? He must doubtlesse, be made of yron, and a blocke, and as hard as the Marpesian rocke, which is not delited, nor mooued with these so many your sweete odours, who doth not for the same vnfeined∣ly wish well vnto you, and which doth not fauour you with all his heart? For mo truly saith Origen, Like as vice euery where is of a most filthy smell: so the sauour of vertue is in all places most pleasant.Origen. For it smelleth like pretious oyntments, the which with a certaine mar∣uailous loue thereof draw all men vnto them Verily albeit that alwaies heretofore I haue made very great account of the name of the English Bacons, because of the singular praises of your whole house, and also haue hereof giuen publike testimonie in that booke, the which I dedica∣ted vnto your most worshipful brother M. Edward Bacon, the which is named Paratitla in Augustinum: yet after I had seene you,Paratitla in Augustinum. a branch and noble ympe of the same tree, together with your brother Edward, and had some tast and experience of you, there was added so great an augmentntion of my loue vnto your whole house, and so great was the increase of the reuerence and seruiceablenes the which I carie towards you all, that I my selfe did wonder at so great an addition, & think that
now there can be added no more thereunto. Therefore to the ende there might no lesse testimonie be extant of my good will towardes you, then your brother Edward, behold right worshipfull Syr, and in all respects most noble, I present vnto you a small gift, namely my Commentaries vpon the twelue small Prophets, as they call them, the which I was de∣sirous to publish and dedicate vnto your Name. For they containe such doctrine,The doctrine of the small Prophets ne∣cessarie for the Church of God at all times. the which as it hath bin alwaies necessarie for the Church of God, so is it especially at this time. For that age of the Church was most miserable and full of troubles, whereof in these small Prophets there is made mention: the enemies then more dangerous and noysome, then at any time else: the kings both of the Israelites, and also of the Iewes, were for the most part persecutors of the truth of God and do∣ctrine of the Prophets, or els mockers of the same: there was left in a manner no outward helpe and aide for the godly at the hands of men: nay of the Israelites themselues, and especially of the Iewes (who alone remained of those twelue tribes and seede of Israel, a people embracing the true knowledge of God) yet I say, of the Iewes themselues many did withstand the true religion, and preferred earthly goods before hea∣uenly: and had their eyes dazeled with the brightnes of the infidelian Monarchies, such as nowe is that of the Turks, and was then of the Assyrians and Babylonians: or beeing caried away with the sweetnes of this earthly peace, chose rather to serue the infidell Princes, then to follow the seruice of God. To conclude, in the ende it came to passe, that as the dogge can not be driuen from his fattie leather, no more would these Iewes afterward be drawne from their blasphemous and idola∣tricall, but yet for the time quiet and vnto them commodious cuntry of Babylon, albeit they were captiues there, nor could be drawne vnto that same promised land, the which was vnto them a token of the hea∣uenly inheritance. All which things, when haue they at any time hap∣pened more truly then at this time,The smal Pro∣phets do shew the iudge∣ments of God vpon the wic∣ked, and bles∣sings vpon the godly. vnto the true Church of God? And out of these bookes also may we notably learne, what iudgements of God did afterwards ensue, either vpon the enemies of the Church, or vpon the backe-sliders and forsakers of the worship of God, as well Israelites as Iewes, people, as Kings: and on the otherside, what blessings of God haue bin shewed towards such men as hath bin in deede godly, and fea∣ring God, which made lesse account of all that they had, and of them∣selues also, then of the glorie of God. What then can be more profitable then this doctrine for euery Christian, or more fit for this time? For albeit your countrey of England of all places of the world in a manner alone these many yeares,England. both through the singular goodnes of almigh∣tie

God, and also through the most wise counsails of Queene Elizabeth, haue remained quiet, and be to be tearmed truly happie: yet hath not it bin without her trubles also, or is without for the name of Christ. And looke what calamities you doe behold in your neighbour-brethren, the same also (of your loue towards your brethren) according vnto the pre∣cept of the Apostle, you doe esteeme and reckon as your owne. But to returne againe vnto our matter in hand, Ierome hath a very notable saying, That we Christians are borne for this end, that we should be made eternall, and therefore that despising the deceitfull promi∣ses of this world, and all the subtile baytes of the Deuill and the flesh, we should wholly consecrate and vow our selues vnto the true immor∣tall, and onely wise, blessed, rich, and almightie God, and his worshippe and will, which thing is especially taught in these books. Iudging ther∣fore this doctrine and these examples to concerne you chiefely, by rea∣son of the hope of the great good seruice to be done in the Common∣wealth, whereunto both God himselfe, by bestowing of innumerable gifts vpon you, doth seeme to cal you, and the which the dignitie of your house doth promise vnto you, I haue the more willingly dedicated these my Commentaries vnto you. For these shall instruct you both vnto true godlines, and also the gouernment of the Cōmonwealth, & shall frame & work you vnto al increase of vertue, the which at al times you are to labour for. And to be short, these shall draw you from euill counsails and examples vnto those that be good and godly. For you knowe that which Plato writeth, lib. 3. de Republ. That young men of good to∣wardnes and nature, are easily corrupted by euill men,Plato. and euill coun∣sails, when as they measuring others by their own disposition, doe thinke no harme or deceit to be in the counsails of others. And truly the more easily that you great and noble men doe liue, the more meete it is, that you should knowe the thinges that are godly and holy. Nowe that your house, that is, the house of the Bacons is most noble,The house of the Bacons. appeareth both by the English and French histories, in the which there is often made honourable mention of the same: and also by this, that euen yet nowe at this day there is remaining a most wealthie village in Normandie, as bigge as a great towne, called Baconvil, in French Bacceville, si∣tuated neere vnto Diepe a sea towne in France,Baconvil. the which keepeth still the memorie of your name together with the remnants of a most strong castle, and the which both the Frenchmen themselues, and all the in∣habitants, and the thing it selfe doth witnes and declare to be a mo∣nument of your most noble and honorable familie. As for this my poore and simple gift (right worshipfull) I doe most earnestly request, pray, and
beseech you with as willing and glad a minde to accept it, as with a lo∣uing and vnfained heart I doe giue it. And because that you doe loue me, as I haue alwaies vnderstoode by your selfe, see that you in like manner loue the holy doctrine herein conteined, both for it owne, and for my sake also. Fare you well. At Orthesium which is a towne in the cuntry of Bearne, vnder the mountains called Pyrenaei, neere vnto Spaine, where is an Vniersitie erected by the most courteous King of Navarre Henry the second. Calend of May, in the yeare of the last time 1585.

