



TO THE RIGHT VIRTVOVS
and venerable Sisters, both in
Bloud and Religion, Sister Mar∣garet,
and Sister Elizabeth Rad∣cliffe,
professed of the second or∣der
of S. Francis, called the poore
Dames of S. Clare; the peace of
our Lord Iesus Christ &c.
RIght virtuous and venerable Si∣sters;
Sisters, I say, first in our
Lord and Sauiour Christ, be∣cause
both beleeuinge and embra∣cinge,
one and the same most ancient, holy
and Christian faith. Sisters in Blood, be∣cause
both descended of one and the same Fa∣ther

and Mother. Sisters also in Religion,
because both professinge vnder one and the
same Father S. Francis, and Mother S. Clare
(full fifteene yeares) the second Rule or Order
of that Seraphicall Saint.
For as much as in virtu of the Obedience
giuen me my by Superiours, your selues, with
all that are vnder you, are committed to my
charge, I finde my selfe bound to promote you
in the way of Pietie, all that possibly lyeth
in my power. Wherein, the better to dis∣charge
my dutie, I haue thought good to
present you with the life of a Saint of our
owne Order, who liued and dyed in the pro∣fession
of the third Rule of holy S▪ Francis.
For this Seraphicall Father, as all doe know,
instituted his Order so, as he might drawe all
people to God, by three Rules. The first wher∣of
is, the Apostolicall Rule of the Friar Mi∣nors,
which I (although far vnworthy) doe
professe. The second, the Rule of S. Clare,
which vvith great perfection your selues doe
practise. The third, the Rule of Penance,
in which this blessed Saint liued and dyed.

The first, for Religious men. The second, for
Religious virgins. The third, for all virtuous
people of ether sex: in vvhich this holy Virgin
profited so vvell, that although she were of
the lovvest ranck for the number of Rules, yet
vvas she not the lowest in holie obseruance, but
singular for sanctitie here in earth, as she is
now for glorie aboue in heauen.
This premised, the Dedication of this booke
seemeth in particular to be due to you, by rea∣son
of a certaine Simpathie betwixt you and
this B▪ Saint. Who as she vvas extraordina∣rily
obtayned of God, by the intercession of his
B. Mother, for the reparation of a Religious
house of the third order, vvhich thorough the
indeuotion, of the Religious, vvas quite fal∣len
to decay: so are you the very first, vvho are
elected for Superiors of an English Monasterie
of the third order, nevvly errected in a forraine
contrie, vvith hope hereafter to transplant the
same in to your ovvne, where Religious disci∣pline
is so decayed.
For this effect, you (Renovvned Sisters)
being by Obedience, first called from your for∣mer

Celles of quiet repose, and seuered by the
holy Ghost vnto the worke wherto he had cho∣sen
you, were next by lot and common suffrage
of your whole communitie, elected to vndergoe
so great labours, as must needes be granted to
be in so great an enterprise. For those whom you
were to gouerne, not being in all particulars of
your ovvne obseruance, nor of so straite and
strict a Rule, hence it followeth, that clothing
others vvith linnen, your selues goe vvolle∣vvard:
lodging others on beds of vvolle, your
selues doe lie vpon the stravv: prouiding others
hose and shoes, your selues goe barefoote: fi∣nally,
sitting at the selfe same Table, and fee∣ding
all your Religious vvith flesh, your dain∣tiest
dishe is but only fishe▪ What Monke or
Heremit, vvas euer yet (by his profession of
fasting) obliged to the like Austeitie?
To conclude therefore (Right venerable Si∣sters)
besides the particular obligation, loue,
and zeale vvhich I beare to your soules, your
rare virtu, worthely dravveth this litle booke
to your defence. Wherin if this my Epistle De∣dicatorie,
may seeme to affect too much plain∣nesse,

I freely confesse, to affect plaine dealing,
open sinceritie and simplicitie. If any shall cen∣sure
the Translation, as sauouring of too rude a
language, in this I humbly pray you, both to
pardon me your selues, and to excuse me also vn∣to
others, vvho so vvell knovv me to be so far
alienated from all sort of affectation, and from
seeking to please the itching vaine of any, with
vvorldly eloquence, vvhich I vvillingly pro∣fesse
to vvant; my principall care hauing beene
employed, faithfully to translate the booke in a
plaine and homely language, the talent vvhich
(most aggreeable to my nature) God hath giuen
me. Far yee vvell, my very deare and beloued
Sisters, and forget not him in your holy pray∣ers,
vvho euer remayneth your faithfull ser∣uant
and poore brother,

