



THE Iniquitie of these times considered,Act. 25. &c. I thinke it happy (right honorable vpright and worthy Iudge) that there is such an one as your Hois, to whō an∣swer may be made of all ye things whereof M. Dorr. is accused by the Prelates: chiefly because you haue the knowledge of all Customes and Lawes which are in this Nation. Wherefore I beseech you to heare me pauently. The cause which I am to recommend to your Lo. favourable and iust consideration is of great importance, and yet will not bee suffered to receaue iust defence from him whom it most con∣cerneth. Wherfore as I am to open my mouth for the dumme in the cause of a childe of destruction, so,Prov. 31. let your iudgement be as a Robe and a Crowne that the blessing of him that is ready to perish may come vpon you.Iob. 29. 14. Pro. 26. And let it not be ob∣iected against me, That hee which medleth with the strife that belongeth not vnto him, is as one that taketh a dogg by the eares. For the maintenance of this cause tendeth aswell to the Glorie of Christ, as to the credit of M Dorrell:Mat. 11. & there∣fore wisdome is to be iustified of all her Children. Indeede I graunt there be many no lesse willing and more able (for wis∣dome and learning) to manage this matter then I am. But I knowe none that hath vsed moe meanes to be truly and tho∣roughly informed in this cause (whereof at the first I was in∣deed very doubtfull) the I haue don: and therefore I think my selfe bound in conscience, being perswaded my selfe to perswade others,Luc. 22. and to iustifie wisdome (as I may) in this case. Which I cannot do more conveniently then by presen∣ting to your L. patient and iudiciall reading these Collection

which I haue withall sincerity (God is my witnes) gathered togeather out of printed bookes, written reportes of sundry faithfull & discret brethren present at the pleading on Whit∣soneue, & out of certaine Apologeticall answers of M. Dorr himselfe and other.. 2.10. I beseech your Lo. as you haue receaued the loue of the truth to reade them ouer. They be but short, and therefore quickly reade: and they bee so pithy that they will informe your Lo. more soundly then all the hearing you haue had. Which hearing notwithstanding, there be many weighty reasons that should moue your Lo to enter into a better consideration of a cause so generally hearkened after, and concerning as highly the glory of Christe our Saviour as it doth merely the credit of a faithfull Minister.
 For it cannot be but conveivent, that your Lo (beeing a Counsailer & imployed in hearing of this cause) should faith fully report the truth thereof to her Maiestie, to whose Royall doome, as to a soueraigne salue, M. Dorrell committeth the wounded creditt of his holy Ministery. That her Maiesties most excellent spirit may reioyce in the Lorde who addeth to so longe and happy Government such a notable signe of his heavenly favour,at. 12.28 as either the glorious manifestation of his mighty power ouer the enemie of mankind in this part of his Church wherevnto hee hath vouchsafed to make her grace a Nursing Mother, or such Prelats as (herein) are not like them of ye Romish Synagogue who by false miracles draw foolish people to their vaine superstitiō.ct. 25.26. In perfourming which duty, your Lo. cannot take a better course then that which Festus tooke who examined Paule the second time, that hee might write a certaine truth to Caesar to whom Paul had appealed. Where it may please your Lo. to obserue, that Festus did not heare againe the plaintifes, but only Paul the defendāt whom he had heard before at large.. ver: 15  16. For when the Highe Priests & Elders of the Iewes desired iudgement vpon their only infor∣mation, Festus aunswered, That it is not the manner of the Romains (for favour) to punish any, before that he, which is accused, haue the accusers before him, and haue place to de∣fend himselfe concerning the crime. But in this case may it please your Lo. likewise to consider. That the Prelats (whom you haue heard againe and againe) do presse iudgment vpon their heaped informacions, and yet concerning them, M. Dorr. hath not had convenient place to defend himself. And therefore there is great reason, that before you certifie her Maiestie: your Lo. should satisfie your owne conscience by reading these his collected defences: wherby the principall allegations (if not all of any force) vrged on Whitsoneue, are seuerally and (I am perswaded) fully and truly answered.
To come somewhat neerer your selfe I pray you (good my Lord) remember your diligence in hearing,Iob. 29. and sincerity in determining causes in other Courtes (namely in the Starr-chamber) where the ears of many heare you iudge vprightly and freely without respect of persons (yea honorable persons dissenting from you) and they blesse you, and so remembring your selfe, examine your own hart why you should not mani∣fest the like diligence & sincerity in this cause. What? Is it in respect of the Lordly Bishops? O! Be it far from you that you should be like such of whom it is said:Iohn. 12.4 Neuerthelesse euen a∣mong the chiefe Rulers many beleeued in him but because of the Pharises they did not confesse him. Nay rather this is concei∣ved of your Ho that howsoever Pashur the Priest (appointed Governour in the house of the Lorde) did smite Ieremy,Ier. 30.1,  & 26, 8, 10, 16. put him in the Stockes, and (with other Priestes) would hastily bring his innocent bloud vpon themselues, yet your Lo. will with the Princes of Iudah, consider better of Ieremyes cause. If then not respect of persons, is it for that this cause is pro∣ceded in ex officio, and not udicially as a cause betwene party and party? Indeed it is to officiously proceeded in, but the truth is, The cause is betweene party and party: I say not be∣twene a faithfull servant of Iesus and a periured Boy, but be∣twene Michaell and the old Serpent, Christ Iesus and the en∣vious man. For Iesus pleadeth (by M. Dorrell) that his great name, which ought to bee glorious among all Christians is highly dishonored, by calling into question his mighty power in casting out Divells at the prayer and fasting of his holy people. On the contrary parte Satan, who long since moved the Pharisees (even against their own consciences) to charge Christ with casting out of Diuells by the power of Belzebub, doth eftsoons (by his instruments) traduce such dispossession pretending it to bee but very counterfaiting. If then a loyall Iudge will diligently heare whatsoeuer can be said in behalfe of her Maiestie in a cause wherein she is pretended to be a party, much more religiously will your Lo. (being a Christian Iudge) heare whatsoeuer can bee said in the behalfe of Iesus, in a cause wherin he is pretended to be a party. And whether the name of Iesus be more glorified (indeede) by vndoubted dispossession, or pretended counterfaiting, your faithfull hart cā quickly iudge. If by vndoubted dispossession, then as good policy as that, whereby M. Moore is not called into any que∣stion about the dispossession of 7. in Lancashire, might direct Christian Magistrates to bend their authority rather to mani∣fest the Glory of Christe, then (altogeather) to obscure the same by pretended counterfaiting.
What soever other do, heare you (8 worthy Iudge) what

the Spirite speaketh evidently and plentifully (concerning this very ving that sposses▪ (in these es) is no acle. . 23. . 24. cause) from the 22. vers. to the 38. of the 12. chap. of Mathew where you may first generally obserue; that Sa∣tan neuer set himself so earnestly against any miracle wrought by Iesus as against this of dispossession. For perceiving the people hereby occasioned to take Iesus for the Sonne of Da∣vid, he moved the Pharisees to traduce the same as before is said▪ and contrariwise Iesus conceiving how highly this mi∣racle concerned the glorie of his Name, did never take his owne part more earnestly then in iustifying the same. From whence wee may learne▪ that Christ his people should shew forth the vertue of him, by whose name they are called Chri∣stians in mainteyning his cause so much the more resolusly, as Satan by his instruments shall oppose himselfe malitiously. But so it is in this cause: For Satan perceiving thousands of the best professors (among whom not a few be honorable, wor∣shipfull, & learned) occasioned by the dispossession of Som∣mers and 9. other to glorifie the name of Iesus, yea so, that Nottingham (heretofore not so forward) became (for a time) very zealous (as I heare) in hearing the worde: Satan (I say) perceiving such a consequent of dispossession, moved sundry adversaries to traduce the same as Papists who deny any such power to be in our Churrh, Atheists who scorne whatsoever tendeth to prove that there is a God or a Divel, But especially certeine Prelates, who (being grosser in their conceipt then the Pharisees) by discrediting 12. sufficient Commissioners, 6. worshipfull Gentlemen, and 6. learned Preachers, by sup∣pressing 17. sufficient depositions, by withhoulding M. Dorr. from answering at large for himselfe, make it (forsooth) a matter of counterfaiting. And yet I must needes say that the L. B. of London (as I haue heard) was fumbling about some proofe▪ That M Dorrell did cast out Divells by witchraft or coniuration But (belike) he remembreth, that so he might overthrow his first pretended counterfaiting. These thinges well weighed, it followeth that all Christians ought to take this cause to heart: and to further the manifestation of truth, no lesse zealously thē the Prelats would obscure it indirectly. If all Christians, then especially it behoveth your L. so to do, having authority even in that case. But the rather because all the godly (whose desire to bee satisfied is not to be despised) attribute most to your L. faithfulnes, yea the Prelates seeme to lay the burthen on your H. For Mistris Dorrell and Mi∣str Moore suing to the L. Bishop of Cant. that their hus∣bandes might haue (at least) the liberty of prison, were referred to your Lo. as to him, that gaue the sentence of close

imprisonment, till further punishment were decreed: and it is likely if further punishment be determined, your Lo. shal∣be put to pronounce the same.
Secondly in Christ his apologeticall discourse your Lo. may consider sundry forcible reasons to perswade due regard of the Lordes worke so wonderfull in our eyes, if we will not cast a vaile before them. Which be these: First Christ iu∣stifieth dispossession with vnaunswerable argumentes in the Mat. 1 25.26.27. verses, and then hee reproveth the traducing thereof. Concerning the former I refer your Lo. to these Collections. The reproofe Christ prosecuteth by noting the offendours, and by censuring the sinne. Hee noteth (as with a blacke cole) the offendours, in the 33.34 35. verses, where he thus argneth, An evill tree cannot bringe foorth good fruite. Therefore no merveill though envious Pharisees traduce the Spirit or Finger of God. To apply: Lordly Bishopes in the iudgment of most, if not of all learned Preachers of the Gos∣pell in England, France, Scotlande▪ and the low Countryes (except Soul-killing non-residents, and ambitious aspirers to to the Prelacy) are plants which (in respect of their ecclesi∣asticall dignitie) the heavenly Father hath not planted in his Church by the hande of his Sonne:Mat. 28.18 19. Eph. 4.8.1 12.13. 1. Cor. 12. who onely (having all power committed to him) appointeth what callinges ecclesi∣asticall hee thinketh best for the building of his Church. If this iudgement be found, then better proceedings then these against M Dorrell cannot be ordinarily expected from them, especially against such as desire the Church to bee reformed of the Romish Hierarchy and Ceremonies enforced. As for your Lo. better fruits are expected from the same, as from a tree planted in the Courts of the Lord, and that by his owne right hand.
The sinne is censured by discouering either the corruption, or  danger thereof. The former is performed by proving wherein, and shewing against whom the offence is committed. Christ proveth wherein, after this manner in the 28. and 29. verses. Only the Kingdome (that is the souveraigne power) of God can cast the strong & envious man out of his possessō: there∣fore in traducing dispossession, ye traduce ye kingdom of God. This argument applyeth it self. I therfore only admonish you to think of it seriously: & the rather, Because Atheists abound in these dayes and witchcraft is called into question. Which error is confirmed by denying dispossession▪ & both these er∣rors confirm Atheists mightily▪ For thus wil they gather if 11. possessed (at sundry times & in sundry places) were all coun∣terfeits, why should we thinke there is any possesson at all?

If neither possession, nor witchcraft, (contrary to that hath bene so longe generally & confidently affirmed) why should we thinke that there are Divells? If no Divells, no God.
 Christ sheweth against whom the sinne is committed name∣ly against himselfe and the holy Ghost. Against himselfe in respect of the matter to wit the very slandering of dispossessi∣on, arguing to this purpose in the 30. vers. My Royall autho∣ritie is so great, that whosoever is not with me is against mee: much more ye, who traduce so glorious an effect of my King∣ly power. This argument ought to moue all faithfull Christi∣ans to take part with Christ, whosoeuer bee on the contrary: much more your Lo carefully to enforme your selfe in this case,. .13.13 least (vnawares) you confederat with them, with whom you should not consent. For answerably to this reason of Christ) it is elswhere written: Whosoeuer wilbe a frende of the world,. 4.4. maketh himselfe the enemy of God. A notable example whereof we haue in Pilat, who beeing loth to displease the high Priest, became guilty of innocēt bloud for all the wash∣ing of his handes.
 Christ proceedeth in the 31. verse to shew this sin to be not only an offence against himself (who then appeared to ye Pha∣risees in the shape of a servant) but in respect of the maner or minde wherewith they did traduce this miracle to bee also Blasphemy against the holy Ghost. As if he should thus speak vnto the Pharisees,. 4.25.26 or. 10.5  4.21.25 br. 9.10 I know your thoughts and immaginations exalted against the acknowledging of me to bee Christ, and hatefull against reformation which cannot bee avoyded. In envy whereof ye malitiously (even against your owne consci∣ences) traduce the Spirit, the Finger or power of God so evi∣dent in this miracle, & therefore ye blaspheme the holy Ghost. That the Prelates (which nowe sett them selues against dis∣possession) be guilty of this vnpardonnable sinne, I will not say. But (without doubt) their hatred of reformation carieth them (as I am perswaded) somtimes to far, and their crooked courses about Sommers, with their deepe silence touching the  dispossessed in Lancashier occasioneth me verily to thinke yt in their hearts they acknowledge vndoubted dispossession. As for your Lo I beseech the same (as you tender the com∣fort of your own soul) to pray with David saying, O cleanse me from my secret faults,. 19.12.13 and keepe me from the presumptuous sin of wilfull reiecting (as libels) the informations of truth touch∣ing the royall power of Christ in casting out Divells, so shall I be free from this great offence.
Lastly Christ discouereth the danger of this sinne, For in the 3.36.37. verses he concludeth to this effect, Men are either iustified or ondemnedy their wordes, therefore accompt is to

be given at the last day of every idle worde, much more of the vnpardonnable sinne of blasphemy against the holy Ghost. Which argument may move your H to say (that which God hearkneth for) what have I done,Ier. 8.6 in countenancing such pro∣ceedings against M. Dorrell; and what haue I done in taking occasion to condemne him, because hee said Sommers is now possessed. Wherin if he be deceaved, It is but an error in opi∣nion, impling rather his simplicity then otherwise, and yet he pretendeth some ground, to witt proofe of repossession, and pleadeth that if Sommers can do his Feares (so called and as is pretended) so strangely as is deposed, he must needs be repos∣sessed: If not, then obiected coūterfeiting is but deluding Gods people, abusing authority, & eclipsing Christ his glory which should rather be cleared. If that your heart smite you,Dan. 4. let (O Christian Iudge) my counsell be acceptable to you, Breake of this sinne and heale this error by taking that course which (out of the premisses briefly collected) I thus conclude.
If 1. (as Festus, so) your Lo. should throughly informe your selfe more Certeinly to certifie our Caesar to whom M. Dorrell appealeth. 2. If your Lo. ought to be nolesse diligent and sin∣cere in this case of dispossession wherein Christ is a party, then in a cause wherein her Maiestie is a party. 3 If all Christians (specially your Lo.) should endeavor the manifestatiō of vn∣doubted dispossession no lesse zealously then many would ob∣scure it indirectly. 4 If it be the fruite of a good tree, planted in the Court of the Lorde to advance the glory of Christ in this Cause. 5. If traducing dispossession be an impeachement to the Kingdom of God, and confirmation of Papistes and A∣theistes. 6. If he that is not with Christ by iustifying dispos∣session is pronounced to be openly against Christ. 7. If mali∣tious traducing of dispossessiō be blasphemy against the holy Ghost, and we are to feare all steps leading in the same And 8. If every idle word spoken to the preiudice of dispossession shall be punished at the day of iudgment. Then I require you in the name of Iesus (our Kinge and Saviour) patiently and iudicially to reade these Collections, and (abhorring his example,act. 24.2 who to get favor of the Iewes left Paule bound) to be an honorable meane that M. Dorrell may haue time and place convenient, to proue and pleade for himselfe, and then if he cannot iustifie his cause, let him bee made a publike ex∣ample of severity against such vngodly counterfeiting. But if he can manifest vndoubted dispossession, let the name of Iesus be magnified in his Church to the conversion or con∣fusion of Papistes and Atheistes.
