



Worthy President, Captaines, and Gentlemen,
THe same Persons, and the same Argument, that indu∣ced me to preach this Sermon in your eares, haue preuai∣led with me to present it, in this manner to your eyes; not to submit it to your iudgements,. Iames 3.1. cap. 4.11. as our masterly-cen∣sorious hearers expect, who make them∣selues
 Iudges of that, which should teach them to iudge themselues, and shall one day iudge them:1. Cor. 11.31. Rom. 2.16. Heb. 4.12. Iude 11. Psal. 91.4. 2. Thes. 2 10. nor to craue your pa∣tronage or protection of it: for it is the Word of God, mighty in operation, and sharper then a two edged sword, to cut off all that gainsay it, and so, able to defend it selfe; yea, it is the truth of God, a shield and Buckler to those that receiue the loue of it, and so, able to de∣fend them. For my selfe; who am I, that I should hope to be exempted from the common condition of Preachers and Writers,Ier. 18.18. that is, to bee smitten with the tongues of those, who ac∣count nothing worthy acceptance, but the fruite of their owne braine? There are principally, three sorts of men,Luke 22.50. that (like Malchus, hauing his right eare cut off) heare all things sinisterly. First, Ambitious persons. Se∣condly,3. sorts of persons iniu∣rious in their censur s of Preache s & Sermons. Malicious persons. Thirdly, Vi∣cious persons: if this Sermon come into any of these persons hands, I must
 expect, that (as men looking vpon any thing through a coloured glasse, iudge that thing to be of the same colour with the glasse, through which they looke so) their opinions of the Preacher, and of the Sermon, will be conformed to the in∣ward distemper of their owne hearts. First,Maleuoli, velut Momi aruedut nos magis ani∣mi morbo, quā iudicio. Me∣lanth. Gul. Epis. Hausmano. 4to. 1. Ambitious persons. Nihil est quod Ecclesiam ita diuellere qucat at{que} ambitio dominandi. Chryst. Hom 11. in cap. 4. ad Eph. 3. Ioh. 9. Iames 4.6. the Ambitious person seekes to raise himselfe in the fall, and to ho∣nour himselfe in the disgrace of those who seeme to outshine him in true worth. Thus Corah, out of a desire of esteeme, resisted Moses; Diotrephes, out of a Loue of Preeminence, withstood Iohn the Diuine; and those false Apo∣stles, that they might exault themselues, vilified, and traduced Saint Paul. Those wee haue more cause to pitty (because God resisteth them) and to pray for them, that God would make them more humble, and lowly-minded, then to bee disquieted at their insolencies, which is a sure signe of their folly, and
 emptinesse. For wee see, the boughs, the more laden with fruite, they are the more lowly, but in a fanne, we see, the chaffe is aboue the Corne, not be∣cause its better, but because its lighter. Secondly,2. Malicious persons. the Malicious person, out of an inward hatred against the person of another, misiudgeth all his actions and intentions. This you may see in the carriage of the Priests and Prophets against Ieremy,Ier 26.11. Amos 7.10. of Amaziah against Amos, and of those cruell, and scorne∣full men, concerning whom the Pro∣phet Isay speaketh, that would make a man an offendour for a word.Isa. 29.21. For these my prayer is, that the Lord would destroy the workes of Satan, that enui∣ous man in their hearts, and fill them with the fruites of the spirit, especially, loue,Gal. 5.22. 3. Vicious persons. Isa. 5.29. peace, gentlenesse, goodnesse, faith. Thirdly, Vicious persons, speake good of euill, and euill of good, these put darkenesse for light, and light for
 darkenesse, these put bitter for sweet, and sweet for sowre. Dauid out of much experience of such, sayth, They are licentious, and speake wickedly: they talke presumptuously: they set their mouth against Heauen,Psal. 73.8, 9. Male de me lo∣qūtur, sed ma∣li. Mouerer, si de me M. Cato. Si Lelius sapiēs, si duo Sciiones ista loqueren∣tur, nunc malis displicere, lau∣dari est. Soen. de rem. fort. and their tongue walketh thorow the earth. To be dispraysed of such, is a prayse; as when an Enemy reuiles a Generall, or Captaine, or common Souldier for his faithfulnes to his King, and Coun∣try: But J must not make a Booke of an Epistle.
To you (right worthy Cittizens) with all due respect, I dedicate these Meditations, such as they are, as belonging to you by right. For your sakes they were preached; at your request, they are now published. If heerein you shall finde any moiues to encourage you, any rules to direct you in this laudable Exercise, let God haue the Glory, and J am
 abundantly satisfied, whom nothing could haue drawne to this taske, but my vnfeigned loue to your persons, and my hearty desire of your incouragement in so worthy designes.

