



TO giue a reason of my worke, is in my part as well as to do it. And therefore my Noble Lord, why I vndertooke to write this History of Eng∣land, I alledge, that hauing spent much time of my best vnderstanding, in this part of humane Learning, Historie, both in forraine countries where especi∣ally I tooke those notions, as made most for the con∣duct of businesse in this kind, and also at home, where it hath bene in my fortune (besides confe∣rence with men of good experience) to haue seene many of the best discourses, negotiations, instru∣ctions and relations of the generall affaires of the

World: I resolued to make triall of my forces in the contexture of our owne Historie, which for that it lay dispersed in consused peeces, hath bene much desired of many. And held to be some ble∣mish to the honour of our Country to come behinde other Nations in this kind, when neither in magnificence of State, glory of action, or abilities of nature, we are any way inferior to them. Nor is there any Nation, whose Ancestors haue done more worthy things, both at home and abroad; especial∣ly for matter of war. For since the Romans, no one people hath fought so many battailes prosperously. And therfore out of the tender remorse, to see these men much defrauded of their glory so deerely bought, and their affaires confusedly deliuered, I was drawne (though the least able for such a worke) to make this aduenture which howsoeuer it proue, will yet shew the willingnesse I haue to do my Countrey the best seruice I could; and perhaps, by my example induce others of better abilities, to vndergoe the same. In the meane time, to draw out a small substance of so huge a masse, as might haue something of the vertue of the whole, could not be, but an extraction worthy the paines, seeing it concernes them most to know the generall affaires of England, who haue least leasure to read them.
And the better to fit their vse, I haue made choyce to deliuer onely those affaires of action, that most concerne the gouernment: diuiding my worke

into three Sections, according to the Periods of those Ages that brought forth the most re∣markable Changes: And euery Section into three Bookes. Whereof the first, briefly relates the va∣rious mutations of State, plantation, and sup∣plantation of the inhabitants in the chiefest part of this Isle, before the comming of the Norman. The second booke containes the life and Raigne of William the first. The third, the succession of William the second, Henry the first, and Ste∣phan. And this part, I haue here done.
The second Section begins with Henry the se∣cond, the first of the royall family of Plantagenet, containes the liues of foureteene Princes of that Line, and takes vp 339 yeares. A space of time that yeelds vs a view of a wider extent of Domi∣nion, by the accession of a third part of France to the Crowne of England: more matter of action, with a greater magnificence, and glory of State then euer: in ermixt with strange varieties and turnes of Fortune: the inflammation of three ci∣uill warres, besides popular insurrections: the de∣posing of foure kings, and fiue vsurpations which, in the end, so rent the State, as all the glory of forraine greatnesse, which that line brought, expired with it selfe.
The third Section containes the succession of fiue Soueraigne Princes of the Line of Tewdor, and the space of 129 yeares. A time not of that virilitie as the former, but more subtile, and let

out into wider notions, and bolder discoueries of what lay hidden before. A time wherein began a greater improuement of the Soueraigntie, and more came to be effected by wit then the sword: Equall and iust incounters, of State, and State in forces, and of Prince, and Prince in sufficiencie. The opening of a new world, which strangely al∣tered the manner of this, inhancing both the rate of all things, by the induction of infinite Trea∣sure, & opened a wider way to corruption, whereby Princes got much without their swords: Protecti∣ons, & Confederations to counterpoyse, & preuent ouer-growing powers, came to bee maintained with larger pensions. Leidger Ambassadors first imployed abroad for intelligences. Common Banks erected, to returne and surnish moneys for these businesses. Besides strange alterations in the State Ecclesiasticall: Religion brought forth to bee an Actor in the greatest Designes of Ambition and Faction. To conclude, a time sto∣red with all varietie of accidents fit for exam∣ple, and instructi-on. This is the scope of my designe.-
And this I addresse to you, my Noble Lord, not onely as a testimonie of my gratitude for the hono∣rable regard you haue taken of mee: but also in respect you being now a publick person, and there∣by ingaged in the State of England, as well as incorporated into the Body thereof, may here learne, by the obseruance of affaires past (for that,

Reason is strengthned by the successe of exāple) to iudge the righter of things present: And with∣all, that herein, you, seeing many precedents of such as haue runne euen and direct courses, like your owne (howsoeuer the successe was) neuer wanted glory, may therby be comforted to continue this way of integrity, and of being a iust seruant both to the King and the Kingdome: nor can there be a better testimony to the world of your owne worth, then that you love and cherish the same, (wheresoeuer you finde it) in others.
And if by your hand it may come to the sight of his Royall Maiesty, whose abilities of nature are such, as whatsoeuer comes within his knowleldge is presently vnder the dominion of his iudge∣ment, I shall thinke it happy: and though in it selfe, it shall not be worthy his leasure, yet will it bee much to the glory of his Reigne, that in his daies there was a true History written: a liberty proper onely to Common-wealths, and neuer per∣mitted to Kingdomes, but vnder good Princes. Vpon which liberty notwithstanding I will not vsurpe, but tread as tenderly on the graues of his magnificent Progenitors, as possibly I can: Know∣ing there may (in a kind) be Laesa Maiestas, euen against dead Princes. And as in reuerence to thē, I will deliuer nothing but what is fit for the world to know, so through the whole worke, I will make conscience that it shall know nothing but (as faithfully as I can gather it) Truth: protesting

herein to haue no other passion, then the zeale thereof, nor to hold any stubborna opinion, but lyable to submission and better information.
Your Lordships to command

