


AVncient and noble is the question concernyng the originall of the worlde, and firste beeginning of all things, Right honorable Baron, which hath not only long tyme and much troubled the wittes of the Phi∣losophers, but also of Christians, & in the end by rea∣son of the diuerse iudgements of men hath rested so doubtfull, that many graue writers coulde not tell what to determine therin. For amōg the Christiās, Origen, in his bookes of the beginnings (which bookes aboue the residue most men do iudge to bee his woorthy woork) and they which after him wrote the Exame∣ra, are so diuided in opinions, that nothing may seeme certeinly to bee gathered out of their writinges. But among the Philosophers, men igno∣rant of God and his trueth, there is farre more diuersitie of opinions, so that concernyng this matter a man may better gheasse than vnderstand by their doctrine what hee hath to follow. Now touchyng these Philo∣sophers, perhaps there is no such cause to wonder at their blindnes in so great a matter, and that thei were so deepely drowned in darknes, foras∣much as they were destitute of Gods woord, that is to say, the true light of knowledge. But among Christians suche disoorde and disagreement cannot with like vprightnes bee excused, for that there is but one way of the trueth, wherof they might haue found most assured groundes in the woord of God, if they had had regard therto. What was thā the cause of so greate disagreement among the Christians concernyng this matter? Forsooth it was the Heathen Philosophie, with the preceptes wherof they were not onely then instructed and infected, but many also of them beeing stuffed, bee witched and deceiued therwith, (in respect that they ascribed mostvnto this art) would graunt and admit nothyng whiche they supposed to bee repugnant to the principles thereof. And this mis∣cheif did not onely continue in the tyme of our forefathers, and the firste

age of the Churche, whiche many hauing learned in the schooles of the Philosophers euen in their tender yeeres, and afterward beeing conuer∣ted to the faith of Christ, could not easily lay doune and chaunge those opinions whiche they had receiued beefore, and of long tyme most stu∣diously embraced. Yea now, since the name of the Philosophers is ex∣tinguished, it cannot bee plucked out of the minds of many that would bee called Christians: so deepely forsooth the admiration and reuerence of this Heathen Philosophie is imprinted within the mindes of some men, and of so great a force it is, as the Prouerbe fayeth, in tender youth, and as it were with the Mothers milke, to accustome a mans self vnto er∣rour, as it were vnto the preceptes of trueth. And therefore I doe not doubt, but that this my woorke concerning Christian Naturall Philoso∣phie, that is to say, how to refourme the opiniōs of the Philosophers by the woord of God, shalbee reprooued of many, and therfore hath need of some noble and great personage, that is welbecloued among all esta∣stes, to bee patrone vnto it, by whose auctoritie beeing defended, and fa∣uour cōmended, it may safely and acceptably come abroade into mens hands to bee read. You only, right honorable, are hee vnto whose name therefore I dedicate the same, how far soeuer I bee disioyned from you by distance of place. And as for your honour, there wanteth nothyng in you, that may suffice to discomfite the force of all enemies, if so bee that you can well like of this woork, and doe accept it vnto your protection. For if it might please you to oppose that same your moste singulare and true Christian godlines of minde, against the old and stubburne crue of heathen men concerning this part of Philosophie, in respect that you do syncerely and purely woorshippe God by direction of his vndoubted woord, weighyng and examinyng euery thing accordyng to that as a most certeine rule: there is no man that doubteth but that there is more credite to be giuen vnto your iudgement, than to all the rabble of those blind Philosophers. But as touching other, I will obiect your greate ho∣nour and auctoritie for a shielde beetweene them and mee for my de∣fence, whiche auctoritie of yours beeyng by you purchased in the sight of all men by meanes of infinite benefites by you beestowed vpon the Churches of Boheme and Morauia, is farre and wide renouined in the mouthes of all people, and knowne vnto those nations that know not your person: whiche also is easily able by the excellencie thereof to put

to silence the slaunderous tongues of certein light persons. And whereas all men whiche know you, doe graunt and confesse, that I doe not falsly attribute these prayses vnto you, then your moste noble Sunne, and no lesse heire to your vertues, than successour to your goodes, Iohn George, prooueth and declareth the same. VVho both of hys owne na∣turall inclination, and by the instruction and diligence of the right lear∣ned and godly man Vuenceslaus Lauanus his scholemaster, beeyng the expresse patterne and image of your vertue, how greate the same vertues bee in you, may bee by euery man easily perceiued. And truely, all wee that liue heere, professe that wee are mutch beeholden vnto you for this cause, for that you haue giuen vs a pleadge of youre singulare loue to∣wardes vs, namely your Sunne, at whose handes wee expect all good things. And in that you would haue this notable testimony of the agree∣ment of your Churches with ours in the true and auncient fayth, to bee extant in the sight of all men: which that it may continually so remaine, and neuer bee broken of through any contention amongest men, wee cease not to make our prayers to Almightie God. And that same desire whiche is in you to deserue well of all nations bee they neuer so farre of, is not only a singulare vertue, but also most worthy of a Christiā, which aboue all other is most familiar and proper vnto you. And although you doe farre excell in nobilitie of birthe, as descendyng from the most aun∣cient house of the Nachosij (whom I suppose to bee the onely remain∣ders of the moste renoumed stock of the Narisci) and also of the moste stout and martiall family of the Moranians (who are successours to the people called Marcomanni, that were sumtyme fearefull enemies to the Romanes, yea when they were in their most florishyng state) amōg whom you enioye very large possessions: notwithstanding your greate humanitie and gentlenes which is vnto you a peculiare vertue, shal farre more excellently aduaunce your name among al ages. And as touchyng my booke, I had rather it were knowne by the effect it selfe, than by my report, what and how greate the commoditie thereof is. How beeit this will I say in fewe woordes, that therein I haue breifly comprehended whatsoeuer I coulde reade to haue binne disputed by the auncient and holy Fathers, either against the Philosophers, or Heretikes: and that I haue not intermingled any question which they haue not handled bee∣fore: neither haue omitted any thing whiche seemed might stande in

steede towardes the vnderstanding of their writinges. Wherein I will plainly confesse vnto you, I haue not so mutch studied to satisfie the hu∣mour of curious persons, as to aduaunce the commoditie of studious young men. And therfore I hope it will come to passe, that your honours moste noble Sunne the Lord Iohn, with other young Princes, beeyng mooued by your auctoritie, will follow sutch kindes of studies whiche they shall perceiue to bee acceptable, and that woorthily, vnto so greate estates. Fare you well. 
VVritten the Calendes of December. 1575.

