



I Haue bin desirous, Right honorable, and that of long tyme, vvith many other to vvhom your most godly di∣sposition hath bin often reported, not only to congratulate, but also to ho∣nor the same vvith some poore te∣stimonie of myne vnfeined good vvill And novv occa∣sion sumdeale fauourably grauntyng vnto my request, hope hath also pricked mee forevvarde to myne attempt, that no studie or traueill vvherby the true knovvledge & feare of God is to bee learned, can come vnvvelcome, or seeme dishonorable vnto your honour. If noneother examples, yet the vndoubted vvord of life vvorthily Englished and set foorth vnder your Right Honorable protection, doth sufficiently prooue: beesides your most fer∣uent zeale in embracing true Religion, and aduauncing the syncere vvorshipping of Almightie God, by meanes vvhereof your fame is spread far among forreine nati∣ons. Thus am I not discouraged, but rather hartened, sem∣blably vvith duetie to offer this my simple trauell vnto your honour, beeing the vvoorthy vvoorke of the lear∣ned Diuine M. Lambert Danaeus of Geneua, concer∣ning

Christian Naturall Philosophie, & the vvonderfull vvoorkemanship of this vvorld. A vvoorke doubtlesse of great auaill, to the knovvledge of God in his creatures. A vvorke of vvonderfull efficacie, to set foorth the ho∣nour and glorie of God the Creator. A vvoorke of mer∣ueilous force to stirre vp mens mindes to the contempla∣tion of true knovvledge and learning, vvhiche is gathe∣red out of the holy Scriptures only. A vvoork of rare ef∣fect to declare the prayse of God the vvoorkman, and to establishe assured fayth, and true religion. To bee short, a vvoorke so farre surpassing all other vvoorkes of like ar∣gument, vvriten either by Christian or Heathen Philo∣sophers, as the proofes and auctorities vsed by them both bee differing: the one beeyng founded vppon the assured ground of Gods vvoord and holy Scriptures, the other established vpon the fickle foundation of mans reason & iudgement. This vvoorke therefore, Right Honorable, so profitable, so pleasant, so necessarie, so full of varietie of Godly matter, so substancially grounded by vvarrant of Scriptures, so surely confirmed by auctoritie of Doctours and Fathers, in most humble and duetifull maner I present vnto your honor. Hoping, that as in the Latine it hath bin generally liked of the learned, so likevvise you vvill not mislike that it novv go abroad in the Englishe tōgue vn∣der the protection of your Right Honorable name, by him vvho resteth your honours most hūble at cōmaundement:

