



VNkind is he, that hauing receiued curtesie at an o∣ther mans hands, denieth it: vnkinde (againe) is he, that dissembleth and will not seeme to know it: vn∣kinde likewise is hee, that studieth not one way or other to requite it: but of all others, the most vnkind and vnthankefull is he, that quite forgetteth it.
Much to blame therfore were I (good Mai∣ster Higham) if for the manifolde benefites re∣ceiued from you, I should either denye, conceale, misregard or forget, how deeply I stād in your debt Booke: or what a number of Arrerages I am behinde withall in your Iournall, in respect of that great heape of curtesies, which I frank∣ly and willingly confesse in full measure to haue flowed from you towards mee.
Neither may I (without blushing) preter∣mit, how deepely I rest beholding to your Wor∣shipfull father in law, my especiall good Friend

Maister Richard Stonley: neither yet can J in honestie conceale the great curtesie that I daylie to my comfort receiue, by and frō your good Cosen my deare Friend and louing neigh∣bour Maister W. Waldgraue. I wil not here speake of your learned brother in lawe, Mai∣ster D. Dunne, to whom also I owe greater things, euen my self. No way am I able (J con∣fesse) to requite any of you, but you remember (I doubt not) what one saith: Mola salsa litāt, qui thura non habent.
Jn part of payment, & for some discharge of duetie, loe here (good Sir) I boldly present vnto you (and in you also to them) this my simple trauaile of three daies, in translating this godly and profitable worke of Danaeus. What effect it shall worke in others I know not: but (surely) if they like no worse of it in reading, then I my selfe haue done both in reading, aduising and translating of it, their labour shall not bee lost, nor their diligence wastfully bestowed. Com∣mending therefore both it and my poore selfe vnto you J end: wishing you and your good wife, no worse to fare, then your vertue requireth, the fauour of men wisheth, and your owne dexte∣ritie promiseth. 
From my house at Litle Ilford
this 24. of Iuly. 1586. 
