



MY hono∣rable Co∣sen, ha∣uinge oft times cō∣sidered with my selfe how many wayes I haue bin made a debtor to you, for many curtesies which I must acknowledg I ha∣ue receiued from you. I
 haue as often againe con∣demned my selfe, that I haue neuer. sufficiently endeuored to shew my selfe thankful to you, which is the least requi∣tal that I may retorne for so many frendships. And consideringe ingratitude to be so odious a vice, that to be noted with it deser∣ueth no lesse punishment then for euer to be blot∣ted out of your remem∣brance: I resolued on no∣thing more then to finde out some meanes how I
 mighte wipe away from my selfe so fowle a ble∣mishe. In which resolutiō I encountered many dou∣tes; for findinge it needful to present you with some thinge, I was longe be∣thinkinge what thinge mighte best befitt me to send you, & what mighte best consorte with your condition. At which ti∣me hauinge in my handes this Treatise which now I present vnto you, writ∣ten first by the Author in the Italian tounge, and
 after for the general good of many turned into the Latin: I thought it a thin∣ge most worthy my la∣bour to spend some time in translating it into En∣glishe, and to present your selfe with the first fruites thereof. Which burthen to vndergoe, two princi∣pal causes haue chiefly moued me. The one the great affection and loue which I beare to the Fa∣thers of the B. Societie of IESVS, by one of whom this worke was first most
 charitably composed. For hauinge by their writin∣ges and laboures receiued no smale encouragement to emulate their vertues, and desieringe in some degree to shew my selfe thankful vnto them, I re∣solued in translatinge this worke to doe them serui∣ce, because I was not other wayes enabled to manifest my loue to thē. The other (& not the least cause was) the desier which as I saied I had to shew my thākful minde
 to your selfe, for when I had accomplished the translation of the worke, there was nothinge more in my desire then to finde out some worthie person, to whom I might dedica∣te my labours taken the∣rein. And althoughe there were many that might of right challenge greater matters from me then this, yet your selfe seemed most worthy to be hono∣red, with al the right that I could chalenge in this worke. I wil not rehearse
 each particular reasō that might induce me to pre∣fer you therein, conside∣ring that the verie sub∣iect of the worke seemeth to allowe you to be the patronesse thereof. For sith it is a consideration how we ought to come worthely to the B. Sacra∣ment of the Aultar; I also cōsidered that now your yeares required some dire∣ctions therein. And al∣thoughe I nothinge dou∣ted, but that by others you might be rightly enfor∣med
 therein, yet this worke so fitly offeringe it selfe vnto me, I held your selfe most fit to whom I might offer it againe. Ac∣cept it therefore, and be pleased to reade it ouer, wherein you shal finde great variety of good in∣structions. For herein are contayned many deuoute considerations to stir vp mens mindes often to fre∣quent the B. Sacrament of the Aultar. Herein are set foorth many deuoute ad∣monitions for worthie
 preparatiō in cominge to that B. Sacrament. Herein are we taught how we ought to behaue our sel∣ues after we haue receiued it. Here shal we finde ma∣ny sweete meditations. Here shal we finde an∣swered many obiections, which some troubled with scruples are accusto∣med to make. And to be short (referringe you to each particular benefit which by readinge this treatise you shal finde in it) here may we learne se∣ueral
 remedies and com∣fortes, against al those as∣saultes and temptations, with which our ghostly enimie is accustomed to afflict the mindes of those persons that he would hinder from deuotion, and from frequenting the B. Sacrament. As therefo∣re amongst many I haue chosen your selfe most worthy, vnder whose pa∣tronage this Englishe translation might shew it selfe to the world, so doe you but accept it with a
 grateful minde, and I shal thinke my labour in trans∣latinge it most happely employed. For the benefit which yourselfe or others shal receiue by reading it, rest behouding to the Au∣thor who first compiled it, to whom al thankes are due for so religious a wor∣ke. And if out of the zeale of your deuotions you af∣forde me to be partaker of the least part of your charitable prayers, I shal think my selfe more then enough recompenced,
 for the labour I tooke in trāslating it into Englishe. And so wishinge you to receiue as much benefit by readinge it, as the Au∣thor shewed charitie in labouring to write it, I rest.

