



IT is not vnknowne to them that are acquainted with the writings of the Brownists, how euery where they charge our Church to be a false Church, an Antichristian Church, and consequently the Synagogue of Sathan: and our particular or parish assemblies, false visible churches. They applie vnto vs, and that often, 2. Cor. 6.14.15. & Reuel. 18.2.4. and so equall vs, with as grosse Idolaters as euer were, heathen and Antichristian We are darkenesse it selfe, wherewith the light hath no communion: We worship Belial, not Christ: We are if not a roote of miscreants,Counterp. in the Epistle de∣fence of the Church and Minist. of Engl. 6. Counterp. 266. and in the Epi∣stle. Paralleles 26. Apologie 209. yet a misceline multitude of beleeuers & infidels: We are the habitation of diuels, the holds of all foule spirits, and the cage of euery vn∣cleane and hatefull bird: Wee are Vr of the Caldees, Baby∣lon, Egypt, and Sodome, out of which they must goe that will be saued. They tell vs further that Rome is our mother, and our Church one of her daughters: And as is the mother, so is the daughter: both harlots. Shall we heare our Church which is the mother of vs all, nay, the Churches of Christ, thus blasphemed and euill spoken of, and that not in a corner, but vpon the house
 toppe, as Absalom abused his fathers Concubines: so as all men may heare; the present world; and the ages suc∣ceeding: and hold our peace? God forbid. So doing we shall shewe our selues rather bastards, then naturall children. Can a sonne endure to heare his mother stan∣dered, and reuiled, and his bowels not be moued with∣in him, and his tongue also to speake in her defence? Verily he that is such, honoureth not his mother, as the law of God, and nature doth binde him. And this is it my deare mother, reuerend, and holy, that hath thrust me forward to write this Treatise in thy defence. I thought indeede with my selfe a long time that this would better beseeme some of my elder brethren. I considered the strength, skill, and forwardnesse of the aduersary to fight without wearisomnesse: and mine owne great weakenesse,M. Iohnson, Ainsworth, Smith, Ro∣inson, for against all these I deale in this treatise. that they with whom I was to haue this conflict were b diuers: my selfe but one, and that a little one: but such (through the grace of God) was my loue to this part of his holy trueth, and hatred to error, that I was able to stride ouer them all.
And beginning first with a litle Treatise against them of the Separation in the defence of our Ministery, Litur∣gie, and Discipline, (mooued thereunto by the continu∣all griefe and vexation my soule was in, to see so many round about me to seperate) I considered that they keepe much adoe about a true visible Church, and a false, accusing vs euer and anone to be a false Church. Heere∣upon I thought it very requisit rather to examine their doctrine of the Church, (which I found to be the very foundation of all that they haue written in this questi∣on) and to make triall whether that were true or false.
I knowe that many will be apt to imagine, that I haue saide litle or nothing against the Brownists and their Se∣peration: because I doe not in this booke answere their
 obiections touching our Ministery, Liturgy, and Disci∣pline. But these men forget, that the maine point of controuersie betwixt the Separists and vs, is: Whether our Church be a true, or a false Church. If the Church of England be a true Church, as wee confidently affirme: Then is the Brownists separation (by their owne confes∣sion) sinfull: the Scriptures alleadged by them to that ende peruerted; their speeches against our Church blaspheamous; and all their arguments concerning our Ministery, Liturgy, and Discipline, so many sophisticati∣ons. Then also, is their ealling vpon men, to separate from vs, and to goe out of Babilon, no more to be regar∣ded, then the barking of dogges in the streete. But if our Church be a false Church, which they contend for: then we acknowledge their seperation to be lawfull, and their reasons concerning our Ministerie, Liturgie, and Discipline, to be found and substantiall. Here∣vpon then all doth rest, as a house vppon the foundati∣on: which being ouerturned, the whole house (we know) fales to the ground. To this end I haue in this Treatise endeuored two things principally. First, by diuers argumentes I proue that the church of England is a true Church, and our parish assemblies (as they are constituted by law) true visible Churches. Secondly, I haue answered their Argumentes, whereby they would proue it to be a false church, and namely those which lately and at large are by M. Ainsworth enforced against vs in his Countrpoyson.
Let none of my elder brethren be offended at this I haue done. What though this cause be not by me so well mannaged as it deserues. Accept of it neuerthe∣lesse. I haue done my best: and God requireth but ac∣cording to that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not. Let not man desire more. If any demaund
 of me, why I, the most vnfit and vnable of a thousand, in the middest of so many great Diuines, famous for learning, haue vndertaken the defence of our Church, which had well beseemed the chiefest of them: I an∣swere, that seeing them silent, I could not hold my peace. And that I being by the prouidence of God cast into the middest of these Separistes, that (towards the Northen parts) did lately spring vp, had thereby many more occasions to mooue & prick mee forward to this businesse, then other of my brethren haue had. Thus God who in his secrete counsell had purposed and appointed me to this seruice, made a way there∣vnto. And it will aboundantly content mee, if that whatsoeuer it is I haue performed, bee approoued of God, and acceptable to thee my reuerend and graci∣ous Mother: whose next to my Father, wholly I am, deuoted to thy seruice.

