



MADAME:
THis Poem of our last Ciuile Warres of England, (whereof the many Editi∣ons shewe what kinde of intertaine∣ment it hath had with the world) I haue now againe sent-forth, with the addition of two bookes: the one,  the course of the Historie; the other, making-vp  part, which (for haste) was left vnfurnisht in the former . And, hauing nothing else to doo with my , but to worke whil'st I haue it; I held it my part, to  (the best I could) this Prouince, Nature hath  to my Charge: and which I desire to leaue, after my death, in the best forme I may; seeing I can erect no o∣ther pillars to sustaine my memorie, but my lines nor  pay my debts and the recknings of my gratitude to their honour who haue donne me good, and furthered  Worke.
And, whereas this Argument was long since vnderta∣ken



(in a time which was not so well secur'd of the future, as God be blessed now it is) with a purpose, to shewe the deformities of  Dissension, and the miserable e∣uents of Rebellions, Conspiracies, and bloudy Reuenge∣ments, which followed (as in a circle) vpon that breach of the due course of Succession, by the Vsurpation of Hen. 4; and thereby to make the blessings of Peace, and the happi∣nesse of an established Gouernment (in a direct Line) the better to appeare: I trust I shall doo a gratefull worke to my Countrie, to continue the same, vnto the glorious  of Hen. 7: from whence is descended our present Hap∣pinesse.
In which Worke, I haue carefully followed that truth which is  in the Historie; without adding to, or subtracting from, the general receiu'd opinion of things as we finde them in our common Annalles: holding it an impietie, to violate that publike Testimonie we haue, with∣out more euident proofe; or to introduce fictions of  owne imagination, in things of this nature. Famae rerum standum est. Though I knowe, in these publike actions, there are euer popular bruites, and opinions, which run ac∣cording to the time & the biass of mens affections: and it is the part of an Historian, to recite them, not to rule thē; especially, otherwise then the circumstances may induce: according to that modest saying; Nec affirmare sustineo de quibus dubito, nec subducere quae accepi.
I haue onely vsed that poeticall licence, of framing speaches to the persons of men according to their occasi∣ons; as C. Salustius, and T. Liuius (though Writers in Prose, yet in that kinde Poets) haue, with diuers other an∣tient and modern Writers, done before me. Wherin, though



they   vpon   ,   à  that was not properly theirs: yet, seeing they  so  a proportion, with the nature of men, and the course of af∣fayres; they passe as the partes of the Actor (not the Wri∣ter) and are 'd with great approbation.
And although many of these Images are drawne with the pencil of mine conceiuing: yet I knowe, they are according to the portraiture of Nature; and carrie a re∣semblance to the life of Action, and their complexions whom they represent. For, I see, Ambition, Faction, and Affections, speake euer one Language, we are like colours (though in seuerall fashions) feed, and are fed with the same nutriments; and only vary but in time.
Man is a creature of the same dimension he was: and how great and eminent  hee bee, his measure and height is easie to be taken. And all these great actions are openly presented on the Stage of the World: where, there are euer Spectators, who will iudge and censare how men personate those parts, which they are set to perform; and so enter them in the Records of Memorie.
And if I haue erred somewhat in the draught of the young Q. Isabel (wife to Ric. 2.) in not suting her passi∣ons to her yeares: I must craue fauour of my credulous Readers; and hope, the young Ladies of England (who peraduenture will thinke themselues of age sufficient, at 14 yeares, to haue a feeling of their owne estates) will ex∣cuse me in that point. For the rest, setting-aside those or∣naments, proper to this kinde of Writing; I haue faithful∣ly obserued the Historie. Wherein, such as loue this Har∣mony of words, may finde, that a Subiect, of the greatest grauitie, will be aptly exprest: howsoeuer others (seeing



in      , )   but as a language  Lightnes and .
For  owne part, I am not so far in  with this forme of Writing (nor haue I sworne Fealtie onely to Ryme) but that I  serue in any other state of Inuenti∣on, with what weapon of  I will: and, so it may make good my , I care not. For, I see, Iudgement and Discretion (with what soeuer is worthy) carry their owne Ornaments, and are grac't with their owne beauties; be they  in what fashion they will. And because I finde the common tongue of the world is Prose; I purpose in that kinde to write the Historie of England, from the Conquest: being incouraged thereunto, by many noble & worthy Spirits. Although , I must not neglect to prosecute the other part of this Worke  being thus re∣uiued by your Goodnes: to whome; and to whose Noble Family, I hold my selfe euer bound; and will labour to  you all she honor, and seruice I can.

