



IT had bene to be wished (right Reuerend & beloued in our Lord Iesus Christ) that some question arising of late, as you know, con∣cerning Dispossession of diuels in these times by fasting and prayer, the same might haue bene propounded, examined, and decided in your lawful assembly. For your senses being exercised in the knowledge of God his truth, and your minds enlightened with continuall pra∣ctise of the Church, would easily haue discerned the stampe of the Sanctuarie: and this iudiciall determination of yours, woulde (no doubt) either haue preuented, or stayed at least much violent pro∣ceeding, manie impious assertions, and great distractions among the people, which not able to iudge of the substance of things, stand amazed at the vaine sound and multitude of words. But as this happinesse hath bin much wished in like case heretofore, so neuer could it be lesse hoped for then now, when our sinnes haue brea∣thed new life into the dead carkesse of Antichrist, whereby hee star∣tles vp on his feete afresh, and begins to strout amongst vs againe in terrible sort. yet notwithstanding your ioint consents cannot be had, I thought it meet to offer this Reioynder to your considerati∣ons seuerally, holding it most requisite that you the same parties should also heare Truth speake in her iust defence, before whom, and to whom, shee hath beene slaundered most shamefully. But what Truth is able to pleade for her selfe shall more fully appeare in the Treatise following: now onely she craueth, that as Gregorie Nazianzen iudged of Iulian by the wagging of his head, so by these two Epistles of theirs, one to your selues, the other to the Reader, it would please you to regard of what disposition these Answerers bee.
In their Epistle to you (reuerend brethren) you shall beholde them false in pretence, vntrue in their words▪ and ridiculously ar∣rogant. For pretence, they make shew of great promptnesse with all humilitie to submit their opinions to your graue and learned censures. And who would not esteeme this lowlinesse, as if the men were lately descended from heauen? But alas, they know your pub∣like

censure is not to be feared: more waightie occasions haue not hetherto procured it: and what any of you shall pronounce pri∣uately, wil be but one Doctors opinion with them. Their practise makes this plaine in their Discourses, where testimonie as cleare as the sunne light alleaged, how the Church both ancient, and present hath demeaned her selfe in like actions, they not hauing one word of probabilitie to reply, would shift off the matter with shame∣lesse outfacing. Is it likely nowe (worthie Fathers and Bre∣thren) these men would reuerence your authoritie, who reiect without blushing the authoritie of them, whom all the learned de∣seruedly reuerence? This profession then is but a meere abuse, ser∣uing onely for a maske to hide the deformity of their natural coun∣tenance. And as they would carrie a faire colour of that, they neuer purpose to doe, so also they be no lesse vntrue in reporting things alreadie past. They tell you, How insolently we denied the Christian conference they prefered vs: whereas they neuer profered me any: and as for M. Moore, they comming to him, promising to confer the next morning, neuer came to him afterwards: thinking it better to cracke their credit in breaking that promise, then to stand to their word, & receiue a foyle in the bickering. So they talk of a new con∣ference with me, offered to my speciall friends: when neither friend not foe kuew where I was: when also had they knowne, and signified vnto me this profered conference, I might with small securitie to my person haue conferred with them, notwithstanding their profe∣red bond. Whereby you may see that occasion was rather sought to blind the world with, then that any conference was soundly intended. In like manner they affirming, that dispossession in these times by fasting & prayer be miracles: that they bee vrged as necessary to support our Relgion: that there is no difference between them wrought in the church of god amongst vs, & these done in Antichrists kingdom: that the dealers, in these actions are to be matched with Bròwnists & Hackets: are assertions of such nature as might with good reason, were they true, enrage your meek & patient spirits with indignation: specially whē you heare their principal end in publishing these Counsels of God lately reuealed vnto them concerning these incricate questions (for so they Answer. page 95speake of these fancies or rather frensies of theirs in the Treatise following) was forsooth to accomplish the peace of Ierusalem. Are nouelties peaceable? Innouations fit for quiet? Doctrines neuer heard of before, procurers of concord? O blessed peacemakers, which would soulder vp the breaches and disagreements of Ierusa∣lem

with latelie reucaled counsels. Thus they dare toyour faces poure forth their vntruths, not onely in matter of faith, wherein none but some speciall persons could conuict them: but also in doctrines, whose falshood your selues are best able of all other to descry as soone as you heare them. And is not their arrogancy worthy to be laughed at (but that your manner is rather to bewaile mens folly) when they would be Magistri sententiarum, & haue their Discourses Dictates for young students in diuinitie? It were hansom sure to be∣hold a Sow sit with a distaffe teaching the fine Ladies to spin: that the Crow should instruct the young Nighttingales to sing▪ and that the Conduites in Cheape should be fed from the publike draynes & sinkes of the citie. But could they bee content to be directours only to the younger students? These mysteries of theirs are an in∣fallible truth, as they say, & Counsels of god lately reuealed vnto them, as you heard euen now. And therfore your selues, learned Fathers, though much trauelled in the sacred sciptures, greatly read in anci∣ent writers, & acquainted with later monuments of knowledge & experience of all kinde, yet hitherto in these poyntes you know nothing: & if you purpose hereafter to vnderstand any thing, you must sucke it onely from the breasts of these late Reuelations. In which regarde it may very well bee, these Answerers could greatly reioyce (as also they professe) if it might please any of you to cōfute them, because they thinke theselues on so sure a ground, & are tick∣led, as it seemeth with an imagination of that glory, which they sup∣pose they should gaine by your foile & discredit. Whether they wil accept such a labour in good part or no, you shall haue experience by this I haue performed. Their former pretences make me to feare this outside of theirs is but ouercast with their wonted perietting.
In the Epistle to the Reader they say that I haue very vnchari∣tably endeuoured to wound S. H. (whom els where they call S. Harsnet vnto death for his dutifull Discouerie. I maruell they are not ashamed to call it a dutifull discorerie, seeing the drift of it is, to proue, that I taught Sommers to counterfeit, wherof themselues acquit me, as ye shall heare forthwith. What dutie performed he to God or man, in slaundering the rare workes of god, & his neightbour? Or do they in commending such a Discouerie. It is true that by my Detection I endeuoured to wound S. H. mortally, so as he should neuer be able to rise vp any more for counterseiting & my teaching to counterfeit: but not with sword, nor speare, onely with the dart of Truth. And I thinke it is as true that I haue wounded him to death.

Had not his wounds bene mortall, or at leastwise incurable, they had beene healed by this, and we had seene him the second time in the field. Otherwise we must deem him for a coward, that encoun∣treth not his enemie being often chalenged. This is the excellency & power of truth that shee subdueth all those that rise vp in armes against her, & they that take part with her, do at lēgth triūph glori∣ously, as being more thē conquerors. They blame my āphlets as ful of vnsound & absurd positions. I wil not confirme in this place, what is els where set down, but refer to your Iudgement whether by the former Suruery, & the following Reply it doth not appeare that many such positions haue issued from their owne heads, & that this charge may be turned vpon their owne pates. For mater, they charge my writings with want of Methode: to bee also schismaticall and Eni∣gmaticall. Touching the Methode, I hope your patience hath beene contented with the order of the Doctrine, diuided into three seve∣rall branches & each part prosecuted first with reasons confirm∣ing it: & after by remoouing such doubtes as might seeme to wea∣ken it. And as for Schisme, I teach no Latelie reuealed counsels, nor my Dialog. Discours. Epist. to the Reader in the be∣ginning.priuate opinion concerning the possession & dispossession of diuels. Both which these men confesse they do, but what hath ben reuealed and held from the beginning & confirmed euer since by cōtinual con¦sent: whereas if their doctrines be their owne priuate opinions, and Latelie reuealed, they bee New. If New, not established by agree∣ment of Scriptures & the Church▪ & if not established, it is schisme at the least, for any thing I can conceiue, to publish & maintein them. Concerning Enigmatiall handling, your owne profiting by reading may best be Iudge. It was not my purpose, neyther, is it my skill to write ridles: Yet because they complaine of darkenes I haue now so indeuored my selfe, that I hope they may spell my meaning, if they put on their spectacles Moreouer they accuse the spirit wherwith my pamphlets are indited, to be sensuall & deuilish, as giuen to Rayling, Contradiction, & Disobedience. Horrible, indeed is the sinne of Rayling. But iust & plaine reprouing with these men is railing: Curing is killing, & whatsoeuer smarteth in the sore, is dead∣ly Iob. 24. 17.poyson. The morning to the adulterer, is as the shadow of death. The vlcerous patient crveth out on euery touch of the Chirurgion, as Tit. 1. 12.at most rough & vnaduised handling. It is no meruail if the Cretians can not endure to be told, they are lyars, eul beasts & sw bellies & that sharpe reproofe be reuiled by such, as altogether in tollerable, barbarous, and inhumane. Yet further behold I beseech you in

themselues, how destitute they are of Gods feare in this behalfe: how voyd of the common wisedom of men: & how strongly pos∣sessed with that self same itching disease they charge me withall. It is great want of reuerence towards god to defame others falsely, & that against their owne conscience, as they doe me most opprobri∣ously throughout their whole treatises. It is exceeding solly to pro∣uoke him by forged crimes, which can repay them againe with most true crimes, with publike crimes, with hainons crimes. And is it not an incurable itching which must needes be clawing, till thier own flesh be rent from their bones? These mens desire of scratching was so hot, that possibly they could not hold their fingers, though they were guilty to them selues, how deare it might cost them: wherein notwithstanding I haue spared them, being ashamed in playne tearmes to vtter that which they haue not bene ashamed to do. Concerning the Contradictions they would thrust vpon me, you will easily perceiue in the Reply, how partly they spring from their owne ignorance, as if I cal▪a▪thing Ordinary and supernaturall, then must there needs be a Contradiction: partly from their adding, detracting, and changing my words at thēir pleasure, which they haue done aduisedly and purposely, whereby their sin is increased. And as for Disobedience by my striring against the sentence of the High Commission: is it a rebellious and vnruly proceeding according to the commandement & example of Christ Iesus to iustifie the works of Matt. 12. 25. 30▪god being slaundered, or yet for one-to complaine of wrong. For marke I beseech you how in this place they affirming, that by due order of law wee were conuented, conuicted, apprehended, impri∣soned, by sentence of Iustice defintiuely condēned for grosse malefactors, & adiudged to prison: yet in their Discourses haue giuen this testimonie of me, that they did not so much as suspect any precompacted cōsederacy Diale. Dis. pag. 352.betweene me and the boy, that all acquainted with my former synceritie and vpright cariage are free from such a perswasion that the graceles boy did gracelesly counterfet, and my self did only erre iudgement, and not of any purpose in practise at all. By the witnes therfore of these mē if the high Cōmission passed any such seutence against vs they did vs open iniurv: & I trust oppressed inuocents may haue this liber∣tie at least to bewaile their greife. But neither hath the Commission awarded any such sentence, and these men haue done a double notable wrong inslauncering both the Commistion, and vs.
To shut vp all, they would boodwink the reader with their godly iealousie ouer him, pretending they labour to prepaire him for one

husband, and to present him as a pure virgin to Christ. But this office 1. Tim. 3.belongeth to the Bishop that is biameles, and is the husband of one wife, &c. as S. Paul saith. And therfore if the Christiā Reader should looke for grapes from these thomes, he should be deceaued▪ this Epistle then to the Reader is fraught with the same vertues of Clo∣king, of forging, of pride (though with some larger addition) wher∣with the former, reuerend Fathers and brethren, was to you. And therefore howsoeuer they thinke, I wil answere them as Hildebrand did, Abbas Cassinensis, frater nimtum tardasti: Deere brethren, you have beene somewhat too slow in publishing your Dialogicall Discour∣ses: yet I doubt not, but both you, and I, will with one consent, ra∣ther returne the contrarie to them, Et vos Disputatores nimium festi∣nastis: And you, O Discoursers, haue made too much haste. For had you trauelled as long, as the Elephant in bringing forth her young, yet the birth of such monstrous deuises, so ignorant, so erroneous, so slaunderons, so impious, had bene abortiue, vntimely, and too soon. For this cause I haue dealt more roundly and freely with them, then otherwise I would haue done with ordinarie men. They could not possibly be wakened out of so strong an Apoplexie, but by bur∣ning feathers and shoo-soles vnder their noses: neither would the Reader haue bene sufficiently warned to eschew their fraud, ex∣cept the trumpet had sounded shrill in his eares.
And whereas some of you, reuerend and beloued brethren, af∣firming, and verie truly, that their bookes were vnworthy the an∣swering, did thereupon earnestly disswade me from writing: I an∣swere, Tit. 1. 10.So also was the doctrine of those vaine talkers, Paul mentio∣neth to Titus, vnworthy to be confuted, yet the Apostle saith, Their mouthes must be stopped. And how? by conuining, as there followeth. Matt. 12. 24What could be more palpablie false, then that of the Pharisees, Hee casteth out diuels, through Beelzebub the Prince of diuels▪ Notwithstan∣sting our Sauiour did conuince thē. Euen so did S. Peter those who Act. 2. 13mocked, and said the Apostles were full of new wine, when the holy Ghost in that wonderful maner fel vpon them. In priuate commu∣nication, A foole is to be answered according to his folly: but if in pub like among the presse, in the highest places of the citie, or entrings of the gates, where wisdomes voice should be heard, a foole chance to babble, and vtter that is dangerous to the simple, which these Discoursers haue done, then is the folly of a foole to bee throughly discouered, and layd open to the viewe of all men. The foolish (of Pro. 14, 15which number are the most) will beleeue euery thing, be it neuer so

false, be it neuer so absurd, neuer so sottish & ridiculous, specially if it be countenanced with Authority, as are the Dialog call Discourses. For this reason, euen to keepe the simple from error, who are so easilie seduced, notwithstanding the vnworthines of these Discour∣ses, there is cause something should be sayd in answere vnto them, by my selfe or other. Neither doe I doubt but these my rude lines will (by the blessing of God) be effectuall to recouer those which through their verbal writings be falne from the truth, to strengthen such as be wauering, and to stablish them which more firmely hold the truth. If this successe follow, I shall haue no cause to repent me of my paines, nor any other to account the same superfluous.
Now therfore, brethren, I beleech you know these disturbers, be not deceiued by their ouercasting and smoothing. Examine what they say, before ye beleeue them. Anb albeit your authority is not able to bridle them (the more is our griefe, and the miserie of our Church) yet auoid their doctrines in your selues, and in your people. I beseech you also, as your occasions may serue, admonish them: that yet in want of a publike degree, they may gather by you seuerally what is the iudgement of all, and be therby ashamed and reclaimed, if so the Lord in mercy please. Litle needes such conflict in these times wherin that antichrist of Rome extreme¦ly rageth, as now entring his last triall. But we must haue fightings 2. Cor. 7. 5.without and feares within: open wars with the preists and lesuites, the seruants of Antichirist, and many priuate grieuances by such as would bee counted of the houshold of faith. It behooues vs there∣fore brethren, to put on the armor of righteousnes on the right 2. Cor. 6. 7hand, and on the left, that wee may manfully defend & mainteine the holy truth in all her bounds & limits vnuiolated syncere where by the puritie of Religion may still bee continued, and all errour a∣bandoned frō anoying either vs or our posteritie after vs. The god of mercy, peace and truth confirme and establish our heartes, that we may fight the good fight, like good soldiers of Iesus Christ, and quit our selues like men: holding faith & a good conscience, to the glory of his name, & euerlasting comfort of our owne soules, through Iesus our Lord and onely Sauiour. Amen.

