


MY LL. I doe not doubt, but your HH. haue hearde of the possession & dispos∣session of VVilliam Sum∣mors, a youth of Notinghā, but in what sence these thinges haue bene carried vnto you, by reason of the manifolde varieties of re∣portes spred abroad, it may be well doubted. Where∣fore to the end, that your HH. might take knowledge of the trueth herein, and according to your knowledge by that hie authoritie deriued vnto you from her Sacred Maiestie, for the gouernement of hir subiectes, accor∣ding to your accustomed iustice and integritie, iustifie the trueth, & discountenance the contrarie: I haue ther∣fore presumed to preferre vnto your LL. this plaine A∣pologeticall treatise, penned by Maister Iohn Dorrell, a principall partie in this matter, but published altogither without his priuitie or consent therein.
The maine point of the controuersie is, Whether William Summers was possessed and dispossessed, yea or no. Whereby there is called into question a matter of fact, a greater then which, can not almost fall out to bee deci∣ded among the sonnes of men, namelie touchinge the malice of Satan, and maruellous authoritie of our Lorde IESVS. They that imagine Summer was not possessed, but did counterfeit, doe by consequence and indirectlie denie the malice of Satan, & the Soueraintie of our Sa∣uiour in this action. But if it fall out contrarie, that hee was possessed and dispossessed in deed, what their sinne

is, and what their reward shall be that blaspheme this great worke of God, I leaue to the secret iudgement of the great day, when they that now iudge, shall be iud∣ged. Onelie, hereby it is euident, that so manie hie or lowe as professe them selues Christians, are greatlie in∣teressed in this matter, that so much concerneth Christ their Maister: and ought therefore informe them selues herein, in asmuch as what soeuer is done against the Head, must needes strecht vnto the Members.
Now, euerie matter of fact (as this is) most vsuallie is determined by the othes of men: It is therefore to bee respected what hath bene & may be proued by the de∣positions of credible men, touching this matter.
By cōmission from the Archbish of York, directed to 12. especiall Iohn Therold Esq. hie Sheriff of Nottinghan. Sir Iohn Biron Knight. Iohn Stanop. Ro∣bert Markham. Rich. Parkins Es. Peter Clerk, Ma∣ior of Noting. Archd. Walton. Miles Leigh, offic. Ioh. Treton, Iohn Brown. Rob. E∣vington, and Tho. Bolton, preachers. persons neare to Notingham, 17. witnes∣ses were deposed, who directlie proue such admitable things to be done or suffered by the saide Summer, that neither Art nor Nature can compasse the like. Besides these 17. the names of others to the number of 60. or thereabouts, were taken in writing, readie to be deposed of the same and the like. But the Commissioners being wearied with examinations of witnesses, & seeing Sum∣mer before their faces violentlie cast into one of his sitts, so as he wallowed with his body stretched out at length with an exceeding swiftnes from one ende of the rowme where they sate vnto another, and being pulled by the cares and pricked with pinnes in his legg and hande, of purpose to trie whether he had any feeling or not, yet he remayning sencelesse, and no bloud follow∣ing, thē they thought it needlesse to proceed any further
Namely, Miles Laigh, Ioh. Tretō Tho. Bolton. At the same time there was seene to three of the Com¦missioners onely (the rowme being also full of people) a black dogge running about Sum. head as he laye before them snuffing at his mouth, which the three Commissio∣ners supposed to haue bene a dogge in deed, and that o∣thers had seene him as well as they, which was not so. To this vision accordeth the speech which Som. vttered when the Commissioners willed him to declare vnto them, who had perswaded him to say he did counter∣feit, wherevnto (being interrupted as it seemed by the Deuill) he stutteringlie answered, That the blacke dogge which brought him the bag of golde, did bidde him say so.
To second the trueth of the extraordinarie handling of this Som. Maister Treton, Maister Brown, and Maister

Ivington, commissioners, M. Hildersham, M. More, and M. Brincesley, all godly preachers, and some of them of great renowme for learning and grauiue, besides manie Gentlemen and others of good credite, volūtatilie haue offred to testifie the trueth in the premisses, but they haue bene reiected & sharplie censured. Petitions haue bene made for copyes of the allegations and depositions against this matter, and for awarding of new Cōmissions to indifferent persons for more full satisfaction: but hi∣therto none of these could be obteined, no not much as patient audience, or any iudiciall course of proceeding.
On the other side, the bare report of Som that he did counterfeit, and was instructed therevnto by M. Darrell (though it bee impossible to be true without the im∣peachment of the othes of infallible witnesses) is helde for authenticall, & long libells or legendis drawen ther∣vpon, which may be confuted by manifold witnesses, if they might be heard. But as if it were more then high treason to affirme the contrarie to that which one man relying vpon Som. relation hath auouched to the L. Archb of Canterb and it may be to your LL. & other personages of hie estate to be true, all witnesses without respect of their authoritie in the common wealth, their learning, grauitie, and approued credite, are scornfullie contemned, or insolentlie charged to medle no more in this matter, although it hath pleased hir most excellent Maiestic, by one of the Gentlemen of hir priuie Cham∣ber M. Fulk Cro∣will.to giue speciall commaundement, that the cause re∣ceiue indifferent hearing.
If the boyes wordes be of such credite that none may impugn them, why should not his words sealed at other times with othes and execations be of like value? After his dispossession & repossession, being sometimes come to him selfe, he voluntarily with his own hand writinge (which is yet to be seene) sheweth how it came to passe that he was induced to giue out that he had bene a coū∣terfeit, not vpon any ground of the trueth, but by the threates of Satan and his instruments. His own wordes are these: Being at A house of correction in Notinghars.Sent Iones, there came vnto me a thing like vnto a Dogg, and said vnto me, And if I would consent vnto him & say that I was a coūterfeit, he would giue me a bagge of golde, and if I woulde not, hee woulde make me be hanged, or else he would teare mee in peeces: Note this.And if I would, I should doe any thing that I would take in hand. And he would come to me like a Mouse, & would

* an asse hee meaneth. helpe me. And there came to me a thing like a Nass, and said, if I would not say that I was a Counterfeit, hee would cast me into the well, and so went away. And Ni∣cholaies Shepand said, and if I were in a fitt againe, hee would fetch a paire of Knipknapes & a roape, & he would make me cōfess. that he was a coūterfetconfesse, or else hang me. And Iohn Couper and Shepeard said, and if I would saye, that I was a Counter∣fait, that Maister Mēre and the Aldermene would giue M. Maior.me ten pound, and I should set vp any trade what I would, and I had better say that I was a Counterfeit, & liue like a man, then to haue nothing. For if I should saye, that I was not a Counterfeit, and goe into the Clergies haude, I should haue nothing. Out of which words of his, may be obserued, that this apparition of the Dogge, consorteth with that which the three Commissioners aforesaid did see, and Som. did vtter in the audience of diuers: Also that the Deuill and his agents conspire in one complott against this mighty worke of the Lorde Iesus. Lastlie, that it is no maruell though Som. delude the vnbelee∣uers by some rare actions, seeing the Deuill promised to helpe him in any thing he would take in hande. Thus Som. is confuted by Som. him selfe.
Yet because experience hath proued that this Som. is a viz. to his M. &c. knowne by the name of Frier. H.villanous wretch, and hath discredited him selfe to his friends by sundrie lewd practises of theeuerie and kna∣uerie since the Bish. of L. was possessed of him (whiche yet are concealed as Secreta imperij, Matters of State, and may not be spoken of in any case) therfore for more suretie least these prankes should be disclosed, Commis∣sions haue bene addressed into Notingham, to gather bet∣ter ground for these surmises. But contrarie to the com∣mendable course of proceedings vnder your LL. in the Commissions sent to Noting.courts of Iustice, those Commissions haue bene directed to the maine Aduersaries and informers against the de∣fendant: he not ioyning in commission with them, not hauing knowledge when they were graunted, or when or where they were to be sitt vpon. The witnesses that voluntarilie offred to be deposed for the trueth, were repulsed: all partiall persons that could be thought vp∣pon, were presently called. Such as were vnwillinge to depose, to satissie their malice, were threatned to be sent Katherine Wright.to London, and one was put in feare that she should be burned, because shee would not falselie depose against hir knowledge. These and such like exorbitant courses

(tedious to be recounted) haue bene vsed: euery tearme and vacation (for the space of a yeare) yeelding straung example of newe greeuance. To omit many particulars. Onely I commend one or two particulars to your LL. consideration. Thomas Gray of Langloy in the Countie of Leicester, Esquier, hauing bin heretofore Maister vn∣to Som. was by the Bish. of Lond. &c. although the Gentleman was bold to tel him, that his dealing should bee made knowen vnto his betters likewise. Whereas Maister Darrell had bene imployed about the disposses∣sing of Thomas Darling of Burton vpon Trent, into whō one Alice Goodridg had sent her familiar Spirit called Minnie (as hir selfe confessed, and for the same was cō∣demned as a witch by the Queenes Iustices, accordinge as in the Treatise following is declared) Now to the end there might bee gained some supplement of proofe to giue colour to the pretended counterfeiting betwene M. Darrell and Som. the said Darling and others haue bin examined vpon their othes by the aforenamed Bish. & drawen to confesse contrarie to the trueth, as them selues haue auouched, that Darling was a meere counterfeit, and was neither possessed nor bewitched. Whereby the iudgment giuen by the Queenes Iustices against the said Alice, for bewitching of Darling, is directly deseated & impeached, especiallie, if Sentence should be giuen here∣in. For if Darling did counterfeit, then hee was not be∣witched: and if he was not bewitched, then was the iudgement and execution against Alice Goodridge erro∣niously and wrongfullie awarded. Whether this practise may stande with the statute of Provision and Premunire, and with the honour which is due to the Temporall Courts, your LL. wisdomes cā best determine. Or if it be not in case of Premunire, it is an abuse which your LL. being now acquainted therwithall, will see redressed.
By this short recapitulation of indirect proceedinges, and that in a matter concerning Christ our common Sa∣uiour, contrarie to the Royall commaundement of our most gracious and soucraine Lady the Queenes Maie∣stie, hir Iawes and lawfull liberties of hir loyall subiects, you see what cause I haue to exhiblie this short Apolo∣gie vnto your LL. humblie crauing that you would al∣lowe some spare time to read it ouer: assuring my selfe, that though it be penned in simplicitie without colours and pompe of humane learning, yet it will leaue such

impression in you, as you will not onely incline to the cause, but also by your authoritie, cleare it of scandall.
It wilbe (perhaps) obiected, that by publishing this A cunning prae¦ctise to intitle the state to pri∣uate abuses. Treatise, I goe about to raise mutinies among ye Queenes subiectes, or to discredite the Ecclesiasticall stae, or hir Maiesties commission for ecclesiasticall causes, which neuer came within the intention of my purpose. All mu∣tinies either among the Subiectes or against my deare Soveraine, I detest from my hart to the lowest hell. And if one ecclesiasticall person among the Commissioners be chalenged before your LL. who are his betters, and equall in commission, and haue authoritie to redresse his abuses, what is this to the Ecclesiasticall estate or hie Ʋnskilfull men are neuer good Iusticers. Commission, which ought to bee honoured of all loyall subiectes? Againe, although by the meanes of the fore∣said partie (as being vnacquainted and ignorant how to proceed orderlie in matter of Iustice) it hath bene al∣readie Sentenced be∣fore hearing. giuen out, for this yeare last past, that all is coun∣terfait and Dorrell a cousener, as if he had bene delibe∣ratelie heard, the witnesses on both sides indifferentlie Discrete Iusti∣cers chide not before the par∣tie be cōuicted. examined and produced, and the Sentence in fine iudi∣cially and solemnly pronounced, yet in verie trueth the matter depondeth "vndecided: Therefore I trust that without offence, we not being admitted to informe your LL. according to the course of ordinarie proceedinges, Inauditi tan∣quam innocē∣tes percunt. may somewhat extraordinarilie in duetifull submission, endeuour to arrest iudgement, which being so vnduelie followed, cannot be lawfull.
Thus referring the consideration of these thinges to your HH. I beseeche the Lord almightie, to continue & increase your cares for the seruice of hir Maiestie, the be∣nefite of this Church and common Wealth, to the en∣largement of all true honour to your selues with comfort at the time of your death, a blessed memorie after life, and eternall happinesse to your bodies and soules in the life to come for euermore. AMEN.

Nullus liber homo capiatur vel imprisonetur, aut dissei∣sietur de libero tonemēto, vel libertatibus, vel liberis Enquire Whe∣ther this royall law doeth not bind a Bishop consuetudinibus suis, aut utlagetur aut exuletur, aut aliquo modo destruatur nec super eum ibimus, nec su∣per eum mittenius, nisi per legale iudioium parium su∣orum, vel per legam tortae. Nulli vendemus, nulli ne∣gabimus, aut differemus iustitiam aut rectum.
Magna Carta. Cap. 29.

