



We reade in the 11. of the Actes, that the Apostles and brethe∣ren
that were in Iudea,verse. 1. hearing that the Gentles had also receiu∣ed
the word of God by the preaching of Peter, were offended with him
for preaching vnto them, and that when Peter was come vp to Hierusa∣lem
they contended against him, and rebuked him for the same: But Peter
beginninge and expounding the thing in order vnto them, and shewinge
that he was commaunded of god so to doe in a vision, they held their
peace, and glorified god. Even so many of the ministers and brethren in
England hauinge bene offended with me for sayinge and standing in
this, that William Somers, Thomas Darling, Katherine Wright, and 7. in
Lancashire were possessed with vncleane spirites, and dispossessed of them
by prayer and fastinge, will I trust when they shall heare the matter in
order sett downe in this treatise following, not onely cease to be of∣fended
with me, but acknowledging the workes of god, magnifie him
for them. True it is that the people of god are borne mightelye in
hand that these are counterfeites, and haue bene theirvnto scholed if
not all, yet some of them by me, and the better to perswade this even
to the whole Church of England, theire hath bene a booke latelye
published by one S. H. entituled, A Discouerie of the fradulent practi∣ses
of IOHN Darrell: but how vntruly this is saide, and vnpossible to
be true appeareth at large by the Detection of that Discouery, and part¦ly
by this treatise, and peece of the Detection here following. VVhich
beinge so, this ought no more to hinder vs from embracinge these
workes of god,Lohn. 9. then the gainsayinge of the Pharises, ought to haue
kept backe the Iewes from beleiunge and acknowledginge the great
worke which Christ did, in giuinge sight to the man which was borne
blind: or that blasphemous speach of theirs, he casteth out deuils through
Beelzebub the prince of deuils,math. 11. 24. from confessing & iustifiyng that worke
of his: or that false, absurd, and ridiculous reporte of the watchmen,
(wherevnto they were hired by the Hie Preistes and Elders) that
Christ his disciples came by night and stole him away, while they slept,
from beleiuing the resurrection of Christ.math. 28. 12. Let not any then be here∣by
kept from giuinge eare vnto that which followeth, but rather pro∣uoked
to examine throughly what is saide of both sides: and then I
doubt not but whosoeuer he be it shall be as easie vnto him to per∣ceiue
on which side the truth is, as opening his eyes to discerne be∣twixt
light and darknes. And to the end the truth might appeare, &
not alwayes lye hid, and the falshood be conuinced which hath he∣therto
prevailed, I haue presumed to publish these followinge lynes:
wherein I could not be wantinge, if there were any loue in me to the
truth, or feare or loue to the god of truth, seeing the truth so vniuer

sally suppressed and troden as it were vnder the feete of men as mire
in the streetes: and the falshod raigne as a queene▪ what christian hart
or louer of the truth could endure to behold this, and let this vsur∣per
alone, if in his hand there was any power to plucke her out of
her thrones we can not (saith the apostle) doe any thing against the truth,
but for the truth. If at all times then we are to contend for the truth,
by speach,2. Cor. 13. 8. by writing, & by euery good way as their shall be cause,
yea to doe any thing for the truth, the manifestation and publishing of
it, and the inducing of men to receiue it: much more when the truth
is impugned▪ and this is our present case.
And that it may be more manifest that heerin I haue performed
a necessarie dutie, such as without sinne against god I could not haue
omitted: we must remember that we are commaunded to publishe
the workes of god whereof any of vs be witnesses, as appeareth by
Psalme 105. 1. 2: and 107. 8. 21. 31. Mar, 5. 19 perswaded thervnto
by reasons or arguments, as appeareth by Psalme. 78, and 111. 2. 3.
4. Math. 10. 32. It is commended vnto vs in the practise and ex∣ample
of the servants of god: as appeareth by Psalme. 9. 1. and 66. 5.
and 1. 17. & 78. 4. Luk. 2. 17. mar. 5. 20. Act. 12. 17. & 14. 27. we
are threatened if herein we faile as appeareth by exodus 20. 7. math.
10. 33. If now euery eye or eare witnes of the workes of god is to
publish and make knowne the same to others, much more the princi∣pall
witnesses, and such a one was I: and most of all they whom god
hath giuen and called to suffer for giuing testimonie to his workes,s 4. 20. as
he hath done me. Such aboue all others must with Peter & Iohn say:
we can not but speake and publish the thinges which we haue seene and
heard. And if at all times we ought to testifie, make knowne, & iusti¦fie
the great workes of god, much more then, when such a worke is
not onely gainsaid, but an evill name and vile report brought vpon
it, and him whom the Lord vsed theirin: and this is our present estat
and condition.
VVhen the holy ghost fell vpon the Apostles in visible manner,
so as they begane to speake with other tongs,. 2. 11. as the spirit gaue them
vtterance: some mocked and said, they are full of new wine. Against this
vile slaunder of the wonderfull worke of god, and his most righteous
servantes, Peter stoode vp and made an Apologie sayinge: ye men of
Iudah these are not drunken,th. 9. 33. 34, 12. 22. as yee suppose, since it is but the third houre of
the day. But this is that which was spoken by the prophet Ioell &c. as it fol¦loweth
their vntill verse 37. 11. 14. In like sorte dealt our blessed Sauiour in
this very worke we haue in hand. when he cast the deuill out of some
which were possessed, the people in deede were aased therat, and
wondered saying, the lik was neuer seene in Israel. But the Pharises said,

he casteth out deuils through Beelzebub the prince of deuils. Against this
blasphemous speach and report giuen out by the pharises, against this
great worke, and Christ him selfe whom theirein they counted for a
coniurer, & bare the people so in hand, Christ Iesus maketh a deence
and in the same by sundrie reasons convinceth them: the which also is
writtē for our learning. And what are we to learne out of these scrip∣tures?
surely by their examples & practise, to doe the like in the like
case, and when such occasion is offered. That is, whē any great worke
of god is wrought in our eyes, & that some shall goe about to mocke
at it: and bring vp an euill name of it: that then and in such a case we
must not be silent, and content our selues with this, that we our selues
conceiue well of the worke, and profite by it: but we must open our
mouthes wide in the defence of it, labourīg to our vttermost to stope
the mouth of the gainsayer, & to wipe away the slaunder, least others
also receiue hurt thereby, and that God may haue the glorie of his
work of allmē, if it be possible. And as all the beholders of such a work
are vpō all occasions to beare witnes therevnto, & to iustifie the same
when it is denyed or slaundered, as they are able as shall hereeafter
further appeare: so those specially vpon whom the worke hath bene
wrought, or haue bene principall witnesses theirof If then I desire to
walke in the steeps of S. Peter, yea of Christ Iesus himselfe, and to prac∣tise
that which the holy ghost in theire examples and practise in the
like case with ours, doth commend vnto vs: how could I doe other∣wise
then make this Apologie? And if I should haue abstayned from
the publishing theirof, I see not but that theirin I should haue failed
in the performance of a necessarie dewtie, and so sinned against god:
& preferred my owne quiet before the glorie of god, and good of his
people. Neither let any mā thinke that it would have suffised to haue
done this inspeach: for to speake all that might be said in a corner to
some few would not availe, seeing this vile slaunder and evill reporte
of the workes of god, & my selfe whom god vsed theirin, hath spread
it selfe farr and neare, even throughout the whole land to the obscu∣ring
and drakening yea annihilating of them, if it were possible▪ it was
necessarie therfore that that which should be said for the convincing
thereof and in iustificatin of these workes should goe as far & wide,
which could not be without printinge. This I say considered it were
not sufficient for me, or a sufficient discharge of my dutye, to wysper
that which followeth in the eare, or speake of it in a corner: but rather
to speake of that in the light, which I haue seene in darknes and what
I haue heard in the eare, and beheld in secret places, to preach on the
houses.

Moreover, if it be so that the doctrine of possession, and of dispos∣session,
and of the meanes thereof, etc doe lye in a manner hid & not
knowne nor acknowledged almost by any: Is it not high time it were
reuealed and brought to light? Is it not parte of the counsell of god,
to the reuelation of all which wee are debtors? And when can any
thinge be done more seasonably then now to treat both of the gene∣rall
doctrine,act. 20, 27. and particular workes we speake of▪ what can come in
better season then even now a treatise concerninge William Somers
his possession, when the eares of all men are opened, to heare what
can be saide as touching the said Somers? how many are their not on∣lye
of the common sorte, but of those which are noble, wise, and
learned, which are verie desierous to be informed in the truth of this
matter? and could this possiblie haue bene done but by this course I
haue taken? And by whom should this latter be performed, but by
my selfe, considering I onely haue bene a cheife witnes of the possessi¦on
and dispossession of all these persons controverted, and called by
god therevnto? I ran not to any of my selfe: wherin, and in callinge
me to suffer for the same, the Lord seemeth to me to haue singled
me out though most vnworthy, and more vnfite then many others,
to this speciall worke. It stoode me then vpon to performe this ser∣vice
whervnto god hath called & appoynted me, otherwise I should
haue my reward with the vnprofitable servant: If either for feare or
slouthfulnes I had fayled theirin. Heerevnto I might add, that I see
many erring exceedinglye herein, and greatlie mistakinge this matter
both in the generall and particular, and heereof I am most sure, and
able also to make that evident vnto them. should I then haue done
well to let them alone?
And for asmuch as many not onely of the irreligious, but of such
as professe the feare of god (as in experience I haue obserued,) regard
not these workes of god: either receiuing the false report that is givē
out against them, or not earnestly considering of them, to the stirring
vp of their owne hartes to prayse god for the same, & make their vse
of them: wherevpon it cometh that the best of these are vnable to de
fend and cleare these workes from that evill name of counterfeitinge
which is cast vpon them, and stope the mouth of the aduersarie: and
that non of them contendeth according to his place for them, & the
convincinge of the aduersarie: that these (I say) may see their sinne &
be prouoked with others to heare and consider of that which follow∣eth:
they must remember, that all the workes of the Lord are great, and
ought to be sught out of all them that loue them,al. 111. 2. and theirfore this: that
it is the propertie of a wise man to obserue the workes of God, and
therefore of fooes to neglect or not regard them. VVhen the pro∣phet

had throughout the 107. Psalme made mention of the mani∣fould
workes or the Lord, and often moued men to confesse before the
Lord his louing kindnes,ver. 8. 15. 21. 31 and his wonderfull works before the sonnes of men,
he concludeth thus: who is wise that he may obserue these thinges? In
the 77. Psalme the prophet in the name of the Church saith: I re∣membred
the workes of the Lord: I did also meditate in all thy workes, and
did deuise of thine actes. And Dauid thus▪ I meditate in all thy workes,
I doe meditate the workes of thine handes. This is the end of the Lordes
great workes: He hath made his wonderfull workes to be had in remem∣brance.
VVhen the Lord then doth any great worke, we must remem¦ber
and obserue it,v. 11. psal. 143, 5. ps. 111. 4 ps, 91, 4 psal. 105,  yea meditate theirin, that so we may the better be¦hold
the power, the wisdome, the Iustice, and mercy of God, and
prayse and magnifie him for the same. Thou Lord (saith the prophet.)
hast made me glad by thy works, I will reioyce in the workes of thine hands.
O Lord, how glorious are thy workes? And againe: declare his workes a∣monge
the people: singe vnto him sing prayse vnto him, and talke of all his
wonderfull workes. And as thus we are to obserue, meditate, and remem¦ber
the workes of God, and prayse him for them: and not onely so, but to
others also talk of his workes, & declare or publish them to his people:
so it is the duetie of all the Lords people to iustifie and defend them,
when there shall be a slaunder raysed vpon them, as partly is touch∣ed
before. VVhen Christ had cast the deuill out of one, and the pha∣risees
had slaundered that worke of his, (as is aforesaid,) affirminge
that he did it by the deuill, he did not onely convince them: and shew
the haynousnes of their sinne, that theirin they had committed that
sinne which should neuer be pardoned, even the sinne against the ho¦lye
ghost: but besides admonish those which by their silence did ap∣proue
that slaunder of the Pharisees, when they should haue iustifi∣ed
the worke, and defended Christes innocencie. Of these he pro∣nounceth,
that he accounteth them also among his aduersaries,math. 12. 30. saying:
He that is not with me, is against me & he that gathereth not with me, scat¦tereth.
He that is not with me, &c. that is, he who is not on my side▪
meaninge: he who defendeth me not against the aduersaries: my
workes against the slaunders they giue of them, and my doctrines a∣gainst
theire obiections, he is against me, that is, him I recken in the
number of my aduersaries. VVherby we may learne, (to applye this
scripture more nearely) that it is not nough, not to slaunder or im∣pugne
the workes of God which haue bene wrought amonge vs, as
some doe: but that moreover we take heede that we approue not the
slaunder of counterfeiting giuen out against them by our silence, but o¦pen
our movthes in the defence and iustification of them. Otherwise
we shalbe reckened by Christ in the number of aduersaries. And here

vnto tendeth that other sayinge of our Sauiour: wisdome is iustified o
her children. As this teacheth all of vs our dutie, and that we ought
to contend for these workes of god, iustifiyng them, to which pur∣pose
I alledge it so particularlye my selfe, and hath (through the
grace of God) prouoked me to write the treatise following in iusti∣fication
of these works, and another treatise for the taking away
of that slaunder of counterfeiting, which Sathan hath raysed
vp for the obscuringe of them. The Lord giue those
who professe them selues to be frends of Christ, and
to be of his side, to shew it in taking parte
with him against his adversaries.

