



Grace and peace from God the Father, and the Lord Iesus Christ his Sonne, with the assistance of Gods holy spirit, to the end and in the end: Amen.
FInding this little Treatise, (Sister, dearelie beloued in Christ) of late yeares a∣mongst my other Papers, which I made about twen∣tie yeares and one agoe, Immediatlie after the death of your godlie Parentes of good memory, with whome I was most dearlie acquainted in Christ, by reason of the troble I suffered in those daies

for the good cause, wherin God made them chiefe comforters vnto me till death sepa∣rated vs. As I vewed it over, and reade it be∣fore some godly persones of late, they were most instant with me, that I woulde suffer it to come to light, to the stirring vp of the zeale of Gods people amongst vs, which now beginneth almost to be quenched in all estates none excepted. So that the saying of the worthie servaunt of God Iohn Knox, (a∣mong many other his fore-speakings) pro∣ueth true, that is; That as the Gospel entred a∣mong vs, and was receiued with feruencie and heat: so he feared it should decay, and lose the for∣mer bewtie▪ through coldnes, and lothsomnesse, howbeit (as he saide many times) it should not vtterly be overthrown in Scotland, til the com∣ming of the Lord Iesus to iudgment, in spite of Sa¦than & malice of al his slaues. Howbeit indeed it is not to be denied, but that the prophesie of that worthie Martyr M. George Wishart, shal proue as true, who prophccying of the victorie of the trueth shortly to followe in Scotland: saide, but allace, if after so great light and libertie of the Gospell in Scotland, the peo∣ple

shall become vnthankfull, then fearfull and terrible shal the plagues be that after shal follow.
But to the purpose, to their request a length I yeelded, although long vnwilling, in respect of the basenesse of the forme of writing, which yet at the time of the making thereof, I thought most familiar according to the old maner of our Countrie, to moue our people to followe the example of these godly persones according to their callings and estate. And so beeing yet put in good hope that it would profite, I was contented it should bee after this manner published, committing the issue to our good GOD, who worketh sometimes by base meanes to some profit of the Church, according to his good pleasure. The saying also of Gregorie Nazianzene, writing of Basile the great after his death, did  a little incourage me, it beeing by Gods providence in my handes when I was about to write this: The sense whereof followeth.
It is a thing of most dutifull affection, to commend the memory of holy persones that are departed, especially of such, as haue bene of most

, vvhether it be by friends or stran∣gers: I haue directed it vnto you, deare Si∣ster, by name, that yee may make your profite of it in particular, for confirming you by the woorthie example of your Pa∣rents, in these evill and declining daies, in that Godlie course of Christianitie, where∣in it hath pleased GOD to make you suc∣ceede vnto them, no lesse than to the world∣lie heritage, proceeding rightly from them to you, after the death of their onely Sonne Nathaniel your Brother: though not with∣out your crosse, your masters loving badge, given to you to beare, no doubt for your profite: The Lord strengthen you to beare it to his glorie and your comfort: And so I ende with this sentence of BASILE, Take heede to your selfe, that ye may take heed to God:
Farewell in Christ: From Edinburgh the 24. of May. 1595.

