




THE Muses, sacrifice; I, consecrate;
They, vnto Heau'n; I, to you, heau'nly THREE:
They, my poore Heart; I, my Loues rich Estate,
together with my Rimes, that rarer be.


But what can be more rare than richest Loue,
sith so rich Loue is, now, so rarely found?
Yes; measur'd-words, that, out of measure, moue
the Soule to Heau'n, from Hel that's most profound!


A vexed Soule for Follies, that betray
the Soule to Death, some call the nether Hell:
Thence moue my Measures; and, doe make such way,
that they all Lets to giue way, doe compell.


These Rarities, which my poore Soule confines,
her treble-Zeale to you (three Graces) brings
For Grace, as glorious as the Sunne that shines
(as bright, as chearefull) on inferiour Things.



Such Grace you haue, by Vertue, and by Fate,
as makes you Three, the Glory of these Times;
The MVSES Darlings, and their Chaires of STATE;
Shapers, and Soules of all Soule-charming Rimes!


BEDFORD, the beaming-glory of thy HOVSE
that makes it Heau'n on Earth, thy Worths are such,
As all our WITS make most miraculous,
because thy WIT and WORTH doe worke so much.


For, WIT and SP'RIT, in Beauties Liuery,
doe still attend thine all-commanding EYES;
And, in th' Achiuements of thine Ingenie,
the glosse thereof, like Orr, on Sable lies.


The Wombe that bare thee, made thy noble Breast
abound with Bountie, yer thou knew'st thy Fate;
Where furnisht was that Bountie with the best
of Honors Humors, giuing Her the Mate.


For which, all Poets Plowes (their Pennes) doe plow
the fertil'st Grounds of ART; and, in the same,
Thy still-increasing Praises (thicke) doe sow,
to yeeld Aeternitie thy Crop of Fame!


PEMBROKE, (a Paragon of Princely PARTS,
and, of that Part that most commends the Muse,
Great Mistresse of her Greatnesse, and the ARTS,)
Phoebus and Fate makes great, and glorious!



A Worke of Art and Grace (from Head and Heart
that makes a Worke of Wonder) thou hast done;
Where Art, seemes Nature; Nature, seemeth Art;
and, Grace, in both, makes all out-shine the Sunne.


So sweet a Descant on so sacred Ground
no Time shall cease to sing to Heau'nly Lyres:
For, when the Spheares shall cease their gyring sound,
the Angels then, shall chaunt it in their Quires.


No Time can vaunt that ere it did produce
from femine Perfections, so sweet Straines
As still shall serue for Men and Angels vse;
then both, past Time, shall sing thy Praise & Paines.


My Hand once sought that glorious WORKE to grace;
and writ, in Gold, what thou, in Incke, hadst writ:
But Gold and highest Art are both too base
to Character the glory of thy Wit!


And didst thou thirst for Fame. (as all Men doe)
thou would'st, by all meanes, let it come to light;
But though thou cloud it, as doth Enuy too,
yet through both Clouds it shines, it is so bright!


Where bright DESERT fore-goes; a spurre is Praise
to make it runne to all that glorifies:
Of such Desert, i ought eclipse the Rayes,
it euer shames FAMES publicke-Notaries.



CARY (of whom Minerua stands in feare,
lest she, from her, should get ARTS Regencie)
Of ART so moues the great-all-mouing Spheare,
that eu'ry Orbe of Science moues thereby.


Thou mak'st Melpomen proud, and my Heart great
of such a Ppill, who, in Buskin fine,
With Feete of State, dost make thy Muse to mete
the Scenes of Syracuse and Palestine.


Art, Language; yea; abstruse and holy Tongues,
thy Wit and Grace acquir'd thy Fame to raise;
And still to fill thine owne, and others Songs;
thine, with thy Parts, and others, with thy praise▪


Such neruy Limbes of Art, and Straines of Wit
Times past ne'er knew the weaker Sexe to haue;
And Times to come, will hardly credit it,
if thus thou giue thy Workes both Birth and Graue.


Yee Heau'nly Trinary, that swayes the State
of ARTS whole Monarchie, and WITS Empire,
Liue long your Likes (vnlike) to animate
(for all Times light) to blow at your Arts Fire.


For, Time now swels, (as with some poysonous Weede)
with Paper-Quelkchose, neuer smelt in Scholes;
So, made for Follies Excesse; for, they feede
but fatten not; if fatten, tis but Fooles.



What strange Chimeaes Wit, (nay Folly) frames
in these much stranger Times, weake Wits t'affright
Besides themselues! for, Wits Celestiall Flames,
now spend much Oyle, yet lend but little Light!


And what they lend, is (oft) as false, as small;
so (to small purpose) they great Paines doe take
But to be scorn'd, or curst, or loth'd of all
that, by their false-light, foulely doe mistake.


For, to giue Light that leads light Men awry,
is Light that leades to Darknesse; then such, Light
Were better out, than still be in the Eye
of Men, that (so) doe, lightly, runne from RIGHT.


For, while such Light doth shine, the Multitude
(like Moates in Sunne) with their Confusion plaies;
Not weighing, o'er their Heads, how Errors Cloud
the while, doth threat, t'o'er-whelme them many waies.


By pouring downe the Haile of hard Conceits
gainst God and Goodnesse, that doe batter both:
Or else, by saddest Showres of darke Deceits,
borne as the fickle Winde of Fancy blowth:


By Lightning; that doth still more hurt than good;
while Errors Thunder-claps make sowre the sweet
(Yea, sweetest) drinke of Nature (our best Bloud)
that doth with Melancholy-madnesse meet.



By all that may (at least) giue some offence
to complete Vertue, Wisedome, Wit, and Art:
For, Ignorance, hath oft more Insolence,
than puffing Knowledge to take Errors part.


Disease of Times, of Mindes, Men, Arts, and Fame,
vaine Selfe-conceit, how dost thou ply the Presse
Of People and the Printer, with thy shame,
clad in the Coate of Fustian-foolishnesse?


For, all that but pretend t'haue Art or Wit,
so trauell with Conceit, amisse conceiu'd,
That, till the Presse deliuer them of It,
their Throwes are such as make them Wit-bereau'd!


Yet, if the Issue of their crazed Braines
doe chance (though monstrously) to com to light;
Lord! how they hugge it, like the Ape that straines
her young so hard, in loue, as kils it quite.


What Piles of Pamphlets, and more wordy Bookes,
now farse the World! wherein, if Wisdome look,
She shall see nothing worthy of her Lookes,
vnlesse the idle Likenesse of a Booke!


But WIT's most wrong'd by priuiledge of Schoole:
for, Learnings Drunkards now so ply the Pot
(Of Incke I meane) Posteritie to foole,
as shames Wits Name, although they touch him not.



Some that but looke into Diuinitie
with their left Eye, with their left Hand do write
What they obserue, to wrong Posteritie,
that by this Ignis fatuis roame by Night.


Some search the Corpes of all Philosophie,
and eu'ry Nerue and Veyne so scrible on,
That where it should be Truths Anatomie,
they make it Errors rightest Scheleton.


Some others on some other Faculties,
still (fondly) labour, but to be in Print:
(O poore Ambition!) so, their Folly flies
abroad the World, like Slips, that shame their Mint.


But Poesie (dismall Poesie) thou art
most subiect to this sou'raigne Sottishnesse;
So, there's good Cause thou shouldst be out of heart,
sith all, almost, now put thee vnder Presse.


And Wit lies shrowded so in Paper-sheetes,
bound Hand and Foote with Cords of Vanities:
That (first) with all Obscuritie it meetes;
so, tis impossible it ere should rise.


But you Three Graces, (whom our Muse would grace,
had she that glory, that our Philip had,
That was the Beautie of Arts Soule and Face)
you presse the Presse with little you haue made.



No; you well know the Presse so much is wrong'd,
by abiect Rimers that great Hearts doe scorne
To haue their Measures with such Nombers throng'd.
as are so basely got, conceiu'd, and borne.


And, did my Fortunes not expose me to
contempt of Greatnesse, sith so meane I am,
I should, with Greatnesse, greatly scorne it too,
sith Fame for Versing, now, is held but Shame.


But, in that Veyne lies not that Maladie;
no, It is sound, and holds Arts purest Bloud,
Which therein flowes to each Extremitie
of Arts whole Body, for the publike-good.


Here-hence it came, that diuine Oracles
(Apollos Dialect, great God of Art)
Were still exprest in measur'd Sillables,
sith squarest Thoughts most roundly they impart.


In which respect it's meet'st to make Records
of memorable Accidents of Time:
Of Princes Liues, and Actions of great Lords:
which Poets, first, did Chronicle in Rime.


Nay, they were first that Natures Workes obseru'd,
and Bookt it out for young Philosophers:
Yea, they were first, by whom, is still conseru'd
the knowledge of Heau'ns motions, and the Starres.



Who sought to finde each Substance separate,
and, in their curious Search, sound what they were;
And, to the Life, did them delineate
on Arts faire Front, that there, more faire, appeare!


Then, Poets were the first Philosophers;
first State-obseruers, and Historians:
First Metaphickes, and Astronomers,
yea, first Great-clarks, and Astrologians.


And, therefore, were they, in the Worlds first Age,
pow'rfull'st Perswaders; whose sweet Eloquence:
(That euer, staidly, ranne from holy Rage)
was the first Rethoricke sprung from Sapience.


For, should we giue this Empresse but her due,
(Empresse of speech that Monarchizeth Eares)
We must confesse, she can all Soules subdue,
to Passions causing Ioy, or forcing Teares.


It is a Speech of most Maiesticke state,
that makes Reas'ns Forces not to be with-stood:
The Tethys, that doth still predominate
th'outragious Ocean of our boyling bloud!


For, it doth flow more fluent from the Tongue.
and, in the flowing, carries all with it,
Which but attempts the Torrent to impugne
and Rockes of Art remoues, to Seas of Wit!



Succinct it is, and easier to retaine
(which with our Wits and Wils doth est agree)
Than Prose, lesse subiect to iust Measures Raigne:
for, Prose from Measures Rule is (loosely) free.


And, for it's ofter vs'd, it cloyes the ae;
nor so compos'd of Measures Musicall;
And not allow'd that Beautie Verse mu beare,
nor yet the Cadence so Harmonicall.


It's not adornd with choise of such rich Words,
which heau'nly Poesi gracefully doth heare;
Nor licens'd that fine phrae▪ Art Verse affords,
then, to diuinest Spirits it should be deare:


For, tis the Honie of all Rethoricks Flow'ers,
the Quintessence of Art, and Soule of Wit;
Right spirit of Words, true phrase of Heau'nly Pow'rs;
and, in a Word; for Heau'n, all-onely, fit.


But Time these Times, it seemes, in Malice chose,
to mischiefe Poets; for, it ne'er brought orth
To this wilde World (mad-merry still in Prose)
such worthy Poets, yet so litte worth.


And, how should they be otherwise? for, they
can twist no Lines, that hold eternall Rime,
On Rockes of Art; but much Time turnes away;
so, get but Fame and Famine in that Time.



For, Time they spend in that which none regards,
but such as would, but can no Larges giue:
While other Arts, more poore, get rich Rewards:
so, Phoebus Sonnes, by Luster, onely, liue!


The Painter, that is Master of his Skill,
and but with Earthly Coulors paints (alone)
Meere Formes of Beasts, hath oft Reward at Will;
but, Poets Paintings, though diuine, haue none.


But Painters, sith to Poets they draw nye,
(saue that they draw inne Gold (vnlike them) still)
And, paint so liuely in dumbe Poesie,
I wish their gaine as great as is their Skill.


For, Pictures speake, although they still be dumbe;
and what they cannot speake, they recompence
With Demonstration; so, can Soules o'er-come,
as soone by silence, as by Eloquence.


But Trades (that doe but Case the Corps aright
with our owne Cost, (which oft they teih, at least)
But aske and haue: when they that clothe the Sp'rit
in Vertues Robes, are paid but with a Ieast.


Which Iesters Memories I wish may be
'mong Trencher-Bustons, Fooles, and Naturals,
Preseru'd by Poets for Posteritie
to weepe or laugh at, as the Humor fals.



For, Poets best preserue the fame or shame
of good or bad▪ sith with their pow'rfull Penne,
They giue the Vertuous an immortall Names;
but, make the vicious liue, still loth'd of Men.


No earthly Matter (howsoeuer wrought,
though it (withall) be rais'd aboue the Clouds)
Can Fame vphold, but it will fall to nought:
for, Earth, in Time, her brauest Buildings shrouds.


Those Threatners of the Skye, proud Ilium,
Byrza of Carthage, Towre of Babilon,
Where are they now, with all their state, become?
are they not all, to all Confusion gone?


Where's Neroes golden-Palace, that drew drye
(had it been liquid) freest Founts of Gold?
Asinius Pollioes Court of Liberty,
so rare for state, are now turn'd both to Molde.


Nay, that proud Pyramed is come to nought,
that, pight neere Memphis, seem'd to proppe the Skie,
Whereon, three-hundred-threescore-thousand wrought
full twenty Yeeres, before it rought so hie!


Some Authors say, the Ground-worke of the same
tooke vp an hundred Furlongs in the Round:
Which higher rose, aspiring, like a Flame,
yet now, of this, no Sparke is to be found.



Much lesse doth any Author testifie
what King (of Fame desirous) rais'd the same:
A most iust plague to checke their vanitie,
that so-in Lime and Stone, entombe their Name.


What rests of Scaurus Amphitheater,
than which, I wot not whether all the Cost
Caligula and Nero did conferre
on all their Buildings, most admir'd, were most!


The Scene whereof, three Stages did containe,
whereon three hundred Collumnes and threescore
Of rarest Marble (deckt with many a Veyne
of orient Coulors) held vp eyther Floore.


Which Pillers, eight and thirty Foote in height,
were each but of one Piece, in each Degree;
Wherein an hundred thousand people might
be plac'd, secure, the Spectacles to see.


And (in the midst) the Stage was all of Glasse,
made thicke, to beare the Actors waight thereon;
Three Thousand Copper-statues all did grace;
besides some Gold, and some refulgent Stone!


And onely for a Month (no longer then
the Playes were playing) was it to endure:
Yet, being but a Romane Cittizen
that made it such, his Fame still sutes his pow'r.



The rather sith he, to adorne the Muse,
this Cost bestow'd; or else (perhaps) his Fame
Had beene, with Neroes, much, but monstrous;
the Muse alone then, well renownes a Name.


Yet, now her Agents are so poore become
in Minde and state, that, for an abiect Fee,
They'l honor (to their shame) but HONORS skum;
yea, Deifie a Diu'll, if he be free.


But, strong Necessitie constraines the same,
(as Israels Singer did the Shew-bread eate
By like constraint) yet, they are Lords of FAME;
and, where they charge with it, there's no retreit.


For, though Time-present see it mis-bestow'd,
yet if Wits Engine it doe rarely raise,
Of Times to come, It shall be so allow'd,
that both the prais'd and praiser, they will praise!


Yet, speake a Language ew doe apprehend;
so few affect it: for, wee nought affect,
But what our Vnderstandings comprehend;
no maruell then the most this Art neglect.


Nay, were't but so, yet Poesie still should finde
some grace with some, whom Art makes great, of vile:
But now such thinke, it but distracts the Minde;
for, broken-Braines such great-Ones Poets stile.



Vnfit for serious vse, vnfit for all
that tends to perfect Mans Felicitie;
Light, idle, vaine, and what we worse may call,
yea, though it were the Skumme of Vanitie.


And would these Truths were all true Falacies,
(though Poets used to none of these incline:
For, personall faults are not the Faculties,
that is not onely faultlesse, but diuine.)


But tis too true in many that professe
the Art; though Leaden Lumpes: for, none can swim
In Helicon without that Happinesse,
which, from his Mothers Wombe, he brought with him.


And, tis as true if Grace and Gouernment,
doe not containe the Minde, in Raptures high,
But it, of Wit, may make so large extent,
as it may cracke the strongest Ingenie.


So may it doe in other Mysteries,
and that which we most praise, may most impeach:
Diuinitie it selfe may soon'st doe this,
if Grace with-hold not from too high a Reach.


Then, let this Arte (which is the Angels speech)
(for, to the High'st they speake in nought but Hymnes,
Which, in the Wombe, they doe true Poets teach)
be freed from speech, that but her glory dimmes.



Then let the ignorant-great-highly base
reuile her ne'er so much, they but bewray
Their owne Defects therby, and giue but grace
to Folly, darkned with Arts glorious Raie.


But no great Spirit▪ (whose temper is diuine,
and dwels in reall-GREATNES) but adores
The Heau'nly MVSE, that in Arts Heau'n doth shine
like Phoebus, lending Light to other Lores.


To you therefore (that Arte predominate
great in your Vertue, Skill, and Fortunes too)
My Muse held meet'st these Flights to consecrate,
sith you most grace the Muse in most you doe.


And as the Sunne doth glorifie each Thing
(how euer base) on which he deignes to smile:
So, your cleare Eyes doe giue resplendishing
to all their Obiects be they ne'er so vile:
Then, looke on These and Me, with such a Glance,
That both may shine through your bright Countenance.


