



RIGHT REƲEREND,
WHen I preached at Carlil at the last Assises, I made no other account, but that my sermon should (like Aristo∣tlesArist. de hist. animal. lib. 5. cap. 19 Ephemeron) haue died the same day that it tooke breath. Since which time I haue beene in∣treated by diverse to make it common: to whom I would not yeeld the least assent, as doubting that their desires proceeded ra∣ther from affection towards the speaker, thē from a sound iudgement of the things spo∣ken. But when I perceived how distastfull it was to some, that beare Romish hearts in English breasts; I resolved, as David did whē Micol mocked him for dancing before the arke, to be yet more vile, by publishing that vnto their eies, which before was deli∣vered to their eares; hoping that the more
 it displeaseth them the better acceptance it shall finde with the true Israelite. Which now at length I haue effected. So that as be∣fore they heard it (or at least heard of it) so now they may read it. And if I haue evill spoken let thē beare witnesse of the evil, but if I haue said wel, why do they smite me? It seems to thē a meere calumniation to say that there is no probability that a Pa∣pist shall liue peaceably with vs, & performe true and sincere obedience towardes our Prince. To whom I might returne the short answere of the Lacones to their adversary, Si: if it were so, my speech was not to no pur∣pose, because not only rebels to the king, but much more to God and his true worship and service, are to be rooted out of a Christian commonwealth. And if those bee worthy a sharpe censure which agreeing vvith vs in the fundamentall points of Divinity, cannot away with the carved worke of our tem∣ple, but cut it downe as it were with axes & hammers: how much more those Sanballats and Tobiahs, that strike at the foundation thereof, and say of it, as did the children of Edom in the day of Ierusalem, down with it, downe with it, even to the ground.
But I rather say, O si, I wish it were so, &
 that there were no feare of danger by their meanes and devises. But this I doubt can∣not be effected, vnlesse there be, I will not say with the Oratour, a wal, but a sea betweene them and vs. Till then there is as great pro∣bability of peace betweene vs as there was of old betweene the Catholikes and the Do∣natists, the Orthodoxall and the Arians, the Hebrewes and the Egyptians, the Iewes and the Samaritans:
Immortale odium & nunquam sana∣bile vulnus. And for true loialty, and faithful obedience there is as great probability, as that the two poles shall meete. The King and the Pope are two contrary masters none can truely serue them both; Either he must hate the one, and loue the other, or he must leane to the one and despise the other. The obe∣dience which either of thē requires is so re∣pugnant, that they cannot lodge within one brest. This loialty which our adversaries do outwardly pretende is but equivocall, no more true loialty, thē a dead hand is a hand; it wants the very forme and soule (if I may so speake) of true dutifulnesse, which is to performe obedience voluntarily and with a free heart for Gods cause, as to Christs im∣mediate
 Vicar over all persons within his dominions. It is with some secret reservati∣on, till their primus motor, the man of sin, vpon whom their obedience depends, shall sway them an other way: or rebus sic stanti∣bus, the state standing as it doth, & donec publica bullae executio fieri possit, vntill they may haue power and strength to resist. So that I may vse the same words vnto thē which Austin doth to the Rogatists,Aug. ep. 48. Saevi∣re vos nolle dicitis, ego non posse arbi∣tror; ita enim estis numero exigui, vt mo∣vere vos contra adversarias vobis multi∣tudines non audeatis, etsi cupiatis. I speak chiefly of such as are grounded in the prin∣ciples of Popish divinity, & take for current whatsoever is stamped in Romes mint. As for their ignorāt followers I only giue them that censure, which S. Paul giues the Iews; They haue the zeale of God, but not ac∣cording to knowledge, for they being ignorant of the righteousnesse of God, & going about to stablish their owne righ∣teousnes, haue not submitted themselues to the righteousnesse of God.
I haue adventured to ioine with this an other Sermon preached before vpon a like occasion (so farre as I could gather it out of
 a few scattered papers flying abroad like Sy∣billa's leaues,
—rapidis ludibria ventis. Which I haue the rather done, because my experiēce these few years in the coūtry, hath taught me how commō those sins are which I haue herein endeavoured to reproue. If these my labours shall not bee distastfull, I shall bee willing to goe forward in a greater subiect. Howsoever they shall be taken, I submit them to the censure of your Lord∣ship, and of everie indifferent Reader (not counting what carping Momus can say a∣gainst thē) in the words of iudicious Vives;Lud. Vives in August. de de Civit Dei li. vlt. c. vlt▪ Si quid dixi quod placeat, habeat lector gratiam Deo propter me; si quid quod nō placeat, ignoscat mihi propter Deum & malè dictis det veniam propter benè dicta; and of holy Austin in the conclusion of his long discourse de Trinitate, Domine Deus vnus & trinitas, quaecun{que} dixi de tuo agnoscant & tui, si qua de meo & tu ignosce & tui.

