



KIng Henry the Second (my most hono∣rable good Lord) was the first King of England after the Norman Conquest, that was styled Lord of Ireland. Yet are there no recordes of that kings time remaining, whereby it may appeare, that he establi∣shed any forme of Civill gouernment in this land. But it is manifest by many re∣cordes, and stories, that his sonne King Iohn made the first division of Counties in Ireland, published the lawes of England, and commaunded the due execution thereof in all those countries which he had made, erected the Courts of Iustice, made the Stan∣dard of Irish moneys equall with the English: Breefely, hee did order & settle the government heere in all pointes, according to the Modell of the common-wealth of England. And to that end, when him∣selfe in person came over into Ireland the second time (which was in the twelfth yeare of his raigne) he brought with him many lear∣ned persons in the lawe, and other Officers, & ministers of all sorts, to put the English lawes in execution: whereof there is a notable record in the Tower of London, 11. Henr. 3. Patent. Membr. 3. agreeing with that which is related by Matth. Paris. histor. magn. sol. 220 b.
After which time the recordes of all legall Actes & proceedings, namely the Piperolls, containing the charge of the revenue both Cer∣taine & casuall, the Plearolls, containing as well Common pleas, as pleas of the Crowne, Parliament Rolls, Charters, Patents, Commissions, & Inqui∣sitions,

were made vp in good forme in euery kings time, till the la∣ter end of the raigne of King Henry VI, when by reason of the dis∣sension of the two Royall houses, the state of England neglecting the gouernment of this Realme, the Clarks and Officers grewe also negligent in the execution of theire severall places. And though many of those auncient recordes haue beene embezeled, & many haue perished by carlesse keeping, yet divers of all sortes doe yet remaine, as faire & authentique, as any I haue seene in England. Howbeit during all the time that the lawes of England haue had theire course in Ireland, which is nowe full foure hundred yeares, there hath not beene any Report made & published of any Case in lawe, argued, or adiudged in this Kingdome: but all the arguments & reasons of the iudgements & resolutions giuen in the Courts of Ireland, haue hitherto beene vtterly lost, & buried in oblivion.
Which seemeth to me the more straunge, because there haue beene within this Realme, in euery age since the raigne of King Iohn, men sufficienly learned in the lawes, who haue deriued theire learning out of the fountaines of lawe in England, the Innes of Court there (being the most florishing & honorable Academy of gentlemen, that euer was established in any nation, for the study & learning of the Municipall lawes thereof) And therefore they might haue beene in∣duced to imitate the learned men of England, who from the Norman Conquest downewards, did continually preseiue the memory of such notable cases as did from time to time arise, & where argued and ruled in the Courts of Iustice in England, by reducing the same into bookes of Reports, which may bee called, not improperly, the Annalles of the lawe.
For albeit our Reports at large which are published in Print, doe beginn with the raigne of king Edw. III. And the broken Cases of elder times, which are scattered in the Abridgements, are not found higher then the time of king Henry III. yet assuredly there were other Reports digested in yeares & Tearmes, as auncient as the time of king William the Conqueror: as appeareth by that which Chaucer writteth of the Seriaunt at lawe
In Termes had hee Cases and Doomes all,
That fro that time of King William were fall.
Neither doth Glanuill or Bracton disaffirme this antiquity of the Reports of the lawe, in that they affirme that the lawe of England was Ius non scriptum in theire times, as your Lordship hath noted in that most learned, graue, & prudent speech of yours, touching the Postnati of Scotland. For indeede those Reports are but Comments or interpretations vppon the Text of the Common lawe: which Text was neuer originally written, but hath euer bin preserued in the me∣mory

of men, though no mans memory can reach to the originall thereof.
For the Common lawe of England is nothing else but the Common custome of the Realme: And a custome which hath obtained the force of a lawe, is alwayes said to bee Ius non scriptum, for it cannot bee made or created, either by Charter, or by Parliament, which are actes reduced to writting, & are alwayes matter of Record, but being onely matter of fact and consisting in vse & practise, it can bee re∣corded and registred no where, but in the memory of the people.
For a Custome taketh beginning & groweth to perfection in this manner. When a reasonable act once done, is found to bee good & beneficiall to the people, & agreeable to theîre nature & disposi∣tion, then do they vse it, & practise it, againe, & agaîne, & so by of∣ten iteration & multiplication of the act, it becometh a Custome, & being continued without interruption time out of minde, it obtaineth the force of a lawe.
And this Custumary lawe is the most perfect, & most excellent, and without comparison the best, to make & preserue a commonwealth, for the written lawes which are made either by the edicts of Princes, or by Counselles of estate, are imposed vppon the subiect before any Triall or Probation made, whether the same bee fitt & agree∣able to the nature & disposition of the people, or whether they will breed any inconvenience or no. But a Custome doth neuer become a lawe to binde the people, vntill it hath bin tried & approued time out of minde, during all which time there did thereby arise no in∣conuenience, for if it had beene found inconuenient at any time, it had beene vsed no longer, but had beene interrupted, & consequently it had lost the vertue & force of a lawe.
Therefore as the lawe of nature, which the schoolmen call Ius commune, & which is also Ius non scriptum, being written only in the hart of man, is better then all the written lawes in the worlde to make men honest & happy in this life, if they would obserue the rules thereof: So the custumary lawe of England, which wee do like∣wise call Ius commune as comming neerest to the lawe of Nature, which is the roote & touchstone of all good lawes, & which is also Ius non scriptum, & written onely in the memory of man (for euery cu∣stome though it tooke beginning beyond the memory of any liuing man, yet it is continued & preserued in the memory of men liuing) doth farre excell our written lawes, namely our Statutes or Actes of Parliament: which is manifest in this, that when our Parliaments haue altered or changed any fundamentall pointes of the Common lawe, those alterations haue beene found by experience to bee so in∣conuenient for the commonwealth, as that the common lawe hath in effect beene restored againe, in the same points, by other Actes of Par∣liament, in suceedîng ages.

And as our Custumary vnwritten lawe doth excell our Parliament lawes, which are written, so for the gouernment of the Common-weale of England (which is as well instituted & established as any Com∣mon-weale in Christendome.) Our natiue Common lawe is farre more apt & agreeable, then the Ciuill or Canon lawe, or any other written lawe in the worlde besides: howsoeuer some of our owne Countri∣men, who are Ciues in aliena Republica, & hospites in sua, may per∣ppes affirme the contrary. But certaine it is, That the greate and wise-men of England in the Parliament of Merton did not preferre a Forreine lawe before theire owne, when motion being made by the Clergie that Children borne before Marriage might be adiudged legitumate, They all made aunswere with one voice, Nolumus Leges Angliae mutari, And againe in II. R. 2. when a newe course of pro∣ceeding in Criminall Causes, according to the forme of the Ciuill lawe was propounded in that vnruly Parliament, Aunswere was made by all the Estates, That the Realme of England, neither had bin in for∣mer times, nor hereafter should bee Ruled and gouerned by the Ciuill law. Rot Parliam II. R. 2. in Archiv. Turris.
And heere I may obserue for the Honour of our Nation, and of our Auncestors who haue founded this Common-weale wherein wee liue, and enioy so many felicities, That England hauing had a good and happie Genius from the beginning, hath bin enhabited alwaies with a vertuous & wise people, who euer embraced honest and good Customes, full of Reason and conveniencie, which being confirmed by common vse & practise, and continued time out of minde, became the common lawe of the Land. And though this lawe bee the peculiar inuention of this Nation, and deliuered ouer from age to age by Tra∣dition (for the common lawe of England is a Tradition, & learned by Tradition as well as by Bookes) yet may wee truly say, That no hu∣maine lawe written or vnwritten hath more certainty in the Rules and Maximes, more coherence in the parts thereof, or more harmony of reason in it: nay wee may confidently averr, that it doth excell all other lawes in vpholding a free Monarchie, which is the most ex∣cellent forme of gouernment, exalting the prerogatiue Royall, and being very tender and watchfull to preserue it, and yet maintaining withall the ingenuous liberty of the subiect.
Breefely, it is o framed and sitted to the nature & disposition of this people, as wee may properly say, it is connaturall to the Nation, so as it cannot possibly bee ruled by any other lawe. This lawe therefore doth demonstrate the strength of witt and reason, and selfe sufficiencie which hath beene alwayes in the people of this land, which haue made theire owne lawes out of their wisdome & experience (like a silke worme that formeth all her webb out of her selfe onely) not beg∣ging or borrowing a forme of a common-weale either from Rome, or from Greece, as all other nations of Europe haue done, but hauing suf∣ficient

prouision of lawe & Iustice within the land, haue no neede Iustitiam & iudicium a alienigenis emendicare, as King Iohn wrote most nobly to Pope Innocent the third. Matth Parishistor. magn pag 215. En populus sapiens & intelligens, gens magna: As it is said of Gods chosen people 4. Deuter. Neither could any one man euer vaunt, that, like Minos, Solon, or Lycurgus, he was the first Lawegiuer to our Nation: for neither did the King make his owne prerogatiue, nor the Iudges make the Rules or Maximes of the lawe, nor the common subiect prescribe and limitt the liberties which he enioyeth by the lawe: but as it is said of euery Art or Science which is brought to per∣fection, Per varios vsus artem experientia fecit, so may it properly bee said of our lawe, Per varios vsus legem experientia fecit. Long experience, & many trialles of what was best for the common good, did make the Common lawe.
But vppon what reason then doth Polidor Virgill & other writers affirme, that King William the Conqueror was our Lawegiuer, & caused all our lawes to bee written in French? Assuredly, the Norman Conqueror found the auncient lawes of England so honorable, & profitable, both for the Prince & people, as that he thought it not fitt to make any alteration in the fundamentall pointes or substance thereof: the change that was made was but in formulis iuris: he altered some le∣gall formes of proceeding, & to honor his owne language, & for a marke of Conquest withall, he caused the pleading of diuers Actions to be made & entred in French, & sett forth his publique Ordinances & Acts of Counsell in the same tongue: which forme of pleading in French continued till 36. Edw. 3. when (in regard that the French ton∣gue begann to growe out of vse, which for many yeares after the Norman Conquest was as common as the English among the Gentry of England) it was ordained by Parliament, that all pleas should bee pleaded, debated, & Iudged in the English tongue, & entred, & enrolled in Latine. And as for our statutes or Acts of Parliament, the billes were for the most part exhibited in French, & passed and enrolled in the same language, euen till the time of King H. 7. And so are they printed in Rastalles first Abridgment of statutes published in the yeare 1559. But after the begining of King Henry 7. his raigne, wee finde all our Acts of Parliament recorded in English. Onely our Reports of the Cases, resolutions, and Iudgments in the lawe, where∣of our bookes of the lawe do consist, haue euer vntill this day beene penned & published in that mixt kinde of speech which wee call the lawe French, differing indeede not a litle from the French tongue, as it is now refined and spoken in Fraunce, as well by reason of the words of Art and forme, called the Tearmes of the lawe, as for that wee doe still retaine many other old wordes & Phrases of speech which were vsed foure hundred yeares since, & are now become obsolete & out of vse among them, but are growne by long & continuall

vse so apt, so naturall, & so proper for the matter & subiect of these Reports, as no other language is significant enough to expresse the same, but onely this lawe french wherein they are written.
And this is the true & onely cause, why our Reports & other books of the lawe for the most part, are not sett forth in English, Latine, or the moderne french, for that the proper & peculiar phrase of the com∣mon lawe cannot bee so well exprest, nor any case in lawe bee so succinctly, sensibly, & whithall so fully reported, as in this speech, which is in deede mixte & compounded of all these three langua∣ges. Which reason hath not beene well vnderstood by those, who ob∣iect it as a fault to the Professors of our lawe, that, forsooth, they write their Reports and bookes of the lawe in a straunge vnknowne tongue which none can vnderstand but themselues, to the end, that the peo∣ple, being keept in ignorance of the lawe, may the more admire their skill & knowledge, & esteeme & value it at a higher price. As Ci∣cero in his first booke de Oratore doth testifie, that the like conceite was held of the first Professors of the Ciuill lawe, Quia veteres illi qui huic scientiae praesuerunt, obtinendae atque augendae potentiae suae causa, pervul∣gari artem suam nouerunt. And Cesar speaking of the Druides, who were Iudges, and interpreters of the lawe among the auncient Brittaines, doth report of them, that though they spent twenty yeares in the study of those lawes, Non existimabant fas esse a literis mandare.
But the weaknes of this obiection against the Authors of our lawe bookes will easily appeare, if wee consider how easie the Lawe french is to bee learned: in somuch that the meanest witt that euer came to the study of the lawe, doth come to vnderstand it almost per∣fectly within ten dayes without a Reader. So as wee doe not seale or locke vp the mysteries of our lawe in Hieroglyphickes, or in a darke lan∣guage that cannot bee vnderstood: But wee expresse the Cases, ar∣guments, & Iudgements of the lawe in a forme of speech, so plaine, so significant, and in a tongue so soone learned by any man, that can speake English, and vnderstand Latine, as I dare say, there is no ra∣tionall science in the world, hauing so many wordes & Tearmes of art and forme, that is so clearely deliuered in any language. And I may truely say withall, that if the bookes of our lawe were all translated into English, they would not bee better, nay, they would not bee so well vnderstood by the students thereof, as in this proper & pecu∣liar language wherein they are now written.
And as this obiection touching the speech or language wherein our Reports are penned doth arise out of ignorance of the cause there∣of, as is before declared, so are there other vulgar imputations cast vp∣pon the lawe & lawiers, which may bee as easily cleared, as hauing indeede no other ground but the meere misvnderstanding of such as are strangers to the profession: namely 1. that there is much vncer∣teinty in the reasons & Iudgements of the lawe. 2. that there are ex∣treame

& vnnecessary delayes in the proceedings of the lawe. . that many bad and dishonest causes are wittingly defended by the professors of the lawe. But Sapientia iustificatur à filijs suis.
1 Therefore first touching the incerteinty of the lawe▪ Certeine it is, that lawe is nothing but a rule of reason, & humaine reason is Les∣bia regula, pliable euery way, or like a cupp with two eares, as the French proueb is, which may bee taken vp on either side, as well with the left hand as with the right: so as not onely the knowledge of the lawe, but all other rationall sciences that are subiect to Argu∣ment & discourse, must needes bee subiect to vncerteinty & to error: & therefore vppon Iudgements giuen in our Ordinary Courts of Iustice the lawe doth admitt & allow writts of error to bee brought, with∣out any touch or dishonor to the Iudges, though there Iudgements bee reuersed for error in point of lawe.
Howbeit there is no art or science that standeth vppon discourse of reason, that hath her Rules & Maximes so certeine & infallible, & so little subiect to diuers interpretation as the common lawe of En∣gland, as it is obserued by the Lord cheefe Iustice Cooke in his Pre∣face to the second part of his Reports, that in all his time, there haue not beene moued in the Courts of Iustice in England, two questons touching the right of discents or escheats, or the like fundamentall points of the common lawe: So certaine, sure, & without question are the principles & grounds thereof.
But whence then doe so many debates & controuersis arise? where∣vppon doe wee plead, & contend so much in the Courts of Iustice, it there bee so few doubtes & vncerteinties in lawe? doubtlesse this question is soone resolued, by one plaine & common distinction. In all the causes that are controuerted, there is either Quastio Iuris, or quaestio facti. But for one cause wherein a question of lawe doth arise, that is indeede with the debating, there are a thousand causes at least wherein the fact is onely in question, & wherein if the truth of the fact were knowne, the lawe were cleere & without question. So as the pleading & contention in Westminster hall, & the rest of the Courts of Iustice in both realmes, is for the most parte touching matters of fact. In the Chauncery whether there bee Trust or no trust, Fraud or no fraud: In the Starchamber whither a Riot or no riott, Forgery or no forgery. Peruy or no periuy: and the like matters of fact come onely in question in all other Courts which proceed to the hearing & determining of causes by examination of witnesses. And in the Co of lawe where the triall is by Iurors, are there not a thou∣sand issues ioyned vppon matters of fact, for one demurrer that is ioy∣ned vppon a point in lawe? & when all these issues are tried either at the Barre or at the Assses, how many hundreds of generall ver∣dictes are there giuen which determine matters in fact, for one spe∣ciall verdict whereuppon doe result questions in lawe?

And againe of all the questions in lawe which doe arise vppon demurrers or speciall verdicts, or which are moued in arrest of Iudgment, how many of them are there ouer ruled vppon the first opening or putting of the Case? and how few of them are there that are mal∣leable or can endure the hammer, so as they come to bee solemnely argued at the Barre, and at the Bench? As for the Eschequer-chamber cases which are of such difficultie as that they drawe an assembly of all the Iudges of the lawe for the resolution thereof, they are so rare as scarce twise in a yeare are those Iudges drawne out of there proper Courtes to deliuer theire opinions vppon those doubtfull pointes. So as it is to bee ascribed to the greate learning, wisdome, grauity, & constancie of our Iudges, & to the certeinty & excellent harmony of reason in our lawe, that there are no more diuersities of opi∣nion among the Iudges, or doubtfull questions in the lawe then there are.
For if the Rules & Maximes of the lawe were a thousand times as many as they bee indeede, yet would they carry no proportion with the infinite diuersitie of mens actions, & of other accidents which make the cases that are to bee decided by the lawe. Besides, it must bee a worke of singular Iudgement, to apply the groundes and rules of the lawe which are fixt & certeine, to all humaine acts & accidents which are in perpetuall motion & mutation.
And therefore wee may truly say for the honor of our lawe, not∣withstanding that vulgar imputation of incerteinty, that the Iudgement & reason of it is more certeine then of any other humane lawe in the world: As well because the groundes of our common lawe haue from the beginning beene laid with such deepe wisdome, policie, & pro∣uidence, as that they doe prouide for, & meete with, almost all cases that can possibly fall out in our common-wealth, as also because those groundes are so plaine, & so cleare, as that the professors of our lawe haue not thought it needefull to make so many glosses & interpretations therevppon, as other lawes are perplexed & con∣founded withall: which glosses, as one doth well obserue, do encrease doubt and ignorance in all Arts and Sciences. And therefore the Ciuilians themselues confesse, that their lawe is a sea full of waues, the Text whereof being digested into so many volumes, & so many Doctors interpreting the Text, & twise as many more Commenting vppon their interpretations, & so glosse vppon glosse, & booke vppon booke, & euery Doctors opinion being a good authority fitt to bee cited & vouched among them, must needes breed distraction of opinions & vncerteinty in that lawe. The like may bee said of the Canon lawe, albeit the Text thereof bee scarce foure hundred yeares old. But of the professors of our lawe, who euer yet hath made any glosse or interpretation vppon our Master Litleton? though into that litle booke of his, he hath reduced the principall groundes of the common lawe

with exceeding great Iudgement & authority, & with singular Me∣thod & order? & yet if hee had beene an author in the Ciuill or Canon lawe, I dare say, there had beene, by this time, so many Com∣ments & glosses made vppon him, as the bookes written vppon this booke onely, would haue beene more in number, then all the volumes of our lawe at this day.
But the learned men in our lawe haue euer thought, that Littleton being a learned & reuerend Iudge, wrote with a purpose to bee vn∣derstoode, & that therefore an other man, specially if he were of lesse learning then hee, could hardly expresse him better then he hath expressed himselfe. And therefore his booke hath euer beene read of our yongest students, without any Commentary or interpretation at all.
But for all this, it is obiected, that our later Iudgements doe many times crosse & contradict the former, directly, in one & the same pointe of lawe, which is a manifest argument of incerteinty in the lawe.
Assuredly, there are very few precedents of such contrary Iudge∣ments, scarce two in one age. And yet if the reasons of the later Iudgements did appeare of record, wee should finde them groun∣ded vppon mischeefes & inconueniencies arising since the former Iudge∣ments, or vppon other weighty considerations respecting the good of the common-wealth in generall. Otherwise there are no Iudges in any State or Kingdome vnder the Sunne, that do more reuerence the opinions & Iudgements of their predecessors then the Iudges of England haue euer done, as your Lordship, for their ho∣nor hath obserued in that most worthy speech of the Postnati, where∣in, among other thinges, your Lordsip doth noate the memorable saying of Askue 37. Henr. 6 fol. 22. Such a Charter hath beene allowed in the time of our predecessors, who were as sage & learned as wee bee, & of Markham 4. Edw. 4. fol. 41. It is good, sayeth hee, for vs to do, as it hath beene vsed in former time, & not to keepe one way one day for one partie, & another day the contrary for th'other partie: the former precedents are enough for vs to followe.
But on the other side, let vs heare what a learned Canonist, Lodo∣icus Gomez in regula de Triennali possessore cap. 5. is bold to say, Non est inconueniens sayeth he iudicium esse vno tempore iustum, & postea eius contra∣rium iustius: & hoc malum videtur imponi mortalibus in pnam, vt corum opiniones secundum varietatem temporum senescant & intermoriantur, aliaeque iuersae vel priorihus contrariae renascantur & deinde pubescant. Talis enim est humani iuris disciplina, vt nulla in a opinio odem statu diú stare possit. Dies di ructat verbum, & nox noct indicat scientiam.
And againe, Opiniones hominum orum corpora sequuntur, quae cum tem∣pore vetaraunt & pereunt, & sut rerum omnium, ita quoque & opinionum est quaedam vicissitudo. And in another place, Stilus hodierns propter

maorem temporum experientiam videtur magis iure fundatus, & ideo solet dic quod moderni sunt sicut Culices in capite Elephantis, quae vident priora & po∣steriora: quanto juniores tanto perspicatiores. And thus much may suffice to bee spoken to remoue that scandall of vncerteinty, which ignorance doth vnworthily cast vppon the common lawe.
2 But if the reason & ludgement of our lawe be so litle subiect to vncerteinty, how cometh it to passe that the proceedings of our laws are so much subiect to delay? for this is another vulgar obiection against our lawe & the professors thereof. But who are they that make this obiection? haue they themselues beene engaged in any suites of importance? haue they passed through the Courts of Iustice either in course of lawe, or in course of equity? if they haue not, they speake but by hearesay, & then their testimony in this behalf is of litle credit. If they haue had any long depending suites of their owne, then let them examine, whither their owne spleene & wilfulnesse, or the corruption of some needy sollicitors, (who picke their liuing out of the busines they followe, & are loath to quench the fur that maketh them warme) haue not rather drawne their causes to an extraordi∣nary length, then the ordinary proces of lawe, or the aduise of lear∣ned Counsell. For such as are learned Counsellors indeede are like good Pilots, who though their skill bee best tried in a long & diffi∣cult voiage, do rather desire faire weather, & a speedy arriuall with their passengers in the hauen.
But the troth is, it is the stomack or malice of such clients as will not stick to say, that they will spend all they are worth to haue their will of their aduersaries (& therefore will not bee satisfied with any Iudgement or decree) that doth produce & prolong suites in lawe: who when their learned Counsell indeede do refuse to nourish that peccant humor in them, doe seeke out discarded impostors or Idolls of whome there is an opinion among light & ignorant people, of ex∣traordinary cunning & sleight in carying of busines with aduantage, & in curing of foild & desperate causes. These men giue them coun∣sell according to their owne hart because they sooth them in their litigious humor: howbeit in the end when they haue wearied & wasted themselues, they finde how weake those wiles & craftie courses are, & learne of Esope, that that one onely plaine way which the Cart had to escape from the dogges, was better & safer then those hun∣dred trickes of euasion whereof the Fox did vaunt before he was taken: and they finde withall, the saying of Cicero true, ignoratio iuris litigiosa est potius quam scientia.
Besides this malignant & vnquiet disposition of many Clients, there is another cause why suites are not brought so soone to an end as per∣happes they were in former ages: namely, the multitude of causes now depending in euery Court of ustice, euery of which causes must haue conuenient time allowed, as well to prepare it, & make it ripe to be

heard or tried, as for the triall & hearing it selfe. And the true cause of the multitude of causes doth proceed from this, that the comodi∣ties of the earth being more improued, there is more wealth, & con∣sequently there are more contracts reall, & personall, then there were in former ages. Besides there is more luxury & excesse in the world, which breedeth vnthryftes, banckruptes, & bad debtors, more coue∣teousnesse & more malice, which begetteth force & fraud, oppres∣sion & extortion, breath of the peace, & breach of trust. Out of these fountaînes innumerable suites do spring, which make the Courts of Iustice so to swell: and hence it is that our statute lawes since Henr. 8. his time, do make vp so greate a volume: & hence it is, that the professors of the lawe are growne withall to so greate a number, for where there is magna messis there must bee of necessity operarij multi.
Indeed, if wee all liu'd according to the lawe of nature, wee should neede fewe lawes, & fewer lawiers. Do as thou wouldest bee done vnto were a rule sufficient to rule vs all: & euery mans conscience would supplie both the place of an Aduocate & a Iudge, & then wee should suffer no costs of suite, nor delay of proces.
And againe if wee were a poore & a naked people, as many na∣tions in America bee, wee should easily agree to bee iudged by the next man wee meete, & so make a short end of euerie controuersie. When the people of Rome were litle better then Sheepards & heardsmen, all their lawes were contained in ten or twelue Iuory tables. But when they became Lordes of all the world, what a world of bookes were there written of the Roman ciuill lawe? The like wee see in euery common-wealth when it once beginnes to flourish, & to growe rich & mighty: the people growe proud withall, & their pride makes them contentious & litigious, so as there is neede of many lawes to bridle them, & many Officers to execute those lawes, & many Lawyers to interpret those lawes, & all litle enough: as when a bodie growes full & grosse, it needes more Physicke then when it was leane.
And yet though our suites and causes bee very many, & our Courts of Iustice but a fewe, whereby it must needs come to passe, that euerie particular busines mouing in his turne must haue the slower motion: yet if wee compare our legall proceedings with the proces of other Kingdomes & common-weales, specially of France, wee shall finde, that according to the vsual clause in diuers writts, wee haue indeede plenam & celerem iustitiam (though the breefest Iustice bee not alwayes best) & that our causes for the most parte beîng orderly pur∣sued may come to their Period in a yeare, with the course of the Sunne, when there are many processes in foreine countries that seeme to be gouerned by Saturne, which planet doth fearce finnish his course in the space of thirty yeares: as Bodin doth testifie of his owne country,

that their were more suites in lawe depending in France, then in all Europe besides, & that many of those causes were an hundred yeare old: as that of the countie of Rais, saieth hee, which suite hath beene so well entertained in all the Chambers of Iustice, as albeit the parties that began it, are long since deade, yet the suit it selfe is still aliue. Besides, wee haue not so many Appeales, nor so many reuiewes of cau∣ses, as the Ciuill & Canon lawes do admitt, neither haue wee at this day so many delaies by Essoines, viewes, vouchers, & protections, as were in vse in former ages, when titles of land were tried onely in actions Reall, which are now growne almost out of vse, & a more speedy course of triall inuented by mxt & personall actions.
Lastly there is no Nation in the world (I speake it for the honor of our Nation, & of our land) that hath a course of Iustice so spee∣dy, & withall so commodious & easie for the subiect, as our trialles by Assise & nisi prius are. For what Kingdome is there vnder the Sunne, wherein euery halfe yeare the publike Iustice doth make her progresse into euery part thereof, as it doth in the kingdomes of England & Ireland? whereby it commeth to passe, that whereas the people of other contries do trauell farr to seeke Iustice in their fixt & setled Courts, as it were at fountaines, or Cesternes, the streames of Iustice are deriued vnto our people, & brought by conduit pipes or quilles euen home, as it were, to their owne doores. And thus much I thought fitt to obserue for the clearing of that vniust imputation of long & vnnecessary delaies in our legal proceedings.
3 But there is yet another exception against the professors of our lawe, namely, that wittingly & willingly they take vppon them the defence of many bad causes, knowing the same to bee vniust, when they are first consulted with & retained. And this is obiected by such as presume to censure our Profession in this manner. In euery cause betweene partie & partie (say they) there is a right, & there is a wrong, yet neither the one partie, nor the other did euer want a Counsellor to maintaine his cause. This may bee true for the most part, & yet in truth the learned Counsell whose fortune it is to light on the wrong side, may be free from imputation of any blame. For when doth the right or wrong in euery cause appeare? when is that distingui∣shed & made manifest? can it bee discouered vppon the first Com∣mencement of the suite, & before it bee knowne what can bee allea∣ged & proued by either partie? Assueredly it cannot: & therefore the Counsellor when he is first retained cannot possibly Iudge of the cause, whether it bee iust or vniust, because be heares onely one part of the matter, and that also he receaues by information from his Client, who doth euer put the case with the best aduantage for himselfe. But when the parties haue pleaded, & are at issue: when they haue examined witnesses in course of equity, or bee descended to a triall in course of lawe: after publication & hearing in thone

cause, & full euidence deliuered in the other: then the learned Coun∣sell of eîther side may perhappes discerne the right from the wrong, & not before. But then are the causes come to their Catastrophe, & the Counsellors Act their last part. And yet vntill then the true state of the cause on both sides could not possibly bee discouered.
If then the causes that are prosecuted, do for the most part hang in a doubtfull ballance, vntill the hearing or triall thereof (for if a cause bee vndoubtedly & apparantly naught on the one side, no man is so vnwise as to followe it to the end, with the expence of money, & hazard of his credit) how can it bee iustly said that the Counsellor against whose Client a decree or verdict doth passe, hath wittingly defended an vniust cause, when hee wist not how the bal∣lance would incline, vntill hee had made his vttermost defence? howbeit if any of our Counsellors do either in the prosecution of their Clients causes, giue sinister & craftie Counsell, or vppon the hearing or triall thereof, make an ouer bold defence of any dishonest action, our Iudges are so tender & iealous of the honor of our profession, as they lay a noate of Infamy vppon such persons, so as they seldome or ne∣uer after are permitted to rise to any higher degree in the lawe, or any Office of trust in the common-wealth.
Whereby it commeth to passe, that no men of any other calling or profession whatsoeuer are more carefull to preserue their good name & reputation, & stand more precisely vppon their good behauiour then the learned professors of the common lawe.
And as our Iudges do discountenance bad Counsellors, so doth our lawe abhorre the defence & maintenance of bad causes, more then any other lawe in the world besides. For by what other lawe is vnlawfull maintenance, champertie, or buying of titles, so seuerely punished? By what othet lawe doth the plaintife, pro falso clamore, or vniust ve∣xation, or the defendant for pleading a false plea pay an amerce∣ment or fine to the publike Iustice? And this is one cause, among others why our lawe doth not allowe Counsell vnto such as are in∣dicted of Treason, Murder, Rape, or other capitall crimes: So as ne∣uer any Professor of the lawe of England hath beene knowne to de∣fend (for the matter of fact) any Traytor, Murderer, Rauisher, or Theefe, being indicted & prosecuted at the suite of the King. Turpe reos empta miseros defendere lingua, saieth the Poet, & therefore it is an honor vnto our lawe that it doth not suffer the Professors thereof to dishonor themselues (as the Aduocats & Orators in other countries do) by defending such offendors. For example whereof wee haue extant diuers Orations of Cicero, one pro C. Rabirio perduellionis reo, an∣other pro Roscio Amerino who was accused of Parricide, & another pro Milone who was accused of Murder.
But good Lawyers haue not with vs that libertie which good Physitians haue. For a good Physitian may lawfully vndertake the

cure of a foule and desperate disease, but a good Lawyer cannot ho∣nestly vndertake the defence of a foule & desperate cause. But if hee fortune to bee engaged in a cause, which seeming honest in the be∣ginning, doth in the proceeding appeare to bee vniust, he followeth the good Counsell of the Schooleman Thom. Aquinas 22. quaest. 71. art. 3. Aduocatus si in principio credidit causam iustam esse, quae postea in processu appareat esse iniusta, non debet eam prodere, vt scilicet alteram partem iuuet, reuelando causae suae secretas: Potest tamen, & debet causam deserere, vel eum cuius causam agit, inducere ad cedendum, siue ad componendum, sine aduersarij da nno.
And thus I conceaue, that the most common & colourable excep∣tions which are taken against our lawe & Lawyers, may bee answered & cleared by the plaine reasons & demonstrations before expressed: So as our Profession may stand & bee iustified in all pointes against Ignorance, Enuie, & ill-contented suitors, who like cholerick Chesse-plaiers, when they haue had a mate giuen them, could finde in their harts to cast both the Chessebord, & Chessemen into the fier.
These vulgar errors being thus reuersed, so as wee may truly say, that there is no such vncerteinty in the rules of the lawe, no such delay in the proceedings, no such preuarication or corruption in the Professors thereof, as it is by some vniustly pretended: why may wee not pro∣ceed further & affirme confidently, that the profession of the lawe is to bee preferred before all other humane professions & sciences, as being most noble for the matter, & subiect thereof, most necessary for the common & continuall vse thereof, & most meritorious for the good effectes it doth produce in the common wealth?
For what is the matter & subiect of our Profession but Iustice, the Lady & Queene of all morall vertues? and what are our Professors of the lawe but her Counsellors, her Secretaries, her Interpretors, her Seruants? againe, what is the King himselfe but the cleare fountaine of Iustice? & what are the Professors of the lawe but conduit pipes deriuing & conueying the streames of his Iustice vnto all the sub∣iects of his seuerall kingdomes? so as if Iustice bee rightly resembled to the Sunne in the firmament, in that shee spreadeth her light & vertue vnto all creatures: how can shee but communicate part of her goodnesse & glory, vnto that science that is her handmaid and waites vppon her? And if Kings bee Gods schollers (as Homer writeth) & that the rules of Iustice bee their principall lesson, & if God doe honor Kings with his owne name, Dixi quod dij estis (as a more diuine Poet then Homer singeth) specially for that they sitt vppon Gods owne seate when they minister Iustice vnto the people, do not Kings againe highly honor those persons, whose subordinate ministrie & ser∣uice they vse in performing that principall part of their kingly office? Vndoubtedly, touching the aduancement of such persons, Solomon the King speaketh, that they shall stand before Kings, & God will sett

them, saieth Dauid, with Princes, euen with the Princes of his people.
Neither is this Profession ennobled in regard of the dignity of her imploiment onely, but shee is to bee honored so much the more for the necessity & continuall vse of her seruice in the common-weale. For if wee must honor the Physitian, propter necessitatem, as the wise man prescribeth: much more must wee honor, for the same cause, the pro∣fessors & ministers of the lawe. For neither do all men at any time, nor any one man at all times, stand in neede of the Physition: for they that are in health (which are the greatest number of men) non egent medico, saieth the greate Physition of our soules, & our onely Aduocate which is in heauen. But all men, at all times, & in all places do stand in neede of Iustice, & of lawe, which is the rule of Iustice, & of the in∣terpreters & ministers of the lawe, which giue life & motion vnto Iustice.
For do not all persons stand in neede of Iustice, when without her rule the Prince himselfe knowes not how to rule, nor his people how to obey? When without her support, the noble man cannot vphold his honor, nor the common subiect hold his liberty? When with∣out her safegard, the rich man cannot bee free from spoile, nor the poore man from oppression? Breefely, when without her no man liuing, bee hee vertuous or vicious, can enioy his life, nor any thing that makes his life delightfull? For the couetous man cannot en∣crease his profitt, nor the sensuall man enioy his pleasure, but vnder the shadowe of her wings.
Againe, is not Iustice needefull at all times, when wee can neither trauell safely by day, nor sleepe securely by night with out her pro∣tection? when if such a lawe were made indeede, as was propounded by a wicked Emperor, That all lawes should cease for foure & twenty houres, that short cessation would bee suffitient to giue opportunity to wicked men to make a greater combustion in the whole world, then that which happened when the Chariot of the Sunne did want a guide but halfe a day, as it is liuely expressed in the fable of Phaëton.
Lastly, is not iustice necessary in all places, when wee cannot with∣out perill make a voiage by Sea, vnlesse shee wafte vs, nor a iourney by land vnlesse shee conuoy vs? when wee should bee opprest by force in the country, if shee not defend vs, & vndone by fraud in the Citty, if shee did not releeue vs? When shee encloseth euery mans garden & feild, & makes euery mans cottage his Castle of de∣fence? So as wee haue not such an vniuersall & continuall vse nei∣ther of the light, of the Sunne, nor of fier & water, as wee haue of the light, & heate, & comfort of iustice: for a man may remaine aliue some howres without the vse of those common benefitts, but a common-wealth, wherein each priuate mans weale consisteth, cannot stand & continue one minute of an houre, if Iustice, which is her soule, bee departed from her.

If therefore Iustice, & the lawe, which is but a Rule or lesson of Iu∣stice, bee so necessary for all persons, times & places, as no family, no Citty, no common-wealth, no Kingdome, can stand without the sup∣port thereof: how needefull is the seruice of learned men in the lawe without which Iustice it selfe cannot possibly stand? for Iustitia per∣iret saieth the President Cassanaeus, si desset qui iustitiam allegaret. For if no man did study the reason of the lawe, if no man kept in memory the rules of the lawe, if no man knewe the forme of pleading, or the course of proceeding in the lawe, what would become of the publike Iustice in a short time? or how should the benefitt of the lawe bee deriued & communicated vnto the people? for as in a naturall bo∣die the reasonable soule cannot vse or transmitt any of her powers, but by speciall Organs of the same body disposed & fitted by nature for euerie function, as the eie to see, the eare to heare, the tongue to speake, & the like of the rest: so in the body politike of a common wealth, the lawe which is the soule thereof, produceth no effect or operation at all, but by such of her ministers, as by art & expe∣rience are enabled & qualified for her seruice. For lex est iustitia in∣animata, saieth the schoolman, Lex est mutus magistratus saieth Cicero: the lawe of it selfe is dumbe & speakes not, but by the tongue of a learned & eloquent Lawyer: shee is deafe & heareth no complaints, but by the eare of a graue & patient Iudge: shee is blinde & seeth no enormities, but by the eie of a watchfull & diligent Officer.
Againe, the lawe is nothing else but a Rule, that is made to mea∣sure the actions of men. But a Rule is dead & measures nothing, vnlesse the hand of the Architect doe apply it. It is indeede an ex∣cellent Instrument, to make harmony & concord in the common-wealth: but the best Lute that euer was made, could neuer make musicke of it selfe alone, without the learned hand of the Luteplaier.
Therefore though Iuppiter (as Protagoras in Plato telleth vs) did first inuent & giue the lawe, yet was Mercury sent with that hea∣uenly guift, to deliuer it euer vnto mankinde. So as it is manifest, that without the ministry of these Mercuries, of these interpretors of the lawe, namely the learned Professors thereof, there can bee no vse or application of the lawe, & consequently the lawe or Iustice it selfe cannot consist without them.
But as the estimation & price of this Profession is exceedingly raised by the necessary & vniuersall vse thereof, so doe her great merits to the common-wealth deserue a farr greater exaltation of ho∣nor. For first the common-wealth is indebted vnto the lawe for all her temporall blessings & felicities whatsoeuer. For all our peace, plenty, ciuility, & morall honestie dependeth vppon the lawe. That wee enioy our liues, our wiues, our children, our lands, our goodes, our good names, or whatsoeuer is sweete & deare vnto vs, wee are beholding to the lawe for it. Quid sunt regna nisi latrocinia sine iustitia?

saieth Sainct Augustine? without Iustice the land would bee full of theeues, the Sea full of Pirats, the Commons would rise against the Nobility, the Nobility against the Crowne: wee should not knowe what were our owne, what another mans, what wee should haue from our Auncestors, what wee should leaue to our Children: Maios hae∣reditas venit vnicuique nostrum à Iure & legibus, quam á parentibus saieth Cicero: in a word there would bee nothing certeine, nothing sure, no contracts, no commerce, no conuersation among men, but all King∣domes, & states would bee brought to confusion, & all humane so∣ciety would bee dissolued.
But on the other side, the lawe is a fortresse for the weake to retire vn∣to, a Sanctuary for the oppressed to fly vnto, it restraineth the bold∣nesse of the insolent, it tieth with Manacles the handes of the po∣tent, & like Orpheus harpe or Noahes Arke, it charmeth the fiercenes of the Lion & the Tiger, so as the poore lambe may ly in safety by them.
If then the lawe it selfe doth merit so highly of all mankinde in generall, for that it is the fountaine of all these benefitts, what do the Professors of the lawe deserue, which drawe these benefitts out of that fountaine, & deriue the same vnto euery particuler person? Nam si non habes quo haurias, & puteus altus est, as the woman of Sama∣ria saieth of Iacobs well in the Gospell, how canst thou refresh thy selfe with the water of that well? Si veritas sit in profundo demersa, as Demo∣critus was wont to say, if humane actions bee so carried in cloudes, as it is hard to finde what is true & what is false, & when the truth of the fact is found, it is many times as hard to distinguish what is iust & what is vniust, if in all causes that come in question, either quaestio facti or questio Iuris must first bee decided, before a man can receaue the benefitt of the lawe (for as the wise man saieth, Deus fecit hominem rectum, sed ipse miscuit se infinitis quaestionibus) what a meritorious worke is it, to resolue these troublesome questions which arise in the Ciuill life of man, either by laying open the truth of the fact, or by clearing the doubtfull point in lawe, that speedie & equall Iustice may bee done vnto all, & euery one may haue & enioy his owne in peace? how often would the truth bee concealed & suppressed? How oft would fraud ly hid & vndiscouered? How many times would wrong escape & passe vnpunished, but for the wisdome & diligence of the Professors of the lawe? Doth not this profession euery day comfort such as are greeued, counsell such as are perplexed, releeue such as are circumuented, preuent the ruine of the improuident, saue the innocent, support the impotent, take the Pray out of the mouth of the oppressor, protect the Orphan, the widowe, & the stran∣ger? Is shee not Oculus caeco, & pes claudo as Iob speaketh? Doth shee not withall many times stretch forth brachium saculare in defence of the Church & true Religion? All which are workes of mercy, & of

singular merit. Againe, doth shee not register & keepe in memory he best Antiquities of our Nation? Doth shee not preserue our aun∣cient Customes & forme of gouernment, wherein the wisedome of our Aun∣cestors doth shine farr aboue the policie of other kingdomes? Are not the Recordes of her actes & proceedings so precious, as they are kept in the Kinges Treasury, like Iewelles of the Crowne, & repu∣ted a principall part of the Roiall treasure? Lastly, is not a worthie Pro∣sessor of the lawe a starr in the firmament of the common-wealth? Is he not Lux in tenebris wheresoeuer hee dwelleth? Is not his house as it were an Oracle not onely to a Towne or Citty, but to a whole coun∣try round about him? So as hee may truly say of the people that seeke his counsell, as Apollo Pithius spoke in Ennius of such as re∣sorted vnto his Temple.Suarum rerum incerti, quos ego ope mea
Ex incertis Certos, compotesque consilij
Deitto, ne res temere tractent turbidas.
Therefore one of the Romaine Emperors doth not without cause giue this honorable testimony of the Professors of the lawe, Aduocati, qui dirimunt ambigua facta causarum, suaeque desensionis viribus, tam publicis in rebus quam in priuatis, lapsa erigunt, satigata reficiunt, non minus human generi prouident, quam si praelijs atque vulneribus patriam parentesque salua∣rent: neque enim solos nostro Imperio militare credimus, qui gladijs, elypeis, & Thoracibus nituntur, sed etiam aduocatos. Militant namque causarum Patroni, qui laborantium spem, vitam, & posteros defendunt. For if it bee a worthie deede (as doubtlesse it is) for a man to defend his freindes or coun∣try with his right hand & his sword onely: what an excellent ser∣uice is it to defend them with his speech, his reason, & wisedome where∣in the excellency of man doth principally consist.
Therefore both the Schooleman & the Politike do preferr Iustice before Fortitude, & the Statute of 31. Henr. 8. cap. 10. which ranketh the great Officers of the kingdome in their due places, doth place the Constable & Marshall beneath the Chauncellor in all assemblies of Counsell. For Ille semel (saieth Cicero) speaking of the Martiall man, Hic semper proderit Reipublicae, meaning the learned man of the long robe.
And in very troth, as the common-wealth is much beholding to the Profession of the lawe, so are the Professors of the lawe not a litle beholding to the common-wealth. For if they procure & preserue her peace & her plenty, doth not shee requite them againe with riches & with honor? Doth shee not aduance them to her cheefe Benches & Offices, & trust them with the liuelyhoode & liues of all her people? Neither do our learned men of the lawe growe to good estates in the common-wealth, by any illiberall meanes (as enuy

sometime suggesteth) but in a most ingenous & worthie manner. For the fees or rewardes which they receaue are not of the nature of wa∣ges, or pay, or that which wee call salery or hire, which are indeede duties certeine, & growe due by contract for labour or seruice, but that which is giuen to a learned Counsellor, is called honorarium & not merces, being indeede a gift which giueth honor as well to the Taker as to the giuer: neither is it certeine or contracted for, for no price or rate can bee sett vppon Counsell, which is vnualuable & inestima∣ble, so as it is more or lesse according to circumstances, namely the ability of the Client, the worthinesse of the Counsellor, the weightynesse of the cause, & the custome of he Country. Breefely, it is a gift of such a nature, & giuen & taken vppon such tearmes, as albeit the able Client may not neglect to giue it, without noate of ingratitude (for it is but a gratuity or token of thankefullnesse) yet the worthie Counsellor may not demaund it, without doing wrong to his reputation: according vnto that morall rule, Multa honestè accipi possunt, quae tamen honesté pe∣ti non possunt.
Lastly, it is an infallible argument, that the estates of such as rise by the lawe, are builded vppon the foundation of vertue, in that Gods blessing is so manifestly vppon them, not onely in raising, but in preseruing their houses & posterities: whereof there are examples not a fewe, & those not obscure, in euery shire of England, & of the English Pale in this kingdome of Ireland.
If then our common lawe of England bee cleare from those vulgar imputations, which ignorance doth conceaue, & enuy report thereof, if the Profession or science of the lawe bee more noble, more necessary, more meritorious then any other temporall Art or Science: & if the dignity of this profession do accordingly dignifie all the Professors thereof which are qualified with learning and vertue fitt for so worthy a Calling (for such as are ignorant or dishonest, as they are to receiue no grace by the Profession, so the profession is to suffer no disgrace by them) how highly is that person honored, whose true merit hath aduaunced him to the most transcendent place of honor, that can possibly bee attained by that Profession? This is that great place or Office which your Lordship most worthily holdeth (& long may you hold the same) vnder his Maiestie, which though it bee the highest pinnacle of honor, that any secular person of the long Robe can in re or spe aspire to, vnder any Monarch, yet was it giuen vnto your Lord∣ship, nec expetenti, nec expectanti, by the wisest & most renowned Queene that euer raigned in Europe: who leauing her Crowne together with the faithfull seruants thereof vnto the wisest & Iustest King vppon earth, his Maiestie in his infallible Iudgement & wisedome confir∣med this honorable Office vnto your Lordship, not onely with a ful∣nesse of grace to your selse, but with an augmentation of honor to your posterity. For what encrease of honor can the Lord Chauncellor

receaue in his owne person, being that in England which Ioseph was in Egypt, the second person of the Realme in the administration of all Ciuill affaires? being made (as it were) cheefe Steward of his ma∣sters house, the cheefe dispenser of his bounty & Iustice, by the deli∣uery & custodie of the great Seale, which may properly bee called the key of the Kingdome? Being the Sole Iudge of that high Court, which is Sedes misericordie, & therefore exalted aboue all seates of Iustice: where hee hath Potestatem absolutam as well as regulatam in binding & loosing the proceedings of the lawe, & in deciding of causes by the rules of his owne conscience.
Breefely what can there bee more done to the man whom the King will honor? Is hee not ad latus Principis, to attend him? Is hee not Auricularius Principis to aduise him? Doth not the King make him a conduit of his wisedome, when hee vseth his voice & tongue to declare his Roiall pleasure? And doth he not make him an Organ of his good∣nesse, when hee trusteth him with his mercy & conscience, in sweetening the bitter waters of Summum ius, & in mittigating the rigour of the lawe vnto his people? In a word doth he not represent reuerentiam Prin∣cipis in the power & authority of his Office? And do not the peo∣ple feare & honor the King euen in the grauity & dignity of his person? And are not all these honors made more honorable, & ex∣ceedingly raised in true estimation & value, when the same are en∣ioyed in a most famou & flourishing common-wealth, & do pro∣ceede as Sunne beames from the most religious, learned, wise, the most renowned & excellent King of the world? If then the greatest ho∣nors do of right belong to the greatest vertues (for what is honor but a reflection & reward of vertue?) how vertuous a person must he bee, with what giftes & graces, with what abilities, & ornaments, both of art & nature must hee bee endowed, who can worthily supply that great & honorable Office?
Assuredly, besides the naturall faculties & powers of his mind which hee ought to haue in great perfection, & besides the outward comelinesse & dignity of his person, for Gratior est pulchro veniens  cor∣pore virtus, & Sapientia hominis lucet in vulueius, saieth Solomon, he must bee furnished withall learning that hath any relation to the publike good: Diuinity, Lawe, Policie, Morality, & specially Eloquence, to impart & communicate all the rest. Hee must withall haue a long & vniuersall experience in all the affaires of the common-wealth: he must be accomplished & absolute in all points of Grauity, Constancy, Wise∣dome, Temperance, Courage, Iustice, Piety, Integrity, & all other vertues fitt for Magistracy & gouernment, yet so, as the same bee sea∣soned & tempered with affability, gentlenesse, humanity, courtesie, howbeit without descending or diminishing of himselfe, but still re∣taining his dignity, state, & honor. Breefely, hee must bee a person of such vertue & worthinesse, as his life may bee a Censure, & his

example a Mirror for all other Magistrates. These are the excellen∣cies & perfections wherewith that great Officer must bee qualified & adorned: And this Idaea haue I conceaued of him, not out of mine owne imagination or weake discourse of reason, but out of an humble obseruation of your Lordship in whom not onely those abilities & ver∣tues before expressed, but many other graces & ornaments do shine so brightly, as the weakest Iudgement may collect out of the same a most exquisite Patterne of a most excellent Chauncellor.
But perhappes it would bee thought more comely for mee to pronounce this of your Lordship to others collaterally, then to speake it to your Lordship of your selfe directly (though what can I declare in this kinde to others, but that which the world hath long since knowne & acknowledged?) yet is there no man liuing whom it may better become then my selfe to praise & honor your Lordship euery way, whose fauor hath beene (as it were) a good Angell vnto mee, & to whom I stand bound for so many benefits, as that which might carry a shewe of adulation in another, must needes bee thought but Duty & gratitude in mee.
Howbeit, besides my particular obligation, there is no Professor of the lawe, that is not obliged to do your Lordship all honor, for the honor you haue done to the Profession of the lawe, whereof your Lordship hath beene, during all your time, a principall light & or∣nament.
And nowe (my most honorable good Lord) my deuotion to the Profession of the lawe, & to your Lordship the most noble Patron of the Professors thereof, hauing enlarged this discourse beyond the measure & limitts of an Epistle (& therefore I giue it the name of a Preface) it remaineth that I present vnto your Lordship the ude collection of a fewe selected Cases, which since the beginning of his Maiesties Raigne haue beene argued, resolued, & adiudged in this Realme of Ireland.
These are the first fruites of my labor in this kinde of learning, & are therefore a due & proper oblation to your Lordship, for that my studie haue yealded the better fruite, being cherished by the Sunne∣beames of your Lordships fauor. This is also the first Report of Ca∣ses arising in Ireland & ruled in the Courts of Iustice there, that euer was made & published to the world, since the lawes of England were first established in this kingdome. Lastly, I haue made choise of such speciall Cases, as are either proper for this kingdome one∣ly, or else doe conteine for the most part points of learning not common, or at least not largely debated, in our bookes of the lawe.
But for as much as Natura incipit ab imperfectis as the Schoole∣man saieth, Therefore these weake & imperfect beginnings do seeke your Lordships protection, till time shall giue them more strength & reputation. In the meane time, if your Lordships Iudgement shall

allowe the publication heereof, I shall haue the lesse cause to doubt the censure of any other, specially of my Maisters of the lawe in En∣gland, if any of these bookes happen to come to their handes: to whom I may truly make this protestation, that these Cases being re∣solued & adiudged in the Courts of Iustice in Ireland, are not col∣lected & published by mee, to encrease the number of the bookes of lawe in England, or to interrupt the better studies of the Students there, by reading of this collection, but principally for the vse and benefitt of our practisers heere in Ireland, and to moue and incite others in this Kingdome, by this first example, which doth onely open & shew them the way, to performe the like seruice heereafter to posterity.
Neither haue I besought your Lordships patronage for these Ca∣ses of Ireland in respect of my selfe onely, but also in regard of that relation which your Lordshp hath vnto this kingdome. For albeit pour Lordship bee Lord Chauncellor of England, yet the great Seal which you keepe there, is also of force & power within this Realme. Neither can wee forgett, without ingratitude, that your Lorship in that high place of Counsell which you hold in England, is vppon all occasions watchfull & carefull of the publike good & welfare of Ireland.
Nowe therefore the onely wise God who hath giuen vnto your Lordship those blessings which wisedome hath in store for them that loue her, Longitudo dierum in dextra ius, & in sinistra ius diuitiae & gloria, preserue your Lordship for many yeares in health and honor, that you may long continue a prudent and principall Counsellor vnto your Soueraigne, a louing & prouident father vnto your country, a comfort and counte∣nance to your particular freindes, and all others who pertake of your honorable fauors, among which I remaine.


