



Most Reuerend in Christ:
AS Liuy of the Roman Re∣publick:Liv. De. 1. l. 1 Aut me Amor Ne∣gotij suscepti fallit, aut nulla vnquam Resp. nec Maior, nec Sanctior, nec bonis Exemplis Ditior fuit: so may I of the BOOKE of PSALMES, or I am too too farre transported with the Loue I beare to that Booke, or there is no Booke in holy Scrip∣ture more necessary to be intreated of, or which containeth more excellent Matter, or is more repleat with heauenly Passages. E∣uery Booke of holy Scripture, saith great Atha∣nasius, hath that which is proper, and peculiar to it selfe,Athna. Epist. ad  ∣cellin, de In∣terp. Ps.  740. E. Comme. : but as for the Booke of Psalmes saith he, that is a Paradice, wherein i planted euery Tree. So S. Basil: The Proph
 haue Doctrine proper to themselues, the Bookes of History haue Matter peculiar to themselues, the Law her particular Forme of Teaching, and againe the Prouerbiall Bookes theirs,Basil. Hom. in Princip. Ps. 1. p. 99. Edit. Ba∣sil. 1532. : but the Booke of Psalmes compriseth in it the Profit of them all. So S. Chrysostom: Forasmuch as the Reading of Scripture hath much labour and paine, the Apostle here perswades thee not, to the Reading of the Hi∣stories, but to the Psalmes, that so by singing them, thou mayst not only delight thy Mind but beguile the Paine that would otherwise clog and cloy thee.Chry. in ep. ad Coloss. c 3. Hom. 9. p. 74. b. Edit. Veron. 1529. Edit. SAVIL. Tom. 4. p. 138. , the Psalmes containe all. But what need wee goe to Greece for Testimo∣nies in this case, hauing so ample Testimonie of his at hoame, for whom the Church of England may blesse the time that euer he was borne. I meane Reverend Hooker, who spea∣king of the Psalmes, VVhat is there necessaryMr. Hooker Eccles. Pol. l. 5. §. 37. saith he, for Man to know, which the Psalmes are not able to teach. They are to Beginners an easie and familiar Introduction, a mighty Augmentation of all Vertue, and Knowledge in such as are entred before, a strong Confirmation to the most perfect a∣mongst others. Heroicall Magnanimity, exquisite
 Iustice, graue Moderation, exact VVisdome, Repe¦tance vnfained, vnwearied Patience, the Mysteries of God, the Sufferings of Christ, the Terrors of VVrath; the Comforts of Grace, the VVorkes of Prouidence ouer the VVorld, and the promised Ioyes of that World which is to come, all Good necessarily to be either knowne, or done, or had, this one Celesti∣all Fountaine yeeldeth. Let there be any Griefe, or Disease incident to the Soule of Man, for which there is not in this Treasure-House a present comfortable Remedy at all times ready to be found. All which, hauing bene experimented in euery Age, hence it is that Dauids HARP hath euer had the preheminence aboue the whole Con∣sort of those Heathen Musitians Simonides, Pindarus, Alcaeus, Horace, Catullus, and the rest; howsoeuerMy LORD of LOND. vpon Ionas. Lect. 27. p. 355. in Marg. & Barth. Sche∣raei Itinerar. in Psalt. Epist. Dodic. Angelus Politianus, and Lazarus Bonamicus preferred Pindarus before him. Hence it was that Frederick the Second, late King of Denmarke, wrote a little Manuell with his owne Hand, of some of the choy∣sest of them, which was his continuall Vade Mecum, as his most ExcellentHis MA∣IESTIES. Meditation vpon the LORDS Pray∣er. p. 96. MAIESTY, our SOVERAIGNE hath bene pleased to re∣member. Hence it was that long before,
 ALFRED, great ALFRED, theSam. Daniel Hist. of En l. 1. p. 36. First let∣tered Prince we had in England, and by whose meanes, & incouragement, publique Schools had here, either their reviving or beginning, that ALFRED, I say, began to translate the Psalter into English, and well nigh had fi∣nished it, but thatM Fox his Act. and Mon. Edit. 4ae. p. 144 Col. 1. ex Hist. Guliel. de Re∣gib. Anglr. Death which could by no means be intreated to spare, prevented him. In a word, hence it is that our Mother the CHVRCH of ENGLAND hath taken such speciall care that the Booke of Psalmes should be read ouer, every Moneth, and to be otherwise read then other Scripture, namely by interlocution, and with a mutuall returne of sentences from side to side, that so it might proue the more familiar to every of vs. To say nothing of thePolid. Virg. De Iuvent. l. 6. c. 2. Church of Rome which causeth them to be read ouer once a weeke, forasmuch as She stands vpon the Opus O∣peratum onely, and takes noAute No∣vatii, apud qu Scriptura coelestes legun∣tur potius quàm intelligutur. Cyp. ad No∣vat. care at all to haue it interpreted to the People.
This and more then this being to be spo∣ken of the BOOKE of PSALMES, I haue adventured among the Variety of Bookes now extant, to interpret the same vnto the
 Church. Which though it hath as other Bookes of Holy Scripture store of Interpretours, yet in the Course that I follow, and in the Way that I take, I could neuer yet light, asmuch as vpon One. The way that I take, is the way of our English Church, and that Translation which Shee followeth in the Liturgie Shee vseth. Which Translation of Hers, howsoeuer it is not altogether as is the Hebrew, yet is it that which for the most part is correspon∣dent with the Greeke, and our Church besides approouing it, as hitherto She hath, and still doth it well deserueth these paines to be ta∣ken therewith.
And indeed it will bee Paines to goe in this kinde through all. For being in all an Hundred and Fifty, and divided into Thirtie Daies according to the Daies of the Moneth, what will it bee to Comment on all? What to bring for every of them the Provision ourMat. 13.2. Saviour speakes of, New and Old. Vpon the First Eight, and the First Day of the Moneth, I haue here aduentured, as your GRACE may see. If they be acceptable to your GRACE, as I nothing doubt but they shall bee, in re∣gard
 the Author of them hath been so many wayes oblieged to your GRACE, (and to loue them on whom wee bestow Benefits is Nature, because in them wee behold the Ef∣fects of our Vertue) your GRACE hereafter may make him in Gods House no lesse then a MONETH, who is as yet but one DAY.
The Lord of Heauen blesse your GRACE and affoord you many good Dayes, and Moneths, and Yeeres amongst vs, that your GRACE reuiued, as it were, out of the Ashes of that Glorious Martyr, your Predecessor, CRANMER of blessed memory (who died before theAct & Mon. Edit. 4ae. p. 1569. and 1888. Gates of that Colledge, out of which, your GRACE is risen vnto vs) you may still with the help of that most Glorious MAIE∣STY in Heauen, and his Excellent MAIESTY here on Earth, stand against Thousands of the Church Malignant, and that whole Alphabeti∣call Rabble of Pontificious and FactiousM.C; N.D; C.E; I. E; H.I; I. R; L.R; S.R; W.R; and such like impetuous ar∣ring Snarlers. DOMINI Serus consu∣mere nati. Priests and Jesuits, the Ban of CHVRCH and COMMONWEALTH.

