



MOses (right worshipfull and dear∣lie
beloued) among manie other
matters of waightie importance,Genes. 37.
remembreth one imminent mis∣chiefe
entended against the inno∣cent
and harmelesse Ioseph, by the preposterous
malice of Iaacobs sonnes. Who (disdaining that
future dignitie of Ioseph, which the Lorde in a
dreame discouered vnto him) waited onelie a fit
oportunitie for the speedie perfourmance of that
dreadful destruction, which they had alreadie de∣termined
against him. And surelie, they had put
that deuise of theirs in practize; had not Ruben
their elder brother persuaded the contrary. Not∣withstanding,
this their choller cōceiued against
him, could at no hand be alaied, before the same
had atchieued some straunge and vnnaturall ef∣fect:
and therefore (by the aduise of Iudah) they
sold him (in most slauish maner) to the Ismeelitish
Merchants. Who also respecting rather their pri∣uate
auailes, then any the rare & hiddē virtues of

Ioseph) did presentlie sell him againe to Potiphar
the chiefe Stewarde of Pharaohs court. But now
the Lorde (purposing, to giue some glimmering
shew of his former promises) doth so prosper pore
Ioseph in all his affaires: that Potiphar foorthwith
affoords him the highest preheminence ouer all
his house, and referres the determination of hys
domesticall matters to the onelie direction and
order of Ioseph. Who likewise shewed himselfe ve∣rie
carefull that waie, and carried withall so euen
an hande in this his appointed charge: that the
Lord both prospered Potiphar within & without,
and bestowed manie blessings vpon his house for
Iosephs sake. Howbeit, this the happie estate of Io∣seph
it held not long. For such were the insatia∣ble
desires of his mistris (besotted with the onely
sight of his beautie) that euerie daie she deuised,
howe to estraunge his heart from his former sin∣ceritie,
& euen earnestlie egged him also an end
to addulterate his maisters bed. To which villa∣nie
of hers, when Ioseph could not by no meanes
be brought: she sticked not then to laie such vn∣iust
accusations against him, as caused Potiphar
foorthwith to clap him in prison: where the pore
soule continued comfortles, vntill the Lord (pro∣curing
by Pharaohs good meanes his glorious de∣liuerance)
committed with all, the whole care of
Egypt to his proper and onely directions. Wher∣in
also hee did not negligently behaue him selfe,
but so indifferentlie disposed the blessinges and
treasures of Egypt, as not onelie the great famin
fore-shewed, was (by his meanes) verie timelie
preuented: but an habitation also for his parents
and kinsefolkes (by Pharaohs consent) very fitlie
prouided.

Surelie (deare brethren) so oft as I remember
this storie, I am driuen with all to consider my
proper estate in this newly attempted enterprise;
For this poore Ioseph of mine (but newlie crept
from the swaddling clothes) was (at the first com∣ming
foorth) so vnnaturallie hated of his elder
breethren (those chapmen I meane before whom
he vttered his vision) that (by the importunate en∣treatie
of some) he was faine to bee deliuered o∣uer
vnto the Ishmeelitish merchants (to the Printers
I meane) or euer he had attained to anie full per∣fection
of knowledge; which men also (respecting
chieflie their priuate profits) haue solde him ouer
againe vnto Potiphar king Pharaohs Stewarde, I
meane to you Merchaunts, and other her Maie∣sties
subiects. If therefore your good worships, or
anie els whosoeuer (hauing him now at home in
your houses) shall finde that the Lorde (by his
meanes) doth prosper your labors: refuse not thē
(I beseech you) forthwith to referre those other
your domesticall dealings to his approoued and
faithfull directions. And although that Potiphars
wife (I meane your worldlie wisedomes) haled
an end with the swaie of her vnbridled affections,
shall happlie attempt (by the sundrie suggestions
of Satan) to adulterate the yonglings former sin∣ceritie,
and not preuailing therein) shall present∣ly
thunder out her forged accusations vniustly a∣gainst
him: yet, let the godlie Potiphars in anie
wise beware that they shewe not them selues to
credulous in admitting those cankred clamours,
neither yet ouer hasty in clapping him close with
in the gaile of forgetfulnes, least with all they de∣priue
them selues of those manifolde blessinges
which before by his meanes they embraced. For

notwithstanding this their vnspeakable crueltie
(concerning onely this poore of-spring of mine)
should worke the aforesaid effect: yet, I doubt not
at all, but that the Lord (who tendreth the truth
of his former integrity) will cause him by Pharaoh
(I meane, by our gratious Princes procurement)
to haue a fuller enlargment, & to come abroad
with more credit then at anie time heertofore.
Yea, and (waying withall his faithfull simplicitie)
will verie solempnelie decree and most straight∣lie
command, that your interchangable trafique
what-soeuer shall bee generallie disposed by his
godly directions. The which so cōming to passe, I
dare boldly assure you, that not only the threat∣ned
famin shall be for-stalled in time: but old Ia∣acob
likewise with the rest of his familie (I meane
the pore members of Christ) shall much better be
prouided for, then heretofore they haue beene.
Labor you therfore (my brethren) with Pharaohs
cheefe Butler when occasion shall serue, and do
your dailie endeuours, (euerie one as his calling
requires) to make my poore Ioseph his cause ac∣quainted
in Pharaohs court. I meane, do mooue
(as you maye) her most excellent maiestie with
her honourable councellers, to see some more
faithfull execution of the established lawes a∣gainst
the horrible abuses in buyeng and selling:
for the better auoiding of all those fearefull ef∣fects
which are handled hereafter at large in this
treatise. And whereas, that miserable enhansing
of graine and of victuales, and that chargeable
preperation of houshould prouision which now
a-daies falleth out, may draw your mindes from
a due consideration of your duties heerein and
hinder this woorke: I promise you therefore

soone as the Lord shall ennable me to it) to con∣ferre
in like manner with those kinde of people
(who are to fraught the Markets for the aforesaid
prouision) as I haue doone heare with your
selues, for the speedier effecting of those the pre∣mises.
Nowe next, concerning the treatise ensuing, I
meane to bee silent my selfe. Onelye, I haue
spoken therein: let the other prophets there∣fore
determine as the Lorde shall direct them.
And, whereas it hath beene a vsuall practise
(drawen from the scriptures them selues and the
primitiue church) to dedicate euerie treatise to
some one man or other, and that for diuers re∣spects:
I thought it also a thing verie conuenient
for mee, to recommend these slender traueiles of
mine, to some suche sincere patrons as (I was
sure) would willinglie vndertake the protection
thereof.
If now therfore you demaūd what should moue
mee (among many others) to make special choise
of your selues: thinke not (I pray you) but that I
haue reason sufficient to lead mee vnto it. For
first, I assuredly know you are able to iudge of the
matter. Both because you professe the faculty of
bying and selling your selues: and for that you are
also those good Marchants in deed, who (for the
pretious Perle of the Gospell) can bee content to
forgo whatsoeuer you haue, wherupon it follow∣eth
that you are the better able to ballance all
the afternamed abuses, by the estimation therof.
Secondly, for that, (by reason of our auncient ac∣quaintance)
I haue bin more specially beholding,
to you both, then to anie other besides: & there∣fore
(although I am detter to all in Christ) more

speciallie abound to you both, then to manye o∣ther
besides.
Being therfore so strongly confirmed herein,
it makes mee the bolder speciallie to present you
both, and generallie in you the whole companie
there, with this my poore Ioseph. Most humblie
beseeching you to accept thereof, as a speciall
meanes to renew that our old and ancient loue.
Which loue of ours, being both begun and con∣tinued
in Christ, and for Christ: maye bee one
principall argument of our eternall electi∣on
in Christ Iesu our Lord, to whose
grace I commend you all,
Amen.

