



GEntlemen, and you the rest, no lesse beloved in the Lord. That most memorableIoh. 21.15. saying of our Saviour , Feed my Lambes: or as it is doubled in the Vulgar, Pasce agnos meos, Pasce agnos meos: Feed my Lambs, Feed my Lambes, spoken personally to S. Peter, but in him to all vs, who haue to doe with the Flocke of Christ: hath made me a many times to bethinke my selfe how I for my part might best performe it to you that are those very Lambs, & in some sort belon∣ging to me. It is now some two yeares since, when oppor∣tunitie was offered me never better. For being chosen by your Superiours to be your Catechisme Reader for a year, a many of you may remember, how I performed that Taske in Twelue Lectures. Since which time, considering with my selfe the slender benefit that might accrew to some of you, by hearing only those my Lectures without some farther helpe, I thought it fit by way of Printing to
 present them to all and every of you, and so much the ra∣ther for that the Eye is a surer Friend vnto the Memory, then the Eare can possibly be, & you knowe whoseHorat. de Ar∣t Po say∣ing it was,
Segnius irritant animos demissa per aurem
Quam quae sunt oculis subiecta fidelibus: & quae
Ipse sibi tradit spectator. Besides, that Speech (especially my Speech) hath not the benefit that Printing hath, of quoting Authors at large, a principall part of these my Lectures, which I could not then in a many respects deliver vnto you so exactly. But my cheefest Motiue of all of committing these vnto the Presse, is the continuall flowing vnto vs of such as you are, some going, others comming and every Yeare some New ones, who since they are to belong to me in respect of my Pastorall charge, faine would I shew my loue vnto my Saviour, by feeding those New ones in this sort. A way perhaps some what chargeable, but God that hath giuen abilitie to compasse this, hath giuen a will too (in humili∣tie be it spoken) to contemne a world of Wealth towards the furtherance of a Soule. Concerning these my Lectures thē, loe they offer themselues vnto you, that which comes vnto you so slightly, let it not be as slightly but regarded.
One SchioppiusGasp. Schiop∣pii Alexipharm. cont. Plessaum. tels vs of late, of Paul the fift now Pope, how little hee answered his expectation in a matter not much vnlike herevnto. If that Gift, saith he, were bestowed vpon his Fatherhood indeed, perhaps he no more attentiuely, or curiously obserued it, then hee did an excellent Booke of a certaine Divine, which I my selfe brought vnto him, to the end and purpose to bring the Author of it in favour with him.Non modò ab eo non lectum, sed ne{que} certò loco, vbi reperi∣ri, mihi{que} resti∣tui pesset, positii fuisse comperi. Schiop. Ib. p. 76. Col. 1. For after a few daies I repairing vnto him againe, & asking of him how he liked the Booke, I found that hee had not onely not read it, as I expected, but could not tell where in the world he had laid it. Indeed the Pope of Rome hath other gates matters then Bookes in his head, and therefore Schioppius there addeth
Virg. Aen. l. 6Tu regere Imperio Populos Romane memento Paul the fift who is a Romane by birth, should remember he was to Rule. True: and me thinkes Schioppius should haue added withall, that hee should remember to forget that which our Saviour said about Ruling: Reges Gentium dominantur eorum. Ʋos autem non fic, Luk. 22.25. But how soever they (it seemes) are not altogether of our Saviours minde, & therefore Schioppius commends the Pope, how∣soever he neglected that Book: yet you, Beloued, should you doe the like, are not sure of such an Homer as Schiop∣pius is, and therefore is it best for you not to followe the Popes example. Martha, Martha,Luk. 10.41. saith our Savior, thou carest, and art troubled about many things. But one thing is needfull. It were happy perhaps for his Holines, if he were but troubled as Martha was, but you, if you please, may be the Maries. That One thing so needfull, loe here in these Lectures.
Concerning my Methode therein I goe not (I con∣fesse) the beaten way, and it may seeme (I graunt) aboue the pitch of Catechising; what hath beene here delivered by me, but presupposing you grounded before in the or∣dinary course of Catecisme; I meane Mr Dr Nowels, best approved of in our Church, I thought it my best way to acquaint you in this sort with matters of this weight, es∣pecially reading as I did in a Colledge, and to Youths such as you are. Such they are as you, whome our Ad∣versaries like wyly Foxes goe about to inveigle with a shew of all Antiquity: you shall haue somewhat here in store out of Antiquity it selfe, to confront that Bragge of theirs, as also to teach you to hold your owne.
And now Beloved what shall I more say? You see my care towards you, my loue, and what not?1. Cor. 3.22. Whether it be Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, even al are yours, & yee Christs, and Christ Gods. Courage then, Dearely Beloved, and va∣liantly march on, who haue so many Helpes towards the saving of your Soules. And aboue all remember the Earth
 and the Soile you now tread vpon is not vulgar or ordina∣ry, but such for all the world, as the ancient Fathers of the Church did tread on in their daies. That whichMidden dorp de Acad l. 2. p. 95. Edit. 1583. Vid. Cent. 4. Magdeb c. 7. p. 510. Nicome∣dia was to LACTANTIVS,Mid. Ib. p. 142 Carthage to TERTVLLIAN,Mid. l. 3. p. 455 Mil∣lan to S. AMBROSE,Mid. Ib. Millan andMid. l. 2. p. 142 Carthage to S. AVSTEN,Mid. ib. p. 203 Constantinople to DAMASCEN,Mid. ib. p. 88. Antioch, andMid. ib p 183 Vid. Naz. M∣nd. Athens to NAZIANZEN,Mid. ib. p. 88. Antioch,B. Iuels De∣fence of the A∣pology. p. 430. Athens, andMid. l 2 p. 202 Constantinople to S. CHRYSOSTOME,Mid. Ib. p. 88. Antioch, andMid. ib. p. 102 Alexandria to S. IEROME,Mid. ib. p. 88. Antioch,Mid. Ib. p. 102 Alexandria, &Mid Ib. p. 92. Caesarea to Origen,Mid Ib. p. 88. Antioch,Mid. Ib. p. 102 Alexandria, andMid. ib. p. 183 Vid. Naz. Mo∣nod. Athens to S. BASILL,B. Iuels De∣fence of the A∣pol. p. 430. A∣thens andMid. ib. p. 102 Alexandria to S. GREGORY, that for all the world is Oxford vnto you. Those were the places in their daies, where their Mindes had the first tincture of SecularVt ii qui com∣bibi purpuram volunt sufficiunt prius lanam medicamentis quibusdam: sic literis talibus{que} doctrinis ante excoli animos, & ad sapientiam concipiendam imbui & praeparari decet. Cicero. Vid. Lips. Var. Lect. l. 2. c. 10 p. 45. Learning, that so they might be the more ready for that deeper die of Divinity. Thus NazianzenNaz. Monod in vit. Basil. Mag. tels vs of S. Ba∣sill (brought vp as I said before in those famous Vniversi∣ties, Antioch, Alexandria, and Athens) how expert he was in Grammar, in Rhetoricke, in Naturall, and Moral Philo∣sophy, in Astrology, Geometry, Arithmetike, Arts & Sci∣ences for the which our Vniversitie hath beene so famous heretofore, as it hath caused them to shew their Bountie therein, who were themselues brought vp in other places.
When Caius of Cambridge didCaius de Antiq. l. 1. p, 152. Edit. 1574. of my FATHERS Printing twit vs in the teeth with some of our Founders here in Oxford that had beene themselues Cambridge Men, as Richard Fox the Founder of Corpus Christi Colledge, Thomas Rotheram the Foūder of Lincolne Colledge, and William Smyth the Founder of Brasennose: At vnde precor (Examen iudicii Cantabrigiensis cuiusdam quise Londinensem dicit nuper de Origine vtrius{que} Academiae lati Cui praefigitur ad ciusdem Prohemium Apologia. Exam. 20. A Booke not yet printed, but of M. Keyes own hand-writing, & in the cu¦stody of our learned Antiquary M. Thomas Allen, and copied forth by my kinde and loving Friend M Myles Windsor a true Lover of our Mother the Vniversitie. saith our worthy Key againe, who fully answered that Booke) tam singularis erga nos a∣nimi
 affectus? ac multo quā in vestrā Academiā maior, nisi quod magis hîc arriderēt illis omnia, Doctrina, Mores, Iu∣ventutis educatio, Instituta, Pietatis cultus, Ritus, Consuetu∣dines, , & Externae Ceremoniae, ipsa{que} demum Oxo∣niensis Nominis celebritas, vt alia multa non commemorem, quàm apud vos, quos alioqui vel ipsius naturae impulsu haud dubiè praetulissent. Surely Beloved the great renowne of the Name of Oxford hath raised vp three Worthies I meane a BODLEY, a BENNET, and a WADHAM, to do more then they did. Though what do I speake of three on∣ly? His excellent MAIESTIE now Regnant, his Reve∣rend CLEARGIE, his Honourable NOBILITIE, and GENTRIE of the Land, do al concurre even in our daies, to the ennobling of this Place, and shall not we to that great Renowne our Oxford hath had in former Ages ioine Doctrine, and Manners, and Breeding vp of youth, & keeping of Statutes, and Religion, and Rites, and Customes, & Discipline, & outward Ceremonies, &c? Shall the whole world (in a manner) concur to do vs good, and we be wā∣ting to our selues? Shall God himselfe be at a Non plus for being ofm ability (as it were) to do more vnto vs,What could I haue done any more to my Vineyard that I haue not done vnto it. Esa. 5 4. and wee bring forth wilde grapes? But it is not Beloved vnto you, that these lines of mine doe appertaine, only I am afraid, least you for whom these paines, & much more hath been taken, should be carryed hereafter an other way, whē you are of riper yeeres, with the streame of the world. At what time thinke on him yet, who hath bin painefull for you as you see, & more truely tendereth your Salvation, then a∣ny Popish Priest or Iesuite whatsoever.
 From my Study in that Colledge whereof your selues are all Members.
Octob. 17. 1614.
