



IT is now well neere Six Yeeres since, Right Worshipfull, and dearely Beloued, that I preach∣ed vnto you at the Christ-mas Day, Decem. 25, 1609. first, of Da∣vids desire to goe to Church. An Argumēt (it might be thought) more befitting our Recusants, then any of our owne Sort, and such as are Prote∣stants, but who so wil visit our Parish Churches in time of Divine Service on the Weeke-daies throughout the Yeare, I meane Wedensdaies, Frydaies, and Saterdaies, & that in populous Townes, and Cities (to say nothing of the Country, where they may seeme to haue some excuse by reason of dwelling farre from Church) shall find too too often, two sufficient Witnesses, the Mi∣nister,
 & the Clarke, that Protestants even Protestants, are almost as peccant in this kind as Popish Recusants themselues. Herevnto if wee adde withall the prepo∣sterous zeale of a Many besides, who vnlesse there be Sermons too, will scarse bee there on the Saboth Day, seldome or never on Holydayes, and they of the Preci∣ser Sort, and who will take it in some snuffe, if wee ac∣count them not more Religious, then the Meyny, or Multitude are, and what may wee thinke Religion it selfe, will come to even in our Daies, who so little ac∣count of DIVINE SERVICE, so Ne contemp∣tui essent com∣munes Ecclesiae Preces, eas splen¦didis elogiis o∣lim Deus orna∣vit: praesertim vbi Templum Vocavit Domū Orationis. Nam & praecipuam Cultus sui par∣tem hac voce docuit esse Pre∣candi Officium, at{que} vt in eose Fideles vno cō¦sensu exerce∣rēt, instar Vex∣illi erectum illis fuisse Templum. Calvin. Instit l. 3. c. 20. §. 29. principall an Exer∣cise of the same. This it was that made me at the first, as to preach that First Sermon of Davids Desire to the Novemb. 5. in the After∣noone, 1609. Vniversitie, so to Preach the Second to Your selues: and after that for your sakes to commit them Both vnto the Presse. From whence that they came to You, and in a manner to You onely, and not to the Church in generall: it was for I would endeauour to be Mat. 25.23. Faithfull in a little, and in these perillous backsli∣ding Times as much as may be, to Cant. 1.5. Keep my own Vine.
Since that time it hath pleased the Lord, towards the Furtherance of your Salvation, to put other Mes¦sages into my Mouth, all which as they were at diuers and sundry times related vnto You, I meane as many of you as could cōveniently be present, so haue J bin at a second Paines to deliver them now vnto you all, that no exception may be taken of not hauing heard what hath beene spoken. When a man hath done his best Ecclus. 18.6. saith the Sonne of Syrach, he must begin againe, and when he thinketh to come to an end; he must againe to his
 labour. I dare be bould to say that to Print is to begin againe, he knowes not what Printing is that knowes it not to be a Labour. It was as Calvin. Praef. in Esay, & in Esay. c. 1. v. 1. Calvin obserues the Custome of the Prophets, after they had spoaken to Prince or People, to make a Brief of what they had spo∣ken, and to fasten it on the Gates of the Temple, where it was to stand some certaine daies to the veiw of e∣very One that would pervse it. Printing is that in our Age, which that kind of Publishing was in theirs, on∣ly the Vnsavorie Pamphlets haue beene so many, that haue passed the Presse aswell as Sermons, as that it makes vs (a Many at the least) esteeme no more of having Sermons printed, then it did the Aegyptians of those three Miracles which Moses & Aaron wrought, namely the Exod. 7.11, Serpent, V. 22. Bloud, and Exod. 8.7. Frogs, which their Inchaunters wrought aswell as they. You, I trust, are otherwise minded, & will be towards these Sermons, the rather for they cal to mind what the most of you haue heard, and some haue beene desirous to haue in this sort: as also for they are more Compleat then when they were first delivered to you, by reason of the Marginall Noats annexed therevnto. It is Mountaignes Essayes l. 1. c. 25 said of Epicurus, that in Three Hundred Volumes which hee wrote, he made no vse of any one Allegatiō at all. Ma∣crobius borrowed much, but acknowledged not his Creditors, and therefore is Macrobius homo satis qui∣dem eruditus, sed ingenio max¦imè ingrato, at propè impuden∣ti: vt qui in tan∣to Aeris alieni cumulo nusquā Creditoris no∣mē profiteatur. P. Crinitus De honest. Discipl. l. 22. c 4. For an In∣stance, com∣pare the Ele∣venth Chap∣ter of the first Booke of his Saturnalia, with Seneca his Seaven & Fortith Epi∣stle. taxed as Vngratefull a∣boue measure. They that list to follow the One, or the Others Example, let them: J professe, I like neither, but had rather say with that never enough praised My Lord of London vp∣on Ionas, Lect. 40. p. 552. Pre∣late vpon Ionas, I never could be bould to offer mine own
 Inventions, and Conceipts to the World, when I haue found them such in S. Augustine, and Others, as might not bee amended. And hence it was, as that worthy PRELATE there So, B. Iuel: Origen, Magi∣ster Ecclesiarū: Basil, Canon Fidei: Eusebi{us} Samo satensis Regula verita∣tis: Athanasi∣us, Orbis Ocu∣lus. B. Iuel De∣fence of the Apol. Part. 6. c. 16. Divis. 2. p. 765. observeth, that St Cyprian called Ter∣tullian his Maister; that St Cyprian himselfe by St Au∣sten, was reputed in the nomber of most excellent Men; that St Austen was tearmed the Hammer of Heretickes; that Athanasius called St Ambrose the Eie of the World; that Athanasius was called by the World it selfe, Athanasius the Great. Besides, that the Quoting in this sort, referres such Novices as shal read my Bookes, to the principall Places themselues where they may read of the Matter more at large, a necessary Helpe to young Students, such as a many were that heard mee, and to whom, as to the more Learned among you, these Labours of mine are now dedicated.
I should here write more vnto you, but that my Portion of Paper allotted mee to the selfe same pur∣pose, is now farre spent, and indeed what need I write vnto You now more, who both Write and Speake vnto You, in all that followeth. I, as it was Heb. 11.4. said of Abel, that By Faith being dead, hee yet speaketh: so I trust that ETERNALL WORD, who hath beene the Fountaine of all this, will permit mee even when I am Dead, to Praedicandi scientia est quo∣dammodo An∣gelica vtrovis modo iuvans, seu per Manū, seu per Linguā operetur. Clem Alex. Strom. l. 1. speak vnto You by these Pa∣pers, and not vnto You onely, but also vnto Yours, to whom Your Selues shall leaue them as a Legacy. This if his Great Goodnesse shall grant vnto mee, it is in re∣gard of this World, the Summa Vo∣torum attigi. Senec. Thyest Act. 5. Sc. Ae∣qualu. vtmost of my VVishes▪
 And it shall more content me at my parting from it, to haue beene in this kinde a Speaker thus, then to haue gone even in this Age, the Dealbatiores Vias saeculi. Aug. Confess. l. 7 c. 6. Milky way of much Preferment.
Aug. Confess. l. 11. c. 2. DOMINE, miserere mei, & exaudi Desideriū meum. Puto enim quod non sit de Terra, non de Auro, & Ar∣gento, aut de Lapidibus, aut decoris Vestibus, aut Honori∣bus, & Potestatibus, aut Voluptatibus Carnis, ne{que} de Ne∣cessarijs Corporis, & huic Vitae Peregrinationis nostrae, quae omnia nobis Mat. 6.33. apponuntur quaerentibus Regnum, & Iustitiam tuam. Vide Domine Deus meus, vnde sit Desi∣derium meum. Ps. 118.85. Narraverunt mihi Iniusti Delectatio∣nes suas, sed non sicut Lex tua Domine. Ecce vnde est De∣siderium meum. Vide Pater, aspice, & vide, & approba, & placeat in conspectu Misericordiae tuae, invenire me Gra∣tiam ante te, vt aperiantur pulsanti mihi interiora Ser∣monum tuorum. Obsecro per Dominum Nostrum JESVM CHRISTVM Filium tuum, Virum Dex∣terae tuae, Filium Hominis, quem confirmasti tibi Mediatorem tuum & nostrum, per quem nos quaesi∣sti non quaerentes te, quaesisti autem vt quaereremus te: Verbum tuum per quod fecisti omnia, in quibus & me, Vnicum tuum per quem vocasti in adoptionem, Populum Credentium, in quo & me, per eum te obsecro qui Rom. 8.34. sedet ad Dexteram tuam, & te interpellat pro nobis, in quo sunt omnes Coloss. 2.3. Thesauri Sapientiae & Scientiae absconditi. Rev. 1.6. Ipsi Gloria, & Imperium, in saecula saeculorum, AMEN.
