



SIR:
IF you aske why, from the heapes of Men, I picke out you onely to bee that Murus a∣haeneus, which must defend mee, let me tell you (what you know already,) that Bookes are like the Hungarians in Paules, who haue a Pri∣uiledge to holde out their Turkish History for any one to reade. They beg nothing, the Texted Past-bord talkes all; and if nothing be giuen, nothing is spoken, but God knowes what they thinke. If you are angry, that I thrust into your hands a Subiect of this Nature; O good Sir, take me thus far into your pardon; that it was impossible for me to beget a Better: For, the Bed on which seuen years I lay Dreaming, was filled with thornes instead of fethers, my pillow a rugged flint, my Chamberfellowes (sorrowes that day and night kept me company) the ve∣ry, or worse than the very Infernall Furies. Besides, I

herein imitate the most Courtly Reuellings; for if Lords be in the Grand Masque, in the Antimasque are Play∣ers: So in these of mine, though the Diuell bee in the one, God is in the other; nay in Both. What I send you, may perhaps seeme bitter, yet is it wholesome; your best Physicke is not a Iulep; sweete sawces leaue rot∣ten bodies. There is a Hell named in our Creede, and a Heauen, and the Hell comes before: If we looke not into the first, we shall neuer liue in the last. Our tossing vp and downe (here) is the Sea, but the land of An∣gels is our Shoare. Sayle so long as we can beare vp, through Honors, Riches, Pleasures, and all the sensuall Billowes of the World: yet there is one Harbour to put in at, and safely to arriue (There) is all the Hardnesse, all the Happinesse. Bookes are Pilots in such voyages: would mine were but one point of the Compasse, for a∣ny man to steere well by I doe not thinke, but euen those Courtiers, who are most taken with the glittering of Pallaces, doe from those glorious Enter-viewes, masques, tilt-triumphs, & such like, (with which their eyes are so often banqueted) reade sometimes excellēt lectures to their soules, by a comparatiue laying those transitory Ones, and those immortall beauties of heauen together. The very Roofes of kings Courts, do almost draw vs vp

to such a contemplation: For when the Pauements of such Places are at the best but Marble, yet the vpper seelings are like Firmaments of Starres: There you see the golden Embosments, and curious Enchainings: The true brauery is aboue.
An excellent Dinner was that in France, when the King and Queen sáte at Table, and with them, Thomas Aquinas and Bonauentura (the two great Schoole∣men.) whilst the others were feeding, one of these cast an earnest and fixed eye vpon the beauty of the Queene: at which the King wondring, asked, why hee did so? O (quoth he) if the great Worke-maister, out of a peece of clay, can mould and fashion so admirable a creature as your Queen is; I am rapt into an astonishable amazmēt, to thinke, how glorious those Bodyes are, who are Cour∣tiers attending vpon his Maiesticall Throne. If I hold the Pen longer in my hand, I shall fall asleepe againe: But howsoeuer I wake, or haue mine eyes closed,—Irest
Euer ready to do you seruice,
Tho. Dekker.
