



KNowledge and Reward dwell far a-under.
Greatnes lay once betweene them. But (in
his stead) Couetousnes now. An ill neigh∣bour,
a bad Benefactor, no paymaister to
Poets. By This Hard-Houskeeping, (or ra∣ther,
Shutting vp of Liberalities Doores,)
Merit goes a Begging, & Learning starues.
Bookes, had wont to haue Patrons, and (now,) Patrons haue
Bookes. The Snufft hat is Lighted, consumes That which Feeds
it. A Signe, the World hath an ill Eare, when no Musick is good,
vnles it Strikes vp for Nothing. I haue Sung so, but wil no mor. A Hue-and Cry follow, his Wit, that sleeps, when sweete Tunes
are sounding. But tis now the ashion. Lords, look wel: Knigts,
Thank well; Gntlemen, promise well; Citizens, Take well; Gulles,
Sweare well: but None, Giue well, I leaue therefore All, for You:
And All (that This can be) to You. Not in hope to Haue; but in
Recognition of What I Haue (as I think) Already (your Loues.)
Acknowledgement is part of payment sometimes, but it nei∣ther
is, nor shall be (betweene you and me) a Canceling. I haue
cast mine eye vpon many, but find none more fit, none mor
worthy, to Patronize this, than you, who haue Protected it.
Your Cost, Counsell, and Labur, had bin ill spent, if a Second
should by my hand snatch from you This Glory. No: When
Fortune (in her blinde pride) set her foote vpon This imper∣fect
Building, (as scorning the Foundation and Workmanship:)

you, gently raizd it vp (on the same Columnes,) the Frontispice
onely a little more Garnished: To you therefore deseruedly is
the Whole Frame consecrated. For I durst sweare, if Wishes
and Curses could haue become Witches, the necke of this
Harmles Diuell had long a goe bin broken.
But I am glad that Ignorance (so insolent for being flattered)
is now stript naked, and her deformities discouered: And
more glad, that Enuie sits maddingly gnawing her owne
Snakes, whose Stinges she had armed to strike Others. Feede
let her so still. So, still let the Other e laughed at. Whilst I
(pittying the One, and not Dreading the Other,) send these my
Wishes flying into your Bosomes; That the God of Poets, may
neuer  your Stage with a Cherilus, nor a Suffenus,
(Males, Eminent in nothing but in Long Eares, in Kicking and
in Braging out Calumnies) vpon whose Cruppers may be aptly
pind, That Morrall of poore Onus making Ropes in Hell,
whil'st an Asse stands by, and (as he twists) bites them in sun∣der.
But if His Versifying Deity, sends you Any, I wish they may
be such, as are worthy to sit, At the Table of the Sun. None els.
I wish a Faire and Fortunate Day, to your Next New-Play
(for the Makers-sake and your owne,) because such Braue
Triumphes of Poesie, and Elaborate Industry, which my Worthy
Friends Muse hath there set forth, deserue a Theater full of ve∣ry
Muses themselues to be Spectators. To that Faire Day I wish
a Full, Free, and Knowing Auditor. And to that Full Audience,
One Honest Doore-keeper. So, Fare-well.

