



Sir.
IT may (happily) seeme strange vnto you, that such an army of Idle-words should march into the open field of the world vnder the Ensigne of your Name, (you beeing not therewith made acquainted till now▪ you may iudge it in me an Error, I my selfe confesse it a boldnesse. But such an ancient & strong Charter hath Custome confirmed to This Printing age of ours, (by giuing men authoritie to make choice of what Patrons they like,) that some Writers do almost nothing contrary to ye custome, and some by vertue of that Priuiledge, dare doe any thing. I am neither of that first order, nor of this last. The one is too fondly-ceremonious, the other too impudently audaci∣ous I walk in the midst (so well as I can) betweene both: with some fruites that haue growne out of my Bra, haue I bin so farre from being in loue, that I thought them not worthy to be tasted by any particular friend & therefore haue they bin exposed only to those that would entertain them: neither did I thinke the Fairest that euer was Mine, so worthy, that it was to be lookd vpon with the Eye of vniuersal censure. Two sorts of mad-men trouble the stationers shops in Paul Church-yard: they that out of a Me and Idle vaine-glory will euer be Pam∣ping (tho their bookes beeing printed are scarse worth so much Browne paper) and this is a very poore, and foolish ambi∣tion: Of the other sort are they that beeing free of Wits Mer∣hant-venturers, do euery new moon (for gaine onely) make 5. o 6. voiages to the Presse, and euery Term-time (vpon Book∣sellers stalles) lay whole litters of blinde inuention: fellowes ye (if they do but walke in the middle Ile) spit nothing but ynck, and speake nothing but Poeme. I would keepe company with neither of these two mad-men, if I could auoid them, yet I take the last to be the wisest and lesse dangerous for sithence al the arrowes that men shoote in the world, flye to two marks only (either pleasure or profit) he is not much to be cōdemned that hauing no more Acres to liue vppon then those that lie in his head) is euery houre hammering out one peice or other out of this rusty Iron age, sithence the golden and siluer Globes of the world are so locked vp, that a Scholler can hardly be suffred to behold them. Some perhaps wil say, that this lancing of the pestilent fores of a Kingdome so openly, may infect those in it that are found, and that in this our schoole, (where close a∣buses

& grose villanies are but discouered and not punished) others that neuer before knew such euils, wil be now instru∣cted (by the booke) to practise them. If so, then let not a trai∣tor, or a Murderer be publikely arraigned, lest the one laying open to the world, how his plots were wouen to contriue a treason, or the other, what pollicies he was armed with, for the shedding of blood, the standers-by (that are honest) be drawn (by their rules) to run head-long into the same mischiefe: no, Our strong phisicke works otherwise. What more makes a man to loath that Mongrell Madnesse (that halfe English, halfe Dutch sinne) Drunkennesse: then to see a common Drunkard acting his Scaenes in the open streete? Is any Gamester so foo∣lish to play with false Dice, when he is assured that al who are about him know him to be a Sworne Cheator? The letting ther∣fore of Uice blood in these seuerall Veines, which the Bel-man hath opend, cannot by any Iudicial rules of phisicke, endan∣ger the Bodie of the Common-wealth, or make it feeble, but rather restore those parts to perfect strength, which by disor∣der haue ben diseased.
Giue mee leaue to lead you by the hand into a Wilder∣nesse (where are none but Monsters, whose crueltie you need not feare because I teach the way to tame them: vgly they are in shape and diuelish in conditions: yet to behold them a far off, may delight you, and to know their quallities (if euer you should come neere them (may saue you from much danger. Our Country breedes no Wolues nor Serpents, yet Theise in∣gender here and are either Serpents or Wolues, or worse then both: whatsoeuer they are, I send vnto you not the Heard of the one, or the Bed of the other, but only a Picture of either, View them I pray, and where the cullours are not well layde on, shadow them with your finger: if you spy any dispropor∣tion, thus excuse it, such Painting is fit for Monsters: How rudely soeuer the Peeceis drawne, call it a Picture. And when one more worthe your viewe lies vnder the workemans pen∣cil, this Bad-one shall bring you home a Better: In the meane time, I cease, and begin to be (if you please)

