


AT your Gates the Belman of Lon∣don
beateth, to awaken your eies,
to looke back after certaine Grand
and common abuses, that daily
walke by you, keeping aloofe (in
corners) out of the reach of Law.
It must be the hand of your a∣thoritie
that must fetch in these
Rebels to the weale-publike, and
your arme that must strike them: I chuse you as Patrons,
(not to my booke) but to defend me from those Monsters,
whose dennes I breake open in this my discouery. More
dangerous they are to a State, then a Ciuill warre, because
their vilanies are more subtill and more enduing. The Bel∣man
not withstanding hath plaide the Owle (who is the Em∣bleme
of wisdome) for sleeping in the day, as abhorring to
behold the impieies of this last and worst age of the world:
In the night therefore hath hee stolne foorth, and with the
help of his Lanthorne and Candle (by which is figured cir∣cumspection)
hath he brought to light, that broode of mis∣chiefe,
which is ingendered in the wombe of darkenesse. A∣monstrous
birth is it, and therefore worthy to be looked at:
from monstrous parents doth it proceede, and therefore the
sight of it to be fearefull. But of such rare temper are your

eyes, that (as if they had sunne-beames in them) they are a∣ble
to exhale vp all these contagious breaths which poy∣son
a kingdome, & so to spese them into thin aire, that they
shall vtterly vanish, and be no more offensiue. In this blacke
shore of mischiefe haue I sayled along, and bene a faithfull
discouerer of all the creekes, rockes, gulfes and quick-sands,
in and about it: Be you therefore as second aduenturers, and
furnish men armed with Iustice, and well furnished in all
points, with a desire to conquer these Sauages, & send them
to set strong and fearfull footing amongst them. It shall be
honour to your felues, and them, and a rich benefit to the
Republik wherein you liue. For my own part I vow, that as
I dedicate these my labours to your hands, so will I deuote
my life to the safety of my Countrie, in defending her from
these Serpents: I will waste out mine eies with my candles,
and watch from midnight till the rysing vp of the morning:
my Bell shall euer be ringing, and that faithfull seruant of
mine (the Dog that follows me) be euer biting of these wilde
beastes, till they be all driuen into one heard, and so huned
into the toiles of the Lawe. Accept therefore of this Night-prize
(my Graue and worthy Patrons) drawne rudely, and
presented bouldly, because I know the colours layde vppon
it, are not counterfeite as those of borrowd beauties: but
this is a picture of Villanie, drawen to the life, of purpose that
life might be dawne from it. None can be offended with it
but such as are guiltie to themselues, that they are such as are
inrold in this Muster booke, for whose anger, or whose stab,
I care not. At no mans bosome doe I particularly strike, but
onely at the body of Vice in Generall: if my manner of Fight
(with these dangerous Masters of the Ignoblest Science that
euer was in any kingdome) do get but plaue, the Belman
shall shortly bid you to another Prize, where you shall see
him play at other kinde of weapons.

