



RIGHT Honorable Lords, you
may not possiblie be ignorant
of the late-bred broyles not
long since brewed & broached
at Nottingham, by meanes of
Sommers his supposed posses∣sion
and dispossession: espe∣cially,
those selfesame broyles
being eftsoones reuiued since,
and now also (by what priui∣ledge
we wotte not) so publikely reported in Print, as their
flying rumours doe mightilie ouer-runne the whole Realme,
yea, euen to the vttermost borders thereof. We two, did vn∣doubtedly
assure our selues that the holie regard of Religion;
of loyall obedience to her Maiesties Princely prerogatiue: of
the publike peace of the Church: of due reuerence to her
Maiesties positiue Lawes: of dutifull submission to the defi∣nitiue
sentence of Iustice: of common humanitie towards the
persons of men: yea, and of a carefull continuance of their ho∣nest
reputations; woulde something haue restrained, if not

vtterly inhibited the parties (especially conuicted) from the
vntimely attempting of any such vnorderly course, as now (by
their newly published Pamphletes) they haue most vnduti∣fully
blazed abroad. And therefore, the Christian care of
that their hoped moderate cariage, hath caused vs hitherto
euen purposely to suppresse this folowing Treatise, which
(almost three yeeres since) we had euen carefully ompyled, as
a christian counter-checke to al such vnwoonted occurrents:
yea, and this our former▪ suppressing thereof, proceeded (we
assure you) from a felow-like feare of procuring vntimely
disgrace, and of adding affliction to the principall parties
themselues. Esteeming it much better, to burie our prece∣dent
labours in the graue of forgetfulnes: then (by any their
needlesse publishing) to procure a present disturbance, or to
hatch a subsequent broyle in the Church, by pestering the
same with such impertinent, obscure and needlesse paradoxes,
as in their books are broched abroad. Howbeit, perceiuing the
principall parties, with other their vnder-hand fauorites
(as it were in a setled pertinacie) not onely to hold all those
their former phantasticall toies with tooth and naile, but
(which more is) thus preposterously, and (perhaps also with
the secret support of their vnder-hand Fauorites) thus vn∣dutifully
to pursue the same with such publike disgrace of
publike persons, notwithstanding any the precedent coun∣termaunds,
or definitiue determinations of publike autho∣ritie:
we verily thought, and our owne conscience did witnes
against vs in the presence of God: that we might iustly be
deemed too too irreligious towards the Lord: disloyall to her
Maiesties Princely prerogatiue: ouer-much carelesse of pub∣like
peace: exceeding remisse concerning the positiue Lawes
of our land: most derogatorious to the definitiue sentence of
iustice: monstrous inhumane towards the persons of men:
yea, altogither carelesse of our honest reputations: if that
light, which the Lord in mercie (we hope) hath reuealed

vnto vs,Math. 5. 11. should now any longer Lie buried vnder a bushell,
and not rather be set on a candlesticke, for the better en∣lightning
of all in the house concerning these intricate and
hidden mysteries. More especially now at this present, when
the fearefull infection of those their factious proceedings, so
vniuersally, and so dangerously ouer spreadeth it selfe: not vn∣like
to the fretting Gangrena,2. Tim. 2. 17. or incurable Canker.
Experienced Antiquaries (right honorable Lords) doe
verie well know, to what dangerous heads such sily begin∣nings,
haue (by carelesse negligence) growen in continuance
of time: and therefore, euen the verie primarie appearan∣ces
of euerie such fearefull occurrent, would be the more wa∣relie
and more wisely nipt in the head, yea, and the streaming
courses thereof the more heedfully intercepted and stopped in
time, for feare of ouerflowing the yoong buds of our holy Re∣ligion.
For these speciall respects wee haue now proffered
our labours to publike view, and doe verie humblie impor∣tune
your Honors patronage, and fauourable protection for them:
so farre foorth especially as they fully accord with the
infallible truth of the Scriptures.
We protest (right Honorable Lords) that we our selues
(in penning this Treatise) did euen purposely resolue with
our soules, to banish all partiall and priuate respects from out
of our brests: as may (by the matter and method thereof)
verie plainely appeere to any indifferent Reader. Yea wee
wholie deuoted our selues, to penne onely such speciall points
as other writers report and record in their seuerall workes;
and which in our owne consciences (before the presence of
God) we are hitherto perswaded are vndoubtedly true: de∣siring
with all our harts to be better and more fully informed
(wherein we haply may erre) by the holie endeuours of such
as the Lord hath in mercie enlightened with a more syncere
and sanctified knowledge concerning these points. The spe∣ciall
motiues for our thus dedicating to your good Honors, all

ioyntly togither this published Treatise: are these that folow
in order.
1 First, your wisedomes hauing heretofore, very orderlie
enquired, into, and iudicially determined the vndoubted
truth of those the aforesaid occurrents: we verily perswa∣ded
our selues, that as you are therefore the most able, so
would you be also the more willing, to approoue, or disprooue of
our labors herein, according to those your former proceedings,
and the holy directions of the eternall God.
2 The aduerse parties themselues, hauing (partly by their
published Pamphlets, and partly also, by their priuate so∣licitours)
verie often, and earnestly laboured, either all, or
the most of your Honors to some fauourable regard of their
languishing cause: wee in like manner (esteeming your
wisedomes the most competent Iudges heerein) do there∣fore
referre the due triall of our trauels, much rather to
your Honors, then to any her Maiesties high Commissio∣ners
in Ecclesiasticall causes: partly, because, they (being
themselues esteemed but parties herein, and openly challen∣ged
of vnequall proceedings) might haply be deemed by the
aduerse part but incompetent Iudges: and partly, for that
your good Honors especially, being euerie way free from such
exception, may therefore, become the more willing to heare
and determine the truth of these matters.
3 Moreouer, considering eftsoones with our selues, that,
those often, and earnest solicitings of parties on both sides
(they arguing especially the controuerted causes with such
flat oppositions) might haply but breed in your Honorable
breasts, some scruple of conscience about the vndoubted truth
of such intricate questions: we did therefore account it our
bounden dutie, to yeeld your good Honors our holiest supplies,
for the better enlightning of your present iudgements in
the hidden mysteries of those cloudie occurrents.
4 Lastly, your good Honors next vnder her supereminent

highnes, enioying a primarie subordinate power concer∣ning
the authenticall hearing and determining of such and
so shamefull disorders as do daily discouer themselues in those
disordered persons, who seeke (in such a malcontented hu∣mour)
to vphold, and maintaine those quaint matters in
question: we were the rather induced to tender our trauels
to your Honorable protections. That so, your good Honors
(by your approoued authoritie) might, the more authenti∣cally
command the aduerse parties themselues, foorthwith
to desist from their former factious courses, and humblie
submit to the truth of the Treatise, it being substantiallie
sounde: or otherwise, in more dutifull sort to addresse their
holiest endeuours to some sounder, and honester maner of
answering, then hitherto they haue shewed to the world.
We looke euerie hower (right Honorable Lords to be noto∣riously
branded with the blacke coale of vnchristian repro∣ches,
such and so scandalous are the cankred mouthes of
some clamorous companions: who (not vnlike to the be∣numming
Torpedo) do purposely endeuour by their intoxi∣cated
and most slanderous reuilings, to astonish the verie
hands of so many as presume to put penne to the paper,
against any their irregular practises. Seeing therefore it is
vtterly impossible the Leopard should alter his spots,Ier. 13. 23.
we do assuredly expect when their Pulpits shall ring out, and
their night crowing Pamphlets proclaime to the world,
that such two, are quite falne from the brethren and their
cause, they know not well what: that they are become Apo∣states,
reuolters, backsliders, formalistes, and such as
fawne on the state: and this onely, for that we fauour not
forsooth, these their Cabalisticall conceits and phantasti∣call
fooleries. Well, whatsoeuer they prate, we will vndergo
it with patience,1. Cor. 4. 3. 4. not passing one pinne, to be iudged of
them, or of any mans iudgement else: no, we iudge not
our owne selues. For, we know nothing by our owne

selues: and yet are we not thereby iustified: but he that
iudgeth vs both is the Lord. And as for that their odious
name of Formalists: wherewith especially they sport them∣selues
most in branding their brethren, we regard not there∣in
their virulent reuilings one rush: hauing (in a more ma∣ture
deliberation) experimented long since, the graue coun∣cell
of Drusius to sound verie sutablie with the sacred Scrip∣tures,
saying thus, Esto potius cauda Leonum, quam ca∣put
Vulpium. Hoc est, da operam, vt potius sis postre∣mus
inter viros generosos: quam primus inter callidos
versipelles.Ioh. Drusij Adag. 2. Haras in libro Auoth. In Sanhedrin. edit. Basiliens: cap. 10. Be thou rather the verie taile of Lyons, then
the head of Foxes. That is, do thou giue thy endeuour, to
be rather the last, or the lowest among noble, and gentillike
persons: then the first, or the highest, among that base crew
of craftie vndermining companions, and heere we haue set
downe our rest.
Hauing hitherto (right Honorable Lords) verie brieflie
displaied our maine purpose concerning the first penning and
publishing of this folowing Treatise: we do now (in all hum∣ble
submission) refer our selues and our sutes to your approo∣ued
considerations, and your good Honors to the almigh∣tie
his holie directions, in this one and all other
your iudiciall proceedings.
So be it.

