

THe thynges whiche principally preserue and mayntayne the woorkes of nature in the memo¦ries of men, are hystories and bookes compo∣sed of the same. Amonge the whiche certes those are esteemed moste trewe and autentyke which haue byn wrytten by wyttie and expert

men well trauayled in the worlde, as faythfull wytnesses of suche thynges as they haue partely seene and byn partely in∣formed by credible persons. Of this mynde and opinion was Plinie, who better then any other autoure hathe wrytten in xxxvii. bookes al that perteyneth to the naturall historie, con¦teyned al in one volume dedicated to Uespasian Themperour. Wherein, as a prudente historiographer, he declareth suche thynges as he had harde: Attributynge the seconde autoritie to suche as he had redde in autoures that wrote before hym: And thyrdely ioyned to the same hystorie, such thynges as he hym selfe had seene as moste certeyne testimonie. Whose exem¦ple I folowynge, wyl in this my breefe summarie reduce and represent to yowr maiesties memorie such thynges as I haue seene in yowre Empyre of the West Indies aswell in the I∣landes as in the firme lande of the Ocean sea, where I haue serued nowe more then twelue yeares in the place of suruoy∣er of the golde mynes by the commaundemente of the Catho∣lyke kynge Don Fernando the fyfte of that name and graundfa∣ther vnto yowre maiestie, to whom god gaue great fame and glorie. Sense whose death also I haue lykewies serued and trust whyle the rest of my lyfe yet remayneth, to serue yowre maiestie as shall please yowe to commaunde. As touchynge which thinges and such other lyke, I haue more largely writ¦ten in a hystorie begunne as sone as my age was rype to take suche matters in hande. Wherein furthermore I haue made mention of suche thynges as haue chaunced in Spaine, from the yeare .1494. vnto this tyme. Addynge also thereunto suche thynges woorthy memorie as I haue obserued in other realmes and prouinces where I haue trauayled. And haue likewise particulerly wrytten the lyues and woorthy actes of the catholyke Princes of famous memorie Don Ferdinando and lady Elizabeth his wyfe to theyr last dayes. After whose fru¦ition of heauenly Paradyse, I haue noted suche thynges as haue chaunced in yowre most fortunate succession. Not omit¦tynge particularly to wryte a large booke of such thynges as haue seemed moste woorthy to bee noted as touchynge yowre maiesties Indies. But for asmuche as that volume remaineth in the citie of San. Dominico in the Ilande of Hispaniola where I dwell and am placed in housholde with wyfe, chyldren, and famelie, I haue brought no more with me of that my wri¦tynge

then I beare in memorie. Determynynge notwithstan∣dynge for yowre maiesties recreation to make a breefe rehear¦sall of certeyne notable thynges wherof I haue more largely entreated in my sayde general historie, and such as may seeme moste woorthy to bee redde of yowre maiestie. Of the which, although a great parte haue byn wrytten by other who haue also seene the same, yet perhappes they are not so exactly and particularly described as of me, forasmuche as in maner all that trauayle into these Indies haue greater respecte to luker and gaynes then diligently to searche the woorkes of nature wherunto I haue byn euer naturally inclyned, and haue ther¦fore with all possible endeuour applyed myne eyes and intel∣ligence to fynde the same. And this presente Summarie shall not bee contrary or dyuers from my larger historie wherin (as I haue sayde) I haue more amplye declared these thynges: but shal onely more breefely expresse theffect therof vntyl such tyme as Godde shal restore me to myne owne house, where I may accomplyshe and fynishe my sayd general hystorie. Where vnto to gyue the fyrst principle, I say that Don Christopher Colonus (as it is well knowen) beinge the fyrste Admyrall of this India, discouered the same in the dayes of the Catho∣lyke kynge Don Ferdinando and the ladye Elyzabeth his wyfe, graundfather and graundmother vnto yowre maiestie: In the yeare .1491. And came to Barzalona in the yeare 1492. with the fyrst Indians and other shewes and profes of the great ryches and notice of this west Empire. The whi∣che gyfte and benefyte was suche, that it is vnto this daye, one of the greatest that euer any subiect or seruant hath done for his prince or countrey, as is manifeste to the hole worlde. And to saye the trewth, this shall doubtlesse bee so commodi∣ous and profytable vnto the hole realme of Spayne, that I repute hym no good Castilian or Spanyarde that doothe not recognise the same. And (as I haue sayde before) foras∣much as in my sayde generall historie I haue more largely in¦treated of these thynges, I intend at this present only briefe¦ly to rehearse certeyne especiall thynges, the whiche suerly are verye fewe in respecte of the thousandes that myght bee sayde in this behalfe. Fyrst therfore I wyl speake sumwhat of the nauigation into these parties. Then of the generati∣on of the nations whiche are founde in the same, with their

rytes, customes, and cerimonies. Also of beastes, foules, byrdes, woormes, fysshes, seas, ryuers, sprynges, trees, plantes, herbes, and dyuers other thinges which are engen∣dered boothe on the lande and in the water. And forasmuche as I am one of thorder and company of them that are appoin¦ted to returne into these regions to serue yowre maiestie, yf therfore the thynges conteyned in this booke shall not bee di¦stincte in such order as I promised to performe in my greater woorke. I desyre yowre maiestie to haue no respecte herevn¦to, but rather to consyder the noueltie of suche straunge thyn∣ges as I haue herein declared, whiche is the chiefe ende that moued me to write. Protestyng that in this Summarie I haue written the trewth of suche thynges as coome to my re∣membraunce: wherof not onely I my selfe can testifye, but also diuers other woorthy and credible men which haue bin in those regions, and are nowe presente in yowre maiesties courte. And thus it shal suffyce to haue saide thus much vn∣to yowre maiestie in maner of a proheme vnto this present worke which I most humbly desyre yowre maiesticas thank¦fully taccept, as I haue written it faythfully.
