



Honourable Praetor: Worthy Consuls.
THose Titles (taking both Des∣cension and Deriuation from the Ancient Roman, Prae∣torian, and Consular Dig∣nities) are happy Honors, in that they

are lent vnto you, from the noblest Na∣tion, that euer carried Armes in the World. Your Places are High, Offi∣ces Great; yet giue me leaue to sit at the Roote of your Glories, (like a Passen∣ger on the way) and to lift vp mine eyes to your spreading Branches, leauing this poore Tablet hid amongst your Leaues, containing nothing but an Inscription of my Loue.
It was some ioy to me, to bee imployed in the Praesentation of your Triumphs, on the day of your Lordships Inaugura∣tion; and it shalbe as great a happinesse to me now, if this my second Praesenta∣tion,

may from your Hands receiue a free entertainment.
What I offred vp then, was a Sacrifice Ex officio: Custome tooke my Bond for the Performance: And on the Day of Ceremony, I hope the Debt was fully discharged. This Oblation is volunta∣ry, and shall prosper well enough, if it meete acceptance. A braue Company of Gentlemen in Armes, were Additions of much splendor, to that Day, (which of it selfe was bright enough) to grace your Lordship, being at this Time their Sole and Worthy Colonell: I come to you now, speaking still in their Warlike

Language. Drums, Fifes, Ensignes, Pikes, and Shot, Marched before you, to your Gates: Drums, Fifes, Ensignes, Pikes, and Shot, doe now come Mar∣ching into your Parlors: I know not how to handle either; yet I handle all. Trum∣pets here sound a Charge, yet no noise heard: A Battaile is fought, but with∣out Bloud shed: I am no Herald, yet I Crye, Warres, Warres, Warres: No Souldier, yet my Pen playes the Cap∣tayne, and Drils a Company of Ver∣ses on Foote, in a Field of white Paper. The Discipline I teach them, is so Prin∣ted in their Memories, that vnlesse their

Limbes be torne in peeces, the World cannot chuse but take notice of their Po∣stures. What scorne, other men (out of Malice, rather than Iudgement) shall throw vpon these my Martiall darings, I will put by, with an Odi prophanum Vulgus, and not care what Canons they Plant against mee, so I may lye safely Intrenched, Sub Triplici Clipeo, Of your Three noble Defences. To which I prostrate, my Loue, Labour, and Ser∣uice:

