



THE impugnations which the enemie of the whole Church so strangely & di∣uersly maketh against this Church of England, are not so much to be marueiled at, as of euery true Christian heart to be lamented. They of the Church of Rome condemne vs, for falling away so farre from them: such as are sprong vp amongest our selues, and are gone out from vs, because wee approch so neere vnto them. The first hold vs as An∣tichristian, for shaking off the Popes go∣uernment, whome they make Christes vi∣car: the others, for that wee retaine (they say) his gouernment still, & are in bondage to it. The first say, we are out of the true
Church: the others say no lesse, and that we haue not Gods Church amongst vs. The first affirme, that we haue no Ministers, no sa∣craments, no lawful seruice of God amongst vs: the others, that we haue no Ministers rightly called, no sacraments duely admini∣stred, no worship of God, and that we wor∣ship a false Christ. The first holde, that the seruice of God in our Churches is so wicked, as it is not to bee frequented: the others, that it is idolatrous, and to be auoided. The first are of opinion, that the Soueraigne Christian Magistrate ought not to haue gouernment in causes Ecclesiastical, other∣wise then to defend the Church, and to see the lawes therof executed, because making of Church lawes and gouernment Ecclesia∣sticall, is soly in the Pope, and in his Clergy: the others holde the like position against the Princes Ecclesiasticall supremacie, for that this gouernment belongeth to Elderships and Synodes of Ministers and Elders, (for else Christ doth not gouerne in his Church) as they teach. Thus both sortes push at the peace of this Church, with the hornes of the beast, and albeit vpon diuerse groundes,
yet to one and the selfe same end, which is, the vtter ouerthrowe of the Church, if their courses be not carefully and speedily preuented. Which (me thinketh) may best be effected by doctrine and by discipline. The first by instructing the simple seduced, and by confuting mightily the froward and insolent: the second, by sharper corrosiues against the wilfull and obstinate sect-ma∣sters on both sides, being , men condemned euen of their owne con∣sciences. This teaching and confutation in sundrie weightie pointes is (in mine opini∣on) very soundly and iudiciously (though in briefe sorte as best fitting sermons) here performed, both against the Romanistes and Catharites. The copie whereof happe∣ly falling into my handes, I haue made so bolde with the Authour as to prefixe a title thereunto (implying not all, but the most principall matters treated of) and thus to publish it, for common instruction and com∣fort: Dedicating the same to your Grace, as to him to whom the Author hath dedica∣ted himselfe in all duetiful seruice, and who
daily seeketh by the said two meanes (mix∣ed with mildnes and grauitie) to reforme the fancie-full, nay sinnefull conceipts of both the factions, and to settle this Church in the vnitie of the spirite, and bonde of peace. Which that your L. and others in au∣thoritie may effectually bring to passe, vn∣der the long and blessed gouernment of our dread Soueraigne, to Gods glorie, the propa∣gation of the Gospell, (exceedingly impea∣ched by them) and to the comfort of all god∣lie and peaceably affected English, The Lorde of Lordes in mercie graunt for Christes sake. Amen.
17. Nouemb. 1590. Anno 33. D. Elizabethae Re∣ginae.
