


MOst gratious and dread Soveraigne) we little thought when first our humble Perition was exhibited to your ex∣cellent Maiesty, (it be∣ing both for the matter honest, and for the manner peaceable) should haue found so hard entertainment abroad, as that this action of ours so Answ. to the Petit. Epist. Ded. p. 4. l. 21. secretly, orderly, and lawfully enter∣prised, should be by publick writing
 traduced, as unduly, and dishonestly attempted. Our meaning was onely to intimate to your Majesty the state of our Church, not to lay open the nakednes of our Mother to the scan∣dall of the enemy, nor to appeale to inferiour iudges, to the preiudice of your Maiesty, to whom the cogni∣zance of this cause, and deciding of this strife of right appertayneth.
We trust therefore that as Abra∣ham composed the variance between Genes. 13. Exod: 2. his, and Lots servants, Moses between the Hebrewes, Constantine among the Church Ministers so it will please your Majesty to be a iudge between us, and to giue us leaue to defend & iustifie our innocent cause. As for us we say with the Apostles: We can∣not but speak the things, which we haue seen and heard: and approue that say∣ing Act: 4. 20. of Hierome: Minoris peccati est se∣qui malum, quod bonum putaris, quam non audere defendere quod pro bono Dialog. 1. advers. Pela∣gian. certo noveris.

Now then most noble King, giue your faithfull subiects and unsained lovers of the trueth, your princely leaue to iustify their honest and god∣ly petition, which hath been by some of our Brethren in their heate im∣pugned. In which their enterprise we humbly craue licence to pro∣pound certain generall observations, which we referre to your Highnesse Christian consideration.
First whereas wee your Maiesties 1. Observa∣tion. Opposition between the Kings iudge∣ment & the Censurers of Oxford. humble Petitioners haue through∣out conformed our desires and re∣quests to your Maiesties iudgement, who haue wished us to iudge of your fu∣ture proiects, according to your by-past actions: and haue proportioned our suites after the rule prescribed in your Majesties book, which you would Preface to Basil. haue taken of all men as an image of your mind, and a Discovery of that which may be looked for at your hands: Yet our brethren to our understan∣ding, haue been bould in diverse
 points to oppose their indgement to your Maiesties.
1. They count it an unsufferable Pag. 7. thing to permit: any thing touching the government of the Church: to be so much as questioned: Whereas it hath pleased your Maiesty in your prince∣ly wisdome, to permit, and will a conference of the learned concern∣ing such matters.
2. They will not grant that these Pag. 10. articulated, are the peccant humors of the Church, and so consequently acknowledge none: Your Majesty saith otherwise: no kingdom lackes her own diseases: and seemeth not to be ig∣norāt of corruptions stoln into the state.
3 They justifie ceremonies & tra∣ditions not warranted by the word, as the crosse in baptisme, the surplice, interrogatories ministred to infants, Confirmation: But your Maiesty Basil. p. 18. 19. hath shewed us to ground our con∣science onely upon the expresse Scrip∣ture, and to discerne between the ex∣presse
 will & Commandement of God in his word, and the invention, and or∣dinance of man.
4. They count them turbulent p. 14. that would not haue the Apocrypha read in the Church: But your Maie∣sties iudgement is otherwise: as to the apocrypha books I omit them, because Basil. p. 1. I am no Papist, and indeed some of them are no wayes like the ditement of the Spirit of God.
5. Your Majesties princely reso∣lution Basil. p. 43. is to see all your Churches within your Dominions planted with good Pa∣stors: Our brethren say it is impossi∣ble, and that the defects of some p. 15. Ans: men may be better supplied by other meanes then by preaching, as by rea∣ding of Scripture, and of homilies, p. 16. p. 14. and of the service boke: and that all Ministers were not preachers in the primitiue Church.
6. Your Maiestie most truly affir∣meth Basil. p. 4. according to the Apostle, that faith commeth by hearing the word
 preached: Our brethren say that the P. 16. Ans. reading of Scriptuers, of Sermons, and Homilies, are the ordinary effe∣ctuall meanes to increase faith.
7. Your Maiesties Christian mo∣tion to the Vniversity is, that leases of their tithes impropriate be so demi∣sed, as Ecclesiastical persons onely may be maintained & inabled to execute their functions, the Collegdes being provided for. But our Brethren do charge the p. 19. Petitioners for this motion with lack of conscience.
8. Your Majesties care is, that the Basil. p. 43. doctrine be preserved in purity accor∣ding to Gods word: The Petitioners for moving to haue an uniformity of Doctrine, and all popish opinions abolished, are challenged for shame∣lesse p. 13. suggestions.
9. Your Majesties will is, that the Basil. 13. discipline bee likewise preserved in pu∣ritie according to the word of God: The Petitioners humbly desire accor∣dingly that the discipline may be ad∣ministred
 according to Christs insti∣tution: for this motion they are re∣proved. p. 20.
10. Your Maiesty most princelike Basil. praef. professeth, equally to loue and honour the learned and graue men, of either o∣pinion: that like better of the single forme of pollicy in the Church of Scotland, or of the many ceremonies in the Church of England. Our bre∣thren Epist. p. 5. count the Petitioners Shisma∣ticks, Hypocrites, dishonest persons, for misliking of some ceremonies, and other abuses, and wish the land were cleane purged of them.
11. Your Maiesty giveth this ho∣norable Basil. praef: 11. testimony of the godly mi∣nisters of Scotland, that there is pre∣sently a sufficient number of good men of them in that kingdom: But the Con∣futers p. 30. say, There are not many men brought up among them in this last re∣formed age, worthy of that wonted ho∣norable maintenance.
12. Your Majesty specially provi∣deth
 for keeping holy the Lords day: so that alwayes the Sabboths be kept ho∣ly, and no unlawfull pastime bee used: But our brethren seeme to urge the Ans. p. 13 rest upon other holy dayes as strictly as upon the Lords day.
Whatsoeuer opinion is conceiued of our brethren, and howsoeuer they are men of credit and estimation in the world: these humble petitioners would by no means hane presumed thus to haue thwarted your Ma∣jesties Christian judgement: We for our parts wish none other reforma∣tion, then your Majesties own pro∣fession hath given us hope of: We thank God for your Christian iudge∣ment and constant resolution: It is our happinesse that God hath sent vs such a king, not onely noble in princely birth and natiuitie, but in vertue, knowledge and piety as the preacher sayth: Blessed art thou, O Eccl. 10. 17 Land, when thy King is the sonne of Nobles: and such an one as Am∣brose
 describeth the King of Nini∣vie: ser. 40. Necesse erat, ut qui potentior cun∣ctis fuerat, devotior fieret universis.
Further, may it please your Maie∣stie 2. Observat. difference be∣twene the old and new Oxford doc∣tors. to understand how much these Doctors and Proctors of Oxford doe vary from the iudgement of their predecessors, approving those abu∣ses and corruptions, which were even in the time of Popery condem∣ned in a Councell held at Oxford un∣der Stephen Langthon Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, not aboue 250. yeeres since.
1. There the Pastors are enioy∣ned, Consil: oxo∣niens: sub steph: Vt plebes sibi commissas, &c. That they procure the people committed unto them to be informed with the food of Gods word: otherwise canes muti iudicentur; they are counted dumb dogges: But these Oxford men excuse unpreaching Ministers, affirming that all were not Preachers in the primitiue Church. pag. 14.
2. They decreed that none should
 be admitted to a vicarage, nisi velit &c. unlesse he will be personally resi∣dent in his Church. They condemne Non-residence, these iustifie Non-residents. pag. 17.
3. They decreed, that if they which are admitted to Cures of a certain value, were not resident, see∣ing bread must not be given but to those that labour, Ecclesijs suis spoli∣entur, &c. should be deprived. But these count it an uncharitable act, yea though other provision be made for them, that they which cannot labour should be removed. p. 15.
4. They would haue no spiritu∣all offices farmed, under paine of sus∣pension: statuentes, &c. decreeing that no Archdeaconry, Deanery, or other Office, which consisteth in meere spirituall things, nulli dentur ad firmam, &c. be put to none to farm. These count it an indifferent thing. pag. 24.
5. Old Oxford men thought good
 that none should bee excommuni∣cate where the fault is not apparant, Nisi canonica monitione praecedente, un∣lesse they be canonically, that is, thrice admonished. These new Oxford men count it contempt for the which men are now excommunicate. p. 23. when as they use but once to bee summoned before.
6. They forbid, Ne praesumant pa∣riter iudices esse & actores: that they should not be both iudges and actors, or promoters. But these simply appro∣ving the oath ex officio, p. 25. do con∣sequently allow such proceedings, for in this case the Iudge dealing Ex officio is an agent and promotor of the cause.
7. They punish such Advocates qui protrahunt matrimonium malitio∣se, &c. which wittingly protract suits of marriage: and such are excom∣municated because by them it com∣meth to passe, ut contra iustitiam processus causae diutius suspendatur: the




 proceeding in the cause is longer, then iustice would, suspended. But these take upon them to defend longsom∣nesse of suits in Ecclesiastical courts.
8. They determine, Ne Monachus vel Canonicus Ecclesiam audeat retine∣re ad firmam: That no Monke or Ca∣non should hold any Church to farme: but these maintaine the demising of impropriate Churches to lay Far∣mers, p. 19. which is more unlaw∣full.
9. They thought good, Vt in sin∣gulis Ecclesijs, ubi parochia est diffusa, duo sint vel tres presbyteri: That in great parishes there should be two or three presbyters. But these allow two or three parishes to one Pres∣byter. p. 18.
10. This Councell prohibiteth, Ne Clerici iurisdictiones exerceant se∣culares, &c. That Cleargy-men ex∣ercise not secular iurisdictions, espe∣cially to the which the iudgement of bloud is annexed, and not to bee
 present where the iudgement of bloud is handled. But now it is an usuall thing with our brethren, not onely to be present, but to sit as as∣sistants to the Iudge in matters of life and death.
Thus was it decreed in those su∣perstitious times: It may seeme strange that any professing purity of religion should come short of them in those duties; for our righteousnesse Math. 5. Homil. 5. Ex∣od. should exceed the righteousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees. And as Origen well saith, Movenda sunt castra cum Israelitis, urgenda est perfectio. Our brethren should haue runne before their blinde predecessors in pious proceedings, not bee cast behinde them: to haue moved their tents forward to Canaan, not to haue loo∣ked backe to the corruptions of Ae∣gypt.
Beside as our brethren haue thus 3. observat. failed in the matter, so they haue been much overseen in the manner
 of handling. They haue burdened the Petitioners, and others, with ma∣ny untrue accusations, laying to their charge, lewd, absurd, false suggestions, vntrue im∣putations. clamorous libels, defamatory supplica∣tions, p. 5. We are further accused to be Schismatikes, p. 5. Puritans, re∣sembled to Papists, Epist. p. 9. Disli∣kers of set and stinted prayers, refusers, condemners of the Lords prayer, such as from whom Barrow and Greenwood tooke their beginning, p. 11. favourers of those which write against Princes ti∣tles, p. 9. That some of us haue cau∣sed our servants to goe to plough and cart upon the feast day of Christs nati∣vity, p. 13. Men accustomed to disobe∣dience, p. 23. That we giue power to the Presbytery to excommunicate Kings: that we giue the Prince, not potestatem iuris, but onely facti, p. 29. We are also charged with undue and dishonest practise, in making petition, Epist. p. 4. with hypocrisie, Ans. p. 10. with factious Sermons, scurrile Pam∣phlets,
 ibid. To haue the hands of E∣sau, Epi. p. 8. The mouth of iniquity, p. 31. To bee Foxes, Epist. p. 11. Evill, malicious, ungratefull men, p. 30. Nei∣ther haue our brethren stayd here, but they haue taken upon them al∣so to censure others: some they call busie headed strangers, imputing un∣to them the want of manners and dis∣cretion, to take upon them in a state wherein they haue nothing to doe, in which words they seeme to meane some who should not be in our o∣pinion counted strangers, seeing we are all under one God and King.
Now may it please your Maiesty, what could we doe lesse, then being thus uniustly accused, by a modest and true defence, to deliver our selues and our brethren from these imputations, being not secretly sur∣mised, but publickly, and that in writing; yea and in your Majesties eares suggested. We doubt not but your Maiesty wil grant us equal hea∣ring,
 as King Agrippa sayd to Paul: Act. 26. 1 thou art permitted to speake for thy self. Wee presse not to offend them but being provoked defend our selues, as Hierom saith: Vulneratus nequaquam contra persecutorem tela divexi, sed ad Russin: meo tantum vulneri admovi manum.
Lastly, wee note our brethrens o∣versight 4. observat. in their manner of procee∣ding in publique impugning what was secretly intended, and in pro∣claiming to the world that which only we presented to your Maiesty. And whereas our brethren suggest, that soone after (this our petition and motion being made) were sent forth Epist: p. 3. into all quarters of the Realme store of the sayd pretended Petitions. It is true may is please your Maiesty, that no copies of the sayd petition were delivered to any beside our selues, (excepting that only which was ex∣hibited to your Maiesty) since which time no copies at all were disper∣sed into any quarters of the realme,
 much lesse into all: neyther before were any hands required to it, but only consent. So that notwithstand∣ing these pretenses our brerhren are found to bee troublers of the state, not the petitioners, and to haue blowne the coales, and kindled the flames, which wee goe about to quench.
Wherefore wee humbly desyre your Maiestie, that it bee not im∣puted to vs as a presumptuous part to answer for our selues being pro∣voked, neyther preiudiciall to the conference determined: wee may verily say with Hierome, si superbum Ad Theoph. sit respondisse, multo sit superbius accu∣sasse. If it be a proud thing modestly to answer, much more insolently to accuse.
Besyde, as is our Brethrens cause, such are theyr proofes: they haue in∣mayntenāce The Censu∣rers sparing in their proofs out of Scrip∣ture. of theyr fāsies through∣out theyr boke alledged, but one text of scripture for any matter in que∣stion betweene vs, which are about the number of thirty seueral points,
 so that wee may say vnto them in Augustines words: Qui divina testi∣monia non sequuntur pondus humani testimonij perdiderunt. They which fol∣low not the divine testimony, haue lost the credit of their owne.
Now we humbly commend the innocency of our felues, and the goodnesse of our cause to your Ma∣iesties Christian iudgement: we sue for nothing but wherein Gods word doth beare us out, whereof your Maiesty hath given us hope, and for the which we doubt not but to an∣swer for our selues in the presence of God. We trust that God hath rai∣sed your Maiesty up as another Da∣vid, to settle the pillars of the earth Psal. 73. 3. that were shaken: and as the Prophet sayth, to take off the heavy burthens, Esay 58. 6. burthenous ceremonies, burthenous censures, burthenous abuses, which many haue a long time groned un∣der. Augustine to this purpose sayth well, handling these words of the
 Psalme, They haue ploughed upon my In Psa. 128. back: Ascende in dorsum meum por∣tare te habeo, &c. Nunquid semper su∣per dorsum meum eris: veniet tandem qui te inde excutiet. And he is now come wee trust which shall breake these yokes: and God we are perswa∣ded will inable your Maiesty to do that which shall bee acceptable to himselfe, profitable to his Church, comfortable to your own soule, that we may all salute your Maiesty with the salutation of the Church of Da∣vid, Psa. 20. 4. 5 the Lord grant thee according to thine heart, and fulfill all thy purpose, that we may reioyce in thy salvation, & set up our banner in the house of God, when the Lord shall performe all thy petitions, that we may all triumphāt∣ly say of your Maiesty, as Ambrose of Ambr. Theo∣dosij fides. the good Emperour Theodosius: Iaco∣bi regis fides nostra victoria.




