

THe diuine prouidence, from the time that he fyrst created the worlde, hath reserued vnto this day the knowledge of the great and large Ocean sea:The largenesse of the Ocean vnknowen to this day. In the whiche tyme he hath opened the same, chiefely vnto you (moste mightie Prince) by the good fourtune and happie successe of your grand∣father by your mother syde. The same prouidence (I knowe not by what destenie) hath brought me out of my natiue coun∣trey of Milane, and out of the citie of Rome (where I continued almost .x. yeeres) into Spaine, that I myght particularlye col∣lecte these marueilous and newe thinges, which shoulde other∣wyse perhappes haue lien drowned in the whirlepoole of obliui∣on, forasmuche as the Spanyardes (men worthy great commen∣dation) had only care to the generall inuentions of these thinges. Notwithstanding, I do not chalenge vnto me only, the thankes of the trauaile bestowed herein, whereas the chiefe rewarde ther∣of is due to Ascanius,Cardinal As∣canius. vicount Cardinal, who perceauyng that I was wylling to departe out of the citie to be present at the warres of Granatum,The warres at Granatum a∣gaynst the Moores. disswaded me from my purpose: But seeing that I was fully resolued to departe, exhorted & required me to write vnto him suche newes as were famous in Spaine, & worthy to be noted. I toke therfore my iourney into Spayne, chiefely for the desyre I had to see thexpedition whiche was prepared agaynst the enimies of the fayth, forasmuche as in Italye, by reason of the dissention among the Princes, I coulde fynde nothyng wherewith I myght feede my wytte, beyng a younge man desyrous of knowledge and experience

of thynges. I was therefore presente at the warres, from whence I writte to Cardinal Ascanius, and by sundry epistles certifyed hym of such thinges as I thought most woorthye to be put in memorie. But when I perceiued that his fortune was turned from a naturall mother to a stepdame, I ceassed from wrytyng. Yet after I sawe, that by thouerthrowe of the enimies of our fayth, Spayne was pourged of the Moores, as of an euil weede plucked vp by the rootes, leste I shoulde bestowe my slippery yeares in vnprofitable idlenesse, I was mynded to re∣turne to Italie. But the singuler benignitie of both the Catho∣lyke kyng and queene nowe departed, and theyr large promises towarde me vpon my returne from my legacie of Babylon, deteyned me from my purpose. Yet doth it not repent me that I drew backe my foote, aswel for that I see in no other place of the world at this tyme the lyke woorthy thinges to be done: as also that in maner throughout all Italie,Italy disquie∣ted with warres. by reason of the discorde of Christian Princes, I perceiued all thynges to runne headlong into ruine, the countreys to be destroyed and made fatte with humane blood, the cities sacked,The sequeles of warre. virgins and matrones with theyr goods and possessions caried away as captiues, and mi∣serable innocentes without offence to be slayne vnarmed within theyr owne houses. Of the whiche calamities, I dyd not onely heare the lamentable outcryes, but dyd also feele the same: For euen the blood of myne owne kinsfolkes and frendes, was not free from that crueltie. As I was therefore musyng with my selfe of these thynges, the Cardinal of Arragone, after that he had seene the two fyrst bookes of my Decades wrytten to Asca∣nius, required me in the name of kyng Frederike his vncle,Kyng Frede∣rike. to put foorth the other eyght epistle bookes. In the meane tyme also, whyle I was voyde of al care as touching the matters of the Ocean, the Apostolicall messengers of the byshop of Rome, Leo the tenth (by whose holsome counsayle and aucthoritie we trust the calamities of Italy shalbe fynished) raysed me as it were from sleepe, & encoraged me to proceede as I had begun. To his holynesse I wrytte two Decades, comprysed in short bookes, after the maner of epistles, and added them to the fyrst, which was printed without mine aduise, as shal further appeare by the preface folowyng. But nowe I returne to you (most

noble Prince) from whom I haue somwhat digressed. Ther∣fore wheras your grandfather by your mothers side, haue subdu∣ed al Spaine vnder your dominion,Spayne subdu∣ed from the Moores.
The kyngdome of Naples. except only one corner of the same, and haue also lefte you the kingdome of Naples, with the fruteful Ilands of our seas, it is surely a great thing and worthy to be noted in our cronacles. But not offendyng the reuerence due to our predecessours, whatsoeuer from the begynnyng of the worlde hath been doone or wrytten to this day, to my iudgement seemeth but lyttle, yf we consyder what newe landes and coun∣treys, what newe seas, what sundry nations and tounges, what golde mynes, what treasuries of perles they haue lefte vnto your hyghnesse, besyde other reuenues. The whiche, what they are, and howe greate, these three Decades shall declare. Come ther∣fore most noble Prince elected of God, and enioye that hyghe estate of thinges not yet vnderstode to men. We offer vnto you the Equinoctiall lyne hytherto vnknowen,The temperat∣nesse of the E∣quinoctiall vn∣knowen to the olde wryters. and burnte by the furi∣ous heate of the sonne, and vnhabitable after the opinion of the olde wryters, a fewe excepted: but nowe founde to be most re∣plenished with people, faire, fruiteful, and most fortunate, with a thousande Ilandes crowned with golde and bewtifull pearles, besydes that greate portion of earth supposed to be parte of the firme lande,Continent or fyrme lande as bygge as three Europes. excedyng in quantitie three Europes. Come ther∣fore and embrase this newe world, and suffer vs no longer to con∣sume in desyre of your presence. From hence, from hence I say (most noble young Prince) shal instrumentes be prepared for you,Riches are the instruments of conquestes. wherby al the worlde shalbe vnder your obeysance. And thus I byd your maiestie farewell: to whose taste if I shal perceaue the fruites of this my tyllage to be delectable, I wyll heareafter do my endeuoure that you may receaue the same more abun∣dauntly. From Madrid, the day be∣fore the Calendes of October, In the yere of Christ M.D.XUI.
