



REuerend Fathers and Brethren,1. Cor. 14.29. 31.32.33. beloued and longed for in the Lord: The blessed Apostle put∣ting downe some certaine pre∣cepts or Canons concerning the sacred Schooles of prophesie, obser∣ueth (in effect) this following order. First, hee permitteth the Prophets to speake by two or by three, appointing the o∣ther Prophets to determine vprightlie of that which they speake: and then next, hee decreeth, that if any thing be reuealed to another which sitteth by, the former should be silent a time, and the other man speake, be∣cause all (being thereunto called) may prophesie one by one, that all may learne, and all may haue comfort. Howbeit, least any the Prophets should happily pre∣sume (vpon this his permission) to speake at their pleasure, the Apostle forthwith (for auoyding disor∣dered confusion) subiecteth the spirits of the Prophets to

which more is (if wee found them able to mannage their matters) to giue them the hand of fellowship con∣cerning their doubtfull cause. Or if happily (vpon bet∣ter deliberation) they yeelded the question to vs: wee protested further, to conceale their secret being, vntill some good course might forthwith be taken for in∣forming authoritie as well of their present conformi∣tie, as also for procuring their speedie deliuerance from the Ecclesiasticall censures, so farre foorth as possiblie might be effected.
Sixtly, beholding the holie Religion of Christ verie shrewdly scandalized, by reason of such falsely preten∣ded miracles: we knew (in our conscience) we might doe nothing at all against the truth,2. Cor. 13.8. but for the truth, and therefore not possiblie conceale those truthes which the Lord hath discouered vnto vs.
Seuenthly, our holy established Religion being ve∣rie scornefully derided with Papists and Atheists, as a Religion that needeth now at length to be presentlie supported by superfluous miracles: we verely perswa∣ded our selues, that no good Christian heart could possiblie forbeare his best endeuour to stay their in∣temperate courses.
Eightly, Master Darel and his fellowes very con∣fidently persisting in the vnhappie support of those their newly broached opinions, hath mightily moued our hearts,Iude. 22.23. to haue (at the least) a compassion of some, by putting a difference, and othersome again to saue with feare, by pulling them violently forth of the fire.
Ninthly, their deceitful and coloured kind of pro∣ceeding, in that they not onely pretend an holie cause, but which more is, doe varnish the same with holy pre∣tences, with faire words and flattering speeches,Rom. 16.18. to intangle (if possiblie they may) the very hearts of the simple: hath

made vs the more carefully to discouer vnto all the world, what lurking poyson lieth shrowded vnder those glorious pretences.
Lastlie, who would not both speake and write whatsoeuer they conscionablie knowe concerning these causes, if hee but respect (as in conscience hee ought) that shamefull reproch which Master Darell and his fauourits (like disordered persons) doe verie iniuriouslie impose vpon the whole land,D. Doctrine pag. 88. vpon Magi∣tracie, Ministery and people in these following words. Wee doubt not (say they) but that other nations and kingdomes about vs, will both giue credit to this matter of fact, so soone as they shall heare thereof, and see how the same hath been witnessed vpon the oathes of many: and will also receiue the Doctrine of possession and dispossession, which we so much haue gaine-saide. Blush then oh England, and be thou ashamed of this thy incredulitie, which is such as the like thereof hath not bin read nor heard of before: for others haue yet acknowledged the worke which hath been done in them, but thou hast not gone so farre, but rather de∣nied the same. Loe, these (in effect) be the maine oc∣casions themselues, which moued vs especially to la∣bour these matters.
Now next,The maine ends which the au∣thors propoun∣ded in writing. Psal. 122.6.7. the principall ends which we propound to our selues in publishing our labours, are these that follow. Namely, we haue (first) done it, to testifie our hearts desire for the timely accomplishment of Ieru∣salems peace.
Secondly, to make knowne to the world, our pro∣uident care for the speedie preuenting of euery such future disordered courses,Tit. 1.10.11. as happily might preiudice the whole, or any part of Gods truth, as heretofore the Brownists and Hackets haue too inconsideratlie effe∣cted, by their vnruly and headie conceits.
Eccles. 12.9. 1. Cor. 13.9.12. Phil. 3.13.14.Thirdly, to insinuate vnto al the world, our arnest endeuours to know the truth: and to be better infor∣med, if happily we erre in these matters.
2. Tim. 2.25.Fourthly, to lay open our Christian care for the timely informing of such as are contrarie minded.
Psa. 119.113.128. Psal. 119.163.Fiftly, to discouer our vndoubted detestation of all false waies in any, how deare soeuer vnto vs.
Sixtly, to vnfold the preposterous giddines of such humorous spirits,Tit. 1.11. 2. Tim. 4.3. 3. Ioh. 10. as dare (in this our doting age) so dan∣gerouslie pester the Church with strange and vnwon∣ted opinions: very fitly consorting with their fauourits natures.
Lastly, wee haue more especially published our la∣bours, to stand in steede of some prouident watch∣word for yong students in Diuinitie, and newly conuer∣ted Christians; that in any wise they beware how they doe either broach abroad,1. Tim. 3.6. Ephe. 4.14. 1. Ioh. 2.14. 2. Ioh. 4.1.2. or receiue any such phanta∣sticall conceits of priuate persons, as are not primarily exa∣mined according to the infallible rules of the word, neither yet authentically approued by publike authori∣tie. Loe, these (in effect) were the maine occasions and ends, for the now publishing of our labours in print.
The premisses therefore considered, and the argu∣ments on both sides rightly respected: we beseech you reuerend Fathers and Brethren to consider diligentlie whether of vs both haue caused diuisions and offences,Rom. 16.17.18. contrarie to the infallible Doctrines which you haue learned from Christ, and auoyd them. For they that are such, serue not the Lord Iesus Christ, but their owne bellies: and with faire speech and flattering, deceiue the hearts of the simple.Iudg. 19 30. Consider therefore we humbly be∣seech you, consult and giue sentence, either with vs, or a∣gainst, as the Lord shall direct your hearts. If wee be thought to haue the truth on our sides; we doubt not but that you will fight together with vs,Phil. 1.27. in one and the

selfesame faith of the Gospell. On the other side, if we be found to haue faulted either in matter or manner, wee beseech you confute vs and spare not: and the blessing of God doe light on your hearts for your labour that way. Neither shall our priuiledged bookes be any stop∣page at all to so good a purpose: for if you be vnwil∣ling to deale that way because of authoritie, your pri∣uate conuictions shall suffice, to procure from vs a pub∣like retractation of whatsoeuer shall bee soundly ad∣iudged amisse.Augustine. For howsoeuer we may happily erre, we purpose (by Gods grace) to bee no Heretikes. Referring therefore our selues and our labours to your ap∣proued considerations: we humblie betake you all in our hartiest prayers, to the holy directions of the onely wise God,Rom. 16.2 who iudgeth accor∣ding to trueth. Amen.

