



O You Lyons of the Wood! (you young Cour∣tiers)
that are kept warme vnder the wings
of Princes and Kings of Christendome, well
may I call you the Lyons of the Wood: for
this yeare of 1609. shall you range vp and
downe the woods, Paks, and Chases, which
were left vnto you by your ancestors, full of tall trees: that
stood like so many amedmen to defend your noble houses
from falling, and your Country from the cold stormes of win∣ter:
But now I say and prophecie it (with a Rauen-like voice)
that like Lyons robd of their yung, shall you goe vp and
downe madding and raging to see your ancient honors de∣faced
and the memorie of your forefathers buried as it wee
(so far forth as the crueltie of these latert deuowring dayes
could reach vnto) euen vnder the rootes of whose statly
Oakes, whose glories they▪ raysed to a full height, but now
haue their heads hid beneath the earth. The propertie of a
Lyon is to feare a Cocke; So likewise shall you this yeare (if
not be afraid) yet be loah to heare the voces of Mecers, tai∣lors,
haberd a sher, Sempsters, &c. who like Cockes, wil (I ga∣ther
by the rules of my Arte, stand crowing betimes at your

Chamber dores for mony. And like a Bell-man (with
papers in their hands) watch to strike you downe with
heauy and vnconscionable Items. Gather your selues
therefore together in heards, and like Lyons indeed fright
them with your suttle lookes, or else like Elephants car∣rie
whole Castles on your backes, and furnish those Castles
with good store of golde and siluer, so will they be affraide
to assault you: let not your strength or courage lye alto∣gether
like the Lyons in your taile, but rather in the pawe:
Stretch forth that boldly, and whatsoeuer it faste vp∣pn
(albeit it should be a whole Lordship, yet let it not
goe till you haue torne it in sunder, and made it more le∣uell
then Salisbury-plaine: and O you the wilde
Buckes of the Forrest (I meane the Gallants and yonger
Brothers of this or any other kingdome) looke that you
peserue well the hornes of that aboundance, left vnto you
by your scraping and carefull Fathers, least they tall into
the handes of Vsuers (who cmmoly are the keepers of
your Lands) as forfeis, or rather (as their fees) make the
pales of their parkes where you run hye: that neither you
breakeout of them, nor others breake them down, and so
sctter you. Suffer no rascall deere to runne amongst you,
that is to say, no Pandars, Buffons, English Guls, nor Pa∣rasites:
beare vp your heas braely, and not too proudly,
for I finde by the coniuction of some planets, that this
yeare many of you  hunted by Marshalls men, Bay∣liffs
and Ctch-poles: & that some will be diuen to take
soile in the bottomeles uers of the two Counters, they will
so hard be pursued either by Grey hounds of that bred,
orelse by Fleee-houndes, whose feet  swift and sent
as good. I finde likewise that a number of you will fall in∣to
certaine toiles, which shall bee pitched day and night
for you by certaine greedy hunters called Punckes: they
are not mch differing from witches, for they take vppon
them sometimes the shapes of beasts, and beeing amongst
your heardes are strucke in steed of Des, but they prone

barren Does, yet are they of the nature of Dogs, and more
nimble then Norfolke tumblers, and more eager
then blood-houndes, if they haue their game before
them.
(O you likewise the hare of the field!) that is to say, the
Punes and young Frye of the Lwe, to you among the
rest doth my Rauen open her bill: listen therefore to her
ominous voyce, for shee prognosticateth that many
plagues will fall vppon you. Reade you onely the Dog∣daies
of this Almanacke, for when the Sunne enteret in∣to
Leo, and that is in the middle of the yeare, and out of
Terme time, you shall finde it will be exceeding hot walk∣ing
vp and downe Fleetstreet or Holborne, especially for
those that all this last Christuas haue giuen out in Cheape∣side
amogst the Mercers, that they must be Reuelles.
It is threatned also by those caelestiall influences, that
worke no in heauen for nothing, that you will this yeare
by reason of certaine bitter frosts which shall driue you to
drinke burnt sacke, rather desire to plead at a Tauerne barre,
and wragle for a reckoning, then at a Westminster barre,
and weare your Gownes thred-bre, by shoulding one a∣nother
about Clients causes, and that yet notwithstanding
you shall so ply the cases of the common Law that you shall
noe aswell in tearme time, as in the vocatin, till you haue
no feathers left on your backes, howbeit I note and finde it
witten by an olde jewish Rabben, that you shall be lusty e∣nough
for all your sweating and moilings and so full of
heath, tht you will scorne to keepe your beds, but for more
securitie▪ put the brokers of Long lane in trust to keepe them
for you. I reade likewise that you will be so  with vain
glory, fantasticallitie, Pride, Bragatisme, Apishnes of wit,
Rediculous Manners, swaggering and a thousand such by∣angles,
that you will be glad to leaue all forme, (like a Hare
being frighted with the yeping of a kennel of houds.) Be∣sides
it is quoted by the best-Star-gazars, and 
egregiously weather-beaten to this science, oth as I re∣member,

constaly affirme it, that Little ton (for all his laye),
shall in Mihaelmas Tearme next, be not onely thrust out of
Commons, but being found lying poorely (in a plaine sute of
Sheepes-skin) vpon a Stall, shall not be worth sixe pence.
As for you that are to be my quarter Patrons, or the fourth
shares in this my dedication, you that are the meet sonnes of
Cittizens, who neuer heard any musicque but the found of
Bow-bell you that al your liues time scarce trauaile to Graes∣end,
because you are sworne to keepe within the compasse of
the freedome: You whose wits rests onely for two waies, mo∣ny,
and to beare offices in the parrish. I place you in the lat∣ter
end of this preface to the Rauens kalender, though you
deserue to stand like Dominicall letters (at the beginning of
euerie weeke in red, because you ae of the golden age, or ra∣ther
you are the Golden number to 1609. Yet giue me leaue
to tell you that this yeare will bring many miseries vppon
your heads, yet shall it happen well inough to many of your
fraternitie, because euen when those stormes are vppon com∣ming,
which by all Astrogicall predictions must happen, you
will be sure and so wise, as to hide your heads, and not put
them out a dores. Beware of combinations, conspiracies,
and copartnerships, knit amongst your selues for th surpri∣sing
of Plutus the God of iches: for let the league be neuer
so strongly tyed, yet it is thought that at the least foure times
in the yeare ome of you will breake.
To bring which stratagem the better to passe, I mean that
of vndermining, breaking in vpon you, & blowing you vp,
I finde that not onely Cortiers but lso Captaines and your
best men of warre, will neuer giue ouer till they be grea in
your bookes and when you haue put most trust into them,
then will they get the gates of the Cittie, yssue brauely forth
to saue themselues, leauing you to the mecy of your cruell
een ie, Serieants and Creditors.
Thus haue I drawne a paire of Indentures. quadrupartite
betwene you my worthiest and most openhanded Patron,
sealing you vp all foure together, in the bondes of my lue.

I bestowe vppon you this first chicken of mine, hatched out
of my Astronomicall braine-pan: and because euery Alma∣nacke
makes as it were a Stage-play of the yeare, deuiding it
into fourepartes, or rather plaies the executioner with it, by
cutting it into quarters, To each one of you doe I therefore
send a quarter: climbe vp then and behold what nest my Ra∣uen
hath builded (this yeare 1609.) But carrie the mindes
and manhood of true Patrons, neither suffer any critickes to
plucke off her feathers, nor offer you vnto her that indignity
your selues. And thus because much fowle weather is to∣ward
(if any Calender tell no lyes) and that I am loath to
haue you stand in a storme, I bid you farewell, dated
the 1. Ides of the first month of this first great
Platonicall and terrible yeare.
1609.

