


THough it was my fortune first of all to set a new edge on this businesse; yet my iourneyes to this Fountaine haue not been made without your good companies and association, nor the seuerall tryals had there, and at home, perfor∣med without your worthy helpes and assistance: nor this little Treatise begun without your instigations and incitements. There∣fore I find none so fit and meet to patronize it, as your selues; being able out of your owne knowledge and ob∣seruation to defend it against all malicious detracti∣ons. To extoll it aboue the Germaine Spaw, may be thought in me either indiscretion, or too much partia∣lity; but why I may not parallele them (being in na∣tures and qualities so agreeable) nor I, nor you (I sup∣pose) know any inducing, much lesse perswading ar∣gument. Wherefore being thus confident, I thought

it no part of our duties, either to God, our King, or Country, to conceale so great a benefit, as may thereby arise and accrue not onely vnto this whole Kingdome and his Maiesties louing subiects, but also in time (af∣ter further notice taken of it) to other foraigne nati∣ons and countries, who may perhaps with more bene∣fit, lesse hazard and danger of their liues, spoiling and robbing, better partake of this our English Spaw Fountaine, then of those in Germanie.
It were to be wished, that those two famous Physi∣tians, Dr. Hunton and Dr. Bright had beene yet li∣uing, to haue giuen testimony of the great good hopes and expectation they conceiued of it. The former of which did oftentimes request me to publish it to the world: and the other was resolued (in case hee had longer liued) to haue done it himselfe. So carefull were they both to promote their countries good, and udious to procure the health of their Countrimen.
I am as briefe and plaine, as possibly I may, to the end the Reader may not be wearied, nor the patient deluded; and if for these causes I may seeme to bee censured, yet I am well assured, that to your selues bre∣uity and perspicuity cannot, but bee acceptable. So wishing you all happinesse, I shall euer rest and remaine
From my house in Yorke, this 20th of April. 1626.

