



AL studies haue theyr speciall tymes (Ryght noble Lady) all good partes, and singuler quali∣ties of the mynde are holden vp, and maynteyned with honour. The seely chylde learneth in his tēder age how to speake, to reade, to write: yoūg laddes bestowe theyr tyme in the study of other liberall sciences: as yeeres come on, and wyt en∣creaseth, so finally, the whole course of learnyng is runne ouer. Agayne, the arte of Grammer is wont erst to be learned, and than Logike after∣warde: naturall Philosophie goeth not before e∣loquence in our schooles: Geometry is first read, & than Geography. So that the studies of good letters haue their times in respecte of mans age, they haue theyr tymes in the order of learning: yea they haue a tyme, that maketh vs all to be∣stowe therein our tyme, and to studie eche facul∣tie in due tyme, I meane that speciall tyme they floryshe in. I may not denye but that learnyng hath at all tymes ben well accompted of, in most countreys the skyll of dyuers languages well thought of, & learned men to haue ben alwayes rewarded. what is than that speciall tyme wher∣in all studies doe flooryshe? Learnyng may bee ryght well compared vnto the floutes & fruites

of the earth, and the speciall tyme of learnyng, vnto theyr singuler seasons. In May, floures: in Iune, Cheries: at Haruest, corne: in September, Grapes: so fareth it in the study of good letters. There was a tyme whā the arte of grammer was so muche esteemed, that Gramariens proceeded masters thereof as woorshypfully, as other pro∣fessours now doe in any other facultie. Than was it honourable to be a Poet: honourable I say, for that the Poet Laureate enioyed the honour of a Palatine. that tyme is paste. There was a tyme whan Logike & Astrology onely so weeried the heades of young schollers, yea and busied olde age also, that true Philosophie in deede was al∣most forgotten, eloquence defaced, the langua∣ges exiled. that tyme is past. Not long since hap∣py was he that had any skil in the greke tongue, he was thought a great scholler that could make a greeke verse. Nowe a dayes, who studieth not rather the Hebrue language? VVhere haue you almost any greeke aucthour printed? Geography laye hydden many hundred yeeres in darkenesse and obliuion, without regarde and price: of late who taketh not vppon him to discourse of the whole worlde, and eche prouince thereof parti∣culerly, euen by hearesay, although in the first principles of that arte, he bee altogeather igno∣rant and vnskylfull? This tyme is now. So long as Poetry was esteemed, the arte of grammer accompted of, Logike muche made of, Astro∣logy well thought of: Diuine Poets, good Gra∣mariens, perfecte Logiciens, excellent Astro∣nomers no where wanted.
A Virgile can you neuer want where one Mecènas is. Honour & promotion bestowed vppon the maynteyners of controuersies in religion, hath brought gray heares from endlesse Sophistry, from Scotus for∣malites, from Buridan and Burley, from Hol∣cot, from Bricot, from Vademecum, from Dor∣mi secure, and taught yonger yeeres rather to passe through Aristotle and his interpreters, than euer to dwell therein: caused them to studie the scriptures, to reade ouer the fathers, to conferre the counseyles, to learne the greeke and Hebrue languages, to searche the Chalday Paraphraste, to peruse the olde Doctours, to translate the newe wryters, to heape vp common places, to discourse of sectes, to wryte cunningly, to preach eloquently: and made them to be, for braulyng Sophisters, graue Philosophers, for formal Dun∣ses, plaine doctors, for rude questionaries, diuine Orators, for vnskilful schoolemen, eloquent and graue diuines.
It is nowe almost one hundred & fiftie yeeres agoe, that Don Henrico, sonne of Iohn the fyrst of that name Kyng in Portugale, and Nepheu vnto our Kyng Henry the fourth, made his vy∣age after the conquest of Sepa to the Canaries, and euraged the Portugales to searche the coastes of Africa, and to seeke the landes therea∣bout not spoken of to fore. His grande Nepheu Iohn the seconde, so furthered this enterpryse, that the Portugale shyppes halled the Cape of good hope, discouered Aethiopia, and sayled where antiquitie denyed passage, beyond all A∣frica into the Indian seas. He sent also expert and

cunning traueylers into Aegypt, and the redde sea coastes to espye what way the Portugales might looke for beyond the Cape of good hope to Calecut in India: the which viage in his sonne Emanuell his tyme, was prosperously taken in hand by Vasquez Gama, the nienth day of Iuly, in the yeere of our Lorde .1497. & happely ended in Iuly againe, two yeeres after, to his great cre∣dit and preferment, to the immortal fame & ho∣nour of his Prince and countrey. Here began the studie of Geographie, that euer since Ptolomeus raigne laye troden vnder foote, & buried in dust and ashes, to spring vp agayne, and by the relati∣ons of skilful traueylers in Europe, Affrike, & A∣sie: through the discouery of the far Indies, the Moluccaes, & new founde landes, of late so to be wondred at, as no other facultie more. I dare be bold to say, that generally all Christians, Iewes, Turkes, Moores, Infidels, & Barbares be this day in loue with Geographie. The wylde and rogishe Tartares myght for famine perishe in the winter, if they in the sommer skylfully followed not the sunne. The heathen Giapans diuided the worlde into three partes: Afrike was described by a Moore. The Iewes report the estates of all coun∣treyes to the Turkes. The Turkishe Basshaes go∣uerne the sweetest prouinces in Europe, A∣frike, and Asia, no men greater traueylers than Christians. VVho but Geographers doe teach vs what partes of the earth be cold, warme, or tem∣perate? Of whom doe we learne howe to diuyde the world into partes, the partes into prouinces, the prouinces into shyres? of Geographers. vnto

whom haue wee to make recourse for Mappes, Globes, tables, and Cardes, wherein the dyuers countreys of the worlde are set downe? vnto Ge∣ographers. Set Geographie asyde, you shal ney∣ther be able to get intelligences of the situation and strength of any citie, nor of the limites and boundes of any countrey, nor of the rule and go∣uernement of any kingdome, nor be able wel to trauayle out of your owne doores. wil you see what wise and experte traueylers, skilful in geo∣metry and Astronomy, (for that is to bee a Geo∣grapher in deede) be able to doe?Kyng of Portugale & Algarbs, Lorde of Guinea, of the cōquest, nauigation, and trafike into Ethio∣pia, Arabia, Persia, & In∣dia. Looke you on the King of Portugales title: the two partes, of the three therein, were atchiued by Vasques Ga∣ma, and other traueylers aduentures. Consider the fruites, the drugges, the pearle, the treasure, the millions of golde and siluer, the Spanyardes haue brought out of the VVest Indies since the first viage of Columbus: The great commodities our nation reapeth by the traueyle of our coun∣treymen into Barbary, Guiny, and Moscouia, wil be a sufficient testimony vnto all vs Englishmen, what it is to be a skilful traueyler, what to bee a paineful Geographer, and learned. Desire of rule breedeth victories, victories come by cōquestes, conquestes are furthered by traueyle, traueyle can not bee maynteyned without great wealth, wealth maketh all traueyle pleasant. The North∣westerne vyage, be it neuer so full of difficulties, will become as plausible as any other iourney, if our passengers may returne with plentie of sil∣uer, silkes, and pearle. Let Columbus, Americus, Cortesius, be wel set foorth againe, and bounte∣fully

rewarded, you shal heare of other newe found landes yet altogeather vnknowen. Let Gama be set in place, and Gama will tell you the situation, the maners, the force and wealth of forreyne na∣tions▪ for Gama his endeuor was, not onely by his friend Coelius to descrye the countrey wher∣soeuer he came, but also to learne him selfe the riches, strength, and conditions of the people. Honour maynteyneth arte: and the skill in Ge∣ography, as all other sciences, hath but a tyme of preferment, the whiche than chiefly myght bee looked for, whan it is most esteemed. This in the noble mynde of Cadamust bred that earnest de∣sire, after Don Henrico his example, to traueyle, to pen his owne aduentures into the Southeast and East partes, to make the nauigation of Gama and his companions knowen vnto the worlde. The occasions, the good successe, the great com∣modities wherof, Barros a counseller of the Por∣tugale Kyng, paynted out long agoe in manye bookes, Osorius of late, historically hath written the same in fewe. This made Marcus Paulus Ve∣netus a courtier in Tartary, Hayton the Arme∣nian to become a Frenchman, Lewes Vartoman∣ne a traueyler in Ethiopia, Brocardus an inhabi∣ter of Iury, & eche one of them to leaue his pain∣ful iorney with posteritie in wrytyng. This enfla∣med the Spanyardes to take vppon them the dis∣couery of the VVest and Southwesterne landes, done and written by Columbus, Pinzonus, Al∣fonsus, Cortesius, and Americus, of whom that region America hath name. VVhose long letters and tedious reportes of thinges there brought to

passe in the conquest of that halfe worlde, the straunge beastes, the sundry sortes of fruites, the ioyes and riches the whiche that countrey yeel∣deth, the manners and fashions of the people, their cities, and princely palaces, theyr nobilitie, their maner of gouernement, their warres, theyr seruile estate vnder the kynges of Spayne, their conuersion vnto the Christian fayth, P. Martyr a learned and graue man, borne at Angleria in the duchy of Milane, then President of the Spanish kinges counsell for the west Indies, gathered in∣to one volume, and leauing a side all superfluous narrations, made thereof, as it were, one briefe and continuall historie. This volume deuided he into eyght Decades, after the Greeke worde, so calling the sundry parcels thereof, for that eche one conteyneth in it ten particuler bookes or chapters. R. Eden our countreyman dyd into English, whan K. Philippe was in Englande, the three first Decades, and the fourth also, though vnder a wrong title, according to the Dutche Printers edition, wherin the fifte, sixte, seuenth, and eight Decades were lefte out. He translated moreouer Gonzales Ferdinandus Ouiedus bre∣uiary of the west Indies, & geathered togeather out of many myghty and huge workes, some other prety pamflettes concernyng the Spany∣ardes and Portugalles voiages into the late dis∣couered lands, adding thereto certeine discour∣ses of the north partes. These his aforesayde do∣inges, as fewe mennes workes at the first come exactly abrode, this paynefull translatour myn∣ded, if not to amende, at the least to augment,

by puttyng thereunto in English Lewes Varto∣mannus Nauigation into Aegypte, Arabia, Si∣ria, Persia, and India, with our Merchantes Mos∣couian and Persian trauelles: but death preuen∣ted his purpose, not suffryng him to accomplish his desire.
Christian charitie therefore vnto the party de∣parted, caused me to helpe his workes forwarde: Nature moued me to take some paynes in pla∣cing orderly, that whiche he had confusely gy∣uen out, the better to direct, and the more to profit the reader: My profession enforced me to cut of some superfluous translations, and to fill vp the rest of his doinges with P. Martyrs other writinges, and finally to furnishe his want with my owne store. Hoping and perswading with my selfe, that if God likewise call me from these worldly Nauigations, and earthly descriptions, before my other trauell in this facultye, taken long since in hande, be ended: some other profes∣sor of Cosmography wil so rewarde me after my death, as presently of this dead man I doe de∣serue. Other credite seeke I none therefore, I loke for no prayse, I hope not for honor, I gape for no gayne by this kind of studie. I knowe this day no place, no preferment, no publike chayre, no ordinarie lecture, no commune stipende, no special reward due vnto the studentes in Geo∣graphy: no not at this time, when this faculty was neuer more set by: no not in this realme, where yt neuer more florished. The honorable name of a Christian, and the infallible fruites thereof, euer inclined me, euen from my tender

yeeres, for the smal portion of learning that god hath lent me, to do good, if I could, vnto many: and specially to make those my friendes and wel doers knowen vnto the worlde, by whose bene∣uolence & fauour I doe liue, and am mainteined. In the smal number whereof, for amongst many wel willers I finde but few well doers, your Ho∣nor (right noble Lady) my Lorde & you, his no∣ble children and yours, since my first returne from beyond the seas, must I confesse to haue stoode me chiefly in steede: & humbly acknow∣ledge, the first yeerely pension I euer was assu∣red of in England, to haue ben by your Ladiship bestowed on me. VVherefore as I will most wil∣lingly yeelde vnto many other of your Honors gētlemē to come of great houses, to haue welthi∣er friendes, larger possessions & reuenues than I, to be more actiue, more comely, more wyse, po∣litike, learned, & to haue seene more: so in hūble duety, loyal seruice, sincere affection & good wil to your Honor, I may, I can, I wyl contende with any of them all, euen to the vttermust force and power of my hart, head, body, life, blood, mynd, & soule. In testimony wherof, and full assurance of my seruice vnto you for euer, these last doings of R. Eden newly encreased, my first labours in our language, his history & mine of trauel in the west & East Indies, altogeather in one volume, duetifully do I present vnto your Honour, with al humility praying & most earnestly requesting your good Ladiship, that you will vouchsafe it, & by leysure, in this iourney, the whiche my

Lorde and you haue determined into the west countrey, to let your page reade them ouer to your Honours recreation, as one of the princi∣pall causes wherefore at this tyme they were set foorth. If varietie of matter, occurrents out of forraigne countryes, newes of newe founde landes, the sundry sortes of gouernement, the different manners & fashions of diuers nations, the wonderfull workes of nature, the sightes of straunge trees, fruites, foule, and beastes, the in∣finite treasure of Pearle, Golde, Siluer, & ioyes may recreate and delight a mynde trauelled in weighty matters, & weeried with great affayres: credit me, good Madam, in listning vnto this worke, shall you haue recreation, you shall finde delight in reading ouer these relations, wherein so newe, so straunge, so diuers, so many recreati∣ons and delightes of the mynd are expressed. Your Honours good lykyng thereof, wyll be to me no small contentation for this worke payne∣fully doone, a good occasion spedyly to finish the rest of my owne labours concerning this fa∣culty, a great encouragement and comfort to be∣stow my whole time hereafter only in that study, wherewith all my former knowledge in Philoso∣phy and Geography may ende. The whiche, conueniently now, I am in good hope to per∣fourme, with my Lorde and your Ladyshyps good leaue, and continuance of my duety and effectuall desire to doe your Honours the better seruice.
At London the 4. day. of Iuly. 1577.

