



Right honourable, and my very good Lo.
YOur singular knowledge in all excellent, and solid Li∣terature, and your ever He∣roicke, and Noble disposition to the best kinds of Learning, are not unknowne unto the world; And amongst
 other studies in your Lo. minoritie at the Vniversitie, you tooke no little affection, to the Mathematicall Arts, as by your Lo. owne Manu-scripts and ex∣cellent Bookes in your Lo. great Libra∣rie I have often seene; Besides, not onely by mine owne sundry conferences with your Lo. but also by the relation of others of more mature judgement I have bin amply informed in these your L. more aged yeares not onely of your continued love to these Arts, but also that your knowledge in them far exceedes many of the Nobilitie of this kingdome. Now my L. when I cau∣sed the subject of this Tractat to be made for your Lo. last Summer (I meane your Lo. Horizontall Quadrant) I had not then any intention so soone to have written publikely upon it; But, ha∣ving then but declared unto your Lo. the excellent and abundant use of the In∣strument
 by the heads of the pro∣positions then slightly compiled, (farre exceeding the Instrumentall way in this nature, that eyther Nobili∣tie, Gentrie, or others are now acquain∣ted with in this kingdome, for a recreative Instrument, as well for the copious use thereof, as its great facilitie, and expedition in operation) your Lo. then incouraging me to the publish∣ing of it for a generall end; many Moneths after I considered thereon: and drew it up into a Body, and thus ac∣commodated it, as I here present it now unto your Lo. favourable censure, and Pa∣tronage (to be sheltred under the wings of your Lo. clemency against all calum∣niators and malevolents) as belonging especially to your Lo. sith you were the sole motive to this worke, and had both the use of the Instrument before it came
 thus to a publicke view, and the first Quadrant that ever was made common in this kind: accept therefore favourably I beseech your Lo. this small mite of my labours, as from the hands of one of your poorest servants (yet true affectionate) who shall alwayes acknowledge your Lo. Noblenesse towards him, and ever rest

