



Right Honorable,
THE doctrine of Repen∣tance and of the new Creature, is very neces∣sarie in all places, and for all assemblies. This doctrine is fit for all persons; it is fit for men of high degree, to cause them to be∣thinke

thēselues. It is fit for men of low de∣gree, to cause them to know thēselues. It is fit for the true iudicious hearer, to cause him to adde practise to his knowledge. And it is fit for the itching care or curi∣ous hearer, to teach him the true vse of hearing Sermons, which is, not to haue his vncircumcised eare carnally plea∣sed, but rather to haue his poore soule regenerated, edified, and refreshed. With Ioel 1. 2.this doctrine was Ioel sent vnto the old men, and to all the inhabitants of the land. With this doctrine was Ionas sent Ionas 3. 4.vnto Nineue, Fortie dayes, and Ni∣neue shall be destroyed. With this do∣ctrine was Christ himselfe sent vnto the Iohn 3. 3.lost sheepe of the house of Israel: Except a man be borne againe, he cannot see the kingdome of God. And with this doctrine is this weake messenger or smal Treatise sent into the world at this time. I desire that it might do much good vnto the soules of Gods elect▪ which if it do, I do vnfainedly confesse, it is

not in respect of any worth or sufficiency that is in the author, but meerly by Gods free blessing following my poore and weake endeuours.
The reasons which haue moued me to make this doctrine and Sermon pub∣licke, are these, viz.
First, the consideration of the neces∣sitie of it: for what is more necessarie then to vnderstand the mysterie of re∣generation? without which no flesh can be saued.
Secondly, the consideration of the ge∣nerall extent of this doctrine: for it con∣cerneth not onely them which heard the Sermon, but also all others; for God ex∣horteth Act. 17. 30.all men to repent.
Thirdly, the desire of diuers holy Chri∣stians, whose earnest and godly request I desire to fulfill to my power.
And in that I do commend vnto your Honour, these my poore en∣deuours contained in this booke, it is:

First, because your Honour was an eare-witnesse of this Sermon, enduring the coldnesse of the season, to heare it with much attention.
Secondly, because your Honour hath purchased to your selfe a good report a∣mong men, by your inst and vpright ca∣riage in that worthy place and calling whereunto you are called▪
Thirdly, because your Honour hath had, and I hope will haue vnto the end, a singular care of Gods Sabbath, that it may not be profaned by the leudnesse of men, which are more set vpon their own gaine and pleasure, then in any sort vpon Gods glorie: which desire not onely to sinne themselues, but also to make Christian magistrates partakers of their sinnes, by giuing licence and libertie vnto them.
Fourthly, that I might hereby testi∣fie my loue vnfained vnto this famous Citie; for the which I will alwayes pray, that God would turne his iudgements

from it, and preuent it with his liberall blessings, especially in heauenly things in Christ.
I beseech your Honour to accept this Treatise, which I offer as the widowes mite, to be cast into Gods treasurie. And so I will pray the very God of 1. Thes. 5. 23.peace to sanctifie you wholly; and that your whole spirit, and soule, and bodie, may be preserued blamelesse, vnto the coming of our Lord Iesus Christ. Amen.

