



WHen our blessed Sauiour ascended, he left this lega∣cie to his seruants;Ioh. 14.27. My peace I leaue with you,Pacem dedit iturus, pacem dabit ventu∣rus. Aug. in Ioh. tra. 77. my peace I giue you. At his departure hee bequea∣thed to his Church peace spirituall, and at his returne, hee will giue to it peace eternall. And for better con∣seruation of this rich legacie, he gaue the blessed Sacrament, as a badge and bond of vnity. Is it not therefore la∣mentable to see this rich legacie negle∣cted, and that sacred ordinance, which should be the bond, become the bane of our peace? But behold, my brethren, as
 it is the excellent worke of God, to bring light out of darknesse, and good out of e∣uill: so is it the malicious endeuour of Satan, to bring darknes out of light, and euill out of goodnesse. For he beeing the first peace-breaker in the World, labours continually to vexe the Church of God, by raising vp the stormes of contention about the blessed Sacrament, not onely betweene opposites, who differ in sub∣stance, but euen amongst brethren, onely for matter of circumstance. And albeit our gracious Soueraigne, who (if euer any a meere man) may fitly be sti∣led a King of peace, hath by excellent courses seconded that great Peace-ma∣ker; yet alas, through mens contenti∣ous dispositions, his iust expectation hath beene frustrate, and his worthy in∣deuours haue beene too fruitlesse; which might discourage any man for entering into these lists: yet when I see Hebrewes striuing together, I cannot be silent, but say to him that doth the wrong, Why fmitest thou thy fellow?Exo. 2.13. Not forth of any pragmaticall disposition, or loue to contention, as all that know me can
 witnesse, but forth of a heart vnfained∣ly affecting the peace of Sion; and de∣sirous by appealing to your better cogi∣tations to effect it. That worthy fact of Master Caluin hath euer affected mee much, who seeing some take offence at the Wafer cakes vsed in the Church of Geneua,Beza in vita Caluini. perswaded them not to raise vp any contention about that which was indifferent, and shall not I doe so in a matter of like nature? Bethinke your selues, my Brethren, what distractions these diuisions doe cause; and can these diuisions be without great thought of heart,Iudg. 5.15. whilst we stand like Cato and Scipio in the Senat, with mihi vide∣tur, mihi non videtur? The one ap∣proues, the other reiects the ordinances of the Church. The godly are grieued, the weake are troubled, the wicked are strengthned; yea, as Nazian speakes,Cur hosti cō∣muni gladios porrigimus? Nazi aduer. Eunoni Ora∣tio. Non quia ve∣ra, sed quia sua est. wee by our contentions, doe put a sword into the hand of our common enemy. Remember, I pray you, that (as Saint Austin saith) There is some man who defends his opinion, not be∣cause it is true, but because it is his
 owne; for so selfe-loue doth draw men into error. Consider that opinions, though grounded on error, through time become strong resolutions.
Bethinke your selues carefully what holds you in opposition. Is it a doubt, that yeelding may disparage your per∣sons, or discredit your Ministery? Consider that the Ancients haue neuer gained more honour, then in retracting their errors. Or is it zeale to Gods glo∣ry? Consider then, I pray you, how this affection hath transported diuers, ve∣ry excellent and eminent members of the Church of God, and this will make you looke rather how safely then how speedily you sayle. Ponder I beseech you seriously, how many faithfull and fa∣mous seruants of God (yea some of which haue layd downe their liues for the testimony of Iesus) haue aduisedly and willingly yeelded to this ordinance of the Church. And hath it not some smacke of presumption, to thinke that all others iudgements haue beene clowded, and the light of truth hath shined onely vpon you?

Suppose that these priuate opinions may seeme euident truths in our owne conceits, yet haue they not found the weight of probability in the iudgement of others. Yea, if ie were certaine, that the gesture of kneeling were vnfit in the act of receiuing; consider whether such a circumstantiall point should bee estee∣med of that moment, as worthy to di∣sturbe the peace of that Church, where the Gospell is so soundly preached, and the Sacraments so duly administred?
In answering long discourses I in∣tended breuity; in regard whereof, I haue contracted the arguments,Neque versu∣tis disputa∣tionibus op∣probrijsque turbemini. Hicr. in Phil∣lip. 1. Si decem mo∣do persuasi fuerint; si v∣nus, nonne nobis hic suffi∣cit ad conso∣lationem. Chrys. de Laz. Con. 1. and shaped their answers accordingly. Yet what seemed to haue weight, I haue pondered and answered, with as much plainnesse as I could, euen the vul∣gar. I doubt not but I shall heare from some, what Moses did from the He∣brew, Who made thee a Iudge ouer vs? But Saint Ierom hath taught mee, not to regard subtill disputes or re∣proches. My conscience beares mee witnesse, that I haue in this matter dealt sincerely. And if I should be smitten
 with the tongues and pennes of many, yet the reducing of a few that erre, and satisfying of some that doubt, shall bee a sufficient comfort to me.Non sunt li∣tigandi isa sed orandi e pora. D. Perkinsus. pi. ad Lect. Harmo. Bibl. It is an excel∣lent speech of a worthy seruant of Christ, Prayers are fitter for these times then Controuersies. I would to God we were all effectually perswa∣ded of the truth hereof: for so might Controuersies be easily decided, oppositi∣ons be turned into vnity, contention in∣to amitie, and those lamentable digla∣diations which afflict the Church, into the precept and practice of pietie and charitie; which blessing of peace, the Lord in his good time grant vnto his Church.
Now those who are no disputers, but onely (being misled) doe dislike the ge∣sture of kneeling, I earnestly intreat, that they will consider, what vncertaine Oracles and vnconstant guides they follow. For some of them haue supply∣cated for sitting, as a gesture fit to set forth rest, and the accomplishment of Ceremonies in Christ. Some haue vr∣ged standing, as better agreeing with
 the Eucharist, it being a Sacrament of Thanksgiuing. Others againe haue condemned both the name of Eucharist, and the gesture of standing; and haue disputed for sitting: because it consorts with our Coheire-ship. In which con∣ceits, this is very obseruable, that they all haue agreed, onely in opposing the Churches practice, and in crossing their owne Positions, which disclaime all signi∣ficant ceremonies. For each of them ties significancie to his gesture.
The due consideration whereof, may be a strong motiue to euery modest and in∣genuous Christian, to conforme himselfe to the Churches vnity and vniformity in this matter of indifferency.
