



Right Honourable,
IT is like, that in the divul∣ging and de∣dicating of these Papers, I shall meete
 with a double censure: One, in that I doe so suddainely follow two such worthy Lights,Episc. Roffens. & Cestrens. as haue lately gone before me in this subiect. Another, in that J presume to present the same to One so eminent.
But for answer to the former; First, the principall of my taske is matter positiue, and the controuersie about Kneeling, is handled but bre∣uiter, and obiter; yet I hope sufficiently to giue satisfacti∣on to a peaceable spirit. And that which may seeme my pre∣iudice, I esteeme my aduan∣tage.
 For had I gone before them, my lot might haue beene like the Day-starre, which is obscured by the succeeding Sunne; whereas a small Starre shines in the Eue∣ning.
Againe, (that J may con∣tinue my Metaphor) Hee that made the two greater Lights, made also the Stars,Gen. 1.16. and the Starres haue their influences, yea,Iob 38.31. the Starres fought against Sisera.Iudg. 5.20.
Had I no other Apolo∣gie, I hold it fit to shew my conformitie, and therein my
 dutie to the Church, and the blessed nursing Father thereof. For as I would not bee like violent Euripus,P. Mela. lib. 2. which is ready to tosse ouer all that comes into it; so would I not be like the Riuer Arar,Caesar Ca. de bel. Gal. lib. 1. whose current is so slow, that a quicke eye cannot discerne which way it runnes.
Neither is my presumpti∣on, in this my Dedication, al∣together without excuse. For as the ancient interest I once had in the fauour of that wor∣thy Knight, your Lordships Father, my much-honoured Friend, some-what imbol∣dens
 mee: So, the interest that the Church hath in your Honour, and the neede shee hath of your assistance, for procuring her peace and v∣nity, doeth very much ex∣cite and encourage me in this my enterprise.
If a Reuerend Bishop,Episcop. Cestren. who hath in some sort power co∣actiue, did lately craue it at your Lordships hands: much more may J, who haue onely meanes perswasiue:Persuadere quis aliquid potest inuito? Pacian. Epist. ad Sympron. Biblio. patr. For who can perswade him that will not be perswaded, saith Pa∣cianus?

The GOD of Heauen, who hath made you gracious with a King of admirable en∣dowments, multiply his bles∣sings vpon your Honour, that you may increase in grace and fauour with God and man.

