



MOST REVEREND.
OF making many Bookes there is no ende. It is true.Eccles. 12.12. Because errour in Doctrine, corrup∣tion in manners haue no end. What surcease therefore from preaching, yea from writing,
 as long as heresie dares shew shew her face, and wickednesse walke the streetes? Many friends desired to renew their memorie, and refresh their comfort in reading printed, that which once they heard preached. And after many de∣layes, I was mooued to satisfie their godly affection. Neuer∣thelesse experience shall finde it true, that there is great dif∣ference betweene preaching, and printing; the tongue and the penne: as betwixt a quicke, and a dead body: Yet laying a side the Action, which is the life of perswasion, I made no difficulty to wrap my selfe in dead letters, to helpe memorie in those that were present, and to extend the benefit of Gods word to others that were ab∣sent.
 And though the condi∣tion of my person be to low, to clime so high: and the forme I haue giuen to this mysticall subiect be to meane, to be pre∣sented to your Grace. Yet your manifold fauours seeme to challenge as due, and to draw from mee this token of thankefulnesse, in dedicating vnto your Grace this my first performance in so publike a place. For you cheered me in my calling at my first comming ouer from France in the yeare 1611. and now you haue re∣newed your fauours in 1616. vpon the sight of my testimo∣niall certificates from the Churches and Synods of France, concerning my thir∣teene yeares seruice in the French Ministerie without spot
 or dis-reputation, and finally you haue admitted mee into this florishing Church of Eng∣land, in the which I receiued my first breathing. This small offering is no more in regard of my debt, then Stillicidium de situla, or Spicilegium de messe, much like the short measures of this age, wherein many debtors pay by the shilling what they owe by the pound; as a shicle of siluer, for a talent of gold. Yet this small and light sheafe, which this weake hand hath brought for the making vp some of the bundle of Gods haruest, shall by your Graces acceptance become perhaps in reputation deare, and the bar∣ren soile it selfe, which brought it forth, shall by the continu∣ance of your wonted good
 aspect, be better heartened to bring forth hereafter Laetiorem segetem. So with my heartiest prayers vnto God for the en∣crease of happinesse to your Graces person, and to this Church,Act. 20.28. ouer the which the holy Ghost hath made you a supreame ouer-seer. I humbly take my leaue, and euer will rest,

