




STEPHEN DENISON wisheth in∣crease of all true happinesse and prospe∣ritie.

DEare friend, it hath bene my purpose a long time, to giue some publicke testimonie before I die, of your loue and kind∣nesse shewed vnto me: and considering that God hath offered such an opportuni∣tie as this, I thought I could not do lesse, hen to testifie my thankfulnesse vnto you, and to▪ iue Gods Church an occa∣sion,

both to blesse God for you, and to remember you & yours in their prayers. I do acknowledge that you haue bene, and so vnto this day you do remaine, the most faithfull friend, and bountifull benefactor, which hitherto I haue found vpon the earth. You and your worthie wife now deceassed were the good Shune∣mites, which gaue me the first constant entertainement in this Citie. Your care ouer me hath bene great, your saithful∣nesse true, and your bountie to me not little. I am perswaded God will blesse you for it, and that Gods deare people, will loue you for it; and for mine owne part I shall still remaine in your debt, to pray for you, and to do you the best spi∣rituall good that I can. God hath depri∣ued you of a vertuous wife, and me of a deare friend; but the will of the Lord is good and he knoweth what is best. Com∣fort your selfe concerning her death, by the sound experience which you had of her godly and vertuous life: and remem∣ber

with ioy, that which drew teares from you at her death, to wit, what a great care she had of your soule whilest she liued. Remember also with comfort those excellent marks which were in her, which you saw in her, and knew in her, as well as my selfe. I confesse you haue a great misse of her many wayes, but the consideration of her vndoubted happinesse, must comfort you concerning that misse. Labour you to make a good vse of her visitation and death; let it moue you to renew your couenant with God, and to be mindfull of your owne mortalitie, to prepare for it in due time, to worke out your owne saluation with feare and trembling. Get oyle into your vessell whilest you haue time, that so you may be ready when the Bridegroome cometh, to enter in with him. And now giue me leaue to speake a word or two to your beloued children.
You M. Iohn Iuxon the first borne, let me exhort you to flie the lusts and va∣nities

of youth, and giue your mind vn∣to goodnesse: remember your Creator now in the dayes of your youth. Learne with Timothy to know the Scriptures of a child: as you are the first borne in age, so be you the first borne in grace; be an ex∣ample vnto the rest of the children in vertue and stayednesse: fulfill the pro∣phesies which go of you. Your tender fa∣ther reioyceth in you, and hopeth that grace is in some measure begunne in you; and for my owne part I hope good of you, therefore be you good.
Ad you M. Thomas Iuxon, let me admonish you, not to turne the grace of God into wantonnesse: vse that capa∣city which God hath giuen vnto you, for the glory of God: be carefull to giue your minde vnto learning, and to know God: be obedient to your parents; feare God and keepe his commandements, for this is the whole duty of man, as Salomon saith, Eccles. 12. And otherwise, if you will not hearken vnto this, then must I

say with the same Salomon: Reiòyce  yong man in thy youth, and let thine beart cheere thee in the dayes of thy youth, and walke in the wayes of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes. But know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into iudgement. Eccles. 11. 9.
And you Mistris Elizabeth Iuxon, let me put you in mind, that as you beare the name of your vertuous mother, so you would be carefull to follow her god∣ly steps: be you diligent to heare Gods word preached, and to reade the same in priuate euery day; meditate that which you heare and reade, and be care∣full to practise that which you learne, both in your generall and particular cal∣ling. For these were the stops of your worthy mother.
And you Mistris Sarah Iuxon, re∣member also after whom you are named, to wit, after Sarah the wife of Abra∣ham. Be diligent to reade the story of

Sarah in the booke of Genesis, and follow her in all things that are good and imi∣table. And remember the words of the Apostle, that women are the daughters of Sarah so long as they do well, 1. Pet. 3.
And lastly, you mistris Marie Iuxon, if God shall giue you life to liue to come to yeares of discretion and vnderstan∣ding, consider what I say vnto you. You are named after the blessed virgine Marie. As she therefore conceiued Christ in her wombe, so do you con∣ceiue him in your heart. As she pondered the words of the sh epheards in her heart, so do you meditate of the word of God day and night. Yea consider what graces were in her, and labour for the same. Yea let me say vnto all you three pure virgins, beware you of the sinnes of the times, take heed of following the vaine fashions of the world, take heed of pride, take heed of whoredome and all manner of vncleannesse: haue a care with whom you consort your selues:

marrie not without the consent of your parents or gouernours, and be sure that you marrie in the Lord. In a word, be carefull to reade and consider the marks which were in your mother, and labour to find the like in your selues. And thus you shall leade a blessed life, and accom∣plish a happie death, and at the last shall come to that heauenly kingdome, whi∣ther your deare mother is gone before. Vnto the which heauenly kingdome, the Lord of his mercie bring vs all for Iesus Christ his sake, Amen.

