


IF at this instant wee consider well,
the estate and condition of Gods
Church, wee may euidently per∣ceiue,
that, what our Lord Iesus
hath foretold & promised, is most
truely fulfilled and accomplished.
For, hauing warned vs of the af∣flictions
& troubles of his Church:
yet afterward he promised, to be al∣wayes
with her,Matth. 28. 40. euen to the consum∣mation
of the world. As for her afflictions, wrapped vp in so
many seuerall persecutions, troubles and diuisions: there is no
mā but doth perfectly know them; &, that our Lord God in his
mercy hath assisted her,The troubles of the church haue beene cruell and terrible in our time. preseruing her euen in the midst of all
her enemies. Wherby we plainely see, that his promise is truely
kept; especially since he neuer leaues her vnprouided of his se∣conding
aydes and good means: to the end she may not be deuou∣red
of Lyons and rauenous Wolues, whom (in his iust iudge∣ment)
he hath permitted, to rush in vpon her, as representing
those persons, which heretofore haue hated, maligned and per∣secuted
her.
Doe we not (at this day) behold many successours to Pilate?Pilate, Iudas, Cayphas and Simon Ma∣gus, seem not yet to bee dead: for they haue succes∣sors inow, that do what they can against Iesus Christ.
Others, that are Lieutenants to Iudas? Others, Vizegerents
to Cayphas? And others, the meere Ʋicars to Simon the Sor∣cerer?
All which together (as it were) doe yet torment and per∣secute

the Church of God, intending to exterminate it whole∣ly,
to the end there might bee no more memorie thereof. But
the Lord our God, against whom there is no wisedome, coun∣sell
or prouidence, knowes how to winke (for a while) at the
impudence of such fooles; And, to the ende his Church should
not stagger in the midst of the way:Prou. 21. hee hath raised vp (in our
time) many liuely figures of those auncient friends to his Gos∣pell.God neuer leaues his Church with∣out friends, and to main∣taine the same keepeth his promise.
I will not compare you to any of the Apostles, although
it cannot be denied; But that God hath giuen vs vessels of
honour, into whose mouthes he hath put his sword, that
cuts on both-sides.
Concerning the excellencie of your selues, I dare boldly say,
that one of you doth liuely represent,Matth. 22. 9. the good king Abgarus:
who being desirous to expresse his loue to Iesus Christ,Hisio. Eccle. offered
him all assistance and fauour,lib. 1. when so graciously he inuited him
into his house.King Abga∣rus a faithfull louer of Iesus Christ. The second hath done the dutie and office of
good Gamaliell, a Prince and Doctor of the Law, also a se∣cret
disciple of Iesus Christ, euermore fauouring and furthe∣ring
his cause.Acts 5. 41. The third is nothing inferiour to prince Iay∣rus;
on whom,Gameliel, Prince and Doctor, and secret disciple of Iesus. euen as Iesus bestowed the raysing of his daugh∣ter
from death to life: so hath hee raysed vp you, most miracu∣lously
preseruing your life, from the blood-thirstie throates
of wolues.
Now most renowned and worthy personages altogether,Mark. 5 41. ha∣uing
collected a briefe disputation of the faith,Jayrus a prince of Is∣rael, conuer∣ted to the Gospel, recei∣ued a great benefit from Iesus-God will not be approoued by mens in∣uentions. touching the
principall Articles thereof, the more gladly I vndertooke this
Argument, to the ende, that thereby might clearely be discer∣ned,
the difference on both sides, and which of them holds the
iustest cause before God, who craues no approbation by mens
inuentions, let them be shadowed and coloured, by whatsoeuer
shewes of sanctitie and good intention. For his word will not
endure addition, change or diminution: nay, the very An∣gels
of heauen are to bee suspected in that cause. Wherefore,
according to the example of S. Luke,Deut. 4. 12. writing his Gospell to
to the beloued Theophilus:Galat. 1. 8. I dedicate and present vnto you,
this small Christian resolution,S. Luke in his Praeface, writes his Gospell to Theophilus a man of great autho∣ritie. most humbly beseeching you,
that you would embrace and defend the same, as already you

haue most religiously begun to doe. For the Lord God hath
chosen you, as his vessels of honour, and principall members of
his Church, to be serued by you, to his honour and glory: to the
end, that his name may be sanctified, and his kingdome euery
where to come,The Church hath great vessels of ho∣nor at this present time, God be prai∣sed therefore. as we pray dayly it may bee increased: and we
to liue vnder obedience and protection thereof. I likewise pray
from the bottome of my heart, that you all may prosper in fe∣licitic,
and most happy contentment. From Egypt, neere
the red Sea: in expectation of the yeere 666. against Ba∣bilon.Mat. 6. 10. The Church of God is yet in Egypt, but it is neere to the red Sea, to passe from thence, expecting the yeere 666. Apo. 13.

