



RIGHT HONOVRABLE,
As the Lord hath honoured you in re∣spect of place, so he hath doubly ho∣noured you with grace and vertue. Amongst the rest of the rare endow∣ments wherewith God hath inriched your honourable person, I obserue these in particular: First, humility,, a grace hard to be found in great personages. Secondly, loue to Gods house; your Honours diligence in this kind will rise vp in iudgement against many proud despisers of holy things, and will condemne them. Thirdly, Christian gouernment in your family. I could name many more, but it is needlesse, be∣cause they are better knowne then I can expresse them. Your singular vertues, together with the experience which I haue of your loue in the best things, do encourage me to dedi∣cate this small worke vnto your Honor. The most part of this Chapter was preached in your hearing, and considering you vouchsafed to heare it preached with ioy and great dili∣gence, I make no doubt but your honour will accept it, and as diligently reade it now, as before you heard it. Good Madam,
 I know God hath laid vpon you a great triall of affliction, in that he hath taken away your noble sonne Sir Ferdinando Dudley. But I beseech you consider whither he is remoued, to wit, from earth to heauen; his great zeale in Religion, especially in his later yeares with the fruit thereof, do giue sufficient testimonie of his present happinesse. Who would not be content that their dearest friend should be aduanced? Behold, he is aduanced to a Crowne, yea to a Crowne of glo∣rie, which shall neuer be taken from him, nor he from it. If the dead in Christ were to speake vnto vs, they would sure∣ly say to vs that mourne for them; Weepe not for vs, for we are in blisse and happinesse. And so, if this worthie sonne were to speake vnto you, he would say vnto you (seeing your teares) My honourable Mother weepe not for me, be∣hold my happinesse. The Church of God hath the greatest losse in the death of this worthy Saint. She hath too few such fauourers as he was: but all must submit to the will of God; the will of the Lord is good, the Lord hath giuen, and the Lord hath taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord. He is taken away from beholding the euill to come; and we are left still for our further triall; the Lord sanctifie our cros∣ses vnto vs. Sorrow for such a sonne shall be no hinderance (as I hope) but rather a furtherance to your Honours zeale. This shall make you more mindfull of mortalitie, more care∣full to worke out your owne saluation, more industrious in the study of heauenly things. And indeed it nearely con∣cerneth euery Christian, to haue especiall respect vnto Gods word in the time of affliction: for whence can any expect sound comfort in time of trouble but from the word, or whence strength to beare afflictions, but from the same word? The word of God is as the balme of Gilead: We must flie vnto it to be healed of our sorrowes. The word of
 God is as a strong Tower, we must runne vnto it, if we would be safe from spirituall dangers. Now Gods word is not onely that which is expresly written in the Bible, but also the la∣bours of Gods seruants in expounding and preaching, so far as they deliuer nothing but that which hath warrant from the Scripture, this is also Gods word. And in this word we must be conuersant as well as in the former; though in the former principally, because it was by immediate reuelation. But I shall not neede to prouoke your Honour to the study of Gods word, for I am perswaded you are taught of God. I one∣ly beseech your acceptation and patronage for this little Booke; and so rest

