



THAT this may be re∣puted
a great bold∣nes
in me, (Gentle∣men)
not hauing so
much as seene either
of you, to stampe
your names in the
fore head of sopoore
a Pamphlet; I deny
not, and craue fauour
for this presumption, offending but in an error of
curtesie and honest affection, not any wilfull or
peremptory pride, impudently to preiudice your

worth, or any way to procure your misconstructi∣on.
Because this faulte (if a fault it may be tearmed)
in former times, hath been desired of the best, and
thought to be the purest golde, that beautified the
richest Diadems in the world: Schollers to honor
Princes with their painefull labours, and Princes
honouring Schollers, with respect and thankefull
acceptation. Beside, that learned saying of diuine
Saint Augustine,S. Aug. in. En∣chirid. ad. speaks sufficiently vnto you both,
in my iust excuse:Lau. Cap. 10. & De Ciuit. Inuisa diligere possumus, incog∣nita
nequaqam. Vnseene men may bee beloued,
but vnknowne,Dei Lib. 22. Cap. 1. very hardly. And yet men haue
been very familiarly knowen, to them that neuer
had any sight of them;Arist. Lib. 2. by the splendor of their
vertues,Elench. Cap. renowne of their actions, their learned
writings,Vlt. Plato. 4. de legibus. Et in Protag. and such like noat-worthye qualities,
Which (as Sir Thomas Moore was wont to say) Doe
make men that are sundered by many miles,Sir Thomas Moore in his Vtop. to haue dis∣pute,
conference, and louing entercourse together, e∣uen
as hee seemed to haue with Cornelius Agrip∣pa.
And that you both (woorthy Gentlemen) al∣though
as yet vnseene, are not vnknowne to mee;
let me resolue you, by this morall ensuing exam∣ple,
which was the first motiue to this presumpti∣on,
and is the only argument, to plead your much
better merite. A yong Grafte, growing sometime
in an vnkindlye ground, where it neither had the
Sunnes warmth, or the least fauour of any wea∣ther,
but, by the enuious Maister of the ground,

was not onely vnrespected, but throwne out (by
his will) to haue prosperitie in no place: First,
by one of you, the poore, though not vnpittied
Plant, was kindly respected, and admitted to haue
fresh groweth in his Garden. Vntill such time,
as, finding an other soyle, (I will not saye more
fertile, but of answerable fruitfulnesse:) with
his owne hand it was thither trans-planted, and
there, by the other of you, so carefully husban∣ded;
as I knowe not which of you I should
most commend, for humanitie, courtesie, and lo∣uing
affabilitie.
Now, in regard, that (though not at the first,
but since those tempestuous times) that Grafte
hath (by some peculyer proprietie) appertay∣ned
vnto mee, and dooth still enioye the fruiti∣on
of both your woonted fauours: In such ma∣ner
as I could best deuise, to cleare my selfe of
ingratitude, and (in some measure) to answere
your great merit; I haue sent you a sillye New-yeeres
gift, better in proofe, than outward ap∣parance,
and more woorth in regarding, then
in the bare reading. It hath no other sute vnto
you, or further expectation; but that God may
blesse the continuaunce of your kindnesse, where
already it hath beene liberallye bestowed: And
the poore Plant to thriue no otherwise, but as it
may daylye prosper in your good opinions. Then,
you both, to measure my loue equally towards

you, in the euen Scale of your friendlie constru∣ction;
Which I will further studie to de∣serue,
though abilitie can therein
(no way) comprehend my
earnest desire.

