



THe outwarde afflictions and manyfolde troubles of a great number of Gods Chyldren, whose trauaile and labour from day to day I had styll in experience: and the inward feeling of many wounded spirites, whose wofull sighes and bitter mourninges I beheld in other, and had tryed in my selfe, it made me verye desirous to seeke for reme∣dies, to stop the complaints of so grecuous cryings, and to prepare our hartes in a strong defence, that the firye dartes of the Deuyl might not wound vs. Upon this occasion, when I had to expounde that place of the Apostle, full of notable comfort: That Christ in the dayes of his fleshe offered vp prayers and supplications to hym that was able to saue him from death, with strong cryinges and wyth teares, and was delyuered from the thynges he feared: I taryed the longer in that matter, and declared more at large, what great boldnes and assurance of hope was offered here vnto al that should obey the word. Which when I had done, as God gaue me vtte∣rance, the poore in spirite, to whom I applyed my selfe, one or two required me to set it downe in wry∣ting, that it might be profitable to many, which was comfortable to them. I durst not reiect such a good request, but though some tyme I differred it, yet I neuer forgot it, tyll I had written all as I was re∣quired. Which when I had done, I purposed then with my selfe to make it yet more common, and set it abroade in print: Knowing assuredly, wher God would geue it encrease, it shoulde bring foorth the fruite of consolation, that we myght stand vpryght in the day of euyll.
Thus hauing perfourmed both the request of o∣ther,

and myne own desire, and the tyme fallyng out with the begynning of a newe yeare, I thought it not amysse, to offer my labour vnto you, who (I know well) would accept it as a New yeres gyft, though of no great price, yet of great good wyll, and though easely obtayned, yet not litle to be esteemed. And therefore my deare brother, whom I loue in Christ, and reuerence in the world, as many wayes I haue cause, so I offer it vnto you. The Lorde for his mercies sake worke his own good pleasure, that I may haue of you the fruite that I desire, and you the grace that you stand in neede of: that as God hath greatly blessed you, and made you abound in many graces, to the glory of his name, the com∣fort of your friendes, and the benefite of his people: so your ioye, that it myght be made perfect, you might also abound in this, to haue a strong fayth a∣gainst the day of tryall: Which God of hys mercye wyll surely graunt vnto you, and finishe the good woorke that he hath begone. Though I loue not to speake faire for feare of slatterie▪ and deceitfull prayses I see what mischiefe they breede, yet I feare not to beare you wytnes of your well doing: the spirite of God hath planted humilitie more deepe in your brest, then that pride and arrogancie can pul it out. And in deede the better you are, the more effectually you do see your own vnworthynes, that all your righteousnes is as a defiled cloth: and the more you approch vnto God, the more you abhorre your selfe, and know that in your flesh ther dwelleth no goodnes.
Abraham our father, Iob, Esay and many other▪ men of excellent vertue, in the syght of God they haue bene all astonished, to see how their righteous∣nes hath bene scattered awaye as the cloudes of the heauens. Paule cryeth out: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliuer me frō this body of death?

But because we haue an enemie that spareth not to display all our corruptions before our eyes, to the ende hee myght make vs dispaire, therefore we may be bold to the strengthening of our hope, to set before vs againe the spirituall graces that woorke within vs, to assure our selues that we be borne of God. So our Sauiour Christ praysed many that beleued on hym, so dyd hys Apostels, so maye we. And our heauenly father wyll ratefie and confirme our wordes, when we speake the truth according to the measure of faith that euerye one hath receaued. So S. Iohn byddeth vs all be bold, and not be de∣ceaued: He that doth the thinges that are righte∣ous him selfe is righteous, and lyke vnto Christ in whom he is sanctified.
So may I say vnto you, the grace of God hath wrought happely in you, in these yeares and condi∣tion of lyfe, that so vnfaynedly you haue sought the Lord. It can not be of your selfe, who are not able so much as to think a good thought, but it is of him whose seede abideth in you. And although, because you haue that treasure in a brittell vessell, you see sometime the fruite of olde dam, and the prickes of his transgression within your bowels, yet feare not hys malice that hath wrought this wo. You are bought with dearer price, then that syn may raygne againe within you, and he that hath purchased you, hee wyll not so suffer hys enheritaunce to bee spoy∣led. It is necessary you should know your synne, or you could not vnderstande how great were your redemption. But your synnes cannot seperate you away from hym, who hath buried them in the earth, and wyll not see them anye more. When you shall ascend to come into hys sight, the earth wyll holde her own, and keepe your synnes behynde you. The pearcing Serpent shall not clyme to accuse you, nor the crooked Serpent shall hyde your redemp∣tion

from you. Your care is cast vppon hym that careth for you, & you know hym who hath spoken: All power is geuen vnto me in heauen and in earth. You know hym who hath a name aboue all names, that in the name of Iesus all knees shall bowe: Euen hee hath bought you wyth a price, and you are not your own. If it be possible for you to pe∣rish, then is it possible agayne that Christ shoulde suffer iniurie.
This boldnes you haue through hym who hath made manifest his grace vnto you, that you denying impietie and worldly concupiscence, should lyue so∣berlye, purelye and godlye in this present lyfe, and looke for the blessed hope that shalbe reuealed, when all secretes shall bee opened. To whych issue and happye ende of lyfe, the Lorde bryng both you and yours in the felowship of hys Sayntes to prayse hys holy name, when he shal make vnto you hys glory vnspeakeable, and crowne it wyth immortalitie. AMEN.
Fare well in Christ Iesu, and pray for me. The. 26. of Decē∣ber. 1572. 
