


HAuing finished (Right worshipfull) and made ready for the Presse this little Dialogue: I bethought me (sith the common maner of all, that write any bookes in this age, is to dedi∣cát the same to one or to other of great place) to whom I might dedicate these my poore la∣bours. At last I did resolue with my selfe,

none to be more fit then your worship: both in regard of some affinity in the flesh, as also because of those manifold good parts, where∣with the Almighty hath endued you. Ha∣uing therefore none other thing to present your worship withall (in token of a thankfull heart for your curtesies shewed towards me) behold, I doe heere send vnto you this third fruite of my labours now published. Most humbly beseeching you to take it in good worth: not weighing the value of the thing, which is of no value, but the simple and good minde and meaning of the giuer. This worke doth sharply reproue and euict the world of sinne, and therefore is like to find many dead∣ly enemies, which with cruell hatred will most eagerly pursue it vnto death. Zoilus also and his fellowes, I know, will bitterly carpe at it. Therefore it flieth vnto your Worship for pro∣tection, and humbly desireth to take Sanctu∣ary vnder your wings. Wherefore I humbly intreat you to take vpon you the patronage and defence of it: that by your meanes it may be deliuered both from the calumnious oblo∣quies of euill disposed persons, and also from

the worlds malignity; so as it may take no in∣iury. And concerning this little volume, the summe of the matter of it, you shall finde in the Epistle to the Reader. As concerning the manner, heere is no great matter in learning, wit, arte, eloquence, or ingenious inuention: (for I haue heerein specially respected the ig∣norant and vulgar sort, whose edification I doe chiefely aime at) yet somewhat there is, which may concern the learned, & giue them some contentment. Whatsoeuer it be, I leaue it with your Worship, beseeching you to giue it entertainement. And so I doe most hum∣bly take my leaue: commending both your selfe, your good wife, and your whole fami∣ly to the mercifull protection of the euerli∣uing God. From South-Shoobery in Es∣sex. April. 10. Anno Dom. 1601.

