



AS ofte as I doe consi∣der the estate of man, here pla∣ced to accomplishe his appoin∣ted pilgrimage, I remember the saying of the rightuous IO. that mannes life is a wafare vpon the earth. But when I further see, what maner of fight we haue, what enimies to encounter with vs, howe great of force, how cankred of will, how subtile in deuise, how con∣tinuall in assault, & on the other side how weak we be of our selues▪ I remember the saying of our sanioure Christ, that if it were possi∣ble the very electe should be deceiued. There is no condition with∣out his enimie, no calling without temptation, no estate sure. The world deceiueth those, who will not see that the worlde doth pea∣rishe. The fleshe defileth other, that think filthinesse to be pleasure, and make vnclennesse their felicitie. And where these two can not bring forth the shamelesse breache of the law of God, there rageth that Dragon, and olde Serpent, that seducer of the world, that lir, and father of lyes, and he soweth cockle among good corne, super∣stition and heresie, among the seedes of obedience, and good bha∣uiour, where of it cometh, that suche as will not be partakers with

SODOME, and GOMORRA, nor haue felowship with those rotten woundes, and stinking sores, that make the blaspheming of Gods holy name their honoure, yet they should be drowned in wicked doctrine, that by some meanes their saluation might be hindred. This estate of man; so muche the more to be lamented, how much the lesse it is regarded, would make a Christian minister to muse muche, and oftentimes, howe he might be a frutefull labourer in Gods vineyarde. For sith the children of wrathe doe not cease to walke disobediently, and with al care, and studie, some in exam∣ple of euill life, some in profession of vngodly doctrine doe allure and entice other to walke with them in their open, and wide iour∣ney of euerlasting wretchednesse: how shall not the children of light, according as euery one hath receiued giftes, so apply their en∣deuoure, that godlinesse, and good religion might call againe the lost children vnto the narow way of euerlasting happinesse? The latter dayes are come, and impietie dothe abound, iniquitie hath so spredde hir selfe, that she is plentifull bothe in worde and deede, and that, not in secrecie only, and in priuate assemblies, but in the face of the worlde, and in open wryting, while some preferre the present state before eternall life: other delite more in dreames, than in the worde of God. It behoueth therefore euery true christian in all places to rebuke sinne, to set forthe Gods glory in open mee∣tings, and to maintaine his worde before the enimie, knowing that his rewarde is the saluation of his owne soule, and his place is pre∣pared in the kingdome of God his father. From this duety, neither King, nor Queene, Duke, nor Earle, honourable nor other, are ex∣empt, but euery one as he is higher in dignitie, so his accompt is the greater in the day of iudgement. It helpeth not the lay man to say he is no minister. Where the cause is Gods, we are all a chosen ge∣neration and a royall priesthode, an holy nation, and a peculiar people to shew forth his vertue, that hath called vs out of darknesse into his maruellous light. If we will not walke in this light, we a∣bide in darkenesse, and in the shadow of death. If we will not shew forthe his vertue, we are not his chosen generation, nor his peculi∣ar people. If we haue not his name wrytten in our foreheade, we

shall not stand among the electe with the Lambe in Mount Syon. If we haue not the pleasant smel of life vnto life, we haue not Gods gosple engrafted in vs. As many, as be Christians, haue giuen their faith vnto Christ in their baptisme, vnder the witnesse of a great many. They haue forsaken the flesh, the world and the deuil. If they wil now be at league with the sinner, and at agrement with the euill doer, they haue broken their first promise, and they are founde vnfaithfull. And for their faith thus violate, giuen vnto the immortall God, God againe will breake with them his coue∣naunt of mercie, if in time they repent not. This made me, right worshipfull sir, according to the talent, which God hath giuen me, so in these euill dayes to apply my laboure, not doubting, but that little light, with which he hath endued me by his free mercy, may shine through the cloudes, and mistes of errour, which the prince of this darknesse hath blowne abroade. God turne their hearts, that builde vpon his euill foundations, and God encrease their number, that be setters vp of vertue, and zealous in the house of the Lord. And of this number bicause God hath made you one, of good will desirous, and of authority able to defend the profession of a christi∣an man, I could not but chuse your worship, vnder whose name my little labor should appeare, both for a testimonie vnto all men, that you are one, in whome your countrey doth reioyce, and a prouocati∣on vnto other, that by your example they might learn to liue. Ther be diuers that loue the worde of God, and in common talke make a glorious profession, but the world wil not let them go vprightly vn∣to the truth of the gosple. There be other, whose conuersation is not amisse, and in ciuil behauior giue good exāple, but they be so drow∣ned in error, that their estate is very lamentable: they be the little flock, and few in nūber, that do ioyne vertue and good religion togi∣ther. It is hard, and laborous to fleshe, and bloud, and therfore we turne vs frō it. The way is narow, wher they are both coupled, ther∣fore few do finde it. Frō the princes priuie chāber vnto the pore cot∣tage they haue rare dwelling. It would make a Christian heart to bleede to consider duely the maners of eche estate. The scarlet and purple garmēts do hide and couer vnchast and vnpure bodies▪ The ornaments of gold, and siluer are had to beutifie most horrible othes:

good learning and wisdome are abused to al deceit and craftinesse. Simplicitie, and plainenesse is a cloke of many subtile cogitations. Neede, and pouertie are common dwelling places of muche dissolute life. Truthe is well nigh forsaken, and faith is almost perished from the face of the earth. But Macte ista virtute tua▪ yet let your worship reioyce in Gods mercies, for not withstanding these daungerous rockes, yet you are passed in to narrow way, and the Lorde God be praised, who shall encrease the number, you haue some companye. There be men of great honoure, and estimation, yet louers of Gods truthe, and voide of all courtly wickednesse. Would God their do∣ings were registred in Ceder trees, and they had golden pictures in the Citie OLYMPIA▪ that they might be spectacles to all noble po∣steritie. God hath sure giuen them double happinesse. Their liues shall ende here in honoure, and then it pleaseth their father to giue vnto them his kingdome. There are other great gouernours of this common wealth, beautifull, and comely members of Christes body▪ which make not policie their religion, nor blasphemie Gods ordi∣naunce, where mannes lawe doth not establishe it. They haue cho∣sen the good parte, which shall not be taken from them. God shall make their dwelling places sure, when the aduersarie shall be thro∣wen downe out of his seat. Some other there be of good estat, and vertuous, not entangled with vanitie, nor blinded with supersti∣tion, which make not gaine their rightuousnesse, nor contempt of Gods ministers their estimation. They shall receiue an hundred folde in this life, and when they haue run their course, they shall haue the crowne of glory. And as in the time of ELIAS, when the Prophet thought that all the children of Israel had forsaken Gods couenaunt, broken downe his altares, and slaine his Prophets with the sworde, yet God made answere, I haue reserued vnto me 7000. men, which haue not bowed their knee to DAAL: euen so at this present time there is a remnant through the election of grace, that haue not their inwarde thoughts spotted with papistrie, nor their outwarde life with especiall crimes. With these and other, bicause your worship doth walke togither in the straight path of true obe∣dience, God hath giuen vnto you this fruit of your aucthoritie, to

be beloued among them where you dwell, and this comfort of your conscience, that by your example they learne to know God. Nowe what remaineth, but that you pray vnto God, that he which hath bgon this good worke in you, will make it perfect vnto the ende, that as your youth hath not bene fed with suche wantonnesse, as in like estate, and fortune do the vsually abounde, so your further yeares should be voide of all vngodly desires, and you found faith∣full vnto your death: in the which hope, and confidence the Lorde God through his sonne Iesus Christ, sende you long life, and happy yeares to the maintenaunce of his glory, and comfort of his Church. 
Fare you well in the Lord, from Christes colledge in Cam∣bridge the .2. of Aprill, 1568. 
