



FAire sex, to whom Nature hath given what she had
most rich and lovely, spring of most agreeable de∣lights,
that hold in your faire hands the Empire of
the Universe, since you command over men, and di∣stribute
to them at your pleasures, either good or bad
fortune; 'tis to you alone I present this worke; I ad∣dresse
it to the most delicate objects of the earth; and as you are that
which most pleases in the world, so is it you also I desire most to please. If
the very power of love depends not but on yours, whatsoever appertaines
to it, owes no homage but to you; and these adventures that are effects of
Ladies beautie, are not to be offered but to those that may produce the
like. I hope there is not one amongst you that will not finde here how
to passe away some houres with pleasure. The severest will not be
offended that this booke speakes to them of love, and will not feare, as
they read it, to tell themselves that they would be loth to heare from the
mouthes of men. Those that suffer onely to be loved without loving, and
will have much respect and ceremony, shall here find such Lovers as they
desire: And those that are softer, and who to ease the flames of their
servants are willing to take a part of them, shall have some satisfaction
to see their owne passions here authoriz'd by examples. But because a∣mongst
those that love, there are some constant, and some wanderers,
and this booke altogether takes part with the first, I should feare lest
the other side might not take offence to see their humour ill intreated, if
I did not give them reasons to defend themselves against those that are
alleaged in this worke. The most severest Judges would finde it a hard
matter to resolve which is more commendable, either to know how to keep
a passion in spight of fortunes traverses, or to change it to good purpose.
It is indeed a very glorious thing to make an invincible love appeare, that
feares neither heaven nor earth, that is the stronger for very opposition,
and that would not be shaken by the ruine of the whole world. Such af∣fections
as these cannot be so perfect, but that they are founded upon ver∣tue;
and reason having bred them, they must of necessity last alwayes, it
being impossible that what was once reason, should be so no more. There is
none but must confesse this kinde of loving admirable, but it is as rare
withall. The most part of loves grow of light causes, a little charme sur∣prizes
the eies, and takes from them the knowledge of many defects. Con∣stancy

in these affections in without doubt more vicious than change; and
very often they call inconstancy, that which in effect is but a judicious
retrait. Change is sometimes a vertue more strong, and more couragious
than Constancie it selfe. 'Tis by it one tames a passion of many yeares, and
repaires all the disorder that was in the soule. Men that have alwayes
more cause to love, fall least into inconstancy; and Ladies that find in us
so many defaults, do oftentimes by reason, & by a generous striving, that
they are thought to do but out of weaknesse. The law that forbids change,
is only more rigorous for us: for it seemes we are oblig'd to suffer to the
very extremity, rather than be unfaithfull; and women are excusable for
changing the least unquietnesse love gives them. Constancy is a quality
too serious, and too melancholike, for so agreeable and delightfull a sex.
That which destroyes beauty, ought to be detested amongst you, as much
as old age or sicknesse. This same Constancy would appeare valiant in you,
and capable to support vexations, at the charge of your richest treasures.
'Tis shee that extinguishes that lively brightnesse of the eyes, that effa∣ces
the colour, that ruines the good looke; and that to gaine you the glo∣ry
of loving well, makes you lose the other of being loved. Lightnesse
hath much more jollity and charmes; and if by some cruell accident in
love there must happen one of these two changes, either of the wit, or of the
beauty, you may very well be pardoned, if you chose that which preserves
the thing in the world you account dearest. And these are the reasons the
inconstant may allege; they that follow the lawes of fidelity shall finde
enough in the book to answer them. I counsell every one of you to continue
in the opinion that is most conformable to her humour; and demand of you
this grace onely, that those that are pleas'd to be unfaithfull, blame not
the austere fidelities they shall finde here describ'd, and that those that
love constancy, accuse not the inconstant. But I stay you, while peradven∣ture
you are impatient to entertaine Ariana. I leave you then with her;
and yet before quitting of you, I must advertise you that she is somthing
bashfull, because she hath alwaies bin shut up, and never yet seene the
world; and that if you desire her entertainment should divert you, you
must not addresse you to her altogether, to learne her adventures. Shee
could not then tell which of you to satisfie, and in the tumult would lose
many of her graces. Take her each of you apart into some retired place,
and then giving her attention and silence, she wil freely recount to you all
her life, and tell the very least of her thoughts. She cannot love noise, or
assemblies, since repose and solitude gave birth to her.
