



IMmediatly af∣ter my retourne in∣to thys Realme, (ryghte
honoura∣ble) I thought no∣thyng more requi∣site, than to shewe the cause
of my lōg pylgrymage. That bothe all menne maye vnderstande, why I haue bene
so long absente from my churche: and also what was the ende of that
assem∣blye, where I was, and eke what fruite, I reaped of my trauayle
there∣in. For I vnderstande, that son∣drye rumours haue bene spred
there∣of, and that manye haue easilye per∣swaded themselues, that whiche
they most desired.
So that in these oure tymes I fynde it most true,
which long synce was spo∣ken. Namely, that the people iudgeth, and now
measure most thyngs accor∣dyng to there owne opynion, and very fewe
accordyng to the truth. Whiche foolyshe iudgements to withstand, I counted
it paine well spence, not onely by word of mouth, to certifie my frēdes and
familyers, but also to put in writ∣ting, to the sight and reading of al
mē, the late doinges betwixt vs, and ye pre∣lates at Poyssye. Whiche as
symply & playnelye: so I protest to doe truly and faythfullye. As
they themselues, which were presēte at the doynge therof, can
witnesse. Great, sure was the expecta∣cion of this assemblye and
cōference. And not wt out cause. For neuer here∣to fore in Fraunce were we
quyetlye heard, or admitted to the defence of our cause: but rather without
cause, con∣dēned, banyshed and imprysoned. Now therefore it was no
maruell, yf with thys straūge and sodayn chaūce, mens myndes were in
greate expectacion, & had conceyued good hope. Especiallye, forasmuche
as the truthe shyneth of it¦selfe,  & waxeth so much y•
more mighty, as men with greate force and suttelty, assay to
suppresse it. But they must not thynke, that we were heard of them,
which were dryuen thereto for ye most part agaynst there willes, &
altogether enforced thereto, by the necessirye of common commaundemente.
For they woulde alwayes, either haue vs put to sylence, oure mouthes
stopped, or els referred to there greate God at Trent: only necessitye
therefore made vs au∣dience. Bycause no otherwise, the feare of imminent
peryls could be repressed, nor they thēselues which hate vs most, haue
prouided for their own quietnes. Wherfore, al be it they fayned, that they were
wiling to come to cōference, yet they cōtinued with vs only so long, as
they hoped in the meane tyme, they myght well content the Kynge and the nobles,
and appease the cōmons. For to leaue of the seueral discourse, al
theyr doinges generally, but chiefly their de∣parture, whereby they brake the
con∣ference, sufficiētly disclosed, what their purpose was. Whiche if
we consider, certainly we shall maruell that we dyd  so often
come to talke, and wer suffred so long to pleade our cause. But wtout
respecting the councels or iudgements of men, we must weye the prouidēce
of God, wherby he preuenteth al perilles, and geueth a happy and lucky ende, to
doubtfull beginninges. For god which neuer faileth those that are his, hathe
farre exceded our hope and expectatiō. For who thought yt albeit we wer
sent for, yet many beyng vnwilling, & some striuing against it, we
should, be heard at all, who sawe not a thousande wyles prepared for vs,
wherby we myghte eyther be put to death or silence? After yt we weronce
heard with ye great grudge of all ye bishops, who wuld haue hoped, for the
seconde, or third meetyng? Who thought not, that, we were led, as
pry∣soners to pleade oure cause? And where as moste vniuste condityons
were offered vs whereby the Byshops mynded to shame vs, and win
them∣selues a glorious victory: who thought not that we woulde streyght
haue bro∣ken of, and hauing so good occasyon offered vnto vs, woulde
foorthwith reasse from conference.
Yet we chose rather to abyde al pe∣rilles, yea, and
to muche wrong, ra∣ther than we woulde geue any occasy∣on to breake of y•
conference. We gaue vp a confession of oure fayth, that is to say, of all
the churches in Fraunce that professe the ghospell. To maintain and
defends thesame, we wer alwayes rea∣die. Or if the bishops would haue
shew∣ed forth any of theirs, we promised oftē to conferre therof: & to
confute it, if ther were in it any thyng, not agreable to the woorde of God.
But we coulde ne∣uer get them together withoute great entreatye, or continuall
callyng on them. At the laste, when they neyther coulde nor durste, openly
to breake of the conference, once begonne by the Kyngs cōmaundement, they
thoughte good by litle and litle, to loose, & breake of. For firste
from the great audyence, in the whiche we were first heard wyth greate
companye, restrained in a more narowe place, we were admitted onely to the
number of .xii. where they had a greate companye of their monkes and doctours.
Neither yet did this order please them long.
For at the laste, the matter was refer∣red to fiue
on ether part, and yet after∣wardes, those that wer chosen for them
bicause they wer graue and quiet men, they said, wer neuer appoynted
therto, by their consent. For they thought thē to much bent to peace &
concord, which they hate. All these pollicies, attempted (as it semed in
vayn) without any aun∣swere geuing vs, or any parte of theyr mindes
signified vnto vs, they depar∣ted. But although this labor may seme
emploied in vain, wherof their apeares eyther no end, or els no certain
conclu∣sion: yet neuertheles herby is made ma∣nifest to al men, howe great
is ye power of truth, which can be suppressed by no might of mē, by no
wile, nor guile. For she feareth her aduersaries, she con∣straineth her
defēders and patrones & maketh thē to be feared, albeit thei are few and
smal of force: she vanquisheth and rooteth out all error, be it neuer
so depe rooted: she detecteth and chaseth deceites and lies, euen as the
light with her beames doth the darknesse: to con∣clude, although manye
yeares, she hath lien hydden and suppressed, yet at ye last
 she becomes vanquisher of all her foes. Which forasmuche as
the lorde dailye proueth before our eyes, truely we are vnkinde, and
vnthankefull, vnlesse we mindefully weye it. Least therefore the fame of
these doynges should dye, least they shuld be falsified with lyes, or
blot∣ted with false tales, immediately after my retourne, I wrote the note
thereof, and described all thynges euen as they wer done. But whiles I
doubted, vnder whose name I might best publishe the same, your honor
cam forthwith to my minde, to whom for great fauoure and gentlenesse I am
much bounden, and not I onely, but as many els, as beyng true worshippers of
god, are fled hither for religion. To your highnes therfore, I haue dedicated
the same, yt forasmuch as you are muche enflamed with the desire of
godlinesse & religion, and wish the banishment of error and deceit,
you may hereby plainly se, how ye lord wor∣keth in our realme of Fraunce,
howe ye gospel encreaseth ther, wt what patiēce & modesty, we
suffred our aduersaries and also what hope we may conceue, of thinges to
come. Neither can I wyth  silence ouerpasse, how much the
exam∣ple of the happy and quiete gouernmēt of this flourishing realme, and
the au∣thoritie of all the nobles of this realme that fauoure the gospell,
and chiefly of the moste noble and gracious Queene Elizabeth, hath ayded vs
to stoppe the mouthes of our aduersaries, which are alwayes wont to obiect,
that with the chaunge of religion, the chaunge and disorder of the realme
will likewise en∣sue. For bothe hye and lowe would laye vnto them the
example of this florysh∣ing realme, whose state hath neuer ben more
quiet, than since the times that the most noble Queene Elizabeth,
resto∣red religion defaced by her sister to the auncient puritie and
sinceritie. For, what may more winne the fauour of ye people to the Prince,
than pure religiō and zele of truthe. Then at the last doe men perfectly
knowe theyr duetyes to their Princes, when first they knowe their duetye to
God, by whom Princes are appointed as vicars or lieuetenāts And those
thynges whiche your honor yet sayde and reasoned, touchyng thys argumente,
and the mayntaynyng of  true religion, when you were sent into
Fraunce to congratulate oure Kyng, yet sticke imprinted in the mindes of
many. Neyther haue ye left any suttle spurres or prouokementes to vertue,
in the mindes of suche as are Godlye, with the president of youre vpryght
ly∣uing, gentlenesse, liberalitie, and youre true and sincere Zele,
whereby when I perceiued, that thei prouoked and en∣couraged, wished so
well to your honor as they ought. I thought I should plea∣sure them also,
if to you, whome I knowe to embrace and defende al godlinesse, I should
present these newes, whiche bothe to all men, but chiefly to such as are
patrones and defenders of y• truth, ought well to bee knowen.
