



AS of late came vn∣to my handes (right ho∣nourable and my very good Lord) this Booke, entituled, the Historie of the successors of A∣lexāder, surnamed the great, written in the Greeke tong by Diodore the Sicilian, and translated into Frenche by M. Claude of Seissell, sometime M. of the Requestes, to the most Christian King Lewis the . xij. of that name, and to him addressed: I

was (when I had ouer read and well conside∣red the same) maruellously rauished, and ear∣nestly wished, it hadde bene published in our vulgare tong, that many others might vnder∣stand it. Bycause (as me thinketh) it is both noble and pleasaunt, as well for the noueltie of the Historie, as also for the varietie and stile, which is right propre, and such one as apper∣teyneth, and chiefly belongeth to a very good Historian: wherein is shewed the vncertein∣tie of fortune, whiche maruellously may serue and helpe to read, and consider the worldly happes heretofore, to great Kings, Princes, and Nobles chaunced, who sometime were in great dignitie and had high authoritie, and wonderful prosperitie. Wherby in seeing (af∣ter great felicitie and maruellous prosperitie) the straunge aduersitie and miserie whiche happened them, and the continual chaunge of their estates and aduentures: may more and

more be vnderstood the instabilitie and imper∣fection of wordly matters. And chiefly in those great and honorable personages, the successors of Alexander the great, by whome is most de∣clared the inconstancie of all things subiect to alteration and chaunge: and where Fortune (to speake after the vulgare opinion) hath best shewed the power, and auctoritie. Whiche Booke when I hadde finished, I aduised me to what honorable and Martiall personage I might fitliest addresse it. And as I aboade in this imagination, I at last called to remem∣brance your late noble progenitor, who in facts of warre and Martiall pollicies, surmoun∣ted in these our dayes the more parte of this noble Realme of Englande. And forthwith considering, that your honoure is he, who in those noble vertues, rightly representeth the very liuely Image of your most noble progeni∣tor, and also vnderstanding your affabilitie

and naturall inclination to all suche as haue delight therein: I am therefore (all these things considered) the rather enboldened, to take on hande to dedicate this the firste fruite of my trauell vnto your honour: Most humbly beseching the same that it woulde vouchsafe to take in worth, thys small present and gifte, and to consider rather the harte and good will of the giuer (who desireth nothing more than to do you seruice agreable) than the value or qualitie of the present, very small, and in a rude stile, to dedicate vnto so Noble a perso∣nage. And bycause the sayd Claude of Seis∣sell would not that this sayde Historie shoulde remayne imperfect, to leaue the Reader in doubt of the ende and issue of the warres be∣gonne by Antigone the great and Demetre his sonne, against al the rest of the Kings and Princes successors of Alexander in those dayes, somewhat touched in the beginning of

the third Boke by the sayd Diodore, he hath therefore taken out of the wise Plutarche, the remnaunte, in the life of Demetre vnto his death, in whose tyme were almoste all the great and notable factes of warre (worthie memorie) exployted and done. Wherefore in reuoluing the sayd Historie with iudgement, and to the ende it is translated, there may (in my opinion) some commoditie and profit be re∣ceyued. For as touching the course of worldly things, may be sene the Stratagemes and pol∣licies in the facts of war, togither many sundry and diuerse battailles, sieges and enterprises, verie pleasaunt to read and heare: wherein may also be lerned many things apperteyning to that arte. And farther as concerning the morall direction of mannes life, there may be∣sides be founde both by learning and exam∣ples manie goodly documentes. And chiefe∣ly, that whiche is moste meete and becom∣ming

a noble personage, whereof he is called Magnanimus, that he shoulde not for any prosperitie whiche happeneth him, be ouer high minded nor yet for any aduersitie he hath or might chaunce him, lose hys harte, courage or hope, whiche things wholly seruing to the per∣fection of man in this present life, and consi∣steth in the habitude and operation of Morall vertues: and also to the perfection of the soule, ordering and appointing the latter ende and in∣tentiō to the euerlasting blisse: which god of hys infinite goodnesse and grace graunt your honour, and vs al, after the course of this present life.

