



THe dayes and times beeing euill (right worshipfull & reli∣gious Ladyes) require preach∣ing, they require also printing. Preaching and printing, so desperate is the case of many, will not preuaile. A great and maine cause of this deluge and flood of iniquitie is the negligence of Magis∣trates who will not adioyne the sword to defend the word. The Lord in his rich mercie towardes vs hath sent forth many worthie Mi∣nisters, who preach in season and out of season, yet oathes abound, the Lords Sabboths are prophaned. And why so? because these sinnes
 escape vnpunished. Caput audaciae, & max∣ima illecebra peccandi est impunitatis spes: The hope of impunity is an exceeding bayte vnto sinne. Wherefore I nothing doubt but that if Magistrates would faithfully exe∣cute their office, we should not haue such bold and presumptuous sinners as swarme amongst vs. Now that the Magistrate may execute his office according to Gods will, he must knowe the same: for which cause I thought good to pub∣lish this sermon, that those which will learne, may both knowe and practise. And as in this sermon is set out the Magistrates duty, so like∣wise in the same is set out the Magistrates death. The consideration of which should mooue all Officers to doe their duties. The Lord with∣out all controuersie will call them one day to an account. And what account can many Ma∣gisters make? no doubt many can make an ac∣count of their debts accruing by vngodly vsu∣ry: Others may count their bribes. But how many can count and number the soules of men which haue reaped benefit by their gouer∣ment! magistrates haue no greater thing then this, that they can punish sinners: they haue no better thing then that they will. Which if they would doe, no doubt many sinners might be conuerted and brought vnto God. Not to pro∣ceede any further in this point, as I haue pub∣lished
 this sermon which concerneth the Ma∣gistrates duty, and his death: so I haue dedi∣cated the same to your Worshippes, whose ver∣tues shine like the starres. If I should speake all things answerable to your vertues, I might peraduenture seeme to some to flatter: If I should conceale some things I might bee thought of others enuious, as Hierome spea∣keth in the like case. Wherefore to leaue this matter of cōmendatiō, I humbly desire yee both to accept this my labour, as an argument of my duty and harty affection which I beare to each of you: the great fauours which I haue receaued at your hands, I confesse deserue a greater worke: But you are wise to know that in great things there are not alwaies good things, but in good things there are alwaies great things. Trusting then to the goodnes of the subiect matter, which is Gods word, I pre∣sent this labour to your Worshippes. The Lord of his infinite goodnesse graunt that the good course which yee haue begun, yee may keepe fast vnto the end. And in so doing, as he hath highly aduanced you in this world, so will he aduance you in the world to come.

