



THe paines of Papists (Right Honourable) in propagating the Romish religion, should mooue sincere Protestants to be painefull in defen∣ding the truth of the eternall God, who in hi rich mercie amongst other innumerable bene∣fits bestowed vpon this land, hath giuen vs the benefit of his holy word, not in a strange tongue as it was in the daies of Poperie, but in our mother tongue, that it may be a lanterne to our feete, and a light vnto our paths. This light the Papists haue laboured to extinguish by trea∣sons, by writings, and all meanes that they could vse, but (blessed be God) frustra illis est, they are deceiued. Now least it should seeme strange to any that heretikes should be so laborious in auouching heresie, may it please him to consider that Idolaters haue bin studious in main∣taining their idolatrie. Ieroboam made two calues,1 King. 12. the one of them he placed at Bethel, and so made it Bethauen, the other at Dan, and so made it a denne of Idolaters. The Israelites offered their children to Moloc: behold the rage of idolatrie! If men could be content that their children should be sacrificed vnto idols, shall we thinke it strange that some should write bookes to subuert the truth of religion? Where∣fore to leaue this point and to returne to that which I said in the begin∣ning, that the labours of Papits should be a spurre to Protestants to defend the Gospel now publikely authorized in England. Why should not we be as carefull for Gods glorie as they are for the glorie of their purple whore? But I feare some are like the beete, which is good both in winter and sommer: others haue bought farmes, or it may be haue married wiues, that is, they are so addicted to the world, and to their pleasures that they haue no leisure to write: I would these men would consider of Christ his commandement, Negotiamini donec venero, vse trafficke vntill I come. But to leaue these loyterers in the Lords vineyard vpon the forenamed consideration, I haue endeauoured my selfe to answer a booke, called a Quartron of Reasons for the Catho∣like
 religion: which booke as I dedicate to your Honour, so I humbly de∣sire you to accept the same as a token of my dutifull minde towardes you. The author of this pestilent pamphlet commendeth the Romish religion for peace,d privil. & . yet Theodoricus de Niem saith, that vnum patet, one thing is manifest, after the suppression of the Imperiall power nothing but factions did spring vp in the Catholike Church, especially in Italie. And as he is not ashamed to lie in this point so doth he also in saying that in England all were Papists, without exception, from the first christening thereof vntill this age of king Henrie the eight: yet Ministers were married many hundred yeares in England, as M. Camden sheweth in his Britannia in many places. In the 129. page of the third edition he prooueth that ante annum 1102. sacerdotibus vxores in Anglia non fuerunt interdictae, Ministers were not restrained from marri∣age before the yeare of our Lord a 1102. And as Ministers were mar∣ried, so Transubstantiation was not acknowledged likewise a long time, as may be seene by Aelfricus his epistle against the bodily presence. Moreouer, the author as he laboureth to disgrace all Protestants in generall, so especially he inueyeth against Luther, wherefore to stoppe the mouthes of Papists, I will set downe the testimonie of Langius a Papist concerning Luther. First he saith, that he was vir venerandus & profundissimus Theologus, a reuerend man and most profound Diuine. Afterward he writeth thus, Martinus ille theologorum nostrae tempestatis omnium facile princeps doctrinam suam E∣vangelicis testimoniis & divi Apostoli Pauli necnon priscorum orthodoxorum patrum originalibus dictis roborans & compro∣bans perstitit invictus. The same Martin the most wise ringleader of the diuines of our age, confirming and strengthening his doctrine with testimonies, out of the Gospel and out of S. Paul the Apostle, and also with the originall sayings of the ancient orthodoxall fathers, perfisted invincible. This testimonie may suffice to cleare Luther from the friuo∣lous quarrels that this slanderer hath written against him. Bellarmine maketh the confession of the aduerse part to be a note of the Church. Hence then are we prooued the Church by this confession of Langius. The same author exceedingly commendeth Hierome of Prage, saying that he was orator eloquentissimus atque acerrimus dialecticus adeo quod nullus doctissimorum virorum in Concilio disputan∣do eum superare poterat. He was the most eloquent Orator, and fine Logician that the learnedest man in the Councell could not ouer∣come him in disputation. Mutius his testimonie of the same man is wor∣thie
 to be heard, Erat, saith he, Hieronymus vir eloquentissimus & insignis cum in omni philosophiae genere tum praecipue in sa∣cris literis. Hierome was a most eloquent and famous man in all philoso∣phie, but especially in the holy Scriptures. Now what cause this proud Papist hath to vaunt of their owne learning, and to disgrace the Prote∣stants, let euery man iudge; seeing Protestants by the Papists owne confession haue beene such famous men. Lastly, not to be long, the au∣thor of this booke extolleth the holinesse of their religion: touching which point let that anciēt writer Aronobius speak, who in his seuenth booke hath this sentence, Crescit multitudo peccantium cum redi∣mendi peccati spes datur & facile itur ad culpas vbi est vaenalis ignoscentium gratia. Sinners doe much encrease when there is hope giuen to redeeme their sinnes, and men easily commit faults where par∣dons are sold. Then is the Romish religion dissolute which selleth par∣dons. Not to proceede any further, the Lord multiplie his graces vpon you and your vertuous Ladie, to your soules good and the benefit of his Church.

