



I Remember (Right Honourable, the whining complaint of the Poet con∣cerning vertue: Credo pudicitiam Saturno: rege moratam delapsum in coelis: 'Tis the iron age, and ver∣tue must haue Estredge like concocti∣on, or else die in an Hospitall for want of a Patron. Tis well she is stellified in heauen: for earth is her locall place of torment: I haue been a sad spectator of her iniuries, and deplore her miserable exile; yet her ecclipse by the interposition of vice is not a totall defect of her heauenly light, but partiall and limited, yet how prodigious it is, the tragicall changes of this age can truly prophesie. Some Sur∣geon might haue begd a dead body from the fanges of exe∣cution, whose Anotomy might haue taught the age the con∣stitution of vice, impostumated with murder and hot raind affections. My prayer is more charitable, then Cynicall to wish any plants of such an vnfortunate tree, I haue seene vice adored with her superstitious Imagerie, and I wish all true Protestants to vertue rather to die Martyrs, then

reuolt from her profession, in whose faith your honour is held a most religious professor, the sects of vice are more then in Amsterdam, to whose errors I oppose my booke, as an eager disputant. The motions of this planitarie satire are regular and presented in a maske of a seuenfold vni∣formity. Appeare Philosopher in thy vndaunted humor of grauity, & spit defiance in the face of scurrile satirrisme: lend heauenly whipcord, and borrow correction from the Sunne: fetch blood from the whole body of Nature, and the sixe planets lay on load on the stigmatick shoulders of vice. This book was conceiued in dog-daies, and must bite, the signe is in Scorpio, and the planets in their most criti∣call mansion. Be as the world thinkes you, vertuous, and reade this booke with a more then laurell resolution. The thunder hath no power ouer a consecrated and vertuous mind, it smites onely strong timbred villanies. Kings haue accepted rootes from a Philosopher: the gift is small: yet it calls you Lord, and me master. A satire is musicke worthie of Pithagor as his opinion, especially, when the pla∣nets dance a heauenly lauolto, they are nimble spirited and actiue, and onely hope for the passiue part of your noble patronage.

