


II is not vnknown (Right honourable and my sin∣gular good Lord) that man is not borne for himselfe, but for the be∣nefit of others. To this principle agreeth the A∣postles precept,Rom. 12. 1. Pet. 4.10. that euery man according to his gift, should indeauour himselfe to do good. And to this precept, the practise of nature is answerable:in Similitud. Vt luna (saith Erasmus) quod lu∣minis accepit à sole mundo refundit: ita do∣num à deo acceptum in commodum aliorum
 est conferendum. As the moone giueth that light to the world which it receiueth from the sunne: so euery gift receiued from God ought to be bestowed to the profit of others. All which excellent sayings, are spoken of e∣uery good, and therefore by consequent of knowledge, of which Seneca writeth thus: Nulla me res delectabit licet eximia sit, quā mihi vnus sciturus sum. I delight not in any thing, which I my selfe know and none other. And againe: Nullius boni sine socio iucunda possessio est. It is no pleasure to possesse any good without a companion. The considera∣tion of these and like speaches, haue caused me to set pen to paper, against the mysticall and secret impietie of Popish religion, al∣though vnfit for so great a worke in many respects; as namely in regard of my health. For I may truly say with Seneca, Nulla mi∣hi secura lux affulsit,Jn Thebaid. I haue had no good day. This beeing a most certen truth, how vna∣ble I am to vndergoe this busines, the simili∣tude vsed by Tully may declare. Quemadmo∣dum scalarum gradus si alios tollas, alios in∣s nonnullos malè haerentes relinquas, ru∣inae
 periculum struas, non ascensum pares, sic tot malis tùm victum, tùm fractum studi∣um scribendi quid dignum auribus, aut pro∣babile potest afferre. If thou take some rounds of the ladder away, and cut other, and leaue the rest loose, thou endangerest a downefall, and causest not an ascension: so the endea∣uour of writing beeing vanquished with so many miseries, what thing cā it bring forth worthie, and worth hearing and reading. This miserie hath another attendant, name∣ly pouertie and want, which (as one saith) is onus miserum, & grave, a woful and a grie∣uous burthen. The renowmed Philosopher could say that felicity needed outward good things. For, . It is impossible,Ethic. 1.8. or very hard for him that wanteth instruments, to doe any famous worke. But not too much of this matter, least I seeme to be impatient, be∣ing my selfe a preacher of patience. Onely this, I feare that the cause, why many are peruerted by Papists, and diuerted to pope∣rie, is the hope of preferment, which is not wanting in that religion. Sublatis studio∣rum
 pretijs ipsa studia pereunt, (saith Cor∣nelius Tacitus) Take away the rewardes of learning,Annal. l. 11. and learning it selfe decaieth. But I leaue this complaint beeing a miserie inci∣dent to the despised estate of Gods Church in the sight of the world, howsoeuer most glorious in the sight of God. Thus (Right Honourable) you see the cause that moo∣ued me to set forth this treatise. Now in that I dedicate it vnto you, I haue many reasons. For (to omit priuate respects, as namly your honourable and singular fauour towardes me, and all my friendes) such is your desire to further Christs kingdome, such is your care of religion, your loue to learning, that for these causes you are most worthie of this dutie. And in these singular and admi∣rable graces of Gods spirit may you more reioyce then in any worldly thing. Aristotle (as Plutarch writeth) writte to Antipater concerning Alexander, that he should not be proud because of his kingdome, because he that knewe God, hath as much cause as he: his meaning is this, that the knowledge of God is better then worldly honour.

The Lord blesse you and your wise, ver∣tuous, and honourable Ladie with all hea∣uenly and worldly honour.

