


BEnefits boū∣tifully receyued, make thankefull heartes al∣vvays to thinke on re∣quitall, vvhervvith ha∣uing bin so plentifully indued at your handes (right vvoorshipfull) as none more, farre beyonde deserte, hovvbeit accordyng to youre peculiar custome of curtesie to all men, although to me (I confesse) in more ample vvyse extended: I haue beaten my braynes in contriuing some deuise, vvher∣in I myght yelde you thankes, and after my simple sorte, make you parte of a re∣compense. VVhich purpose of myne, by

no other meanes beeing able to accom∣plishe: neuerthelesse I iudged it not con∣uenient in any poynt to quayle, vvherin I might declare my good vvil, but am novv so hardy as to present your vvorship vvith Dionysius, a vvorthie gentleman of Alex∣andria, vvhose noble vvorke of the Situa∣tion of the habitable VVorlde, I haue put of late into English: requiring most hum∣bly youre friendly acceptation and patro∣nage of the same. VVhereof I do partly already assure my selfe, recompting youre vvorships accustomable fauour, vvhereby you are moste curteously prouoked, not only to the aduauncing of learning, and suche as seeme to haue any small tast ther∣in, but also of other vertues and commen∣dable qualities, hauyng professed youre selfe a refuge and rampier vnto tvvo sorts of people, I meane the godly and poore, as your dayly and late practises do testifie. And partely for that I haue marked, for vvhat great benefits, hovve small or none the recompences are vvhich you haue re∣ceyued. VVherfore being my selfe a lyke disabled detter, I craue but acquittaunce for semblable payment, to vvit, your cur∣tesie

in vvell accepting that, vvhiche an heart fraught vvith good vvil, of dutie of∣fereth: vvhich is altogither the thing that I looke for in this behalfe. Doubting not but you shall receyue singular delight in the reading hereof, vvhen vacant leysure from vveightier affaires shal licence you, and I therby shall be the more embolde∣ned to enterprise the like attempt, if God permitte me grace and lyfe. Leauing thus any farther to trouble you, vvith my duti∣ful cōmendations, and daily interces∣sion to the Almyghtie, for the happie estate of your vvor∣ship, and the good gen∣tlevvoman mistresse Mary Louelace your louing vvyfe.
At London the .xv. day of May. ANNO. M. D. LXXII.

