



WEre it not well knowne to me, and more clear∣ly to some singularly literate men, endowed with sublime wits (with whom great is your name) whose ingenuity, do∣ctrine,

iudgement, and iustice I have not without cause) in high esteeme. Were it not that the voices of all those Schollers who have occasio∣narily conversed with you, testifie your great gifts by nature, your en∣richments by industry, methodical∣ly commenced in the Latine, Greek, and the mysticall Languages (rare instruments of universall know∣ledge) prosecuted in the liberall Sci∣ences, perfected in the high and di∣vine. I say your propitious nature, your named addictions, with atten∣tions not ordinarily found in any so intensive, yea, and so immersed, by which the accomplishment of them, as also almost of all speculative and

practique hath beene by you rarely acquired. Were you not knowne to be a great Animater to Learning, and hence affect and cherish all the wayes to the acquisition of it in fa∣vour of them, who yet are to bee bred; were there not yet over and above manifestations of your cour∣teous respects to our family, my no∣table encouragement among these so many foresaid.
I should not have beene so bold to have presented this, alas, poore Introductory offering, so farre be∣low you, so richly in this and other excellent parts endowed.
And lest yet I prove too too hardy in my presumptuous importunities

upon the precedent named. I here crave humbly that I may under your wings coverture deliver these not formerly received in our king∣dome, to this our countries view; yet such, as I am no wayes diffident, but will square to true, authentique, and genuine Latine construction, with evident perspicuitie, and easie manuduction, therfore profitable & full of encouragement to youth. All which will clearly appeare to your worthy selfe, as singular helpes, I say, to those who are not arrived to the habite of Latine construction.
Let but the luster of your incom∣parably endowed selfe appeare fa∣vourable to my labours, and many

sollicitudes in this little compiled piece, then will Momists snarles ea∣sily be checkt, nipt, and intelligent men (such as are not preiudicated) to whose iudgements I humbly sub∣mit my selfe, will not disdaine the reading hereof, were it that they were solely allured by your accepta∣tion. For further abilities cannot they acquire by this low subiect. Language already in them being spunged up from authentique Au∣thors true fountaines.
And though small be my present, yet may not I give the attribute of the entire peece to my selfe. Should I be bold herein, it must necessarily be that I were a betrayer of the

Truth. Though I may well say that I have not beene idle. The most part of the Regimen, as you reade it in Latine, was compiled by Ne∣brixa (a rare professour of Sala∣manca) His Spanish Comment, vindicatory of his texts truth, I turned into English. Yet have I strengthened the one and the other diversly, and in many places.
Whatsoever concerneth Con∣cordance is mine, there being not found in the said Nebrixa, such as might ought profit, or exceeding little.
The totall cutting off the figures of Construction hath beene my at∣tention; which I haue wrought to

release the learner from innecessary perplexities: which both the truth and profit will plainly appeare to the intelligent, and will facilitate the ignorants taske.
The further reasons of all will appeare in the Preface which is drawne, at my request, by a friend, well versed in the learned Langua∣ges, importuned by me to confront the Latine with them. Vpon assu∣rance was my request that there would bee found consonance and harmony in this Latine Language and them. I am satisfied in my friends integrity therein, that so they are found.
Be you (worthy Sir) iudge who

are expert in them. And were it that the Latine Syntaxe should ap∣peare divers from the construction of those Languages; yet notwith∣standing, so delivered as it is, The Latine will answer in its true foun∣taine compleatly for it selfe.
Thus wishing happinesse, and all graces to your worthy selfe, Noble Sir, I humbly take my leave.

