


THE Title and frontispice of this booke, shewes for whom it is provided: such as haue need of milke and not of strong meate,Heb. 5. and are vn∣skilfull in the word of righteousnesse. And to these I doe present and offer it as the fittest dish for their vse; wherein the milke of the Catechisme is as it were chewed, and softned in the mouth, that their vnderstand∣ings may the more easily receiue, and digest it into nourishment, and strength. It was my error I con∣fesse,
 to make an open and publique offer of this meat vnto you, not considering how some had ra∣ther ever want then seeme at any time to be in need, and to perish rather then acknowledge their infirmity: But I am at length reform'd and be∣come the man you would perchance haue me to bee, an house-Chaplaine, or priuate Minister to Cate∣chise, instruct, and teach you, and your Children, and your seruants at home in the rudiments and beginnings of your Christian profession. Whosoeuer you be take heed how you sleight, and contemne the learning of these small & Childish things; for they are the first principles of the Oracles of God as the Apostle calls them,Heb. 5. and the foundation whereon the spirituall building of Grace and ever∣lasting blessednes standeth; Neither doe yee, that are yet vnlearned and ignorant, content your selues with a bare memorie, and Mother-beleefe of words, without some knowledge and vnderstan∣ding of what you speake, and professe and to beleiue, or doe. For of good & evill the more knowen the easier the one is to be avoided, and the other done: And in matters of faith perswasion takes most hold, and application is made with most comfort and as∣surance where vnderstanding leads the way. The like is to be obserued in Prayer, and other Religi∣ous
 workes, vnderstanding and knowledge must goe along with them.1. Cor 14.15 For I will pray with the spirit saith (the Apostle) and I will pray with vnderstanding also. And I will singe with the spirit and I will singe with the vnder∣standing also. Jn your seuerall trades and cal∣lings it is easie to obserue that you haue them not by roate only; but are therein skilfull and vnder∣standing, and able to giue an accompt and a reason of your worke: And my desire and purpose is to make you as learned in the word of Righteousnes, skilfull to discerne both good & evill,Heb. 5. 1. Pet. 3. & able to giue an answer to every man that asketh you a reason of the hope that is in you. And for this cause I haue taken this forme with which the Printer hath pleas'd to Cloth me, and wherein I may without any trouble continuallie be present among you, and vpon all occasions readie to doe you seruice in the worke of the Ministrie. No time wilbe vnseasonable for me to be your Teacher as long as you shall finde any need, or will in your selues to be instructed. Fix and fasten me to some convenient place in your Houses (otherwise I shall be in some danger to be swept out of dores) and let me be vnto you for a Fringe that you may looke vpon it, and remember all the Com∣mandements
 of the Lord and do them; And that you seeke not after your owne heart & your owne eyes after which you vse to goe a whoring.Numb. 15. That you may remember and doe all the Commandements and be holy vnto your God. J shalbe well pleased to stand a side while your dayly, and necessarie imployments are in your hands (for there is no good kindred & agreement betwixt vs) but at your times of rest and leysure, or in the Euenings, or while you are absent from the Church, I could wish my selfe your Compainon to passe a way the time with all. Here together with your Children, and the rest of your Familie yee may continually exercise your selues, by conferring, admonishing examining & edifying one another & searching the Scriptures whether the things be so as you finde them reported to be. By this meanes you may cause the word of Christ to dwell in you richly,Colos. 3. your Faith may be encreased, and confirmed, your vnderstanding and knowledge in the things of God bettered, and en∣larged, your affections and will refined, and recti∣fied, & at length come vnto a perfect man, vn∣to the measure of the stature of the fullnes of Christ: That henceforth yee be no more Children readie to be tossed to and fro and
 caried about with every winde of doctrine by the sleight of men,Ephes. 4. & cunning craftines whereby they lie in waite to deceiue: But being groūded & setled in your owne professed Re∣ligion, yee may with boldnes make resistance a∣gainst the vnderminings of our Romish adversaries who closlie steale into our houses, and surprise weake and vnsetled mindes, and wrest them vnto a deniall and hate of the Church and professi∣on wherevnto they were Baptised before they haue learn't either what our Church doth teach them to beleiue and know, or they themselues ought to pro∣fesse, and practise for the salvation of their soules. Therefore my people are gone into Capti∣vitie saith the Lord,Isai. 5. because they haue noe knowledge. Without this a man is like a Citie without a wall or a trench; hauing not where with all to gainesay & resist an assault made, presently thinkes on a compositiō, & for some faire promises wilbe content to exchange, and deliuer himselfe for ever a slave vnto the Conquerour.Luk. 11. But God be thanked hetherto our houses, & goodes are in peace as if we were all strong men armed the Enimie hath not broke in vpon vs spoiled our houses, or carried any of vs away Captiues. And in this estate, and Libertie of trueth noe doubt we
 shall continew firms and setled, if so be that wee be not at any time wanting vnto our selues, and neglect the meanes of strength and knowledge whereby we may be enabled to resist in the day of temptation. For whosoever hath, to him shalbe giuen & he shall haue in more abun∣dance.Luk. 8. But whosoever hath not, from him shalbe taken even that he seemeth to haue saith our Sauiour Christ. I beseech you there∣fore beloued Parishioners and exhort you by the Lord Iesus Christ that yee labour to put of all Childishnes in vnderstanding, and be strong in the word of God, and in the knowledge of his truth and of your Christian dutie, goe on from strength to strength, from knowledge to knowledge, from grace to grace, and giue not over till you haue clothed your selues with the whole Armour of God. Soe shall you approue your selues worthie of the vocation where with you are called in Iesus Christ, and he will accept of your Godly endeauors, and zeale, and will add there-vnto of his spirit in more abundance, and increase you with increase of God, vntill he shall haue brought you to be perfect and compleat in himselfe, who filleth all things, to whome be honour and praise & thankesgiuing now and for ever. The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ be with you all. Amen.
