




ALthough in this my reply vvhich I haue made for the iust defence of M. Doctour, and of the truth deliuered by him, I may offend some; for that veritas odiū parit, and be it neuer so discreetlie deliuered, is dispeasing to some, yet my desire is pea∣ce; and as the end of vvarre ought to be peace, so my intentiō in this my disputatiō vvas to shevv∣euerie order the truth, vvhich all men vvhen they see doe imbrace; and so to induce them to peace.
And therfore novv I addresse my speache vnto you the Reuerend and venerable Priests of
our afflicted Church, desiring you, that seing I haue sette before your eyes (vvhich othervvise you knevve) the perfection of the states, both of Bis∣hops, Pastours, and Regulars: you vvould honour one another,Rom. 12. yea in honour prenent one ano∣ther, and lay a side all contentions, that (as the Apostle vvisheth) you may be of one mea∣ning, hauing the same charitie,Philip. 2. of one mynde agreeuig in one: nothing by contētiō neither by vaine glorie, but in humilitie, eahe counting other better then them sel∣ues, euerie one not considering the thinges that are their ovvne, but those that are other mens.
And trulie if one order had not too greate an ouervveening of its ovvne perfections, but rather vvould cast an eye vpon the perfectiōs of another, vvhich vvilbe fovvnd to excelle in one thing or other: this consideration vvould cause humilitie, and humilitie charitie, and charitie peace and amitie. So our blessed sauiour Christe Iesus God and man, though euen as man he vvas greater in dignitie and sanctitie then all the men that euer vvere, though neuer so holy (of vvhich also he vvas not ignorant) yet he as man considering not so much the perfection he had by vnion vvith the diuinitie, as vvhat he vvas according to his huma∣ne nature takē barelie and nakedlie in it selfe; and comparing him selfe vvith the grace and sancti∣tie he savve in others, humiliated him selfe in con∣ceite vnder others, vvho in state and dignitie
vvas aboue all others. So the Blessed virgine Mo∣ther, and Mother of God: so all the Sainctes of God, considering not vvhat they vvere by grace (though they knevv it full vvell) but vvhat of them selues they vvere, and casting an eye of that vvhich others vvere by the diuine grace; cast them selues in conceite at the feete of all men, euen those that vvere farre inferiour vnto them. If all orders vvould practise this, none vvould contend vvith another fer perfection or state of perfection.
Let the Clergieman (sayth Thomas Walden∣sis) looke into the state of the religions,Th. VVald. de Clericis & Regula∣ribus Tit. 9. cap. 2. and hee shall find something vvherin he is inferiour to the Religions: and let the Religious man behold the order of the Clergieman and he shall fynd vvher∣in the Clergieman excelleth him. If this they doe,Philip. 2. eahe vvill count other better then them selues, because euerie one (as S. Paules coun∣selleth them) considereth not the thinges and perfections, that are his ovvne, but those that are other mens.
If this they doe, noe order vvill preferre it selfe before another, but rather thinck more lovvlie of it selfe then of another and so contention vvilbe auoided: If this they doe, none vvill bragge of their ovvne state and perfection, but all vvill stu∣die and endeuour to get perfection: knovving that it is not the state or office, but the holy life and merit vvhich God especiallie respecteth; and that if one liue not according to his state, the higher his state is, the greater is his damnation; for that
from the highest place is the lovvest fall. The state of S. Paule and S. Peter is high, but as S. Hie∣rome sayth:Hieron Ep. ad Heliod. Non est facile stare loco Pauli, te∣nere gradum Petri: It is not an easie thing to stand in the high place of Paule, or to hold and to stand stedfast in the high de∣gree of Peter.
S. Augustine looking into both states, so com∣mendeth in both the good, that he discommēdeth in both the badde, that so if they think to vvell of them selues for the good,Ep. 147. 2d Valer. they may humble them selues in consideration of the bad: for speaking of the Bishop and the Clergie he vseth these vvords to Ʋalerius: Ante omnia peto vt cogitet re∣ligiosa prudentia tua, &c. before all I desi∣re that thy religions prudence vvould think that there is no thing in this life more easie, gratefull and acceptable to men, es∣peciallie in this tyme, then the office of à Bis∣hop, Priest, or Deacon, if carelesselie it be performed, but nothing before God more miserable and damnable: likevvise that no∣thing in this life, especiallie at this tyme, is more difficile, more laborious, more dan∣gerous, then the office of a Bishop, Priest or Deacon, but before God nothing more hap∣pie and blessed, if so they vvarre as our Em∣perour commaundeth. Which S. Augustine considering vvept bitterlie, vvhen he vvas con∣secrated Bishop, as he him selfe in the same epistle confesseth. And in another epistle speaking of
Religions, he maketh this protestation: Simpli∣citer autem fateor charitati vestrae coram Domino Deo nostro, &c. I confesse simplie to your charitie befere our Lord God, vvho is vvitnes vpon my soule, from such tyme as I began to serue God; as I haue hardelie experienced or found better then such as haue profited in religion; so I haue not found vvorse then such as in monasteries haue fallen.Epist. 1 37. But as gold is not to be refused for its drosse, nor vvine for the lees, nor the good corne for the Chaffe; so neither are stares and orders of the Church to be lesse conceited, because some mens li∣ues are not sutable to their order and profession.
All orders are holy, yet none so holye but that the superiour order vvanteth some thing of the inferiour. The state of the Regular is inferiour to the state of the Bishop and Pastour in dignitie, and Hierarchiall functions, but it is lesse subiect to danger, and so exceedeth in securitie. The state of the Bishop and Pastour hath annexed vnto it greate honour, but this honos is onus, this ho∣nour is a greater charge and burdē, then is the Re∣gulars state, because it is harder to saue ones selfe and others, vvhich is the Pastours office, then to saue ones selfe only, vvhich is the care of the Religions. Let then the Pastours behold in the Regular merit and mortificatiō: let the Regular admire in the Bishop and Pastour great dignitie, and no lesse charitie in engaging his ovvne life yea soule for others: and the one vvill not despise the
other, but they vvill both loue and honour one an∣other.
S.Greg hom. 10. super Ezech. c. 3. Gregorie expounding that place, of Ezechiel: Vocem alarum animalium percutientium alteram ad alteram: the voice of the vvings of liuing creatures stricking one against an∣other, hath these vvordes: Omnes Sancti se inuicem suis virtutibus tangunt, & sese ad profectum excitant, ex consideratione virtu∣tis alienae. Non vnidantur omnia, &c. The Sanctes touche one another by their ver∣tues, and stirre vp them selues to profit by the consideration of anothers vertues. To one all are not giuen, least eleuated by pride he take a fall, but to this man is giuen vvhat to thee is not giuē, and to thee is giuē vvhich to him is denyed. That vvhilest this man considerenth the good that thou hast, and he hath not, he may in his cogitation pre∣ferre thee before him self: and againe vvhilest thou seest that he hath vvhat thou hast not, thou mayst in cogitation ranke thy selfe after him, that vvhat is vvritten moy be fulfilled: Superiores sibi inuicem arbitrantes: Eche counting others better then them selues. So the same father a litle after sayth,Philip. 2. hat S. Paule euen after his conuer∣sion vvhē in sanctitie and perfection he vvas per∣aduenture inferiour to none, yet considering vvhat the rest of the Apostles by Christe his grace then vvere, and vvhat he by his sinne and hatred of
Christians had been, counted him selfe Apostolo∣rum minimum, the least of all the Apostles,1. Cor. . and S. Peter not regarding his ovvne perfection admireth S. Paules vvisdome and learning shevved in his Epistles.2. Petr. 3. This hath beene the pra∣ctise of Christe and his Mother, as I sayd before in vvhich all the Sanctes of God haue imitated them.
And if vve practise the same mutuall conside∣ratiō and comparison of our defectes vvith others perfections, this mutuall consideration vvould cause mutuall loue, and mutuall loue vvould cause mutuall prayse, and mutuall prayse vvould cause mutuall humilitie (for that the more vve prayse another, the lesse vve esteened our selues) and mu∣tuall humilitie vvould take avvye all contention, (for that into humble mens consideration it neuer entreth, vvhich is or should be greater,) and contention taken avvay, a peace vvould fellovv.Luc. 9.
And indeed, novv that the Regulars in Eng∣land are all allmost Priests, and haue the same authoritie that Priests haue; the secular Priest hath inste cause to loue the Regular, and in him, his ovvne state and order: and the Regular Priest hath good reason to respect the secular Priest, Priesthood being the richest pearle of his crovvne and the fayrest flovver of his garland; and not to think that he is dispraysed vvhen the Priest is com∣mended.
The secular Priests vvho labour in the shippe of Peter vvilbe contēt to beckē to their fellovve
fishermen that are in another shippe, that is in another state,Luc 5. to come and helpe thē. And the Regulars vvill vvith all charitie and respect also yeeld their helping arde. The secular Priests ha∣uing louinglie inuited them, and the cheefe Pa∣stour hauing sent them to that end. And seing the haruest is great,Gers. de statu Cu∣ratorum confid. 15. and the vvorke men fevve, the secular Priests vvill (as Gerson sayth they must) benignelie and louinglie receiue them, so that (sayth Gerson) they doe not de tract, from the Pastours, or seeke to bring them in contempt vvith their parishioners.
If both secular and Regular Priests vvould but looke backe to former freindlie offices vvhich haue passed betvvixt them, it vvould be sufficient to make them renevv former freindship. The tyme hath been vvhen the Clergie of England inui∣ted the Iesuites to be partakers vvith thē of their merit and labours in the mission. Our most learned and zelous Cardinal of most pious memo∣rie, the first founder of the English Seminarie, to vvit, of Dovvay, and of the mission of Priests in to England in this tyme of Schisme, vvriteth thus in his Apologie for the Priests chap. 6. Cum itaque nos ante aduerteremus, & paucis ab hinc mensibus cerneremus Anglorum non∣nullos a superioribus Societatis Iesu ad In∣dos amandatos, &c. vvhen therfore vve perceiued, and fevv monethes since did see, that some English men by the Superiours of the Societie of Iesus, vvere sent to the
Indians; vve demanded of them (the Supe∣riours) that they vvho vvere of this nation, should rather be reserued for the profit of their countrie, then of externe nations: to vvhich petition after mature deliberation had of that matter, vvith great affection of charitie, they yeelded. The like D. Worthing∣ton President also of Dovvay College, relateth in his Catalogue of our late English Martyrs. Do∣ctour Pitse also in his booke of the famous vvriters of England. In Edmundo Campia∣no, Conformablie to Cardinal Allen sayth: Vi∣dentes autem sacerdotes nostri, multam esse messem, &c. Our Priests seing that the Har∣nest vvas greate and Worke men fevv, did earnestlie request the Fathers of the Societie of Iesus, that they vvould adioine them sel∣ues as cooperatours, and vvould send if not earlie in the morning, at least at the third sixt or ninth hower of the day some of theirs to labour in the vineyeard of our lord. And vvith vvhat charitie and respect the Priests receiued the first Jesuites, extolled their order, conducted them from place to place for their more safetie, and to bring them acquain∣ted vvhere they vvere not knovvn, some yet liuing can tell; and that trulie Religious and learned Ie∣suite Father Campion acknovvledgeth no lesse in an Epistle to his Generall, saing: Presbyteri nostrates, ipsi doctrina & sanctimonia pre∣stantes,
tantam opinionem nostri ordinis excitarunt, vt venerationem quam nobis exhibent Catholici, non nisi timdè comme∣morandam existimē. Our Priests, they them selues excelling in learning and sanctitie, ha∣ue raysed such an opinion of our order, that I think the veneration which the Catholi∣ques giue vs, is not to be spoken of but fearefullie. And vvill the Jesuites novv de tract from the good name of them, vvho haue so much extolled their order and giuen t the first na∣me and credit it had in England? noe: it can not be imagined. And vvill the Jesuites seeke novv to supplante those, vvho first planted them in Eng∣land? noe they vvill not; and if heretofore any vvould, hereaster they vvill not. Nor vvill the se∣cular Priests seeke novv to exclude Iesuites from the mission, vvhom they haue louinglie inui∣ted, knovving that:
Turpius eijcitur quam non admittitur hos∣pes:
Tis better to deny a guest no doubt,
Admittance; then admitted, turne him out.
Rather both orders reflecting vppon these for∣mer friendlie offices vvill endeauour to renevv the former friendship.
The tyme also vvas vvhen the secular Priests shevved courtesies to the Benedictins, and vvere so farre from hindering their vnion or mission in∣to
England, that they helped to set forvvard both: and had the Clergie opposed their mission (as some others did) and not rather furthered thē in their, sute; vvee should not haue had perchaunce, at this Day a Benedictine in England. This the Benedi∣ctins haue heretofore acknovvledged, and must therfore haue respecte to the Clergie. And if they reflect vpon the many good offices the Clergie hath done them, and if the Clergie like vvise looke backe to the forner loue and old freindship vvhich bath been betvvixt them, it vvill I hope renevv old friendship and take a vvaye all iarres and di∣uisions.
The tyme also vvas vvhen the Franciscans ob∣teyned their mission of Clement the eight, at the instance of Cardinall Allen, vvhich notvvith∣stāding the Pope had before refused at the instan∣ce of Cardinall Caietan; as some yet aliue doe affirme, vvho liued in Rome at that tyme. And the Reuerend Father, F. Francis Nugent inten∣ding a mission of English Capucins, vvrote to M. Birchet then Archpriest about the yeare 1611. to haue his consent and assistance; to vvhich his request the Archpriest vvillinglie condescen∣ded. And I haue heard M. Doctour Kellison affirme, that he also vvrote to Rome to procure their mission.
J knovve also that vvhen our English Recolle∣ctes had obteyned letters of the Nuncio in Bru∣xelles to the Magistrats of Dovvay to receiue
them into their Tovvne; the Nuncio sent his let∣ters inclosed in one to Doctour Kellison, in vvhich letters he vvrote to the sayd Doctour, that if he thought their admissiō into the Tovvne might prone preiudiciall to his College, he should not giue them the letters, but keepe them backe: and yet Doctour Kellison gaue the letters to the Franciscan that brought them, and did fur∣ther their admission vvhat he could. And this they also vvill acknovvledge, and this acknovvle∣gement vvill conserue a respect in them to the Clergie and a loue of the Clergie to them.
And all these orders haue had their source and first beginning from the Clergie and College of Dovvay: most of their principall men hauing had a great part, at least of their education in that College. And so the Clergie and College vvill beare a fatherlie loue to their children and ofspring, and the Regulars vvill neuer be vvan∣ting in a respect and filiall loue to their louing Pa∣rent, and vvill neuer be so vnnaturall children as to oppose their mother that did breed and beare them: nor so euill byrds, as to seeke to stayne by euill aspersions the nest vvherin they vvere hatch∣ed.
Jf the Priests secular and regular be not deui∣det, their sheepe vvilbe vnited, and none vvill saye:1. Cor. 1. I ame Paules, and I Apollos, I Cephas, but all vvilbe Christs, and seing that Christe is not de∣uided, all vvilbe vnited, and the multitude of
beleeuers vvill haue one harte and soule.Act. . If the vvorkemen vvho endeuour to rebuild our Hierusalem and Temple, our litle Church of England, vvill vouchsafe to follovv the directions of their Architect, and vvith him and the other fellovv-vvorkemen ioyne in all peace and con∣cord their fruitefull labours: the building vvill goe on a pace, and vvill the sooner bee finished; because virtus vnita est fortior seipsâ dis∣persa: vertue and force vnited is of more force then the selfe same deuided. But if the vvorke men vvorke euerie one a parte, the vvorke vvill proceed but shovvlie; and if they oppose one onother, it vvill neuer be accomplis∣hed. Wherfore as vvee tender our ovvne spiri∣tuall good, vvhich vvith contention can not pro∣sper; Catholiques edefication, vvho by this dis∣cord can not be edifyed; heretiques and Schisma∣tikes reconciliation vnto vs, vvho hereby vvilbe rather alienated from vs; God his honour,2. Reg. 12. vvho∣se name as it vvas by Dauids sinne blasphemed by the enemies of our lord, so it vvilbe glo∣rified by your concord and vnitie, obscured by your diuision; As (J say) vvee respect al these things, of vvhich the least should be a sufficient motiue to reconcile vs: Let vs not seeke to trench vpon one another; but let vs rather as much as reason and conscience dictateth, yeeld to one an∣other: let vs not dispute vvho in state or digni∣tie are greater, but rather let euerie one in humi∣litie
and charitie seeke to excelle and to preuent one another: and to end as I began vvith S. Pau∣le;Philip 2. Let nothing be done by contention, neither by vaine glorie, but in humilitie, eche one counting other better then them selues, euerie one not considering the thinges that are their ovvne, but those that are other mennes.
