



IT is a thing better knowne, then well considered of, that in the mysticall body of Christ Iesus, euery member hath his seuerall office, whereon it must attend, the weakest as well as the strongest: and in the fa∣milie of the great Ruler of heauen and earth, each seruant hath his seuerall ta∣lent, which hee must imploy; the meanest, as well as the worthiest. To deny my selfe to bee a member of that body, a seruant of that family, I cannot without iniurie to God and myselfe: To professe to bee such a one in word, and in deed to denie it, were no lesse dis∣honourable
to my head, to my master; then discom∣fortable to my selfe. What then is to bee done? I bethought my selfe (for the auoiding of these rockes) what seruice I might performe, and in thinking, this which J haue now done, was offered to my considera∣tion: whereby as an vnderling in Gods houshold, for want of greater abilitie, I haue done my best en∣deauour to put foorth to the best aduantage others ta∣lents, which else (to the griefe of many) would haue beene hidden at least, if not vtterly lost. For the doing whereof, I had rather vndergoe the censures of such as are curious and carnally disposed, then depriue those of a benefit, that are religious and spiritually minded.
Let it not bee offensiue vnto your Ladiships that I haue presumed to offer these Sermons vnto publike view, sheltered as it were, vnder your names: for I had sundry motiues which euē enforced me thus to do.
First, in regard of the matter therein contained, much of it being deliuered in your hearing, and all of it suting vnto your affections, whose religious care for the preparing both of your selues, and of those that depend vpon you, for the worthy receiuing of the holie Sacrament, is well knowne vnto those that are acquainted with your conuersation in Christ Iesus.

Secondly, in regard of the Authors, whose affe∣ction I perswade my selfe is such towards you, in sundry both Ciuill and Religious respects, that they would most willinglie consecrate themselues and their labours to your further building vp in Christ Iesus.
Lastly, in regard of my selfe, who for many spe∣ciall fauours receiued, doe acknowledge my selfe vnrequiteablie indepted, and indissolublie bound vn∣to your Ladiships. And hauing nothing of mine owne of any worth whereby to testifie my vnfained thankefulnesse, I haue borrowed of others for this purpose, and withall annexed my hand-writing, that if my ingratitude should heereafter appeare, I might by a publike censure bee condemned and made ashamed for the same. Thus hoping for pardon of my boldnesse, and for fauourable acceptance of my good meaning in this behalfe, I humbly take my leaue, recommending your Ladiships to the Lord and to the word of his grace, who is able to perfect that good worke which hee hath begunne in you both.

