



My most dread Soueraigne and Liegelord,
AMong temporall bles∣sings giuen from God, and powred vpon men, this is not the least, for a man to behold the fruit of his owne body, surculum exradice, an impe, or graffe, the Oliue branches about his table, the hope of his posterity, the image of himselfe, and the staffe of his old age. The considera∣tion of the want whereof caused that good

Patriake out of the bitternesse of his soule to cry and make his complaint vnto his God in these words. Behold I goe childlesse, and the Steward of my house is Eleazer of Damascus; loe to me thou hast giuen no seed, wherefore a servant of mine house must bee mine heire. But to be furnished with mas∣culine issue, and to haue his first borne of that sex, to whom the Birthright is due, as to the sanctfiied of God, and the preseruer of his name and patrimony, is a double blessing vnto all men, much more vnto Kings, the Lords anointed, whereby his horne is established, his subiects in the middest of the day present, do behold the Sunne that shall arise vpon them the day suceeding, and haue their hearts setled to say vnto their Soueraine, wee and our seed will serue thee and thy seed for euer: This made the Propheticall King in the day of his departure to blesse God, and say, Bles∣sed be the Lord my God, who hath caused mine eyes to see this day that one of mine own loynes shall fit vpon my Throne. But contrariwise was Achah accursed, of whom God said

he would not leaue him one mingentem ad parietem, threatning (as it were) by that circumlocution to root out all issue male of Achab that might succeed him. And hence it is that all Potentates of the world haue highly respected and aduanced in the eyes of their subiects, their heire apparant, and giuen and conferred vpon him very high and eminent titles of honor: Of theSuetonius. Lampridus. Tacuus. Romans he was called Caesar and Princeps juventutis, as the principall of all their hopes in their posterity Of the French he is honored by the name of the Dolphin of that part of the Country, being his pa∣trimony. And in like manner in this our Country of England, the Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall, and Earle of Chester. He is, next his father, the chiefe in the Realme, and by course of the ciuill Law, is to sit at his right hand in all solemne as∣semblies of state and honor: So that not without reason did King Edward the third King of England, place Richard, his grand∣child, and next heire apparant, in his so∣lemne feast at Christmas, at his table next

vnto himselfe, aboue all his Vncles, being the sonnes of that King, and men mani∣foldly renowned for their prowes and vir∣tue. And yet hath not the Prince any Kingly prerogatiues allowed vnto him by the Lawes of this Realme, in the life of his progenitors, other then such as are due vnto other Noble men, that hee might ac∣knowledge himselfe to bee but a subiect, and whereof he is put in remembrance e∣uen by the Poesy that he vseth in the old English or Saxon tongues in this forme conceiued, Ie dien, I am a seruant. The due consideration whereof hath caused me by the encouragement of an honora∣ble, learned, and worthy Councellor my Lord of Buckhurst, your Maiesties Lord high Treasurer of England, and my very good Lord, and being eased therein by the carefull paines and industry of a Gen∣tleman Mr. Richard Connock his seruant, in some conuenient method after my rude and vnlearned manner, to set downe what the ancient and true estate of his excellen∣cy the Lord Prince hath beene, what it

now is, and how impaired, and to what estate and dignity by your Maiesties high and Princely wisdome, it may againe be re∣duced: Beseeching your highnesse of your accustomed clemency, to pardon this my bold attempt, and to accept my poore tra∣uels therein, with that gratious aspect as you do the manifold gratulations of other your Maiesties louing subiects.

