



MY GOOD LORD:
I Present you here with a di∣uine Iewell, which as it was found by a rich Merchant in his field, so was it polished by the cunning skill of his owne most curi∣ous hand. Jf you behold the quantitie, it may seeme but as a Mite: but if you consider the quality and vertue there∣of, it is farre to bee preferred aboue much refined gold. For among o∣thers, it hath this hidden vertue: that
 whosoeuer contemplates the lustre thereof with a chaste eye, it will reflect a sanctified illumination into his very heart. And seeing that by Gods pro∣uidence it came to my hands, when as by the death of the Author it was like to haue been lost: I thought my selfe bound in conscience to communicate it with the Church of God for the pub∣like good, rather then to keepe it still in my closet for my owne priuate be∣nefit.
And howsoeuer the splendor of this Iewell will glad the heart of euery eye that seeth it, yet being well conside∣red, you shall finde it belongeth by a more peculier right, to such among the sonnes and daughters of men, who are eminent for their birth, and honou∣rable for their place and condition. And because the worth of the Iewel requi∣red a Patron of no meaner ranke then one of the sonnes of Nobles:Eccles. 10, 17 I thought
 good to recommend this Iewell vnto your Lordships Patronage and protecti∣on: and the rather, that it might bee some testimonie of the fauours which I haue receiued from: and of that duty wherein I acknowledge my selfe to be indebted vnto your Lordship. It is now your owne: oh let the light and lustre of euery beame therein, shine in your Person, and appeare in your practise: that to the glorie of God, the ioy of your friends, and solace of your owne conscience, Grace and Honour, Godlinesse and greatnesse, knowledge and sanctifica∣tion, may be seene in you amiably to embrace, and beuatifully to adorne one another. For when after a long account you shall at the last come to cast vp your Summa totalis, you shall finde, that Godlinesse will proue the greatest gaine, Grace the richest treasure, and Gods fauour the highest honour. The Lord with his fauorable countenance
 blesse you and your vertuous Lady, and euery branch of your vine;Psal. 92.13, 14 that as the Lords planting you may so flourish in Gods courts, that branches be neuer wanting to your stocke, nor fruit vnto your braunches, that men may see that verified of your honourable vine, which the heathen man said of his golden tree;
Primo avulso non deficit alter
Aureus, & simili frondescit virga metallo.
Bunbury in Cheshire.
Iuly 13. 1614.

