


IT prycketh now fast (if my memory
fayle me not) ryght worshipfull sir, to∣wardes
the poyncte of seuenteen yeares,
when I, beyng a yong nouyce of Cal∣uyns
relygyon, was fyrst by my frendes
brought, to that famouse schole at Wyn∣chester,
of bishop VVyckham hys foundation. At which
tyme it pleased you of your goodnes (beyng then one of
them, who had for that yeare the right and auctoritie in
that behalf) without monye, without rewarde, with∣out
commendation of frendes, apon the onlye contem∣placion
and respect of my pooer and nedye estate, and
some lyttle hope (perhapps) conceiued hereof, that once
the tyme myght cōme, when I should not be alltogether
vnprofytable, eyther to my countrye that brought me
forth, eyther to the place that should nouryshe me vp:
to bestowe apon me beyng then a futer for that purpose,
your voyce or suffrage, for th' obteinyng of a place emon
gest the scholers there. By the benefyte whereof, I was
the same yeare made one of that numbre, brought home
agayn to Chrystes churche from whence I was strayed:
and fynally haue obteyned that knowledge and small vn
derstanding (yfyet emongest the learned it may be ac∣compted

any) to the which you now see me growen.
True ytis, I can not denye yt, that other helpes God hath
sence that tyme prouyded for me, to the furnyshyng
and makyng perfect of that buyldyng, the foundacion
whereof, by your handes he fyrst disposed to be layde.
To whome I mynde not nether, to showe my self in
tyme and place, of so great benyfytes by them receaued,
eyther vnmyndfull or vnthanckfull. In the meane sea∣son,
yf, as next after God, of that profytt which I haue ta¦ken
in my studye, what so euer yt be, I accompt you for
the author, and verye founder thereof: so I doe with the
scripture (askyng quis plantat vineam et de fructueius non co∣medit?)1. Cor. 9. offer to you (such as they ar) the fyrst fruictes
thereof for a taste,vvho plā∣th a vyn ard, an  tastith not of the fuctes thereof? and that (apon the groundes of the law
whych wyll that the most auncient debt be first dischar∣ges)
before all other: none I trust, of my other frendly cre
dytours, wyll be therewithall offended.
Thys hath byn, ryght worshypfull sir, the verye cau∣se
of my boldnesse, in offeryng to you, thys rude and sym∣ple
treatyse of myne. Wherein yf any offence on my part
haue byn commytted, impute it I praye you to the abun∣dane
of the great good will that I beare towardes you,
and the necessitie that I thought my self to stand in, for
the testifyeng of my mynd, ready in some part to
discharge, as I was hable, my dutye to you.
Fare you wel, at Aquicinctum the
seat of my banyshment.

