


AMongst all our Labours in this life (most dread SOVERAIGNE) there are none better imployed then those, which are spent in seeking after, and in establish∣ing in our selues, and others, true Content, and Happines:
 For what doth it profit a man, if Math. 16. 6. hee gaine the whole world, and sustaine the damage of his soule? or what permutation shall a man giue for his soule? and deliuer it to be afflicted in this life with temporall discontent, and in the other with eternall tor∣ment: Will hee take to be an Emperor, or King of the whole Globe of the earth; to raigne with discontent, for seauen yeares, ouer all the people in the world? It is so hard an exchange, that none indued with reason would accept of such conditions: for what is an Emperor, a King, or any man, but his Content, and Hap∣pines? To be, and not to be happy, is but to be by a priua∣tion of well being, wretched, and miserable. Neither is it sufficient to Happines, that a
 man thinke himselfe happy, and be not, for this is but an increase of misery; not to seeme to be, that which hee is, vntill it bee too late, to obtaine that which he would; true Content: whereby wee see, that true Happines is more woorth then King∣domes; and true Content is more to bee esteemed, then all the treasures of the East, and West Indyes, since it indueth Emperors and Kinges with whatsoeuer true goods they haue, and filleth Sub∣iects with what they can de∣sire, if they will not desire that which is hurtfull to them∣selues: Insomuch, as let but a Prince establish in himselfe, his Court and Subiects, the practise of true Happines, they rest and remaine, each
 one reioicing at others good, and all well content, with that which euery one hath of his owne: and let him but per∣mit, false, and deceitfull Hap∣pines, to bee practised in himselfe, and Subiectes; and doe what he can, hee and they will become wretched, and miserable, in all thinges else, sauing in imaginations: which considerations haue moued mee to seeke out the pathes of Content, and set downe at large the way to true Happines, and Rest, that I might thereby asmuch as in mee lyeth, call all my Countrey men from the dis∣gustes, and dissentions of this age (which the iniquitie of heresie hath brought forth) to a rich Repose, and Ioy in our Lord.

 And hauing Dedicated our First part, vnto the most wor∣thy Prince CHARLES your Sonne (whome God Almigh∣ty long preserue.) I could not set out these our Second labours, vnder the protection of any other, but your Maie∣stie: For seeing I am to speake of Content, and Happines, to whome may I more fitly de∣dicate our labours, then to my Soueraigne, vnto whome a∣boue all men liuing I hartily wish them. Accept therefore most dread Soueraigne, the protection of this our worke against all calumniators; and bee well pleased, that true Content, and Happines, which your Maiestie cannot but de∣sire to your selfe, may with your Gracious fauour, and vnder your protection, bee
 communicated to all your Subiects: that all dissentions and discontentments taken out of your Highnes King∣domes: it may bee verified of your Monarchy; which was spoken of Sion the Temple of God: The habitaiton in thee, is as it were of all Reioycing, Psal. 86. which is that I desire, and hartily pray for, and so humbly submit my selfe, and rest,



