



MY beloued children, If the spi∣rituall Wracke of Christian soules could in the approach be sensibly discerned, it might of it selfe serue for a warning-marke, and all both eminent Rocks and vnder-water shelfs would be discried, and so shunned. But so much the more dangerous, and per∣nicious is that woefull shipwrack, which swalloweth vp an infinite number of you, my deare children, in that those, that vndergoe it, neither know, nor once all their life long heed this their owne ruine. Can I then your
dolorous Mother, can I brooke this mise∣rable losse? can I suffer so many of my chil∣dren to bee cast away? Noe, I cannot. Needs must I impart the trueth vnto you; I am resolued to hide nothing from you.
When in my yong & first teeming daies I felt the wounds, and torments of Heathe∣nish persecutions, very bitter, alas, was the anguish of my soule, to behold on all sides streaming riuers of the blood of my tender children so impiously shed by most cruel Ty∣rants, & persecutors of the faith of IESVS CHRIST my Spouse, and Lord. No soo∣ner ceased these tyrannous persecutions, but I was beset with other more dangerous af∣flictions of Heresies, whereby the bitternes of my soule was more encreased: In asmuch∣as that first kinde of persecution was onely outward, slaying the bodies of my children, but not hurting their soules, nay rather much benefiting them. But this latter pier∣ced
inward, destroying the soules of many, and wounded my very heart, euen the faith of my Spouse. At length the storme of here∣sies was hushed; and so I sate me downe in peace, enioying a faire and goodly calme, whē, behold,
Isa. 38.17. my griefe was most bitter in peace. Peace brought vpō me a greater bitternes then any of my former. The per∣secutions of the Heathen, and the mu∣tinies of the Heretiques were indeed a bit∣ter seruice to mee; but yet they both had their sweetning. For, by the former I was made a more fruitfull mother,
Tertul. Apol. aduers. gent. The blood of the Martyrs being the seed where∣out more Christians grew; and by oc∣casion of the latter my Officers, and Mini∣sters became the more watchfull, and fur∣nished themselues with more store of know∣ledge of sound doctrine, and pure faith, and also fed my children with so much the more exact spirituall nourishment. But the bit∣ternes,
which mine owne Officers and ser∣uants haue, by reason of peace, through their owne idlenes, brought vpon me, is be∣come diuers ages since, but in these dayes more then euer, distastfull to me.
From these my Ministers comes this your shipwrack; they haue set in your way all these Rocks, & Shelfes, & Quick-sands, wher∣by so many of you are cast away. Peace, and idlenesse haue beene my bane. As stan∣ding-water in wells, ditches, and puddles through want of motion quickly corrupteth, and breedeth wormes, toades, snakes, and other such vermine: so peace, and idlenesse hath bin to my chiefe Ministers, Bishops, & Prelates the cause of putrefaction. And so they following the crooked bent of corrupt nature, and running a madding after their owne concupiscences, haue first giuen ouer themselues in prey to Auarice. Ʋery large haue bin of old the almes, and oblations of
faithfull, and very deuout people, for the maintayning of their spirituall fathers Af∣ter these followed the bounty of Emperours, and other Christian Princes, and benefa∣ctors; they, in their vnaduised deuotion hea∣ping vpon me more and more riches, haue, I may say to you, brought my Ministers to a good passe. For my part, I was at my high∣est, and in best esteeme, whilest I went in a thinne coate, such as I was cladde withall when my Spouse Christ Iesus betroathed himselfe to me. My most proper orna∣ments, my truest greatnesse consisteth, not in outward pompe, nor superfluous worldly commodities, but in spirituall, and inward vertues. My beloued Dauid wrote con∣cerning me,
Psal. 45.13. that the king's daughter is all-glorious within. And my worthy sonne St. Hierome hath noted concerning me, that,
Hiero. de vita Malchi. after that I was entertained by Christian Princes, I grew greater in
state, and wealth, but abated much in vertue. In thus saying, (alas the while) hee came too neere the truth. Yet this was none of my fault: It was mine owne Mi∣nisters, that haue brought this scar vpō me: especially in that they, without my allow∣ance, or weeting, haue diuided among them∣selues that stocke of temporal goods, which, by my appointment, for diuers ages remay∣ned in common, and whereout, by the pub∣lique dispensers, or stewards, dayly, or mo∣nethly portions were wont to bee allotted to euery of those my Ministers for their ne∣cessary maintenāce; but afterward by their Auarice properly was brought in. And I would to God they had there stayed, and contented themselues with their parts so as∣signed to them: then had that bene tolera∣ble, and now perhaps were necessary. But (as the guise of the couetous man is neuer to say hee hath enough) they haue gone on,
inuenting new deuises of purchase, though with the apparant danger of their owne, & their peoples, my childrens, soules, and to the no small hinderance of all kind of spi∣rituall gaine.
Hauing afforded some, but neuer full, content to Auarice, they, by the sway of naturall corruption, cast themselues farther in prey to Ambition. They saw them∣selues esteemed, and exalted by me, like fa∣thers respected, reuerenced, and honored by my children: whereupon, forgetting that they were no other then my Ministers, and seruants, and that their office, and charge was to serue my children, rather then to command, (euen as they were taught by the example, and precept of my Spouse, their and my Lord and Master, who came not to be ministred vnto,
Matth. 20.28. but to mini∣ster) they began to think so highly of them∣selues, and to swell so bigge with the conceit
of their office, that they pretended them∣selues to be Lords ouer my house, and very Princes, and so caried very small respect to me, whose ministers, and seruants they are. After that this Infernall spirit of Ambition had entred into them, they now, not deigning any lōger to employ their ioynt paines in digging my vineyard, (which is the very office allotted thē by my Christ Iesus) set themselues to contend with one another about Primacy, & Ancestry, and one to domineere ouer the other, and to play the commander, as is well obserued, and de∣clared by my Eusebius.
Euseb. histor. lib. 8. cap. 1.
These bee the two horrible wilde beasts, these the two monsters, namely Auarice and Ambition, which haue cast my Offi∣cers headlong into very important errors, so that, putting away a good conscience, they haue also made some shipwrack concerning the faith: And, that which is worse, to
boulster out their Couetousnesse, and Ambition, they of their owne head, with∣out my foreknowledge, or consent, nay to my great griefe, & notwithstanding my cease∣lesse reclaimes, and continuall protests a∣gainst thē, euen to the stopping of my mouth, by downe-right violence, they haue thrust vpon the world their owne inuentions, and established their owne ordinances, not drawne out of that Testament, which my Spouse left to me, and them, namely the ho∣ly Scriptures; but craftily hammered out of their owne capricious proiects, and ten∣ding to the preiudice, downefall, and ruine of your poore soules, my deare children. These their fancyfull deuices, and mon∣strous inuentions, brought in after those many ages of my purity and singlenesse, were past, these being founded vpon Aua∣rice, and Ambition, and cunningly cou∣ched vnder the water, yet so that they stand
neere the toppe of it, are the Rockes, and Shelfes, and Quick-sands, vpon which full many a wracke is made in the chiefest parts of my Dominions.
Now therefore, my beloued children, especially you, that finde your selues, though to my dishonour and great preiudice, vnder the yoake of my daughter of Rome, I will discouer to you all these Rockes, as I haue formerly discouered them to diuerse other my daughters, whereby they haue beene much secured from danger. Afford mee attention with diligence, for your part. I, for mine, protest in the presence of my Spouse, your Lord, and mine, and forwarne you, that from henceforth the shipwrackes, which you shall suffer, shall bee your owne fault, and not mine, if vpon vaine scruples, or feares suggested by the diuell, and cheri∣shed by those, who in name and profession beare themselues as my seruants, but are
indeede my most deadly enemies, and re∣bells against me, you shall forbeare to open your eyes, and to bee aduertised of those dreadful Rocks, which for your euerlasting good I heere compendiously, as in a Sea∣mappe, decipher out before your eyes, to the end that you, escaping out of them, or rather keeping farre and wide from them, may euery of you guide the vessell of his soule with all safetie to the hauen of eter∣nall saluation. Giue eare therefore to me. And although Couetise hath risen before Ambition, and giuen the first blow to my Ministers; yet, forasmuchas Ambition hath been the first of the two that hath built to your cost, I will therefore beginne with the Rockes, which Ambition hath layd, and afterward will passe to those which grew out of Auarice.
