



Most mightie and sacred Soueraigne.
AS Temporall armies consist of Press'd men, and volunta∣ries, so doe they also in this warfare, in which your Maie∣stie hath appear'd by your Bookes. And not only your strong and full Garisons, which are your Clear∣gie, and your Vniuersities, but also ob∣cure Villages can minister Souldiours. For, the equall interest, which all your

Subiects haue in the cause (all being e∣qually endanger'd in your dangers) giues euery one of vs a Title to the Dignitie of this warfare; And so makes thoe, whom the Ciuill Lawes made opposite, all one, Paganos, Milites. Besides, since in this Battaile, your Maiestie, by your Bookes, is gone in Person out of the Kingdome, who can bee exempt from waiting vpon you in such an expedition? For this Oath must worke vpon vs all; and as it must draw from the Papists a profession, so it must from vs, a Confirmation of our O∣bedience; They must testifie an Allea∣geance by the Oath, we, an Alleageance to it. For, since in prouiding for your Maiesties securitie, the Oath defends vs, it is reason, that wee defend it. The strongest Castle that is, cannot defend the Inhabitants, if they sleepe, or neglect the defence of that, which defends them; No more can this Oath, though framed withall aduantagious Christianly wise∣dome,

secure your Maiestie, and vs in you, if by our negligence wee should o∣pen it, either to the aduersaries Batteries, or to his vnderminings.
The influence of those your Maiesties Bookes, as the Sunne, which pene∣trates all corners, hath wrought vppon me, and drawen vp, and exhaled from my poore Meditations, these discourses: Which, with all reuerence and deuoti∣on, I present to your Maiestie, who in this also haue the power and office of the Sunne, that those things which you ex∣hale, you may at your pleasure dissipate, and annull; or suffer them to fall downe againe, as a wholesome and fruitfull dew, vpon your Church & Commonwealth. Of my boldnesse in this addresse, I most humbly beseech your Maiestie, to admit this excuse, that hauing obserued, how much your Maiestie had vouchsafed to descend to a conuersation with your Sub∣iects, by way of your Bookes, I also con∣ceiu'd

an ambition, of ascending to your presence, by the same way, and of parti∣cipating, by this meanes, their happinesse, of whome, that saying of the Queene of Sheba, may bee vsup'd: Happie are thy men, and happie are those thy Seruants, which stand before thee alwayes, and heare thy wisedome For, in this, I make account, that I haue performed a duetie, by expressing in an exterior, and (by your Maiesties permission) a publicke Act, the same desire, which God heares in my daily prayers, That your Maie∣stie may very long gouerne vs in your Person, and euer, in your Race and Progenie.

