


IT is a maxime and generall obserued in Philosophy
that all things naturally tends and inclines to the
center of the owne kinde: if so in things Physicall
where altogether nature beares the sway, much
more in matters Politicall where reason rules
& hath the Preheminence, yea, even in Religion and pietie,
as the common Proverbe goeth Charitie begins at the selfe.
What marvell then, right Noble Lord, that I (although the
meanest of all such who stand oblished and ingadged to your L. in
all humble duetie and service) yet hauing the honour to bee one of
your L. Name, & presuming vpon the good report I heare in
the mouthes of all men of your L. good nature, courteous hu∣mane
& affable disposition haue adventured and taken the bold∣nesse
in this litle triviall taske, and extemporaniall lynes (the
very first essay & fruit of my Muse) to addresse my self, and haue
recourse vnto your honourable L. the true and worthie center
of my Sphere & Horizon: and that my Darkenesse beeing inlight∣ned,
by the meanest reflects that flowes from the Sunshine of
your L. worth, I may, darre appeare in publicke & the more
boldly shew my self to the view of the World in this learned and
Apollo-bred age. It is cleare & evident, that the mirthlesse

Musicke of the Droning Bee, is no wayes so pleasant as the
melodious warbling of the matchlesse Mearle or rarest Phi∣lomel
and the rest of Heavens sweet singing Quiristers yet
doth shee not ceaese to fill the vacuitie of the spacious Aire, and
to please the eare of the Auditours in giving them all that na∣ture
hath giuen her, so I in this time of necessitie and common
concurrance while as euerie man endevors to bee some way stedable
to the most worthie proceedings of our most sacred Soveraignes
intended Warres, though I can neither doe as others, nor say
or sing as others, yet with others I will bee bold to shew foorth
my goodwill, though it were but to roll and tumble my Tub with
Diogenes, and with the Bee to blast soorth the bombing sound,
of my barren Song. And as for your honourable L. who is
the due subject of my Songe, I am perswaded that as the naugh∣tiest
mettall, even Lead it selfe, being presented to the most rare Al∣chimist
stone by the touche and vertue thereof, is presentlie
transformed into Gold: so no question this drosse of my plumbish
Poesie being once presented & touched with the most rare vertue
of your L. fauour, shall incontinent bee Metamorphosed in a gol∣den
shape: & las the weary Dove flying to the safe Ark of your L.
protection with this one leaf of the olive maybee sheltered & enioy
a sure couer from all the stormy blastes, not of the vncertaine god
AEolus, but of the certaine windie Devi Zoilus, such a dam∣nable
detracter, who is well practised and learned in his arte of
carping & calumniating other mens workes, but was never so well
learned himself, as to vnderstand but these three words 
. So hoping, yea, assuring my self your L. out
of your euer accustomed courtesie and goodnesse, will excuse and
take in good part this my boldnesse and presumption and so much
the rather, my chiefe aime heerein being the glorie of God, the
eredit of our King and Country, & the celebration of your L. duelie
deserved honour and praise, wherein I haue done as I could though
not as I would: yet protesting when a more fauouring influence

shall, afford mee seme matter of greater importance the same also
shall come foorth vnder the shelter of your L. honourable Name
whom I haue chosen to bee the great Protectour and onlie Mae∣cenas
of my Muse as I am and shall ever remaine,

