



YOVR Maiesties gra∣cious
acceptance of
my Treatise concer∣ning
Antichrist, hath
emboldened me to de∣dicat
these my labours
vnto your Highnesse,
which are in no other
respect worthie of your royall patronage, but
that they haue bene imployed in the expla∣nation
of an excellent Psalme of the royall
Prophet Dauid; whose writings the holy
Ghost hath the rather commended to poste∣ritie,
that by his example Kings and Princes
might be admonished to spend part of their
time, which they may spare from their royall
administration, in heauenly meditations, and
spirituall exercises: whereby they might ga∣ther

assurance to themselues, that after their
earthly kingdome is ended, they shall inherit
an euerlasting kingdome in heauen: for al∣though
it be a singuler fauour of God vouch∣safed
vnto them, that they should so beare the
image of his power and authoritie amongst
men,Psal. 8 6. as that they should bee called Gods:Exod. 22. 28.
yet godly and Christian kings, are not so
much to glorie in the fruition of their tempo∣rall
crownes and kingdomes; as to solace
themselues in the comfortable expectation
of that incorruptible crowne of glorie, which
is laid vp for them in heauen: For which
cause King Dauid thought it to be his dutie,
to giue all diligence (as Peter since hath ex∣horted
vs all) to make his calling and ele∣ction
sure:2. Pet. 1. 10. and by vndoubted testimonies
and infallible tokens, to gather assurance vn∣to
himselfe, that hee was the true child of
God. And that he should not take his marks
amisse, (as men are apt to deceiue them∣selue
in this point) he intreateth the Lord in
this Psalme to reueale vnto him the vndoub∣ted
marks of the sons & heires of God: which
hauing learned by the information of the ho∣ly
Ghost, he publisheth them, to the com∣mon
good of the Church: Shewing as it

were from the Oracle of God, that not all
that professe the true religion, nor all that are
able to discourse therof; but those that walke
worthie of their calling, that behaue them∣selues
as it becōmeth the children of the light,
that is, that liue vprightly, worke righteous∣nesse,
speake the truth from their hearts, &c.
are the sound members of the Church mili∣tant
vpon earth, and shall bee inheritors of
glorie in the Church triumphant in heauen.
The meditation and practise of which things
I do so much the more boldly commend to
your Maiestie, because it euidently appeareth
by your former both studies in priuat, and al∣so
speeches in publicke, and writings publi∣shed,
you haue propounded Dauid to your
selfe as a patterne for imitation. And now as
a Minister of God, I exhort your Highnesse
to immitat him still, as in speaking and wri∣ting,
so especially in the conscionable pra∣ctise
of Christian duties: that you may bee
more and more (as he was) a man according
to Gods owne hart, walking before the Lord
as he did in truth, and righteousnesse,1. King. 3. 6. and
vprightnesse of heart; and gouerning and
guiding the people of God, according to the
integritie of his heart,Psal. 78. 71. 72. and the singuler wise∣dome

of his hands. So shall the Lord take
pleasure in you, as he did in him, and will not
onely giue your Highnesse long and pros∣perous
dayes, but will also blesse your po∣steritie
after you, and establish them in the
throne of these kingdomes for euer, to the
euerlasting glorie of his name, and the perpe∣tuall
good of his Church: which mer∣cies
the Lord graunt for his
Christs sake. Amen.

