


WHAT care the almightie King of Heauen hathe, of the Princes and States of the earthe, though sacred Scripture did not teache vs, Pro∣phane doctrine might instruct vs.
Homer shevveth, that God thro∣vveth his shielde in the vvarre, to defende the Prince from harme, and that he appoynteth to euerye gouernour, a peculiar God for his protection.
Hovv God plagueth them that conspire againste theyr Prince, this Historie declareth at the full. For of all them, that coniured against Caius Caesar, not one did escape violent death. The vvhich this Author hathe a pleasure to declare, bycause he vvould affray all men from disloyaltie tovvard their Soueraigne.
The greatest seruice that men can doe, is to saue theyr Countrey from daunger. The Romanes gaue him a crovvne that saued one Citizen. Then hovv many crovvnes deser∣ueth he, that helpeth to saue a number?
They vsed to make a coyne for his commendation, vvith this inscription: The Senate and people of Rome for Citizens saued.
Cicero vvas called, Father of the Countrey, bycause hee

kept it from decay. All they that in theyr consultations, do seeke the like benefite to their Countrey, doe deserue the like revvard and prayse, and in the testimonie of good mēs hearts, they are sure to haue it.
Then seeyng this Authoures onely purpose is, to extoll the princely rule, and to procure the safetie of the people, I haue presumed to make a presente of hym to youre Ho∣noure, that you being in case to do the like good, maye re∣ceyue the same triumph of your desert.
Hovv vvorthy the VVryter is to be redde, I referre it to the vvitnesse of one vvorthyThe reuerend father in God T. C. Bishop of Lincolne, in his booke entitu∣led Thesau∣rus linguae Latinae & Britannicae. Prelate of this lāde, vvho (as he sayd of Plato) shal suffice for a multitude. Further, vvith the manner of the Authoures vvriting I doe not meane to trouble you, himselfe shall tell your Honour, that such as be in your case, may bring to passe that he desi∣reth, to the glory of God, the honour of the Prince, the benefite of the Coun∣trey, and renoume of your selfe.

