



THE prudent speech of the po∣liticke Historiographer (most gracious and dread Soue∣raigne) is in some sort verified of vs in this Church,Thucydi , those which be in the middest are slaine or at the least wise assayled on both sides: The Romanists on the one side blaming vs for departing too farre from the Church of Rome; our innoua∣tours accusing vs on the other side, for comming too neare the same. Which contrarie accusations of men being in contrarie extreames,Medium beati. are a good euidence for vs, that wee hold the meane. For nei∣ther are wee departed further from the now-Roman church, then it hath swarued by Apostasie from the auncient Church of Christ, to which, in departing from them, wee are returned: neither haue wee re∣tayned

eyther for the substance of Doctrine, or for the forme of Discipline any thing almost agreeing with them, which with them wee haue not receiued, eyther from the doctrine or institution of the Apo∣stles, or from the approued practise of the Primitiue Church. The which, as it is to be acknowledged to the high praise of God, and to the singular com∣mendation of your Maiestie; so also to the conten∣tation and ioy of all your louing subiects. God ha∣uing vouchsafed vnto vs this especiall fauour, (for which his name is euer to be praised and magnified among vs) that there is not a Church vnder the Sunne, which both for the substance of Doctrine, and forme of Discipline, doth come so neare the patterne of the Prime and Apostolicall Churches, as these vnder your gracious gouernment. Your Maiestie also hauing beene a blessed instrument of God, not onely for the retayning of the truely Ca∣tholike and Apostolicke doctrine and religion in all your Dominions; but also for the establishing of the auncient and Apostolicall gouernment, where it was in vse before; and likewise for renewing and restoring the same (though to your great cost and charges) where it was formerly abolished. These vnestimable benefits, if wee in this land doe not acknowledge and professe our selues to haue recei∣ued from God by your Maiestie wee must confesse our selues to be not onely vnthankefull, both to God (who is the gracious Authour) and to your Highnesse who are the happie meanes of these benefits) but also vnworthy to enioy them. If we doe (according to our bounden duetie) acknowledge so much: it

remayneth, that wee should testifie our thankefulnes to GOD Almightie, as in respect of his true Do∣ctrine and sound religion continued among vs, by walking worthy our calling,Ephes. 4 Tit. 2. and by adorning the doctrine of God our Sauiour in all things: so also in regard of the Apostolicall forme of gouern∣ment established among vs,Phil. 2. Heb. 13 by a due and res∣pectiue countenancing of it on all hands. For how∣soeuer a great number in these dayes haue thought so much the better of themselues, by how much they haue thought the worse of Bishops: yet is it most certaine, that the contempt of Bishops is the cause, if not of all euill (which notwithstanding Chrysostome seemeth to affirme) yet of very much euill among vs.In 2 Ti This contempt therefore is diligently to be pre∣uented and auoided, as by the godly and religious care, both of your Highnes in preferring worthy men to this high and sacred function, and of the reuerend Bishops in shewing themselues worthy of that honour whereof they would, and indeed should be accounted worthy: so also by instructing the peo∣ple to conceiue a right of this holy and honourable calling. And for as much as the pernicious schisme and diuision, which is among vs, proceedeth from an erroneous conceipt, eyther that the Presbyterian Discipline is the holy ordinance of Christ, or that the gouernment by Bishops is vnlawfull and Anti∣christian: I was perswaded (for my part) that I could not performe a seruice, eyther more accep∣table vnto God, or more profitable to his Church; then to publish those arguments for the satisfaction of others, which had perswaded mine owne soule,

not onely that the Presbyterian Discipline is a meere humane inuention, and new deuise, hauing no ground eyther in the Scriptures, or other monuments of An∣tiquitie: but also that the Episcopall function is of A∣postolicall and Diuine institution. And whereas my Sermon published in defence of the holy and ho∣nourable calling of Bishops, hath been eagerly op∣pugned by a namelesse refuter; I thought my selfe bound in conscience to deliuer the truth, which I had defended, from his sophisticall cauillations. The which, through Gods good blessing vpon my la∣bours I haue so performed, that there is scarce any one sentence of the Sermon (if any at all) oppug∣ned by the aduersarie, which I haue not defended by plaine, euidence of truth. These my labours I haue presumed to dedicate to your Maiestie, as the principall Patrone (vnder Christ) of that truth which I defend; not onely intreating your Highnes to ac∣cept in good part my poore endeauours; but also commending my selfe, and them, to your most gra∣cious Patronage and Royall protection. The King of Kings blesse, prosper, and preserue your excellent Maiestie to his glorie, the good of his Church, and your owne euerlasting comfort. Amen.

