



AMong all the worthy histories of the Saincts which are registred in the booke of God, there is not any one example of faith and o∣bedience comparable (as I suppose) to A∣braham: who as he was the father of all the faithfull Rom. 4.11. so he is propoun∣ded to all the heires of promise, as a most worthie patterne for imitation. And to this end the Lord as he had indued him with an excellent measure of his grace, so by a cor∣respondencie of trials proportionable to his faith, he hath manifested the same to the world: that all those which professe them∣selues to be the sonnes of Abraham, might either imitate his faith and obedience, or else know themselues to be none of his children. For which cause the holy Apostles Paule

and Iames, the one intreating of the causes whereby a man is iustified, the other of the effects and signes whereby a man is knowne to be iust: the one prouing that we are iusti∣fied by faith alone without works, the other concluding that we are iustified by such a faith as is not alone, or without works: both propound the example of Abraham as a rule, the one of that iustification whereby we are made iust, to wit, by imputatiō of Christs righteousnes apprehended by faith, the other of that whereby we are declared to be iust, namely by the fruits of faith, which are good works. Paule therefore prouing that we are iustified by faith without works, that is, by imputation of Christs righteousnes alone, which is apprehended by faith, argueth from the example of Abraham to this effect: that as he was iustified, so are we, Rom. 4.23.24. he was iustified by faith without works, that is, by imputation of Christs righteousnes ap∣prehended by faith, without respect of anie righteousnes inherent in himselfe, therefore wee are iustified by faith, without works. Iames disputing against vaine mē Chap. 2. ver. 20. who thought to be iustified by an idle or counterfeit faith, proueth from the

example of Abraham, that wee must be iustified by such a faith as is not without works. For by such a faith as Abraham was iustified, must we be iustified: Abraham was iustified not by an idle or dead faith, but by a liuely faith working by loue, as apeareth especiallie by that example recorded, Gen. 22. Therefore howsoeuer we are iustified by faith alone, yet we are not iustified by such a faith as is alone: but as we are iustified by faith alone, that is, made iust by imputation of Christs righteousnes, which is apprehen∣ded by faith alone: so we are iustified, that is, declared and knowne to be iust by good works, which are the fruits of faith. Abra∣ham therefore as you see, is propounded to all the faithfull as a patterne in both re∣spects. So that if we would be esteemed the sonnes of Abraham (as all the faithfull are) we must looke to be iustified as he was, and by such a faith. The Papists therefore, who seeke Iustification by works, that is, inherent righteousnes, are not the sonnes of Abra∣ham. For those who are of faith, that is, who seeke iustification by faith and not by workes, are the children of Abraham, Gal. 3.7. No more is the carnall Gospeller▪

 by such a faith as  and voide of righteousnes  our Sauiour saith Iohn. 8.  the sonnes of Abraham,  do the works of Abraham.  Abraham though he were iustified by faith alone, yet he was not iustified by such a faith as is alone. But howsoeuer the no∣table faith of Abraham whereby he was iustified before God, and his dutifull obedi∣ence whereby he was knowne and declared to be iust, appeareth in many particulars re∣corded by Moses, yet then especially he ap∣proued both his faith and obedience, when he was enioyned by a commaundement of tryall, to sacrifice his owne and onely sonne Isaac. For by this greatest tryall the Lords purpose was to manifest to the world his greatest faith and rarest obedience: and in respect of both to commend him to all suc∣ceeding generations, as a most liuely patterne to be followed of all the heires of promise. For which cause as I thought this notable story of Abrahams tryall most worthie to be handled in this Easters solemnitie: so others haue desired, and I haue yeelded, that the Sermon wherein it was handled, should be

made more publike for the benefit of more then did heare me. Being therefore to pub∣lish this Sermon as the first fruits of mine english labours, I thought good to dedicate the same to your Worship, to whome with your louing brother, and the vertuous Lady your wife, I am for great benefits excee∣dingly bound: that there might remaine some memoriall both of your bountifulnes, and of my thankefulnesse. Accept there∣fore (I pray you) according to your accu∣stomed fauour this commendation of Abra∣hams faith and obedience. And as hitherto you haue (to Gods glory be it spoken, and to the good example of others) shewed your selfe to be one of the sonnes of Abraham: so my desire is, that this example of Abra∣ham commended vnto you, may be some in∣couragement for you, to continue to the end in that course wherein you haue long wal∣ked. That imitating still the faith of Abra∣ham, and treading in the steps of his obe∣dience vnto the end, you may be sure after the labours of this life to rest in Abrahams bosome,Luk. 16.22. where you shall receiue the end of your faith,1. Pet. 1.9. which is the saluation of your soule by the precious merits of Iesus Christ,

.
,
the 28. of Aprill 1602.


