



ALBEIT (Right Wor∣shipfull, and most deerely beloued) some haue causelesly doub∣ted of, and others haue damnably denyed, a maine and principall Article of the Christian Faith; namely, the visi∣ble and glorious descent of our

Lord Iesus from heauen to iudge both the quick and the dead, whose comming wee thirstingly and continually expect and pray for; yet it is cleere and very de∣monstrable, by the current of sa∣cred Scripture, and by due obser∣uance of the ruinous estate of the world, and the daily accomplish∣ment of the fore-runners and ge∣nerall Signes of the last day; that the ends of the world are come vpon vs,1. Cor. 10.11. That the end of all things is at hand,1. Pet. 4.7. and that these are the very last times: For
First, if in the Apostles times it was so neere his period and con∣summation, yea consumption; how much more neere is it in our times, sith that so many hundreds of years are long agoe expired? And what if the Lord seemeth to stay long,

and to deferre his comming, yet this delay is nothing, being compa∣red with Eternity, and a thou∣sand yeares with God are but as one day,2. Pet. 3.8. and the Lord will in the meane time, haue the number of his Elect fulfilled, and the sinnes of the Reprobate grow to their full measure and ripenesse.
Secondly, it is certaine that the glorious Gospell hath, euen in the Apostles times, beene solemnely published and proclaimed to the whole (habitable) world, so that such a solemne and generall Lega∣cie and Embassage is not againe to bee expected.
Thirdly, the ancient and migh∣tie Romane Empire, that in former ages had the commaund of some two hundred and fifty Countries, Kingdomes and Prouinces, is now so impaired, wasted and weakned,

that it hath lost all his former Ma∣iestie and Dominion, and retai∣neth onely a bare and naked image, and picture, of that it formerly enioyed:2. Thess. 2.. So that that, which by it puissance kindred Antichrists comming, being taken away, and the thousand yeares of Satans bin∣ding being expired,Apoc. 20.2 Antichrist is confessedly come.
Fourthly, Antichrist (I meane that Italian Priest and Romish Caiphas) hath beene (by his ex∣cesse of tyrannie and superstition) reuealed, euen in the yeare of Christ, 607, and sithence; but from the yeare 1517, vnto our daies, he hath bene not so much discouered, as by the Breath of Gods mouth, that is, by the Preaching of the Word, beene confuted and confounded: and not withstanding that the busie and restlesse. Ie∣suites,

Priests, Seminaries, studie and striue to recouer their losses, and heale the wounds of the euer-dying Beast, yet it is but a light∣ning before death, & periturum gaudium.Ester 6.13. The Romish Haman hath begunne to fall before Mor∣decai of the seea of the Iewes, yea, to fall before the reformed Chri∣stians, and therefore hee shall ne∣uer preuaile against them but cer∣tainely fall before them.
Fiftly, sinne and iniquity euery where aboundeth, and is growne excessiue and impudent: all things are out of square, all flesh hath cor∣rupted his way, and (whether wee respect Doctrine, Discipline, and (specially) corruption of manners) in most Coasts and Countries, there is almost no faith left on the earth.
Sixtly, All the Elements, all the

creatures, the Sun, Moone, Starres, Plants, Birds, Fowles, Fishes, &c. groane grieuously vnder the bur∣den of mans sinnes,Rom. 8.20.21.22.23. and are won∣derfully peruerted by man; yea, ex∣ceedingly decayed in their proprie∣ties, vertues, efficacies, and there∣fore watchfully waite for their plenarie and finall deliuerance from this bondage of corruption.
Lastly, (to passe ouer in silence many other Arguments, yea, and some few Signes shortly to be ful∣filled, whereof I distinctly entreate in the ensuing Treatise) the iust Iudge of the world must needs giue perfect rest and glory to his trou∣bled Saints and seruants;2. Thess. 1.7.8. and of necessity render vengeance vnto his, and their, implacable ene∣mies.
Wherefore (my deerely beloued Brethren and Parishioners) let vs

be wise hearted and awaken our selues; and the rather, because God (in his wisedome) hath deserued∣ly concealed and kept from vs, the knowledge of the set houre, day, yea yeare, let vs (casting away all vnprofitable and vaine curiosities) take notice of the accomplishment of the Signes and Tokens of the last iudgement, as they are reuea∣led in the volume of the Bible, and seeing the last of them to beginne onely to come to passe, let vs re∣ioycingly hold vp our heads,Luk. 21.28. knowing that the day of our (full) redemption draweth nigh.
And that you might bee more plainely and plentifully, directed and instructed in these Doctrines and Duties, I haue (in my loue and Pastorall care) beene moued, to Print, Publish, and Inscribe vnto

you, this small Treatise following, purposing (if neede require) here∣after to enlarge it. And seeing that, by Diuine Prouidence, the ample charge of Douercourt and Harwich is committed vnto mee, a poore Minister of the Gospell, I therefore, by the helpe of God, will carefully and conscionably dis∣charge my Office and Ministery. And I doubt not, but that you ge∣nerally, hauing with such content∣ment receiued my doctrine, and so kindly and respectiuely entertai∣ned mee, will continue, yea, hap∣pily proceed in the worke of your loue; which will greatly redound vnto Gods glory, and much tend to my encouragement. If my re∣uerend, graue, learned, and dili∣gent Predecessour, your late Pastour of blessed memory, hath planted you, I will doe my best endeuour to

water you, and build you vp in the faith, referring the successe and encrease vnto the blessing of the Almighty.
But being so well perswaded of you all, and expecting all good things from so well disposed and zealous people, I cease to vse fur∣ther speech, and I withall, betake and commend you vnto the di∣rection and protection of the Prince of Pastors, the Bishop of your soules, our Lord Iesus Christ, who alwaies blesse and preserue you. From Harewich in Essex Iune 12. 1615.

