



BLessed is hee (sayth Dauid) whose wic∣kednesse is forgiuen and whose sinne is couered, &c. Here is one Medicine for two maladies: here is one salue that heales two sores. Sinne is the testie botch that may not be touched. All are infected with this plague: but heere is the diffe∣rence, some see it not at al, some see it too much, some feele it, & feare it, some nei∣ther feare it, nor feele it. In some negli∣gent blindnesse, and securitie breeds con∣tempt of imminent perill; in some, the
 view of great daunger accompanied with feare without faith, commits them to the dangerous downefall of a deadly desper∣ation. The one seeth not his sinne, & ther∣fore seeketh no remedie; the other ouer∣whelmed with sinne, findeth not the meanes to applie the remedie. Heere is both the remedie and the application. Ther is a meane betwene these extremes: This meane is, to see our sinne, our naked∣nes, our wickednes, but so, as we alwaies haue one eye on our selues and our sin, the other, on Christ and his merits. If we see our sins in themselues, they exceede in number the sands of the Sea, in great∣nesse, the compasse of the whole world. If we then goe about to match them, with our owne power, strength, or merites, how infinitly shall we bee ouerwhelmed in this comparison? But if we, leauing our selues, fly to the power of God, by which he can; and his mercie in Iesus Christ, by which he will deliuer vs from this infect∣ing plague; we shall presently see, both sin, hell, and Sathan to consume as smoke, be∣fore the presence of our God. Sin is the plague, sinne is the sore: The medicine is,
 the mercy of God, thorough Iesus Christ in whome, and by whome, our sinnes are forgiuen. This mercie is apprehended by faith, and faith is the gift of God. There∣fore, when we haue cast vp all our recko∣ning, we shall find, that all our righteous∣nes, and all our merites, (in respect of per∣fection, to merite saluation) are nothing else but the righteousnes and merites of Christ, imputed to vs by the mercie of God, by which our sinnes are pardoned. And therefore with Saint Paule euerie man, to his owne Conscience, may right∣ly say, What hast thou, which thou hast not re∣ceiued? Yet, to this mercie there is tyed a blessing, and a curse, to shewe the diffe∣rence betweene the reprobate, and the children of God. They, which by mercy, attaine this mercy, are truely called bles∣sed; They which for want of mercie, are depriued of this mercy, are iustly accur∣sed. But can there bee in one, and one so certaine and immutable cause, such, and such diuers effects? Can mercy be found without mercy? Can light be seene with∣out light? Can fire be felt without heate? What more contrarie the one to the o∣ther,
 then glorie, & confusion? Yet one, and the selfe same fire, makes golde more glorious, which vtterly consumes wood, straw, and stubble. What is more contra∣rie then hard, and soft? yet one and the selfe same sunne doth harden the dirte, and mollifieth the waxe. These contrarie effects proceede not from any contrarie∣tie that is found in the pure and simple essence either of Sunne or fire, but from the diuersitie which lyeth hid in the na∣ture of the subiects, on which they work. The mercy of God, being still one and the same, is offered to al without respect, (as the Sunne shines and the raine fals, as well on the vniust as the iust) but all re∣ceiue it not. The wicked see it, but des∣pise it, and make a iest of it, till, by the iust iudgement of God they perish in theyr wickednesse, as did Pharao, Iudas, and the wicked sonnes of Elie, &c. The elect, being moued by the spirit of God, do see, lament, and repent their sinnes, and so by mercy obtaine pardon. So that, though, both the elect and the reprobate are both alike happie, in that mercy is offered to both a like, yet because the wicked refuse
 it, they are iustly accursed; and the other that receiue, and take hold of it, are here accounted happie and blessed. And yet not blessed in respect of any work or wor∣thinesse in themselues, but that, by the merits of Christ, (which they apprehend by faith) they are by mercy and imputa∣tion, made worthy of this blessing. This then is the golden meane, that makes the godly blessed to beholde their sinnes by faith in Christ; and not as the reprobate, either, not to see them at all, or, without faith to behold them. Of this meane, Da∣uid himselfe tooke happie hold-fast. For now, conducted by mercie, and faith, we see, how lustely hee leapes out from the hote-house of desperate temptations in which it seemes (at the making of this Psalme) he was deepely plunged, by the terror of a guiltie conscience, touched by the hand of God, for the sinne which he had committed with Barsheba. The ex∣tremity of his passions and the vehemen∣cie of his conflicts, are described in the 3. and 4. verses of this Psalme. Now this is not Dauids case alone; but it is certaine, that all the children of God, that are elec∣ted
 in his eternall purpose, in their times appointed, shal heare the like calling and tast of the like mercy. For manifestation of the which, wee may see an example of the same mercy, which the Lord shewed vnto a simple and sinfull man, the com∣mon Iailor of Phillippy; of whō in the 16. of the Acts ther is an honorable memorie left to al posterity. K. Dauid, & this Iaylor, were both sinners; both of them acknow∣ledged the hand of God heauie vpon thē for their sinnes; the one, called to repen∣tance by the voice of a man; the other, shaken from his drowsinesse, by the ter∣ror of an Earthquake; both felt comfort in their miseries, by the mercy of GOD, which kept them from desperation. The rarenes of which example, the great mer∣cy of God; and the singular instructions that rise, to the profit of such as deepely waigh the whole action; besides the ear∣nest desire of some, whose request I could not denie; haue drawne me now, to set downe certaine notes, and considerati∣ons touching the singular working of the spirit of God in this man, vttered long si∣thence vpon occasion; which I haue ter∣med,
 The Iaylors Conuersion.
This being the first thing of mine, that euer past the presse; I thought to make bold, to Dedicate it, to the first friend, that euer was truely possessed of my hart. The first fruits were stil most accepted & de∣sired of the Lord; The first childe, by na∣ture, is best beloued of the father: The first faith is euer most firme, most deare and sweete to the possessor: My first faith∣full affection, hath inforced me, to offer these simple first fruites, to you that had the gift of my first faith. Which affection you first wonne by curtesie, & after con∣firmed it by desert; which, being planted young, hath now growne to be olde: be∣ing begun long sithence, hath continued to this present, inuiolable; and as the greene bayes, (whome no tempest can blast) euer flourishing; & (so I hope) shal continue so long, as life shal giue leaue to loue. If I could as easily bestow on you, a great part of the world, as I doe willingly giue you this smal portiō of words, thogh you bee great already, yet would I make you greater: But seing words for want of welth, must shewe my will, consider in
 these words, not the words, but the wor∣king of the spirit of God. And I dare pre∣sume to say, that if you can imitate right∣ly this one example, these words in short time, though you bee good already, yet shall they make you better.
The Lord, that hath giuen you a great portion of faith, & hath bestowed on you great worldly blessings of wisedome and welth, increase this faith, & so dayly mul∣tiplie these blessings vpon you, that you may go forward, frō faith to faith, from vertue to vertue, from life to life, till in the day of the Lord, your imperfections being made perfect, you may receiue the Crowne of immortall glorie, prepared for such as loue the Lord vnfainedly. Ho∣niton in Deuon, this 30. daye of Iune. 1596.

