



Right Worshipfull and Worshipfull:
NEver age did afford more variety of Sermons, more Elegancy: who will blame choise where there is store and good, or feare to Surfet at the sight of too much, where the meate is wholesome and heavenly? Who, if not of a sowre sullennesse, will grudge others ,Heliodori Aethiop. lib. 3. what delights, but gluts not, what at once doth ravish and profit: where is mixt utile dulci, 'tis

a squeamish stomacke turnes at the plentie, and as rude an care, startles at all descant and harmony: My heart bubbleth out a good matter,  or if wePsal. 45. 1. reade it a good word, the Originall will be are us out; and indeed the intermixtures of polite phrase, gives to the matter it selfe, if not weight, yet ornament: divine truth must have a decent, though not gaudy dresse: were it so in this, or were it that. Chariclea's zone, of which Heliodorus tels us, ,Aethiop. lib. 3. it might be spread before your eyes, and perhaps attract at once your view and liking: but this were a taske for Apelles himselfe, my pencill cannot reach it: why so boldly than have I fixt your names here? I might alledge the custome of the Age
renet insanabile multos Scribendi cacoethes: not a Rheumaticke quill, but is dropping into the presse, though it drop tumours and froth onely; not an idle head, but is busie at the mart, and askes in his Athenian humour, what new things? allScribimus in∣docti, docti{que}, &c. buy, most out of lenity, all write, most out of fancy, it is not my private fault, I moove in the same Orbe with others: I pleade not this, nor any worthinesse in the peece it selfe, that it should look up to so high a Pa∣tronage: the life it had to please, is buried by the dis∣advantage of a dead letter: that which makes it Publique, and now sends it to kisse your hands, is to shew the world, where I have setled my Estimation and Service, where I am to pay the fealties and homage of my gratefull minde: to whom are the first fruits due, but to him, who bestowes the whole crop? I would not smoother the publi que fruits of charity in Any, the oyle of refreshing which you have powred on the heads of

thousands (& quorum pars magna fui, not a few drops fell on mine) I dare not silence it, and make GOD a looser: I cannot, the whole world sees and doth blesse you for it, sees the incense of your Aimes, how it ascends in pillars of holy smoke into the nostrils of GOD: your names thus enbalm'd shall never rot: thus much I tell others, whilest I make this publique addresse to you, pardon the rudenesse of it, 'tis a testi∣mony of your goodnesse, whereto I have set my hand, and a weake expression of my duty, sent you as a token of the gratitude of my heart: let him not want your candid Acceptance, who shall pray ever for your flourishing estates every way, and Pride himselfe to be thought

