



WHen as it pleased God by his publicke visi∣tation the last yeare, to call vs vnto Fa∣sting and mourning, and to mooue the Royall heart of our Soueraigne Lord the King, to proclaime a generall Fast to be ob∣serued weekly: I did acknowledge it to be my bounden du∣ty, (hauing according to direction of publicke authoritie, assembled the congregation ouer which I am placed, for the obseruation of those Fasts) first, to instruct them in the doctrine of fasting and prayer, and after to stirre them vp to the effectuall practise of these Christian duties. Where∣fore, after I had bestowed some paynes that way, I was in∣treated by a louing friend that I would not only set downe in writing a couple of my Sermons which especially handle the dutie of prayer; but also pen a Treatise of the Chri∣stian exercise of Fasting. The which I was the more easily persuaded vnto, because it was then alledged, and I knew not the contrarie, That there was very little written of this argument in the English tongue. Howbeit, I do now vnderstand, that not onely before that time, but also since I wrot this Treatise, (which I wholly finished the

last yeare) some others haue taken good paines in this kind. To whose godly labors this booke of mine, though publi∣shed after them, ought not to be preiudiciall, as though I had gathered into this short sum, what they and & others haue written more at large of this argument: for as I had fully finished this Treatise before I saw theirs, so haue I not since taken any thing from them.
This Treatise of the Christian exercise of Fasting, to∣gether with the other of Prayer, containing two Sermons on the 15 verse of the 50 Psalme (which were written in the due season, though published thus late, hauing waited at London euer since the last yeare vpon the printing of my Lectures on the 15. Psalme:) I now dedicat to your Worship, as a small token of my great loue, and a perpe∣tuall remembrance of mine vnfained thankfulnesse: Of my loue, in respect of your manifold vertues, wherewith I was long acquainted whiles we liued together in Christs Colledge, that famous seminarie of good learning and true godlinesse: Of my thankfulnesse, in regard not onely of your former goodwill, but also of your late fauours vouchsafed vnto me since you followed the Court. The Lord blesse you and enrich you with his graces, and in∣crease your fauour with God and man, to his glorie, and your owne endlesse comfort. Amen. 
Mondon in Hertfordshire, the 12. of Nouember. Anno 1604. 
