


TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFULL and truely religious Es∣quire, Mr. Edw. Benlowes of Brent-Hall in Essex R. W. wisheth Internall, Exter∣nall, and Eternall happinesse.
IT was well answered by him, who being asked, What this life was, said thus, It is nothing else but the Meditation of Death. If a man should ask me, What Time is, I think I might fitly answer thus, It is nothing else but the Meditation of Eternitie. Our Life is but a Posting unto Death; and our Time, a short dayes sail unto Eternitie. In this Time of Life we are, as

Pilgrims and Strangers, travelling towards our celestiall Countrey. We are as Sailers, bound for the Ha∣ven of Eternitie. But we must runne through many troubles be∣fore we can come to our journeys end: We must sail through salt and bitter waters, and passe through the Gulf of Death, be∣fore we can come to Land. There is a Land which is called The Land of the living; and there is a Land which is called The Land of Hor∣rour and Despair: There is a two-fold Eternitie; either of the Blessed, or of the Cursed: There is a two-fold Life, after Death; either in Eternall joyes, or Eternall pu∣nishments. It is good therefore in this short Life, to think upon that Life which never shall have end: It is good whilest we are on the way to think upon our Journeys end: It is good in Time, whilest we are sailing, to have an eye still upon our Compasse, and think upon Eternitie. To think upon Eterni∣tie, is a Soveraigne Preservative to keep us from falling into Sinne:

To think upon Eternall joyes, sweetens the salt and bitter waters of Sorrows and Afflictions: To think upon Eternall punishments, makes us not to set our hearts upon Temporall Delights and Pleasures. Heaven is even here on Earth in part enjoyed, whilest we raise up our thoughts to meditate upon it: And Hell may for ever be escaped, if by serious and frequent thoughts thereof, here in this life, we descend into it. Such thoughts as these mo∣ved Drexelius to write these CON∣SIDERATIONS, and me also to translate them. He wrote upon a Generall subject; And every man may challenge a part in it. What he wrote, he intended for a publick benefit; And so did I in the trans∣lating of it. I hope He and His shall finde never the worse entertain∣ment, because He is a Stranger, and come from beyond seas. It is the honour of our Nation, to be kinde and courteous unto Strangers. He was commended unto me by a Tra∣veller, a most religious and learned Gentleman (Be not angry with me,

Mr. Benlowes, if I say, He was as like you as can be in every respect; For indeed he was) bred and brought up in the Romish Religion, and sent beyond seas to be confirm∣ed in it, but yet brought home again by divine providence and restored to his Mother the Church of England, for the Conversion, I hope, of many, singled out of all his kindred to be a most zealous Protestant, born to good Fortunes, and yet not given to Pleasures, wedded to his Books and Devoti∣on, spending what some call idle time in the best companie for the edifying himself or others; count∣ing nothing good which he posses∣seth but onely that which he doth good withall; taking more care to lay out his money for the good of others, then others, in laying up money for themselves. To con∣clude, A Gentleman of whom I may most truely say, That his Con∣versation is in heaven, his Dis∣course on things above, and his thoughts upon Eternitie. Upon such a mans commendation as this,

I could not but take a liking to the party commended, and the more I grew acquainted with him, the more I liked him. It is the counsell of Horace,
Tu quem commendes etiam atque etiam aspice: nè mox
Incutiant aliena tibi commissa pu∣dorem.
Beleeve me, Mr. Benlowes, I have had such experience of this party, whom here I commend unto you, that I dare confidently say, If you entertain him into your service, you shall never repent you of it. Philip of Macedon appointed one every Morning to salute him with a Me∣mento of Mortalitie: Drexelius his office shall be, if you please, To be your Remembrancer, and every Mor∣ning, Noon, and Evening, to round you in the eare with a Memento of Eternitie. But, I know, That is so often in your thoughts, that you need not any to put you in Re∣membrance of it. Neither yet do I intend here, though I have a fair

occasion, to run over the Catalogue of your Christian Vertues, specially that pair of Christian twins, your Pietie and Temperance, with your Charity and Bounty. For the first, they that daily converse with you cannot but see how you converse with them. The other pair go along with you wheresoever you go, and though you desire to hide them, cannot be concealed: in speciall many poore Scholars, godly and de∣vout Ministers in the Universitie, and abroad, of severall Colledges, have had a feeling themselves of them, and cannot but make them conspicuous nay palpable to others. These shall praise you in your ab∣sence: for my part, I do not love to praise a man to his face. But if the living hold their peace, the dead shall rise up and praise you, I mean those many and excellent books to∣gether with other rare monuments purchased at a great price, which without any sollicitation at all, out of meere affection you bore to Saint Johns Colledge in Cambridge, where you were sometimes a Student, you

have bestowed on their Librarie: Their Librarie, but the most ma∣gnificent work, and Eternall Mo∣nument of the Mecoenas of our age, John Lord Bishop of Lincoln, the true lover of learning, and Patron of Scholars. And now it appeares, Mr. Benlowes, that you have lesse need of Drexelius his service, then before. But howsoever, I pray you, entertain him: Let him have but the honour to weare your Cogni∣zance: And both He and I will put it upon the file of Thankfull Remembrance, and register it for a singular act of your Beneficence. Pardon my boldnesse in this▪ And command me in what liberall ser∣vice you please.

From Kings Coll.
June 1. 1632.
