



ALbeit (most noble Sir) the doctrine of the restitution of this whole vni∣uerse, and the renouation of the principall creatures therein con∣tained, may be thought to bee cu∣rious, intricate, doubtfull, and to minister oc∣casion of scorne, or errour to the ignorant and those that are carnally minded; and albeit the doctrine of the glorious resurrection of the bo∣dies of the Saints in the same matter and sub∣stance, be doubted of, by the curious; denied by infidells; and impugned by diuers Heretikes and Atheists, yet both these doctrines and assertions, whereof the latter is an Article and maine foun∣dation of Faith, are plainely proued by plentifull and pregnant testimonies of Scripture, euinced by euidence of Arguments, and subscribed vnto by consent of the best Diuines both ancient and moderne. That there shall be, at the second com∣ming

of our Lord Iesus (which shall not bee be∣fore Rome be ruinated, and the dispersed Iewes generally conuerted to Christianitie) a glorious restorement and reformation of the world: Of these visible heauens, with their lights, eyes, starres: and of the earth, and (in all probability) of all such, plants, trees, beasts, birds, hearbs, which were created by God in the sixe dayes, and which shall be found remaining at the day of the Lord, it is sufficiently proued in this present Ser∣mon. Yet that I may giue your Lordship some tast and touch, these places and arguments im∣mediatly following, are forcible, and duly to bee considered. First, there shall be a newe (outward) heauen, and a newe earth, (new I say for qualitie Isay 65. 17. 2. Pet. 3. 13. but not for substance) wherin dwelleth righteousnes, (that is) righteous men, yet by entercourse, and not by any continuall residence. Secondly Saint Paul saith  that is, wee know, that euery creature groaneth after this glorious libertie, Rom. 8. 22. therefore the Apostle taketh this restitution as a thing granted. Thirdly, the creatures shall bee changed, namely into a better forme, ergo they shall not bee eternally abolished. Fourthly, the inward supernaturall and constant desire of the creatures, to be fully and finally freed from vanity and the bondage of manifold abuses, and with∣all (in their maner and proportion) to be restored into the glorious libertie of Gods children, doth euince as much. Fifthly, sinne, the corrupting cause of the creatures, shall at the last iudgement wholy cease, therefore the corruption and abuse

of the creature; shall then likewise cease. Sixthly, God who is the God of order, and not the au∣thor of confusion, will at length, rectifie and re∣forme whatsoeuer hath bin and is, disordered and deformed. Seuenthly, Christ our mighty Sauiour, the second Adam, and the Lord from heauen heauenly must & shal cure euery wound, that the first Adam, and that sinne and Sathan haue inflicted. Eightly, the Apostle proueth the certaintie of eternall life, by the secret desire of the creature after this time; wherein it shall bee gloriously renewed. Ninthly, Gods elect must, and shal wholy recouer the dominion ouer other creatures, which by Adams fall, they haue (in great part) lost, and then the mecke shall (in their maner) inherit the Earth, and none but they, but now for Matth. 5. ver. 5. the most part, Tyrants, and Gods enemies vsur∣pingly possesse it. Lastly, (to omit the generall consent of later and most worthy Writers) Saint Theodoret, Ambrose, Oecumenius &c. hold and ac∣knowledge this particular restitution. Neither must it be thought that the Creatures renewed shall engender, or multiplie; for as there is, and shall be no engendring, nor multiplication of the A Parable. Saints in heauen (notwithstanding the distincti∣on of male and female shall remaine;) so shall there be no multiplication, much lesse in infini∣tum, of plants, beasts, birds, in the renewed earth. Touching the vse and end of the creatures, they shall serue to set forth Gods power, wisedome, mercy, goodnes, and shall serue for the Saints delight & con∣templation, and not otherwise. And as for al other

cauils and obiections of any moment. I suppose I haue sufficiently answered them in the booke.
Now that the bodies of Gods children (though for the present vile, mortall, deformed, miserable &c, shall at the last day arise againe in power, glorie, incorruption, and that in the same substance with all their parts and dimensions, in few words I thus demonstrate. First, the Scrip∣tures of the old and new Testament do abun∣dantly declare it.
Secondly, sundry types and figures of the old law, and the rising of diuers Saints, both in the old and also the new Testament, (at least) to a temporall life, are good inducements hereunto. Thirdly, the Saints bodies, being the Temples of the holy Ghost, and being redeemed by Christ, as well as their soules, must of necessitie bee glo∣rified, as well as their soules. Fourthly, the resur∣rection is grounded vpon Gods almightines, and Matth. 22. 20. vpon his infallible promises. Fifthly, Christ our head, to whom we must be made conformable, arose againe in the same bodie and substance that Phil. 3. 20. hee died in; therefore our bodies shall in like sort, arise againe. Lastly (not to exceed the skantling of an Epistle) the bodies of the Saints must come to iudgement, as well as their soules; and there∣fore they must needes rise againe. Concerning the sundry and sweete comforts that the holy me∣ditation of the Resurrection affordeth vs. I haue distinctly laid them forth in the Treatise. Where∣fore the matter being so vsefull, so desirously heard in the greatest auditorie, and worthy of an

honourable and iudicious Patron, I haue vpon iust causes, and due deliberation presumed to en∣title it to your Honour, and to commend it to your patronage: For first, to whom should the de∣dication of it, of better right appertaine then to a noble Caedar in Gods Church: A Mecenas of lear∣ned men, a Sheild of Iustice, a sincere Israelite, and to one that in Stafford-shire shineth, as the Sunne amongst the lesser Starres.
Secondly, your Lordship is knowne to be very learned, and studious & a diligent hearer of your painefull and godly preaching Minister Master Macham: Lastly, it hath pleased the right Reue∣rend father in God, and my singular good Lord, the Bishop of Couentry and Lichfieild, in his re∣spectiue compassion towards mee, to procure for mee, and seate mee in the vicaredge of Coll-wich, a fewe miles distant from your Honours dwel∣ling house, and therefore I would be glad to haue so noble a protector neere mee. And thus, most humbly requesting your Lordships fauour, and gratious acceptation of these my meditations, I betake your blessed Lordship, together with your most vertuous, and zealously religious La∣die, vnto the continuall tuition, and heauenly gouernment of the Almightie.

