



THe wisdom, power, and prouidence of God, as it doth (right Honoura∣ble) most eminently and admira∣bly appeare and shine forth in the frame, preseruation and gouern∣ment of the vniuersall world, and of all things therein conteined: so in the mystery and matter of predestination, in the illumination and blinding, saluation and condemnation both of Iewes and Gentiles, it is most deepe, yea & past mans found∣ing out. For who can comprehend the depth of Gods councell, or render any particular reason of it? why God, who had amongst all the nations of the earth elected and selected the Iewes to be his onely pecu∣liar and beloued people, with whom he made such a singular couenant of mercy and saluation, to whom appertained the adoption,Rom 9. v. 4. & 5. the glory, the lawe, the ser∣uice of God, of whom are the Fathers, and of whom (concerning the flesh) Christ came who is God blessed for euer-more, should for so many hundred years, euen from the Apostles preaching vnto our dayes, gene∣rally cutt and cast them off from being his people and Church? and by occasion of their vnbeliefe and desertion, haue in their roome and stead, so generally in all countries and kingdoms of the world, adopted and substituted vs Gentiles,Rom. 11.17. Deut. 32.21. Ephes. 2.12. who formerly were no∣thing but Wilde Oliues, no people, not beloued, strangers from the Couenants of promise, without Christ, without hope, without God in the world?
The reason (I say) and mouing cause of Gods decree and councel, is vnserchable and past finding out; yet if we duly examine and consider the euent, and exe∣cution of it, we cannot but discerne & acknowledge that God hath most iustly reuenged himselfe vpon the Iewes & powred out his wrath vpon them to the vtmost. For before Christ his incarnation, they often misused,1 Thess. 2. ver. 15▪ and 16. derided, persecuted, & slew Gods prophets, & since they refused & murdered the Lord of glory, they forbad his Apostles to preach to vs Gentiles, they persecuted and killed them, and from that time to this present houre, cease not to blaspheme & spi out their venim against Christ his church, his gospel and his seruants. And yet, (notwithstanding all this) is it not a mistery to bee wondred at and adored, that God hath in all ages of the Church, chosen & reserued to himself, and called to Christ a remnant of them, which is vndoubtedly, a fore-runner and ar∣gument of their generall conuersion not far off. Se∣condly it is a maruelous worke of God, & not with∣out his mistery, that the Iewes (howsoeuer wandring and dispersed in al countries almost,) should stil con∣tinue such a distinct and vnconfounded nation, so in∣numerable in multitude, and so constant in the keep∣ing and obseruing of (as much as they possible may) their ancient lawes, rites, and ceremonies. Thirdly they haue bin in the times of greatest persecutions, when the tirants of the world sought to extinguish, and root out the scriptures (and still are) the faithfull keepers & preseruers of the old testament: & all this may put vs in some good hope of their future calling and conuersion. Lastly God hath (as Saint Paul mani∣festly proueth,) made an euident promise of their plenary calling & saluation, when the full number of

vs Gentiles, is (successiuely) come into the church.
Thus seeing their miserable state for the time past, and also at this present, and that a remnant is alway remayning, & the conuersion of the nation of them is dayly expected; we must not passe by so memorable a worke of God without vse & application. By their fall and apostacy wee must not only iustifie, but also tremble & stand in awe of Gods iudgments, feare to offend the diuine Maiesty, and beware least through vnbeleife, contempt of the gospel and profaine secu∣rity, we at length attract & draw the like iudgments vpon our selues. Secondly, in that so great a multi∣tude of them shalbe againe ingrafted into Christ and beleiue the gospell, we must be so farre from despise∣ing them, or scandalizing them by our ill life and ex∣ample, & from despairing of their saluation, that we must heartily pray for them, and by our zealous pro∣fession and holy life and conuersation study & striue, through the working of the holy Ghost, to reduce them into the right way.
Lastly, Christian Monarches & Magistrates must not only by enacting and execution of seuere lawes, represse their vile and intolerable vsuries, whereby they plague & oppresse many poore Christians, and punish with al sharpnesse their horrible blasphemies against Christ and his gospell, but cause them being vnder their authority & subiection to be by degrees instructed in Christian religion, and for the sooner effecting of it, to compell them to heare the gospell. Then shall the miserable and seduced Iewes bee brought home, the world reuiued, the hearts of Gods people replenished with vnspeakeable ioy, all nations shal glorifie God in Christ, and we shal al in short time be fully & finally, perfected and glorified.
This is (most noble Lady) the summe and subiect of this small volumne, which hoping that it will bee profitable and comfortable to many, I thought good to publish it, and in many respects mee mouing, to commend the protection and patronage of it, to your Honour.
First your Honour, is zealous, religious, wise, and learned, and alwaies haue beene (and still are) in these regards; illustrious and renowned.
Secondly, you to your greatnesse, ioyne goodnesse▪ to your honor, humilitie; and to your knowledge, Chiristian kindnesse and benigniie, and therefore you cannot but accept of, iudge of, and read at your leasure, any sound and holesome treatise that direc∣teth and furthereth you therein. Lastly, I am so deep∣ly obliged and indebted vnto your most noble and religious Parents, and to the honourable, studious, and hopefull Knight your brother, that the signifi∣cation of my thankfulnesse doth in equity also belong vnto your Honour.
Wherefore I most humbly beseech you, gratiously to respect my small labours▪ and to make vse of them for your edification. Thus desiring your good accep∣tance, and crauing pardon for my boldnesse, I pray the God of heauen to encrease you in all honour and grace, to make you a noble Cedar in his house, a bright Starre in his Church, fruitfull in all good workes, happy & blessed in your good courses, and after ful∣nesse of age, faith, and felicitie, to crowne you with euerlasting glory in his heauenly kingdome. Amen.
Couentry.
Nouember. 1608.

