



EVEN as (right worshipfull) it was the
commendable and diligent practise of
the Prophets and holy men of God (for
the encrease of their comfort and confir∣mation
of their faith) to calculate,1 Pet. 1. v. 10
and 11. by
the direction of the word of God, and to
search and enquire out the very time of
Christ his incarnation, his death, his glorification. So in sem∣bable
sort, it as much concerneth vs, vpon the ends of the
world are come, and who haue both promises and signes of
Christ his second appearance at hand for our perfit redempti∣on
and full saluation, to take due notice of them, to serch into
them and obserue the accomplishment of them in their proper
times. Our rule of direction, must not be humaine collections,
fained prophecies and reuelations, Astrologicall conictures,
Arithmetical computations, for these are vaine, vncertain, de∣ceitfull,
as the euent in all ages doth demonstrate: but it must
bee onely the written word of God, which albeit it hath not re∣ueiled
the daie, nor the yeare, nor the definite time of Christ his
second comming, yet it hath left vnto vs many generall yet
vndoubted signes and forerunners of it, which are some of
them, wholy expired, some of them in present motion and pro∣gresse
and others yet wholy to come. These signes and predicti∣ons
if wee serch them out, weye and make vse of them, (as they
are described in holy scriptures) wee shall not onely bee contai∣ned
and preserued from Atheisme and vnbeleefe, the common
sinne of the world, and bee kept from all ras, foolish and vn∣grounded

urisities, but also bee effectually and continually
stired vp to prepare our selues in Faith, Hope and Repentance
against Christ his comming, and we shal in all trialls and temp∣tations
whatsoeuer might comfort our hearts in that our Re∣demption
is so nigh at hand.
This doctrine, being of so notable vse and profit, (especially
for the Godly and sober minded,) I thought good to publish it
and vpon good considerations to recommend it to your worships
patronage. First you for learning, iudgement and experienc
are very sufficient to iudge of it. Secondly your vertuous affec∣tion
and most religious disposition will (no doubt) finde comfort
and contentment in it. Thirdly, your fauonr, grace and au∣thoritie
beeing tempered with so much humanitie and humili∣tie,
 not (I hope) be wanting. Lastly (not to be tedious) I
can by no other meanes so well testifie my thankefull dutie for
your late and extraordinary kindenesse both in word and deed,
testified towards me.
Wherefore, most humbl entreating your acceptance, and
requesting you to make vse of my short obseruations, I here,
most humbly take my leaue. The Lord, blesse, preserue and
prosper your worship, as likewise the Noble, and vertuous La∣die,
the Ladie Puckering your wise: and infulness
of daies and Faith, glorifie you both
in the Heauens.
Couentry: Iuly 1608. 
