



AMongst all the tem∣porary and ordi∣nary penalties and punishmēts of mās transgression: sure∣ly, sicknesses, disea∣ses, malladies, ach∣es, yea most of all, death it selfe, to∣gether with all their seuerall acci∣dents, and temptations, are most grieuous, yrkesome, and vnwel∣come. For they are simply in them∣selues, and in their owne nature cō∣sidered, plagues and curses, & they produce fearefull effects, in the vn∣regenerate, namely impatiency, vn∣quiet nesse, horrour, blasphemy, des∣peration,

and the practise of vnlaw∣full cures and remedies. Where∣fore it is (right worshipful) a worke of no meane art, skil & experience, soundly to catechize the sick, to rec∣tifie their iudgements, to bring thē to a true sense & confidence of sin, to begette faith in them, to cause them in hope and patiency to wait vpon God, & to prepare them to dye well and blessedly; but it is opus & labor. It requyreth the tonge of the learned, and a messenger (or interpreter) one of a thousand, such as haue bin of late times Mr Spineus, and Mr Perkins, two bright and glo rious stars in the French and Eng∣lish Firmament, but now Saintes in heauen, who haue learnedly and largely trauaild in this point.
Wherefore it may seme a need∣les matter for any man to write fur∣ther of this subiect, & my self may bee thought morebolde then wise,

in presuming to put forth any newe matter, or to change or ad ought: yet because no mans worke is abso∣lutely perfect, and for that variety of treatises is both delightsome and desireable, and because the fraile memory, and the simple capacity of very many cannot comprehend large and profound discourses, but best profiteth by short and easy instructions.
I haue vppon these groundes, drawne and contracted the large treatises of the aboue-named Au∣thors into plaine and compendious questions & answers, with diuers additions and illustrations of mine owne, hoping that in the dilligent reading hereof, the ignorant shall get knowledge, the wauering finde resolution, the distressed receiue comfort, the presumptious bee humbled, the tempted armed against Satans assaultes, and all

that are well affected, bee prepared for God, and directly guided to eternall glory. Wherefore vppon this expectation, & also induced by the earnest request of a much re∣spected friend, I haue thought good to publish it, and vpon due conside∣ration, to consecrate and commend it to your fauourable protection & patronage. For first, you are very learned, and wil iudge well, you are most kind and curteous, and wil take all in good part, and you are vnfain∣edly relligious, and wil giue inter∣tainment to any matter of godly∣nesse. Secondly you in an heroicall zeale and rsolution, haue both in the time of Queen Elizabeth a Prin∣cesse of most renowned memory & of incomparable excellency, & sith∣ence, fought for Christ & his blessed Gospell, and therefore what thing more pleasing vnto you then mat∣ters of religion & consciēce? Lastly

hauing receiued so manifold kind∣nesses from you, I can by none o∣ther meanes better testifie my thankful heart. Thus intreating your worshippe to read, accept off, and make vse of my Catechisme, and yeelding you many thankes for all your fauours, I heare most hum∣bly take my leaue.
God almighty who hath giuen you recouery of health, and increase of spirituall comfort in a religious Cittie, perfit both the one and the other in you; blesse and protect you and your most godly and vertuous Lady, grant you both a long and blessed life in this world, and consu∣mation of holynesse and happinesse in the world to come.
February. 12. 1609.

