



AFter that I had ta∣ken
vpon me (right Hono∣rable)
in manner of that vn∣learned
and foolish poet Che∣rillus,
(who rashly, and vn∣aduisedly,
wrote a bigge vo∣lume
in verses of the gestes
and valiant prowesse of A∣lexander
the great) to trans∣late
this present booke, con∣teyninge
the Metamorphosy of Lucius Apuleius: beynge
moued therunto by the right pleasant pastime, and de∣lectable
matter therein: I eftsones consulted with my
selfe, to whome I might best offer so pleasant and woor∣thy
a woorke, deuised by the Author, it beyng now bar∣barously
and simply framed in our Englishe tongue.

And after longe deliberatiō had, your Honorable Lord∣shippe
came to my remembrance, a man muche more
woorthy then to whome so homely and rude a transla∣tion
should be presented. But when I againe remem∣bred
the iestinge and sportfull matter of the booke vn∣fitte
to be offred to any man of grauitie and wisedome,
I was wholly determined to make no Epistle dedica∣tory
at all: till as now of late, perswaded thereunto by
my fréendes, I haue boldly enterprised to offer the
same to your Lordshippe, who as I trust will with no
lesse good will accept the same, then if it did entreate of
some serious & loftie matter, consideryng that although
the matter therein séeme very light, and mery, yet the
effect thereof tendeth to a good and vertuous morall, as
in the followynge Epistle to the Reader may be cléerly
perceaued. For so hath all wryters in times paste em∣ployed
their trauell and labours, that their posteritie
might receaue some fruictfull profite by the same. And
therefore the Poetes feigned not their fables in vaine,
consideringe that children in time of their first studies,
are muche allured thereby to procéede to more graue
and déepe disciplines, whereas otherwise their mindes
would quickly lothe the wise and prudent woorkes of
learned men, wherein in suche vnripe yéeres they take
no sparke of delectation at all. And not onely that pro∣fite
arriseth to children by suche feigned fables, but al∣so
the vertues of men are couertly thereby commen∣ded,
and their vices discommended and abhorred. For
by the fable of Actaeon, where it is feigned, that when he
sawe Diana washinge her selfe in a well, he was imme∣diatly

turned into a Hart and so was slayne of his owne
Dogges: may be ment that when a man casteth his eies,
on the vaine and soone vadynge beautie of the worlde,
consentinge thereto in his minde, he seemeth to be tur∣ned
into a brute beast, and so to be slayne thorough the
inordinate desire of his owne affectes. By Tantalus
that standeth in the middest of the floode Eridan hauynge
before him a tree laden with pleasant apples, he beyng
neuerthelesse alwaies thursty and hungry, betokeneth
the insatiable desire of couetous persons. The Fa∣bles
of Atreus, Thiestes, Tereus and Progne signifieth the
wicked and abhominable factes wrought and attemp∣ted
by mortall men. The fall of Icarus is an example to
proude and arrogant persons that weeneth to clymbe
vp to the Heauens. By Mydas, who obteined of Bacchus
that all thinges whiche he touched mought be Golde,
is carped the foule sinne of auarice. By Phaeton, that
vnskilfully toke in hande to rule the Charriot of the
Sunne, are represented those persons whiche attempt
thinges passinge their power and capacitie. By Castor
and Pollux, turned into a signe in Heauen called Gemini,
is signified, that vertuous and godly persons shalbe
rewarded after life with perpetuall blisse. And in this
fable or feigned ieste of Lucius Apuleius is comprehended
a figure of mans life, ministringe moste swéete and de∣lectable
matter, to such as shalbe desirous to Reade the
same. The whiche if your Honorable Lordshippe shal
accept and take in good parte, I shall not onely thinke
my small trauell and labour well employed, but also
receaue a farther comforte to attempt some more se∣rious

matter whiche may be more acceptable to your
Lordshippe: desiring the same, to excuse my rashe and
olde enterprise, at this time, as I nothinge doubte in
your Lordshippes goodnesse. To whome I beséeche Al∣mighty
God to imparte longe lyfe with increase of
much Honour.
From Vniuersitie Colledge in Oxforde
the .xviij. of September. 1566.

