




RArest of Ladies, all, of all I haue,
Anchor of my poore Tempest-beaten state,
Which giuest life, to that life Nature gaue,
And to thy selfe, doest onely consecrate:
My hopes true Goddesse, guider of my fate,
Vouchsafe to grace what here to light is brought,
Begot by thy sweet hand, borne of my thought.


And though I sing of this tumultuous rage,
Still paynting passions in these Tragedies,
Thy milder lookes, this furie can aswage,
Such is the vertue of thy sacred eyes,
Which doe contayne a thousand purities;
And lyke them selues, can make their obiect such,
As doth Th'elixar all things it doth tuch.


Sweet fruite, sprong from that euer sacred tree,
That happie wombe from whom thou lyfe do'st take,
And with that lyfe, giues vertue vnto thee,
Thus made of her, her lyke of thee to make,
Shee lou'd for thee, thou honour'd for her sake;
And eithers good, from other so deriued,
Yet shee, nor thou, of any due depriued.



The Harringtons, whose house thy byrth hath blest,
Adding such honour to theyr familie,
And famous Bedfords greatnes still increast,
Raysing the height of theyr Nobilitie,
That Earledomes tytle more to dignifie?
That Vertue lyuely pictur'd forth in thee,
May truly be discernd, what shee should be.


And Lawrell-crowned Sidney, Natures pride,
Whom heauen to earth, but onely shew'd this good,
Betwixt the world, and thee did then deuide,
His fame, and vertues, which both equall stood,
The world his fame, to thee of her owne blood
Hee gaue his vertues, that in his owne kind,
His neuer-matched worth might be enshrin'd.


That whilst they boast but of their sun-burnt brayns,
Which Tramontani long haue termd vs so,
With all their Po's, their Tyburs, and their Rheyn's,
Greeuing to see how tidefull Thames shall flowe,
Our Groues which for the gracefull Muses growe:
Thy name shall be the glorie of the North,
The fayrest fruit that euer shee brought forth.


And in despight of tyranizing times,
This hope great Lady yet to thee is left,
Thy name shall lyue in steele-out-during rimes,
Still scorning ages sacraligious theft,
What fame doth keepe, can neuer be bereft:
Nor can thy past-priz'd honour euer die,
If lynes can gyue thee immortalitie.



Leauing vnto succeeding times to see,
How much thy sacred gyfts I did adore.
What power thy vertues euer had in mee,
And what thou wer compar'd with those before,
Which shall in age, thy youth againe restore:
And still shall ad more vigor to thy fame,
Then earthly honors, or a Countesse name.


Proclayming vnto ages yet to come,
Whilst Bedford lyu'd, what lyuing Bedford was,
Enclosing thee in this immortall toombe,
More durable then letter-grauen brasse,
To shewe what thy great power could bring to passe,
And other hopes I vtterly refuse,
And thou my hope, my Lady, and my Muse.


