


not perpetual, and they in the meatime, are not exempted frō all euils▪ And what if in the greatest danger: some Iosephs, some Daniels, and some Hesters, are both fauoured and ad∣uanced? yet this is very rare and ex∣traordinarie. Therfore it behooued euery seruant of God, while she hat time and meanes, to prepare an arme himselfe against all future e∣uents and temptations; and for th end to put on the girdle of constan∣cie; and in the truth, to bee ready to confesse the Gospell of peace; to take vnto himselfe the Shield of faith tri∣umphant in Christ; to couer his head with the hope of saluation in∣stead of an helmet; and with the sword of the spirit .i. with testimonies of the scriptures, to offend and foile these spirituall Amalekites: and here∣unto to adioyne feruent and conti∣nuall prayers, without which all this spirituall armour will little auaile. Thus doing, hee shall find light in darknes, consolation in tribulation,

power in weakenesse, and in all his trials, he shall bee more then a tri∣umpher in Christ. And for his fur∣ther encouragement, let him remē∣ber, that in this warfare, the Lord Ie∣sus is the Generall; godly Kings and Princes the Coronels; the Nobles, Iudges, and Iustices, are the Cap∣taines; the Ministers of the Church, the Trumpetters and Centinels; the Angels the assistants; God the Iudge, and Rewarder; and eternall glory, the monument & trophy of triumph. This preparation being so necessary, and the comforts so needfull, and so a∣bundantlie set forth in the sacred scriptures; I haue (according to my mediocrity) from thence chiefly, borrowed my spirituall armorie, and haue reduced and contriued the whole doctrine of it, into certaine chapters and pithy grounds & pro∣positions. And to the intent, that the Church of God should find cō∣fort and profit by it, I thought good to publish it. And because you (most

excellent Lady) are the Phoenix o your sexe, a glorious starre in our fir∣mament, and so ful of princely piety, vertue and clemency; I haue presu∣med to offer these my labours to your Graces view, and to commend them to your Graces patronage. For wherein should so noble a Lady in her young and flourishing yeares, more labour to excell, then to bee a conqueresse ouer sinne and satan? For such holie beginnings, cannot but bring forth blessed conclusions.
Vouchsafe therefore (most grati∣ous Lady) to pardon my bold enter∣prise, and to shelter these my medi∣tations vnder the wings of your Graces fauour. In humble desire, and comfortable expectation whereof, I commit your Grace to the blessed gouernement of the highest Maiesty. Couentry, March 30. 1611.

