


DEARE Ne∣phew,
if the Church of GOD re∣ceive any benefit by this my labour her obligati∣on will bee acknowled∣ged unto you for the same. For in the answer which I made unto the
 Cardinall Du Perron, when it happened I had improvidently omitted the Chapter which trea∣teth of an unknowne tongue: You advertised me of that defect, and moved me to supply the same. I have condescen∣ded to your motion, and have composed this Treatise, which I heere tender unto you. You shall receive it, if you please, for a testimony of my hearty affection, and of that joy which I receive by seeing you serve in the worke of the
 Lord with so great ap∣plause. It is a comfort to me amidst so many desolations to see that God causeth to spring up lights to shine in the darknesse which grow thicker from day to day. For seeing God raiseth up good work-men and labourers, it is a signe that he will yet leave us some harvest. Hee who from your infancie hath indued his feare, and hath set you apart for his service, will cloath you with strength, and with courage not to faint un∣der
 the burthen. For you are entred upon your charge in a time where∣in you shall have need of double zeale, and of an holy magnanimitie: It shall be a great honour for you to stand in the breach, and in the shock of the maine battle: and amidst the darknesse of the time to be the bea∣rer of so faire a light. There shall you have ex∣perience of those suc∣cours, which God pro∣miseth to those which love him, and who e∣steeme it a great honour
 and gaine to loose their lives or goods for his service. He, who hath given unto trees, which grow on the tops of the rocks, stronger roots, be∣cause they are more ex∣posed to the boisterous∣nesse of the winds, will give unto you also strength according to the measure of the com∣bats, whereunto he will expose you. The match indeed seemeth very unequall, and the enter∣prise no lesse difficult, e∣ven as if with pinnes we should take in hand to
 supplant a rocke. But we must remember, that we defend Gods cause, who is wont to use the wea∣kest tooles or instru∣ments for the effecting of his workes of won∣der: that the glory of the successe might not be at∣tributed to our strength. And that the heavenly truth, were it plunged downe unto bottome of the bottomelesse deeps, might at last regaine the upper hand. And as the Church is more firme then the world; seeing the world was made for
 it. VVhereunto may be applied what is written of the cittie of Iericho, to wit, that he that built it, laid her foundation upon his first borne. The same God, who at the sound of Iosua's trū∣pets made his enemies walls to fall flat to the ground, will one day make to fall downe the walls of Babylon at the blast of the trumpet of the Gospell. But if by reasō of the ingratitude of this stiffe-neckt age, God putteth off unto a∣nother time so excellent
 a worke, we which have sowed on earth with small successe, shall not faile to reape abundant∣ly in heaven. We beare, like Gedeons souldiers, this light in earthen ves∣sels: namely, in weake bodies, the breaking whereof will be happie and honourable, if it may but serve to set forth in sight the light of the Gospell. For wee which preach the Crosse of Christ, should we be exempted from it? VVe that beare this arke, should not we passe first
 thorow this Iordan? be∣ing patternes not onely in doctrine, but also in zeale and in all vertue? as for me, having pre∣sently finished my course, & heartily brea∣thing after that rest, which God hath pro∣mised to them that feare him, I reioyce to leave behinde mee men en∣dued vvith his graces in greater measure: and particularly a Nephew, vvhom I have loved with a fatherly affecti∣on: vvho treading in the steps of a vertuous fa∣ther,
 and vvhose memo∣rie is as a blessing to the Church of God, shall surpasse and much out∣strip his predecessors, and shall be an example unto posteritie. But vvhilst I am in this temporall abode you owe mee the releefe of your prayers, as I also on my part doe beseech Almighty God to giue you grace to bee unto him a faithfull servant, and to fight the good fight, and to bring forth fruit unto his glorie.

From Sedan
this 6. of August. 1629.

