



RIght Reverend, at the first that I was intrea∣ted by Authority to this Sermon, I intended it only to be, filium horae, the sonne of an houre, o die as soone as my breath should ex∣ire, but only so much of it as the holy host should quicken in their harts who eard me that day: but scarse being out f the Pulpit, I found to be true by expe∣ence, whichEnch. c. 15. Epictetus affirmeth to fal t in every businesse () That every thing, especially a Sermon; th two handles; some, both Ho. and
 VVor. tooke it by the right eare, & ac¦cepted of it beyond its worth; others b the left eare, haling it to a farthe sense then (God knoweth) ever it was inten¦ded. The maine scope was to cry dow the Supremacy of Rome, where by reaso of those words, To te King as to the Super¦our, in the order of my Text, I was occa¦sioned to say somewhat of the Immun¦tie of Kings from al coactiue power of thei subiects. All that I said was not much, eu no more, then hath beene said befor me,Can. to∣tā de poen. dist. 3. Solum principem soli Deo hbere de pe¦cato reddere rationem, and againe,Can. ali∣orum 9. q. 3 Soli coe debere Innocentiae rationem. A doctrine thinke, neuer denied in print by any, vn¦tillVindiciae contra Ty∣rannos. Brutus, andDe Iure regni apud Scotos. Buchanan, andDe Iustâ abdicatio∣ne Hen. 3. Bo¦chier , vsing or abusing rathe their malitious zeale to treasonable oc¦casions, did embase the mettall of th Crowne, and put theDan. 2. golden head  the picture vnder its foot of clay, & sub¦iected
 Kings to the mercie of their people. That which I then spake, was delivered n their words, from whom I borrowed t, and sure I am in their time held to be good and sound divinity, and I cannot yet vnderstand the contrary, but true & necessary for these times also; when, if ever we haue occasion to preach over & over againe that Text of Scripture,Ps. 105.15. Touch ot mine Annointed, and oe my Prophets no arme. VVhē the sacred Maiestie of Kings s made so vulgar, that many lesse trem∣ble to cut the throat of their Soveraigne,Sam. 24. v. 6. then David to cut off the winge of Saules garment. And when, had not our Gracious Soueraigne both Regium & Sacerdotalem a∣nimum, as Leo hath it of good Theodosius,Epist. 17. ad Theod. semp. Aug. Aarons rod, and the pot of Manna, would both bee snatched out of the Arke by prophane hands, and peradventure the Arke it selfe be giuen vp into the hands of the Philistims. The phrase is popular
 and easie, applied to the auditory which then was mixt, and I would haue that to commend a Sermon which doth com∣mend an honest woman,Ep. Ench. cap. 62. Modestia non for∣ma. VVhatsoeuer it is either for matter or manner, I humbly offer it vnto your Lordships censure; and if your L. shal en∣courage me, I will step farther abroad.
Propert.Crescet & ingenium sub tua iussa meum. If otherwise, it shall be my excuse that I haue ventred thus far only to giue satis∣faction to the world, and to beare true witnesse to mine owne innocency:Serm. 1. in anniversa∣rio assūpt. Eius ad Sum. pont. Rom. cul∣men & o∣nus. & my prayer for your L. ever shalbe the same of B. Leo for himselfe, Qui ibi honoris est author, ipse fiat administrationis adjutor, det virtutem, qui contulit dignitatem.

