

Right Honorable,
Most Worthy:
THat great and wise
Monarch, King
SALOMON, said
long since, that
there is no end of
making Bookes,Eccles. 12. 12. and much studie
is a wearinesse of the flesh.
Which Paradoxe was neuer
more verefied, then in these de∣generate
dayes of Vanity, when
ignorant as well as wise men
will bee still writing of them∣selues,
whereby the Presse is
euen oppressed with multipli∣citie

of such idle Treatises, more
light then vanity it selfe. But
for such Bookes as doe either
affoord direction to the Church,
or a way to reforme and better
our Life, those are most wor∣thy
to bee read, and carefully
obserued.
This excellent Worke, (first
penned in French by one of
the most learned Diuines in
France) clearely shewing vs the
Ʋanity, Misery, and Inconstan∣cie
of this World, doth warne
and admonish vs to take heede
how we trust to it, and that we
must not build our happinesse
vpon so deceitfull grounds as
Riches and Earthly possessions,
but to direct our Hearts, leuell
and lift our mindes and thoughts

to HEAVEN, to that Eternal
and blessed Habitation of
CHRIST IESVS.
Considering these things,
what greater abomination can
there be, then to see the people
of this miserable age delight to
vndoe one another,Pyrrus King of Epirots, that va∣liant and victori∣ous warriour, is killed by a silly woman with a tile stone. enuie, de∣spise,
curse, warre, and finally
kill one another? For a thing
so vaine as this World, deceitful,
miserable, inconstant, and dam∣nable,He who had filled the earth with the Trophees of his deedes, and tri∣umphs of his vi∣ctories, Alexan∣der of Mace∣donia, that most famous Monarch, died impoysoned by his owne ser∣uants.
which sometimes honors
vs, and presently contemnes
vs, cals vs to high Callings, and
sodainly debases and degrades
vs; lifts vs to high prosperity,
and immediatly flings vs head∣long
into lowe aduersity. Ther∣fore
PHILIP King of Macedo∣nia,The chiefe of the Greekes, hauing escaped so many perils in the Troy∣ans warres, is cru∣elly murdered be∣fore his Castle.
acknowledging the worlds

great inconstancie, hauing re∣ceiued
many good newes in
one day, prayeth the immortall
Gods to stop the course of so
greatioyes,Great Pompey hauing shunned the bloudy hand of his enemies, is killed by his deare & obliged friend. fearing lest some si∣nister
actions, and mournefull
euents should ensue them.
Right Honourable, this
Booke hauing past many Im∣pressions
in FRANCE,That victorious French Mo∣narch, Henry of Bourbon, the 4. of that name, whose inuincible valour made Spaine quake, & Rome trēble, is in time of peace lamentably mur∣dred in his Coach, in the midst of his Royall citie of Paris. is
now arriued, newly reuiued
and augmented here in Eng∣land;
and though it bee little in
shew, yet it containes many
good things, yea, matters of
weight and consequence, wor∣thy
to bee read, knowne, and
obserued: As also very fit and
needfull for a Christian to me∣ditate.These examples do euidently shew the worlds mu∣tability and in∣constancie.
The exquisite worth
thereof hath mooued mee to

translate it; but the fame of
your rare vertues hath the more
imboldened mee to publish it
vnder the banner of your No∣ble
protections. Accept it (most
Honorable) as courteously, as
officiously it is Dedicated and
Consecrated to the perpetuall
Honour, and Honourable vse
of your Illustrious Houses and
Noble Families, by

