



Madame,
AS Speech is the Character of man: that is, the image of his heart and mind, and be the Image of God, so silence, whilst it is
 a seasonable and discreet suspension thereof, becomes a man in its time and place: unseasonable use of either, offensive and ob∣noxious to censure. The excesse is branded for a nullifier of Religion, whilst it makes it vaine: The seeming defect finds some approbation in morali∣tie.
Nam nulli racuisse nocet: nocet esse locu∣rum.
I was dumbe, and ope∣ned not my mouth, because thou didst it, this untun'd
 not this sweete singer, yet made him fall upon a large rest, which it served not to impeach, but rather to improve his spirituall me∣lodie. Often suddaine and unexpected accidents pro∣duce semblable effects: Zacharias silenc't for his want of faith, yet after Ward enabled both with his heart and tongue to praise God, and to sing a Benedictus. That;
Saepe taccs vocem verbaque vultu habet.
Who holds his peace, hath yet a voice, that be∣wrayes
 him, and his coun∣tenance beares words with it. Yea a delinquent in the one, or an offendor in the other, as farre as ei∣ther are exempt from the mixture of the leaven of malice, deserves an in∣dulgent construction, and exemption from all impu∣tation, either of surque∣drie, or sullennesse, as diffe∣rent circumstances may accordingly induce dissi∣militude, as of affect in one, so of affection in ano∣ther.
Hac ego si compel∣lar
 imagine.
This plaine; yet true version of these sacred ex∣pressions, Holy Prayers, and Meditations of a faithfull soule, so truly sti∣led by their Author, so well knowne to all, to be a reve∣rend and worthy Divine of the French reformed Church. I present and de∣dicate to your Ladiship. The end herein proposed to my selfe, being the same with that of my Authors; which none can justly ei∣ther question, or quarrel at to wit, the advancement of
 this part of Gods worship, so' much languishing in the cold if not frozen deuo∣tions of many, and opposed by the giddie practice of mothen a good many, that so farre nauzeate Prayer, publike especially, that in their unkindly and mis∣guided zeale, they endea∣vour by one Ordinance of God to shoulder out ano∣ther, Prayer by Preach∣ing. God hath stiled his House the House of Prayer. Now, what my well meant paines herein cals mine, I wish may finde acceptance
 with you, as I do humbly tender & resigne the same unto you, not so much for supply of a supposed want in your own particular, of these Spirituall helps to de∣votion, as for a testimony of observance and due respect Where my obligation is so great. When I plowed with mine own heifer, a smiling autumn failed not to crown those weaker performances with a plenteous & lasting crop for after-use. But to usher in these Holy Prayers and sacred expressions of a faithfull Soule, into the
 approbation and use, of all that know their Author or his works. His name (as I suppose) will suffice. And hence is it Madame: that I presume of your good allow∣ance for them to beare your name in their Frontispice, that thereby others may be excited and induced to the perusall and use of them in the frequent practice both of this sacred duty, and of the works of mercy, where∣unto the other subsequent Tractates annex't do in∣vite. The perusall of which as in order they stand
 rankt, with like good affe∣ction I commend to those your Olive branches, that stand about your table, to whom any tie of precedent relation may iustly claime my respect. All which I shall not faile to second with continuance of my daily prayers for your La∣diships health and happi∣nesse, both in your stemme and branches, and will e∣ver rest

