



I I may seeme (Right Honorable) an
admirable and new Paradox, that
Halchymie should haue concurrence
and antiquitie with Theologie, the
one seeming meere Humane, and
the other Diuine. And yet Moses,
that auncient Theologue, descri∣bing
& expressing the most wonderfull Architecture
of this great world,Genesis 1. 2. tels vs that the Spirit of God moued
vpon the water: which was an indigested Chaos or
masse created before by God, with confused Earth in
mixture: yet, by his Halchymicall Extraction, Sepera∣tion,
Sublimation, and Coniunction, so ordered and
conioyned againe, as they are manifestly seene a part
and sundered: in Earth, Fyer included, (which is a
third Element) and Ayre, (a fourth) in Water, how∣beit
inuisibly. Of which foure Elements, two are fix∣ed,
as earth and fire: and two volatil, as water & ayre.
That spiritual Motion of the first mouer, God, hath
inspired al the creatures of this vniuersal world, with
that spirit of Life (which may truely be called the spi∣rit
of the world) which naturally moueth,Eccle. 3. 19. and secretly
acteth in all creatures, giuing them existence in three,
to wit, salt, sulphure, and Mercury, in one Huposiasis.
Mercurie congealing Sulphur, & sulphur Mercurie,
neither of them being without their Salt, the chiefest
meane by whose helpe Nature bringeth forth al vege∣ls,
Minerals, & Animals. So that of these 3. whatso∣euer

is in Nature, hath his original, & is compacted of
them, and so mingled with the 4. Elements, that they
make one body. Therefore this Diuine Halchymie,
through the operatiō of the spirit (without the which
the elemental & material Character, letter, and forme,
profiteth not) was the beginning of Time, & of Terres∣trial
existence,Acts 17. 28. by which all things liue, moue, and haue
their being; consisting of body, soule, & spirit, whether
they be vegetals,1. Thess. 5 23 minerals, or animals: reseruing only
this difference,Heb. 4. 12. that the soules of men & angels are rea∣sonable
& immortal,Gen. 1. 16. according to the Image of God
himself,Wisd. 11. 17 & the sensuals (as beasts and such like) not so.
Moreouer, as the omnipotēt God, hath in the begin∣ning,
by his diuine wisedom, created the things of the
heuēs & earth, in weight, mūber, & measure, depēding
vpō most wonderfull proportion & harmony, to serue
the time which he hath appointed: so in the fulnesse
& last period of time (which approacheth fast on) the
4. Elements (whereof al creatures consist) hauing in e∣uery
of thē 2. other Elements, the one putrifying and
combustible, the other eternal & incombustible, as the
heauen, shall by Gods Halchymie be metamorphosed
and changed. For the combustible hauing in them a
corrupt stinking feces, or drossie matter, which maketh
thē subiect to corruption, shal in that great & generall
refining day,2. Pet. 3. 10. 13. be purged through fire: And then God
wil make new Heauens and a new Earth,Apoc. 21. 5. and bring all
things to a christalline cleernes, & wil also make the 4.
Elements perfect, simple, & fixed in themselues, that
al things may be reduced to a Quintessence of Eternitie.
Thus (right Honourable) you see a Paradox, no Pa∣radox,
& a Hieroglyphick plainly disciphered. For Hal∣chymie
tradeth not alone with transmutation of metals
(as ignorant vulgars thinke: which error hath made
them distaste that noble Science) but shee hath also a
chyrurgical hand in the anatomizing of euery mesen∣teriall

veine of whole nature: Gods created hand∣maid,
to conceiue and bring forth his Creatures. For
it is proper to God alone to create something of no∣thing:
but it is natures taske to forme that which he
hath created.
VVherefore if the foole which hath in his hart said,Psal. 14. 1.
There is no God, will put away the mist of ignorance
and infidelitie, and behold the power and wisedome
of God in his creatures, manifested more particular∣ly,
and inwardly by the Art of Halchymie, imitating na∣ture
in seperating from one substance, be it Vegetall,
Mimeral, or Animal, these three, Salt, Sulphur, and
Mercurie, shal by that mistery, as in glasse, discerne the
holy and most glorious Trinitie, in the Vnitie of one
Hupostasis Diuine.Rom. 1. 20. For the inuisible things of God
(saith the Apostle) that is, his eternal power and God-head,Col. 2. 8.
are seene by the creation of the world, being
considered in his workes. This Phylosophy therefore
(my good lord (is not of that kind which tendeth to
vanity and deceit, but rather to profit and to edificati∣on,
inducing first the knowledge of God, & secondly
the way to find out true medicine in his creatures.
Plato saith, that Phylosophy is the imitating of God,
so farforth as man is able: that we may knowe God
more and more, vntill we behold him face to face, in
the kingdome of heauen. So that the scope of Phylo∣sophy,
is to seeke to glorifie God in his wonderfull
workes: to teach a man how to liue wel, and to be cha∣ritably
affected in helping our neighbour.Gen 30. 37. This Phi∣losophy
natural,Iob. 9. & 26. & 28 &. 37. 38. 39. both speculatiue & actiue, is not only
to be found in the volume of nature, but also in the sa∣cred
Scripture: as in Genesis, in the booke of Iob, in the
Psalmes, in Syrach, and in other places.
In the knowledge of this Philosophy, God made Sa∣lomon
to excel all the kings & Phylosophers that were

in the world, whereby the Queene of Sheba was allu∣red
to take a long Iourney, to make an experiment of
that wisedome,2. Cron. 9. 2 whereof she had heard so great fame,
and found it by effect farre greater.Mat 12 4.
Anaxagoras a noble gentleman, but more noble in
wisdome and vertue: Crates, Antisthenes, with many o∣thers,
contemned the pleasures of the world and gaue
thēselues to the studie of naturall Philosophie. Philo∣sophers
haue brought more profit to the world then
did Ceres, who inuented the increase of corne & grain:
then did Bacchus, that found out the vse of wines: then
did Hercules, which ridde the world of monsters. For
these things belong to the maintenance of bodily life
and pleasure: but Philosophy instructeth and nourish▪
the soule it selfe.
This phylosophy, together with the most rare, excel∣lent
& healthful Physicke linked to true grounds; and
vpholden by daily experience, the very marow of true
medicine, & the quintessence of marow it selfe, I most
humbly present vnto your honours hands, as a Iewel
of prise, to procure and preserue health: which Ptolo∣meus
the sonne of Antiochus valued at so high a rate,
that he gaue to Erasistratus a noble Physitian, on hun∣dred
talents for the curing of Antiochus.
My labour herein, be it but as the apple, which A∣contius
gaue to beautiful Cydippe to make knowne his
amorous affection: yet being tendred with no lesse
good wil, in al humilitie I beseech your honour to ac∣cept:
hartily wishing that as you are a principal piller
of this Common wealth, so it may be a meane to pre∣serue
you in health with long life, to your countries
good (as heretofore) and to Gods glorie.
Thus crauing pardon for my bold conceit, I euer
resolue to be,

