


MADAM,
This book which warreth against the vanitie of humane life, is deseruedlie due vnto your Ladyship, who hath truly vanquished it in your selfe. I encounter it with words, but you ouercome it by actions. And actions doe so far surpasse words, as health excelleth a me∣dicine, and as victory is more honorable then a combat. Your name only in the beginning of
 my booke shall serue for a u∣ment: for if this little worke be a true portraiture of vices, your life is a perfect patterne of op∣posite vertues. Also I doe inge∣niously confesse to haue receiued from your perfections much aid toward the perfecting of this small inuention. For to drawe out the Image of vices I am to represent the contrary of that which I do both see and admire in you; to haue the sacred word of God often in your hand, but more often in your mouth: to be daily in prayer; to haue Modes∣ty without Art: to haue your hand open to the afflicted, and your eare deafe to vice: In vn∣derstanding aboue your sex, to haue humility below your con∣dition:
 to haue a firme and free zeale without any scruple, from which christian prudency hath taken away al affected austerity. These are vertues that each a∣part is sufficient to attract ad∣miration, notwithstanding they all concur in you. They are vertues that the greatnesse of your house doth render more re∣markable, and the corruption of our age more admirable. An age in which vices are māners, and wherein debosching hu∣mors, and prophane vanity are passed into nature, and turned into complexion. In the midst of these corruptions, you shine as a burning candle in an ob∣scure night. I am well assured that your modesty permitteth
 not this discourse; but the pub∣like profit requireth it. To the end that each may knowe what estimation we haue of vertue. To the end also that those vices which spread themselues, & in∣crease amongst vs, may be repel∣led by your good Example, and that your vertues seruing as accusations may be a meanes to incite vs to good. It is our glory that that sacred seed which wee haue scattered abroad, hath fal∣len into so fertill a land where it hath brought forth so rare fruit, especially amongst vs, who haue so many examples exstant, that doe demonstrat the diffe∣rence betweene true piety, and that superstitious deuotiō, which endeuoureth to obtaine the fa∣uour
 of God by a seeming pen∣siue action, which limiteth it selfe to a set number of reitera∣ted prayers, and hath reduced religion to the fingers ends.
Hauing then had (Madam) so many reasons to dedicate this writing vnto your Ladyship. This one being sufficient, that I had neuer vndertaken it but by your command. For I am desti∣tute of those ornamēts that are required in this distastfull age: I haue not any great words, nor those swelling tearmes that on∣ly fit frolike humors: I spèake not of the Barriquades of gree∣dy The foole∣ries of Fa∣ther Cor∣ton in his sermons before the K. of Frāce desire, nor of the Escalades of vertues. I call not Iesus Christ the Daulphin of heauen, neither doe I compose Orations vpō the
 Fanne and Nosegay, it sufficeth me to write French, my intenti∣on being only to be vnderstood; and in deciphering of vices to plant in your spirit the contēpt of the world▪ and the loue of God. In meane tearmes I intend to discourse of high matters, and with a coale to delineat out the truth. The defect that is in it ought to be imputed in part to my dulnes, in part to my condi∣tion, which is much busied and disturbed.
It is hard for a man to medi∣tat amongst the blowes of Har∣quebusches, and to mount his spirit very high, when a thou∣sand opposed things doe tend downward and break his flight. But the selfe same ing enious
 disposition, which solicited you to incite me to write, shall also cause you to support the imper∣fectiōs of it. Because (not think∣ing in the beginning, it should haue passed forth of my house) it is not so well adorned as I could wish. But seeing that it must now trauerse abroad by your commandement, my desire is that it may be receiued as frō the hand of him, which prayeth to God for the prosperity of your most Noble family, which God hath honoured with his holy and diuine alliance, & who hath noe other ambition thē to obey you, and remaine all his life


