



MADAME,
SO great is my Obligati∣on to your Honour; that your Honour may chal∣lenge the best seruices of my tongue, or pen, as due to your La∣diship for those brightest beames of your bounty lately cast vpon me: whereby you haue comforted, and re∣uiued my languishing and drooping

fortunes. The lesse I am able to dis∣charge so great a debt, the more I am bound to acknowledge it. Anaxagoras finding Perides very ready to make vse of his learning in Philosophy, but slow to contribute any thing to his maintenance, brake with him in the end after this manner: Sir, if you desire to see by my light, you must minister oyle to my lampe. I must confesse, and I willingly professe it (Right Noble and vertuous Lady) that you haue poured oyle into my Lampe in abun∣dant measure; and therefore by Anaxagoras his Apophthegne, the light of my Lampe is yours by right. A Lampe that burneth dimly at the first kindling, yet afterwards yeel∣deth a cleare and comfortable light; which putteth me in some good hope that my labours, how obscure soe∣uer they are now, yet hereafter by more industry, and practise in this kinde, may serue not only to illustrate

my Authors, but also your Lady∣ships name. For the present, I must intreate a fauourable glance of your Ladiships eye vpon the worke I haue now aduentured to Translate and Dedicate to your Honour. It consi∣steth of foure rare pieces, drawne by an excellent hand. The first presen∣teth to your view the liuely image of a Christians confidence in the word; the second, of his deuotion at the Sa∣crament; the third, of his patience in aduersitie; the fourth, of his watch∣fulnesse in prosperity. All the parts and lineaments of these beautifull pictures, I haue entirely represented in my translated draught: but our language did not alwayes afford mee colours answerable to my Authors: Which defect in them, if your Lady∣ship will dispense with, I doubt not but that they will seeme very agreea∣ble to your Honour, and not altoge∣ther vnworthy to be laid vp in your

Ladyships rich Cabinet of spirituall rarities and diuine Treatises in this kinde, which you rightly value a∣boue all other precious things in the world: For, iewels and precious stones adorne but the body, these beautifie the minde, and repaire the image of God in the hidden man of the heart. The first of these will dispose you to the diligent hearing of the Word; the second will prepare you to the worthy receiuing of the Sacrament; The third wil offer you comfort in sicknes and distresse; The fourth will giue you wholesome counsell in prosperity. Before you goe to Sermon, to set an edge vpon your spirituall appetite for the foode of your soule, I commend to your deuout meditations, the first of them, which discourseth of the excellency of the Gospell. When you are bid to the Lords Table, to take your Sauiour, with Simeon, into your hand, peruse the second Trea∣tise,

being wholly of that subiect. And if God at any time shake his rod ouer you, and you feare a fit of sicknesse, or any grieuous trouble and affliction, make vse of the cordiall contained in the third Treatise. Lastly, when you find your selfe dull and heauy in your deuotion, & in a manner lulled a sleep by the sweet enchantments of world∣ly comforts and delights, then take the siluer Larum-Bell in the fourth Treatise, into your hand, and ring it out to awake you. So shall your prospe∣rity be secure, your affliction cheere∣full, your receiuing the Sacrament most comfortable, and your hearing the Word most delightfull and fruit∣full. Which he neuer ceaseth to pray for, who remaines

