



Sir,
I dare adventure to com∣mend to you, and the Age, these ensuing Let∣ters, written by two esteemed great in the Learned Republique. Truth cōmands me to answer for them, that there is no proportion

betweene their bulke, and value, being defective in nothing but length. For the Authors them∣selues Monsieur du Moulin, and Monsieur de Balzac, their Pens are justly ranked amongst the most excellent of their Nation. The Logicke, and many worthy Divine workes of the former have gained him a great name euen a∣mongst his adversaries: the latter (though of the like abillity) hath made himselfe Master of a more glorious Fame; but in my judgement, Imp'd out with ma∣ny a false Feather; neither his great Cardinall, nor Monsieur du Moulin shall with their most cunning Rhetoricke lull me into such a grosse errour as to beleeve him Master of that▪ Eloquence which Antiquity desir'd, yet

despair'd of. O! that any man who hath had the least cast of Cicero's, and Livy's flowing, or Seneca's distilling Elo∣quence should give so sinister a judgement! Great praise is due to the man, and it is by all deservedly paid him, but what is in him most elegant you can terme, at the best but the Scraps of Cicero's abundant E∣loquence, whose Zany if wee call him wee doe him a grace, if wee introduce him a Corri∣vall, wee doe Cicero an af∣front.
I confesse the times are infi∣nitely bound to him, and his like, for keeping ciuill Language from degenerating into Barba∣risme, and most men from hack∣ings, hewing, and enterfaring in

their discourse, but I will ne∣ver allow them as Emendators of the Ancients, it is enough if as happy Imitators I admit them.
O Marcus! Marcus! did thy Ghost now walke amongst us, thy bloodlesse face would essay to blush after death, to heare thy all-convincing, char∣ming Tongue, (which hath made Guilt tremble, and shooke Ty∣rany it selfe) compar'd with the faint, Hectick Eloquence of Balzac, which now even in its Birth is neare utter extincti∣on, whereas thy Rhetoricall Flowers shall budde, and flo∣rish till fire consumes the World, and all Terrestriall Oratory gives way to the Celestiall. Nor would thy shame be lesse,

Anaeus Seneca, to have (after all the glories thy Penn hath purchas'd) such a competitor as Balzac, who holds the same place with thee, and Cicero, that in the Triumvirat with Anthony and Octavius did Le∣pidus, who in the Government of the World stood onely for a Cypher.
But to justifie my assertion I will take so much paines as to compare their stiles. That of Cicero is not compos'd for the Scene, onely to delight, but for the Sand also, and the Fight. it is like a Tree which produceth not onely the Foliage, as an Ornament, but the Fruite too, as foode.
Here you may detect Venus, and Minerva, kissing in every

line. With the reading of him the most prostrate, groveling witt must needes bee raised, the most benummed take fire. This is none of those lukewarme Spirits, which can infuse no heate into others because they have none themselves; for as we cannot light a Taper at ano∣ther not already lighted: so we can not take flame from a wit not already fired.
The mind of this Writer en∣flames his Stile, his Stile his Reader. Now for that of Se∣neca; his words are choise, pro∣per, and so Significant, that at the first view a man would thinke they implyed more, then indeede they doe. It is pecu∣liar to his Genius alone to com∣prehend plenty, and solidity of

sence in parcimony of Speech, Perspicuity in Brevity. Then his matter is alwaies grave, and weighty, drawne out from the very Center of History, and Phy∣losophy.
To come to the Stile of Bal∣zac. You may at first sight discover in it not a becomming care, and a neate dresse, but a vaine affectation, and the Fucus it selfe. And as his Language is affected, so his conceptions are for the most part idle, and shal∣low, no way able to satisfie the expectation of a full, and knowing man. They consist for the most part of Hyperbolicall Complements, and malitious Invectives: witnesse with mee the supreame Spirit, that I taxe him not as a detracting Enemy,

but an impartiall Examiner. Iustice her selfe will warrant me to pull that Palme out of his vsurping hand, which Ignorance had there placed. I confesse I can not endure to see him borne by the vulgar breath to so high a pitch, as to out-soare all Anti∣quity, who hath not written so many Pages as hee hath mo∣derne equals, nay Superiours in that persuasive Art. The rea∣son of this their so immoderate praise, is no other then that their infant knowledge derides the Simplicity of their Ancestours, whose Science it should have in admiration. My owne indigna∣tion, and the Printers petition, (who complaines much of the Bookes brevity,) have caused me to spin out this Epistle to an

unvsuall length. My comfort is (if this way I deserue censure) I am faulty with Se∣neca, and many brave Authors, who haue delivered their minds in Letters far more prolixe. I am now onely a Petitioner to the Reader for a license to adde so many words onely as will let you know, (Noblest Sir,) that I truely honour You, and and that I create you (who understand well the Origi∣nall) Iudge of the Translation, which hath already beene Ho∣nour'd with many great Ap∣probations. I am confident that you will make use of your mercy rather then your Iustice towards him, who into your hands hath voluntarily put the life of his Reputation in good

Letters, to him farre, far dea∣rer then his Naturall, during which he vowes to remaine
Sir,

