


MAdame, since the houre that I had the hap to become knowne vnto you, you haue done me the honour as to com∣mit your health altogether into my hands, and to vouchsafe me as great cre∣dit, as if I had been a second Aescula∣pius. This affection and goodwill, which I acknowledge to proceede more of your kindnes and naturall inclination, then of any deserts of mine, haue so preuailed with me, that nei∣ther the loue of my country, nor the number of my friends, which was not small, nor the honourable place of publique Lecturer, which I discharged with sufficient commendation in one of the most famous Vniuersities of Europe, could stay or hinder me; but that passing ouer all difficulties, and breaking all these bonds, I haue intirely and wholly deuoted my selfe vnto you, and haue fol∣lowed you, wheresoeuer it hath pleased you to commaund me. I haue wherein I may exceedingly praise my selfe, and as hitherto to rest contented with my fortune, which hath been so fauourable vnto me, as to make all my seruice profitable and well liked of, I am verely perswaded Madame, that it was Gods will to vse me as the meanes for the lengthening of your yeares, and making of your old age more blessed and happie. You haue had sufficient triall thereof within these two yeares: for being very forcibly as∣sailed with three of the most violent and extraordinarie diseases that euer man hath seene, and which were strong enough to haue shaken the best complexion in the world, and to haue spilt the prosperous estate of a more flourishing age then yours, yet you haue not felt any eclipse of your vigour and lustines. This is of
God alone, (which hath opened my vnderstanding to finde out fit remedies, and himselfe to giue good successe thereunto) to whom I am bound to render all glorie. There now remaineth in you onely your three ordinarie diseases, which I labour to vanquish day by day, by obseruation of good Diet, and such gentle medi∣cines as are no way able any thing to alter and hurt the good dis∣position of your naturall constitution. In your right eye, you haue some small beginnings of a Cataract, but the other is perfectly sound. You feele at certaine times some touches of the windie melancholie, but so sleight, as that they vanish away like the smoke. The thing that is most tedious and troublesome vnto you, is those pettie distillations and fluxes of humours which fall down vpon your eyes, teeth, armes and legges. Your spirit, which is able to conceiue of any thing in the world, be it neuer so rare & strange, hath been very inquisitiue to vnderstand the causes, and to know from whence all these accidents should proceede, which I haue oftentimes spoken largely of, and that both in vulgar and com∣mon speeches, as also in the artificiall and plaine tearmes of Phi∣sicke. In the end my reasons became so well liked of by you, that (when you had withdrawne your selfe to the Abbey of Marmon∣ster, to sport your selfe with the beautie of the place and goodnes of the ayre) you commaunded me to set downe the same in wri∣ting, and to cause them to come to light, vnder the shield of your authoritie. I cannot with honestie denie it vnto you, howsoeuer yet it were meete, that so waightie a matter according to the de∣sert, should bee garnished with infinite varietie of authorities and proofes from the learned, which my memorie could not affoord, through my want of bookes. I haue therefore fitted vp and made readie three discourses for you, touching your three diseases: the first is, Of the excellencie of the sight, and the meanes to preserue it: the second is, Of windie melancholie, and other melancholike dis∣eases: the third is, Of Rheumes, and the meanes for to heale them. And vnto these in the ende I haue ioyned a little treatise of Olde age, which may bee for your vse against the time to come. For there is no shadow of reason why I should as yet call you old, see∣ing you are not incombred with any of the infirmities of old age. For is not this one of the miracles of our age, to heare your com∣munication
so wise and graue, to see your vnderstanding and iudgement so sound and vncorrupt, your memorie so fresh and plentifull, and your sences so absolute, as that on your sound eye you vse to reade a farre off the smallest letter that any man can bring vnto you, without spectacles? Your hearing also conti∣nueth very easie and quicke, and your taste also as exquisite and daintie as euer it was: your heart so couragious and lustie, as that notwithstanding all the assaults that euer your windie melancho∣lie could giue vnto it, yet it hath not been able at any time so to shake it, as that it could make it alter his course: your liuer so li∣berall, as that it ministreth store of blood more then is needfull: in so much as that we are cōstrained to cause you to tame it once a yeare. I will say nothing of the goodnes of your stomack, you your selfe know it well enough; hauing an appetite at euery houre, and disgesting whatsoeuer you bestow vpon it. Seeing then the faculties of the soule doe euery one of them so well execute and performe their functions and offices, can a man call the instru∣ment thereof ouerworne or old? I am perswaded (Madame) that no man can call you old in any respect, if it were not that you are past fiftie, and that custome in accounts hath designed the first degree of old age to this number. You haue great occasions to praise God: for this long and happie life is a certaine testimonie of his loue, because the most excellent reward which he promi∣seth vnto them whom he loueth in this world, is, that they shall liue long vpon the earth. Cheere vp your selfe then Madame, you are but yet on the first step of your old age, which is ouergrowne with flourishing greene, and affoording an vndaunted courage; you haue other two behinde and remaining. God who hath gi∣uen this strength vnto your bodie, and which hath honoured you with so gracious and good a soule, vouchsafe to make them as happie, as your Ladiship can wish or desire them.

