



I Take mine Authors word, and mine owne experience, for warrant from beyond the Seas, (most Dread Soue∣raigne) that your Maiesties excellent knowledge and lear∣ning, haue wonne you admiration a∣mong forraine Nations. And for home-affecti∣ons it is well knowen, that your Maiesties sincere loue to the truth of Religion, and constant Con∣fession of the Catholicke Faith, whereof your Ma∣iestie is worthily stiled The Defender, haue knit the hearts of your people vnto you. Who well per∣ceiue by your Kingly Apology directed to the Princes of Christendome, that God hath made your Maiesty such a one as was DAVID, The sweet Singer of Israel, euen a Propheticall King,2. am. 23.1. and a Kingly Prophet; whose bold profession it is, Psal.
119. I will speake of thy testimonies,Psal. 119.46. euen before Kings, and will not be ashamed: Such as the Kings also a∣mong the Heathen are said to haue beene, both Princes and Prophets;
Rex Anius,Virg. Aeneid. 3. rex idem hominum, Phoebi{que} Sacerdos. Concerning the Authour and Pen-man of this booke I neede not say any thing: Authorem com∣mendat opus. Touching my selfe, vpon whom this taske was secundarily imposed, I know the Transla∣tion will blab out mine imperfections. Your Ma∣iesty is apt to pardon greater offences, and therfore, I hope, these. The ground worke is your Maie∣sties owne; which maketh me bold to vse that say∣ing toward your Maiesty, my Soueraigne Lord, wherewith Paulus Orosius dedicateth his Story to S. Austin, his Master and Tutor; Totum tuum sit, quod ex te,In initio. ad te redit: It is all your Maiesties owne doing, which comming from you, I returne it back againe vnto you. And so I dedicate you to your selfe:In Apologet. cap. 30. concluding with that which Tertullian re∣porteth to haue beene the auncient Christians Prayer, for the safety of their Emperours; and is now in vse also in the Church of Rome, if we may beleeue Doctor Coeffeteau, but, I feare me, not with like true affection;Fol. 5. Vitam Maiestati tuae prolixam, Imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitum fortem, Senatum fiaelem, populum probum, regnum quietum obnixè precor.

