



LEVVIS of GRANADA, that excellent and diuine Beseleel of our time for the building and polishingExod. 31. of the spirituall tabernacle of Christes church, amonge many other his notable monuments, intiteled one: The Me∣morial of a christian life. The first parte whereof intreating principallye of the Sacraments of Penance, and the sacred Communion, was to the singular benefitte of our countrey, translated into the English tongue. God whose hand is not abbreuiated, hath inEsai. c. 59. the same nation, raysed him vp a com∣panion, like an other Ooliab, for theExod. c. 31. prosecuting of the same worke: one of whose small treatises I haue likewise translated, as desirous to inriche our countrey with so singular a treasure: and because it is an Addition to a
 former worke, and so by the Author cal∣led: a name nothing fitting it now, when it commeth forthe alone, therefore haue I thoughte good after the imitation of that learned man, especiallye because as his, so this also contayneth a briefe note, of that which euery good christi∣an oughte often to practise, concerning the Sacramentes of Pennance, and the holy Communion, to put it forth with the title of a Memorial: and the name (litle) I haue added, both for distincti∣on from the former, and also for that it is comprised in a farre lesse quanti∣tie. And althoughe denied it can not be, that not onelie GRANNADA, but many others, haue learnedly en∣treated of the same subiecte, yet who knoweth not, that as mens vaines bee diuers in writing, so likewise their af∣fections in readinge not all one, and therefore both with profitte and pleasure, many good workes may bee published
 of the same matter, the latter either for methode, perspicuitie, or some o∣ther notable thinge, adding somewhat which in the former was wanting, and as it were with Ruth gathering vpRuth. c. 2. such eares of corne, as slipped from the reapers handes: and that such labours may fruitfullie bee enterprised: beside reason, and common practise, wee haue also the example of the fower E∣uangelistes, who by direction of the ho∣ly Ghost, as with singular vnitie, so with profitable varietie, wrote the same life and death of our Sauiour Christe. This booke therefore, though it intrea∣teth of Confession and Communion, the subiect of diuers excellent discourses, yet is it worthy to be imbraced, seeing the manner and scope thereof, is of that qua∣lity, as I thinke few can reade it, that will repent their small paines employed, and some haply be of opinion, that albeit others with S. Iohn came first to theIohn 20. v. 4.
 monument, yet that this author with Saint Peter entred first in: and all such, whose harts God shal so effectually touch, as that they will not onely reade, but also carefully practise, may with much more reason blesse the time, that they met with so heauenly a maister, for the sauing of their owne soules, then e∣uer did Dauid blesse Abigail & her wise speech, hindring him from the kil∣ling1 Reg. 15. . 32. of an other mās body. The principal intent of this Memorial is, to inflame all with the loue of the Sacraments, and to stir vp our dull spirits, often to repaire vnto those diuine fountaines of grace, from which so many and rare benefittes doe flowe: to discouer also the vsuall disorders, into which not only those that be carelesse, but euen the deuoute ser∣vants of God doe sometimes fall, when they goe to confession, and to receaue the blessed Sacrament, togither with singu∣lar remedies, how we may auiod al such
 inconueniences, and so free our selues, more & more from sin, purchase greater abundance of grace in this world, and eternall felicitie in the worlde to come: all which pointes he doth so excellently performe, and like a diuine phisition search out the secret and lurking disea∣ses of our soule, and prescribe such sweet and heauenly receits, that there is almost none so voide of spirituall sence, but by reading, shal finde theire conscience tou∣ched: nor any proceeded so far in pie∣ty, but that they may make great bene∣fit of this small treatise, and generallye all that sincerely desire the amendment of their life, and increase of vertue, shall feele their hartes burning in them, as the two Disciples did when our Sauior wal¦kedLuc. 24. v. 32. in their company, and opened them the Scriptures.
One thing there is which the author in discoursing of such sins, as many con∣fesse not through culpable ignorāce, hath
 omitted, to witte the dangerous error of many yonge persons, that without the knoweledge or consent of theire pa∣rents, bestowe themselues in marriage: and an other no lesse dangerous then the former, if not more, and that is to make priuie contractes, whereof not only such as liue vnder the charge of theire pa∣rents, but others also of all estates & callinges bee some time founde guiltye. Of these pointes though passing necessa∣ry, he maketh no mention, because the councell of Trent making all priuie con∣tractesSes. 24. c. 1. of no force, hath freed them frō such inconueniences, which is not so here in our countrey for lacke of publication, a thing required by the councell before that decree can take anye place: and therefore I haue thought good to say som∣what, both concerning the one & the o∣ther, (because they be sins very rife, and be accompanied with many and greate mischifes, especially the second, as discord
 betwixt houses, ruines of families, the perpetuall state of adultery, and not sel∣dome a continuall torment of conscience, as daily experience teacheth) to the end that such as feare God, & be desirous to saue their soules, may know what herein they haue to followe and practise.
As it is certaine, that the marriage of children (beeing of yeares requisite, and no other impediment hindring it) contracted freche without their parents consent, is perfect matrimony, and canConcil. Trid. ses. 24. cap. 1. not either by them, or the temporal ma∣gistrate bee broken: certaine also that children may somtime vpon iust & good causes, marrie without the knowledge or consent of their parents, as for example, when they would marrie thē to an heri∣ticke, & in some few other cases: so most certaine it is, that vsually & for the grea¦ter part, children doe very much offende God, in contractinge marriage either without their knowledge or against the
 mindes of their parents, seing it belon∣geth to their charge to prouide for their children: and their experience and loue towardes them is such, that neither can they be so easilie deceaued, nor yet pre∣fer them to any matches, then such as be good, and most conuenient for their e∣state: and in holy scripture we read, that the marriage of the children, was rather commanded vnto the parents then vnto them: for God speaking of the Cana∣nites saith thus. Thou shalt notExod. 34. Deutr. 7. giue thy daughter to his son, nor thou shalt not take his daughter for thy sonne: And blessed Iacob, vpon the commaundement of his father Isaac, verye obedientlye married theGenes 28. daughter of Laban, and not of such as he had forbidden.
Seeing then marriage is oftentimes with sin contracted by the children, for lacke of their parents knowledge, or con∣sent, and sometime without any sinne at
 all: such as liue in feare of God, & wil∣lingly woulde not offend him, ought not herein to relie vpon themselues, & their own partiall affectiō, & so to determine that in this and this case, they may with out any respect to their parents consent, make their owne choise: but let them craue the aduise of some wise and dis∣creete ghostly father, and with humility submit themselues to his iudgement: and in any wise let them take heed that they doe not herein, refuse the resolutiō haply of many, & rest vpon the opinion of some one whome they haue found out, because he doth moste fitte their fancie, and best please their passion: for that were a cer∣taine argument, that they sought not sin∣cerely the truth, nor the honor of God, but rather a cloake for their sinne, and a fewe colde figge leaues with Adam toGenes. 3. v. 7. couer their naked soules. Parentes also that be the true seruants of God, oughte herein to proceede with great moderati∣on,
 & not to presse their children so much with their authority, as by feare & vio∣lent meanes to draw them cleane contra∣ry to their owne minde and liking, for that were to take away that christian li∣bertie which ought to be in marriage, & without which as shall straight waies bee handled, it is no marriage at all, & what pitifull effectes followe such vnfortunate matches, where the terror of the parents more preuaileth, then the reasonable loue and liking of the children, daily experi∣ence doth teach vs.
Concerning secret marriages and con∣tractes, as the danger is far greater, so it deserueth a deeper consideration: for ma∣ny haply thinke, that herein either no sin is committed, or a very litle one, seeing matrimony is a thing most free, & there∣fore al at their libertie to contract as they please. But herein are they much decea∣ued: for albeit most free it is in this sence that none ought to be enforced thereunto,
 but must willingly and freely giue their owne consent: and therefore if one should by any kinde of violent meanes bee com∣pelled to marry an other, to whome in their hart they gaue no consent, most cer∣taine it is, that it were no matrimony at all: yea the violence & feare may be such that albeit inward consent be wrung out & gotten, yet is it not marriage for lacke of free consent. I touch this matter brief∣ly, as being not that whereof I mean now to intreat: if any haue herein any diffi∣cultie, and desire farther resolution, let them craue the counsell of those that bee vertuous and learned, with that purity of intention before mentioned. Yet for all this, in other thinges marriage is not so free, that men or womē may either mar∣rie with whom they list, or in what mā∣ner they please. For by the lawe of God, and the church, they are forbid∣den to marry with such as hee allied to them in certayne degrees of consan∣guinitie
 and affinitie: and if any should presume so to doe, besides a greate mor∣tal sin committed, the marriage also is of no force, and their state damnable. Nei∣ther can they marrie in such manner as they please: for to omit other cases, and to speake of that which we haue nowe in hande. If any heere in our country, con∣tracte marriage priuilie, althoughe the marriage be of force, yet cannot the mā∣ner of doing be excused from sin, & that such a one, as doth oftentimes plunge thē into a perpetuall misery, a point worthy to be deepely considered of al sorts of per∣sons: for what case can be more lamen∣table, then when two haue contracted secretly, and made themselues man and wife before God: and yet afterwarde, either vpon the dislike of their friends, or discontentment growing betweene them∣selues, they goe backe, marrie openly o∣thers, and so all their life time continue in the state of adulterie, and that with∣out
 all helpe, in respecte of any outward courte or consistorie: for seeing the first marriage was secret, the church can take thereof no knowledge and so prouide no remedie. For the auoiding of this so in∣finite an inconuenience, the churche of God, tendering like a carefull mother the good of her children, hath vtterly forbid∣den such kindes of contracts, as the coun∣cel of Trent testifieth in these words. TheSes. 21. c. 1. holy church of God vpon iuste causes hath alwaies detested and forbidden secret marriages. Hee therefore that is the seruant of God, and woulde not willingly wounde his soule with sin, nor offende against the precepte of the church, nor yet cast himselfe into a sea of miseries, ought to refraine from all such priuie contracts, and as much as can be, to obserue the decree of the fore∣saidVbi supra councell, which is to contract matri∣mony in the presence of a priest, & two or three witnesses, at the least. Good coū∣sell
 also it is, especially for yong persons, whose iudgments are weaker, experiēce lesse, & their passiōs cōmonly more strōg, not to make so much as any secret promi¦ses of marriage, no thoughe conditionall: as if such a portiō or ioynter may be pro∣cured, or if my friendes shall be content, & such like, for processe of time, much talking of such matters, & other like ac∣cidents, make them afterward to doubt, if anye future breach happen, whether they bee cleere in conscience, and may securely marry else where or no, & so al such kinde of promises in conclusiō, serue for nothing else but to afflict the soule, & to weary the conscience with many scru∣ples: frō al which miseries they be cleare, that keepe themselues free from all priuie contractes, and secret promises of what manner so euer, and doe neuer bind them selues, but in such sort as before was mē∣tioned: or else expect vntill their matri∣mony be publiquely solemnized.

Although I said before that the state of him that was priuilie contracted, and did after marry opēly with an other, was without helpe: yet God forbid that any should in that case dispaire, for God who is rich in mercie and will not the death of a sinner like the good Samaritane, hath in store oyle and wine to powre in∣toLuc. 10. v. 30. the woundes of him that hath thus pittifully fallen into the hands of theues, and is lefte halfe dead: and therefore though true it be, that such a one, as I saide before, hath no remedye in anye worldlye courte or consistorie, yet in the court of conscience, meanes are left for the sauing of his sinfull soule. The medi∣cine I confes falleth out ordinarilie to be verie sower and sharpe, yet if men wil∣linglye venture the losse of a limme for the preseruing of the corruptible bodie, though haply they fell into that extremi∣tie without any fault of their owne: no reason haue they to refuse any remedy,
 though neuer so penitentiall, for the sa∣uing of their immortall soule: seing espe∣cially by their owne folly they haue gi∣ven themselues so deepe a wound. Where¦fore such as finde their conscience herein troubled, let them make choise of some excellent, wise, discrecte, and learned ghostly father, for the well managing of this busines, being so important and dan∣gerous. Thus much gentle reader haue I thought good to insert here in the preface, being a thing passing necessary (and yet omitted by the Author vpon the reason before mentioned) and as I verily hope, that which will bee the occasion for the preseruing of such as feare God, frō ma∣ny great sins, which otherwise through ignorance they might fall into. Now no more remaineth, but that thou wouldest for thy further direction, to the end thou mayest auoide many impediments which hinder others that be carelesse from re∣ceauing that abundant cōmoditie which
 is gained by deuout frequenting of con∣fession and the holy communion vouch¦safe attentiuely to peruse this small trea∣tise, and I doubt not but that thou  in comparing the Author with others of our time, that intreat of the same mat∣ter, say of him as they did in the gospell of our Sauiour. Neuer did thereIoan 7. v. 46. man so speake as this man. If thou doubtest (as Nathaniel did of Christ) and demande how in so small a booke so great learning or deuotion can bee contained: I willinglye surcease frō other answers, & say with S. Philip Come andIoan. 1. v. 46. see: Reade and iudge.
