


Right Honourable,
IT was a salt and a smart speech which one Melanct∣hon spake unto an Italian; Vos Itali vnltis Deum habere in pane, quem non creditis esse in coelis. Melch. Adam. in vit. Melanch. You Italians will have God to be in the bread, in the Sa∣crament, whom ye beleeve not to be in Heaven. It were to be wished that many amongst our selves were not under the guilt of somewhat the like incongruity. It is an high opinion that men generally have of the Sacrament, and reason good, it
 should be had in pretious esteeme; but that which is sad to consider, they partake of that Ordinance with such irreverence, careles∣nesse, and prophanenesse of spirit, as if they beleeved not there were a God, or as if in that Ordinance, they had not to do with the God of Heaven. That which was once in∣joyned the Dominican Priests, in memory Morn. myst. Iniq. prog. 56. and hatred of that heinous act of one of their fraternity, in poysoning the Empe∣rour, Henry the seventh, in the Hoast, That they should communicate, only with the left hand, may bee feared to bee the case of too many thorow their owne negligence, that they are no better than left-handed Com∣municants. It matters not before God with what hand the Sacrament be received, the right-hand or the left, so the heart be right, and the work done in a right order. But yet in a spirituall sense to be left-handed recei∣vers, is a matter, not only of disgrace, but of danger. It is all one in Scripture phrase, to be left, and to be lame-handed. And to be sure, to be left-handed in this worke, is to be lame-handed. The lame, and the blinde, who knowes not in what ill esteeme they were with God? The lame and the blind had no acceptance with God. And wherein concernes it men to be more solicitous for acceptance, than in the so∣lemne
 service of receiving the Sacrament? No acceptance is to be had, but when it is well done. If thou do well, shalt thou not be accepted, sayes the Lord to Cain? It was good which Cain did in offering Sacrifice; but if thou do well, shalt thou not be accep∣ted? It must be a good thing, and a good thing well done, which shal find acceptance. That speech of Aarons in his case, would be a very seasonable thought for men be∣fore the Sacrament, Behold this day such Lev. 10. 19. things have befallen me, and if I had eaten the sin-offering to day, should it have beene accepted in the sight of the Lord? Happy were it, that before the Sacrament men would thus say with themselves; Behold this day, week, this moneth, &c. such things have befallen me, and I have fallen into such sinnes as have made my person guilty, mine heart hard and dead; and if I should in such a case, before I have prepared my self by faith and repentance, eat the Supper, Lord, should I be accepted in the sight of the Lord? They were crosses and afflictions which (by Gods providence) befell Aaron in the death of his Sons, and the sorrow and mourning that followed thereupon, that indisposed and unfitted him for eating the flesh of the sin-offering. Sanctified things were not to be eaten in a mans mour∣ning. Deut. 26. 14.
 They be sins that men thorow their owne corruption fall into, that they live, and lye in, and the want of sorrow, and mourning for them, that unfit men for eat∣ing the Sacrament. With spirituall sorrow and mourning for sin, should these sanctify∣ed things be eaten. And for want of this and other due dispositions, it is, that this holy Ordinance that men seeme to think so highly and reverently of, is so much abused and profaned.
Conceiving it therefore a worke of cha∣rity to direct people to a preparation, and a performance suitable to the holinesse, and excellency of the Ordinance, I have publi∣shed this small treatise. And such as it is, I present it to your Honours, as a publike te∣stimony of that thankfulnesse, service, and due regard I owe unto you, and your Noble Family: the which deserves so much the more honour from men, by how much the more it is honoured by God. They were ill Si quis ex nobili∣bus ad Deum cō∣verti caeperitsta∣tim honorem no∣bilitatis amittit—Religio ignobi∣lem facit—Si honoratior quis∣piam religioni se applicueit llico honoratus esse disistit. Salv. de Provid. lib. 4. times that Salvian lived, in and complai∣ned of; when religion and godlinesse were thought staines and blemishes of Honour, as if Religion, made Noble Persons vile, and ignobled Greatnesse. But that which GOD cals Glory and Honour, let no man account shame and basenesse. It is most true which S. Bernard writes to Sophia a
 religious, Noble Woman, Thou art the more Insignior plane, atque illustrior, quod de paucis facta es, quam quod orta de magnis. Illud namque Dei mu∣nere tuum est. Hoc tuorum. Porro quod tuum est, tanto carius cst, &c. Bernard. Ep. 113. illustrious, that thou art made one of few, (aluding to that of Paul, Not many Noble) than that thou art borne of Great Ones. That by Gods gift is thine owne, this, name∣ly, her Birth and Noble Parentage, thou art beholding to thy Parents for. That which is thine owne, is so much the more deere, by how much the more rare. Who shall finde a vertuous woman, much more a vertuous and Noble one? God indeed is no accepter of persons, yet I know not how it comes to passe, yet to passe it comes, that vertue in a Noble person is more pleasing, peradven∣ture, because it is more shining. As light is more glorious in the Stars of greater, than of lesser magnitude. It is a most sure thing, what ever the world may judge, that no∣thing so enobles, as Christ, grace, and be∣ing in the Covenant. I have blessed Ishma∣el, sayes the Lord, twelve Princes shall he beget, But my Covenant will I establish with Isaac. Account it your greater Ho∣nour, Gen. 17. 20. 21. to be in the Covenant, than to have Seed Royall issue out of your loynes, or to have Bloud Royall runne in your veynes. Then are persons truly Honourable indeed, when pretious in Gods sight, Since thou wast pretious in my sight, thou hast beene honourable. So may You, and Yours, be
 ever more and more Honble; and long may Your House flourish, in such and all other Honor. Experience lets us see, that not only Nobles, but Nobility it selfe is mortall; and that not only Great Men, but Great Hou∣ses dye. Yet there is a way to make Ho∣nours and Houses longer lived than many times they be. Davids prayer was this, Let 1 Chro. 17. 24, 27 the House of thy Servant be established be∣fore thee; let it please thee to blesse the House of thy Servant, that it may be before thee for ever, for thou blessest, O Lord, and it shall be blessed for ever. But that is not all that David did; as he prayed God to blesse his House, so he himselfe also blessed his House, And David returned to blesse 1 Chron. 16. 43 his House. Needs must his house be establi∣shed, when he not onely desires God to blesse it, but withall he blesses it himselfe, by doing what ever it might be that might bring a blessing upon his House. Then doe Great Ones blesse their Houses, when among other things they be like the Nobles of Israel. Those Nobles had their staves, which haply they bare in their hands as Ensignes of their Nobility. Now they made those staves which were the Ensignes of their Honour, the instruments also of common good: The Princes digged the well, the Nobles of the people digged it with Num 21. 18.
 their staves. With their staves of Honour they digged a Well for the common good, and publike benefit of the people. That is one speciall way to keep the staffe long in a Family; and long to continue the Honour, Nobility, Dignity, and wealth of great Fa∣milies; when they improve their Honours and Power, to honour God, in being ser∣viceable what they can to publike good. It lies a black blot upon the Nobles of Tekoah, that they put not their necks to the work of Neh. 3. 5. the Lord, in not being forward to promote a common good; which though a civill worke, yet because it conduced to com∣mon good, is called the worke of the Lord. As that thing blurs their Names, so who knowes, but it might gradually moulder, bring downe, and lay their Houses in the dust. This is out of question, that Doing worthily makes a mans name famous, and his House glorious. Doe thou worthily Ruth 4. 11, 12. in Ephratah, say those Elders blessing Bo∣az, And be famous in Bethlehem, and let thine House be like the House of Pharez. That which was their blessing upon him, is, and shall be my prayer for you; that the GOD of Heaven, and Father of our Lord Iesus Christ, will be pleased to make good that blessing upon your Honours Per∣sons and hopefull posterity, that with
 Abraham he would make you blessed and blessings; that ye being heires of blessing here, may be heires of blessednesse hereaf∣ter in the Kingdome of Glory.

