


RIGHT HONOVRABLE:
THe Lord hath not left him∣selfe without many wit∣nesses to call vpon vs for the same worke, for the which this worke doth call. An argument that people are backward, and the duty necessa∣ry. If either the men were more forward, or the duty lesse important, Quorsum haec profu∣sio? To what end were this waste? What needed this waste of paper and inke; nay,
 of the spirits and lungs of Gods messengers, cry∣ing earely and late: if people were not too late in that duty, wherein they cannot bee too earely? It was not for nothing, that our Sa∣uiour yoakes these two petitions together; Giue vs this day &c. And forgiue vs our trespas∣ses. Surely, me thinkes, hee teaches vs, that so long as wee haue neede to say Giue, so long we haue neede to say forgiue, and that daily repentance is as necessary for the soule, as daily sustenance for the body. And yet such is the worlds folly, that while they make one to be of an absolute necessity, they shuffle off the other as a matter of indifferency, at least conceit it not of that present necessity which we vrge. Most deale with Repen∣tance, as countrey people with Physicians, they loue not to haue to doe with them, till they feare they are gasping their last breath, and conceit as great an efficacie in these fiue words, Lord haue mercy vpon me, spoken with their last breath, for the translation of their soules into heauen, as the Papists do of their fiue words of consecration, for the transub∣stantiation of their hoste. Nay, without
 question many thinke of their Repentance before their death, as diuerse ridiculously doe, of making their wils; That if they make their wils in their health, it is an ominous presage of their death; That because many make not their wils but when they die, ther∣fore they must needes shortly die if they make their wils: The like thinke many of Repenting in their life time, that because most make it a death-bed duty, therefore to doe this duty, will hasten them to their death. And so many fearing it in their life, are denied it at their death. But for the ne∣cessity, the worth, the speede of the practise of this duty, I spare to speake ought. It is the summe of the following Treatise. A Treatise not of mine own; but of his, whose labours need not feare the light. Many and worthy indeede are the labours of others, that are extant vpon this argument; and in∣deede so many, that amongst such a multi∣tude, I should scarce haue aduentured this small Treatise, if the generall gracious ac∣ceptance of his former works, which I pub∣lished, had not made way for it. The kinde
 welcome that it found at the hands of most, seemed to promise that these present labors should not be fruitlesse. Thereupon I tooke heart both to perfect and to publish this Treatise. And being perfected, I haue made bolde to commend it to your La. By your patronage the worke may receiue grace from you: and by your diligent perusall of it, you may receiue encrease of grace from it. The Lord grace you with all spiritall blessings, till hee bring you to Glory, the perfection of Grace Epping in Essex. April. 18.

