


MADAM,
IT is not vnknowne vnto your Honour, what first occasioned mee to meddle with this Subiect. That which first moued me to preach it in
 mine owne Charge, hath also indu∣ced mee to make it more publique. I conceiued it might bee a worke well worth the while to vindicate, as much as in mee lay, the Honour of God from that impeachment it com∣monly receiues from Scandals, to heale the bleeding wounds they vsu∣ally giue to the profession of Godli∣nesse, to stop the mouth of iniquity which they set so wide open, and to giue men notice of the great danger that both the taking, and giuing of Scandal may bring them into.
J obserue, that men doe with the Scandals of Professours, as the Le∣uite did with the twelue partes of his Concubine, they send them Iudg 19. 29. thorough all the quarters of Israel. It were happie that such foule actions as trench to the disho∣nour of God, and Religion might
 be buried in eternall silence, and ne∣uer be published, Publish it not in 2. Sam. 1. Gath: But since that is impossible, but that they will be published in Gath, What inconuenience is it that something bee published in, and sent into the Coasts of Is∣rael, that may stop the mouthes of the men of Gath, that may salue the Honour of God, and Religion, and that may discouer and preuent the danger of Scandalous euils.
J confesse, that when I conside∣red how frequently Scandals haue fallen out, and what a world of mischiefe hath beene done by them, I wondred, that no man, for ought I know, or can learne, had hitherto medled with this Argument so needfull, and so vsefull, and there∣fore thought it would not be lost la∣bour to doe something in this kind.

 And what I haue done, I now make bold to present vnto your Honour, as presuming that that shall be welcome to you that pleades for the Honour of God, and his Truth. I acknowledge my selfe many wayes deeply engaged to your Honour, and the many fauours I haue receiued from you, binde mee to a thankefull acknowledgement of them. May it please you therefore to accept of this small Treatise as a publike testimoniall of my thanke∣fulnesse. Which if you shall please to doe, I shall reckon it as a super∣added fauour to all the rest, and to my thankefulnesse to your selfe, shall adde my daily prayers to the God of all Grace, for his blessing vpon your noble Family, both roote and branch, and that he would not onely continue to you the blessing of the
 left hand, Riches and Honour, Prou. 3. 16. but giue you the blessing of the right hand also length of dayes, and with them both, the best of his blessings, All spirituall blessings in heauenly places in Christ Iesus. This shall bee the daily suite of

