



I Haue now, welbeloved in Christ our Saui∣our, served well-neare a double apprenti∣ship amongst you, in the service of the Gos∣pell: in which, though the surest, and best evidences of my loue, and affectionate care of your good haue not beene wanting, yet together with others my desire is to leaue vnto you, when my testimony shall be finished, this one more pub∣like testimony of mine vnfained affection towards you. To this purpose haue I dedicated this present Dedicatory Sermon to your selues, for whose sakes it was first occasioned. And indeed to whom was it fitter it should bee dedicated then vnto you, to the service of whose faith, both my selfe, and all mine endeavours are to be wholy dedicated in the worke of the Ministery. I desire this action of mine may bee interposed as a demonstration of that speciall honour, and high esteeme wherein I hold you. And if your Ministers esteeme can be construed any matter of honor vn∣to you, I would it might engage you to a regard of this one suite, namely, that you would bee wise to know this the day of your peace, and of Gods gracious visitation, and to returne vnto the Lord some in come answerable to his cost, and laying out vpon you. Where much is given, much will be required: God hath given you much, and hath beene a long time good vnto you. He brought the preaching of the Gospell earely amongst you, after the darke night of Popery, and hath ever since continued that mercy vnto you, with the benefit and blessing of a weeke-dayes Lecture, over and besides the Sabbath service. But amongst o∣ther favours bestowed vpon you, I may not omit the specifying of his late goodnesse, in raysing you vp so many good friends, and benefactors, for the enlargement and repaire of your Chappell,
 the ancient place of your Lecture. In such dead, and hard times to finde so many, were strange to vs, to be not onely voluntaries, and liberall benefactors; but also, cheerfull factors, not onely givers to, but gatherers for the worke, (whilest other some, though due and dayly hearers, yet earnest disputers against, and discouragers from the worke.) Whose worke was this, but his who hath the hearts of all men in his hand? As therefore you haue cause to begge for a seven-fold recompence into the bosomes of your benefactors, so haue yee much more cause to acknowledge the goodnesse of God, your great benefactor, that opened so ma∣ny mens hearts, and gaue them hearts to open their hands to so good a worke. All good workes, to take them in the narrow lati∣tude, were not done in the dayes of Popery. Survay the mother Citie, and divers other places in the Kingdome, end let any one twenty yeares in the time of Popery, in fiue hundred yeares past, shew but so many Churches, Chappels, and Schooles built, as haue beene reard, and reedified these last twenty yeares: the yeares of our present Soveraignes raigne. I am not sory that it hath prooved our lot to haue a share in this glory, and that our Towne should be in the number of those that can affront the Pa∣pists in their boastings.
Now therefore since God hath given you much, he also lookes for much at your hands. Hee lookes for a returne proportionable to his stocke, he will not be a loser by you, much he lookes for, and much will he haue. Better you returne him the much he expects in an answerable obedience, and walking worthy of his mercy, then that he exact much in the rigorus reckoning of his iustice.
But I spare a further pressing of you, and change my pressing into prayer. The God of heaven, and the Father of our Lord Iesus, that hath given you so many helps, giue you also all hearts to improue them, fill you with all knowledge and wisedome, make you rich in the worke of the Lord, and in all good workes, make you shine as lights here, that you may shine as the Sunne in the Kingdome of God. This is the desire, and shall ever bee the prayer of

