




IF Christians in these daies were as religi∣ous in dedicating of their books, as Hea∣then men in former time were superstitious in dedi∣cating of their Churches, I doubt not but men would bee as farre

from writing of bookes, as they are from building of Churches. In dedication of their Temples they were (as it is reported) too curi∣ous; in dedicating of our bookes we are (as it appeareth) too negli∣gent. They regarded time, place, circumstance and person; we nei∣ther respect time, place, circum∣stance nor person. Indeede the three former doe not much con∣cerne vs at all, but as for the last it should be the first thing which is to bee considered in euery booke: for it sufficeth not that the booke be well written, vnlesse the person to whom it is written bee fitting and agreeable with the booke. For as the Heathens neuer, or seldome imes, dedicated their Temples to men touched with the same infir∣mities that they were, but either nto the person of some great god

or goddesse, who might if neede were, be able to defend them: so should not wee commit our la∣bours and workes vnto their pa∣tronage and protection which are but simply men, scarce able for to helpe themselues: but vnto such as either for their vertues sakes are better then men, as Aristotle saith, orels by reason of their places and offices in the Common-wealth, are farre aboue all other men in dignitie, and equall vnto GOD himselfe (as the Scripture testifi∣eth) in name. This respectiue care (Right Honorable) hath not som∣what, but altogether perswaded me to offer vp this small booke of Morall Philosophie (which I tran∣slated as well vpon iust commen∣dations of the author, as also vpon intreatie of my kind friend a lear∣ned Doctor of Diuinitie) into your

Honors hands: not as if I meant to interprete the same vnto your Lordship, which better knoweth the French tongue and other lan∣guages then my self, or most men doe: but for as much as this small booke had great neede of some worthie Patron, and none more worthie then your Honor was to be found, whether your rare ver∣tues bee to bee regarded, or the place which you hold with honor in this Common-walth: it see∣med good therefore vnto mee to vse your Lordships name aboue all others for patronage of this booke, if it shall neede defence, as doubtles it will, though it were neuer so well written (as it is most excellently compiled in French) such is the priuate malice of cer∣taine euill men, and common de∣tinie of al good writers. For who

is he that will regard a booke if it be little? so little doe men consi∣der the goodnes of things, when they measure all things by great∣nes: as if Dauid were not little when he slew Goliah the giant; the clowde little which threatned all Israel with raine; the oyle little in the pitcher which filled all the emptie vessels of the widow. And as that oyle was little vntill the time that it was powred foorth: so small bookes when they come a∣broad into mens hands, if they be furnished with doctrine, are of great power to conuert men vn∣to petie and godlines. The title of this booke is, The Morall Philo∣sophie of the Stocks. Let it not seeme strange vnto vs that Philo∣sophie should be a meanes to help Diuinitie, or that Christians may profit by the Stoicks. Indeede the licentious loosenes of our times

cannot well brooke the strines of this sect. The Stoicks are as o∣dious vnto some men, as they themselues are hated of others: they call the professors hereof in their gibing manner stockes, and not Stoicks, because of the affini∣tie of their names. And I pray why may not wee call them wisards as well as wise men by the same rea∣son? Philosophie in generall is profitable vnto a Christian man, if it be well and rightly vsed: but no kinde of philosophie is more profitable and neerer approching vnto Christianitie (as S. Hierome saith) then the philosophie of the Stoicks. Let vs then that are Chri∣stians follow them as farre oorth as they haue followed the trueth: for truth, as a learned writer saith, Vndecung, est à spiritu sancto est: from whence or whom so euer it

ommeth commeth from the ho∣lie Ghost. The Israelites when they departed from the Egyptians stole away their iewels: wee are permitted to vse the wordes and sentences of the Heathen wri∣ters to our purpose in case of doc∣trine and exhortation, but as it were by stealth very warilie and sparingly, as S. Pal vsed for to do. This libertie Master Caluin in his Commentarie vpon those places liberally granteth vs, and I suppose it cannot lawfully bee denyed: for gold and iluer and pretious iewels were euer vsed as ornamēts in the old law to decke and gar∣nish the Temple withall. As for the wordes of the Apostle, which biddeth vs to beware of philoso∣phie least they beguile vs, they are most profitabl for our instruc∣tion, to teach vs not to attribute

more vnto philosophie, then phi∣losophie or the Arts deserue. A∣braham was married vnto Sarah, Hagar was but his handmaid, or at the most but his concubine, yet both liued with him in the same house, and lay with him in the same bed. Euery Christian must endeuour to be as Abraham was married vnto Sarah, that is, vnto Diuinitie: for Sarah signifieth a Ladie and mistresse, and who fit∣ter to be Ladie and mistresse then Diuinite, which must be attended on with Philosophie, which is in stead of Hagar her handmaide, which must be vsed no otherwise then as a concubine or as a stran∣ger, as her name in the original be∣tokeneth. If Philosophie, with her yong sonne Ismael the Ars, begin to despise Diuinitie, as Hagar de∣spised Sarah, shee must bee cast

oorth to be taught her obedience abroad, which she might as well aue learned at home. But where∣ore need all these words? why do I goe about to perswade your Honor vnto the embracing of this kind of Heathen diuinitie, which is better knowne together with the right vse thereof vnto your godly wisedome, then my foolish ignorāce can informe you? Doth not the temperance of your wel∣gouerned life and sober discipline in manners shew that you are a perfect Philosopher, not in word onely but in deede also? There be many which are Stoickes in the schooles, as Arrian vpon Epicte∣tus noteth, but are Epicures at home; that speake well in pub∣like, but liue ill in priuate: your Honor is right well knowne to be one of these. For your life in priute

is answerable vnto your life in publike, and your words agree∣able with your deeds. And whence proceedeth al this, if a man should search the fountaine of all your actions, but from the fountaine and liuely source of all true lear∣ning? which is so vnited and in∣grated into your stocke, that few haue been of your kind, which haue not been either greatly lear∣ned, or great louers & embracers of learning so that learning com∣meth vnto your Honour, as the Priesthood did vnto the Leuits, by ght of succession from the father vnto the sonne. Continue there∣fore (Right Honorable) continu∣ally to cherish the Artes, and loue learning and learned men, as you haue done: and amongst the rest let the worthie work of this noble Getleman of France, whose

name is not as yet knowne in En∣gland, haue a small roume among your other bookes, till such time as the French copie be to be had, which now is hardly to be gotten: and so as there is ioy in your Ho∣nors name in this life, so shall you most assuredly in the next world, your name being written in the booke of life, haue ioyes without end: which God grant, to whom I leaue your Lordship: hum∣bly crauing pardon of the same for my bold∣nes.

