



SEing, most miserable and wretched Prouince, that thy ouer great exceeding in thine auncient and wonted delights & pleasures, hath brought thee into this outragious fury, and that thine ill hap hath caused thee to put to these thy rent and torne hands, to plucke out thine owne bo∣wels withall, and to disfigure thine own face: yet if there he any intermission of this hoe broyling mischiefe, see thou employ the same about the beholding and looking vpon thy mi∣serie. But if so be thou be too too fearefull of the miseries which thou best brought vpō thy selfe, or caust not abide the sight of them, be∣hold and looks vpō the ruine & destruction of these miserable Hebrewes, because it is the truest glasse that thou canst looke in. But whō a thine eyes shall haue borrowed their image
 and face to behold and see thy miseries there∣in, let them also borrow teares of thee to, wayle and mourne for them. For the chiefest remedy to ease thy sorrow and griefe, is for thee to acknowledge the same, and then to haue compassion thereof. And when will that be? forsooth euen then, when God, who loueth thee more then thou louest thy selfe, shall by his owne loue ouercome that desire of thine which thou hast to destroy thy selfe. And in waiting for this good, and praying for the same, I do here prepare and make ready for thee holy teares, that thou migh∣test thereby mollifie thine hard hart, and ex∣tinguish therein the wrath of God enflamed against thee. It may be that they will well like thee, as a charitable remedy ought to do, and it may be that they will mislike thee, and then wilt thou do en do, who vtterly r∣iect whatsoeuer is offred them for their good. And whether they please or displease th, yet will I neuer cease both to loue and serue thee. For, what  it that I should more v∣ly and willingly loue and serue, then  are and best beloued Countrey,  deare Countrey, I say, that maketh some  of me? The Lord my God saue and presence thee my poore countrey of France, and gra gr are to be able as blessedly to pu thy welfare, as I haue an earnest desire to do it.

