


RIGHT HONOVRABLE:
THe Divine provi∣dence hath in won∣derfull wisedome put an uncertainty upon all earthly good, and hath so ordered it that there should
 be a vicissitude, an entercourse, and an enterchange as of sea∣sons so of conditions. There Genes. 8. 22. must bee whiles the earth remaines a variety and a suc∣cession of seasons. Seed time and harvest, cold and heate, summer and win∣ter, day and night; And there ever hath beene, and will be whiles the World remai∣neth, the like variety and suc∣cession of conditions in this life. There is a seed-time, and an harvest. They that sow in teares shall reape in joy. Psa. 126. 5, 6. Hee that goeth forth and
 weepeth bearing preci∣ous seed, or the seed bas∣ket, shall doubtlesse come againe with rejoycing, bringing his sheaves with him. There is a winter and a Cant.  11, 12. summer. Loe the winter is past, the raine is over, and gone. The flowers ap∣peare on the earth, the time of the singing of the Birds is come. There is a day and a night. The mor∣ning was come, but the night also doth come: thou hadst a time of prosperity, but Isa. . 12 Sic J now affliction is comming upon
 thee, saies the Prophet to Edom. Now as it is a matter of com∣fort that may support our spi∣rits in a wette seed-time, in a cold winter, in a darke night, that a joyfull harvest, a warme summer, a lightsome day will come, so it is matter of feare in a joyfull harvest, in a warme summer, in a bright day, that after these a wet, and a weeping seed-time, a cold and a pinching winter, a darke and a gloomy night may come. The time may come when wee may say, Loe the summer is past, the raines, and the cold are com∣ming,
 and the shadowes of the evening stretched out may tell us that then the day goes away, and that wee may Ier. 6. 4. then say, Woe unto us. As this successive entercourse of conditions in the times of evill should keepe us from a fainting succumbency, and an umbesee∣ming despondency of spirit; so in the time when our mountaine seemes strongest, and our com∣forts seeme to bee most setled, it should keepe us from security, and setling upon our lees. It is good to feare the worst in our best condition, and so to feare
 the worst as to provide and pre∣pare for it. Though Iob had some probable grounds to say, I shall die in my nest, yet Job 29. 18. hee never so rocked and lulled himselfe asleepe with the conceite of a perpetuity of his prosperity, but that hee feared what might, and what did come. I feared Job 3. 25. a feare, and it came upon mee, and that (saies hee) which I was afraid of, is come unto mee. He never so hoped in hope, but withall in his best estate hee feared a feare. Never any man on earth en∣joyed a more glorious peace then
 Salomon did, and yet never any Prince that had, and made greater preparations for warre. Hee had dominion over all the Region on this side the River, and hee had 1 King. 4 24, 25, 26 peace on all sides round about him, And Iudah and Israel dwelt safely, every man under his Vine, and under his Fig∣tree, from Dan to Beer∣sheba, all the daies of Sa∣lomon. And Salomon had forty thousand stalles of Horses for his Charets, and twelve thousand
 Horse-men. Here was great peace and safety, and yet great provisions against a danger that might happen. His wisedome is exemplary, and it is wisedome to follow it. Since all earthly felicities are mutable, and sor∣rowes and calamities may come in their roome, it is singular wis∣dome, as to foresee them, so to provide for comfort and safety in them. It was a wise speech of Crates the Theban when hee forsooke Thebes after it was repaired, and so fortified: I . Aelian. l. 3. c. 6. need not, said hee, a City that Alexander or some
 other may overthrow. He thought it a folly to trust to any City or hold for his safety, which might not bee able to withstand Alexanders, or another ene∣mies power. That was the high∣est pitch of his prudence and providence; and so farre should Christians goe, but must yet withall goe farther, not onely not to betrust their safety with any thing in a mans power, but to seeke their comforts and their safety in such an hold and mu∣niment as is above the reach and power of an Alexander, or any other man. Such an hold,
 and such a Tower there is to bee had. That's the gracious good∣nesse of the Lord, that though hee will bring changes and alte∣rations of our conditions, and turne our comforts into feares, yet hee will never put us into such feares, nor put us upon such streights, as that wee shall bee left comfortlesse or Towerlesse. Hee hath in the hardest, and worst that can befall us, provided us the Tower of his Name; to which, wee may runne, and to which if wee doe runne, wee shall finde succour and safety. So that looking upon godly and
 righteous men, will a man say of them, as Balaam said when hee looked upon the Kenites, Num. 24 21. Strong is thy dwelling place, and thou puttest thy nest in a Rocke? And what ever sad condition then be∣fall a Christian, what need his spirit bee perplexed, and distra∣cted with feares? When hee hath put his nest in a rocke, why should any thing put his heart in a feare? But this is our folly, and our weakenesse, that God having provided us so strong a Tower as his Name is, that wee take not the advantage of the
 strength of this Tower, that wee make no more hast unto, and in∣to it. It is said of Ephraim, Hos. 7. 11 that hee was a silly Dove without heart; and well it were if the same might not as truly be said of us. To be a Dove without gall, that's commen∣dable, but to bee a Dove with∣out heart, that is neither com∣mendable nor safe. A rod, saies Salomon, is for him that is voyd of heart. That Prov. 10. 13. man must needs lie open, and be exposed to the judgements of God that fall upon the world. A Dove-like, Innocency our
 Saviour requires in us, Bee innocent as Doves; but a Dove-like sillinesse not min∣ding nor fearing the Fowlers nets and snares hee cautions against when hee requires a Serpentine wisedome. And yet the Dove is not so silly but when shee sees a danger, and is in feare of her enemy, she can dwell in the rocke, Ier. 48. 28. and make her nest in the sides of the holes mouth. The Dove is not without heart, but in her feare and danger shee will seeke shelter in the Rocke. To get into
 this Tower of Gods Name how would it settle and se▪¦cure our hearts, and quiet Sub tecto Imbrem exaudire. Adag. our spirits in the saddest con∣ditions? How good is it to heare the raine rattle upon the tyles when a man sits under the roofe? When Moses gave warning of that dread∣full storme of haile and fire mingled with it, such of Pharaohs servants as feared the Word of the Lord, made their servants and cattell flie into their houses, . 10. 1. such as regarded not so faire warning left them abroad in
 the field. When the storme came, who were the wiser and the safer then? then both par∣ties saw how good it was to bee housed in a storme. And what is an house to this Tower of Gods Name? when so much safety in an Egyptian cottage, what will the safety of a mans person, and the serenity of a mans spirit bee within the covert of so strong a Tower? But who shall bee the men that shall have the benefit of this Tower? Such as bee Gods friends. And who bee Gods friends?
 Such as have their conver∣sation in heaven. They that have their conversa∣tion in heaven are the friends of the God of hea∣ven, and they that are the friends of God shall have the Name of God for their strong Tower. And there∣fore it is that I have joyned these texts, and treatises toge∣ther in one, they having such correspondence with, and re∣ference each to other.
And now (most Noble, and my much Honoured Lady) they comming forth
 to publique view, I make so bold as to tender and present them to your Honour, as a publique testimoniall of my thankefulnesse to you. I must ever acknowledge mine en∣gagements unto you, such as transcend possibility of any retribution on my part, and must leave that unto him that can and will repay you seven∣fold into your bosome. I must with all thankefulnesse to God acknowledge your Noble∣nesse in your favours, coun∣tenance, and encouragement to mee in the worke and labour
 of my Ministery. There is mention made in Scripture of Hezekiah's acts, and 2 Chro. 32. 32. his goodnesse. Acts, and goodnesse, that's a glorious commendation. Wee read of his father Ahaz, his Acts, and of all his waies, first 2 Chro. 28, 26. and last; but wee read of no goodnesse. They bee Acts, and Goodnesse, good Acts that make the Name sweete and Honourable. And what were Hezekiahs Acts and Goodnesse? I finde amongst other, two of speciall note, The one was that He encou∣raged
 the Levites that 2 Chro. 30. 22. taught the good know∣ledge of the Lord. His encouragement of the Levites was his Honour: there was an Act and Goodnesse, an Act of Goodnesse indeed. And in that Act of Goodnesse doth your Honour share with him. The other Act, and Goodnesse of his was that hee made a poole and a conduit, and 2 King. 20. 20. brought water into the City. His purse was going for the benefit of others, and the good of many. And herein have you followed him
 in his Goodnesse, your Fountaines have beene Pro. 5. 16 dispersed abroad, and your Rivers of waters in the streetes. You have built Salomons Conduit, and the waters of your bounty and mercy cease not to spring, and runne abroad to the reliefe of many. Your workes praise you in Pr. 31. 31 the gate, as Bathshe∣baes vertuous womans should. The backes of the poore which you cloathe, the loynes of the poore which your fleece warmes, the bellies of the poore
 which you feed, and the bo∣wels of the poore which you so often refresh, they all blesse you, and God for you. And hee that heares the cur∣ses of the poore oppressed, will certainely heare the prayers of the poore refreshed. Not onely Cornelius his prayers, but his Prayers and his Almes both came up for a memoriall before God. Act. 10. 4 The Kings of the Gen∣tiles affected the Title of Be∣nefactours, how well they Luke 22. 25. deserved it some of them, their stories witnesse, but what
 they affected, you have really deserved, The Honourable stile of a Benefactour to the poore. It is said of Dorcas Act. 9. 36 that shee was a woman full of Good workes, and Almes-deeds which she did. And herein it appeared that shee was indeed a woman full of Good workes that all the Widdowes▪ and poore women which she had cloathed, stood wee∣ping Act. 9. 39 by Peter when she was dead, and shewing the coates and garments which shee had made a
 her cost, and cloathed them withall. So many coates and garments as they shewed, so many evidences they brought forth of her good workes. The like honour is yours upon the Hic cau∣sam notat Lucascur snscitata fuerit Thabita, nempe quod Deus pauperum misertus, eorum votis, sanctae foeminae vitam concessit. Calv. in loc. same grounds. And it is worth the noting that Calvin notes upon that place. That the text points out one cause why Dorcas was raysed from the dead, namely that God out of compassion to the poore granted the life of that holy woman at the instance of their prayers. And if God at the instance of the prayers of
 the poore whom shee had shewed mercy to, raised Dorcas from the dead, then how much more will hee at the prayers of the poore continue, and draw out their lives that doe draw out their bowels to the poore? It is certaine that God will have an eye for good over such as have had a good eye to the poore. He will bee a Tower to such in a time when a Tower will bee of greatest vse. The man that shall not bee afraid of evill tidings, and in evill times, that
 shall have his heart fix∣ed, Psal. 112. 4, 6, 7. that shall have his heart established, so as hee shall not bee afraid, is thus qualified amongst o∣ther things. Hee is gra∣cious, and full of com∣passion, and righteous: that is, liberall and good to the necessities of the poore. Such an one shall finde God good to him in an evill time of misery. Gods Name shall bee a Tower of safety to such n one. And that that Name may bee ever your trong Tower of safety,
 and that the God of Heaven, and father of our Lord Jesus Christ would abundantly mul∣tiply your Graces, and your Daies, that hee would continue and increase the ho∣nour of your Noble Family, both in Roote and Bran∣ches, and that hee would give you at the last a full Reward in his glorious Kingdome, is and ever shall bee the hearty prayer of

