


Right Honourable:
NEuer did any time afford so great a mul∣titude of Bookes, so great a throng of Wri∣ters, as these present daies wherin we liue: So that no lesse wisedome seemes to be re∣quired of a Reader in the choice of his Au∣thor, then of a Writer in the choice of his matter. I would not be so construed as if I taxed any for their writing: for what if all the Lords people could prophecie? And how were it to be wished, that many worthy ones, who confine their gifts within their parochiall bounds, would giue their labours the liberty of the ayre, and walke of the whole Church? But if in this great variety any should be puzzeld, and at a set where to bestow his time, and reading, if my poore counsell were worth the giuing, I should aduise such, whose callings and conditions giues them not the leasure to turne ouer euery mans leaues, to make choice of such who may helpe and direct them in the vnderstanding of the Booke of God. Like to that of our Sauiour to Martha, it may be said to many, both Writers, & Readers, They trouble them selues about many bookes, but One booke is necessary: that
 Booke which is able to make vs wise to saluation. If Luthers loue to this booke, and the reading of it, made him hate his own Ego odi meos libros, et saepe op∣to cos interne, quod metuo e morentur lectes a lectione ipsius Scripturae, quae sola onmis sapi∣entiae sons est: Luther in Ge∣nes. 19. bookes, and wish them lost, which yet were of so excellent vse, and for which the Church stands so much bound to God, then how much more would hee not onely haue hated, but accursed, not onely those bald, and base pamphlets, the scurse of scald & scabby heads, but euen a number of Authors, who though they haue haply their vse, yet their huge voluminous compositions swallow and drink vp, either all, or too much of that time which were to be redeemed for the Scriptures vse, and search. Surely, if the Scripture be that onely booke vpon vvhich our day and nights▪studies must be spent, Iosh. 1. 8. then should such Au∣thors as vnclaspe the same, be most welcom to vs, and haue the precedency in our choice. Of this nature is this booke where∣withall I am bold to present your Honour, presuming in that respect vpon so much the greater acceptance. In the perusall whereof, as you shall meet with diuerse passages not vnprofita∣ble, so amongst others with one short one, the tedder of the text not giuing larger liberty, concerning the right, and religious gouernment of a family. A point of great consequence, and vse for all, but for none more then great persons, whom God hath betrusted with the gouernment of great families. Philemons house is here honoured with the title of a Church. To the Church that is in thine house. Most great houses haue the ornaments of Chappels, but few the honour of Churches. So irreligious and irregular are the followers of many great personages, that they seeme to metamorphose their Masters houses, as the Iewes did the Lords House, which should haue been an house of prayer, into a den of thieues. Yea so pro∣digiously inordinate are the courses, and carriages of some fa∣milies, that a man in regard of their retinue, may iudge the Prophets curse to be fallen vpon them. Namely: That Ziim doe lodge there, and that their houses are full of Ochim, or of dolefull creatures, Ostriches dwell there, and Sa∣tyres dance there, Iim and Dragons are in their pleasant Palaces, Esay 13. 21, 22. And this plague, that great
 houses are haunted with such vncleane spirits, whence comes it, but from a double neglect in Gouernours, either in the chu∣sing, or ordering their seruants? In the choice of seruants, what is lesse regarded then the Truth and Power of Religion? Most chuse as Salomon did Ieroboam, 1. King. 11. 28. he saw that the young man was meet for the worke, and therefore entertained him into his seruice. But with what issue? He wrought a mischiefe to and against his house. It had beene happy for Salomons house, that a man of more conscience, though of lesse skill, had been retained. How many scruple not to entertaine very Ieroboams, so be it they be meet for their worke, though otherwise their religion be either a Popish, pup∣pet and calfe-worship, or a flat irreligion? The world is not so empty and barren, but it is possible if care were had, to finde Skill, and Conscience, Ability and Honestie, matcht in one and the same scruant. But in the ordering of families is as foule a neglect, whilst most masters are of Sallioes faith, that matters of faith and religion belong not to their cure. Hence is it that they neither constraine them to the true seruice of God, nor restraine them from Popery, profanenesse, dissolute & disordered life. Ioshuaes resolution, I and my house vvill serue the Lord, is growne out of credit with the world. Let a seruant faile in the carelesse performance of his place, in the neglect of his Masters profit; nay, if but a paltry dog, or hawke be vnfed, or misdieted, oh the tragedies, oh the blusters, and terrible thunder-cracks of fierce and furious language that ensue! But let a seruant be ignorant, a neglecter or despiser of Gods worship, a swearer, a Sabbath-breaker, a drunkard, an vncleane person, yet, I will not say against such there is no law, but against such there is no anger, no rebuke, no censure, no making the family Church-like in the excommunication, and eiection of these Satyres, and Ostriches. All such Gouernors are as farre from the honour, as the practice of Philemon. Whose example if happily any great Ones should conceit to be too lowe for their imitation (though the meanest of the Scrip∣ture-Saints are patternes for the greatest) may they be pleased
 to remember not onely those ancient Precedents, Abraham, Ioshua, and Dauid, all three honourable in this particular, but to looke a little neerer their owne dayes, to a man of their owne ranke, I meane, that right religious, and worthy Prince of Anhalt, of whom Melancthon reports, That his Cham∣ber Cubiculū eius e∣rat Templum, A∣cademia, Curia. Nam ibi haec fie∣bant quotidie, preio, lectio, scriptio, et delibe∣rationes de gu∣bernatione. Me∣lanct. de Georgio Principe Anhal∣tino, in praefat. 5. Tomi oper. Lu∣theri. was a Church, an Vniuersity, and a Court. Besides the dispatch of ciuil businesses, there was daily praying, reading, writing, yea, and Preaching too. For so Scultetus reports of him. I doe not thinke that this noble Earle, hauing a Church for God in his Chamber, suffered a Temple to Bacchus in his Celler. In too many families Venus hath her Altars in the Chambers, & Bacchus his Sacrifices in the Butteries: which two, hauing made their diuident in the family, & shared their Deuotoes, alas, what poore thirds wil be left for God? What∣soeuer disorders are in publike, they will neuer be redressed, so long as families, especially great Ones, are vnreformed.
The Family, the Common-wealth, the Church, are Sunt igitur tres coelestes Hierar∣chiae, de quibus Asini Sophistae tam multa nugā∣tur, aliud nihil quam vita Oeco∣nomica, politica, Ecclesiastica. Luther in Gene. the three heauenly Hierarchies, as Luther termes them. But surely, the first is not heauenly, vnlesse the last be in it. If the church be not in it, it wil proue but an hellish Hierarchy, yea and will poyson both the other. If families were Churches, and religiously gouerned, what great ease would Gouernours of the Church, and Common-wealth finde? The way to heale the naughty waters, is with Elisha, 2. King. 2. 21. to goe to the spring, & to cast in the salt there. It is but a folly to com∣plaine of misorders else-where, while our own families are mis∣ordred.
Now R. H. as you graced, and gaue countenance to the first of this Authors works, printed since his death, so may you be pleased to accept this last as a testimony of all thankefull acknowledgement, of your great, and vndeserued fauours. As it was the Authors desire in the handling of this holy Scrip∣ture (the first fruits of his constant ministeriall labours) to per∣fect that noble, and honourable family of your Fathers, where it was opened, as in many other points of Christianity, so in the knowledge of family-duties, that it might be brought to greater
 perfection: so is it my desire by publishing the same, to further the common good of all good Christians, in awakening, & stir∣ring them vp to the conscionable discharge of teaching, and right ordering their families, to the honour of God, their owne, and the endlesse good of many soules: And that by your diligent reading hereof, you would be pleased to obserue & practise all such rules, & directions, as may any way tend to the bettering of your iudgement and family. For it is with Families as with Churches on earth, none completely perfect, during our pilgri∣mage here. The which while you shall doe, you shall bring vp∣on your selfe Abrahams blessing, promised for his wel-ordered house, and Philemons honour of a Church in your family, and in the end, peace and happinesse to your own soule. The which vnfainedly wishing you from the God of peace, I humbly take my leaue, and rest,
Epping in Essex, August 15. 1618.


