


RIGHT WORSHIPFVL,
THat which the Apostle Paul speakes of a mans desire of the office of a Bishop, may be truly spoken of every one who desires to gaine men to the love of a good Conscience, that hee desires a worthy Worke: Yea, it is the worke which is, and ought to bee made the scope and drift of the worthy worke of the Ministery. And therefore it is, that he, that desires the calling of the Mini∣sterie, desires a worthy worke, because of this worthy worke of bringing mento Vnicuique li∣ber est pro∣pria consci∣entia, & ad hunc librum discutiendū & emendan∣dum omnes alij inventi sunt, Bern. de Cons. good Conscience, A worke at which all workes and books should specially ayme: Conscience is a book, one of those books that shall be opened at the last day, and to which men shall be put, and by which
 they shall be judged. Therefore to the directing, informing, and amending of this booke should all other bookes speci∣ally tend. Yea Salomon seemes to call men off from all other bookes, and stu∣dies, to the study of this so necessary a point, the keeping of a good Conscience: Of making many bookes, (saith he) there is Eccles. 12. 12, 13. no end, and much study is a wearinesse of the flesh; Let us heare the conclusion of the whole matter, Feare God and keep his Com∣mandements, for this is the whole dutie of man. As if his advice tended to this, to neglect all studies in comparison of that study which aimes at the getting & kee∣ping of a good Conscience. It would be exceeding happy with us, if this study were more in request amongst us. Wee seeme to live in those dayes fore-told by the Prophet, wherein the earth should bee filled with the knowledge of the Lord. We Isa. 11. 9. are blessed that live in so cleare a Sunne∣shine of Gods truth, but yet the griefe is, that through our owne default, our Sun∣shine is but like the winter light, all light, little or no heate, and we make no other use of our light, but onely to see by, not to walke and work by. In the first re-en∣trance of the Gospell amongst us, how
 devout, holy, zealous, and men renow∣ned Antiqua sa∣pientia nihil aliud quam facienda & vitāda prae∣cepit, & tūc longe meli∣ores erant viri. Postquā docti prodi∣erunt, boni desunt. Sim∣plex enim illa & aper∣ta virtus in obscuram & solertem sci∣entiam ver∣sa est, doce∣rumque dis∣putare non vivero, Se∣neo. epist. 56. Rom. 15. 14 for Conscience were our Martyrs, and our first Planters, Preachers, & pro∣fessors of Religion? They had not gene∣rally the knowledge and learning, the world now hath, nor the world now the Conscience they then had. There bee now better Scholers, there were then better Men: they were as excellent for Devotion, as our Times are for Disputa∣tion. It is an excellent sight to see such Christians as were the Romanes; Full of goodnesse, filled with all Knowledge. It is pitty that ever so lovely a paire should be sundred. Yet if they be parted, it is best being without that which with most safe∣tie may be spared. A good Conscience is sure to doe well, though it want the ac∣complishment of Learning, and greater measures of Knowledge and Vnderstan∣ding. But take Learning from a good Conscience, and it is but a Ring of gold in a Swines snout; or that which is worse, A thorne in a Drunkards hand. Learning Prov. 26. 9. is to bee highly apprized; Riches, Ho∣nours, and all other earthly blessings are vile to it. But yet though it take place of all other things, yet must it give good Conscience the wall and upper-hand, as
 that which is farre before it in worth, vse, and necessitie. As Salomon of wisdome, so may it be said of good Conscience, Shee Prov. 3. 15. is more pretious than Rubies, and all the things thou canst desire are not to be compa∣red to her. Gold and Rubies cannot so en∣rich a man as good Conscience doth, and yet alas the blindnesse of men, how wil∣ling are they in this case, with a wilfull povertie? Not Rubies, but handfulls of Barley, morsels of Bread, and Crusts are preferred before the invaluable trea∣sure of a good Conscience.
After the many worthy endeavours therefore of so many as have bin before me in this worke of labouring men to a good conscience: I have adventured also to lend my weake strength to the same worke. If one or two witnesses prevaile not, yet who knows what an whole cloud may doe? Though Eliah and Elisha bee the Horsemen and Chariots of Israel, yet the Footmen do their service in the bat∣tell, and Apollo may without offence wa∣ter, where Paul hath planted.
Now these my poore endeavours such as they are, I am bold to publish under your Worshipfull name, and to put them foorth under your Patronage, entreating
 you to countenance that in a Treatise, which you have so long countenanced in the practise. None so fit to bee a Patron of a Treatise of good Conscience, as he that hath bin a religious both professor, & protector of the practise therof. To haue a Naile fastned in a sure place, the antiquity Isa. 22. 25. of a long standing Name, and Family, to be hewen out of the Quarry of the best Stocks of Parentage, to have faire Lines, and a faire lot in outward possessions, to be blessed with a fruitfull Vine, and O∣live plants, fairely growne and planted round about a man, all these are to bee held high honors, and great favours from the God of heaven. And with all these hath the Lord honoured your selfe. But yet your greatest honour that hath given lustre to all the rest, hath bin your love to the Truth, Religion, and a good Consci∣ence. Augustine repented him that he attributed more to Mallius Theodorus, to Displicetau∣tē illic quod Mallio Theo∣doro, adquem librumipsum scripsi, quā∣vis docto & Christiano viro plus tri∣bui quam de∣berem. Aug. Retr. lib. 1. cap. 2. whom he wrote a booke, than he should have done, though otherwise hee were a learned and Christian man. A man may easily overshoot himselfe in the commē∣dation of a good man, especially, if a great man. It shall suffice therfore to have said so little, and that to this end, that hereby,
 the World may know the reason of my choice of your Patronage of this Trea∣tise. It would have bin an incongruity to have had the name of a person of an evill Conscience, prefixed before a booke of good Conscience. I desired a Patron su∣table to my subject. I presume the very subject shall make the Treatise welcome to you: Be you pleased to afford your ac∣ceptance, as I will afford you my poore prayers, that the Lord who hath already set upon your head the crowne of the El∣ders, Prov. 17. 6. Childrens Children, and one Crowne of glory here one earth, Age found in the Prov. 16. 1. wayes of righteousnes, would also in his due time give you that incorruptible crowne of righteousnes, and eternall glory in the heavens, which that righteous Judge shall give to you, and to all those that in the wayes of a good Conscience waite for the blessed appearance of the Lord Iesus.

