


ALBEIT (right learned & ver∣tuous Prelate) the wonder∣ful workmāship of the whole world: the great¦nes and beawtye of the celestiall bo∣dyes: the inuiolable order which they keepe in their cōtinuall & most swift mouing: the inestimable bene∣fites which they yeeld to the inferi∣or partes by their seasonable inter∣chaunges: the straunge and some∣tyme terrible effectes that proceede of their secret influences and ope∣rations: the continuall intercourses of the dayes and nightes: the orderly succeeding of the tymes, as winter,




 Springtyme, Sommer, and Haruest: the generation of Cloudes, Frosts, dewes, windes, thunder, lightning, and such other impressions and alte∣rations of the ayre: the situation of the huge earth in the middes of the world without any proppe or stay to hold it vp: the highnes of the moū∣taynes: the fertilitye of the valleyes: the largenes of the chāpiō groūdes: the beawtye and vertue of plantes, trees, herbes, and flowers wherewith the earth is so excellently adorned: the vnmeasurable widenes of the maine seas, some inuironing the compasse of the whole earth, and some shooting forth into the maine land, to the incomparable commo∣ditye of all countryes: the marue∣lous comming & going of the tides: the dreadfulnes of the waues rayzed by tempestuous windes: the great plentye of all kinde of fishes and mō∣sters in them the amiablenes of the
 freshe waters, some flowing with restlesse streame into the great Oce∣an sea, some sincking into the earth from whence they spring, some stā∣ding in vnmoueable Lakes, and all of them fraught with fishes and o∣ther liuing creatures necessarye to the vse of man: the propagation, multiplication, and preseruation of all liuing thinges in their seuerall kindes; and finally the most wise and skilfull making of man, the Lord of all earthly thinges, who is rightly called μικρόκοσμος, that is to say, a litle world whose head is euen as it were a litle globe of the world, and con∣ceiueth all worldly thinges: doe plainly declare & shew that there is a God, a wise deuiser, a mighty wor∣ker, and fatherly preseruer & main∣tayner of all thinges, to whome we ought of right to be subiect, in such sort as all our doinges may be agre∣able to his will: yet notwithstanding
 sinne the mother of all calamityes hath by the fall of our first parēts so venemously infected vs all their mi∣serable posteritye and progenye, and so blinded vs: that what God is, and what his will is concerning true re∣ligion, righteousnes, and eternall lyfe, wee of our selues are vtterly ig∣norant. Therefore hath he merci∣fully geuen vs his heauenly worde, a rule whereby wee may learne to acknowledge, celebrate, inuocate, and worship him according to the saying of the kingly Prophet: Thy Psal. 118. worde is a lanterne vnto my feete. Of the vertue of this heauēly word, according to the abilitye which God hath gratiously geuen me, I hauing not long sithēce publiquely spoken, & being earnestly requested of certayne vertuously disposed, to cōmunicate my labours to them & others: haue thought it meete to sa∣tisfie their reasonable request: which
 labour I consecrate to your good Lordship, and offer the same to your learned iudgement, as a scholler to his Maister as a souldiar to his cap∣tayne. Wherein my endeuour is to seeke the glory of God: to encourage the faythfull: and to bring into the kinges high way of their saluation, such as goe astray, and daungerously wander in the marishes of idolatrye and superstition. Yet I protest to your Lordship, that considering the infelicitye and malignity of this pre∣sent tyme, and the vanitye of opini∣ons, I was almost discouraged to speake or to write. And if I could doe it without offence to God, I would enioyne mee selfe, (not with Pythagoras schollars, to fiue yeares silence, but) to seuen yeares silence. 1. Tim. 4.  2. Tim. 3.  These be the vnhappy dayes that the Apostle sawe so long before, wherein men can not abide soūd doctrine. The Prophet Esai sayth
 there were schollars in his time that would say to their teachers: Loquimi∣ni sa. 30. 10. nobis placentia: Speake to vs such thinges as may lyke vs. And truely there are now a dayes I feare me too many such scholars: too many it∣ching eares: too many newfangled persons, and to many wranglers. But I am cōforted whan I consider that the veritye ouercommeth fal∣shod, and that the thinges which are of God, doe daunt whatsoeuer is obiected of men, and of Sathan himselfe▪ what hurteth the enemye, yf God protect? what preuaileth enuy, yf the highest preserue? They may mutter and murmure, brawle, and cauill: but they cannot hurt. Truth will get the vpper hād: Christ will haue the field. I would to God euery man would seeke the truth in the worde of God. S. August. sayth: ugust. m. 1. onfes. lib. . cap. 24. Vbi inueni veritatem: ibi inueni Deum meum ipsam veritatem: Where I foūd
 the truth: there I found my God, who is the truth it selfe. I would to God men would embrace the truth and now at length stick no longer in their mire, but cease to defend the denne of Antichrist, the house of their spirituall whoredome, & shops of falshode, fraughted with sha∣dowes, dreames, pride, vaineglory, and all other abhominable abuses. It is great pitie that learning should be so ill bestowed. For how much might they be able to doe to the ad∣uauncemēt of the truth, which shew so great cunning and skill in defence of falshod? Erasmus a man of excel∣lent and exquisite learning, writte much of the prayse of follie: what could he haue written in the prayse of wit? Cornelius Agrippa writte much of the vanitye of sciēces: what could he haue written in the com∣mendation of sciences? how could he haue praysed helth, that praysed
 the feuer quartane? how could he haue praysed bewtifull heare, that praysed deformed baldnes? how many aduenture witte in desperate causes? It is a desperate cause that can not be smoothed with words of eloquēce. No follie so vaine, but by some shift it may be maintayned. By meanes wherof, the blinde drinc∣keth many a flye, and the simple eye is sone beguiled. Yet notwithstāding their Transubstantiation, their Pur∣gatorye, their Merites, their Inuo∣cation of Saintes, their Supremacy, and such other Romish platyre can not be iustly defended by scripture or Doctours. Therfore it were good for those kinde of teachers to cease to abuse the simplicitye of the peo∣ple, and to professe the trueth. S. Ambrose sayth: Nullus pudor est ad Ambros. in Epist. ad Theo∣dosium. Tom. 1. melior a transire: It is no shame to re∣moue to the better. Augustine was an infant in Christes religion the
 three and thirtye yeare of his age. S. in Possi∣donio. Paule began ill: and yet he ended well. Of a cruell persecutour, he be∣came a mighty defender of Christes religion: Of a scatterer he became a gatherer: Of a wolfe, a lambe: Of an Antichristian enemy, a Christian souldiar: Of a learnd lawier at Hie∣rusalem, a learner of the Gospell at Damascus: and of a Saul, a Paul.
God of his mercy graunt that all they which haue traced the path of Antichrist, may renoūce their foo∣lishe dreames, and fonde assertions, and (after the example of S. Paule) professe Christ: detest Antichrist: & goe forward in all godlynes, euen vnto their liues end. Dauid may fall, and Saule may rise. Wee ought to hope the best of all men, to iudge the best, and to thinke the best: For charity thinketh no euill. S. August. sayth wel: Bononorum desyderū est vt 1. Cor. 13. qui mali sunt corrigantur: ma∣dium
 est vt qui boni sunt consumantur: Good men would faine haue ill men amended: and ill men would faine haue good men consumed. There are too many such in this doting age of the world, which hate all mē extremely that please not their fan∣sies: yet they make great shew of ho∣lynes. But if their visardes were pul∣led of, (Good Lord,) what a masse of malice should a man see? what enuy, what falshode, what spight∣fulnes, & rancour should a man be∣hold? Turkes and Iewes are better to be lyked, than such hipocriticall Christians. Charitye ouer commeth all thinges: without charity nothing preuaileth: and wheresoeuer chari∣tye is, shee draweth all thinges vnto her: and shee is the bewtye of the soule. I surcease humbly and harte∣ly beseeching Christ the Prince of Pastours to perserue your honour by the vertue of his holy Spirite many
 yeares, to the aduauncement of his glory: to the repayring of the ruines of Sion: To the vtter ruin of Ba∣bylō: and finally after your pe∣regrination vpon earth, to geue you the laborers peny of euerlasting blessednes.
At London the 2. day of September.

