



SIR,
NEITHER Seas nor Mountaines are so impassable a diuision in humain society, as diuersity of language: they seperate our

bodies onely, these our mindes, making vs absent euen in pre∣sence, while though our bodies meet together, yet wee, (I meane our diuiner parts) cannot: If any one could open the backe doore of the Indies, and let vs in a neerer way, how would fame dwell on his memory, and poste∣rity gratifie his labour. A sin∣ceere cleere Translator dooth more, for hee conducts our vn∣derstandings the next safest way to the ritchest intellectuall mines that are. How many after a long trauaile, bring forth onely some forraine deformitie, their exam∣ple making deeper impressions then their precepts, where as these Bees bring vs home the

honey, leauing the poyson in the weede, saue vs the labour of tra∣uaile, by transporting other countryes to vs, and not exiling vs to them, making remotest kingdomes as domestick and cheape as mapps, greatest Princes as familiar as bookes, and our farthest iourney but to Paules Church-yard. For they reconcile and new tune iarring man-kind, bringing back the harmony of speech from discord to vnisone. For as originall writers are the spring-heads of knowledge, so are these the conduit pipes bring∣ing vs home what wee haue not strength or leysure to fetch abroad. The vnhappy difference is, that all waters are cleerd and

purified by long conueyance, writings corrupted and thick∣ned. How so nyce and delicate an apprehension will relish these, euent will tell mee. The Author can protect him-selfe (who is yet liuing, and famous for his singular learning and eloquence) and you mee, not by patronizing mine errors, but in correcting them. Some houres of melan∣choly I haue bestowed on these Holy Meditations, with much satisfaction to my selfe, if so to you I will thinke it a very for∣tunate idlenesse, and striue hereafter to present you with matter of some other subiect. Thus wishing you whatsoeuer may become your owne vertues

or my desires. I submit my selfe to your fauourable censure, and rest

