



SYR, being called vpon to prepare this sermon for an impression: and finding a necessitie laid vpon me, to satisfie the importunitie of some friends, it came in∣to my minde to tender the same to you. And I doe more then hope that you will kindly accept it from me, and entertaine it as a testimonie of my loue: because it was both preached in your hearing; and at the funerall of that worthy and Worshipfull gentleman Master Dutton your fa∣ther in law. And I am the rather incouraged to commend it to your vse, and to write your name (as it were) in the front of it; because albeit you liued not vnder my Ministerie, yet in as much as out of that part of your faire inheritance, which lyeth here, I receiue some part of my maintenance and sustentati∣, I must needs thinke it my duty, to bestow some spirituall gift; by which I might euidence my care of your soules health, and something further you, in your passage towards that
 Countrey which I trust you seeke. Let it not displease y therefore, that I haue presented you with these few notes; bu vouchsafe them a roome of lodging among your bookes. I con¦fesse in this scribling age, many are carried with a busie h∣mour, making the times surfeit with their needlesse papers.  would be loath that anie man who hath in him anie true worth and is of a right religious vnderstanding, should so thinke of me wherefore to cleere my selfe to euery sober iudgement, this I say; I was drawen into this course in presenting this sermon to publique view: by the earnest request of some friends, and by the good approuement of sundrie fearing God. The matter of this sermon is excellent, if the workemanship were suteable, I might boldly say, It were no disparagement to you to afford your patronage, and to haue your name prefixed. Whatsoeuer my defect maie be, I beseech you be pleased to accept from me this small present: small, not in respect of the matter of it, for no man can treate of a more worthie subiect: But in regard of the manner of handling.
Accept it I saie, as an vndissembled argument of the sinceri∣tie of my affection, as a testimonie of my well wishing to your soule, and as a pledge of my setled purpose to labour to deserue your loue: And to be a continuall petitioner to the throne of grace, that you and your good Ladie, your Worshipfull mother in law, with the rest of your line and familie maie be kept by the power of God, through faith, vnto saluation. From Great Budworth in Cheshire.

