



FOr as much as wee are all strangers and pilgrimes on the earth,
2. Cor. 5.6. Heb. 11.13 1. Pet. 2.11 it shall be our wisedome as strangers and pilgrimes to abstaine from fleshly lusts, which fight against the soule: euen as it is the wisedome of a
pilgrime or traueller to ab∣staine (as much as is possible) from all things, that may di∣stract his minde from the loue and desire of his owne home, or cause him to linger in the way, and triflle out his time, til either his meanes or strength doe faile him, whereby hee should come to the end of his entended iourney.
For euery pilgrime or tra∣ueller hath three things especi∣ally to looke vnto. The first is the scope and end of his iour∣ney. The second is the direct and ready way that leadeth to it. The third is what things they be, which may either fur∣ther
him or hinder him in this way, that accordingly he may embrace the one,
2. Tim. 3.16. and shunne the other. And these three are all of them plainely and plen∣tifully laied out vnto vs in the Holy Scriptures.
The generall end & happi∣nes, as of al creatures,
Pro. 16.4. so more specially of the redeemed of Christ, is the glory of God.
Num. 9.23 But there is a more particular end in regard of our selues,
1. Cor. 10.31. which we ought euery day & houre, yea (if it were possible) euery minute and moment to set before our eyes, and the same is double.
The first and principall end
in regard of our selues,
Psal. 16.11 &. 17.15. is, a perfect and perpetuall fruiti∣on of Gods most gratious and glorious presence in the king∣dome of heauen. The second is a sound perswasion & com∣fortable assurance thereof in this present life.
Luk. 10.20 2. Pet. 1.10
The way to bring vs to the end of our iourney (being the second thing which a traueller is to looke vnto) consisteth in two things, whereof the one is the first and more principall in nature and order, the other being the second, is like to the first and springing from it. The first is to belieue truely in the Lord Jesus Christ that hee
Ioh. 20.28. &. 3.16.36.
is our Lord and our God,
Act. 4.12. &. 16.23. & that by him alone wee haue full re∣mission of al our sinnes, and e∣ternall felicity both of soule and body.
The second being as it were the fruit and branch springing from thence (without which wee vtterly deceiue our selues in it, embracing a shadow in stead of the substance & a fan∣cie in stead of faith) is to re∣pent vnfainedly of all our sins, beeing smitten with a godlie sorrow for them, and perfect hatred of them, firmely resol∣uing to forsake them finally, and daily to resist them,
Luk. 13.3.5. Ier. 3.10. with full purpose of heart to cleaue to
the Lord,
2. Cor. 7.10. 2. Kin. 5.17 Act. 11.23. & 24.16. and neuer to returne a∣gaine to folly, but to exercise our selues, to haue a cleere conscience, both towards God and towards men continually.
The thing (to come to the third point) that will most ef∣fectually further vs in this spi∣rituall iourney, is a religious and constant vse of all holy meanes and helps, both pub∣lique and priuate,
1. Thes. 5.22. which God in his wisedome and mercy hath ordained and sanctified to that end and purpose;
1. Tim. 4.7 8.13.14.15.16. and chiefly of the word and pray∣er, whereby those corruptions are kept vnder, that would bring vs to perdition,
2. Tim. 3.15 & those
heauenly graces kindled and quickned in vs, without which we can neuer come to eternall glory.
The things that hinder vs in our spirituall iourney, are ei∣ther as causes or occasions. The causes are partly from without vs (though they come very neere vnto vs and get within vs) & partly (yea prin∣cipally) from within vs. The causes from without vs (and yet getting within vs) are the sifting or winnowing of Satan & his Angels (against whom we are continually to wrestle) who as roaring Lions walke about seeking whom they may deuoure.
Luc. 22.3.31.
2. Cor. 11.3 Eph. 6.12. 1. Pet. 5.8.

The causes from within vs and which (in Adam) wee wit∣tingly and willinglie pulled vpon our selues (being indeed the direct and proper causes of our ruine) are our owne corrupt affections,
Gen. 3.1. &c. Acts 5.3. Eccl. 7.31. Mat. 15.18. or (as the holy Apostle calleth them) our owne pleasures,
Iam. 4.1. & 1.13.14. or lusts, that fight and make war in our mem∣bers; and whereby (as hee said before in the same Epistle) we are drawne away and entised.
The occasions which doe incumber and hinder vs in our spirituall passage towards the kingdome of heauen, are like∣wise of two sorts; whereof some are such as (according
to the common phrase of speech) may be said to come on the left hand; others are such, as (according to the like phrase) may bee said to come on the right hand.
Pro. 30.9. The first (as the wise man saith) cause vs to steale and robbe men of their goods, the other causeth men to deny (or bely) God, and rob him of his glorie.
The occasions comming on our left hand are sicknesse,
Deu. 28.34 Eccles. 7.9. pouerty, oppression, reproach, deformitie, and the like, by oc∣casion and meanes whereof many are distracted, deiected,
Exod. 4.24 &. 6.9. &. 15.22.23.24. &. 16.2.3. &. 17.8.9 discouraged and greatly hin∣dred in their passage towards
the heauenly Ierusalem; as the Israelites (through their owne corruption) were hindered by the like occasion in their passage and trauel towards the earthly Canaan.
The occasions on the right hand, as they are much more gratefull and pleasing to flesh & bloud, then those are which come on the left hand, so are they much more powerfull to doe vs hurt.
Of this sort are prosperitie, health, wit, wealth, riches, ho∣nour, beauty, and the like: of al which being abused (as for the most part, and by the greatest number they bee) it may bee
truely saide of them all which the Apostle saith of one of them (namely riches) that they bring men into tentation & snares,
1. Tim. 6.9 and into many foolish and noysome lusts, which drowne men in perdition and destruction.
Of these occasionall hinde∣rances (as I may call them) the holy Apostle speaketh in the second Chapter of his first E∣pistle: saying,
1. Iohn. 2, 15.16. Loue not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man loue this world, the loue of the Father is not in him. For all that is in this world, as the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye and the pride of life, is not of the Father but
of this world.
Where (as with some lear∣ned and godly men I vnder∣stand it) by the lust of the flesh, he meaneth carnall and fleshly affections, feeding vpon beau∣ty, and other like baites of the sensuall and voluptuous per∣son: fearefull examples there∣of, and of the iudgements fol∣lowing there vpon, we haue in Shechem the sonne of Hamor:
Gen. 34.2.25.26.27. et. 39.7.8. in Potiphars wife the mistris of Ioseph; in Amnon, the eldest son of Dauid the king;
2. Sam. 1.3 1.2. &c. in Herod An∣tipas, who being rauished with the wanton dauncing of a light young woman, condes∣cended to the beheading of
Iohn Baptist, a most zealous & faithfull preacher, & the fore∣runner of Iesus Christ.
Yea this baite hath, begui∣led not onely the vncircum∣cised in the flesh, as Shechem, & in heart, as Herod, but also di∣uers of the deere children of God: doe we not reade how Sampson the Lords champion,
Iudg. 14.7. was caught with this baite? was not Dauid by the like meanes entangled and drawne to dis∣honour God,
2. Sam. 11.2. &. 12.10 and bring hea∣uie iudgements vpon himselfe and his house?
Gen. 6.2. did not the like lust of the flesh deceiue a great number of the sonnes of God (whereof it is like some were
sonnes indeede as well as in name) and brought destructi∣on vpon the world?
By the lust of the eyes, I vnder∣stand a greedy desire of wealth & riches, which are as thornes & briers to the couetous man; examples whereof we haue in Achan,
Ios. 7.21.25.26. whose hart and eies be∣ing pricked with these thornes, brought trouble to the whole Church of God, and especially to himselfe,
1: King. 21.12.3.4. &c. and his own fami∣ly: and in Ahab whose greedy eyes being set on fire with the sight of Naboths vineyard, that lay so fitly (as he imagined) to serue his turne, made him giue waie to the murthering and
oppressing of the innocent, which brought vengeance vp∣on him and his.
The like may be said of the pride of life, wherby is meant worldly honour & prefermēt, great attendance, braue attire, gorgeous houses, stately ser∣uice and other things of that kind which are as nets & snares to the ambitious. By these nets (to omit manie other) was Absalō brought to that height of disloyaltie against his law∣full King,
2. Sam. 15.1.2.3.4.5. &. 18.6.9. and too louing fa∣ther, that plotted a halter of his owne goodly haire, and set vp a gibbet to hang him vpon in the wood of Ephraim. The like
pride of life, puffed vp with glittering apparell and popu∣lar applause,
Act. 12.21.22.23. made Herod who a little before had killed Iames and imprisoned Peter, a praie to the lice and vermine that issued abundantlie out of his body.
Against these occasionall incumbrances and impedi∣ments, in our spirituall passage towards the kingdome of hea∣uen (and most properly a∣gainst the first of them which is the lust of the flesh) doth holy Salomon in this diuine prouerb endeuour to strengthen vs: and the penner hereof (accor∣ding to his weake measure)
aymeth at the same marke.
This treatise returning in∣to my hands without alterati∣on, additiō, or detractiō, cleane contrarie to my expectation, by the vnexpected, & to (speak according to man) vntimelie death of a deare friend and neighbour, to whom I had freely giuen it, for his own vse, I thought good to present to you, as one that haue receiued much comfort from amongst you, and haue beene (I trust by the grace of God by which alone I haue beene that I haue bin,
1. Cor. 15. ver. 10. &. 6. & am that I am) an instru∣mēt of some spirituall blessing to diuers of you, whereof ma∣nie
remaine aliue this day, and manie are fallen asleepe in the Lord.
To you (I say) I doe present it as a small testimonie of my true thankfulnesse, both to∣wards the dead, and towards the liuing, and of my vnfained desire to draw such as remaine aliue, from the corrupt and carnal loue of these vain things,
Act. 14.15 to a more feruent and hear∣tie loue of the euerlasting, most louing and louely God, who made heauen and earth, the sea and all (the faire and beau∣tifull) things therein: whence it followeth of necessitie, that he alone is the perfection of
all beauties,
Cant. 1.16. & 5.9.10.11. Hag 2.8. Psal 75.6.7. & 16.12. the store-house of all riches, and the well-spring of all true preferment, plea∣sures and delights in heauen and earth: and therefore that he alone is to be admired, ado∣red, esteemed and loued farre aboue all things in heauen, and earth besides.
And this thing I desire and endeuour,
A digressi∣on in la∣mentation of the death of our late Prince. so much the rather to effect, beecause of late, the Lord of hostes hath sounded an alarum, & blowne a trum∣pet in our eares, to awaken vs out of that dangerous and deadly sleepe of carnall secu∣ritie, into which wee are so deepely fallen: yea, hee hath
vttered his voice, & sent forth a sudden and terrible thunder∣clap, and that in a great calme and faire sunneshine towards (through the expectation of a happie coniunction betwixt a most christian yong Prince & Princesse) by taking from vs the secondary breath of our nostrils,
Lam. 4.10. euen the eldest son of our gracious Soueraigne, that peerelesse Hen∣rie, late Prince of VVales, in the verie prime & spring of his greene and florishing age.
Wee reioyced indeede the fifth day of Nouember (as wee had iust cause) in remem∣brance of Gods most watch∣full and mercifull prouidence
towards vs, disappointing the most diuelish and deadly blow, that euer was intended and plotted against anie kinge∣dome in the world, being dis∣couered the fifth of Nouem∣ber 1605. for which cause the fifth of Nouember ought worthily to bee kept (as the daies of Purim) with feasting and ioy throughout euery ge∣neration.
Est. 9.26.27.28.
The Emperor Caligula (a monster rather then a man) onely wished that al the heads of the people of Rome stood vpon one necke, to the end he might chop them all off at one blow, meaning by heads their
naturall and bodily heads: but our Iesuited Papists (diuels rather then monsters) had not onely wished with manie a long wish, but euen almost wrought and gotten all our ciuil and polliticke heads (one of which is worth ten thou∣sand of the other heads) into one net,
2. Sam. 18.3. &. 21.17. with full purpose and expectation to haue blowne them to fitters with one blast.
Psal. 124.7 Therefore we reioyced (and that in the Lord) because their net was broken, and we were deli∣uered.
But the next day,
Ioel. 2.2. Iob. 30.31. 2. Sam. 1.10 was a day of darkenesse and blacknes, wher∣in our harpe was turned to mour∣ning,
& our organs into the voice of them that weepe. Tell it not in Gath, neither publish it in the streets of Askalon, least the daugh∣ters of the Philistims reioyce, least the daughters of the vncircumci∣sed triumph.
Tell it not in Rome, nei∣ther publish it in the streetes of Rhemes, least the daughters of the superstitious & idolatrous reioyce, least the seducers and the seduced triumph toge∣ther Least they praise their Gods of gould and siluer,
Dan. 5.4. Esay 58.4. of brasse and iron, of wood and stone: least they glorie to much in their hipo∣critical fasting (if eating of fish and drinking of wine at din∣ner,
& iunckets at supper may be called fasting) this last sum∣mer:
1. Cor. 15.39. least they count it meri∣torious to abstaine from flesh of beasts, who make so little account of the blood of their brethren; yea of their true and lawfull Kings.
For (giue me leaue to speake to you, as Dauid sometime spake to his seruants and fol∣lowers) know yee not that there is a Prince and a verie great one (and of great expectation for vertue and valour) fallen this day in our English Israel? After this manner spake Dauid by occasion of Abners death whom Joab had murthered &
by this patheticall and earnest speech hee iustifieth his owne fasting and mourning, prouo∣king others by his example to doe the like: shewing therein, that the chiefe reason, why men are not moued with such iudgements as they should, is because they doe not know, that is, duly consider and lay to heart the greatnesse of their losse.
If King Dauid laid the death of Abner, being no sonne, nor heire to the crown, but a sub∣iect onely (and a late recon∣ciled enemy) so neere his hart; Oh how ought we to be affe∣cted with this vntimely death
(I speake according to man) of the eldest sonne of our gra∣tious Soueraigne) being now come to mans estate, & to that maturity & ripenes of Prince∣ly wisedome and valour, that many hundreds were refresh∣ed vnder his shadow, and ma∣ny thousands, or rather milli∣ons, might haue tasted of the sweete fruit of his kingly ver∣tue and magnanimitie in time to come.
But alas wee may now, if e∣uer, take vp the complaint of the holy Prophet and say of a number, not onely of our watchmen,
Esay. 56.10.11.12. but of all sorts, that they are all blind. They haue no
knowledge: and a little after, they lye and sleepe and delight in sleeping: and these shepheards (much more their sheep) can∣not vnderstand. Then follow∣eth the reason. They all looke to their owne way, euery one for his aduantage and for his owne pur∣pose, saying Come and I will bring wine, (and Tobacco) and wee will fill our selues with strong drinke, and to morrow shall be as this day,
Esay. 57.1.2. and much more a∣bundant.
In the meane time (as the same prophet saith in the be∣ginning of the next Chapter) The righteous perisheth and no man layeth it to heart: and mer∣cifull
men are taken a way, and no man considereth, that the righte∣ous is taken a way before the com∣ming of that great euill. Yea no man remēbreth (as he ought) the words of our Sauiour Christ, saying, The dayes will come (the Lord knoweth how so one and suddenly) when men shall say,
Luc. 23.29 30 31. blessed are the barren, and the wombs that neuer bare, and the pappes which neuer gaue sucke. Then shall they begin to say to the mountaines, fall on vs, & to the hills couer vs. And marke the reason heere of in the next verse. For (saith he) if they doe these things to a greene tree, what shall be done to the drye?

Wherefore let vs all, euen the best of vs all, consider as Salomon saith, the plague in our owne hearts: yea let vs (as some translate it, and vnderstand it) consider the plague of our owne heart: that is,
1. Kin. 8.39 Mat. 15.19 our secret and o∣pen sinnes, whereof our heart is the sinke and fountaine, which haue brought this hea∣uy iudgement vpon vs, and do yet threaten, (though this were very greeuous and la∣mentable) more grieuous and lamentable iudgments against vs. For it is not (if we will goe to the root of the matter) the practise of the Papists, the dis∣order of the patiēt, or error of
the Phisitian: it is the sinnes of the people that cut off Prin∣ces.
This is that which holy Sa∣muel teacheth in his diuine ex∣hortation to the people of Is∣raell,
1. Sam. 12.24.25. saying, Feare you the Lord and serue him in the truth, with al your harts, & consider how great things be hath done for you. But if you do wickedly, you shall perish, both you and your King. And though, blessed be God, wee haue a gratious King, and a hopefull Prince, yet touching our late illustrious Prince,
Hose. 10.3. We may say we haue no Prince Henry because we feared not the Lord.
It was not the fword of Pha∣rab
Lam. 3.39. &. 5.16.
Nece, but it was the sinnes of Iudah and Jerusalem (as Ie∣remy sheweth in his spirituall lamentations) that cut off Jo∣sias,
Lam. 3.39. et. 5.16. that godly and zealous King of Judah, in the midst of his daies: neither was it any naturall infirmity or artifici∣all confection, that took away King Edward the sixth (to omit forraine and former exam∣ples) of blessed and holy me∣mory, in the spring of his age: it was the sinnes of the people, yea of the Protestants of Eng∣land, while euery man drea∣ming of a long continuance of the Gospell, the most part began to turne the grace of
God into wantonnes and world∣linesse.
Iud. ver. 4.
The like may be said of our illustrious and hopefull Hen∣ry) late Prince of Wales, who by the same sword of our sins, was cut off in the flower of his youth. For the multitude loo∣king (as the manner is) onely downeward vpon men; and se∣ing that wee had not onely a most Christian king of mid∣dle age, a true defender of the Faith, both by his politick go∣uernement and by his penne: but also a prince of such he∣roicall parts and expectation for piety & iustice, to succeed him in the throne of the king∣dome,
whensoeuer God and nature should haue translated him to a higher crowne.
The multitude I say, loo∣king onely downeward vpon these things, and in confi∣dence thereof growing pro∣phane, licentious, proud, co∣uetous, ambitious and outra∣gious, in oathes, diet, appa∣rell, oppression, and all other sinnes against the first and se∣cond table of the law, haue pulled downe this heauy iudg∣ment of God vpon our heads.
But to conclude (least I be said to make the entry longer then the house) Let vs search and trye our waies,
Lam. 3.40.41.42. and turne a∣gaine
to the Lord. Let vs lift our hearts with our hands to God in the heauens: and say, wee haue sinned and rebelled, therefore thou hast not spared, no not Prince Henry, the most lawfull and hopefull successor of this imperiall Crowne. O let vs repent of these, not on∣ly soule-murdering, but also King-murdering and Prince-murdering sinnes.
Esay. 56.6. Let vs in this common affliction, Seeke the Lord diligently while he may be found, and say to our selues and one another;
Hose. 5.15. & 6.1. Come and let vs returne vnto the Lord: for he hath spoyled; and hee will heale vs: hee hath wounded vs, and
hee will bind vs vp.
Let euery one of vs forget the speech & manners of Am∣mon and Ashdod,
Nehe. 13.23.24. that is (as if I might say) of Atheisme and Popery, of blasphemy and ri∣bauldry; and learne to vse the language of Canaan, euen such words as the Holy Ghost doth prescribe, saying. The Lord is my portion,
Lam. 3.24.25.26. saith my soule; therefore will I hope in him. The Lord is good to them that trust in him and to the soule that seeketh him. It is good both to trust and to waite for the sal∣uation of the Lord. And in ano∣ther place. It is better to trust in the Lord then to haue confi∣dence
in Man,
Ps. 118.8.9. it is better to trust in the Lord then to haue confidence in Princes.
We haue stumbled too long at this stone, (and yet wee will not bee taught) to the high di∣shonour of almighty God, and to the great hinderance of the true peace and sound comfort of our owne soules; quite and cleane forgetting what wee haue so often read and heard out of the holy Prophet say∣ing.
5 Thus saith the Lord God,
Ier. 17.5.6.7.8. cursed be the man that trusteth in man, and maketh flesh his arme, and withdraweth his heart from the Lord.

6 For hee shall bee like the heath in the wildernesse, and shall not see when any good commeth, but shall inhabit the parched pla∣ces in the wildernes, in a salt land and not inhabited.
7 Blessed bee the man that trusteth in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is.
8 For he shall be as a tree that is planted by the water, which spreadeth out her roots by the ri∣uer, and shall not feele when the heat commeth, but her leafe shall be greene and shal not care for the yere of drought, neither shal cease from yeelding fruit.
Wherfore obey Princes,
Rom. 13.5. pray for Princes, that if they bee
good and gratious, they may continue & encrease, if other∣wise,
Tit. 12. Eccles. 10.20. that they may conuert & amend, but speake no euill of them, much lesse spurn against them, and thus doe, not be∣cause of wrath onely (or chie∣fly) but for conscience sake: because God hath so com∣manded thee, & because they are instruments of so great & manifolde blessings vnto thee; yet whatsoeuer they bee, bee thou alwaies mindfull of the admonition giuen by him who is King of all Kings, and Lord of all Lords, saying, put not your trust in Princes, nor in the sonne of man (sauing in him who
is also the sonne of God) for there is no help in him. His breath departeth, hee returneth to his earth: the very same day his thoughts perish. Blessed is hee that hath the God of Iacob for his helpe, whose hope is in the Lord his God.
To this God of Iacob, & fa∣ther of our Lord Iesus Christ let vs daily pray, that it would please him by his holy spirit to teach vs so to number our (short slipperie and sinfull daies) that we may get wise & vnderstāding harts, to profit by his word,
Psal. 90.12. to profit by his works, to profit by his mercies, & to profit by his iudgements, which what else
doe they preach vnto vs, but the summe of that most hea∣uenly sermon which Christ set∣teth downe in few words, say∣ing,
Luke 13.3. Except you repent and a∣mend your liues, you shall all like∣wise perish.
God hath tried vs by many iudgements, & by many more mercies and deliuerances, and of late yeares by a most migh∣ty and mercifull deliuerance, from a matchles and (if it had taken effect) vnrecouerable mischiefe, of which maruelous worke, God the Father may say vnto vs Englishmen, as his sonne Christ saide of his mira∣cles to the Iewes; If I had not
done workes among them which none other man did,
Ioh. 15.24. they had not had sin; saith Christ & God may say of vs, If I had not wrought such a discouery and deliuerance, as was neuer wrought for nation since the beginning of the world, their ingratitude had beene more excusable.
But now hauing seene and tasted the sweetnes of his loue in that great mercy, & yet not beene stirred vp to loue him againe, and hauing also seene and felt the smart of his wrath in this heauy iudgement, and yet not beene mooued a whit the more to feare him, and forsake our sinnes, who shall
entreate for vs, whom neither such matchlesse mercies, nor such vnlooked for iudgements will worke vpon?
The Lord grant that these things may awaken vs, and worke kindly vpon vs, and that for his sonne Christ Iesus sake to whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, one true eternal, Almightie, most wise and onely good God, bee giuen all glory and praise both now and euer.
