



MAny commend the Churches glory, but few imitate it, be∣cause they never truly knewe it; so∣mewhat they have read, & heard of it but never truly saw it, for with carnall eyes they behold her spiri∣tuall beauty & cannot discerne it. An ignorant person looking on the picture of Helena drawne by Zeuxes, sayd, that she seemed not to him to be so fayre.Nico∣machus,
 the Pamter answered him, Take my eyes & you will Sume meos oculos & De am judica∣bis. thinke her a Goddesse. The best way to judge of the Churches glory is to get it, & within our hearts to feele it, Rev. 2. 17. none knowes the new Name that Christ writes on his, but he that receives it VVhosoever hath once felt within him, the excellent & unspeake able benefit of the pardon of his sinnes, peace of conscience, joy in the holy Ghost, power of fayth, quiet fruit of patience, comfort of obedience yea the sweetnesse of the very tea∣res of repentante, with other parts of the Churches ornaments, will say with Peter when he saw but part of Christs glory in his transfigura∣tion Mat. 17. 4. It is good being heere &
 with the Rev. 12. 1. VVoman in the Revela∣tion, cloathed with the Sun, viz Christs righteousnesse, tread the Moone, viz all earthly change¦able gloryes under feet.
And though your Majestie knowes more of the Churches glory by your invvard feeling of it, then I can discover, yet in all dutifull acknowledgment of your Majesties favours & gracious countenance of my Ministerie, with an hearty desire to doe your Majestie any good service, vvere it but to bring Pin∣nes to the Temple, in the least to further your spirituall dressing & glory, I am bold to present to your Majesties view this small treatise of the Churches glory. And what you vvere pleased once to heare (being called by your command to
 preach) vouchafe I humbly desire now to reade. Being confident of your Majesties gracious acceptance hereof for the matter sake, (though not set forth vvith shew of vvor∣des, vvhich the truth needes not, the Churches glory being sufficient of it selfe to commend it, playne vvorke being best & most in use, & curious vvrought plate not re∣garded,) I commend your Majestie to God & to the vvord of his Act. 20. 32. grace vvhich is able to build you up & to give you an inheritance a∣mong all them that are sanctified, 1. Pet. 1. 4. an inheritance incorruptible, & undefiled, that fadeth not away re∣served in heaven for you.

