


IVdiciall and courteous, least I be thought in this
my boldenesse, to Imitate Irus, that car'd not
to whome he bar'd his nakednesse, so hee might
be clothed. Thus much vnder your fauours I
protest, that in writing of these twoo imperfect
Poemes, I have ouergonne my selfe, in respect of what I wish to be
perfourmed: but for that diuers of my friendes haue slak't that
feare in me, & (as it were) heau'd me onwards to touch the lap of
your accomplished vertues. I haue thus boldly, what in a yeare
bene studiously a dooing now in one day (as our custome is) set to
the view of your Heroicke censures.
Base necessitie, which schollers hate as ignorance, hath beene
Englanddes shame, and made many liue in bastardy a long time:
Now is the sap of sweete science budding, and the true honor of
Cynthia vnder our climate girt in a robe of bright tralucent
lawne: Deckt gloriously with bayes, and vnder her faire raigne▪
honoured with euerlasting renowne, fame and Maiesty.
O what is Honor without the complementes of Fame? or the
liuing sparkes in any heroicke gentleman? not sowzed by the ada∣mantine
Goate-bleeding impression of some Artist.
Well could Homer paint on Vlysses shield, for that Vlysses
fauour made Homer paint.
Thrise happy Amintas that bode his penne to steepe in the
muses golden type of all bounty: whose golden penne bode all
knightes stoope, to thy O thrice honoured and honorable vertues.
The teares of the muses haue bene teared from Helicon. Most
haue endeuoured to appease Iupiter, some to applause Mercury,
all to honor the deities. Iupiter hath beene found pleasant, Mer∣cury

plausiue, all plyant; but few knowne to distill Ambrosia
from heauen to feast men that are mortall on earth.
How many when they tosse their pens to eternize some of their
fauourites, that although it be neuer so exquisite for the Poeme, or
excellent for memoriall: that either begin or end not with the de∣scription
of blacke and ougly night, as who would say, my thoughts
are obscur'd and my soule darkened with the terrour of obliuion.
For me this restes, to wish that such were eyther dum & could
not speake, or deafe and could not heare, so not to tune their stately
verse to enchant others, or ope their eares to the hurt of thēselues.
But why temporize I thus, on the intemperature of this our
clymate? wherein liue to themselues, Schollers and Emperours;
esteeming bountie as an ornament to dazell the eie, and telling to
themselues wonders of themselues, wherein they quench honor
with fames winges, and burne maiestie with the title of ingrati∣tude,
and some there are (I know) that hold fortune at hazard, &
trip it of in buskin, till I feare me they will haue nothe but skin.
Silly one, how thou tatlest of others want? is it not an ordina∣ry
guise, for some to set their neighbours house on fire, to warme
themselues? beleue me courteous gentlemen, I walke not in clouds,
nor can I shro'dly morralize on any, as to describe a banquet be∣cause
I am hungry, or to shew how coldly schollers are recompenst,
because I am poore, onely I am vrg'd as it were to paraphrase on
their doinges with my penne, because I honour learning with my
hart. And thus benigne gentlemen, as I began, so in duety I
end, euer prest to do you all seruice.

