


Right Reuerend, and Right Honourable:
I Haue little Learning, but I haue so much Musicke, as to know there is no
discord so harsh, as when Benefits and vngratefulnesse are put together.
This is a discord that cannot be tempered by any art, to make a grace, or to
make the harmonie more rare and artificiall. It were a shame for me there∣fore,
that know somewhat in Musicke, to commit such an vnpardonable er∣rour
in manners. And this I must of necessitie doe, if with all humility from
the deepest thoughts of my heart, in priuate and in publique, I doe not ex∣presse
all possible thankefulnesse to so Great, so Wise, so Learned, so Noble,
and bountifull a Patron and Benefactour. Goodnesse is not to be esteemed by quantity. A Hand or
an Eye drawne by a curious Painter, is worth a large Table done by an ordinarie Hand: But your
Lordships Beneficence was both great and good. For it was an Annuity for my life; and it was done
so, that it had in it all that can commend a good deed. It was not done for allyance, or former know∣ledge,
which makes a benefit a debt: Not for Seruice past; for that is not a benefit, but a reward:
Not wrung or forced by long suit, or mediation of friends, which puls downe the price of any benefit:
Not after long delay and much wayting, which is the torment of Suitours, and makes a benefit payd
for before it come. Not done with wayward lookes, and chiding, which vnder the colour of good
counsell, giues a benefit a bitter taste of contumelie. Nor wonne after some denyals and repulses;
that which we wrastle for, we account our owne. Neither was it giuen vpon no cause, for so benefits
are not placed but cast away. It had none of these, but all the contrary commendations. For your
Lordship conferred it on me when I was vnknowne vnto you, when no man had euer spoken for me;
when I was farre remote and least thought of so Honourable a friend, and lesse of such a fauour,
and it was sent by your Lordship to me; and all this done so, that when I came to sent my thankes,
your Lordship knew not who I was; yet was it done vpon hearing of some Motects of mine, of which
I would not in modesty speake, but that it makes for your Lordships iust praise; He doth not giue,
but throw away, that hath no reason for his giuing: Let the world then be iudge, if I haue not good
cause to professe all thankefulnesse. And if euery man, whom your Lordship hath thus preuented
in greater matters (as I haue heard of a great many since this fauour was done to me) had oppor∣tunity
or would take occasion to giue your Lordship thankes as this Paper doth, it would turne the
enuy of some ill-disposed, into admiration of your sweet and noble nature. For my poore selfe, I haue
hastened these few Motects, that I might show some part of my thankefulnesse, and be further
indebted to your Lordship, for a new fauour, in taking them vnder your Lordships protection. I
know they are not worthy your Lordships eare, but thankefulnesse consists not in the meanes, but
in the heart of him that for benefits is engaged. Yet it would be some content to me, if I were sure,
that as many eyes would looke vpon this Epistle, as it may be there will be eares to heare the Songs
I present. But I must be content with the inward testimonie of my heart, in which I will daily pray
for your Lordships happinesse, and honour, and rest

