




AS it is most certaine (Right VVorshipfull) that Christian knowledge aboundeth in our land, by reason of the manifold plentie and long continuance of the sa∣cred truth of Christian veritie by Gods vnspeakeable mercy, and admirable blessing, setled and taught amongst vs: so can it not be denied, that Practise, that is, conuersation according with our knowledge, and an∣swerable to our profession, very much faileth and wanteth among vs. For (besides those, the number or rather swarme whereof is not small,2. Thess. 1.8 Eph. 4.18. that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Iesus Christ: who ha∣uing their cogitations darkened, and being meere strangers from the life of God, (as the Apostle spea∣keth) thorough the wilfull ignorance that is in them, haue giuen themselues ouer Heathen-like, or hellish-like rather, to worke all manner of vncleannesse and wickednesse, euen with greedinesse) many can say, Lord,

Lord,Math. 7.21. which doe not the will of their heauenly father: and not a few are contented to seeme rather then to be sincere Christians, as taking more delight to professe in words with their mouthes, then expresse with deedes in their liues the Gospel of Christ. So that it seemeth to mee (howsoeuer, notwithstanding the false imputation and vile slander of our Romish aduersaries, the Preachers of the word amongst vs, haue not beene vnmindfull thereof, nor negligent or sparing therein hitherto) very necessarie and fit, that they should henceforth bend themselues more then vsually that way, that is, some-what forbearing do∣ctrine of Faith and matter of knowledge, to insist especially and vrge chiefly and ordinarily such doctrines, such ex∣hortations and admonitions as concerne sinceritie of life and integritie of conuersation: that so (if it be possible) they may prouoke our people more carefully to walke aswell as to talke the Gospel, and to haue an holy and vertuous life as∣well as a sound and true beleefe; whereby the mouthes of our aduersaries may be stopped, and men may be occasioned, see∣ing our people to shine by our good life and honest dealings as lights in the world,Math. 5.16. 1. Pet. 2.12. to glorifie God on our behalfe.
To this purpose, I among others, hauing oft times bent my speach, and by occasion of late handled that parcell of our Sauiours Sermon,Math. 7.12. the Sermon on the mount, viz. Quaecunque igitur, &c. Whatsoeuer yee would that men should doe to you, euen so doe yee to them: Ob∣seruing it (being An absolute Rule of all true Iustice and equitie betwixt man and man, which therefore we may (mee thinkes) very aptly terme, as S. Iames doth, it, or its coequall,Iam. 2.8. The Royal Law) to bee verie profita∣ble and auaileable to the vse and intent before mentioned, I haue beene willing of a priuate Sermon to make it a publike Treatise, and to conuey it, the forme somewhat altered, and the matter enlarged, from the Pulpit to the Presse.
This little labour of mine, I am desirous (Right Wor∣shipfull)

vnder the Patronage of your worthy Name, might be shielded and set foorth. First in regard of my dutie vnto your Worship; namely, that thereby I may, lest any note of vnthankefulnesse, or spot of forgetfulnesse be as∣persed vpon mee, somewhat testifie my gratefull minde and mindfull remembrance of your speciall fauour and bountifull kindnesse vnto me from time to time shewed and continued: and then in regard of the Argument it selfe, which is of Equity and conscionable dealing: which by reason of your Honourable place, and worthy employ∣ment vnder the Kings most excellent Maiestie in his Court of Requests, seemeth vnto me verie fit to be De∣dicated vnto your Worship aboue some others, as to one that by his place, and (I doubt not) his often practise, doth see the vse and necessitie, and oft is mooued to vrge and require the obseruation and performance thereof: which alone, well regarded and fulfilled among men, would vndoubtedly cause much more peace and agreement to be in the land, and fewer Petitions by many to passe your hand.
I haue heerein, among other particulars, some-what vrged (an Argument wherein Viz, in my Maintenance of the Minist. and my two-fold Tribute. otherwhere, and in other wise, as vnto your Worship it is not vnknowne, I haue more plentifullie laboured) more equall and consciona∣ble dealing toward the Ministers of the Church. That, in some mens opinions, may happely seeme to require some Cleargie rather then any Lay-man to patronize the worke. But partly, since that is but the least and the last part thereof, and partly for that I haue found your Wor∣ship as a sincere louer of the Gospell, so a speciall fauou∣rer of the Cleargie, and in particular in some of the points vrged, so conscionable and respectiue, as I haue shewed others should be, but I haue knowne none but your selfe to be; I suppose that fitly and iustly both it, and I for it, may craue your speciall Protection, and fauourable accepta∣tion thereof.
Which trusting, according to your accustomed kindnesse, that courteouslie many times reacheth out the hand to many a meaner suite, you will accordingly vouchsafe, I doe with all dutifull affection commend it vnto you, and by you to the godlie and vertuous Reader: Heartily beseeching Al∣mightie God, as he hath enriched you with no small mea∣sure of his graces and blessings, and adorned you with sun∣dry worthy ornaments and endowments both of bodie and mind, so to continue and increase the same in and vpon you, as may be best to the furtherance of his glorie, the bene∣fit of our Countrey, and your owne, both temporall and eternall good. Amen.

