



HE GYVETH TVVYSE THAT Bis dat, qui clto dat. gyueth quyckely (sayth Senek). the griete, whiche I had tor your lordeshypes dysease, with the de∣syre that ye mought lyue longe, without syckenesse, caused suche spede in buyldinge the Castell of helth, that ther∣in lacked some parte of perfection, but yet the promptnesse in gyuynge that thinge, whiche I thought necessarye, to declare myne affection, I doubt not, was no lasse estemed of your good lordeshyp, than afore is rehersed. Notwithstan∣ding whan I had eftsones perused that lytle for∣tresse, and founde here and there some thinge that lacked, I toke my penne in the stede of a truell, & amended the faultes, and added somwhat more, where I thought it conuenient: And yet per∣thaunce some thinges mought happen to escape, which were as nedefull to be corrected: myne at∣tendaunce on the parlyament, I beynge a mem∣bre of the lower house, withdrawinge frome me leysur conuenient, to fynde in this warke all the faultes, which mought be amended. May it now lyke your good lordeshype to take in good part,

not etsones the castell, which I alredy haue gy∣uen you, but my good will and diligence in amen dynge or repayryuge the same, which is also prin¦ted in a moche better lettre, consyderynge that I no lasse do behold you continuelly with myne eye of remembrance, than they which at dynuar and souper do dayly loke on you, the cause I wyll not repete for suspicion of flaterye. Frendeshype (as men saye) shoulde be requyted, but yet craue I none other thinge, but onely equall beneuolence, and fayth without any suspicion: whereunto ac∣tuall demonstracion is so moche requysite, that without it they both, seme to be drowned, sens a∣monge vs that be mortall, thinges are most iud∣ged by outwarde tokens. And yet also in them men be sometyme deceyued, Hypocrisy hauing in this world so great a preemynence: but in amitie is one rule, which seldome fayleth. He that lyueth moderately, dothe loue alwaye faythfully: for o∣uer him affections and passions haue left autho∣ritie: and he that standeth iuste in the myddell, standeth moste surely. Also in the worlde there is no more foly, than to chese frendes of them, whi∣che do folow fortune, lyke as swyne do folow the mayden, which beareth on her hed a payle full of mylke. And yf the payle fal, or happen to be emp∣tye, they will folowe no lengar. The moderate personne, where bothe authoritie and vertue be in his frende equall, bycause that vertue was the onely cause of his loue, that remaynynge, his mynde is in suche wyse therevnto ioyned, that al∣thoughe

authoritie happen to flyp, yet that loue & vertue maye neuer be seuered. I haue spoken of frendshyp perchaūce more than nedeth, but who wil not wyshe (yf it mought happen) to haue such a treasor, as neither the mountaynes of Ethiope, nor the ryuers of Inde do conteyne in them, to be therto compared. Callimachus an auncient porte sayth, Puyssance is dredeful: Richesse is honora∣ble: but loue for surete is most incōparable. Who perceyueth herein more thā your good lordeshyp, whiche besydes the aboundaunt knowlege of hi∣stories & naturall wyt, also concernyng this ma∣ter in your owne sondry experiences, I dare saye without flattery, are equall to any noble man ly∣uyng. Yet this my longe tale is not superfluous, which is tolde not to teach you, but only to renew your lordships remembrance, which is not alway present, specially where the brayn is choked with worldly maters of wayghty importance. In such as I am, hauynge lytle and lytle to do, remem∣braunce standeth more at libertie, and therfore we maye more often thynke on that, whiche we haue both herde and sene, and in chesinge frendes, be the more circumspect. But leste I shall make the name of frendeshyp tedyouse, by often rehersall, I now conclude, that I leue this lytle warke a monument of the longe continued affectiō by me borne toward your lordeshyp, & a perpetual wyt∣nesse, that I haue deserued, so moche of your fa∣uoure, as in mutuall frendeshyppe is of rayson requyred: whych maye be as easyly payed, as it

 graunted, yf in place, where it ought to be she∣wed, ye doo not forget it, In the meane tyme I shall praye to God to adde to youre good fortune and helthe, continuaunce, with his grace and fauour, wherin onely is most perfyt sure∣tie.
