



COnsidering with my selfe (Right worshipfull) how much I am bound to glorifie GOD, to whom I owe my selfe, and al whatsoeuer I am, and that in speciall sort I am bound to seeke the aduancement of his name in that holy cal∣ling and seruice, wherewith he hath honoured me, (the vnworthiest of all other) in doing good to his Church, and especially to those ouer whom he hath set me, as a guide to direct and conduct in the way that leades to eternall blisse and glory; and consi∣dering withall mine owne weakenesse and inabi∣lity
 (more then ordinary in other men) to answer that duty incumbent and lying vpon me; I haue beene moued, (being thereunto often and earnestly importuned by many, by whose motion, the Lord seemes to require it at my hands) to send foorth this part of my poore labours, to the view of all that shall please to looke vpon it, and so to imploy that talent the Lord hath trusted me withall, to the greatest aduantage that I can, and to vse the best meanes I am able, of furthering the good of Gods Church, and heereby in some measure, to make supply of that, which (through my knowne debi∣litie of body) is wanting in the discharge of my Pastorall function. And howsoeuer these my poore labours bee not worthy the veiw of the learned and iudicious, being simple, plaine, and popular, both for matter and manner, yet (I hope) they are sound, and without corruption, and will not bee vnprofitable to the simple, and honest hearted, who want those speciall endowments of lear∣ning, and depth of iudgement, and yet are desirous to bee informed in the mystery of godlinesse, to their sauing comfort, and especially to those that are of my charge, whose profit in holy things, I chiefely tender, and to whom my labours are most familiar, and principally due. It grieues not mee now againe, to recommend to their eies the things which heeretofore haue beene sent by their eares to their mindes, and (I hope) to their hearts; and though I cannot precisely say as the Apostle Peter did, I know that the time is at hand that I must lay
 downe mine earthly tabernacle; yet that time bee¦ing vncertaine, and hauing had many times warning to bethinke my selfe of my vncertaine continuance in this life, hauing sometimes recei∣ued the sentence of death in my selfe, that I should not trust in my selfe, but in God,2 Cor. 1.9. who raiseth the dead; I thinke it meete, as long as I am in this ta∣bernacle to stirre them vp by putting them in re∣membrance, and to endeauour that they may bee able to haue remembrance of these things after my departing.2 Pet. 1.13.15
In the Epistles of the blessed Apostle Paul, and in this, written to the Colossians, most clearely and plainely men may see, and heare what the Lord saith to his Church, and what he requireth at the hands of all Christians, both for matter of faith, and of practise, and that both in generall, and in particular duties: yet in reading this and other Scriptures, it is not safe to goe alone, (vnlearned and vnstable soules peruert somethings in them to their owne destruction) a guide (as the Eunuch confessed) is of necessarie vse.2 Pet. 3.16. Act. 8.31. I haue therefore by these my poore labours, shewed my selfe willing to be helpefull vnto such as stand in neede of dire∣ction, and want better guides; and I haue endea∣uoured to point out the way, whereby they may come to some measure of right vnderstanding and sauing knowledge of that holy and heauenly truth that is reuealed in this diuine Epistle, and my ear∣nest desire is, that the readers whosoeuer, would bring to the reading of these my slender paines,
 humble and teachable hearts, and such as are plyable to the truth, and that they would lay aside all preiudicate and forestalled thoughts, and parti∣all affections,Ehes. 4.15. and set themselues both to seeke and to follow the truth in loue.
My method is not curious or hidden, but plaine and open, and for the most part one and the same, the simplest reader endued with any discretion, may obserue that the coherence, and parts of the Text being laid forth, the sense and meaning of it is giuen (wherein I hope the Lord hath directed me, according to my desire, to finde the right) and then doctrines are thence raised, which being clea∣red and confirmed, and occurrent doubts re∣mooued, such vse and application is made, as my shallow braine conceiued most properly, sorting and suiting to the subiect matter in hand, the heads of doctrines and vses, are thorow out in the mar∣gent. Such as thinke my labours for their vse, may please to vse them, and finding good by them, let them blesse God for it, and yeeld all praise and glo∣rie to him, to whom onely of right it belongs; and such as are otherwise conceited, I intreat to take my good meaning in good part, and to leaue them to others, who like better of them, and my selfe to stand or fall to mine owne Master,Rom. 14.4.10 before whose iudgement seat we must all one day appeare.
And now (right worshipfull) since it pleased the Lord to make you the meanes of giuing me a com∣fortable accesse to my charge, (wherein I haue exercised my Ministry this tenne yeeres, and vp∣wards)
 howsoeuer in much weakenesse, yet the Lord vouchsafing strength, aboue, and beyond mine owne expectation, and the conceit of others, for which (as I am euer bound to praise the name of the Lord) I doe freely, and thankfully acknow∣ledge your vndeserued loue and fauour towards me therein, and resting assuredly vpon the conti∣nuance of your wonted loue and kindenesse to me ward, I make bold to shelter these my poore la∣bours (beeing part of my paines taken in my charge) vnder your name and Patronage; I doubt not but as my selfe haue found you a kinde and friendly Patrone, so these my labours comming vnto you submissiuely (as they doe) shall finde your fauourable countenance towards them, and you will bee pleased to vouchsafe them your best protection. Accept (I pray you) this poore mite I now tender vnto you, in stead of some rich pledge of my vnfained loue and thankfulnesse. I doe hear∣tily wish, and earnestly desire of the Lord, that as you haue beene the meanes (in some sort) of the being of these labours of mine, so they may re∣turne vnto you in way of thankefulnesse, some spi∣rituall good, which I hope, they shall, the Lord blessing your carefull and frequent perusall of them.
Thus being loath to be tedious and troublesome vnto you, I commend this silly present to your fauourable acceptation, and your selfe, to the gracious protection of the Lord,1 Tim. 4.8. who grant you euer that grace that hath the promise, both of
 this life, and of that which is to come. So I pray, and will (God willing) not cease to pray for you.
From Barmondsey neare London,
March the 6th. 1614.

