



AS many seeme to themselues to bee some∣thing, when they are nothing, deceiuing themselues in their owne imagination: So many (out of an idle presumption, and
bare profession) dreame to themselues that they are Christs, when they are none of his, vnder the vaile of hypocrisie, hauing onely a name that they are liuing, when they are dead. If they had any sparke of a true de∣sire of their owne saluation, they should rather giue all diligence to make their Cal∣ling and Election sure, and carefully endeuour both to become, and to bee assured that they are Christs; which is mans highest happinesse: And to testifie the same, by crucifying of the flesh, with the affections and lusts; which is mans most thankfull duty. This little
Treatise serueth to giue in∣struction herein, and to comfort and encourage all those that are truly Christs; to continue in him, and to be faithfull to the death. I deliuered it in one of my ordinary Sermons, whereof (Madam) you were then one of my accustomed hea∣rers. It was immediatly penned, but it came not a∣gaine into my hands till now. I haue thought it good to put it forth vnder your Ladiships name, worthy to bee remembred. Your La∣diship is the godly mother of many godly children: and in speciall, the mother of that worthy and truly re∣ligious
daughter, Dame Anna, Lady Ferniherst, my faithfull friend, who now rests in the Lord, and fully feeleth that shee was, and is Christs. Your Ladi∣ship hath been alwayes to all, a mirrour of sincere and constant godlines: and, for that respect was had of your true piety and grauity; your Ladiship obtained once that honour, as the fittest Lady to attend our late gracious Queene of worthy memory; and to haue vnder your hand this our most gracious Prince in his tender Infancy. But a∣boue all these, God hath ho∣noured you by his speciall
and sauing grace: and gi∣uen you this dignity with the rest of his Saints, to be verily one of Christs, that you may confidently say, and sing with the Church, My Beloued is mine, and I am his. These considerati∣ons (amongst many other) haue moued me to dedicate this Manuell vnto you. If by perusing it, you reape any cōfort, as once you did when you first heard it: and if it can benefit any other, it is all the gaine that I expect for my paines. And so wishing your La. all happinesse in Christ our Sauiour, I shall e∣uer abide,

