



TRVE it is (Right Worshipfull) that there is not the like efficacy and force in the same things, written and read in priuate, as there is in them being vtte∣red by liuely voyce in publike, breathing instructions are most ef∣fectuall and mouing, Gods owne quickning Spi∣rit putting life into them according to his pro∣mise of more speciall blessing thereunto made; yet things written haue this aduantage, they
giue men leaue to consider and to pause vpon them, and oftentimes to reuiew them, and they reach further then things spoken: hee that spea∣keth in the publike Ministery of the Word, be∣ing thereunto called, and diuiding the Word of Truth aright,
1. Cor. 14.3. speaketh to edifying, to exhorta∣tion, and to the comfort of those that heare him: but he that writeth profitable and comfortable things, reacheth out the profit and comfort of them to many more. This being thought on and considered by me, and thereunto adioyned a se∣rious and due consideration of mine owne inabili∣ty, to profit the Church of God (as I am bound and as I desire) by speaking, and especially that part of Gods Church to which I stand in speciall relation as an vnworthy Ouer-seer, and to which my good will is to deale not onely the Gospell of God,
1. Thess. 2.8. but mine owne soule for the good of it, hath moued me now againe to put pen to paper, and to offer these my poore and simple labours to publike view by writing, that in that kinde (if God bee pleased to adde a blessing thereunto which J heartily desire and pray for) I may be more profitable, not, as though I were able in that or in any other kinde to profit Gods Church, as others of farre greater worth and sufficiency,
stretching my selfe beyond my measure,
2. Cor. 10. vers. 14. but as willing and desirous to vse the best meanes of doing all the good I can, according to the mea∣sure of grace giuen vnto me. In the examples of holy and sanctified beleeuers, especially such Worthies as the blessed Apostle PAVL was, the Church of God hath sensible euidence of the com∣fort of Gods holy Truth; and no Truth of God, in my slender iudgement, is of more speciall vse and consequence, and more needfull to be disco∣uered and knowne, then that which may yeeld comfort to poore weary soules, right deare and precious vnto God, cumbred with their inward and hidden corruptions, and complayning of them, and panting and groning vnder the bur∣den of their owne sinfull infirmities; this Truth is fully and excellently exemplified in the A∣postle himselfe in this Chapter, which through Gods gracious and speciall assistance I haue pas∣sed thorow, in my ordinary course of preaching to my particular Congregation, all praise and glory be to his holy Maiesty for the same; My shallow braine is not able to reach the depth of that comfort that herein is comprised; I haue onely diued as deepe into it as I was able, and thence fetched out what sweetnesse and comfort
it pleased God to communicate vnto mee. And now (Right Worshipfull) being willing to make these my poore labours more common, I am em∣boldened vpon your speciall and vndeserued loue and kindnesse towards mee, euidenced by many infallible testimonies, to shrowd them vnder your fauourable countenance and protection, intrea∣ting that you will take in good part this poore token of my thankfulnesse; not that it can an∣swere that which I owe vnto you, but shewing what I would if I were better able. Pardon (I pray you) my boldnesse, and let it please you to affoord me the continuance of your wonted loue and kindnesse, and accept of that which here out of an heart vnfeynedly desiring to be thanke∣full, I offer and present vnto you. And so, I com∣mend you to God, and to the Word of his grace. The Lord Almighty multiply the blessed fruits of his holy Spirit vpon you, and grant you and yours all true peace and prosperity both temporal and eternall in the Lord Iesus, Amen.
Barmondsey neere London, May VI. 1618.

