



IT is not my purpose, neither doe I think it needfull for me to enter into commendation of the Author of this worke, whose worth is so well knowne to you, that for the space almost of twentie yeeres inioyed his la∣bours, and are witnesses of his watchfulnesse, faithfulnesse, diligence, and painfulnesse in his Ministerie, euen beyond strength of bodie; yea, some of you (I doubt not) being the Seales of his Apostleship,1 Cor. 9.2. the Lord by his Ministerie working your conuersion, and calling you out of darkenesse into his marueilous light.1 Pet. 2.9. Neither will I speake of the excellencie of
 the Worke, nor shew how commodious it may bee to Gods Church: for these are done by one better able, though the Worke will sufficiently commend it selfe to euery honest-hearted and indifferent Reader. I would ra∣ther make bolde to giue you a word of ad∣uertisement, exhorting you not to mourne im∣moderately, (though neither you nor I my selfe can sufficiently bewaile our losse) but to reade his Works diligently, whereby he being now dead, speaketh vnto you the same things that hee taught you while hee was aliue, and liued amongst you: and among others, labour to acquaint your selues well with this Worke of his, and be often conuersant in the reading of it; wherein is layd before you what God requireth of you in his Law, and whereby you are taught how to behaue your selues both toward God, and toward man; and shewed in a good measure both what may bee done, and what ought not to be done. And let me intreat you, not to rest in the bare reading of these things,ut. 4.6. but get them into your hearts, that you may keepe them, and doe them; whereby you shall shew your selues wise indeed,eut. 6.3. and so shall it goe well with you. See that as hee
 went before you by sound doctrine, and in a holy life: so ye be followers of him, as he fol∣lowed Christ: and then shall you in the end be taken vnto him to inherit that glory which he already in part enioyeth.1 Cor. 11.1. But if you be care∣lesse to keepe and doe these things heere layd downe before you, he himselfe, his former la∣bours and paines taken with you, and these his Workes, whereby he is in a sort still calling vp∣on you, shall be witnesses against you. Take heed it be not said of any of you,Gal. 4.11. that Labour hath been bestowed vpon you in vaine. To this his Exposition, or opening of the Commandements, is annexed his fruitfull Exposition of the Lords Prayer, teaching vs what Prayer is, to whom we are to pray, for what, &c. Let it bee your care also to make good vse of this, so shall you haue much comfort. I am the bolder to ex∣hort you hereunto, because it pleased the Lord to call me, and you to make choyse of mee, to bestow my poore Labours among you: now though I cannot doe what I ought, and would doe; yet my hearts desire is,Rom. 10.1. that you might be saued; and my daily prayers shall bee, that the Lord would bee pleased to blesse and make prosperous, both this and all other good
 meanes, and lawfull endeauours, or paines ta∣ken for that end, that when you haue done the businesse, and finished the worke for which you were sent, and haue finished your course with comfort heere on earth, you may bee taken vnto Christ, to haue your abode in heauenly glory, and your inheritance among all them which are sanctified.

