



RIght Worshipfull, I am not igno∣rant of it that many learned and worthy seruants of God, both an∣cient and moderne, forreigne and domesticall, haue before me handled this sweet and comforta∣ble 8. Chapter of the Epistle writ∣ten by the blessed Apostle Paul to the ancient famous Church of Rome, and haue vnfol∣ded the sweetnesse of it most excellently and most di∣uinely, and from thence haue discouered the true Chri∣stians heauen vpon earth: and there was small reason for me after such bright shining lights to set vp my dimme candle, yet considering with my selfe that God may be glorified in all mens gifts, and the glorie of his goodnesse and wisedome may shine forth in the varie∣tie of them, and that a different manner of handling the same portion of holy Scripture, it being sound and orthodoxall, may be vsefull for the Church of God, the same truth being sometimes more readily conueyed to the minds of some men, and better relished of them by some mens handling then by others: and withall esteeming an vnprofitable life to be an vncomfortable
 life, because the Lord Iesus will assuredly call all his ser∣uants who haue receiued any talent from him to an ac∣count,Mat. 25.19.20. &c. and none must hide his talent in a napkin, I haue bene moued vpon the earnest intreatie of some in mine owne charge, and others not a few, once againe to aduenture my selfe vpon the open stage, and to of∣fer my poore and slender paines taken in my particular charge to the view of the world. It is well knowne to as many as do well know me, that I haue bene for a long time withheld by the good hand of God vnder more then ordinarie weaknesse and sicknesse of body, & that neare to death, from the publicke exercise of the worke of my ministerie; and now since it hath pleased God of his rich mercy and vnspeakable goodnesse to bring me to it againe, by restoring me in some measure to my former health and strength, (for which mercy I cannot be sufficiently thankfull to his holy and blessed Maie∣stie) I desire as the same good God shall be pleased to giue abilitie, to redeeme the time, & not to let slip any opportunitie offered of doing what good I can within the compasse of my calling. My other weake & slender labours formerly published, haue found kinde accep∣tance and entertainment at the hands of many: and of this present worke I haue the more reason to conceiue a cōfortable hope that it will not be disregarded or neg∣lected, because of the excellency and sweetnesse of the matter therein handled.Austustine de Sanctis Ser. 26. What Epistle of Paul (saith an ancient Diuine) is not sweeter then honie? And by cō∣mon consent of all, this eight Chapter of this Epistle to the Romans, is as the hony combe, most full of hea∣uenly sweetnesse & soule comfort: it setting forth that one thing necessary to the comfortable state of a Chri∣stian,Luk. 0.42. yea absolutely needfull, in respect of which all o∣ther
 things are but accidents & retainers. For the truth is, our conceits and apprehensions of comfort are but dreames, till we attaine some true feeling of Gods loue to vs in Christ Iesus powred and shed abroad in our hearts by the holy Ghost giuen vnto vs:Rom. 5.5. that once gai∣ned, it fils our hearts with ioy vnspeakable & glorious,1. Pet. 1.8. Rom. 8.37. and it makes vs more then conquerours, triumphing both ouer the corruption that resteth within vs, and al∣so ouer the sorrowes, euils, and most bitter afflictions that are brought vpon vs, and which we meete withall in this vale of miserie, and ouer all those enemies that oppose our comfort here and our happinesse hereaf∣ter. And where find we this ground of comfort more plainly and pithily deciphered then in this Chapter? I confesse that the forme of this my work on this Chap∣ter is rude and vnworthy the view of the learned: and if Readers find not that loftinesse of style that is sutable to the excellencie of the matter, I intreate them to con∣sider that the things here put downe were deliuered in a popular auditorie, where care was had to vtter high & heauenly things, in plaine, easie, & familiar termes, I holding it better to speak fiue words to edification,1. Cor. 14.19. thē a thousand to vaine ostentation. And now right Wor∣shipfull and worthy Sir, I finding my selfe deeply inter∣essed in your vndeserued loue and fauour many wayes, and by many reall euidences expressed both to me and mine; yea your tried good affection towards me alto∣gether vnworthie of it, hauing bene extended and rea∣ched out in the sweet fruites of it to those that belong to my charge, for which we are neuer able to make re∣quitall; but our good God remember it in goodnesse;Nehem. 5.19. my desire hath bene to take any opportunitie offered to shew my thankfull acknowledgement of your more
 then ordinarie fauour and labour of loue shewed to∣wards me,Hebr. 6.10. and to giue some reall testification of my thankfulnesse. I therefore out of my poore measure and penurie, here offer and present vnto you what I am a∣ble, much better then it is I wish it were, some fruite of a thankfull mind, praying your fauourable acceptance of the same, and humbly crauing that what I now ten∣der vnto you, may through your hands passe into the world: and if these my poore trauels may finde good acceptance with you, and patronage from you, I shall hold it and that iustly, no small addition to your for∣mer kindnesse towards me: and the God of heauen, whose glorie I chiefly ayme at in them, be pleased to blesse them for the spirituall good and sauing comfort of your selfe, and of all that shall vouchsafe to peruse them with care to profit by them. Now the very God of peace sanctifie you throughout,1. Thess. 5.23. and I pray also that your whole spirit, soule, and bodie, may be kept blame∣lesse vnto the comming of our Lord Iesus Christ: to whom euery where, but especially in the Church, be praise for euer and euer. Amen.
Barmondsey neare London: May the 10. 1623.

