




YOu first borne brothers of the highest skies,
Twins of best Ioue by blest Memoria,
From whom our glories and our liuings rise,
Brothers and sonnes to him that brings the day,
(Phoebus) whom none can see but by your eyes,
You onely and you euer I shall pray
(And praysing euer) that your Sunnie shine,
May beautifie our GLOBE in euery line.

But what higher straine am I in when your selues haue set my tongue lower?
Most liberall and well affected, I am brazd by your fauours and made bould in your ostended curtesies, I haue seene you both wayes as the Hare that squints on either side, marry to looke fore∣right I cannot because iudgement out-lookes mee. But as the Phi∣losopher squened at his curst wife in some feare, because of quiet, so I fearefull presume not to looke into the milstone least I grauell my eye sight. I haue seene the stars at midnight in your societies, and might haue Commenst like an Asse as I was, but I lackt liberty in that, yet I was admitted in Oxford to be of Christs Church, while they of Al-soules gaue ayme, such as knew me remember my mea∣ning. I promised them to proue mad, and I thinke I am so, else I would not meddle with Folly so deepely, but similis similem, &c. If I doe offend as I make no question, my Pardon is signed I doubt

not, marry there is an Execution yet behinde, and I long till I passe my plundge, that is censure. They say he goes in collours, as one strangely affected, and I goe in Motly making my own cloake∣bag ready, If hee proue porter and beare with me I shall rest be∣houlding, if not I am his Martir and suffer extreamly. I haue Gentlemen in this booke gone through Ireland, if I doe sticke in the bogs help me out, not with your Skene head me, that's the way to spoyle all, but with your goad pricke me on to the true tract. And you of our Innes of Court, nimble braind brands that burne without smoking, I challenge of you neighbourly neerenesse, and therefore dare say sumus in tuto. If you should flie out like rancke riders, or rebell like the Irish, twere much because my presumption chal∣lenges better being in you. But since all is one, and one all, thats car'd for, singlenesse hath such regard, I make a question, which if you easily answere, I am satiffied, otherwise buryed quicke, how euer my loue looses not his labour, an Vniuersitie fire in the Winter, and a Temple pot may warme good licour, in which you may drink to me, and ile pledge you, I may liue to make you amends if not no more but this, such a one died in your debt, and thats a Countertenor many a one sings. Vale, as for vide and vici let Caesar at his next ariue so salute you.

