



THE HONOVRABLE PHILOSO∣pher Plutarchus, mooste worthye mayster to Traiane the emperour, dothe define in a similitude moste apte and pro∣per, what is signified by the dignitie and name of a kynge, saying: That which god is in heauen, and the sonne in the fyrmament the same in erthe is a kynge to those, whom he gouerneth. In almyghty god nothynge is greatter than Iustyce, wherby he rewardeth good men, aboue theyr merytes, and punysheth yll men vn∣der theyr deseruynges. The power of the Sunne is declared whan he sur∣mountynge the rygorous stormes of sturdy wynter, and being in his most dilectable progresse of lusty sprynge tyme, sheweth to the worlde his cele∣stiall vysage dyscouered: than herbes, graynes, and fruites, both holsom and dylectable, be founde in abundance, the pleasant verdure of trees doth delyte the beholders: the byrdes in theyr harmony do declare, howe moche they reioyce at the benigne aspecte of that noble planete. Lykewyse that kynge, whiche gouerneth for the weale of his countreye, beholdynge be∣nygnely them that be studyouse, or occupyed aboute thynges that be ver∣tuouse, he not onely doth animate or gyue lyfe to theyr courages, but also rendreth to theyr wytt more sharpnesse, with a prompt dexteritie armed with hardines. It is ther  meruayle, that great kinges haue in their counsayles moste wytty person, seinge that the makyng of great wyttes is in theyr puissaunce, although vertue procedeth immedyately from god, and sapience lykewyse. And yet Sapience is oftentymes hydde in those persones, whome eyther malyctouse wyttes hateth, or enuye pursueth, or fortune contemneth. Of the sayd power annexed (as it were) vnto a kyn∣ges maiestie, most noble prynce, mooste gracious soueraygne lorde, I a∣monge dyuerse other haue had good experience. For where aboute two ye∣res passed, farre aboue myn expectation, I receyued by wordes procedyng from the mouthe of your hyghnesse, comfort incredible to the settyng forth of my Dictionary, whyche at that tyme I had lately begun, and that very sengly, and with lyttell study. I all inflāmed with the sayde comfort, dyd afterwarde procede therin moche more exactly, and dyd ampliate the warke aboue that that I purposed: so that your maiestie (as I was infourmed) and dyuerse other commended my diligence. Not withstandyng, the sayd comfortable wordes of your hyghnes, contynually resortyng vnto my re∣membrance, cessed not to prouoke me to reade ouer eftsones, and reuolue
 my sayd warke, fearyng (as god shall iudge me) lest by my neglygence, ey∣ther some wordes lackyng, or som interpretation being mysconceyued, my labors shuld be not only vnprofitable vnto the reders, but also vnworthy the most benygne and fauourable report of your excellent maiesty. I ther∣fore moste feruently styrred by your gracis comforte, in pervsyng my sayd Dictionary, haue proceded to the correction and amplifycation therof, in suche fourme, as hereafter foloweth. Fyrst sequestrynge my selfe from all other busynesse (that onely except, wherein I was bounden to serue your hyghnesse) I assembled all suche authours as I thought shulde be neces∣sary, for the achieuynge of that whiche I toke in enterpryse, whose names do immedyately folowe this proheme: and layenge them before me, I not onely dyd seriousely and dilygently trye and examyne euery worde, which eyther in sygnification or fourme of speakynge, called a phrase, moughte make any doubt to them that shulde reade it, and by the same authors dyd as truely correct it, as my lernynge wolde serue me: but also with a newe spirite of hardynesse, receyued by the often remembrance of your gracious sayde comforte. I folowynge the exaumple of Suidas the greke, aduen∣tured to make a generall collection by the order of letters of all notable countrays, cities, mountaynes, and ryuers, with theyr true descriptions, boundes and commodities, the names and natures of sundry beastes, fou∣les, serpentes, and fysshes: the declaration of a great number of herbes, trees, fruites, gummes, precyouse stones, and metalles, whiche before me were neuer of any man (that I can here of) declared and sette forthe in en∣glyshe: The true definitions of all syckenesses and kyndes of maladyes, whyche commonly do happen to men, with the cause, wherof they procede: Fynally the names of moste notable personages, who from the fyrst man Adam vntyll thre hundred yeres after the incarnation of CHRISTE, dyd any thynge worthy a speciall remembrance, expedient and necessary to the moderation of our actes and procedynges, with the hystoryes or lyues of the sayd persones compendyousely gathered. I haue not omytted fables and inuentions of paynymes, for the more easy vnderstandyng of poetes. I also thought it necessary to enterlace the detestable heretykes, with theyr sundry heresyes, concernynge the substance of our catholyke faythe iustly condemned by the hole consent of all true chrysten men, to the intente that those heresyes beinge in this wyse diuulgate, may be the sooner espyed and abhorred in suche bokes, where they be craftily enterlaced with holsom do∣ctrine. Ne the knowlege of them as heresyes may indamage any man in his conscyence (as some men haue supposed) more than the cōmune know∣lege and ofte recitation of treasons, fornication, or felonies contriued or practysed in sundry facions, for as moche as these thynges do requyre lesse study, than the maynteynynge of erronious and dyuellysshe opynyons, wherfore the knowlege thereof is moche more daungerouse: And yet the knowlege bothe of the one and the other is ryght expedient, sens in euery thynge it is as necessary to aforesee, what shall brynge damage vnto vs,
 as contrary wyse what mought be founden good and cōmodiouse. As well in this parte as in the hystories and fables, I haue sette out the computa∣tion of tyme callid Chronography, wherin it appereth how longe the per∣sons were eyther before the incarnation of CHRISTE, or howe longe af∣ter. Also I haue declared the auncient coynes, weyghtes, and measures, conferryng them with those whiche be currant and vsuall amonge vs. I haue planted in prouerbes, callyd Adagia, such as be founden in latyn au∣thours, with theyr expositions. Also the proper termes belongyng to phi∣syke and surgery, and other dyuers and sundry artes and scyences. More ouer I haue declared dyuers greke wordes, whyche be vsurped of latyne authors. In this fourme haue I fynyshed this warke, to the glorye of al∣myghty god, and the no lyttell porfyte (I truste) of all englyshemen, whi∣che are and shall be desyrous of doctrine, whyche I shulde neuer haue en∣terprised, nor haue brought to conclusyon, had I not ben inflamed by the comforte receyued of your royall maiesty. By this it appereth, that the be∣nygnitie of pryncipall gouernours, extended to them whiche be of honest exercyse, dothe stere vp in them a more greatter spiryte, wherby theyr wyt∣tes and courages do appere more abundant. Witnesses therof be the great numbres of wonderfull lerned men, and moste valyant and polytyke ca∣pytaynes, which were in the tymes of great Alexander, Octauian, Titus. Traiane, Hadriane, bothe Antonines, and Alexander Seuerus, moste no∣ble emperours, of whom dyuerse by them were aduanced to dignities, ma∣ny enryched, none vnrewarded. And truly in this your gracis realme there is a great numbre studyousely inclyned to lernynge, prouoked as well by your gracis moste noble example, whych haue shewed your selfe not only studyouse in holye scripture, but also to be notably lerned, and to haue an excellent iudgement in all kyndes of doctrine, as also your bysshops and chapleynes of honour, men famouse in lernynge. And by suche wordes as your hyghnesse hath openly spoken in comfortyng and also commandyng yonge gentylmen, to enbrace good letters, and to be occupied in readinge good authors, there be not a fewe yonge men of the state of the temporal∣tie, by an honest emulation, do endeuour them to be founden in lernynge worthy to receyue lyke fruites of your gracis benygnitie, as the state of the clergie hath done hytherto, wherof dyuers haue bene ryght worthy to haue it. But whan bothe your temporaltie and clergy do flourysshe in do∣ctrine, as (your hyghnesse procedynge to the settynge vp of good lectures with lyberal salaries) it is likely to happen right shortly: than this realme of Englande, lyke as it maye compare with any realme christened in tem∣perate ayre, and abundance of all thynges, whiche the necessitie of mans nature requyreth: so in all partes of honour and suretie shall it surmount all other countrays, your maiestie gouernynge, whom almighty god hath abundantly endowed with the principall gyftes of grace, nature, and for∣tune. Fynally may it lyke your most royal maiesty to receyue this my sym∣ple labour and study, which I haue eftsones dedicate vnto your hyghnes,
 with lyke benignitie as you receyued my fyrste edition, whyche neyther in dilygence, nor syncere exposition, nor in copy of wordes, nor in abundaunce of matter and sentence, is in any wyse to be hereto compared. And if I may perceyue your hyghenesse to be pleased with this fourme of exercyse, god gyuynge me helthe, and by your gracis assistence and fauoure, lyuynge in quietnesse and out of necessitie. I intende to imploy the reste of my tyme in suche study, as your maiesty shall haue cause to take no lesse thankful∣ly, than yf I serued your hyghnesse in other affaires, wherin shuld be mo∣che more trauayle of body: Suche truste and assured iudgement I haue in your gracis moste excellent wysedome, whiche is the onely botreaux of my welthe and comforte, lyke as it is to all Englande the princypall bul∣warke. I hartily beseche god to augmente your hyghnesse in all partes of felycitie.
