



AFTER THAT I had diligently rad and considered, the lyfe and history of queene zenobia, a ladye of mooste fa∣mouse renoume for her excellente vertues and moste noble courage: I was ryghte desyrouse, that it shulde be radde in our owne lan∣guage, wherby women (specially) moughte be prouoked to imbrace vertue more gladly, and to be cir∣cumspecte in the bryngynge vp of theyr children. But with that ima∣gination
there came also to my re∣membraunce, the vngentyll cu∣stome of many men, whiche do set theyr delyte in rebukynge of wo∣men, althoughe they neuer recey∣ued displeasure, but often tymes benefyte by theym: ye whan theyr wanton appetite stereth them, they offer to serue them, and doo extoll them with prayses ferre aboue rea¦son. which thyng I of my nature abhorrynge, determyned (for the reuerēce that all honest men ought to beare to the vertuouse and gen∣tyl sort of good women) to prepare for thē a sufficient defence agaynst yl mouthed reporters. Than forth with entred in to my fantasy the de¦uise of this lyttell treatyse, wherin I dyd imagine, that the tyme were nowe whan zenobia lyued, whiche was about the yere after the incar¦nation
of Chryst. CC .lxxiiii. whan also the noble Aureliane was Em∣perour of Rome. And to induce that noble pryncesse to declare her owne lyfe, I deuised a contention betwene two gentylmen, the one named Caninins, the other Can∣didus. Caninius lyke a curre, at womennes condicions is alwaye barkynge, but Candidus, whiche maye be enterpreted benygne or gentyll, iudgeth euer wel, and re∣proueth but seldome: betwene thē two the estimation of womankind commeth in question. And after longe dysputation, wherin Candi∣dus (as reason is) hathe the pree∣minence, at the laste for a perfyte conclusiō, Queene Zenobia by the example of her lyfe, confirmeth his argumētes, and also vainquisheth the obstynate mynde of frowarde
Caninius: and so endeth the mat∣ter, whiche I doo dedycate vnto your hyghnes mooste noble pryn∣cesse, humbly desyryng your high∣nesse in suche wyse to accepte my good wyll and seruice and this lit∣tell warke as your owne, that vn∣der your gracis protection and fa∣uour it may saufely passe through the daungerouse rase of dysdayne and enuy, and be receyued thank∣fully and ioyousely of al good wo∣mē in this your noble realme, who by the onely example of your excel∣lent maiestie, maye be alway desy∣rouse to imbrace vertue and gen∣tylnesse, wherein consisteth verye nobilitie.
¶ Often readynge
Causeth good vnderstandynge.


coat of arms of Sir Thomas Elyot


