



IN-as-much as that ther
is Mercie chaunced vnto me / 
through the Loue of God the
Father, so is my Spirit incli∣ned
to thesame Spirit of God
the Father, and also to ye Ser∣ice
of my Neighbour: and that altogether to
hesame Loue.
. To the Communialtie in the Loue, vnto
whom wee wish in the Lorde / much Felicitie,
Health, and Saluation.
. MY Beloued in the Lorde, the cause of
my writing of this Epistle vnto you, is
o geeue your Loues to vnderstand, that the
orde through his elected Minister HN, hath
cripturelie setfourth and declared in full and
mple maner / the Mans Falling awaye tho∣ough
the Disobedience; from his God, and
lso his right Conuertion by Repentaunce;
nto God: and in like maner how hee should
e instructed, to his Growing-vp in the God∣nes / 
euen vnto the euerlasting Life. Hee hath
so brought-fourth through thesame his elec∣d
Minister; certen Epistles of Correction
nd Exhortatiō out of heartie Loue, to a pluc∣ing
vnder the Obedience of the Loue, and to
epentaunce for ye Sinnes, vnto them which
ink themselues wise, and therfore blaspheam

our Seruice & our Communialtie in the Lou
Othersom also / as Exhortations, to warne th
Louers of the Trueth / of all false Visions an
Spirites, which makevp themselues out of th
wicked World / in this last daungerous Tim
4. In conclusion, ther is sufficient to answe
eueryone, of what Minde ether Opinion soeuer
hee be, if hee will be answered by ye Trut
And therfore wee need to doo no more, but 
make-manifest those-same Exhortations / 
conuenient time, as the cause doth require it.
5. Notwithstanding, although wee through
the Goodnes of the Lorde; doo our dligence
to make-manifest the Woorkes of th
Lorde, to his Laude and Praise, and to ye Con¦uerting
of Sinners from their Sinnes, and to induce
or leade them to an vpright Life / bo
before God and Men, Yet are wee counted 
iudged for Seducers: and are slaundered wit
all Wickednes, and bruted for Euel-dooer
And thissame is assuredlie a great Miserie vpo
the Earth.
6. Whoso then can now in this wicke
Time / perceaue such wicked Deedes, The
may also perceaue therout, that thissame Tim
is euenlike as was the Time of Noe in the former
corrupted World, and as the Time of Lo
in Sodom and Gomor: and that in thesame Tim
all Iniquitie and Falshod doth beare-swaye.
7. They may farder note and perceaue, th
in this self-same Time / the World is couere
ouer with the Darknesses of Egipt, with th
Plagues of Phara, with the Ignoraunce of th

ananites, with the Contention and Discord of
e intangled Babel, with the Deceit and Insti∣tion
of the false God seruices of Ieroboam, with
 wicked Enterprise or Deuice of Iezabel, with
e sectuarish Spitefulnes of the Scripture-lear∣ed
and of the Pharisees and Saducees, with the
mbition of Pilate, and with the Tirannie of
, as also with all heathenish Instabilitie: and
at the Destruction is hard-at-hand.
FOr-as-much then my Beloued in the
Lorde; as that ther are now so manye
rrible and abhominable Euels risenvpp in
ese Dayes: wherby wee see that the Abho∣nation
of Desolation possesseth the Holie,
erof ther is prophecied by the Lorde Iesus
ist: and that ther are also false Christes and
se Propheates, euen as ther were manye in
se Dayes, which madevp themselues when
 Lorde Iesus was personallie vpō the Earth;
elliousie and blaspheamouslie: So are ther
 now in this last Daye which is the Com∣-againe
of the Lorde Iesus Christ, with the
y Thowsandes of his Sainctes, according
he Promises; many Offallers, Aduersaries,
 Resisters, which makevp themselues re∣iouslie
and blaspheamouslie / against the
de and his most-holie Seruice of Loue: of
which som of them haue made-manifest
selues, and their Names / by their slaun∣us
Bookes: namelie these are knowne vn∣
in England, Stephan Bateman (in his Booke
uled The golden Booke of the leaden Gods: and
hn Rogers Booke / To the Reader) Iohn Rogers

(in his Booke intituled The Displaying of the Famlie
of Loue) and Iohn Knewstub and his Companons
(in his Booke intituled 1. Knewstub against 
Heresies of HN) together with their slaundero
Blaspheamies, Cainish bloud-thirstie Tira¦nie,
and extreeme Persecution / for to shead 
innocent and giltles Bloud.
9. For which occasiō / wee are forced through
the Loue which wee haue vnto G
and our Neighbour; to translate this Epistle
Reproofe and Exhortation heerafter follo¦ing out
of the Woorkes which are gon-fou
through Abia Nazarenus, a Fellow-elder w
HN in the Familie of Loue: wherby it mou
be knowne, how the Lorde hath mooued
elected Elders, to write against the Blasphmers,
Backbyters, and Slaunderers. &c. 
therfore wee will not contend with them,
submit our cause vnto the Almightie, and h
vpon his Goodnes.
10. Howbeit wee haue thought it goo
make-manifest their Names / which are 
pheamous Writers: desiring the Goodwi
which loue God & his Righteousnes, to 
intercession with vs vnto the almightie 
head, with these or such-like Wordes. and 
11. O God, prepare the Heartes of ye ple
to the Lowmyndednes,A Prepa∣ratiue. that
mought stand in Meekmyndednes subm
to the Loue, and loue the Coming of thy 
in his Lordlynes: through whom the 
passe of the Earth shall be iudged with
eousnes: which also shall trouble all Mig

iolence, and bring it vnder his Obedience.
nd geeue-ouer or render vnto thee O al∣ightie
God; the Kingdom, that thou maist
e all in all.
2. O God geeue this into the Heartes of ye
Maiestrates for to beholde, and illuminate all
inges, Princes, Lords, and Gouernours / with
y godlie Wisdom, that they mought feare
y holie Name▪ stand submitted to thy Loue
nd her Seruice▪ and so turne them away from
 Violence and Misvse: that the World may
so be inhabited to thy Praise; in the Loue
nd in all Trueth: and that all Men in true
epentaunce for their Sinnes; may be turned
nto thee▪ and the horrible Plagues of ye Vn∣odlines
which are com ouer the World for
er Sinnes cause; ceasse or holde-vp.
. O God, let vs now finde Grace before
ine Eyes, like as the Citie of Niniue in times∣ast,
which thou receauedst to mercie: That
ee perish not now all as Sodom and Gomor. For
ur Sinnes are many▪ and aboue measure; be∣m
manifolde.
. O Lorde and God O heauenlie Father;
are I beseech thee / the Prayer of the Poore,
nd leade vs in thy Wayes. Gather vs together
on thy Pathes, and make our Heartes agree
 one Band of thy Loue, as One in all, and All
 one / which loue the Right and Righteous∣s.
Clense our Mindes from all vngodlie Be∣g,
and breake all the Counsaile of Vngodli∣es,
to thend that the Wickednes gouerne not
wayes, and euermore.

15. BEhold, my Beloued: This is my frinlie
Exhortatiō vnto you, that yee wi
submit you vnder the mightie Hande of th
Lorde, and hope vpon his Goodnes: abyding
the Lord-his leasure, and putting your confidence
in Him / according to his Promises.
16. But if the Blaspheamers will not leaue
of frō their Blaspheamie, nor take any Counsaile
out of the Woorde and Woorkes of th
Lorde, which are figured-fourth in the Seruic
of Loue / to their Reformation, so will we
then be blameles of their Destruction: for a
much as wee haue figured-fourth ye Counsail
of the Lorde before them, to their Reformation
and Preseruation, in all our former Seruice
of the Loue, and now in this Exhortatio
heere-after following.
17. The Loue of God the Father throug
the Reuelation of the Coming of our Lord
Iesu Christ; be with you, my Beloued: and illminate
your Spirit, in a true Knowledg of th
Life / in the Spirit, for to see liuinglie with
right Deserning; and to knowe the secre
Counsaile & Will of God, for that yee monug
iudg with a right Iudgment; according
to the Trueth. That graunt vs
the almyghtie Lorde / 
through his Loue.
AMEN.

O Lorde God / Father and Lorde of my Life, let 
not com among the Blaspheamers, and let mee not 
among them.
Eccli. 23.

