

To the Right Honourable, the Lords and the rest of her Maiesties most Ho∣nourable priuie Councell, increase of all graces and blessings needfull. {etc}.
IT may be deemed an intol∣lerable pride in a poor pri∣soner (my verie good Lor∣des, {etc}:) to presume to write vnto your Honours after this manner, during the time of my restrainte, (Namelie being (as I am) a man without cre∣dit, hauing not as yet her Maiesties pardon: but if my case be dulie considered (as I nothing doubt but it is with your Honours) howe that my trespasse being great, mine offence publike, and my fact preiudiciall to the whole common wealth: there is none (saue such as are deuoid of reason) but will allow it to be my bounden dutie, to pen and publish my vnfeined repen∣tance, so soone as my libertie woulde permit: There hath not as yet three weekes ouerpassed, since the same by your Honours was granted vnto mee (for the free vse of the prison onelie) during the which time I haue added my inde∣uor,

uor (the Lorde bearing witnesse, with a single heart) to set downe the storie of my fearefull fall, that all others (if possible) might by my example be warned betimes to foresee and pre∣uent the practises of satan, who seeketh by all meanes to bring men to destruction, as by this discourse shall more plainly appeare, which be∣ing now finished (by Gods good direction) I could not bethinke me vnto whome more fitly to dedicate the same, then vnto your H H. and that for two respectes: The former: that next to her Maiestie, hauing more deeply trespassed against your H H. then any other men, I should labour to be reconciled into your fauours, be∣fore others. The latter, that hauing found more fauour at your H H. hands, then euer did anie, (my case well considered) both reason, consci∣ence, and duty requireth, that your H H. should receiue the first fruites or testimonie of my true repentance, because in hope thereof you exten∣ded your fauor, eue to spare his life, that iudged himselfe most worthie of death, and still doe from the bottome of my heart, for so deepely dishonouring my fauiour Christ Iesus, and so greatly abusing her Maiestie, your H H. and all Christian people: But as Dauid saith in the 32. Psalme, I did confesse my sinnes vnto the Lord,Psal. 32.5. and he forgaue the iniquitie of my sinnes: Euen so hath it falne out with my vnworthie self, & I still liue in hope to receiue more mercie, that the same God will moue the heart of my souereigne, to

grant her gratious free pardon also, to so wofull a wretch as sueth for the same continually, vp∣on the bowed knees of my heart and soule, ex∣pecting dayly to heare good newes thereof: That both I and all my friendes may haue the greater cause to pray for her Maiestie, and all your H H. That her highnesse may long reign, and your H H. rule ouer vs, with much increase of glorie to God, of renown to her Maiestie, of honor to your persons, of comfort to the true subiect, and either of conuersion or confusion to all traitors, which the Almightie grant: that his gospell may florish, and this Iland abound, with all wished peace, prosperitie and comfort, to the good example of all other kingdomes: So be it in Christ. Thus humbly praying par∣don, {etc}. From my poor chamber in the Coun∣ter, this 25. of Februarie. 1592.

