



ISAAC the Sonne of Abraham and childe of
promise signified Ioy (Right worshipfull Patrone
and worshipfull good Citizens.) And Iacob his
sonne otherwise called Israel signified strong with
God, also by interpretation. Wherein as we see
Isaac the father, Ioy goeth before, and Iacob the
sonne strong with God followeth: This maketh a
most apt mistery of Gods almightie power and
wil, and a most conuenient order in accomplishing
of the same. For as in those ancient Ludis Saecularibus dedicated in
honour of Apollo and Diana, the Trompeter ioyfully going before sounded
the signification of some great Nouel which should ensue therupon, when he
also said vnto the people, Come to the games which no mortal man
hath seene or shal see the like: So here semblably portendeth this Ioye
in the father before going some strange or rare euent in the sonne strong
with God following him.Genes 32. And so in deede it was. For, Iacob as we reade
wrestled with the Angel of God, and by prayer preuailing with him, bare
away the blessing. And what was that? verely that he should thenceforth
Preuaile both with God & man. This wrestling then may be a famous
example, & an earnest tryal of al the faithfull children of God, by excellent
enterprises and exercises of life euen in the beholding eye and sight of the
same God of Abraham, Isaac and Iacob. The 12. Tribes of Israel proce∣ding
from Iacobs loynes were the Lordes elect & Gods peculiar people, and
so mighty a Nation as none more mighty vnder the sunne, in whom the o∣racle
of Gods Angel promised to Iacob, was altogither by Gods prouidence
performed.Exod. 18. These had a Ruler, euen Moyses ordained by God himselfe, and
one which spake face to face with God: He was commanded also to chuse
men of courage ouer them as his Substitutes, namely Rulers ouer thousands,
Rulers ouer handreds, and Rulers ouer tennes, and it is written, that they
made Israel a holy nation. The Lord him selfe also commanded these to set

markes on the mountaine of Sina,Ibidem. and sanctifie it. He enioined them
yearly to celebrate the feaste of the Lordes passeouer,Exod. 12. to obserue that day in
their posterity for euer. And in their peace  in the day of their gladnes
that they should blow their Trompets ouer their sacrifices and ouer theyr
peace offerings,Numb. 10. that they might be a remembrance for them before their
God. Likewise in their warres to blowe an alarme with the Trompet, to
the ende they might be remembred before the Lord their God;Ibidem. and be sa∣ued
from their enimies.Ibidem. And then did the same Moises as grand captaine
and guide go before them with the Arke of the Testament, the foresaid 12.
Tribes marching orderly after the same: for whose defence against their e∣nimies
on a time he praied thus vnto God. Rise vp Lord and let thine
enimies be scattered, and let them that hate thee fly before thee.
And when the Arke rested he praied thus for them. Returne Oh Lord
vnto thee many thousands of Israel. Hercules in peace was famous
among the heathen for ordaining those games of wrestling, running & lear∣ned
exercises at Olimpus by him dedicated to the honour of Iupiter. Ce∣sar
in peace time prouident for wars was also famous among the Romains
for ordaining those sword plaies to the better exercise and encouragement of
young men against the time of nedeful wars the more boldly and skilfully to
encounter with their enimies. And Anthonius sirnamed Pius, in time
of warres was more famous among them for exercising al maner of mighty
and sauage beastes to be rid vpon and trained for the battel, as well as his
owne souldiours fearcely to foile his enimies: who of him selfe also was said to
be so coragius and valiant, that he slewe with his shafts 100. Lions of his e∣nimies
power at one bickering. But Apollo aboue al others was most fa∣mous
(in war times for recouery of peace) at Delphos when being named
the God of wisdome and Prince of Archers with his 1000. shaftes slaying
and nailing to the ground that perillous serpent Pithon, he deliuered the
people from perill thereof to liue in peace afterward, and betaking himselfe
thereupon to his pleasant pastime accustomed of hunting Deere and Goate,
did also institute by this his cheualry, those games in Latin called Pithij
after the name of the serpent slaine. All these foure (I say) were famous in
their estate and condition, for maintenance of cheualry and actuity in peace
time and warres: and haue their due commendations accordingly as it
standeth with credit: But bicause these were without the knowledge of god,
& mere prophane, therefore their actions, fame and memory are the more
obscure and lesse permanent with glory. But contrariwise immortal Fame
followeth the noble ordinances & actions of the Faithful which alwaies
haue bene, are and shal be within the watch of Gods heauenly Eie, within
the helpe of his holy hand, and within the precinct of his almighty and eter∣nall
protection. As it is most notably verified by Ecclesiastes 10. cap.
where it is said, He that is cheefe among brethren is honorable,

So are they that feare the Lord in his sight. ver. 21.
Here is that indissoluble band of amity betwene God & goodmen which
the wiseman affirmeth of Sap. 7. For she is an infinite treasure vnto
men, which whoso vse become pertakers of the loue of god,
and are accepted for the gifts of knowledge. ver. 14.
Here is that euerlasting knot of peace & loue which the princely Prophet
Dauid so highly praiseth betwene Brethrē in & for God their father. viz.
Psal. 133. As the dewe of Hermon which falleth vpon the moun∣taines
of Sion, for there the Lord appointed the blessing of life
for euer.
And here is that Round Table of cheefest Cheualry ordained by the
Lord of Lords, and King of Kinges, euen Iehouah the God of hoastes be∣fore
whose heauenly presence (of immense maiesty and immortall magnifi∣cence)
enuironed round about with Patriarckes, Prophets, Princes, Apo∣stles,
Euangelistes, Angels, Archangels, and Soules of the righteous, in∣cessantly
shal be sounded Amen.Reuel. . Praised be God, praise ye our God
al his holy ones, and ye which feare him, smal and great.
Amongst which number of mighty Kings, Conquerours and warriers
in sacred histories most famous. (Right worshipful Patrone and worshipfull
Citizens) let not I beseech you the noble ordenance of that princely Prophet
and Conqueror King Dauid dye in obliuion, but liue in your perpetuall me∣mories,
1. Cron. 11. & 12. how he for maintenance of princely chiualry and knighthood, had
not onely about him 30. Mighty men of armes, and of the 12. Tribes with
him retaining a mighty number as it were like the hoast of God.2. Reg. 2. But also the
first statute that euer he enacted after he was King, was instituted, that all
the Children of Israel should learne to shoote in the Bowe: which exercise
by so noble and chosen a King established as he mencioneth thereof many
times in his Psalmody. So I beseech you remember how he promised the
Lord of hostes,Psal. 119. vers. 15. That he as at a marke would aime to walke in the
waies of the Lord.
Our ancient Arthures noble ordinance order and famous memory like as
your worships do yearely with worthy solemnity celebrate as the Israelites
did their daies of gladnes in their peace time. So if I were worthy with
Cicero to exhort you,Lib. 2. de offic. to prefer al duty auailable to maintaine Neghborhood
and fellowship of men aboue that duty which consisteth in knowledge &
science. I would herein encourage your worthy good wils to way and con∣sider
what our most noble and famous Kings of England in that your fa∣mous
accustomed exercise of shooting, haue most renowmedly enterprised &
eftsoones renewed. But touching your famous order & fellowship of knights
in shooting,Ann. 1279. 5. Edw. 1. though in K. E. 1. his time A valiant Knight and manly Mor∣timer
at Kenelworth appointed a knightly game, which was cal∣led

the Round Table of 100. knightes and so manie Ladies (na∣meth
not expressely shooting to be one) yet for exercise of armes thither
came many warlike knightes of diuers knigdomes. And the most famous
& victorious king E. 3. builded at Winchester an house called the
Round Table of an exceeding compasse,Ann. 1344. 18. Ed. 3. to the exercise of like or farre
greater Cheualry therein: when he also was the first king (for memory therof
most magnificent) which instituted euen there also the most noble order of
S. George his knightes of the honorable Garter yet vsed: whose perpetuall
fame for his princely actions, encouragement and euent by the exercise of
shooting in his wars as I haue in this booke inserted as most worthy: So the
most famous,Ann. 1485. 1. Henr. 7. prudent, politike and graue Prince K. Henry the 7. was the
first Phenix in chusing out a number of Chiefe Archers to giue daily at∣tendance
vpon his person, whom he named his Garde. But the high and
mighty renowmed prince his son K. H. 8. not onely with great prowes and
praise proceeded in that which his father had begon:Ann 1509. 1. Henr. 8. But also added greater
dignity vnto the same, like a most roial renowmed Dauid, enacting a good
& godly statute for the vse and exercise of shooting in euery degree.Ann. 33. H. 8. cap. 9. And
furthermore for the maintenance of the same laudable exercise in this ho∣norable
City of London by his gracious Charter confirmed vnto the wor∣shipful
Citizens of the same, This your now famous order of Knightes of
Prince Arthures Round Table or Society: Like as in his life time whē
he sawe a good Archer in deede, he chose him and ordained such a one for a
knight of the same order. After the conquerous Dauid ensuing the daies
of a most prudent and peaceable Salomon, we reade he had also a puisant
power,Cantie. 3. 60. valiant men of the mightiest in Israel, & 24000. Lords of the
Tribes of Israel monthly by course seruing through out the yeare:1. Cron. 27. his peace
and prosperitie in al respectes so surpassing his princely Progenitors, as the
Quene of Saba seeing the same was astonished therat saying:3. Reg. 10. Thou excee¦dest
the fame that I hard: Blessed be the Lord thy God which lo∣ued
thee to set thee on his throne as king in the stead of the
Lord thy God. ver. 8. The like wherof (for the time he liued) as it ap∣peared
in that gracious Prince and blessed K. E. the 6. So since that tyme
God hath for these many yeares much more manifested as wel to vs at
home, as our neighbours about vs, the incōparable peace, prosperity & bles∣sed
estate of our sacred Salomon Queene Elizabeth and this her Ma∣iesties
Israel euen the allotted inheritance of the Lorde most admirable.
This then being so true, as none can iustlie denie, Oh what Causes haue we
al and euery one of vs highly to praise God therefore, and pray vnto him for
the long continuance of the same. What causes of mutuall gratulation and
reioising thereat haue we in al degrees, and to studie for the augmentation
and preseruation of this aboundant blessednes. Herein for one minimus ex¦minoribus,

I acknowledge my selfe (Right worshipful Patrone & wor∣shipful
Citizens) answering with poore Pederectus,Plutarchus in Apophtheg. not worthy to be chosen
in the number of 300. which in this Citie for this purpose excell others in
worthines of learning, liberal art or humane dexteritie, but yet cherely and
frendly I will take my leaue of your good Worships, reioicing that this Citie
hath 300. such persons better then my selfe am in any point able to satisfie
your so worthy and notable expectation: Notwithstanding thinking my
selfe as much bounden herein as the best, and as much beholding vnto my
countrie as the most which can do better, I haue brought forth at this present
this simple show of my best abilitie & sincere good wil towards the premises.
And as an addition vnto my last yeares translatiō of the assertion of Prince
Arthure incident in purpose and conuenient in order. I dedicate this ancient
order, societie & vnitie of Prince Arthur & his knightly armorie, vnto you
the famous & worshipful president & to you the knights of English Archery
in the same order with a condigne commendation and encouragement vnto
my natiue countrie vniuersallie therunto. Hūbly & hartely beseching you to
accept in good part this my poore paines, as partly in fauour & furtherance
of the lawdable exercise of shooting in this our prosperous peace time, vnder
the blessed gouernment of this our so sacred Salomon Queene. The conti∣nuance
whereof with continuall praier let vs all craue at the hands of the
highest Iehoua that it would please him many mo yeares to multiplie the
same in his manifold mercies, to the continuall honour and glory of his bles∣sed
name, our mutuall consolation in this our happy Israel, and to the pub∣like
comfort and commoditie of his vniuersal Church. And finallie that we
with our neighbors & they with vs Famously continuing in the Concord
& Vnitie of Christian Faith, & true religion of the Gospel of Christ Iesus.
May in fine by his merites and mercies enioy those blessed Ioies celestiall
which Eie hath not sene the like, eare hath not heard the like, nor hart hath
not conceiued the like: which God in mercy hath ordained for them that
loue him. To whom be al power, dominion, praise, honor, and glory, for euer
and euer, Amen.

