



MOst religious & renowned Prince, when I duly consider what a sonne of peace your Maiestie hath bene, His Maiesties speech to the Parliament. Keeping peace and amitie with all, yea an heire of reconciliation, in whose royall person, those two princely houses are vnited: as also what a Father of peace and peace∣making reconciler, outwardly of our enemies, inwardly of our selues, your Maiestie continueth; I cannot but iudge your Maiestie is the Salomon, in whose peaceable dayes Gods house shall be finished, when thus peace is tied to your person. In regard of our ciuill vnion, seeing your sacred person hath ioyned the wood of Israel and Iudah in one tree, that they shall be no more two peoples, neither be diuided henceforth any more into two kingdomes, as the Ezk. 37. Prophet speaketh, I thought it seasonable to write of Reconciling of Brethren. And in respect of our Ecclesi∣asticall vnion, sith your sacred selfe hath bene our peace,
 in breaking downe this partition wall of ceremonies and rites in this Church; so making of two one, and re∣conciling both to one God, slaying hatred thereby: I thought it bounden dutie, and presumed to dedicate to the Reconciler of Christendome a worke of Brotherly Re∣concilement. An argument (gracious Soueraigne) if euer and for any, now and for vs, most needful and necessary, when not onely the bands of brotherhood are dissolued a∣mong brethren, but sonnes also (as prophesied our Sa∣uiour) rise against their reuerend fathers. How much the rather may I hope your royall clemencie will put forth a gracious hand, and receiue this Doue into the arke, that comes (shal I say from the waters of affliction?) with an Oliue branch of peace and reconcilement in her mouth, sith she findes no rest for the sole of her foote, but on the arke of your testimonie! wherein I rest, beseeching God still to blesse you, with the head of Salomon, the heart of Dauid, and hand of Gedeon; and fructifie may he your work of vnion and Brotherly Reconcilement, that in this bodie humorisme purged out, in the feamelesse coate scisme sewed vp, and men in orders (indeed out of all order) brought into order, God may be serued in verity by this Church, and preserued in vnitie till the coming of his sonne Christ Iesus vnto iudgement. Amen.
Greenwich this 27. of Aprill. 1605.

