



RIght vertuous and worthshipfull, having by your
direction trained vp and practized in the milita∣rie
discipline, the youth of this most flourishing
Towne, and now for the common good being to
publish to the World those precepts which I had
privatlie taught all them that would learne of mee; I thought
I could not more deservedly present the fruites of my laboures
to any than vnto that Towne to which I was so much oblished,
and to you which were so carefull to haue your Burgesses made
able, as well for Warre as Peace. As the Governour of this
World hath apointed Life and Death, Summer and Winter,
Day and Night, and almost given evrie thing a contrarie, so hath
hee made Peace and Warre to haue an interchanging course on
the face of this earth. Though Peace bee alwayes to bee de∣sired,
yet Warre is to bee provided for, and the youth when it
should fall forth (for the chasticement of People) is to be trai∣ned

therevnto. All civill lawes and orders, if there were no
defence prepared to maintaine them, were no better than beau∣tifull
Pallaces destitute of Roofes to hold out the violence of
storme. What haue the most peacefull Comonwealths beene
without trained Souldiers, but a pray to some stronger? It is
set downe as a blemish in Constantin the great, that at the de∣sire
of some (too peacefull) subjects, hee cassired the auncient
Legions, and in them overthrew the Militarie discipline of Rome,
leaving a breach for barbarous nations to invade the Empyre;
not considering how lawes, justice, subjects, and the whole Bodie
of the estate lie vnder the protection of Armes, as by a mighty
forteresse. cap.  25. Salomon in tyme of Peace prepared armes and cha∣riots:
None dare doe wrong to that nation which they know it
ready prepared,Chron. 2. cap. 1. 14. cap. 9. 25. and promptlie furnished for Warre. If GOD
shall moue the posteritie to continue this noble exercise, which
yee in this tyme haue so happelie begunne, there are faire hopes,
that as this Towne is the chiefe of this laend, so shall it be farr:
aboue many, and equall if not exceed the braue number of Soul∣deours,
that haue with losse of tyme and blood followed the
Warres in forraine partes of the earth. To which they may bee
stirred vp, if there were some plot of ground alloted to bee a
militarie Garden for the training vp of the rude youth: which
the Kings M. desired most earnestlie to be done, knowing how
the youth of Scotland is not inferiour to any living in courage:
To which worthie purpose I found the most and best of the com∣mons
most willing and well affected. By this meanes, of weake citi∣zens
yee shall haue strong, of timorous couragious, of idle labo∣rious,
and for a People which scarce are able to sustaine a de∣sensiue
Warre against invaders, a Nation reddie to offend any
stranger kingdomes abroad. Thus hoping yee will accepte of this
tractise with the same minde that it is presented vnto you, I pray
Almightie GOD to prospere, and make ever flowrish this Towne
with a race of such Worthie and Vertuous Magistrats and
Councellours as yee are, which now this present yeere governe it.

