



AGesilaus King of Lacedemon, when one prai∣sed a certaine Orator that he could stretch out small matters at large and length; and amplifie them with many words, both fitly and fully answeared him, But I cannot Plut. Apotheg. thinke him a good Shoo-maker, that would put a great and wide Shoo vpon a slender foote. There be many I feare, who considering the short∣nesse of this present Epistle; and comparing it with the largenesse of my Exposition, will bee ready to suppose and surmise, through the fore-stalling of their preiudicate Opinion, that to a little Citty I haue set vp wide Gates; and to a slender body, haue fashioned a wide Garment; both which, are faulty and vnfit. But, if these partiall Iudges would weigh the cause aright, in iust and equal Bal∣lances, without the corrupt affections of Malice, or Enuy, I doubt not, but they will rather thinke, that to a great Foot I haue fitted and applied a little Shoo.
For this Epistle Written to Philemon, though it be short in words, and comprehended in a little compasse; yet, if wee regard and re∣spect (as we ought to do) either the pithy and profound substance of the matter, or the cunning, or rather curious Art of Paul the wri∣ter, or the great and glorious Maiesty of God the Endighter, which shineth and sheweth it selfe euen in the least things; we shalbe con∣strained to confesse, that this is a right great Epistle, and as Macrob. com∣ment in Som. Scipion. lib. 2. cap. 5. one saith in another case, Verborum parua, sed rerum foecunda, and the In∣terpretation of it very breefe, both in regard of the Worthinesse of the Argument, and the Wisedome of the Spirit that appeareth therein. A Diamond may be little, yet it is of great price. The eye is small, yet it seeth farre. The heart is little, yet is it the life of the body. It pleaseth God to shew forth the greatnesse of his power in
 the least works of his hands. And as Merchants that cast Accounts, Vellei. Pateri. hyster. lib. 1. comprize greater summes in shorter roome; so doth the Apostle handle most weighty Matters & Mysteries within the slender com∣passe of a few Verses, that we should rather weigh the worke, then number the words. He seemeth no where to reason more exqui∣sitely, and to deale more pregnantly then in this place. Euery word almost hath the force of a Motiue; and seasoning his cause with Wisedome, and his doings with Art, he so creepeth into Philemons bosome, and closeth with him at a suddaine, that by no meanes hee can start from him. Sometimes, by louing Titles; Sometimes by Artificiall insinvations; Sometimes, by fauourable preuenting of Obiections; Sometimes, by Rhetoricall perswasions; Sometimes, by earnest Preparations; Sometimes, by Charitable Mittigations; Sometimes, by strong Obligations; Sometimes, by deepe Prote∣stations; Sometimes, by fit Reuocations; and sometimes by forci∣ble Arguments, as it were by so many courteous Congies, and ve∣hement Adiurations, hee dealeth and preuaileth in such sort with him: Liuy histor. lib. 45. as Popilius the Romaine Ambassador, against Antiochus King of Syria, who hauing deliuered his message from the Senate, made a circle about him with his rod, and charged him to put off all de∣layes, and giue him present answere before hee departed out of it. Thus doth the Apostle lay his Net, and cast his Chaine about Phi∣lemon, that he hampereth him fast, and holdeth him close, before he is aware of any such matter.
This Philemon (to whom the Epistle is directed) was a Wealthy man, a Cittizen of Colosse, the Host of the Church, who had a Ser∣uant, named Onesimus; he, hauing pilfered and purloyned some of his Maisters goods, fled away from him and the Church that was in his house. For, whatsoeuer the care and diligence of the Gouer∣nors be, lewd persons do oftentimes shroud themselues vnder their Roofe. But comming to Rome, no better then a fugitiue, hee heard Paule preach the Word, which is as Ier. 23, 29. an Hammer to breake in pieces the stony hearts of vnregenerate men, and Rom. 1, 16. the power of God to salua∣tion, to all that beleeue; so that he acknowledged the falt he had com∣mitted, and desired to be reconciled to his Maister, whom hee had offended. He being thus gained to the Faith, Gualt. hom. 1. in Philemon. and kindely and courteously entreated by Paule (Who becommeth all thinges to all men, 1 Cor. 9, 22 that by all meanes he might saue some) is by him sent back with these Letters of Commendation, and intercession for him, pleading his cause, as it were at the barre, effectually, crauing pardon for him earnestly: and teaching Gualt. hom. 2 in Philemon. thereby, that no man (albeit of the lowest sort and condition) truly repenting, ought to be despised and con∣temned. He went away Vnprofitable, he returned Profitable; he went away Gualt. hom. 5 in Philemon. Peruerted, he returned Conuerted; hee went away a Seruant, he returned a Brother. Before he heard Paule preach, hee was a Theefe; but when he had heard him, he became as his Natu∣rall Sonne, Phile. ver. 10 as he is not ashamed to call him, and account him in this Epistle.

Question. Vpon this occasion of this Seruants flying away, and be-taking himselfe to his heeles, a question may be demanded, which also of some Paraeus in Genes. cap. 39. is handled, whether it bee lawfull for bond-slaues that are bought with money (such as the state of Seruants in those daies for the most part was) to runne away from their Maisters, forasmuch as the Apostle saith, 1 Cor. 7, 21. If thou mayest be free, vse it rather. Where he willeth them to prefer freedom before bondage, and to be their owne men rather then anothers; and to be at liberty, rather then to be Seruants to the Honour and Humour of other men. Answere. I answere, such practise is not to be any wayes allowed, vnlesse they be oppressed with beastly and intollerable Tyranny, and bee denied meate and maintenance, whereby life is to be sustained. For then their Maisters that haue payed Terent. in An∣dr. act 1. scen. 1 a price for them should bee defrau∣ded, the Couenant or promise (that themselues haue passed) should be disanulled, and themselues beeing taken, should thorough their owne misdemeanor, be more cruelly handled, and kept in harder & straighter durance. We see when Ioseph was sold by the Treachery of his enuious Brethren, and thereupon carried farre from Genes. 39, 1 his Fa∣thers house, he behaued himselfe with all Modesty and Meeknesse, he endured the crosse with all patience, being laide in fetters where Psal. 105, 18 the Iron entred into his soule; he neuer attempted to make a wil∣full escape, or to break open prison (albeit it had been no hard mat∣ter to do it) least while he thought to auoid the smoake, he should fall into the fire: like vnto Espops Fish, who being in the pan, leaped vpon the coales. The Israelites when they were holden in Exod. chap. 1, and 2. Egypt in bondage and great slauery, neuer offered to make resistance, but waited with all long suffering, vntill God sent Moses and Aaron to worke their deliuerance. The Doctrine of the Popish School-men alloweth in their deciding of cases of conscience, such as are vniust∣ly and wrongfully imprisoned, to escape for their liues if they can: and according to this determination, is the practise of the Papists. But this is no better then to resist the Magistrate, Rom. 13, 2. vvhich is the Or∣dinance of GOD, Rom. 13. The Apostles being clapt vp in prison, ne∣uer sought occasion and opportunity to deliuer themselues, vntill God and Man deliuered them, and brought them forth: and some∣times Acts 5, 19. & 12, 7, 8. the Lord sent his Angell from Heauen, to open the prison doores, and to smite off their chaines, and to free them from the rage of their enemies. The Apostle Peter warneth Seruants to bee subiect to their Maisters with all feare; not onely to the good and courteous, but also to such as are froward: and he giueth this Rea∣son, 1 Pet. 2, 19. For this is thanke-worthy, if a man for Conscience toward God, en∣dure greefe, suffering wrongfully. Wee must commit our selues and our causes to God, and take heede we vse not vnlawfull meanes to set our selues at liberty.
Now, concerning the counsell and direction of the Apostle, he perswadeth no liberty but such as is lawfull, euen to free themselues from thraldome by all good and honest meanes, onely that God
 shall put into their heads and hands. For, when Seruants were bought and sold as Villaines, nay as brute Beasts in the Market, and while their Maister had power ouer them of life and death, hee would haue all such as are vnder the yoak, 1 Tim. 6, 1. Count their Maisters wor∣thy of all Honor, that the name of God and his Doctrine be not euill spoken of. When Paule and Silas were committed to close prison, as they sung Psalmes to God, Act. 16, 25, 26. suddenly there was a great Earth-quake, and the Foundation of the Prison was shaken, by and by all the doores opened, and euerie Mans bandes were loosed, so that they might without knowledge or disturbance of any, haue escaped and gone their wayes; but being committed by authority, they remained as lawfull prisoners without euasion.
These thinges heere briefly touched, are largely intreated of in this Commentarie; touching the penning whereof, to leaue mine owne Labors to the Iudgement of the indifferent Reader, I can∣not deny (but doo ingenuously confesse) that I haue benefited my selfe, and do desire to benefit others, by other Authors, both Olde and New, whom I haue searched and perused, through whose tra∣uailes I haue bin guided and directed in the way, and by whose eyes I haue seene into many particulers heere discussed. Concerning the ancient Writers, that haue the grayest haires, I cannot passe ouer Chrysostome and Theophylact, both Greeke Writers: Concerning the Moderne and later, Caluine, Beza, Illyricus, Rolloc, Piscator, Hun∣nius, which (for Honors sake) I name & remember. Among whom, some haue written shorter Annotations, others haue written ful∣ler expositions, and al of them haue yeelded some matter and stuffe toward the erecting of this building. Neither is this any shame or reproach to acknowledge, Prolog. in Adelph. but rather a fruit of Iustice and Equity, to giue to euery one his owne. Let no man therefore obiect, that I haue thrust my Sickle into another mans Corne, or put mine hand into another mans Coffer, or ploughed my ground with another mans Heifer, or set to sale other mens goods, as mine owne; much lesse vpbraide with contumely and contempt, Horat. lib. 1. epist. 3. the saying of the Poet:
Si forte suas repetitum venerit olim,
Grex anium plumas, moueat cornicula risum,
Furtiuis nudata coloribus. that is;
If euerie Fowle shall fetch her plumes againe,
The Naked Crow, shall stript of all remaine. The Wiseman teacheth, Eccle. 1, 9, 10 There is no new thing vnder the Sun, is there any thing whereof one may say: Behold this, it is new? It hath bin already in the old time that was before vs. The Heathē man saw this, & could say:
Nihil est iam dictum quod non sit dictum prius: that is;
There nothing is, or saide, or seene;
Before our times, that hath not beene. The Apostle writing to the Corinthians, saith, 1 Cor. 3, 22. All things are yours,
 whether it be Paules, or Apollos, or Cephas, &c. all are helpes allowed and appointed vnto vs to bring vs vnto Christ. It is no small comfort to Trauellers Bucan. praef. in Institu. The∣olog. to tread and trace the footsteps of such as haue walked the right way before them. In like manner, it is no small profit and pleasure to me, grounded vpon the euidence of the trueth, to haue followed the examples of learned and approoued Authours, that haue laboured faithfully in the Vineyard of the Lord, and lighted a Candle vnto others.
This Exposition (such as it is) I presume to offer vnto your Wor∣ship, not fearing your Iudgement in the allowance, nor doubting of your fauour in the acceptance thereof, and therefore grounding my selfe vpon it, I regard not the censure of Carpers and Cauillers, who haue nothing to grace themselues, but by seeking the disgrace of others; nor yet any thing to raise themselues a great name, but by taking away others good name: so that as one saith well, Scaliger. ex∣ercit. in fine. Ex alieni nominis ruina gradum sibi faciunt ad gloriam suam. They will dislike ei∣ther the person, or the matter, or the stile, or the allegations, or they know not what, and care not what, so it be somewhat. The proofes vsed are too many, the Reasons too large, the Vses too ve∣hement; yea, nothing can please them, that please them-selues in their owne conceits. If I should craue pardon for my slippes in this Exposition, or for my boldnesse in this Dedication, I should there∣in also open the mouths of many, to tax me of vanity, and reproue me of folly. For, when Albinus, who wrote an History of the Ro∣man Offices in the Greek tongue, requested the Readers in the Prae∣face, to beare with him if they found any imperfections and wants in his worke, M. Cato the Censor answered when he read it, Plut. in the life of Cato. Doubt∣lesse he had deserued pardon indeed, if he had bin forced to write his Story: but he is a Trifler that had rather aske pardon for his fault, then to be with∣out fault. For men are wont Macrob. Sa∣turn. lib. 1. in Praefat. to desire forgiuenesse either when they erre at vnwares, or when they commit a fault by constraint & com∣pulsion from such as haue authority ouer them, whom they cannot or dare not deny. Such seuere and sharpe Iudges I am like to light vpon, who will demand the question of me, what I meane to plead for pardon? For, who compelled mee to make the fault for which I craue fauour? And why I did not rather keepe my selfe from offen∣ding, then desire the forgiuenesse of the offence?
Wherefore, leauing these rash and rigorous Censors of other mens doings, I come to declare the causes that haue induced me to offer the exposition of this Epistle vnto you, and to passe it vnder your Worships name. For to whom doth a Treatise of Godlinesse more fitly agree, then to him that professeth Godlinesse, and hath the power of it dwelling in his heart? Or to whom should I com∣mend the Patronage of the truth, better then to him that is a fauo∣rer and louer of the truth, and of such as fauour and loue the trueth? Besides, as I haue heeretofore tasted of your kindnesse and bounti∣fulnesse toward me, which I euer esteemed as a debt lying vpon me,
 so I haue beene desirous to leaue a perpetuall Testimony to others, of a thankefull heart. I am not able to recompence like for like, but may rather say with the Apostle, Acts 3, 6. Siluer and Gold haue I none, but such as I haue I giue vnto you: and so much the more I will alwaies be rea∣dy to follow the example of Paul, who when he had receiued mercy at the hands of Onesiphorus, he praied vnto God to render backe into his bosom the fruits of his loue bestowed vpon him, 2 Tim. 1, 16 17, 18. The Lord shew mercy vnto the house of Onesiphorus, for he oft refreshed me, and was not a∣shamed of my chaine: but when he was at Rome, he sought me out very dili∣gently, & found me. The Lord grant vnto him, that he may find mercy with the Lord at that day, &c. So my ernest prayer to God, euen the Father of all mercy, and God of al consolation, is, & euer shal be, to shew mercy for your mercy, & loue for your loue, & to preserue you vnto his heauenly kingdom. And I beseech you oftentimes to Meditate vpon the 71. Psalme, which as it was composed by the Prophet in his latter time, so he oftentimes craueth of God to be with him, & to keepe him safe, now that his head was hoare, and his haires gray, Psal. 71, 5, 9, 17, 18. Thou art my hope, O Lord God, euen my trust from my youth: cast me not off in the time of age, forsake me not whē my strength faileth. And afterward, O God, thou hast taught me from my youth, euen vntill now, therefore will I tell of thy wonderous workes, yea euen vnto mine old age and gray head, O God, forsake me not, vntill I haue declared thine arme vnto this genera∣tion, and thy power to al them that shal come. For, a man may fall away from God, as well through the doting of age, as through the lustes of youth. Be faithfull vnto the death, & you shal receiue the crown of life: continue vnto the end, so shall you be safe. The Wise-man teacheth, that the daies will come, when we shall say, wee haue no pleasure in them, Eccle. 12, 3. when the keepers of the house shall tremble, that is; the hands which safegard the body from iniuries, shall shake as in a palsie: The strong men shall bow themselues, that is, the legges, which are as a strong Staffe, or as a firme Piller, to sustaine and beare vp the weight of the body, shall begin to faile and waxe feeble: The Grinders shall cease; that is, the teeth appointed to chew the meate, eyther waxe loose, or else are lost: They waxe darke that looke out of the windowes; that is, the eyes of the body (which are as the Win∣dowes of the house to giue light) Liuy. lib. 5. in the Oration of Licinius Caluus Pliny. lib. 7. cap. 50. shall decay and grow weaker and weaker, that they cannot behold the brightnesse of the Sunne: The doores shall be shut without by the base sound of the Grinders; that is, the Lippes which are as two Doores or Gates, shall scarce bee able to open themselues, being become stiffe: He shall rise vp at the voyce of the Bird, that is, the least noyse shall be able to awake him, he that while he was young slept soundly, so that the sound of a Trumpet coulde hardly mooue him, is now by the crowing of the Cocke, or the chirping of a Bird, raised and disquieted: All the daughters of sing∣ing shall be abased; that is, the eares and other Instruments of Mu∣sicke shall be so weakned and dulled, that they shall take no pleasure nor delight therein, 2 Sa. 19, 36. as Barzillai confesseth vnto Dauid: also They
 shall be affraid of the high thing, that is; when once they grow crooked with age, euery plaine way will seeme rough; and euery stone, a Mountaine vnto them. And the Almond tree shall flourish: that is, their head shall be renowned with the comely ornament of white haires, as the beautifull Blossomes of an Almond Tree, &c. Thus doth the Wise-man describe the discommodities and difficulties of old age, which approacheth vnto vs all, and will in the end ouertake vs, to the end we should learne to remember our Creator in the dayes of our youth. The Lord God Almighty, who is the ancient of daies, deliuer you from euery euill worke, and blesse you and yours more and more with al spirituall blessings in heauenly things, that as you beare the Image of his Eternity, so you may be partaker of eternall Glory, Amen.

