



IT is true (righte worship∣full sir) vvhich the auctor of this vvorke at the very first entrye thereof doth aledge, that some errour doth as it vvere cleaue to euery treatise or disputacion, for Aristotle contendeth that mūdus est ae∣ternus, The Stoickes haue assigned tvvo be∣ginninges of all thinges, to vveete, Deus, & materia: Democritus and Epicurus say, the vvorlde is composed ex atomis temere & ca∣su concurrentibus, that is: of litle motes fly∣ing together in the ayre, and cleuing one to an other, and so increasing this great massi lūpe, or earthy globe of the vvorlde. Thales saith, vvater vvas the broode mother and beginning of all thinges. &c. And other acknovvledged this vvorlde to haue a beginning, and God to be the cause of that beginning, and by their di∣ligent studies and vvisedome, haue founde out of vvhat diuers elementes mankinde vvas composed: Yea further by their great knovv

ledge in many mightie vvorckes of God, but specially in the creation of man, they confessed God to be perfectly vvise, perfectly iuste, and summum bonum, out of vvhich reasonable knovvledg (naturaly graffed in mā it seemeth) the auctour of this treatise toke his ground to prooue the resurrection of the dead by reason. First admonishing all those that doubt or be∣leue not this doctrine, to examine effectualy by reason the cause of their vnbelefe or doubting, for he affirmeth truly, that to admit doubtes, or incredulitie vvithout due examination in reason vvhy, is the part of the prodigall as he calleth them, that is, of suche as spende their vvittes vvast fully and careleslye, vvithoute reason or iudgement: and as there vvere ma∣nye errours about the beginning of thinges, so not a fevve errors (touching the repairing of those thinges, vvhich God made to be resto∣red after their dissolution) vvere the cause of this mans vvriting. For Epicures & the Sa∣duces flatly denyed the resurrection, As Sar∣danapalus last king of Syria declareth in an Epitaphe, vvhich he made for him selfe a litle before he leaped headlong into the fire, vvher∣in he vvas brent as Strabo noteth.
Cum te mortalem noris, presentibus exple
Delitiis animum, post mortem nulla voluptas
Nam{que} ego sum puluis, qui nuper tanta tenebam
Haec habeo quae edi, quae{que} exaturata libido

Hausit: at illa manent multa & preclara relicta
Hoc sapiens vitae mortalibus est documentum
That is, for asmuch, as thou knovvest thy self to be mortall, glut thy desire vvith presente delights. After death there is no pleasant so∣lace, for see I am dust, vvhich of late possessed so great honour & ritches. Those things onc∣ly J haue, vvhich I did eate: Yea vvhat gree∣dye lust hath deuoured, I holde in possession: But all my golde, magnificient buyldinges, landes, ritches and honour left behinde mee remayne for other. Loe I am an example and vvise lesson for all mortall creatures to consider. It greeued this Epicure that hee coulde not eate all the vvorld vvhile he liued: Also Philetus & Hymineus saide, it should be spiritual. Some heahten hathbeleeued the soule onelye shoulde remayne for euer vvith the Gods. And other thought the soule should suruiue the body, and yet could not tell vvhat shoulde become of it, as Aelius Adrianus the Emperour, vvho desperatly cryed in his sickenesse,
Animula vagula blandula
Que nunc abibis in loca?
Nec vt soles, dabisiocos
Hospes comes{que} corporis
Pallidula, rigid a nudula.
Oh my litle svveete soule, vvhither vvilt thou novve departe avvaye from mee? For

thou being pale, nomme, and naked, shalt not henceforth enioye thy pleasures as in times past, being a ghest and companion of the body. Other thought that soule and body did perish together, and also shoulde rise againe in the last day, of vvhō Eusebius, saith, Exorti sunt autem alij quidam tum temporis in Ara∣bia. &c. At that time there sprong up an o∣ther secte in Arabia, vvhich helde an opiniō contrary to the truth, vvhich sayd that soules perished together vvith the bodies, and also shoulde rise vvith the bodies in the last daye. Other affirmed that mens bodies should rise, but not the self same bodies, nor the same flesh. All vvhiche false opinions contraye to them selues, and repugnante to the Christian faith, as your vvorship heareth them dayly cōfuted by aucthoritie of scriptures and examples in the same: so here you shall see the same ouer∣throvven by force of reason: and vvhere some graunt God to be able, and yet doubt of his vvill, Athenagoras shevveth that the om∣mpotencie, Iustice, vvisedome and vvill of God are so linked together by an inuiolable decree concerning this matter, that the Epi∣cures may asvvel deny that there is a God, as deny the resurrestion of the dead, and laste iudgemēt. And though some haue signed rea∣sons (as seemed to them) vvherfore they doub∣ted

of this matter, as the transmutaciō of one substaunce into an other by digestion (for so phisitions define digestion) namely of mens bo∣dies deuoured of beastes and birdes, and the same beastes and birdes deuoured by men. &c. And so conclude an impossibilitie that men should rise againe vvith their ovvne bodies. The aucthor doth phisically make avvaye to loose or vnknit those doubts by these reasons, that all such meate as man and beast eateth, is not tourned into the substance of the eater, but onely that part vvhich is truely naturall for substanciall foode by order of creation or of nature. And that seeing the creator vvas able and did knovv hovv to compose bodies of sundry seuered substances, he also is able and could not be ignoraunt hovve to conserue the integritie of the nature & substances compo∣sed, though they might be dissolued and scat∣tered into hovv many so euer thousand parts or places. Against the heathen he affirmeth that vvho so euer hath receaued the lavve, must be iustified or condempned, but it vvas not the soule onely, but soule and body, ther∣fore soule and body must be iustified or con∣demned, vvhich canot be vnlesse the body rise, ergo the dead must needes rise againe. And further as it is absurde to attribute the affec∣tions of the body to the soule, so is it an vniust

thing to saye the soule shalbe iustified or con∣dempned: but it is absurde to saye the soule is a theefe, a hooremonger, or murtherer, for that vvay the soule offendeth by the instru∣mentes of the bodie, and therefore soule and bodie must needes come to iudgement, vvhich cannot be vnlesse the dead rise, and therefore the dead must needes rise again. And though it may be saide these be but arguments proba∣ble and not necessaryly strong of them selues, to confirme or stablish the truth: yet are they of sufficient force to shake doubtes and incre∣dulitie in peeces, vvhich is the auctors pur∣pose in this treatise, and therefore I referre your vvorship to his argumentes, you shall finde him hard, & no maruaile, for he vvrote in Greeke, vvhich tongue muche abhorreth our commō phrase. There vvas but one copie in Europe to be foundvvhen this vvas first translated into latine, and therefore might be infected. And besides this Athenagoras doth not only play the Philosopher in matters phi∣losophicall, but in the profoundest matter of Religion, so that your vvorship taking him in your hande, haue to deale asmuche vvith a most cunning deuine, as vvith a moste vvise philosopher, and in a matter of great impor∣taunce: namely the resurrection of the dead, vvheron the chiefest parte of our religion de∣pendeth

M. Peter Nannius taught him to speake latine thirtie tvvo yeres since at the v∣niuersitie of Louane in Brabant, and novve I haue taught him to speake english in Lon∣don, made him a free denizen, and broughte him acquainted vvith your vvorship, as vvith a man very meete for vvisedome, learning, & aucthority, to giue in the behalfe of our vvhole citie honorable interteignement to so noble a straunger. And as I hartelye desire you to accept my doinges as a token of thankefulnes (though farre from a iuste recompence) for your manifolde friendshippe to mee sundrye vvayes shevved: So I humbly beseeche you to make him a free man of London, bring him acquaynted vvith the honorable Lorde Mayor, & his right vvorshipful brethrē the Aldermen, vvith liueries of all compaignies, and their yeomanries, for he vvas a vvise Ci∣tezen, a Religious deuine, a prudent philoso∣pher, a great louer of Justice, & a most faith∣full Patrone to Christes Church, as appea∣reth in that more then thirteene hundred yeres ago, he vvrote an Apologie or defence in Greeke to Antonius & cōmodus Empe∣rours, in the behalfe of the Christians. No de∣uelishe Diagoras can race the vvalles of that Citie vvhere godly Athenagoras dvvelleth: All godlesse Atheists, beastly Epicures, scof∣fing

Lucianists, mocking Machiauelists, re∣uolting Iulianistes, Hipocrites and abhomi∣nable vvorkers hovv soeuer they bleare mens eyes, are made afrayed by Athenagoras of that iust iudge, vvhich cannot be blinded, bri∣bed, out faced, nor intreated, before vvhome all must stande, having their deedes naked and bare to aunsvvere for them selues, and receaue sentence of life or death eternallye. And thus fearing lest through vttering ouer many vvaste vvoords, I may be thought ra∣ther comberous then commendable, I beseech the almightie preserue your vvorship to his vvill and pleasure.
At Lon∣don this 10. of October. Anno. 1573.

