



WHen as it plea∣s'd the right wor∣shipfull M. Alley M. of the lewell house, earnestlie to desire me to satisfle you right worthie Gentlemen his ve∣rie good freends, as touching the right vse of the Canezzan first mooued vnto him by you Mai∣ster Mackwilliam, as afterward for the like vse also of the Bit, by you M. Fitz∣williams, and that in writing; the which things both doo spe∣ciallie rest in the true vse of the hand, wherein the chiefe sub∣stance of the whole Art of Riding standeth: I was in great doubt what answere to make. For as I was verie loath to denie the earnest request of such a person, to whom I thought my self so greatlie bound; so doo I feare to fall into the iust blame that they deserue, which take vpon them the thing that is aboue their power, or so presume to put themselues in prease among so manie, as haue so well written of the said Art alreadie.
But herevnto, he (as one more desirous to satisfie you, than willing to vnburden me) answered and said; Though it be true in deede, that diuerse haue so doone, yet euerie one that is desi∣rous to be a professor, or at least a practiser of this Art (as the whole companie of valorous yoong Gentlemen ought to be)
doo not conceiue the true meaning of the said Authors rules, or can iudge of the errors of ill teachers, by whom they be de∣ceiued otherwhiles rather than taught, as by the dailie practi∣sing of them one may easilie perceiue.
The true vse of the which are not gotten at the first assaie, but by long experience, and dailie conference with such as haue had long practise in the said Art, as he supposeth I haue had: and here vpon makes me beleeue I may doo somewhat to the great profit of such yong beginners, though not by giuing of new, or altering the old, but by the way of interpreting, expla∣ning or shewing the reasons of such rules, as speciallie in this point, which is cheeflie purposed to be treated of at this time, that is, concerning the true vse of the hand: a thing not easie, but very hard to be vnderstood, and fewest rules be giuen ther∣of, and commonlie most vnskilfullie vsed: so as thereby they maie the better vnderstand the meanings of those Authors, & also iudge of others doings, and be more warie in their owne practisings. And by this meanes also he persuadeth me that I shall auoid the dangers which I before so greatlie doubted of, and thus hath he coniured me (as it were) to take this matter vpon me, as he saieth you haue doone him M. Mackwilliam verie oftentimes to haue it doone.
In this maner therefore thus moued therevnto, I shalbe con∣tent to doo my best to satisfie you all, yet letting you vnder∣stand therwith, that as the shame is like to fall on me, if through mine vnablenes anie fault be iustlie found; so will the blame be common to vs all, but most to him, that hath been the chie∣fest procurer thereof; and least to me (I hope) that was so loath to take this enterprise vpon me. Now then I haue first to con∣sider in what order I shall proceed therein. For how shall one make another vnderstand, to what purpose the pomell of a sword serueth, if he shew him not first what a sword it selfe is? euen so how shal a man make another know what the true vse of the hand is in the Art of Riding, if first he dooth him not to vnderstand in generall, what the verie Art it selfe in nature is?
I therefore haue thought good to proceed in this maner.
First, to shew what this Art is, and out of that to draw the right vse of the hand. The first part I will passe ouer with a short discourse, and confirme the same with approued authorities. The other, as touching the true vse of the hand, I meane to shew, by telling in what sort I haue practised those Authors rules, and what profit I haue found thereby; and therein by the waie to interpret and explane where neede shall so require, such places as maie seeme in them anie thing hard or vneasie to be vnderstood.
And so I will leaue it to your considerations, & require you both most earnestlie, before you make it common, that you will cause it to be perused priuatlie, by some particular freends skilfull in that Art, according to your promise M. Mackwil∣liam, when you first motioned the matter vnto the M. of the Iewell house, as he hath often told me: among the which I wold most gladlie, that M. Th. Blundeuile speciallie should haue a vew thereof, who hath alreadie gathered verie diligentlie the whole substance of that booke of the order of Riding, which was written by that excellent M. in that Art Frederike Gry∣son a noble Gentleman of the citie of Naples, and hath verie skilfullie put it in such order, as if men take good heed, & wilbe diligent, they cannot but greatlie profit thereby, to the great benefit of themselues, and the seruice of their countrie. For the which, and manie other his good abilities, if this time were not too much vnkind and forgetfull, he could not lie thus hidden as he dooth.
And this doone, then my request is, that it maie be returned to me againe, before you proceed anie further: and there∣vpon I will not faile foorthwith to send it you againe. And thus I leaue it to your fauorable interpre∣tation, and to your wise and freendly pro∣tection, wishing you both that you most defire. The last of September, 1583.

