



Right Worshipfull:
THE former Edition of this Treatise touching the Sacraments, some eight yeares since pub∣lished, was not onely by your selfe louingly receiued, but by diuers godly Christians be∣yond my expectation fauourably and friendly accepted. And being at length content to yeeld to a new Impression, it hath fared with mee in perusing this worke, as with him that goeth about to repaire an old house. For albeit he purpose with himselfe to pull downe a little, or to make a slender addition and alteration in the building, yet when once he beginneth to stirre and meddle with the old frame, one piece draweth downe another, and the augmen∣ting of one part, I know not how, in a pleasing manner pro∣cureth the adding and annexing of another. In like man∣ner, when I determined to review and peruse this booke, mine intent was no more then heere and there to insert a little, as time, reading, conference, and better iudgement haue giuen occasion to see farther: but beeing entred into the matter, and one change causing another, the worke is risen to this volume, like a flood that swelleth by the accesse and comming in of other waters, that it may rather seeme to be the making of a new, then the amending of an olde. I haue endeuoured heere to set before the eyes of all that wil
 vouchsafe to reade these lines, the nature and vse of the Sa∣craments, which were instituted of almighty God to admo∣nish vs by their mysticall signification, both of his goodnes and of our weaknesse, being as signes and seales to assure vs of Christ and of his righteousnesse, and all his merits.
There are diuers sorts of signes mentioned in the holy Scriptures, which may be fitly sorted into foure ranks. Some are naturall,Mat. 16, 2, 3 as the clouds be a signe of raine; the rednes of the sky in the euening, of faire weather; the lowring of the sky in the morning, of foule weather. Some are ciuill, as a sword carried before a Magistrate is a signe of his autho∣rity,Rom. 13, 4. as the Consuls of Rome had their roddes and axe born by their officers. Some are miraculous, as we see in Ge∣deons fleece,Iudg. 6, 36. Mat. 24, 29 which was wet when the earth was dry, and dry when the earth was wet: such shall be in the Sunne and Moone, and in the starres, in the end of the world, as the Lord declareth. Other are religious signes which apper∣taine to piety and godlinesse and an heauenly life: of which some are tokens of things past,Exod. 16, 33 Heb 9, 4. Leuit. 8, 7 as the reseruing of Manna: some of things present, as the garments of the Priests and Leuites, and their often clensings and purifica∣tions.
Some be signes of things to come, as the sacrifices and oblations. But the Sacraments of the new Couenant and last Testament of CHRIST sealed by his precious blood (which wee haue heere described) serue as monu∣ments and memorials of all these, euen to note out vnto vs blessings past, and present, and to come. For they signifie the death and passion of Christ which is already past: likewise the promise of grace and forgiuenesse, which are present to the mindes of all right receiuers. Lastly, holinesse of life, mortification of sinne, repentance from dead workes, and the fruites of faith, heereafter more and more to be perfected and performed, as also the resurrecti∣on of the body and eternall life, which are to bee accom∣plished in the world to come.
Especially I haue beene carefullThe corrup∣tions of the Romane Church vn∣masked. to vnmaske the cor∣ruptions of the Church of Rome, if I may call that vnmask∣ing, which is in it selfe so palpable and apparent, that who∣soeuer
 hath the sight of the eye may quickly espy them, or the vse of reason may easily discouer them; wherein wee haue the full consent of the former and purer Churches. If we wil a little consider the truth of this point, and compare the doctrine of the reformed Churches with the polluti∣ons and prophanations of the Romish Synogogue, we shal plainely perceiue, that light and darknes are not more dif∣ferent and repugnant, then these are the one to the other. Indeed they oftentimes appeale to the sentence of the Fa∣thers, as if their faith were the ancient faith, and their do∣ctrine had the approbation of elder times, howbeit all this foppery serueth but for a flourish, to varnish their rotten postes with deceitfull colours; forasmuch as they are con∣tent the Fathers shall be expositers of the Scriptures, but it is with this caueat and condition, that themselues will bee Interpreters of the Fathers.
Wherefore I will3 points dis∣cussed. propound as it were in a Table 3. points to be handled: First, their contrarieties and opposi∣tions standing against the truth. Secondly, their contenti∣ons and contradictions remaining among themselues. Last∣ly, I will answere their obiection that thinke the matter is not so cleere on our side as we pretend, who contemne Transubstantiation and the reall presence, and maintaine the spirituall eating against the carnall and Capernaiticall.
First, touching their corruptionsComparisō between the Lords supper & the Masse. and contrarieties, they are so notable and notorious to all the world, that they can no longer hide them and conceale them, as we may gather by comparing the institution of Christ, with the traditions and abhominations of Antichrist. Christ deliuered his last Supper, as he sate at the Table with his Disciples, where they did all eate as at a banket: but Antichrist hath turned and transformed this Supper into the abhominable Idoll of the Masse, which hath no shew or appearance of any feast at all, where the Priest plaieth this Pageant alone, hee sit∣teth not at the Table, but standeth at the Altar, turneth a∣way his face from the people, beeing belike ashamed that they should see his fraud and legier-demaine. Christ took breadMat. 26.26. Mar. 14, 22. Luk. 22, 19. 1 Cor. 11, 24 as the Euangelists note, such no doubt as was ap∣pointed
 to be eaten with the Paschall Lambe, and not of purpose prepared apart for the Supper: but in the papacy they vse thin wafers, not fit to nourish, nor scarce deseruing the name of bread, howbeit shaped after the fashion of mo∣ny, and stamped with the Image of a Crucifixe, thereby to call to remembrance that the Lord was betrayed of Iudas for thirty pence, and that hee was crucified for vs vpon the Crosse. Christ gaue thanks to his Father for the benefit of our redemption, and blessed the bread and sanctified it to be the figure and remembrance of his body giuen for vs: but BellarmineBellar. lib. 4, cap. 13. de Eu∣charist. vnderstandeth it that he turned the substāce of the bread into the substance of his body; so that this con∣secration is no other with them thē the monster of transub∣stantiation, whereof there is not one word or sillable in the word of God. Christ brake the bread, not onely that hee might distribute it and diuide it among them, but to the end he might represent the breaking, that is, the crucifying of his body: but among the papists the bread is not broken, but euery one hath a little wafer: & in the Masse the Priest breaketh the host, but he doth not distribute it or deliuer it among those that are present. Christ gaue the bread to the Disciples: whereas they giue it not to the people, but offer it vp to God the Father, imagining that they offer vp his Son for the sins of the quick and the dead, and for the soules departed and detained in Purgatory, and they lift vp the bread and shew it to the beholders to be worshipped of thē: al which tend to the dishonour of God, to weaken the com∣fort of the people, and to crucifie him againe, who by the onely sacrifice of his death, hath purged away the sins of al that beleeue, and purchased vnto them the fauour of God his Father. Christ willed his Disciples to take the bread into their hand,. as the word properly signifieth; for as hee tooke it into his hands, so he commandeth them to do: but these doe not deliuer the bread into the Communicants hands, but put it into their mouths, as if forsooth the hands were more prophane and polluted then the mouth, or the mouth more holy then the hands: which notwithstanding they may not eate and swallow, but must hold it on their
 tongue vntill it melt and dissolue by the heat of the mouth: which argueth intollerable stupidity and superstition. Last∣ly, Christ also tooke the cup, and bad them all drinke of the wine, the fruite of the vine, which before had eaten of the bread: but the Papists who hauePapists why so called. submitted themselues to the seruice of the Pope, and thence drawne their names, say, that he commanded them to drinke his owne blood vnder the forme of wine, and yet withall they keepe theBellar. lib. 4. cap. 25. de Eu∣char. people of God from drinking of the cup, as if hee had not shed his blood for them. Thus we see that in the institution we haue no mention at all of reall presence or Transubstantiation, or eleuation, or adoration, or reseruation, or Masse, or oblati∣on, or Purgatory, or propitiatory and vnbloody sacrifice: in all which standeth the life and substance of the popish Eu∣charist, so that there is nothing almost expressed by the E∣uangelists in the celebration of the Supper, but they eyther by their false expositions haue wrested, or by their sacrile∣gious detractions haue mingled, or by their presumptuous alterations haue corrupted, or by their superstitious additi∣ons haue shamefully and horribly depraued.
The second pointContentions and contrai∣eties among the Papists. is touching their contentions & con∣trarieties, which are plentifully found among them: for as they could neuer agree with the truth, so they cannot yet accord with themselues, and if their tongues be diuided one against another, no maruell if they speake against vs. First, they make & moue a question, whether the body of Christ be eaten with the mouth of the body and passe into the bel∣ly, or onely by faith. Some of them hold,Antonin part 3, ca. 6, sect. 3 de defect. Miss. he is taken bo∣dily into the mouth, but goeth not into the belly. Others that he passeth into the belly, and remaineth there so long as the Species of bread abideth. And others go farther, that the body of Christ may be vomited vpward by the mouth, and purged downeward by the draught. Secondly, they dis∣pute whether the body of Christ bee broken and chewed with the teeth or not? Pope Nicholas in a councell holden at Rome caused Berengarius to recant in this wise,De Consecra. dist. 2, ca. Ego. Bereng. I beleeue that the body of our Lord Iesus Christ sensibly and in very deed is touched with the hands of the Priests, broken and ground with the
 teeth of the faithfull. Others thinke that nothing is broken truely, but only in shew: others, that the accidents of bread are broken and chewed, digested and euacuated, and that they are accidents by which wee are nourished and streng∣thened.
Thirdly, they are much troubled and perplexed, whe∣ther Myce eating the Sacrament, doe also eat the body of Christ? Peter Lumbard master of the sentencesSent. lib. 4. dist. 13. standeth in a brown study, and resteth in a muse and mammering, & cannot teach himselfe, saying, What is it that the Mouse re∣ceiueth? God knoweth. Neuertheles, in the end he giueth his resolution thus: It may well be said that bruite beastes doe not receiue the body of Christ. But the Doctors of Paris haue cen∣sured him and corrected his iudgement, and say, Hic magi∣ster non tenetur, Here the maister is not to be followed: so that now it is the common and receiued opinion, that the Mouse eating the Sacrament, eateth and receiueth the bo∣dy of Christ. Thus they make the Supper of Christ institu∣ted for Myce and vermine, and hold that beastes may haue as great benefit by carnall eating, as the beleeuers. They cannot agree among themselues, whether the substance of bread bee turned into the body of Christ, or whether the bread be consumed to nothing, & then the body of Christ brought in place of it? Whether the water mingled with wine in the Challice be transubstantiated into the bloud of Christ? or be consumed to nothing? or be turned into the vitall humors of Christ or not? whether the wormes engen∣dred in the Eucharist come from the substāce of the bread, or from the accidents, or from the ayre? Lastly, there is great diuersity between them, with what words their con∣secration is wrought, and how many words are directly & precisely required to the forme therof, touching the which they are not as yet agreed.
It were no hard matter to make an whole volume of such differences, howbeit I will leaue them in their owne deui∣ses, and come to the third point; which is, to answere those that pleade the cause of Baal, and are bold to speake what they dare for the whore of Babell: who albeit they liue a∣mong vs, and would bee thought to bee of vs: yet they are
 neyther affrayd nor ashamed to affirmeAgainst such as would not haue it dispu∣ted and deter∣mined, how Christ is pre∣sent. that the contro∣uersie of the Supper is not so manifest as we teach, nor the words of Christ so easie as we affirme, nor the iudgement of the Fathers so cleer as we pretend, nor the maner of eating so necessary to be holden as we define: that we are to be∣leeue that Christ is present, but how he is presēt we should not dispute, whether it be carnally, or whether it bee spiri∣tually. Indeed we feare not to teach that there is no transe∣lementation or transubstantiation, that is, no reall turning of the bread into the body, and the wine into the bloud of Christ: but when he said, This is my body, hee intendeth not to change one substance into another, but meaneth, This bread is a signe or Sacrament of my body, which is deliue∣red to death for vs and for our saluation. And when he saith This Cup is the new Testament in my bloud, hee vnderstandeth that the wine in the Cup is a Sacrament of the new Testa∣ment, of our reconciliation to God, and of our communi∣on and participation of Christ with al his benefits; & there∣fore we doubt not to call this Sacrament, a representation, a remēbrance, an image, a token, a type, an antitype, a signe, a figure, and such like. Now that it may appeare that the wordes of institution are truely expounded, and haue the constant consent and full approbation of al antiquity,The anciēt Fathers teach the same tou∣ching the Sup¦per that we doe. let vs produce our witnesses, and see what the Fathers of the grayest heads before vs haue declared & deliuered. But be∣fore we come to fight hand to hand with these aduersaries, and to discharge the volly of shot which we haue in store, it shall not be amisse to set downe certaine inducements, as it were certaine preparatiues to leade vs to beleeue, that the Doctours of the Church are no lesse ours in this cause and controuersie, then Caluine and Beza, and the later writers. For first, we shal neuer read in all the monuments of former times any mention of adoration or eleuation of the host, or that the maner was to lick vp the drops of the Challice, or to sweepe the place where a drop was falne, or to burne the wormes which haue corrupted or consumed it, or to seeke out the host whē it is vomited vp, & to commend those that will swallow it againe. Secondly, Ierome teacheth that after the communion they had a common banket in the Church,
 whereat they did eate vp all thatIerom. vpon 1 Cor. 11. remained after the admi∣nistration of the Supper. If then it were the manner of many Churches to eate the residue at their loue feasts and ordina∣ry bankets, doubtlesse they did not thinke it was Christ himselfe which was eaten therein. Thirdly, the custome was in some places to burne the remainder of theHesych. lib. 2. in Leuit. ca. 8. Eucha∣rist, and therefore it could not bee that they should beleeue that the bread was the very body of Christ, forasmuch as it had beene horrible impiety and a most detestable prophana∣tion to burne it, as aGregory 7. an Atheist & Necromācer. certaine Pope in his rage and fury cast the Eucharist into the fire, because it did not answere to his questions when he consulted with it: or else peraduenture the body of Christ (seeing the flame of fire comming toward it) fled vp into heauen for feare of beeing consumed by it. Fourthly, another teacheth that in other Churches the cu∣stome was to giue the parts that were not spent and vsed, to little childrenNiceph lib. 17. cap. 25. frequenting the Schoole, who are barred from partaking of the Supper by the Apostle, because they are not able1 Cor. 11.28 to examine themselues, and therefore they were not of opinion with the Church of Rome. Fiftly, the Masse it selfe vsed at this day, and the prayers vsed in it do speake for the truth against their Idolatrous practise. Heereunto commeth their sursum corda, when they exhort to lift vp the heart on high to God, and the prayers crauing of God that their oblation may be acceptable, which is the figure and signe of the body and blood of our Lord: whereas if the Church had beleeued that they did eate Christ with their mouths, they might haue stayed their eyes beneath, gazing and gaping vpon that which the Priest held in his hands, and needed not to haue lifted vp their harts to Christ Iesus, which sitteth at the right hand of his Father in the highest heauens. Sixtly, they teach vniformely, that a body cannot be but in one place, and that if we take space of place from them, we destroy the being of a body: and thereupon one saith,Virgil. lib. 1. Contr. Eutich. The flesh of Chrst was not in heauen, when it was vpon the earth: and now because it is in heauen, it is not on earth. And Augustine in his 57, Epistle to Dardanus hath these words, The humane nature of Christ is destroyed, if there bee not giuen
 vnto him, after the manner of other bodies, a certaine space wher∣in he may be contained. The popish purgers and correcters could not suffer the waight of this sentence, and therefore hauePrinted at Paris, Anno. 1571. raced it out of some of their late editions; and yet Bel∣larmine doth alledge it and obiect it against himselfe: how∣beit (it is likely) he did not remember himselfe, but had forgotten to consult with his good companions, who blot out that which they cannot answere. These sixe considerati∣ons are as certaine inducements to sharpē our taste, to break the Ice, and so to prepare the way: now let vs set downe the seuerall testimonies themselues, and see how they depose for vs. Tertullian one of the most ancient faith,Tertul cont. Marci. lib. 4. Christ re∣ceiuing the bread; and the same being diuided vnto his Disciples made it to be his body, saying, This is my bodye, that is to say, a signe of my body. Theodoret saith, , &c. that is, the mysti∣call signes depart not from their nature, no not after conse∣cration: for they remaine in their former substance, figure, and forme. Can any thing be spoken more plainely? Doubt∣lesse Theodoret was in this point a Lutheran or a Caluinist, & one of those whom the bastard Catholikes call heretickes. Augustine is a man of great authority in the Church, & ther∣fore a sufficient witnesse beyond all exception: he saith for vs,Aug. cont. Adamant. 2. The Lord made no doubt or difficulty to say, this is my body, when he gaue a signe of his body, declaring thereby, that by these words (My body) he vnderstood the signe of his body, expounding the former by the latter. It is also very waigh∣ty and worthy to be considered,Epist. 23. which he writeth in his E∣pistle to Boniface, If the Sacrament had not a resemblance of the things whereof they are Sacraments, they should not be Sacramēts at all: but because of this most commonly they take the name of the things themselues: so then as the Sacrament of Christs body is after a sort the body of Christ, and the Sacrament of Christs blood is after a sort the blood of Christ, so the Sacrament of faith is faith. If he had verily beleeued that it is really the bodye of Christ, he would neuer haue said this Sacrament is after a certaine fashion the body of Christ, as euery man would laugh vs to scorne, if we should say that Paul was after a sort
 a man, or Peter was after a sort a man, who were men truely and indeed. And in another place he saith,Tract. 50, in Iohan. Wee haue euer Ie∣sus Christ according to the presence of his Maiesty, but according to the presence of his flesh, hee hath truely sa de to his Disciples, Mee shall ye not haue alwayes, Mat. 26, 11. Origen also is plaine for vs writing vpon Mat. 15,Mat. 16, 11 where he saith,Orig hom. in Mat. 15. This meat which is sanctified by the word of God & by prayer, as touching his mat∣ter, goeth downe into the belly, and is voyded into the draught. Let vs come to Chrysostome, who aboue al the rest is vehement in his amplifications & excessiue in the hight of his eloquence, being desirous to draw the people to a reuerence of this Sa∣crament, & to redresse the abuses thereof crept in, of which he complaineth in all places of his workes; yet when hee speaketh properly, he teacheth as others teach, and writeth as others write, as when he saith,Chrysost. hom 83, in Math. If Christ be not dead, wher∣of is this Sacrament a signe and token? And likewise in that place, When our Lord gaue the Sacrament, he gaue w ne. And if he gaue wine, then by consequent hee gaue bread also: which ouerthroweth such asDureus in Wht. say he took bread, but gaue it not; he tooke wine, but gaue it not. If these places bee not plaine and pregnant enough, heare yet much plainer. He demandeth,Hom. 24, in 1 Cor. What is this bread? He answereth himselfe, The body of Christ: now least any should imagine some change of substance, and the maintainers of Transubstantiation be∣gin to lift vp their eares, he addeth immediately, And what are they made which partake thereof? He answereth, The body of Christ, . And in the same place he telleth vs, We must mount on high like Eagles, if we will come neare to that body. And in the vnperfect worke vpon Mathew, (if that worke be Chrysostomes)Cost. oper. inr. Mat. hom. 11. If it bee so dangerous a thing to transferre to priuate vses those sanctisied vessels, in which the true body of Christ was not, but the mystery of his body: how much more the vessels of our bodies, which God hath prepared for his habitation? But of all other testimonies none is more euident then an Epistle of his written to Caesarius in the time of his banishment, which albeit it be not prin∣ted among his workes,Pet. Martyr. loc. class. 4. c. 10. sct. 31. yet is auouched to be extant in the Library at Florence: Before the bread be sanctified wee call it bread, but when the grace of God hath sanctified it, it is surely
 freed from the name of bread, and is thought worthy to be called the body of our Lord, though the nature of bread remaine in it. True it is,Bellar. de Euchar. lib. 2, cap. 22. Bellarmine denyeth that euer he wrote any such thing: howbeit Gregory of Valence admitteth the words, & confesseth the place, and yet goeth about to shift it off and to weaken this witnesse, as if it were not written by that godly and golden Father,Greg. de Va∣len. lib. de tran∣sub. but by one Iohn of Constantino∣ple. Thus he would delude and deceiue his Reader, foras∣much as that Iohn was no other then Iohn Chrysostome, and Iohn Chrysostome was Bishop of Constantinople. Their owne glosse maketh this exposition,De Cons. dist. 2. Vocatur corpus Christi, id est, significat corpus Christi, It is called the body of Christ, that is, it signifieth his body. Adde to these, the witnes of Max∣imus the GreekeIn eccles. Hierar. Scholiast, who opposeth the signes to the truth, , these things are signes, but not the truth. I will shut vp all these authorities and alle∣gations with the words of Gelasius Bishop of Rome,Gelas. in his booke of two Natures. Sure∣ly the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ (which wee re∣ceiue) are diuine things, for that also by them we are made par∣takers of the diuine nature: and yet neuerthelesse the substance & nature of the bread and wine do not cease to remaine. Can any speake more cleerely and euidently then these do? Or haue any of our owne writers written more plainely and distinct∣ly against popish Transubstantiation? How then are they deceiued that thinke we wrest the words of Institution? Or that we impose vpon the people more to bee beleeued then can be collected & concluded out of the Scripture? or that we teach and receiue more as authenticall out of Caluine & Beza, and other later authors, then the ancient Fathers euer deliuered? I wil briefly answere an obiection, which these produce out of Cyprian in his Tract of the Lords Supper,  Cyprian. de coen. dom. This bread is changed, not in shape, but in nature, and by omnipo∣tency of God is made flesh. To which I reply 4. things. First,  a change of nature doth not euermore import a change of substance. A wicked person when he repenteth and tur∣neth vnto God, changeth his nature, but the alteration is in quality, not in substance: there is a kinde of conuersion, but no Transubstantiation. Secondly, this booke is but a bastard, it beareth vpon it the name of Cyprian, but
 it is a counterfeit,Censur. pa∣trū. authore Rob. Coco. pa. 75 as is sficiently and substantially proo∣ued, euen by the confession of the Papists themselues. And whosoeuer will vouchsafe to reade the booke it selfe, may easily discerne by the style as it were by the smell, that it came out of some Couent or Cloister, it is in many places so barbarous. Thirdly, if the word Nature should be taken for Substance in this place, it must expresly contradict sundry testimonies of those writers which wee haue alledged be∣fore, who deny that the nature of bread is changed, that is, the substance. Lastly, this Author is so farre from saying that the bread is conuerted into the flesh of Christ, that hee saith the contrary, to wit, that this bread is conuerted into our flesh and our blood, and serueth for our life and the in∣creasing of our bodies.
Thus we see that the ancient Fathers held the same faith that we hold, and differ not in iudgement from the refor∣med Churches, nor the reformed Churches from them, as we shall shew (God willing) more at large in another place. And thus I haue runne ouer these three poynts which I pur∣posed and proposed to handle in the beginning, all which are more at large to be seene in the Treatise following. This I offer the second time to your Worships consideration, as a witnesse of my loue, and a testimony of the sauours I haue receiued. My meaning was and yet is, that it should first come vnto your view, and from you & for your sake to the vse of the Church of God, euen of as many as can make a∣ny vse of these my simple labours. I haue prosecuted these points at large, but I cease from troubling you any further, cōmending you to his good hand whoIoh. 13 1 loueth them to the end whom once he loueth,Rom. 11, 29 whose guifts and graces are without repen∣tance: and so wishing all good from the AlmightyReuel. 5, 13. that sit∣teth vpon the Throne, and from the Lambe which liueth for euermore, both to your selfe, to your good Lady, to your hopefull Children, and to your whole family, I ende and rest.

