



I Vndertake (Right Worshipfull) in this Work, to expound one of the Bookes of Moses, a part of the Churches Treasury, committed to writing by the hand of one of the best Worke-men, and one of the greatest Pro∣phets of the Church. And howsoeuer sundry parcels thereof may seeme at the first view to offer vnto vs little profit, as containing onely sundry names of persons and places, which may be thought little to concerne vs: yet as the whole Scripture giuen by inspiration, is profitable for Doctrine, for reproofe, for correction, and for instruction  righteousnesse, that wee thorough patience and comfort of the Scriptures might haue hope,2 Tim. 3, 16 Rom. 1, 4: so if we looke in∣to this present parcell with a single eye and a pure heart voide of partiality and a preiudicate opinion, we shall oftentimes finde much substance to lye hidden vnder shadowes, and as it were rich Mines where the soyle may be taken to bee barren. And as this booke beareth in the front of it the name of Numbers, so it hath this peculiar aboue the rest, that it layeth before vs the numbering of the people, and the excellent and exquisit or∣der that God commanded to be obserued among them, in their tents, in their marching, in their remouing, in the vnfolding and wrapping vp of the instruments of the Tabernacle, and in the Priests and Leuites that attended vpon it. All Arts and Sciences before they can bee learned, must be reduced into order and method. There is an order in God himselfe, as wee see in the blessed Trinity: for albeit all the persons bee coeternall and coequall, and the essence it selfe of the Deity vndiuisible; yet there is the first, the second and the third person. And as it is in God, so it is in the creation and workes of God, from the heauen of heauens to the center of the earth. The elect Angels that do his commandements, and hearken vnto the voyce of his word,Psal. 103, 20 haue an order among them; there are Thrones and Dominions, Powers and Principalities, Ephes. 1, 21. Col. 1, 16. and an Archangel, that at the last day shall blow the Trumpet, 1 Thess. 4, 16. And as it is among the Angels, so it is among the Saints, the soules of iust men perfected; albeit all haue enough, and none of them any want, yet there is a difference in the measure of their glory, inasmuch as euery man shal receyue his owne reward according to his owne labour, 1 Cor. 3, 8. Dan. 12, 3. The Starres are not all of one magnitude, but there is one glory of the Sunne, another of the Moone, and another of the Starres for one starre differeth from another starre in glory; so also is the resurrection of the dead 1 Cor. 15, 41, 42. Gen. 1, 16, 17. Psal. 136, 7, 8.9. Thus it is also in the workes beneath, that God may euery where appeare to be the God of order, 1 Cor. 14, 33. Some creatures haue onely a being: some haue being and life: others, Being, Life, and Sense: and others besides all these, haue reason and vnderstanding. A Campe well disciplined, is a perfect patterne of good order. He that would order a battell aright (saith Vegetius) hath respect to the Sun, to the dust,Veget. Cap. 14. to the winde; because the Sun and dust hinder the sight, and a contrary wind weakneth the blow. The
 Church of God is ruled by order, while there are some to teach, and some to heare. Neither may any of these seeme strange, forasmuch as there is a kinde of order, euen in the place of all disor∣der and confusion, euen in hell it selfe, prepared for the diuell and his angels, Matth. 25, 41.Matth. 25, 41. for there also are principalities and powers, and the rulers of the darkenesse of this world, Eph. 6.2: and among these one is cheefe and principall, as it were an head ouer this body, called therefore the prince of the diuels, Matth. 12.24. So then we see, that in the Creator, and in the creatures, in the Angels, in the heauens, in the campe in the church, yea in the place of darknesse and desolation it selfe, there is me order, from whence sprang the common Prouerbe,  that is, There is nothing so profitable as order.
When Moses had receyued the law of God as from the mouth of the Law-giuer, and publi∣shed it among the people, and had finished the Tabernacle of the Arke and Sanctuary, hee mu∣stered all the Tribes and families of Israel: and hauing seene what forces and number of men (fit to beare armes) were found in euery Tribe from 20. yeares of age vpwards, hee appointed vnto them (by direction from the Lord) such Princes and Leaders as in worth and reputation were in euery Tribe most eminent.Numb. 1, 46. The number of the whole army was 603550. men for the warres, besides women and children: also beside the strangers which followed them out of Egypt. This great body of an army was diuided by Moses into foure grosse and mighty Battalions, each of them containing the strength of three whole Tribes, hauing Captains and Colonels appointed vnto them. Thus did the blessing which Israel gaue to his children, and God himselfe before to Israel, take place among them.
In the middest of the foure great armies, sorted vnder their seuerall standards, was the Taber∣nacle,Numb. 3, 8 as a portable or mooueable Temple, carryed; which was surrounded by the Leuites, and the Leuites also by the other Tribes: so that not onely the Pagans and Heathens were forbidden accesse vnto it,Verse 38 but the sentence of death passed vpon euery soule of the Israelites themselues that durst approach it, who were not of the Leuites to whom the charge was wholly committed. So sacred was the Tabernacle of the Congregation,Numb, 1, 39 and with such reuerence garded and regarded, that two and twenty thousand Priests were dedicated to the seruice and attendance thereof. For, as the industry in framing euery the least part thereof, the curious worke-manship bestowed vpon it,Exod. 31, 3, 4 and the charge and expences about it were exceeding great: so the dutifull obseruance in the preseruing and laying vp of the holy vessels, the solemne remoouing thereof, the vigilant eye in attending thereon, together with the prudent and prouident defence of the same, serued to pro∣cure all due reuerence to the holy things of God, and to encrease zeale and deuotion in such as approached neere vnto him: euen as on the other side, this is the maine cause of the prophana∣tion of the Sacraments, and of the contempt of the Word and Prayer, and of so little practise of true piety among vs, because there is so little feare and reuerence in the hearts of men towards the worship of God, and the parts thereof.
Great was the zeale and forwardnesse both of Princes and people, as appeareth both in ma∣king the Tabernacle and all manner of worke for the seruice of the Sanctuary, Exod. 36, 5. & in offering afterward. For after that Moses had taken order for all things necessary, written in the Lawes, numbred his armies, and diuided them into seuerall Regiments or squadrons, whereof the Tribe of Iudah led the Vantgard: the twelue Princes or Commanders of the Tribes, renow∣ned of the Congregation, and the heads of thousands in Israel, Numb. 1, 16. brought their Offerings before the Lord, to wit, sixe couered Chariots and twelue Oxen to draw them, therby to trans∣port (as they marched) the parts of the Tabernacle, Numb. 7, 2. with all the appurtenances; the Sanctuary onely excepted, which for more reuerence and regard, was carried vpon the shoul∣ders of the sonnes of Kohath, vnto whom that care and charge was commited, Numb. chap. 3. verse 31.
Neuerthelesse, after so many mercies of God vpon them, hauing seene so many miracles she∣wed, so many victories atchieued, so many remissions obtained, so many benefites receiued, and so many iudgements inflicted vpon the disobedient; yet they as a stubborne and rebellious generation, a generation that set not their heart aright, Psalme 78, 8. & whose spirit was not sted∣fast with God, neuer ceased to prouoke him by their sinnes, and oftentimes as it were made a generall Conspiracy against him and Moses his seruant, so that Miriam and Aaron were not free,Arist. Rhetor. lib. 2. cap: 24. Numb. 12.1. verifying the saying of the Philosopher,  that is, Euen a mans Kindred know how to enuy at him. But among all other mutinies and murmurings recorded in this Booke, none was greater then that which happened after the returne of the twelue Aduen∣turers or Discouerers sent out by Moses into the Territories of Canaan, as wel to informe them∣selues
 of the force of the inhabitants and fertility of the Countrey, as also to take knowledge of the Wayes, Passages, Riuers, Foards, Plaines, and Mountaines thereof, that nothing might be hidden from them. For the wrath of God was turned against Israel, being kindled by the violent breath of their rebellion, Numb. 14.22.30.31. so that hee punished the same in a most fearefull manner,Iude verse 5. and almost extinguished euery soule of the whole multitude which he had brought out of Egypt: for onely two, Caleb and Ioshua were excepted.
And albeit Moses was the mildest and meekest man vpon the earth,Numb. 12.3. and often prayed vnto God for them, to renew his wonted mercies, and to consider that theyr destruction would encrease the pride of the Heathen Nations, both of the Egyptians from whence they came,Numb. 24, 13. and of the Canaanites to whose Land they were going; and preuayled by his wonderfull prayers with him, (For the prayer of a righteous man auayleth much, if it be feruent, as the Apostle Iames saith, chapt. 5. verse 16.) yet they ceased not to murmure against him; witnesse heereof amongst others, the insolent behauiour and conspiracy of Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and their Partisans, Numb. 16. verse 1. who for the contempt of God and his Ministers, and seeking to ouerthrow the order and discipline of the Church, were some of them swallowed vp aliue, and by the earth (opening her mouth) deuoured; others, euen two hundred and fiftie in number, which offered Incense with Korah their Captaine, were consumed with fire from heauen, besides fourteene thousand and seuen hundred which iustified the former mutiny, were stricken dead with a sodaine pestilence, as Numb. 16. verse 49.
Thus while the wicked multitude vsurped ecclesiasticall authority, and endeauoured to sub∣uert the power of the Church-gouernment, and to bring in a parity, that is, an horrible confusi∣on, by making all men alike, by pretending that all the Congregation are holy euery one of them, as Numb. 16. verse 3. and by rebelliously contending against the high Priest, and the cheefest Ma∣gistrate to whom God committed the ouersight of all; the Almighty altered the course of Na∣ture, that They dyed not the common death of all men, neither were visited after the visitation of other men, Verse 29. but he made a new thing, and wrought one of the greatest wonders and myra∣cles which fell out in all the time of Moses his gouernment. And the better to assure his people and in his great goodnesse to confirme them touching the election of Aaron and his sonnes to the Priesthood, it pleased him also to approoue the same by a great miracle of the Twelue Rods, giuen in by the hands of the twelue Tribes, of which Moses receyued one of euerie Head and Prince of his Tribe; all which being withered and dry Wands, and on euery rodde the name of the Prince of the Tribe being written, and Aarons name on that of Leui: it fell out that the Rod of Aaron receyued by the Omnipotent power of God a vegetable soule. For, being layde vp in the Tabernacle of the Congregation one onely night, it had vpon it Buds, Blossomes, and ripe Almonds, wherby the power of God was manifested, the calling of Aaron confirmed, the mouth of the Conspirators stopped, & the whole Congregation of Israel perswaded to rest themselues vpon the ordinance that God had appointed and setled among them.
It were almost endlesse to rehearse all the other murmurings against Moses, and prouocati∣ons against God. For when they came to the Mountaine Hor, after the death of Aaron, Num∣bers 33. verse 38: who dyed in the first day of the fifth moneth of the fortieth yeare, after theyr departure out of Egypt, all the people murmured most violently against Moses, by reason of the scarsity of water, when neyther the punishments by fire from heauen aboue them, nor the ope∣ning of the earth vnder them, nor and swallowing of them vp, nor the often and sodaine Pestilen∣ces that seized vpon them, nor any myracle formerly shewed among them, neyther the loue or wrath of God could preuaile any longer with this stubborne and rebellious people, then while their bellies were filled, and their appetites satisfied, Numb. 20. but in stead of seeking for helpe and releefe at Gods hands in their necessity, when they suffered hunger, or thirst, or any other want, they repined and repented of their estate, casting into his teeth (who least of all deserued it) all their misaduentures. And albeit they were entred into the fortieth yeare, wherein all tra∣uailes, troubles, and miseries were to take end, and that they were euen in sight of the land pro∣mised, yet againe they tempted God as obstinately as in former times, and neyther trusted his promises, nor feared his iudgements, nor regarded his miracles.
Neyther are we to thinke, by way of Iustification of our selues, or condemnation of Israel, that wee are by nature better then they, or they a worse people then our selues: for it hath al∣wayes beene the disposition of the common sort, to waxe weary of present things, and to desire some change and alteration.
The multitude (as Polybius doeth not vnfitly speake) is like the sea, where a small gale of winde
 causeth a great Tempest.Cicer. pro domo sua ut Demost. in orat. de fas. legat. They are changeable and vnconstant, and as variable in their opinions as the weather is. And so often as I remember the dislike and discontent of this people with such Gouernors in the Church and Commonwealth as God had set ouer them, (who had they beene changed, and others placed in their roome, would haue liked them no better) I cannot forget a memorable example that fell out among the Campanes in the City of Capua during the second Punicke Warre, through a mutiny among the people against their Magistrates, as Liuy repor∣teth;Liuy decad. 3. Lib. 3. when as the Commons abusing their liberty, would needes depose the Senate, to which they were maliciously affected, and weary to be vnder their gouernment any longer, and agree∣ed to put them to death; Pacuuius Calauius the head Magistrate, willing to saue them, when they had passed sentence vpon one Senatour to haue him executed, bad in his stead to choose a good Senator and a righteous. At the first, all were silent and as still as midnight for default of find∣ing a better. Afterward, when some odde groome past all shame and reuerence seemed to no∣minate one to succeede, by and by they grew to lowd words and great clamors, while some sayde flatly they knew not the man; others, layde to his charge sundry lewd and naughty vices, and o∣thers obiected against him basenesse and beggery, or else some dishonest kinde of Trade and Occupation whereby he gate his liuing. Thus fared they, and much worse a great deale, when a second or third Senator was named to bee substituted in the roome of others; so as it was wel seene that the men bethought themselues better, and repented of that they had done already, considering how much they fayled and were to seeke when they should appoint another in his place, &c. And so at length they were content to keepe their olde Senators. It is not therefore without cause,Decad. 3. lib 4. that the same Historiographer describing the beast of many heads, sayth well; Haec natura multitudnis est, aut seruit humiliter, aut superbè dominatur: libertatem, quae media est, nec spernere modicè, nec habere sciunt, that is; See the nature and disposition of the multitude, ey∣ther they serue basely, or rule proudly: Liberty that is the meane betweene them both, they haue neither the skill to despise with reason, nor the grace to entertaine in measure.
But to passe ouer these things, and to see how Israel passed forward toward the Land of Ca∣naan, I cannot omit, that Moses omitted nothing before his death that might serue for the good of the people, and to shorten their iourney what he might, and therefore sent Messengers vnto the Prince of Idumea,Numb. 20, 17. praying him that he might passe with the hoasts of Israel through his Terri∣tory, into the Land promised to their Fathers, which bordered it. For this was the nerest way of all other from the citty of Kadesh where Moses then encamped: whereas otherwise taking his iourney by the Riuers of Zared, Arnon, and Iordan (which afterward he was constrained to do) hee might haue runne into many hazards in the passage of those Riuers with his great Army. And albeit Moses vsed many strong and forcible reasons to perswade the Prince of Idumea, re∣membring him, that he was of the same race and family with Israel, calling him by the amiable name of a Brother, they being as sonnes of one Father, to wit, Isaac: inferring thereby, that he had more reason to fauor and respect them, then he had to affect the Canaanites; & making a short repetition of Gods blessings bestowed vpon them, as also of his purposes and promises concer∣ning them in the time to come, & assuring him that he would no way offend him or his people, neither yet wrong any by military insolency, but would restraine his army within the boundes of the common and Kings highwayes, paying money for whatsoeuer they vsed, yea euen for the water which them selues or their Cattle should drinke:Deut. 2, 27, 28 yet the King not trusting faire words, & know∣ing the strength of his owne country rampard with high and sharpe Mountaines, and withal sus∣pecting (as a naturall wise man) that so mighty an army of strangers (consisting of more then sixe hundred thousand) being once entred into the heart of his countrey, it would rest in their owne wils to giue him law, and to refuse directions from him, and so bee at their owne discretion and disposition, whether to abide there, or to depart thence; resolutely resisted their passage that way, and returned this answer to the messengers, That if they attempted to enter vpon his frontiers, he would take them for no other then enemies, and resist them by all possible meanes: & to make his deeds answerable to his words, not tarrying to see how Moses would digest this deniall, or whether it would satisfie or exasperate, he gathered the strength of his countrey together, and came out against him with much people, and with a mighty power, Numb. 20, 20. Wherefore Moses being commanded by God, not to prouoke the children of Esau, to whom he had giuen mount Seir, Deut. 2, 4. and considering that the end of his enterprize was not the conquest of that Country which was prohibited, but of the land of Canaan which was promised vnto them, refused to med∣dle with them, and to aduenture the army of Israel against a Nation, which beeing ouercome, gaue onely a passage or through-fare to the inuasion of others, and so hee turned himselfe to the
 East, and marched toward the Deserts of Moab.
When Arad a King of the Canaanites vnderstood this proiect,Num, 21, 1, 2 and that Moses had blanched the way of Idumea, knowing that it was Canaan that he aymed at and not Edom, he thought it his best and safest way, according to the surest rules of war, rather to find his enemy in his neigh∣bours country, then to be sought out by them in his owne Dominion. To this purpose he led the strength of his people to the edge of the Desert, and set vpon some part of the hoast of Israel; which for the multitude occupied a great space, and for the many Heards of cattle that they draue with them, could not incampe so close together, but that some quarter or other was euer∣more subiect to surprize, whereby it came to passe, that he slew some few of the Israelites, and carri∣ed with him many prisoners.
Now it is very probable that it was this Canaanite, or his predecessor, which ioyned his for∣ces wtth the Amalekite, Numb. 14, 45. & gaue an ouerthrow to those mutinous Israelites, which without direction from God, or permission from Moses, would haue entred Canaan from Cadesh∣barnea. For it seemeth that the greatest number of that army were of the Canaanites, because in Deut. 1.44. the Amorites are named alone, & are said to haue beaten the Israelites at that time. But whereas it is sayd, that the Israelites vtterly destroyed the Canaanites and their Cities,Numb. 21, 3 they are much mistaken which thinke that this destruction was presently performed by the Israelites, or in the dayes of Moses; whereas it is rather to bee vnderstood to haue bene done in the future, to wit, in the time of Ioshua the successor of Moses, who fought these battels of the Lord. For as we haue declared in Numb. 12, 3. many things dispersed heere and there throughout the bookes of Moses, seeme to mee to haue beene added (but by the speciall direction and inspiration of the same Spirit by which Moses himselfe wrote) by some other Prophet after they were come into the land of Promise. And doubtlesse if Moses had at this present entred Canaan in the pursuit of Arad, they could not haue fallen backe againe into the Deserts of Zin and Moab, and afterward haue fetcht no lesse dangerous then wearisome compasse by the riuers of Zered and Arnon, of which we spake a little before, Numb. 21, 12, 13, 14. Againe, if we consider the mutiny that follo∣wed immediately after the repetition of this victory, it is sufficient to prooue that the same was obtained afterward by the conquest of Ioshua, and not at the instant of Arads assault. For had the Israelites at this time sacked the cities of Arad, they would not the next day haue complained for want of bread and water, when they spake against God, and against Moses, Wherefore haue yee brought vs out of Egypt to dye in the wildernesse? For there is no bread, neyther is there any water,Numb. 21, 5 &c. all this had bene needlesse, inasmuch as they had store and abundance both of the one and of the other: because it cannot be doubted, but where there are great cities, there is also plentie of water and bread. So then we must vnderstand, that it was in the time of Ioshua,Ioshua 12, 14 that the Israe∣lites tooke this reuenge, and after they had passed Iordan, to which Moses neuer came: but Ioshua the General of this great army of Israel then gouernd them, who nameth this Arad by the name of his city so called, and with him the king of Horma, vnto which place the Israelites pursued the Canaanites, and he nameth them among those kings which himself vanquished and put vnto the sword.
After this assault and surprize of Arad, Moses finding that all entrance on that side was block∣ed vp and defended, he led the people Eastward to compasse Idumea and the Dead Sea, and to make his entrance by Arnon, and the Plaines of Moab, at that time in the possession of the A∣morites. But the Israelite (to whom the very name of a wildernesse was terrible and trouble∣some) began againe to rebell against the Lord and their Leader, till the Lord chastised them by a multitude of fiery Serpents which stung them to death, Num. 21.6. For by the mortall byting of these Scorpions, whose venom enflamed them, and burnt them as fire within their bodies, hee made them know their error, and so afterward according to the plentifull measure of his grace hee cu∣red them againe by beholding an artificiall Serpent set vp by his commandement vpon a pole, Numb. 21, 9.
These victories atchieued whiles Israel soiourned in the valleyes of Moab, the Midianites and Moabites (ouer both which Nations it seemeth that Balak the king of the Moabites then commanded in cheefe) sought earnestly according to the counsell and aduice of Balaam, both by alluring the Hebrewes to the loue of their daughters,Numb. 31, 16 Reuel. 2, 14 Mic 6, 5 2 Pet. 2.15 and by perswading them to honour and serue their Idols, to diuide them in affection and Religion among themselues, thereby the better to defend their owne interest against them, as also to beate them out of Moab and the countryes adioyning.
The Israelites as they had euer bene inclined to these euill courses, so were they the more easi∣ly
 perswaded to hearken with both their eares to the Syren songs sung by that Sorcerer, and ac∣ted by those enemies,Iosh, 13, 22. & 24, 9, whereby they drew vpon themselues a greeuous plague and pestilence, whereof many thousands perished, Numb. 25, 8. 1 Cor. 10, 8. but when Phinehas the sonne of E∣leazar the high Priest rose vp, and executed iudgement, the plague ceased, and the wrath of God was appeased, Psal. 106, 30.
In this valley Moses caused the people to be numbred the third time, and then there remained of able men fit to beare armes and to draw the sword six hundred and one thousand, seuen hundred and thirty, Numb. 26, verse 51. but amongst these there was not a man of them whom Moses & Aaron the Priest numbred, when they numbred the children of Israel in the wildernesse of Sinai: for the Lord had sayde of them, They shal surely dye in the wildernes, and there was not left a man of them saue Caleb the Sonne of Iephuneh, add Ioshua the Sonne of Nun, Verse 64.45. This muster being taken, Moses (as his last enterprize) appointed out of them twelue thousand to be chosen out to inuade the Cities of Midian,Numb, 31, 5. who together with the Moabites had practised with Balaam to curse Israel, Deut. 23, 4, 5. and to allure them from the worship of the true God to the seruice of Baal-Peor, & to the rest of their beastly idolatry: ouer which Companies Moses gaue the chiefe charge to Phinehas, who slew the fiue Princes of the Midianites, who were or had lately bene the vassals of Sehon king of the Amorites,Numb. 31.8. as appeareth in Ioshua, chap. 13, 21. Thus hauing subdued all their enemies on this side Iordan, and none of them being able to stand before them, Moses is commanded by God before his death (which followed immediately after) to charge the Israe∣lites to bound out the land so soone as they were come into it,Numb, 24, 2. and 35, 2 and to assigne to the Leuites cer∣taine cities taken out of the inheritance of their possession, that there might be no diuision nor contention among them when once they were passed Iordan, which haply otherwise might haue disturbed and disquieted them.
This is the historicall part of this Booke, which hath entermingled with it many and sundrie ceremonies of the Leuiticall Law; as touching their Fasts and Feasts, the yeare of Iubile, their feasts of Trumpets and Tabernacles, as also of the Passeouer and Pentecost: a few chapters whereof I published certaine yeares past, which I haue now reviewed, and added the interpreta∣tion of the whole Booke from the beginning to the ending, which I presume to offer vnto your Worships, as a testimony of my loue and duty toward you. The Iewes in the Gospel commend the Centurion, and make it a motiue to perswade Christ our Sauiour to heale his seruant that was deere vnto him, being sicke and ready to dye, because hee loued their Nation, and had built them a Synagogue, Luke 7, 5, 4. So I may truly affirme of you, that you loue our nation, and are true friends of the church, & loue the preachers of the Gospel, which is so much the more wor∣thy praise and commendation, as there are few in these euill dayes (especially of your ranke and calling) that affect eyther the one or the other. It is a true saying, as proceeding from the mouth of the author of all truth, Them that honor me, I will honor, & they that despise me shalbe lightly estee∣med, 1 Sam. 2, 30. It is the cheefest honor that we can receiue in this world, to honour the Lord, which is the beginning of that honor which shall neuer decay; whereas all other without this is vaine and vncertaine. And albeit I confesse you neede not any helpe or furtherance from mee in the race of godlinesse wherein you runne, neither is my weaknesse able to affoord any thing that way; yet I am so farre from being discoraged hereby to presse into your presence, that I acknow∣ledge it as a speciall reason to induce me to this, because I offer the same to you that are able to iudge, whose learning and sufficiency that way all men know perfectly that know your person, & in that both of you are well exercised in the Scriptures, and in the doctrine which is according to godlinesse: so that I nothing doubt, but at vacant houres from waightier affaires, you will vouch∣safe to peruse this Commentary, or at least some part of it, it being a duty belonging to all, high and low, rich and poore to search the Scriptuaes, in which our hope is to haue eternall life. Thus crauing pardon of my great boldnesse, and hoping of your Worships good acceptance, and praying the Almighty to increase the sauing graces of his Spirit vpon you, I humbly take my leaue; resting euer

