



GRace be to you and Peace from God the Father, and from our Lord IESUS CHRIST, who gaue him∣selfe for our Sinnes; and in the absence of his Body for a remmbrance the Bles∣sed Supper, till his second appearing. As often as we taste thereof, he takes it as a token we are not vnmindfull of his ten∣der mercy that tasted Death it selfe for vs; so many melting trials and tor∣ments, the innocent Lambe for a brood of Ʋipers, whose damme is Death
whose sting is Sinne, he that washed vs in his owne Blood vnto whome there is no accesse but by Faith; Behold hee com∣meth, and euery eye shall see him. To him be glory and dominion for euer and euer. Amen.
Jt seemed good vnto me, having a per∣fect vnderstanding giuen mee in these things, and the dispensation of them, an office not a trade; to roote out, to pull downe, to build, and to plant, by the grace and bounty of IESUS our Lord God. To present this Visitation to your view, joyning you together of the first Arke, and vniuersall great House, vessels of Honor and dishonor, some cleane and purified, others having need of purging.
Former things are come to passe, and new things I declare vnto you; no age so weake, nor sex excusing; when the
Lord shall send and will put his words in their Mouth. He powreth out his Spi∣rit vpon his hand-maidens; the rich are sent emptie away, even so Father for it seemed good in thy sight.
Pressed and constrained with obedi∣ence to him, and Duty towards you; saying no other things then the Prophets and Apostles did say should come to passe, that yee might know the certainty of those things, wherein yee haue beene instructed, whether you will heare or whe∣ther you will forbeare.
Jt is a salue to annoint and open the eyes of the blinde, to bring them that sit in darkenesse a light, to leade them out of the Prison-house; others by meanes of remembrance, (whose annoyn∣ting long since teacheth them all thinges) to stirre them vppe;
It is a true looking-glasse, a large houre-glasse, Phisicke for the sicke, wholsome for the whole, milke for the young, and meate for the strong. It is vpon Record due, an olde debt One and Twenty hun-yeares since; Vnto me is giuen this stone to polish, vnto me this grace is giuen.
Jt is as it were a new Song to be sung before the euerlasting Throne, a saluta∣tion for Strangers and the Brethren; if we loue them that loue vs, if we salute the Brethren only, what doe wee more then others; yea but they come at the last houre, others hauing borne the heate and burthen of the Day.
Shall not the lost Son be found againe, the Father of these that Blaspheme and are found lyers; But in the eye of our weakenesse their prosperitie will weaue the webbe of enuie; murmure not at the
good-man of the House; Is it not lawfull; is it no wrong (as he will) to dispose the riches of his owne goodnesse; nay, rather may we not all say, we are vnprofitable, we haue both gon out of the way, there is none that doth good, no not one; nay, are not his Iudgements according to truth; O man grudge not his grace, dispute not his justice.
But they haue bin, and will be to the worlds end, our persecutors and slaunde∣rers, need they not so much the more our Prayers; recompence no man evill for e∣vill; Therefore let the Congregations of the faithfull Pray for them, poore, blind, distracted, naked, wretched people, and giue glory to God, who hath done away the vaile from these hidden mysteries, that hindred our stedfast sight, Though to blinde mindes and deafe harts, this vaile remaines still vntaken away.

Wherein for mine owne part, J chal∣lenge little, not so much as those that brought to the Tabernacle guifts of their owne spinning of Blew and other colours; But rather to be in the number of those servants, that drew out the wonderfull Wine for the Bridegroomes Feast, to beare it to the Gouernor and the Guests; though to cast in my myte with others J was never vnwilling.
Finally, to those that require a Signe, or thinke this Confidence; Boasting that high stiles are not steps for the declining age of this weake world to climbe, my age of this weake world to climbe, my defence is no shorter then free.
Least any should thinke of me aboue or better then he seeth me to be, as others to suspect a forged passe; To present you with Pearles of that sort or holy things, I forbeare at this time.

If the debt be paid the secret of the mul∣tiplyed oyle is to my selfe; Though J shut the Doore or shadow my name, I feare no faces, smiles nor frownes, for, the hope of Israel, to me no chaines are heauie, it is no bought nor stolne fire, my ability nor bold∣nesse extending so high; yet a Candle too high mounted for Sathan, and all his at∣tempts to blowe it out, thriued the Gospell the lesse, rejected of the Iewes.
But all alike hit not the marke, they presse forward, wranglers started aside like a broken Bowe, the match is wonne, one Foord is not knowne to all Passen∣gers; eleven strikes the clocke saith he, twelue saith she; doe these contradict those that are not against vs or with vs; Antichristians those that are not against vs, are with vs; Even so, glory be to him alone (the Set is ours) the houre and set
time of whose Iudgement is at hand; and O Lord remember thy servants Abra∣ham, Isaac, & Iacob, & looke not to the stubbornnes, nor to the wickednes of this People, turne their harts, preserue thy Church, and his victorious Matie. to tread downe the power of his enemies, our Sove∣raigne gratious Lord and the Queene, an∣noint them with thy holy Spirit, Crowne them with Grace; and forren Princes, e∣specially the Kings excellent Sister, with a happie life here, and eternall life here∣after. Be gratious to the remnant of IO∣SEPH, heare J beseech thee the Prayer of thy servant.


PostscriptTO maske my name with boldnesse to vnmaske Error J craue no Pardon, the manner let none dispise; Dreames in times past haue beene interpreted, our Fathers in divers manners haue beene spoken vnto, the winde bloweth where it listeth.

