



Madam;
THe saying of the Apostle is remarkable and never to be forgotten,
1 Tim. 4.8. & 6.6. Godlinesse is pro∣fitable unto all things, having the pro∣mise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come: and afterward in the same Epistle, Godlines with cōtentment is great gaine. For what can it profit a man, if hee should gaine the whole world, and then lose his owne soule? Now the drift of this ensuing Treatise (as appeareth by the Title) is to shew to a godly Christian, received already into the love and favour of God in this life, & looking for happines in hea∣ven after this life, by what holy meanes he may support his heart, as posts doe the house, with sufficient contentment against all the miseries that doe or may assault him in time of necessity. The crosses and tentations, wherewith the life, especially of a poore Christian is distressed, are manifold, and Satan worketh upon their severall wants, to surprize them, and make them often cry out, What shall we eate?
Matth. 6.31. or what shall we drinke? or wherewithall shall we be clothed? Every calling in the world, from the highest to the lowest, is assaulted with his proper and peculiar tentations, and there are certaine unlawfull and ungodly courses practised by wicked man, which we may not unfitly call The speciall sinnes of such a calling. Hence it is, that the Apostle among
other precepts beateth upon this,
Heb. 13.5, 6. Gen. 28.15. Deut. 31.6, 8. Iosh. 1.5. Let your conversation be without covetousnesse, and bee content with such things as ye have; for hee hath said, I will never leave thee, nor forsake thee: so that we may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, I will not feare what man shall doe unto me: and our Saviour, to comfort us against feare of famine, sendeth us sometimes to God, sometimes to our selves, sometimes to the Heaven, sometimes to the earth, and sometimes to the Gentiles, that by all these wee might have strong consolation and rest in him, that hath given us both our lives and our bodies. Consider a little the History of the Creation, as it is described in the Booke of Genesis: God made all the Creatures to serve for mans use, before he made man himselfe, wherein wee may behold a perpetuall patterne of his providence, that he never bringeth any into the world, but that first hee ordaineth things needfull for them, for the time alotted them to be there; even as milke in the Mothers brests for the child to sucke, before ever the child be borne to sucke the same. A very gaod patterne al∣waies to have before on eyes, against that distrust and infi∣delity which commonly hangeth on, and haunteth the nature of man in those matters. Let us also take heed of setting our heart upon the world, and the things in the world, and be rea∣dy evermore to confesse in word, and shew it by our, practice that we account our selves to be but as Strangers and Pil∣grims in this world:
Heb 11.13. Psal. 62.10. if riches increase, we must looke to it, that we set not our hearts upon them: and we must use the world, as if we used it not, because the fashion thereof passeth away. And if we doe not set our hearts and affections upon our riches,
 sundry good fruits will follow thereupon. First, it bringeth comfort and contentment with our estate, as being that portion which God allotteth unto us, & maketh us not to repine against his providence, because we have not a larger allowance; for he that doth not too much affect their presence, will not too much bewaile their absence, neither be discontent because he hath not abundance of that which hee doth not
much regard; but as the Apostle saith,
1 Tim. 6.8. Having food and raiment, will therewith rest contented. Secondly,
 having store of this worlds good, if wee doe not set our hearts upon them, then we will be content to leave them, whensoever God the supreme and soveraigne Owner calleth againe for them, and not excessively mourne for them when they leave us. And as we will not refuse and reject them when we have them, seeing they are the gifts of God, so when they betake them to their wings and flee away, we will looke after them with a quiet minde, as it was with Iob; who, because hee rejoyced not when his substance was great,
Iob 31.25. & 1 21. and when his hand had gotten much, therefore he did not much grieve when his wealth was taken away, but in his greatest losse praiseth the Lord. So also it was with Paul, who, because he used this world as not abusing it, and esteemed the best things thereof no better then dung in comparison of Christ and his benefits,
1 Cor. 7.31. Phil. 3.7, 8. & 4.11, 12, 13. it was no great paine to him to take forth a farther lesson, in what state soever he was, therewithall to be content: he could be abased and abound, every where in all things he was instructed, both to be full, and to be hungry, to abound, and to have want: yea, hee could say, I can doe all things through Christ which strengtheneth me. Thirdly,
 if worldly riches be wanting, we will not seeke them by evil meanes, nor glory in them when we have them to make us high minded, or to put our trust and confidence in them. Lastly,
 it will make us keepe a vigilant eye over them, that through our a∣buse they doc not degenerate from their owne nature, and be∣come Satans baits to allure us, nor his snares to intangle us, nor his thornes to choke us, that the seed of the Word cannot prosper, neither the graces of God grow in us. Hence it is that I goe about to perswade to lay hold on Gods speciall provi∣dence watching over his children, to succour and relieve them out of hopelesse and remedilesse troubles, when they ap∣peare destitute of all succour, and in a manner in a desperate estate, without all meanes left unto them. When the Sonnes of Iacob stood gazing one upon another, that is,
Gen. 42.1. they fared
as men amazed, and at their wits end, that they know not what to doe for themselves, their wives, and their children; then the Lord by his good hand opened a way for their re∣liefe, that there was plenty of Corne in Egypt, when there was none in the Land of Canaan, verifying his gracious promise, Gen. 8.22. So when the poore widdow in time of a great fa∣mine was brought to that extremity,
1. King. 17.12, 13. that shee had but an handfull of meale in a barrell, and a little oyle in a cruse, and was now going purposely to gather a few stickes to dresse it for her selfe and her sonne, that they might eate and die; when she was in this great perplexity, necessity, and extre∣mity, the Lord (that never leaveth his) by his good provi∣dence directed the Prophet Elijah (who immediately before had himselfe beene fed by Ravens that brought him bread and flesh in the morning,
verse 6. and bread and flesh in the evening) to tell her good newes, that the barrell of meale should not waste,
verse 14. neither the cruse of oyle faile, until the Day that the Lord sendeth raine upon the earth. Thus it was with the widdow of one of the sonnes of the Prophets, she was left so farre in debt, that her children were to be sold to satis∣fie the griping and greedinesse of the mercilesse Creditor: and she had nothing to discharge it,
2 Kings 4.2. but a little pitcher of oyle: yet she was provided for by wonderfull meanes: all which examples, as a cloud of witnesses, doe verifie the say∣ing of the Psalmist,
Psa. 33.18, 19. and 37.25. Behold, the eye of the Lord is upon them that feare him, upon them that hope in his mercy, to deliver their soule from death, and to keepe them alive in famine: and Psal. 37. I have beene young, and now am old, yet have I not seene the righteous forsa∣ken, nor his seed begging bread.
But if there were no other reasons or considerations, then such as are handled in this Scripture, to be as a preservative or counterpoison against diffidence and distrust, touching earthly things, which doe more disquiet & disturbe, not one∣ly the naturall man, but even the Regenerate themselves of∣tentimes, then any thing in the world besides, herein we may
finde matter sufficient to take from us the carnall feare of future wants: first, because we are his Flocke,
 and he is our Shepheard. Will the good Shepheard starve his Sheepe, and not make them lye downe in greene pastures? This confidence in God doth the Prophet shew, and concludeth from this ground the point in hand, The Lord is my Shepheard,
Psal. 23.1. therefore I shall not want: how then can they assure them∣selves to be in the number of the Sheep of Christ, that doe not rely upon the care of this great Shepheard? As then the Prophet saith in another case,
Esay 40.11. Ezek. 34.2. Should not the Shepheards feed the Flocke? So we may be assured, that the Shep∣heard of Israel, that leadeth Ioseph like a Flocke, will ne∣ver be wanting to his sheepe, that call and cry unto him.
 Se∣condly, because the Title given to God, assureth us hereof, he is called a Father.
Psal. 80.1, 2. Will the father give over the care of his children, and forsake or forget the fruite of his owne body? nay, doth not the Prophet say,
Esay 49.15. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the sonne of her wombe? yea, they may forget: yet will I not forget thee, whom I have graven upon the palmes of my hands. And Christ our Saviour speaketh to the same purpose, What man is there of you,
Matth. 7.9.10.11. whom if his sonne aske bread, will he give him a stone? or if he aske a fish, will he give him a Serpent? If ye then being evill, know how to give good gifts unto your children, how much more shall your Father which is in heaven give good things to them that aske him? Lastly,
 because we have the promise of a Kingdome, and of the glory of heaven which is unspeakeable, incomprehensible, and everlasting. He that hath promised us a Kingdome, will he with-hold from us food and raiment? nay,
Rom. 8.32. as the Apostle teacheth us to reason, He that spared not his owne Sonne, but deli∣vered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things? So should we cōclude, that seeing he hath called us to an inheritance incorruptible, and unde∣filed, and that fadeth not away, reserved in heaven, 1 Pet.
1.4. He will never leave us nor forsake us in this life, but if we first seeke the Kingdome of God,
Matth 33. all other things shall be added unto us. He that promiseth and provideth the greater, can he faile us and not performe the lesse? He that maketh us Kings unto his Father, and hath promised a Crowne,
August. de verb. Domini Qui da∣bit regnum, non dabit viaticum? will he deny us a bit of bread, and a cup of drinke?
These points are more particularly discussed and opened in the ensuing Treatise, which I have presumed to dedicate to your Lady-ship, and not without good and waighty rea∣sons. You heard the publike preaching of them with speciall attention, (though many yeeres since,) and therefore I must needs acknowledge you among my best hearers and friends, and withall consecrate vnto you some part of my labours, which I have bestowed in writing. Besides, considering your earnest desire, to know that God, whose goodnesse you have alwaies tried, your zeale to glorifie him, on whom you have alwaies called, your care to walke in his waies, whom you have alwaies served, and the fruits of a lively faith, that have plentifully flowed from you, whereof there are so many eye-witnesses among us, the hearts of many distressed Mi∣nisters, and the loynes of many poore people being ready to blesse you, and God for you: I cannot but beseech your La∣dy-ship, to accept of this small testimony of my unfained ob∣servance of your many praises in the Gospell, and as a pledge of my thankefulnesse, which I leave behind me to the world, being now ready to goe out of it. The God of eternall glory, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, make you abound yet more and more in all the riches of his saving graces in this life, and fill you with the inward comforts of the blessed hope of the appearance of Jesus Christ.

