


MY Lord, so much is to be said in your commendations, as to forbeare in so ample a subject of elocution, were rather an ingratitude then silence; and I never sparing of my praises in all mens merits, seeming to have refused them untill now to yours, shall doe much better here to confesse, then to defend my thanklesnesse. It is not my good Lord, but I have as much inclination to honour you, as I have cause, which is to have it in the greatest perfecti∣on that can be imagined; but the same instigation I have had to speake, hath made me still silent, and the greatnesse of the subject which had ani∣mated most, hath yet discouraged me. There is so farre a distance from your highnesse to my

lownesse, and twixt my own power and my will, as I deemed it a sinne against my knowledge, rashly to have undertaken a thing not possible to be performed, but in great imperfection: and that my enterprise would much rather have discove∣red my weakenesse then my intentions. Notwith∣standing which my Lord, are they not the most rare affections which men testifie to their owne prejudice? how can I then more perfectly mani∣fest mine, then at the dispense and disrepute of my knowledge? How can I better make seen to you the passions that I undergoe for your service, and for your glory then by the exposing them a∣mid my own weakenesses, and my defaults? This consideration my Lord hath changed my former feares into rashnesse, and hath made me so bold to undertake that, which I have not had the da∣ring to thinke of: beleeving that if the execution were impossible, yet the enterprise was at least honourable, and by so much the fitter to manifest my devotions bent to you wards, as it beares me hood-winked beyond my knowledge and my power. But I am erred my good Lord even at the entry of my discourse, which beginning with your commendations, as the greatest and richest argument that could be chose, I know not how I have so suffered my selfe to be carried away with my passions, as I have said without thinking that which I would not, and have not yet spoke one word of what I would say. The cause of my er∣ring is the boundlesse extent of my subject. Hardly could it be but I should lose me in a laby∣rinth,

from out of which it is so difficult to get; but the wonder is I have not entred it, and that in stead of loosing my selfe in search of the issue, I have erred at the entry without once having found the beginning. But indeed great Prince, where is there any beginning in things infinite? If I should begin at the greatnesse of your birth, and weigh you as Prince of the chiefest kingdome in the world, and Son and Brother to the two grea∣test Kings the earth hath ever bore; were I not di∣verted by the excellence of your admirable na∣ture, by the exquisite education wherewith it is so happily propagate, and by the ample hopes you give both of the one and the other? what multitudes of other things might here be added in your commendations, did I not feare to doe them wrong, and loved I not more to honour them in silence, then to injure them by going a∣bout to speake their greatnesse: but reducing me to these three onely, and speaking but one word of each; what more excellent nature was there e∣ver found in Prince, or more generous then yours? What Achilles fed with the marrow and pith of Lyons one day to subdue the force of He∣ctor, does not give way to you as well in noriture, as couragious heart? And what hopes may we not well conceive from such and so magnani∣mous a Prince, as surpasseth the greatnesse of his birth by the excellence of his nature, and the ex∣cellence of his nature by the goodnesse of his no∣riture. But rising up to the fount head, and scorse of your great Ancestors, and so descending by

the succession of so many Kings as have been since S. Lewis, to Henry the great, I not observe you onely as a green and flourishing branch of thestock of Bourbon, or as a Sience of that of Anjou, but as Sonne and Prince of France, that is to say, of the best house and most illustrious Empire of the world. What can I hope lesse, or the enemy feare more, then some still, and unexpected en∣terprise mannaged with no lesse silence and priva∣cie, even to the entire and generall conquest of all such authority as strangers do usurpe from us? victories seeming as incident unto the house of Bourbon, as crowns seem destinated unto that of Anjou. Charles the brother of Lewis was the first of this family crowned King of Naples, Sicile, and Ierusalem. Lewis, brother to Charles the wise, and first Duke of Anjou, went to take possession of those kingdomes with 30000 horse. And in our times the last Henry of the house of Valois, being then Duke of Anjou, and brother to Charles the ninth, was crowned almost against his will King of Poland. But the most honourable titles of all these Kings, were yet to be brothers to the Kings of France. For this cause only was it that Henry rather chose the quality of Duke of Anjon in France, then that of King of Poland. And for the same reason as well he as Francis his brother, be∣ing but Princes of France, did precede the dead King your father, when as he was but King of Na∣varre: which I speake but by the way my Lord, to let you see how much this dignity of brother to the King ought be esteemed by you before all

the Scepters and the Crowns of the whole earth. Be it then that you would regain you the antient possession of your inheritance in Italy; the remem∣brance of Charles the eighth, of Lewis the ninth, and of Francis the great, causeth the Alpes as yet to tremble. Be it that you would passe to Constan∣tinople, the eastern Empire conquered, and posses∣sed by the French, doth there (with all feare) still redoubt their very name. If you would yet thrust further, and as farre as Palestine, the same French have conquered and possessed that also you may affright the Sultans of Egypt, and the Mores in Affrick, by the sole memory of S. Lewis. In what part soever of the world fatecalleth you, thither may the renown of your predecessors open you a passage; No mountain is so steep that will not stoop below your feet, nor sea so inraged and im∣petuous, as not to be appeased and humbled be∣neath your sailes. Go on great Prince under the name and armes of that great King, to whom onely you ought rest a subject. Goe and happily re-enter on the possession of so many Realmes. Eface by your immortall acts, & those in the end worthy a Gaston of France, the glorious memory and illustrious name of Gaston of Foix. Make seen there is as much difference between your valour and your renown and his, as there is between his condition and his house and yours. 'Tis said, A∣lexander intending to passe into Asia, there was one of the statues of Orpheus, whose forehead stood with sweat, from whence the Augures drew a presage that he should there bring so great

things to passe, as should produce sweat on the browes of such Poets and Musicians, as should de∣sire to relate them. May you great Prince, beare Armes more farre then Alexander, and do those deeds as the admiration and astonishment thereof may render men mute, and statues speaking, that after I have been often covered with sweat in the pursuit of the thunder of your Armes in battell, I may again sweat within their triumphs, singing the hymnes of your so glorious victories. So as I may from out those large extended wings wher∣on Renown it selfe ought beare your glory, draw a quill best capable of their description, and which supplying the imperfections of this book, (that I purpose to the eternity of your memory) may leave to posterity, works more worthy your name, and the desire I have to signallize me.
My Lord, 

