



Right Worshipfull,
HAving heretofore upon sundry occasions divulged sundry Bookes which are abroad in the world, where∣by J received much encou∣ragement, J resolved not∣withstanding being now in yeares, and as it were donatus rude,
Horat. lib. 1. epist. 1. preparing for a nune dimittis, utterly to give over, and to enjoyne my selfe a perpetuall silence touching this kind of writing, and to content my selfe with per∣forming the other more necessary duty of tea∣ching.
Neverthelesse being requested, or rather importuned by friends to publish some things which had lyen a long time by mee (whereof they doubted not but J had some store) J delivered into their hands, these two short Treatises both of one nature, preached at such time as the heavie hand of God was gone out against us in Towne and Ci∣tie. For after that he had sent forth his destroying Angel,
Psal. 91.7. and that thousands fell at our side, and ten thousands at our right hand, and by his Majesties expresse appointment and command∣ment, we were enjoyned weekly to assemble toge∣ther for the practise of piety in the exercises of hu∣miliation, that the Lord at length might say, It is enough,
2 Sam. 24.16. 1 Chro. 21.15. Stay now thy hand: J thought J could not bestow the time better, than to deliver and insist upon the doctrine of repentance, which is the life of all our fasting (albeit handled before by many) that we repenting of the evill which we had committed, he might repent of the evill which he had executed. For what is all our praier but lip-labour and a sacrifice abominable in his eares? or what is all our outward fasting and abstinence, but meere hypocrisie which his soule abhorreth, un∣lesse
they be accompanied with faith in his promi∣ses, and with repentance from dead workes?
Chrysost, ad versus Iudaos or atie prima. It was well said of Chrysostome long agoe against the Iewes, Ne ita dixeris, jejunant: quin potiùs illud mihi ostendito, eos ex Dei sententia jejunare; quod ni ita fiat, quavis ebrietate sceleratius est jejunium. Let no man say to mee, they fast; rather let them shew that they fast according to the minde and meaning of God, or as he hath ordained; for unlesse they fast after this manner, their fasting is farre worse than any drunkennesse, no doubt because they a∣bused the holy name of God, and under a pretence of piety they practised all kinde of impiety. And immediatly afterward, Ne{que} enim solùm considerandum est quid ab istis fiat, ve∣rùm illud etiam observandum, quam ob causam faciant, that is, we are not onely to con∣sider the action what men doe, but the affection is principally to be observed, for what cause and in∣tent they doe it. It cannot be denied but the Isra∣elites fasted and praied before they went to bat∣tell against their brethren the Benjamites,
Iudg. 20.23. they wept before the Lord untill even, yet were
they overthrowne, and 18000. of them perished with the edge of the sword. Some men may justly marvaile, that the cause of the Israelites being good, and of the Benjamites bad, yet that they fell before the men of Benjamin, yea albeit they fasted and prayed and consulted with God who should first beginne the warre:
Rogers upon Iudges, pag. 921. But whatsoever men may object or mutter, the Lord might dispose of the issue and successe of it without any injury to them that were overcome; forasmuch as it is free for him to afflict and chasten his as it pleaseth him, who hath alwaies just cause so to doe, and among such as are supposed to be most innocent, what man shall be able justly to say to him, Why hast thou done thus? Hee doth all things well, neither can evill dwell with the Almighty, whereas wee are corrupt, and in our best workes defective. Besides, he would prevent the evils that hang about us, and abate the strength of pride, or some other sinne whereunto by nature he seeth wee are most prone; yea, he will make triall, what patience, faith, obe∣dience, and thankfulnesse is in us, whether such graces be in us, or not. True it is, it is not direct∣ly expressed what the cause was, why God gave
Israel the foile, and forsooke them in the day of battell: But whether they did trust in their great armies and put confidence in an arme of flesh, and therefore doubted not, but presumed of the victory and prevailing over their enemies; or whether they did it not in truth and sincerity, because they did not as well pursue the men of Dan for their Ido∣latrie and forsaking of God,
Iudg. 18.30, 31. Gen. 49.18 the fact being as hor∣rible every way, as the private injurie offered to the Levites Concubine: It is most certaine, they did not throughly repent, as indeed they did after∣ward, and prevailed, when they were throughly humbled. So then, notwithstanding the goodnesse of their cause, the greatnesse of their strength, the consultation with God, the practise of fasting, and the duty of prayer; yet may we still say as the sonnes of the Prophets in another case,
2 King. 4.40. There is death in the pot, the want of true turning to God, defiled and deformed all the rest. This is the great and generall fasting, not to abstaine from meat and drinke, but to cease from sinne, as the Prophet speaketh.
August. su∣per Iohan. Esay 58.6. Chrysost. su per Math. Hee that sinneth and yet withall fasteth, (saith Chrisostome) doth not fast to the glory of God, but spareth his
owne substance onely. This is handled at large in these Treatises, wherein is noted, what the true exercise of fasting is, what are the out∣ward and inward parts thereof, the one answering to the other, together with the severall abuses of the counterfeit fastings. True it is, the Church of Rome complaine against us, and accuse us as enemies to fasting, even as the Pharisees some∣times condemned the Disciples of Christ,
Math. 9.14 whom he excuseth and defendeth: but were we worthy of this reproch and reproofe, yet are they the unfittest to upbraid us with it, who beside the bare name and naked title of fasting, have nothing remaining of the true nature and right practise thereof; but the end they ayme at, is to set up their owne me∣rits, and to puffe up them selves with pride, as it was with the blind Pharisees their predecessors, whom in this and in sundry other points they fol∣low. These things thus laid open, J presume to of∣fer to your Worship, whose good affection to our Tribe, (so much scorned and scoffed at in the world) and carefull frequenting the exercises of religion many wayes appeareth, and as a token and testimony of my thankfull remembrance of your
love to me, in that you disdaine not, but upon every occasion of passing by, to come under the roofe of my poore cottage: remembring the words of our blessed Saviour,
Mar. 6.4. A Prophet is not without honour, save in his owne Countrey, and among his owne kinne, and in his owne house. The God of heaven and earth encrease your zeale to the truth, and finish that good worke which he hath begunne in you, unto the day of Je∣sus Christ.

