


Madam,
HOW great aduan∣tage a natiue disposi∣tion to goodnesse is, we confesse all; all know how much the goodnesse of the Stock, conferres towards the sweetnesse of the Fruite. And yet haue our Gardeners

obserued another aduancement of Nature: namely, how won∣derfully the goodnesse of the Stock, is improued by the ver∣tue of the Cyon: and that tis the Graft, and not the Plant alone, which renders the fruit more pleasant. Besides that naturall preeminence there∣fore which your Ladyship hath, to be honorably descen∣ded; you are (as the world acknowledges) vertuously de∣scended also (your Stock is good) and you are (which the world knowes not) high borne too (your Cyon is better) borne from aboue; not onely once, but againe; and I fully perswade my selfe, that I haue long since seene many vn∣sayned assurances of it. I must not tempt your Ladyship with your own prayses (your neighbours can speake foorth them) and did I not know you to be most discreetly humble,

I might not haue sayd so much. Let me now be bold (good Madame) to adde one Counsell after many Commendations, (it shall be but such a one as I know you most apt to take) giue mee leaue to put you in mind, that al this, though the chiefe, yet is it not the onely Engage∣ment your Ladyship stands ob∣liged to Almighty God in; but that you owe him, aboue most women, a daily thankeful∣nesse both for his domesticke and worldly blessings. God hath endowed your Ladyship with a most plentifull fortune: And aboue that, with a well∣chosen and a towardly Gen∣tleman, one of the early hopes and prayses of his Country; a yoake-fellow equall to your Selfe in blood, in youth, in personage: And to increase all these blessings, hath God in∣creast you both, with a sweete & numerous Issue, euen so nu∣merous,

that your Oliue bran∣ches are already round about your table: So that (blessed be God) neyther of you both are likely to want Heyres, nor they, Inheritances. Thus hath God blest you, as he did Ioseph, with blessings of the Heauen Gen. 49. 25 aboue, and blessings of the Deepe beneath, blessings of the brests and of the womb. And what could God haue done more to his Vine? And what remaines for your Lady∣ship to doe, but to cultiuate, to pune, and to water both Stock and Cyon, with a reli∣gious industry? I know your Ladyship to be addicted as well to the Closet, as to the Church; to priuate Reading, as to pub∣like Hearing: and I haue here∣tofare serued your Ladyship in both. In thankfulnesse therfore for your salt which I haue ea∣tē, here make present of a most fit instrument for your Spiri∣tuall

culture, St. Austens own Pruning knife, by which Hee cut off his sinnes by Repen∣tance: an exercise for your Closet deuotion; the deuout st piece of all St. Austen, and the vsefullest: by which, Confessi∣on is made vnto Saluation. I Rom. 10. 10 direct not this to your Name by any chance, but vpon deli∣borate choyce: for I presume to be so priuy to the way of your Religion, as to know that euen this Subiect of Priuate Confessions will much please you. It will, I hope, do your soule good; Let it therefore, I be∣seech you Madam, partake a∣gaine of your Goodnesse: Countenance it, I intreate your Ladyship, with your Nime, and defend it with the priui∣ledge of a Ladies Honour, which no man (I hope) will be so vnmannerly as to viv∣late. God blesse your Hono∣red Husband, and Selfe, and

Children, and Kinred, and Family, with Grace in this Life, and with Glory in the next. Thus prayes he affecti∣onately, who still remaines,
Madame,

