



ALthough oure sauiour christe Jesus doothe affyrme yt the yoke and cares of man & sayn¦tes to be swete, and easy to bee obserued and borne: yet howe many (most excellent Ladye) do at this present alow, or ad∣mit yt saying? ye, howe manye do admyt & affyrme ye contrary

and yet say they not that it is for anye man or woman im∣possible to lyue chast? to loue theyr enemies, to lyue sober∣lye & Christianlye? O God, how is vsury and Symony cloked? how is intemperate lyuynge vsed and estemed? Howe do men kepe the cha∣stitie of Matrimonye? How do men paye vnto God and his ministers theyr tythes? what charitable dedes, what dolefull penaunce, yea, what murder, adultery, and forni∣cacion, what bybbynge, and wandering, clene contrary to doing yt commandements yt we re vsed: For nowe to Lynke sunder snoeuen is a virtue, to kepe a concubyne, is not muche blamed, to seke vpon aulkers and diuiners

is comenly vsed, to be proud, is accepted for clenlynes, to be auaritious, for prouidēce, to be crafty and deceytful, for policye, to spende and waste, for good felowshyp, to skoffe and ieste, for a poynt of ciuili∣tie, to flatter, is taken for in∣tier loue and amitie. O lorde shall these men come to the euerlastynge beatitude? shal they se the kinge in his estate and maieste? no verely. Who then? He that lyueth iustlye, and speaketh the trueth: he Esai. that abhorreth to do iniuries couetously, and remoueth a∣waye hys handes from gyf∣tes, he y• stoppeth his eares, least he heare the deceytefull oppression of the innocente bloude, and that shutteth his eyes, lest he se euyll: this man

shal inhabit places, and se the kynge in his glorious estate. Why do not men folowe the sayinges and wordes of the prophete? Whye do they not ensue the doctrine of famous doctours and preachers?
There was neuer more sin∣cere and true preachynge, than is nowe of late, nor the worde of God more spoken of, thē is in these oure dayes. But so muche preachynge, & so lytle folowynge, so muche exhortation to charite, and so feable & weake loue, so much perswasion to succoure and ayde the poore, and so greate pouertie, so much good coun¦sel geuen to ensue vertu, and so litle apprehended & vsed, was neuer sene. Why so? For euery man (as now ye worlde

is fashioned) be he neuer so rude and vnlearned, wyll be his owne doctour, his owne interpreter of scripture, and folowe his owne sense and o∣pinion, his owne maner of li∣uyng and pleasure, cleane cō∣trary to all wysedome, reasō, and good learnyng. The old aunciente fathers, and true interpreters of Gods holye worde, the masters of vertu∣ous and godly conuersation, are amonge many lytle or no thing regarded. What were they (say thei) but men as we be? Truth it is: but yet farre more excellente both in lear∣nynge and vertuous opera∣tions thā we be: blessed mar∣tyrs, holy confessors, the cho∣sen seruauntes and vessels of God, the ensuers of his steps

and statutes, the reprouers of vyce, men of moste perfecte lyfe, & the sincere preachers and expounders of the word of God. For who is he liuing that (as for an ensample) in subtilite of wyt, in profounde learnyng, in cleare declarati∣on of scripture, or in godly ex¦ample, that may be compared vnto S. Augustine? Whose workes are incomparable, & singuler in al kindes of good learninge: and to reduce mā from vice to vertue, from the actiue, to the contemplatyue lyfe most excellente. Oute of whose sermons, to admonish and reuoke the people frome theyr dissolute and vitious lyuinge, and to put them in remembraunce of theyr due∣tye, and vnthankefulnes to∣wardes

god: I haue selected and translated these twelue sermones, the whych in mine opinion and mynde, are most worthy, and most necessarye to be knowen and had in me∣morye, but to be folowed, muche more necessary. Desi∣rynge your hyghnes thank∣fully to accepte this my rude translation. Rude it is (I cō∣fesse) and barbarous, because I woulde be playne vnto the playne and simple people, the whiche thynge (as I con∣iecture) is not far amis, nor yet greatlye to be blamed.
