



THis little booke of the
greatest Doctor of the
Church of God, faithful∣lye
translated into the
English language for the confort of
our afflicted Catholickes, runneth
of its owne accord into your gratious
patronage: first in regard of the au∣thour,
who hauing beene the tongue
of holy church to preach, dispute,
and define with power, and effica∣cie
against the rebellious heretickes,
and schismatickes of his time, see∣meth

to exact that his workes should
be dedicated onely to such a patron,
as cometh nearest vnto him in those
sacred functions; and certainely the
world can witnesse, that no Bishop
of this age hath so powerfully, so
learnedly, so constantlie, amast so
manie factious insurrections, before
so great, and glorious auditories, in
many of the chiefest cittyes of France,
and especiallie in that abridgement
of the world, and Royal seat of the
Monarchie of France, Paris, im∣pugned,
and confuted the furious
and fierie heresies of Caluinisme,
then your grace hath donne. Wher∣vpon
the most Christian King, the
eldest sonne of the Church, and
glorious Lilly of the Princes of the
world, with manifest showe of a
feelinge iudgement of vertue, and
true zeale of Catholicke faith, hath
worthily chosen your grace to be
chiefe Pastour of his Peeres, and
Metropolitan of that holy church

of Rhemes, which as in times past
it deserued to be called, so vnder
your graces gouernment, it will still
deserue to be accompted, the Mis∣tris
of Ecclesiasticall discipline in
France.
Secondly in regard of the Trans∣lator,
who being a poore monke, and
vnworthy member of that litle mo∣nasterie
of S. Laurence in Dieule∣wart,
in which your Lordship re∣ceiued
the habit of S. Bennet, and ex∣ercised,
with not able humilitie al the
duties of an humble, and an obseruāt
religious, and afterwards al the parts
of an exemplar, and prouident supe∣riour,
could not persuade himselfe
to seeke abroade any other patron of
his poore labours, hauing one so ex∣cellent
at home, whose glory; & great∣nes
might ennoble, and beautifie the
worke, which the Translatours rude
and vnpolished language could not so
perfectly expresse to the reader, as the
worth thereof doth deserue.

And though so small a labour may
seeme a very vnproportionable guift
to be offered to soe Illustrious a Prelat,
yet the offerours ability stretchinge to
noe greater a present, will in your
graces courteous acceptance, supply
that want of proportion, especially
since he had a kinde of necessitie im∣posed
vpon him by dutifull affection,
and by commaund of obedience to tes∣tifie
by this little endeauour the com∣mon
ioy, and gladnesse of al his bre∣thren
the English Benedictins in this
your Lordships so wonderfull, though
worthily deserued promotion. Perhaps
it will be counted a sleight obserua∣tion,
yet may it be pardonned me, if in
demonstration of ioy, I poure forth
what my affection biddeth me, though
in exacter iudgement I should haue
concealed it, that the order of S. Ben∣net
gaue the first Bishop, and first En∣glish
Bishop vnto our nation before
euer it had any; and now againe hath
giueu the first consecrated English

Bishop, that the nation hath had after
so long an interruption, as heresie
hath made in that dignitie. For in the
beginning of our conuersion from Pa∣ganisme
to Christianisme, and for ma∣ny
ages after, scarse had England any
Bishop, that was not a Benedictin:
that being a prerogatiue willinglie
granted by the whole nation vnto the
order which first planted, and wate∣red,
and cultiuated the true faith of
our Sauiour Christ amongst them, &
continued in those glorious labours,
neuergiuing them ouer by interruptiō,
as a late authour would haue it be∣leiued,
contrarie to the truth of histo∣rie
which it seemes he did not well ex∣amine;
for euen in the most trouble∣some
times of the church of England
both of ancient, and later memory, the
monkes of S. Bennet haue showed
themselues most zealous in defence of
the faithe, and therfore balling Iohn
Bale, no great friend of Priests not r∣gulars,
in his booke of the writers of

England, rayleth at a learned Bene∣dictin
as the first, and most zealous,
and eloquent unpugner of Wclifn
Oxford: and a better author, as being
a worthy Confessor M. D. Pitz in a
booke of the same title, numbreth a co∣pious
catalogue of learned preachers,
and writers of the same order, who
successiuely from age to age, emploied
their endeuours to desend, & illustrate
the faith, which their first Fathers had
brought into England: and he might
haue learned out of M. D. Sanders no
small number of Abbots, & Monks of
the order to haue stood for the same
with losse of their liues: and himselfe
might haue remēbred the famous, and
Reuerēd Abbot Fecknam so much tos∣sed,
& torinoyled in the late Q. Eliza∣beths
daies, for his constancy in retai∣ning
of his faith, & refusal of the oth
of Suprem. against which he writ, and
in which constancie he gloriously died
in prison: whose Chaplain, and fellow
monke D. Sebert Buckley, not ma∣nie

yeares after the death of his
Lord, receiued from beyond seas, a
fresh supply of Monasticall Benedi∣ctin
preachers, sent to continue their
auncient mission by authoritie of the
sea Apostolicke from the Popes of glo∣rious
memory Clement the eight, &
Paule the fift, as appeareth by the
motus proprius of the holy Father
Paule the fift, dated the 24. of De∣cemb.
1612. Pont. suian. 8. And we
may put your grace for a witnesse
though domesticall, yet now, as being
a Bishop, vnpartiall, who haue
knowen many Confessors of the or∣der,
and can restifie of one especially,
who though blind in body, yet cleare
sighted in mind, in the church of
West-minster publickly, and stoute∣ly
confuted in an after-noone sermon,
aprecedent railing sermon which D.
Horne by appointment of the Coun∣cel
sounded in the eares of the peo∣ple,
to disgrace the profession of
Monkes, and Catholique Religion.

So that there neuer hath bene any in∣terruption
of Benedictin preachets,
and teachers in England, and we trust
neuer wilbe till the worlds end; of
which confidence of ours we esteeme
a very probable argument, the memo∣rie
and loue vnto the order of S. Ben∣net,
so deepely ingrafted in the harts
of English men, that no emulation by
neuer so extraordinarie diligence can
roote it out; and we thinke no small
coniecture therof may be taken from
this admirable promotion of your
Lordship, of which we may say what
Mardocheus said vnto Hester: Et quis
nouit vtrum idcirco ad regnumve∣neris,
vt in tali tempore parareris?
Who can tell but that your grace is
therfore by Gods prouidence raised to
this Ecclesiasticall Kingdome, that in
these times you might be ready to e∣rect,
and fortisie your brethren the
Benedictins, as a man gratious with
both Monarchs, with the Lily of Frā∣ce,
for your fruitfull labours in the

soules of his subiects, with the Lion
of England, for your acknowledged
faith, and loyaltie to his personall
right, and succession.
But enough of the causes of dedi∣cation:
a word or two by your graces
leaue of the reasons, why this worke
is translated. Taking delight in rea∣ding
of those heauenly conceipts of S.
Augustin, I purposed for the priuate
intertainemēt of that time, which obe∣dience
left vnto my choice, to put them
into English as carefully as I could,
and then exhibiting my labour to my
superiours, as an account how I spent
my leasure, they thought good to pub∣lishe
it, although it had before bene
translated, which I neuer knew; for
the translator M. Rogers, insteed of
giuing the deuout reader the true
works of S. Augustin, tooke vpon him
presumptuously to mangle, and mai∣me
them in all such places, as the holy
Doctor had writte directly contrary
to Protestanticall doctrine, forcing

him to speake like an hereticke in all
points, of prayer vnto Saints, merits of
good workes, suffrages for the faith∣ful
departed, & such other, as ordina∣rily
do occurre in spirituall exercises:
in which S. Augustin most plainely,
and clearelye speaking as a true Ro∣main
catholike, this saucie controller
M. Rogers, either peruerteth his wor∣des
to Puritanisme, or els leaueth them
out, euen whole chapters, as if he were
more illuminated with the grace of
God, and knowledge of truth, then
that glorious Doctor, esteemed, euen
by our aduersaries, the learnedst mai∣ster,
that euer the Church had since
the Apostles. And where S. Augustin,
in the feruour of his deuotion, with
most eloquent, and wary tearmes, re∣presenteth
vnto his soule, and the
readers thoughts, the dolefull specta∣cle
of our Sauiours passion this im∣pious
hereticke leaueth all that out,
or els wickedlie transformeth it,
censuring it as escapes, and ouer∣sights,

when it is most euident that
they were written by Saint Augu∣stin
with full aduertisement of a
farre deeper, and carefuller iudge∣ment,
then euer can be in the bray∣mes
of an hereticke. In one thinge
yet is the man to be commended, that
he doth not this by stelth, and si∣lently,
as most of that faction doe,
but openly, and plainely professing
his fact in his prefaces, and yeelding
particular accompt thereof; but no
other reason sauing the credit of his
heresie. But most abominablie in
the first preface doth he belie the
English Catholickes at home, impo∣sing
vpon them their translating,
and printinge of diuers lewed le∣gends
of knights errants, as Amadis,
Palmerin, and the like, as if they had
beene published by crafty papists, as
he calls them, to peruert Protestants,
whom they could not cōsute with dis∣putations:
wheras the world knowes,
the translators of those books to haue

bene professed Protestants, and some
of them Poursuiuants, and damnable
Apostata's, as Antony Monday, and
the like, sworne officers, and helhoun∣des
to hunt out poore afflicted Catho∣licks
& bring them to the miseries of
imprisonments, and premuniries. And
both Rogers, and Ascam his authour
whom he cites, were not of so little
reading, but in their conscience they
knew, that all such bookes are forbid∣den
very strictly to be read in the Ca∣tholicke
church by any of her faithfull
children, and condemned by the rules
of the expurgatorie Index, appointed
by order of the great Councell of
Trent, and drawne out by most indi∣cious,
and godly diuines to direct Ca∣tholickes
how to auoid the venini, and
poyson of all pernicious books, which
Index, it is a wonder how these men
dare presume to find fault with, be∣cause
it blotteth out many vnprobable
words, and doctrines in late Authors,
where as they presume, by their owne

confession, to blott out all words, and
doctrines contrarie to their false belie∣fe,
euen in the very ancient, and grea∣test
Doctors of the Church; whose
writinges that index, for the reueren∣ce
due vnto them, euen in those poincts
wherin, as men, some of them haue
missed, hath left vntouched, and vncō∣trolled.
All which I haue presumed to
say in this speech vnto your Lordship,
for the better instruction of all
Catholicke readers, who in reading
this preface, I doubt not but will re∣ioyce
with me, & glorifie God for the
great honour, and blessings both tem∣porall,
and spirituall powred forth
abondantly vpon your grace, not∣withstanding
the resistance made by
enuie, and emulation; and that in your
bannishment in a strange countrey;
though indeed France is not a stran∣ge
countrey vnto the Giffords, whose
noble family hath its originall stock,
and florisheth yet at this day in little
Britanie, and other parts of France,

and from thence sent forth its bran∣ches
into the greater Britany, with
such prosperous successe, that it gaue
to England the Dukes of Buckingam,
and remaineth as yet a principall
branch of that house; so that it may
seeme France hath made estimation of
your grace, not onely prouoked ther∣vnto
by your learning, and vertues,
but euen by the secret instinct of na∣ture,
gladly embracing the good which
sprung first from its owne soyle.
I haue added certaine verses, and
a deuout consideration of Blessed S.
Peter Damian Cardinall of Ostia, &
monke of our order, a man in those
dayes so profitablie, and feruently im∣ploied
by the churches commaundment
for his admirable zeale, and power∣ful
eloquence in reducing Schismatic∣kes,
and Sectaries of Italie, that your
grace may seeme to haue placed him
before your eies, as a patterne of your
actions, and the gouernement of your
Diocese. The verses were heretofore

namelesse in many Latin editions of
these works, but now adiudged by the
learned to be S. Peter Damians. The
consideration also, taken out of the
same Saints works, seemed to me, for
the profit therof, to be a fitt end, and
conclusion of this my translation, as
a point most necessarie to remaine al∣waies
in the memorie of the faithfull
reader.
All this I offer vnto your grace, by
the commaundment of my Superiours,
and myne owne desire, in the name of
all English Benedictins, whose pray∣ers
vnto almighty God shall neuer be
wanting for the long life, health,
and prosperous direction of your gra∣cious
Lordshippe in all vertue, and
happinesse. From my Cell in Dieule∣wart,
your Lordshipps beloued mona∣sterie,
where by the leaue of obedience
I meane to spend the remainder of my
life, and remaine alwaies.

