


AMong all other be∣nefites,
most graci∣ous
soueraigne La∣die,
which God in
mercie hath besto∣wed
vpon your roi∣al
person▪ the know¦ledge
of GOD is
most singuler, & for the which we your
humble Subiectes haue moste cause to
prayse God. But I meane not the know¦ledge
of hys essence or beyng, whych
none of the Angels or heauenly powers
are able to comprehend: Neyther yet
that general knowledge of God which
is gotten by his creatures and workes
from the creation of the world. Which
although it bee of no force to chaunge
the mynde, & regenerate to true god∣lynes,
yet are all men by it made inex∣cuseable

before God, in as muche as
when they knewe God,Roma. 1. they glorified
him not as God. But I mean the chiefe
and singuler knowledge of God, wher∣by
not onely his vniuersall power, and
infinite mercy replenishing the whole
earth, but also his vnsearchable counsel
in sauing vs by Christ, hidden from the
world, is well perceiued and knowen.
This knowledge of God hath eternall
lyfe annexed vnto it,Iohn. 17. as sayth Christ:
Thys is lyfe eternall, that they myght
know thee the onely true God, & Iesus
Christ whom thou hast sent. And as this
knowledge of God doth comprehende
in it the counsell of God to saue vs by
Christ: so it doth renue the whole mā,
& vrgeth hym to apprehend that good
thing which it sheweth, accordyng to
the saying of Christ: you shall knowe
the truth, and the truth shall make you
free.
That this knowledge of God, by hys
good spirite, already planted in your
Maiesties hart, might dayly encrease, &
more and more bee confirmed, I haue
chosen out a litle short treatise, stirryng

and mouing verye much to the loue of
God, through the consideration of hys
benefites: Accompted amonge the
workes of saint Augustine, & set forth
in hys name, to dedicate the same to
your Highnes. The diligent vewe and
consideration whereof, I knowe ryght
well, wyll not a litle enflame and set on
fire those sparkes of the knowledge &
loue of God, already by Gods good spi∣rite
kindled in your royall hart. For I
am not ignorant, most gracious soue∣raigne,
of your good and gracious na∣ture,
and how muche your Maiestye is
enclined to loue and mercy, to pity the
poore & miserable, to respect the cau∣ses
of such as are in distresse, to help the
oppressed, to pardon offences, to doo
good to all men, which all are nothing
els but fruites of that knowledge and
loue of God, whych by the woorde of
God, and Gospell of Christ you haue
conceaued. And as the same hath alre∣dy
brought forth these fruites, so I no∣thing
doubt, but the continuall medi∣tation
of Gods infinite loue, and innu∣merable
benefits, wyl bring forth more

loue of God, to solace and comfort her
selfe onely in his loue, in respect where∣of,
all pleasure, ioy, & loue of this world
waxeth vyle, and chuseth rather wyth
him to beare afflictions, and suffer hard
thinges, then with the world to enioye
the pleasures of sinne for a season. For
surely suche is the nature of the loue of
God, that as it nothing forceth of, or
regardeth not the afflictiōs of thys life,
so it vtterlye contemneth and treadeth
vnder foote the vanities & loue of this
world, as nothing, in respect of his loue,
who first hath loued vs.
To the furtherance whereof, the di∣ligent
reading of this litle treatise, wyll
very much helpe. Wherein the Author,
euen of sense and feeling, and as one all
together rauished with the loue of god
setteth forth how diuersly, by his bene∣fites
and loue, we are mooued to loue
him, and that his vnspeakeable loue to∣wards
vs, can no waies better be recom∣penced,
then by loue againe. Wherein
if it shall please your Maiesty to bestow
some short tyme, I know the more it is
read, the more comfortable delight wil

be conceiued therein. And though par∣aduenture
this myght bee thought of
some a trauaile altogether superfluous,
to translate the same out of Lattin, in
which tong it was first wrytten, and to
dedicate the same to your highnes, con∣sidering
the excellencie of your know∣ledge
in the same tounge, wherein you
might vvith more delectation & plea∣sure
haue solaced your selfe: yet to me
it should not seeme superfluous, beyng
set foorth in a language that moste of
your Subiectes do vnderstand, & ther∣fore
like to redounde to the profite of
the moe. And besides forth, that vvhich
is set foorth vnder the protection and
priuiledge of Princes, is of all men the
more diligently read.
And to vvhom myght I more aptlye
dedicate the introduction to the loue
of God, then to so godly and vertuous
a Prince, out of vvhose brest ther flovv∣eth
such streames of mercy, and flames
of loue tovvard her subiectes, that shee
seemeth an apt & meete soyle of God,
vvherein the loue of God myght pro∣fitablye
be planted. The God of loue

therefore, enflame your most royal hart
vvith his loue, and vvith his holy spirit
direct you in the ryght course to eter∣nall
lyfe: That in this life your Maiesty
may haue such sence and feeling of hys
loue, that in tyme to come you may
haue the full fruition therof in
his eternall glorye.
Amen.

Viuat Regina.
