


AMong Christians
it is & hath bin for
longe continuance
an ancient custome,
Honorable, at this
time, and at this daie commonlie
of the yeere, either to purchase fa∣uor,
if they haue none; or to con∣firme
friendship, which they haue,
with giftes and presents. Hence
both hie estates, to them of lowe
calling; and meane persons, to
their betters; and euerie friend to
his wel-willer lightlie wil sende
some token, if his habilitie doe
serue of a friendlie hart and affe∣ction.
In the daie two special things
are to be obserued. One is, that

our Sauior Christ was circumcised
herevpon; another that the newe
yeere beginneth now. If we showe
arguments of loue one toward an∣other,
for that we haue perceaued
the loue of our Sauior to vs ward,
by his natiuitie, circumcision, and
suffering in ye flesh for our sakes1. Pet. 2, verse. 21.;
doubtles our custome is a Christi∣an
custome: if otherwise, because
the new yeere beginneth, we seeke
new loue, or a renuing of old good
wil, it is a Ciuil custome; com∣mendable
in either respect, yet v∣sed
in both, it better pleaseth God.
I therefore hearing of the good
opinion, which it hath pleased
your Honor to conceaue of mee,
haue thought no time coulde be
better than now, by some present
both to thanke your Honor for
the same, and to craue the conti∣nuance
thereof, til by euil demea∣nor
I shal deserue the contrarie.
My gift which I doe offer is for
price of no great value; such as a
poore Student may present. For as
the Persians.Aeliamus variae hist. lib. 1. from the richest to
the poorest, woulde gratifie their
Kings with giftes and rewardes,
some with golde, as Noble men;
some with silke, and spices, as Mar∣chant

men; and some too with sim∣ple
apples, and plums, and such
like frute, as Husbandmen, who
had no better to giue: So, though
persons of Honor may giue you
gold and iewels; marchants vel∣uet,
silk, and spices; rich men cost∣ie
rewardes: yet can a poore la∣orer
in the garden of Christian
knowledge, giue no better than
such as he hath, apples and plums,
euen the frute of his studie, and
trauel.
Notwithstanding, smal for price
though it be, I haue good hope
your Honor wil accept it wel in
woorth, both for the matter it con∣taineth,
which is so holie; and for
the maner of handling the same
by the auctor, which is so hea∣uenlie,
that, in my iudgement, nei∣ther
Historia Animalium, which A∣ristotle
gaue vnto Alexander the
Great; nor that of Cicero De Re∣publica,
which Cardinal Poole
sought after with the expence of
2000. crownesR. Ascham Ioan. Stur∣mio, Epist, l. 1. p. 37. b. Nor finalie those
sibyllian works, that Tarquin. Pris∣cus
bought ful deerelie of Amal∣theaLactant. de falsa sap. cap. 6., are so profounde for know∣ledge;
nor manie big volumes of
Philosophie, for methode so ex∣quisite;

nor al ye bookes of huma∣nitie,
so necessarie for vse, as it is.
Which I doe write, neither to
dissuade anie from the reading of
those, nor to persuade your Ho∣nor,
to conceiue wel of this booke.
For I verilie do thinke, that both
they are commendable, yea, and
necessarie too, applied to their due
endes; and that your Honor con∣ceaueth
better of this, than I by
writing can expresse, being, as you
are, for your wisedome, an hono∣rable
Counseler; for your lear∣ning,
a reuerend Doctor; by your
sundrie good, & necessarie bookes,
a famous Writer; and for your
zeale, a valiant oppugner of sin
and wickednes.
But as I thinke therof my selfe:
so doe I write. In which respect I
haue not shunned paines to a∣dorne
the same with places of
holie Scripture. For, seeing the
booke, by perusing it to mine vn∣speakable
both profite and plea∣sure,
to sauor most fragrantlie of
the flowers and sentences not of
humane, that is vane wisedome,
but of Gods holie word; and to
be as holie for phrase, as for mat∣ter
holie; being wholie taken out

of the holie Scripture: me thought
were the places of Scripture an∣nexed
in the margine, it would be
 quick spur, not onlie vnto the
true Christians zealouslie to read
this ancient and godlie Father,
when they should see al his sen∣tences
in a maner to be nothing
but verie Scripture; but also vnto
Papists, who, neglecting Scripture
cleaue ouermuch vnto this, and
other Fathers of the Church, to
reade the Scriptures, when they
should perceaue al his delight to
be in vsing the verie words of the
holie Ghost.
Wherefore both for the bring∣ing
the Scripture into more credit
with al Papistes; and this holie
Father with some Protestantes;
and his methode, and maner of
handling the Scriptures, to be a
perpetual monument of imitation
vnto both, I haue added the pla∣ces
(the more willinglie through
the earnest instigation of some
godlie persons, especialie of the
Printer heereof, whose good na∣ture,
and zeale, as it is not vn∣knowne
to your Honor, so is it wel
knowne to the Church of Christ,
by his careful, and orderlie im∣printing

good bookes) and now
haue published my dooings vnder
the protection of your Honor.
Which my paines, if I shal per∣ceaue
to be wel taken of the god∣lie,
chiefelie of your wisedome, I
purpose, God assisting me, to pro∣ceede
in setting forth after this
same order, not onlie the auctors
Manuel and Meditations, but also
diuers and sundrie of S. Augustine
his workes beside: that the verie
Papistes may see, though they
know it wel ynough alreadie, that
Augustino plurimùm tribuamus, as it
is wel giuen out of vsR. As∣cham. Ioan. Sturmio. li. 1. Epist. pag 16. b..
But, me thinkes, I heare some
aduersaries among themselues on
this wise speaking, His quoting we
condemne not, and his translating
we allow, but by his presumptuous
parting of Sentences, and corre∣cting
such a Doctor, he plainelie
sheweth, that he is by the one o∣uer-curious,
and by the other a
ranke Heretike.
May it therefore please your
Honor to heare my reasons of do∣ing
what I haue done, the which if
your wisedome do like, I shal not
weigh, what anie either Zoilus of
enuie, or aduersarie of malice will

thinke.
Touching my parting of the
sentences, I did it vpon these occa∣sions:
First, to imitate those good
Bookes out of which they were
borowed, that is, the sacred Scrip∣ture.
For surelie, in mine opinion,
t were not wel, the Booke beeing
most notablie deriued out of the
pure fountaines of Gods holie
word, if it were set forth in anie o∣ther
forme, than is the spring from
which it flowed.
Secondlie, that the Reader
might the more sensiblie perceaue
the mind and methode of the au∣ctor.
For, I dare saie it, by this par∣ting
or seuering of the sentences, a
more cleere light of the auctors
minde wil appeere to him, who
gladlie woulde vnderstande the
same, than when they are con∣founded,
or not parted.
Thirdlie, to offer cause of deepe
contemplation to the zealous
Christian. For there is no sentence
almost throughout the Booke,
which is vane, but most heauen∣lie,
and able to make euen him
who is farthest from Christianitie,
to occupie his minde with holie
and deepe meditations. Therfore,

albeit they can be placed in no
forme amisse, yet then best do they
profit, and mooue the mind, when
they are parted.
Last of al, for the better dispo∣sing
the places of Scripture by the
Printer, I haue diuided the senten∣ces.
For had the Booke bin printed
in that letter which other Bookes
of Meditations, set forth by me,
are done withal, as I thought it
would, then should the places,
they are so plentiful, neuer haue
stoode in good forme, nor sight, as
in some part of this Booke may ap∣peare,
notwithstanding the letter
be verie great, in mine eie, for so
smal a volume.
Now concerning the seconde
point, it stoode me vpon, both for
my owne credite, and also for the
behoofe of others, to leaue som∣what
out. For had I not so done, I
should haue said, that the hands of
GOD, Manus inquam illae quae af∣fixae
clauis sunt pro meSoliloq. cap. 2., did make
mee: I should haue said, that the
light which was made, when God
said, Let there be light, was Angeli∣ca
scilicet naturaSoliloq. cap. 8.: I should haue
said, that the Angels, as for diuers
other ends, so for this are appoin∣ted,

Vt orationes filiorum Dei offerant
in conspectu maiestatis suaeSoliloq. cap. 27.. I should
haue said, that the same Angels do
bring Gemitus nostros at{que} suspiria ad
Deum, vt impetrent nobis facilem Dei
benignitatis propitiationem, & referant
ad nos desideratam saue gratiae benedi∣ctionemSoliloq. cap. 27.:
I should haue said, that
our Sauiour descended into Hel,
Vti sedebant in tenebris patres nostriSoliloq. cap. 32.:
I should haue said, that Christ as∣cended,
Assumpta secum ex inferis
captiuitate, quam captiuauerat anti∣quus
ille hostis, humani generis inimi∣cusSoliloq. cap. 32.:
finalie, I should haue said,
that we ought to doubt, An ad por∣tum
salutis peruenire valeamusSoliloq. cap. 35., quia
omnia infuturum reseruantur incerta:
and so where my purpose was to e∣difie,
I should haue destroied the
soules of the weake with erroni∣ous
opinions. Beside, I should haue
cooled the zeale euen of the
strongest, when thinking to pro∣ceede
in holie meditation, they
should find such stumbling blocks
of error cast in their waie. And
therefore did I iudge it better to
leaue them quite out, though it
greeue the Papistes, than to leaue
them in, either to the destruction
of some, or to the offence of anie

good Christian: marueling much
why in other English translations
this matter hath not bin loked vn∣to
ere this, and these faultes not
wholie, as in part they be, amen∣ded.
And heere I beseech your Ho∣nor,
euen for Gods glorie; the fur∣therance
of the Gospel; and com∣moditie
of this land; that among
al abuses which you studie to re∣forme,
as a godlie Magistrate, and
ought to informe hir Maiestie of,
as a prudent Counseler, you would
remember the hurt that commeth
by corrupt bookes in our English
tong. First, they infect the mindes
of the simple; secondarilie, they
offend the godlie; and thirdlie,
they confirme the obstinate, and
the more a great deale, because
they are allowed by publike au∣ctoritie,
and not either diligent∣lie
corrected, or orderlie forbid∣den.
Againe, cal into mind those
bookes which do more hurt than
they, namelie, the inchantments
of Circes brought out of Italie,
and such vngratious workes, ei∣ther
translated out of Italian into
English, or imitating wholie the

Italian inuention. Ten Sermons at
Paules CrosseMaister Ascham in his School∣maister. booke. 1. pag. 26., do not so much good for
moouing men to true doctrine, as one of
those bookes doe harme, with inticing
men to il liuing. Yea, I say further, those
bookes tend not so much to corrupt ho∣nest
liuing, as they do to subuert true
religion. Mo Papists be made by your
merrie bookes of Italie, than by your
earnest bookes of Louaine. This fore∣see
subtile Papists.Pag. 27. Therefore when
the busie & open Papists abrode could
not by their contentious bookes, turne
men in England fast inough from truth
and right iudgement in doctrine, than
the subtile and secret Papists at home,
procured baudie bookes to be translated
out of the Italian tong, whereby ouer∣manie
yoong wils and wits allured to
wantonnes, doe now boldlie contemne al
seuere bookes that sound to honestie,
and godlines.Pag. 27. b. Which bookes open, not
fond & common waies to vice, but such
subtile, cunning, new, and diuers shifts
to carrie yoong wils vnto vanitie, and
yoong wits vnto mischiefe, to teach olde
baudes new schoole points, as the simple
head of an English man is not able to
inuent, nor neuer was heard of in Eng∣land
before, yea when papistrie ouer∣flowed
al. Suffer these bookes to be read,
and they wil soone displace al bookes of

godlie learning: for they carrieng the
wit vnto vanitie, and marring good ma∣ners,
shal easilie corrupt the minde with
il opinions, and false iudgement in doc∣trine:
first to thinke il of al true reli∣gion,
and at last to thinke nothing of
God himselfe. And that which is most
to be lamented, and therfore more need∣ful
to be loked vnto, there be mo of these
vngratious bookes set out in print with∣in
these few monethes, than haue bin
seene in Englande manie score yeeres.
And because our English men made I∣talians
cannot hurt, but certaine per∣sons,
and in certaine places, therefore
these Italian bookes are made English,
to bring mischiefe inough openlie and
boldlie to alestates, great and meane,
yoong and olde, euerie-where. So that
now they be solde in euerie shop in
London,Pag. 26, b. commended by honest titles, the
sooner to corrupt honest maners, dedi∣cated
ouer-boldlie to viriuous and ho∣norable
personages, the easelier to be∣guile
simple and innocent wits.
These are the words, as your
wisedome smelleth I am sure, not
of a yong wit, but of a graue head;
nor of a meane Scholer, but of the
best Schoolemaster that euer Eng∣land
bred, and therefore not light∣lie
to be ouer passed, nor quicklie

to be forgotten, but with earnest
endeuor oftentimes carefulie to
be recorded, as good counsel ex∣pressed
from an hartie good-wil
with rare eloquence, tending to
the glorie of God, and benefit of
this our Countrie, that neither
such as are wel giuen may be alie∣nated
from virtue, nor those
which are il bent, prouoked vnto
wickednes, through baudie, beast∣lie,
and blasphemous Bookes.
Last of al, remember, I humblie
once againe in the bowels of Ie∣su
Christ beseech you, remember
another abuse that hurteth more
than both those which I haue al∣readie
mentioned; namelie, pro∣phane
Plaies, publikelie vsed, set
foorth as banners of open defi∣ance
to the Gospel, and godlines,
& that vpon Holi-daies, yea, and
in those places to (I meane the V∣niuersities
for learning, and Lon∣don
for resort) which ought to be
the Lanternes of godlines vnto
al the land beside. Preachers euen
the grauest for wisedome and
yeeres; and the greatest for zeale
and knowledge; & not the smal∣lest
for auctoritie, euerie-where
crie out vpon them so zealouslie

with such griefe of hart, that they
are euen tyred againe with cri∣eng.
Doctors condemne themCyril. Ca∣tech. 1. Mystag. Tertul. lib de Spect.:
By shops write against themSaluianus inuenter of the 2. blast of retraite from plaies.: yea
& the best auctors in these daies
of those wanton, yea wicked toies
are quite out of loue with them,
& ashamed of their doingsAuctor of the 3. blast of retraite from plaies: and also the auctor of the Schoole of abuse.. Oh
that the Magistrate, our soue∣raigne
Magistrate I meane, would
vtterlie forbid them publikelie to
be vsed, that the common people
might not haunt them, and al
should be wel!
But to returne to my purpose
from which I haue digressed, these
errors, I feare mee, haue caused
manie to doubt, whether S. Augu∣stine
were ye auctor of this booke;
but being left out, as nowe they
are, I cannot see, why S. Augustine
might not make the same, the
matter is so heauenlie, praiers;
the words so holie, Scripture; e∣uerie
thing so wiselie, orderlie,
excellentlie done by the auctor,
that he must needes be a most ex∣cellent
man, whosoeuer made the
same, and a more excellent than
S. Augustine among the Doctors,
I thinke was neuer none.
Which being so, I trust I shal

t neede to request your Honor
 accept this booke in good part:
 to request your Honor to par∣n
my boldnes in dedicating my
ple doings, obscure, as I am, &
 person vnknowne to your Ho∣r,
and to beare with my rude
diousnes, and tedious rudenes,
aue great neede; and so I hum∣ie
doe.
The Lord almightie, and King
 glorie, who hath cast the eies
 his gratious countenance vpon
u, abide with you for euermore,
and with this new yeere powre
vpon your Honor a newe
increase of his hea∣uenlie
blessings,
Amen.
The first of Ianuarie, An. 1581.

