


May it please your Grace,
I Praesent here unto you the Writings of a King. J have praesumed that You would honour that sacred Name even in a Heathen so farre, as to accept of the worke, were it but for the Authors sake. For as it may well be esteemed (in
such an age as this) none of your Graces least commendations, that you are truly ; so J suppose your selfe ac∣count it no small happines, that you live to serve so Great & Gratious a King. But if the bare Name of a King would not serve, J could add, that they are the writings of the Wisest, the Learnedst, the Bost that ever was a∣mong Heathen Kings, if Historians may be credited. Jt is observed by some of them as a great argument of the Di∣vine Providence, that such a Prince was provided against such times, when all things seemed to tend to ruine and confusion, and all human ordinarie meanes were thought too little to keepe the Empire standing: the happy prae∣servation whereof they generally ad∣scribe to the singular & extraordinarie VVisdome of this One; both in his Warres, abroad; & in his Civill govern∣ment,
at home. Hence it is, that as of a man of whome there is no hope, wee com∣monly say, Ne Salus quidem: so was it used as a Proverbe in afterages by some of them, of a State irrecoverably gone, and declined, Ne Marcus quidem. As for his Learning, J could wish your Grace had the leasure to per∣use the historians owne words, least myne may seeme too hyberbolicall, and yet come far short of their expressions. What shall J say then of his Integritie, which is so commended by them, as it alone might well be thought sufficient without any other commendation, to make him Incomparable? And indeede J feare J have spoken but improperly, when J have mentioned his Wisedome, Learning, & Integritie, as three seve∣rall Excellencies, since that (as he Him∣selfe professed, & they report of him) all the Learning he was ambitious of,
was but to be Wise, & all the wisedome, but to be good. The writings of such a one, J know your Grace would respect, although he had beene no King. And yet another reason, which hath made me the bolder to praesent them to your Grace is, because in reading them you shall of∣ten reade your selfe: and though per∣chance your Modestie will not suffer you to make the application, yet others will, J am sure, that shall reade him, and J could not but have respect unto it. Ʋ∣pon these reasons I have presumed. If beyond reason; I have no other excuse of my boldnes, but as I am,

