



Reuerend Sir!
IT may haply seeme strange vnto you, to receiue such a Present as this from my hands: but when you haue well consider'd it, and the oc∣casion of it; I doubt not, but with∣out further wondring, you will be ready to chal∣lenge it before any other, as your owne principall due. It is not your minde, I know, that I should here proclaime vnto the world the many dutifull ties, and speciall engagements, wherein I stand bound vnto you; how that (next vnder God) I haue liu'd in this happy place aboue this foure yeeres, especially by sucking in the sweet ayre of your continuing fauours: and not so onely, but how in a neerer kinde of reference, you haue vouchsafed to take me into your owne Diuine Tutorage, and honour'd me (beyond all desert) with the priui∣ledge of vsuall disputes before your selfe, amongst those that were your Noble Scholers. How much

these, and the like, may serue for the illustration of your goodnes, I well know not, in that you plac'd your fauours on so low and worthlesse a subiect; but I am sure, they stand with my credit for euer to remember them: for which, and for diuers other particular respects, if I had not iust occasion to pre∣sent you these first fruits of my Studies, which were nourish'd vp in your owne Garden: yet here againe I could appeale vnto you, as to a common Patron, or Godfather as it were of the Diuiner Muses. If I had made choice of any other Muse then Vrania; or if my Subiect were not Diuine, I would not haue presum'd to approach your eyes with it, or intreate the world might know it vnder your Patronage. But since all these circumstances doe so happily conspire; and if these my labours may also prooue any way beneficiall to Gods Church and Children by your good approuement; let them, I beseech you, as my first conceptions, haue leaue to breathe forth their sorrows to the world vnder your Name: Neither let it bee accounted my pride, that I seeke after the vain-glory of the world by being in Print; for these, I hope, can sufficiently witnesse for mee, that if I glory in any thing, it is with 2. Cor. 12.9. Paul, in my infirmities: after this manner would I haue the world take notice of me, and to amend in them∣selues what they finde defectiue in me: but if any thing herein seeme praise-worthy, I would intreate all men to know, that this came from a higher Spi∣rit, and my selfe can glory in nothing of it, but by being the Instrument. If you knew but the paines I haue suffer'd in trauell hereof, how many preci∣ous

houres and dayes I haue detain'd from those sports and vanities which are common to others; yea, how much time I haue stolne from my other priuate Studies (which lay of necessitie on mee in this place) and sacred them onely to this: and then againe, when I came about it with earnest in∣tents, how vnaptly I was disposed for it; how rea∣dy for any thing besides it; what drowzinesse would set vpon me; and when I went sometimes more happily onwards by the strength of Gods Spirit, what Legions of euill thoughts would sud∣denly interrupt me; in briefe, what heauy and hard conflicts, and what a tedious trauell I haue had (as God knowes) in the producing of it, I dare pro∣mise my selfe, it would make your yeelding heart e'en bleed to thinke on't. Had I gone about any any worke of vanitie, I am sure I should haue had the World, Flesh and Diuell at hand to forward it: but this hath shewed it selfe to be a worke of a contrary nature, and hath had all these (as earst Neh. 4.7, 8. Nehemiah had Sanballat and his complices) conspirators to hinder it: But now (thankes bee to my God) after two yeeres tedious trauell, I haue at length finished it. And since it has growne vp hitherto vnder your Tuition, I doe here also humbly commend it to you for its future preser∣uation, and fauour in publishing it: which if you please but daine mee, I dare promise, its life shall prooue so thankefull vnto you, as besides mine owne prayers, procure you the blessings of many other soules for preseruing it. To which great fa∣uour I shall onely craue this one addition for the

crowning of my desires, that I may alwayes re∣taine my wonted priuiledge, in being euer

From my Study in Exe∣tr Colledge in Oxford,
this 11. of Aprill, being the day of our Sauiours Passion: 1628.
