



My LORD,
THE deserving Patron reads
the Dedication with a Cau∣tion,
as curious, as the mo∣dest
Poet feels when writing
it; both equally afraid of any Thing
that looks like Flatt'ry. But Your

Lordship may be, (at present) as easie
in a Poet, as I am happy in a Patron;
You are above it; and I think, I
need take no great Pains to Vindicate
the Assertion, since I shall make it my
business in this Address to convince
Your Lordship, that 'tis below ev'n
me. Nor will I, with industrious Art,
couch Flatt'ry under the pretence: of
disavowing it. I would not apply to
any Person, whom I believe not every
way Noble; I am a Stranger to Your
Lordship, I mean, so far a Stranger,
as only to know Your Lordship by
the Opinion of the World, and by
the Character Mankind has given you:
Why should I then run out on your
Encomiums, and only Eccho to the
World what I first hear'd from them?
All that becomes me to say at pre∣sent,
is, that I agree with the Uni∣versal
Consent of either Sex, and make
one to fill the Train of your Admi∣rers.

To whom can I more fitly
present the Art of Love, than to Your
Lordship? You are the Lover in all
the several Scenes of Life, the Courtier,
the Husband, and the Widdower;
you were the Lover of your Wife, you
lov'd beyond the Fashion, you lov'd her
tho' your Wife; you were the Lover of
your Wife, and are the Lover of your
Children. So fond you are of those
young Pledges of your Nuptial Friend∣ship,
you seem the admiring Courtier
of them, you seem wedded to them,
you seem the very Father of Love it
self. Hence 'tis that this Book, the
Child of Love, flies to Your Lord∣ship
for Protection. 'Tis an Original,
not Copied after Ovid; for Ovid's Book
indeed cannot be properly said with
modesty, to be the Art of Love. Where
his Precepts are virtuous, as they fall
in naturally to the purpose, I could
not well avoid them; for every Man

that Loves, runs fondly, (I may say
without Thought almost,) on the same
amorous Expressions. How far I have
Succeeded in the Attempt, Your Lord∣ship
can best Judge, who are the
greatest Master in all the Noble In∣nocence
of generous Gallantries; Your
Approbation of it will sufficiently re∣commend
it to the Fair, and Crown
with Success, the Wishes of
My Lord,

