



MADAM,
IT is Divine Providence, and not Fortune or Humane In∣dustry, that bestows Scepters and Crowns; and all France visibly discovers in the Regency of YOUR MAJESTY, the Mild and Loving thoughts of the Divine Regent of the World, in giving us the Best, as well as the Greatest Princess of the Earth to Govern it.
But may YOUR MAJESTY be pleas'd to suffer us, the poor Daughters of St. JOSEPH, to declare, That it is in You that we have not only observ'd, but felt one of the most beautiful draughts of this Divine Providence; which is, That as it hath its Eye and Scepter over the least of the Worms that creep upon the Earth, as well as over the most exalted of Monarchs who is lifted up on the Throne; So, Great Queen, Your Regency bearing its Glory already beyond Admiration, by so many Glorious Actions which seem to rob each other of their splendor in the Government of Your State, You judged that it would have lost somewhat of its Lustre, had not You shew'd Your self as well a Charitable Mother of the poor Orphans, as a worthy Queen Regent of this great Monarchy. You have said from the beginning, what the Wisdom Incarnate said formerly, in this World, Suffer these little Souls to come to me. I am pleas'd to assist the Designs of Preventing Grace, which has drawn 'em out of the evil steps and perils of great Miseries, to which an
extreme Poverty would have reduc'd 'em: Divine Provi∣dence has taken 'em into its care, and it pleases Me to make My self its Agent, or Lieutenant, in the means of Loving and Helping them; I receive them under my Protection, and into My Bosom.
Truly it is an Action so much the more Powerful and Meritorious before God, as it has the less of Interest, and as he alone could be its motive: But 'tis an Action which perfectly resembles, and worthily honours the steps of Di∣vine Providence, of whose Favours and Succours, the Lit∣tle as well as the Great, the Shorn as well as the Crowned heads partake.
The most sublime cares in which YOUR MAJESTY is constantly to Admiration taken up for the Glory and Felici∣ty of this State, are, it must be confess'd, the lively Colours of its Pourtraiture: But Divine Providence was willing that the little destitute Maids, whose Honour and Life You pre∣serve, should give the Shades.
That therefore all France may admire the wonders of Your Conduct, Your poor Maids of St. Joseph will do no∣thing else in the World but publish to it the Miracles of Your Charity, and declare in the condition wherein we mean Creatures are, That as there is nothing too high for Your Regency, so nothing is too low for Your Goodness; which by too much meriting towards us, puts us into an entire ina∣bility of being ever able to be sufficiently Thankful.
Behold, nevertheless, a small Testimony of our profound Acknowledgment, which carries our Hearts to the Feet of Your Majesty by this little Work and Abridgment of the Pre∣rogatives of St. Ann, which we adjudged ought to be, if not worthy, at least not unworthy of Your Eyes, for the dignity of the Subject which it treats. And the motives which invited us to this Duty are, That as it was the day of St. Ann, when God inspir'd into us the first designs of Erecting an House after the Pattern of his, where Maids
should be bred and instructed till the time they be pro∣vided for, in like manner as the Holy Virgin her Daughter was so carefully and so holily educated by her: So is it this same Saint which we believe to have been among the se∣cond Causes, that which procur'd us from the First this in∣comparable favour of the greatest Queen in the World, who imitates her Virtues, as well as worthily bears her Name.
Wherefore after having taken St. Ann for our Tutelar, and the Governant in this House, and Dedicated to her a Chappel in the Design of erecting thereto a Confrairy in her Honour, who hath tied us to her self by Adoption, and by Spirit and Grace to Jesus and Mary, who compose her Family; we have presum'd for the best return of Thanks which we have been able to present to Your Majesty, to represent to You upon this little Paper, as in a Map, a World of Merits and Perfections which were in this Great Saint, so to make yours acknowledg'd and admir'd, and God prais'd by see∣ing your Majesties Life a true Image and Abstract of Hers. For if St. Ann were of the Blood-Royal of David, and con∣sequently of the Race of Patriarchs and Prophets, and so much honour'd by God; all the World knows that Your Majesty is of a Royal Birth, so exalted, as the Sun always honours it with its Light, having no Horizon or setting for its Realms.
If St. Ann were Great in Piety and Devotion; and if imi∣tating the ancient Ann, Samuel's Mother, she had frequent recourse to the Sanctuary by her Prayers and Vows; the Piety which Your Majesty has from Your Ancestors, Charles 5. and Philip 2. is so familiar to You, as it may be call'd the Star which commands Your Inclinations; the Spirit which gives Life to Your Actions, and Success to all Your Designs.
If St. Ann be worthily nam'd by St. Damascene a Reasona∣ble Turtle, forasmuch as she past good part of her Life in solitude and sighing; alas, Madam, how many years has
your Majesty led a Life more like to a solitary Person, than to the chiefest and the most virtuous Queen of the Universe!
If St. Ann were great in the Love which she bore to her God, whom she could scarce ever suffer to be out of her sight; and to her Neighbor, by the assistance she gave to all who were any ways necessitous; alas, Great Queen, it is at Your expence, and by Your own experience, that You have learnt, like the Messias, both to suffer for God, and to suf∣fer with the Miserable. And a time was when the Divine Providence had taken away the use and disposal of Riches, thereby to augment Your Charity towards God, but which at this day has given You the means whereby You may exer∣cise Charity towards Your Subjects with a Liberality as ex∣tensive as exceeds both hopes and desires.
If Prayer and Faith made St. Ann bear the Fruit of Be∣nediction, and the first fruits of our Redemption; our Sacred Monarch, who shall, if it please God, one day place the Flowerdeluces above the Crescent, and the other fair flower of Your Majesties Crown, are the Fruits as well of Your Prayers, and of Your Royal Virtues, as of your Womb. Have not so many reiterated Vows, so many sighs of your Majesty sent toward Heaven, made you the peaceable Dove of this State, and the Calm of our Storms?
If St. Ann gave Lessons to her little Daughter, the holy Virgin, of living in Humility, Charity and Holiness; how many Blessings owe we to Heaven, to see this Royal Spirit with which Your Majesty was born, and so many excellent Virtues and Royal Qualities slide so admirably into the Eyes, Ears, and Spirit of our good young King? How un∣der so good a Government shall we not have a King of Wonders, one Liberal, Generous, and Pious?
Lastly, If Jesus and Mary were both the most excellent Masterpieces of the Divine Power, both the Richest Trea∣sures of Divine Wisdom, both the Divinest Objects of its Goodness, both the Worthiest Subjects of the Cares and the
Government of St. Ann, yet hinder'd her not from dayly adopting and associating to these two noble parts of her Fa∣mily, several confiding Souls; So, tho the Attention of Your Majesty more peculiarly regards the Education of the King, and the second Hope of France, his Brother; both given by Heaven for the Rest of this Monarchy, and for the Consola∣tion of Your Majesty; yet You disdain not to open Your Bosom, and to tender the Arms of Your Mercy and Pro∣tection to the poor little Orphans, the Maids of St. Joseph.
Behold, MADAM, the just resemblances of Your Glori∣ous Pattern, which have given us the Confidence of laying at Your Majesties Feet an Abridgment of the Wonders of this Holy Lady, whom God chose from all Eternity to be the Principle of his Ways in the Salvation of Men; think∣ing we could not better clear our selves of the Ingratitude which Your Majesties Lustre and excess of Goodness have made necessary, than by a little Treatise that contains the Prerogatives of St. Ann, to whom your Majesty gives and consecrates dayly Your Person, Your Family, Your Realm and Your Subjects; and in consideration of whom, we bring to the Feet of your Majesty the Vows which we make of living and dying,
MADAM,

