



Reader,
THeology is the Doctrine of the
Kingdom of God: A King∣dom
is a State of Govern∣ment:
Government is by
Laws: He therefore that will
understand any thing in Di∣vinity,
must understand the
Laws of God: And though there be many
inferiour Particles, distinguished from the
weighty things of the Law, which few do
clearly understand, yet is it necessary that we
know in general, what kind of Law, it is
that we are under, and also that we know
the most important parts: If we understand
not the Law of Tything Mint and Cummin,
we must not be ignorant of Iudgment, Mercy
and Faith, Matth. 23. 23.
They that tell us we are now under no Laws,
do tell us thereby that we are under no Go∣verment,
and consequently that God, and out

Redeemer Jesus Christ, is not the Governour
of Believers. And he that knoweth that the
Name [GOD] doth signifie the Divine
Relation to Man, as well as the Divine Na∣ture,
will know that this is to deny a God, and
to deny Iesus Christ; and rather to be called
Atheism, and Infidelity, than Antinomianism:
Even they that had not the written Law of
Moses, had a Law of Nature, partly written
out upon their hearts: And Christians have
both the Law of Nature Extrinsick, and the
written Law of Christ, and both (acccording
to the various measures of Grace) written
out upon their hearts, that is, received by
knowledge, Faith, Love, and readiness to
obey.
But they that know that we are under a
Law (as those in Heaven, even Angels are)
yet do not all well understand what Law it
is, and on what terms the World, or the
Church are governed, and must be judged.
That the first Law of Natural Innocency, as alone,
or as to the Promissory part, or as to threatning
without mercies or remedy, is it that any part
of the Earth is now governed by, or under, is
an intolerable Errour: God promiseth not
sinners everlasting life on condition they be
no sinners: That Promise ceased by a Cessa∣tion
of the Subjects capacity without any more
ado, or possibility of reviving it. Nor doth
God deal with any people according to the

sole threatning of that Law, without mercy,
dispensation, or remedy. The Law of Grace
was as truly made with all men in Adam, Gen.
3. 15. as the Law of Innocency was. Though
the Serpents Seed be mentioned in it, that in∣timateth
not that any were such as then in
the Loins of lapsed Adam, but as consequently
they would become such by rejecting and abu∣sing
Grace, and so contracting a further Ma∣lignity.
If Man, as in Adam's loyns, then was
the Serpents Seed, then all God's Elect should
be such, and so be bruised, and not saved
by Jesus Christ: For all then were really
alike in Adam. And to say, that God's meer
Election and Reprobation, without any real
inherent difference existent, or foreseen, is
the reason of denominating, some the Seed of
the Woman, and some the Seed of the Serpent,
is an unproved fancy, and irrational corrupt∣ing
the Word of God.
All men therefore in lapsed Adam were at
once under the guilt of Sin, and also under a
remedying Law of Grace, so far as that it is
enacted and offered, to save those that receive
it. It saved not Adam himself meerly by the
making of it, till by Faith he had received it.
And no doubt but as the Covenant of Grace
to us extendeth to the faithful and their Seed,
so did the Covenant of Grace to Adam; for it
was the same as was made to all the faithful
before Christs Incarnation. The case of In∣fants

being obscure, clearer Truths are not to
be reduced to it: And whether Cain and Abel
as they were both born in Original Sin, so were
both pardoned upon their Covenant-Dedica∣tion
to God by their Parents, and Cain after
lost his Infant-state of Grace (as Davenant,
Ward, &c. think Infant Grace may now be
lost) or whether Adam and Eve neglected
that Dedication of Cain to God which was
needful to his Sanctification, or whether God
past him by, and denyed him Infant-Grace of
his meer will, I leave to Mens enquiry, and
various judgments; (The controversie con∣cerneth
Children now, as well as then, and
the difficulties every way are not small) But
of these things I am past doubt:
1. That Cain was not the Serpents Seed
meerly for Original Sin, and as born of Adam
(as Abel was also) nor did God make him the
Serpents Seed by Reprobation; but that he
made himself so by superadded Sin against the
Redeemer and Law of Grace.
2. That all Mankind are still under this
Law of Grace, further than they forfeit the
benefits of it by sins against it.
3. That most Writers, if not most Christi∣ans,
do greatly darken the Sacred Doctrine,
by overlooking the Interest of Children in
the actions of their meer Parents, and think
that they participate of no guilt, and suffer
for no Original Sin, but Adams only; and

bring the Doctrine of Original Sin it self into
doubt, by laying all upon Covenant-Rela∣tion,
and denying, or overlooking the Natural
Proofs: Doubtless, through Scripture it is re∣markable
that God usually judgeth the poste∣rity
of new sinners to new punishments, and
promises and threatnings are made (since the
Covenant of Innocency ceased) to the belie∣vers,
and unbelievers, or wicked, with their
Seed: For we may well say that the Seed of
Cain, Cham, Nimrod, Ishmael, Esau, Saul, A∣hab,
&c. had more Original Sin than what they
had from Adam. And Matth. 23. 35. Ex∣pounds
the matter. It was not in vain that
Ezra, Daniel, &c. confessed their forefathers
sin, nor doth our Liturgie pray for the dead,
but the living, when it saith [Remember not
Lord, our offences, nor the offences of our Fore∣fathers,
neither take thou vengeance of our
Sins.
The Author of this Treatise beginning at
the Promise made to Abraham, doth it to com∣port
with the Apostle Paul, who thought
meet to call the Iews to no higher Observati∣ons
than the Case in hand (about the
Non-obligation of Moses's Law to the Gentiles)
did require. But this denyeth not, but sup∣poseth
the same Law of Grace in the main
to have been made to all men in Adam, and
Noah, and to have been in force to all Man∣kind
before it was renewed to Abraham; sa∣ving

that to him and his Seed there were
many great priviledges added, above the rest of
Mankind, upon his extraordinary obedien∣tial
Faith.
Of how great importance it is to have a
right understanding of the difference between
the Law of Innocency, and the Law of Grace,
and in it, the Promise made to Adam, and
Noah, and that to Abraham, and the peculiar
Mosaical Law and Covenant, and the perfe∣cter
Edition of the Law, or Covenant of
Grace by Christ Incarnate, a true Student of
Theology may easily discern: Wherein I hope
the Reader, will find that (among the many
late Treatises on this Subject) the Authour
here hath done considerable service to the
Church of God. Of which Subject I have
written long ago so much my self, and am at∣tempting
to make it yet more plain, that I
need not here tell you what is my judgment;
only, lest any who know not how to stop in
Mediocrity, should be tempted by Socinians or
Papists, to think that we countenance any of
their Errors, or that our Differences in the
Point of Justification by Faith or Works, are
greater than indeed they are; and lest any
weak Opiniative persons, should clamour un∣peaceably
against their Brethren, and think to
raise a name to themselves for their differing
Notions; I shall here give the Reader such
evidences of our real Concord, as shall silence
that Calumny.

Though some few Lutherans did upon
peevish suspiciousness against George Major
long ago, assert, that [good Works are not ne∣cessary
to Salvation] And though some few
good men, whose zeal without judgment doth
better serve their own turn than the Churches,
are jealous, lest all the good that is ascribed to
Man, be a dishonour to God; and therefore
speak as if God were honoured most by saying
the worst words of our selves; and many
have uncomely and irregular Notions about
these matters; and though some that are ad∣dicted
to sidings, do take it to be their godly
zeal to censure and reproach the more under∣standing
Sort, when they most grosly erre
themselves: And though too many of the
people are carried about through injudicious∣ness
and temptations, to false Doctrines and
evil lives; yet is the Argument of Protestants
thus manifested:
1. They all affirm that Christ's Sacrifice,
with his Holiness and perfect Obedience, are
the Meritorious Cause of the forgiving Cove∣nants,
and of our Pardon and Iustification
thereby, and of our right to Life Eternal,
which it giveth us. And that this price was
not paid or given in it self immediately to us,
but to God for us; and so that our foresaid be∣nefits
are its effects.
2. They agree that Christ's Person and ours
were not really the same, and therefore that

the same Righteousness which is an Accident
of one, cannot possibly be an Accident of the
other.
3. They all detest the conceit that God
should aver, and repute a Man to have done
that which he never did.
4. They all agree that Christ's Sacrifice and
Merits are really so effectual to procure our
Pardon, Justification, Adoption, and right to
the sealing gift of the Holy Ghost, and to
Glory, upon our Faith and Repentance; that
God giveth us all these benefits of the New
Covenant, as certainly for the sake of Christ
and his Righteousness, as if we had satisfied
him, and merited them our selves: And that
thus far Christ's Righteousness is ours in its
effects, and imputed to us, in that we are thus
used for it, and shall be judged accordingly.
5. They all agree that we are Justified by
none but a Practical or working Faith.
6. And that this Faith is the Condition of
the Promise or Gift of Justification, and A∣doption.
7. And that Repentance is a Condition also;
though (as it is not the same with Faith, as
Repentance of unbelief is) on another apti∣tudinal
account; even as a willingness to be
cured, and a willingness to take one for my Phy∣sitian,
and to trust him in the use of his Remedies,
are on several accounts the Conditions on
which that Physitian will undertake the Cure,

or as willingness to return to subjection & thank∣ful
acceptance of a purchased parden, and of the
Purchasers love and future Authority, are the
Conditions of a Rebels pardon.
8. And they all agree that in the first instant
of a Mans Conversion or Believing, he is en∣tered
into a state of Justification before he hath
done any outward works: And that so it is
true that good Works follow the justified, and go
not before his initial Iustification: As also in the
sense that Austin spake it, who took Justifica∣tion
for that which we call Sanctification, or
Conversion.
9. And they all agree, that justifying Faith
is such a receiving affiance, as is both in the In∣tellect
and the Will, and therefore as in the
Will participateth of some kind of love to the
justifying Object, as well as to Justification.
10. And that no Man can choose or use
Christ as a means (so called in respect to his
own intention) to bring him to God the Fa∣ther,
who hath not so much love to God, as
to take him for his Endn the use of that means.
11. And they agree that we shall be all
judged according to our Works, by the Rule of
the Covenant of Grace, though not for our
Works by way of Commutative, or Legal proper
Merit. And Iudging is the Genus, whose Spe∣cies
is Iustifying and Condemning: And to be
judged according to our Works, is nothing but
to be Iustified or Condemned according to
them.

12. They all agree, that no Man can pos∣sibly
merit of God in point of Commutative
Iustice, nor yet in point of Distributive, or
Governing Iustice, according to the Law of
Nature or Innocency, as Adam might have
done, nor by the Works of the Mosaical
Law.
13. They all agree, that no Works of Mans
are to be trusted in, or pleaded, but all excluded,
and the conceit of them abhorred.
1. As they are feigned to be against, or in
stead of the free Mercy of God.
2. As they are against, or feigned, instead
of the Sacrifice, Obedience, Merit, or Interces∣sion
of Christ.
3. Or as supposed to be done of our selves
without the Grace of the Holy Ghost.
4. Or as supposed falsly to be perfect.
5. Or as supposed to have any of the afore∣disclaimed
merit.
6. Or as materially consisting in Mosaical
observances.
7. Much more in any Superstitious Inven∣tions.
8. Or in any evil mistaken to be good.
9. Or as any way inconsistent with the te∣nor
of the freely pardoning Covenant. In all
these senses, Justification by Works is disclaim∣ed
by all Protestants at least.
14. Yet all agree that we are Created to
good Works in Christ Jesus, which God hath

ordained that we should walk therein, and that
he that nameth the Name of Christ must de∣part
from iniquity, or else he hath not the Seal
of God; and that he that is born of God sin∣neth
not, that is, predominantly. And that
all Christ's Members are holy, purified, zealous
of good Works, cleansing themselves from
all filthiness of flesh and Spirit, that they might
perfect holyness in God's fear, doing good to
all Men, as loving their Neighbours as them∣selves:
And that if any Man have not the Sancti∣fying
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, nor
without holiness can see God.
15. They all judge reverently, and chari∣tably
of the Antients that used the word [Me∣rit
of good Works] because they meant but a
moral aptitude for the promised Reward, accord∣ing
to the Law of Grace through Christ.
16. They confess the thing thus described
themselves, however they like not the name of
Merit, lest it should countenance proud and
carnal conceits.
17. They judge no Man to be Heretical for
the bare use of that word, who agreeth with
them in the sense.
18. In this sense they agree, that our Gos∣pel-obedience
is such a necessary aptitude to
our Glorification, as that glory (though a free
gift) is yet truly a Reward of this Obedience.
19. And they agree that our final Justifica∣tion
by sentence at the day of Judgment, doth

pass upon the same Causes, Reasons, and Con∣ditions
as our Glorification doth
20. They all agree that all faithful Ministers
must bend the labour of their Ministry in pub∣lick
and private, for promoting of Holiness and
good Works, and that they must diifference
by discipline between the obedient and the dis∣obedient.
And O! that the Papists would as
zealously promote Holiness and good Works
in the World, as the true serious Protestants do,
whom they factiously and peevishly accuse as
enemies to them; and that the Opinion, Dis∣puting
and name of good Works, did not cheat
many wicked persons into self-flattery and per∣dition,
while they are void of that which they
dispute for. Then would not the Mahometans
and Heathens be deterred from Christianity, by
the wickedness of these nominal Christians that
are near them: Nor would the serious practice
of that Christianity which themselves in ge∣neral
profess, be hated, scorned, and persecuted
by so many, both Protestants and Papists; nor
would so many contend that they are of the
true Religion, while they are really of no
Religion at all, any further than the Hypocrites
Picture and Carkass may be called Religion.
Were Men but resolved to be serious Learners,
serious Lovers, and serious Practisers, accord∣ing
to their knowledge, and did not live like
mockers of God, and such as look towards the
life to come in jest or unbelief, God would

vouchsafe them better acquaintance with the
true Religion, than most Men have.
Having prefaced this much, for the rest I
refer thee to the perusal of this Treatise, which
will give thee much light into the nature of
the Gospel, and especially help thee to the
right understanding of the meaning of the
Apostle Paul in all his Epistles, about the Law,
the Gospel, and the Justification of a sinner. O
pray, and labour for A CONFIRMED
PRACTICAL FAITH, as daily doth
 Iune 4th
1672.
