


Men, and Brethren,
THough we were very much stran∣gers, both to the person and state of this gratious hand-maid of the Lord (the subject of this ensuing treatise, du∣ring the time of her sore bondage, and captivity of Spirit; and so had no share with those that in a solemn manner (ex∣presly on her account) sympathized, sighed, and groaned to God in her behalf: Yet ha∣ving now through grace (we trust, we may say) to the advantage of our souls, heard out of her own mouth, in the midst of the Congregation to which we belong, (to wit, the Church of Christ at Dalwood in Dorset) the wonderful deliverance which God hath wrought fr her poor soul: We cannot, but in a special manner rejoyce with her, and blesse the Most High for his unspeakable mercy.
That this work is of the Lord, and soul-work indeed; it speaks for it self to all the wise in heart. That the Relation is very faithfully made, We do hereby testify, ha∣ving
 (as we said before) heard out of her own mouth the substance of the whole; who then (in point of circumstance) would have been more particular and large, had not time, and the earnest sollicitation of a near Relation of hers (whom God had used in some good measure, as an Instrument of her enlargement) concurr'd to prevent her.
Two or three of our observations, while she related this unto us, we cannot but mind the Reader of.
1. That having layen so long (as the Narrative mentioneth) under such error of soul; And having now newly received her enlargement, she was so filled with admiration at the exceeding Riches of the grace of God in her deliverance, as that it many times stopt her Spirit, for a consi∣derable season: and she could in all appea∣rance) have dwelt long between sentence and sentence, in a secret, inward silent lif∣ting up of her soul to God in thanks-giving.
2. We observed very much faithfulness, and tendernesse of soul in her faithfulnesse; in that she dwelt as long upon, and spake as largely to, the darkest passages of her blaspheming God, and maligning his people (though doubtlesse the remembring of such things was with grief of soul to her) as in speaking to the highest manifestations of
 the grace of God, in her present enjoyments of her soul; expressing her self to the same effect with the Apostle, Rom. 5.20. Where sin abounded, grace did much more abound.
Tendernesse, In that with very much circumspection she endeavoured to keep even to a tittle, both to the matter and Me∣thod of Gods dealing with her: And if at any time she (or any else, who knew her in her afflicted estate, and endeavoured to help her memory) slipt, she would presently correct both herself and them, and state the matter aright, and in its place, before she would let it passe.
3. That her rejoycing was mixed with much holy fear and trembling; still esteem∣ing her self as a poor Worm before the Migh∣ty God of Israel, though exalted to many glorious Priviledges through his rich grace.
We might speak further, what we ob∣served of the crafty wiles of Satan, in the manner of his working with her poor soul; first training her on from sin to sin, and from degree to degree, still forestalling her with a perswasion that she was already both in the sin, and in the degree which he would train her into: And when by that slight he had got her further on, then
 perswading her, that she had out-sinned all grace; so endeavouring to destroy all hope. And indeed this is our common observation of the working of Satan, (to wit) That to persons that are in a wret∣ched state, and insensible thereof, he lesse∣neth sin, and wideneth grace, that they may run the more greedily in their evil wayes; making out to them, as if the gate of grace, opening to life, were wide enough for all persons to passe in at, with all their sins. But to those persons that are brought to the sight of their sins, and their wret∣chednesse thereby, he wideneth sin, and narroweth grace; making out to them, as though their sins (though not against the Holy Ghost) are greater then can be forgi∣ven: in both which, he is a grievous de∣ceiver.
Also we might here more largely shew the Rea∣der, what subtle slights Satan used with this Ser∣vant of the Lord, to hinder her obedience to the Commandments of Christ, and particularly to that of Baptisme; presenting it as a poor low thing, &c. But as to that, we shall in this place onely give thee notice, that when she was in the highest revelati∣ons, and had the most sealing Testimonies of the grace of God to her soul, She was then led forth most affectionately to own the Lord Jesus in that despised Ordinance and appointment of his; as may be seen more at large in the Narrative it self; suitable to that word given to Paul, after his great
 revelations of grace, Act. 22.16. where it was said unto him by the Spirit, And now why tarriest thou? arise, and be Baptized, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord.
What we shall further say in this matter, shall be onely to signifie, that upon the whole (she desiring to give up her self to the Lord, to walk in all his Com∣mandments blamelessely, and to have fellowship and communion with his people, in the exercise of all the Gospel-Priviledges instituted by Christ their King and Head, for his Body the Church; and particularly with this Congregation, to watch (and be watched over by them) She was with universal satisfaction accepted, and accordingly Baptized, and received. Many fierce Assaults hath the Enemy of her peace made against her, since the chain of her bondage was broken: but against all, the Lord hath made very gracious provision through the word; bringing home (through the Power of his Spirit) many sull promises to her soul, and establishing her through them.
To the God of Peace, who (through his own Rich and free love, after many years horrour of soul) is become her Peace; do we desire to commit all his chosen Vessels to honour, for his calling in his sea∣son unto, and for his establishing and growth of those that are called in the truth, as it is in Jesus: which Jesus we desire to own as our King, our Crown, and hope of glory; and to whose appearing with that glorious Kingdom, we desire to be dayly better prepared: That at his coming we may have the honour to be of that blessed number that shall wait upon him with Hallelujahs, singing forth praise, glory and honour to the Father and to the Lamb, for ever and ever, Amen.

