



Dear Friends and Brethren,
UNder Christ, (whose I desire chiefly to be, and whom I would firstly serve) you are nearest to me in spiritual relation, and dearest in Christian affection, having, upon your call and invita∣tion thereunto, given my self to the service of your Souls; and though through much infirmity, I have
preached the Gospel to you, (being the most unworthy of them who Mi∣nister in holy things) yet my weak∣ness you have not despised nor re∣jected, but received me as an An∣gel of God, yea, even as Christ Je∣sus: And though I have spent nigh Eighteen years amongst many of you, yet I have not reason to put that question to you, which St. Paul did unto his Galatians, Where is then the blessedness you speak of? For your respects to me and my weak endeavours, continue fresh and vigorous at this day, even as at the first. To some of you I am obliged in many bonds of gratitude, to all in love and duty; to others I owe much, to you my self; and therefore I could make a dedicati∣on of these Discourses to none so
fitly as your selves. The many im∣perfections in them, may render them contemptible to others, yet I know your love will cover my defects, and will receive them with as much candour and kindness from the Press, as you did attend them with diligence and affection in the Preaching of them; especially, con∣sidering that some of you importu∣ned me to it, judging them season∣able; I cannot easily wish the sub∣ject treated of greater or better, but the manner of explaining and ap∣plying these excellent Promises, I could desire were much better for your sakes: But where there is a willing mind, it is accepted with Christ, and I doubt not but you will be conformable to his example in this particular.

As the following Sermons were at first Preached for your instructi∣on, and now published for your edi∣fication; so let them be well digest∣ed by meditation, and practised in your conversation. You are called a Church of Christ. O study to be so indeed, viz. A Congregation of faithful ones; faithful to God, and with the Saints. Be not like E∣phesus, declining, in your love and first works; or if you be abated therein, remember whence you are fallen, and labour to recover. Be not like Pergamos and Thyatira, seduced by erronious Principles, or debauched by evil Practises: A∣bove all, be not like Laodicea, self-conceited, and proud of your at∣tainments and enjoyments, or luke∣warm in the great things of salva∣tion,
for such are loathsom to the heart and spirit of Jesus Christ: But be you a sweet-smelling Smyr∣na; let the savour of Christs good Ointments be manifested in all your words and ways; and shew your selves Philadelphians, of humble, meek, loving dispositions to∣wards one another, unto all the Saints, yea, even unto all men.
In a word, Labour to approve your selves good Soldiers of Jesus Christ; look to him who is the Au∣thor and finisher of your faith: yield not to, compound not with, fly not from your spiritual enemies, but resist stedfastly, for Christ stands by you, fights for you, and will give victory to you in the end. 'Tis re∣ported of the ancient British Na∣tion, that they never ran away in
Battel, till their General first for∣sook them: Let us all demean our selves valiantly in our Christian warfare, till Christ the Captain of our salvation desert us; which will never be, for we have his faithful Promise, saying, I will never leave you nor forsake you: To his blessing and holy protection I com∣mend you, desiring the continuance of your Prayers for me, and your acceptance of this small testimony of my respects to you, by which I may speak to you, when I shall go from hence and be seen no more. I am
March 26. 1681.

