



Honourable Patriots;
THe unthankful Murmures and Com∣plaints of unreasonable men, wherewith they much obscure the Great Merits of our Pious King and Religious Parliament, gave occasion to this Discourse; wherein I have endeavoured to prove, that they have no just cause of complaint, but only in themselves: For his Majesty, like a Skilful Pilot, hath Steered a right and straight Course to the safe Harbour of Peace and Tranquillity; as appears clearly in his many Pious Motions, Orders, and Proclamations: and if we are not yet arrived, our General Disobedience is the greatest Remora. The Honourable Par∣liament have done great things for the good

of the Nation, specially in securing our Re∣ligion against the Intrusions of Popery, where∣of our Forefathers were quite weary; as appears by that Prayer in the Old Letany, From the Tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, Good Lord deliver us. And if their Pious Intentions have not attained the Desired End, our general unthankfulness is the un∣doubted cause of it. Our Distempers are high still; the Lord direct you to fit and proper Remedies. My humble Petition to his Majesty, and the Honourable Parlia∣ment, is for the Church of England; She hath been terribly shaken with late Storms; and the Enemy cries out still, Down with her, down with her, even to the ground. We desire not the Life of our Enemies, nor the trouble of any that are Peaceable; con∣ceiving it none of the best ways to settle Peace and Truth. But after all these Storms, if the Church were well setled upon her own Foundations or Principles, her Breaches re∣paired with her own Materials, and good Discipline restored, She would be the Glory of the Nation, the Honour of his Majesties Reign, the Joy and Comfort of all good

Subjects, and a most hopeful means of com∣posing most of our greatest Differences. The Church lies in the Bowels of the Common∣wealth; and if the Church be disquieted, the Commonwealth cannot be at rest. And I humbly beseech your Honours to remember the Ministers of the Church, to deliver them out of the many Oppressions which they are under; and that they may enjoy the small remainder of their Ancient Patrimony with more Peace to the Church, and less Scandal to Religion. The whole Land is over∣whelmed with Impiety and Licentiousness, all manner of Debauchery and Profaneness; Drunkenness, Lying, Swearing, Oppression, &c. insomuch that we have just cause to fear, that God hath a Controversie with the Land, the issue whereof may be some Fear∣ful Judgment. Good Laws are trodden un∣der foot, Dignities reviled, Authority out-faced with the Insolence of unreasonable and wicked men, the Word of God despised; and the Word of the King, in his Pious Proclamations, not at all regarded The Nurseries of all Vice, and Corrupters of Youth, thoroughout the Nation, Taverns and

Tipling-Houses encrease beyond number, to the dishonour of God, and disquiet of the Realm; being great occasions of profaning the Lords Day, and of many other disorders against the Peace of the Nation. A Cardi∣nal Archbishop of Saltzburg said once, That he knew there was need of Reformation; but that a poor Monk should do it, was not to be endured. I meddle not with it, but leave that to your Honours Wisdoms; Hum∣bly conceiving, that a well-setled Ministry would be no small help to it.
 Feb. 15. 1674.
