



TIS a Priviledge that the Country Ministers are bless'd with, above your great Towns Vicars or Lecturers, that their People, remembring their Catechisms, presume not to think themselves more Learned or Wiser than their Teachers; but ac∣cording to Christian Primitive Modesty and Doctrine, they Learn of, and Obey, Reverence, and are Ruled by their Spiritual Pastors. But your Corporation Ca∣techumens, your Men of Gath, are big of themselves, especially if Opulent and Thriving, and will not al∣low Master Parson, whether he belongs to Church or Conventicle, [for that's the diminitive word they scornfully Salute with the Levitical Order, whether in Gown, and Cassock, or in Coat and long Cloak] they will not, I say, allow them so much as to think other∣wise
than they think, nor to speak otherwise than they would have them speak; nor grant that their Univer∣sity Education, or much Study, or many years Exer∣cise in the Ministry, gives them any ascendant above their Level. If they will not say their Pater-Noster the way they would have them, they shall have no Peter's Pence from them. Thus stands the Case of your Town and City Clergy. And some of the Sons of the Church, I am loath to think them Sons of Belial, but they have appear'd such Sons of strife and stiffness, as indeed provok'd me, against mine inclination, to publish the following Sermon; at the Preaching of which, two of your discontented Pew-Mates carried themselves (as at other times ever since the
Tho' they have very early taken the Oaths to K. W. and Q. M. Revolution) with all the proud and insolent contempt imaginable: yea and in seeming great rage and wrath quitted the Congregation, as if I had been about overturning Foundations, and deny'd the Faith once deliver'd to the Saints; and were running apace to the Dissenters, and was doing their work.
This is the Charge, and this is the Crime; and I think it a very great one too, if I should think, say, or do any thing against the Church. But I have deliver'd no more than what you may read in the Bishop of Wor∣cester's Discourse against the Socinians; or in Dr. Light∣foot, Bishop Peirson, Dr. Towerson, and others of our Learned Church of England.

The Dissenters, as the Novatians of Old, may be right in their Doctrine, except in that which causes or occasions their separation. And I heartily wish all that are Zealous for, or against Ceremonies, were as warm for Peace, and Holiness, Truth, and Concord; and that all of us, as Disciples of the humble and holy Jesus, under the Ministry of Paul, or Apollo, would as new-born-Babes desire the sincere Milk of the word, that we may grow thereby in Grace, and substantial Knowledge; which is the earnest and sincere Prayer of the Minister of the Parish, and Parish Church of Bridgewater; and therefore,

From my Study, Bridgewater, April, 1697.
