


Most Noble Senators and Patriots,
THe Noble Lord Chancellour, in his excellent Speech, May, 1662. calls to minde the ex∣cellent temper of the Time of Queen Eliza∣beth; the blessed Condescention and Resig∣nation of the People then to the Crown; the awful Reverence they had then to the Governours and Government both of Church and State: And we may better remember the sweet times of King James, when we went all together to the House of God as Friends. Now to reduce the People to their ancient sweet temper, must be the work of God; and under him we have no hopes but onely in the great Wis∣dome of his Majesty and this Noble Parliament. His Majesty hath done so much already, as if he had studied to do for this Nation, what a Roman Caesar said of his City, Marmoream se relinquere, quam lateritiam accepisset. (Suet.) And Your Ho∣nours have failed of nothing belonging to your high Trust. The first Cause of Breach clearly discovered, would doubtless point out the right way of Peace.

The famous Parliament of Paris told their King once, That the onely way to extirpate Heresie, Schism, &c. was first to reform their own Church after the example of the Primitive, who resisted He∣resie with Preaching the Word of God. The Church of England is of an excellent Constitution; if all her Members were of as good a Complexion, her Beauty would allure many Thousands to return to her Com∣munion, that now are gone astray. The Doctrine of our Church is pure, her Discipline good; neither of these so much as our vicious Lives, that opens the mouths of our Adversaries so wide against us. There be other Crimes more heinous in their own guilt, but Drunkenness is the greatest Eye-sore: If that beastly Vice were supprest, our Adversaries could have nothing to say, but what we can well answer and stop their mouths. False Brethren have always done more mischief, than profest Enemies. This present Discourse I was provoked to by the Challenge of a Learned Frier, and humbly present it to your Honours grave Judgment. The most wise God be with you, and direct you in all your Con∣sultations, to the good of our Church and Nation.
 May 21. 1677.
