


BEloved, you have herewith brought unto you an Olive-branch, shew∣ing forth the floods abatement, and the rest and safety of the soul that is entered into the Ark of God; the ransome of a poor Prisoner out of the Pit indeed, in which there was no wa∣ter: which will be, I know, the more welcome to some of you (I hope only to the praise and glory of God on high) because you so long wept before his Heavenly Throne, and made your humble supplication to him almost un∣to fainting for her, who was bound of Satan so many years: yet that the
 height and depth, length and breadth of the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord, might be the more admired of all, and magnified herein; And this Monument of mercy may remain in the Churches, throughout all ages, to∣wards the support of such as sit in dark∣nesse, and see no light: I am willing, (though most unworthy) to adde my mite towards the compleating this ac∣count of the grace of God, extended to my poor (late distressed) Sister, Mi∣strisse Deborah Huish; who is now made rich in Faith, through grace, and the wise Virgin-subject of this ensuing Relation: to the truth of which, as de∣livered by her with much fear and joy, with trembling received, and faithful∣ly written from her lips, by my dear Brother Allen, I can do no lesse then bear my testimony, that (to those who judge us faithful) it may out of the mouth of two or three witnesses be established.
Yet because many may be subject, with Thomas, called Dydimus, to que∣stion what their eyes see not, and their fingers feel not; These shall ad∣vertise any who do esteem soul-con∣cernments of the greatest consequence,
 and desire to be informed more per∣fectly in some part of the truth hereof, for the help of their own souls, or (as natural members of the body of Christ) to administer some assistance unto their sister, the subject of this ensuing trea∣tise, towards her continued walking uprightly and humbly with her God; That she is the third Daughter of James Huish Esquire of Sidbury, in the County of Devon; To whom God Al∣mighty to save, hath already granted an hopeful place in his house, to the joy of the faithful Churches in Christ Jesus, who have more diligently then some in our dayes, weighed the truth of their high and heavenly calling, in the Balance of the sanctuary, and inqui∣red into their soveraigne love to Christ, and sutable conversation to the word of God, before they gave the right hand of Fellowship unto them: One of the three now is not, but having witnessed unto death a good confession before many witnesses (and running best at last, even in these worst dayes of de∣clining, wherein Sun-shine and world∣ly Professors are so puzzled, and put to their shifts, how to get with cre∣dit again into their wider place, out
 of the faithful Churches) is fallen a∣sleep in Jesus, whom God will bring with him at his coming, and her works shall follow her. In her stead hath God seasonably raised this her Sister to supply the breach made in the visi∣ble body of Christ, and in the Spirit of many faithful members, who (having sorely lamented their too little im∣provement of her, and some other dear Friends, lately taken from the evil to come (of whom this world, yea the Churches (or many amongst them) yet in too much Fellowship with the world, I fear, were not worthy) will learn wisedome (I trust) to know their day, for treasuring the Gold granted us, though through Earthen Vessels; and better improve the small remnant of Gods Elect, amongst the great bo∣dies of outward Israel, who remain yet amongst them.
This blessed workmanship in Christ Jesus, was through his good provi∣dence (as her Sister) from a Child in∣structed in the holy Scriptures, by their truely vertuous Mother: which edu∣cation the Lord Sanctified, to make her very serious in her infancy, re∣straining her from common foolish and
 vain communication. She was at a∣bout fourteen years old, first sensibly assaulted by the tempter, and that fu∣riously, as you will perceive by the Se∣quel: And from thenceforward you have her own Relation, to which I shall refer the serious Reader: but must remind many of the poor mourning Saints in Ireland, what they have of∣ten heard from her; which may per∣haps prove helpful to them, and other dejected souls, according to my ear∣nest wish; to whose use her rest and shelter (through rich grace, after a fourteen years sad stormy Voyage, and bewildered wandering) is now Dedi∣cated. For I judge her deep casting down, and powerful raising up, was not onely for her sake, and private uses; but as a Pillar should be erected for common caution against unbelief, and every sin which cost her so dear, and for encouragement out of such dis∣mal deeps, to look yet unto God's ho∣ly Temple, and to flee for hope and re∣fuge alwayes, onely to our one strong∣hold. And whoso is wise, and will ob∣serve these things: even they shll under∣stand the loving kindnesse of the Lord. Psal. 107.43. Let us remember then




















 what a meeting in, of almost all the complaints of the deserted, darkened, and disconsolate ones on Scripture re∣cord, have refted on her poor soul, to the sore afflicting also of some of yours, before the Throne of God, who did defer, but not deny, to answer your poor Prayers on her behalf: but at last hath heard, after you have heard her bemoaning herself, as Hman the Ez∣rahite, Psalm 88.6. Thou hast layed me in the lwest Pit, in darknesse, in the deep; thy wrath lieth hard upon me; and thou hast afflicted me with all thy Waves: I am afflicted and ready to die from my youth up, while I suffer thy terrours I am distracted, verse 15. with Job 7.3, 4. So am I made to possesse months of Vanity; and wearysome nights are appointed to me: when I lie down, I say, When shall I arise, and the night be gone? I am full of tossings to and fro, unto the dawning of the day, mourning without the Sun, &c. Chapter 30.28. with Hezekiah, reckoning till morning, that as a Lion so would he break all my bones from day even till night wilt thou make an end of me. Isai. 38.13. And he hath both spoken to me, and him∣self hath done it: I shall go softly all my years in the bitternesse of my soul: Yea,
 with David she might have said, I my tell all my bones Psal. 22.17. and agin, my heart is smitten and withered like grasse, so that I forget to eat my bread: by reason of the voice of my groaning, my bones cleave to my skin. And Psal. 102.4, 5. and again, When I kept silence, my bones waxed old, through my roaring all the day long; for day and night thy hand was heavy upon me: my moisture is turn∣ed into the drought of Summer. Psal, 32.3, 4. and with the Church, Lam. 3.18. My strength and my hope is perished from the Lord: nay, with the desperate hath she not said, in the hearing of many, There is no hope? Jer. 18.12. And with Cain, My punishment is greater then I can bear: Or, my Iniquity is greater then that it may be forgiven. I have sinn'd unpardonably; you sin in praying for me: I am undone and rejected; I know the very time when it was sealed to me; I know it, I am sure I am damned for ever, &c. Oh! how have we been terrified together in our as∣semblings on her behalf, who have seen her sorrow, and disability to speak, un∣lesse sometimes in such like Language against her soul, and our seeking her Salvation; who was as a very fearful spe∣ctacle
 pining away (even like to an Anatomy) before us: and how many of us, like the Friends of Job, came at first to mourn, and comfort her; but fainted, left off, relinquished her, con∣cluding hopelessely! how hath a whole Church flagged in their Faith herein, (who resolved to fast and pray for her until deliverance) fainted and left off, yea drop'd away as weary, or ashamed? how have some holy women (skilfull in mourning) assembled? what private indeavours by some obtaining her to their houses, have been assayed? but all as water spilt upon the ground, in their esteemes: Yea, to the glory of the grace of God alone herein, (who then loves to approve himself most favorable to his chosen, when they are most friend∣less, helpless, destitue, & most stand in need of succour from him,) let me adde further this observaion to yours, that a special Friend, whose affection led him further, and longer at a certainty then mine, or any I observed to weep for her, and to reprove others for fain∣ting, and neglects of her before him, yet lately wrote from Ireland to me his despairing also concerning her; at the very interim God our God, who
 comforteth those that are cast down, was surely succoring her, and incoura∣ging his poor mourning fainting fol∣lowers, whose Spirits were willing, though the Flesh was weak, as he will further do in their sight, unto publick admiration, for those who in this evil time shall go forth weeping bearing pretious seed, according to his promise, Psal. 126.5, 6. and their Prayers in the fourth verse: Yea, when there is but little Faith in the Earth; for alas, how have we, even we that were nearest re∣lated also, left off our hope for this poor soul? Yea, how have I, to my shame, that had the charge of her, fail∣ed most herein! I must say indeed, to my abasement, the weights and fear of her untimely end; the cares of keeping her from any Instrument to accomplish it; and the dread of divers kinds that so long encompassed me concerning her, with the trouble we had to get her eat her bread, and to gaining her under hearing the word of God (which is more necessary) with the discouraging influence of living under the dayly droppings of those many dismal predi∣ctions she uttered of her suddain and certain ruine & destruction, after more
 then three years care of the kind a∣foresaid, and so many attempts and faintings: Alas, Paimed now at no more in my own mind, then to get her safe again delivered into her dear Pa∣rents hands, that my face might not be covered with shame, according to my fear of her untimely end, at such di∣stance from them: which being accom∣plished by the good hand of God, (in our safe Voyage through his special grace, who led us and our little ones through his stormy deep, and after some hazzards landed us in safety; which I wish we may not let slip) alas, she almost fell out of my memory, and was seldom in my Prayer; the Lord grant me the mercy of her earnest sup∣plications; for which Jobs Friends were made humbly to apply to him through like frailty towards him in his sorrow, as I have reason to impute to my self towards her herein.
Thus hath the Lord our God stain∣ed the pride of all glory, as he shall yet more publickely do unto his praise; and give grace to the humble, that they who glory, might onely glory in him, as the great end of his works of wonder, his great Salvations, and the
 operations of the Almighty in the Earth; that the faint, who relie on the Lord, may be revived; that youths, and every confident one may faint, and be humbled before him. Where∣fore Beloved, I beg the best effects in every heart, of this unspeakable mercy, and to the glory of God in the highest, which I trust is the onely end, why my poor Brother and Companion in mourning for our own sins, and short∣nesse, and for yours also, which have the greatest hand in hiding good things, yea the expected publicke Sal∣vations also from us, have agreed by the Advice of divers, who are also in the dust for Zion, in this dark declining day, to recommend this token of good from God our Father and yours, unto you, towards the support of your sink∣ing souls, in his cloudy, gloomy houre, with our poor Epistles, full of affection to your pretious souls, affixed to this gratious earnest of releasing, drooping, dying Captives; who shall draw nigh to, and alone depend on God: And these I trust shall come to every hand, with some effect of our earnest Prayer, that the Lord God (Almighty to save) would accompany it, and greatly bless
 this grain of Mustard seed, to make it grow and multiply unto the Faith and refreshment of many, the abasement of all, and the glorious exaltation of our King, who sitteth at the right hand of the Father for us, and sends the Comforter to succour his feeble ones, in earnest of his care of those who cast their care upon him, who onely hath the healing Medicines, and will surely (right soon) therewith visit such in every Nation; When all the proud, (how high soever) and they who still do wicked∣ly, shall be as stubble before him. Mal. 4.1, 2. 2 Sam. 22.28. Oh that this pre∣tious answer to your supplications (in the best season) might be now impro∣ved, as a prop to uphold your hands, with the Rod of God therein, in this doubtful day, that Amalek may not prevail: Oh! wrestle fervently in the unspeakable priviledge of Faith; and (with Christ in your Armes) present your weepings, and spread your suppli∣cations before the Father in other di∣stressed cases still before you, by this incouragement; yea, let us improve it to publicke as well as private bene∣fit; for surely patterns of mercy should be so made use of, 2 Cor. 1.10. And
 call for Faith in the path of them, as the most natural improvement. 1 Tim. 1.16. Heb. 13.5. as well as to dread the expectation of a contrary portion, in the contrary path. Psal. 125.5. And as the Declaration of Judgements, with the cause assigned, or the way in∣to them, warneth all, and speaks incou∣ragement to none; so the manifestati∣on of grace, and the path thereof, is an incouragement to all in the same path, and Spirit; which was eminently seen of old, in God's special presence with Israel, in driving back Jordan by his mighty Power for their present deli∣verance (and their adversaries destru∣ction) for which they erected Pillars of praise, to encourage the future Faith and hope of faithful ones that should follow God fully, as his Servant Jo∣shua did: Yet could not Israel then have the least ground to expect the dri∣ving back of Jordan again, or remo∣ving other difficulties, to have incoura∣ged their retreat, or furthered any hu∣mane design, to which they were some∣times subject through unbelief: Nei∣ther in our dayes have any persons ground to suppose (much lesse to con∣clude) that the Lords eminent pre∣sence
 in the high places of the field, scil. Naasby and other parts with his people, while they faithfully followed him, can now yeeld any incouragement to expect the like presence of God, while they are turning back, and de∣clining from him.
Neverthelesse, new appearances of the like glorious presence with the truely humble followers of the Lord, (as the matter should require) might again be safely expected from the Ma∣jesty on high; who by the former no doubt manifested his right-hand Pow∣er, for the strengthening of the Faith and hope of all upright followers of him, according to Psal. 33.8, 9, 10, 11. and Psal. 36.6, 7, 8, 9. and Mic. 6.5.
And the very end of the Lords de∣ferring to relieve Lazarus, whom he loved until he was dead, and laid in the Grave, and so no visible hopes left unto his Disciples touching his pre∣sent resurrection, was to the intent they might believe, Joh. 11.15. not that he raised him onely; which every sen∣sual beholder would believe: but that in future distresses, in their greatest depths, they might depend on him by
 that proof of his Power to save to the uttermost.
And no doubt Israel of old, of whom its said, They soon forgot his works, was so ravish'd with the red Sea won∣der, that they ever retained the Theory thereof, and could all of them relate it to any that should ask them, either in matter or manner concerning it: but their not retaining the Teaching sence thereof for use, in point of thankful∣nesse for past deliverances, and of Faith in their future straits, in the way of following God; left them to those fears, through which they fell short of obeying God, and entring Canaan. Now therefore, thou poor sinking de∣spairing soul, who sittest in darknesse, and seest no light; Learn thou assured∣ly, this pattern of mercy and long suf∣fering is to manifest to thee, that the Lord's thoughts are higher then thine; that so thy soul may be encouraged, under the sentence of death, by reason of sin, through believing, to have life and hope in him: If thou sayest, Is any sorrow like my sorrow? Yea, is any sin like my sin? and truely considerest the sorrow of this soul, and most de∣sperate sin of a secret Devilish mind,
 in this case related, with her confident expectation of Hell thereupon, on the one hand; and the gratious pity and acceptance she found from Christ, be∣ing embraced by him as in open Arms, so soon as truely perswaded humbly to come unto him, on the other hand: I hope it will silence such suggestions di∣stressing thee, and seal to thy comfort the truth of that promise, that is so richly confirmed to her, John 6.37. Now if any accepted through grace, should abate in their Faith, because their present Feast seems not so full, nor their entertainment so sensibly free, as that whereat this soul now sits so fully refresh'd; I trust, if (in their weaknesse) supporting grace be surely afforded, and they found waiting in their Fathers house and affaires, that word shall suffice to balance them from fainting and fretting at such grace to others, recorded, Luke 15.31, 32. And that her years of sorrow shall be by such considered, according to Ps. 90.15. Make us glad, according to the dayes wherein thou hast afflicted us. And oh! that this might warn all of every sin, and neglect, which being bound on her soul, have been found so long and
 so heavy a load: but how shall I utter the evil and bitter effects thereof, better then by asking the serious soul, what debasing, defiling, and enslaving misery himself hath experienced, as the effect of but eating the forbidden fruit at first, and that by another? Yea, with design to be made more Spiritual, nei∣ther have good mens good meanings excused the least transgression or er∣ror: This treatise will tell you also what those poor souls lose, who ne∣glect, or are slighty in family-endea∣vours, in the word and Prayer; in both which she found more benefit (through grace) then in more able publick Ad∣ministrations, under which some can scarcely profit, through their horrid ne∣glect herein; and will have poor kind∣red, Children, and Servants, one day complain of their loss, by living under the shadow of such, few of whom will shine as Stars in the Firmament, ac∣cording to the promise, Dan. 12.3. if they persist in the neglect thereof, and forget that exhortation, Eph. 6.4.
That I may not make an end of these poor hints, towards the improving this mercy, without remembring the Mourners in Dublin, of another (elect




















 one I trust) whose secret sins, standing in the light of God's countenance, humbly waited for his Salvation, so many solemne dayes among them, possessing Months and years of sorrow, and they of tears for her poor soul, who alas is not now found in the way of the true converts path, Psal. 116.17, 18, 19. And will surely, as Jacob, have her fears renewed, for building short of Bethel, when new troubles shall incompasse her, and the Courts (short of the Lord's) prove unable to comfort: Oh that this effectual expe∣rience of breaking the bands of Sa∣tan for another (who was with lesse hope and expectation so oft joyned with her in your intercessions) may re∣new your strength in supplication for her; whose seeming weanednesse from the world, and the weights of such vain Company as now beset her, sometimes administred hopes, that she would never be ashamed to chuse affli∣ction with the people of God, nor be otherwayes then as Hester in the Court of the miss-informed and enra∣ged against them. Oh! that by fer∣vent wrestlings she might be raised a∣gain from every false rest; and as being
 plucked by the Arm of the Almighty, as a fire-brand out of the fire, might be saved from all vain pomp, infecting Company, and customes; the fury of the highest of men, and from smoother temptations more near unto her, pro∣mising her liberty in neglects; and so beguiling her of her choisest good, as the Tempter beguiled Eve: yea, work∣ing I fear with the stumbling-Block of the falls of some, (found in the wayes of God) improved to the utmost in this evil day, to prejudice souls with them; so that many indeed are now offended in Christ, and I much long that a Sove∣rain love to his holy wayes, might pre∣serve her from that evil: According to Psal. 119.11, 165. Yea, let the kind∣nesse of Gideon be remembered, to oblige us herein; who unweariedly with unparalell'd uprightnesse, shew∣ed forth his labour of love to the Lord, and to us in the Lord unto death, re∣sting much in the perswasion, that his dearest relation (and Children left be∣hind him amongst us) would never more be beset with the unexpected snares of that sort now encompassing; but be in the constant special care of the most faithful of the Saints; delight∣ing
 herself with David, in those that excel in vertue.
Me thinks this mercy improved a∣right (without diversion) may be ex∣tended also, to Administer reviving to the poor Prisoners for righteousnesse sake (who (onely in a way of righteous∣nesse) shall humbly wait for the Salva∣tion of God) notwithstanding the pub∣licke reproach cast upon them, by men of corrupt minds: For behold, the hand of the Lord, who led Joseph through Imprisonment, slanders, and many difficulties, and thereby fitted him for further special publick relief and benefit; (though his Brethren meant not so, Gen. 50.20) is not yet shortened, but here shewed gloriously in the ransome of this sometimes poor hopelesse Prisoner, that distressed ones may have hope in him, Who causeth light to arise out of darknesse; leading his Prisoners forth in his set time and season; who will say shortly to his Captives, Shew your selves, according to Isai. 49.9. And surely this may help to succour also the whole Zion of God; though she be ready to say, My God hath forgotten me. Oh that therefore that travel spoken of Isa. 66.6, 7, 8. &c.
 were now begun by all that have their hearts heavy loaden, with their own (and others) Iniquities; and that such might never hold their peace, nor give the Lord rest: but in the strength of Jacob, by weeping and supplication, wrestle with the Mighty one of Jacob, till he return in pitty unto Zion, to their own souls, and to all the distres∣sed who wait upon him; and to the stopping the mouth of all Iniquity in the Nations (so lately rescued by his hand) even till the dry bones live, and the heart of those that weep now, greatly rejoyce, and flourish like an herb; and the hand of the Lord be known towards his Servants, and his indignation towards his Enemies; yea, to that effect in Isai. 66.12. For thus saith the Lord, Behold, I will extend peace to her as a River, &c. and Jer. 30.21. And their Nobles shall be of them∣selves, &c. That the glory of the Lord may be redeemed in the Land.
Let us still wait on the Arm of the Lord, who caused Ahasuerus to be restless in the night, till he had read the records of the Chronicles of the good service of Mordecai, to the changing his heart from his wicked decree, and
 turning it against his treacherous Flat∣terers; and who have taught us to re∣member his hand upon the haughty of old, and to plead it in future distresse, as in Isai. 51.9. Awake, awake, put on strength, Oh Arm of the Lord! awake, as in the antient dayes, &c. For hereby hath he gratiously given us a fresh proof of his Power, to performe whatever may make to our relief and comfort in every condition, whether we be in∣compassed with publicke, or private distresses: wherefore I have somewhat enlarged upon this opportunity of Printing on this occasion, which other∣wayes I love not, thus variously to im∣prove this instance (though some men may esteem them unnecessary diversi∣ons) for the begetting of Faith in God by this Example of dread, and incou∣ragement; which can onely inable to meet him acceptably in humiliation, and before the decree be gone forth, as against Shile of old, and Judah, who perished with the signes of God's pre∣sence in their hand, through their not observing aright, to Sanctifie his name, who had made them so strong and suc∣cesseful against their Adversaries. And seeing the Lord alone can heal our sick∣nesse,
 and our wound, and the breach upon us, which is wide as the Sea; let every true Mourner humbly approach before him, on the behalf of our selves, and whole Zion, the Prophets, Rulers, Judges, Laws, Customes of these Nati∣ons; & on the behalf of the afflicted, de∣serted, unbelieving, divided, and there∣by liable to be destroyed people; and to turn the heart of those that are en∣raged, and ready to do evil, because it is in the Power of their hands to do it: for now all men almost see our sick∣nesse, and our wound, how foolish ma∣ny Physitians and our false refuges have proved.
Let us therefore now cease not on∣ly from Babylon, Egypt, Ashur; Horses, Armies, fenced Cities, &c. But also from those other fair shews in the flesh, to which some fearful Friends would compel us to conform, which have too oft deceived us: Neither let us humour the lusts of men and multitudes, nor be found in the indirect path of fretting proud wrath, envying and grudging one against another; nor in rash inga∣ging, submitting to traditions, tempo∣rizing, &c. But in deep humiliation, and brokennesse of soul, let us be as
 Doves of the Valley, every one mourning over his Iniquities, which is the most hopeful path of refreshment from his presence, who hath hereby shewed us his right hand; which will certainly relieve, and that right soon, those that truely sowe in teares; for according to his faithful word, Psal. 126.5, 6. He that goeth forth and weepeth, bearing pretious seed, shall doubtlesse return again with rejoycing, bringing his sheaves with him: When the Blos∣some of pride shall wither, and the bands of mockers will be made strong: Let my soul and yours be imbarked with those that weep this day before the Lord, chusing affliction with his people, rather then with those who rejoyce now, and are not sensible of the afflictions of Jo∣seph; but make merry with the nakednesse of Noah: and that the Counsel given us for sup∣port, in Isai. 26.20, 21. may be accompa∣nied with the residue of the Spirit for our gui∣dance and succour, as being given us to be a word of gratious Counsel for such a day as this: And that though Satan be seen yet fur∣ther to fall, as lightening from Heaven; We may chiefly rejoyce, in that our names are writ∣ten in the Book of Life. And now to be still freely admitted with this precious soul, to that Feast that fadeth not for evermore; is the humble and earnest desire (on the behalf of himself, and all Saints) of

