




SIRS,
THese three following Sermons (though conceived elsewhere) were first brought forth in your Ancient & Honourable City. The subject matter of them is seasonable for these sickly times. Though you in your City, (as I am informed byMr. Feak and Mr. Wanley your pre∣sent Mi∣nisters. those who have best reason to know) have been this last year as healthful as at other times, (a mercy which you can never be too thank-full for) yet the Towns and Villages about you, yea the most part of this Nation (I hope you are sensible of it) have been sorely visited with sick∣ness; I therefore, at the importunity of some Friends, thought good to make these Notes publick. The Word preached is too soonVox au∣dita perit. sed litera scripta manebit. forgotten, and reacheth but to few, but Printed may be seen by many, and peru∣sed at pleasure. I hope these Sermons that found acceptance with many when Preach∣ed, will, being Printed, find the like accep∣tance
 with the sober Christian. You have that here presented to the eye, which was de∣livered to the ear; for I have made little or no alteration, onely I have inserted se∣veral Latine Sentences, (which I did not mention in the Pulpit, partly because I would avoid the suspition of vain-glory, and partly because they would have taken up too much of that little time alotted, every Sand of which we should frugally improve to the profit of the bearer). You that under∣stand Latine, may read these Quotations to your better satisfaction: You that like them not, because you cannot understand them, may over-look them. These Ser∣mons, like the Author, come forth in a plain dress: My desire was not, with elegant cadencies of words, to please an itching ear, but with plain Scripture-evidence, to affect an honest heart: And strong-lines could not reasonably be expected from one so weak as I then was, being but lately reco∣vered of a grievous sickness. Well, dear Friends, whatever they be, I humbly pre∣sent them to your acceptance, as a testimo∣ny of my thankfulness, and to shew how willing I am

Ashow, March 27. 1671.
