



SIR,
OF that Gentile who built them a Synagogue, the Jews gave this Eulogie; That he was worthy, and that he loved their Nation. That your self came a worthy person into the World, your paternal Dignity will avouch; and that you are one who not onely love your Nation, but the Religion of it, I shall onely in proportion to the Synagogue say, You have lately at your own Cost beautisied the better part of the House of God, not doubting but Beauty in Place, as well as in a Person, may be a great attractive; endeavouring to woe the People to worship their God in the Beauty of Holi∣ness. Having thus done, and hearing the following Sermon, you did more than desire that it might be made publique; and merely therefore, because it had for subject onely the Worship of God; which as di∣stinct from Service, hath not been in your hearing so plainly explicated, as you candidly concéived it is. Now, [honoured Sir] to gratifie you, and at your instigation to promote the Worship of God, in the ca∣pacities of such who are not sinely learned, I have de∣livered

my Endeavours, and your Desires to the world. My Intention is good, the Acceptance dubious: but shall I please God and please you in so doing, I have my end.
There is annexed to the Sermon; [what many years hath lain in the posture it now appears] which for the Brevity, Easiness, and Time it was writ in, was much importuned. Thousands [since the Glory of our Worship brake forth that dismal Cloud, which many years it stood eclipsed in] I say, thousands have now courted it as the rising Sun; but by their min∣cing and mangling, and neglect of it, declare they receive it onely as an expedient to hold a Living: Whereas when that was writ, a Living was lost for the using of it, and the Author suspended by an im∣perious Beggar [Tam ab Officio quam à Beneficio] for reading the Common-prayer without Book. The sum is, that to worship God by a set Form, is the sta∣blest and most certain advance of his Glory; and the securing of the holy Duty from all impertinen∣cies. A Discourse not unfit to accompany and wait upon a Sermon precisely about Worship; which shall suffice at this time to trouble both your honourable Self, and the willing Reader.
From my Study at Leamington, No∣vemb. 20. 1677. 
