


Great SIR,
THe gracious acceptance which your Majesty was pleased to allow the first Volume of my Re∣flexions upon the Holy Scriptures to establish the Truth of the Christian Religion, encouraged and almost ne∣cessitated me to the further presump∣tion of laying these two Volumes at this time at your Majesties Feet. Your Majesty did me the honour to say, That you were pleased to see Divines apply themselves to the clearing of Sub∣jects so important. And after this Judg∣ment
given by so great a Prince, which is so evident a Demonstration of your Zeal for the Fundamental Truths of the Christian Religion, it had been unpardonable in me not to have gone on with the Work; and I had Reason then to Consecrate it wholly to your Majesty, who I was assured would approve of my Intentions, and for that Reason would pardon the Imperfections of the Performance. As your Majesty continues still to give such illustri∣ous Instances of your Clemency and Royal Protection to those of our Nation, so, I confess, Sir, I thought my self under an Obligation to lay hold upon this Opportunity of pub∣lishing what all those who find so sure a Protection in your Majesties Dominions, feel and think as much as my self upon these new Testimo∣nies of your Royal Bounty: When
your Majesty had taken us into your particular care, and had granted us several Priviledges, and so made us sharers in all the Advantages, which those who live under your Govern∣ment enjoy, your Majesty did yet something more, and inspired all your Subjects with the same com∣passion towards us with which your Royal Breast was already touched. You saw our miseries, and resolved to give us ease, and this generous Design was executed, and your Roy∣al Clemency diffused in the hearts of all your Subjects. The whole World, Sir, which has received upon all its Coasts some Remainders of our Shipwrack, is fill'd with admiration of the unexampled effects of your Majesties Clemency. There is no place so barbarous, whither the re∣nown of that mercy which has been so gloriously extended towards us,
has not been carried: and the re∣membrance will be ever dear to the remotest Ages of Posterity. We must Sir, be wholly insensible if we had not all of us the highest sense of so great a Bounty; and we should justly appear to the whole World to be unworthy of this your Majesties Paternal care, if notwithstanding that low condition to which we are now reduced, we should not pro∣strate our selves before your August Throne with the humblest demon∣strations of Thankfulness. When God show'rs down the greatest Bles∣sings upon Mankind, he requires this just Tribute, which is also their greatest honour, by opening to them an access unto the Throne of Glo∣ry. And this sacred Pattern we crave leave to follow, when we solemnly pay the like Tribute to your Maje∣sty, who can receive nothing from
us again, that can answer the great∣ness, or the number of those Fa∣vours which have so very much ex∣ceeded all our desires. I could wish, Sir, that this Work which I now present to your Majesty, might be so haypy as to pass to Posterity with this Character of our acknowledg∣ment, and that it might stand as a faithful Record for ever, to per∣petuate the memory of that lively sense of your Bounty, which is im∣printed on all our hearts: If this could be hoped for, it must be wholly owing to your Majesties glorious Name, which latest Ages will receive with Reverence. But, Sir, tho' I dare not hope that these Reflexions can obtain that honour, yet our Age at least may see, that they bear these publick Marks of Gratitude for all your Majesties Royal Favours. This, Sir, is my sole
aim in the Dedication of this Work to your Majesty; and may your Sa∣cred Majesty be pleased to approve of these poor Testimonies of our Thankfulness in general, and to look upon them as Instances of mine in particular, and of that profound Respect, with which I am,
London May the 7th. 1688.
Sir, 
