



Dear Sir,
DIvine Providence hath de∣prived you of many dear Friends and Relations, amongst others he hath ta∣ken away your Religious Parents, and lately your dearMis. Frances Lorymore Wife, the choicest under heaven of all your outward Possessions and Delights,
 made nearer unto you by Marriage than either Father or Mother. I call her one of Gods Jewels (such there are Mal. 3.17.) she was little of stature, but of great worth: She was a Great Fortune, but, which is more considerable, she was an huge good person. She was a constant frequenter of the Ordinances, a strict observer of the Sabbath; her Family-devotion was great, and her secret ejaculations fer∣vent and constant. She was meek, mo∣dest, chaste, courteous, charitable, pa∣tient, humble, &c. These and the like Virtues came streaming into her Soul from the Fountain of Divine Grace. She was no scoffing Michal, nor you a churlish Nabal: The onely strife betwixt you was this, which should shew most dearness and tenderness; so pleasing was your deport∣ment each to other, that one would think, one Soul animated two Bodyes. You did never grieve her Spirit but by your exces∣sive grief to see her in that extreamity ofShe dyed in child∣bed. pain; which, with greatest care you could not remedy, and with admirable patience and Christian courage she chearfully under∣went.
 She was not afraid of Death. Though she loved her Husband as dearly as any Christian ought to do, yet she loved him much less than her Saviour, and she knew that Death would bring her to an hap∣py sight of him; and I doubt not but she is with him whom her soul longed for.
What remains, sweet Sir, but that you look upon your self, at least as half dead, and become a most serious and mortified man. I know when God first snatched this precious Jewel out of your bosom, you were sadly affected with your loss (indeed her Funerals were celebrated with great solem∣nity, with many a weeping eye and sorrow∣ful heart) let not sensual delights make you to forget it. Labour to get good by this affliction: Let her Memory be still preti∣ous with you, not for adoration (leave that foppery, to the Papists) but for imita∣tion.
And that you may make a right use of this, and such like losses, which have and may still befal you, let me entreat you to peruse this
 following Treatise, to which I take the boldness to prefix your Name, to testify my thankfulness for former Favours, and to de∣clare to the world, That I am
SIR,

Ashow, March 3d. 1670.
