



Right Honourable,
SOmeAret. in Luk. 1.3. Marlorat. in Luk. 1. Chemnit. Harm. Evan. Stella in Luk. 1.3. are of Opinion that St. Luke dedicated his Gospel, and the Acts of the Apostles, those two pieces of Divine Writ, to Theophilus, a
 Man of Eminencie in the Church. Stella saith he was Praesul Antio∣chenus septimus: And the Epithet given him, shews he was some great man, for that Evangelist calls him , most Excellent,As Acts 23.26. Act. 24.3. Act. 26.25 which is a Title of Honour; Nomen honoris et dignitatis. Yet someDoctor Hammond his Annot. in Luke 1.3. Salv. in Epist. ded. before his Books ad Eccles. Cathol. learned Men are of another Opinion, (viz.) That Theophi∣lus was not the proper name of a particular Man, but a feigned Title to signifie every Christi∣an, who is, or ought to be a lover of God, to whom St. Luke addresseth his Discourse.
Sure I am of this, that St. Paul, as he prayed for Onesiphorus, who so oft refreshed him in his Bonds, so he made honourable mention of him in his Writ∣ings, 2 Tim. 1.16, 17, 18.
My Lord, I think I should
 be guilty of that crying sin ofIngratum si dixeris, omnia. Ingratitude, (a sin, which a∣mongst others makes the times so perillous, 2 Tim. 3.1, 2. ) if I should not, as I have often prayed for you, so upon occasi∣on make honourable mention of you, who have so oft refreshed me in my wants. Since I first saw your smiling Countenance, I have oft thought of that Speech of Ruth to Boaz, Ruth 2.10. Why have I found grace in thine eyes, that thou shouldest take knowledge of me, seeing I am a Stranger? I was a stranger to your Lordship, yet you were pleased freely to be∣stow a small Parsonage upon me. I call it a small one, (for so it is of it self) but it hath happily received amongst other Churches, for several years, an Augmentation of twenty pounds
 and upwards, paid duly, with∣out trouble; for the Lady Alicia Duddely (that sweet Flower, whom God gathered early to himself, for she was ripe be∣times) Daughter of that Pat∣tern of Piety and good Works, the Lady DutchesSee the Narrative of her life & death, by Dr. Boreman. Duddely, late∣ly deceased; This Daughter, I say (to whom I may apply that of the Wise Man, Prov. 31.29. Many Daughters have done vertuously, but thou excellest them all) left by her last Will an Estate of the yearly value of an 120 pounds, to be disposed for ever to such poor Vicaridges and Parsona∣ges as the said Lady Mother should appoint: And accor∣dingly it was performed by her Grace the Lady Dutchess Dud∣deley, whose good Works, like Maries Oyntment, cast a sweet
 perfume. Mine is one of theManceter Stone∣leigh. Ashow. Leek∣wotton. Kenel∣worth. Monks∣kirby. six Churches that partaketh of this bountie. I know, my Lord, you will pardon this digression, for you love to make honoura∣ble mention of your dear Aunt, this incomparable Dutchess, up∣on all occasions.
I now return to your Lord∣ship, who have not onely been my Patron, but in other respects a constant Benefactor; for you were pleased to receive me for your Chaplain, and accept my poor pains, for which (to your Noble Generosity, not to my desert, be it spoken) you gave me, besides other Favours, a considerable allowance. Meet then it is that you should have the first Fruits of my Labours in this kind, as a token of my real love, and testimony of a
 grateful heart, and I hope your Lordship will so interpret it.
Another Reason why I pre∣sume to prefix your Lordships Name to the following Dis∣course is this; that it being shrouded under your Honoura∣ble Protection, may pass the more currant: We live in a carping Age; but if these Pa∣pers find acceptance with you, (I know you to be so judicious and well-devoted) I do not much value the exceptions of o∣thers.
This Paper-Present I call A Funeral Handkerchief, Con∣taining Arguments to comfort us at death of Friends; and the several Uses we ought to make of such losses. Noble Sir, you have out-lived many Friends, you have buried many dear Children, and lately parted
 with a Religious Lady, who drew with you in the Yoke of Marriage above 59 years. [I am not afraid to call her Religious, Her daily respect to the Word and Prayer in private; Her love to the Publick Ordinances; Her strict ob∣servation of the Lord's Day, and her pious care that others should do so: Her fastings and soul-afflictings upon occasion, together with her constant cir∣cumspect walking, are to me undoubted signs of her Religious Disposition.] These afflictions, and many o∣thers which God Almighty hath pleased to exercise your Lord∣ship with, you have patiently undergone & overcome, through the Auxiliaries of Reason, and Divine Assistance. But, my Lord, have you learnt to make a right use of death of Friends and Relations? This is an hard
 lesson which few take forth: let me intreat you to cast your eye especially upon the second Part of this following Treatise, where you shall find several Uses set down; Copy them out in your daily practice, that so when the Sun of your life doth set, which declines apace, you may go to your Dormitorie in peace.
Though these Papers do not inform you of what you know not, yet they may serve to mind you of what you know. King Philip knew that he was a mortal Man, yet he would have his Mo∣nitor every morning to tell him that he was so, uttering these words with a loud voice, . I think it meet, my Lord, as St. Peter speaks, 2 Pet. 1.13. to stir you up, by putting you in re∣membrance: And I hope your
 Lordship will suffer me to be your Remembrancer from the Press, as I was forI had the honour to be Chap∣lain seven years. several years from the Pulpit, which was no small encouragement to me in my Ministerial Pains.
But fearing lest I should ex∣ceed the bounds of an Epistle, craving your Lordships Patro∣nage and Acceptance of these my Labours, I take leave, and rest,
My Lord,

Ashow, Jan. 27. 1670.
