


SIR,
FOr a deed which I might have chosen whether or no I would have done, it seems somewhat uncouth to make any manner of Apology, for I might have saved both labours; and therefore I shall not make use of that Hackny Stale (which hath not been wanting) Importunity of Friends; Nor shall I colour

my Design with any pretext of more Consequence, than the thing is.
The naked truth, or rea∣son then, why these two Ser∣mons see the light, it is a desire I had (which Nature it self prompts every Agent to) opus perficere, to finish what I had begun, and indeed to bless God who before my own, hath brought, A Period to the Grand Conspiracy.
It was (I profess) a great Alleviation of my sufferings, to meditate the Parallel between my Saviour and my Soveraign; His great Example silenced all murmurs! and since it hath pleased God to restore him in

the greatest, and nighest capa∣city this State affords; since we enjoy him in his Lively I∣mage; since there sits upon the Throne, Carolus nulli nisi Patri secundus,
A second to that glorious Martyr, Quis tam ferreus ut teneat se? who can be so Stoical as not to rejoyce, and be exceeding glad? And indeed I never hope to see a gladder land, then I saw upon this ac∣count!
Nor truly did I onely stand by, and observe, but even then as early as any, these two Ser∣mons, even as they are now pre∣sented, were then preached; But I conceived the Musick was

too loud then, for a plain song to be heard in, and the tinkling of a Cymbal is best spared, when Trumpets, Shaumes, and Sack∣buts sound up their stronger Elegancies; for which cause I have chosen a stiller hour, and indeed therefore a longer day, that I might take due measure of my own affections, and make some trial, whether my hopes or my Soveraign, were the bottom of my joy. And,
Right Worshipful, it was meet, yea very meet, that I should delay, and proportion my intentions even to your lea∣sure; it was meet I should give you the full liberty of that gene∣ral Tryumph, before any thing

of mine should call you off: For next to the happy arrival of our Gracious Soveraign Lord the King, I am bound to blesse God for you; for you, whose Bounty did surprize my hopes; for you, who guilded my black∣er letters, and feared not to be an Obadiah to the Prophets of the Lord, in the saddest times.
Ever must my prayers be, Good luck have thou with thine Honour, even with that Honour, which was the undoubted evidence of more Loyalty, than Ambition, when your noble Choice was, rather in a minorated degree of Ho∣nour to Attend, then to be onely a thrifty Spectator at the Co∣ronation

of your Soveraign.
The Grand Conspiracy, and the Continuation of it, when they durst not see light, they had the light of your Coun∣tenance; and therefore, I doubt not but this Happy Period it shall be received by you, as the first Fruits of his Gratitude, who is bound to proclaim him∣self,
From your boun∣ty and my Vi∣carige of Lem∣mington Hastings' Jan. 30. 1661.

