



THe Apostle Peter knowing (as he saith) that shortly he was to put off that his tabernacle of the flesh,
2 Pet. 1.14, 15 as our Lord Jesus Christ had shewed him; he therefore endeavored that Gods peo∣ple, after his decease, might have those things he taught them always in remembrance: And thus it came to pass, that to this day we have that portion of holy Writ which he then left in writing. If Peters practice be imitable in this kinde, I sup∣pose the same duty lies on
Si M. T. Ciceroni tanta fuit cura de sua republica, ut scripsit in lib. de Amici∣tia.—Mihi autem non minori curae est qualis resp. post mortem me∣am futura sit, quàm qualis hodie est: Multò magis incumbat mihi cura de anima∣rum salute ut benè cedat illis postquam ego è vivis exiero, ae{que} ut jam ante obitum meum. me. Revelation I have none, but many stitches and infirmities, which I take to be fore-runners of my departure hence. Some things, and amongst the rest, these First Things,
I have taught you; what remains now, but that after my decease you might have these things always in remembrance? To that purpose, the same I delivered once to your ears, I now present to your eyes; as you were then pleased to hear them, so I trust you will now peruse them: Onely one thing you may please to observe through this Treatise, That whereas in the Name of Christ I often Beseech, Ex∣hort, Command the unregenerate to believe, to be reconciled to God, to pray, to fall on this or that duty, it is not as if they could do any thing of their own strength or power; but because Jesus Christ, in Exhorting, Entreating, Commanding, puts forth his own power, and his own strength to enable them. While Paul exhorted the Goaler to believe in the Lord Jesus, that he might be saved, God enabled the Goalor to believe. Life and power is conveyed to the soul, in Gospel-Commands and Exhortations. While Ezekiel prophesied over dead bones, breath came into them, and they lived: so while the Pro∣phets of the Lord do preach over sinful impenitent hearers, who are like to the Prophets dry bones, the breath of Heaven, the Spirit of the Most High in the Ministery of the Gospel, enters into them, and so they are made new creatures, and see the Kingdom of
God. I have no more to say, onely I beseech God you may receive a Blessing by these poor labors upon your poor souls: it is the hearty Prayer of

