



Right Honourable,
ONce I made bold to prefix an Epistle to Your Honour, before my Book entituled Ultima, since which time, You have continued with increase Your wonted fa∣vours; As the Sun that rejoyceth to run his race, and is unwearied after his many revolutions; so Year after Year, have You indefatigably expressed Your great Bounty, whereby both my self and family have been exceedingly refreshed. As I cannot but in way of thankfulness acknowledge thus much; So I shall be a sincere Remembrancer both of your Honour, and Your nearest Relations at the Throne of Grace.
My Lord, I have now composed this Work, containing a ne∣cessary practice and high priviledge of every Christian; it is by way of supplement to the other duties set down in my Book call'd Media, but because of my large handling it, I reserved it for a tract by it self. Indeed of all other duties, I prefer it as the chief, and I exceedingly wonder that before this time, it hath not been underta∣ken by some abler hand. Christians ordinarily go to Prayer, Sacra∣ments, Hearing, Reading, and Meditation of the Word; and some∣times (though more seldom) they set on the exercise of other Duties, as self-trial, self-denial, the improving of experiences, the clearing of evidences, extemporary and deliberate meditation, &c. but in the mean time how is the main, the prime employment, even the duty of duties, of Looking unto Jesus, wholly neglected? If many, or most have been ignorant of it hitherto, I think it is high time, to discover it to the sleepy world; and it may be when day is clear, they will walk in the light, and bless God for finding out a way, wherein they may more immediately have commerce with Jesus Christ. I could have wished that others more able had appeared in this service, in
 a particular handling of this excellent subject, I find it in print wisht for by a godly Brother, where he complains that Christ's love had been so little studied. Men have been very swift in searching after other truths, but slow in searching after this, An ample ex∣act discovery of this love of Christ, I say of this love (in carrying on our souls salvation from first to last) may well be set down a∣mongst the desiderata, the desirables of Divines, it having been so little handled (unless in some parts or pieces) by any: Surely it is very sad to think, that the knowledge of this love of Christ (in a continued series) being of such necessary and high concern∣ment hath been so little enquired into. O what a gallant Gospel-design were it for some one who is acquainted with the Spirit in a large measure, to go over the whole History of the Gospel (of the everlasting Gospel of Jesus) and to observe the glorious shi∣nings of the love of Christ to Believers in all! it would be preci∣ous if some would take it in hand, and perfect it to the purpose, but it is sad to think it hath been neglected so long. As the Lord hath enabled, I have adventured; and if for my rashness in not waiting any longer, to see if any Star of a greater magnitude would have ap∣peared, I must be censured, I fly to your Honour for Patronage. Nor only for Patronage, but I humbly heg of You, and Yours, to peruse and practise this slender Work; who can tell but some of the golden Oile of Grace may come out of Jesus Christ the true Olive-tree, even through these Pipes? and if so, your own experiences will be satisfa∣ctory answers to all other censures. Sure I am in this exercise (how∣ever the directions may be weak) you will find the advantage of ly∣ing at the well-head, and so you may drink more sweetly than others that make use only of the streams. That you (my noble Lord) and your vertuous Lady, with your hopeful Issue, may receive spiritual good by this Treatise, and all other helps which God's good provi∣dence, may put into your hands. Is the hearty prayer, My Lord,

