


Monseigneur,
THough the State of Venice is at this day in its declension, yet in the condition it is, it retains somthing of Majesty; It is ve∣nerable for an Antiquity of a∣bove Twelve hundred years; Il∣lustrious for Christianity which it has professed from its Cradle; Famous for the Kingdoms it possess'd in the Levant, and for the Wars it has maintain'd against the Turks; Famous for the form of its Government, which is a Master∣piece of Policy; and Famous for its ancient Allyance with the Crown of France, which has had it somtimes for its Companion both in Arms and Victories. I have thought, Sir, these Reasons a sufficient recommendation to your Lordship, of this History which I now present. I am sensible notwithstanding, I ought not to expose so poor a Work to the Eyes of so great a Minister, and that a person respected by all

France, consecrated to the Publick, ought not to be interrupted by particular Affairs; and in∣deed I could not but ballance betwixt my de∣sire of doing somthing that might testify my Zeal to your Lordships service, and my fear of committing that which might be interpreted boldness. But when I consider'd your Goodness, as great as your Power, I could not but hope your Lordship would extend the effects of it to me, who along time have been a silent Ad∣mirer of your Vertues: Vertues that your Lordship has inherited from your Father by way of advance; Vertues, that have render'd you like him, a compleat Minister.
I could not but admire in your Lordship, that pregnancy and force of Spirit that makes you sufficient alone for so many different affairs, whilst neither their difficulty disturbs you, nor their multitude confounds you. That faith∣ful and uninterested Devotion you carry for your Prince, (whom you honor more for his Person than his Crown) That respectful liber∣ty wherewith you address to himself, not to his fortune; preserving by a great and unusual secret, the Dignity of your Office, and the Reputation of his Favour; That Heroick Con∣stancy that places you above the reach of Envy or Hatred, things wherewith you fear not to incumber your self, when the service of your Prince and Countrey requires it; And last of all, That incomparable Vigilance that keeps you always in action, which carries you to all

places where your presence is necessary, and which inables you to see, to understand, and to penetrate into all things. For, if we may trust what is said and known of your Lord∣ship upon the Frontiers, and in our Armies, There it is Sir, that you are observ'd to pass whole nights on Horseback, to expose your Per∣son to danger, perform all the most laborious offices of a Soldier, to give example to others, and necessitate them to the execution of their Duty. So that Sir, 'tis not without good rea∣son his Majesty loves you, and heaps upon you his favours and benefits. He does honor to his own Justice in advancing of you, and you are the Workman-ship rather of his Wisdom, than Kindness. He wanted a sagacious, exact, active, indefatigable Minister, and such a one as was fit to succeed in the place of your in∣imitable Father: He has found all those qua∣lifications in such perfection in you, that he has put your industry upon tryal in several dif∣ficult Imployments. His choice discovers your worth, and your actions, that you are wor∣thy of his Choice: He is happy in a Minister, your Lordship in a Master; and betwixt His Majesty and your Lordship, we may see the ex∣cellent Concert that was formerly betwixt Au∣gustus and Mecenas, that is, a perpetual Con∣flict betwixt Generosity in the Prince, and Gratitude in the Subject. I perceive I am flown out insensibly in your praises, which flow in upon my Pen without any labour or study; but

though they proceed from a true Sentiment, and Flattery has no share in them, neverthe∣less because I would not offend your Lordship's modesty too much, I ferbear to pursue them.
It remains them that I only beseech your Lordship to vouchsafe your protection to this Work in which you will see as in a Glass, the finest and most delicate Maxims of the Vene∣tians. I could wish it had been more perfect, but I hope you will excuse its defects, and per∣haps commend the design, which was the more difficult, because Venice is a place where Se∣crets are impenetrable to Strangers, especially to Embassadors and other Ministers, to whom they never speak but by gestures and signs. Be∣sides, scarce any thing is to be seen in their Government, but clouded with variety of ap∣pearances and pretences far enough from the Truth. For my part, I have endeavour'd to tell truth quite through my Book, and your Lordship will easily discern it; Your Lordship who your self use it so much, and can so readi∣ly distinguish it from Falshood. In the mean time, I shall esteem my self transcendently happy, if this Work (which is the first pro∣duct of my thought and my solitude) may assist to perswade Your Lordship that I am with all possible Reverence and Devotion.
My LORD,

