



Honourable and Beloved.
SOme who have been judicious Spe∣ctators
of those uncharitable quar∣rels,
which have broken forth in
these Latter dayes, amongst Pro∣fessors,
have been ready to conclude,
That either Men have not understood that thing
which Religion signifies, or else they have abu∣sed

the Name of Religion, making it serve to
advance themselves, and promote some world∣ly
designe: And if they shall consider the power
of unmortified lusts in the hearts of wicked men
emboldened by the Advantage of such generall
dissentions, it will not be so great a wonder to
see many cast off God and Holinesse, as to see
any keeping the Faith, and cleaving unto Christ in
such an houre of Temptation. One great snare, that
the Devill hath layed to intangle soules, hath
been, To put them upon it to call every thing
into Question; which hath been the more dange∣rous,
because such enquirie doth pretend to Inge∣nuity,
and is like that Tree of knowledge, a Tree
to bee desired to make one Wise, and certainly it
is farre better to be humbly and modestly inqui∣sitive,
then Popishly and Sottishly ignorant, for
the Wise mans eyes are in his head, but the Foole
destroyes himselfe by a strange implicit faith, and
blind obedience: But when a Proud and Deboyst
Spirit shall become one of those 
those haesitating Questionists, how will
he Vaunt and Triumph in his conceits, as if he
had Posed and Non-plust Truth it selfe: When
such a one is gotten into this strong hold, what
will not his bold confidence dare to Question?

And although hee might consider that a Foole
may aske more questions then ten Wise men
can answer, yet still he persisteth in vaine In∣terrogatories;
And such is the disturbance of his
minde occasioned by the pride and wickednesse
of his heart, that lett the most cleare and perti∣nent
Reply be made to his Demands; yet is Hee
wholly indisposed to receive satisfaction. Thus is
the poor, but proud and insulting Sceptick, at once
Really the Devils Bondslave, and conceitedly his
owne freeman.
When I was, by your Order, called to this pub∣lique
service, many things of this kind did presse
in upon me, And the greatest impression that I
could perceive  my spirit was, To speake
something, that , by the blessing of God,
tend to the Vindication of the Truth of Religi∣on,
from the Malicious, but Frivolous affronts
of Prophane, yet Cunning men; and I could
not finde out a more Direct meanes to this end,
then by an appeale to the Common sense of all
Regenerate soules, which I have done in the fol∣lowing
discourse, according to the measure of
the gift received, the effects whereof I heartily
desire may be these two,
First, For ever to silence that Machiavilian

Blasphemy, that Religion is nothing but a Poli∣tique
Engine, and that there is no such thing in∣deed
any where to be found. There are those in
the world, who in a true spiritual sense, have heard
with their eares, and seen with their eyes, and
handled with their hands of the word of Life; And
it is to be feared, that those soules, which deny,
that there is any Religion abroad, are wholly
devoid of it within themselves. Religion is not
a Chimaera or Notion, but a real thing in the hearts
and lives of good men.
Secondly, To stirre up and awaken Professors,
that they rest not satisfied in any Outward forme,
without the inward life and power of Religion.
Oh! Bee not contented to serve in the Oldnesse
of the Letter, but in the Newnesse of the spirit.
Wee have raised such a Dust by our Disputes in
lesser matters, and by our espousing such triviall
quarrels, that we have almost lost our Christ, and
alienated our affections from our first Husband.
It is time for us now to call forth that Primitive
spirit of Love and Purity, if by any meanes wee
might remove the Scandal of our contentions, and
exhort one another so much the more, as we see
the day approaching.
After you had patiently given this Sermon the

Hearing, you were pleased to importune the Pub∣lication
thereof, whereby your selves and others
might the better Perpend, and truly examine what
is therein contained; which request of your Ho∣nours
I could not easily deny, but have accord∣ingly
performed, and do here tender it to your
Christian Acceptance, with hopefull confidence,
that seeing for the Truths sake, it found such un∣expected
entertainment at your eare, it shall not be
despised at the more severe Tribunal of your Eye.
Now, that good spirit of Jesus Christ open
the eyes of your mindes, that you may see and
approve things that are excellent, and perswade
your hearts to receive the Truth in the Love of
it, and direct your steps to walke in the paths
of Mercy and Truth, that you may be Saved.
So prayeth,

