



SIR!
SInce your Command gave occasion to the Conception of this Discourse, justice will oblige you to stand for its God∣father; which you may safely do without danger from the Canon. The height of my ambition was to provide my self of a Right Worshipful Susceptor, when Favourites may command the Patronage of the Right Honourable: thus every man will answer for a Great mans Error, when the poor mans Truth may go unchristen'd: for thus the Poet,
An heaven-born-Truth (like poor mens infants) may
For want of Godfathers, unchristen'd stay,
And find no Priest; when every stander-by,
Will be a Gossip to a Great mans Lye.
Among the many discouragements I struggled with in answer∣ing your desires and the Doctors Sermon, there was none more terrifying (though many so) than that it was a Sermon, and a Sermon premunited with the Lord Mayors Order. The former; because it seem'd indecent to Arraign a Discourse, that came with the Certificate of the God of Heaven, and had so honourably been acquitted by the Gods on Earth: To this I had nothing to say in my Defence, but that, He that will plead the priviledg of the sanctuary, must keep within the verge of it. I have heard of a Gentleman, that being long prosecuted in the high Commission for striking a Reverend Clergy-man, pleaded that Mr. Parson was not in his Canonical Habiliments, and therefore ought not to insist upon his character; and Archbishop Laud voted for the poor

mans discharge, because it was but Lay-battery to cudgel a Coat; which would have been Theomachy upon a Cassock: I must bor∣row the same Plea; That the Reverend Doctor ought not to stand upon the priviledg of a Preacher, unless he had kept closer to his Commission, and preacht nothing for, but what really was the Word of God: But to be open with you, Sir, It was the latter that put me hardest to it, when I saw the flag of London stream∣ing before the Ship; for I protest to you, I am always ready to strike sail to the meanest Yatch that hangs out the Colours of so sacred a Name, so great an Authority: And yet I rub'd through that, by considering, that the Order was for its Printing, not against my Answering; and though that License made it more vendible, yet not at all more unanswerable; and so I hope we are past the worst, for I never much Dread those Polemical pieces, whose greatest strength lies in the left-hand Page before the Title. And yet I was a little stumbled at the Order, which desires the Doctor to Print, not only what he had preached, but what fur∣ther he had prepared to deliver at that time; which (me-thought) lookt somewhat like the Implicit faith required by the Rubrick, which enjoyns the Minister to use one of the Homilies set forth, or hereafter to be set forth by Common Authority.
In the very entrance of his Epistle Dedicatory, the Doctor takes notice of a Report raised, it seems, by some ill men (that's the Alamode phrase) that he intended to stir up the Magistrates and Judges to a persecution of Dissenters. I was not a little troubled, that a person of his Character should be so unworthily misrepre∣sented, and misinterpreted; and no less joyful, that the Doctor has so timely and zealously disclaimed a design so horrid in it self, so unbecoming the Place he then bore, and the Title he justly wears; nor can I imagine whence a suspicion, as scandalous as groundless, could be foster'd, except from this one thing, That his Sermon was preach't to those Righteous persons, who (in the matter of Conformity) needed no repentance, when the Harangue had been more pertinent and proper for a Conventicle, to those Sinners whom he presumes to need it.
But so far was he from blowing up the coals of persecution, that he professes his only design was to prevent all occasion of it, by finding out a certain foundation for a lasting union among our selves. And not without good reason: for seeing there are but two ways to extinguish a raging fire, the one by pouring water upon that merciless Element, the other by withdrawing the fewel that feeds, but never fills its insatiable appetite; the Dr. judg'd it the wiser course to convert all the Dissenters, that there might be nothing to burn; rather than leaving such combubistle mat∣ter to quench the fiery fury of persecution: for if there were no offenders, there would neither be room for pardoning mercy, nor vindicative justice; and if he could perswade all men to con∣form upon such easie arguments, the whole Generation, Kind, and Tribe of Ecclesiastical Informers, must be extinct, and fail for ever.
However, an union, and a lasting union; and a foundation, nay a certain foundation for that lasting union, are terms of that me∣lodious chime to our ears, that his tendries must needs be highly acceptable, even when their disproportionateness to those ends give us feeble hopes that they will prove effectual.
All union that pretends to be lasting, must be real and cordial; and that it may be so, must necessarily be founded upon terms consistent with the conscientious principles of the united parties: force may possibly justle and thrust men into one place, but never into one mind; and fraud may palliate for a while the threatning symptoms, but will never eradicate the causes of the malady: such was that union between the Greek and Latin Churches, hastily patcht up in the Council of Florence, where his Holiness, like an old bungling Botcher stitcht together the two ill-matcht pieces, which presently dropt asunder, and the rent was made worse. All dough-bak'd Alliances will give again; and those differences which are compromised upon unequal terms, last no longer than a fair juncture shall tempt the aggrieved party to a rupture. So have we sometime seen a mighty Conqueror impose such terms upon the conquered, that they suppose it one tacit Article in the Peace,

That it shall endure no longer than the injured and weaker side can get power to justifie its violation.
This lasting Ʋnion (the Doctor thinks) is impossible to be at∣tained, till men are convinced of the evil and danger of the present Separation: but others think (with equal plausibleness) that it is impossible to be attained till men are convinced of the evil and danger of the present Impositions: and the Dr. was once of that mind, when he proved so learnedly, Iren. p. 1, 2. That things ne∣cessary for the Churches peace must be clearly revealed: Which prin∣ciple had he and others adhered to, his Weapon-salve for the Chur∣ches wounds had been as common and famous as the sympathetical Powder which Sir K. Digby assures us is in France successfully practised by every Barber. But why is Union impossible but upon such conviction? Is it impossible for the same Power that imposed these severe conditions of Union, to relax and remit them? We use to say, Eodem modo quo quid Instituitur, destitui∣tur: There's no more goes to Repeal a Law, than to Enact it: Nay, it's more possible for our Ecclesiasticks to wave what they confess indifferent, than for the Laity to comply with what they judg sinful. But if inexorable stiffness has made their condescention impossible, who created the impossibility? If Union (as matters now stand) is become desperate, who put matters into that de∣sperate posture? It's unreasonable that any should create a neces∣sity of separation, and then complain of an impossibility of union: but 'tis easily observed, that men to conciliate repute to their own humors, call what they have a mind to, absolutely necessary; and that to which they bear an aversion, simply impossible. The Grandees of the Church knew full well, that the generality of the Nation who seriously attended Religion, had contracted such principles as either condemned the Ceremonious appendages as sinful or unuseful, and therefore sinful because unuseful: they knew well also, that these Impositions had lost much of that stock of credit upon which they had formerly set up for themselves, and driven a pretty trade among us: They must needs know too, that to perpetuate the old Conditions, would be but to perpetuate old

divisions, and create new ones; why then would they venture so precious a lading as Peace, in that old worm-eaten bottom, where∣in it must certainly miscarry? But if it be impossible to attain Union at cheaper rates with men, we must look up to Him to whom nothing is impossible, who can open their eyes to see the things that belong to our common peace; and in the mean time en∣able us to discharge the things that belong to our duty, and bear those evils which shall attend them. What a fine world now must moderate and unconcerned Christians have between these two, some have sworn to endeavour a Reformation according to the word of God, and others seem to have taken a solemn Oath never to come up to that Rule; and between them both, Ʋnion is im∣possible.
Well! say what we will or can, it's impossible to attain a last∣ing Ʋnion till Dissenters are convinc'd of the evil of their Sepa∣ration. Pray then convince them of it! That he will do with a wet finger; for the present Separation (says the Doctor) is carried on by such principles as not only overthrow the present constitution of our Church, but any other whatsoever. If that be the worst on't, we'l endeavour to carry it on by better principles that shall over∣throw neither; will that please him? But what if I should re∣turn; that the present Impositions are supported by such princi∣ples as will divide, not only our Church, but any Church whatsoever. This would be but a Rowland for his Oliver: And I am some∣what confident, that fairer probabilities may be offer'd for this Assertion, than the other; for as to matter of fact, it's most evi∣dent, that from the first Infancy of the Gospel-state, when the Church was in its Minority of years, and Adult state of perfection, to this very day, nothing has more disorder'd the outward face of the Church, than the Lordly, Imperious Imposition of dubi∣ous matters: Thus the Judaizing Dogmatizers, who would stretch all mens Consciences to their own Last, and compel them to a conformity to the antiquated Law of Moses, began the brawl, and their successors in pride have danced after their measures, to the World's confusion. Nor has any Engine of the Devil more

batter'd and shaken the well-compacted Walls of God's Jerusa∣lem, than these roaring Ecclesiastical Canons: And if we examine the principles upon which they proceed in exacting these unne∣cessary and doubtful terms of Union, we shall find them the very same upon which proud Rome has introduced the whole Lirry of her superstitious Observances, viz. an unaccountable power in those that are the Top, to make them do and say any thing that are at the Bottom; in which Observances, and upon which Prin∣ciple, the Christian World never yet united, and it's more than probable never will.
But I intend not to confront, but modestly examine the truth of the Doctor's Assertion, namely, Whether the present Separati∣on be carried on by such principles as not only overthrow the present Constitution of our Church, but of any other whatsoever. And there are two Inquiries I shall make upon this subject: First, Whether the principles by which the Separation is carried on, will destroy any other Church? Which if it be true, and that the Dis∣senting-Churches are built upon such mouldering foundations, such self-destroying principles, it is next to miracle that they should yet stand, and neither fall with their own weakness, nor the weight of Oppression wherewith they have been surcharged; that they should be continually batter'd with violence from with∣out, and undermined by policy from beneath, and yet no conside∣rable breach be made in their intrinsick Frame and Constitution! Now to put this Question out of all question, I will make a rea∣sonable motion, Leave the Dissenters quietly to overthrow them∣selves by their own bad principles, and so shall the Church of Eng∣land avoid the odium of Persecution, which of late has no very good name; and the Separators as Felones de se, shall be condemn∣ed to have a stake driven through them, who, like the foolish wo∣man, pluckt down their own house upon their own heads, with their own hands. Give them but respite from outward fury, and com∣mit them to be crumbled to nothing by the inconsistency of their own principles; and they must lay upon themselves, not the Church, the guilt of their own destruction. The Dissenters have

outlived one twenty years of vexation; and if men could be quiet, may outlive twenty more, and in time outgrow all their weak∣nesses; so that it may tempt an Impartial Considerer to think their present constitution immortal, which no outward assaults, no inward Schisms has been able to dissolve. There are two things usually pleaded for the souls Immortality; the one, that it's not compounded of Contraries, such as by intestine jars may dissolve its essence; The other, that it's not obnoxious to exter∣nal Impressions, such as may storm, and break in piece its pow∣ers. And on both those accounts, the Dissenters humbly hope their Congregations may prove Immortal, seeing they have not felt utter ruine from the latter, and do not much fear a disso∣lution from the former.
Secondly, Let us a little enquire, what truth there may be in the other branch of the Doctors Proposition; That the Separa∣tion is carried on by such principles as will overthrow the present constitution of the Church of England. I shall not assume the confidence to say, That then its present constitution is none of the best and strongest: but this I may with modesty assert, That the principles upon which the Dissenters proceed, will pluck down nothing that Christ ever built, nor pluck up any thing that Christ ever planted; and if they should pluck up a few weeds which the envious one threw over the hedg, whilest men slept, the good corn would thrive the better for such weeding; if they should pluck down a few Imaginations which curiosity has carved, and set up in the Nitches on the outside of the Church-wall, the main of the Fabrick would stand more firm, discharg'd of a need∣less cumber, without prejudice to the foundation: Some few Traditions, some few unscriptural Additions, some supernume∣rary Ceremonies, or some few Encroachments upon Christs Regal and Prophetical Offices their principles might overthrow: but what are these, all these, to the being, the well-being, the flourishing being of the Church of England? Is it true, that no Ceremony, no Episcopacy? Was ever a Church built upon such Woolsacks? Such discourses as these tempt us to suspect there's

nothing substantial in that Constitution, which cannot subsist without these accidents. Are Ceremonies grown such Insepara∣ble Adjuncts, that they cannot Abesse sine subjecti Interitu? We may as well fancy, that to scowr off the rust, will destroy the Iron; or that it's impossible to wash the face, without fleying of the skin: as that a Reformation, according to Gods word, will draw along with it the inevitable ruine of that Church which is founded on it, and reformed by it: And if it rest upon any other Basis, it needs the principles of none but it self to un∣do it.
I can allow the Doctor to see much farther into these mat∣ters than I; and yet I cannot be perswaded that I am stark blind; and with the best eyes I have, or can borrow, cannot yet dis∣cern what prejudice it can be to them that worship God in a more spruce, splendid, gentile mode than we do, to suffer us to worship our God in his own, old, Scripture-fashion: It cannot be denied, that the Protestant Churches in France are really separated from the Papal Gallican Polity: It must be acknow∣ledged that their principles carry a direct opposition to those of their Adversaries, that their separation from, and opposition to the National frame is much greater than that of Dissenters from, and to the constitution of the Church of England; and yet the Roman Polity lives, and thrives, and prospers, and no one of all the Popish Kingdoms bears a greater port, or glories more in its exteriour splendor and grandeur than that does: Why then cannot Conformists secure themselves against the Dissenters prin∣ciples, as well as the Gallican Church, against those of the Hugo∣nots? And why may not Dissenters plead for the same freedom, especially as to the immediate worship of God, and ordering their own particular Societies, since they plead for less here than they there enjoy, and yet upon much stronger arguments? for the Dissenters at home plead for no power to set up Classes, and Synods, Provincial or National, which yet are there indulged them; and they think they might expect a little more respect, as being of one and the same Protestant Religion, and not guilty of

any principles which have any tendency, as they that own them have no design, to overthrow the present constitution of the Church; so that the Doctors Reasonings are herein so unlike himself, so defective of that evidence and cogency wherewith he attacques the Papal Idolatry, that had I not known his Dis∣course to have been Concio ad Magistratum, I might have sus∣pected it to be nothing but Ad Populum phalerae.
The principles upon which the present Separation (such a one as it is) is carried on, are such as fear not to appear before any Bar, where Scripture and Reason, not Interest and Prejudice have the Chair; which though it be not here pertinent to dis∣pute, but nakedly to assert, leaving their Justification to those larger Volumes which are in every mans hand concerned to ar∣rive at satisfaction in these matters; yet shall I direct the Rea∣der to some few of them:
(1.) That every particular Church upon a due ballance of all circumstances, has an inherent right to chuse its own Pastor, and every particular Christian the same power to chuse his own Church; I say not they have a power to mischuse, but a power to chuse; not to chuse any, but one that may best advance their own edi∣fication; at least that no Pastor be forced upon a Church, no Church obtruded on a single Christian without their own con∣sent: A principle so highly rational, so clearly scriptural, and of such venerable Antiquity, as ought not upon some imaginary or pretended evil consequences to be exploded, seeing the con∣trary principle is clogg'd with more real, than this can be with surmised Inconveniencies: I will thank my friends that will re∣commend to my choice an able Physician, a faithful Lawyer; but I am sure I love my health, my life, my estate so well, as not to put the Election out of my own hands into theirs, who are not likely to love me better than my self: and if I chuse amiss, the greatest wrong will be my own: Now what Church this principle would overthrow, I am yet ignorant; If indeed such tyranny should prevail in the world, that men must be driven to Heaven, like silly sheep to the Market, and this principle

should a little cross the humour on't, the Churches of Christ would stand where they do, and I believe carry a clearer Coun∣terpart of the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
It is pretended, that upon this principle men would chuse one Pastor to day, another to morrow, and a third the next; and so turn round till they are giddy, or run themselves out of breath in a wild-goose chase, till they sit down, and rest in Athe∣ism and Irreligion: And is this all? The Apostle commands us to prove all things: must we needs therefore never hold fast that which is good? We ought upon great deliberation, advice and counsel, chuse our own Pastor; and when we have so chosen, sit down under Gods Ordinance, and wait for his presence in, and blessing upon his own way: And in the purest Primitive times, when the Churches exercised this power most, then were they most firmly united, and Divisions, Schisms and Separations the greatest rarities among them: but suppose the worst on't; That some malecontent should now and then desert the Commu∣nion of England for that of Rome; Cruelties will never remedy the evil, or the Remedy would be worse than the disease; and what if some odd Maggot-pate should drop out with the Dis∣senters Congregations? what is all this to the overthrow of the Church? This priviledg may be abused, must it therefore not be used? Ʋnsetled heads, and unstable hearts will be wandring; let them go; 'tis a good riddance of them if they be obstinate; but where this humour has destroy'd one Church, this rigorous forcing of Pastors upon the people has divided and destroyed hundreds.
The generality of Dissenters in this Nation, at this day may be reduced to two Heads:
First, Such who having been formerly sixt with, and under their faithful Pastors, by their deliberate choice, after good expe∣rience of their Ministerial abilities to teach them the mind and will of God, of their wisdom to advise them in their spiritual cases; of their skill to conduct them through their emergent difficulties, of their meekness, sobriety, heavenly-mindedness, and

whatever might recommend to, and inforce upon their consci∣ences their sound Doctrine, do still judg it their unquestionable duty to abide in that Relation, and by no terrours to be driven, by no blandishments to be withdrawn from their oversight and guidance, according to the word of God; judging that such withdrawing, such separation would be that real Schism, which hears so badly in, and is loaded with such guilt by the holy Scriptures.
A second sort is of those who having been sometime hearers at large in their respective Parish-Churches, and coming at last to have more concernment for their souls, and the important busi∣ness of another world, and finding that their Parochial Teacher was either so overlaid with a numerous throng of people (which he commonly, but unadvisely calls his Flock and Charge) that he cannot personally take care of the hundredth part of them; or so engaged in secular affairs, of more weight to him than his Pastoral Charge, that he has neither heart nor leisure to attend so troublesome an employment; or so unskilful in the word of Righteousness, that he cannot tolerably declare the Counsel of God for edification; or so unsound in his judgment, that he's more likely to poyson than feed his people; or so debauched in his life, that he plucks down more in an hour, than he builds up in a year; or such a Bigot for humane Inventions and Superstitions, that the naked simplicity of divine Worship, is either clouded to render it useless, or clogged to render it burdensome; this per∣son seeks and finds out some other Pastor (qualified as before de∣scribed) to whose Ministerial conduct under Christ (the only chief shepherd) he commits himself; and there peaceably and patiently continues, notwithstanding the barbarick clamours of Schism and Separation: And all this without more prejudice to the Church he forsakes, then it's an injury to a Tradesman to leave his shop, who has left it himself, or has his hands full of better customers.
(2.) That it is the duty of every Christian to worship God, not only in purity of the heart, but according to the purity of Gospel-administrations:

The true measure of which Purity, is to be ta∣ken from its consonancy and harmony with the word of God, which has sufficiently either in general, special, or particular in∣structed us in the acceptable service of our God: Purity of wor∣ship is no such idle and contemptible thing, to be flam'd off with an impertinent story, that we must not separate from a true Church upon pretence of greater purity: Nor can I imagine upon what pretence, except that of greater purity, the Church of En∣gland separated from Rome, if it be true what we read in Rat. Account, p. 293. That the Church of Rome is a true Church; and what he further owns, Defence against T. G. p. 785. I allow (says the Doctor) the Church of Rome to be a true Church, as holding all the essential points of the Christian faith: and what the Archbishop Laud confessed to that Lady, who would needs go before to Rome alone, because she could not bear a crowd, that she might be saved in Communion with the Roman Church: Now if Rome be a true Church, if she holds all the essential points of Christianity; If salvation may be attained in that Communion, why was there such a stir about reforming of Accidents, when the Essentials were secured? Why such a Contest about a little easier way, when the other way was passable? Why all this a-do about a purer Church, when the other is confessed a true Church? These things then will follow in the lump from the Archbishops and Doctors Concessions: 1. That a person, or party may separate from some true Church, which holds all the essential points of the Christian faith, without the Imputation of a Schismatick. 2. That a person or party may separate from some Church where salvation is attainable, without peril of the guilt of Schism. 3. That the only Reason (that yet appears) to justifie the Church of Englands departure from Rome, is, that it is lawful in some cases to withdraw from the Communion of a true Church, wherein all the essential points of faith are owned, and wherein salvation may be attained; for the sake of greater purity of worship, greater clearness of Doctrine, and greater security of salvation. Is it then lawful for England to separate from Italy for greater purity? It

may be lawful for others to separate from England for greater purity: 'Tis readily acknowledged, that the Impurity of the Roman Synagogue is much more, unconceivably more than that of the Church of England; and therefore there was not so great cause to leave the latter, as the former upon that account; but in aspiring after Conformity to the Institutions of Christ, we are not to consider so much what is behind, as what is before; not so much what we have left, as what we have yet to reach; nor so much the Terminus aquo, from what state of Impurity we have emerged; as the Terminus ad quem, to what state of purity we would arrive: for if it be true that there is such a state of Pu∣rity to be obtained, and such a state of Impurity to be avoided, as will justifie our forsaking of this for that; and such a mea∣sure of both these as will not; It must be exactly stated, what is the lowest degree of corruption that will, and what is the highest that will not warrant a separation: The Dissenters being judges, there are enow at home to excuse their secession; The Roma∣nists being judges, there are not enow abroad to vindicate the Church of Englands separation; and the former are more con∣firm'd in their judgment, since the Doctors Epistle Dedicatory to the now B. of London, prefixt to his Defence against T. G. where he openly avows on the behalf of the English Church, that it has reformed those abuses only, which have crept in since the times of the first four general Councils: Now the last of these four first being held at Chalcedon, An. 451. there were such Corrup∣tions crept into the Church before that time, which if imposed upon any as the condition of enjoying the means of their salva∣tion, will justifie a separation; but I shall the less insist upon this, because I am confident the Church of England never gave the Doctor a Commission to declare so much in her name, and I believe will give him as little thanks for his labour.
(3.) That every Christian is obliged (at least necessitate praecepti) to live in the use of all Gods Ordinances and Commandments; and therefore it will follow, 1. That where all Christs Institutions are not to be had, a Christian may peaceably withdraw from that

society, and seek them where he can find them: Now they say the case is this; That though we ought not to commit one sin to enjoy all Christs Ordinances, yet there are some wanting in this Church, which if you would commit a thousand sins to pur∣chase you cannot have them: The preamble to the Office of Com∣mination, intimates some such matter. Brethren, in the Primi∣tive Church there was a godly Discipline, that at the beginning of Lent, such persons as were notorious sinners, were put to open penance and punishment in this world, that their souls might be saved in the day of the Lord; and that others admonished by their example, might be more afraid to offend: Instead whereof, until the said dis∣cipline may be restored again (which thing is much to be desired); it is thought good, that at this time in your presence should-be read the general sentences of Gods curse against impenitent sinners. Now view this paragraph well in its parts. 1. There was a godly discipline in the Primitive times, if we could have kept it. 2. That this discipline was of unspeakable benefit to the people; notori∣ous sinners were put to open shame, others warned by their cen∣sures, and the end of all was the salvation of their souls. 3. That this Ordinance is not to be found in the Church at this day; which is a great loss. 4. That it is a thing to be much desired; and therefore it cannot but be worth the while to step over two thresholds for it: it's worth a wish (if wishing would do it) with the most ordinary Christian on earth. 5. That there's some∣thing set up instead of it; but quo warranto, we are not informed, nor who has power to chop and change any Institution of his, for a new trick, a Quid pro Quo, contrived by men. And there∣fore we may fairly hope, we shall not be condemned for Schis∣maticks for practising what they desire to practise; but alas we can, and they cannot, because none hinders them. 2. It will fol∣low also, that where the Institutions of Christ may be found, yet if they be fetter'd and chain'd to, or mixed with sinful Con∣ditions, 'tis the same case as if they were not at all to be had; for we can do nothing, but what we can lawfully do.
To name no more at present; we cannot have our Infants

baptized without the Aerial sign of the Cross, as a Medium whereby it is dedicated to Christ. What then shall we do? Here we may have a part or two of worship with innocency, and peace of conscience: but if we will walk in all Christs institutions, we must seek elsewhere: What shall we do then? must we spend our Lords days in an undecent trotting up and down the Town for one scrap here, a snap there? or shall we sit down under a well-fixed order of Worship and Discipline, and joyn with other Congregations occasionally in what they have? This is the ge∣neral course of Dissenters, and will deliver us from that argu∣ment wherein they so much triumph, That though we cannot joyn with them in all parts of worship, yet are we bound to it so far as we are perswaded it is lawful so to do: for we are fully per∣swaded 'tis our duty to partake of, and communicate in every Ordinance of Christ, and therefore statedly and fixedly to adhere to that Church, where, to that Pastor by whom they are all administred, not neglecting other Congregations, as Providence shall invite, to participate of what they afford, and what with∣out sin we may have.
(4.) That it is sinful to submit, subscribe assent to dubious and obscure terms of Communion: How far this principle will be al∣low'd us, I know not; but this I know, the Reverend Doctor once allow'd himself the benefit of it, when he justified the Se∣paration of the Church of England from Rome, Dialogue, p. 165. We think (says he) the requiring of doubtful things for certain, false for true, new for old, absurd for reasonable, is ground enough for us not to embrace communion with that Church, unless it may be had on better terms. And we think that this is ground enough for us, as well as himself, not to embrace the Communion of this Church, seeing there are imposed upon us doubtful things for certain, new for old, and we think too, false for true; I say we think so; and it was but the Doctors [we think] that he op∣posed to T. G. And we think further, that this will vindicate us from those loud, but empty outcrys of Schism and Schisma∣ticks; for so the Doctor asserts, Ibid. We have often proved, that

the imposing unreasonable conditions of Communion, makes the Church so imposing guilty of the Schism. I have told the Doctor what we think, I will tell him now why we so think, that doubtful things are imposed on us for certain, false for true; and among many others I assign this one instance, That in the Catechism of the Church, wherein the Laity are concern'd, this Doctrine is contained, That Infants perform faith and repentance by their sure∣ties; and such repentance too, whereby they forsake sin; and such faith, whereby they stedfastly believe the promises of God made to them in that Sacrament.
You see, Sir, how the Importunity of the Doctor has drawn us out of our reservedness; Dissenters have been modest to their great prejudice, and had rather dispute the matter upon other Arguments, than those drawn from the sinfulness and unlawful∣ness of the things required, out of that great veneration they have ever had for the Church of England; and yet we hope, that they that call and invite, nay provoke, and force us to this task, will not be so disingenuous to trapan us into the ambush of a penal Statute; it being unworthy of Gentlemen, and persons of Honour, first to be our Tempters, and then our Accusers.
(5.) That every Christian is obliged to walk with, and in all the ways of God, so far as they have attained: so far as they have the knowledg of Gods Will, they are to live up to it; so far as they see their freedom from bondage, they are to stand fast in it; so far as they are advanced towards a perfect reformation, they are to persevere. All retrograde motions are dangerous; for who knows but that the least declension from the ways of God may terminate in Apostacy? Foreseeing Christians therefore will not dare to tread back those steps they have taken towards per∣fection, but rather will be pressing forward to whatsoever degree of exactness in this life is attainable: We question whether we ought not to aspire and endeavour after greater purity; but it's past all question with us, that we ought not to retreat to greater Impurity; Dissenters are so far from divding, that they would be growing up into greater Union: they would walk as they

have attained to know, and would know more, that they may walk farther; know clearer, that they may walk holier; and for what they cannot attain by study, prayer, and the due use of all good means, they would humbly wait upon God, till he shall, and that he may reveal even that thing also unto them: But some are so hasty and impatient, that they will neither stay Gods leisure, nor theirs, but drive knowledg into their heads, and their brains out of their heads, with the great Churchbeetle.
(6.) Lastly, I have heard some of them own this principle, That where the Church has no power to command, there it cannot be the peoples duty to obey; for power to command, and obligation to obedience being Relatives, must be affirmed or denied equally and reciprocally: if then the Church has no power from Christ (and whence she should derive it but from him, I cannot divine) to impose these things in Controversie, it can never be proved their duty to obey in the premises: 'Tis a sad sight to see how Dis∣senters have been teazed with that Text, Let all things be done decently, and in order; but the clamour grows very weak from that Quarter: and now a new Text has been found out, which, they hope, will kill and slay all before it: As we have already attained, let's walk by the same rule; from whence they argue with singular acuteness, we must walk as we have attained, and therefore we must walk as we have not attained; if we be other∣wise minded we must wait till God reveal it to us; therefore, though we be otherwise minded, we must act as if like-minded; and though there be various degrees of light and knowledg, yet we must come up to an uniformity of practise, as if there were no variety of degrees; which makes a man a certain creature about six pence better than a horse, though some think upon that prin∣ciple he's a shilling worse: But these Doctrines of the Doctors, are collected and raised from the Text, just as our Collectors raise a Tax upon indigent, non-solvent people, who come armed with a Law, and a Constable, to distrain for that which is not to be had, rather than the King should lose his Right; and certainly never was Text so strained and distrained to pay what it never

owed; never man so Rack't to confess what he never thought; never was a Pumice-stone so squeez'd for water which it never held; nor ever a good Cause so miserably put to its shifts, as to press those innocent Texts against their wills, which refuse to come in as Volunteers to the service.
Notwithstanding what has been said; it shall stand for not-spoken, if the Doctor can prove his assertion, That the present Separation is carried on by such principles as will overthrow any Church whatever: Thus then he proceeds. If it be lawful to sepa∣rate upon pretence of greater purity, where there is an agreement in Doctrine, and the substantial parts of worship: then a bare differ∣ence in opinion, as to some circumstantials in worship, and the best constitution of Churches, will be a sufficient ground to break Com∣munion, and set up new Churches. Now because this dead weight always hangs lugging on one side, give me leave to put a Coun∣terpoise on the other side, to make it hang more even: If it be lawful to impose the Ceremonies upon pretence of decency and order, and to exact submission to them upon pretence of Peace and Ʋnion, then may bare will and pleasure be a sufficient reason to raise the severest persecution, to force Communion against conscience, or to de∣stroy all the Churches of Christ on earth for a bare difference in opi∣nion as to some circumstances.
Let us however with all tenderness examine this way of Rea∣soning, always protesting; 1. That we will not be cheated with that expression of pretence of greater Purity: for we do not al∣low hypocrisie to be a sufficient ground of Separation. 2. Nor with that other expression, a bare difference in opinion, which we would explain both here, and hereafter, if we understood the meaning of it: These things premised, I observe in his Argu∣ment some things prudently supposed, and those supposals as wisely improved. First then, here are some things very prudently suppo∣sed: As (1.) that there is a confessed agreement between the dif∣fering parties in Doctrine: But where shall we find that system of Doctrine, in which the Agreement is supposed to lye? shall we seek it in the Holy Scriptures? In vain! one party can find a

Church-power there to make Canons, in which the other party shall be bound to acquiesce upon pain and peril of the guilt of Schism: but the Dissenting-party can see no such matter: Those again have found a Doctrine there, that the Addition of any thing in specie to Gods word or worship, which he has not com∣manded in genere, is culpable; but the other party wonder where they pickt up this ungrateful Doctrine; shall we then go search for this supposed, or confessed agreement in the 39 Articles? there, or no where, we may expect to meet with it; but here also are we miserably disappointed, for the Doctor himself has satisfied us in his Rational Account, p. 54, 55. That the learned Primate of Ireland (understand not B. Ʋsher, but Bramhall) tells us the sense of the 39 Articles of this Church. Neither doth the Church of England define any of these Questions necessarily to be be∣lieved, either necessitate praecepti, or Medii—but only bindeth her sons for peace-sake not to oppose them; And more fully in another place. We do not suffer any man to reject the 39 Articles of the Church of England at his pleasure, yet neither do we look upon them as essentials of saving faith, or legacies of Christ and his Apostles, but in a mean, as pious opinions, fitted for the preservation of Ʋnity; neither do we oblige any man to believe them, but not to contradict them. Now if this be true, I would fain learn how the Doctor can be so confident that we are agreed in Doctrine, when we are at a loss, and wholly to seek in what Doctrine to agree?
You are surprized (Sir!) I doubt not at this discovery: Has not the Church of England defined in her 39 Articles any thing necessarily to be believed? then it seems the essence and existence of a God is not defined to be necessary. Are these Articles no essen∣tials of saving faith? then it's no essential point of faith to be∣lieve, that Christ is the eternal Son of God. Are these but pious Opinions? then it's a pious Opinion that we are justified by faith without our own merits: Is it enough not to contradict them, and that we are not obliged to believe them? then an Atheist is agreed in the Article of the Godhead, if he has but wit enough to keep a good tongue in his head: And the Socinian is agreed in the

Article of the Trinity; the Papist agreed too in the Article against Transubstantiation, provided always they can but bite in their sentiments; nay the Protestants at Rome are agreed in the Arti∣cles of Trent, the Christians in Constantinople are agreed in the Alchoran, for I think they do not believe them, and yet have so much wit as not to contradict them.
Here they torment us with new-coyned Distinctions, of pri∣mary and secondary, affirmative and negative Articles; some more refined, others of an inferiour Alloy; Well then, let us suppose that the negative, secondary, the Articles of the lower Classis are not necessary to be believed in order to salvation; Are we agreed in the primary, affirmative, and those of the highest form? I doubt not! for granting that the Dissenters assent to them, and the As∣senters dissent; or suppose on the other side, the Conformists agree to them, and the Nonconformists disagree; 'tis all a case, they are in the same degree of distance from each other: Now the plain truth is this; The Dissenters generally agree with that book, which is commonly called the 39 Articles, which was com∣piled above a hundred years ago, and this book some men call the Church of England; but then they are far from Agreement with the leading Clergy-men of this generation (who as near as we can ghess do constitute the Church): And this is certain, that the Rulers and Teachers of the Church do really differ from one another, and therefore Dissenters must needs differ from some of them; but which of them is the Church, we know not; If both parties, the Church must necessarily be of two Reli∣gions; and so this pretended agreement is not real and sincere, but notional, speculative and imaginary.
(2.) 'Tis further supposed, that the disagreeing parties are yet agreed in the substantial parts of worship: To which I must an∣swer, 1. That we know of no Commission, no Charter granted by Christ to any Church, to institute any parts of worship at all, whether substantial, integral, or circumstantial, or by what other devised terms they be distinguished, or confounded, 2. Nor have we heard of any Rule assigned by Christ to warrant them

how to disterminate the substantial parts of worship from the In∣tegral, or the integral parts from the circumstantial: How easie a thing were it to demolish a substantial part of worship, pre∣tending it to be only a circumstantial part? or to magnifie some∣thing of their own, which they have drest up like worship, and then exact Conformity to it, and Union in it in the Name of Christ? for it's a common observation, That when they would wheadle us into Compliance, then every thing is but Circum∣stance; but when they proceed to chastise us for Nonconformity, then the same things are nick-named substantials, matters of mo∣ment, such as without which no Church, no Government, no Wor∣ship can possibly breathe or subsist.
And yet if the matter were well searcht into, perhaps we are not so clearly agreed in the substantial parts of worship: An out∣ward visible sign of an inward and invisible grace, whereby a per∣son is dedicated to the profession of, and subjection to the Redeemer, is a substantial part of worship: If it be instituted by Christ, 'tis a divine, lawful part of worship, and he will bless it; If only ap∣pointed by man out of his great tenderness to supply the defects of Christs Institution, this is also a part of worship, but humane; it has the matter, and outward form, only wanting the right effi∣cient cause; it wants that which should give it the stamp of Au∣thentical and warrantable worship.
Again, we see with our eyes worshipping towards the Altar, the East, and at the sound of the word Jesus: and these things are made the Motive of worship, if not something else; per∣haps no Canon enforce these, but yet they are generally practised by all that hope to make earnings and good wages out of the Churches preferments. Now whether the Conformists exceed the Canons, or the Nonconformists fall short of them, 'tis still the same case, and there will be the same or greater difference, than if the former kept level with the Rule, and the other came short of it; or the latter came up to the Rule, and the other transcen∣ded it.
The Doctor will tell us, That to bow at the Name of Jesus, is

no more than going to Church at the Tolling of a Bell, Defence, p. 864. and is very facetious and pleasant with his adversary T. G. drolling about Whittingtons Bells, and Meg of Westmin∣ster, p. 867. nor ought any man dare to check the excellent wit of these Repartees, only it had been wisht he had bestow'd a little fancy on Whittingtons Cat: but I assure the Doctor in many indifferent mens judgment, the Objection is not so easily dofft off; for why may not an Image give warning to the eye when to worship God, as well as a Bell to the Ear? 'Tis true indeed, the Papists have preferred an Image higher, than to be Motivum Cultûs; but the question is, Whether they do not sin in applying it to this lower use, to make it an ordinary stated Motive to worship? If they do, how shall we excuse our own Adorations? if not, why do we not introduce Images into our Churches, as well as these other of bowing towards the Altar, &c? which if once our Church-men shall venture upon (as with equal reason they may do), they'l find them not a Bell to Toll Dissen∣ters into the Church, but thousands of Assenters out of it. Besides his Illustration is very lame, though witty enough; for the Bell tolls out of worship to Convene the people to the worship of God: but the sound of the word Jesus is used in the midst, in the height, in the heat of worship, when the soul should be most firmly, ardently intent upon its Devotion, and not sit listning and watching, as Whittingtons Cat watcht the Mouse (there 'tis for you) for the casual starting of a word, and the dropping of two syllables. But if it be a duty to give external reverence to God when ever the word Jesus is named, there's more need of it in our ordinary Converses, and the secular affairs of this world, when those divertisements distract our minds from the actual thoughts of God, which might be retrieved by this Doctrine; and so that word might do the service of another Bell, I mean that which in Popish Countries goes Ting tang, ting tang, before the Hoste, when carried to the sick, or dying, from which all that meet it are obliged to take the hint, and fall down and worship.
The moderation of that Canon, 1640, which recommends bowing towards the East, or Altar, is very commendable: In the practise or omission of this Rite, we desire the Rule of Charity pre∣scribed by the Apostle may be observed; which is, That they which use this Rite, despise not them who use it not; and they who use it not, condemn not those that use it. I would gladly hear a fair Rea∣son given, why the Apostle should prescribe the Rule of Charity to be observed in this one Rite or Ceremony, more than another? why the Rule of Charity should take place in bowing towards the Altar, and yet the Rule of severity in the sign of the Cross, and kneeling at the Lords Supper? what solid Reason can they give, why they make fish of one, and flesh of another: The Apostle prescribes a Rule; and they will make use of it, when, where, and in what cases they please; and in others where 'tis as useful, lay it by, like one of their vacated Canons. Is it because we are bound to walk according to the Rule prescribed by the Church? why are not they bound to walk according to the Rule prescribed by the Apostle? Are we more bound to obey them, than they the Lord Christ, speaking in and by his immediately inspired servants? why could they not have relaxed the other Canons to the mode∣ration of this? or why not have screwed up this to the inflexi∣ble rigour of the others? was it for peace-sake that we were in∣dulged in this one? Let the same Motive prevail for the same Indulgence in the rest! was it to shew their Authority, that they may bind and loose, command what they please, and leave what they see good at liberty, without rendring a Reason, but that of their Wills? Such arbitrary power is too great an encroachment upon the freehold of Conscience, and Soveraignty of Christ, and will justifie any Christian to assert that liberty against it, wherein Christ has instated him. Was it because the people had been broken by long use and custom to the others, and therefore they would struggle hard to keep the ground they had got, when this latter was but a Novice, a Candidate, a Probationer for Accepta∣tion, which if the people would tamely bow their necks unto, they might be cramped with a more peremptory Canon when time

should serve; but if they proved restiff and cross-grain'd, the next Convocation might make an honourable retreat?
And what if now we are stumbling ere we are aware upon the true Reason of the diversity between the tempers of this, and some other Canons? However, whether these things be com∣manded, or merely recommended, or barely permitted, all is a case as to my Argument; for I find these things practised by all our leading Church-men; All the Fathers of the Church, all the Mo∣ther-Churches are agreed; all that pretend to any hopes of com∣fortable Importance, are agreed to outrun the Constable, and though herein they outrun one another, and all of them outrun the Dissenters; and this is a difference in something more than a circumstance, even at least in a circumstantial part of worship; yet must we be supposed to be agreed.
This last mention'd Canon of the Church, I hear is repealed by Act of Parliament, which plainly proves, that the Civil Ma∣gistrate has more authority even in matters of worship, than the whole Church, as a Church, when most solemnly met together in the Representative Church (as they call it) of a Convocation; and yet the practise runs with a full stream towards their own old Canon, as if they secretly gave great Deference to the Autho∣rity of the Church against the Parliament, for the leading-practise of the grand Ecclesiasticks is tantamount to a Canon, nay to a Law, to those whose hopes and expectancies teach them a de∣pendance on them; so that this now obsolete Canon has past in∣to the nature of a Commandment, much like the old Statute, Ne Rectores prosternant Arbores in Goemeterio; the Tenor where∣of runs thus: Which thing we will not command to be done, but we will commend it when it is done.
Secondly, The Doctor having prudently supposed one half, comes to prove the other half; and it's wisely done to lose no∣thing for asking: He argues thus: If it be lawful to separate up∣on pretence of greater purity (suppose as before supposed) than a bare difference in opinion as to some circumstantials will be a suffi∣cient ground to break Communion, and set up new Churches. To

which I answer, 1. by denying the consequence; strange! what deny the consequence? what can be plainer? Where there's an agreement, a confessed agreement in doctrine, and the substantial parts of worship; what can you pretend to divide in, to separate upon, but some sorry circumstances, unless you will make a Schism about Goats Wool, or Moon-shine in the water? But if you please, Sir, to have a little patience, I'le tell you! substantial parts of worship, and bare circumstances, are not so immediately op∣posed, but there lies a certain thing in the middle between them: upon which middle thing, though otherwise we were agreed in Doctrine, and the substantial parts of worship, it will be lawful to divide; I say it again, there is a Medium between substantial parts of worship, and bare circumstances; A bare circumstance is that which adheres to every action, as it is an action; to every natural body, as 'tis a natural body; every action, whether civil or sacred, must be performed in some time; every body must be circumscribed in some place; A substantial part of worship, is a Term of the Doctors, and his Friends making, and we may ex∣pect it should be of their explaining; As far as I can under∣stand, they mean by it either, 1. that which God has expresly commanded; or 2. some notable parts of worship as the Sacra∣ments; or 3. that which God mainly requires, as the directing our hearts to himself, as the object and end of our worship; or 4. I cannot tell what, till they tell me: but besides these two extremes, there are some intermediate things, which are neither natural circumstances cleaving to the person that worshippeth, nor to the Religious action it self, on the one hand: nor yet on the other hand, are they commanded by God, either in genere, or in specie, i. e. God has neither commanded the things them∣selves, nor are the things necessary to the performing those things that he has commanded; nor any of their kind; nor are they in∣cluded in any general rule, or precept of the Gospel: And yet it has pleased the Church, that is, the Episcopal party, to exalt these things to a high preferment in worship, to signifie the same things with the Sacramental Elements, to make them necessary

to salvation, as far as man can make them, that is to lay them as Conditions in the way of our enjoying the Sacraments, which, they say, God has made necessary to salvation; and lay the stress and weight of the Churches peace, safety and unity upon these things, translated out of their proper places; and that these things so used, so applied, so cloathed with their present cir∣cumstances, are sinful, is not our bare opinion (as the Doctor wisely phraseth it) but our setled judgment, which we have, do, and shall maintain against them, when they have once lei∣sure to understand the Question: We have therefore some∣thing to divide upon, besides substantial parts of worship and circumstances. And now where is this consequence, which to an intelligent and observing Reader, is the only strength of his Sermon? But we need never fear it, the Clergy will be sure to find us matter for quarrel and contention, or it shall go hard, besides a parcel of inconsiderable circumstances, which may be determined, but very sorrily by those that pretend most to the power; for he that worst may, commonly holds the Can∣dle. But 2. for further answer, let him go back to the for∣mer Discourse, where I have proved that the foundation upon which his discourse is built, is weak, and therefore the whole superstructure must tumble upon his own head; for he suppo∣ses there is an agreement in Doctrine, and the substantial parts of worship, which we either deny, or cannot grant till we are taught what he means by them.
The Controversie therefore stands upon the same bottom on which it has stood these hundred years, and more, like that famous stone in the West, which they say, a child may shake, but a hundred men cannot overturn. Every wrangler can jostle our principles, but the United force of the world cannot over∣throw them; True men may be killed, but Truth will out∣live all enmity. This argument of the Doctors has been frequently answered, and exposed; but now like an old Li∣very new turn'd, and fresh trim'd up with a new Lace, it passes for a spruce piece of Gallantry, a brisk sally of Ratio∣cination;

so considerable it is, who it is that speaks and writes, more than what is spoken or written! So have I known a sorry Jade, which in the hands of the poor Countrey-man, would not give five Marks; when in the hands of a Gentleman, a little curried up, well managed by a nimble Jockey, and stout∣ly voucht for by one that was no slave to his word, fetch roundly Twenty Guineys at the hands of a youngster that had more money than wit.
What has hitherto engrost the whole strength of the Doctors Reason; he now comes to set a fine edg and gloss upon with his Rhetorick: To separate (says he) considering the va∣riety of mens fancies about these matters, is to make an infinite Divisibility in Churches, without any possible stop to further Se∣paration. Which is nothing but the Eccho of that Charge, which from their Roman Adversaries has so long and loudly rung about their own Ears. I shall only say, That the power which he ascribes to National Churches, considering the great va∣riety of the fancies and humours in finding out and imposing their own Inventions, will but make burdens innumerable and intolerable, without any possible stop to further and greater vexa∣tions; only let him not always miscall Conscience by the scan∣dalous name of Fancy! The very truth is, we have no Ma∣thematical Certainty in these matters; no such Demonstration, Cui non potest subesse falsum, which Archbishop Laud (and by consequence the Doctor) requires of all Dissenters; when yet he could find no such Demonstration for the being of a God (as I shall evince ere long). But some will scruple where they need not; and others to cry quit with them, will impose where they ought not; and thus between weakness and wilfulness, between little knowledg and great pride, humble peaceable Christians are like to have a fine time on't: But from some inconsiderable, and petty inconveniences, some lit∣tle trouble that arises to a Church from the levity and volubi∣lity of mens minds, to bring in that enormous, monstrous prin∣ciple, of enslaving all mens judgments and consciences, forcing

them to surrender their Reasons to naked will and pleasure, and put all that's worth owning in their Beings, into the hands of those of whose fidelity and tenderness to keep and dis∣pose of them, they have had no better experience, and can have no good security; is a Medicine worse than that Poyson, even as much as 'tis better to have a Rational Soul, though sub∣ject to mistakes, than the Soul of a Brute, which may be ma∣naged as you will, with a strong Bit and Bridle.
Honoured Sir! you see how I have wearied my self, to tire you, with the prolixty of this Letter; and now to refresh you in the close, I'le tell you a piece of News: The Doctor tells us, That if once the people be brought to understand, and pra∣ctise their duty as to Communion with our Churches, other diffi∣culties, which obstruct our Ʋnion, will be more easily removed. It's incredible what the various Votes of the Coffee-houses are about those words; some say, Ay! If there were no Noncon∣formists, there would be no Nonconformity; if there were no disagreement, we should all be agreed: others again deny it; and say, That though the people were brought to understand, and practise all their duty which they owe to God and man, yet the same difference, the same distance would continue, except it be first proved (which they are always coming towards, but can never find a time to come to) that it is their duty to hold entire Communion with the Parish-Churches: others again of the more warm tempers, assert, That if the people could be brought to understand and practise their duty in these matters, those Assemblies would be thinner than they are; and some protest it's a most Meridian Truth, that if men could be brought to conform in practise (but there lies the cunning on't) though against the shins and conscience, all other dif∣ficulties would be easily removed; for they that are once engaged in a practise (whether by slavish fears, or worldly hopes, it makes no matter) must study Arguments to defend their pra∣ctise as well as they can, and they vouch infallible experience

to justifie their opinion; for (say they) throw a Dog into a River over head and ears, and if he will not take care to swim out, let him be drown'd.
It's mighty pleasing to me to hear the Doctor profess, he has endeavoured to pursue his design, without sharp and provoking reflexions on the persons of any: for though you, Sir! have noted several passages, as inconsistent with the sincerity of this expression, yet I doubt not to clear up his Integrity. You mention Page 38. where, I confess, the Doctor does say, The most godly among them [Dissenters] can least endure to be told of their faults. This did a little startle me, but not stum∣ble me into a disbelief of his Honesty: for though he tells us, he has not used provoking reflexions on the persons of any, i. e. by name; yet he might with a good conscience, and without contradicton to his word, make sharp provoking re∣flexions upon the whole generation of the Dissenters, and condemn them in the lump: And whereas you insist upon't, that the expression is either a scurrilous Sarcasm, unbecoming a Sermon; or very unchristian, as presuming to judg mens hearts; or a ridiculous piece of non-sense, seeing they cannot be supposed the most godly (except they be all Villains) among them, who cannot bear reproof for their faults, which is a main part of godliness: yet I have this to say; 'Tis exceeding hard for Ministers when they mount the Pulpit, to leave their pride and passion behind them in their Studies, or in the Desk: be∣sides a Sermon, except a little larded with a line or two of bitterness, would not have pleased the pallate of the Reader from the Press, whatever it might, some of the Auditors from the Pulpit: Nor must you, Sir! be too rigid in exacting all things to the precise Rule of Gods word, when the Doctor in his Sermon has propounded you another Rule than that of the word to walk by.
In a word, Sir! the greater trouble I have given you in this Epistle, will ease you of much in the Discourse it self; And having here opened the springs of his Reasonings, you may with more ease and delight trace them in all the wind∣ings and twinings of the streams. If I obtain your pardon, I shall receive it as a Reward; and for you, not to Censure, is more than some twenty mens Commendation; and if I fall short of your expectation, I shall yet gain one advantage, That you will not hereafter engage, in what is above him,

