



RIGHT WORSHIPFVL,
MY ordinary employment being of late for some time interrupted, and the usuall course of my studies, not so much diverted, as quite stopt by the late generall and miserable di∣stractions of the Kingdome, and e∣specially of the place I live in, I be∣thought my selfe of some meanes whereby I might mitigate my apprehension of the mi∣series issuing from these present distempers; When (I thinke God so directing it) this Treatise, with some o∣thers of the same nature, came to my hands. The Au∣thor is of as generall repute among us for learning, as any late Writer we have received from beyond the Seas these many yeares: and the Worke is an Explanation of the xx. Chapter of the Revelation. The Subject thereof is The assertion of the Glorious Kingdome of Christ here on earth; a matter no doubt of great comfort, and consola∣tion to the Church of God. And as I am not ignorant that Apocalypticall Discourses in generall are liable to ma∣ny censures, and that this Divine Prophecy it selfe is as yet a sealed book, in so much that the great Calvin was forced to acknowledge, (if the Io. Bodimus me∣thod Hist. cap. 7 reportes wrong him not) that

he knew not what so difficult and obscure a Writer, as the Author thereof, meant: so I am sure this part there∣of hath beene subject to most divers and contrary in∣terpretations; that what Epist. ad Pau∣linum Quot babet verb, t Sacramnt. Hierome saith of the whole, may well be said of this passage thereof: So many words, so many mysteries. Yet receiving my selfe much satisfacti∣on and selednesse of mind from this exposition thereof, I thought that Gods people also might reape some bene∣fit and fruit thereby: And this is the maine cause, that I have made it publique. Now that I have inscribed it onto Your Names I have deal but right and  therein. For owing the first groundes and foundation of my studies to Your large bounty and benevolence, I must acknowledge the first fruites thereof communica∣ted abroad (and indeed I ever intended them so what∣soever they had been) to be Yours by  due claime and challenge of them. The Persians (in whose Schooles gra∣titude was taught, as Letters and Arts in ours, whose Dtate exu∣perant latae con∣tra ingraos le∣ges. Amm. Mar∣cell. lib. 23. . Themit. Orat. 3. Laws punished the contrary almost as deepe as wee doe Homicide,) had an Order in their Xenophon , . Colledges, which were for the education of them whose service was ap∣pointed for the King, that after their greatest promoti∣ons, and abilities in publick attendance, they were to ac∣knowledge all as received from the Classis of their first institution. My naturall propension to thankfulnesse makes me confesse I owe all that I am in good letters (I best know how little that is) to the foundation I laid thereof in Your excellent Seminary of learning, and to your extraordinary favour, and encouragement to good studies and endeavours. I pray God lead You alwaies a∣long by the hand in all Your affaires and occasions.

