



Honoured Sirs,
GRreat was the goodness of God af∣ter our Saviours Resurrection and Ascension, that he sent down cloven Tongues from Heaven, like as fire upon his Apostles; which was a visible sign of those invisible ifts of the Spirit, poured down abun∣dantly upon them for the service of the Church, and the enlightening of the World with the knowledg of Salvation by Jesus Christ; and that, even after
the Nations of the Earth had so many Ages sate in darkness, and in the sha∣dow of death, a dark Cloud of Bar∣barous & Heathenish errours and super∣stitions having over-spread the face of the whole Earth, insomuch, that wick∣ed Men and Women, Adulterers and Adulteresses, Stocks, Stones, and other Creatures were mistaken for Gods and Goddesses.
The times of this Ignorance (as the Apostle calls them, Act. 17.30.) were woful; but then let us see the goodness of the Lord, who restored the light in so plentiful a manner, that, as that Cloud which Elijah's Servant saw at the first rise up like a man's hand, had in short time over-spread the Heavens; so that little Lamp, which at first be∣ing put into the hand of Adam, gave light to his House and Family, became now like the Sun in the Firmament, and shined to all Nations; the know∣ledg of God being plentifully dispersed all abroad, as the Sun-beams diffused through the whole body of the ayr.
But then again; that evil Angel of the bottomless pit, sent out a smoak in the Ages following, which darken∣ed
the face of the Heavens, and the light of the Church. The Devil raised up divers Instruments, not only open and notorious Hereticks, but those (of all others most dangerous) who closely promoted the mystery of Iniquity, ne∣ver ceasing their secret workings, un∣til they had lifted up Antichrist into his Chair of Pestilence, and by degrees corrupted the simplicity of the Truth, darkning the knowledg of Christ with corrupt traditions, errours, contrary to the Faith, defaceing the glory of Christ, his full satisfaction and perfect merit, with their own merit and works of supererogation, and pretended Trea∣sury of the Church, joyning with Christ other Mediators, and finding other ways to Heaven, which the Holy Ghost never taught, the Gospel of Christ never mentioned. So that we may as truly say of them, as of the Heathens, Professing themselves Wise, they became Fools: Foolishly bragging of an infallibility nailed to their Popes Chair, that it was impossi∣ble for him to erre, or be deceived; they fell into gross and monstrous er∣rours, and led many thousands away
by their strong delusions to destruction, who had pleasure in Ʋnrighteousness, and received not the love of the truth, that they might be saved.
The Romanists have used abun∣dance of lyes, and cunningly devised fables for the maintenance of their Te∣nets, and the defence of their sup∣posed truths, as also for the defacing and blemishing of the undoubted truth of God. They used not only fabulous specches, but also fabulous actions too, viz. lying wonders. How many false miracles have they hatched for the de∣fence of their Religion, their Purgato∣ry, Praying for the Dead, Invocation of Saints, Transubstantiation, Wor∣shipping of Images, &c? Would not these much trouble many weak minds, had not the spirit of God expresly fore∣told, that this should be the practice of Antichrist, that man of sin, whose coming should be with signes and lying wonders, and all deceiveableness of un∣righteousness in them that perish, 2 Thes. 2. So that that which they make use of to prove their Religion by, when they want proofs in the Word of God, we are taught by the word to make
use of as a proof, that their Pope is the very Antichrist, and they the followers of the Beast. What shameful lyes do they bring also to prove their Tenets that are in Controversie? How do they abuse Scripture, and as much as in them lyeth, put lies into the mouth of the holy spirit of truth for the main∣tenance of their false doctrine? for what is it else, when men will wickedly go about to make the Scripture speak that, which the Spirit, who endited it, never meant, wilfully perverting plain Texts of the Word to serve their base ends, and to confirm those falshoods which they have learned from the Fa∣ther of lyes: On the other side, how many wicked Tales have they devised to suppress & deface the Truth? That edious lye concerning Luthers death, and that of Beza's death, and falling from the Truth to Popery, cast abroad in his life-time, which himself lived to confute to their shame; what doth it but shew by what Spirit they are led? what shameful lyes have they devised against many other special Instruments of God's Glory? They hope (it seem∣eth) that some will be found so foolish,
as to believe their loudest lies; yea, do not many of them maintain lying as lawful for defence of Religion? that Faith is not to be kept with those whom they call Hereticks? and that Equi∣vocation (a more cleanly kind of lying) is lawful? insomuch, that when Tres∣ham; one of the Powder-Traitors, in articulo mortis, lying on his Death∣bed in the Tower, denied by solemn Oath what he knew to be most true, to save the life and credit of Garnet the Superiour of the English Jesuits, and a man of great account among them; and when the thing was proved mani∣festly, and Garnet was asked what he thought of his case, he said, he knew not, unless Equivocation might excuse him. But if their doctrine be true, it cannot want truth to defend it: if, false (as it is) all the lyes in Hell will not hold it up against the power of Truth, no more than the darkness which silleth the ayr at night can resist the Sun-beams at his rising; for as darkness is but a shadow, and so cannot withstand the light, so lyes are but sha∣dows and fancies, there is nothing se∣lid in them, and they are not able to re∣sist
the power of truth, which is divine, and cometh down from the Father of Lights, and God of Truth.
Worthy Sirs,P
It is lamentable to consider what the Pope of Rome, and his Clergy in this Land, did heretofore practise upon the Nobility and Gentry of this Nation, suffering them to live in Ignorance, whereby they might not boggle at any looseness or wickedness of life, that so the Clergy might afterward confess and fleece them to purpose. Lamenta∣ble was the woful blindness that was in those times reigning in the World, when no man might buy or sell; no man might live without danger of the Popes Curse, but such as received the marke of the Beast in his hand, or in his fore∣head. It was death to profess the Truth of Christ, and once to mutter a∣gainst their Errours. It was thought worthy to be punished with Fire and Faggot, when any did but seek the sa∣ving knowledg of God, though in a se∣cret way; to have a few leaves or Chapters of the New Testament in their own tongue, which they could un∣derstand,
was held even a Capital of∣fence against the Roman Catholique Church. For, whiles the Shepherds, who had the charge of Souls, became dumb-dogs, not preaching; or blind Watch-men, not discovering danger to the souls of the people, or preaching per∣verse things to lead men from the know∣ledg of Salvation, lest any should (a∣gainst their wills) get light from the Word by reading the Scriptures in pri∣vate, and be able to espie their false dealings, they took a most devilish course to take away the Key of Know∣ledg, as the Scribes and Pharisees did. But they (worse than these fore-Fa∣thers of theirs) did shut up the Word in an unknown tongue, that the knowledg of Christ might be hidden from the peo∣ple; yea, and they taught them their very Prayers in a strange Language. Oh the impudence of Sin and Wickd∣ness, when it hath gotten head, and is some to the height.
Now here again, we are to acknow∣ledg the Lord's unspeakable goodness in restoring unto us the knowledg of his Truth, and in a clear and admirable manner in despite of all the power and
policy of the man of sin, and his many Instruments, who with fire and sword, as well as with pen and paper, laboured to maintain his Kingdom. When An∣tichrist set his foul feet, and laid his iron-yoke upon the tender neck of the Spouse of Christ, enthralling the peo∣ple of God to his Traditions; enthron∣ing himself in their Consciences; it was not now the Sword of any Empe∣rour, nor the policy of any deep-headed Statist, that restored her, or ruined him; but it was the breath of the Lords mouth in the Ministry of his Word, which gave life to the Church again, and blasted the glory of that Whore of Babylon, according to that Epigram applied to Luther:
Lutherus decimum confecit strage leonem;
De clavâ noli quaerere; penna fuit.
Insomuch, that if the Popish Priests be not worse than the Egyptian Sorce∣rers, how can they deny, but this was the finger of God, that in so short a time so great a light should shine throughout
so many Nations, and that so many men and women of all sorts and de∣grees, rich, poor, noble, mean, learned, unlearned, should see so much into the mysteries of Salvation, to which the world for a long time had been a stran∣ger; should rely wholly and onely upon Christ for Salvation, and renounce all Considence in themselves, or any other Creature, or any device of man's brain; should acknowledg the sufficiency of the holy Scriptures for a full doctrine of Salvation and Godliness, and despise all traditions of men which are not grounded upon it; defying the Pope as Antichrist, who for a long time had been honoured above God, and whom none almost durst gainsay, or once mut∣ter against, renouncing Will-worship, Image-worship, Invocation of Saints, and the like Idolatrics and Spiritual Whoredoms, wherewith the Whore of Babylon hath defiled the world. This was the Lords doing, and it is wonder∣ful in our eyes.
Yea, and in this Visitation, the Lord did bestow greater means upon our Nation, than upon many other. There was no Nation in these, parts of
the world, but they had some means, e∣ven those that now cleave most close to the Pope, as Spain and Italy. But unto us especially the light of the Word hath been clearly manifested, to teach us the knowledg of God in Christ, and we have had the Martyrs fires burning clearly to confirm us in the same. And this light have we now enjoyed for a∣bove an hundred years together, with∣out interruption.
Much honoured in the Lord!
I humbly Dedicate to you this en∣suing Treatise, Entitled The Anato∣my of Popery. The Roman Syna∣gogue is not only spelunca latronum, but lerna malorum, a sink of Sin, of Heresy, of Idolatry, Impiety, Trea∣chery, Villany, mare mortuum, a dead Sea, wherein spiritual Sodom and Gomorrha are not sunk, but swim and flourish. Yea, how many Popish Emissaries are come from the See of Rome into this Nation, like the Salmon into fresh Rivers, to beget a new spawn and frie of Catholiques a∣mong us? Now if we fasten the An∣chor of our judgment upon the firm
ground of Truth, it will stand sure and steady against all contrary winds of doctrine. When a certain Jester (set on by others, as it was thought) in the presence of the King of Hungary, spake to a noble man of Prague, touch∣ing his Religion, because he fancied not the Romish service, but was addicted to Rochezana, a follower of John Husse, the Noble man gave him this answer: If thou speakest of thy self, thou art not the man thou Counterfeitest, and so I will answer thee, as I would a Wise man, if by others setting on, it is meet I satisfie them. Hear me therefore; Every man useth Church-Ceremonies agreeable to his Faith, and offereth such sacrifices as he believes are accep∣table with God. It is not in our own power to believe what we will, The mind of man conquered with powerful reasons, willing, or nilling, is taken Captive. I am sufficiently resolved of the Religion I follow; if I follow thine, I may deceive men, but God that searcheth the heart I cannot deceive; nor yet is it fit I should be like to thee; one thing becometh a Jester, and ano∣ther thing a Noble man. This you may
take to your self (saith he) or report, if you please to them that set you on work. It is good to be zealously affected always in a good thing, as St. Paul saith.
Honoured Sirs,
The Lord establish you in the truth, which is animi pabulum, & sponsa intellectus, as Lactantius calleth it. Truth is a Kings Guard, Prov. 20. Hezekiah's Cordial in Sickness; yea, the blessed life is nothing else but gau∣dium de veritate, as St. Augustine saith.
