



WORTHY, and ver∣tuous young Gentle∣women: My Penne for your spirituall good, is willing in these ensuing leaues, to spread it selfe. You are all Catholikes in Fayth and profession, and there∣fore the more apt to receaue (if so Gods Grace be not wanting) the impression of the Aduice & Coū∣sel, which in this Treatise is giuen.
My mayne proiect at this pre∣sent

is, since you all (to whom I wryte) as yet remayne in your Chast and Virginall state, & free from Mariage, to perswade you (what in me lyeth) to abandone this Wicked World, and to im∣brace a Votary and Religious life. A hard labour (no doubt) in your iudgments, but facile and easy to such of you, who haue a feeling, & true apprehension of the ioyes of Heauen, and torments of Hell.
I do not speake this, as if one in a maried state could not arryue to Heauen, and auoyde Hell. Noe, God forbid; For I acknowledg with the Apostle, He∣br. 13. Mariage to be honourable, but withall I hould Virginity to be more honourable. I here only propound the most se∣cure way to come to Heauen, and escape Hell. And here I demand, if any of You were married, and after the death of your husbands,

were to enioy a great, and rich Ioynture, of a thousand, or two thousand pounds yearely; would you not be desirous, that besydes the common Course of making Ioyntures (which perhaps might be subiect to some danger) to take (by your learned Counsell) the best meanes for the ratifying and better securing of your Right to your said Ioynture? I know, you would be most solicitous herein.
You all pretend Title to the kingdome of Heauen; a kingdom infinitly surpassing in worth, all worldly Iointures that the whole Earth can affoard; and will you then content your selues to seeke by the common, and ordinary Course of a Secular lyfe, to obtaine this kingdome (in which state, as I grant, many liuing haue gayned it, so incōparably far many more haue lost it;) but that rather you

wil enter into that Vocation (how seuere, how strict, how crosse soe∣uer to flesh and bloud it shall seeme) which may giue you grea∣ter assurance, and more streng∣then your Interest, and Title to that most Blessed Kingdome?
This Treatise I haue compo∣sed in forme of a feigned Dialo∣gue, as hoping that thereby you will be sooner induced to the rea∣ding and perusing it at full; then if it were written in one long con∣tinued speach, without any vicis∣situde, or change of Persons.
In the Persons here feigned by supposall, I haue thought good to incorporate all the Reasons (as deliuered by them) chiefly mo∣uing to a Religious & retired Life; as also such obiections, as com∣monly are made against that most happy Course; as you may be more fully instructed by perusing

the Argument, or subiect hereof next following.
And seing the chiefest barre, & et in women to a Monasticall lyfe, is desire of Mariage, & hope of children; I will (besides what is treated ther∣of hereafter) insist heere a little, discouering the insufficiency of this Motiue; shewing that the ac∣customed miseries of a married lyfe, and of hauing issue, ought much rather to sway with women, for their forbearāce of Marriage.
And first, whereas Lyfe is the dearest thing to man or woman; yet we find, that besides the cer∣taine great paines of Child-birth, Lyfe it selfe in young married wo∣men, is for the most part, euery one, or two yeares greatly endan∣gered to be lost: witnesse heereof is the daily experience of women dying in Childbed.
What true desire then can a wo∣man

haue to vndertak that course of life, wherein lyeth so great a pe¦rill of loosing that (I meane he Lyfe,) which is most deare vnto her; and that her body thereby shall, before its prefixed tyme by God, become meate for wormes
Yf any one of you had a Iewels set with rich and Orient pearle, valewed at some hundreds of pounds, how carefull would you be in keeping of it? & how would your care be doubled from en∣dangering the losse of it, at any tyme? And yet only for the en∣ioying of a litle momentary plea∣sure (attended after with multi∣tude of miseries) you can be con∣tent so often to hazard the losse of your owne lyfe, the most precious Iewell, that God & Nature hath bestowed vpon you in this world. O fondnes of Iudgment!
But to proceed. Admit, that a

woman in bringing forth her Children, should be freed from all danger of death; yet to how many other insupportable affli∣ctions doth she become thrall, & lye open? For we obserue (and this not seldome) that the Hus∣band becomes vnkind, withdraw∣ing his loue and affection, from whence it is due, & placing it on others where it is not due. Againe, the Husband (I meane, no few number of them) doth oftentimes dissipate and waste his Estate and Patrimony in sensuality and riot, to the vtter ouerthrow or begga∣ry (in the end) of Himselfe, his Wyfe, and Children.
But suppose, the Husband be exempt from these disorders; yet f the wyfe haue many Children, falleth it not often out, that the children through the negligence of their Father, are brought vp in

all liberty and dissolution, to the inconsolable griefe of the poore Gentlewoman their Mother, & to the eternall Damnation of the Childrens soules? And what com∣fort then can that womā haue, to be an instrumēt of bringing forth that Child, who shall become for euer, an Heyre of Hell-fyre?
O how many wyues are there in England, who find by ouer late, & too dearely bought experiēce, all this to be true, which I here af∣firme, of the frequent dangers, griefes, and afflictions of mynd commonly accompanying Mar¦riage? From all which languors of spirit, that woman deliuereth her¦selfe, who forbearing marriage doth determine to leade a Reli¦gious lyfe.
In proofe of the Truth her said, I appeale euen to the certain knowledge of diuers of your sel∣ues,

who, if you will but cast your es vpon some of your owne yndred, and friends, (at least of our acquaintance, that liue in ate of mariage) must needs con∣fesse that all, or diuers of the a∣re mentioned miseries and ca∣lamities, do daily oppresse many f them. You are yet free; beware en of such dangers. Nor will any further enlarge my selfe in his place vpon this Subiect, but will refer you to the serious peru∣ll of the Booke it selfe.
Yf this Discourse were a se∣cond Syr Philip Sidneys Arcadia, reating of amourous Conceyts; with what a greedines would ma∣ny of you read it? Cōdemne then your owne want of spirituall fer∣uour in such of you, as but only vouchsafe to cast a curious eye here & there vpon these leaues; & yet it may be in part said, that

this Booke in general discourseth of the same subiect, of which the Areadia doth; to wit of Loue. But the Arcadia, of sensuall and Ʋayn Loue, attended on with sinne, and Repentance; This, of chast, and holy Loue, whereby a Soule by so∣lemne vow espouseth herselfe to Christ her Bridegroome: so veri∣fying those words of the A Present 1. Cor. 11. you a chaste Virgin Ʋre Christ.
I only wish, that what Cosmophila (a feigned young Gentlewoman in this Dialogue) is supposed to do, you really, and truly would act her Sceene, in your procee∣dings: So might you by a morti∣fyed lyfe, not only auoyd all spi∣rituall dangers both of foule and body; but infallibly purchafe to your selues, an eternall Crowne of Glory.
Yf any of you reape such pro∣fit

by this my Labour, as by the eading heereof, to shake hands for euer with the vanities of the world, and happily to Cloyster your selfes in some deuout Mona∣stery; how fully should I thinke ny paynes to be recompensed herein? And with this I cease, in∣reating your remembrance of he (only for my intention at east, and endeauour of aduan∣ing your spirituall good) at the best tymes of your deuotions.

