



SIR,
IT was the special Com∣mand of Your Roia&Father, our most Gracious Sovereign, to the Bishops of Lon∣don and Elie, now with God, to take
care that, of the innu∣merable Papers of This Reverend Prelate, none should bee com∣mitted to the Press, but such as They found perfected by His accurate hand.
In prosequution wherof we are much bound to Their care and faithfulness for the communication of His Incomparable Sermons & Discourses, which now inrich the World with Pietie and Learning; and put
it to the wonder to see the Quintessence of the Fathers & School distilled through His Limbeck, in so fit language and expres∣sions, to the great advantage of the Church of God.
Why This most ex∣cellent Piece of His Devotions was not by Them presented with the rest, the Language, wherin it was con∣ceiv'd and us'd by Him, will give abun∣dant satisfaction to
Your Highness. His Greek had been but a Barbarian unto them, whose benefit was chiefly intended in all the Publications of His Works. Nor is Your Highness now to bee assured, that They, who were imploied in that service, were Wise and Honorable Persons, that They well knew Their Work, and did it.
And truly, SIR, the Commands of His Majestie shall ever be
so sacred to me, and the Judgment of Those Reverend Prelats so much esteemed by me, that I should not have presum'd on this Es∣saie, had not the Ho∣nor of This Renowned Bishop been eclipsed, by obtruding on the World some broken parcels, miserably de∣faced by a careless Press, under the glo∣rious Name of Bishop Andrews.
If this be thought no sufficient ground
for this high presum∣ption, I shall proceed in my presumption on Your Highness, to be a Mediator to Your most Glorious Father, for His Gracious Par∣don to a sinner, who, not being without great hopes of ad∣vancing Pietie by his sin, is confident of obteining Your Prince∣lie Interposition that it is Felix Error. And that, the benefit here∣of so much redound∣ing to the Glorie of
God, by promoting Christian people in Devotion, it would have been a greater sin against the Public, to detein so pretious a Jewel from im∣provement: It being the peculiar happi∣ness of Sacred Commo∣dities, to be made bet∣ter by their using.
And to whom should Devotion ad∣dress her self for Pa∣tronage, in this Age of Irreligion and Pro∣phaness; in this great
invasion upon God, the King, the Church, and whatsoëver is called Holie, if not to Your Highness? It will bee no sin in us, to look for the righting and maintenance of them all, from Your Princelie Arm, assisted with the Power of Hea∣ven.
Ride on, Great Prince, upon the Hor∣ses of Salvation, and the Lord of Hosts sight your battels. Maie the Sword of the LORD
and Prince CHARLES be mightie in opera∣tion, for the Redem∣ption of His Sacred Majestie, and the Resti∣tution of This Church and Kingdom to Their ancient Libertie and Glorie. Maie Honor, Prosperitie and Peace so accompanie and crown Your Pious, Christian, and Princelie undertakings, that our eies maie once more see the King upon His Throne, gloriously triumphing in the Af∣fections
of His Subjects, happily united in the indissoluble bonds of Love and Loialtie.
This is the summe of all our desires, and the dailie Praier of him, whose highest ambition is, not to be utterly uncapable of doing service to the Church of God, and of approving himself,
SIR,

