


THat the Charge of His Majesties King∣dom of Ireland, not exceeding what it is computed to be, in a Paper, styled, The State of Your Majesties Revenue, deli∣vered in by your Vice-Treasurer, shall from the 25 of December, 1670. until the 26 of December 1675. be fully and duely answered and discharged, excepting what ought to be deducted for Cheques made by your Majesties sworn Officers.
That all arrears of Pay, due to your Martial and Ci∣vil Lists, at, or on the last day of December last past, accord∣ing to the establishment; and all other Debts mentioned in the aforesaid State, which your Majesty is obliged to pay, shall before the 25 of December 1675. be fully paid and dis∣charged, and that without any Composition or Defalcation, except the Fees and Cheques, usually and duely made; and except what shall be found to be still due of the Ten months Arrears in the Lords Justices time, which hath all along been compounded for one half, and so much every body con∣cerned therein shall have.
That all such Defalcations as shall appear to be justly due unto the late Farmers of your Majesties Customs Import∣ed, Inland Excize, Licenses for Ale and Beer, Licenses for Wine, Aquavitae, and Strong-waters, during the two
 years and three quarters of the late War with the Dutch, shall be adjusted and setled in such manner as your Ma∣jesty shall be wholly freed and discharged from any Demand, for or concerning the same.
That the present Farmers of His Majesties Revenue in Ireland may continue their Farms under the Articles, Covenants, Conditions, and Provisions mentioned in their several Grants, and that any pretence of Defalcation by them shall be solely determined, in such manner as by their several Agreements is, and was appointed, without any Lett or Interruption therein.
That your Majesty shall have and dispose of as you shall think fit, the Ballances of the Earl of Anglesey's Account, and the Ballance of Sir George Carteret's Account being 20000 l. or thereabouts.
That as to any addition which shall hereafter be made to your Majesties Revenue by Act of Parliament, the Pro∣poser will in no wise pretend thereunto, or intermeddle there∣with.
That the Proposer, over and above the Payments and Discharges to be made as aforesaid, will be engaged to pay your Majesty 80000 l. sterling, within the space of two years, to commence from the 25 of December, 1675. by four equal Portions, half yearly.
That Your Majesty may continue the Excize of Your Royal Prerogative, and Power to Suspend, Mitigate, Reduce, or Pardon any Particulars under the survey of the Greenwax, and any Fines and Forfeitures upon Penal Laws (other then such as relate to your Revenue) and for appointing Commissioners for reducements thereof. But that all such Moneys which after such reducements shall be Payable, Levied, or Received by Your Majesties Offi∣cers, shall belong to the Proposer.
That as for any payment due to Your Majesty from the Clergy for First Fruits, or Twentieth Parts, the Proposer will be concluded by such Returns as shall be made by the Commissioners lately impowred for that purpose, under the Great Seal of Ireland.

That to the end Your Majesties Revenue may not be diverted out of its proper and usual Channel; The Propo∣ser Declares, That all Moneys due and payable to Your Majesty, whither upon the account of the present Farms, Arrears, or otherwise, shall be answered and brought into the Receipt of Your Majesties Exchequer in the same man∣ner as formerly, to be there ready to answer the Ʋses here∣in undertaken.
That all Warrants for the issuing out of any of Your Ma∣jesties said Revenue, shall be Signed and Ordered as former∣ly by your Majesty, or Chief Governor, and directed to the Proposer, who will forthwith answer the same, according to the intent of these Proposals.
That the 30000 l. Granted by Your Majesty to the Earl of Suffolk, shall be satisfied out of the proper Fond where∣on it is Charged.
That it is not intended hereby to abridge Your Majesty from Granting, Leasing, or Confirming unto any Person or Persons, &c. any Messuages, Lands, Tenements, or He∣reditaments, within Your said Kingdom, which are yet un∣disposed of; or to which Your Majesties Title hereafter shall be made appear; so that the Quit-Rents, or the Crown-Rents, which shall be found most for Your Majesties profit, be reserved, and no Arrears, or mean Profits due thereon, be remitted.
That to prevent and avoid the many and sad consequen∣ces which may happen by a speedy and rigid Levying and bringing in of Your Majesties Debts and Dues, and to secure and ease Your Subjects from any unnecessary trouble, unjust vexations, or double payments.



1. THat all Persons in Arrears for Quit-Rents, shall have the full benefit and ef∣fect of a Covenant for Instalments alrea∣dy made between Your Majesty and the present Farmers of Your Revenue.
2. That a Power may be given to Your Governors and such others whom Your Majesty shall think fit to ap∣point, for Installing all other the Debts, Arrears, &c. due to Your Majesty, on, or before the 25 of December, 1670. where they shall see cause, upon consideration had upon every respective Case, so that none of them be in∣stalled for above eight half yearly Payments, of which, none to extend beyond the 24 day of June, 1675. And that the payment so Installed, be sufficiently secured; But this Power not to extend to any Farmers, Receivers, or Collectors, who either are, or have been of Your Majesties Revenue; nor to any small or inconsiderable Sums, except the Debtors be found very unable, nor to any who shall not own the Debts, or will not consent to secure the Payments thereof, by such Installments, without Suits at Law.
3. That nothing which is not now in charge, shall be sued for, or Levied, until satisfaction be first given to the chief Governor, and such others whom Your Majesty shall please to appoint, that there is good grounds for so doing, and that Your Majesty is justly entituled thereunto.
4. That the chief Governour may be directed to issue out Proclamations, as occasion shall require; whereby all Col∣lectors, Receivers, and Accomptants, may be warned with∣in a reasonable time, to come in and clear their Accounts; And that all other Your Subjects, who are any ways in∣debted to Your Majesty, may have notice of the Favour of Installments intended, and accordingly may take some effectual course to state and secure their respective Debts and Arrears.

That a just Account shall from time to time be given to Your chief Governour, and such others whom Your Majesty shall think fit to appoint, of all proceedings in the manage∣ment of this undertaking, and any directions from them which may conduce to the better and more easie carrying on of this work, shall be most willingly embraced, and that in all matters of Law in which may occur the Judgements and Decrees of Your Court of Exchequer, shall be conclusive.
As concerning what is to be Granted, Covenanted, and Agreed by Your Majesty, to, and for the Proposers encou∣ragement it is Humbly tendered.
That the Commission of Enquiry now on foot, may forth∣with be Superceded. That all Respits of Quitrents, and o∣ther Sums now due to Your Majesty, be forthwith determi∣ned. That the Composition with the (49) Officers may not be obstructed, but perfected as intended, and that the benefit arising thereby to Your Majesty, mentioned in this said State, may belong to the Proposer, for the carrying on of the Ʋses undertaken.
That Your Majesty will renew Your Letter to the chief Governor and the Council, to reapplot the deficiency of the years value; but that therewith, all Your Majesties Grace and Favour may be extended to Your Subjects in allowing them four years for the payment thereof.
That as well the Arrears as growing Rents and Profits of the present Farm of Your Majesties Revenue, until the 26 of December, 1675. (including the last Quarters Rent then due, though not payable) And also all the Moneys now in Your Majesties Treasury, or due by Imprest, or other∣wise, may be wholly imployed to the uses herein undertaken, and to be from time to time accepted and accounted as payable for the said Ʋses.
That Your Majesty will be pleased sufficiently to Commis∣sionate and Impower such able and fit Persons, as the Pro∣poser shall nominate, and Your Majesty approve of, to be Your Officers and Ministers, Granting to them such Pow∣er and Authority as shall be thought requisite (without in∣terrupting
 the present Farmers, or their Officers, in Collect∣ing, and bringing in the Revenue under their Charge) in Your Majesties name, and with the assistance of Your Of∣ficers, to Mannage, Levy, Collect, Sue for, Recover, and Receive, all and every Your Majesties Revenues, Certain and Casual, Ordinary and Extraordinary whatsoever, not hitherto remitted or pardoned, as well such, as upon or be∣fore the said 25 of December, 1670. were in arrears, and yet unpaid, as such, which, from and after the said time, until the 26 of December, 1675. including the Rents and Payments which shall be due for the time preceding, the said day, were or shall be by any matter of Record or otherwise, howsoever due, owing or payable to Your Majesty; or which might, or ought to have been, or may, before the 26 of December, 1675. be Taxed, Levied, Collected, Recovered, Answered for, Paid, or Payable to Your Majesty, out of, or for all, or any the Estates, Real and Personal, of any Person or Persons, Bodies Politick or Corporate, or other∣wise, by reason of any Tax, Subsidy, Assessment, Impositi∣on, Contract, Covenant, and Agreement, Account, Debt, Sum, or Sums of Money, Matter or Thing Imposed, Made, Issu∣ed, or which did or shall arise, grow due or payable within the said Kingdom of Ireland, before the said 26 of De∣cember, 1675. (excepting the particulars before proposed to be excepted.)
That the Proposer, and the Persons to be Commissiona∣ted as aforesaid, may Have, Receive, and Enjoy the full bene∣fit and advantage of all Your Majesties said Arrears, and growing Revenue now in charge, or that which hereafter may be in charge, or discovered, and not before excepted, with∣out being Answerable or Accountable to Your Majesty, af∣ter this their undertaking shall be accomplished, but that the same being accordingly performed by them, they may Receive, Retain, and Enjoy the whole Surplus of the Reve∣nue, to their own proper uses, without further Account, and be absolutely discharged as to Your Majesty, Your Heirs and Successors, of and for the same.

That the said Persons may have such farther Power and Concessions, requisite both to make Your Majesties Grant herein effectual in Law to them, and for the bet∣ter enabling them to perform the said undertaking, as are usual or useful in cases of the like nature, so that the same extend not to the Demand of any Defalcations out of the sums hereby undertaken to be paid, other then by reason of the hand of God, unavoidable necessity, or Your Majesties own Act.

