


My Lord,
HAving taken occasion to present the following Papers of your Noble and Learned Father to the World, I held my self obliged to make a particular Dedication of 'em to your self, in whom so much of the Acuteness of his Wit, and of his incomparable Mo∣desty, and of his Loyalty to his Prince, and Conformity to the Church, Fidelity in Friend∣ship, and Candour of Disposi∣tion and Manners, is Conspi∣cuous to the World: And by which latter Qualification your

Conversation is perfectly char∣ming to all who have the Ho∣nour of it.
His Lordships great value of these generous qualities in you, was often signified to me by him in my more than twenty five years frequent Conversati∣on with him in the latter part of his Life; and wherein you gave him so much just Cause to presage, that your Lordship would be both a Propp and an Ornament to his Family.
And I doubt not but those Great and Manly efforts of his Reason, Religion and Learn∣ing that I here lay before your thoughts, will be further In∣ducements to you to make a Na∣tural use of his great Example, and to spend as much of your

Life, as you can spare from the Service of your Country, in the most vigorous pursuits after Knowledge, and in the investi∣gation of Truth; and for your doing which, you have in the Course of Nature so fair a prospect of a long race of Life before you.
His Lordship used often to quote occasionally that saying of my Lord Bacon's, Actio est Conversatio cum Stultis, lectio autem cum Sapientibus: The thought whereof induced him to spend so much of his time in his Library; and where he u∣sually loc'kd himself up so close, that in stead of fortifying his Interest at Court, as great Men do, by frequent giving of Visits to one another he very

much avoided the receiving them.
And therefore he having so vast a Collection of Choice Books both in the Ancient and Modern Languages, and especially of Divinity, Com∣mon-Law, Civil Law, Canon-Law, and History; and laying the Scene of his Life so much among them▪ and living to a good Old Age, the World might well expect that what he should leave behind him of his own Composing, should be worthy of himself, and it: And such your Lordship will find this Volume to be.
The first Work of your Fa∣thers, that I shall Entertain your Lordship and the World with, is that of his Letter to

my self, of Iuly the 18th. 1683, Writ on the occasion of my minding him of his yearly Cu∣stom of sending Venison to Sir George Ent; and which Letter is variously instructful to the Age. I placed before his large Dis∣course by way of Letter to me in Answer of Mine to him of that Nature, because the Or∣der of time required it.
He had my entire Discourse by him in his Study, Printed and bound up long before he dyed. And his Lordship telling me, that he intended his by way of return to it, and to be Prin∣ted in Folio to be bound up with mine; mine thereby happen'd not to be Published in his Life time.
It was afterward Published with the Title of the Happy Fu∣ture

State of England, and since by a new Title, viz, A Discourse of the growth of England, in po∣pulousness and trade since the Re∣formation, &c. Printed for Wil∣liam Rogers, at the Sun over a∣gainst St. Dunstans Church in Fleet-Street.
And as all great Writers (and especially of such Subjects that refer to various kinds of Learn∣ing) have Customarily employ∣ed several persons in gathering Quotations for them, and ab∣stracting them (and as for this purpose, I have some where Ci∣ted the Lord Secretary Falkland, for saying of Cardinal Peron, that Baronius and Bellarmine were but fit to gather Quotati∣ons for him) so your Father was pleased to Crave the Aid

of Quotations from his Learn∣ed Friend Bishop Barlow, in two or three Points relating to The∣ology and the Canon Law, and which were sent to him in Let∣ters. I scarce know any one Man who is so absolute a Ma∣ster of all the various kinds of Learning refer'd to in your Fa∣thers large following Discourse, as to have commanded the pro∣per use thereof, without apply∣ing to the Labour of some o∣ther Friend in this kind. Nor have any of the most Learned of the Jesuits presumed to Pub∣lish the most Famous and Ela∣borate of their Volumes, either Historical or Mathematical, without owing a beholding∣ness to others for Quotations.
And as any one here, who

entertains a great Prince in a Splendid manner, holds himself obliged not to confine himself to his own Ground for all the Materials of his Treat, so he who invites to his Entertain∣ment no meaner a Guest than the World by his Writings, ought not to Disdain the use of the Heads or Hands of others in finding out the most Curious Provision for it, and especially in so Critical an Age as this.
But even herein was your Fa∣thers great Modesty so Signal, as to shew that he designed not the Appropriating wholy to himself the Honour of all the Bishops Learned and Judicious Quotations (and which yet by the Custom of other great Wri∣ters, he might have justifiably

done) that he is pleased to no∣tifie to the World in p. 21. his having apply'd to the Bishop on that account, and what Com∣munications he had from him by Letters, and his desire of their Publication.
Another great instance of his Exuberant Modesty, I shall here Entertain your Lordship with, is the great Complement he was pleased to put on me, when not very long before his last Sickness, he delivered to me his large Discourse as fair∣ly Writ out by his Amanuenses, and variously altered by his own Hand (and the which af∣ter the Printers have made use of, I intend to offer to your Lordships Cabinet) and desired me, that I would take the same

Freedom in putting out, or De∣leting any thing I thought Su∣perfluous or proper to be ex∣punged, as he told me, Mr. Boyle had desired me to do when I Published his Excellent Book of The Style of the Scriptures. Mr. Boyle in a Letter to me Printed before that Book, Addrest it to me with the Initial Letters of Mr. P.P. A.G. F.I. (by which he meant to refer to me as Ad∣vocate General for Ireland, and giving a Friendly Reason for not more openly naming me.) And he is there pleased to say, I have been obliged, that I might obey you, not only to Dismember, but to Mangle the Treatise you perused, cutting out here a whole side, and there half, and in ano∣ther place perhaps a quarter of one.
And if it had so pleased God, that your Father had lived any considerable time longer, I would have humbly offered it to his Consideration, to have some Passages there omitted, and par∣ticularly that wherein he giveth his thoughts of somewhat in p. 70. of my Discourse, and like∣wise those wherein his Lordship is pleased to signifie his over-va∣luing of my poor Sixth-rate Ta∣lents, and my performance in my Work. But since he lived not long enough for my having an opportunity to satisfie him with my Reasons, for the leaving out any passages, as I did the in∣comparable Mr. Boyle, I presum'd not to delete any thing therein, worth the speaking of. But as I took great Care to watch the

Press in my Publication of that Noble Work of Mr. Boyles, to prevent the Printers Errata, so I have in this of your Fathers.
The Author of the Athenae Oxonienses having among the Lives of the Oxford Writers, Writ that of your Father, is there plea∣sed to mention, that in the be∣ginning of the year 1686. He began to be admitted into the Fa∣vour of King James the II. But he was admitted into his Maje∣sties Favour before; and Mr. Ryley after your Fathers Death, shew'd me this in his Lordships Diary, viz. On March 8.85. Spent most at home in Business; and Duty (i. e. Prayer) In the Even∣ing was private with the Lord Sunderland, my good Friend; and then was with the King a full hour

at Mr. Chiffinches; who was ve∣ry kind, free, and open in Discourse: Said, he would not be Priest-rid∣den; Read a Letter of the Late King, said I should be welcome to him. I refer to this, to shew like∣wise on what Terms he stood in the Royal Favour (and which was so great to him, that his Friends supposed, that had he lived a Month longer, he would have been Lord Chancellour) and that his zeal for his Religion, suf∣fered no Diminution thereby, and which sufficiently appeared by the Picture of his mind drawn by himself in the following Dis∣course, and to which he was then applying his finishing Touches.
And hence the Reader may guess, that his private Belief of his Prince not designing the un∣settlement

of our Religion, En∣couraged him in his thoughts of Loyalty, and in his Inculca∣ting the Moral Offices of it so much throughout the follow∣ing Discourse.
And indeed his Advices then about it, were but Eccho's to the Pulpits of the Divines of the Church of England in general, that rang with it till the time of the setting up the Ecclesiastical High Commis∣ssion, and by virtue of which, they had apprehensions of their being removeable out of their Church-Freeholds in two or three days time: And where∣upon they had (as I may say, in the School-Divinity Terms) the motus primo primi, to think that the Affirmative precepts of

Preaching up Loyalty in their Sermons as before, did not bind Semper & ad Semper. But your Father was in his Grave, before the Birth of that Commission, and it was several Months after in that year 1686. before the Commissioners opened their Commission, and which they did on Tuesday the 3d. of August that year.
However it may be said that no Revolutions time can cause, can make persuasives to Loyal∣ty wholy useless, or it cease to be a Vertue, or to want the Sup∣port of any Government, and which must be supported by it.
But your Fathers growth in his Habitual Loyalty, when he was so near his End, needs no Apology. And according to the

observation I have met with from some of our Practical Divines that God watcheth when his Child is at the best, and his Graces ripest, and then takes him, thus was it with your Noble Father.
And as no thought can be more obvious to a prudent States-Man▪ who was for a time Employed by his Prince in a Provincial King∣dom under his Vice-Roy, and was preparing to return to his King, and to be under his Eye, than that 'tis his great concern to part fair∣ly with the Vice-Roy, and not to be conscious of having Dishonoured, or of having render'd him uneasie in the discharge of his Office; so neither can it be unthought of by any Pious Minister of Kings (who are Gods Vice-Gerents) that it highly imports him after his splen∣did

Sojourning here, to have the Testimonials of a good Consci∣ence, ready to carry to Heaven with him, that he here Honoured the great King of Heaven and Earth, in the persons of such Vice-gerents, and did not by stirring up any popular ferments, trouble their Administration and frustrate their Counsels.
Had your Father lived to have come to the Helm of State, as a primier Ministre, I believe his in∣fluence would have prevented ma∣ny inconveniences that happened by the Bigotry, Pedantry, and blind zeal of some particu∣lar papists. For tho I have own'd to the World in print, the excel∣lent Tempers and Justice and prudence of some Great Roman-Catholicks then, yet I have often

been diverted by the impotent passion of some certain Popish Bi∣gots, who, because I in my Book which I designed as perswasive a∣gainst the Exclusion, & the growth of the popular fears of Papists and Popery, and wrote in the tur∣bid interval of the Kingdom, the interval of panic Fears, and when the Ayre of Mens fancies was ge∣nerally infected, and the Kingdom was in a Chaos-like condition, thought it necessary to Demon∣strate, that I was a Non-Papist, and not to dilate in invectives against the Belief of any popish Plot what∣soever, and against all the Witnes∣ses in particular, were pleased in common talk, to shoot the bolts of their Censures against me and my Works. And the truth is, for any writer for the aforesaid pur∣poses,

to have then appeared in such a Dress, as they would have had him, would have shew'd as strangely, as when it once happen∣ed, that one being to Act Theseus in Hercules furens coming out of Hell, he could not for a long time be perswaded to wear some old sooty Clothes, but would needs come out of Hell in a white Sat∣tin Doublet.
Your Fathers Learned Book may in various places, teach such Censorious bigots common sense. And his Lordship justly coming under the Character of , I may account his single acknow∣ledgment of my performance, to out-weigh Myriads of such Igno∣rant Censurers, and be very well content with my having escaped the Scandal of their praise.
But here I must needs say, that as I have sufficiently shewn in print, the aversion of my Humour from courting the popular praise of any party (as having judged that the medicament of Notions I applyed to each, would be neces∣sarily helped in the working by the ungratefulness of the Taste) so by my having so long delay'd the publication of this excellent Volume of your Father, I have shewn some uneasiness or back∣wardness in receiving the various Honour he was pleased in his short Letter prefixed, and following large one, to do to that Work of mine, which in obedience to his Commands, and for the doing him Justice I wrote.
And I believe, had not a Learn∣ed and Prudent Friend of mine

of the Church of England told me, that my being thus accessory to the publishing of your Fathers Lauda∣tory Acknowledgments of my per∣formance, was as much consistent with the Laws of Modesty as is many grave and wise Authors pre∣fixing Commendatory Verses or Prose-testimonials from others be∣fore their works (and for which pur∣pose, he told me of Mr. Hobbes having before a philosophical and politi∣cal Work of his, printed some ex∣cellent verses of Dr. Bathurst; and of Dr. Templer having printed some of another before his admirable Confutation of Leviathan) and withal represented it to me, that I was in Conscience bound to the supporting the Honour of our Church, by the publishing the New Matter contained in your Fathers

Book against popery, and likewise to the supporting the Justice of our Compassion, for the sufferings of our Brethren in France by the Bigottry of the French Clergy, upon the account of their not owning the Faith of the Council of Trent, (your Fathers Book beyond all o∣ther Writings published, so clearly shewing it out of the most Authen∣tick Histories, that that Council was never published and received in France) I should have been incli∣ned to have Transmitted this in∣comparable Discourse of his Lord∣ship, to have lived only in the Ar∣chives of the Oxford-Library. And so chiefly by the weight of this latter Consideration, I have held my self obliged to make it pub∣lick: And I doubt not but all pro∣testants, and especially our Divines

of the Church of England, will bid it welcome to the World.
But My Lord, I am to crave your Lordships Pardon, for thus long detaining your thoughts from the Great and Noble ones of your Fa∣thers in the following Discourse; and will no longer offend therein, than by Subscribing my self,
My Lord, 
July 17. 1693.
