



BY these Papers which I send to be Perused by you, my Worthy Friend, you may perceive I have (as you desired me) Con∣sidered the Contens of Mijn Heer Fagel's. Letter, con∣cerning our Penal Laws and Tests, and Remarkt upon that Subject, as Occasion was offered.
Before I had finished what I intended therein, The Solution of the Popular Objection against the Repeal of the Penal Laws and Tests, was Publish∣ed; Therein the Task you imposed upon me, was so effectually Perform'd by the Author, that you may well demand a Reason, why I did not upon sight of it desist from any farther proceeding upon this Subject.
My Apology is, Tho that has Substantially pre∣vented me, you did not formally forbid me.
The Arguments of it are sufficient to fortifie a∣gainst any Fears Suggested from future Parlia∣ments, if Foundations be well laid in the next, for Liberty of Conscience; and may serve (as is hinted in the Title Page) for an Answer to this Letter of Mijn Heer Fagel, as well as to any o∣ther Papers Published upon this Subject. But yet I perceive there are, who adhere to the Opi∣nion in Vogue—That we are more secure in our Religion and Liberties under our present Laws for Oaths and Tests, then we can be by any other Provi∣vision, if these be Repealed: And they strengthen themselves herein, by what has, been declared by this Letter of Mijn Heer Fagel to Mr. James Stewart; and because the Author of that Paper does not stile it an Answer thereto in particular, it still remains with some, as if it were unan∣swered.
I encline to think (and shall so do till I am o∣therwise convinced) No man will attempt openly to Relpy upon those Arguments; But I cannot take Silence in this case to be a sufficient Evidence of a Conviction; I have therefore steered another course to break this Silence, by offering some things to be considered upon the subject matter of Mijn Heer Fagel's, Letter, as a Moot Case.
1. Whether contrary to their Highnesses de∣clared Opinion, many Christians are not subject to be very ill used, because they differ from the Publick Established Religion, if these Tests con∣tinue without any further Provision by a New Law to secure them from such Ʋsage?
2. Whether those Penal Laws and Tests are Effectual to Exclude Roman Catholicks from any share in the Government, Publick Trusts, or Employments; Or whether they have not been improved to a damage, rather then to any real advantage to the Reformed Religion?
3. Whether Better, more Justifiable, and Sui∣table Security, both for our Religion and Civil Rights, may not be obtained if His Majesty please to give His Royal Assent, by Establishing the se∣veral matters proposed in His Declaration for Indulgence, and some other Provisions to be made by a New Law, then can be had or expected by continuing the Penal Laws and Tests as now they are?
What I have written, tends to resolve these points for a Repeal of our Penal Laws and Tests, If it meet not with better Arguments to the con∣trary then hither to have been published. I have been the more large upon this Subject, because I am of Opinion, (1) That no man can for the cause of Religion plead any justifiable excuse for his not rendring Subjection to such as are his Superiours in a Natural or Civil Station, in their lawful Commands. (2) That the inflicting Temporal Penalties for such Errors in Religious Opinions as cannot be Evinc'd by the Principles of Reason and Conscience, to be against the common Light of Nature (tho they may be proved by Scripture to be against such mysterious Truths as are proper only to the Christian Religion) is not to be justi∣fied either by the general Law of Nature, or ge∣neral Rules of Scripture. (3) Though the point of Liberty of Conscience seems to be, yet I doubt it is not really granted, but stands in some need to be more fully inculcated, That each person who desires for himself to be free, and not coerced by Penal Laws to Worship God contrary to his Conscience, may be disposed to allow the like Liberty to every other Person who desires it, and is of years of discretion to plead for it pon the like terms.
It is a true saying, Id verum quod Prius; Truth's Elder than Error: But Error has trod upon the Heels of Truth, by Satan's Transforming
himself into an Angel of Light, and his Mini∣sters being Transformed into Ministers of Righ∣teousness; so as that the most Ʋpright, from the first Creation of Man upon the Earth, through∣out all succeeding Generations, have been so liable to Temptations, as not always to consider by what Spirit they are Acted—After the Fall of Man, from that Original State of Ʋprightness where∣in he was at first Created, Though Internal Grace, through Faith of the Operation of the Spirit of Christ, for the Hope of Redemption by the Promised Seed, first directed the proper use of Religious External Forms, so as to render the Worshippers acceptable therein to God; and in that Respect, Liberty of Conscience had the Pre∣cedency of Persecution for Conscience: Yet through the Instigation of that Old Serpent, (the Spirit of Antichrist) Persecution for Conscience, is as old as the Murther of Abel. The Form of God∣liness without the Power, (which then began to shew it self in Cain, who was of that Wicked one, and slew his Brother) has ever since manifested it self in various Forms, like the Harlot in the Proverbs,
Prov. 5.6. Gal. 4.29. whose Ways are moveable, throughout all Ages in the World.
And this evil Persecuting Spirit crept, and still insinuates it self into the visible Church; and in∣to such among them, as have a Zeal for God, and for an outside Form of Godliness, but not according to Knowledge. And this is so much the more re∣markable, because, although the Tract of Holy Scriptures discovers, and often repeats the doleful Effects of this (formal, pretended Godly Cor∣rection of an Erroneous, but really cruel) Per∣secution of an Ʋpright Conscience;
Gen 4.8. Mat. 23.35. 1 John 3.11, 12, 13. Jude, verse 11. and has pre∣served upon Record, from the Beginning to the Conclusion of Holy Writ, the very Name of the first Bloody Transgressor of this sort, often Repeated, that it might be rendred odious to all future Ages, especially under the Gospel: Tet how oft has it hapned, (to the Evi∣dence of the Divine Original, and Verity of Scrip∣ture-Prophesies) that even such as read them, & pre∣tend, but do not attend to be guided by their Voice, have fulfilled them in Condemning the Just? And whilst they speak, as in the Language of the Jews, when they built the Tombs, and Garnish∣ed the Sepulchres of the Righteous; (if they had lived in their Fathers Days, they would not have been Partakers with them in the Blood of the Prophets,) even in the interim, are stupidly re∣gardless of the temper of their own Minds, then bent upon, and in the next Opportunity, actually Persecuting the Righteous, so as to fill up the Measure of their Fathers, and bring upon them∣selves the Blood of all the Prophets, which was shed from the Foundation of the World. My Inducement to touch upon these Points, is the Hopes I have conceived, that by His Majesty's Royal Countenance and Authority, the destru∣ctive Instruments of this Inhumane Persecu∣ting Spirit may be taken out of the Way; so as that, although the Malignity of it be as inou∣rable as that of Babylon, menti∣oned by the Prophet Jeremiah;
Jer. 51.7; 8, 9. Mic. 3.3, 4.5. yet its Rage shall be so fettered as no more to take away Peace from the Earth; whereto the setling, and bounding of Religious and Civil Interests, upon, and within their distinct proper Foundations and Limits, will greatly Contribute.
I cannot say, as it is reported you have some∣times said, That if you thought, what you advised and perswaded to, were not the safest way, you would reckon your selves concerned to Act another Part: But I can freely say, If I were not of that Mind, I would have chosen to be silent, and Acted no Part at all. But being perswaded, that the modest Handling, throughly Penetrating, and free Debating these Points, may produce such a Settlement amongst us, as is most just and equal; and in that Respect, if it be once well laid, most likely to remain unshaken to Perpetuity.
I have therefore written with an Intent, that what I write should be throughly Scann'd, with a Preparation of mind, to bear the Censures of such as have a better discerning, and will dis∣cover wherein I have Erred: And in the first Place, submit the whole to your Correction; and Disposal, as you think fit: Wishing, that both you and my self, may so persevere in our mutual Endeavours to do well, that in all our Greetings and Partings, we may (without Transgressing our Lord's Rule) bid each other Heartily
Farewel.
