



My LORD,
THE Almighty in His Law, ordered none to appear be∣fore him, empty handed, yet he himself being to Flesh invisible, the present was an offering to His Priest; God who is also called, Good accounting it churlish to addresse in thankfulnesse to Him, without something that figured bounty to His Servant; neither would he have his People alwayes takeing, but some∣times also giveing: unto which Law, as a Conformist, I in this your Clinical condition, comeing to receive your Blessing, presume to present this my Mysterium, in regard of your Acquaintance with Godlinesse, not accord∣ing to the new stile, which intimats separa∣tion; but to Scrpture-Dialect, Respecti

Holinesse and peace. You have had experi∣ence of the CROSS, and that at home, we by your Lordships order in our Pulpits, pray for your PASCH; your self waits for ASCENSI∣ON in your bed, the power of the RESUR∣RECTION haveing said, be not affraid.
My LORD, when the Rivers of Babylon begu to swell, I mean, when those tyds of con∣fusion, that destroyed all order in these plea∣sant Lands, of late years, did first rage, you were one of the Hundreth and Twenty, that resolved TO SIT by and weep retiring from your own, to other Countries, to any Kingdom rather then IN those waters, to become in∣strumental of your Countries Sorrow, Death, or Discredit: How did my dear and worthy Father, your Brother and Companion in that Tribulation, and in the Kingdome and patience of Jesus Christ, exult at his Death, that he had in a bloody Time, been free of the blood of all men, whether executed on the scaffold, or slain in battel? and that in a time when one cryed up Character of a perfect E∣vangelist was to be an Incendiary to which, how vehemently was he solicited in both Kingdomes.
IN those dayes of unleavened bread, the Angel who Redeemed you from the same e∣vill made you find Favour in the sight  Strangers; Providence among them alott alottin

you a Charge, peculiarly respecting Church-Festivities, and that Theme pursu'd, untill In∣iquity, and Invasion, gave Check to Royalty and Order: but these again, being Captiv'd by Truth and Decency, a door was open'd, and that Holy subject a fresh prosecuted; Vntill God and the King, whom you alwayes joyned, called you to weare an Honourable Mytre in that City, wherin you had so signaly, Innocent∣ly, and patiently, endured the Crosse.
VPON which score, unto whom fitter could this manuel be delivered, for Patronage then to you my dear Lord? The Author cofiding to be participant of the effects of those vertues where∣of Experience hath evidenced to him, you are copiously endowed conveyed into your breast, as it were by Christanity and Blood▪ finding one William Archbishop of St. Andrews, Anno Dom. 1279. Chronicled for a lover of peace, and your Names-sake, and our Martyr Mr. George Wisheart, to be fam'de for Humility and Charity: Vpon which rocks I build my presentment, Conceiving that your Aged, Young, and yet Accomplished Abilities, shall not disdain my Improportionat Dedication, but that you shall depart in peace, even with me, pardoning my failings, praying for direct∣tion to my good Intentions, and for Ad∣ditament

to my weak endowments: In grati∣tude whereof, that your Nunc Dimittis, with Simeon, may be in Peace, and that Peace to come in Job's opportunity▪ as a shock of Corn cometh in his Season, shall be the Prayer of,
My LORD, 
From my Study
May 15. 1671.
