



Right Honourable,
REceiving a command from your Honours, met together at your Quarter-Sessions House in Bedford, Octob. 2. for the publick reading of the Liturgy of the Church of England, which hath been, and still is looked upon (by some) as the troubler of our Zion, and grand Malefactor of our Is∣rael, being sentenced before tryed, as Po∣pish and Antichristian; Antichristian, because Ancient; and Po∣pish, because Orthodox; I was bound in conscience by that duty that I owe to God, and to his Church, to blow away that dust, and to wash away that silth, which by maliious and discontented persons, had been cast upon that Book, whereby it was noysome to the eyes of the weak and ignorant, before I could own it, as a∣ny way conducing to the edification of the Church, which must have been granted by my publick using of it.

Enabling myself to graple with, and in some sort to resist th brutish force, (I must so call it since it is irrational) and which I foresaw I should be assaulted with in yielding obedience to your Honours commands in this particular, gave a being to these few lines, which at this time with all humility I present unto you, hoping that you will give protection to this tender plant, not yet ten dayes old, sice your Order was the sole and only cause of its production. I come to your Honours Court as a Court of equi∣ty, not doubting but that Common Iaw would do me Justice, but hoping that your graver Judgements will give a quick hearing to this suit, since it is so clear, and I be dismissed without long at∣tending; if at your Bench it pss for the Desendant, I shall not be troubled, though in a corner passionate men commence a suit a∣gainst me.
Worthy Sirs, there are two evil Spirits, walking at this time through the Land, hunting both our private houses, and our pub∣lick Temples, disturbing both our Church and State; the one is of looseness and prophaneness; the other is of giddiness and per∣verseness: which must be conjured, and that suddenly; assaulted, and that undauntedly; both from our hbitations of Justice, and Mountins of Holiness. Be not afraid of their faces, nor dismay∣ed at their looks, Ezek. 2. 6. may be a fit Memorandum both for our Princes, and for our Levites; both for your Honours Benches, and our Pulpits, our Dread Soveraign hath sharpned the Axe for the one, and you great Sirs, must lay it at the root of the Tree. You cannot but remember that it must be the fear of God in  Land, that must turn our Spears into Shares, and our Swords into Pruning-hooks: Your Honours are Justices of the Peace, and your practice is to keep the Kings peace; let not Warre be pro∣clamed against heaven; let there be free Trade ever kept with that Kingdom, and we need not fear what our enemies can do a∣gainst us. One Frederick a Duke of Saxony (as I have read) proclaming Warre against the Archbishop of Magneburgh, ap∣pointed one to go to his Court, to inform him of the nature of the Archbishops preparations for an Invasion, and finding that the Bishop made only God his Associate, gave over his design, with this advice to the World, Alius insaniat ut bellum inferat ei qui confidit se Deum desensorem habiturum. You have Right Ho∣nourable, a happy opportunity both joyntly and severally, to stop

that Inundation of prophaneness, which seems to overflow the strongest Bulwarks and Banks that can be made or cast up against it, by a severe putting in execution those Laws that for that kind are made and provided. As for that other spirit, Noble Sirs, we may divide it into two sorts: It causes some, out of petulancy and frowardness, to oppose the best Laws, except such as are made by themselves, or for themselves, or by those who are of the same judgement with themselves; they are fiery and excen∣trical in their motion; through the overflowings of their gall, they speak bitter words, even against Dignities they bring railing ac∣cusation; like fiery Comets they predict some signal, fatality to that Countrey wherein they are, and some future judgement to that place over which they hang: They are such, that though favour be shown them, they will deal perversely, Clemency (so vitious and cholerick are their constitutions) like honey, will but increase their distemper: These, Sirs, must be observed, and such mad spirits must be bound, or charmed, or extirpated out of the bounds of a Christian Common-wealth. From the Bench the States Law must be read with all Authority to them, and put in execution with a moderate severity upon them. From the Pulpits they must hear with all boldness, the necessity that lies upon them, to obey principalities and powers, lest they be delivered over unto Sa∣tan,, that they may learn not to blaspheme, and forget to curse either God or the KING. Your Honours may be very instrumental for making us to lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and hone∣sty, by making Application of that Doctrine, Ezra. 7. 26. Who∣soever will not do the Law of thy God, and the Law of the King, let judgement be speedily executed upon him, whether it be unto Death, or to Banishment, or to Confiscation of goods, or Imprisonment.
There are others, Right Honourable, who purely (out of ig∣norance) are drawn from their obedience, and are, as it were, made giddy, staggering through the Doctrine instilled into them, by those above-mentioned; who out of a well-minded zeale, though not well-grounded, follow that light that such hold out; and by a holy fear and care to avoid sinning, boggle at the just demands of Supreme Authority; disputing rather for the time with their own consciences, than at any time against His Majesties Injunctions, desiring to know how to keep their consciences void of offence, not only towards men, but towards God, in reference

chiefly to Church-services, Divine performances, and outward Ce∣remonies. If such, Right Honourable, be presented before you, (you may easily know them) as transgressors of the Law, they are to be handled with all meekness; senitive medicaments had best be prescribed for the curing of their distempers: Let them alone my Lords, this year also, and we will dig about them, inform them of the nature of things, and they may by beholding our Order, bring forth the fruit of obedience; we must behold them as if our selves were also in the body. In the other case, Fiat Iustitia; but in this, Innotescat aequitas vestra.
Knowing, Right Honourable, that Ueritas parit odium, truth begets hatred, and hatred begets contention, I come to your Per∣sons as Preservers of the Peace, desiring, that this innocent crea∣ture that lately spoke in defence of your Honours, because of your Laws, and set its face against that calumny, which though not per∣sonally, yet virtually is cast upon you, for being Instrumental in so publick a way for the putting in execution those Laws that have been made touching the using of the Service-Book, that it, I say, might be preserved from hurt, and freed from abuse, I put it into your hands, as into the hands of its Father; for indeed you begot it through the Law, I bore it through the Gospel; the information and instruction of that sort of people, that hath been deluded by self-seeking men, (robbing the Ancients of all glory, that alone they might have the Kingdom) next your Honours Order, was the sole cause of my preaching, and now publishing of these sheets. Praying that you may be in Counsels prosperous, and in peace glo∣rious, happy Instruments of Gods glory, His Majesties honour, this Kingdoms prosperity, and this Counties Piety,

From my Study at Leighton, Octob. 12. 1660.
