



TO Discourse modestly of God, and Matters relating to him, is no small part of Religion. For since the Nature of God is incom∣prehensible, his Power infinite, and his Name inexpressible, no thought





can comprehend his infinite Power, no Eye approach so glorious a Light, no Tongue can declare it: And for this reason the more sound Philoso∣phers have been very sparing in their Discourses upon this Subject. Plato is commended for his Modesty in this case; who, tho' he is not afraid to stile God, The Creator of the World, a Lover of Mankind, and the provident Curator of all things, (Forasmuch as he is a most Wise Be∣ing, and doth not slight and despise the Work of his own Wisdom;) yet notwithstanding all this confesseth, That the Eyes of Men are too weak, to see through Matters of Divi∣nity.
Aristotle was satisfied with placing some one first Mover in the Hea∣vens. But he dares not say one word about the Nature of God. Others thought fit wholly to omit this Que∣stion. The Judgment of Simonides on the Case is commonly known;

who being ask't by Hiero about the Nature of God, prolong'd the time a good while, by requesting more Days for Deliberation, and at last return'd this Answer, The more I think on't, the less I understand of it. After such a manner did the Excellency of this Divine Nature exercise and tire the liveliest Wits without the Church, that they were at last forc'd to acknowledge the inscrutability of the Majesty thereof: And on the other side they perceiv'd such a blind∣ness and decay of strength in Human Nature, as rendred it utterly incapa∣ble of raising it self to such a degree of purity without a peculiar dispen∣sation from above.
And tho' within the Church this Doctrine of God has always re∣main'd more uncorrupted and per∣spicuous; yet nevertheless the most Religious have thought it a great piece of Wisdom, to confess their own weakness in this Affair; and

have therefore been contented with those Discoveries, God has been pleas'd to make of himself, and have desisted from any farther search into this Sublime Mystery. Hence in the Invocation of him this Phrase is made use of; God of Abraham, God of Isaac, God of Jacob, God of our Fathers, &c. And when Iacob made too curious an Enquiry after the An∣gel's Name, he was repell'd by the Rays of the Divine Majesty, and reprimanded by a Voice; Wherefore is it, that thou askest after my Name? Moses also upon his asking after the Name of God, who sent him to the Children of Israel, received only this answer, I am that I am; and say, I am hath sent me unto you. We ought therefore in this business also to take notice of the Apostle's Advice, Not to think, above what we ought to think, but to think soberly. For it's most certain, when we cast our thoughts on things relating to God,

our Understanding sees as little, if not less, than the Owl at Noon-day. But since there is a necessity still of Man's being instructed concerning God, and this instruction is to be re∣ceiv'd from the Church alone, 'tis the best way to keep strictly to one form of speaking, drawn from the Pro∣phetical and Evangelical Writings; because the Church has taken these from God's own Mouth; whence the Apostle calls the Scripture , or inspired. And this the Church kept pure and undefiled, till a parcel of Ambitious Men rose up, who laying no restraint on their wild Fancies, made a very ill use of the simplicity of the Scripture, and be∣gan to affix New Interpretations to Texts. To keep these Fellows within their Bounds, and to shew that their Opinions were contrary to Scripture, 'twas necessary, that bet∣ter Men should limit the sense of things in other words. Wherefore ☜

since. Words were to be interpreted by Words, and Phrases by other forms of Speech, they referr'd them∣selves and their Writings to the Scri∣ptures. Forasmuch as no one can speak better of God, than God doth of himself. And therefore, when we are to speak of him, it's our Du∣ty to consult him first speaking of himself. Moreover as it's impious to deny the use of Scripture-Forms of speaking; so it's downright Malice to condemn those that are commonly receiv'd, so long as reason proves not, that they maintain any thing against Scripture. In Ecclesiastical Histories and Acts of Synods there are abundance of Examples (were they pertinent to be mention'd here) of this Nature. Our Age has seen one in Valentinus Gentilis; who, that he might destroy the Unity of the Divine Essence, in his explication of the Three Persons, quarrell'd first with the receiv'd Terms, such ☞

as are the  and  of the Per∣sons. See Dr. Sherl. taking the same Course since; as appears from these Words. The Truth is, That which has confounded this Mystery (viz. of the Trinity) has been the vain endea∣vour to reduce it, to Terms of Art, such as Nature, Es∣sence, Substance, Subsistence, Hypostasis, and the like. Vind. Trin. p. 138. l. the last, and page 139. l. the first. For as long as they were made use of, he saw 'twas impossible to maintain three Spirits distinct in Es∣sence and Degree.
This small Treatise shews the una∣nimous determination of the Church concerning this Doctrine, together with the rise of that Corruption.
My Lords, I present this History to your Lordships, because you pre∣sided at the Tryal; and it was to your grief that you heard this Cor∣ruption of the true Doctrine was brought into the Church: And since the account might prove useful to the World, 'twas not fit it should be made publick so much upon my pri∣vate Will, as your Lordship's publick Commands.

The Lord Jesus Christ govern you by his good Spirit, that you may lead long and happy Lives in these Honourable Stations, to the defence of the Orthodox Do∣ctrine, and the interest of your Country. Amen.
M. D. LXVII. Cal. Junii.
My Lords, Your Lordships most humble Servant,
B. Aretius.
