



THe Glorious Temple had a beautifull gate.Hag. 1. 9. Such is a
Gratulatory Epistle to a Sermon of Thanksgiving.Acts 3. 10.
Our Estates and Liberties blesse your Honours. Religi∣on
and Learning do no lesse: I shall therefore here men∣tion
a few of the many good offices done for them.
Whereas the publike worship of God was much embased,Is. 1. 25. you have
been carefull to take away the glittering tin of specious Ceremonies,
together with the ugly drosse of known Superstition.Gal. 6. 2. Let popish Spi∣rus
bewaile the want of making a fair shew in the flesh, which so
many desire; let them cry out, and say, There is not so much State
and bravery in the service of God, as heretofore: I dare be bold to
tell the World,Vitulus aureus occidit, Serpen aeneus sanat. that much more holinesse will be found in your brasen
Serpent, then ever was in their golden Calf. It is not long since Chri∣stians
of the greatest zeale were iniured by certain Sons of Levi even
as of old the sons of Eli,1 Sam. 2. 12, 13, 14. with their flesh-hock of three teeth, offered
violence to the people, when they came to offer sacrifice. You have wre∣sted
from them their flesh-book, and broken the three teeth thereof,
which were illegall Canons, ensnaring Oaths, and rigorous High
Commission-censures. Not long since Professors in England, Amnon-like,
were lean from day to day,2 Sam. 13. 4. by reason of the love they bare to
Romish fopperies, as he to Tamar, (many affecting the garbe of Rome
in their most solemne worship,Ver. 6. 7. 14. as Amnon pretended to lorg for meat
of Tamars dressing: Others proceeding, as he did with her; to a car∣nall
knowledge of that Whore.) But after your happy assembling,
the hand of God wrought an happy change in their hearts,Ver. 15. 17, 18. and made
them generally hate this Tamar, as much and more then ever they
loved her. You have now not onely turned her out, but boulted the
doore by an holy Covenant, to endeavour the extirpation of Popery

and Superstition. Not long, since there were many pens and tongues
fully employed in decrying the Lords day, and disputing against the
morality of the fourth Commandement. An employment to be for ever
abhord;Gen 7. 2, with Chap. 8. 20. because as Noah tooke to himselfe clean beasts by sevens,
six for propagation, the seventh for sacrifice, which was according∣ly
offered up, at his comming out of the Ark: So the Lord who al∣lows
us six daes for civill affaires; would have the seventh sacrifi∣ced
to himselfe as an whole burnt offering. Yet, as Antiochus took a∣way
the daily sacrifice, these men had almost taken from us the Sacri∣fice
of days; but you have restored it, by a most pious and wholsome
Ordinance,April 1644. according to the good hand of God upon you. And where∣as
one of the breasts of our common Mother▪ hath been dried up of
late, or rather yielded much bloud instead of milke; you have al∣ready
made some, and (we hope) are about to make further provision
for the other, lest the coal which is left us be quenched, as the wo∣man
of Tekoah said to David;2 Sam. 14. 7. lest Cambridge become as a cottage
in a vineyard,Is. 1. 8. as a lodge in a garden of cucumbers.
After such high and holy services, be it far, exceeding far from you
all to dishonour him who hath said ye are Gods,Psal. 82. 6. by an ungodly conver∣sation:
If it be not, if any root of bitternesse, do spring up hereafter
in either House, I shall crave leave to represent the danger thereof
as in a parable. A certain Priest having to doe with a great men
that was resolute in sin, yet desirous of absolution, and perceiving be
did not understand the latine tongue, instead of absolving him, said
as followeth.Gerhard. L. C. Dominus Noster Jesus Christus,Ioc. de Poenis. § 117. teabsolvat, si vult; &
remittat tibi peccata tua, quod ego non credo; & perducat te ad
vitam aeternam, quod est impossibile, My Lords and Gentlemen,
the parable be to them that hate you, and the interpretation thereof
to the sworn enemies of Jesus Christ. That not so much as one of you,
who continue members at this day, will at anytime prove a stone of
offence, by the errors of his iudgement, or irregularities of his life;
that every one will become an Eben-Ezer, a stone of help, in that
sense wherein Joseph is called the sheepherd,Gen. 49. 24. the stone of Israel, is
the hope, and shall be the prayer of

