


Honourable Sir,
THERE is not any of Ari∣stotle's Writings wherein that Ancient Author seems to have been more Elaborate, then in his four Books of Rhetoric. And this the Famous Philosopher does in some Measure acknow∣ledeg in his last Piece, which is dedi∣cated to Alexander the Great, and

written in Obedience to his Com∣mands. Which made him doubt∣less employ the choicest of his thoughts to gratifie so Excellent a Prince. Nor is it to be thought that Aristotle deem'd it a small Ho∣nour to be so Illustriously Patro∣niz'd.
The Emulation of the English Version to approach as near as might be to the Greek Original, and to follow the Authors Example, em∣bolden'd this Address to your Ho∣nour. For they were not the Pe∣dantic Rudiments of Rhetoric, which Aristotle offer'd to one that had been his Royal Pupil, but the most substantial Part, which he there∣fore fits and appropriates to the Practical Management of Human Life. As knowing the Potent Ef∣fects of Learned Eloquence in the Conduct of all Great Affairs, whe∣ther at the Council Board, or in the Field.

What then was once thought wor∣thy the acceptance of a Prince, seeks now for Harbour in your Honours Favour. For where should Learn∣ing, when Important, seek for Pa∣tronage, but to a Person so well acquainted with Her, as your self? The Greatest Glory and the Grea∣test Justice she can do her self, is to lay her humble offering at the Feet of Honour and Vertue. Accom∣plishments, which you your self so conspicuously inherit by a long de∣scent of Famous Ancestry. Story, that near will dye, admires Ireland once govern'd with applause by Great and Prudent Sidney; no less Famous for the Overthrow of Shane, Oneal and all his Rebel Crew. Nor can Time deface the Memory of Sr. Philip, of whom Thuanus, Juvenis virtute, ingenii solertia & eruditione praestans; nor of his Sister the Coun∣tess of Pembrook, once the Orna∣ment

of her Age. And if your Noble Father excell'd in Learning and Philosophy, well may we say, your self the Son of such a Parent have rais'd your self no less Conspicuous Monuments of your Wisdom and Prudence, both at home and abroad; while the Deep Affairs of late Negotiation and Treaty still Crown'd your Trans∣actions with eminent success,
No wonder then that Alexander and Aristotle dubious what entertain∣ment they may find in English Dress, make their Applications to your Honour, for a new Pass-Port through the Common-wealth of Learning; since their Fate depends upon your Pleasure.
For my own part, I was glad of the Opportunity, not knowing (though under some Relation to the Noble Blood of the SYD∣NEYS) how I might approach

your Presence in better Company, or that could better excuse the Pre∣sumption of
(Honourable Sir)

