



RIght Honorable & thrice Noble Lord, pardon my sudden & abrupt incoun∣ter in so saluting you with∣out preamble; yet true it is, thrice renowned, for three remarkable & noble actions: 1681. First, for the in∣counter of the French Geryon, Fran∣cis de Valoise, Duke of Alonson, in the presence of Queen Elizabeth, and giving him the Buffe at the Barriers. 1686. Secondly, your faithful and valorous incounter of the I∣rish Iohn Gerond Desmond in the Gerondine war
 of that kingdom, managed by your brother-in-law, Thomas Boteler, Earle of Ormond and Osserie, you being his true Patroclus in armes, to the utter ruine and extir∣pation of the Gerardine rebels. The 1581. third, your adventurous assistance given to your thrice noble Uncle Charles Howard Earle of Notting∣ham, in the incounter & overthrow of the Spanish Armado in 88. ter∣med Invincible in their high con∣ceit, that intended the ruine and o∣verthrow of the Realm of England, the true Religion, and destruction of Queen Elizabeth of famous and long-fasting memory, your dread Soveraigne & Mistresse. For these thrice-noble and three-fold acti∣ons, counted worthily one of her Majesties Worthies; and elected the yeare following to bee one of the thrice noble Order of the Gar∣ter.
 If I said no more, it were suffi∣cient, I might here pause; your government, being Lord President of the North, for the space of six∣teen years, holding the Bucklers a∣gainst the Espaniolized undermi∣ning Jesuits of the North, sowing even then the seed of this unnatu∣rall warre, the Ashes of the Pow∣der-treason, as one termeth it, will speak if I were silent, your o∣pen protestations and endeavours to discover the continuall under∣mining practices of the hellish Locusts, still seeking the subversi∣on of Religion, Lawes, and Liber∣ty of the Subject, to bring this Kingdome into the thraldome of Pope and Spaniard, is not to be for∣gotten by him that was a continu∣all eare-witnesse of it; nor like∣wise your safe and faithfull coun∣sell during this unnaturall warre,
 now of late yeares broken forth, The in∣telli∣gence sent to Mendosa anno 1588. after so many yeares hatching and contriving. Nor can I passe, by, without remembrance, your ever to be remembred constancy and perseverance in your vertues for Faius the rea∣der of divinity In Ge∣neva, secund. Iacobi. the true Christianity the most part of eighty yeares; wherein I flatter not, as many both at home, and e∣ven in forain parts, can and doe beare witnesse. After sixty yeares experience of your particular fa∣vours and love extended towards me, I should shew my selfe un∣gratefull, if I at this time were si∣lent to you, when the Divine Pro∣vidence did incite me to this which followeth: The changing of this work of Reverend John Arndt, intituled, True Christianity, into our home-spun habit, being a work so well approved of in forain parts, so often printed and translated out of
 the German tongue, as I shall need to say nothing thereof, the worke will approve it selfe. Onely I be∣seech your Honour to accept in good part of this my aged, trem∣bling, and halfe-forgotten faculty; such as it is, full of defects, even such as I could: which if the gar∣ment be not fitting the person of reverend John Arndt, I wish him hearty good will that shall amend it: and humbly intreat your Ho∣nour to accept of this my labour, as your accustomed manner is, with the good will you have ever shewed me, and entertain it as a to∣ken of my thankfulnesse unto your Honour, for your long-continued love (ever to be remembred) whose property is to change the lover in∣to the beloved; and so desireth to continue your Honors obliged ser∣vant unto death,

