



My Lord,
IT's a safe Rule, that Statesmen must have no more anger then will serve their design; for subjection to powerful wrath is dangerous both ab intra, being a constant disease, a fire that commonly consumes the house where first it kindles; and ab extra, it betrayes to ignoble acts, and the unavoidable censure of the Soveraign. The last Century hath been too fruitful in such instances.
And herein Prudence speaks her Mother tongue, and hath learnt it from Religion, which further saith, Ira simulata charitas vera. Let Anger be the dark sha∣dow, Love the beautiful body, the one to fright the evil from their wayes, and deliver from death; the other cor∣dially and constantly endeavouring every mans peace, comfort, and joy. This is living in love, and living in  &c. Nhi pectu jacundius quam bonorum virorum con∣s. nsus. Plat. in 2 Epist. God. Oh that all the Subjects of our Soveraign Lord were thus qualified, for advancing his Title King of Saints. We have too long observed what Factions have done for us, and for themselves. In patience the reason∣able Soul may be possessed, which the distemper of impa∣tience doth turn out to the courtesie of others, and  una∣wares it's taken away. If Lust unto destruction were a
 necessary or lawfull concernment of Mankind, there would be less need of an able Ministry.
My Lord, as I dare not here touch your Honours Name, choicest Pictures are not for Tents and Boothes, so I cannot smother this common sence; for its general∣ly noted in your Honour with great applause, that your constant carriage doth rebuke the envy of those that would better conform to his Majesties Royal pleasure by endeavours for union.
I have good reason for this, and all dutiful Addresses to your Honour; for my native Soyl is the Inheritance of your noble and renowned Family, my Christian name, with admission to the visible Church, and divers com∣forts of my life, I owe your near Relations, and as I may assert faithfulness, from former Generations; so I shall most gladly engage me and mine.

