



THEY who from the Study of the Holy Scri∣ptures, and of the na∣ture of worldly things, learn and do confess that God takes care of sublunary affairs; do clear∣ly perceive that the rough Tempest wherein most Christian People are at present tossed, is not the effect of the uncertain influences of the Stars, nor that it is raised by hidden and obscure causes. None of them doubt, but that the publick Calamities of
 Kingdoms, People and Cities, are sent by the Judgment and Provi∣dence of God the avenger of wick∣edness; and that before they happen, they are Prophesied and foretold by Pious and Chosen Men, for the glo∣ry of divine Justice, and the a∣mendment of the lives of sinful Men; as it is written: Amos 3. Can two walk together, except they be agreed? Will a Lion roar in the Forrest when he hath no Prey? will a young Lion cry out of his Den, if he have taken nothing? Can a Bird fall in a snare upon the Earth, where no Gin is for him? Shall one take up a Snare from the Earth, and have taken no∣thing at all? Shall a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the Peo∣ple not be afraid? Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord hath not done it? Surely the Lord God
 will do nothing, but he revealeth his secret unto his servants the Prophets. Now for what causes such Commotions are raised both in publick and private affairs, the same Prophet does declare: pubish in the Palaces at Ashdod, and in the Palaces in the Land of Egypt, and say, assemble your selves up∣on the Mountains of Samaria: and behold the great tumults in the midst thereof, for they know not to do right, saith the Lord, who store up Violence and Rob∣bery in their Palaces. Therefore thus saith the Lord, an adversa∣ry there shall be even round a∣bout the Land; and he shall bring down thy strength from thee, and thy Palaces shall be spoiled.
To me, truly, the visible cause o' the divine Judgment against us
 appears to be our publick and com∣mon sins; whilst I see the greatest part of Christians rent into several Sects, not only seduced and led a∣way by many errors, but also proud and puffed up in them; and others who live in the Communion of the Church, and profess the true Do∣ctrine, neglecting the duties of the same, and almost wholly per∣verting it: and so, whilst I reflect upon the depraved minds of some, and the corrupt and dissolute lives of others, and the Dissentions, Jars, Oppositions, Enmities and perverse courses of both, I often think with my self upon this. The Lord looked down from Heaven, upon the Children of Men; to see if there were any that did under∣stand and seek God. They are all gone aside, they are altogether become filthy: there is none that doth good, no not one.

Tho I neither be a Prophet, nor the Son of a Prophet, yet I dare be bold to foretel greater Storms hang∣ing over our heads, unless they be prevented: It is enough to me, to make me affirm this; that I see those crimes in the Earth, which God Almighty by infallible Oracles has threatned not to let go unpuni∣shed. For if the Lion roar, who will not be afraid? if the Lord hath spoken, who shall not prophe∣sie? Therefore he may very lawfully predict future evils, who sees the manifest causes, from which, God Almighty, calling Heaven and Earth to witness, has foretold that diffi∣cult and sad times will arise. Isa. 1. Now the causes which I observe, I think are obvious to all Men, to wit, Deut. 32. our contumacy and inso∣lence, our hardned obstinacy in wicked
 courses; and a kind of contending with God that punishes us; which the Prophet Isaiah takes notice of in the Jews. Isai. 1. Why should ye be stricken any more? ye will re∣volt more and more: The whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. From the sole of the foot even unto the head, there is no soundness in it; but wounds, and bruises, and putrifying sores: they have not been closed, neither bound up, neither mollified with Ointment.
And, would to God! that in this tossing and agitation of the World there were no other loss but of the wealth, dignities, splendour and honours of the age, which tho they be highly valued, yet it might justly be born with, nay and perhaps to be wished, seeing such heavy loads and burdens are many times
 hinderance to the prosperity of our course: but, which is most sad and grievous, when the danger of the loss of one poor soul ought, in right, to be prevented by the throwing o∣ver-board of all the goods and Car∣go of the Ship; yet in such doleful Ship-wrecks, innumerable numbers of souls are observed to perish, and be swallowed up in the deep; which is the greatest of all humane mise∣ries. Now seeing it is the duty and office of the Masters and Pilots, to bestir themselves for the safety of the beaten Vessel; and that I observe many of those who are concerned, diligently labouring for that pur∣pose; tho I want both authority and skill to act amongst those who rule the Ship; yet as being of the num∣ber of those, who in common dan∣ger, ought not to be idle spectators but busie in lending a hand, or at
 least assistant with fervent prayers, I thought it my duty, according to the mean and low station that I stand in, in the Church of God, with all humility and modesty to propose what I have judged proper for remedying of the evils, whereof the causes are so obvious to be known; especially since we bend our care to the admonishing and help∣ing of those, who when they are unable to understand higher and greater matters, are not, perhaps, frequently taught those things which are more useful, and necessary to be known of all Men in general; and which if they be ignorant of, they can never attain to salvation, nor to the knowledge of those Points which are reckoned more noble and sublime truths. Nor do we fear that these our endeavours will seem un∣seasonable or superfluous to those
 great Men, who are more learned and skilful in the art of instructing and teaching the way of living; we are rather confident that the consi∣derate will approve of our design, hoping that if we have given any hints that may serve for foreward∣ing their duty, they will take it kindly and in good part. For in great Storms, the chief Masters and Pilots, receive sometimes good advice from the Passengers, when they are pleased to hear them. In how much then, we have learned from the Doctrine and Word of God, for the obtaining of God the salva∣tion of our souls in the next World, and publick Peace and Tranquillity in this, we conceive two things are to be done, the one is, that we per∣severe in the pure and holy Faith of the Catholick Church; and the other that we endeavour the amend∣ment
 of our lives and manners, ac∣cording to the Rules and Precepts of our Lord and Master, constant∣ly praying against sin that endan∣gers our souls, and for eternal life, which is their happiness and bliss. If these things be purely, religious∣ly and holily set about, they will procure us the grace and mercy of God through Jesus Christ; as the Holy Ghost by the mouth of his Prophet does assure us: Psal. 107. Oh that Men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the Chil∣dren of Men. They that go down to the Sea in Ships, that do bu∣siness in great waters: These see the works of the Lord, and his wonders in the deep. For he commandeth and raiseth the stor∣my Wind, which lifteth up the waves thereof. They mount up
 to the Heaven, they go down a∣gain to the depths, their soul is melted because of trouble. They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken Man, and are at their wits end. Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble, and he bringeth them out of their distresses. He maketh the Storm a Calm, so that the waves thereof are still. Then are they glad because they be quiet; so he bringeth them unto their desired haven. Oh that Men would praise the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the Chilren of Men. Let them exalt him also in the Congregati∣on of the People, and praise him in the Assembly of the El∣ders.

Whose is wise, and will observe these things, even they shall under∣stand the loving kindness of the Lord.
