



Madam,
HOw long will you suf∣fer Love to weep? for having spent all his Darts against your Heart in vain, he confesses that he owes to the power of your conquering Eyes a thousand Victories, yet he re∣ceives no content from all these Conquests, since you (too too Obedurate Fair one) refuse to grace his Triumph. Behold him at your feet attended by a thou∣sand Kings and Heroes in Chains, begging admittance into your little Family of Love; it is there
he desires to establish the Seat of a new Empire, and in your Heart to erect his Throne. Dispute, Dispute no longer, most charming Creature, but since Nature has been profuse in giving you all the Graces of ind and Body, let Love give a finishing hand: with∣out it your Eyes will loose that all-dissolving Sweetness which melts the most flinty Hearts, and your Vertue will be a little too se∣vere; 'tis Love, Love onely, that gives the last perfection.
Take heed that Cruelty and Injustice doth not Tarnish the lustre of your excellent Quali∣ties; but as your Eyes are the sweetest in the world, so let your Heart be tender; and as your Vertue, Wit, and Beauty has gained you the Title of the Fair Saint, be not inexorable to the Vows of him who sighs inces∣santly for you, and languishes
under the Rigour of a long and cruel absence; and by me pre∣sents you with these Verses.


Love sits inthron'd in fair Aretia's eyes,
Where he in Triumph raigns,
Secure of the Victories
Which he each hour obtains.



His Slaves and Captives happy seem,
And kiss the Chains they wear:
They wish not Freedom to redeem,
Nay, nothing more they fear.



The poor Almedor onely lyes
Prostrate with bleeding Heart,
Wounded by Darts shot from her Eyes,
Whilst she delays to cure the Smart.



O Love! whose Empire is so vast,
If thou wou'dst universal be,
To conquer fair Aretia hast,
And wound her too, as deep as me.




Then from her Eyes remove thy Throne
INto her tender Heart,
Permitting ever me alone
To share a little part.

Ah! Charmant fille, vivre sans aimer nest pas vivre, & l'on vit seulment quand on aime.
MADAM, 
