


May it please Your Grace,
O permit Yur Obliged Chaplain to publish this following Treatise under r Grace's Name. The Design of which, ll humility, is to vindicate the Great jesty of Heaven, from the Malitious lections of a Blasphemous Tongue.
f the Person concerned in these Papers  not confessed, upon Demand, That e is a God; I should then have judg by the rest of his Discourse, that he s a down-right Atheist. And ought ave treated him as such, and not he milder Name of Deist.
ut whether Deist or Atheist his Ex∣ons were so extravagant, That I did think to have return'd him no An∣ It being neither prudent nor safe st Pearls before Swine. And per∣ such Bravoes as these are best An∣'d with Silence: Who deserve a sharp∣ onfutation then can be given them  the Pen. But when I remember'd  advice of Solomon; Answer a Fool ording to his folly, lest he be wise is own Conceit. And did likewise ve, how this Hector of Satan re∣ed his Rambles in the Neighbour∣d of my Parish. And with what Scorn reated my Profession, with a Come son convnce me if you can. I then
 thought it my Duty, to magnifie mi Office, by pleading the Cause of  Great Master, against the taunting R¦proaches of this insulting Sennacheri
If what I have here writ may be i any measure useful to the Cause of R¦ligion, I do chearfully Publish it und Your Grace's Patronage. And when have first Declar'd; That I perfect hate Flattery; And am either too Pro or too Honest to be guilty of such mea¦ness; I will then take the Freedom tell the World, how highly I Honour Yo Grace's Worth and Vertues. And wha Satisfaction it is to all true Lovers  the House of Ormond to observe the Bu¦ding Hopes of Your Grace's Greatness.
'Tis an Argument of a truly great a generous Mind, to bear Adversity wit Patience. And tho 'tis much hope through Gods Blessing upon His Maj¦sties Arms, Your Grace's Affairs will i a short time, be in a better Posture; y possibly few Persons, of Your Grace's ¦gure, would have born some Passag with such Decency as You have done.
But when I remember the genero Examples of your Illustrious Grand-F¦ther and Heroie Father, 'tis but w was expected from Your Grace. Greatness seems to be entailed u Your Family. And that Your Gr may live to equal the Worth Greatness of Your Ancestors, is Prayer of,
My Lord,

