


Right Honourable,
I AM so far from being guilty of any trifling Apologies (the usual Em∣bellishments of these Dedicatory E∣pistles) that, quite contrary to common expectation, I have thought fit, in my own defence, to give this Assurance; That the following Discourse is, if not
 Pertinent, at least Seasonable; and (had not their prejudices prevented) might have been as profitable to others, as to my great encouragement I find, it is acceptable to your Honour, who by your Command to publish it, have made it yours.
Had some men, who have no mean thoughts of themselves, been my Judges herein, they would sooner have sent it to the Fire than to the Press. For to deal ingeniously, as will appear upon its per∣usal, it is not calculated for their Me∣ridian.
I have neither blazon'd the priviledges of the Saints, nor enlarg'd any other of their darling Doctrines. Nor indeed (that I may freely declare my Opinion) have I any great kindness for them; un∣less it be for this one, wherein, I confess, I am their perfect Convert. 'Tis their
 Doctrine of Perseverance. That is, such Saints as the World hath hitherto found them (and I have not now judg'd it suitable to give you their Character) such they resolve still to continue. And thus far, upon good Grounds, I am ve∣ry apt to believe them.
For when men are once grown to this height of Confidence (this is a real Truth, but it will not please them) to boast of it as their Glory, to head and hold up a Party; when they shall study ways how to evade, where they are cal∣led to obey, and are resolv'd to erre, because they have err'd, and to hold the Conclusion in despite of all Premises; when they are angry with all those that shall endeavour, though by the mildest Methods, to reform them; the utmost that can be said is this; Great is Diana of the Ephesians; 'Tis their Interest
 to have it so; the cry runs on, and who can help it?
Were it pertinent to detain your Lordship with such Expostulations, I would then express my trouble, that any one should so far mistake my Discourse (and there were some that did so, for they had not the Patience to hear it) as to interpret any thing by me then deli∣ver'd, either as a discouragement of Preaching, or an encouragement of its Opposers.
As I am sure such a Gloss was be∣yond my Intention (and certainly I should best know my own meaning) so I dare be confident, if my Accusers will but allow my words such a favourable In∣terpretation, as the composures of men do usually challenge: That is, Let them but consider my Discourse as a Totum complexum; give every Sen∣tence
 its due connexion and dependence with the preceeding and subsequent mat∣ter, and they will then confess; That had their hearts been as innocent as my Sermon, there had been no cause to have troubled, either Them or my Self with this present Vindication.
The God of Heaven grant them humble Hearts, and governable Spirits, is the constant Prayer of


