


Right Honourable,
WHen I prepared this Sermon to attend your com∣mands, it was very farre from my purpose or thoughts, to make it more publike then in the Pulpit. And although I finde in my self an utter aversnesse (in many regards) to appear in print; yet your Lordships earnest desire (which I account a com∣mand) set on by the sollicitations of some others, hath conquered my unwillingnes, to transcribe this Sermon for the Presse.
I presume upon this Dedication, not only because the Ser∣mon was preached, and is printed at your command, but also that I might hereby make an open, gratefull acknowledgement of your love divers waies expressed towards me.
My Sermon is for substance the self same, which you heard, I know not any one particular head, which I have either added or diminished, only some phrases are changed (for my memory could not reach the same expressions) and the words of Scri∣pture-quotations are given in more largely, then when I preached. My subject is seasonable for these times, wherein the Lord hath been pleased to give us in this City occasion to ce∣lebrate many daies of Thanksgiving. The practice of our prai∣ses, is that which God expects, and I perswade.
Vnto how many in our Assemblies (when we meet to sing praises) may our God say, Quid verba audio, cum facta vi∣deo? This people draweth nigh to me with their mouth,
 and honoureth me with their lips, but their heart is farre from me. Loquere, ut te videam. Let your lives answer your language. When shall your works witnesse your thankfulnesse? My Lord, I have often heard you use these words, Quid retri∣buam Domino? Give me leave to be your Lordships remem∣brancer; your obligations to the Lord are now much increased, and with them God hath added opportunities of more puhlike service to himself. Divine providence hath set you in a place of Honour, Authority and Trust, wherein much is expected from you: Magistratus virum indicat. A man is that in truth, which he is when tried. The world will judge of you for the future according to this years service. You be likely to meet with many temptations, to draw you aside both to the right hand and to the left: but I beseech you remember, whose you are, and unto whom you must give a strict account of all your waies. Advance God in your hearts, design the welfare of Sion, consult most with them, who counsell from God and for God according to his Word, and I beseech you all, often, and se∣riously minde your selves, and remember others of the solemn Nationall Covenant, that the Almighty may not be further provoked by the neglect and violation of it. For the Sword un∣der which we smart and bleed, doth avenge the quarrell of Gods Covenant, Lev. 26. 25. Therefore let every one thus speak un∣to the Lord, Praise waiteth for thee ô God in Sion, and un∣to thee shall the vow be performed, Psal. 65. 1. I will sing praise unto thy Name for ever, that I may daily perform my vows, Ps. 61. 8. Right honourable and right worship∣full, the Lord hath conjoyned you as brethren, in the great work of the Government of this renowned City, I pray God you may be of one minde, soul and way, for the true welfare thereof, and for the incouragement of all such in it, who sincerely seek to set up the holy government of Iesus Christ, in whom I am

