



YOur House, and theyAnciently there was but one House and sometimes one undivided Body sub dio. Thus one of K. Edgar's Char∣ters An. 970. Non clam in angulo, sed sub Divo, palam evidentissimè scientibus to∣tis regni mei Primatibus. to whose Rights You suc∣ceed, having, for several Ages, been the Principal Support of the English Monarchy; the Ene∣mies to so excellent a Constitu∣tion have thought it could never be more effectually undermined, than by the drawing your Rights into Question: and thus have many made  their deceitful Courts to Princes.
'Tis not for me to determine, whether Malice or Sycophantry have induced some to deny, your

being in any manner invested with that Authority, which they offi∣ciously ascribe to the Kings of this Realm, and their Council of Lords, or rather Privy Coun∣cil; to the derogating from the Lords in Parliament, no less than from You.
I conceive it, allowable for me, to joyn the Men of this assurance with Dr. Brady, and other Ad∣vocates for Despotick Power: who have contended, that your first Presence, or Representa∣tion, in the National Council, began by Rebellion in theDr. Brady's Answer to Mr. Petty l. p. 1, 2. o rescue these sacred things from groundless and designing iepretations: I follow his own Method, and do affirm, 1. Tha the Commo s of England represented by Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in parliament were not introduced, not were one of the three Estates in Parliament before the 49th of H. 3. 2. That before that time the body of the Commons of England, or Freemn as now understood or as we nw frequently call them collectively taken, had not any share or votes iu making of Laws for the government of the Kingdom, nor had any comunication in Affairs of State, unless they wre represented by the Tex nts in Capite. 49. of H. 3. which being taken as proved, they conclude, that Kings may as well set you aside, as a

Subject may any obligation extor∣ted by threats and duress.
And whoever has made any attempt towards the removing that Corner Stone for Tyranny, has been sure to incur the imputation of promoting Anarchy: as if your venerable Body did not in the least interpose between those two Extremes.
The fairest colour which the Men of Foreign Notions and Alle∣giance have, for their premises, is from King John's Charter, which as they imagine, has declared or establish'd the Tenents of the Crown in Chief, to be the only legal Members of the Common Council of the Kingdom: the far different sense of which Char∣ter, I may well say 'twas my fortune to find and evince, upon my

Vid Jani Anglor. faciem nov. ed. An. 1680. first enquiry into the Nature of our Government; since the force of truth has obliged evenVid. Dr. Brady's Ap∣pend. to his Copleat Histo∣ry cited in f. Dr. Bra∣dy to yield it up to me,Dr. Brady's Introtuct. f. 36 Speàing of Seditious Pieces defign'd, as he says, to overturn the Go∣vernment, and publish'd on purpose to usher in Anarchy and Confusion, (leaving a Blank for Mr. Ptyt's Name, whom be sufficiently de∣scribes) these and other such stuff, says, he did mightily contribute to the Sedition and Rebellious Practices of a Great Man who laid violent Hands upon himself to prevent the Hand nd Stroak of Justice, And like to this Piece are Jni Anglor▪ acies nova, Jus Anglorum ab antiquo, Reflections upon Antidptum Brit. &c. All written and timed to promote Sedition and in expectation of Rebellion and the de∣struction of the Establish'd Government. after all the hard Words which he had gi∣ven me on that occasion.
Nor has he offered the least Shadow of Evidence against my ListJus An∣glorum ab antiq. from Domesday Book; shewing, that notwithstanding the supposed Conquest of this Land by W. 1. they who had not for∣fe▪ ted their Estates, enjoyed them upon or under Titles Priour to his Entrance; without relation to any Grant, or Confirmation from him.

Permit me to say, that the Re∣searches in which this Controversy engaged me, have, in some measure, enabled me to assert your Authori∣ty, in the highest Instances of the exercise of Power; aud to make out by Deduction, and numerous Presidents, what you have as 'twere by Intuition; that Ireland, as 'tis annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom; is sub∣jected to that Authority, which is, and must be absolute; and yet can never be gaievous, because of your share in it.
Votes, Lunae, 27 Junii 1698. Tho▪ the bold denial of this, has already receiv'd your just cen∣sure of being of dangerous Con∣sequence to the Crown, and People of England: Yet, if I may use the Allusion, I might ob∣serve, that 'tis not held improper to make Comments upon the Sacred

Text, to explain it to Vulgar Understandings: Which, I should hope, may plead in my Excuse, if not, Justification, while I am proving, that, as you have right∣fully concurred with the Lords, in giving Ireland a King, by fil∣ling the Vacant Throne; andVid. Mat. Par. Addit. f. 281. De foris factu∣râ regni per Johannem, & regni vacatio∣ne per ejus∣dem demissi∣onem in ma∣nus Papae. that Glorious Preserver of your Liberties has, with the Advice and Consent of the States of this his Realm, made Laws with a declared intention of binding Ire∣land; these Acts of Sovereignty, are not only agreeable to the Laws of Nature, and of Nations, but warranted by the Ancient Con∣stitution of this Monarchy.
The foundation of which, while I have been labouring to clear, from that Rubbish which would render it unstable; it has happened with me, as with those, who having ex∣hausted

themselves in working a rich Mine, are forced to leave the bright Oar to them that come after: And thus 'tis likely to be with those Collections which I have by me, concerning the Fundamental Con∣stitution of this Government: by which I had flattered my self, that I must have contributed towards the Peace and Happiness of my Country, in shewing the admirable Harmony that there is between the constituent parts of this Em∣pire; how strong and beautiful they are in their due order; How conspicuous that Degree of the Baronage, or Nobility of Engl. which you're present, has been in all the Ages of this Monarchy, in maintaining its Glory; what Persuasive Reasons both Prince and People have, to be satisfied with their several, and yet com∣mon

Interests; and how little they are to be thought Friends to either, who prompt them, as the Learned Grotius has it,
In partem non suam involare. Whither I have been any way ser∣viceable to the Publick, or can yet serve it, according to my Zeal; is submitted to the Collective Wisdom of the Nation: The Judgment is with you; who, if you should not think this, or any of my former labourous Effects of Idle∣ness, as the Poet calls the Writ∣ing of Books, worthy of your Pro∣tection, or Notice; I doubt not will extend your Pardon, to En∣deavours consecrated to your use, By,

