



Right Honourable, Honourable, &c.
ALthough you are by far the
least in Number, you are yet
to be esteemed as the much
more considerable part of the Inhabi∣tants
of that Country, in respect of
your Power, and the Authority which
you bear there. 'Tis true, that upon
the first Subduction of the Irish Na∣tion

to the English Government, the
Laws and Liberties of Englishmen
were granted unto them, equally with
the Colony of the Old English that
were planted among them; but as they
were a people that had been always
us'd to a sort of wild aud barbarous
way of Living, they did not affect to
embrace the more Civiliz'd Customs
and Manners of the English, but for
the most part kept themselves off from
uniting and joining with them in the
Management of the Government, which
by the Concessions made to them, they
might freely have acted in; yet they con∣tinued
as a distinct and separate people,
sway'd and influenc'd by their own
petty Princes or Chiefs of Clans, even
to the breaking out into frequent In∣surrections
and Rebellions against the
English Government; which therefore
continued all along to be chiefly admi∣nistred

by the Inhabitants of the Eng∣lish
Pale: And in this state the
Affairs of Ireland remain'd until the
Reformation of Religion, from whence
sprung such a Revolution as produc'd
a great Change in the Administration
of the publick Affairs there: For after
the Reformation had obtain'd in Eng∣land,
the Ancient English of Ireland
did generally remain of the Roman
Communion, and consequently when
'twas found dangerous to continue them
in the Execution of publick Trusts,
they also as well as the Irish of the
ame Religion, were in process of
Time, by the Influence and Authority
of England, utterly disabled from
acting any thing in the Government of
the State; and 'tis in their rooms
that you have since succeeded, and are
therefore look'd upon and treated by
England as the governing part, and

effective Body of the Kingdom of
Ireland.
But when I came to consider Mr.
Molyneux's. Book, I thought it very
strange, that he who design'd so Ela∣borate
a piece in your Favour, should
yet give you no stronger a Title to
the preheminence which you bear in
that Country, than what would de∣volve
upon you from those Concessions
which were anciently made to the Na∣tive
Irish and Old English; which,
as he would perswade us, did amount
to no less than the establishing them
upon the Foundation of an Absolute
Kingdom, distinct and separate from
the Kingdom of England, and wholly
Independent thereon; the Consequence
of which, if it had been so, would
have stood you in very ill stead, for
as you cannot make any pretensions
to such Concessions, because you are

not (generally speaking) descended
from either of those People, but their
Progeny are still in being, and acknow∣ledged
to be such; all the Rights and
Priviledges which Mr. Molyneux hath
so strongly contested for, should be
due to them, if the Case must be taken
as he hath stated it; and nothing can
be more plausibly offered in their Iu∣stification,
for the cutting the Throats
of the Modern English, than this No∣tion:
And Mr. Molyneux is so fond
of ixing you upon this Old Founda∣tion,
that e even disputes the possi∣bility
of their forfeiting, or the reaso∣nableness
of our retractig those Con∣cessions:
I believe indeed, that he
might forsee, that if it should be ad∣mitted
that the frequency of their re∣belling
and our reducing them by force
of Arms, did amount to a Reconque∣ring
of this their Independent King∣dom,

(as he makes it) that would
have dissolv'd that ancient Concession,
and spoyl his Design of entailing it
upon you: However it be, I think
this sort of Title does naturally fall
under an inextricable Dilemma: For,
If Ireland was granted to the Na∣tive
Irish and Old English, as an
Absolute, Independent Kingdom, and
was never since re-conquered by Eng∣land;
the Right of administring
the publick Affairs of that Govern∣ment
(under the King) ought to re∣main
in them, since 'twas never gi∣ven
up to you by their Consents; and
then they have no reason to consider you
otherwise, than as having no Title
more than Usurpers and Oppressors,
and that you may justly be treated
as such whenever they are in a condi∣tion
to do it? But if this Indepen∣dent
Kingdom hath been reconquer'd,

the former Concessions are actually dis∣solvd,
and neither you nor they can
have any more pretence to an Inde∣pendent
Kingdom, until you can pro∣curea
New Grant for it: And thus
Mr. Molyneux in labouring to raise
you higher than your proper Basis,
hath quite unhing'd you.
But I have yet no doubt of your
being as well Entituled to the Power
and Authority which you enjoy and ex∣ercise
in that Country, as any People
in Europe are; and that it is justly
deriv'd to you, from a much more cer∣tain
Original than what Mr. Moly∣neux
hath assign'd; and I have there∣fore
undertaken in the following Pa∣pers
to controvert his Notion through
every point, and to shew in Opposition
to his Arguments; First▪ That Hen∣ry
the Second, having subdu'd Ire∣land
by the means of an English

Army, that Country came to be an∣nex'd
to the Imperial Crown, or King∣dom
of England, but not to the Per∣son
of King Henry, in any separate
propriety from the Kingdom. Second∣ly,
That the Subduing of Ireland by
the people of England, under the Con∣duct
of their King Henry the Se∣cond,
was then esteem'd to be a Con∣quest,
and is much more to be account∣ed
so, than William the first's acqui∣sition
of the Crown of England, and
that Ireland was thereby most cer∣tainly
brought under the Iurisdiction
of the Parliamentary Authority of
England. Thirdly, That King
Henry's Descent upon Ireland was
a just Undertaking, and that the in∣tire
submission of the People to the
Government of England, their re∣ceiving
its Laws, and being endo'd
in all the priviledges of Englishmen,

made them become a Member of, and an∣nex'd
to the English Empire, and gave
England a just Title to exercise a per∣petual
Iurisdiction over them. Fourth∣ly,
That all the many Concessions made
to Ireland, empowering them to hold
Parliaments, &c. can be understood no
otherwise, than that they should be enabled
to devise and enact such Laws when
Occasion required, as were suitable
to the Circumstances of that Country:
But that no Grant ever did, or
could make Ireland an Absolute, Di∣stinct,
Separate Kingdom, and wholly
Independent of England, or invest
it with such a supream Legislature as
is inherent in the Head of the Go∣vernment
only; which, with respect to
the Body of the English Empire, can
never reside any where else than in the
King, by and with the Advice and
Consnt of the Lords and Commons of

England in Parliament assembled.
Fifthly, That the Presidents and Opi∣nions
quoted by Mr. Molyneux, do
not by any means assist his Argument,
but do most of them support mine
against him. And Sixthly, That his
Reasons and Arguments offered on one
side and t'other, are as little to his
purpose; but that the English Settle∣ments
in Ireland always were, and
ever must be properly accounted as a
Colony of England, and hath ever
been by her protected and supported
as such.
By these Principles then, and no
other but such as these, can the Eng∣lish
be justify'd in their Conduct to∣wards
the Irish; whereas if they had
been an absolute, distinct, independent
People, the former and latter Distur∣bances
they have given us, could not
have been Rebellions, but were just At∣tempts

to vindicate their Rights against
a People that had without Reason vio∣lated
them; their Lands had not been
legally Forfeited, but forcibly taken
from them, against all Iustice and
Reason; and the Spilling of so much
of their Blood must lye heavy upon
those that provok'd them to take up
Arms, in Defence of their just Liber∣ties
and Properties. Is it not much
more for your Interest then, to put
this matter on the right bottom, upon
which our Actings towards them were
always grounded, by considering the
Irish as a People that had been sub∣du'd
and brought into Subjection to
the English Government, and were
united to it in the Nature of a Pro∣vince
of its Empire; and to esteem
the English that have been settled
there as a Colony of England, which
we were oblig'd to protect and defend

against any Insults and Violences of∣fered
them by the Natives? For this
must justly subject them to the For∣feitures
and Penalties due to Rebels,
vindicate us in the Severities we have
exercis'd upon them, support you in
the possession of the Estates which
were taken from them, and return the
the Guilt of all the Blood that hath
been shed in the Irish Wars, upon
their own Heads, as being the Ag∣gressors.
These things are so Obvious, that
I believe, there are many of you that
can have no good Opinion of Mr.
Molyneux's Book, yet I am told that
there are others, and some of good
Rank among you, that are very fond
of it: does indeed with respect to
you carry the face of a Popular Ar∣gument,
and is artfully written; and
he that can take the Latitude of ad∣vancing

his own Imaginations and mis∣taken
Conjectures with the Confidence
of Realities and Certainties, suggest
Falsities with the utmost Assurance,
and omit Material Truths; may im∣pose
much upon an unwary Reader,
especially if be thinks what's offer'd
is for his Interest.
Quod volumus, facile credimus.
But any thoughtful Man, that will give
himself leave to Consider it impartially,
will find it to be one of the weakest and
most mistaken Books that ever was writ∣ten
with such a flourish of Language,
and shew of Learning and Integrity.
The Story of King John's being made
an absolute Independent King, is the
main Prop on which he lays the great∣est
stress of his Reasoning, aud yet it
proves but a meer Imagination: The
Writers indeed of these Times do say,

he was made King of Ireland, but
it looks but like a Complement to him,
for the Grant it self shews plainly that
'twas but feudatory Donation, and that
'twas never intended to make him an
Independent King, because he was li∣mited
to use no higher Stile than that
of Lord of Ireland.
Mr. Molyneux also deals very
unfairly in many other particulars,
and it appears that he had more re∣gard
to the point he contests, than to
discover the genuine Truth of the mat∣ter;
for he hath not only stretch'd in
favour of his Argument beyond what
any Authorities can warrant, but he
has also conceal'd divers obvious In∣stances
that make against him; of
which I shall observe to you some Par∣ticulars,
which have occur'd▪ to me
since I had gone through with my An∣swer:
I have accidentally met with

Sir Richard Bolton's Statutes, (which
he quotes) wherein I Observe,28 H. 8. Ch. 2. Ch. 8. Ch. 19. 33 H. 8. Ch. 1. that there
are several Acts that declare in most
express Words, that the Kingdom of
Ireland is appending; united; knit,
and a Member rightfully belong∣ing
to the Imperial Crown of Eng∣land:
And yet Mr. Molyneux ob∣serves
this to us with such a Dimi∣nution,
as represents it but as it were
united, and which he conceives ef∣fects
no more, than that Ireland
shall not be aliend or separated
from the King of England; &c.
but I cannot imagine that he is so ig∣norant
of our Constitution; as not to
know, that we can have no Notion of
uniting or annexing to the Imperial
Crown of England, as appropriated
to the King's Person, distinct from the
Kingdom, which if it can be sence any
where else, is yet perfect Nonsence in

England. But I have met with one Pre∣varication
so notorious, that I must not
omit shewing it: Mr. Molynex in
page 41. hath these words; For the
Dominion and Regality of Ire∣land
was wholly and separately
vested in King Iohn, being abso∣lutely
granted unto him without
any Reservation. And he being
created King in the Parliament
at Oxford, under the Style and
Title of Lord of Ireland, enjoy'd
all manner of Kingly Jurisdiction,
Preheminence and Authority Roy∣al,
belonging to the Imperial State
and Majesty of a King, as are the
express words of the Irish Statute,
33 H. 8. cap. 1. I must confess,
that I believ'd that this Statute had
been as express in the matter as he de∣livers
it, but 'tis so far from it, that
there is no mention made of King John,

or his Grant in it: The words of the
Act are, Forasmuch as the King
our most gracious Sovereign Lord,
and his Grace's most noble Pro∣genitors,
Kings of England, have
been Lords of this Land of Ire∣land,
having all manner of Kingly
Jurisdiction, Power, Prehemi∣nencies,
and Authority Royal, be∣longing
or appertaining to the
Royal Estate and Majesty of a
King, by the Names of Lord of
Ireland. We deny not, that King
Henry the Eighth's Progenitors, the
Kings of England, had this Royal,
Sovereign Authority over Ireland▪
but his Insinuation, that John had it
before he was King of England is
plainly false, and not warrantable by this
Statute.
Again, he mightily imposes upon the
World, in ssering, That before the

Year 1641. there was no Sta∣tute
made in England,p. 99. introducto∣ry
of a New Law, &c. but those
which he had before-mentioned:
And though while I am dealing with
Mr. Molyneux, I confine my self to
mention no Authorities but his own, yet
I will here presume for a proof of his
Ignorance or Disingenuity, to name some
other old Acts binding Ireland, which
have been imparted to me by a very
Learned and Observing Gentleman of
our House of Commons, whose Cre∣dit
I can relye on, without troubling
my self to search the Records; and
I doubt not but Mr. Attwood hath
been much fuller in this particular,
though I deny my self the reading his
Book till my own be perfected.
The Statute of York, 12 Ed. 1st.
Enacts Laws to be observed in Eng∣land
and Ireland; 11 Ed. 3. cap. 3.

Prohibits any Cloaths to be brought in∣to
England, Ireland, Wales, and
Scotland, (for we then claim'd a Do∣minion
over Scotland also) but such
as were made in the King's Domini∣ons,
upon pain of Forfeiture; 27 Ed. 3.
Erects Staple-Towns in Ireland; 34
E. 3. cap. 17. Enacts, that Mer∣chnts,
Aliens or Denizons, may come
into Ireland with their Merchandize,
and freely return; 43 Ed. 3. cap. 1.
The Staples of Ireland, &c. shall be
kept at the places where they were first
ordain'd; 1 Hen. 6. cap. 3. Enacts
that the Irish, that have Benefices or
Offices in Ireland, shall abide there
upon their Benefices and Offices, upon
the pain of forfeiting the Profits of
their Benefices and Offices for the De∣fence
of Ireland, and mentions the like
Law made the 1st. of Hen. 5th.
From these and many other instances,

it evidently appears, that England
hath always exercis'd a Legislative Iu∣risdiction
over Ireland, whenever fit
Occasions have made it necessary.
I have also seen the Irish Acts of Set∣tlement
and Explanation, and though
Mr. Molyneux says, that they plain∣ly
shew, that the Parliament of Ireland
may repeal an Act pass'd in Eng∣land,
yet I find nothing like it in those
Acts; but on the contrary, the King's
Declaration, which is of the Body of the
Act of Settlement, although it takes
Notice that the Estates and Posses∣sions
enjoy'd by the Adventurers, would
prove very defective, if they were exami∣ned
by the Letter of the Law, because
they had not strictly pursu'd and observ'd
those Acts of 42, from which they de∣riv'd
their Title; yet 'tis made the first
Business of this Act, to confirm these Ad∣venturers
in the Inheritance of all the

Estates allotted them by virtue of those
English Acts of Parliament; and 'tis
provided, that if they should be obliged
to restore any of those Lands to In∣nocents,
they should be first repriz'd
to the full Value out of other forfeit∣ed
Lands. What more could be desired,
to shew the utmost regard to those
English Acts of Parliament? 'Tis
true indeed, that the Act of Explana∣tion
retrenches one Third of the Allot∣ments
made to the Adventurers; but
this could not be construed as any
Breach upon the English Acts, for
if they had taken a greater share, than
the Lands that remain'd forfeited would
amount to, 'twas but reasonable to re∣duce
them to a just proportion: So that
here again Mr. Molyneux hath evi∣dently
strain'd this Suggestion beyond
the Truth of the Fact. I have indeed,
remark'd these things at large in their

places, but as some more perfect Infor∣mations
have since come to my Hand,
I thought they might not improperly be
hinted here, for the obviating the too
great Opinion of Mr. Molyneux's
performance, with which some may yet
remain praepossess'd, and preparing them
to entertain my Answer with the less
prejudice.
I have heard indeed, that 'tis not
to Mr. Molyneux alone that we are
beholding for this Notion, but that
it hath for several Years past been
talk'd on among several of your People,
and he hath only redu'd it into form,
and now at last brought it forth into
the World; and you may observe by
the Votes of our last Parliament, that
they were of the Opinion, that several
Resolves of your House of Commons
gave Encouragement to the publishing
of this Book. But I would yet hope,

that many of that Assembly were not
so far appriz'd of the Matter, as wit∣tingly
to Design the doing any thing
that should give so great an Offence
to England: Yet I can assure you,
from the Conversation I have had with
several of the Members of our House
of Commons, that although they had
not Leisure to proceed further upon
this Business in their last Sessions,
'tis however very probable that it may
be taken into Consideration again by
the ensuing Parliament, as a Matter
which if it be not check'd in time, may
produce very ill Effects: And you can∣not
but be sensible of the Dangerous
Consequences of breaking the fair Cor∣respondence
and firm Confidence that
ought always to be maintain'd between
the Head Government and its Mem∣bers;
and that when Misunderstand∣ings
and Iealousies are once enter∣tain'd,

they are too apt to be improv'd
into Extreams on both sides. You know
also, that you have an Old Enemy near
you, who would be ready enough to
entertain hopes of Advantage to them∣selves
from any such Iarrings: And
you must needs acknowledge, that 'tis an
imprudent thing to provoke those that
have not only Right, but also Power to
support it.
It hath been an usual Policy with
some other Governments, to keep so
strict a Hand over their Colonys, as
not to suffer the Criolians, or People
born there, to bear any Considerable
Office or Command therein; but the
Government of England hath not
dealt so ardly by you, and doubtless
it will be always your Interest to pre∣vent
the giving any Occasion to distrust
your Fidelity, and to think it may be
needful to treat you with more Caution.
I should think therefore, that you
cannot do your selves a greater Right,
than in the next Sessions of your Par∣liament,
not only to Censure this Book,
but utterly to Disclaim also the No∣tion
of your being a Kingdom so abso∣lute
within your selves, as to be whol∣ly
independent of the Kingdom of Eng∣land;
I hope I have been able in my
following Discourse, to Convince any
reasonable Person that it cannot be so,
and that instead of doing you any good,
'twould tend to your Destruction to
have it thought so: Yea, and if you
should Recognize your selves to be a
Colony of England, (as I have shewn
that you cannot be lookt upon under
any other Consideration) I believe no∣thing
can be more agreeable to your
Circumstances, or better support your
Title to what you enjoy in that Coun∣try.
It would also be well worth your

Thoughts, whether it might not be fit
for you to shew your Readiness to Con∣tribute
something, according to your
Ability, towards the Reimbursing of
England a part of the vast Charge
they have been at, in recovering that
Country, and restoring you to your
Estates; whereby you may possibly
prevent the Parliament of England's
requiring it of you; for I can tell
you, that since Mr. Molyneux hath
started the Thought, some of the most
considerable Members of our House of
Commons ave talk'd on't.
I have no ill will to Ireland, I have
had the Honour to have been in Con∣versation
with many of you, for whom I
have the utmost Respect and personal
Esteem, and I have been sorry to see
so much of an Inclination in some wor∣thy
Persons, to favour this Opinion of
Mr. Molyneux. The sense of Power

and Profit prevails much upon Hu∣mane
Frailty; nay, it easily subdues our
Reason, and makes us unwilling to enter∣tain
Convictions against what we have
believ'd to be our Interest; but I have
endeavoured to shew those that are
mislead in this Matter, that it can by
no means be their Interest to be freed
from the Iurisdiction of the Parliamen∣tary
Authority of England: You know
that you are not able to protect and
defend your selves against the Rebelli∣ons
of the Irish, and that the Kings
of England cannot raise Money upon
the People to help you, without their
Consent in Parliament; would you
have them then only to have Autho∣rity
to raise Money, and appropriate
it to your Service, without having any
more to do with you? Or can you
think, that the Parliament of Eng∣land
will ever more assist you upon

those Terms? rather may they not
with good Reason demand a Reim∣bursement
of what Mr. Molyneux
owns to be due to us for former As∣sistances?
which would doubtless a∣mount
to a greater Sum than you
are ever able to pay.
People that do good Offices, expect
at least a grateful Acknowledgment
from those that receive them▪ We have
never been sparing of our Blood and
Treasure, to help you in your Distres∣ses,
and yet 'tis too well known, that
many of your People have been apt to
speak very stightingly of what we have
done for you, and to tell us, that what
we did was not out of regard to them,
but to our selves: And since the Bill
design'd to restrain you from spoyling
us in our principal Trade of the Wool∣en
Manufactury, by underselling us in
Forreign Markets, we have been sharp∣ly

reflected upon in print, as if we
were about to ruine and undo you, and
even deny you Earth and Air, and the
common priviledges of Mankind Nay,
we were after a ort Threaten'd with
the Danger of your joining with some
other Interest than that of England,
or of your quitting the Country, &c. and
even Mr. Molyneux hath given some
touche upon the same string Give me
leave to tell you, that this is not lookt
upon as a modest or friendly Behavi∣our,
much less does it denote any sense
of Gratitude retain'd in a People that
were so lately Reliev'd by England,
and restor'd to the enjoyment of plen∣tiful
Estates, which they must never
have expected but through the Help
of England; and this hath been done
wholly at our Cost, and they have not
(hither to) been askt to Contribute one
Penny towards it; some People would

not surely have so soon forgotten so
great a Benefit. I am yet desirous
to reason a little with you upon this
Matter, but 'tis hard to use so much
plainness as is requisite, without giv∣ing
Offence to some, which I would
as far as possible avoid, my Design
being real Friendship and Good-will to
you, and I should rejoice if I might be
instrumental to Reconcile you to an even
Temper of Mind; but that's hardly to
be done with such as shall persist to
be of the Opinion that they are altoge∣ther
in the right: Suffer me however
to tell you, that you have ways enough
to employ your Poor, without the Wool∣len
Trade, which with you (as to those
sorts that hurt us) is a New Under∣taking:
You have large and encouraging
Improvements arising from the product
of your Lands; your great quantities
of Provisions, Butter, Leather, &c.

afford you a fair Foundation for For∣reign
Trade, besides you are very ca∣pable
of a Linnen Manufacture, if
you will employ your Stock and Indu∣stry
that way. On the other hand,
England hath for many Ages, ap∣ply'd
her self to the Woollen Manu∣factury,
the poor are settled in it, and
have no other way of Livelyhood; she
hath no means of gaining Wealth suffici∣ent
to support her Government without
it; but your being able to work so much
cheaper, must of consequence abate the
prices to so great a degree, as that
she cannot be able to hold the Trade;
which in time will cause a decay of
her Wealth and Power, draw inevi∣table
Ruin upon her whole Empire,
and involve your selves in the same:
Is it not easie then to determine, for
whom 'tis reasonable to give place in
this Contest? 'twas upon this Consi∣deration,

you have been restrain'd from
exporting your Wools to any Country
but England, and is not the necessity
of restraining the Manufacture there∣of
much more cogent? Bear with me
to say, that the evident reason of the
thing is sufficient to convince all Man∣kind,
that England must be perpe∣tually
oblig'd to preserve this Trade
to her self; that she cannot suffer any
of her Members to interfere with her
in it, and that to advocate against so
just an exerting of the Supream Au∣thority,
shews only a self-seeking Tem∣per,
in Minds that would grasp all to
themselves, without having any regard
to the Well-being of the whole Commu∣nity,
of which they are but Members:
You see the People of Romney-Marsh,
are not willing to be hindred from send∣ing
their Wools to France, and the
justice of the thing is as much to them

as you, the only difference is, that they
being within the Realm of England
send Representatives to the Parlia∣ment;
and yet perhaps they would have
been as far from consenting as you,
if they had not been over voted: But
there would be no possibility of con∣serving
Societies, if such Compulsions
might not be exercis'd towards parti∣culars.
We must yet own that 'tis but a
natural infirmity, for Men to be hardly
perswaded into the right reason of
things which they believe to be against
their own Interest; nay, we find that
they are too apt to be prejudic'd against
such who endeavour to convince them
of their Mistakes; and as we observe
that particular Persons are subject to
prevailing Inclinations, so also there
are Habits and Dispositions, that are
in some measure peculiar to distinct

Countries and People, from whence it
hath been usual to give general Chara∣cters
of the Inhabitants of particular
Countries, according to the Virtues or
Vices that have been noted to be most
predominant among them; neither is it
difficult to assign some natural causes,
from whence such habitual Dispositions
may proceed; for some instance where∣of,
I would offer the consideration of a
Colony well settled in an abundant Coun∣try,
where the People find very easie
means of subsistence and improvement,
and are in great measure exempted
from the solicitious Cares and Difficul∣ties
of Life, that attend the Inhabi∣tants
of places that are more populous
and fully cultivated; and where also
they have been us'd to exercise a large
Dominion and Power over the Natives,
who have been always kept in a servile
Obedience and Subjection to them, to

a far greater degree than can be practi∣ced
in a Country where the People enjoy
a more equal share of Liberty: Is it not
reasonable then to expect, that the Inha∣bitants
of such a Colony may be naturally
Generous, Hospitable, Free of Conver∣sation,
and of Couragious and Bold Spi∣rits?
These are Virtues, which every
Body will commend; but is it not as na∣tural
for such a People, to be less ready
to pay so intire an Obedience as may be
requir'd of them by their Superiours, and
to be uneasie under any Checks, that may
impeach them in the prosecution of such
Advantages that they may find them∣selves
capable of, without considering how
preiudicial they may be to others? may
there not be an aptness in such a People to
be somewhat assuming, and to have a
good Opinion of themselves? will there
not be a proness to impatience, and for∣wardness
to reflect, when any Contradi∣ction

is given them? may they not be likely
to expect more regard from others, than is
really due to them? Is it not probable, that
they would be less considerate in giving
Offence, than ready to take Offence at
others? may not heighth of Spirit be
nearer their Temper, than true Humility?
Moreover, as they have no Concern in
the transacting with Forreign Nations in
matters of Government, they may be the
less us'd to consider of the Nature and
Reason of Political Managements, or to
think how far it is incumbent upon a
Mother Nation or Supream Government,
to regulate all her Colonies or Members,
so as that the Tranquility of the whole
Empire may be best conserv'd; and per∣haps
they may be subject to forget the
Obedience and Duty which must be per∣petually
owing from them to her: These
are Humane Infirmities, that may be very
naturally incident, to a People under the
fore-mentioned Circumstances; and I have
met with ingenuous Persons who have
been bred up in such Colonies, that have
readily acknowledg'd, that their Iudgments
have been much rectify'd in these matters,
when they have come to see more of the

World, and been made sensible of the bet∣ter
Accomplishments that are to be found
in a more Polite Conversation; they may
perhaps attain to a good pitch of School-Learning,
but that can amount to no
more than a very superficial Knowledge,
in respect to the far greater improve∣ment
that is to be gain'd by reading the
great Book of the World, and practising
the ample Study of Men and Things.
I am tender of putting these things too
home, because I know that though Men
should be brought to see their own Infir∣mities,
but few can endure to be told of
them; yet a Marriner will esteem him for
a Friend, that warns him of the Rocks and
Sands that lye in his way, and a wise man
will never account such an one his Enemy,
who over-perswades him into the right way,
when he was confidently going on in the
wrong. I am sure, I want not good
Will to the People of Ireland, and I be∣lieve
no Man that hath no concern there,
can wish their Prosperity more than I do,
and I am very sensible, that 'tis the in∣terest
of England to encourage them in
all such improvements, as may conduce
to their Happiness and Well being, pro∣vided

they are such as may not prove
highly prejudicial to her self.
I shall think my pains in this Vnder∣taking
to have been very well bestow'd,
if I have been able to offer any thing
that may convince you, that 'tis your
undoubted Interest utterly to abandon the
Thoughts or Desires of being look'd up∣on
by the Parliamentary Authority of
England, to be a People wholly exempt
from their Iurisdiction: And as I know
my Name is too inconsiderable to add
any Authority to the Argument, I hope
I may be excus'd in concealing it from
the Odium of such, who may not discern
the sincerity of my Intentions towards you
in this Essay; and yet I will not doubt,
but there are others who will believe me
to be, as I am resolv'd upon all Occasions
to the utmost of my Capacity, to render
my self,
Right Honourable,
Honourable, &c.

