



My LORD;
THEY who observe what License has been given, as well as taken, to blemish the Instruments, under God, and our King, in the greatest Deliverance, with the most immediate appearance of God in it, perhaps of any next to that of his chosen People of old; would think the Nature of things to be inver∣ted, Triumph to belong to the Conquer'd, and the most desir'd Deliverance to be worse than the depre∣cated Bondage, or to lose its Nature, because it was the return of Prayers and Tears, and not purchas'd by Rivers of Blood.
And after-times,I have seen an exact Pe¦degree o the Earl's Family from Syford a noble Norman Gothick Ex∣traction,Vid. Pref. who was e∣minent un∣der Rollo, who, Anno 912, obtain'd Normandy by Treaty with Charles the Simple, and marrying his Daughter. This Syford made the like bargain with Arald the first, Earl of Flanders, from which Marriage the Earls of Flanders, and the Veres Earls of Guisnes in Flanders, descended. Alberic, or Aubrey de Vere, or Ver, as he stands enter'd in Dooms-day Book, is suppos'd to have come into England with W. 1. 'Tis certain at the time of the great Survey he was a Proprietor in several Counties, particularly in Essex; and Humphrey the Son of Alberic had at that time several Mannors in Norfolk and Suffolk. 'Tis probable that this Son of Alberic dy'd in his Father's Life-time. I should take the Comes Albericus, who is enter'd in Dooms-day Book in several Counties as a Proprietor, from before the reputed Conquest, to have been Alberic de Ver, and the rather, because, otherwise he and his Descendents from that time are wholly lost: and besides, no place in England can be found of which any Alberic, or Aubrey was Earl, till the time of H. 2. when Aubrey the third of his Name was crea∣ted Earl of Oxford. But before that time the Office of High Chamberlain belonged to the Family, and, as appears by Records which I have seen in the Tower, was annex'd to their Barony. But that of Bolebec belong'd not to it till about the time of King John, when Earl Robert married the eldest Daughter of the Lord of Bolebec; the Barony of Sandford came by another Marriage about the time of H. 3. the Barony of Badesmere came not till the time of E. 3: with the eldest Sister and Co-heir of Bartholomew Lord Badlesmere. in which your Lordship's Great Name will flourish, taking root downwards, as it has spread upwards to the first Ages, will treat their Memories with Contempt, who would inure the

Brand of Disloyalty and Unchristian Be∣haviour upon your Lordship, and the Followers of so bright an Example.
Selden Dissert. ad Flet. f. 519. speaking of the time of Will. 2. sub idem tempus, &c. eminentissimus erat, pristini planè commatis juris sine ullâ Caesarci intermixtione peritus, at{que} exercitatissimus apud nos Albericus de Ver.Nor was your Ancestor Earl Aubrey more emi∣nent in the time of W. 2. for his Skill in the un∣mix'd English Laws, than your Lordship is, and will be to Posterity, for your generous Defence of them.
Certain it is how much soever some pretend to passive Valour, they cannot bear the Reproach of such extraordinary Vertue, and are forced to shut their weak Eyes at that shining Bravery, with which your Lordship strugled, with the Flatteries, and Threats of Fortune, and of Power: Becoming, in the Lan∣guage of the Heathen Philosopher, "a Spectacle most "pleasing to the Gods: the Effects of which Plea∣sure your Lordship has felt, in the admir'd Tran∣quillity of your own Mind, and in the Glory per∣mitted you, of being signally accessary towards the present Happiness of your Country; not only by your resolute Ʋndertaking, but even by your Sufferings.
I must own the Sufferings of others to have con∣tributed to it by accident, as those things may well be said to be, which happen contrary to the inten∣tion of the Agent, and nature of the Action.
But the Nation was glad to find their private Resentments, and self-Defence, to carry them along with the Publick Interest, which some of them had sacrificed to low Ends, or stupidly neglected; being as unconcern'd at publick Calamities, as if their former Exemptions, which they seem'd to aim at, had made them of another distinct Community.
Such as these deservedly lost the Credit of their share in this Revolution, not only as they had drawn their Sufferings upon themselves, and others, by tempting those whom they flattered to make Experi∣ment of the force of their Doctrine; but as their subsequent Carriage has demonstrated, upon what narrow Principles they engag'd, not in the Cause of their Country, but their Own. Their lowness of Spirit makes them resemble those fawning Creatures, whom the least Gentleness raises to Familiarity; but notwithstanding the Advantages which they enjoy un∣der this Government, 'tis not to be presum'd that they are given them otherwise, than to reclaim and wean them from Notions, as destructive, as they are useless, to this equal Administration.
They who now pretend to merit, by transplanting the Doctrine of the Bow-string into the Service of this Government, would do well to consider, whether in the late Reign it really profited any but them∣selves; and whether they kept to it any longer, than while they found their account in it.
As it is our Happiness to have a King born, and acting for the Good of Mankind, it is not to be fear'd

that he should cherish what is contrary to their com∣mon Sense, and Interest; or that he will countenance Reflections upon those noble Patriots, who ventur'd every thing dear to them, in the same Cause with him∣self, while Success was doubtful; and whose Repu∣tations, next to his own, facilitated that Revolu∣tion, for which late Posterity shall praise those of this Generation.
One would think that such a Cause should not stand in need of Advocates, or they of Patrons: yet when Men High in Titles, and Pretences to the Service of Crowns, range themselves on the other side, and Reflections fly about, and must fall some where; 'tis requisite for Men of my Mediocrity, to be cloth'd with the Priviledges of them for whom they plead.
Ʋnder this Protection I may affirm, that while your Lordship would have the Throne establish'd in Righteousness,So Seneca represents the Epicure∣ans justify∣ing the Worship of a God. Deus colitur propter Ma∣jestatem exi∣miam, singu∣larem{que} na∣turam. Sen. de Beneficiis, lib. 4. and the Crown not only to be easy to them that wear it, but amiable to all; Others, out of folly, or design, would remove the very Foundation of this, and all regular Governments, hanging them by Geometry upon meer Air; and render Kings, like Indian Gods, to be worshipped only for their Power to destroy, not for the Beneficence of their Natures: which eximious quality in their Majesties, and in your Lordship, absolutely disposes of,
My Lord,

