



THat speech of him was neither false, nor fri∣volous, who said, Librorum fortuna nihil ferè à liberorum conditione dissentit: in his edendis insudat corpus; animus in illis aestuat. And, as there is need of a mid-wife, to help bring them forth: so is there also need of a nurse, to help attend and de∣fend them. Sir, you have been the mid-wife (I must needs confess) already, without whose help (I dare boldly say) this piece had never seen the light of the Sun. I see a company of sorry Pamphlets daily come forth with easie passage; that neither benefit Church, nor Common-wealth, and are good for no∣thing but to corrupt the minds of youth: Eunuchi gi∣gnunt, steriles pariunt: plures haec aetas  tales in uno anno extrusit, quàm quibus ipsa Arithmetica suficiat enumerandis; So that we may well take up the complaint of Famianus Strada, Obruimur libris, oculi le∣gendo, manus volutando dolent. But as for this work, not∣withstanding that not I my self alone, but also all that have seen it, do judge it to be both as necessary and be∣neficial to a Common-wealth, as any at this day extant; and the matter whereof it treats (for the most part)

such as was never yet handled by any; (as measuring of all kinde of ground by the Chain onely, as quickly, and exactly, as by any Geodetical Instrument whatsoever, And what can be more beneficial then quenching an house on fire? with divers other such Problems.) Yet, not onely this, but several other pieces, as commodious and beneficial to a Commonwealth as this is; as, My di∣rection and method of teaching school: (which your self, Sir, have both read and examined; together with another piece of Common Arithmetick, and The Do∣ctrine of Triangles, and a fourth piece of Dialling.) whereof both the Reverend Vice-chancellour, and others the Heads of the Universitie, have so willingly and freely long since granted me their hands for licence of impression; hitherto have wanted the good hap of being able so much as to crack the shell, till now that this is got forth and flown abroad; but at Doctor Rowls his cost: for amongst all our Book-sel∣lers none would ever bid me a penny for my copy; so that I have lost all mine own labour, and a great deal of charge in transcribing; so that had not Doctor Rowls beg'd a pardon for it, it had gone to the pot. When the other will be printed, God knows, they are ready: the children are brought to the birth, but there is no power to bring forth. I fear I shall not speed so well, as the report goeth of a Kentish Carpenter, who going from home on Mondays, and coming home on Sa∣turdays; for a moneth together, each severall Saturday his wife welcomed him home with a new babe. If I could have but one of these in a moneth, I should think it well. And since this is born, it must be kept: there∣fore my humble request to you is, That you would be

pleased to take it into your protection; though I am not able to put it in so fine a dress as others can, yet remember (I beseech you) Sub sordida veste saepe latet scientia. You are the best able to protect it, of any I know, in regard of your excellent knowledge in all kinde of good learning; and more particularly (which is the main reason of my taking Sanctuary at your Ca∣stle;) in Geodesie, the subject matter of this Discourse, which I know, your love is such to the furtherance of all good Arts, that you will not refuse to harbour and shelter. Which so accepting, you shall for ever oblige,

