



Most Gracious and Dread Soveraign,
THough I had the Honour to be very well known to His Majesty of ever Blessed Memory, Your most Royall Father, and to be a Sufferer in the loss of a considerable Estate, for His most Just Cause, yet I may not be so well known to Your Sacred Person: however, the same Duty that moved Me▪ to fight for Him, remains in Me to write for You; not out of any Confidence in my Pen (for I am the first shall judge that my Self) but out of Conscience and Loyalty to my Soveraign; for whose sake, I resolve to hazard Censure, rather than to be wanting in any Discove∣ry, that may tend to Your Majesties Interest, and indubitate Right.
The least loss of Power in a Magistrate, is a great Detri∣ment to his Government, and an Advantage to his Enemies; the least Creep-Window robs the whole House; the least Errour in War not to be redeem'd▪ And as that ever Blessed late Martyr said (when He gave his Watch of Go∣vernment▪

to be cleansed by the too-long Parliament) the least Pin of it being left out, would cause a Discord in the whole: Therefore might Solomon well say, Where the Word of a King is there is Power: The King and Power being Relatives.
That Printing belongs to Your Majesty, in Your publique and private Capacity, as Supream Magistrate, and as Pro∣prietor, I do with all boldness affirm; and that it is a consi∣derable Branch of the Regal Power, will no Loyal Person deny: for it ties, and unties the very Hearts of the People, as please the Author: If the Tongue, that is but a little Member, can set the Course of Nature on Fire; how much more the Quill, which is of a flying Nature in it self▪ and so Spiritual, that it is in all Places at the same time; and so Powerful, when it is cunningly handled, that it is the Peo∣ples Deity.
That this Power which is intire and inherent in Your Majesties Person, and inseparable from Your Crown, should be divided, and divolve upon Your Officers (though never so great and good) may be of dangerous Consequence: You are the Head of the Church, and Supream of the Law; shall the Body govern the Head? Men use to trust, when they cannot avoid it; but that there may be a Derivative and Ministerial Power in them, with Appeal to Your Majesty, I do with all Humility admit and propose.
Printing is like a good Dish of Meat, which moderately eaten of, turns to the Nourishment and health of the Body; but immoderately, to Surfeits and Sicknesses: As the Ʋso

is very necessary, the Abuse is very dangerous: Cannot this Abuse be remedied any other way, then by depriving Your Majesty of Your Antient and Just Power? How were the Abuses taken away in Queen Elizabeth, King James, and the beginning of King Charles his time, when few or no Scandals or Libels were stirring? Was it not by Fining, Imprisoning, Seizing the Books, and breaking the Presses of the Transgressors, by Order of Councel-Board? Was it not otherwise when the Jurisdiction of that Court was taken a∣way by Act of Parliament, 17 Car. If Princes cannot redress Abuses, can less Men redress them? I dare positive∣ly say, the Liberty of the Press, was the principal further∣ing Cause of the Confinement of Your most Royal Fathers Person: for, after this Act, every Male-content vented his Passion in Print; Some against his Person, some against his Government, some against his Religion, and some against his Parts: the Common People that before this Liberty be∣lieved even a Ballad, because it was in Print, greedily suckt in these Scandals, especially being Authorized by a God of their own making: the Parliament finding the Faith of the Deceived People to be implicitely in them, Printed the Remonstrance, the Engagement to live and dye with the Earl of Essex, the Covenant, &c. and so totally possest the Press that the King could not be heard: By this means the Common People became not onely Statists, but Par∣ties in the Parliaments Cause, hearing but one side▪ and then Words begat Blows: for though Words of themselves are too weak Instruments to Kill a Man; yet they can direct how, and when, and what Men shall be killed: In the Statute

of 21 Jac. Printing keeps very▪able Company▪ as Salt-Peter, Gun-Powder, Ordnance, &c. all which are Ex∣empted from being Monopolies.
Not to be longer tedious, I too much fear, this late Act for two years compleats all the former Concessions of the late King: I know it was done in hast, and with a good Intent; but by Your Majesties Gracious Leave and Pardon, even then very considerable Persons in Your House of Com∣mons, were of Opinion they had nothing to do with it, the Power of the Press being so wholly in Your Majesty. Indeed, Necessity that hath no Law, was the cause of this Law, viz. to hinder the Growth of Scandalous Books and Pamphlets; but it hath fallen very short of the End: for few or none, of many Printed, have bin brought in by the Stationers. I have now discharged my Duty to Your Majesty, and if I find I have so far prevailed upon Your Royall Goodness, as to ask unconcern'd Councel what is best to be done, I have my End; I hope Your Majesty will have the Advan∣tage. So prayeth,

