



Dearly Beloved,
IT is much to be lamented in any day, if many of the righteous are taken away by death (Isa. 57.1.) as being signal of evil to come; & more, when many Eminent Ministers of the Gospel are so removed, whereby Vi∣sion faileth; and most of all, when the Sin of a People, and impending Judg∣ment threaten their being benighted, and no prospect is given of others to fill up the places of those who are transplanted to Eternity.

I know you cannot but have many searchings of heart, for your deep share in this matter of Lamentation; the Lord having (in so short a measure of time) called home to himself from among you, so many faithful Teach∣ers; as that Spiritual man Mr. Armi∣tage, Judicious Mr. Allen, and now this Laborious Mr. Asty, who served you in the Gospel: But it is some matter of refreshment, that they be∣ing dead, yet (by their Printed La∣bours) they still speak to you.
It was the earnest desire of some amongst you, that the ensuing Ser∣mons of Mr. Robert Asty might be Published; they were taken from his mouth by the Pen of a Ready Writer, and not polished by his own hand, yet may be exceeding∣ly useful to all, for the promoting of Faith, Obedience and Comfort.
Indeed, the chief purport of this
Treatise is, to raise the Joy of those who are interested in Christ, and that in every state and condition: It directeth unto the right Object of Joy, the Lord, and so to an everlasting ground of Rejoycing.
I shall add a few words of Coun∣sel to you, for whom I have a great respect.
1. Improve the remembrance of those Gospel Truths which you heard from the mouths of your Ministers now at rest: Their Labours were not intended by the Lord only for a present relief to your Souls during their speaking, but for afterward, Rev. 3.3.
Remember how thou hast Re∣ceived and Heard, and hold fast. Beware of losing or growing in∣different as to the practical owning those Gospel Principles which you
have been grounded in; be tena∣cious there; hold them fast; for Christ addeth, If thou shalt not watch, I will come on thee as a Thief, and thou shalt not know what hour I will come upon thee.
2. Keep up lively Affections to∣wards God, when your Gospel-Mi∣nisters are withdrawn from you. When David was exiled from the Ordinances of God, yet then had he the most earnest pantings of Soul after Enjoyments of God, Psal. 42.1, 2. & 63.1, 2. O God, thou art my God, early will I seek thee — Beware of coolings in Affe∣ction to the Institutions of Jesus Christ when you want them, and let nothing short of God satisfie when you enjoy them. Beware of leaving your first love, Rev. 2.4, 5.

3. Maintain frequent Spiritual Communion each with other when some Gospel Administrations are wanted. This is prescribed as a means for the prevention of Decli∣nings or Departures from God, Heb. 3.13. Exhort one another daily while it is called to day. Daily Converses each with other duly managed, may not only preserve from Spiritual De∣caies, but quicken Affections, and blow up the spark of your graces into a mighty flame.
4. Wait uncessantly in Prayer for the Return of God's Ark to you. The less you have of Preaching, the more should you be in Praying, and others for you, that Gospel-Light may shine among you as in former daies; and the Answer will rejoyce many, and should grieve none; for, what
hurt can it be to any real Christian, that Christ is Preached to others?
I shall only add 2 Cor. 13.11. Fi∣nally Brethren, farewel, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in Peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you. So prayeth he who is

Octob. 23. 1681.
