



I Know no occasion wherein all sorts of people have taken greater liberty, than in their Dedications, both in regard of the persons to whom the Com∣plement is made, and of the things that are usually said in them. All Authors pretend to disclaim flattery upon these subjects, and yet were Historians to draw Great Men according as they are represented in De∣dications, abundance of Persons would pass▪ with Po∣sterity for men of wit, who never made a jest in their lives, and for honest Patriots, who were only mere Fripons at the bottom; but tho most Authors are agreed to wheedle and flatter in their Dedications, yet I see they are not so well agreed in the choice of their Patron; some have chose whole Corporations, or Societies for this Office, and indeed this conduct would be politick enough, if the Parties, who are concerned in the Dedication were obliged to espouse the Author's quarrel; others have gone a step fur∣ther,

and dedicated their Books to the respective Coun∣tries where they live; and lastly, some of a more Vni∣versal Spirit, have offered them to the whole World in general, without any restrictions or limitations, as it consists of the four known parts, Europe, Asia, Africk and America, and comprehends persons of all sorts and characters, those that can read as well as those that cannot, and those that have a Religion as well as those that have none at all. But the genera∣lity of Writers decline this course of Dedication, be∣cause Bodies Politick, and Countries, and the World it self, as large as it is, seldom reward the Author, for, as we say, what is every mans business, is no mans business, and therefore they generally make choice of particular persons, and those for the greatest part of the best Estates and Fortunes; not because an Illustrious name gives any better protection to a Book than a Meaner would do, altho this is always pre∣tended, but because such persons are best able to re∣ward an Author, and consider him for his incense. As I never knew a bad Book sell a farthing the better for having a gaudy Title prefixed to it, so a good one never fared the worse because it appeared with∣out a fine Fiocco: For in short, if the world has a mind to be censorious, a Person of Quality's name is as feeble an Amulet against the Criticks, as a Silver Horseshoe nailed upon a threshold would be against Witchery and Possession; for I am of opini∣on, that an Horseshoe made of Iron is full as powerful a preservative as the other. Now I had two reasons, Mr. Pate, to address the following Translation to your self, the first is because you are my Friend, with whose entertaining learned Conver∣sation I have been often diverted, and the next is,

because I can approach you without any of that Ce∣remony and Fineness, which uses to embarras a young Author so much, when he addresses himself to Qua∣lity, where, as he is obliged to say several things a∣gainst his Conscience, so he cannot assume that fami∣liarity and openness, which makes all sorts of Dis∣courses agreeable. However I would not have you think, that I am so unreasonable as to desire you to stand Surety, or (what in a few years will become a scandalous word with us) Godfather to my Tran∣slation, because I am sensible there are several faults in it; nor yet to defend the little Poetry in it, be∣cause I understand Spanish no more than I do Arabic, and consequently was forced to copy after the French Paraphrase; nor lastly to stand up for the Author of this Epistle, for then you must resolve to combat all comers and goers: All I require of you is that if any of your acquaintance should enquire either after the Book or the Translator, you would only tell them that the Book gives a good account of a certain Prince's Court, who at this present wri∣ting is one of our Allies and Confederates, and that the Translator is a very honest fellow, who between a little French and less Latin makes a shift to get a sorry livelihood.
I have been often reproached, and particularly by your self for fitting idle a whole year, and writing nothing of my own; now th I must confess a certain party amongst us has given us almost daily provoca∣tions to encounter them, yet I find they are a genera∣tion that are never to be edified by Satyr, and in∣deed all wholesome advice is effectually lost upon them. Suppose you or I should tell honest Mr. Par∣tridge yonder of Covent-garden, that it was not

civily done of him to leave the thirtieth of January, Good Friday, and the twenty ninth of May all at a clap out of his Almanack, and that John Gadbury and he may now shake hands together, like a couple of bigotted Rascals as they are, perhaps next year, (as who knows how far a turbulent Reformer's zeal may carry him) he will leave us never an Apo∣stle in the Calender, to the utter confusion of the poor people in the Country, who make no other use of the Apostles, but only to direct them to the next Horse∣race or Fair. To say the truth, we have too many ridiculous follies, and divisions amongst us ever to be cured by writing, which puts me in mind of what Mr. Burgess, who has made all the Town merry with his Preaching said lately upon this Argument. We Englishmen, crys he, have been famous in all ages for our wars and jars, and strife and life, and so forth: Why, what do you think Virgil said of you sixteen hundred years ago? Even peni∣tus toto divisos orbe Britannos, i.e. the Britains are the most divided people in the whole world. Thus you see, Mr. Pate, what little encouragement a man has to write, since it is so unlikely that he should ever cure any of those distempers that are so in∣veterate in our Climate, but I haue a more particular reason still behind, which obliges me to sit a specta∣tor, and purely respects my self; for as I have had the ill luck to displease the Moderate Party by at∣tacquing the merits of the Comprehension in my last Dialogue, so I have fallen under the indignation of the Criticks by being too profuse and lavish of my similes. As for the first I have nothing to say to them, because they are a sort of Gentlemen, to whom I never designed to make my Court, and as for the

last, before I go about to justifie my self, I will tell you a short Story. I happened some years ago to make a visit to an honest decayed old Captain in Alsatia, and his Chamber was a perfect Wilderness: Pipes and Napkins, and ends of Candles, and old Cloaks were jumbled all together, but what was most remarkable a Loaf and a Cheese lay upon his Close-stool. I asked him the reason of it, and the Captain honestly told me that he did it only for want of room. And this Mr. Pate was my own Case exactly, for there were several Per∣sons in the world for whom I had a kindness, and these for want of a better convenience I was often forced to throw into a simile, and to say the truth some, of them were such sad wretches that they did not deserve to have a Paragraph bestowed upon them.
But now to speak a word or two in behalf of these Memoirs, I am in good hopes they will be favou∣rably received, both because they were written origi∣nally by a Lady, which will go a great way you know with the Ladies, and admirers of Ladies, as also be∣cause they give us a true Idea of the Spanish Court, with which the generality of men amongst us, are utterly unacquainted, and lastly because they provide an agreeable entertainment to all sorts of people: For here is Rain and Sunshine, and Earthquakes and Shows, and Masquerades, and Processions, and the Lord knows how much History in Sippits to divert the zealous Admirers of Stow and Hollenshead: And then for Persons of better Palats here are abundance of political reflexions, and judicious observations, with the true reasons how this vast Monarchy, which in the last Century made so considerable a figure in the world, is in this become so feeble and Paralytic; so

that not to flatter the Work, I should scarce believe it was written by one of the fair Sex, but that several French Gentlemen here about the Town have fully satisfied me of the truth of it. I will only take notice of one Instance among the rest to give you a true taste of this Lady's ingenuity. Don Juan, while the ad∣ministration of affairs was lodged in his hands removed a poor Dominican from Salamanca (which place you know a certain Doctor who pretends he has received more stripes on his back than St. Paul and all his Brethren did, has made remarkable in Story by the Chimerical Degree he took there) and made him the King's Confessor. He thought by this means to have secured the Monk for ever to his own Interests, and to have had a trusty Confident upon all occasions near his Majesties person: But he found himself mightily mistaken in his expectation, for this beast of a Religious, soon abandoned his Patron's party, and herded amongst his profest Enemies. Some People, says this Lady, pretend that he did it out of a Principle of Conscience, but as for my self I am of another opinion, il est impossible que l' ingratitude puisse jamais avoir de bons Principes. It is impossible that ingratitude should ever flow from any good Principle. I am sorry that this honest Doctrin is not in better Reputation with some People amongst us, for I am satisfied that no pre∣tence whatever can atone for so black and ungenerous a Sin as Ingratitude is.
I should here, according to the laudable Custom of all Authors, take occasion to say something in your praie, but besides that I will not offer that Violence to your Modesty, I cannot handsomely commend you, for so

great a variety of Learning in so much Youth, but but at the expence of the City, and you know I have too great a respect for our honourable Metropolis to do any any thing of that nature, or indeed without a reproach to our selves, who cannot pretend such excuses, as the perpetual distractions of Trade and Business. Indeed if your good fortune in the world prove answerable to your merits, you may for all I know dye a richer man than Gresham or Sutton: But I must tell you, my dear Friend, that good Fortune and Merit are two as different things as any are in the world. I knew a Gentleman who made a pleasant remark upon this oc∣casion. I have, said he, in my time laid out for two things, viz. Preferment and a Red Nose, with as much zeal and application as any man in Town. To attain the last I have dutifully drank my Gallon of Claret eve∣ry night, and a dull sober Sot, a Neighbour of mine, with his single penurious Pint has arrived to it before me: and as for the former I have wearied out my Patience in waiting at Court, and at Noblemens Le∣vees, and yet could never stumble upon any; and so he concluded that several men come by Preferment and Red Noses, who never deserved either of them.
After all, Mr. Pate, if my wishes will do you any good, I wish you store of Customers, but never a Poet, or Courtier, or disbanded Captain, or Player amongst them all. May I be so fortunate as to behold you advanced to the highest Pinacle of honour in the City, to furnish new matter for Elkanah Settle's Triumphs of London, to sentence light Butter and Bread on Horseback, to terrify Sabbath-breakers, and those that forget to hang out their Lights, to appear in the next Edition of Baker or Stow, and arrive to

the Priviledge of sleeping in your Gold Chain at Guild∣hall Chappel. In short, may you be the wealthiest, hap∣piest man within the Bills of Mortality, and may you ever continue to love

