


ROYAL SIR,
HAving humbly invoked your Majesties
most gracious inspirationVirg. Aeneid. l. 10.
Nam{que} aliud
quid sit quod jam implorare queamus,Tu satis ad dandas quaevis in carmina vires.
Luc. l. 1.
who are as well theSic tibi nec docti desunt nec principis artes:
Mista sed est animo, cum Jove Musato.
Ibid. Apollo of our Musoeum, as
theDii tibi sunt, Caear juvenis: tua numina placa.
Hac certe non est notior ara tibi,
Ov. de Pont. l. 4. El. 8. Jupiter of our State) to this expressive ad∣miring
your Restorers vast worth, I am obliged
I presume (how small soever the tribute of Loy∣alty
be) with submissive boldness to tender it to
you, whose influence it is by which my poor
Muse subsists. In your happy Restauration,
your Subjects love is not so much our wonder,
as your Majesties Divine Virtue, who change
the hellish hue of such Negroes in wickedness as
we, and perswade us, after so long an habit of
Rebellion, to our duty of Obedience. When
that Plague had spread it self over the body of
the whole Kingdom, was possessed of its very
heart and vitals, we admire that an Arm, one
single member of it, should be left untouch'd,
and that speedily to administer an effectual Re∣medy

to an inveterate Disease of twenty years
continuance: but we are confounded to think
that the Remedy should be a Prescript of your
bounteous Royal hand, since your Worship and
Honour lay rejected here, like theCarthage being taken, the wife of Asdrubal burned
the Temple of Aesculapius, that stood in the mids 
the City, on the top of the Castle Byrsa. ruined
Temple of Aesculapius in Carthage, who have ex∣perienced
your Subjects Insolence even to that
height, asOvid Met. lib. 8. fab. 1. (O nostri infamia secli!) to be ba∣nished
from them, like theThe Romans, out of a conceit that Physick was de∣structive
to the body, banished the Physicians many
years together. v. Pensieri di Alessandro Tassoni.
Lib. 7. Quesito 7. Physicians of old
from the fanatick Romans, and (pro neandum
scelus! O monstra hominum ex scelere & immani∣tate
concreta! to proscribe the remembrance of
your Majesty as far as was possible from our ve∣ry
thoughts) whose return to repossess what the
Usurpers matchless malice kept from You, they
(horrendum dictu! a word of horror to think and
write as well as speak) madeVid. Civil Wars of Great Britain and Ireland, An.
1659. p. 375. l. ult. Treason to men∣tion.
Our Victor George without force of Arms
conquers all our Dragons; but with the charm

of Your Authority. They yeeld to Him in
Obedience to You. He as theApresso i Lacedemoni fu una statua di Apollo con
quattro orechie e con altre tante mani. Why the
Lacedemonians made a Statue of Apollo with four
hands, and four ears. See Imagini dei Dei, Apollo
con quattro ochi. Lacedemonian
Apollo, is strengthened with four hands to fight
victoriously for us: but two of these hands are
those belong to your Most Sacred Person. His
Voice, as Alectryons, scares away the Bats and
Screech-Owls of our Night; yet no otherwise,
but as he proclaims Your Coming, the approach
of our Sun. Who can see a Loyal Orator plead
for the Subjects Hearts to their true Lawful So∣veraign,
and not see withall their hearts (quite
tired with the expensive, ridiculous, cursed and
bloody Changes of a tedious Civil War, and
tormented with the Remorse of their own most
heinous—Haec prima malorum
Causa fuit.
Virg. Aen. l. 7.
Hoc caput, O Cives, haec belli summa nefandi. l. 12. Impiety, the sole cause of it) were
their Soveraigns wholy before he speaks a word?
And who can see lost hearts restored to their
Royal owner by the kindness and virtue of such
an Orator, and not have so much gratitude as to
give him his suffrage? None certainly can more
ds  our applausie breath, than he that

opens our dumb mouths to speak. The least we
can render Him, who raiseth us out of the dust
with three Kingdoms out of their ruines, is our
Publick Acknowledgement of so matchless an
Obligation. And none so fit to hear the report
of his merit (were theSeneca Epist. 79. Laus, as Seneca
saith it should be umbra virtutis, could with
equal proportion be the shadow of it, and an∣swer
its vast dimentions) as your Sacred Majesty,
whose high goodness is the subject upon which
his Virtue depends.
(Ovid de Pont. Lib. 1. Eleg. 3. Haec animum possint audita movere,
Ovid de Pont. Lib. 1. Eleg. 1. Et mihi tu faveas) May my presumption in
what I dedicate here, I humbly beg, be made
pardonable upon this account,
Ovid de Pont. l. 1. Eleg. 9. (Et tibi Rex vo detur fortssime, nosto,
Semper honorata sceptra tenee manu.
Ovid de Pont. Lib. 2. Eleg. 5. Ut servus maneat tibi fidus
Comprecor ad vitae tempora summa tuae.)
Your Majesties long happy Reign be ever bene∣fited
by this great Worthy's service.
Ovid de Pont. Lib. 4. Eleg. 2.
—Laudata{que} Virtus
Crscat.Et mecum populi vota prcantur idem. L. 2. El. 5.

