



Honoured Sir,
AMong other of your ma∣ny Learned and Profi∣table Labours, (which have much Inlightned the World) You have been pleased (together with the Ho∣nourable

and Royal Society, whereof You are a Worthy Mem∣ber) to take into Consideration the Work of Planting and Preserving all sorts of Trees; not onely of Forrest-trees for Building, Fuel, and other uses, but also of Fruit-trees, especially in Relation to (the most wholsome Drink) Cider; which hath (together with many o∣ther of Your undeserved Favours towards me) imboldned me to make this humble Address unto You, in∣treating Your Favour and further Help in this good and profitable Work. And conceiving that I have so much Interest in Your Honours Favour, as to have liberty to make such Proposals unto You, as con∣cern the Profit of the Publique (not

doubting of Your good acceptance of them) I do humbly submit these fol∣lowing particulars to Consideration, which I judge to be material, if not necessary, as to many persons.
1. First, That there be a Law made to enjoyne the Work, as we have in other Cases of far less con∣cernment then this; and according to the Example of other Nations in the same thing: For although ma∣ny that are Ingenious Persons, will not need such an Excitement, yet the Common vulgar People (which are the greatest part of the Nation) will do but little without it.
2. Secondly, That there be Overseers or Officers appointed to look after the Work, from year to year, (without which, some Laws

will have but a feeble Execution) and these Overseers to have due Encouragement one way or other: This is no more then what is done in other Cases of far smaller ad∣vantage then this would be.
3. Thirdly, That there be Books Printed and Published for instruction in this business, which may have these Characters.
1. First, That they be of small Bulk and Price; Because great Volumns (as many are upon this Subject) are of too great a Price for mean Husbandmen to buy; as also take up more time to peruse then they can spare from other La∣bours.
2. Secondly, That the Stile and Expressions be plaine, and

suited to the Vulgar (even to the Capacities of the meanest, for these (Generally) must be the Workmen and Labourers thereabout. Now, we know that many Pieces upon this Subject, are in Latine, French, and other Tongues; yea, and some that are in English; being the Works of some Learned and E∣minent Persons, (whose Faculties are raised by Study and Education, far above the reach of common Ca∣pacities) their Expressions are answerable, and therefore not so profitable to the Vulgar, though Excellent in themselves, and very useful unto those that understand them: But when Men are spoken to, and taught in any Art in their own Language, (in their common

familiar stile) things are more easi∣ly received, and take the deeper Impression in their minds, and are better remembred.
3. Thirdly, That these Books for Instruction, be Experimen∣tal; according to what is tried and practised from year to year.
Many that have Written upon this Subject (especially some An∣tient Authours) have been meer∣ly Contemplative men; and have presented us with little else but their Notions and Apprehen∣sions: And though some things may be rational and useful, yet many are not so, which when they come to be tryed by the Touch∣stone of Experience, fall off and deceive men, to their loss of Time,

Cost, and Labour, with discou∣ragement; and discover them∣selves (as Sir Francis Bacon observes in his Advancement of Learning) to be but meer Puta∣tive things: And hereunto he adds, That it were to be wish∣ed, (as that which would make Learning indeed solid and fruit∣full) that Active or Experi∣mental men, would, or could, become Writers: And the oft∣ner Experience in things is renew∣ed and repeated, from year to year, the more it is Confirmed, and so fit∣test to be Communicated and Practised.
Now, how that which is here done (in the ensuing work) answers to these things, I leave to others to

Iudge, not doubting but that You [Honoured Sir] will continue your Endeavours for the carrying on this good and profitable Work of Planting. A Work wherein not onely the most Learned Philoso∣pher, and Exquisite Indaga∣tour into the Mysteries of Nature, may exercise his Judgment, and please his Mind; but also a work Pregnant with Profits, Real and Substantial to all people all their life long, from the Cradle to the Grave: A Work that (instead of empty and fruitless specula∣tions) will fill the Belly and cloath the Back. A Work that will en∣rich the Poor, and adorn the Rich: A Work that will Encrease the Kings Revenues, and the Sub∣stance

of all his Subjects: A Work Praised and Practised by the Greatest and most Eminent Persons in all Ages. In a word, It is a Royal Work, and worthy the most serious Considerations and Endeavours of the Royal Society; whereby those Worthies may raise to themselves perpetual Honour, as being Instrumental to promote and carry on the same, to a greater and more general pro∣fit.
Wherefore [Worthy Sir] You being a principal Wheel in this great and famous Engin, [framed on purpose for great and profita∣ble Works] are able to move it strongly and effectually to that end; which that you would be pleased to

do, is earnestly desired; whereby you may engage, not onely the pre∣sent Age, but also many Gene∣rations to come; to be acknowledg∣ed by many, but especially


