


My Lord:
YOur just dealing with your Adversaries, is mat∣ter
of reall Honour to your Person, your ene∣mies
themselves being Judges; your instru∣cting
the ignorant, your rebuking the ob∣stinate;
your remitting the Penitent, your
protecting the Innocent, your keeping Cove∣nant,
and conditions of Articles with all men, have mani∣fested
your proceedings both of Warre and Peace, to be truly
Honourable to them, but especially to us, who have heard
how Judah-like you have ruled with God, and have been faithfull
with the Saints, Hos. 11. last. Your silence before the Lord
(when a cloud was upon the Campe) had great confidence,
when the Lord went before you like a Pillar of Fire by night,
shining upon your wayes, and telling you, that you should be
to your enemies, as Threshing instruments with teeth, Isa. 41. 15.
and this your confidence in God, what boldnesse wrought it
before the Battle? and what humblenesse of minde after the
Victory? refusing honour of men, when God had put glory
upon you, in sight of all the world. It hath been said, Before
honour goeth humility, Prov. 15. 22. That may be an humble∣nesse,
as of necessity; but that humblenesse which followeth
honour, is ever matter of lasting praise; for, Honour upholdeth
the humble in spirit, Prov. 29. 23. and victory over a mans selfe
is the greatest conquest:
Fortior est qui se, quàm qui fortissima vincit Maenia.
Yea, this your confidence uttered did put life into your Coun∣sels,
courage into your Resolutions, & made your Forces more

forcible and active, so, as they did the work of the Lord effe∣ctivè,
both against the Presbyterian interest, at Dunbar, and
the Royall interest at Worcester, For there fell downe many slaine,
because the war was of God, 1 Chro. 5. 22. God is the judge him∣selfe,
to whom both parties at Dunbar made their appeales,
God hath pleaded the cause of his people, and since these
appeales hath given sentence for you now twice, By this I know
thou favourest me, because mine enemies doe not triumph over me, Psa.
41. 11. The issue must no longer passe under the vaine titles
of meer events and chances of war: The Kingdom is the Lords,
and he is the governour among the people, all the ends of the earth shall
come and declare righteousnesse unto a people that shall be borne, that he
hath done this. All men shall heare and feare, and declare the worke
of God, for they shall wisely consider that it is his doing. The righteous
shall be glad in the Lord, and shall trust in him, and all the upright in
heart shall glory, Psal. 64. 9, 10.
It hath been the wonder of all lands, to hear of England,
how the meek of the earth here, have formerly borne all man∣ner
of yoaks and oppressions under Royal and Episcopal Ru∣lers,
and how they have lately risen like Gyants and men of
might, for recovering their liberties, to defend their just rights
and to bring wrong doers to condigne punishment. As if the
judgement (against Moab) written, had been sealed upon their
hearts, Cursed is he that doth the worke of the Lord negligently, and
cursed is he that with-holdeth his sword from blood, Jer. 48. 10. Neither
regarding Nature, nor Nations, that they might execute Gods
judgements against an Idolatrous people. And 'tis observable,
God had said distresse not Moab, Deut. 2. 9. til Moab had thus sin∣ned.
But after Moab had committed Idolatry (a sin against the
Nation of Israel,) he shall beare his curse, that spares Moab:
any former command of God to the contrary notwithstand∣ing.
Sinfull mens changes justifie God and good men, in
these great changes of times.
Now England is delivered from her enemies, and the people
dwell safely through the mercy of God under your hand, I
humbly desire this, that after all publicke expeditions against
open enemies, you may (now) keep your selves from foes of your
own houshold, from friends of your owne Councell; for Christ himselfe

was betrayed with a kisse, wounded in the house of his friend; Gal∣lant
Judas was treacherously slaine by Demetrius: And good
Jonathan captivated by Triphon pretending kindnesse to him. Maccab,
9. 18. and chap. 12, 13. Cura teipsum, cautus esto, nè fidas. Set the
Lord God alwayes before you, waite for his counsell; let
impartiall justice be your greatest designe, and go on in this thy
might, be not perverted by envy or flattery of men, So run that
you may obtaine, in due time you shall reape, if you faint not. You
(now) chuse affliction with the people of God, and hereafter you
shall with them partake in the recompence of reward, when the
dead in Christ shall rest from their labours, and their works follow them.
For my selfe, that which made me write, was, that others
might not be burdened, and I eased, for Nullum genus cru∣delitatis
majus quam in communi periclo esse negligens. That which
caused these my humble addresses to your honour, was, to
answer the querulousnesse of some persons, who have bid defi∣ance
to the Armies of the living God, fixing their challenge up∣on
my selfe, with whom after conference had, I appeared
thus publickly, as a Souldier in the field, that waiteth his ene∣mies
motion. Yet being little as David, to encounter with the
great Goliah's of the adverse part, I herein crave your Lordships
wonted patronage, and hence forth I shal hold on triumphing
In Gods praises, who hath safeguarded your person, succeeded
your Armies, and recovered our Liberties, and in my con∣stant
prayers shall ever remaine,

