



Dear Countrymen and Friends!
WHiles in my retired condition, I was late∣ly devising, how I might do some good to the place of my Nativity, I had a strong apprehension, from the affections many of you have express'd to my Fathers Family, that some of the Labours of my dear Brother Mr. Thomas Adams, now with God, would be very accepta∣ble to you, for the edification of your souls; and there∣upon as most generally useful for you: I resolv'd to be at the charge of Printing this Catechetical Explanation of His. 'Tis well known amongst you, that my Grandfather Mr. Ri∣chard Adams was Rector of your Church, and then by his purchase Patron of the perpetual Advowson, Six of his Line and Name since all devoted to the Ministry of the Gospel, viz. Mine honoured Father Mr. Charles Adams, and Uncle Mr. Randal Adams (yet I hope alive in Ireland), my self, and three Brothers, Peter, Thomas, and Charles Adams were born in the Personage-house Psal. 87.5, 6.. My dear Mother (who also bore two other of my Brothers, viz. Iames and Iohn there too) the Daughter of a worthy Gentleman was likewise born in your Parish. My Reverend Father and Uncle did some short part of their time exercise their Ministry a∣mongst you; and all of us Brethren in the Ministry, have preached an occasional Sermon or more to you, though none of us could be setled with you, to spend our selves and be spent amongst you. However, we that are alive and at a distance from you, do often bear you upon our hearts, and earnestly desire that you may be saved in the day of our Lord Iesus Christ. Some of you cannot but re∣member, whiles my dear Father had the charge of your

Souls, he did preach the Gospel to you, both in season and out of season, beseeching you to be reconciled to God, who soon took him off from that work with you, to his eternal rest. And I do assure you, my Brother (whose sound and whole∣some fruit you may here taste) was very solicitous, and so are those who yet survive, that you may be acquainted with the truth as it is in Iesus. In order whereunto, I do now present and heartily recommend to you, this short Manual of Christian Doctrine. I pray you be pleased to re∣ceive it kindly, and entertain it friendly; not only out of love to the Author or Donor, but to the Truth. It is prover∣bially said amongst you [Cheshire Chief of Men], there ha∣ving anciently been valiant ones born and bred there: Let not now any Prophet of the Lord have occasion to com∣plain of you, that none are valiant for the truth Ier. 9 3.; which none can be as they ought, unless well-trained, instructed, or Cateehised (as Abrahams brave ones Gen. 14.14. were for the war) in the mysteries of the Gospel; for lack of knowledg where∣in, a professing people will be destroyed Hos. 4.6. Being alienated from the life of God through the ignorance that is in them, be∣cause of the blindness of their heart Eph. 4.18.. He that made them will not have mercy on them, and he that formed them will shew them no favour Isa. 27.11.. To prevent this mischievous ignorance, and help your understandings that you may rightly know God and do his will. Such as I have, give I you. Let none then despise this small token of my love, which I do in the name of Iesus Christ send to you. Others of their plenty have formerly given to the meaner sort of you Milk and Bread for the body, and lately Means for the instructing the Minds of your Children in the Rudiments of Learning; now I do offer a Mite out of my penury, to establish your hearts in Religion;Act. 3.6. spiritual milk 1 Cor. 3.2. Heb. 5.12., and bread Mat. 4.4. Amos 8.11., which I know you have need of. It comes not to eat your Bread, but to distribute something of the bread of life to every Family. I expect you should bid it welcome, and not distaste it, as the Gaderens for the sake of their Hogs, did the com∣pany of Christ himself, wishing him to leave their Coasts Luk 8.26, 37. —9, 5. —10, 11, 12.. Lest coming in kindness to you all at this day, it should be

a Testimony against any of you at the great day Mat. 10.14, 40, &c.. Believe me! I would not have it as the Flying Roll in the Prophets Vision, to consume any House whereinto it doth enter Zach. 5.; but to warn every person and every family of you, in this crooked generation, to flee from the wrath to come, and meet God by repentance. I confess it would trouble me to come into any of your Houses (or have tydings there∣of) and find this little Book, designed for your good, to be carelesly thrown up and down, and given to little ones to play with, and tear in pieces; or the leaves cut out with a knife, and burnt, as the Book Ier. 36: 23. that Baruch wrote from the mouth of the Prophet Ieremiah was misused; and mostly for the sake of those careless and untoward ones. Yet if one sinner be reclaimed by it from the error of his ways, built up in faith, and love, and brought really to obey the Gospel, that will answer all my cost, and be abundant matter of much joy. But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost 2 Cor. 4.3:. However I may in some sort say with the Apostle for his Countrymen, Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for you, is, that you may be saved.Rom. 10.1. I shall therefore take the freedom upon this occasion to enlarge something under these three following heads, viz.

1. Concerning the necessity of instructing, and being instructed in the Doctrine which is according to godliness.
2. The import and advantage of this Book before you, and how you may particularly use and improve it.
3. Some general Rules consonant to Scriptures, and the Mate∣rials of this Book grourded thereon, to help you all in your Practise.

I. The necessity of instructing, or Catechising, both as it respects those who Teach, and those who are Taught Gal. 6.6., is evi∣dent from the Injunction of the supream Lawgiver, who doth frequently charge Superiours to teach, and Inferi∣ours to learn Deut. 11.18, 19, &c.—6.6, 7, 8. —4.9. Eph. 6.4. Isa. 28.10. Ex. 13.8. Psal. 78.5. Prov. 22.6.—29▪ 3.—10.1.—1.10.—4.1, 2. Col. 3.11, 12. Gen. 18.18, 19. 2 Tim. 1.5. with 3.15, &c.. Which strongly obligeth those who have others under their authority, to do it as they are able; and (if they cannot read themselves) to put those who

have learn'd to read upon the work, and see them do it to the utmost of their power for edification. To strengthen this charge of so great and useful importance, the Spirit of God doth highly commend the practice according to it, as that wherein he much delighteth; and therefore makes it necessary to us, who should be solicitous to please him; yea in the Families wherein we live, as well as in the Con∣gregation; as a part of that solemn service he hath appoint∣ed in his word, with Prayers and Praises. Unless persons learn the Principles of Christian Doctrine 1 Tim. 4.3, 4, 5. Ioh. 8.29., they will not be able to hear Sermons with profit, nor understand clearly and distinctly the nature of Faith, Repentance, Iustification, &c. nor to give a reason of the hope that is in them, which they are required to do. And the rather that they may with∣stand fundamental errors, as well as resist evil practices; which was memorably seen in the very Children of Merin∣dol, who made a solemn Confession of their Faith from Scrip∣ture, amazing and confounding their persecuting adver∣saries. That shining Star Luther, in the dawning of the Reformation, used to say his Catechism was parva Biblia, the little Bible, meaning a short sum of that heavenly Do∣ctrine which the very Son of God did publish from the bosom of his eternal Father, and which the Holy Spirit did reveal by the Prophets and Apostles for the salvation of our souls. This might move him, reforming the Church from the dregs of Idolatry and Superstition, to carry his Catechism always along with him, to read and peruse it almost every day, as he did; affirming seriously, that he always learned something from it, which he did not (at least so practically) know before. Agreeable whereunto, in our age, said laborious, holy, and zealous Mr. Ioseph Alleine concerning Catechism, If any think themselves above it, 'tis from their pride or ignorance, for my part I account my self a learner. And therefore a Sum of Christian Principles, methodically digested and explain'd, ought to be sought after and embrac'd by us, as a precious treasure, yea for the elder to have recourse to; but more especially for the younger, who almost from their very Cradles may learn something of it as the Apostle speaks 1 Tim. 3.5., that as new-born Babes they may receive the sincere milk 1 Pet. 2.2. Isa. 55.1, 2. of the word,

that they may grow thereby Sir Edwyn Sands observed Eighty years ago, that this was a notable means for the growth of the Reformed Religion.. Upon this account I ear∣nestly intreat you who can justly claim a superiority in your own houses, that you would bethink your selves what an authority you are entrusted with from God, who re∣quires you to exercise it with an holy zeal, and maintain it with all Christian prudence, without Lordliness and ri∣gour, endeavour to be well skill'd in the Scripture Deut. 17.18, 19.; con∣sult the several tempers of those within your doors; allot fit and stated seasons for the getting of these Principles by heart; and watch over them daily with care, both as to their set task, and practice answerable to these Principles; keeping them seriously to mind both the business of Reli∣gion in their general Calling, and of their distinct worldly employments in their particular Callings. Suffer not your selves and houses to go hurrying to Hell, by opposing Gods most wise government of the world, which he car∣ries on orderly for the safety and comfort of his Servants, by well-instructed Families (such as Abrahams was) who became instrumental to carry down the knowledg of God in all peaceableness to posterity; so as to leave an expecta∣tion of Gods blessing upon them, whose welfare Nature it self doth move us to promote. The truth is, My Friends, if we did but remember our selves, as we are Christians, dedicated to God by Baptism, expecting benefit by the pur∣chase of Christ, we should consider we are not our own, but bought with a price, under the greatest obligation to live to him that hath bought us; and should take all pos∣sible care that we and ours might be His. Do then I be∣seech you, all you can to save your selves and others. Oh! pity their poor souls defiled by sin, and expos'd to misery. Oh! let them not perish through your carelesness, lest any of them say in Hell, as Cyprian brings in Children saying, their Parents were their Murderers; 'Tis long of you that we lye in easeless torments. Bewail the corrupted sad estate of your Children, as descending and deriving pollution from you. Let them timely know the only remedy; bring them to reverence the holy God, and read his word with greatest awe; shewing them the danger of breaking his

Commandments, the benefit of ordering their lives accor∣ding to his mind, that they may truly glorifie and enjoy him. Charge them to take heed they be not carryed away with an inordinate love to the profits, pleasures, and ho∣nours of this life; but learn the great lessons of self-denial and cleaving to the Lord Jesus with full purpose of heart, bearing patiently whatever he is pleas'd to try them with. And be sure you neglect not seasonably and duly, to ad∣monish and correct them Prov. 29.15, 17. with 4. 1 Sam. 2.23, &c. —3.13. Luk. 12.47, 48. Prov. 1.24, 25, &c., that their iniquities be not their ruine. Do you who are Inferiours willingly submit. Oh! take heed of refusing instruction, or opposing the means which is used to bring you acquainted with God and your selves; lest you be found guilty of shutting out the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, that it may not shine into your hearts.
II. Concerning the import and usefulness of this small Book I do here put into your hands and houses; praying the spiri∣tual matter of it may reach to, and abide in your hearts. You see here be under four chief Heads or Chapters an 107 short Articles (which also are Answers to the Questions in the Margin) now generally received. These A.'s are as so many entire Sentences, or distinct Propositions and A∣phorisms (the Commandments are Ten of them) with∣out depending for their sense upon any Question; contain∣ing the fundamentals of Christian knowledg and practice; so that the Learner may by committing them to memory, lay up in his heart the Sum of Christianity; and make a pro∣fession, confession, or repetition of it when call'd, in a con∣tinued speech, or else answer to any part of it, particularly when the Questions in the Margin are used by another, ma∣king enquiry into his knowledg. These several Articles you find have plain proofs from Scripture at large, to shew that these necessary matters of Faith and Obedience are surely founded upon the never-failing word of God; whose su∣pream authority should be of force to awe our consciences, and engage our hearts to the practise of those things which do appear to be our indispensable duties. Unto Divine war∣rant, for further illustration and confirmation, here are the Testimonies brought from the authentick Records of Reformed

Religion amongst us, I mean the Articles and Homilies of the Church of England, as agreeing with, and clearing or strengthening of the several Propositions; yea and very consonant to the main body of the materials in the short Catechism which is in the Common Prayer Book, to be learn'd by every Child, before he be confirm'd, or admitted to re∣ceive the Holy Communion. For the four chief heads there, are the Creed, or things to be believed; the Ten Command∣ments, shewing our duty to God and our Neighbours; the Doctrine of the Sacraments; the things contain'd in the Lords Prayer. And there they who present Children at Bap∣tism, are charged to call upon them to hear Sermons, and chiefly provide that they may learn the Creed, the Lords Prayer, and the Ten Commandments in the English tongue, and all other things which a Christian man ought to know and believe to his Souls health. All which are (as in so short a room can be well expected) methodically presented to you in this Book. Wherein lastly you have our departed Friend's endeavours in a short and easie Explanation, to make the Principles plain to be understood. Now for the use and improvement of it, and the advantage you may have by it (supposing you will first read this Epistle of mine to you), I would ad∣vise you who have the charge of Families especially, and can read, or have those in your house or neighbourhood who will do it for you; unless your own prudence dictate somewhat better for any of you in your circumstances: (1) Distinctly and treatably to read over, the Articles or An∣swers, without taking any notice then of the Questions; and require those under your charge to attend diligently there∣unto. I suppose you may go over (if not all) one half of the A. s (which are printed in a large letter) at one solemn reading; then the next time the rest, beginning where you left. But if any of you think the Task too large for once or twice, divide it into four or three Read∣ings. If according to Chapters, you may read each day (that you set apart for this purpose) one; if into three, according to Chapters, or chief heads, for distinction of matter, you may the first one day, the second another, and the two last on the third. If according to Articles for five days, on the first day read Nineteen Articles, on the second Nineteen more, ending with the Thirty-Eighth Ar∣ticle, on the third twenty A. s more, ending with Article

Sixty-two, on the fourth Twenty-two A. s more, ending with A. Eighty-five, on the fifth Twenty-two A. s more, to the end. (2) Your next reading of these Principles or Articles over, should be with the Texts of Scripture that prove them, and the Testimonies of the Reformed Church of England, attesting and in a sort opening, or some way clearing each Proposition. (3) The last reading (if not dispatch'd at once with the second) should be the Expla∣nations of the Author, enlarging more upon each Article, and so making it more plain and clear, even to the mean∣est understanding, who will be attentive and considerate. To which purpose, those who govern in each Family, should be always watchful to see there be an attendance to it without noise. But you should at the beginning, after the first Reading, set in with those under your charge to get the Articles or Answers without book; (and if by Friends I understand the poorer sort will in good earnest learn them by heart, likely I may procure the A. s printed in one sheet by themselves to give to them; those who are more able will I suppose buy them). Then you may hear them repeat what they have learned; and proceed those days you Catechise them, especially every Lords-day (you who have not better helps) to read some portion of the Explanation, so much at least as was learn'd the week be∣fore, engaging them by small rewards and punishments, to hearken with all seriousness, and to do that with all their might which is evidently prov'd to be their duty. This con∣scientiously and constantly perform'd, will I hope through Gods blessing turn to a good account for you and me. 'Tis only for the sakes of some I am thus minute. Give me leave then particularly to mind those who have not yet exercised themselves to Prayer (as they should have done), how this Book may be helpful, and improv'd to a solemn performance of that duty, and an attainment of a gift therein; by having variety of orderly and fit matter upon all occasi∣ons, from a distinct knowledg of our sins and wants. As for instance, A. 98. you have the nature of Prayer described, which you will do well to read, pause upon, and consider how it is prov'd by Scripture-Testimony, and how attested by our Forefathers; then read our Authors Explanation of it, whereby you will come to understand the parts of Prayer; and in whose name it is to be offered to God, for which see

also A. 21, 25. Now for you who are a Learner, to frame your self to pray orderly and pertinently, you may look into, and meditate upon A. 4. compar'd with A. 100, 101. for a Preface. Then pass on to confess your original sin, by considering (and if you will you may take your Pen and write out particulars prayer-wise) A. 14, 15, 16. compared with A. 13. Then you may particularize your actual trans∣gressions, by considering what is forbidden in every Com∣mandment of the Law, and acknowledging those sins, which by looking into that glass you find your hearts to upbraid you with, A. 47, 51, 55, 61, 65, 69, 72, 75, 78, 81. Then you may see their aggravations, A. 83, 84. with their Explanati∣ons. Then the consequents or punishments due to trans∣gressors, A. 17, 18, 19. Hereupon consider the Gospel requires Faith and Repentance, A. 86, 87. Then come to the next part of Prayer, viz. Petition. Here you may have directions to pray for the Spirit, working in Effectual Calling, A. 29, 30, 31. Pleading Christs mediation, A. 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. and seek∣ing particularly, that God would give what he requires in his holy Commandments, A. 46, 50, 54, 57, 64, 68, 71, 74, 77, 80. compar'd with A. 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, and A. 33, 34, 35, 36. still collecting and compacting such materials out of these Articles, and the Scriptures proving of them, with what follows (where it is needful) in the Explanation more briefly or largely, as every ones present condition and cir∣cumstances require. Now for the remaining part of Pray∣er, which is Thanksgiving, you will better know what you are to give thanks for, by seeing what sins or evils God hath kept you from; and what good things he hath bestow'd upon you. And this you will materially discern, by con∣sidering well what you have confess'd and petition'd; then it will be further helpful to meditate upon A. 9, 10, 12, 20, 21, 22, 31, 32, 85, 88, 89. For Conclusion read A. 107. with the Scriptures and Explanation. Turn to these Articles, as you see them noted here thus minutely for the sake of you (who need such direction) and yours, some of whom possibly you may engage to write what you shew them in this order, or when you read to them, for the teaching of them to be more methodical, in learning to pray, and that longer or shorter, as occasion requires, for their own and others edification. But still remember, It is the Spirit likewise that helpeth our infirmities, Rom. 8.26. So that our

prayers through Christ may be truly acceptable to God, and a means of our sanctification. I do not urge you in every prayer to insist on every head here, or restrain you to these, only shew you a way how to use these; neither would I tye you to this way, but advise you to exercise your spiritual senses to discern, and have regard to your own occasions, and the enlargement of your own hearts, that out of the abundrnce of them, in faith and humility you may express your minds to God in Scripture-language, from a feeling of our own wants. Thus I have took the freedom to suggest something of help in this kind, to those who may either desire or need it. But I impose nothing upon any one, which God hath left free. I hope none that know me well, will judg me to be so narrow-spirited. I have only offered a guide to the weaker, for to bring to their mind needful matter, under the three main parts of Prayer, viz. Confession, Petition, Thanksgiving. It may be some will begin with Petition or Thanksgiving, and then Confession, or vary and use them interchangeably, as in pru∣dence they think best for that season, or are moved by the holy Spirit to omit, or but touch on one, or the other part, and slay most on the third, which may do well. The great care to be took, is that the party praying perform this ne∣cessary duty with hearty and sincere devotion. But I humbly conceive, it were of great advantage, for one or more se∣rious persons in a Neighbourhood, who have better under∣standing (after the reading this I now write to you) to shew unto those of meaner abilities, the import of this ad∣vise for the use and improvement of this small token for their knowledg and practise. Perhaps the School-Master may think it expedient to do it for some of his Scholars in the highest Form. However I could perswade my self some unexperienc'd in praying (especially towardly young ones) will rejoice to be directed. I have latele known some who have been much changed and wrought upon by the serious reading of such a Book as this, given and heartily recom∣mended to them. It would do well in your Family-read∣ing of it, if some of the House would turn to the Bible, and find out the Texts, that you may with your own eyes see them there as cited. I doubt not but you will find them, unless possibly by the error of the Printer (which yet I know not) there may be somewhere a failure; but

then you having the words, a little searching of the Scrip∣ture will soon amend that (if it should be so). But I fear in being thus particular for your profit (which I aim at) I shall run my self beyond my projected bounds. It remains I should subjoin something of,
IIIdly, Some short general Rules, consonant to Scripture, and grounded mostly upon these cited in this little Book which may be of concernment to all; to help both superiors, in∣feriors, and equals, in the practice of godliness. Wherefore that you may by this Mannual grow better, which I hum∣bly beg of our good God.
(1) Keep your end in your eye, and think much on the means prescrib'd to attain it, and how you may best use them. You must make Religion your business; and that requires you to aim at the glorifying of God, and the enjoying of him, the saving of your own souls, according to the Rule God hath given you in his word. In all your employments, whether in your general or particular Calling; and all your enjoyments, whether spiritual or temporal, magnifie the Name of God, extol his excellency and perfection in thought, word, and deed. Endeavour to carry your selves so agreeable to his mind, that you may please him, and be accepted of him. 'Tis a small matter then how you are censur'd in mans judgment.
1 Cor. 6.20. Mat. 16.26. Rom. 11.36. Psal. 50.23. Mat. 5.16. Psal. 144.15. 1 Cor. 13.12. 2 Tim. 3.15, 16. 2 Cor. 5.9. 1 Cor. 4.3.
(2) Bethink your selves, who God is, and that you your selves are dependants upon him. Oh! labour to have right no∣tions of him who is wholly a spiritual, invisible, indepen∣dant being of himself infinite in all perfection, as none else is or can be, a most gracious and merciful rewarder of all those that diligently seek him. Who is but one, yet distinguished into three persons, or subsistents, all equal in power and glory; and doing all things most wisely and powerfully. Remember by him you were made and are govern'd; in him you live, move, and have your be∣ings; and can do nothing without him, who is every-where, and will every-where be worshipped in spirit and truth.
Iob. 4.24. Iob 10.4. Exod. 3.14. Ioh. 11.7, 8, 9. Heb. 11.6. 1 Tim. 2.6. 1 Iob. 5.7. Psal. 104.24. Iob 1.3. Act. 17.28. Neh. 9.6. Ioh. 15.5. Luk. 12.26. 2 Cor. 3.5. 1 Chron. 28 9, 10. Ier. 23 23, 24. 1 Cor. 3.16, 17.
(3) Consider well what an happy state man was in, when he came first out of Gods hands; and into what a sad plight of sin and misery you and all other meer men and women are faln. Be sure no blessing can be expected, but a curse, so long as you abide in a state of corrupt nature, unregenerate; tribulation and anguish do attend every mothers child of you, both here and hereafter. Yet,
Psal. 8.4, 5. Gen. 2.7. Iob 35.10, 11. Mat. 10.28. Eccles. 12.7. —7.29. Rom. 3.9, &c.—5.19. Gen. 3.6. —6.5. Eph. 2.1, 2, 3. Ier. 4.22. Tit. 3.3. Gal. 3.10. Ioh 3.3. Lam. 3.39. Rom. 2.9.
(4) Hearken attentively to what is done and and offered by our gracious Redeemer for your restoration. What offices he hath of Priest, Prophet, and King, both in his estate of Humiliation and Exaltation. Oh be affected with the glad tidings he brings, who came to save his people from their sins; and is the great Peace-maker, and only Mediator betwixt God and man, ready to save to the uttermost all poor sinners that come unto God by him, in that new and living way which he hath consecrated for us, through the vail, that is to say his flesh.
Mat. 1.21. Act. 4.12. Ioh. 1.14, 48. Eph. 2.14, 15. 1 Tim. 2.5. Mat. 11.28, &c. Ioh. 6.37. Heb. 10.20.
(5) Ponder throughly upon, and readily receive what help the Holy Spirit is pleas'd to afford in working of effectual grace, and see the necessity of it. He is a most free agent, and stands ready to enlighten the mind, and convince of sin, righte∣ousness, and judgment, to encline the will, soften the heart, and put a principle of grace within it, or else it would remain strong under all the rebukes and exhorta∣tions of the word.
Ioh. 3.5, 6. Eph. 2.8. Phil. 2.12. Ioh. 16.8. Act. 16.14. Heb. 4.12. 1 Cor. 6.17. Rom. 8.28. 2 Thes. 2.13, 14. Ezek. 36.26. 2 Cor. 3.3, 6.
(6) Look your selves often in the glass of Gods holy Law, and therein take notice of your own deformities. See how much you fall short of what God calls for, and how much you do of that which he forbids. This will be a means to come to a distinct sight of your own vileness and sinful∣ness; as also if you are renewed, how you ought to walk;

but that you can never merit Gods favour by the best works of the Law. Yet you ought mightily to oppose the first motions and risings of any corruption in your hearts, and carefully to avoid all such occasions as are likely to give advantages to those corruptions, and betray you into their hands.
Mal. 4.4. Iam. 1.23. Rom. 7.7. Gal. 3.10, 22. Iam. 2.10. —3.2. 1.25. Mat. 5.18, 19. 1 Tim. 1.8. Rom. 4.2. Gal. 2.16. Luk. 17.10. Iam. 1.14. —4.7. 1 Thes. 5.22. Mat. 13.37. Mat. 26.41.
(7) Hereupon, Enter into your Closets, be convinc'd of, sigh and mourn over your own impotency, inability, and unwilling∣ness to come to Christ, till you are effectually drawn. Alas! you find by comparing your selves with the Law, that you are neither able nor willing of your selves to keep the Commandments, but do daily break them in thought, word, and deed; yea and with aggravating circumstances in the sight of God, deserving his wrath and curse both in this and the future world: Which may make you sit down and bemoan your low estate, and cry out, What shall we do to be saved? Then,
Ioh. 6.44, 45, 65. —5.40. 1 King. 8.46. Ecclss. 7.20. Prov. 20.9. Col. 1.21. Gal. 5.17. 2 Cor. 10.5. Isa. 46.8. Act. 2.37.—16.30.
(8) Look up to Christ by an eye of faith, trust to him alone, and repent of your sinfulness, which keeps you from God. Con∣sider him who hath satisfied Divine Justice, as he is offer∣ed in the promises; and give credit unto them, which are in him Yea and Amen. Put your affiance in him alone, who is the Saviour, for acceptance of your persons, remission of your sins, and obtaining of eternal life. God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself; your great great concern then is, to receive him who saves his people from their sins; resign up your selves unto him as Mediatour, and through him unto God. Be sorrowful after a godly sort, for all that which offends him, which is not only an outward forbearance of sin, but a particular inward loathing and hatred of all sin as sin, striving against it, and endeavouring to mortifie it.
Act. 6.31. —2.38. —3.19. 1 Ioh. 5.13. Phil. 3.7, 8, 9. Ioh. 3.14, 15. —6.29, 47. Act. 13.38, 39. Isa. 28.12. Prov. 3.5. 2 Cor. 5.19.

Ioh. 1.12. Rom. 5.11, 17. Mat. 1.21. Zach. 12.10, &c. Act. 5.31. Psal. 119.104. —97.10. Iam. 4.8, 9, 10. Act. 8.22. Col. 3.5.
(9) Be careful to observe the institutions of Christ, and all his Ordinances as he hath prescrib'd. Hear, Read, Receive the Sacraments as he hath appointed, waiting for the Spi∣rit, who makes all means effectual. Oh! delight to meet God in publick Ordinances, and give up your selves to be ruled and directed by him therein. And therefore take a very especial care for the due observance of the Lords-day, which is appointed for the more solemn worshipping of God, and the benefit of man to refresh him with heavenly things. This you should spend in the Lords-work, and not in worldly pleasures or profits. I can assure you, the Author of this Explanation did make great conscience here∣of, and express'd much distaste of those who did sleight or prophane it. The last Sermons he preach'd were to urge a due observance of the Lords-day. And on the Lords-day-morning Decembr, 1670. a little before he departed hence, He told us, He was going to keep a Sabbath in heaven, and here strangers did not intermeddle with his joy.
Mat. 28. ult. Isa. 63.5. Psal. 19.8. Ioh. 5.39. Act. 26.18. Rom. 10.13. 1 Cor. 3.7. —12.13. Ier. 31.31, &c. Col. 3.16. Mark 16.16. Luk. 22.19, 20. Mark 2.27. Isa. 56.6.—58.13.
(10) And lastly, Be much in prayer to God, through Christ, in the Spirit; which indeed should go before, accompany, and follow after daily mercies, other duties and enjoy∣ments. You should constantly perform this Duty with all intention of mind, and heartiness both in publick, and your Families at all praying-seasons, and more especially in secret; which if you rightly do, from a pure heart, a good conscience, and faith unfeigned, according to the Rule to measure our requests by, to the honour of God, in the Name of his beloved Son; will keep up the life of Religi∣on, and be prevalent for a blessing upon all you take in hand and enjoy.
Mat. 26.41, 42. Col. 4.1. Phil. 4.6. Mat. 6.6. Ioh. 15.16.—16.23, 26. Psal. 66.18. 1 Ioh. 5.14. Heb. 4.16. Rom. 8.26, 27. Psal. 92.1, 2. —50.15.
Thus, My Friends! I have as briefly as I could, laid be∣fore

you these Ten Directions, to help you in your Christian practice, agreeable to the materials more largely spoken to in the Book it self. I earnestly intreat you, to work them upon your hearts, and set in heartily to practise by the prudent use of these Helps. I have unto them affixed Texts of Scripture, which do abundantly prove them. It may be some of you will not only turn to them in your Bibles, and read therein the proofs confirming each direction, (ground∣ed for the main upon the Articles, as these are upon Scrip∣ture), but will take the pains to write out the Scriptures at large in a Paper-book, as they fall under the general heads, which would be a notable means to imprint them in your minds, and deeply affect your hearts with the things, and engage you to do as God in his word requires That you may all consent to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Iesus Christ,1 Tim. 6.3. Eccl. 12.13. Joh. 13.17. Phil. 4.13. 1 Cor. 9.23, 27. Mat. 10.13, 14,-40. Luk. 10.16 1 Thes. 4.8 Joh 12.25, 48. and to the Doctrine which is according to godliness. Fear God and keep his Commandments. Be happy in knowing and do∣ing of these things is that I aim at. And believe it, Friends! If I my self do not in some mea∣sure endeavour, through Christ enstrengthening me, to live agreeable to these Directions I have now given to you, I must expect the wrath of God should abide upon me. And if you remain heedless and careless after you have received or rejected this Token of my love to your Souls, it will be a Witness against you. But Beloved! I am perswaded better things of you. That the God of Heaven may make you all wise unto sal∣vation, and bless these and all other endea∣vours for your spiritual, temporal, and eternal welfare, is the unfeigned Prayer of

Aug. 3. 1675.
