



Right Honourable,
THat Generousness which pardo∣ned my first Address (of this Nature) to your Honour, has onely ser∣ved to Embolden a Second. It faring with Scriblers, as with those Votaries who never forsake the Saint they once finde Propitious.
If the ensuing Discourse treated of Maxims of Rule, there would need no Apology for its Dedication to a Person whose Prudence and Vertue have gi∣ven Him the blessing of his Prince's Favour, and the Reputation as well in Forrain Countries as his own, of an ex∣cellent and profound States-man.
But what is here devoted to your Honour, is of a different, and (per∣haps) of a much inferiour Character. The following Papers containing only a plain Account of the present Customs and Religion of the Hebrew People, Collected in some of those Hours the Employment would spare me, which for several years I underwent, abroad in the publick Service of our Reli∣gion, and in a Latitude that yielded no few opportunities of making these Observations.
That I have hereunto prefixed your Name, it was not for Shelter against the Common Enemy, Rudeness and Censure; nor onely to take this occasion of tel∣ling

the World how much I am obliged by your Favours▪ For though I am thereof truly sensible; yet this way of acknowledgement was never greatly welcome to those Generous Persons, who are no less obliged by the bene∣fits they bestow; than by those they re∣ceive.
But besides all this, pardon me, Sir, that I take this opportunity to make Publick Recognizance of your Honours Eminent Bounty to (our Common Mo∣ther) Queens Colledge in Oxon. To which Antient Nursery of Loyalty and Good Letters, though your pious Libe∣rality be already magnificent; yet they who know your Temper, believe that what you there have done, is but an Earnest of what you intend to do. For which a Thankful Posterity will for ever Celebrate and Bless your Name. But I dare not give my self the Liber∣ty of expressing so much as a short Elogie, upon a Subject that is able to justify the largest Panegyrick. For

when I consider that you are one of those Publique Spirits, who under our Gratious Soveraign assert the Indivi∣dual Interest of Church and State, I can∣not hope the Grand Affairs of your Eminent Place should spare Minutes enough to peruse a longer Dedica∣tion.
That your Honour may long Live Exalted in your Prince's Favour, and Prosperous in your Negotiations, to the Encouragement and Promotion of true Learning, Piety and Vertue, shall be his incessant Requests to Heaven, and at all those Devotions cannot forget to be

From Milston, neer Ambrosbury in Wilts,
Jan. 28. 1674/5.
