


THO I am sensible of several Failures in this Discourse, which Second Thoughts might have somewhat amended, by expunging, altering, or adding somewhat which came to the Ear: Yet, that I might not incur more Censures, by varying much from what was preached; I have altered, added, or omitted nothing material, further than what is requisite betwixt the Pulpit and the Press: That what you have made current, by your Approbation and Desires, may hopefully pass with fewer censorious Remarks.
To you the disconsolate Relict of the Deceased: I heartily wish, for the allay of your Grief, and composure of your Spirit, That you would seriously deliberate upon what that excellent young Gentlewo∣man, in her Day, Mrs. Katherine Stubbs, said to her Husband on her Death-bed, desiring him not to mourn for her, upon this strong Reason: That she was not in a Case to be mourned for, but rather to be rejoiced of, for that she should pass from Earth to Heaven, from Men to holy Angels, Cherubims, and Seraphims; to holy Saints, Patriarchs and Fathers, yea, to God himself. Changing Persons. I doubt not, but upon the departure of your most pious Son Arthur, you have heard your own dear Husband, that Righteous Abel (as I may allude) comforting of you his Wife, from the same unanswerable Reason. And being Dead he yet speaketh
Heb. 11.4.: I pray you hear his Voice. Now is the time you should hear his Voice from God: As you know the Day before he was summoned hence, in his last Sermon, He was pres∣sing the People, to Day to hear God's Voice. If you now stop your Ears, and do not mind it; his surviving Son and Daughter, your dear Children, who will yet a while be more led by their Mo∣thers Example, than by her Directions, will heardly believe their Fathers present Joys. I question not, but their Father said to You,
at your last great Mourning, as Elkanah said to his Wife Han∣nah
2 Sam. 1.8., Dorothy, Why weepest thou? Why eatest thou not? And why is thy Heart grieved? Am not I better to thee than Sons? Thy Maker is thy Husband, (the Lord of Host is his Name.
Is. 54.5. Doth not he say unto you now? Am not I better than Ten Husbands? Let these dearest young ones know, that you really believe it, by your cheerful Carriage, that when Nature hath had its Course with decencie, and they begin to consider what it is to want such an earthly Father, as they had, they may begin to hope and say, Our Heavenly Father will be better to us than Ten earthly Fathers. Add not therefore to your sweet Childrens Loss, by casting your self into their Father's Grave; which you are likely to do, if you immoderately mourn over it. You know what your ex∣cellent Husband's last Lecture at High-gare was, as if it sounded his own Knell, from Luke 2.29. Lord now lettest thou thy Ser∣vant depart in peace, for mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation.
To you that were of his Congregation and special Charge, having in the close of the Sermon urged a steddy Practice of what your wor∣thy Pastor did deliver and recommend to you, I shall add little more: Yet I would be your Remembrancer of what he recorded in his Ser∣mon, at the Funeral of Mr. Cawton, as his Words spoken to his People, viz. Prize a Guide that will be faithful to your Souls; keep the Unity of the Spirit into which you are called by the Gospel; and seek God earnestly for both. I shall add no more, but heartily begg of God, That he would take care of the mournful Widow and hers; and of the Widowed People. And supply all your Wants, upon the departure of so obliging a Relative, through Jesus Christ, the best Husband, and chief Shepheard. In his Hands He leaves you, who looking to Jesus, doth commend you all to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and give you an Inheritance among all them which are Sanctified
Act 20.30..

April 24. 1690.
