



Worshipful Doctor,
AFter those Respects due to you, this is humbly to entreat you with patience to
read and consider this following Narrative of matters between you and my
self, in which I have been careful to give a true Account, without any bad
Language, or any bitter Reflections, which are too common in matters of
this kind: My only design in this is to discover past Proceedings, as well on my own
part as on yours; that so such as may hereafter be concerned with Ecclesiastical
Courts, as I have been with yours, may by these Proceedings learn either to forbear to
do as I have done, or else improve the same to do better, or find out some other way
more for their own Advantage.
And for as much as your Worship hath loaded a Multitude of his Majesties Protestant
Subjects with Admonitions and Excommunications (and with the Writ de Excom∣municato
Capiendo) to force them into a Jail, if they do not pay you great Sums of
money for not obeying your Admonitions:
I beseech you to receive a few Protestant Admonitions agreeable to the Holy Scripture.
I. That you being a Doctor and Judge of a Court called Spiritual, it highly concern∣eth
you to see that you are a true Spiritual man, not walking according to the Lusts of
the Flesh: Spiritual persons ought to maintain Spiritual practices, Rom. 8. 1.
II. Take heed that you do not force any Persons by your Admonition to come
unto the holy Communion, who are unholy in their Conversation; and that they may
escape your Excommunication, Venture to Eat and Drink their own Damnation.
1 Cor. 11. 20.
III. Take heed you do not force the Godly to partake with the Vngodly, least you make
them Partakers of other mens Sins; but purge out the Old Leaven that you may be
a new Lump; for a little Leaven leaveneth the whole Lump, 1 Cor. 5. 6, 7, 8, 9.
IV. Take heed you do not that to others, which you would not have them do to you,
viz. You would not be willing the Protestant Dissenters (considered as Independents,
Presbyterians, or those falsly called Anabaptists) should compel you to take the Holy
Sacrament amongst any of them, Mat. 5. 12. Therefore why should you do the like?
V. Take heed that you do not force Persons to the holy Sacrament against their
Wills, seeing God must be served with a perfect heart, and with a willing mind,
1 Chron. 28. 9.
VI. Take heed you 'do not force Persons to the Holy Sacrament, who have not a
right unto it; or such as for fear of your further Proceedings may come unto it con∣trary
to their own Consciences, of whom it may be said as Paul said to the Corinthian
Professors, 1 Cor. 11. 20. This is not to eat the Lords Supper; for the abusing of Gods
Ordinance is a losing Gods Ordinance, to the Abusers of it, and it may be said, Such
eat mans Dinner, rather then the Lords Supper.
VII. Take heed that whilst you proceed in handling Persons about Spiritual things,
that you let your Proceedings be according to Spiritual Rules contained in the Holy
Scriptures, in which there is no Directions to inflict outward Penalties upon Persons
for not performing of Spiritual Duties.
VIII. Take heed that you do not debase Religion in making Spiritual matters bow
and Truckle unto Temporal matters, for base ends; and let not the Holy Sacrament
be made a Qualification for keeping an Alehouse, or for being Electors of Magistrates;
it is enough that men be Free-holders in the Country, or free-men and of the Livery
in the City for such things.

IX. Take into your Consideration the many miseries that now attend a great num∣ber
of his Majesties good Subjects, some constrained to be as Prisoners, in their own
Houses, others fled into the Countrey, others let their Houses, and put off their Trades,
and others remove from those Parishes where they were prosecuted, in hopes to be more
quiet elsewhere, and some are carried to Prison; and all by reason of your Proceedings.
X. Take heed that the Sighs and Cries of poor Women and Children, (who groan un∣der
this Distress) do not go up to the God of Compassion, and be returned against you as
the Cause of them.
XI. Do not think it will be enough for you to say you have proceeded according to Law,
(if you could prove that) but consider that the Ecclesiastical Doctors, and such as were
called Spiritual Judges in Queen Maries days, had the same Plea for their Perse∣cuting
the poor Protestants.
XII. I Beseech you consider that the Non-Compliance of Protestant-Dissenters, in
matters of Religion, as imposed by you, is not for want of Loyalty to his Majesty, but
for fear they should corrupt Christianity.
And now worthy Sir, be not afraid to put your self upon a Tryal by this Christian
Jury of Sober Admonitions, which are humbly and honestly Impannelled by

