



Right Honorable!
I Am often in very great doubt (if I may so speak), that the Goodness & Wisdom of God, & his thoughts of these, are very rarely met with, in the Paths, which the scanthing of Man's Reason and Judgment walk in; And as I dare not but own the Belief of the Coming of his Appea∣rance, and the breaking forth, very shortly, of his Glorie: So I believ likewise, this will bee a sight very strange, and very unexspected to men; and not onely great∣ly above, but in som measure even contrarie (and perhaps, very unwelcom) unto the most enlarged and raised thoughts wee have yet prepared our selvs with, to receiv it.
The sign of which Coming, will bee the Detection, by little and little, of all Imposture, and the laying of all things low, naked, and mean before him; the stripping men of that Honor, Credit, and Repute, that they had by several means been gaining with themselvs, (and by themselvs) with others, either through
a Not-knowledg, or through an artificial concealing of them∣selvs.
In these very things (if well observed) lying, and within these indeed, beeing spent and consumed, the whole Indeavors, Practice, Studie and Wisdom (if not Religion) of All States, Ages, Nations and Men, viz.

Either in devising shifts (by acquisition of such and such Power, Habits, or otherwise) not to appear uncomly to themselvs, but to beget rather agreatness, esteem and satis∣faction in themselvs, and others of themselvs;
Or, in Concealing and keeping close (by several Glosses) the Imperfections, weaknesses, and uncomlinesses, (known to themselvs) from the sight and apprehensions of others;

The more exquisite Wit exceeding the more inferior onely in this, that the former is able to finde out more tight and ex∣quisite textures for it self then the other; And the most fortu∣nate man in this world, having the Advantage of the more un∣fortunate, but after the same manner also, viz. that the cove∣ring of this fall's off a little sooner, and the other wrap's him∣self up in it a while longer.
For thus all Lusts whatsoever (whether those of Acquisiti∣on) in the minde (or others to exterior things) both in their first Issuings forth, and in their utmost Accomplishments, are still but either to give countenance unto, or further to heap up akinde of greatness, Repute and Esteem in us for us. The Assump∣tion (on the other side) of a Repute and Esteemence to our selvs, is, That which after give's a kinde of lawfulness, boldness, and currancy (during it) to all Lusts. (These two, observing tune, and holding time each to the measures and motions of the other) and within this Circle therefore is concluded whole Hu∣mane Nature, with all the Parts, and the most perfect Actions of it.
Ʋpon these thoughts (Right Honorable!) I finding none not very ready to have asscribed to himself the name of beeing (in som measure) wise, becaus it is estimable, finde none that can
endure the Manifestation (in any kinde) of their Follie; or that can bee willing to have this their Wisdom and Glorie to bee flatly and plainly called a Pageantrie, Mumming, or playing at bo-peep with themselvs and others; and yet (it really beeing no honester) if wee cannot bear the Judgments thus one of another, how shall wee abide the Trial, or bee able to stand before the Judgment of God, which seeth us, (and will shortly search us) with more pure and uncorrupt Eies? And how miserably then are the Imaginations of almost all men muffled up here in their own dressings? when the Truth most certainly is in our Beeings, at their best (natural, or acquir'd) Appearances, are yet such feign'd Things, and Propp'd up with such Lyes and fundamental mi∣stakes of themselvs, that they would (Belshazzer like,) moulder and shatter themselvs to pieces, should they bee taken quite asun∣der from the disguises and patchings they have put upon them∣selvs, bare-facedly and undeceivedly to see themselvs but one small part of an hour.
Beeing convinced, by these, therefore (Right Honorable!) of the low Condition wee are herein, I not knowing what the Councils of God intend to bring forth for the settlement of this Nation; Nor how hee hath resolved in his Wisdom to dispose of it, (as to its outward Condition,) whether Hee intend's wee shall bee oppressed by other Nations about us, that hee may the more manifest his Power and Protection over us: Or that wee shall bee advanced in Prosperitie above others, that so hee may perhaps shew us our vanitie (the casting of the Scale either way in appearance much depending upon the present Councils) I say, not knowing this, I can as little judge what means Providence will pleas to use in order to the bringing to pass these his purposes, whether hee will chuse This, or reject That.
But in this Case, notwithstanding remembring the advice of Solomon,
Eccles. 11.5, 6. and knowing nothing (for I do affirm it but as to mine own understanding) that hath presented it self in this Common∣wealth, of more Import to bee looked after, or to bee very heed∣fully taken into Consideration, then Matters of Trade, (if wee
shall either regard the Safetie, Unanimitie, or Defence of this Nation) Nor any other waie possible but This, to preserv and maintein this Countrie: calling also to minde, how many times I have heard it urged, That there is no other means to quiet or keep up the spirits of the poorer sort of people: No other to give them Imploiment, or to finde a vent and Incouragement for their Labors (when they have wrought) and consequently no other to provide against the wants and distempers of them, and of the Generalitie, but solely by Trade, and by a due Order and Re∣gulation of it. All these things making up a very strong Affe∣ction in mee, I judged it my dutie (Right Honorable!), and what necessarily became the faithfulness I owe to the Common∣wealth's service, to indevor the representing of this Truth (for your Honor's fuller Information) with the clearest Grounds and demonstration I could, which beeing a matter that did much de∣pend upon Experience, I knew not how to bring this more home, then by propounding a President for it in our Neighbors the Hollanders; and such an one, as is still in sight, which may at once witness, The Advantage of Trade, By themselvs, and the benefit they have found by it; The Disadvantage of neg∣lecting it, By what they have brought upon us; And the clear waie of Governing it, By the Courses they Actually took, and have practised to effect both these.
All which Conceptions, nevertheless, are with all humble∣ness submitted By

Febr. 11. 1651/2
