


SIR,
THE Dedicating of Books to Noblemen, is either Ambition in the Author, to adorn the Front of his Work with Illustrious Titles; or a counterfeit beg∣ging their Patronage and Protection; or else an ac∣knowledgment of Favours received from them. I am

not guilty of the first, nor have I flattered my self with the second, but I have made use of the last, to express in some measure, a sence of the many Obligations I have to you. I confess I have been quarrelling with my Studies, that they have not afforded me something of more value than a Translation, as a Pre∣sent to my Friend, who is so great a Master of Origi∣nals; yet this Anthology of Fables, for the Pains I have taken, in gathering and new modelling them, toge∣ther with my Notes and

Observations on them, de∣serving a Title somewhat above that, cannot, I hope, be thought improper to be submitted to your Judg∣ment. I intended them for the benefit of such as have not the Skill to search for them in their several Lan∣guages, from whence I fetch∣ed them. The representing of which pleasant Ideas, to the Readers Fancy, being like the placing of Pictures be∣fore their Eyes, whereby more firm and lasting Im∣pressions of Vertue may be fix'd in them, than by plain

Rules and Maxims. This was Horace's Opinion, who in his Art of Poetry, says,
Segnius irritant Animos demissa per Aurem,
Quam quae sunt Oculis subjecta fidelibus.
I have also been very careful that the Subjects of my Fables should be modest, grave, and accommodated to the best Precepts of Vertue and Wisdom; wherein I have exploded all manner of indecencies, too imprudent∣ly

used by I. Poggius the Florentine, and some others; that so they might be more proper for Instruction of Youth, whose minds are commonly delighted with such Fancies as these. And, in a plain Stile have I dres∣sed this Work, to their Ad∣vantage particularly, whose Parents either cannot or will not, be at the Charge of ha∣ving them bred to Learning, but will leave all to the strength of Nature, as their only School-Mistress. For these Seeds of Virtue natu∣rally sown in them, will de∣generate,

unless by some wholesome Precepts, stirred up, and made to exert their latent Qualities. Thus the ge∣nerous Vine, if not timely pruned and dressed, becomes Wild and Unfruitful.
Now as certain Medicines are used, as well for keeping Men in Health, as for Cu∣ring the Sick; so, to ex∣cite and preserve Vertue, as well as to cure the Diseases of the Mind, good and sound Precepts of Morality are re∣quisite, which are always esteemed its properest Medi∣caments. 'Tis the Know∣ledg

and Practice of this Mo∣rality, which makes our Lives happy; by whose Rules, Violence and Oppres∣sion are separated from Justice and Equity: They show clearly the difference betwixt what is Vertuous, and what Vitious: with∣out which Distinction, as Iso∣crates says, there could be no Society amongst Men. These are the sober Guides, which call back Fools from going astray, and even admonish and secure the Wise in the right Paths. Wherefore the Greeks very Significantly

called such Instructions , because they settle our Thoughts, and consti∣tute our Understandings. Youths raised to this pitch are preferred to others, being pronounced by Plato, to be qualified for the good of Mankind, as having their minds adorned with such useful Knowledg, , says he, .
But I shall fall into the same Error with him, who read a Lecture of War to Hannibal; since no Man knows the Genius of Youth better than your self;

under whose Vigilant Care, Prudent Discipline, and dili∣gent Culture, so many Noble Plants have been already, and others are now raising, for the Service and Glory of their Country. Your Ex∣perience, Sedulous Reading, and quickness in all manner of Learning, have justly ren∣dred you, in the Opinion of the best Judges, the most Compleat Master for Educa∣ting Youth, in this our Age. Your School for its easie Methods, for the large Ac∣quirements there to be had, and for its Regularity, may

more properly be termed a Colledge; where you keep up to a Wonder the Forma∣lity of a Master, without the Pedantry; and have happily joyned the Gentleman, with the Scholar; by which you become a proper Governour, for the Sons of the most Eminent Families of this Kingdom. Amongst whom you dispence your Precepts, so full of Truth, Wisdom and Honour, that the being within your Walls, should be an Incitement to the worst of Tempers, to be in Love with Vertue and Learn∣ing.

Your Employment, car∣ried on as it is, ought to be as Honourable as it is Labori∣ous, and import its Rewards, as it exports its Cares. And with the Satyrist, in respect of the Labours of Learned and Indulgent Masters; I must wish well to all that pay Gratitude to them.
Dij Majorum umbris tenuem, & sine pondere terram,
Spirantesque Crocos, & in urna perpetuum ver,
Qui Praeceptorem sancti voluere Parentis
Esse Loco.
Juvenal. Sat. 4.
SIR, 
