



IT is an excellent Rule, prescribed by the great Apostle of the Gentiles, (in case of Brethrens dissentings each from other,) that wherein they have attained, they should yet walke by the same Rule, minding the same thing. By vertue of which we presume, to offer our Brethren our Agreement in the matter of Catechizing, being the first fruits of our long debates, and what we perswade our selves, will meet with a desirable acceptance from them. We cannot in the least doubt (Dear and Reve∣rend Brethren,) but that many of you (however of dif∣fering perswasions from us in some things of Ecclesi∣asticall Order, or in regard of your remoteness of Ha∣bitations, not Associated with us,) have with an equall moving of Bowels with (if not exceeding any of) us, considered the sad effects, which the want of a setled Discipline in the Church; the divisions of Brethren in their Sentiments, concerning the things of Religion, and (we are afraid) our own too great deficiency to our
respective Duties, have produced in severall parts of these as well as other Counties in this Nation. If both we, and our fellow Servants had not too long slept, the enemy (doubtless) had not sown Tares, to such an unhappy advantage. The consideration of which, did at last Alarum some of us (more conveni∣ently scituated for a correspondence each with other;) to a serious consideration of what (in this dissetled estate of the Church of God amongst us) might by a volun∣tary Association, and mutuall Obligation laid upon each other, be done to give a little check to that torrent of confusion, which we saw every day like a streame of mighty waters rushing in upon us, and upon the people for whom we must be accountable in the day of Jesus Christ. Having therefore first agreed in some Rules of Order to be observed by us, for the managing of more generall, and particular meetings, for the best ad∣vantage to so noble an end, as is the preserving amongst us the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace; the first thing we propounded for the Subject of our debates, was an uniforme agreement in the Administration of all the Ordinances of the Gospell, of which the Lord had made us Stewards: that having by a joynt owning of the Doctrine contained in the Confession of Faith and Catechismes, advised by the Late Reverend Assembly, de∣clared our oneness of judgment in the things of God, We might likewise agree in the same practice, especi∣ally as to publick Administrations, serving the Lord with one heart, in one and the same way; and by this meanes taking away all stumbling blocks out of the way of weak Christians.
Upon a survey of publick Ordinances, we found that some (which we must look upon as publick Ordi∣nances,) had been for a long time disused, and that some
began to question, whither there were any divine war∣rant for them: these were publick Catechizing, Read∣ing of the Scriptures, and singing of Psalmes in the pub∣lick Congregations. We resolved to begin with the first, in our debates. And because it is questioned by some, whether there be any warrant for it in holy Scrip∣ture, or any great need or profitable use of it; and o∣thers question, whether any but Children be the Sub∣jects of it? and others are again divided in their fan∣cies, concerning the particular forme of Catechisme, most fit to be universally used: And lastly, (while the Magistrate pleaseth to interpose his authority,) We perceived some at a loss to determine, what could be done by us as Ministers, to promove it, amongst fro∣ward people, who should not be found willing to sub∣mit themselves to this Method of instruction. We of∣fered all these things first to the more private debates of our Brethren in their particular Associations, who be∣ing first agreed amongst themselves, were desired to send in their thoughts to the generall meeting; which results of their more private debates, when we had ob∣tained from them, and came to compare them each with other, we found no difference in judgment amongst us concerning the things, and very inconsiderable differen∣ces, in the Sentiments of particular Brethren, relating to the uniforme practice and exercise of them. What small diversities there were in the severall Papers, were easi∣ly reconciled, upon a debate in a generall Meeting. And considering with our selves, what a prejudice the world (this part of the world especially) hath entertained a∣gainst this usefull exercise, because it is represented to them as a puerile exercise; and by reason of the scan∣dall which others have brought upon it, as tending but to a forme of knowledg, or at most but to a forme of
godliness, and (in their opinions) anticipating the teach∣ings of the spirit, (which many cant of in these daies, but wofully betray themselves, that they know not of what they speak, the spirit teaching men not by Enthu∣sianismes, but by and in the use of meanes, and much, (Secundum quod nctus est Organum) (to use Erasmus his expression) not using now adaies to teach men, to speak diverse Tongues, without learning the Rudi∣ments of the Grammer, nor yet the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, without meanes proportionate to that end. We say considering these things, that we might (together with our Brethren in other parts of the Nation,) beare a publick Testimony, to the use∣fulness of this ancient exercise, and let our people know, upon what grounds we have so deliberately pro∣ceeded to the Agreement we are come to (through Gods blessing) upon our debates, as to the reviving the prctaice of this exercise amongst us; As also how far they stand obliged to a submission to it: We thought sit to refer it to one of our Brethren, out of our seve∣rall Papers to draw up, the Summe of our Agreement in this thing, with some explanatory Discourses, contain∣ing the Arguments which prevailed with us, to enforce such an Agreement from us; and an Exhortation to the severall persons, who are Members of our particular Congregations, to a just submission and performance of their duty, both in reference to us their Ministers, and more especially to their own souls, and the souls of those who are committed to their domesticall charge. Which being done, and the draught (as is here presen∣ted to you, appproved by us) we thought fit to publish it to the world, as a testimony of our unanimity in this thing, and concurrence with our Brethren in other parts, and as a witness, both against our selves, and our peo∣ple
too, if our people shall hereafter perish, through want of such knowledg, as may this way (through the blessing of God upon our endeavours) be communicated unto them. We hope our Reverend Brethren will not conceive every person in our Association, respon∣sall for every particular passage in the Explanatory Discourses, or Exhortation annexed, much less for eve∣ry failer the Press may be guilty of; but only under∣stand, that we are joyntly agreed in the Articles, de∣claring our judgment and resolutions to practice in this thing, and to the substance of what is contained in the discourses annexed, explaining the grounds of our a∣greement, and the matter of the Exhortation, though we have not particularly examined every Quotation, or accent; or (if we had thought it considerable) possibly this or that phrase might have been altered by some one or other of us. The summe of what we here present is the Agreement of foure score and odde Per∣sons in Association with us, and that upon due and mature deliberation. And nothing herein, having been imposed by us upon his Brother, by the Magi∣steriall dictate of any one, but being first propoun∣ded and debated, freely consented to by all present and concerned in it, as overruled by the dictates of their own consciences, and force of Argument, we conceive it both will & ought to make the deeper impression upon others; and will be conceived by all, who have concurred in it, more highly obliging to a suitable practice, of what in these debates they have either pleaded for, or at least by a silent vote consented to, refusing the liberty grant∣ed them throughout the debates, to produce their argu∣ments, either against the whole, or any part thereof.
And we trust that we need not multiply words to our other (Deare and Reverend Brethren) in these Coun∣tries, who have not been equally concerned with us,
in these debates, and this Agreement which comes forth as the result of them; considering that we know they are sufficiently instructed, how much they are concerned,Non est quod bonus dicat Pastor, quid mihi cum sordi∣do coriario, aut cum abjecto mendico, aut tri∣obolari malier∣culâ? Nulla no∣bis anima vilis videri debet, pro quâ domi∣nus gloriae mori dignatus est. Erasmus in Ecclesiaste. that the souls of all in their particular Con∣gregations, should not perish for want of knowledg. And for any to say, what have they to do with poore and ig∣norant persons? (as Erasmus long since noted) cannot be the voice of a good Shepheard; for no soule ought to appeare vile in our eyes, for which the Lord of glory vouchsafed to dye upon the Cross. We trust none of our Brethren will take it ill at our hands, that they have not been called into counsell with us, (upon which ac∣count we have only stiled it the Agreement of the Associated Ministers in the County of Norfolk, &c.) We trust the most of our Brethren know, that the doores of our Association have been open to all those who were willing but to declare, their consent to the substance of the Doctrine contained in the Confession of Faith,Ord. 3d. Jan. 1644. Forme of Church go∣vernment, 29th Sep. 1648. and Catechismes, lately advised by the Reverend Assembly of Divines; and their approbation (so far) of the Directo∣ry for Worship and forme of Church-government, so also advised and established by the Authority of Parliament, as that they would Preach nothing contrary to the former, nor practice any thing contrary to the two latter. So that we are not justly to be charged with slighting of any of our Brethren, because as we conceive our selves obliged to conforme so far as might be, to the authority of the Parliament, in things wherein our con∣sciences were fully satisfied; So we judging it reasona∣ble (especially in such times of reproach and blasphemy as these are) that some common Test, should be put up∣on those, to whom we gave the right hand of fellowship in such an intimate degree of communion, could think of none more fit, then what (agreeing with the judgment
of most sober Christians, and the best reformed Church∣es) had also the approbation of so grave and Learned an Assembly, and the signature of publick authority. Nor would we have our Brethren interpret us as if we thought our selves the only Ministers of the Gospell, in these Countries thus far agreed; We know and are perswaded, that we are not, but are aware of many, who have been hindred from this concurrence withus, only by their disconveniency of habitation, at such distances from us and the place of our generall meet∣ing, that they could with no conveniencies personally attend these debates, and who we doubt not will (though as to the debates they were absent in the body) yet as to the practice evidence that they were present in spirit with us, and will rejoyce in what we here ten∣der unto them. For any of our Brethren to whom this may be any rock of offence that they have not been present with us; we shall only speak unto them with allusion to the words by which Gideon once pacified the Ephraimites, contending with him because they were not called to fight with the Midianites. What have we done, in comparison of what you yet may do? If God shall put into your hearts to practice with us what we have agreed. The gleaning of your Grapes of that nature, will be better then the Vintage of our debates, in reference to the end which we have pursued in all that we have done of this nature.
The generality of our Brethren being (as we con∣ceive) sufficiently with us convinced of their duty in the reviving of this ancient and usefull exercise. We have nothing to do but only to stir up their pure minds by way of remembrance. That as they believe so they would also speak and do. If any of our Brethren shall think we have extended the obligation too far, in
bringing aged persons under a duty of submission to to this method of instruction, and declaring our resolu∣tions, to deny the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, to such as refuse such a submission; we shall (besides what we have hereafter produced in our justification) mind our Reverend Bretheren, That we are inform∣ed by a Reverend Brother, who upon diligent search had found it in the Records of the Bishops Courts, in the City of Norwich; That Ministers were anci∣ently enjoyned to go from seat to seat and to require of their severall Parishoners, as well old as young, an account of their knowledg in the Principles of Religion, and both Minister and People were presentable in the Ecclesiasticall Courts, if either the one neglected his duty in inquiring such account, or they omitted their duty in giving it to them. It hath been the constant judgement of all reformed Churches, that ignorant persons ought not to be admitted to the Lords Supper. Those Reverend Persons, who by command of King Henry the eighth, and afterward of Edward the sixth, drew up that Book called Re∣formatio Legum Ecclesiasticarum, determine that none ought to be admitted to the Lords Supper, whose Faith was not perfect in all parts.Tit. de div. offi∣cis. cap, 7. Nam ad sacro∣sanctam domini mensam nemo admitti debet, cujus fides om∣nibus partibus perfecta non sit. Our Brethren (we trust) will easily be perswaded, that in their spirituall fishing, (to which God hath cal∣led them) the little fishes are not those alone whom their Nets are laid out for, he is doubtless a lamen∣table Fisherman, who contents himself with enclo∣sing the Fry within the compass of his Net. And if any of our Brethren, can obtaine so easie a dis∣charge from their consciences in the discharge of the great work of the Ministry, as to think the Preaching of a Sermon or two in a Week, is a
due fulfilling of the work of their Ministry, to∣wards all but Children, we shall but desire of them to confute themselves, by taking account from some one or two of their People, (such especial∣ly as are of the poorer sort, and have wanted like advantages of Education with others,) how farre they are profited in a distinct knowledge of the Principles of Religion, by the many yeares paines, which they, or others before them, have spent a∣mongst them in Preaching the word of righteous∣ness; yea even in those places, where Preaching hath been mannaged with the best tendency, and to the best advantage for such an end, Oh! how dreadfull is the work of the Ministry, concern∣ing which the great Apostle cryes out, Who is sufficient for these things? We cannot without trembling thinke of that passage of Chrysostome.
I speake (saith he) no otherwise then I thinke,, &c. Chrysost. in Acta. homil. 3a. and judge; I do not thinke that there are many Ministers will be saved: but the much greater number of them will perish: The reason is, be∣cause the work of the Ministry requires an ex∣traordinary Spirit; for he will meet with many things that will take him off from his Duty: and he had need of a numberless number of eyes to see to the discharge of it. Do not you see (saith he) how many things are required of a Minister? he must be apt to teach, full of for∣bearance, faithfull as to the Word of God; how great is this difficulty? The sinnes of o∣thers will be reckoned to him. I say no more, if but one poore soul goes away not instructed, his whole Salvation is hazarded by it, for the loss of one soul is so great, as cannot be compen∣sated:
for if the Salvation of this or that indivi∣duall soul, was judged by God of so great conse∣quence, that for its sake, the Sonne of God must become Man, and suffer so great things; how great must the punishment be, which the ruine of one soul, will require for satisfaction. And if that man who hath contributed to the loss of his Brothers naturall life, deserves to dye for it; what doth he deserve who contributes to his Brothers de∣privation of eternall life?
Oh that this Meditation might so farre sinke, both into our hearts, and the hearts of all our Bre∣thren, who have been called to this Sacred Office, and so far operate, as to ingage both us and them, To take heed to our selves,2 Tim. 4.2. and the flock of Christ committed to our and their charge, that we may neither contribute to their ruine by example,Acts 19.41, 27. nor yet by Doctrine, neither by the Commission of any thing unworthy of us, or Omission of any du∣ty incumbent upon us, but that we may Preach the Word, be instant in season and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and Doctrine, not ceasing to warne every one with teares night and day. Nor shunning to declare unto all the whole Counsell of God, warning and instructing them from house to house, not counting our life, much less our labours deare to us, So that we may finish our course with joy, and the Ministry, which we have received of the Lord Jesus Christ, to testifie the Gospell of the grace of God.
We know to whom we are speaking, and shall therefore forbeare further to multiply words, to press a confessed duty. We have only further to be∣seech our Brethren, to consider, how conducible, to those glorious ends, which both they and we
aime at in the reviving of this exercise; an uni∣formity in our practice, as to the exercise of it, will be: at least as to the formes of Catechisme, which we have agreed, in using that first, which is contained in the lesser Catechisme, advised by the late Reverend Assembly of Divines, and published by Authority of Parliament, (as appears by the Or∣der prefixed to it, dated the 15. of September, 1648. What reasons have constrained from us an Agreement as to the use of that forme, Our Brethren will see in the following sheets; and we hope they will appeare as cogent to them, as they have been to us. The great Apostle 1 Cor. 1.10. hath taught us how conducible to the avoiding of divisions amongst us, it is, that people speake all the same thing, in matters of this nature, and our Brethren will easily con∣ceive, with us, how much it will gratifie, such as are of weaker judgements and apprehensions, to say nothing of the expediency of it, in refe∣rence to the removals of Families, out of the precincts of one Congregation, into the Precincts of others. In which cases (especially as to Children and Persons of weaker capacities) the work will be toties quoties, to be again began, if different formes be used in severall pla∣ces. Having premised thus much, we leave our A∣greement in this thing with the grounds of it, to the serious consideration of all our Brethren, and fellow labourers in the work of the Lord, Commending both their and our labours herein to the Lord, and the blessing of his grace, and assuring them, that we have nothing more in our desires, then that we might all walk toge∣ther knitted in love, and preserving the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. Though we all waies judg, it would be as great an errour in us, to sell the truths of God, or
part with the purity of Administrations in the worship of God; to hold correspondency with men, as it was in the Romans,G. Cassander, De officiis pii veri. to build their Temple of Concord, in the very place where their most seditious outrages were committed. And we are so far of Cassanders mind as to think; That alone to be true, and solid peace amongst Christians, which is conjoyned with the glory of God, and the obedience of his will, and is seioined from all deprava∣tions of Heavenly Doctrine and divine Worship. In which we trust also our Brethren are agreed with us.
