



WORTHY SIR,
SO much of this small Piece, as was (Originally) in Latine, was dedicated to
 no lesse a Personage then a Queen, viz. Queen Eliza∣beth of blessed memory, wherupon I am induced & moved to think, that you possibly will not disdain the same, with its Additi∣ons in English. I am the more confident in this par∣ticular, upon these two (ve∣ry sufficient) grounds. 1. Your bountiful accept∣ance of my Triplex Memo∣riale, which being of as little worth as Bulk, was not worthy of such acceptance as it found with you. 2. The generous and chearful in∣couragement
 (in the next place) which you have al∣wayes given me in this en∣terprize, which certainly had not been able to have looked upon the light, had not you put Spirit into your Servant, to travel of it to the Birth.
Sir, Now that it is by Gods Providence and your favour, so (incompleatly) finished, as it is: It layes it self at your feet, and ac∣knowledges you for an e∣minent, though (poor) me for the next, and immediate cause of it self, and will wil∣lingly
 beare no name but yours. Only if you please, with as much chearfulnesse to look upon it, as you did to heare of it, when it was but in the conception and generation, you shall infi∣nitely in the first place de∣serve of me, and not a little of many others, who by your meanes do compasse an help to bring them to a speedy acquaintance with the Scriptures
Sir, He that wrote the short exemplar hereof in Latine, undertook thus much of it, that it would
 make a man both bonum Textualem, & bonum Theo∣logum, a good Text-man and a good Divine, and tru∣ly I confesse it would do so, to those that were not con∣founded with his brevity, but I am much more bold to undertake it of this, wherein I have indeavour∣ed more intelligiblenesse and perspicuity. If any man that savours the things of God, read this book without abundance of pro∣fit, let me bear the blame for ever, for my , my impertinent and un∣profitable
 labours. But if e∣very such man that sees and reads it be hereby inriched to God-ward, and to eternal life, I am sure you wil think you have incouraged me to good purpose, and rejoyce that you are an instrument of advancing not of dark∣ning Knowledge, which will contract and concen∣tre upon you the many Prayers of many People, besides
SIR,

Febr. 17. 1651.
