


SIR! Great men decline, migh∣ty men may fall, but an ho∣nest Philosopher keeps his Station for ever. To your self therefore I crave leave to pre∣sent, what I know you are a∣ble to protect; not with sword, but by reason; & not that only, but what by your acceptance you are able to give a lustre to. I see it is not in vain that you have compassed Sea and Land, for thereby you have made a Prose∣lyte, not of another, but of your self, by be∣ing converted from vulgar, and irrational incredulities to the rational embracing of the sublime, Hermeticall, and The∣omagicall truths. You are skilled in the one as if Hermes had been your Tutor; have insight in the other, as if Agrippa

your Master. Many transmarine Philosophers, which we only read, you have conversed with: many Countries, rarities, and antiqui∣ties, which we have only heard of, and ad∣mire, you have seen. Nay you have not only heard of, but seen, not in Maps, but in Rome it self the manners of Rome. There you have seen much Ceremony, and little Religion; and in the wilderness of New England, you have seen amongst some, much Religion, and little Ceremony; and amongst others, I mean the Natives thereof, neither Cere∣mony, nor Religion, but what nature di∣ctates to them. In this there is no small vari∣ety, and your observation not little. In your passage thither by Sea, you have seen the wonders of God in the Deep; and by Land, you have seen the astonishing works of God in the unaccessible Mountains. You have left no stone unturned, that the turning thereof might conduce to the discovery of what was Occult, and worthy to be known. It is part of my ambition to let the world know that I honor such as your self, & my learned friend, & your experienced fellow-traveller, Doctor Charlet, who have, like true Philoso∣phers

neglected your worldly advantages to become masters of that which hath now rendred you both truly honorable. If I had as many languages as your selves, the rhe∣toricall and patheticall expressions thereof would fail to signifie my estimation of, and affections towards you both. Now Sir! as in reference to this my translation, if your judgement shall finde a deficiency therein, let your candor make a supply thereof. Let this Treatise of Occult Philosophy coming as a stranger amongst the English, be patro∣nized by you, remembring that you your self was once a stranger in the Country of its Nativity. This stranger I have dressed in an English garb; but if it be not according to the fashion, and therefore ungrateful to any, let your approbation make it the mode; you knowstrangers most commonly induce a fashion, especially if any once begin to ap∣prove of their habit. Your approbation is that which it will stand in need of, and which will render me,
SIR,

