



Honoured Sirs,
I Thought it my Duty to Dedic this Poem to Your Honours,  have had such a hand in the Subject
 it. Your Loyalty and Sufferings for the Protestant: Interest have exceeded that of any other Society of Men: For when all the World judged the Protestant Cause in IRELAND lost, Your Courage and Zeal Retriev'd it. Had the Late King JAMES Subdued Your City, the next Attack had been Fatal to all Protestant Countries: But Your Courage and Con∣duct oppos'd the Torrent, that was like to sweep the Protestant. Religion away with it. Your Sufferings likewise have suffici∣ently demonstrated Your Zeal for the Crown of ENGLAND: But to attempt Your due Eulogy, were to undertake an Herculean Labour, let the following Poem speak the rest; which deserved the Pen of a Homer or Virgil rather. The Acti∣ons and Occurrences of this Famous Siege are so Heroick of themselves, that they needed no strokes of Poetry to set them
 off. He that considers the uncoath Names made use of  this Poem, and how un∣fit they are for Metre, will easily pardon the unlftiness of the Stil. I have seen several Narratives of the Siege, but all far short of the thing. And I may bold∣ly aver, That no Material Passage is wanting in this, having ba my Informa∣tions from good Hands, besides the Ad∣vantage of the Printed Narratives. I have Stiled Colonel Adam Murray, Here, and General; which I am sure no Man that knew his particular Merits in the Siege, will think unjust or unsuitable, espe∣cially such as have Read the Printed Nar∣ratives. But to Anticipate all Detracti∣on, I will Insert the Paragraph upon London-Dery out of the great Histori∣cal and Poetical Dictionary, Published by Authority. London-Dery was defended by Eight Sakers and Twelve Demicul∣verins;
 the People at first were there∣unto encouraged to hold out by Colonel Adam Murray, who gave frequent proofs of an unheard of Valour, in his Sallies upon the Enemies, and killed the French General Maimont with his own hands before the Walls. As Your Honours particular concern in the Subject of this Poem, moved me to De∣dicate it to You, so also the Opportunity of knowing the Truth of the Actions en∣courages me to expect Your Protection: For You are the best Judges of the Matter of Fact. That Your City may be for ever Perserved from all such Popish Innovations, and from all Insults of Foreign and Do∣mestick Enemies, shall be the daily Prayer of Your Honours,

