



SIR,
I Here offer you not a Transcript, nor Tran∣slation, but my own free, and perhaps, not quite un∣grounded Thoughts on seve∣ral Subjects; though I pre∣tend not to impose on any Mans Ʋnderstanding, my

own irregular Fancies, as inclining more▪ to Scepti∣cisim in disputable matters, than to that Bold, and Ma∣gisterial air of Dogmatical Philosophers. My chief Design then in writing and publishing this present Treatise, was to furnish the Virtuosi with matters fit for ingenious Conversations: Which perhaps I have per∣form'd in some measure, be∣cause of the great, and not unpleasant Variety of things it contains. I speak every

where my mind with a Phi∣losophical freedom, neither blaming other mens Fancies, nor presuming too much upon my own Conceits. And if I seem to be somewhat Pa∣radoxical on several occasi∣ons, 'tis more in appearance perhaps, than in realty: for these seeming Paradoxes, if not overlook't, may appear to an unprejudic'd▪ Reader undenyable Truths, or at least (which is my utmost aim) not to be altogether improbable. Of such things

'tis free to every one to dis∣pute Pro and Con, as it serves his turn, or present Fancy. Wherein I could never conceive any thing of a pedantick Humour, but a very Lawful, and Laudable Exercise of Wit and Abili∣ty: which I designedly add, because some, I know, are of Opinion, that all kind of Learning and Ingenuity should be banished from a free and familiar Converse: But I conceive such Men to be either of the dullest

sort, or Epicureo de grege Porcos, meer Epicureans, as taking delight in nothing, but what may please their Senses, or revive the I∣mages of their past Pleasures. Thus some home-bred Gen∣tlemen make a long Story to every one they meet, of what they daily either eat or drink. Others talk per∣petually of their Amours, Mistresses, and new In∣trigues, and not a few a∣buse your Patience with severe Reflections on their Neighbours.
But since you are not guilty of such Irregularities, I had, no doubt, some other reason, than your Instructi∣on, to prefix your Name before these Papers. I shall then perhaps, offend your Modesty, but not the Truth, if I say it was chiefly the great share you have in the Subject they treat of. 'Tis true, the Antient and present State of your Noble Family, and other advantages of that kind might have enga∣ged me to make you this

Present, had I been of an Humor to value Men only by their out side, I mean, by what is without them, and not rather by their real Parts, and if I may so say, intrinse∣cal Nobility. I ow indeed an outward Respect to a Person of Quality, yet I shall pay him no inward Ho∣mage, if nothing else recom∣mend him, but the Great∣ness of his Family; whence you may easily judge, that, how considerable soever you may be in the Eyes of the

World on other accounts, I do value you most for what is really your own, I mean your Ingenuity, Dis∣cretion, Wisdom; yea, and Virtue too, so seldom to be met with in this corrupted Age we live in. As these Endowments of the Mind are far more taking with me than any other advantages of Fortune whatsoever, so they were my chief Induce∣ments to let you know by this inconsiderable Present, that I am in Realty, and

without Flattery, which I hate,
SIR,

