



FATHER,
WHERE the Devil have you been all this while? It is now ever since the fifty fourth Olympiad you dy'd at Delphos, and to arise again at White∣hall is very remarkable. I am now apt to believe the Doctrin of Transmigra∣tion, and that your Soul having past the Habitations of the Bodies of the Horse, the Ass, and other Beasts, you'r now informing the Body of a
Courtier. Good Dad! don't come too near me, you stink most damnably of Sulphur, I'm almost suffocated. You have been lamentably paid off in t'other Country; your Clothes are horridly be∣dawb'd with liquid Bitumen, Links, Flambeaux and Card-matches; you make a very indifferent Figure indeed Father. What Country you have been in I can't tell, but by your new Fables I find you have liv'd under a Monar∣chical Government, and are mightily in love with it, as are my two elder Bro∣thers of Tunbridg and Bathe; but your youngest Son, my Right Worship∣ful self, begs your Pardon if he don't jump with you and the rest of his Bre∣thren in their notions of Government. You can't tell, Father, what a lament∣able spot of work you have made
with the Fables you wrote the first time you liv'd; the sower Pedagogues have made the blind Cheeks of many a Boy as raw as a piece of Beef, be∣cause they could not understand 'em; nay I have been persecuted my self upon the same account. Besides, Sir, your Fables have been the foundati∣on of abundance of Lies; your Book serves instead of a Charter to the Mythologists of all Ages; you stand in competition even with the Devil himself, which shall be the reputed Father of Liars. And one would think after you had slept so many years, your Consulatation with your Pillow might have afforded you better Thoughts. 'Tis pity, Father, you and I should fall out after so long absence; but you ought to allow us that live upon the
surface of the Terrestrial Globe, to see farther than you, who have been so many Years embowel'd in the Ca∣verns of the Earth: Indeed, Father, I would advise you to return home again, unless you had brought better Notions with you from t'other Coun∣try; for those possest with your No∣tions here, we esteem either Stupid or Mad. Now being in this place, Father, and breathing in a free Air, I can talk of nothing but Freedom, Liberty and Property. I hope, if it does offend the Assertors of Ty∣ranny, they'l consider I am in a com∣mon Asylum, and out of their reach.
AMSTERDAM.
