



SIR,
YOUR Honour, some considerable time ago, being much Concern'd about the best Method in the Edu∣cation of your Children, was pleas'd to ask my Opinion therein: But my Thoughts concerning it, at that time, being but in the Embryo, conceiv'd upon the Reading a Treatise of EDUCATION, writ by the Learned and Inge∣nious Mr. Lock, to whose Opinion fearing I might be too partial by the Satisfaction his other Writings gave me, and knowing how unsafe and invidious it is to oppose Inve∣terate Customs, I, as handsomly as I cou'd, declin'd the Matter. Only I ventur'd upon your pressing me further, to tell you I should prefer a Domestic to a public Insti∣tution. Your Honour was pleas'd to inform me, you were of the same Mind, and desir'd me to enquire out a Tutor, proposing such a Sallary as I believe few Gentlemen in England give, and which might have invited into your Family a Man of Sobriety, Parts and Learning. But tho' I durst not then venture my callow Thoughts abroad, after they were fledg'd and confirm'd by Time and mature Advice, at the Instance of your Worthy Brother, Mr. IAMES HUSTLER. (a GENTLEMAN of that Piety and Vertue, that I dare not write his Character; and if I durst, of such Modesty, I shou'd be afraid to lose a Friendship, which has been so many ways to my Credit and

Advantage) I sent them to you in a few Proposals, tend∣ing to make a Domestic Institution less chargeable to the Parent, and more Useful and Easie to the Child. Upon the Reading of which, some Objections arising, I was desir'd to answer them, and subjoyn the Reasons of the said propo∣sed Method, which I purpos'd to do with all the brevity I cou'd, and send them to you the same day. But beginning to think what Method to use therein, it seem'd necessary to shew there was a General Male-Treatment of Children; and this I conceive to be not only the most proper, but most useful way of proceeding in Cases of this Nature. For if I can prove a Reformation is necessary, I have gained a con∣siderable Point; and having no Ambition my Diminutive Name shou'd stand in the Catalogue of Reformers, shall be satisfy'd in the hopes of seeing some other more happy and suc∣cessful Proposals, in order to the effecting thereof. An honest and ingenuous Man ought not to be concern'd, that his Methods for Reformation, of any grievance in Church or State, are rejected, if he has been so happy to Convince that some or other were Necessary.
SIR,
I humbly desire your Pardon for prefixing your honour'd Name to these Papers, assuring you I don't pretend to make a Present, but beg a Patronage. And if you will please to do me these two Favours, first, To think I meant honestly, and nextly, To pardon the failures of the management to the Can∣dour and Ingenuity of the Design, I will (in Return) do you the only one that lies in my Power, in Superseding wretched Panegyrics and fulsome Flatteries, the usual Fur∣niture of Modern Dedications, being sensible that Persons of known HONOUR and WORTH, are abus'd by having their Names taken in vain by every trifling Scribbler; And only add that I am,
Honour'd Sir, Your Obliged humble Servant,

