



FATHER,
WHERE the Devil have you been all this while? It is now ever since the fifty fourth Olympiad you dy'd at Delphos, and to arise again at Whitehal is very remarkable. I am now apt to believe the Doctrine of Transmigration, and that your Soul having past the Habitations of the Bodies of the Horse, the Ass, and other Beasts, you'r now informing the Body of a Courtier. Good Dad! don't come too near me, you stink most damnably of Sulphur, I'm almost suffocated. You have been lamentably paid off in t'other Country; your Clothes are horridly bedawb'd with liquid Bitumen, Links, Flambeaux and Card-matches; you make a very indifferent Figure indeed Father. What Country you have been in I can't tell, but by your new Fables I find you have liv'd under a Monarchical Government, and are mightily in love with it, as are my Two elder Brothers of Tunbridge and Bathe; but you youngest Son, my Right Worshipful self, begs your Pardon if he don't jump with you and the rest of his Brethren in their Notions of Government. You can't
 tell, Father, what a lamentable spot of work you have made with the Fables you wrote the first time you liv'd; the sower Pedagogues have made the blind Cheeks of many a Boy as raw as a piece of Beef, because they could not understand 'em; nay I have been persecuted my self upon the same ac∣count. Besides, Sir, your Fables have been the foun∣dation of abundance of Lies; your Book serves in∣stead of a Charter to the Mythologists of all Ages; you stand in competition even with the Devil him∣self, which shall be the reputed Father of Liars. And one would think after you had slept so many Years, your Consultation with your Pillow might have afforded you better Thoughts. 'Tis pity, Fa∣ther, you and I should fall out after so long absence; but you ought to allow us that live upon the surface of the Terrestrial Globe, to see farther than you, who have been so many Years embowel'd in the Ca∣verns of the Earth: Indeed, Father, I would ad∣vise you to return home again unless you had brought better Notions with you from t'other Country; for those possest with your Notions here, we esteem either Stupid or Mad. Now being in this place, Father, and breathing in a free Air, I can talk of nothing but Freedom, Liberty and Property, I hope, if it does offend the Assertors of Tyranny, they'll consider I am in a common Asylum, and out of their reach.
AMSTERDAM
