



DREAD SOVEREIGN,
THIS Book humbly addresseth it self un∣to Your Royal Pa∣tronage, upon Ac∣compt both of the Work, and the Author. Mines

of Gold and Silver bear a Value, which appropriates them to the Crown, wheresoever they be found. Here is a Treatise of Warfare and State-Policy, brought Ex umbra in Solem; and bearing a special reference to your Sovereign Majesty, from whom both the Sword, and the Gown derive their lawful Power and Authority.
The great Instrument of Your Majesty's MOST MEMO∣RABLE RESTAURATI∣ON fitly appeareth Author of this . Wherein he hath left his Important Observations, for preparing others after him to serve Your Majesty Do∣mi Militiaeque.
Singular Success following long Ex∣ercise

in Martial Offices Advanced this Person: That it may reasonably be doubted of him, Fortiorne an fe∣licior esset. Valour and Sufferance he is pleased to call the two Chief Parts of a Souldier. Both these sig∣nally concurring in himself, were wrought up at length to that just Com∣position, Imperator bonus, idemque robustus miles. Neither may I omit, that in fighting he came nearest the way of the Antient Romans, Pres∣so gradu, ac stabili pugna cominus rem gerere.
And when he had leasure from Arms, his Pen was busied in Com∣piling this Platform of Military Con∣duct, being a Collection of his Read∣ing and Experience together. It was written five and twenty years since,

and sent from the Author then Pri∣soner in the Tower, unto the Lord Viscount Lisle. So that it will admit almost the same Epilogue, that Am∣mianus Marcellinus makes to his Hi∣story, Haec ut miles quondam—Pro virium explicavi mensura, &c.
After the Duke of Albemarle's Decease, I had the Honour to be Publisher of his Manuscript, con∣ferr'd upon me by the Favour of my Lord Lisle. In whose hands it hath been faithfully preserved, as a true Picture of the Author drawn by him∣self: whereof let me only say, Ex pede Herculem. And so I leave him Inter Ingentes Bellorum Animas.
God Almighty multiply his Mani∣fold Blessings upon Your Majesty's

Royal Person, Family, and Govern∣ment, unto the attaining of all Happi∣ness; which is the fervent Prayer of

