



My Lord,
I Was once fully resol∣ved to side first openly with the Protestant Church,

and then to inform the Pub∣lick of the true motives of my Conversion from Po∣pery to Protestancy; but upon second thoughts, ad obstruendum os loquen∣tium iniqua, to stop the mouths of such as could mis∣construe my intentions, I judg'd it necessary to pre∣vent the reflections of some, and surprisal of others.
I acknowledge my self in this Conjuncture Ac∣countable by duty to two sorts of persons: 1. To the Jesuites my former Bre∣thren.

2. To the Roman Catholicks of my familiar acquaintance: I was looked upon by those as being able to serve them at home, as I had not been useless to them abroad, and by these as a zealous Defender of Po∣pery. If I can but allay the first heats of both, and hin∣der a sudden rise of anger and passion, I may hope by this peaceable method to conquer irresistibly their understandings, yea, if pre-occupation stand not be∣twixt them and the truth,

strike at their hearts, and change their wills.
My Thoughts, my Lord, were not long at a stand, under whose Patro∣nage this short Treatise should face the Publick, it being chiefly intended for the Conservation of the Prote∣stant Religion, and Conver∣sion of His Majesties Sub∣jects from Superstition and Popery, I was of opinion you could claim a peculiar right to it, not only on the account of your Character and Dig∣nity, but particularly because

of that Apostolick zeal you are inflam'd withall for your Flocks spiritual Con∣cerns and Proficiency; where∣by you are powerfully moved to accept of, and defend whatever may prove instru∣mental to the increase of true Virtue and Christian Piety.
I confess ingenuous∣ly, your Deep Knowledge makes me somewhat appre∣hensive of your Censure, but your eminent Virtue puts me in hopes again you will easily pardon whatever you

shall find defective in this method; or not answerable to your own Accuracy. Yet I have call'd it, and hope it shall prove such, infallible for two Reasons. 1. Be∣cause taken wholly, it a∣mounts to a clear and for∣cible Demonstration, though perhaps each Argument it contains will not prove a full Conviction to every obstinate Romanist. 2. Because it relies on Self-evident Prin∣ciples, and overthrows the most material Obstacles to the Conversion of Roma∣nists,

I mean their preoccu∣pated Opinions, and ground∣less Fancies, That Prote∣stants are all Reprobates, Schismaticks, Hereticks, and such as retreat from Popery to Protestancy, Apo∣states; but however this method prove otherwise in∣fallible, which the event must determine; one thing I may confidently ascertain, it will shew infallibly to Po∣sterity, with what respect I am,
MY LORD,

