



SIR,
YOur Noble and Constant Kindness to Mr. Baxter Living, and your Honourable Respect to him Dead, have in∣duced me to inscribe the follow∣ing Memorial of him to your Name. He was most worthy of your highest Esteem and Love, for the first Impressions of Hea∣ven upon your Soul, were in Reading his unvalued Book of the Saints Everlasting Rest. This kindled a mutual Affection in your Breasts: his Love was

Directing, Counselling, and Ex∣citing you to secure your Future Happiness: your Love was Ob∣servant, Gratefull, and Benefi∣cent to him. The Sincerity and Generosity of your Friendship, was very evident, in your appearing and standing by him, when he was so roughly and unrighteously hand∣led, by one, who was the disho∣nour of this Ages Law; whose Deportment in a high place of Judicature, was so contrary to Wisdom, Humanity, and Justice, that there need no foul words to make his Name odious. Of this and your other Favours Mr. Bax∣ter retain'd a dear and lasting Sense; and in his dying hours declared, that you had been the

best friend he ever had. He has finished his Course, and recei∣ved his Crown: His Name will shine longer than his Enemies shall bark.
I cannot omit the mentioning, that Mr. Boyle and Mr. Baxter, those incomparable Persons in their several Studies, and dear Friends, died within a short space of one another. Mr. Boyle was enga∣ged in the Contemplation of the Design and Architecture of the visible World, and made rare dis∣coveries in the system of Nature: not for Curiosity and barren Spe∣culation, but to admire and adore the Perfections of the Deity in the Variety, Order, Beauty, and mar∣vellous Artifice of the Creatures

that compose this great Universe. Mr. Baxter was conversant in the invisible World: his Mind was constantly applied to understand the harmonious Agreement of the Divine Attributes in the Oeconomy of our Salvation, and to restore Men to the Favour and Image of God. They are now admitted into the inlightned and purified Society above: where the immense Vo∣lumes of the Divine Wisdom are laid open, and by one glance of an eye, they discover more perfectly the Causes, Effects, and Concate∣nation of all things in Heaven and Earth, than the most diligent In∣quirers can do here, in a thousand years Study, though they had the Sagacity of Solomon. By the

Light of Glory, they see the face of God, and are satisfied with his likeness for ever.
'Tis a high honour to you, that Mr. Boyle and Mr. Baxter should by their Last Will nominate you amongst their Executors. It was the Saying of a Wise Roman, Malo divi Augusti judicium, quam beneficium. I had ra∣ther have the Esteem of the Em∣perour Augustus than his Gifts: for he was an understanding Prince, and his Esteem was very Honourable to a Person. That two who so excell'd in Wisdom and Goodness, should commit to your Trust the disposal of their Estates for the Uses of Piety and Charity, is a more noble Testi∣mony

of their Esteem of your Pru∣dence and inviolable Integrity, than if they had bequeathed to you rich Legacies.
It is a satisfaction to me, that I have complied with Mr. Bax∣ter's desire in Preaching his Fu∣neral-Sermon, and with yours in Publishing it. I shall unfeigned∣ly recommend Your self, your ex∣cellent Lady, and vertuous Chil∣dren, to the Divine Mercies: and remain, with great Respect,
SIR,

