



Most Gracious SOVERAIGNE,
IT is now Two and twenty Years since first this PIECE was Rough-cast, In∣ter Tubam & Tympanum (during the SIEGE at Oxford) being then Com∣manded upon that Service by that late Incomparable Prince Your Royal Father, and my Most Gracious Master, KING CHARLES the I. of Glorious Memory (a most zealous Ene∣my to all kind of Sacriledge)
 Since that time, whilest I lived abroad Fifteen Years (a full Fourth Part of my whole Life) in a voluntary Exile, only for my Constancy in the True Reli∣gion, and for my faithful Allegi∣ance to Your Crown: This young Benoni was soon Over-laid, and so did, in a manner, lie long Bu∣ried in the Graves of Schisme and Rebellion: Till now, being called upon, I have stretched my selfe over it, Endeavouring, through God's Blessing, to Re∣suscitate it. Assoon as the Child begins now to Breath again, it softly Creeps towards Your MAJESTY, and humbly Craves to be called Yours by Right of Inheritance. In this Ne∣cessary Work, as I do most just∣ly Condemn Sacriledge, (that fatal Blazing Star to whole Na∣tions) so, if I did not in all Hu∣mility,
 lay down the WORK (such as it is) with the Author, at Your Sacred Feet, I should then Commit Sacriledge indeed, and so both contradict the Work & condemn my self. The whole Designe of this Plea is nothing else, but a Just Defence of some old honest Truths, which are ne∣ver the worse for being now a-days so much spoken against by the Many. Though the IX Cha∣pter of this Book doth chiefly Concern Your Majesty in Point of Conscience, yet (all being well Considered) the whole Cause may Concern You no less in Point of Justice, as well as in Point of Honour; And so this WORK becomes Yours again by another Title, by Right of Pur∣chase; since, as by Your late Gra∣cious Restoring both of the Church and Church-Lands, De∣dicated
 to the Service of God (in thankfulness to that Great God for Your own marvellous Royal Restauration) You have strong∣ly Confuted the late Sacrilegious Ʋsurpations; so, by Your Con∣stant Care to Preserve the Church Committed to Your Charge, in the Laws, Customs, Franchises, Canonical Priviledges, and Epi∣scopal Government (according to the Tenour of Your Royal Oath) You will not only In∣vincibly secure all these from future Sacriledge, but also put Your own Great Seal to Your Father's Royal Deed,I pray God neither I nor mine may be Accessary to the Ruines of the Church, &c. The King's Portraicture, Sect. 19. upon the Covenant. and turn that King's Prayer into a Pro∣phecy, who (to speak out this His Prerogative-Paramount, in His own Heroical words) E∣steemed it His Greatest Title to be called, and His Chiefest Glory to be the Defender of the Church
 both in its true Faith, and its just Fruitions, equally abhorring Sacriledge and Apostacy: Thus the KING being dead yet speak∣eth, of whom it may be almost said, Never King spake like this King, except the King of Kings!
The Church of God is by an∣other King (Solomon) descri∣bed Terrible as an Army with Banners (Acies Ordinata,Cantic. vi. 10. for Power, Authority, and Order) in Allusion to the Camp of Israel, in whose Tacticks (the Martial Style) we may, to our Admira∣tion, if not Imitation, Observe the Mysterious Manner how they Pitch'd about the Tabernacle, (that Curious Emblem of the Church;) First then they Pitched with their Faces towards the Ta∣bernacle, to intimate the singu∣lar Regard all the Tribes had to the Tribe of Levi, because that




 Tribe had the Charge of God's Tabernacle, (therefore the other Tribes did not turn their Backs upon it, much less stretch forth their Hands, or lift up their Heels against Levi.Num ii. 2.) Secondly, they pitched round about the Ta∣bernacle, (three Tribes on each side of the four quarters of it) as a Guard to defend it, as a Ma∣gazine to Maintain it: To which goodly Order of the Camp of Israel, King David seems to al∣lude in his Royal Religious Pro∣clamation,Psal. lxxvi. 11. All ye that are round about him, bring Presents unto him that ought to be feared; that is, un∣to God, (because always Resident and President in the Church) and thus Israel pitch'd their Camp.
But when they marched, Juda,Num. x. 17. Issachar, and Zabulon led the Van on the East, and then the Gersonites and Me∣rarites,
 (Levites) went next bearing the Tabernacle, whereby the Priests were not, like so ma∣ny Enfants perdus, put upon the Forelorn hope; but Juda the Royal Tribe always stood be∣twixt Levi and the Enemy (and they prospered accordingly) as very well knowing that the Ark of God was indeed the Glory of Israel, which,1 Sam. iv. 21.Nunquam pro∣sperè cedunt Res humanae ubi negliguntur Divinae. when once depart∣ed, the Crown would not stay long after it.
Lastly, The LORD as their General, dwelt in the midst of their Camp, to go in and out be∣fore them, who, (as some have Observed it) is therefore in ho∣ly Scripture styled The Lord of Hosts above 200 times. Thus Israel having God for their In∣vincible General, having the Ark of God for their Sacred Arsenal; no wonder if (as the
 Author to the Hebrews Blazons their Martial Atchievements) They through faith subdued King∣doms,Heb. xi. 3, 34. waxed valiant in fight, turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens: Nothing but Trophies, nothing but Triumphs, so long as God's People keeps God's Order.
SIR, You are as well by Theory, as by Practice, (both ways) so eminently Experi∣enced in Martial Discipline, that to make Application of this Plat-form were a Presumption, much more impertinent than that of Phormio before Hanni∣bal: I know to whom I speak, to a Prince, as great in Ʋnder∣standing, as in Power: Indeed, Your Times, in so short a Pe∣riod, have been as full of strange Revolutions, of rare Ac∣cidents,
 as any Prince, which wonderful Passages of the Divine Providence over You, may appear so many strong Ar∣guments, that hitherto the King of Heaven, hath had a special Regard to Your Royal Person here on Earth, and may also hereafter be so many sure Pled∣ges, that the same Great God, who hath, so Marvellously (I might truly say Miraculously) Re∣scued, and Restored You, will, no doubt, both preserve and prosper you still, whilest you (in a Gracious Return) con∣stantly bear a Reciprocal Regard unto God the King of Kings, Ob∣serving his Laws, unto the House of God, the Church, preserving her Rights, unto God's Service, and Servants, whose daily Of∣fice therefore is to Offer up un∣to God the Spiritual Sacrifices
 of Prayers for you, especially that the Sons of Zerviah be not too hard for you: (for the Sons of Zerviah are Men of blood,1 Sam. xxvi. 8. 11 Sam. ii. 19. 11 Sam. iij. 27. upon God's own Re∣cord:) And although Zerviah be dead, albeit by your Royal Power and Prudence, that Great Beldam Rebellion (pardon the word, for we cannot odiously enough term the late violent Ʋsurpation) be now utterly quelled, and abolished (God be thanked) yet it is to be feared, the Sons of Zerviah are alive still; nay, which is worse, they dare appear very lively and stir∣ring, very Comprehensive to con∣trive Mischief, very Active also to bring forth again Confusion both in Church and State, (which God avert.)
That, under God, my Lord the King,11 Sam. xiv. 20. according to the wisdom
 of an Angel of God, may Discern the Good, and the Bad, as it is, in Duty, my daily Devotion for Your Majesty, so is it the best New-Years-Gift I am able to afford: In which honest Vow persevering unto my Lives end, I do, in all lowliness, crave your Majesties Gracious Pardon, and Patronage, and in hope of your Royal Favour, and Acceptance of both the Work and the Workman, Humbly Remain,
Most Dread Soveraigne,  Westminster, on New-years-Day, 1668.
