



DREAD SOVERAIGNE,
BUT that, in O∣bedience to Your Royal Command, (reiterated) I must now Pra∣ctice as well as Preach Allegiance; This pre∣sent ARGUMENT, (now laid down at Your MAjESTY's Sacred Feet) had never pre∣sumed further than Your Royal Eare. What was then Spoken,
 and by You Accepted, and is now Published, and also by some good Men's Occasional Desire, and by other bad Men's ma∣licious Opposition Enlarged, is (all of it) the Verdict of an Impartial Conscience, convinced of both the Antiquity and the Verity resident, (If any where upon Earth) within the Bosom of this Persecuted Church, the Envy therefore, and the Butt of all Opposites at Home and abroad: And yet for all that, to this day, the Admiration in Chief,Floren∣tissima An∣glia Ocellus ille Eccle∣siarum, Peculi∣um Christi singulare, Perfugium Afflictorum, Imbel∣lium Armamentarium, Inopum promptuarium, Spei melio∣ris Vexillum, — Splendidae domini Caulae — Horrore toti concutimur ad Versam hanc Pulcherrimam Ecclesiae inter vos Faciem: Corrupit Spes nostras Turbo ille Coitio∣num apud vos Popularium, quae Regis Serenissimi Discessi∣oni à suo Parliamento causam praebuere.—Deus reponat IN ALTO ILLO Sanctae gloriae ECCLESIAS VESTRAS, quae hactenus in Terris, & Ecclesiae Theatro emicuere. D. Deodat. Genev. Responso ad Con∣ventum Ecclesiasticum Londini. This is the voluntary At∣testation of GENEVA, sent then to the Assembly-men, concerning the Flourishing Estate of the Church of England, before that RAGING TEMPEST OF POPULAR CONSPIRACIES AND TU∣MULTS, which have FORCED AWAY THE KING FROM HIS PARLIA∣MENT: (These are the GENEVA-Men's own Expressions.) So far are meer Strangers from Approving of that Rebellious War, or Judging this Church Corrupt, or Antichristian in Doctrine or Discipline, as it is blasphemed by her own Rebellious Children, against whom these free Witnesses may one day rise up in Judgment. of the best men in other Reformed Churches, though now made the very Off-scouring
 of all by her own Ungracious Domesticks. God, Alto Judicio, may (for a while) suffer TheDan. 8.12. Truth to be cast down to the ground, yet Oppressed Truth, is Truth still, and in God's good time, may up again, for all this Eclipse.Blessed be the God of Truth whose gra∣cious Pro∣vidence hath made good this Prophesie, full fifteen years after, for an Encouragement and Reward of Loyal Perseverance.] As by your Royal
 Obligation, so by your Just and very'Tis a gross Error to think that the Kings of England's Title of De∣fender of the Church is no older than King Henry VIII. For 300 years ago in the old Writs of K. Rich. II. to the She∣riffs, the old style runs, Ecclesia, cu∣jus nos De∣fensor sumus, & esse vo∣lumus. Ancient Title, and constant Profession too, God be thanked, your MAjE∣STIE (in Fact, as well in Right, DEFENDER OF THE FAITH) hath more than a general Interest, in this, and in all right Catholick Truth: And therefore, (whatever o∣thers do in an Injurious Age) I cannot but Render toMatth. 22.21. Cae∣sar the things that are Caesar's. And herein, So God be Served, the Church Defended, Your MA∣jESTY Obeyed, Your People Warned, and Conscience Dis∣charged, he hath his Ends, who, though compassed about with many Imperfections, yet, in this Service, lies not much under the Command of any worldly Hope, or Fear. May the King
 of Kings at last, Remember You, and Yours, and all your Troubles, and by the Merit and Vertue of his own Glorious ASCEN∣SION, (the Mystery of this good Day for a good Omen) work out at last also Your ROyAL ASCENSION every way: And mean-while in this, and in all Truth else, the God of Truth, with his own Right Hand, sup∣port and stablish You more and more,K. Da∣vid's Prayer,  properly, Uphold me with the Spi∣rit of a Prince; so the Original Emphatical∣ly bears it. with his free Spirit; so daily Prayeth
 Oxford, May VII. Ascension-Day, 1646.
