



Right Honourable and Renowned Lady,
THE favourable acceptation which this small Present found with you, incouraged me to communicate it to other vertuous Ladies and Gentlewomen, who were very desirous of a Copy of it; which de∣sires growing ample and importunate, made me weary of writing, and willing (though not ambitious) to impart it to the Press: partly to commemorate the honourable accepta∣tion, and partly to congratulate and gratifie the respects it found.
Moreover, by much perusal, I perceived that I had left out many memorable Persons of high account in Holy Scriptures, and that some that were put in had too scant a Cha∣racter, wherefore to make all compleat, and to leave a living Monument of those Resplen∣dent Vertues that are recorded of the Female Sex, which will undoubtedly excite good Wo∣men to Godly imitation, I have presumed to make this Paper publick for the honour of that Sex which God hath so highly honoured, as the most acute Aretius observes upon the pious Wo∣mens coming first to the Sepulchre of our Sa∣viour,

Luke 24.1. Totum hoc ad gloriam Muliebris Sexus pertinere, That it did all be∣long to the Glory of the Female Sex: and learned Polanus saith on the same occasion, Syntag. Theol. Christ. Page 419. at the letter C. Column 1. Resurrectio Christi primum ab Angelo annunciata est mulieribus quia voluit Deus sic ornare pietatem illarum quarum Ze∣lus pro Gloria Christi fervidior erat quàm Virorum. The Resurrection of Christ (saith he) was first told by the Angel to the Women because their zeal for the glory of Christ was hotter than the Mens.
Considering therefore that it cannot be con∣demned for flattery; (for none can inherit such glory but they that imitate them) nor can it provoke envy or disdain, which is so clear a record of the Holy Scriptures, neither doth it derogate from the Man, but dignifie him. For as he is her head, so she is his glory, 1 Cor. 11.3.7. And a Vertuous Woman is a Crown to her Husband, Prov. 12.4. I humbly crave your Honours allowance and ac∣ceptation of the Publication in your Name. And so with supplications for your Honours long health and happiness, I rest,

