



CErtainly this Meeting justly claims a place among the considerable Benefits our Country doth enjoy, not only in regard of the correspondence the several members of it, that are removed to this City, hold one with another; but especially that by this means so many Plants are yearly removed from the barren parts of it to this richer Soil, where they are pruned and dressed, and having depth and fatness of earth grow into Trees, that yield Profit and Beauty to the whole.
Nor is the advantage small to those, whose Lot doth not fall in this pleasant place: since the Coun∣try is yearly eased of so many, who, by reason of ill Circumstances, would be rather a Burden, than advantage to their Neighbours; especially those places that have more Hands than Work; where Men stand idle, perhaps, for no other reason, but because none have hired them. And I have some∣times known a Town at great expence, both of
time and Mony to keep out, it may be, some sin∣gle person from being an Inhabitant, because they had more than they could employ before. And where the younger do increase, the more ancient, while yet serviceable, being left without employ, are necessarily supported by the Contributions of the place. And in Corporations, and Market-towns, where some might have crept into little Trades, this is already divided into so many hands, that (some few in a Town excepted) they have little else to do, but to open and shut the Windows of their Shops, and when they have shut, are scarce able to set and keep them open. Whence we may take some measures of the Benefit, the Country doth receive from this Company. For should they lay down so good a Work, our poor, and therefore our payments would increase; more would die in∣debted to the world, leave Charge behind them, and each way oppress the living: and the business of all private and publick Sessions would yearly increase.
Therefore certainly all the Inhabitants of that place are bound in point of policy, and reason, if not of duty too (according to their several Capa∣cities) to encourage and maintain so good a Work. Especially the Gentry, whose Abilities, Divertise∣ments, or other Concerns, calling them so oft to
Town, give them so fair an opportunity: especi∣ally considering these Benefits reach even the high places themselves are yet in. For Landlords thrive best, where Tenants prosper. And Rents usually fall, where the poor, and therefore payments, do in∣crease. I must therefore impute it to the non-con∣sideration of these things, and perhaps, in some to the want of Generous and Publick Spirits, or at least to the not kindling, those Sparks of Virtue into a frame of Love, and Bounty, which (how∣ever Titles go) are essential to a Gentleman, that we are in this Affair so far left by those whose pre∣sence would be an Honour to the Company, a Glory to the place of their Nativity, and would give new life and vigour to the business of this As∣sembly. Great Bodies move the lesser. And good Leaders in that Contribution, which is not (as some suppose) for the Stewards Pockets, but towards the Binding Children out to Trades, by their very example gain more from others, than the Sums themselves do give can amount to. And the more is thus collected, the more the Stewards are incouraged to a free and large addition; that for their own Fame, and the Childrens Good they may place them to the better Trades, which often proves as great a kindness, as the setting them out to any: for sometimes ingenuity is forced to creep, when it might run high, if placed in a better Cir∣cumstance.
And since the want of publick Spi∣rits prove a decay to a whole Society, to parti∣cular Companies, and smaller Bodies; we are the more obliged, where we sind them, to pay them due respects, and give a just applause. And since such a spirit appears so eminently in your self, not only from your publick Works and Monuments in the City, and our County Town of Warwick, in which your name shall live to future ages (He loves our nation, and hath built a synagogue) &c. But also from the Incouragement you are pleased to give this charitable Work: in having formerly vouchsafed to be Steward of this Company; and in the Yearly Honour you do it by your presence, not suffering any business, no, not the Burden, as well as Honour, you sustain'd, when Lord Major of this City, to deliver you from it; I thought my self in duty bound, by this Dedication, to let you know the Honour and Respects our Country ows you, as well as him, who is

