


Psal. 47. 6.
Sing praises to God, sing praises, sing praises to our King, sing praises.


Psal. 66. 2.
Make a joiful nois unto God all yee lands, sing forth the honor of his Name, make his prais glorious.



Most Renowned, Prospered, and most Can∣did Christian SENATORS!
THe LORD of Life and Glo∣rie, who asscended up on high, and led our Captivitie captive, hath in these later daies ap∣peared on Earth (as hee ever doth in Hea∣ven) in behalf of his Spous, and hath dis∣pensed unto you (the friends of the Bride∣groom) most incomparable Signal Victo∣ries and Conquests in her behalf; for which you have worthily enacted manie Sweet and Solemn Daies of Triumphant Thanks∣givings;

which Thanksgivings beeing indeed much advanced by singing of Psalms, it is a thousand pities that the Psalms in use are not by this daie cured of so manie grievous defects and gross absurdi∣ties, as have been of long time discovered in them: For although those gross faults were generally corrected by a worthie Mem∣ber of your Honorable Hous, in an Edition by him put forth manie years ago; yet was that endeavour wholly dashed by a reference to the Assemblie, who, under an opinion of bringing them most strictly to the Origi∣nal, made them in manie places more dark and disorder lie then could bee well amended for the present: upon which consideration I was emboldened, with the assent of Mr Rous (the first Autor) and with the assi∣stance of som Godlie Learned men, to endea∣vour a new Translation, both cleer and smooth, and accurately compared with the Original; which having effected & present∣ed, it pleased your Honors to refer it to Mr N. Mr B. and Others to review, & report to

the Hous; but they, accounting the said Translation too Poëtical, do intend to compile a new one out of it, more strictly to the words, which doubtless will produce that obscuritie of Phrase, and deformitie of Style, which marr'd the other, and made it less accepta∣ble and profitable to the People: and for which verie reason this new Composure of mine was more accurately framed, having formerly put forth a Translation of mine own, which was not wholly innocent of that Original error, which indeed the Transla∣tors do not alwaies so easily apprehend.
Now, becaus this Review of the Com∣mittee may bee very tedious to wait for, (it beeing a year and more since the Order past the Hous, and I cannot perceiv they are half waie in the work) and when it is don, it must needs varie from the express Text by Paraphrase or Metaphrase, for a great part; and becaus the Opportunities are becom in∣deed Importunities, and very urgent, I pre∣sume to dedicate to your Honors this short Assaie of Psalms and Hymns, beeing

readie to print and publish the whole Book, if it pleas your Honors to allow mee the se∣curitie of my Copie, that no man print it from mee, and those that are interessed therein; without which favor, the present printing of the whole would endanger my utter undoing, having already endebted my self so deeply upon the said account: But if after publication of all, your Honors shall receiv better satisfaction by anie other en∣deavours, I shall fully rest satisfied in this, that it shall bee determined by the Supreme Autoritie of England, which, from the first, I have publickly owned, obeied, honored, praied for, pleaded for, and praised God for, as a singular Blessing to this Na∣tion, under which wee may lead peaceable and quiet lives in all Godli∣ness and Honestie; and if anie fearing God bee otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto them. In consci∣ence and confidence whereof, I rest

