



Sweet Ladies and Gentle-women,
THE reason why this en∣suing Relation (wor∣thy of all future me∣mory) is chiefly pre∣sented unto you, is the equity and congruity thereof; together with that particular right, by which you, of all others, seem to lay claim to it. The Person here spoken of, was bred up in the same Fa∣ily with you, and among you, a daily object before you, and a lively exam∣ple
 to as many of you as had wisdom to take notice and make use of it. The manifold Excellencies that shined in her, whether natural, acquired, or in∣fused, are not unknown to you. Whatever was ornamental to body or mind, from nature, breeding, or grace it self, she had as much of it, yea, more (all cir∣cumstances considered) than any that I have heard or read of. Indeed some there were of those eight hundred that have been educated in her Father's house within the compass of her time, that did out-do the rest in their respe∣ctive seasons, some in one quality, some in another, according to their dif∣ferent capacities, and the pains they took, or the time they spent, more or less, in the School: but not any one that came neer to her in one half of those en∣dowments and rare abilities (without offence be it spoken) that She had attain∣ed unto, as will appear abundantly in the ensuing Narration thereof. For if that be true which Mr. Rogers, Mr.
 Bing, Mr. Coleman, Mr. Brian, Mr. Hazard, and the rest of the Masters of the School, have often said in respect of the several qualities she learned of them, that (to use their own words) they knew not where she hath left her fellow in the world: when all her other excellencies are considered also, in con∣junction with them, it must needs be then much more true. That is a rich Jewel which is made up of all manner of pre∣cious stones; and that a sweet Nose-gay that hath all sorts of fragrant flowers in it; even such lustres and pleasant mixtures were conspicuous in Her, to every unprejudiced and impartial eye. Indeed it was her hap to be less known to, and less loved by some, than others; whether it were out of a secret envy at her eminent worth, by which she out-shined them, or from too severe a cen∣sure of that in her, which even in them∣selves (because of higher rank in the world) they did easily allow, I know not. But this I can and do affirm, with
 truth concerning her, that when she was told above a year before her death, that certain persons (not here to be named) who wished her well, were jealous of her, lest she were puffed up with pride, and the love of vanity; the only answer she made, was, That whatever they thought of her, she honoured them for the grace of Christ she believed was in them, and that she hoped God would en∣able her to make a good use of this their fear of her, for the better observing of her own heart, and the keeping it the more humble.
Among those inducements that oc∣casioned the publishing of this, some of the chief are these which follow.
First, to rofute the opinion of such as greatly blame the education of publick Schools, as if they were places of all other, most dangerous to corrupt the manners of youth: Behold here a great instance to the contrary, besides many others that might be named of the very same School, there having been al∣wayes
 some as virtuous and religious young Gentlewomen brought up there, as in any private Family whatsoever. Nor is it difficult to go to the several Ci∣ties and Counties of this Kingdom, and find out the Houses in which many of them are surviving, beautiful Orna∣ments of the places where they live, ei∣as ther Virgins, Wives, or Matrons.
Secondly, to give a proof of the restlessness of a Soul once touched with Divine Love; for let it be where it will, though cumbered with never so much business, and called off with ne∣ver so many divertisements, yet early or late, at one time or another, it will have its opportunities of converse with God, and will not be hindered, but ra∣ther lose both meat and sleep; than such opportunities as these.
Thirdly, to let all men see that there is something in that which we call Grace, which in the midst of all the most enticing vanities, and blandish∣ments of the world, can and doth ravish
 the heart more then all these ever did or could do. Here was a young Gentle∣woman in the flower of her Age, com∣passed about with all manner of delights and entertainments, that a carnal mind could desire, and yet what dead things were they to her, and she to them! how were they mutually crucified each to other, when once her nature was renew∣ed, and she felt the sweetness of the change! how was an entire Commu∣nion with God, even an Heaven upon Earth unto her! Holiness (let prophane scoffers and wretched Atheists say what they will of it) hath something in it more lovely than all the Beauties in the world; something more sweet than all the Musicks in the world; something mor  all the Pleasures in t 
Fourthly and lastly, to set a rare Pat∣te and Example to all that shall hap∣pen to hear or read of this Relation; and indeed this is none of the least in∣ducements, because it pleased the Lord
 that divers, who are now living, are able and ready to witness and acknow∣ledge, that her Example, while they were in the Family with her, did not only con∣vince them of their own neglect of the duties which she constantly practised betwixt God and her own soul, and smote their consciences for it; but did so far work upon them, as to cause them to do the like ever since. It may there∣fore be reasonably hoped, that God may bless the same Example unto others, though she be dead; and were it not for such an end as this, how vain would the publication hereof be? Can it any way availe her now she is gone? surely no∣thing less; let none therefore be so un∣charitable as to think, that th Author hereof can propou  end therein, but such  n∣ed. He hopes he th better learned Christ; nor yet that what is here related is more out of favour or affection than otherwise. Those that please to enquire, will find witnesses enough to assert the
 whole truth of the premises; and there∣fore notwithstanding the unkind cen∣sures of any, out of a desire of serving Christ, and the good of precious souls, he can appeal to God, he hath done this, and accordingly makes it his earnest Prayer for a blessing on it: who to shew his resolution to own & make good what∣ever is here said, subscribes his Name,

