



AGainst the Opening the present Session of Par∣liament, I thought it my Duty, (considering the Nation's great Distress) to point out to your Honours, who were the principal Causers and Continuers of its Miseries; which I did in the fol∣lowing Dialogue; Containing, 1st. Bare Matter of Fact already prov'd against the Lords of the Admiral∣ty, Commissioners of the Navy, Commissioners of the Post-Office, and Commissioners of the Sick and Wounded Sea∣men, &c. with the foul Practices of the Commissioners of the Publick Accounts, for Concealing and Justify∣ing the said Crimes. 2dly, Natural Consequences and Arguments drawn from the said Matter of Fact, in Reference to Religion, Law, Policy and the true

Interest and Safety of the King and Kingdom.
The Book being out, it was seiz'd by Messengers, divers reporting it was High Treason, and Mr. Cros∣feild, and a Poor Woman, were Committed to the Poultrey Compter about it, by a Justice of Peace, at the bare Instance of a Messenger: The said Justice of Peace often professing he was sorry the matter came before him, for that by his own Losses he could speak deeply to the Truth and Honesty of the Book, but was afraid of being chid by some of the Court, if he neglected to do what the Messenger bid him, with Divers other Expressions of like Nature; which shews the great Force of Truth, that it will be Confess'd, tho from the mouths of its ve∣ry Opposers.
I was also inform'd, that the aforesaid Messenger had given direction to the said Justice of Peace to Commit me the first time he saw me; for that there was a Warrant out against me for High Treason (which Trouble they need not have given the Ju∣stice of Peace, for they knew where to have found me themselves). But I being very infirm and weak of body, by reason of long sickness (occasion'd by my ill usage) was unwilling to be committed to

Newgate, in this smugling manner, to destroy my Health (which I knew was the Design against me); and the said Justice of Peace, thro' Ignorance and Timerousness, wou'd certainly have done it, (had he seen me) tho the book I had printed had been David's Psalms.
This Report was on Saturday, and the Monday following I went to the Secretaries Office to surren∣der my self to this Warrant of High Treason: but, upon Enquiry, found there was no Warrant against me for High Treason; Sir William Trumball's Secre∣tary making a Jest of it, told me, 'twas only the Messenger's mistake (but I could not get him to ex∣amine the Messenger about it); and that what was against me in that Office, was only upon Suspicion of being the Author of this Dialogue (so the High Treason was fallen only to Suspicion of a Misde∣meanour), and that I must submit to be confin'd in a Messenger's Custody, which was accordingly done. After some days I got a sight of the War∣rant for my Commitment, which was not upon Suspicion of my being the Author of this Dialogue (as I was told at the Office), but for Publishing and Dispersing a Seditious and Scandalous Libel against His

Majesty and Government; without Naming what Libel, or mentioning its Title in the Warrant. The Warrant also shews, that 'twas drawn after I surrender'd my self; for it begins thus, These are in His Majesties Name to require you to keep in safe Custo∣dy, &c. Whereas another Warrant directed to a Messenger, to apprehend any Person, commands him to go and take a Constable to his assistance, and seize or attach the Body of such a one, and bring him and his Papers before the Secretary to be Exa∣mined, &c. By which it appears what Drudgery was design'd for this Timerous Justice of Peace to commit me to Newgate for High Treason, to Ruin my Health without Warrant, Law, or Sence.
Thus I continued a Prisoner in a Messenger's Cu∣stody from the 26th October 1696. to the 29th Ja∣nuary following, being 3 months and 3 days, to the great endangering of my Life by bad Diet, and was then discharg'd, giving a Recognizance of 500 l. to appear the first day of the next Term. So I, that have serv'd the King, and discover'd, and detected many of the Utter Enemies of his Majesty and his People, am now Cited to answer as a Criminal, for pointing out the Destroyers of the Nation to the Parliament.

And those Notorious Criminals I write of in this Dialogue, are brought to no Tryal, but protected, as if there was no Law to take Cognizance of them.
And further, the matters of Fact related in this Dialogue (the Post-Office excepted) are no more than what are contain'd in a Petition and Articles Exhi∣bited by Mr. Crosfeild and others, in the House of Peers, about two years since, where it is now depen∣ding: The late Commissioners of Accounts, to whom it was Referr'd to Examine into it, and make their Report, having hitherto by Evasions, and False Allegations, in behalf of the Criminals, delay'd and stopt the laying open these Grievances, and have to this day disappointed your Honours of a true Knowledge of them; whereby the said Grie∣vances have been supported and increased; for which the Nation has severely suffer'd; But has reason now to give thanks to God, that the said Commission is so happily Dissolv'd, which was so great a Bulwork of Iniquity; And I hope it is a good O∣men, or Presage of a General Overthrow of Fraud and Wickedness.

So now because the Facts contain'd in this Dia∣logue, are not yet Examin'd in Parliament, (by means of the aforesaid Commissioners of Accounts) the Printing them again, to re-mind the Parlia∣ment of the present miseries, that God may be honour'd by the Punishment and Suppression of Wickedness, the King and Kingdoms Enemies re∣mov'd, and the Laws put in Execution for the publick safety, for the future, is (it seems) be∣come A Seditious and Scandalous Libel, against his Majesty and Government. I▪m sure, this Dialogue chiefly depends but upon three things. First, Truth in the matter of Fact related. Secondly, The Gospel in reference to Gods Judgments, for Imo∣rallity and Tollerated Wickedness. And Third∣ly, The Laws of the Land in reference to their being Invaded, and Perverted, and not put in Execution: And if this Dialogue will endure a Tryal by these three Touch-Stones, and yet con∣tinue still to be a Seditious and Scandalous Libel, &c. Why, then, Truth must be Scandalous, and the Scripture and Statutes of England Seditious Libels, and he that Writes for the safety and pre∣servation of the King and Kingdom, is an Enemy to his Majesty and Government. This shews how

Exceedingly Wickedness abounds, and what a Ca∣bal of Men there are in Power, ready to turn the King's Authority against himself, and to subvert Gospel, Law, Loyalty, Justice, and all things tending to the honour of God, and benefit of the King and State.
This Dialogue is call'd a seditious Libel: Whereas it speaks for the Execution of the Law with as much Force as words can express. Now where the Law is put in Execution, there can be no Sedition; but where the Laws and Constitutions of a Kingdom are invaded and perverted, by the Arbitrary Power of Evil Ministers, it is that which introduces Sedition; and as Sedition is a dangerous Distemper in a Nation, so the Impartial Execution of the Law is a Sovereign and Certain Cure. And whereas it is call'd a scandalous Libel, I an∣swer, that if 'tis true, 'tis not scandalous, and every Sub∣ject of England has an undoubted Priviledg to Com∣plain of, and discover Injuries done to the King, and also lay open the Grievances of his People: And if all the Subjects of England, tho in never so high a Station, are subject to the Law, and answerable for their Acti∣ons (which I hope is not in the least question'd), then this Dialogue will not deserve these Characters, nor the Author deserve to be Arraign'd as a Criminal for wri∣ting it (while the real Criminals he writes of are prote∣cted): For certainly the pure and undefiled Law of Eng∣land

does not provide any punishment for its Advocates. 'Twas a Noble saying of that Glorious Prince Edw. 3. of Famous Memory (when he hang'd his Chief Ju∣stice [Thorp] of the Kings Bench, for taking a Bribe of 100l.) That he being intrusted as the King's Deputy, to administer Justice in that Court, had, as much as in him lay, broken that solemn Oath that his Majesty made to his People at his Coronation.
If such strict Scrutinies shou'd be made in these Days, (which no doubt God Requires) what a mul∣titudewould there be found Guilty of this Chief Ju∣stice's Crime, who continue to practice it without any regard to their Master's Safety, Honour or Coronation-Oath, or Safety of their Country? nay, so far are they from thinking it a Crime, that a Learned Lawyer not long since (as I was inform'd) brought it as a migh∣ty Objection to the Bill against buying and selling Offices, That the Perquisites of his Employment came to about 3000l. per an. and pray'd a Clause in the Bill to secure it to him, which shews how strong a de∣sire he had still to be able to Expose the Rights and Liberties of the People to Sale to the highest Bidder: So Religious a Regard had that Gentleman to his Master's Coronation-Oath. Nevertheless, such Corrupt Men as these, who so openly oppose Justice, do gene∣rally pretend to have a great Love for their Sove∣reign,

and how they'll stand by him with their Lives and Fortunes, and what not, when alas, their Love has no more reallity than the pretended Love of a Common Harlot: For Certainly, a Corrupt and Unfaithful Servant, can no more Love his Master, than an Adulterous Wife can Love her Husband:
It is not Improbable, but this Dialogue may by a Tryal in the Kings Bench be made (as 'tis call'd) A Seditious and Scandalous Libel against his Majesty and Government; And so the Tables shall be turn'd, and I shall be try'd as a Criminal, for laying open the Nations Grievances to the Parliament, and the Criminals acquited of the Crimes they are accus'd of, without any Tryal at all; It cannot be suppos'd, that I shall have free Liberty in the Kings Bench Court, to bring such Numbers of Witnesses, as are necessary to prove the Matters of Fact contain'd in this Dialogue; For the Court is ty'd to one single Ishue, and therefore cannot Enquire into the bot∣tom of Grievances in the State: Besides, it is rarely seen that any Man escapes the Censure of the Courts of Westminster, who runs Counter to the Predominant Party at White-Hall, let his Cause be ever so just; Instances enough may be given of it in the late Reigns, when the Courts of Justice have (under pretence of Law) been made perfect Slaughter-Houses to Punish, Imprison, Fine, and take away the Lives of Divers Noble Patriots of their Countrey, for doing that which we now call their Duty, whose memories we Commemorate, and the Judgments against them have been Revers'd in Parlia∣ment. But Certainly, it had been much more Honourable (if it cou'd have been done) to have sav'd their Lives, by put∣ting a stop to their Illegal Tryals, than now to say, we are sorry for their Deaths.
Therefore, I most humbly appeal to this most August As∣sembly, who in these Cases are ty'd to no single Isue, but

may throughly enquire and search into the Nations Grievances, (which my Designs has been only Loyally and Faithfully to lay open) humbly Conceiving, that if I produce Witnesses to prove the Matters of Fact, Contain'd in this Dialogue; That then it will not deserve the Title, given it in the War∣rant for my Commitment, Viz. A Seditious and Scandalous Libel, against His Majesty and Government. Neither, shall I deserve to be Arraign'd at the Kings Bench Bar as a Criminal, the next Term, where I am bound to appear by Recogni∣zance of 500 l. after above three Months Imprisonment, to the hazard of my Life.
And being thus ready and able to produce Witnesses, to prove the said Matters of Fact, Contain'd in this Dialogue (to the great Advantage of the King and Government) when∣ever your Honours shall please to Command; I humbly Cast my self upon your Honours Justice and Protection, that no such Prosecution may be made against me, as is intended, till I be first heard, and have liberty to prove, that what I have Written in this Dialogue is Truth, and for the King and Kingdoms true Interest, Peace, and Safety, and then I shall be willing to stand a Tryal at the Kings Bench Bar; And sub∣mit to what Law my Adversaries can find, to punish me, for Writing this Dialogue. I am,

London, the 16th of March, 169.
