



SIR,
THE Ministers of the Gospel, are in the Scripture Language, Stars in the right Hand of Christ, to signifie their diffusive Light, and beneficial Influences. As in the future State of the Resurrection, some Stars shall differ from o∣thers in Glory; so in the present State of the Regeneration, some Ministers are distinguish'd from others, by a brighter Eminence in their Endowments, and a more powerful Emana∣tion of Light in their Preaching. Of this Se∣lect Number was Mr. Philip Henry, in whom there was Union of those real Excellencies, of parts, Learning, and Divine Graces, that sig∣naliz'd him among his Brethren. This does evi∣dently appear in the Narrative of his Life, drawn by one very fit to do it: as having had intire knowledge of him, by long and intimate Con∣versation: and having by his Holy Instructi∣ons, and the impression of his Example, been made partaker of the same sanctifying Spirit. The describing the External Actions of Saints,

without observing the Holy Principles and Af∣fections from whence they derived their Life and Purity, is a defective and irregular Repre∣sentation of them. 'Tis as if an account were given of the Riches and Faecundity of the Earth, from the Flowers and Fruits that grow upon it, without considering the Mines of Precious Me∣tals contain'd in its Bosom. Now, only an in∣ward Christian that has felt the Power of Re∣ligion in his Heart, can from the Reflexion up∣on himself, and his uncounterfeit Experience, discover the Operations of Grace in the Brests of others.
Mr. Henry was Dedicated to the Service of Christ by his Mother, in his tender Age. His first Love and Desires (when he was capable to make a judicious Choice) were set upon God. He entred early into the Ministry, and Conse∣crated all the Powers of his Soul, Understand∣ing, Memory, Will and Affections, with his Time and Strength, to the Servio of Christ. And such was the Grace and Favour of God to him, that he lost no Days in his Flourishing Age, by satisfying the voluptuous Appetites, nor in his declining Age by Diseases and Infir∣mities, but uncessantly applied himself to his Spiritual Work. He was called to a private place in Wales, but his shining Worth could not be shaded in a Corner. A Confluence of People from other parts attended on his Ministry. In∣deed

the word of Truth that dyes in the Mouths of the cold and careless, (for they are not all Saints that serve in the Sanctuary) had Life and Spirit in his Preaching: For it proceeded from a Heart burning with Zeal for the Honour of Christ and Salvation of Souls. According∣ly he suited his Discourses to the wise and the weak: and imitated the Prophet, who con∣tracted his Stature to the dead Body of the Wi∣dows Son, applying his Mouth to the Mouth of the Child, to inspire the Breath of Life in∣to him. The poor and despised were instruct∣ed by him, with the same compassionate Love and Diligence as the Rich, notwitstanding the civil distinction of Persons, which will shortly vanish for ever: For he considered their Souls were of the same Precious and immortal value. In the Administration of the Lord's Supper, he exprest the just temperament of sweetness and severity: with melting Compassion he invited all relenting and returning Sinners to come to Christ, and receive their Pardon Sealed with his Blood: But he was so jealous of the Honour of Christ, that he deterr'd by the most fearful Consequences, the Rebellious that indulg'd their Lusts, from coming to par∣take of the Feast of the unspotted Lamb. He was not allur'd by Temporal Advantage (which is the mark of a Mercenary) to leave the first place, where by the Divine Disposal, he was seated.

When the fatal Bartholomew-day came, tho▪ he had fair Hopes of Preferment, by his At∣tendance upon the King and Duke of York, in their early Age, of which the remembrance might have been reviv'd; Yet he was guided by a Superiour Spirit, and imitated the Self∣denyal of Moses (a Duty little understood, and less practised, by the Earthly minded) rather choosing to suffer Affliction with the People of God, than to enjoy the good things of this World. As the Light of Heaven, when the Air is stormy and disturb'd, does not lose the rectitude of its Rays: So his enlightned Conscience did not bend in compliance with the Terms of Con∣formity, but he obeyed its sincere Judgment.
After his being Expell'd from the place of his publick Ministry, his deportment was be∣coming a Son of Peace. He refus'd not Com∣munion with the Church of England, in the Ordinances of the Gospel, so far as his Consci∣ence permitted. Yet he could not desert the Duty of his Office, to which he was, with sa∣cred Solemnity set apart. He was Faithful to improve Opportunities for serving the Interest of Souls, notwithstanding the Severities inflict∣ed on him. And after the restoring our Free∣dom of Preaching, he continued in the Per∣formance of his delightful Work, till Death put a period to his Labours.
After this account of him, as a Minister of

Christ, I will glance upon his Carriage as a Christian. His Conversation was so Holy and regular, so free from taint, that he was unac∣cuseable by his Enemies: they could only ob∣ject his Nonconformity as a Crime. But his vigilant and tender Conscience, discover'd the spots of sin in himself, which so affected his Soul, that he desir'd Repentance might accom∣pany him to the Gate of Heaven: an excel∣lent Testimony of Humility, the inseparable Character of a Saint. His love to God was supreme, which was declar'd by his chosen▪ Hours of Communion with him every day. The Union of Affections, is naturally produ∣ctive of Union in Conversation. According∣ly our Saviour promises, He that loveth me shall be loved of my Father; and I will love him, and will manifest my self to him: And he repeats the Promise, If a man love me he will keep my words: and my Father will love him, and we will come to him, and make our abode with him. To his special and singular Love to God, was joined a universal Love to Men: He did good to all according to his Ability. His forgiving of Injuries, that rare and difficult Duty, was eminently conspicuous in the shap∣est Provocations. When he could not excuse the offence, he would pardon the offender, and strive to imitate the perfect Model of Cha∣rity exprest in our suffering Saviour: who in

the extremity of his Sufferings, when resent∣ments are most quick and sensible, pray'd for his cruel Persecutors. His filial trust in God was Correspondent to God's Fatherly Provi∣dence to him. This was his Support in times of Tryal, and maintain'd an equal temper in his mind, and tenor in his Conversation. In short, he led a Life of Evangelical Perfection, most worthy to be honourably preserved, in the memory of future times. The following Narrative of it, if read with an observing Eye, how instructive and affecting will it be to Mini∣sters, and apt to Transform them into his likeness?
Thus, Sir, I have given a short view of the Life of that Man, for whom you had such a high Veneration and dear Love. It argues a clear rer Spirit and a Diviner Temper than is usual in Persons of Conspicuous Quality, when Holiness is so despicably mean in the esteem of Carnal Men, to value it above all Titles and Treasures, and the Perishing Pride of this World. I am perswaded it will be very pleasing to you, that your Name and excellent Mr. Henry's, are join'd in the same Papers. I am,

