



Dear Friends,
YOU are the Only People that ever I took a special Pasto∣ral Charge of: And Gods blessing and your Obedience to his Word, do make the remembrance of my Labours and Converse with you to be sweet. It was neither by Your Will, or Mine that we have been this twelve years se∣parated, nor that we yet continue so. I thank our most Gracious God, who, maugre all the Serpents Malice, hath Inwardly and Outwardly so well provided for you, above most others, as that I hope you will be no losers by any thing, which hath yet befallen you. That I have hitherto survived so many of my departed Friends both with you and elsewhere, after all that you have known, is my own won∣der, as well as yours: And what I have been doing in this time of our separation, I have formerly told you in part by some other Wri∣tings, and now tell you more by this (which was written about five or six years ago, though it found not passage into the world till now.) I live not yet Idle: But whether this be the way of my chiefest service to the Church of God, in my present case, some distant Censurers have questioned; If it be not, my Ignorance of my duty, and of what will be most useful to others is the cause, and not my Love of Ease, or my obeying Man rather than God. I judge that my chief duty, which I think is likest to do most good. I am glad that once more before I dye, I have opportunity to speak to you at this distance, and to per∣swade you to, and Direct you in, that Family Holiness and Righteousness, which hath been so much of your Comfort and Honour, and will be so while you faithfully continue it: O how happy a state is it; to have God dwell in your Families by his Love and Blessing, and Rule them by his Word and Spirit, and Protect them by his Power, and Delight in them and they in Him, as his Churches preparing for the Coelestial Delights! O how much of the Interest of true Religion must be kept up in the world, by the Holiness and Diligence of Christian Families! How happy a supply doth it afford, where there are sad defects in the

Teaching, Holiness and Discipline of the Churches? O that the Rulers of Families, who are silenced by no others, did not silence themselves, from that Instructing, and Prayer which is their work? I should be sorry that this Directory is so Voluminous that few of you can buy it, but that more Ends than One in such works must be intended. If any of you (which God forbid) shall shew by an ungodly life, that you have forgotten the Doctrine, which was taught you, or if more yet shall traduce the Doctrine of your once (unworthy) Teacher, Poste∣rity shall here see what it was, in this Record, which may remain, and preach, when I am yet more silenced in the dust. The Lord whom we have served (though with lamentable defects) and in whom (though alas too weakly) we have trusted, preserve us in the Life of Faith; Hope and Love, in Sincerity, Zeal, and patient Constancy, to the Glorious Life, where we hope to behold, in Perfect Love, (without the fear of death or separation) our most Blessed Head and God for ever.
Amen.
Totteridge near Barnet,
Feb. 10. 1671/2.

