


Reverend and dear Brethren.
AS I ow you an account of my Doctrine, when you require it, so do I also in some regards, when it is accused by others: which accordingly I here give you; and with you, to the rest of the Church of God. I take my self also to have a Right to your Brotherly admoniti∣ons; which I earnestly crave of you, when you see me go aside. And that I may begin to you in the exercise of that faithfulness which I crave from you, I humbly exhort you, that in the study and practice of such points as are here disputed (yea and of all the Do∣ctrine of Christ,) you would still most carefully watch against Self, and suffer it not once to come in and plead its Interest, lest it entice you to be Man-pleasers, when it hath first made you Self-pleasers, and so no longer the servants of Christ. You are deservedly hono∣red for your Agreements and Undertakings: but it is a faithful Performance that must prepare you for the Reward, and prevent the Doom of the slothfull and unfaithful, Mat. 25.23, 26. But this will not be

done, if you consult with Flesh and Blood, Self-de∣nial and the Love of God in Christ, do constitute the New-man; The exercise of these must be the daily work of your Hearts and Lives; and the preaching of these the summ of your Doctrine. Where Love doth constrain you, and Self-denial clense your way, you will finde alacrity and delight in those works, which to the carnal seem thorny and grievous, and not to be attempted. This will make you to be up and doing, when others are loytering, and wishing and pleasing the flesh, and contenting themselves with plausible Sermons, and the repute of being able pious men. If these two Graces be but living in your hearts, they will run through your thoughts, and words and waies, and give them a spirituall and heavenly tin∣cture; They will appear in your Sermons and exem∣plary lives, and give you a special fertility in good works; They will have so fruitful an influence upon all your flock, that none of them shall pass into another world, and take possession of their everlasting State, till you have done your best for their Conversion and salvation; and therefore that we may daily live in the Love of God, in Self-denial and Christian unity, is the summ of the praiers of

Kederminster, Jan. 17. 1656.
