



Madam,
I Present a Sermon to your view, that drew forth your Tears in the Hearing, and is like to be a revival of your Sorrow in Reading; but I could not without Indecence decline the inscribing it to your Name. 'Tis design'd to the precious Memory of one, whose Piety and Prudence had render'd most worthily and affecti∣onately

respected by you: One who for Forty Years faithfully served you in the Affairs of your Soul, and in that long space there was a continual Circulation of Favours on your Part, and Observance on his. As his Presence and Counsel, and Example in your Family was an excellent Blessing and dearly pri∣zed by you, so in proportion your afflicting Grief rises for the loss of him. But you are instructed to be content with the Divine Dis∣posal: And our Gracious God by withdrawing intermediate Com∣forts, calls you to more intimate and Heavenly Communion with Himself.
I might here take a just occasi∣on to speak of your eminent Ver∣tues, and of your serious Religi∣on

that crowns the rest: For then Praise-worthy Excellencies may be duely and safely represented, when he that Commends is not in danger of falling into Flattery, and the Person Commended is not in dan∣ger of being swell'd with Pride: And such is your excellent and conspicuous Goodness, that it re∣flects a Lustre upon your Nobility, and is above Verbal Encomiums; and your rare Humility is most re∣lucent amongst your other shining Graces. But 'tis needless to illu∣strate that Worth that is so visible to all.
I shall only observe, that as you have been so happy as to find Wisdom, the true Spiritual Wisdom that directs us to our Last and Blessed End, the Wisdom

that excells Rubies, and by an incomparable Comparison all the ad∣mired Things in the World: So the promised Reward of Wisdom has been your Portion: Length of Days are in her right Hand, and in her left Hand Wisdom and Honour. You are now come to Old Age, and are apt to com∣plain (such is your zealous Piety) that, your Strength being spent, you are useless, and with Impatience desire a Dismission from hence. But as a Servant that stands and waits upon his Master's Pleasure, as truly serves him, as he that is most industrious in his Business; so by an humble patient waiting upon your Heavenly Lord, till he shall call you to the Blessed State Above, you as truly please and

glorifie him, as when your active powers were fresh and lively, and you went about doing good.
Be encouraged, Good Madam, with unfainting Perseverance to expect the final Reward: For your Salvation is nearer than when you first believed. Let the Love of Christ always reign in your Heart, and the Crown of Glory be always in your Eye, that you may finish your course with joy. These are the most unfeigned De∣sires of him who is,
Madam, 
