



Much Honoured Cousins,
IT is not any Ambition to appear in Print,
that hath induced me to this Ʋnder∣taking;
Only I could not handsomly de∣cline
the Dedication of this Posthumous
Piece, and Presenting it to your Hands, who
have so clear and unquestionable a Right to
it, as will appear by the Sequel. I presume
you are not ignorant, that it was really in∣tended
and designed for you by the Reverend
Author, (now at Rest with the Lord) your
dear Brother and mine; Who, (had he
not been prevented by Death) had done it
with his own Hand: but perceiving the

Printing of this Book procrastinated beyond
his Expectation, and being dayly sensible of
his near approaching and long expected
Change, it was his desire that I would un∣dertake
it in his behalf; and indeed it was
one of the last requests he made to me before
he left the World. I doubt not then, but what I
have done herein, will be well construed and
kindly accepted, when it is done in pursuance
of so honest a Design▪ & to gratifie the just &
reasonable Desire of so near and dear a Rela∣tion,
who (on his Death-bed) bequeath'd
this Legacy as a Testimony of his unfeigned
Brotherly-Love, and Memorial of his real
Gratitude to you his dear Dear Sisters, who
had not been forgetful of him, but oft re∣lieved
and refreshed him by your Kind and
Christian like Visits, in his Low and Lan∣guishing
Condition.
As for the Subject of the following Dis∣course,
You will easily grant, it is very sea∣sonable
and needful as for all Times, so espe∣cially
these last and worst Times, wherein
Worldliness so much prevails & gets ground
of Godliness even in the Hearts and Lives
of those that call themselves Christians,
whereas did they truly answer the Name
they bear, what would it speak else, but their

Conformity to Christ, and not to the World.
The Words of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7. 29.
30, 31. deserve seriously to be taken, and
laid to heart by every Christian: Where, to
take us off the extreams of Joy and Sorrow
in the Possessing, or Parting with Earthly Re∣lations,
and Worldly Comforts, he tells us,
The fashion of this World passeth away:
and yet notwithstanding, how do we find
by Woful Experience, the Hearts of too many
drawn away and enticed through the Pre∣dominancy
of Worldly Lusts, that this
is their chiefest study how to keep in with the
World by Fashioning and Conforming the
dayly Actions of their Lives according to
the Rules and Patterns of it? And herein,
how do they seek to out-vye and out-stripeach
other with so great Emulation and Conten∣tion
(when their Lives and the World are
hastning to an end) as if it were their
highest Ambition to live and dye the Werld's
Favorites? But, certainly if there were a
through and sound Belief of a Life and
World to come, after this present frail and
transitory State of all things here below,
how would it turn the Stream and Current
of Mens Thoughts and Affections, and have
a powerful Influence on their Lives and Con∣versations,

to make them more Godly, & less
Worldly; and from this very Consideration
(2 Pet. 3. 11.) the Apostle argues strongly
for a Holy and Godly Conversation, and
not a Worldly Conformity. But our Saviour
himself hath foretoldus (and therefore we
may and must believe it) that towards the
end of the World it will be a rare thing to
find true Faith, (Luk. 18. 8.) that Victo∣rious
Grace which, St. John tells us. (1 Joh.
5. 4.) overcometh the World and the Lusts
thereof.
But (dear Cousins) I am perswaded bet∣ter
things of you, and such as accompany
Salvation. You have been happy above ma∣my,
in respect of your Education, having
been acquainted with Sound Principles of
Godliness from your tender years, through
the Care and Diligence of your Religious
Parents. And although there are too ma∣ny
to be found in these times, between whose
Principles and Practices there is little or no
Conformity, but the one is rather a plain
Confutation of the other; I hope you will
never be found in that number: for that
precious Seed of good Principles which was
sown in your Minority, was not (it seems)
burned and last, but hath (through Gods

Blessing with a continual watering) budded
and brought forth seasonable and wholesom
Fruit for the Comfort and Refreshing of o∣thers,
which hath occasioned (no doubt) the
Thanks-giving of many to God on your be∣half.
And if God hath given you, (with
a large and plentiful Estate) a large Heart
and open Hand to do good, it is a double
Blessing, and lays a double Obligation upon
you to be thankful.
Now because the best Christians need day∣ly
Monitors to warn them of Dangers, and
to awaken them to Duty and the continual
Exercise of their Graces; give me leave as
a faithful Friend to beseech you to keep in
remembrance, and seriously to ponder what
the Apostle writes to Timothy (1 Tim. 6.
17. 18, 19.) The more Splendid your out∣ward
Condition is, the greater is the Dan∣ger
you are exposed unto, from the Tempta∣tations
of a Smiling & Flattering World,
which being masked & vetled, are not easily
known and discovered; which if they were,
would more easily be resisted, and were no∣thing
so dangerous. They that by Experience
know what a tempting thing Worldly
Grandeur is, and have any acquaintance
with their own hearts, how apt they are to





be taken with it, cannot but acknowledg, it
is none of the easiest Points of that difficult
Duty of Christian Self-denial, for those
that have arrived at the Haven of Worldly
hopes, to keep their Hearts humble from be∣ing
lifted up with Self-admiring thoughts,
when their outward Greatness and Splendor
invites others to applaud and admire them.
And indeed it will put the Faith of Christi∣ans
to the greatest Stress, and prove not only
the Truth but the Strength thereof, when, in
the midst of Worldly Enjoyments, they can
look above them to higher and better; and in
the midst of Worldly Greatness, can live a∣bove
it in the Soul-ravishing View of Hea∣venly
Glory. It must needs be then a Mercy
worth the asking, and a Lesson worth the
learning, to have our Hearts loosed from
all outward Comforts before Hand, and to
leave and part with them in affection, be∣fore
we are called to part with them indeed,
(seeing there will be a time of parting and
we enjoy them on no other, but parting∣terms)
and then, whensoever they are ta∣ken
from us, or we from them, the trouble
of parting will not be great. But to detain
you no longer with an Epistle; As concern∣ing
the Author of the ensuing Sermons, it

is needless for me to write any thing to you
who were so nearly related and so siliarly
acquainted with him, to whom (I doubt
not) his Memory is and will be precious;
and that true Love, and due esteem you al∣ways
had for his publick and profitable La∣bours
is a sufficient Commendation of this
Practical Piece to your Serious Perusal which
I hope and heartily wish (through the Bles∣sing
of God) may prove advantagious to
preserve you from Worldliness, and for the
promoting the power of Godliness in your
Hearts and Lives, that you may dayly strive
after a nearer and closer Conformity to
Christ your Heavenly Pattern in all his imi∣table
Graces; then shall you have no cause to
repent the reading, but rejoyce and bless
God, that by his good Providence it is
brought forth to publick View, wherein the
Author, (though dead) yet speaketh.

