


SIR,
THO' no Man can put asun∣der, whom God hath joyn∣ed together; yet if He who makes the Union will make a Separa∣tion, Who durst say, what doest thou? The absolute Soveraignty of God, and his irresistable Power consi∣dered, hath repressed the Exorbitant Passions of Heathens under Temporal Evils: Though the Gospel assists us with divers more special and consola∣tory Arguments, yet we often come short of their Sedate Temper and Self-Government.

Your Affliction must be confessed Great, in the loss you sustain: And though the Advances of Death were from Time to Time apprehended, yet its Arrest was sudden; and this gives no small Accent to the Calamity. But the Subject of the ensuing Discourse is capable of affording Relief, Great and Suitable.
The Doctrine of a Glorious Resur∣rection is propounded by the Apostle, as a particular Lenitive to moderate Sorrow upon the Departure of our dearest Friends, who die in the Lord, 1 Thess. 4.13, 14. Its Efficacy and our Advantage by that Article depends upon our believing it: If ye believe that Christ died and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. There is great Reason to believe your departed Relative among the number that sleep in Jesus, so that your Peace and Comfort will be according to the Degree of your Faith in his Death and Resurrection.

I confess, it owing to your Self, that I insisted on this Subject, or rather a Particular Interposure of Divine Pro∣vidence, which without praevious Thoughts or Inspection fixed both your Eye and Mind together on this Text. I cannot omit to mention it as a thing which deserves a thankful Remark, that in so dark and sad a Season, you should be led to so bright and Joyful an Argument. What could have been suggested more Great and Support∣ing!
The direct Influence this Truth hath upon the Life of Man in General ren∣ders it useful to all; As there is no Man liveth, and shall not see Death, Psalm 89.48. So no Man that dieth, and shall not be raised: And since the kind of our Resurrection will be answe∣rable to our Manner of Living and Dy∣ing, this necessarily claims our best Cir∣cumspection and Diligence. Our na∣tural State is that of Apostates or Re∣volters from God: The Great Busi∣ness
of such Creatures is Conversion or Re-union with God through Christ. When we thus return and enter our Selves into the number of His Covenan∣ting Renewed ones, we becomes enti∣tuled to Redeeming Grace in all its Parts. And who is there that would not be redeemed? That would not (how slight soever his Present Thoughts are) when it comes to the utmost Point, give the whole World were it his, to be saved from Wrath and Hell? That would not rather with the assured Christian commit his departing Spirit into the Hands of God, and his Flesh to a hopeful Rest in the Grave, than to fall under the Seizure of the Devil, and the Arrest of Death together? The great Danger is least Men deceive themselves by separating between the Effects and Benefits of Renewing and Redeeming Grace, and therefore I have taken some Care to Guard against this, as the limits of the Time and Discourse would allow. I know Men are secretly dissatisfied
with the Terms of God; they would be Redeemed, but not subject to the Redeemer; they would live to them∣selves, and when they can live no longer, would Die in the Lord: But this is so Gross, they dare not utter it; and so full of Guilt, as that it will effectually consign them to an irre∣versible State of Dissatisfaction and Torment for ever.
I am Glad, that while I comply with your Request in the Publication of this, I can also testifie the great Respect I bore to the Person whose De∣cease occasioned it, and contribute in this way to the Embalming Her Pre∣cious Name. I shall not fail to di∣rect my best Desires to God, that He (who alone can) would fill up every Relation vacated by Her removal, by more plentiful Communications of Him∣self; that Her Humble and Pious Ex∣ample may live in your Memory; that Her hopeful Descendants may tread in Her steps; that you may all
attain to the same full Assurance of Hope; that God will be your God and Guide unto Death, and after∣wards Redeem You from the Power of the Grave, and receive You, that you may all (together with Her) be for ever with the Lord: In whom I am
Dear Sir,

