



SIR,
THough weakness and distance have prohibited me that converse with you which sometime I did enjoy, yet have they not excussed your former Kindeness out of my Remembrance. Received Benefits should not Die before us: If the Do∣nor kill them not by Retraction, the Receiver must not suffocate them by Oblivion; nor prove their Grave, who was intended for a Store∣house, if not a Garden where they may be Root∣ed and be fruitfull. In those hearts where Benefits Live, the Benefa∣ctor Liveth. And those that Live in our Estimation and Affection, we desire their Names may be inscribed on our Monuments, and survive with ours, when we are Dead. While we live also we more regard their Judgements of us, then other mens; and are more ambitious of stand∣ing right in their esteem; and therefore are willing that our just Apo∣logies may be in their hands, to hinder misapprehensions, and resist un∣just Accusers. May these Reasons excuse my prefixing your Name to these Papers, and directing them first to your Hand: (Custom having led me into that Road, wherein I do not unwillingly follow.) It is not

for Protection or Patronage of my Opinions: For that I referre them wholly to the Father of Lights, the Illuminating Spirit, and the Light of that Truth which they contain and Vindicate. Nor do I desire that you should make these things your Studies; they being more fitted to the use of those Students, that can lay out much of their time on such things. I confess I had rather see in your Hands, the Holy Scriptures, and Books of Practical Divinity, then these Controversies: and had ra∣ther hear such Practical Discourses from your Mouth. So farre am I from soliciting you to any singular Opinion of mine, that I solicit you not once to read these Books; save onely when any Opinion in them shall be Accused, to turn to the Words, and see what is said. It is the Pra∣ctical Christian that holds fast the Truth, which many eager Disputers soon lose. Doting about Questions that engender strife, is not the Reli∣giousness that God approves; What ever the Professours of this Age may imagine. It is the most Practical Teachers and People in Eng∣land commonly that are the most Orthodox. I have oft noted many mens Prayers to be much freer from Libertinism, then their Sermons; and their Sermons then their Writings and Disputes. That's a mans Judgement indeed, which he dare reduce to Practice, and own before God.
The Work of these Papers have been to my minde somewhat like those sad Employments wherein I attended you: of themselves, grievous and ungratefull; exasperating others, and not pleasing my self (besides the ruinating of my bodily health) And as the Remembrance of those years is so little delightfull to me, that I look back upon them as the saddest part of my life; so the Review of this Apologie, is but the renewing of my trouble: to think of our Common frailty and darkness, and what Reve∣rend and much valued Brethren I contradict; but especially for fear lest men should make this Collision an occasion of Division, and by receiving the sparks into Combustible Affections, should turn that to a Conflagrati∣on which I intended but for Illumination. If you say, I should then have let it alone: The same answer must serve, as in the former Cause we were wont to use. Some say, that I who pretend so much for Peace, should not write of Controversies. For my self it is not much Matter: but must Gods Truth (for such I take it) stand as a Butt for every man to shoot at? Must there be such Liberty of opposing it, and none of De∣fending? One party cannot have Peace without the others Consent. To be Buffeted and Assaulted, and Commanded to Deliver up the Truth of God, and called Ʋnpeaceable if I defend it and resist, this is such Equi∣ty

as we were wont to finde. In a word, both works were ungratefull to me, and are so in the Review; but in both, as Providence and mens on∣set imposed a Necessity, and drove me to that strait, that I must Defend or do worse; so did the same Providence so clear my way, and draw me on, and sweeten unusual Troubles with unusual Mercies, and Issue all in Testimonies of Grace, that as I had great mixtures of Comfort with Sorrow in the Performance, so have I in the Review: And as I had more eminent Deliverances and other Mercies in those years and wayes of Bloud and Dolour, then in most of my Life beside; so have I had more encouraging Light since I was engaged in these Controversies. (For I speak not of these few Papers onely, but of many more of the like Nature that have taken up my time.) And as I still retain'd a Hope, that the End of all our Calamities and strange Disposings of Providence, would be somewhat Better then was Threatned of late: so Experience hath taught me to think, that the Issue of my most ungratefull Labours shall not be vain; but that Providence which extracted them hath some use to make of them, better then I am yet aware of; if not in this Age, yet in times to come. The best is, we now draw no bloud: and honest hearts will not take themselves wounded, with that blow which is given onely to their Errours. However, God must be served when he cals for it, though by the harshest and most unpleasing work. Onely the Lord teach us to watch carefully over our Deceitfull Hearts, least we should serve our selves while we think and say, we are serving him; and lest we should Militate for our own Honour and Interest, when we pretend to do it for his Truth and Glory!
I hope, Sir, the Diversity of Opinions in these dayes, will not dimi∣nish your Estimation of Christianity, nor make you suspect that all is Doubtfull, because so much is Doubted of. Though the Tempter seems to be playing such a Game in the world, God will go beyond him, and turn that to Illustration and Confirmation, which he intended for Confusion and Extirpation of the Truth. You know its no news to hear of some Ig∣norant, Proud and Licentious, of what Religion soever they be. And this Trinity is the Creator of Heresies. And as for the sober and Godly, it is but in lesser things that they disagree: and mostly about words and Methods more then Matter (though the smallest things of God are not Contemptible.) He that wonders to see wise men differ, doth but wonder that they are yet Imperfect, and know but in part; that is, that they are yet Mortal sinners, and not Glorified on Earth! And such wonderers know not what man is, and it seems are too great strangers to themselves.

And if they turn these differences to the prejudice of Gods Truth, or di∣shonour of Godliness, they shew themselves yet more unreasonable; to blame the Sunne that men are purblinde. And indeed were Pride and Passion laid aside in our Disputes, and men could gently suffer contradiction, and heartily love and correspond with those that in lower matters do gainsay them, I see not but such friendly debates might edifie.
For your self, Sir, as you were a friend to sound Doctrine, to Ʋnity and to Piety, and to the Preachers, Defenders and Practisers thereof, while I converst with you, and as fame informeth us, have continued such; so I hope that God who hath so long preserved you, will preserve you to the end; and he that hath been your Shield in corporal dangers, will be so in spirituall.
Your great Warfare is not yet accomplished: The Worms of Corrupti∣on that breed in our bowels, will live in some measure till we die our selves. Your Conquest of your self is yet Imperfect. To fight with your self, you will finde the hardest, but most necessary Conflict that ever yet you were engaged in; and to overcome your self the most honourable and gainfull Victory. And think not that your greatest trials are all over. Prosperity hath its peculiar Temptations, by which it hath foiled many that stood unshaken in the storms of adversity. The Tempter who hath had you on the waves, will now assault you in the calm; and hath his last game to play on the Mountain, till nature cause you to descend. Stand this Charge and you win the day. To which, as one that is faithful to you, I shall ac∣quaint you in a few words, what his temptations are like to be, and how you should resist them: If you are already provided, a Remembrancer will do you no harm.
1. The first and great Assault will be, to entice you to Overvalue your present Prosperity, and to Judge the Creature to be better then it is, and to grasp after a fulness of Honour and Wealth, and then to say, Soul, take thy Rest. As you love your Peace, your Life, your Soul, your God, take heed of this. Judge of Prosperity as one that must go Naked out of the world: Esteem of earthly Greatness and Glory as that which will shortly leave you in the dust. Why should it be proper to Dying men to be Wise, and to Judge truly of this world, when all the living undoubtedly know that they must Die?
2. At least the Tempter will perswade with you to enjoy your Prosperity to the satisfying of your flesh; and tell you that the free use of the Creatures is your Christian Liberty, and therefore you need not deny your selves those Delights that God affordeth you. But remember that it is the seem∣ing

sweetness of the Creature that draws men from God: The Pleasantest Condition is the most dangerous. If ever you would have your soul Pro∣sper, make no provision for the flesh to satisfie its lusts: A better man then any of us, was fain to tame his body and bring it into subjection. Mor∣tification is a necessary, but much neglected part of the Christian Reli∣gion.
3. Should the Tempter prevail in these, it would follow, that God would be much forgotten, former Engagements violated, and the Invi∣sible things of the Life to come would be seldom thought on, and less estee∣med. O think on him that remembred you in your greatest straits! Its a provoking sin to break those Engagements which depth of Extremity, or Greatness of Deliverance, did formerly constrain us to make with our God! Ingratitude makes a forfeiture of all we have. And think not well of your own heart, when you cannot think more sweetly of another world then of this. Its unhappy prosperity that makes God to be more sleighted, and the Glory to come more unsavoury to our thoughts, and makes us say, It is best to be here.
4. Another dangerous Temptation that will attend these, will be, to disregard Christs Interest through an over-minding of their own: To play your own game, and lay out your chiefest care for your self, and make Gods business to stoop unto your own. Where this prevails, the hearts of such are false to Christ: While they pretend to serve him, they do but serve them∣selves upon him. They will honour Christ no longer then he will honour them. And when they are once false to Christ, they can be true to no one else. Their friends are esteemed but as stepping stones to their Ends. When they can serve them no longer they reject them as unprofitable. Ever Re∣member, that man stands safest that espouseth no Interest contradictory to Christs; I had almost said, None but Christs: For even Christs must be made his own, and then his own will be Christs. God is more engaged to secure his own Interest then ours. There is no Policy therefore comparable to this, to Engage most deeply where Christs chiefest Interest lieth, and to Ʋnite our own to his, in a just subordination. He that will needs have a standing divided from Christ, Independent on him, or Equal with him, much more in Opposition to him, is sure to fall. It will break the greatest Prince on Earth to espouse an Interest inconsistent with Christs, when he doth but arise to plead his Cause. Study therefore where Christs Interest most lieth, and then devote all your own to the promoting of it: and hold none that lives not as the Vine on the Wall, or rather as the branch in the Vine, in Dependance upon his. And upon Enquiry you will finde, that

Christs Interest lies much in these two things, the Piety and the Peace of his People. The Reformation of his Churches, and the Ʋniting of them (at home and abroad) are the greatest works that any can be Imployed in. To which ends Gods chiefest means, is an Able, Godly, Diligent Mini∣stry, to Teach and Rule his flocks according to his Word. All the Interest that God hath Given you, he expecteth should be speedily, diligently and undeservedly imployed to these Ends. Delay not, you have but your time. Think it not enough to do no harm, or no more good then those below you. Your standing is unsafe when you do little or nothing for God. He is not bound to hold you the Candle to do nothing, or to work for your self. Work therefore while it is day: the night comes when none can work.
5. Another Temptation that you must expect, will be, to have your minde swell with your Condition: and to disrespect the inferiour sort of your Brethren. But I hope the Lord will keep you small in your own eyes; as remembring that you are the same in the eyes of your Judge, and your shadow is not lengthened by your successes, and that you must lie down with the Vulgar in the common dust.
Sir, Because the matter of this Book may be less useful to you, I could not direct it to your hand, without some words that might be more useful. I do not fear least you should take my faithful dealing for an injury, or interpret my Monition to be an Accusation; as long as you so well know the Affections of your Monitor. The Lord be your Teacher and Defence, and Direct, Excite, Encourage and Succeed you, and all that have Op∣portunity to do any thing to the Repairing of our Breaches, by furthering The Reformation and Unity of the Churches: Which is the earnest Desire, and daily Prayer of

Kederminster,
Marc. 8th 1653.












