



SIRS,
THough it might seeme In∣gravity that the Sprouts in Libanus might attinge or touch the tops of the Cedars in
 Libanus. Notwithstanding, it is the most princely dignity, and the high∣est honour to the highest Cedars of Libanus; to overshadow & defend the lowest sprouts. Was it honora∣ble in King Agrippa, Felix and Fe∣stus, to lend audience to Paul a chay∣ned Prisoner? And will it not bee counted an honorable thing to your Highnesse, and to Your Honorable Lords to countenance the Contem∣plation of your Prisoner concerning the Prisoners of Hope? Were the gleanings of Ephraim better then vintage of Abiezer? and is not our Contemplation concerning Christs Prisoners, more fruitfull then the Vine with its fullest clusters? the Starres which are obscured in the presence of the brightest Sunne, are profitable in his absence, giving their light to the sublunarie travi∣lers: Howsoever the light of these our Contemplations for the present may seeme as darkenesse, yet if
 through your Princely favour, and your Honours protections these may be allowed; they will give a glimmering light to the poorest soule, and most distressed spirit: It will bee to them as the flowing springs of Solace, and as the plea∣sant influence from the highest starres. How will they sing of love because of the Fathers dearest love? how will they speake of glory in Christ the prince of glory? when they shal understand that they are set free by the blood of his Covenant out of the pit where in there is no water. Zach. 9.11. As for thee also, by the bloud of my Covenant, I have sent forth thy Prisoners out of the pit, wherein is no water. When they shall finde that their Lord was anoynted to set thē loose out of the Dungeon of death and darkenesse: and that hee was the chosen Redeemer to breake the barres of death, throw upon the gates of hell, and knap in
 sunder the chaines of the Devill. Isa. 61.1, 2, 3. The high and ho∣norable are not ignorant, that the greatest prince under heaven, and the mightiest Monarch in the sub∣lunarie world are poore prisoners of hope unto Christ mediatour of the covenant, King of his bought & Redeemed. Is the Earth beholding to the watery clouds? and the low∣est plants to the highest planers? & are not all Terren & earthly Princes beholding to Christ King of Kings and Lord of Lords for ever. The Prisoners of hope in this state and Kingdom are almost infinite in num∣ber. How many thousands lye sicke at the poole of Bethesda? how ma∣ny thousands of mourning and drooping hearts waits for Christs springs of love more then David did for the waters of Bethlehem? I might say, how many Millions wounded in their consciences, blee∣ding in their bloods; lies waiting at
 this houre before the throne of grace for the sweete and cleare countenance of God the Father, therefore they sigh and groane for his assurance through his Adoption of children, for his liberty through the Redemption from Eternall bonds, for his righteousnes through his presentation glorious, and for his joyes and consolation through the law of the Spirit of life and ob∣signation: as they have found under your Highest, Noblest and worthi∣est fauours, a gratious defence and loving protection, so they doubt not, but that two wings and two shadowes will be one wing and one shadow for their prosperity & pro∣tection: Considering, that there is such a neerenesse of union between the Princely Head, and the Hono∣rable shoulders of this Royall state and Kingdome. I with the Priso∣ners of Hope had neither gold nor silver, riches nor treasures, pearles
 nor jewells to present unto His Highnesse, or to the Honorable Assembly; save these lines of love for acceptation: Not doubting, but our present will bee as rich as the Queene of Shebaes was in Ierusalem; and as Benjamins and Judahs was in the sight of Joseph, sith the pre∣senter with the Prisoners of Hope, presents nothing else but a present concerning the Love of God the Father, the rich treasures and the righteousnesse of Christ Mediator, of the joyes, love and peace concer∣ning the Spirit of glory our comfor∣ter: knowing that is not conveni∣ent for the meanest to be offensive to the highest, and the weakest trou∣blesome unto the Honorable: We by generall petition, desire and re∣quest that His Majesty with your Honours, might honour the poorest with your shadow and vindication, and we in generall shall bee bound by an everlasting obligation, to wish
 all peace, all unity and concord be∣tweene His Majesty and your Ho∣nours for ever. Oh that the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah would not only crowne the Lyon with strength and fortitude; but also honor his poo∣rest Prisoners with peace and sweet tranquility. Oh that the King of Kings might shine gloriously upon the head of His Majesty, and the Prince of Princes might shine favo∣rably upon the Nobles of this Kingdome. Oh that the gratious fa∣vour of him that was in the Bush, and the deare love of him that was upon the Crosse might compose these differences, put an end to these great distractions, and make two one in this our Native Country. Whilst we thus desire and wish the welfare, prosperity and dignity of this State and Kingdome; we shall waite for His Highest and Princely acceptation, and your noblest and worthiest approbation of this Trea∣tise
 concerning the Prisoners of Hope, sith it is no lesse then the mes∣sage of the King of Kings unto a King, an Ambassage from the Prince of glory unto Princes: and a Contemplation of the Throne of grace to all that waits for grace in Israel. Therefore silence shall constraine us, whilest we wish for the highest glory the richest mercy, for the dearest bounty, and for the greatest love that flowes from the Thron of grace to fall upō you, that your dewes may be more soft then the dewes upon the tender herbs, that your light may bee more splen∣derous then the sun in the Meridian, and that the stability, firmenesse and glory of this State and Com∣monwealth may be faster fixed then the celestiall Orbe. Amen, Amen, Amen. Then shall the sonnes of Sion sing a song of Melodious, the daughters of Jerusalem make a har∣mony victorious, and the poorest
 Prisoners of Hope shall sit under your shadows most joyous, each gi∣ving glory, praise, honour, truth, and thankesgiving to him that sitts upon the Throne now and for ever∣more: Recording that sentence memorable throughout all ages and generations. Apoc. 4. last. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honour, and power: for thou hast cre∣ated all things, and for thy pleasure they are and were created.

