


My Lord,
I Am bold to Dedicate these my first fruits to your Honour as a testimony of my grateful mind for your Lord∣ships favours towards me. Three
things prompted me on to this undertaking.
First, The great honour I bear to Almighty God, whose Nature being mistaken, his Name is blasphemed, whilst he is ren∣dred so unlovely, as fatally to doom the greatest part of Man∣kind to everlasting fire, chiefly for his own glory, and not for the bad usage of the Talents they have received at his hands by making their sins but the sub∣ordinate cause of their damna∣tion, and Gods omnipotent power to justifie such a Decree. Now I would fain know how these fatal Dogmatizers could paint out the Devil in worse co∣lours, than they do our gracious God, if he had Gods omnipo∣tent
power to abuse, towards the far greatest part of mankind. But certainly God is more mer∣ciful than these men would have him be; else such blasphemers of his merciful nature had not died the common death of all men.
Secondly, The great honour I bear to the King, and the great love I bear to Kingly Govern∣ment, as least subject to oppres∣sion; or renting the State in pieces by Faction. In all Go∣vernments some body must ne∣cessarily be trusted with the Supremacy upon their ho∣nesty; and who is fitter to be trusted than he whom God and Nature shall design for so great a trust? If ungodly men have a mind to change, still they
must trust, or again rebel, and so in infinitum; for unless some∣body be trusted at last, there can be no peace. Who shall keep the Keeper is an unanswe∣rable question, unless you say God alone. If you say the Law, that indeed ought to keep him in the Right, and to be the Kings Director, but the Law cannot keep him as his Superi∣our, so as to touch life or limb if he be a Transgressour. He that hath a Prerogative to save other mens lives, when by Law condemned, must needs be sup∣posed to be above Law for his own. And blessed be God for the Kings Prerogatives, without which the Nation could not long continue in peace and safe∣ty.
If we revolve the English Histories of King Henry III. in the Grant given the Douze Peers (as they were called;) or of King Charles I. in the Grant to the Long Parliament, and consider the fatal destruction of Simon de Montford their General, and most of the Peers in the end; (al∣though so triumphant at Lewis in Sussex at the first) as a conse∣quence of the one; and of King Charles of blessed memory; (af∣ter so much bloudshed, and op∣pression) as a consequence of the other; it may teach us how unsafe it is for the People, to de∣sire any thing of the King, or for the King to grant away any Prerogative to the People, which may make him too weak for
Government, upon any diffi∣culty, or fair pretence whatso∣ever.
Thirdly, The great love I bear to the truth, as desirous to raise the decayed credit of it; that so men may walk in it. For Er∣ror embraced debases the under∣standing, as a Noble person his bloud by marrying one of mean Parentage and base conditions; and men acting generally ac∣cording to those Principles they have espoused; (for all their after reasonings, and deliberate actions, are founded on those Principles) when they are er∣roneous they take false mea∣sures of honour, and dishonour, of right and wrong, and the more zealous they are for them,
the wrose they are, as the Arrow ill levelled at hand, the further it flies, the further it is off the Mark. That God would give your Lordship length of days, riches, and honour, and at the end of those days everlasting felicity, is the Prayer of,

