



My Lord,
AMONG the gifts of Na∣ture God hath not im∣parted to Man a more admirable, than that of Reason; which is that to the soul, that the soul is to the bo∣dy. And amongst those of Fortune, he hath not given him a greater, than the Crosses of life; which render his ver∣tues

Eminent and Conspicuous, in pro∣curing him Palms of Victory, and Crowns of immortal Glory. The Pre∣sent I make your Eminence, of the cros∣ses and oppositions Cardinal Ximenes en∣countred and surmounted, in the Go∣vernment of a Kingdom, I dare affirm, the greatest and most considerable, the Treasures of past Ages can afford. But I fear, my Lord, I may appear as ridicu∣lous in offering it, as he that carries water to the Sea. Since the Esteem and Repute you have this day, of the prime Person of our Age, is no less grounded upon your incomparable Constancy, in ore coming all obstacles that oppose your vertue; then your admirable Con∣duct in Affairs of State. The Painter certainly commits no Crime, who fi∣guring out the Battels of other men, de∣lineates the Combates of some Great Captain, which were not designed the subject of his Pencill. And if my Pen innocently mention any Action, that may correspond, and run parallel with yours; I conceive it merits neither blame, nor contempt on that accompt. For, my Lord, what Minister of State is there, who hath not resembled others in some Traverses of Fortune, and cross

occurrences in his Administration, it being impossible to govern men, with∣out opposition from men? The Plato∣nick Philosophers held it an undoubted truth, That the World is a Temple built by God, who hath impressed his visible Image in the body of the Sun, to act in his stead. What the Sun is in the Universe, that a Minister of State is in the Government under his care; the great Representative of the Soveraign Authority. The Sun is the Eye of the World; and the Minister of State, in the Persian phrase, the Eye of the King. Yet this glorious Luminary hath its Eclipses, and aspiring mists and Clouds interposing between us and him, to the obscuring of his Light. The Ancient Fiction of the Suns rising out of the Sea, and setting there, without dimi∣nution of his Lustre; presents to us in him, the lively Picture of a Minister of State in the Government of the world; and intimates those troublesome and disastrous occurrences, that frequently infests the beginning and end of his Administration; but cannot impair the Rayes of his Glory. Cardinal Ximenes who by his good Conduct, rendred Spain happy; had notwithstanding a

whole Order of Religion to decry his Politick Actions. And besides them, the Grandees, the People, Cities and in∣tire Provinces, banded against him; and at last all that was powerful and considerable, in the Court and Coun∣trey he had so worthily served, aban∣doned and forsook him. But he who had a breast prepared, amidst the Court∣ly smiles of prosperous fortunes, to re∣sist the Storms and Tempests of Adver∣sity, hath left us a grand Example and famous Instance, to confirm the truth of that Assertion, which holds Constancy one of the principal qualities requisite in a Minister of State; that a stout Re∣sistance against the ills that encounter him, is the Buckler that secures his ver∣tues; And to turn his back to the As∣saults of Fortune, an Act misbecoming and altogether unworthy that Man, who has the Conduct of others. Behold him  (having surmounted all obstacles  in his way, to stop or disturb the urse of his vertue) arrived in France; where he may see practised the Rules of excellent Government; and hopes to acquire a second Glory, if, my Lord, you permit and allow his name to live with yours. The Age wherein he Go∣verned

Spain, and that which your Acti∣ons have filled with wonder and asto∣nishment, immediately succeed one the other; and may dispute with the Ages past and to come, the honour and esteem, of being the happiest of Ages, as ha∣ving produced two men, who have been the Oracles of good Conduct, and Poli∣tick administration.
If you grant him this favour, my Lord, I hope for my part, that in re∣compence of my Studies, and in consi∣deration of my Joint Travel with him, in this Commentary of his Administra∣tion, I may with your consent, obtain and carry the Title I desire, of
My Lord,

