



Reverend Sir,
THE Message on which this Epistle cometh to you is, to intreat you to Present this Treatise to the next Convocation, and to endeavour their publick renuncia∣tion of Foreign Jurisdiction, and their censure of the Books that are written here for it. The Reasons of my re∣quest are,
I. The Canons condemn them, that deny the Convocation to be the Church of England Representative: And they that have written for and promoted this Doctrine and Design,

have not only been Chief Men in the Church, but have laboured to fasten their Doctrine on the Church, which yet before the time of Bishop Laud, the Church disclaimed and openly condemned; and took Foreign Bishops and Councils, for Brethren and a lau∣dable means of Communion, while they did their proper work, but not by Jurisdiction to be the Governours of us, and all Christian Kings and Kingdoms as their Subjects. And who can be Ignorant, that when at the present the Papist Bishops are very Many to One Protestant Bi∣shop, they will accordingly carry it by their Votes in Councils: And if the Major Vote be the Collegium Pastorum, that have the Chief Go∣vernment in the Interval of Coun∣cils, we are now Subjects to the Bi∣shops and Church of Rome: And if  Roman Petrus Primus must call

the next Council, (or there must be none till all Christian Kings agree to call it) the present College is like to be long the Universal Ari∣stocracy.
The Representative Church of England is so nearly concerned in this great Matter, both for the mo∣ment of it, and the imputation of this Design unto it, that we cannot think they will lightly pass it by without their censure.
Which will be the more expe∣cted because of the Owning of Dr. Beveridge's Sermon to them, which I have here examined.
Dr. Whitby's Reconciler of Prote∣stants escaped not the Oxford cen∣sure; and we hope the Represen∣tative Church of England, will not be more favourable to Subjection, which is more than Reconciling to the Foreign Papists: Lest they che∣rish

the Suspicion that the desire of so much Concord with France in Church Constitution and Govern∣ment, will intimate a preparation to another Relation to them, which England cannot bear with ease.
And we are loth to be disabled to confute the Separatists, that will never be reconciled to the Church of England, if they can say that it is revolted to a Subjection to the Pa∣pists.
But why should we doubt whe∣ther the Convocation will renounce that which both themselves and all the Church and Kingdom are Sworn against, even all Ecclesiastical Foreign Jurisdiction.
II. The Reasons why I presume to desire you to be the Man that shall present this Book and Motion to them, Are 1. Because it is said that Custom maketh the Dean of

Pauls usually to be chosen the Pro∣locutor to the Lower House. I speak but by hearsay, having never been one of them: (For the Clergy of London choosing Mr. Calamy and Me for their Clerks, of that Convocation that made the Materials of the late differencing Impositions, Bishop Shel∣don by Prerogative excluded us to our great Ease: and so the City of London consented not by their Clerks to any of those Acts.)
2. And you are the Man that Published that Excellent Book of Dr. Isaac Barrow, which unanswera∣bly (against Mr. Thorndike and such others) confuted the Pretences to a Foreign Jurisdiction.
3. And you are known to be so firm a Friend to Love, Concord and Peace, (like your Father in Law Bi∣shop Wilkins, who once by appoint∣ment treated, and agreed with us in

a Vniting Form of Concord) that I may confidently expect your best Assistance.
If any should be so adverse to this Necessary Work as to turn it off by diverting to Accusation a∣gainst me, or the Nonconformists, I pray tell them how impertinent that is to the present Business: And if it be needful, shew them my Treatise for National Churches, and that of Episcopacy; and my English Nonconformity stated and argued: And whereas I am said to have refused a Bishoprick because I was against Epis∣opacy, be it known that in 1661, he Pacificators never offered any hing lower than Archbishop Vsher's Model of the Primitive Episcopacy: nd when the King's Declaration anted us less, we Published a hankful Acceptance. And I gave  Writing the Reasons of my Re∣fusal

to the Lord Chancellor Hyde, That If that Declaration were Confirmed by a Law, I would be no Bishop, because I would not disable my self to perswade as many as I could to Conformity, by drawing them to say that I did it for my own Ends. Which Answer satisfied the Lord Chancellor. I think every Bishoprick in England hath Buried many of its Bishops since my refusal; who am now near Dying in the 76th Year of a Painful Life; and in∣treat you though I be Dead to do this Office, for the Endangered Church of England, and for your truly honouring Brother,

