


DEarly beloved, seeing we are bound, by the deare love of Christ, not to conceal the mind of Christ, and that we are not our own, but every one bound by the bond of dear affection, to tender the good one of another, not onely in temporall, and common affairs, but al∣so in spirituall and celestiall matters; and not to retain as churlish Nabal, but rather dispence as Booz, unto Ruth; I
therefore upon the aforesaid considera∣tions am determined according to the strength and power which Christ hath given unto me, to bring to the view of the Saints, this heavenly Doctrine of free grace, of vocation by the Spirit, of Adoption, of Mediation by the Lord of life, and glory; of Reconciliation by his blood; of sanctification, by the Spi∣rit; of union through faith and love, and of glorification through that sweet communion which we shall injoy in him who is the Lord of life and blessed∣nesse for ever. To whom shall I present these lines? except to you who know the mysterie of life and salvation, who are heires and coheires with God in Christ, who have interest in all that is the Fathers, and Jesus Christs whom he hath sent, and walke in the light, as Christ is the light of truth, and Re∣demption. I am perswaded of your in∣tire loves and affections to the Word of life and salvation; and that nothing is so dear unto you as to heare of the praise of your beloved. In the true knowledge of what is Christs, consists the true solace of heart, joy in consci∣ence, and contentment of mind. What
joy? what peace? what consolation can be without this knowledge? that God communicates to his grace, unde∣serving: that they are called from the kingdome of Satan, to the kingdome of Christ: that they who were slaves, and captives of hell, are made the brethren of Christ, that they are united to the be∣loved Christ, from whom they receive their being, and well-being, that they are sanctified by the Spirit of life, which frees them from the law of sinne, and death; that they are clothed with the royall robes of Christ, and that they shall for ever dwell with Christ, in the heavenly Jerusalem. This fountain is as Gileads balme, and Damascus rivers; As a continuall spring, of the sweetest repast: as a fountaine of over-flowing pleasures, and the delightsome delecta∣tion of all the faithfull. Hath eyes seen, hath eares heard, or mind conceived the admirable joyes, that God hath laid up for them that love him? or hath eye seen, eare heard, or mind conceived the singular consolation which comes from the knowledge of these to the Saints through the hand of a Mediator? Was Jacob joyfull because Joseph was
yet alive? was Isaac comforted because of Rebeckah his wife? and may not the Saints be consolated in this divine love and favour through the testimonie of the Spirit?
O the height of favour, O the deep∣nesse of love, O the breadth of grace, and the longitude of free immense, and in comprehense mercie of God to his poore servants, that the clouds are dis∣cussed, the mists and foggs of darknesse dispersed, and the Saints behold the mirror of divine glory in the face of Je∣sus Christ! I confesse (beloved brethren) that my talents in number answereth his who had but two; and the compo∣sure of these lines are as the gleanings of the vintage: yet doubt I not of your loving and sweet acceptation, there∣fore I rest upon your loving acceptance: yet will I never rest, nor cease day and night imploring and beseeching the Fa∣ther of supereminent grace, and boun∣tie, to seal these spirituall and heavenly benedictions to your souls, wishing your strength like Judah's; your bles∣sing like Josephs, and your triumph like Gads, through the good will of him who was in the bush; and the sweet pleasure
of him who died on the Crosse: that so you may be preserved from miserie, unto eternall felicitie, through the Son of everlasting righteousnesse and glory; to whom be ascribed all glory, and ho∣nour for ever and evermore. Amen.

