



Most Dear Brethren,
I Never well understood their mean∣ing,
who crave Patronage to their
Writings from the meere great o∣nes
of the times. If they need or
desire a borrowed honour, me∣thinks
they quite mistake their way, and go
for water to the top of Teneriffe, which they
should seek in the valleys or stillflowing
Springs. To give them our Writings to in∣struct
them, is agreeable to our Office and
duty: but to submit them to their censures,
or crave the protection of their Greatnesses,
and prefix their names as the Signatures of
Worth, as if Truth did ever the more dwell
within, where this gilded sign is hang'd with∣out:
this seemeth to me, to be as needlesse,
as absur'd. The self-idolizing sin of Pride is
so naturall to all men, especially when fur∣thered
by dignities and wordly pomp, that
they are apt enough without a tempter, to
take themselves for the summum genus in every

Predicament as well as their owne. A little
help wil mount them above their Teachers,
and a little more above Ordinances; but the
top of the ambition is to be above God; that
on them as the Alpha all may depend, and to
them as the Omega all may ascribe. I think it a
more needfull work (not for our honour, but
their own safety) to make them understand,
that Princes and Parliaments are Schollers in
that Schoole where Christ is the Master, and
we his Ushers: and that (at least) in respect of
our Nuncupative, Declarative power, we are
their Rulers in spirituals, whom they are
bound to obey, Heb. 13. 7. 17. and that all Mi∣nisters
are Bishops or Overseers in the lan∣guage
of the holy Ghost, Act. 20. 28. Phil. 1.
1. &c. and not the servants or pleasers of men,
Gal. 11. 10.
They leave us the bare name of their Tea∣chers,
so that we will teach them nothing but
what they have taught us first, and leave out
the hard sayings, which they cannot beare.
For my part, though I have found as much re∣spect
from such as most, yet have I known very
few of the most Religious great ones, but if I
would deal but half as plainly as my commis∣sion
and patterns doe require, I should quickly
turne their respect into indignation. If the
old round dealing Prophets and Apostles were
among us, I doubt some pious Gentlemen

would take them for sawcy, proud, pragmatical
fellowes; and would think their tongues
(though not their revenues) did need a refor∣mation.
All this is no blemish to Magistracie,
the Ordinance of God, but to humane nature,
that for the most part can as ill beare a high e∣state,
as a mans brains can endure to stand on
the pinacle of a steeple. Nor is this to blame
any due honor to such, but to excuse my
selfe, that I employ not my breath to fill any
empty bladder. For you who are low, and
full, I suppose the acknowledgement of your
worth is lesse dangerous. As I am more be∣holden
to Reason and Religion, then to Great∣nesse,
so doe I feel them command my esteem
and affections most powerfully. Your names
therefore have I chosen to prefix to this paper.
1. As acknowledging you indeed fit censors
of my Doctrine; having alwayes valued the
judgement of Aristotle in Philosophy before
Alexanders; and thinking your approbation
more considerable then all the Lords or Com∣manders
in the Land. If you approve, I shall
be the more confirmed (and so will my people
for whom I write it, who know and honour
you.) If you disallow, (for I cannot conceit
that there is nothing to be disallowed) I shall
suspect, and search againe.
2. I desire also hereby to acquaint the world
with the reverend esteem I have of you, and

to shew the contemners of the ministry some
examples for their confutation: That they
who think that England hath not as learned,
holy, experimentall, judicious, humble, heart-piercing
Preachers, as any other Nation what∣soever,
may look upon you and confesse their
errour: That for all the dissentions that have
so wasted both Church and State, it may ap∣peare
in you, wee had some that were lovers
of peace; and if all had been so minded, our
wounds had bin heal'd. That our ignorant
yonglings that rush upon the Ministry (who
may see themselves in that glasse, 1. Tim. 3. 6.
may consider their distance from such as you,
and be humbled. That those who wonder at
the spreading of errors in our people, may see
in you, we had some that taught them better;
And Alexander did unjustly hang Ephestions
Physitian because hee dyed. And that our
Authors or defenders of Ieroboams worship,
whose fingers itch to be doing with the Pro∣phets
that gain say them, may see what manner
of men they have to deale with, whose worth
is sufficient to disgrace the proudest persecu∣tors,
and make their names hatefull to all ge∣nerations:
To whom I commend Sir Walter
Rawleighs true observation (Hist. of the world
par. 1. l. 4. c. 3. . 6.) [If Antipater upon his con∣quest
had carried all other actions never so
mildly, yet for killing Demosthenes, all that

read his eloquent Orations, doe condemn
him for a bloody Tyrant to this day: Such
grace and reputation doe the learned Arts
finde in all civill Nations, that the evill done
to a man famous in one of them, is able to ble∣mish
any action how good soever otherwise
it be, or honorably carryed. To such ends as
these have I here prefixed your names; and
not to interesse you in the dishonour of the
imperfections of this slender Tractate.
Farewell, Reverend Brethren, and go on
to be exemplary in all spirituall excellencies:
And that the Lord of the Harvest would send
forth more such, and lengthen and succeed
your labours to his Church, is the hearty
prayer of.

Apr. 7. 1649.
