



My LORD,
THis Sermon had never been more publick then the Preaching of it made it, had it not been complained of, and represented by some of the Governours of the City of London, for a Sermon that deserved to be Censured, as reflecting upon the Government of the City. Your Lordship being my Diocesan, I have here presented your Lordship with the whole of what was preached; humbly submitting my self and my Sermon to your Lordship's Censure. It may be suspected, that I have suppressed in the printing, something that was preached; which

I have not done: something may be added, but nothing is diminished: so that if there be no Reflexions upon the Government of the City in my Sermon now, there were none then. My Discourse, as my Text did direct me, was wholly to the Governed. Directions to Governours as Governours, from me, would have been pre∣sumptuous, and therefore I used none. There is one Expression indeed in my Sermon to this purpose, That were Laws duly executed, men durst not despise and affront the Government so as they doe: which Expression, if it reflect any thing, it is Praise and Applause to the Go∣vernment and the Laws we are governed by; and onely wisheth, that the Mean whereby Go∣vernment attains its End, were sometimes look∣ed a little better after. Reflexions either up∣on the Government, or Governours, I ever thought improper for the Pulpit. Nay, I have ever hated them from the time that Pulpits were turned by such doings into Drums, to beat up for Sedition and Rebellion; remem∣bring what the dismal Consequences of them have been to this Church and State. I am so unwilling to reflect upon any, that I am not pleased that the Vindication I have made of my self, by the printing of my Sermon, will re∣flect,

as it will, upon the Misrepresenters of it, accusing them (except my pressing Subjection to Governours be reflecting upon the Government) of the breach of the Ninth Commandment. But the Slander I had not at all weighed, but that it reflects upon the Government my sly Ac∣cusers seem so tender of. For the Government will be suspected to be in evil Circumstances, if it shall be found inconvenient to press due Subjection unto Governours: and men will be made to fear that we are in such Times again as we were in about the time of the Scotch In∣vasion, when they who appeared for the Go∣vernment, by adhering to their lawfull Go∣vernours, were accounted the Delinquents; whilst others were accounted the best Subjects, (as it is observed by him that hath lately writ the Life of Archbishop Bramhall) when their Swords were drawn against him who could onely grant them Commissions, and their Scabbards thrown away. My Lord, my ap∣pealing to your Lordship is in a right line; and my presenting your Lordship thus publickly with my Sermon, for as much as I doe it in my own Defence, it will (I hope) in part excuse the Defects of it, of which I am so Conscious, that the Requests I had of Friends had not

prevailed with me to publish it, if I had not had this Provocation. For the thing that I believe gave Offence, my declaring that the Execution of the Laws is the best Expedient to preserve them from Contempt: my Opinion herein I shall never retract: and your Lord∣ship's Government, from the time of your Lord∣ship's Translation to the Diocese of Norwich, hath very much confirmed me and others in it. And the Experience the Clergy have, that it is not Preaching and Writing will so preserve the Peace, as the Governours interposing himself to see the Laws observed, doth oblige the whole Body of the Clergy, to desire heartily the long continuance of your Lordship's Government over us, and particularly
Your most obedient Servant,

