



MADAM,
OF all Affairs for the compas∣sing
whereof Men are so di∣ligent
and sollicitous, there
is none of that absolute necessity, and
high importance, as the Preparation
for Death and Judgment. This
requires the whole Man in his best vi∣gour,
and should be the Work of the
Day, but 'tis usually delayed till the
melancholy Evening of Age, or the twi∣light
of Death. The Trifles of this
World divert them from that main bu∣siness,
to which all other things should
be subordinate. It equally deserves
Wonder and Compassion, that Death
which is so constantly in Mens view,

should be so seldom the matter of their
application, when all are of the same
Glass, made of the same frail natural
Principles; and no Argument is more
frequently and pathetically urged upon
them.
'Tis not strange that deep Truths,
that by the strength and exercise of the
mind are drawn like Gold out of the
Mines, have no efficacy upon those that
are not capable of understanding them:
but the Doctrins of Death, and Judg∣ment
after it, are plain Truths, by
Natural, Moral, and Divine Evidence
known to all, yet no more affect Men,
than a Paradox of incredible Novelty.
If the Doctrine of Eternal Judg∣ment
were but a probable Opinion,
controverted with equal Arguments,
yet 'tis a matter of such vast concern∣ment,
that Reason requires all our pos∣sible
diligence to avoid an eternal evil
that may be, the loss of coelestial Glory,
and the Torments of Hell: But since

'tis an infallible Truth, as certain as
the Word of God, 'tis a Miracle to
astonish Heaven and Earth, that Men
live as carelesly as if they should never
die, and die as securely as if they
should not live in the next state, to re∣ceive
the just punishment of their Sins.
They are fearless whilst Death is far
off in their thoughts: and when Age
has snowed upon their heads, that no
Marks of decaying Nature should ap∣pear,
make their own Winter to flourish
with another Spring. But 'tis in
vain, for Death knows them under
their disguise, and will not stay beyond
the appointed time. And in that deci∣sive
hour, Infidelity or Presumption
hardens Men to pass as quietly and
boldly in appearance into another world,
as unfeigned Faith, and a regular lively
Hope in the Promises of the Gospel.
But as deceitful Physick stops the Fit
for the present, that will return more
violently and fatally afterwards: So a

counterfeit short Peace transmits them
to everlasting Sorrows.
The design of the following SER∣MONS
is to awaken Men, that
they may be wise and consider their lat∣ter
end: to secure an interest in our
Redeemer, who has disarmed Death of
its Sting, and made that Enemy our
Friend: and to practise dying every
day, by withdrawing their hearts from
the vanities of this transient World,
that have such a pernicious influence to
excite the carnal appetites, and stupify
the Conscience, which are the true
causes of their sin and misery. And
what can be more powerful to render
them temperate and sober in the use of
present things, vigilant and serious in
their preparations for their great and
final Change, than the remembrance
that Death is immediately attended
with Judgment, and Judgment
with Blessedness or Misery for ever.
I know this Argument is naturally dis∣pleasing,

but the usefulness should re∣commend
it to our most solemn and com∣posed
thoughts, before all the vain en∣tertainments
of the Fancy and sensual
Affections. As Herbs of Medicinal
virtue, that are not pleasing to the sight
or smell, yet are valued by the Skilful
as treasures of Health; and preferr'd
before the fairest Flowers that are per∣fum'd
and painted by Nature, so as
to excel the richest lustre of Solo∣mon's
Glory.
The Body is in a continual Con∣sumption,
and no Art can long preserve
it: but whilst the outward Man is
irrecoverably declining and wasting, if
the Inward Man be ascending and
renewing to perfection, the advantage
is incomparable. O how comfortable
is it to a holy Believer in the parting
hour to commit his Spirit into the hands
of his Heavenly Father! (for thus he
is authorized and encouraged by our
Saviour's Example) and lay down

the Flesh to rest in Hope: for
Christ is the Guardian of the Grave,
has the Keys of Death, and will
revive the Bodies of his Saints incor∣ruptible
and immortal, the Copies of
his own glorious Body.
Madam, I shall not attempt the
celebrating your Ladiships Vertues, that
render you a bright Ornament of your
Sex, and more truly Honourable than
your Noble Descent and Alliance: but
direct my best Desires to God, that
your Family may be a singular and e∣minent
Example of the Divine Favour:
that the fading Gloss of this World may
not deceive you, but your Heart may
be above where your Treasure is;
that you may live to God and your Soul,
for Heaven and Eternity. I am,
Madam, Your Honours very humble
and faithful Servant,

