


Humbly sheweth,
THat the Religion of the Papists is Superstitious and Idolatrous, their Faith and Doctrine erronious and hereti∣call, their Church in respect of both Apo∣staticall. To give them therefore a Tolera∣tion, or to consent that they may freely ex∣ercise their Religion, and professe their Faith and Doctrine is a grievous sin; and that in two respects.
For first, It is to make our selves acces∣sary,

not only to their superstitious Idola∣tries, Heresies, and in a word, to all the abomnations of Popery; but also (which is a consequent of the former) to the per∣dtion of the seduced people, which perish in the Deluge of the Catholick Apostacy.
And as it is a great sin, so also a matter of most dangerous consequence, the conside∣ration whereof we commend to the wise and judcious. Beseeching the zealous God of Truth, to make them who are in Authority, zealous of Gods Glory, and of the advancement of true Religion; zealous resolute, and couragious against all Popery, Superstition and Idolatry. Amen.

Ja: Armachanus.
Auth: Medensis.
Ro: Dunensis. &c.
Richard Cork, Cloyne, Rosses.
Tho: Kilmore & Ardagh.
Mich: Waterford, and Lismore.
Mal: Casohellen:
Tho: Hernes. & Laughlin.
Geo: Deceus.
Andr: Alachadeus
Theo: Dromore.
Franc: Lymrick.



Since then, neither in right reason, and true policy of State, it is either becoming or safe, for Christian Magistrates, to have no ac∣knowledgment of any face of Religion, so farre among their people and Subjcts as to stablish, own and command it; nor is it any piety, for Christians, to be alwayes scepticks in Religion; ever unsatisfied, and unresolved, and unestab∣lished in matters of Gods worship, and mans salvation, still ravelling the very grounds of Religion with endless cavells and endless disputes. Since the Word of God is neer and open to direct all men in the wayes of God; and since what is necessary to be believed and obeyed in truth and holinesse, is of all parts in Scripure most plaine and easie; No doubt, but Christian Magistrates are highly bound in Conscience to God, and in charity to the good of their Sub∣jects, (to whom they must do more good, then they are desired to do by the Vulgar) to establish those things, as to the extern order, Ministry, form and profession of Religion, both in doctrine and duties, which they shall in their consci∣ence judge and conclude, upon the best advice of learned and godly men, to be most agreeable to the will of God, as most clearly grounded

on the Word in the general tenor and analogy of it; and as most fundamentally necessary to be believed and obeyed by all Christians; where∣to the Catholick beleife and practice of all Churches (more or lesse agreeing) gives a great light and direction. Christians must not be al∣wayes tossing to and fro in Religion, as if no∣thing were true fixed and certaine in Religion; nothing heretical, corrupt, and damnable in opinion and doctrine; nothing immorall, un∣lawfull, and abominable in practice; nothing perverse, uncharitable, and uncomely in sediti∣ons, schisms and separations.


