



SIR,
YOur Names stand here in the front of this Treatise, on a double account: First, that (the custom of Writers ha∣ving given me such an ad∣vantage) I may tell the pre∣sent and future Ages, how much I love and honour your Piety, Sobriety, Integrity and Mo∣deration, in an Age when such Vertues grow into contempt, or into lifeless Images and Names: And how much I am my self your debter,

for the manifold expressions of your love; and that in an Age when  the superio culties is ou of fshion; and towards such as I, is grown  crime Sincerity and  are things that shall be honourable, when Hypocrisie and Malice have done their worst: But they are most con∣spicuous and refulgent in times of rity; and when the shame of their contraries se them off.
Secondly, To signifie my Love and Gratitude by the best  which I can make; which is, by tendering to you and to your family, the surest Directions, for the most noble manly life on earth, in order to a blessed life in Heaven. Though you have proceeded well; you  need of help: so great a  for skilfull counsel, and  and industrious, and unwea  And your hopeful children may  to learn this excellen Life from these Directions, for the love of your prefixed Names. And how happy will they b, if they converse with God,  are wallowing in the  of  When the dead heated sinner thinketh not

of  be dragg'd out of  papered corrup∣tible flesh, to divinie , and with the beginnings of endless , to the world where they might have found everlasting rest; what joy will then be the portion of mortified and patient Believers, whos Treass, and Hearts, and Conver∣sati in Heven, are now the foretaste of their possession, as the Spirit of Christ which causeth this, i the se of God, and the pledge and earnest of their inheritance. If a  pleasing life in a dark, distracted,  world, were better than a life with God and Angels, methinks yet they that know they cannot have what they , should make sue of what they may ha▪ And they that cannot keep what they , should learn to  what  may keep. Wonderfull stupidity! ht they  dead bodies  grave, is as common a work,  children into the world, and that this

life is but the road to another, and that all men are posting on to their , should think no more considerately whi∣ther so many thousand souls do go, that daily shoot the gulf of death▪ and return no more to the world which one they called their home! That men will have no house or home, but the ship which carryeth them so swiftly to eternity! and spend their time in furnishing a dwelling on such a tempestuous Sea, where winds and tide are hasting them to the shore! and even to the end are contriving to live where they are daily dying! and care for no bitation but on horse-back! That almost all men die much wiser than they lived; and yet the certain foreknowledge of death will not serve to make them more seasonably and more safely wie! Wonderful! that it should be possible for a man awake, to believe that he must shortly be gone from earth, and enter into an unchangeable end∣less life, and yet not bend the thoughts of his soul, and the labours of his life, to se∣cure his true and  Adam hath given sin the  grace, and madness the priority to wisdom;

and our wisdom, health and safety, must now come after, by the way of recovery and cure. The first born of lapsed man was a malignant persecuting Cain. The first born of believing Abraham, was a perse∣cutor of him that was born after the Spirit, 1 John 3.12. Gal. 4.29. And the first born of this Isaac himself, was a profane Esau, that for one morsel sold his birth-right, Heb. 12.16. And naturally we are all the off-spring of this profaneness, and have not acquaintance enough with God, and with healthful holi∣ness, and with the everlasting heavenly Glory, to make us cordially preferr it before a for∣bidden cup, or morsel, or a game at foole∣ry, or a filthy lust; or before the wind of a gilded fools acclamation and applause; or the cap and counterfeit subjection of the multitude: But the —fortunae, non tua turba (ut Ov.) & quos sportula fecit amici (ut Juv.) who will serve mens lusts, and be their servants, and humble attendants to damnation, are regarded more than the God, the Saviour, the Sanctifier, to whom these perfidious rebels were once devoted. That you and yours may live that more wise and delightful life, which consisteth

in the daily sight of Heaven, by a Living Faith, which worketh by Love, in constant Obe∣dience, is the principal end of this publick appellation: That what is here written for the use of all, may be first and special∣ly useful to you and yours, whom I am so much bound to love and honour; even to your safe and comfortable life and death, and to your future joy and glory; which is the great desire of

Feb. 4. 1669.
