


and still continueth so to do. And while I can say, that I know of no No∣bleman living who hath read more of my Writings than You have done, all that know the End of Writing, will consent, that there is no Noble Name which I should prefer. And as I long ago read in the Learned Spanhemius's Dedication of his Dubia Evangelica p. 3. to You (well joyned with the famous Usher) the predication of Your Judicium supra aeta∣tem maturum, rerum omnium cognitione sub∣actum pectus, and that as attested by the Illustrious Duke of Rohane, the Most Sagacious Arbiter of ingenies; And years and experience have been long adding to Your knowledge: Being not a stran∣ger to the Truth of this my self, I have great reason to be Ambitious to stand right in Your esteem: (For who reverenceth the Judgement of ignorant Readers? Or doth not reverence the Judgement of the Wise?) And therefore to give You an account of my self and of this writing;
Since I overgrew that Religion which is taken up most on humane trust, by in∣creasing knowledge I increased mens displeasure; and my judgement not falling just into the mold of any Sect among Church-dividers, there is scarce any Sect which doth not, according to their various interests, signifie their displea∣sure. Some only by Magisterial Censures; more credibly acquainting the world, what they are themselves, than what I am, or what is my judgement. But from others I take a meer slander for Clemency, and as Philostratus saith, de Dicto Phavorini) Et dum Socratis cicutam non bibam, aereâ privari statuâ non laedit. Simple Christiani∣ty is my Religion: I determine to know nothing but Christ Crucified (and Glori∣fied.) And I am past all doubt, that till simple Christianity become the terms of Church-Unity and Concord, the Church will never see Unity or Concord, which shall prove universal or durable. So certain am I, that the Wits of the Learned, much less

of the Community of vulgar Christians, will never arrive at the stature, of Concord, in numerous and difficult points: Nor the marvellous diversity of Educations, occasions, temperatures and capacities, be ever united in any thing but what is plain and sim∣ple. And as Certain am I, that the Universal Conscience of true believers will never unite, in any thing which is not evidently divine. And yet as certain am I, that the forsaking of the determina∣tion of the Holy Ghost and the Apostles, Acts 15.28. and of Pauls Decision, Rom. 14. & 15. hath been the Engine of Church-Divisions and many calamitous di∣stractions to this day: And that that blessed Prince who must have the honour and comfort of beginning the true heal∣ing and Concord of the Churches, must pare off all their superfluities, and leave them at best among their things indif∣ferent, and unite them on the terms of simple Christianity.
And as to Popery I have certainly

found, that the Cross Interests and Passions of Disputers have made us (though re∣ally too distant) to seem commonly about many Doctrinals more distant than indeed we are: And that it had been better with us, if such men as judici∣ous Ludov. le Blank, had had the stating of our Controversies at the first, that differing words and methods might not have passed with either side for dam∣nable errors in the faith. I mean in the points of fore-knowledge, predestination, providence, predetermination, concurse, origi∣nal sin, free-will, universal Redemption, sufficient Grace, effectual Grace, the nature of Faith, Justification, Sanctification, Merit, Good Works, Certainty of Justification, and of Salvation, Perseverance, &c. For my knowing this to be true, I am censured by those on one extream, as too favourable to the Papists (being indeed an Ene∣my to injury, calumny, uncharitable∣ness or cruelty to any in the world.) But I am much more displeasing to the

Roman party; Because I know, that One man is naturally uncapable of being the Monarch of all the world: That the King of Rome (as the Geographia Nubiensis calls him) was never by Christ made King of Kings and Lord of Lords: That he ne∣ver was, nor can be a Pastor at the An∣tipodes, and over all the Earth, or as far as Drake and Candish did Navigate: That it's a sorry Argument, [Monarchy is the best Government: Ergo, An universal Mo∣narchy is best:] That the Government setled in Nature and Scripture, is for Princes to rule Churchmen and all, by the Sword, and the Pastors of all particular Churches, to rule their Congregations by the Church-Keys, that is, by the Word, using Synods for due concord and corre∣spondency: And this much will do better than all the stir that the Clergies Ambition hath made in the world.
I know that the Pope standeth on no better a foundation than the other four Patriarchs: And that he was but the

chief Prelate or Patriarch in one Empire, as the Archbishop of Canterbury is in En∣gland; And that the Greek Church never took his Primacy in that one Empire to be of Divine Right: For if they had, they had never set up the Patriarch of Constantinople against him, who never claimed his Primacy as jure Divino. I know that the great Council of Chalcedon de∣creed, Act. 16. Bin. 734.
[We fol∣lowing alwayes the definitions of the holy Fathers and the Canon, have our selves also defined the same things, concerning the Priviledges of the same Most Holy Church of Con∣stantinople, New Rome; For to the Seat of Old Rome because of the Empire of that City, the Fathers consequently gave the Priviledges: And the one hun∣dred and fifty Bishops most beloved of God, being moved with the same intention, have given equal Privi∣ledges to the Most Holy Seat of New Rome: Reasonably Judging that the

City adorned with the Empire and Senate, shall enjoy equal Priviledges with Old Regal Rome.]
I know that their late Bishop of Chalcedon saith (against Bishop Bram∣hall, Survey, pag. 69.) [To us it sufficeth, that the Bishop of Rome is St. Peters Suc∣cessor; and this all Fathers testifie. But whether he be so jure Divino vel humano is no point of faith. Vid. Bellarm. 1.2. de Pont. l. 12. And Holden Analys. fid. l. 1. c. 9. p. 161. Multa sunt quae traditione universa firmiter innituntur (puta S. Petrum fuisse Romae) quae revelata non sunt; ideoque ab articulorum fidei Catholicae numero exclu∣duntur.
I know that there never was such a thing as a true Universal Council in the world (unless Christ and his Apostles were such); nor ever must, or will, or can be.
I know that they were called Univer∣sal but as to one Empire: and that Empe∣rours called them together, who had no∣thing

to do without that Empire; and that (unless accidentally any inconsidera∣ble number) no Churches out of the Em∣pire were summoned, or sent their Bishops thither: Which needs no other proof than the knowledge of the limits of the Roman Empire, and the Notitiae Episcopa∣tùum, and the Names subscribed to each Council in Binnius and the rest.
I know that long ago their Raynerius said (Cont. Waldens. Catal. in Biblioth. Pa∣trum Tom. 4. p. 773.) [The Churches of the Armenians, and Ethiopians, and Indians, and the rest which the Apostles converted, are not under the Church of Rome.] And that Godignus and others make no doubt but the Abassines had the faith from the dayes of St. Matthew and the Eu∣nuch.
I know that Theodoret. Histor. Sanct. Patr. c. 1. saith, [James the Bishop of Ni∣sibis came to the Synod of Nice; for Ni∣sibis then obeyed the Roman Empire.] Nothing can be more plain.
I know that Jacob. de Vitriaco (and others) say (Hist. Orient. c. 77.) that [the Churches of the Easterly parts of Asia alone exceeded in number the Christians ei∣ther of the Greek or Latin Churches]: And that Brochardus that lived at Jerusalem saith, that [those called Schismaticks by us are far better men than those of the Roman Church.]
And to perswade the Kings of other Kingdoms, that the necessary way of Church-Union, is to unite all their Sub∣ject-Churches under the Patriarchs of ano∣ther Empire, is no wiser than to tell all the world that they must be under the Bishop of Canterbury.
I know that it was long ere Our anti∣ent Britains, and especially Your Scots, would so much as eat with the Roman Clergy, (as Beda sheweth.)
And I know that their Melch. Canus saith, (Loc. Com. cap. 7. fol. 201.)
[That not only the Greeks, but almost all the rest of the Bishops of the whole world, have

fought to destroy the priviledges of the Church of Rome; And indeed they had on their side both the Arms of Emperours and the greater number of Churches: And yet they could never prevail to abrogate the power of the One Pope of Rome.]
Was this Pope then (or the Roman Church) Universal? Besides that, to this day, they are but about the third or fourth part of the Christian world.
And I know that General Councils are their Religion: and what the General ap∣proved Council at Lateran sub Innoc. 3. hath Decreed against Temporal Lords and their Dominions, and absolving of their Subjects from their Oaths of Fidelity: Besides what Greg. 7. hath said in his Concil. Rom. of his power to take down and set up Emperours.
The knowing of these things, maketh me taken for their enemy. And their Image of Worship in an unknown Tongue, with their Bread-Worship and multi∣tude of ludicrous deceitful toyes, are things

which my soul can never be recon∣ciled to: Much less to that renuncia∣tion of humanity which hereafter I de∣tect, in the following Treatise.
And having given You this Account of my self, I add as to this Treatise, 1. It grieved me to hear that so many re∣fused the Parliaments Declaration against Transubstantiation: And I desired to shew them what it is.
2. Instead of joyning with those who talk much of the danger of Popery in the Land (to keep it out,) I thought it better to publish the Reasons which satis∣fie me against it, and leave the success of all to God.
3. And having occasion to re-print the First Part of my Key for Catholicks, with Corrections, instead of the Name be∣fore prefixed, (of one whose face I ne∣ver saw, nor ever had a word from, but ignorantly endeavoured to have provoked him to do good) I thought Your Name fittest to be gratefully substi∣tuted,

who were the first then that checked my imprudent temerity.
Though I was not so vain, as to ex∣pect of late in your multitude of great∣er business, that You should read over my more tedious Writings, I despair not but You may find leisure in perusing this, to see that I have prefixed Your Name to nothing, but what Sense and Reason and Religion do avow. And so Craving Your Pardon for the boldness and tediousness of this Address, I rest,

August 27. 1673.
