



I Suppose you do not only remember, that ten Years ago I Preached these Sermons to you; but also what Schisms, what revilings of the Ministers of Christ, what Heresies of Ranters, Seekers, and others; what cruelties against one another, and what remorsless over∣turnings of Government; and worst of all, what bold appeals to God himself, as if he were the ap∣prover of all this, did give you and me extraor∣dinary occasions of such thoughts and lamenta∣tions as are here expressed! But though the great mercy of God did preserve your selves from these transgressions, and made it your los to behold them with daily complaints and sor∣rows; yet I must not so flatter you as to say, that the ordinary weaknesses of Christians are not at all among you. The things which I specially loved in you, I will freely praise, which were [A special measure of humility, a plain simpli∣city



in Religion, a freedom from the common Errors, a readiness to receive the Truth, a Ca∣tholick temper, without addictedness to any Sect; a freedom from Schisme, and separating wayes; and a unity and unanimity in Religion; a hatred and disowning of the Usurpations and perturbations, and Rebellions against the Ci∣vil Government; and an open bearing of your testimony in all these cases; together with seri∣ousness in Religion, and sober, righteous, chari∣table and godly conversations:] But yet with all this, which is truly amiable, I know you have your frailties and imperfections. The weaker sort of Christians (either in knowledg, or in holiness) are the greater number in the best Congregation that I ever yet knew. (To say no∣thing of the unsound) And what may be your Case these eight years since I have been separa∣ted from your presence, I cannot tell, (though, through the mercy of God, I hear not of your de∣clining.) It is our sin which hath parted us asunder, Let us lay the blame upon our selves! I have now done expecting my ancient comforts in labouring among you any more: For these six years time, in which I thought my greater experience, had made me more capable, of serving my Master better than before, his Wis∣dom and Justice, have caused me to spend in grievous silence: And now my decayes and disability of body are so much increased, that if I





had leave, I have not strength, nor can ever reasonably expect it; Therefore once more I am glad to speak to you as I may, and shall be thankful if Authority will permit these Instru∣ctions to come to your view, that the weak may have some more counsel and assistance: And if any shall miscarry, and disgrace Religion, there may remain on Record one more testimony, what Doctrine it was that you were taught. The Lord be your Teacher, and your strength, and save you from your selves, and from this present evil World, and preserve you to his heavenly Kingdom, through Jesus Christ, Amen.
Octob. 31. 1668.

