



MADAM,
IN hope of the fuller pardon of my delay, I now present you with two other Treatises be∣sides the Sermon (enlarged) which at your desire I preach∣ed at your departure hence. I knew of many and great afflictions, which you had undergone in the removal of your dearest friends, which made this subject seem so suitable and seasonable to you at that time:

But I knew not that God was about to make so great an addition to your tryals in the same kind, by taking to himself Charles Earl of Bal∣carres who dyed of a stone in his heart, of a very strange magnitude. the principal branch of your Noble Family, (by a rare disease; the embleme of the mortal malady now raigning.) I hope this loss also shall promote your gain, by keeping you nearer to your Heavenly Lord, who is so jealous of your affections, and re∣solved to have them entirely to himself: And then you will still find, that you are not alone, nor deprived of your dearest or most necessary friend, while the Father, the Son, the sancti∣fying and comforting Spirit is with you. And it should not be hard to reconcile us to the disposals of so sure a friend. Nothing but good can come from God; however the blind may miscall it, who know no Good or Evil, but what is measured by the private standard of their selfish interest, and that as judged of by sense. Eternal Love engaged by Covenant to make us happy, will do no∣thing but what we shall find at last, will ter∣minate in that blessed end. He envyed you not your Son, as too good for you, or too

great a mercy, who hath given you his own Son, and with him the mercy of eternal life. Corporal sufferings with Spiritual blessings, are the ordinary lot of Believers here on earth: As corporal prosperity with spiritual calamity is the lot of the ungodly▪ And I beseech you consider, that God knoweth better than you or I, what an Ocean your son was ready to lanch out into, and how tempestuous and terrible it might have proved, and whether the world that he is saved from, would have afforded him more of safety or seduction, of comfort or calamity? whether the protraction of the life of your Noble husband, to have seen our sins and their effects and conse∣quents, would have afforded him greater joy or sorrow? Undoubtedly as God had a bet∣ter title to your Husband, and Children, and Friends than you had, so it is much better to be with him, than to be with you, or with the best or greatest upon earth. The heavenly in∣habitants fear not our fears, and feel not our afflictions. They are past our dangers, and out of the reach of all our enemies, and deli∣vered from our pains and cares, and have the full possession of all those mercies which we

pray and labour for. Can you think your Children and Friends that are with Christ, are not safer and better than those that yet remain with you? Do you think that earth is better than heaven for you your self? I take it for granted you cannot think so, and will not say so; And if it be worse for you, its worse for them. The providence which by hastening their Glorification, doth promote your San∣ctification; which helpeth them to the End, and helpeth you in the Way, must needs be good to them and you, however it appear to flesh and unbelief. O Madam, when our Lord hath shewed us (as he will shortly do) what a state it is to which he bringeth the spirits of the just, and how he doth there en∣tertain and use them, we shall then be more competent judges of all those acts of Provi∣dence, to which we are now so hardly re∣conciled! Then we shall censure our censur∣ings of these works of God, and be offended with our offences at them, and call our selves blind unthankful sinners, for calling them so bad as we did in our misjudging unbelief and passion. We shall not wish our selves or friends again on earth, among temptations

and pains, and among uncharitable men, malicious enemies, deceitful flatterers, and untrusty friends! When we see that face which we now long to see, and know the things which we long to know, and feel the Love which we long to feel, and are full of the joyes which now we can scarce attain a taste of, and have reacht the End which now we seek, and for which we suffer, we shall no more take it for a judgement to be taken from ungodly men, and from a world of sin, and fear, and sorrow; nor shall we envy the wicked, nor ever desire to be partakers of their pleasures. Till then, let us congratulate our departed friends the felicity which they have attained, and which we desire; and let us rejoyce with them that rejoyce with Christ, and let us prefer the least believing thought of the everlasting joyes, before all the defi∣led transitory pleasures of the deluded, dreaming, miserable world. And let us pre∣fer such converse as we can here attain, with God in Christ, and with the Heavenly So∣ciety, before all the pomp and friendship of the world. We have no friend that is so able to supply all our wants, so sufficient to

content us, so ready to relieve us, so willing to entertain us, so unwearied in hearing us, and conversing with us, as our blessed Lord. This is a friend that will never prove untrusty; nor be changed by any change of interest, opinion or fortune; nor give us cause to suspect his Love: A friend that we are sure will not forsake us, nor turn our ene∣my, nor abuse us for his own advantage, nor will ever dye or be separated from us, but we shall be alwaies with him, and see his Glory, and be filled and transported with his Love, and sing his praise to all Eternity. With whom then should we so delightfully converse on Earth? and till we can reach that sweet delightful converse, whom should we seek with more ambition, or observe with greater devotedness and respect? O that we were less carnal, and more spiritual, and lived less by Sense, and more by Faith; that we knew better the difference between God and Man, between visible Temporals, and invisible Eternals! we should then have other thoughts, and desires, and resolutions, and converse, and employments and plea∣sures than too many have!
Madam, it displeaseth me that it is no more elaborate a Treatise, to which the pre∣sent opportunity inviteth me to prefix your Name; but your own Desire of the Third must be my excuse for all: But pardon the Manner, and I dare commend the Matter to you, as more worthy your serious contempla∣tion, and your daily most delightful practice, than any other that was ever proposed unto mortal man. This is the man-like noble life: The life which the Rational soul was made for: To which if our faculties be not by san∣ctifying Grace restored, they fall below their proper dignity and use, and are worse than lost; like a Prince or Learned man that is employed only in sweeping Dog-kennels, or tending Swine. To walk in Holiness with the most Holy God, is the improvement and advance∣ment of the nature of man, towards its de∣signed equality with Angels: When Earthli∣ness and Sensuality degrade humanity into (a voluntary, and therefore sinful) brutishness: This is the Life which affordeth the soul a so∣lid and durable pleasure and content: When carnal minds evaporate into Air, and bubble into froth and vanity, wasted in a dream, and

the violent busie pursuit of a shadow; decei∣ving themselves with a mixture of some coun∣terfeit Religion; playing with God, and wor∣king for the world; living in jeast, and dying, and despairing, and suffering in ear∣nest; with unwearied labour building on the Sand, and sinking at death for want of a foundation; hating the serious practice of their own profest Religion, because it is not the profession, but the serious practice which hath the greatest enmity to their sensual de∣lights; yet wishing to be numbred with those hereafter, whom they hated here: This Holy Walking with the most Holy God, is the only life which is best at last, and sweet in the review; which the Godly Live in, and most of the ungodly could wish to dye in; like him that wished to be Caesar in life, and Socrates at death: Yea this is the Life which hath no end; which we are here but learning, and be∣ginning to practise, and which we must here∣after live (in another manner and degree) with God for ever: O wondrous Mercy! which thus ennobleth even the state of mortality! and honoureth Earth with so much participati∣on of, and communion with Heaven! That by

God, and with God, we may walk in holy peace and safety unto God, and there be blessed in his perfect Sight and Love for ever! Madam, the greatest service I can do you for all your favours, is, to pray that God will more ac∣quaint you with himself, and lead you by this blessed way to that more blessed end; that when you see all worldly glory in the dust, you may bless him for ever, who taught you to make a wiser choice: Which are the prayers of
Dec. 24. 1663. MADAM, 
