



Worthy Sir,
WHen it befalleth me to differ from men more judicious, it
is not because I have a greater esteem of my Intellect
than of theirs, but because that which to me seemeth
Evidence constraineth me. And when I publish that
seeming Evidence, it is not in expectation that any receive it, save
those that by impartial deliberate thoughts, discerning it, are con∣vinced
by it. I therefore craved your censure of these Papers, because
I found that you had long and laboriously studied the Controversie,
and were confident of much of that which I write against: I have
read no man that hath handled it with so much Learning and Mo∣deration
as you have done: And therefore I knew no man fitter, if
I err, to detect my Errours. And as your Candour is rather for my
publishing, than suppressing these Papers; so truly I am so far from
disliking a true Confutation of this (or any Errour that I shall pub∣lish)
that I therefore direct these lines to you, to intreat you, to
write (whether I be alive or dead) your Reasons against any mo∣mentous
or dangerous Errour which you shall here find: That as we
thus friendly consent to such a Collision, or rather Communication,
as may kindle some further sparks of light, the Readers may be helpt
by comparing all, the better to find out the truth.
Seeing the chief Writers for the Millennium are Conformists,
(and men of greatest Learning and Piety among them) as Jos.
Mede, Dr. More, Dr. Twisse, (then conformable) Dr. Cressoner,
Mr. Beverley, Mr. J. M. &c. I hope they will not take it for scan∣dalous
in you and me herein to differ.
You have partly relieved me against some Accusations of Singu∣larity,
when you tell your Readers (in the Preface to your English
Mystery) that so many think the Thousand years past already, viz.
That Aretius, Bilney, Wickleffe, Walter Brute, Benno
Cardin, &c. thought that the time began at the Birth of Christ.
That Viegas, Pererius, Augustine, Primasius, Beda, An∣dreas,
thought it began at the Passion of Christ: That Junius,
Pareus, Dent, Broughton, Bibliander, Usher, thought it be∣gan
at the Destruction of the Jewish State: And that even
Brightman, Majer, Forbes, Willet, Gerhard, Guild, Cart∣wright,
as well as Alcaser Castiglius, begin it at Constantines

Inthronization; which is as the same with John Fox (Acts and
Mon. Vol. 1. p. 111.) Grotius, Hamond, and many others that
begin it at the Fall of Maxentius, or Licinius, or at Constan∣tines
Edict for Christians, from whence to the Ottoman Empire
say they was just a Thousand years: And that the Conversion of
the Jews will not be till the present state of this World be near its
end, you hold with Beda, Estius, Acosta, Stella, Zanchy, Per∣kins,
Vossius, Finnus.
And page 20. you believe that the 1290 years in Dan. are past
long ago, as you say, Arnold. de Villa nova, The Author
of the Problem Mr. Stevens, Mede, Alsted, Lud. Capellus,
Dr. Twisse (to whom I may add many more.)
Though you are plain, that the Thousand years are not before
the Conflagration, and that Antichrist shall not be finally destroy∣ed
till then (though Rome shall) and that a Thousand years will
be but a part, a morning of the last great day, in which the Just
only shall rise, and that the evening will be the time of the rising of
the unjust to destruction, and the space that is till Christ give up the
Kingdom, &c.] Yet because oft-times you joyn the Jews earthly
Monarchy so obscurely with the Resurrection, without mentioning
the intervening Conflagration, I intreat you in your next to make
your self therein more intelligible: And give some proof that the
wicked shall not be raised nor judged till after the Thousand years,
(neither those dead before, nor those found alive at the Conflagra∣tion:
seeing many words of Christ and Paul seem plainly to assert a
common Judgment, of Sheep and Goats, just and unjust, at the same
time of Christs coming.
As to my Opinion, that Pagan Rome was Babylon, I have so
much to say for it, as must not here be repeated: If that cast away
my reputation with any or many, let it go: He is unworthy of reputa∣tion
that cannot give it up for Truth. The Revelation hath much
plain and easie to them that read it without prejudice (who I doubt
are few.) I only fix on so much, and leave the rest to wiser men, with∣out
dishonouring of their Judgments, so be it they give not up our
Cause to the Papists, by laying it upon things doubtful or untrue,
while we have sure and plain proof enough against them.

London, Decemb. 19. 1690.
