



Madam,
THough it be usual in Dedi∣cations to proclaim the honour of inscribed names, and though the proclaiming of yours be a work that none are like to be offended at that know you, they esteeming you the honour of your x and nation; yet that you may see I intend ot to displease you by any unsafe or unsa∣oury applause, I shall presume here to lay  double dishonour upon you: The one by refixing your name to these lean and hasty ermons: The other by laying part of the ame upon your self, and telling the world at the fault is partly yours that they are blished; Not only yours I confess: For

had it not been for some such auditors as Christ had, Luk. 20.20. and Mark 12.13. and for the frequent reports of such as are mentioned Psal. 35.11. I had not written down all that I delivered, and so had been uncapable of so easily answering your de∣sires. But it was you that was not content to hear them, but have invited them to recite their message more publikely: as if that were like to be valued, and effectual upon common hearts, which through your strength of charity and holy appetite, is so with yours. My own thoughts went in the middle way; neither thinking as those that accused these Sermons of injurious tendencie, against — I know not whom, or what. (that have been so long in contention, that they dream they are still contending, and fan∣cie every word they hear, from those that their uncharitableness calleth adversaries, to signifie some hostile terrible thing; as the scalded head doth fear cold water:) nor yet did I thinke them worthy to be tendered by such a publication to the world: But valuing your judgement, and knowing that the subject is of great necessity, though the manner of handling be dull and dry, I hope it may be profitable to some; and I find nothing in it to be hurtful unto any, an

therefore submit, and leave you both to bear the blame, and take the thanks, if any be re∣turned.
I perceive you value the subjects which you have found in the practice of your soul to be most useful: As they that know God would fain have all others to know him; so those that know themselves, do love the Glass, and would have others to make use of it: I wonder not if your experience of the bene∣fits of self-acquaintance, provoke you to desire to have more partakers in so profi∣table and so sweet aknowledge. Had you not known your self, you had never known your Saiviour, your God, your way and our end, as you have done: you had never een so well acquainted with the symptomes nd cure of the diseases of the Soul; the ature and exercise of grace, the way f mortification, and the comfortable upports, refreshments and fore-tasts of eavenly believers: you had never so clearly en the vanity of all the pomp and fulness f the world, nor so easily and resolutely de∣ised its flatteries and baits, nor so quietly rn variety of afflictions; nor imitated oses, Heb. 11.25, 26. nor received the  Character, Psal. 15. He that is a stranger  himself, his sin, his misery, his necessi∣ty,

&c. is a stranger to God, and to all that might denominate him wise or happy. To have taken the true measure of our capaci∣ties, abilities, infirmities, and necessities, and thereupon to perceive what is really BEST FOR ƲS, and most agreeable to our case, is the first part of true practical saving knnowledge. Did the distracted mindless world consider, what work they have at home for their most serious thoughts and care and diligence, and of what unspeakable concernment and necessity it is, and that men carry within them the matter of their final doom, and the beginning of endless Joy or sorrows, they would be called home from their busie-idleness, their laborious-loss of precious time, and unprofitable vagaries, and would be studying their hearts, while they are doting about a multitude of impertinencies, and would be pleasing God while they are purvey∣ing for the flesh; and they would see that it more concerneth them to know the day of their salvation, and now to lay up a-treasure in Heaven, that they may die in faith, and live in everlasting Joy and Glory, than i the crowd and noise of the ambitious, cove∣tous, voluptuous Sensualists, to run after a feather, till time is past, and mercy gone, and endless woe hath unexpectedly surprized

them. Yet do these dead men think they live, because they laugh, and talke, and ride, and goe, and dwell among gnats and flies in the sun shine, and not with worms and dust in darkness: They think they are awake, because they dream that they are busie; and that they are doing the works of men, be∣cause they make a pudder and a noise for finer cloaths, and larger room, and sweeter morsels, and lower congees and submissions than their poorer undeceived neighbours have: They think they are sailing to feli∣city, because they are tossed up and down: And if they can play the Jacks among the fishes, or the wolves or foxes in the flocks of Christ, or if they can attain to the honour of a Pestilence, to be able to do a great deal of urt, they are proud of it, and look as high s if they saw neither the Grave nor Hell, or knew how quickly they must be taken down, and laid so low, that [the Righte∣ous shall see it, and fear, and laugh at hem, saying, Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength, but trusted in he abundance of his riches, and strength∣ed himself in his wickedness▪ Psal. 52., 7. [Behold, these are the ungodly that rosper in the world, and increase in rich∣s; surely they are set in slippery places,

and cast down to destruction and brought to desolation as in a moment; and utterly consumed with terrors; As a dream when one awaketh, so, O Lord, when thou awakest, thou shalt despise their image, Psal. 73. Though while they lived they blessed themselves, and were praised by mn; yet when they die they carry nothing away; their glory shall not descend after them; like sheep they are laid in the grave: death shall feed on them, and the upright shall have dominion over them in the morning; Man in honour abideth not; he is like the beasts that perish; This their way is their folly; yet their posteri∣ty approve their sayings, Psal. 49. As the proverb is, At last the wolfs skin is brought to the market, and the Foxes to the Furrier. They shall find that God is not afraid to lay the hand of Justice on the stoutest of them, and will be as bold with silkn shining gallants, as with the poorest worms; and will spit in the face of that mans glory, who durst spit in the face of the Glory of his Redeemer; and will trample upon the interest which is set up against the interest of Christ. The jovial world do now think that self-study is too Melancholy a thing: and they choose to be distracted

for fear of being melancholy: and will be Mad in Solomons sense, that they may be wise and happy in their own: Eccles. 2.2. The heart of fools is in the house of mirth, and the heart of the wise in the house of mourning, Eccles. 7.4. and yet there is most Joy in the Hearts of the wise, and least solid peace in the hearts of fools: They know that conscience hath so much against them, that they dare not hear its accu∣sations and its sentence: They dare not look into he hideous dungeon of their hearts: nor per∣se the accounts of their bankrupt souls, nor ead the history of their impious unprofitable ives, lest they should be tormented before e time: They dare not live like seri∣us men, lst they should lose thereby the lights of bruits. O sinful men! against hat light, both natural and supernatural,  they offend! They see how all things haste way; The names of their predecessors are ft as a warning to them; every corps at is carried to the grave, being dead, yet eaketh: and every bone that is thence st up, doth rise as a witness against their xury and lust: and yet they will have eir wills and pleasure while they may, atever it cost them: and they will set eir houses on fire that they might have one

merry blaze, and warm them once before they die.
O Madam, how happy are you (if one on earth may be called happy,) that have looked home so often and so seriously, that now you can dwell at home in peace, and need not, as the ungodly, be a terror to your self, nor run away from your self, nor seek a place to hide you from your self: when impious vagrants have so abused their Consci∣ences, that they dare not converse with them, nor meet them alone or in the dark! what a mercy is it, that in the great Reconciler you are reconciled to your Conscience, and that it doth not find you out as an enemy, but is a messenger of peace and of good tidings to you! That you need not the smiles of great ones to refresh you, nor pompous entertain∣ments, complements, plays or sports to re∣create you and drive away your sorrows; but that you can find more blessed and de∣lectable company and employment at home; That you can daily retire into your self, and there peruse a richer treasure, than bodily eyes on earth can see; and there be taken up with a far more contenting satisfactory employment, and a more fruitful and plea∣sant converse and recreation, than any creature in Court or Countrey can afford:

That your Joy is laid up where the hand f violence cannot touch it; and that they hat can deprive you of estate, and liberty, and fe, yet cannot take your comfort from you. That when fleshly unthrifts love not home, ecause all is spent, and they can expect no etter entertainment there than want, con∣sion, chiding and distress, you can with∣aw from a coufused troublesome world, in∣ a well-furnished and adorned soul, reple∣shed with the precious fruits of the Spirit, d beautified with the image of your Lord!
Madam, what sweet and noble employ∣ent have you there, in comparison of that hich worldlings are troubled with abroad! here you may read the sentence of your stification, as foregoing and foreshewing  publike final sentence of your Judge: ere you can converse with God himself,  in his vindictive Justice, but as he is ve: For the love that dwelleth so plen∣fully in you, doth prove that God dwel∣h in you, and you in him, 1 Joh. 4.7,  16. There you may converse with Christ ur head, that dwelleth in you by faith, hes. 3.17. and with the Holy Ghost who elleth in you, and hath communion with , by the beams of his illuminating, san∣fying, Confirming and comforting grace:

There, as in his Temple you are speaking o his Glory, (1 Cor. 3.16, 17. & 6.19 with Psal. 29.9) and rejoycing in his holy praise, and remembring what he hath don for your soul: There you can peruse th Records of his Mercy, and think with gratitude and delight, how he did first illuminate you, and draw and engage your hear unto himself: what advantage he got upo you, and what iniquity he prevented by th mercies of your education, and how he secretly took acquaintance with you in your youth▪ How he delivered you from worldly fleshly snares; how he caused you to savour th things of the Spirit: how he planted you i a sound well ordered Church, where h quickened and conducted you by a lively faithful Ministery, and watered his gifts by their constant powerful preaching of his word where Discipline was for a defence, an where your heart was warmed with th communion of the Saints, and where you learned to worship God in spirit and in truth; and where you were taught so effectually by God to discern between the precious and th vile, and to love those that are born of God whom the world knoweth not, that no subtilties or calumnies of the Serpent can unteach it you, or ever be able to separate you from

at love. You may read in these sacred cords of your Heart, how the Angel of  Covenant hath hitherto conducted you, rough this wilderness towards the land of omise; how he hath been a cloud to you in  day, and a pillar of fire by night; how  Lord did number you with the people that  his flock, his portion, and the lot of his in∣itance: and led you about in a desert land, tructed you, and kept you as the apple of  eye. (Deut. 32.9.10.) His Manna th compassed your tent: his doctrine hath pped as the rain, and his words distilled as  dew; as the small rain upon the tender , and as the showres upon the grass, (v. 2.)  his beloved you have dwelt in safety by ; and the Lord hath covered you all  day long, (c. 33.12.) when storms have , he hath been your refuge; and when  compassed you on every side, he hath  you as in his pavilion, and his Angels ve pitcht their tents about you, and born  up: you have been fortified in troubles,  enabled comfortably to undergoe them:  war and in peace; in your native country  in forreign lands; among your friends  among your enemies; in Court and Coun∣; in prosperity and adversity, you have nd that there is none like the God of

Israel, who rideth upon the heaven i your help, and his excellency on the skie▪ The Eternal God hath been your refuge and underneath are the everlasting arm (Deut. 34.26, 27.) You may remembe the mercies of your younger years, of you maried state, and of your widdow-hood your comforts in your truly Noble Lord though troubled and interrupted by his death yet increased by the consideration of his felicity with Christ; your comfort in you hopeful issue, though abated by the injur of Romish theft, which stole one of the Rose of your Garden, that they might boast of th sweetness when they called it their own: ( may well say, stole it, when all the chea was performed by unknown persons in th dark; and no importunity by you or  could procure me one dispute or conference i her hearing, with any of the seducers, before her person was stoln away.) Though comforts conveyed by creatures must hav their pricks, yet your experience hath partly taught you (and more will do) that by all th mixtures of sower and bitter ingredients your Father doth temper you the most wholesome composition; He chasteneth you fo your profit, that you may be partaker o his Holiness (Heb. 12.10.) and the leas

degree of Holiness cannot be purchased at too dear a rate. His rod and staffe have com∣forted you: and whatever are the begin∣nings, the End will be, the quiet fruit of Righteousness, when you have been ex∣ercised therein: And though man be muta∣ble, and friends, and flesh, and heart have failed you, yet God is still the strength of our heart, and your portion for ever, Psal. 3.26. O the variety of learning that is ontained in the secret writings of a sanctified heart! The variety of subjects for the most ruitful and delightful thoughts, which you ay find recorded in the inwards of your oul! How pleasant is it there to find the haracters of the special Love of God, the eaments of his Image, the transcript of  Law, the harmony of his gifts and graces, e witness, the seal and the earnest of his pirit, and the foretasts and beginnings of ternal Life! As Thankfulness abhors livion, and is a Recording grace, and keep∣h Histories and Catalogues of Mercies; so  it a Reward unto it self; and by these Re∣rds it furnisheth the soul with matter for he sweetest employments and delights; Is it  pleasant to you there to Read, how God th confuted the objections of distrust? how  he hath condescended to your weakness,

and pardoned you when you could not easily forgive your self? how oft he hath enter∣tained you in secret with his Love? and vi∣sited you with his consolations? How neer him sometimes you have got in fervent prayer, and serious meditation? And when for a season he hath hid his face, how soon and seasonably he returned? How oft he hath found you weeping, and hath wiped away your tears? and calmed and quieted your troubled soul? How he hath resolved your doubts, and expelled your fears; and heard your prayers? How comfortably he hath called you His Child; and given you leave, and commanded you to call him Father; when Christ hath brought you with boldness into his presence! How sweet should it be to your remembrance, to think how the Love of Christ hath sometime exalted you above these sublunary things! How the Spirit hath taken you up to Heaven, and shewed to your faith the Glory of the New Hierusalem, the blessed company of those Holy spirits that attend the Throne of the Majesty of God, and the shining face of your glorified Head! By what seasonable and happy Messengers he hath sent you the Cluster of Grapes as the first fruits of the land of promise! and commanded you oft to Take and

Eate the Bread of Life? How oft he hath reached to your thirsty soul the fruit of the Vine, and turned it sacramentally into his blood, and bid you drink it in remembrance of him, till he come and feast you with his fullest Love, and satisfie you with the plea∣sure and presence of his Glory.
But the volumes of mercy written in your heart, are too great to be by me tran∣scribed. I can easily appeal to you that are acquainted with it, whether such Heart-employment be not more pleasant and more profitable, than any of the entertainments that flashy wit, or gaudy gallantry, or mer∣riments, luxurit, or preferments can afford? Is it not better converse with Christ at home, than with such as are described, Psa. 12. abroad? To dwell with all that blessed retinue, Gal. 5.22, 23. than with Pride, Vainglory, Envy, Dissimulation, Hypocrisie, Falshood, time-wasting, soul-destroying plea∣sures, to say nothing of the filthiness which Christian years abhor the mention of, and which God himself in time will judge, Eph. 5.3, 4, 5, 6. Heb. 13.4. and the rest re∣cited, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. If ungodly per∣sons do find it more unpleasant to converse at home, no wonder, when there is nothing but darkness and defilement; and when they have

put God from them, and entertained Satan, so that their hearts are like to haunted houses, where terrible cries and apparitions do make it a place of fear to the inhabitants. But if their souls had such blessed inhabitants as yours; could they meet there with a recon∣ciled God, a Father, a Saviour and a sancti∣fier; had they souls that kept a correspon∣dency with Heaven, it would not seem so sad and terrible a life, to dwell at home, and withdraw from that noise of vanity abroad, which are but the drums and trumpets of the devil, to encourage his deluded followers, and drown the cries of miserable souls. Your dearest friends and chiefest treasure, are not abroad in Court or Country; but above you, and within you; where then should your delightful converse be, but where your friends and treasure are? Matth. 6.21. Phil. 3.20. Col. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. When then is almost nothing to be found in the conver∣sation of the world, but discord and distracti∣on, and confusion, and clamours, and malice, and treachery, is it not better to retire into such a heart, where notwithstanding infirmi∣ties and some doubts and fears; there is or∣der, and concord, and harmony, and such Peace, as the world can neither give nor take away? O blessed be the hand of Love, that

blotted out the names of Honour, and Riches, and Pleasures, and carnal interest, and accommodations, from your heart; and inscribed his own in Characters never to be obliterate! That turned out Ʋsurpers, and so prepared and furnished your heart, as to make and judge it such, as no one is worthy of it but himself. O what a Court have you chosen for your abode? How high and Glorious! how pure and holy! unchangeable and safe! How ambitiously do you avoid ambition? How great are you in the lowli∣ness of your mind? How high in your Humility? Will no lower a place than Heaven content you to converse in? (For Heart-converse and Heaven-converse are as much one, as beholding both the Glass and Face:) Will no lower correspondents satis∣fie you than the Host of Heaven? Cannot the company of imperfect mortals serve your urn? Nay, can you be satisfied with none below the Lord himself? Well, Madam, if you will needs have it so, it shall be so: What you judge BEST FOR YOƲ, shall be yours: what you had rather be, ou are: and where you had rather dwell, ou shall: and seeing you have understood hat One thing is necessary, and have hosen the Good part, it shall not be

taken from you, Luke 10.41, 42. Having first sought the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, you shall have such Ad∣dionalls as will do you good, Matth. 6.33. Rom. 8.28. Psal. 84.11. You have learned to know while God is yours, how little of the Creature you need, and how little ad∣dition it maketh to your happiness (You are Wise enough if you live to God; and honourable enough if you are a member of Christ; and rich enough if you are an heir of heaven; and beautiful enough if you have the image of God: and yet having made your choice of these, how liberally hath God cast in as overplus, the inferior kind; which you find in losing them? As if he had said t you, as to Solomon, 2 Chron. 1.11. [Be∣cause this was in thine heart, and thou ha not asked riches, wealth or honour, no the life of thine enemies, neither yet ha asked long life; but hast asked Wisdo and knowledge for thy self— Wisdo and Kowledge is granted to thee; and will give thee Riches, and wealth, and honour—]; as if God would convin even flesh itself that none are like the servants of the Lord: And when the envio one hath said, that You serve not God so nought, though he hath been permitted 

put forth his hand, and touch you in your dearest friends and relations; your peace, your habitation and estate, yet hath he so re∣strained him, and supported you, as may easily convince you that the Worst of Christ is better than the Best of the World, or Sin.
I have purposely been long in opening the felicity of Heart-converse, as a matter of your own experience, both for the exciting of you to a life of Thankfulness to God, and that this undigested Treatise which you have drawn out into the light, may come to your hands with some supply, in that part of the Application which doth most concern you: And because your Name may draw the eyes of many others to read this Preface, I shall add here a few Directions to those that would be well acquainted with themselves, and would comfortably converse at home.
Direct. 1. Let him not overvalue or mind the deceitful world, that would have fruitful converse with God & with himself: Trust not such a cheater, as hath robbed so many thousands before us; especially when God and common experience do call out to us to take heed: The study of Riches, and rising, and reputation, and pleasures agreeth not with this study of God, and of our hearts: And though the world will not take acquain∣tance

with us, if we come not in their fashi∣on, nor see us, if we stand not on the higher ground; yet it is much better to be unknown to others, than to our selves: Though they that live upon the trade, do thinke there is no fishing like the Sea, yet those that take it but on the by, will rather choose the smaller waters, where though the fish be less, yet few are drowned, and made a prey to the fish that they would have catched. A retirement therefore must be made, from the inordinate pursuit of worldly things, and the charms of honours, riches, and de∣lights: And if some present loss do seem to follow, it is indeed no loss, which tendeth un∣to gain. He will catch no fish that will not lose his flie. Me thinks they that sincerely pray [Load us not into temptation,] should not desire to have bolts and barrs between God and them, and to dwell where salvation is hardliest attained! Desire not to be planted in any such place, (though it seem a Paradise,) where God is most unknown, and used as a stranger, and where Saints are wonders, and examples of serious piety are most rare, and where a Heavenly Conversa∣tion is known but by reports, and reported of according to the malice of the Serpent, and represented but as fancie, hypocrisie or

faction: where sin most prospereth, and is in least disgrace; and where it is a greater shame to be a Saint than to be a swine; a serious Christian, than a seared stupified sensualist: Bless you from that place where the weeds of vice are so rank, as that no good plant can prosper neer them: where gain is Godliness; and impiety is necessary to acceptable observance; and a tender Conscience, and the fear of God, are chara∣cters of one too surly and unplyable to be countenanced by men; where the tongue that nature formed to be the Index of the mind, is made the chiefest instrument to hide it; and men are so conscious of their own incre∣dibility, that no one doth believe or trust another: where no words are Heart-deep, but those that are spoken Against Christs cause and interest, or for their own; where a vile person is honoured, and those contemned that fear the Lord: Bless you from the place where truth is intollerable, and un∣truth cloaked with its name: where holi∣ness is lookt at as an Owle or enemie, and yet hypocrisie must steal its honour from it: where he is a Saint that is less wicked than infamous transgressors; and where Dives life is blameless temperance; and where Pride, Idleness, Fulness of bread, and filthy fornication and lasciviousness, are

the infirmities of Pious and excellent per∣sons: where great sins are small ones, and small ones are none; and where the greatest must have no reproof, and the Physicion is ta∣ken for the greatest enemy: where chaffe is va∣lued at the price of wheat, and yet the famine is of choice: where persons and things are measured by Interest; and duty to God derided as fully, when ever it crosseth the wisdom of the world, and hated as some hurtful thing when it crosseth fleshly men in their desires: And where Dives Brethren are unwarned; and none are more secure and frolick, than those that to morrow may be in Hell; and as at the Gladiators sports, none complain less than those that speed worst, quia caesi silent, spectatores vociferantur. Old Travellers are usually most addicted to end their days in solitude; Learn to contemn the world at cheaper rates than they; Neither hope, nor wish to live an Alexander, and die a Socrates; A Crowd or concourse, though of the greatest, where is the greatest tumult of affairs, and confluence of temptations, is not the safest place to die in: and I have most mind to live where I would die. Where men are Barbari moribus, etsi non natione; Chri∣stians in Name, and infidels in Conversa∣tion: the sweetness of their Christian names

will not preserve them or you from the dan∣ger of their unchristian lives: It was not the whole of Lots deliverance to be saved from the flames of Sodom, but it was much of it to be freed from their malitious rage, and filthy grievous conversations: The best medicine against the Plague, is to keep far enough from the place that hath it. The Proverb saith, He shall have fleas that will lye with the dogs. Desire not that condition, where all seem friends, but none are friends indeed; but they that seem to be your servants, are by flattery serving themselves upon you: Where few persons or things are truly represented; but men are judged of by the descriptions of their enemies, and the Lambs have the skins and names of Wolves: and the best are odious when bold calumniators load them with odious accusations. In a word, desire not the place, where the more men seek, the less they find, and the more they find, the less they have: and the more they have, the less they do en∣joy: Where the more are their provisions the less are their supplies: the more their wealth, the more their want: the more thier pleasure, the less their Peace: the greater their Mirth, the less their Joy: the greater their confi∣dence, the less their safety: Where the great Mistake about their Happiness, their Best,

their End, doth make their lives a constant error, and death a dolefull disappointment: He must needs lie crooked that hath so short a bed.
Direct. 2. Keep all clean and sound with∣in; that there may be little of loathsome∣ness to disaffect you, or terror to frighten you from your selves; It is a frightfull thing to be much conversing with a guilty soul, and hearing the accusations of a consci∣ence not cleansed by the blood of Christ: And it is an unpleasant thing to be searching in our wounds, and reading the history of a life of folly; especially of wilful sin, and of un∣grateful neglect of offered grace. Make not such work for your self, if you love it not. We make our beds ill, and then we are aweary of them, because they are so hard: Our Comforts are more in our own hands then in any others: The best friend or Pastor can∣not do so much to promote them, nor the great∣est enemy so much to destroy them as our selves. If we will surfet, and make our selves sick, we must endure it. If Wasps and Vipers be our guests, no wonder if we dwell not quietly at home; and if we sit not at ease, when we carry thorns about us. Folly and Concu∣piscence breed our misery: It is the smoak of our own corruptions that troubleth our eyes,

and the scent & smart of our ulcerated minds that most annoyeth us. We cannot waste our Peace, and have it. Turk and Pope, and all the terrible names on earth, are not so terri∣ble deservedly to a sinner as his own: The nearest evil is the most hurtful evil: If a scolding Wife be such a continual dropping, and troublesome companion, as Solomon tells us, what then is a distempered, troubled mind, and a chiding conscience? It is pitty that man should be his own afflicter, but so it is: And, as the proverb is, he hath great need of a fool, that will play the fool himself; so I may say, He hath great need of a tormenter, that will be a tormenter to himself. Folly, and lust, and rashness, and passion are sorry keepers of our eace: Darkness and filth do make a dunge∣n, and not a delightful habitation of our earts: God would take pleasure in them, if e kept them clean; and would walk with s in those gardens, if we kept them drest: But if we will defile his Temple, and make  unpleasing unto him, he will make it un∣leasing unto us. Terror and trouble are he shadow of sin, that follow it, though the un shine never so brightly. If we carry re in our cloaths, we shall smell it at the ast. Keep close to God: obey his will: ake sure of your Reconciliation and Adop∣tion:

keep clear your Evidences: and grieve not the holy Spirit which sealeth you, and must comfort you: And then it will do you good to look into your heart, and there you shall find the most delightful company; and the Spi∣rit that you have there entertained, will there entertain you with his joyes.
But if disorder have prevailed and made your Hearts a place of trouble, yet fly not from it, and refuse not to converse with it: For though it be not at the present a work of pleasure, it is a work of Necessity, and may tend to pleasure in the end: Conversing wise∣ly and faithfully with a disordered troubled heart, is the way to make it a well ordered and quiet heart.
Direct. 3. In judging of your present state and actions, let one eye be al∣wayes on the end: This will both quick∣en you to be serious in the duty, and di∣rect you in all particular cases to judge aright. As the approach of death doth convince almost all men of the necessity of studying themselves, and calleth them to it from all other studies; so the considerate fore∣sight of it, would do the like in better time▪ And it is the End that communicateth th Good or Evil to all things in the way: an therefore as they have relation to the End▪

they must be judged of. When you peruse your actions, consider them as done by one that is entring into Eternity, and as those that must all be opened in a clearer light. If we separate our actions in our considerations from their ends, they are not of the same sig∣nification, but taken to be other things then indeed they are. If the Oaths, the Lies, the Slanders, the Sensuality and filthiness of im∣pure-sinners, had not relation to the loss of Heaven, and to the pains of Hell, they were not matters of that exceeding moment as now they are: And if the Holiness, Obedience and Watchfulness of believers, had no relation to the escaping of Hell fire, and the attainment of eternal life, they would be of lower value then they are. The more clearly men dis∣cern that God is present, that judgement is at hand, that they are near to Heaven or Hell, where millions have already received their reward, the more seriously will they study, and the better will they know themselves.
Direct. 4. Though you must endeavour to judge your self truly as you are, yet rather encline to think meanly, then highly of your self, and be rather too suspitious, then too presumptuous. My reasons for this direction are, Because mans nature is gene∣rally disposed to self-exalting; and pride, and

self-love are sins so common and so strong, as that it is a thing of wondrous difficulty to overcome them, so far as to judge our selves impartially, and to err as little in our own cause, as if it were anothers: and be∣cause self-exalting hath far more dangerous effects, then self-abasing, supposing them to exceed their bounds. Prudent humility i a quieting grace, and avoideth many storms and tempests, which trouble and shake the peace of others. It maketh men thankfull for that little as undeserved, which others repine at as short of their expectations: It telleth the sufferer that God doth afflict him much less then he deserveth: and causeth him to say, I will bear the indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him (Micah 7.9.) It teacheth us a cautelous suspition of our own understandings, and a just sub∣mission to those that are wiser than our∣selves: When Pride keepeth out Wisdom, by keeping out the knowledge of our ignorance. And as Pliny tells us of some Nations, where they are grey-headed in their Infancy, and black-headed when they are old; So Pride maketh many wise so soon, that they never come to be truly wise: They think in youth that they have more than the wisdom of age, and therefore in age they have less then what be∣seemed

them in youth. Every hard report or usage is ready to break a proud mans heart: when contempt doth little disquiet the hum∣le, because they judge so meanly of them∣elves. The proud are frequently disturbed, ecause they climb into the seats of others: when humility sits quietly, and no one bids it ise, because it knoweth and keepeth its own lace. Therefore it is that true contrition aving once told us of our folly to the Heart, oth make us walk more circumspectly while e live: And that no man is better re∣olved then he that was once in doubt, and hat no man standeth faster, than he that hath ad a fall: and no man is more safe, then he hat hath had most assaults. If you love your afety, desire not either to be, or to seem too igh. Be little in your own eyes, and be con∣ent to be so in the eyes of others. As for worldly Greatness, affect neither the thing, or the reputation of it: Look up if you lease, to the tops of Steeples, Masts and Mountains: but stand below if you would e safe. Though the Chimney be the highest art of the house; it is not the cleanest or he sweetest part: it is scorcht more with he fire, and suffocated with the smoke than ther parts. And for spiritual endowments, esire them, and improve them: but desire not

inordinately the reputation of them: It seldom increaseth a mans Humility, to be re∣puted Humble: And though Humility he you to bear applause, yet the remnants of pri are ready to take fire, and other sins to get advantage by it.
Direct. 5. Improve your self-acquaintance to a due apprehension of what is mo suitable, most profitable, and necessary fo you, and what is most hurtfull, unsuitabl and unnecessary. He that hath taken a ju measure of himself, is the better able  judge of all things else. How suitable wi Christ and grace appear, and how unsuitabl will worldly pomp appear, to one that trul knows himself? How suitable will serio fervent worship appear, and how unsuitab the ludicrous shews of Hypocrites? And  pair of eyes will be valued above many pa of spectacles: and one pair of legs before  pair of crutches, by one that is not a strager to himself. He that takes grass and prvender to be his best and most delightful fo hath sure forgotten that he is a man, an taketh himself to be but a beast, or else  would not choose the food of a beast, nor us himself as a beast. If a man knew arig the capacity and tendency of the Reasonab nature, and the evil of sin, and the necessit

and distress of an unrenewed soul, what sweet, what longing thoughts would he have of God, and all that tendeth to the pleasing and en∣oying of him? How little would he think himself concerned in the trivial matters of onour or dishonour, riches or poverty, favour r displeasure, further than as they help or inder him in the things that are of more egard? Know your self, and you will know what to Love, and what to hate; what to hoose, and what to refuse; what to hold, and what to lose; what to esteem, and what to ight; what to fear, and when to be couragious nd secure: the curing the dotage thus, would ure the night walks of the dreaming, va∣ant world: And they that find that mu∣ck cureth not the Stone or Gowt, would know hat mirth▪ and gallantry, and vain-glory, re no preservatives from Hell, nor suffici∣t cure for a guilty soul: And that if an king head must have a better remedy than  golden Crown, and a deaseased body, a ore suitable cure than a silken suit, a di∣ased soul doth call for more.
Direct. 6. Value not your self by muta∣e Accidents, but by the essence and sub∣nce of Christianity. A mans life con∣teth not in the abundance which he pos∣sseth, Luke 12.15. Paul knew better what

he said, when he accounted all but loss and dung for the knowledge and fruition of Je∣sus Christ (Phil. 3.7, 8.) then they that dote on it as their felicity: And is a man to be valued, applauded, and magnified for his dung, or for his personal endowments? Is that your perfume, that stinketh in the no∣strils of men of sounder senses? Judge not of the person by his apparel, when the fool∣ishest and the worst may wear the same: The Master and inhabitants honour the house more than the house doth the Master and inhabitants. All the wit and learn∣ing in the world, with all the Riches, Ho∣nour and applause, yea and all the civility and winning deportment, will not make a Christian of an Infidel or Atheist, nor a hap∣py of a miserable man; As nothing will make a man honourable indeed, that hath not the use of Reason, which differenceth m from bruits; so nothing will make or pro him holy or happy or safe, that hath not the Holy Image of God, which must difference his children from his enemies: If he be un∣sanctified, and be not a new creature, and have not the spirit of Christ within him▪ he is an Atheist, or Infidel, or an ungodly wretch, let him be never so rich, or great▪ or honourable. And as a harlot is never beau∣tifull

in the eyes of the wise and chaste, so a wicked man is never happy in the eyes of any but his phrenetick society.
Direct. 7. Think not that a few seldom hasty thoughts will bring and keep you in cquaintance with your self. It must be diligent observation, and serious consideration hat must accomplish this. Many a man walketh where he doth not dwell. A transi∣nt salute is not a sign of intimate familiari∣y. It is enough sometime to step into your eighbours house for a charitable visit; but ou must dwell in your own; Be more busie and ensorious at home then the proud and the ma∣icious are abroad: and be as seldom and tender  censuring others as such Hypocrites are in ensuring themselves. Put on your spectacles  home, when you are reading over the Re∣ister of your consciences; but wear them t as you walk the streets; but take up ith so much knowledge of ordinary passen∣ers as you can have without them. Think t that you are unconcerned in the danger or fety of your neighbour, but remember that u are more concerned in your own. Its ere most reasonable to say, that charity gins at home, when self-neglect will dis∣ble you to help another. And if sometimes ur falls or frailty do find you matter for

purging, griping, troublesome thoughts, and interrupt your sweeter, comfortable medita∣tions, refuse not the trouble when you have made it necessary: Its many a sad and seri∣ous thought that the Ministers of Christ have for the cure and safety of their flocks: and should not the people have as serious thoughts for themselves? None foul their hands (saith the Proverb) about their own work▪ They that bring in the filth, should not re∣fuse to sweep it out. We must not cast all the foul and troublesome work upon our Nurses, as long as we can help our selves. Your Reason, your Wisdom, care and diligence▪ are more your Own than any ones else; an therefore should be more used for your self then for any. And if after much thought∣fulness, and labour, you find your heart to b no whit better, yet Labour and Believe.  is not the last blow of the axe alone, that cut down the Tree, though it fall not till th last: The growth of Grace, as of plant and fruits, and flowers, is not perceived  immediate inspection. There is much go obtained when we discern it not: And nothing is more certain, than that honest dilgence is never lost in the things of God an our salvation. It is worth all our labour,  we grow no better, to keep our spark fro

going out, and to see that we grow no worse: And the preventing of Evil, is here an ex∣cellent Good. Many a thousand eat and drink, that never hope to grow any fatter or stronger than they are: It is not nothing to be sustain∣ed for our daily work and to have our oyl renewed daily as it wasteth. The mill gets by going, saith the Proverb, though it stir not from the place. O keep the Heart with all diligence, for out of it are the issues of life, Prov. 4.23. Actions receive their spe∣cification and quality from the Heart. Death and Life are in the power of the tongue, Prov. 18.21. but the tongue is in the power of the Heart.
Direct. 8. Let not your self-knowledge be meerly speculative, or affective, but also Practical. Be not contented that you know what you are, and what you have one, nor that your Heart is much Affected with it: but let all tend to Action, to mend what is amiss, and to maintain, improve nd increase what is good: and let the next uestion be, What am I now to do? or What must I be for time to come? It is a lamentable istake of many that tire themselves with riving to make deep affecting impressions on heir hearts, and when they have got much rrow, or much joy, they think they have done





the greatest matter, and there they stop: But Affections are the spring that must move to Action; and if you proceed not to your Duty, Affection is much lost; And if with smaller Affection or passion you can stedfastly and resolutely cleave to God, and do your Duty, you have the principal thing, and are accep∣ted: Not that outward Actions are accepted without the Heart; but that there is most of the Heart, where there is most of the Esti∣mation and Will, though less of Passion: and there is most of Will, where there is most Endeavour: and inward Action is the first part of Obedience: And without these, no speculations will avail: However you find your Heart, be up and doing in the use of means, to make it better, and wait on God for further grace.
Direct. 9. Manage your self-acquaintance prudently, cautelously, and with the help of your skilfull friend or Pastor. Think not that it is a work that you need no Helper in. If you mistake in your Accounts, and put down a wrong summ, and call your self confidently what you are not, or deny Gods graces, when ever through Melancholy or distemper you cannot find them, and pass false conclusions against Gods mercies and your self, this were to turn a duty into a sin and snare.
And you must do it seasonably: Melan∣choly persons are most uncapable of it, who do nothing but pore upon themselves to little purpose: such must do more of other Duty, but lay by much of this till they are more capable, and make much use of the Judge∣ment of their Guides: And weaker Heads must take but a due proportion of time for self searching Meditations, lest they contract that troublesome disease: Duties must be used with profitable variety, and all done un∣der good advice. But young persons, and those that are yet unconverted, have need to fall upon it without delay; and to follow it till they have made sure their calling and election, 2 Pet. 1.10. O what a dreadfull thing it is, for a man to come rawly and newly to the stu∣dy of his soul, as a thing that he is unac∣quainted with, when sickness is upon him, and death at hand, and he is ready to pass into ano∣ther world! To be then newly to ask, What am I? and What have I done? and Whither am I going? and What will become of me for ever? is a most fearfull state of folly.
Direct. 10, Terminate not your know∣ledge ultimately in your self: but pass up unto God in Christ, and to the blessed pri∣viledges of the Saints, and the joyfull state of Endless Glory, and there let your medita∣tions

be most frequent and most sweet: But of this elsewhere.
Madam, I have added these Directions not principally for you that have learnt the Art, but for your hopefull Sons and Daughters, who must be taught these things betimes, and for your friends who will be invited hi∣ther for your sake. They that know you not, will think I have taken too much liberty, and spoken too much both of you, and to you; But I appeal from such: They that know not how easily you can pardon any one, except your self, will aggravate the weaknesses which your charity will cover. I was purposely the longer because the Treatise is defective; And if one Kingdom do not hold us, and I should see your face no more on earth, yet till we meet in the Glorious Everlasting Kingdom, we shall have frequent converse by such means as these, notwithstanding our corporal distance: And as I am assured of a room in your fre∣quent prayers, so I hope I shall remain,
Madam, 
August 25. 1661.
