


AS I never desired any greater prefer∣ment in this world, than to have continued in the work of my Ministry among you, so I once thought my days would have been ended in that desired station: But we are unmeet to tell God how he shall dispose of us; or to fore∣know what changes he intends to make. Though you are low in the world, and have not the Riches which cause mens estimation with the most, I see no probability that we should have been separated till death, could I but have obtained leave to preach for nothing.
But being forbidden to preach the Go∣spel in that Diocess, I must thankfully take the liberty which shall anywhere else be vouchsafed me: And while I may enjoy it, I take it not for my duty to be over queru∣lous, though the wound that is made by

my separation from you be very deep. And though to strangers it will seem pro∣bable that such severity had never been exercised against me, but for some heynous crime, yet to you that have known me, I shall need to say but little in my defence. The great crime which is openly charged on me, and for which I am thought unworthy to preach the Gospel, (even where there is no other to preach) is a matter that you are unacquainted with, and therefore, as you have heard me publikely accused of it, I am bound to render you such an ac∣count as is necessary to your just informa∣tion and satisfaction.
It pleased the Kings Majesty, (in the prosecution of his most Christian resolu∣tion, of uniting his differing subjects by the way of mutual approaches and abate∣ments) to grant a Commission to twelve Bishops and nine assistants on the one side, and to one Bishop and eleven other Divines and nine assistants on the other side, to treat about such alterations of the Liturgie, as are necessary to the satisfying of tender consciences, and to the restoring of unity and peace. My experiences in a for∣mer Treaty (for Reconciliation in matter of Discipline) made me intreat those to

whom the nomination on the one side was committed, to excuse me from the service which I knew would prove troublesome to my self, and ungrateful to others; but I could not prevail. (But the Work it self, I very much approved, as to be done by fitter and more acceptable persons.) Be∣ing commanded by the Kings Commission, I took it to be my duty to be faithful, and to plead for such Alterations as I knew were necessary to the assigned ends; thinking it to be treachery to his Majesty that entrusted us, and to the Church and cause for which we were entrusted, if under pretence of making such Alterations as were necessary to the two forementioned ends, I should have silently yielded to have [No Alterations] or [next to none.] In the conclusion (when the chief work was done by writing) a Committee of each part, was appointed to manage a Disputation in presence (by writing also.) Therein those of the other part formed an Argument, whose Major proposition was to this sense (for I have no copy) [Whatsoever book enjoyneth nothing but what is of it self lawful, and by lawful authority, enjoyneth nothing that is sinful:] We denyed this proposition; and at last gave divers Reasons

of our denyal; among which one was that [It may be unlawful by Accident, and therefore sinful] You now know my crime; It is my concurring with learned, reverend Brethren, to give this Reason of our denyal of a proposition: Yet they are not forbidden to preach for it, (and I hope shall not be;) but only I. You have publikely heard, from a mouth that should speak nothing but the words of Charity, Truth, and Soberness, (especially there) that this was [a desperate shift that men at the last extremity are forced to] and inferring [that then neither God nor man can enjoyn without sin.] In City and Country this soundeth forth to my re∣proach. I should take it for an act of clemency to have been smitten pro∣fessedly for nothing, and that it might not have been thought necessary to afflict me by a defamation, that so I might seem justly afflicted by a prohibition to preach the Gospel. But indeed is there in these words of ours so great a crime? Though we doubted not but they knew that our Assertion made not Every evil accident, to be such as made an Imposition unlawful, yet we exprest this by word to them at that time, for fear of being misreported:

and I told it to the Right Reverend Bishop when he forbad me to preach, and gave this as a reason: And I must confess I am still guilty of so much weakness, as to be confi∣dent that some things not evil of themselves, may have Accidents so evil, as may make it a sin to him that shall command them. Is this opinion inconsistent with all Go∣vernment? Yea I must confess my self guilty of so much greater weakness, as that I thought I should never have found a man on earth, that had the ordinary rea∣son of a man, that had made question of it; yea I shall say more then that which hath offended, viz. that whenever the command∣ing or forbidding of a thing indifferent is like to occasion more hurt than good, and this may be foreseen, the commanding or forbid∣ding it is a sin. But yet this is not the Assertion that I am chargeable with, but that [some Accidents there may be that may make the Imposition sin∣ful;] If I may ask it without accusing others, how would my crime have been denominated if I had said the contrary? Should I not have been judged unmeet to live in any Governed society? It is not unlawful of it self to command out a Navy to Sea: But if it were foreseen that

they would fall into the enemies hands, or were like to perish by any accident, and the necessity of sending them were small, or none, it were a sin to send them. It is not of it self unlawful to sell poyson, or to give a knife to another, or to bid ano∣ther do it: but if it were foreseen that they will be used to poyson or kill the buy∣er, it is unlawful; and I think the Law would make him believe it that were guilty▪ It is not of it self unlawful to light a candle or set fire on a straw; But if it may be foreknown, that by anothers negligence or wilfulness, it is like to set fire on the City, or to give fire to a train and store of Gunpowder, that is under the Parliament house, when the King and Parliament are there: I crave the Bishops pardon, for be∣lieving that it were sinfull to do it, or command it: Yea or not to hinder it (in any such case,) when Qui non vetat pec∣care cum potest, jubet. Yea though going to Gods publike worship be of it self so far from being a sin, as that it is a duty, yet I think it is a sin to command it to all in time of a raging pestilence, or when they should be defending the City against the assault of an enemy. It may rather be then a duty to prohibite it. I think Paul spake

not any thing inconsistent with the Go∣vernment of God or man, when he bid both the Rulers and people of the Church, not to destroy him with their meat for whom Christ dyed: and when he saith that he hath not his Power to destruction, but to Edification. Yea there are Evil Accidents of a thing not evil of it self, that are caused by the Commander: and it is my opinion that they may prove his commad unlawful.
But what need I use any other Instances then that which was the matter of our dispute? Suppose it never so lawful of it self to kneel in the Reception of the Sacra∣ment, if it be imposed by a penalty that is incomparably beyond the proportion of the offence, that penalty is an Accident of the command, and maketh it by accident sinful in the Commander: If a Prince should have Subjects so weak as that all of them thought it a sin against the example of Christ, and the Canons of the general Councils, and many hundred years practice of the Church to kneel in the act of Recei∣ving on the Lords days, if he should make a Law that all should be put to death that would not kneel, when he foreknew that their consciences would command them all, or most of them, to die rather than

obey, would any man deny this command to be unlawful by this accident? Whether the penalty of ejecting Ministers that dare not put away all that kneel, and of casting out all the people that scruple it, from the Church, be too great for such a circum∣stance, (and so in the rest,) and whether this, with the lamentable state of many congre∣gations, and the divisions that will follow, being all foreseen, do prove the Impositions unlawful which were then in question, is a case that I had then a clearer call to speak to, then I have now. Only I may say that the ejection of the servants of Christ from the Communion of his Church, and of his faithful Ministers from their sacred work, when too many Congre∣gations have none but insufficient or scandalous teachers, or no preaching Ministers at all, will appear a matter of very great moment, in the day of our Accounts, and such as should not be done upon any but a Necessary cause, where the benefit is greater then this hurt (and all the rest) amounts to.
Having given you (to whom I owe it) this account of the cause for which I am forbidden the exercise of my ministry in that Countrey, I now direct these Sermons to

our hands, that seeing I cannot teach you s I would, I may teach you as I can. And  I much longer enjoy such liberty as this,  will be much above my expectation.
My dearly beloved, stand fast in the ord; And fear ye not the reproach of men, ither be afraid of their revilings: For e moth shall eate them up like a garment, nd the worm shall eate them like wool: but e righteousness of the Lord shall be for ever,  his salvation from generation to genera∣on, Isa. 51.7, 8. If I have taught you  doctrine of error or impiety, of sobedience to your Governors in lawful ings, of schism or uncharitableness, learn them all, and renounce them with nitent detestation: But if otherwise, eseech you mark them which cause visions and offences, contrary to the doctrine hich you have learned, and avoid them:  they are such as serve not our Lord sus Christ, but their own blly; and by  words and fair speeches deceive the rts of the simple, Rom. 16.17. If any all speak against Truth or Godliness, member what you have received; and  little any adversary could say, that er made such assaults upon you, while I  with you: and that it is easie for any

man to talk confidently when no man must contradict him. I denyed no man liberty upon equal terms, to have said his worst against any doctrine that ever  taught you. And how they succeeded, I need not tell you: your own stabi∣lity tells the world. As you have maintained true Catholicism, and never followed any sect, so I beseech you still maintain the ancient faith, the Love of every member of Christ, and commo charity to all, your Loyalty to your King your peace with all men: And let no draw you from Catholick Unity to  faction, though the declaiming again Faction and Schism should be the devi by which they would accomplish it. A as the world is nothing, and God is all,  all that are sincere believers; so let  worldly interest seem regardable to yo when it stands in any opposition to Christ but account all loss and dung for him,  3.8. And if you shall hear that I yet suf more than I have done, let it not be yo discouragement or grief; For I doubt  but it will be my crown and joy: I  found no small consolation, that I  not suffered, for sinful, or for small and inferent things: And if my pleading agai

 ejection of the Ministers of Christ, nd the excommunicating of his member, r a ceremony, and the divisions of his hurch, and the destruction of Charity all be the cause of my suffering (be it ever so great,) it shall as much rejoyce e to be a suffering witness for CHARI∣Y and UNITY, as if I were a Mar∣r for the Faith. I participate with Paul  an expectation and hope, that Christ shall  magnified in my body whether by life or ath: and as to live will be Christ, so to  will be gain; Only let your conversation  as it becometh the Gospel of Christ; that hether I ever see you more, or be absent till the joyful day) I may hear of your fairs, that ye stand fast in one spirit, with  mind striving together for the faith of he Gospel; and in nothing terrified by your dversaries, which is to them an evident ken of perdition, but to you of salvation, nd that of God, if to you it shall be given  the behalf of Christ, not only to lieve on him, but also to suffer for his ke, Phil. 1.20, 21, 27, 28, 29. But let  injury from inferiors provoke ou to dishonour the Governors that God himself hath set over you. Be meek nd patient; the Lord is at hand; Honour

all men; Love the Brotherhood: Fear God▪ Honour the King: For so is the will of God, that with well doing ye may put  silence the ignorance of foolish men, 1 Pet▪ 2.15, 17. It is soon enough for you an me, to be justified at the bar of Christ (by himself that hath undertaken it) against all the Calumnies of malicious men. Til then let it seem no greater a matter the indeed it is, to be slandered, vilified or abused by the world. Keep close to hi that never faileth you, and maintain you integrity, that he may maintain the joy that none can take from you. Farewel  dear brethren, who are my glory and joy the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ his coming (1 Thes. 2.18, 19.)

Nov. 11. 1661.
