



Reverend Sir,
SUpposing the Book which I answer as injurious to you, as to me, I judge it meet to propose to you this Opportunity of your own Vindication: Or if I be herein mistaken, to crave your help for my own Conviction. Your former Accusation of such as I, of the heinous Sin of Schism, or Separation, I confess I answered in a manner that required your Patience: If it was too free, and provoking, I beg your pardon, and do not Justifie it. My Reasons were, 1. That I thought, that to take such as I for Schismaticks, or Separatists, was a great hardening and strengthening of the real Separatists, when my Cha∣racter, and such others, should seem to be theirs; and if we were falsly ac∣cused, they should seem to be so too.
2. Because I knew how much your Authority, and just Reputation, would add, as a Whet-stone, to the keenness of their Zeal who thought us unmeet to live out of the common Goals.
3. Because I knew (whatever is said against it) how great a Loss it would be to Souls, to have all silenced Ministers give over preaching to any more than four; and what Sacrilege we should be guilty of, to give over our Mini∣stery, which we were vowed to, and to be banished five Miles from all Corpo∣rations, or there to avoid all publick worshiping of God.
And your Pacificatory Accommodation, so earnestly restraining Parents (without excepting the Nobility) from chusing School-masters for their own Children, seemed to one to be an unsufferable Overthrow of that Family Go∣vernment which is of Divine Institution, antecedent to Regal, and most li∣terally required in the Fifth Commandment.
These Reasons carrying me to Earnestness, I perceive the Conceit or Suspi∣tion is too common, that your Exasperation was the Spring both of Dr. Mor∣rice's Defence of you, and of this Book, which is commonly famed to be writ∣ten by Mr. Long of Exeter, a Member of the Representative Church of England, (of whom I will not say, as Bishop Morley of me, Ex uno omnes.) This Concest is increased by the Title of his Book, the same with yours, as The Second Part; and by your Collocutor's Title, [The Army-Chap∣lain;] and such other Circumstances.
For my part, I take it for my duty to believe, that you abhor such a Far∣del of malicious, impudent Lyes: And that he that hath written so many ex∣cellent Books (of which, I thankfully acknowledge the Receipt of many, as your Gift) will by no Temptation be poysoned to the Approbation of so venomous a Label.
But if I should be in any part mistaken, and while you own not the manner of his Writing, you should own the main Cause, or Accusation, I humbly and earnestly beg, that before I dye (if it may be) you will afford me that help of Conviction and Repentance which may be expected from a Man of Learn∣ing, Piety and Truth, and the now Bishop of that Diocess where the surviving part of my only Flock (that ever I had) remain; among whom you may learn more of the falshood of this Man's Accusations.
And as I cannot but think, that the present Necessity (brought about by God's Providence, without us) will engage a Man of your Knowledge and Temper to use your Interest and Parts to the uttermost, both in Parliament and Convocation, for the strengthening of this Nation and Church by Concord and necessary Amendment, and unlocking the oors of the Parish-Churches to the Lovers of Unity and Peace. So Acquaintance enableth me to be confident (that though such as I are past having our part in such a Blessing on Earth, yet) a great number of young Preachers will be ready, joyfully to accept of any law∣ful Terms for so good an End, who now serve God on Terms of Slfdenial, and are Men of greater Orthodoxness, Piety, Learning, and skilful, powerful Preaching, than you would have believed our Nonconformists Schools would have brought forth. And if that blessed Day may hasten, I doubt not but those of the suffering Ministers that have overlived their long Silencing, Im∣prisonments, and Distresses, will gladly do as Joseph, forgive the Envy and Injuries of their Brethren and Afflicters; observing how much of the Hand of God was in the Over-ruling of all, and making use of that Sin which he did neither cause nor justifie.
Sir, As the Importunity of Cantianus, with many others, drew me to pub∣lish this Writing, which I once cast by, as never to have been seen; so the op∣portune Occasion of my desiring your own Vindication, or your help for my Con∣viction, hath caused this Address to you, from
Jun. 13. 1691.

