



Reverend Fathers and Brethren,
IT is now seventeen years since neer two thousand Ministers of Christ were by Law forbidden the exercise of their Of∣fice, unless they did conform to Subscrip∣tions, Covenants, Declarations and Practices, which we durst not do, because we feared God: Foreseeing what this would do to the destroy∣ing of Love and Concord, and of mens sous, weakning the Land, encouraging Popery, He∣resie and Schism, we did our best betime by Reason, & submissive petitioning the Bishops, to have prevented it; but in vain: We ne∣ver made one motion for Presbytery, or against Liturgies, nor to abate any of the Bishops Wealth, or Honour, nor any thing as to Church-Government, but Arch Bishop Ushers Model of the Primitive way: And we thankfully accepted of much less, exprest in His Majesties Gracious Declaration about

Ecclesiastical Affairs▪ which, we hoped, would have ended all our discords. The Reasons of the Great Change, and New Impositions, it is God, and not we, that must have an ac∣count of from the Convocation, &c. and of the consequents. Since then, as we foresaw, con∣trary interests have increased contrariety: The Laws against our Preaching to more than four, the Penalties of forty pound a Ser∣mon, and long imprisonment in common Gaols, and driving us five miles from Cor∣porations, and places where we lately preacht, and the reasons given are not un∣known to you: Many Books are written, and Sermons preached, earnestly pressing Ma∣gistrates to execute these Laws against us: And though, when demanded, we gave in a Catalogue of divers things in the old Impo∣sitions, which we underook to prove to be great sins; and in our Petition for Peace, protested that nothing but avoiding sin should hinder our Conformity, and we had never call or leave to give our reasons against the New Conformity; I my self have been re∣ported to my Superiours, to be one that con∣fesseth the Lawfulness of all, save the renoun∣cing of a rebellious Covenant: And while the Law and Canons imprison, and excommuni∣cate us ipso fact, if we do but give the reasons of our Nonconformity; and I have offered to Reverend Bishops and others, to beg leave to

do it on my knees, and nothing more grieved me, than that I might not so endeavour to save men from the damning sins of Hating, false accusing, and ruining their Brethren, and sacrilegious hindering the Preaching of Gods Word; yet have I been called on to tell them what it is that we would have, and told that our Superiours judge us not sincere, but meer factious Schismaticks, that will neither Con∣form, nor tell them why we do not▪ Vehement Letters of accusation are sent me: Many Books charge us with heinous Schism, even as wilfully done against our consciences: Yea that Covetousness and Pride, and not Consci∣ence, cause our Nonconformity; that we are the worst men alive, and unfit for humane so∣ciety, &c. while we are made their scorn, and many want bread, and many of us preach for nothing, save the spiritual benefits and rewards. And those of us that have bread, know of so many that have families, and no∣thing but alms to maintain them, that we are glad to give them all that our necessities can spare: And we suppose our accusers would not think that if they chose beggery and scorn, or lived only on mens charity, it would prove them to be covetous or proud. I have read the Books of Bishop Morley, Mr. Sileman, Mr. Fulwood, Mr. Durel, Mr. Fow∣lis, Mr. Falkener, Mr. Nanfen, Dr. Borem,

Dr. Parker, Dr. Tomkins, the Friendly De∣bate, Dr. Ashton, Mr. Hollingworth, Dr. Good, Mr. Hinkley, the Counterminer, Mr. L'Estrange, Mr. Long, and many more. And as my flesh is no more in love with poverty and scorn than yours, nor was I more uncapable of such a lot as yours; so I here testifie that no man is more inexcusable than I, that have dwelt so long in pain, so neer the grave, if I have been so mad as to silence my self, and chose a Gaol among malefactors (where I have lain) and bitter accusations and prose∣cutions, for any thing of this world that I could hope for, or for any thing less than my salvation. And either I am an utter stranger to my self, or else I was willing to know the Truth: and Liberty and Wealth is liker to be a byas, than that which the Law decreeth against us. But if I be so unhappy as to be uncapable of understanding the lawfulness of all that is made necessary to the Ministry, you should better think of it before you beg the ruine of all that are as ignorant as I▪ Had you told us how to come to your measure of knowledge, we would thank you: When I askt Bishop Morley such a question, he advi∣sed me to read Bilson and Hooker, where I found more than I approved for resisting or restraining Kings: and had long before read them and Saravia, Bishop Downam, Spalaten∣sis,

Petavius, Sancta Clara, Dr. Hammond, and abundance more for Prelacy, &c. He is not worthy the name of a man that would not know that truth, which maketh both for his temporal and eternal welfare
Under these accusations my conscience urged me to acquaint the accusing Clergy with our Case, believing it be uncharitable to impute all their false report to Malignity, or Diabolism, but that it was STRANGENESS to our Case, while wrath and cross interest kept them from hearing us: But my pru∣dent friends perswaded me silently to leave all to God, assuring me it would but more exasperate, till they called us themselves to speak. Twice we were since invited to a Tryal for Concord, and both times came to an Agreement with the moderate and eminent Persons that we treated with: But it was buried in privacy; and still we are called on, to give the reasons of our Dissent.
Having long forborn for fear of offending them that require it, at last I have here ad∣ventured, not so far as to urge the Case, but only to state it, and tell you barely what it is that I dare not do: If I find that you can bear this, if I have leave from God and man, I shall venture on more, and give you my reasons: This unarmed Account is easily trampled on. I doubt not but it will meet

with such usage as I have had already: But I must say, that if such as the Counterminer will say that to fear such sin as I have here named, by one that is not willing to be damn∣ed, is Treason, Rebellion, Schism, Faction, Pride, Obstinacy; this will not pass with me for con∣vincing Argument, on which I may venture my salvation. Jul Scaliger exercit. tells us, that in France our Bicott, the Learned Schoolman, was envied by another for his Auditors in Philosophy, and his crafty adver∣sary told the King, that Bicott was a Peripa∣tetick, and Aristotle was against Monarchy: There needed no more, and Bicott was cast down.
As for them that think that to name the late Wars is a Confutation of Nonconfor∣mists, as if they knew not that they were raised on both sides by Conformists (Heylin in Lauds Life will tell them who.) I now on∣ly repeat, [Silence all that had a hand in those Wars (except the Conformists) and no more, and I and thousands will give you thanks:] I plead not for my self: The years are past in which I might have better served the Church, had I been thought tolerable. I am almost uncapable now of your kindness, or of any great hurt that you can do me. A tor∣rent of reproaching scornful words may ease some mens minds, and serve some mens ends,

but will not satisfie my conscience, nor heal the Land. I write not this as accusing Con∣formists, or the Law-makers, but as answer∣ing their loud and long accusations and de∣mands. If telling what I fear, seem a telling what others are guilty of, it is a consequent which I cannot avoid; but to avoid it and such like, have seventeen years been herein silent. So far am I from desiring the weak∣ening of the Church, that I had not written this, but to prevent it. Though I with Saint Martin renounce communion with Ithacius and Idacius, I go not so far as he in separa∣ting from the Synods of Bishops; nor will I separate from any Christians, further than they separate from Christ, or expel me: Church-Order I love; Church Tyranny and Schism I love not: I am for more Bishops, and not for fewer: If Parish-Oratories, or Chapels were made Parish-Churches, at least in each Corporation antiently called : Yea if the Parish-Ministers might be Pastors, Episcopi¦gregis, and not forced by strangers to excom∣municate, absolve and receive to communion against their knowledge and consciences, nor to profess, promise or practice sin against God, nor omit their known Ministerial duty, far be it from me to be against Conformity. I doubt not but he that will preserve Religion here in its due advantages, must endeavour to pre∣serve

the Soundness, Concord and Honour of the Parish-Churches. And as the truly wise and honest Judge Hale hath said to me, It must be a new Act of Uniformity that must heal us, if ever we be healed. I am of the mind of old Mr. Dod, who, for the peoples sake, thanked God that there were so many wor∣thy Conformists, and for Truth and Conscience sake, thanked God that there were so many Nonconformists. I love and honour the Re∣verend, solid, worthy Preachers which I hear in most Churches in London, where I come; and I endeavour to have all others honour them: And though I am by the Canon ipso facto excommunicate, they shall put me out from them before I will depart. But for the Church, and Kingdom, and their Consciences sake, I beg of the Clergy, that before they any more render odious those whom they never heard, and urge Rulers to execute the Laws against them, that is, to confine, imprison, excommunicate, silence and undo them, they would be sure what manner of spirit they are of; and that this is acceptable to God, and pro∣fitable to the Land, or to themselves, and that which the Churches Experience commendeth. My honest friend, whom I once perswaded from Anabaptistry, writing against Separation, saith, that when he saw herea leg, and there an arm in the way, it was time for him to stop.

But in Church-history I have had a sadder sight, even the carkasses of thousands, streams of blood, and turnults in the chief Cities and Churches of the world, the Crowns of Empe∣rours & Kings, the loss of the Eastern Empire, the generation of the Papacie, the reproach of Christianity, and that by Clergie-Domina∣tion, and Contention, striving who should be Greatest and seem wisest. Some say, If we take in a few moderate men like you, what the better are we? Ans. More than you dream of, are far better than I: I hope few are worse; Bishop Morley bid Ab uno disce omnes: Shall London have no clocks unless they will all strike at once? shall none be tolerated but the perfect? Are you such your selves? Do you differ in no∣thing? how then shall we have Communion with you when we differ in all the things here described? Pardon me for saying, I think that Mr. Tombs hath said more like truth for Ana∣baptistry, the late Hungarian for Polygamy, many for drunkenness, stealing and lying, in cases of necessity, than ever I yet read for the lawfulness of all that I have here described. And what is it that some men cannot copi∣ously and confidently talk for? And what wretched Reasons be they that have hindred Englands unity and peace? And how fully hath Rom. 14. and 15. and our Common interest and notorious experience confuted them! I

have long wondered what powerful cause it is, that with such men and so many, could so long prevail against such evidence and light. If you will not hear, those will whom God will use to the healing of his Churches: and blessed are the Peacemakers for (though you call them otherwise) they shall be called the Children of God. I have prefixed the words of some as our admonition; and I have written with this a fuller Treatise of the only true terms of the Concord of all Christian Churches, and of the false terms which they never will unite in, but are the causes of Schism. I commitall with my self living and dying, to him that is the Lord of the dead and living, and will shortly judge us all in righteousness. Come Lord Je∣sus; and prepare us for thy Coming.
Amen.
