



SIR,
THe reasons are many which induce me to pre∣sume to direct these Pa∣pers first to you, and to tell the world how much I honour you: first my personal ancient obli∣gations to you: secondly, Principal∣ly, your approved wisdom and mo∣deration, and taking part with the waies of Charity and Peace, in your most publick capacity in these try∣ing times: thirdly, your Relation to the Noble Author on whose wri∣ting I here Animadvert; which as it is your honour to be the Brother

of so learned and ingenious a Lord, and the Brother of so excellently ho∣ly as well as learned and ingenious a person, as Mr. George Herbert, Orator to the University of Cam∣bridge, and a faithful Pastor in the English Church; so it obligeth me the more to give you an account of this Animadversion. It is long since I sought after the Book, as pro∣voked by the Title and the honour of the Authors name, and received it from you as your gift. The premi∣sed Letter from an unknown person of the same name, occasioned me to review it: The sad case of many of my acquaintance, and the increase of Infidelity of late, especially a∣mong debauched sensual Gallants, and the danger of England hereby, and the Temptations against which the best of Christians have need of help, were the Reasons of my pre∣sumption, it being my Calling to propagate and vindicate the Chri∣stian

Faith: I am so far from wri∣ting against his whole Book, that I take most of his Rules and Notions de Veritate, to be of singular use. And had so great a wit had but the Internal Conditions due to such an Intellectual apprehension, as his and your holy and excellent Brother had; no doubt but our supernatural Revelations and Verities, would have appeared evident to him, and possest his soul with so sweet a gust, and fervent ascendent holy LOVE, as breatheth in Mr. G. Herbert's Poems, and as would have made them as clear to him in their kind, as some of his Notitiae Communes. The truth is, as he was too low to us, who number not our Divine Re∣velations with the Veresimilia, but with the Certain Verities; so he was too high for the Atheistical Sensualists of this age: And I would they would learn of him, that the Being and Perfections of God,

the duty of worshipping him, and of holy Conformity and Obedi∣ence to him, and particularly all the ten Commandments, the ne∣cessity of true Repentance, and the Rewards and Punishments of the Life to Come, with the Souls Immortality, are all Notitiae Com∣munes and such Natural Certain∣ties, as that the denyal of them doth unman them. To know this and to live accordingly, would make a great alteration in our times: And Christianity could not be disrelished by such, that so know and do. I may well suppose that your approbation of the Cause I plead for, will make it needless to me to Apologize for my boldness in medling with such an Author, while I do it with all ten∣derness of his deserved honour:

Jan. 17. 1671/2;.
