



Worshipfull, and the rest Beloved,
THE chief part of this following Dis∣course, being prea∣ched among you, and that upon an occasion which you are ob∣liged

to consider, (Isa. 57.1.) being called to publish it, I thought it meet to direct it first to your hands, and to take this opportunity, plainly and seriously to exhort you in some mattes that your pre∣sent and everlasting peace is much concerned in.
Credible fame reporteth you to be a people not all of one mind, or temper in the matters of God: but that 1. Some of you are Godly, Sober and Peaceable: 2. Some well-meaning and zealous, but addicted to divisions: 3. Some Papists: 4. Some Hiders, se∣duced by your late deceased neighbour Clement Writer, (to whom the Quakers do ap∣proach in many opinions.)

5. And too many prophane and obstinate persons, that are heartily and seriously of no Religion, but take occasi∣on from the divisions of the rest, to despise or neglect the Ordinances of God, and joyn themselves to no Assemblies.
1. To the first sort (having least need of my exhortation,) I say no more, but, As you have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him: rooted and built up in him, and stablished in the faith, as ye have been taught, abound∣ing therein with thanskgiving: and beware lest any man spoil you by deceit, &c.] Col. 2.6, 7, 8. Walk as a chosen g∣neration, a royal Priest-hood, a holy Nation, a peculiar

People, to shew forth the praises of him that hath cal∣led you out of darkness into his marvellous light; having your conversation honest among the ungodly, that whereas they are apt to speak against you as evil doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold, glo∣rifie God in the day of visita∣tion: For so is the will of God, that with well doing you may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, 1 Pet. 2.9, 11, 12, 15. Your labour and pati∣ence is known to the Lord; and how ye cannot bear them which are evil, but have tried them which say they speak from the Lord, and are Apostles, and are not, and

have found them lyars; even the woman Jezabel, that is suffered to teach and seduce the people, calling her self a Prophetess, who shall be cast into a bed of tribulation, and all that commit adultery with her, except they repent; and her children shall be killed with death; and all the Churches shall know that Christ is he which searcheth the reins and hearts; and will give to every one according to their work. As for your selves, we put upon you no other burden, but that which you have already, Hold fast till the Lord come, Rev. 2. Be watchfull, that ye fall not from your first Love: and if any have declined and grown

remiss, remember how you have received and heard, and hold fast, and repent, and strengthen the things that re∣main, which are ready to die, lest your Candlestick should be removed, Rev. 3.2, 3, &c.] And beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness; but grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Je∣sus Christ, 2 Pet. 3.17, 18. And I beseech you brethren, do all things without mur∣murings and disputings, that ye may be blameless, and harmless, the Sons of God without rebuke, and in the midst of a crooked and perverse Na∣tion, among whom you (and

your brethren) shine as lights in the world, Phil. 2.14, 15. And if in weldoing yo suf∣fer, think it not strange, but rejoyce that ye are partakers of the sufferings of Christ, that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad al∣so with exceeding joy: If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, ye are happy, for the Spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you, being glo∣rified on your part, while he is evill spoken of on theirs, 1 Pet. 4.12, 13, 14.
2. To the second sort (in∣clinable to divisions) let me tender the Counsell of the holy Ghost, Jam. 3.1. My brethren, be not many Masters (or Teachers) knowing that

ye shall receive the greater condemnation. The wisdom that is from above, is first pure, and then peaceable, gen∣tle and easie to be intreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and with∣out hypocrisie: And the fruit of Righteousness is sown in peace, of them that make peace. Who then is the wise and knowing man amongst you? Let him shew out of a good conversation, his works with meekness of wisdom: But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glo∣ry not; and lye not against the truth: This wisdom descend∣eth not from above, but is earthly, sensuall, devilish: For where envying and strife is,

there is confusion, and every evil work.] Look on those Assemblies, where the people professing the fear of God, are of one heart and mind, and walk together in Love and holy Order, and people give due honour and obedience to their faithfull Guides; and compare them with the Con∣gregations where professors are self-conceited, unruly, proud, and addicted to osten∣tation of themselves, and to divisions; and see which is likest to the Primitive pattern, and in which it is that the power of godliness prospereth best, and the beauty of Religi∣on most appears, and Christi∣ans walk as Christians indeed. If pride had not brought the

heavy judgement of infatuati∣on or insensibility on many, the too clear discoveries of the fruits of divisions in the numerous and sad experiences of this age, would have caus∣ed them to be abhorred as odious and destructive, by those that now think they do but transcend their lower brethren in holiness and zeal. [I beseech you therefore bre∣thren, by the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you, but that you be perfectly joyned together in the same mind, and in the same judgement, 1 Cor. 1.10.] The God of patience and consolation grant you to be

like minded one towards ano∣ther, according to Christ Je∣sus; that ye may with one mind and one mouth glo∣rifie God,] Rom. 15.5, 6. And I beseech you brethren, to know them which labour among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you: And esteem them very highly in love for their works sake, and be at peace among your selves, 1. Thes. 5.12, 13. And mark those that cause di∣visions and offences, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them, Rom. 16.17. And if there be any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fel∣lowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye

our joy, that ye may be like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind: Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind, let each esteem other better then themselves. Look not eve∣ry man on his own things, (his own gifts and graces) but every man also on the things (the graces and gifts) of others; Let this mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus; who being in the form of God, thought it not robbe∣ry to be equall with God; but made himself of no reputation (or, emptied himself of all worldly glory: as Isa. 53.2, 3, 4. as if he had had no form or comeliness, and no beauty to

the eye for which we should desire him: but was despised and rejected of men, and not esteemed,) Phil. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. It is not (as you ima∣gine) your extraordinary Knowledge, Zeal and Holi∣ness, that inclineth you to di∣visions; and to censuring of your brethren; but it is Pride, and Ignorance, and want of Love: and if you grow to any ripeness in Knowledge, Humi∣lity, Self-denyall and Charity, you will bewail your dividing inclinations and courses, and reckon them among the grea∣ter and grievous of your sins, and cry out against them as much as your more charitable and experienced brethren do.
3. To the third sort, (the

Papist) I shall say nothing here, because I cannot expect they should read it and con∣sider it: and because we are so far disagreed in our Princi∣ples that we cannot treat with them on those rationall terms as we may do with the rest of the inhabitants of the world, whether Christians, Infidels or Heathens. As long as they build their faith and sal∣vation on the supposition that the eyes, and taste, and feeling of all the sound men in the world, are deceived in judg∣ing of Bread and Wine; and as long as they deny the certain experience of true believers (telling us that we are void of Charity and unjustified, be∣cause we are not of their

Church,) and as long as they fly from the judgement and Tradition of the ancient and the present Church (un∣less their small part may be taken for the whole, or the major Vote,) and as long as they reject our appeal to the holy Scriptures, I know not well what we can say to them, which we can expect they should regard, any more then musick is regarded by the deaf, or light by the blind, or ar∣gument by the distracted. If they had the moderation and charity impartially to per∣use our writings, I durst con∣fidently promise the recovery of multitudes of them, by the three writings which I have already published, and

the more that others have said against them.
4. And for the fourth sort, (the Hiders, and the Quakers) I have said enough to them already (in my Book against Infidelity, and those against Popery and Quakers:) but in vain to those that have sinned unto death.
5. It is the fifth sort there∣fore that I shall chiefly address my speech to; who, I fear, are not the smallest part. It is an astonishing consideration to men that are awake, to observe the unreasonableness and stu∣pidity of the ignorant, care∣less, sensual part of men; How little they Love or Fear the God, whom their tongues confess; How little they va∣lue,

or mind, or seek the ever∣lasting glory, which they take on them to believe; How lit∣tle they fear and shun those flames which must feed for ever on the impenitent and unholy; How little they care or labour for their immortall souls, as if they were of the Religion of their beasts: How bitterly many of them hate the holy wayes com∣manded by the Lord: while yet they pretend to be them∣selves his Servants, and to take the Scriptures to be his word: How sottishly and con∣temptuously they neglect and slight the Holiness without which there is no salvation; Heb. 12.14. How eagerly they desire and seek the plea∣sing

of their flesh, and the matters of this transi∣tory life, while they call them vanity and vexation; How madly they will fall out with their own salvation, and from the errors and sins of hy∣pocrites or others, will pick quarrels against the Doctrine, and Ordinances, and wayes of God; as if other mens faults should be exceeded by you, while you pretend to loath them. If it be a sin to crack our faith by some particular error, what is it to dash it all to pieces? If it be odious in your eyes, to deny some parti∣cular Ordinance of God, what is it to neglect or prophane them all? If it be their sin that quarrel in the way to

heaven, and walk not in com∣pany as love requireth them; what is it in you to run to∣wards hell, and turn your backs on the holy Laws and wayes of God? If it be so la∣mentable to the Nation and themselves, that so many have faln into schism and dis∣order; what is it then that so many are ungodly, sensual and worldly, and have no true Re∣ligion at all, in sincerity, life and power? Ungodliness is all Heresie transcendently in the lump, and that in practice. A man that is so foolish as to plead that Arsenick is better then bread, may yet live him∣self if he do not take it: but so cannot he that eateth it in∣stead of bread. Hereticks

only in speculation may be saved: but practicall hereticks cannot. You think it haynous to deny with the mouth that there is a God, who made us, and is our only Lord and Hap∣piness (and so it is.) And is it not haynous then to deny him with the heart and life; and to deny him the love and obedience that is properly due to God? It is odious Idolatry to bow to a creature as to God; and is it not odious to love, and honour, and obey a creature before him, and to seek it more eagerly, and mind it more seriously then God? If it be damnable Infidelity to deny Christ to be the Re∣deemer, it is not much less to turn away from him, and

make light of him and refuse his grace, while you seem to honour him. If it be damna∣ble blasphemy to deny the Holy Ghost; what is it to resist and refuse him when he would anctifie you, and perhaps to make a scorn of holiness? If t be Heresie to deny the holy Catholick Church, and the Communion of Saints; what is it to hate the Holy mem∣bers of the Church, and to avoid, if not deride, the Com∣munion of Saints? Be not deceived, God is not mocked: A mock-Religion, and the name of Christianity will ne∣ver save you. Do you know how near you are to judge∣ment, and will you fearlesly thus heap up wrath, and lay

in fewell for the everlasting flames? Do you know how speedily you shall wish in the bitterness of your souls, that you had heard, and prayed, and laboured as for your lives, and redeemed your time, and obey∣ed your Teachers; and yet will you now stand loytering, and quarrelling, and jeasting, and dallying in the matters of salvation? nd will you live as if you had nothing but the world to mind, when you are even ready to step into the endless world? O Sirs, do you know what you are do∣ing? You are abusing the liv∣ing God, and wronging the Lord Jesus, and trampling up∣on that mercy which would comfort you in your extremi∣ty,

a drop of which you would then be glad of: You are grieving your poor Friends, and Teachers, and preparing for your endless grief. Aas, what should a faithfull Mini∣ster do, for the saving of your souls? He seeth you befooled in your security, and care∣lesly passing on towards Hell, and cannot help it: He sees you posting to your misery, where you will be out of the reach of all our exhortations, and where mercy will not fol∣low you to be accepted or re∣jected: and though he see you almost past remedy he cannot help you. He knoweth not when he speaks to you, whe∣ther ever he shall speak unto you more, and whether ever you shall have another call

and offer; and therefore he would fain speak effectually if he could; but it is not in his power. He knows that the matter sticks all at your own wills, and that if he could but procure your own consent, to the most rea∣sonable and necessary business in the world, the work were done, and you might scape the everlasting flames: And yet this is it that he cannot procure! O wonderfull, that any man should be damned; yea that many men, and most men should be damned, when they might be saved if they would, and will not! Yea that no saying will serve to pro∣cure their consent, and make them willing! That we must look on our poor miserable

neighbours in Hell, and say, they might have been saved once, but would not! they had time, and leave to turn to God, and to be holy and happy as well as others, but we could never prevail with them to consent, and know the day of their visitation! O what should we do for the saving of careless, senseless souls? Must we let them go? Is there no remedy? Shall Ministers study to meet with their necessities, and tell them with all possible plainness and compassion, of the evil that is a little before them, and teach them how they may escape it? Why, this they do from day to day, and some will not hear them, but are

tipling, or idling or making a jeast of the Preacher at home, and others are hearing with prejudice and contempt, and most are hardned into a senseless deadness, and all seems to them but as an empty sound: and they are so used to hear of Heaven and Hell, that they make as light of them as it there were no such States! Alas, that while millions are weeping & wailing in utter desperation, for the neglecting of their day of grace, and turning away from him that called them, our poor hearers at the same time should wil∣fully follow them, when they are told from God what others suffer! Alas, that you should be sleepy and dead under those

means, that should waken you to prevent eternall death! and that ever you should make merry so near damnation, and be sporting your selves with the same kind of sins that others at the same hour are tormented for? And is such madness as this remediless, in people that seem as wise as others for worldly things! Alas, for any thing that we can do, experience tells us that with the most it is remediless! Could we remedy it, our poor people should not wilfully run from Christ, and lie in the flames of Hell for ever. Could our perswasions and entreaties help it, they should not for ever be shut out of Heaven, when its offered to them as

well as others. We bewail it from our hearts before the Lord, that we can entreat them no more earnestly, and beg not of them as for our lives to look before them, and hearken to the voice of grace that they may be saved. And a thou∣sand times in secret we call our selves hard-hearted, un∣mercifull, and unfaithfull, (in too great a measure) that speak no more importunately for the saving of mens souls, when we know not whether we shall ever speak to them any more. Is this all that we can say or do in so terrible a case, and in a matter of such weight as mens salvation! The Lord forgive our great insensibility, and awaken us, that we

may be fit to waken others; But yet for all this, with grief we must complain, that our people feel not when we feel, and that they are senseless or asleep when we speak to them as seriously as we can, and that tears and moans do not prevail; but they go home and live as stupidly in an un∣converted stae, as if all were well with them, and they wre not the mn we speak to.
O tha you knew wha  fearfull judgement it is, to be forsaken of God because you would have none of him, and to be given up to your hearts lust, o walk in your o Counsells, be s you wold not hearken to his voice, Psl. 81.11, 12, 13. and to have

God say, Let those wretches be ignorant, and careless, and fleshly, and worldly, and fil∣thy still, Rev. 22.11. O that you knew (but not by expe∣rience) what a heavy plague it is to be so forsaken, as to have eyes that see not, or seeing do not perceive, and to have ears that hear not, or to hear and not understand, and so to be unconverted and un∣healed, Mark 4.12. and to be hardened and condemned by the word, and patience, and mercies that do soften and save others, and should have saved you! Take heed lest Christ say, [I have lent them my messengers long enough in vain; From henceforth never fruit grow on them? because

they would not be converted, they shall not.] Take heed lest he take you away from means, and quickly put an end to your opportunities. You see how fast men pass away, but little do you know how many are lamenting that they made no better use of time, and helps, and mercies while they had them. O hear while you may hear, for it will not be long: Read while you may read, and pray while you may pray, and turn while you may turn, and go to your Christian friends an Teachers, and en∣quire of them, what you must do to be saved, before enqui∣ing be too late. Spend the Lords Day, and what other time you can redeem, in holy

preparations for your endless Rest, while you have such a happy day to spend. O sleep no longer in your sins, while God stands over you, lest be∣fore you ae aware you awake in Hell. Patience and mercy have their appointed time, and will not alway wait and be despised. O let not your Teachers be forced to say, [We would have taught them publikely and privately, but they would not: We would have Catechized the ignorant, and exhorted the negligent, but some of them would not come near us, and others of them gave us but the hearing, and went away such as they came.] If once by forefeit∣ing the Gospell the Teachers

whom you slight be taken from you, you may then sin on, and take your course, till time, and help and hope are past.
The Providence that called me to this work, was soe warning to you. Though it was not the calling away your Teacher, it was a removing of his Helper, a pattern of meekness, and godliness, and charity, and he is left the more disconsolate in the pro∣secution of his work. God hath made him faithfull to your souls, and carefull for your happiness. He walks before you in humility and self-denyall, and patience, and peaceableness, and in an up∣right inoffensive life: He is

willing to teach you publike∣ly and privately, in season and out of season: He manageth the work of God with pru∣dence and moderation, and yet with Zeal, carefully avoid∣ing both ungodliness and schism, or the countenancing of either of them: Were he not of eminent wisdom and integrity, his name would not be so unspotted in a place where Dividers, and Disputers, Papists, and Quakers, and so many bitter enemies of godli∣ness, do watch for matter of accusation and reproach against the faithfull Ministers of Christ. As you love the safety and happiness of your City, and of your souls, un∣dervalue not such mercies, nor

think it enough to put them off with your commendati∣ons and good word: It is not that which they live, and preach, and labour for; but for the Conversion, Edifica∣tion and salvation of your souls. Let them have this, or they have nothing, if you should give them all you have. The enemies of the Gospel have no wiser Cavill against the painfull Labourers of th Lord, then to call them e∣lings, and blame them for look∣ing after Tythes, and great matters in the world. Bt as among all the faithfull Mini∣sters of this Countrey through the great mery of God thse adversaries are now almost ashamed to open their mouths

with an accusation of Cove∣tousness? So this your Reve∣rend, faithfull Teacher, hath stopt the mouth of all such ca∣lumnie, as to him. When I in∣vited him from a place of less work, and a competent main∣tenance, to accept of less then half that maintenance, with a far greater burden of work among you, he never stuck at it, as thinking he might be more servicable to God, and win that which is better then the richs of this world. And if now you will frustrate his expectations, and disappoint his labours and hopes of your salvation, it will be easier for Sodom in the day of judgement then for you. Alas how sad is it to see a faithfull Minister

longing and labouring for mens salvation, and many of them neglecting him, and others picking groundless quarrels, and the proud unru∣ly selfish part, rebelling and turning their backs upo their Teachers, when ever they will not humour them in their own wayes, or when they deal but faithfully with their souls! Some (even of those that speak against disobedience, conven∣ticles and schism,) turn away in disdain, if their Children may not be needlesly baptized in private houses, and if that solemn Ordinance may not be celebrated in a Parlour Con∣venticle. How many refuse to come to the Minister in private to be Instructed or Catechised,

or to confer with him about their necessary preparation for death and judgement! Is not this the case of many among you? Must not your Tea∣cher say, He sent to you, and was willing to have done his part, and you refused? Little will you now believe how heavy this will lie upon you one day, and how dear you shall pay for the causless grie∣ving and disappointment of your guides. It is not your surliness and passions that will then serve turn to answer God. Nor shall it save you to say, that Ministers were of so many minds and wayes, that you knew not which of them to regard: For it was but one way, that God in the

holy Scripture did prescribe you: and all faithfull Mini∣sters were agreed in the things which you reject, and in which you practically differ from them all. What? are we not all agreed, that God is to be preferred before the world? and that you must first seek the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness? and that no man can be saved except he be converted and born again? and that he that hath not the Spirit of Christ is none of his? Mat. 6.33. John 3.3, 5. Mat. 18.3. Rom. 8.9. and that you & your housholds should serve the Lord, Josh. 24.15. Are we not all agreed that the Law of the Lord must be your delight, and that you must meditate

disable Death to terrifie and dis∣courage us; and raiseth us above our Natural fears, and sheweth us (though but in a glass) the exceed∣ing eternal weight of glory which churlish Death shall help us to. So that when the eye of the unbliever looketh no further then the grave, believing souls can enter into Hea∣ven, and see their glorified Lord, and thence fetch Love, and Hope, and Joy, notwithstanding the ter∣rors of interposing death. The eye of Faith foreseeth the salvation ready to be revealed in the last time, and causeth us therein greatly to re∣joyce, though now for a season (if need be) we are in heaviness through manifold temptations. And so vi∣corious is this Faith against all the storms that do assault us, that the tryal of it, though with fire, doth but discover that it is much more precious then Gold that perisheth, and it shall be found unto praise and ho∣nour,

and glory at the appearing of Jesus Christ; whom having never seen in the flesh we Love, and though now we see him not, yet believing we rejoyce with unspeakable glorious joy, 1 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. and shall shortly receive the end of our Faith, the sal∣vation of our souls. Thus Faith, though it destroy not Death it self, destroyeth the malignity and enmi∣y of death: while it seeth the things that are beyond it, and the time when death shall be destroyed, and the Life where death shall be no more. Faith is like Davids three mighty men, that brake through the host of the Philistines, to fetch him the waters of Bethlehem, for which he longed, 2 Sam. 23.15, 16. When the thirsty soul saith, O that one would give me drink of the waters of Salvation! Faith breaks through death which stand∣eth in the way, and fetcheth these living waters o the soul. We may

ever, Psal. 15.4. and have contemned the ungodly as vile persons, though they had been of your side. The Ca∣tholick Church is One, and containeth all that heartily and practically believe in God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, the Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier, and live a ho∣ly heavenly life. Leave off your siding, and keep this bles∣sed simple Unity, and you will then be wiser then in a passion to cast your selves into Hell, because some fall out in the way to Heaven.
Nor will it serve your turn at the bar of God, to talk of the miscarriages or scandalls of some, that took on them to be godly, no more then to

run out of the Ark for the sake of Cham, or out of Christs family for the sake of Judas. What ever men are, God is just, and will do you no wrong; and you are called to believe in God, and to serve him, and not to believe in men. Nothing but wickedness could so far blind men, as to make them think they may cast off their love and service to the Lord, because some others have dis∣honoured him: Or that they may cast away their souls by carelesness, because some others have wounded their souls by particular sins. Do you dislike the sins of the Professors af Godliness? So much the better: We desire you not to agree with them in

sinning: Joyn with them in a Holy life, and imitate them so far as they obey the Lord; and go as far beyond them in avoiding the sins that you are offended at, as you can; and this is it that we desire. Sup∣pose they were Covetous, or Lyars, or Schismaticall: Imi∣tate them in holy duties, and fly as far from Covetousness, Lying and Schism, as you will.
You have had Learned and Godly Bishops of this City: Search the writings of those of them that have left any of their labours to posterity, and see whether they speak not for the same substantials of faith and godliness, which are now preacht to you, by those

that you set so light by. Bi∣shop Latimer, Parrey, Babing∣ton, &c. while they were Bi∣shops; and Rob. Abbot, Hall, &c. efore they were Bishops, all Excellent, Learned, Godly en, have here been Preachers o your Ancestors: Read their ooks, and you will find that hey call men to that strictness nd holiness of life, which you cannot abide. Read your Bi∣hop Babington on the Com∣mandments, and see there how zealously he condemneth the Prophaners of the Lords day, and those that make it a day of idleness or sports. And what if one man think that one Bishop should have hundreds of Churches under his sole jurisdiction, and ano∣ther

man think that every full Parish Church should have a Bishop of their own, and that one Parish will find him work enough, be he what he will be, (which is the difference now among us,) is this so heinous a disagreement, as should frighten you from a holy life which all agree for?
To conclude, remember this is the day of your salvati∣on: Ministers are your Hel∣pers: Christ and Holiness are your way: Scripture is your Rule: the Godly must be your company, and the Communi∣on of Saints must be your de∣sire: If now any scandals, di∣visions, displeasures, or any seducements of secret or open adversaries of the truth, or

temptations of Satan, the world, or flesh whatsoever, shall prevail with you to lose your day, to refuse your mer∣cies, and to neglect Christ and your immortal souls, you are conquered and undone, and your enemy hath his will; and the more confidently and fear∣lesly you brave it out, the more is your misery; for the harder are your hearts, and the harder is your cure; and the sure and sorer will be your damna∣tion. I have purposely avoided the enticing words of world∣ly wisdom, and a stile that tends to claw your ears, and gain applause with aery wits, and have chosen these familiar words, and dealt thus plainly and freely with you, because

the greatness of the cause per∣swaded me, I could not be too serious. Whether many of you will read it, or how those that read it will take it, and what success it shall have upon them, I cannot tell: but I know that I intended it for your good, and that whe∣ther you will hear, or whe∣ther you will forbear, the Ministers of Christ must not forbear to do their duty, nor be rebellious them∣selves: but our Labours shall be acceptable with our Lord, and you shall know, that his Ministers were among you, Ezek. 2.3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. [Yet a little while is the Light with you: Walk while ye have the Light, lest darkness come

upon you; for he that walketh in darkness, knoweth not whi∣ther he goeth.] John 12.35. O take this warning from Christ, and from

