


THough in publishing our Writings, we in∣tend them for the good of all; yet custom (not without reason) doth teach us, some∣times to direct them more especially to some. Though one only had the origi∣nal interest in these papers, yet do I now direct them to you all, as not know∣ing how in this to separate you. You dwell together in my Estimation and Affection: One of you a Member of

the Church, which I must Teach; and legally the Patron of its Mainte∣nance and Minister: The other, a spe∣cial branch of that family, which I was first indebted to in this County. You lately joyned in presenting to the Parliament, the Petition of this Coun∣ty for the Gospel and a faithful Mini∣stry: When I only told you of my in∣tention, of sending some poor Scholars to the University, you freely and joyntly offered your considerable An∣nual allowance thereto, and that for the continuance of my life, or their necessities there. I will tell the world of this, whether you will or no: not for your applause, but for their imi∣tation; and the shame of many of far greater estates, that will not be drawn to do the like. The season somewhat aggravates the Goodness of your Works. When Satan hath a design to burn up those Nurseries, you are watering Gods plants: when the greedy mouth of Sacriledge is gaping for their Maintenance, you are voluntarily add∣ing

for the supply of its defect. Who knows how many souls they may win to Christ (if God shall send them forth into his harvest) whom you have thus assisted? and what an addition to your comfort this may be? When the Go∣spel is so undermined, and the Ministry so maligned, and their maintenance so envied, you have, as the mouth of this County, appeared for them all. What God will yet do with us, we cannot tell; but if he will continue his Go∣spel to us, you may have the greater comfort in it; If he will remove it, and forsake a proud unworthy false hearted People; yet may you have the comfort of your sincere endeavors: you (with the rest that sincerely fur∣thered it) may escape the gnawings of Conscience, and the publique curse and reproach, which the Historie of this age may fasten upon them, who af∣ter all their Engagements in blood and Covenants, would either in ignorant fury, or malicious subtilty, or base temporizing cowardize, oppugn or

undermine the Gospel, or in perfi∣dious silence, look on, whilst its de∣stroyed. But because it is not the work of a flatterer, that I am doing, but of a friend; I must second these commendations with some caution and counsel; and tell your selves of your danger and duty, as I tell others of your exemplary Deeds. Truly the sad experiences of these times, have much abased my confidence in man, and caused me to have lower thoughts of the best, then sometime I have had. I confess I look on man, as such a di∣stempered, slippery and unconstant thing, and of such a natural muta∣bility of Apprehensions and Affecti∣ons, that as I shall never more call any man on earth, My friend, but with a supposition that he may possibly be∣come mine enemie; So I shall never be so confident of any mans Fidelity to Christ, as not withal to suspect that he may possibly forsake him: nor shall I boast of any mans service for the Go∣spel, but with a jealousie that he may

be drawn to do as much against it (though God who knows the heart, and knows his own decrees, may know his sincerity, and foreknow his perse∣verance.) Let me therefore remember you, that had you expended your whole estates, and the blood of your hearts for Christ and his Gospel, he will not take himself beholden to you. He oweth you no Thanks for your deepest engagements, highest adven∣tures, greatest cost, or utmost endea∣vours. You are sure beforehand that you shall be no losers by him: your seeming hazards increase your securi∣ty: Your losses are your gain; your giving is your receiving; your ex∣pences are your revenues: Christ re∣turns the largest usury. The more you do and suffer for him, the more you are beholden to him. I must also remember you, that you may possibly live to see the day, when it will cost you dearer to shew your selves faithful o the Gospel, Ordinances and Mini∣sters of Christ, then now it doth: and

that many have shrunk in greater tryals, that past through lesser with resolution and honor. Your defecti∣on at the last, would be the loss of all your works and hopes. If any man draw back, Christ saith, his soul shall have no pleasure in him. Even those that have endured the great fight of Affliction, being reproached and made a gazing-stock, and that have taken joyfully the spoiling of their goods, in assurance of a better and enduring sub∣stance, have yet need to be warned that they cast not away their confidence, and draw not back to perdition, and lose not the Reward for want of Pati∣ence and Perseverance, Heb. 10.22. to the end. That you may escape this danger, and be happy for ever, take this advice. 1. Look carefully to the sincerity of your hearts, in their Co∣venant-closure with Christ. See that you take him with the happiness he hath promised for your All. Take heed of looking after another felicity;  cherishing other Hopes; or esteem∣ing

too highly any thing below. Be jealous, and very jealous, lest your hearts should close deceitfully with Christ, maintaining any secret Re∣serve for your bodily safety: either resolving not to follow him, or not resolving to follow him through the most desolate distressed condition that he shall lead you in. Count what it may cost you to get the Crown; study well his precepts of Mortification and Self-denyal. There is no true hopes of the Glory to come, if you cannot cast overboard all worldly hopes, when the storm is such that you must hazard the one. O how many have thought that Christ was most dear to them, and that the hopes of heaven were their chiefest hopes, who have left Christ, though with sorrow, when he bid them let go all? 2. Every day renew your apprehensions of the Truth and Worth of the Promised Felicity; and of the Delusory Vanity of all things here below: Let not Heaven lose with you its Attractive force, through your

forgetfulness or unbelief. He is the best Christian, that knows best why he is a Christian; and he will most faithfully seek and suffer, that best knows for what he doth it. Value not Wealth and Honor above that rate which the wisest and best experienced have put upon them: and allow them no more of your affections then they deserve. A mean wit may easily dis∣cover their emptiness. Look on all present actions and conditions with a remembrance of their end. Desire not a share in their prosperity, who must pay as dear for it as the loss of their souls: Be not ambitious of that ho∣nor which must end in Confusion; nor of the Favor of those that God will call enemies. How speedily will they come down, and be levelled in the dust, and be laid in the chains of dark∣ness, that now seem so happy to the pur-blinde world, that cannot see the things to come? Fear not that man that must shortly tremble before that God whom all must fear. 3. Be more

solicitous for the securing of your Consciences and Salvation, then of your honors or estates: In every thing that you are put upon, consult first with God and Conscience; and not with flesh and blood. It is your daily and most serious care and watchfulness that is requisite to maintain your inte∣grity; and not a few careless thoughts or purposes, conjunct with a minding of earthly things. 4 Deal faithful∣ly with every truth which you receive. Take heed of subjecting it to carnal interests: If once you have affections that can master your Understandings, you are lost, and know it not. For when you have a Resolution to cast off any dty, you will first Believe it is no duty: and when you must change your judgement for carnal advantages, you will make the change seem reasonable and right: and evil shall be proved good when you have a minde to follow it. 5. Make Gospel-Truths your own, by daily humble studies, arising to such a soundness of Judgement, that

you may not need to take too much upon trust; lest if your guides should miscarry, you miscarry with them. De∣liver not up your understanding in Captivity to any. 6. Yet do not over∣value your own Understandings. This Pride hath done that in Church and State, which all discerning men are la∣menting. They that know but little, see not what they want, as well as what they have; nor that imperfection in their knowledge which should humble them, nor that difficulty in things, which should make them diligent and modest. 7. Apprehend the necessity and Usefulness of Christs Officers, Or∣der and Ordinances for the prosperity of his Church: Pastors must guide you, though not seduce you, or lead you blindefold. But choose (if you may) such as are judicious, and not ignorant, not rash but sober, not formal but se∣rious and spiritual, not of carnal but heavenly conversations; especially a∣void them that divide and follow par∣es, and seek to draw Disciples to

themselves, & can sacrifice the Churches Unity and Peace to their proud hu∣mors or carnal interests. Watch care∣fully that no weaknesses of the Mini∣ster do draw you to a dis-esteem of the Ordinances of God: nor any of the sad miscarriages of Professors should cause you to set less by Truth or God∣liness. Wrong not Christ more, be∣cause other men have so wronged him. Quarrel more with your own unfit∣ness and unworthiness in Ordinances, then with other mens. It is the frame of your own heart that doth more to help or hinder your Comforts, then the quality of those you joyn with. To these few Directions added to the rest in this Book, I shall subjoyn my hearty Prayers, that you may receive from that Gospel and Ministry which you have owned, such stability in the faith, such victory over the flesh and the world, such apprehensions of the Love of God in Christ, such directi∣on in every strait and duty, that you

Live uprightly, Dye peaceably, and Raign Gloriously. Amen.
May 9. 1653.

