



SIR,
YOur Name is not prefixed to this Treatise, ei∣ther as accusing you of the Sin herein detect∣ed, or as praising you for those Virtues, which good Men are more pleased to possess and exercise, than to have proclaimed, though they be as Light, that is

hardly hid. But it is to vent and exercise that Gra∣titude which loveth not the concealment of such Friendship and Kindness, as you and your Lady E∣minently, and your Relatives and Hers, [the Chil∣dren of the Lord Paget] have long obliged me by: And it is to Posterity that I record your Kindness, more than for this Age, to which it hath publickly notified it self, during my publick Accusations, Re∣proaches, Sentences, Imprisonments, and before and since: Who knoweth you that knoweth not hereof? And it is to renew the record of that Love and Ho∣nour which I owed to your deceased Father (former∣ly, pthough too slenderly recorded,) to be the Heir and Imitater of whose Faith, Piety, Charity, Patience, Humility, Meekness, Impartiality, Sincerity and Per∣severance, is as great an Honour and Blessing as I can wish you, next to the conformity to our highest pat∣tern. And though he was averse to worldly Pomp and Grandeur, and desired that his Children should not affect it, yet God that will honour those that ho∣nour him, hath advanced his Children, I believe partly for his sake: But I intreat you all (and some other of my Friends whom God hath raised as a Blessing to their Pious and Charitable Parents and themselves) to watch carefully lest the deceitful World and Flesh, do turn such Blessings into Golden

Fetters, and to be sure to use them as they would find at last on their account.
And as you are a Member of the present House of Commons, I think the Subject of this Treatise is not unnecessary to your consideration and daily care: That when proof, and notorious, and sad Experi∣ence telleth us what distractions have befaln Church and State, by Mens self-conceited, erroneous rush∣ing upon sin and falshood, as if it were Certainly Good and True, and how little Posterity feareth and avoid∣eth this confounding Vice, though History tell us that it hath been the Deluge that in all Ages hath drowned the peace and welfare of the World, you may be wary, and try before you venture, in doubt∣ful cases, especially where the Sacred and Civil In∣terest of this and many other Lands, doth probably lye on the determination? Do you think all that ven∣tured upon the Actions and Changes, that have tost up and down both Churches and Kingdoms, by Di∣visions, Persecutions and Wars, had not done bet∣ter to suspend their Judgments, till they could have more certainly determined? Who should proceed more cautelously than Bishops? And where rather than in Councils? And in what rather than about Faith and Publick Government and Order? And had Bishops and

Councils torn the Church, and Empires, and King∣doms, as they have done by aspiring after Superiori∣ty, and by contentious Writings, and condemning each other, and by contradictory and erroneous, and persecuting Canons, or by raising Wars and De∣posing Princes, ever since 400, or 500, or 600 years after Christ, if not sooner, if they had known their ignorance, and suspended in such dangerous cases till they were sure?
I know you are none of them who dare pretend to a Certain Knowledge, that all those Oaths, Decla∣rations, Covenants, Practices imposed by Laws and Canons on Ministers and People in this Land, in the Act of Uniformity, the Corporation Act, the Ves∣try Act, the Militia Act, the five Mile Act of Ba∣nishment, &c. are so Good and Lawful, as will justi∣fie the Execution of them, and the silencing, eject∣ing, ruining, and judging to lye from six Months to six in the common Jails till they die, 2000 as faith∣ful Ministers of Christ as any Nation hath under Hea∣ven, unless they forbear to Preach the Gospel to which they are vowed, or venture their Souls on that which they fear to be sins so great as they are loth to name: When Christ will sentence them to Everlast∣ing punishment, who did not visit, feed, clothe him

in the least of them, whom he calls his Brethren. Be∣fore Men silence conditionally the whole Ministry of such a Kingdom, and actually 2000 such, while the wound∣ing, dividing consequents may be so easily foreseen, and before men deliberately and resolutely continue and keep up such Battering Engines on pretence of U∣niformity and Obedience to Men, and before they venture to own this to that Lord who hath made o∣ther terms of Church Unity and Peace, it nearly concerneth them to think, and think on it a thousand times: A suspended judgment is here safer than prefidence and confident rage.
And also they that desire an Abolition of Episco∣pacy, should a thousand times bethink them first what True and Primitive Episcopacy is, and whether the Episcopi Gregis, or eorum Praesides, or true Evange∣lists, or Apostolical General Bishops, disarmed and duely chosen, be any injury to the Church? And whether the Jews had not been a National Christian Church under the Twelve Apostles and Seventy, if they had not rejected him that would have gathered them as the Hen gathereth her Chickens under her Wings.
They that cannot deny that Christ setled a Supe∣rior Rank of Ministers, appointing them besides

their Extraordinaries, the work of Gathering and Over-seeing many Churches, promising therein to be with them to the end of the World, and that only Matthias must make up the National number of such, though Justus had been with Christ as well as he, must be the Provers that this Rank and Imparity was reversed by him that did Institute it, if they affirm it: And not without proof charge Christ with seeming levity and mutability, as setling a Form of Ministry and Government, which he would have continue but one Age: Much less must they impose such an unproved affirmation as the terms of Church Con∣cord.
Woe, woe, woe! how effectually hath Satan al∣most undone the Christian World, by getting in naughty Ministers and Magistrates, where he could not utterly Extirpate Christianity by Arms? There∣by making Rulers and Preachers the Captains of the malignant Enemies of seriousness in that Religion which they Profess and Preach themselves: And if in such Hypocrisie they Convert a Soul, they hate him as an Enemy for believing them: And thereby tempt Religious Men to mistake the Crime of the naughty Preacher, as the fault of the Office, and to oppose the Office for the Persons sake; and

so Ministry and Christianity is despised by too many.
The shutting of their Church Doors, and con∣demning to Scorn and Beggery, and Jails, those that were as wise and faithful as themselves (unless fearing heinous sin made them worse,) should have been by the Persecutors long and deeply thought on, twenty eight years ago▪ and ever since, by them that believe that Christ will judge them. And so should all Doctrines and Practices that tend to un∣warrantable separations and divisions by others. Things of this moment should not be ventured on, nor Papists made both Lords and Executioners by our distracted Combates with each other, and the miserable Nation and undone Church, left to no better a remedy than a non putaremus, and to hear the worldly Tyrants, and the tempted Sufferers accusing each other, and disputing when the House is burnt who was in the fault.
I think he was most faulty that could most easily have helped it, and would not: But if Great and Rich Men will be the strength of the Factious, as they have most to lose, they may be the greatest losers.
All this hath been said, to tell you how nearly the Doctrine of this Book, for necessary Doubting and a humble Understanding, and for Christian Love, and against pretended Knowledge and rash Judging, doth concern the duty and safety of this Nation, Church and State.
My late Book of the English Nonconformity fully evinceth this, and more; but blinding Prejudice, Worldliness and Faction, give leave to few of the guilty to read it.

July 31. 1689.
