



Right Honorable,
BEing desired to Preach be∣fore
you at Pauls, I was fain
to preach a Sermon which I
had preached once before to a
poor ignorant Congregation
in the Country, having
little leisure for study in London. I was
glad to see that the more curious stomachs of
the Citizens did not nauseate our plain
Country Doctrine, which I seemed to discern

in the diligent attention of the greatest Con∣gregation
that ever I saw met for such a
work: But I little expected that you should
have so far esteemed that discourse, as to
have thought it meet for the view of the
world, as I understood by a Message from you,
desiring it may be Printed. I readily obey
your wll, when it gives me the least intima∣tion
of the will of God. Its possible some
others may afford it the like favourable Ac∣ceptance
and entertainment. I am sure the
subject is as necessary as common; and the
Plainness makes it the fitter for the igno∣rant,
who are the far greatest number, and
have the greatest need. I have added the 9,
10, 11, and 12. Heads or Common places,
which I did not deliver to you for want of
time; and because the rest are too briefly
touched (as contrived for an hours work)
I have enlarged these; though making
them somewhat unsuitable to the rest, yet
suitable to the use of those that they are now
intended for: The Directions also in the end
are added.
Blessed be the Father of Lights, who

hath set up so many burning and shining
lights in your City, and hath watered you so
plenteously with the Rivers of his Sanctu∣ary,
that you have frequent opportunities for
the refreshment of your souls, to the joy of
your friends, the grief of your enemies, and
the glory of that Providence which hath hi∣therto
maintained them, in despite of Perse∣cution,
Heresies and Hell! It was not alwaies
so in London: It is not so in all other pla∣ces,
or famous Cities in the world: Nor are
you sure that it will be alway so with you. It
doth me good to remember what blessed
Lights have shined among you, that new
are more gloriously shining in a higher
sphere: Preston, Sibbes, Stough∣ton,
Taylor, Stock, Randal, Gouge,
Gataker, with multitudes more that are
now with Christ! It did me good to read in
the Preface to Mr. Gatakers funeral Ser∣mon,
by one of your reverend and faithful
Guides, what a number of sound and unani∣mous
Labourers are yet close at work in
that part of Christs Vineyard! And it did me
good in that short experience and observati∣on

while I was there, to hear and see so
much of their Prudence, Unity and Fideli∣ty.
Believe it, it is the Gospel of Christ that is
your Glory: and if London be more hono∣rable
then other great and famous Cities of
the earth, it is the light of Gods face, and
the plenty and power of his Ordinances and
Spirit that doth advance and honour it.
0 know then the day of your visitation!
Three things I shall take leave to pro∣pound
to your Consideration, which I am
certain God requireth at your hands. The
first is, that you grow in knowledge, humi∣lity,
heavenliness and Unity, according to
the blessed means that you enjoy. In my
eyes it is the greatest shame to a people in the
world, and a sign of Barbarousness or block∣ishness,
when we can hear and read what a
famous, learned powerful Minister such a
place, or such a place had, and yet see as
much ignorance, ungodliness, unruliness and
sensuality as if the Gospel had scarce ever
been there. I hope it is not thus with you;
but I have found it so in too many places of

England. We that never saw the faces of
their Ministers, but have only read their
holy Labours, have been ready to think,
Sure there are few ignorant or ungod∣ly
ones in such a Congregation! Sure
they are a people rich in Grace, and
eminently qualified above their bre∣thren,
who have lived under such Teach∣ing
as this! At least, sure there can be
none left that have an enmity to the
fear of God! But when we have come to
the Towns where such men spent their lives,
and laid out their labours, we have found ig∣norant
sottish worldlings, unprofitable or
giddy unstable Professors, and some haters
of godliness among them. O what a shame
is this to them to the eyes of wise men! and
what a confounding aggravation of their sin
before God! Thrive therefore and be fruit∣ful
in the Vineyard of the Lord, that it may
not repent him that he hath planted and wa∣tered
you.
The second is this; Improve your interest
to the utmost, for the continuance of a faith∣ful
Ministry among you: and when any pla∣ces

are void, do what you can to get a sup∣ply
of the most Able men. Your City is the
Heart of the Nation: you cannot be sick but
we shall all feel it. If you be infected with
false Doctrines, the Countreys will ere long
receive the Contagion. You have a very
great influence on all the Land, for good or
evil! And do you think the undermining
enemies of the Church have not a special
Design upon you in this point? and will not
promote it as far as is in their power?
Could they but get in Popish or Dividing
Teachers among you, they know how many
advantages they should gain at once! They
would have some to grieve and trouble your
faithful Guides, & hinder them in the work,
and lessen that estimation which by their U∣nity
they would obtain: And every Deceiver
will hope to catch some fish, that casteth his
Net among such store. We beseech you, if
there be Learned, Holy, Judicious men in
England that can be had for supply on such
occasions, let them be yours; that you may
be fed with the Best, and Guided by the Wi∣sest,
and we may have all recourse to you for

advice; and where there are most Opposers &
Seducers, there may be the most Powerful,
Convincing helps, at hand; Let us in the
Country have the honest raw young Preach∣ers,
and see that you have the chief Fathers
and Pillars in the Church. I speak it not
for your sakes alone, but because we have all
Dependance on you.
The third thing which I humbly crave,
is, that you will Know them which
Labour among you, and are over you in
the Lord, and admonish you, and to
esteem them very highly in love for their
work sake; and be at peace among your
selves. 1 Thes. 5. 12, 13. And that you will
instead of grieving or rejecting your Guides,
Obey them that have the Rule over you,
and submit your selves: for they watch
for your souls as they that must give
account, that they may do it with joy,
and not with grief, for that is unprofita∣ble
for you. Heb. 13. 17. 7. Encou∣rage
your Teachers, for their work is great,
their spirits are weak, they are but frail men;
the enemy is more industrious against them

then any men; and their discouragements
are very many, and the difficulties which
they must encounter are very great. Espe∣cially,
Obey, submit and encourage them in
the work of Government and Exercise of
Christs Discipline, and managing the Keyes
of the Kingdom which he hath put into
their hand. Do you not perceive what a
strait your Teachers are in! The Lord Iesus
requireth them to exercise his Discipline
faithfully and impartially: He giveth them
not empty Titles of Rule, but layes upon
them the burden of Ruling: It is his work,
more then their honour that he intends:
and if they will have the Honor, it must be
by the work. The work is, as to Teach the
ignorant, and convince the unbelieving
and gainsaying, so to admonish the disorder∣ly
and scandalous, and to reject and cast
out of the Communion of the Church the
Obstinate and Impenitent; and to set by the
Leprous, that they infect not the rest;
and to seperate thus the precious from the
vile by Christs Dscipline, that dividing se∣paration,
and soul destroying Transgressi∣ons

may be prevented or cured. This work
Christ hath charged upon them, and will
have it done who ever is against it. If they
obey him and do it, what a tumult, what
clamours & discontents will they raise! How
many will be ready to rise up against them
with hatred and scorn! though it be the
undoubted work of Christ, which even un∣der
persecution was performed by the
Church-Guides. When they do but keep a
scandalous untractable Sinner from the
Communion of the Church in the Lords
Supper, what repinings doth it raise! But,
alas, this is a small part of the Discipline:
If all the apparently obstinate and impeni∣tent
were cast out, what a stir would they
make! And if Christ be not obeyed, what a
stir will conscience make? And it is not on∣ly
between Christ and men, but between
men and men, that your Guides are put upon
streights. The Separatists reproach them
for suffering the Impenitent to continue
members of their Churches, and make it
the pretence of their separation from them;
having little to say of any moment against

the authorized way of Government; but
only against our slackness in the Execu∣tion.
And if we should set to the close Ex∣ercise
of it, as is meet, how would City and
Country ring of it, and what Indignation
should we raise in the multitude against us!
O what need have your Guides of your En∣couragement
and best Assistance in this
streight! God hath set them on a work so
ungrateful and displeasing to flesh and
blood, that they cannot be faithful in it, but
twenty to one they will draw a world of Ha∣tred
upon themselves, if not mens fists about
their ears. Festred sores will not be lancht
and searcht with ease: Corrupted members
are unwilling to be cut off, and cast aside:
Especially if any of the great ones fall under
the censure, who are big in the eyes of the
world and in their own. And yet our Sove∣raign
Lord must be obeyed; and his house
must be swept, and the filth cast out, by what
names or Titles soever it be dignified with
men. He must be pleased, if all be dis∣pleased
by it. Withdraw not your help then
from this needfull work. It is by the

Word, Spirit, and Ministery, that Christ
the King of his Church doth Govern it:
Not separatedly, but joyntly, by all three:
To disobey these, is to disobey Christ:
and subjection to Christ is Essential to our
Christianity. This well thought on might do
much to recover the Unruly that are Reco∣verable.
You may conjecture by the strange
opposition that Church-Government meets
with from all sorts of carnal and corrupted
minds, that there is somewhat in it that is
eminently of God. I shall say no more but
this, that It is an Able, Judicious, God∣ly,
Faithful Ministery, not barely heard
and applauded, but humbly and pi∣ously
submitted to, and obeyed in the
Lord, that must be your truest present
glory, and the means of your everlast∣ing
Peace and Joy.
So testifieth from the Lord, 
