



Dear Friends,
ONce more, through the great mercy of God, I have liberty to send you a Preacher for your private fami∣lies, which may speak to you (truly and plainly, though not elegantly) when I cannot, and when I lie silent in the dust. I take it for no small mercy that I have been so much employed about the Great and

Necessary things, in despight of all the malice of Satan, who would have entangled me, and taken up my time, in personal vindications and barren controversies. As I never knew that I had one enemy in the world that ever was ac∣quainted with me; so those that know me, dis∣swading me from Apologies against the accusa∣tions of those that know me not, have spared my time for better work. Though there is about fifty writings (in whole or part) against me published, (by Infidels, Seekers, Familists, Enthu∣siasts, Quakers, Papists, Antinomians, Levellers, Covenant-breakers, State-subverters, Church-divi∣ders, besides impatient dissenting Brethren, and De∣pendants that took it for the rising way), I yet find no cause (as to the present age, and those that know me) to be at any great care or pains for a defence; while malicious lyes do but make men wonder, that wrinkled Envy should be so mad as to come so naked on the Stage, and shew her ugly deformities to the world, and could not stay at least till Wit had helpt her to a Cloak.
I was also when I first intended Writing un∣der another temptation; being of their mind that thought that nothing should be made publike, but what a man had first laid out his

choicest art upon; I thought to have acquaint∣ed the world with nothing but what was the work of Time and Diligence: But my consci∣ence soon told me, that there was too much of Pride and Selfishness in this; and that Humility and Self-denyal required me to lay by the affecta∣tion of that stile, and spare that industrie, which tended but to advance my name with men, when it hindred the main work, and crost my end: And Providence drawing forth some popular unpolished Discourses, and giving them success beyond my expectation, did there∣by rebuke my selfish thoughts, and satisfie me that the Truths of God do perform their work more by their Divine Authority, and proper Evi∣dence, and material Excellency, than by any orna∣ments of fleshly wisdom: and (as Seneca saith) though I will not despise an elegant Physicion, yet will I not think my self much the happyer, for his adding eloquence to his healing art. Being encouraged then by Reason and Experi∣ence, I venture these popular Sermons into the world; and especially for the use of you, my late Auditors, that heard them. I bless God that, when more worthy Labourers are fain to weep over their obstinate, unprofitable, un∣thankful people, and some are driven away by

their injuries, and put to shake off the dust of their feet against them; I am rather forced to weep over my own unthankful heart, that did not sufficiently value the mercy of a faithful flock, who parted with me rather as the Ephe∣sians with Paul, Acts 20. and who have lived according to this Plain and Necessary doctrine which they have received: Among whom Pa∣pists, that perswade men that our doctrine tend∣eth to divisions, can find no divisions or sects: Who have constantly disowned both the Ambi∣tious usurpations which have shaken the Kingdom; and the Factions, Censoriousness, and cruel vio∣lence in the Church, which Pride hath generated and nourished in this trying Age. Among whom I have enjoyed so very large a proportion of mercy, in the liberty of so long an exercise of my Ministry, with so unusual advantage and success, that I must be disingenuously unthank∣full if I should murmure and repine at the present restraining hand of God: But I must say with David, 2 Sam. 15. 25. [If I shall find fa∣vour in the eyes of the Lord, he will bring me again and shew me the Ark and habitation (There or elswhere use me in his service): But if he say, I have no delight in thee, behold here I am, let him do to me as it seemeth good unto him.
And now with this Treatise, let me leave you these few seasonable requests.
1. Be faithful to your faithful Pastors: Think not that you can live in order and safety without their Ministry. When you can, attend their publike Ministry! Refuse not their more private help: Read well my two sheets for the Mini∣stry: Where the lawful Pastor is, there the Church is: Be not either impiously indifferent in your worshipping of God, or peevishly quar∣relsom with what is commanded or practised by others, nor disobedient to Authority in lawful things.
2. Maintain still your antient Love and Uni∣ty and Peace among yourselves, and improve your company and converse to the advantage of your souls. Be daily interlocutory preachers to one another: Speak as the Oracles of God; and Preach by a holy, patient, harmless, chari∣table and heavenly life. This kind of Preach∣ing none can silence but your own corrupti∣ons.
3. Improve the profitable books which are among you. 1. Read them frequently, and re∣verently, and seriously to your families; when you have called them together, and prayed for Gods blessing. 2. Carry them abroad with

you, and when you fall into company where you cannot better spend your time, read to them some seasonable passages of such writings. 3. Give or Lend them to those that need, and want either Purses or Hearts to provide them; and get them to promise you to read them, and enquire after the success. By such improve∣ment Books may become such Seconds or Substi∣utes to publike preaching, as that they may not be the least support of Religion and means to mens edification and salvation.
4. Make special and diligent provision to satisfie your selves and others against Popery, which is like to be none of the least of your temptations. To this end, I pray you read well the single sheet against Popery which I published, and give of them abroad to others where there is need: Read also my other books against it: (My Safe Religion, and Key for Catholicks, and Dispute with Mr. Johnson) and Dr. Challoners Credo Sanctam Ecclesiam Ca∣tholicam: And when their sophistry puzzleth you, 1. Call your able Pastors to debate it. 2. And remember that they have the Scripture, and the far greater part of the universal Church, and the senses of all the world to confute, before they can make good the cause their of ambitious

Clergy. If you are but sure you know Bread and Wine when you see, and feel, and smell, and taste them, then you are at the end of controversie with the Papists. Above all, see that you maintain the Love of God, and a heavenly mind, and mortified affections, and grow not opinionative, superficial or loose in your Religion: For he that is heartily of no Re∣ligion, is prepared to be of any Religion: And it is because men are false to the acknowledged Truth, that they are given up to make a Reli∣gion of deceit and falshood: Your fidelity to your King and Countrey, obligeth you to do your part to preserve the subjects from a disease so injurious to them. Saith Dr. Sherman in his late [Account of Faith] against the Papist, Pres. p. 4, 5. [If Kings would think upon it, there mi be no Popes; since if Popes could well help it, there should be no Kings.]
5. Take heed of all temptations to turbulen∣cy, resisting of Authority, or other unlawfull means in the obeying of your passions or dis∣contents. As God chose most eminently to Glorifie his Power under the Law of Works, and the spirit of bondage to fear did much prevail; but under the Gospel he hath chosen most eminently to magnifie his Goodness, Love and Mercy; so ac∣cordingly

is the impress made upon his servants hearts: They are animated by Love, for the propa∣gating of Love; and therefore must work with Instruments of Love. And if we had well learnt the Doctrine and Example of our Lord, and made it our work to Love all, and to do good to all, and hurt to none, and with meekness and patience to let any hurt us, rather then do any thing for our own defence, which is against the Law of Love, we should see that Christianity would better thrive, when it would be better understood by the practice of the professors. Often have I noted that a whole flock of sheep will run away from the smallest dog, and yet there is few of them killed by dogs, because they are under their Masters care; when a Woolf or Fox is pursued by all, and few of them suffered to live. And oft have I observed, that when men that shift for themselves can scarce pass the streets, yet children play in the way of Carts and Coaches without hurt, while every one takes it for his care to preserve them, that cannot take care of and preserve themselves. And though the Deer that is within the Park is killed when the Owner please, yet he is preserved there from others, when the wild and stragling Deer that are abroad, are a prey to any man that can catch or kill them.

He that saveth his life shall lose it, and he that loseth it for Christ shall save it.
The Lord stablish, strengthen, direct, and preserve you to his Kingdom, and keep you from the passions of corrupted nature, and from the snares and rage of a deceitful and malicious world; I beseech you continue yet your prayers for him that desireth no greater advancement in the world, than to be

June 7. 1662.
