


Right Honorable
BEeing desired to Preach before you at Pauls, I was fain to preach a Sermon, which I had preached once before to a poor ignorant Congregation in

the Countrey, having little lei∣sure for study in London. I was glad to see that the more curious stomacks of the Citizens did not nauseate our plain Countrey Doctrine, which I seemed to dis∣cern in the diligent attention of the greatest Congregation that ever I saw met for such a work: But I little expected that you should have so far esteemed that discours, as to have thought it meet for the view of the world, as I understood by a Message from you, desiring it may be Printed. I readily obey your will, when it gives me the least intimation of the will of God. Its possible some others may afford it the like favour∣able Acceptance and entertain∣ment.

I am sure the subject is as Necessay as common; and the Plainness makes it the fitter for the ignorant, who are the far greatest number, and have the greatest need. I have added the 9, 10, 11, and 12. Heads or Common-places, which I did not deliver to you for want of time, and because the rest are too briefly touched (as contrived for an hours work) I have enlarged these; though making them somewhat unsuitable to the rest, yet suitable to the use of those that they are now intended for: The Directions also in the end are added.
Blessed be the Father of Lights, who hath set up so ma∣ny burning and shining lights

in your City, and hath watered you so plenteously with the Ri∣vers of his Sanctuary, that you have frequent opportunities for the refreshment of your souls, to the joy of your friends, the grief of your enemies, and the glory of that Providence which hath hitherto maintained them, in despight of Persecution, Here∣sies and Hell! It was not al∣wayes so in London: It is not so in all other places, or famous Cities in the world: Nor are you sure that it will be alway so with you. It doth me good to remem∣ber what blessed Lights have shined among you, that now are more gloriously shining in a higher sphere: Preston, Sibbes, Stoughton, Taylr,

Stock, Randal, Gouge, Ga∣taker, with multitudes more that are now with Christ! It did me good to read in the Pre∣face to Mr. Gatakers funeral Sermon, by one of your Reve∣rend and faithful Guides, what a number of sound and unani∣mous Labourers are yet close at work in that part of Christs Vineyard! And it did me good in that short experience and ob∣servation while I was there, to hear and see so much of their Prudence, Unity and Fideli∣ty.
Believe it, it is the Gospel of Christ that is your Glory: and if London be more honorable then other great and famous Cities of the earth, it is the

light of Gods face, and the plen∣ty and power of his Ordinances and spirit that doth advance and honour it. O know then the day of you visitation!
Three things I shall take leave to propound to your Con∣sideration, which I am certain God requireth at your hands. The first is, that you grow in knowledge, humility, heavenly∣ness and Vnity, according to the blessed means that you enjoy. In my eyes▪ it is the greatest shame to a people in the world, and a sign of barbarousness, or blockishness, when we can hear and read what famous, learned powerful Minister such a place, or such a place had, and yet see

as much ignorance, ungodly∣ness, unruliness, and sensuali∣ty, as if the Gospel had scarce ever been there. I hope it is not thus with you: but I have found it so in too many places in England: We that never saw the faces of their Ministers, but have only read their holy La∣bors, have been ready to think, sure there are but few igno∣rant or ungodly ones in such a Congregation! Sure they are a people rich in Grace, and eminently qualified above their brethren, who have lived undersuch Teach∣ing as this! At least, sure there can be none left that have an enmity to the fear of God! But when we have come

to the Towns where such men spent their lives, and laid out their labours, we have found ignorant, sottsh worldlings, un∣profitable or giddy unstable Professors, and some haters of godliness among them. O what a shame is this to them in the eyes of wise men! and what a confounding aggravation of ther sin before God! Thrive therefore and be fruitful in the Vineyard of the Lord, that it may not repent him that he hath planted and watered you.
The second is this; Improve your interest to the utmost, for the continuance of a faithful Ministery among you: and when any places are void, do what

you can to get a supply of the most Able men. Your City is the Heart of the Nation: you cannot be sick but we shall all feel it. If you be infected with false Doctrines, the Countreys will ere long receive the Contagion. You have a very great influence on all the Land, for good or evil! And do you think the undermining enemies of the Church have not a special De∣sign upon you in this point? and will not promote it as far as is in their power? Could they but get in Popish or Divi∣ding Teachers among you, they know how many advantages they should gain at once! They would have some to grieve and trouble your faithful Guides▪ and

hinder them in the work, and lessen that estimation which by their Vnity they would obtain: And every Deceiver will hope to catch some fish, that casteth his Net among such store. We beseech you, if there be Learn∣ed, Holy, Judicious men in England, that can be had for supply on such occasions, let them be yours; that you may be fed with the Best, and Guided by the Wisest, and we may have all recourse to you for advice: and where there are most Op∣posers and Seducers, there may be the most Powerful, Convin∣cing helps at hand: Let us in the Countrey have the honest raw young Preachers, and see that you have the chief Fatherspunc;

and Pillars in the Church. I speak it not for your sakes alone, but because we have all Depen∣dance on you.
The third thing which I humbly Crave, is, that you will Know them which Labour among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admo∣nish you, and to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake; and be at Peace among your selves. 1 Thes.5.12, 13. And that you will in¦stead of grieving or rejecting your Guides, Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit yourselves; for they watch for your souls as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and

not with grief, for that is un∣profitable for you. Heb. 13.17.7. Encourage your Teachers, for their work is great, their spirits are weak they are but frail men; the enemy is more industrious against them then any men; & their discouragements are very many, and the difficulties which they must encounter are very great. Especially, Obey, Sub∣mit and Encourage them in the work of Government and Exer∣cise of Christs Discipline, and managing the Keyes of the Kingdom which he hath put in∣to their hands. Do you not per∣ceive what a strait your Teachers are in! The Lord Iesus requi∣reth them to exercise his Disci∣pline faithfully and impartial∣ly:

He giveth them not empty Titles of Rule, but layes upon them the burden of ruling: It is his work, more then their Honor that he intends: and if they will have the Honor, it must be by the work. The work is, as to Teach the ignorant, and convince the unbelieving and gainsaying, so to admonish the disorderly and scandalous, and to reject and cast out of the Communion of the Church the Obstinate and Impenitent; and to set by the Leprous, that they infect not the rest; and to sepa∣rate thus the pretious from the vile, by Christs Discipline, that dividing separations, and soul-destroying Transgressions may be prevented or cured. This

work Christ hath charged upon them, and will have it done whoever is against it. If they obey him and do it, what a tu∣mult, what clamours and discontents will they raise! How many will be ready to rise up against them with hatred and scorn! though it be the undoubt∣ed work of Christ, which even under persecution was perform∣ed by the Church-Guides. When they do but keep a scandalous untractable sinner from the Communion of the Church in the Lords Supper, what repin∣ings doth it raise! But, alas, this is a small part of the Dis∣cipline: If all the apparently obstinate and impenitent were cast out, what a stir would they

make! And if Christ be not obeyed, what a stir will consci∣ence make? And it is not on∣ly between Christ and men, but between men and men, that your Guides are put upon such streights. The Separatists re∣proach them for suffering the Impenitent to continue mem∣bers of their Churches, and make it the pretence of their separation from them; having little to say of any moment against the authorized way of Government; but only against our slackness in the Execution. And if we should set to the close exercise of it, as is meet, how would City and Countrey ring of it, and what Indignation should we raise in the multitude

against us! O what need have your Guides of your Encourage∣ment and best Assistance in this streight! God hath set them on a work so ungrateful and displeasing to flesh and blood, that they cannot be faithful in it, but twenty to one they will draw a world of Hatred upon themselves, if not mens fists about their ears. Festred sores will not be lancht and search with ease: Corrupted members are unwilling to be cut off, and cast aside: Especially if any of the great ones fall under the censure, who are big in the eyes of the world and in their own. And yet our Soveraign Lord must be obeyed; and his house must be swept, and the filth cast

out, by what names or Titles soever it be dignified with men: He must be pleased, if all be displeased by it. VVithdraw not your help then from this needful work. It is by the Word, Spirit and Ministery, that Christ the King of his Church doth Govern it: Not separatedly, but joyntly, by all three: To disobey these, is to disobey Christ: and subjection to Christ is Essential to our Christianity. This well thought on might do much to recover the Unruly that are Recover∣able. You may conjecture by the strange opposition that Church-Government meets with from all sorts of carnal and corrupt∣ed minds, that there is some∣what

in it that is eminently of God. I shal say no more but this, that It is an Able, Judi∣cious, Godly, Faithful mini∣stery, not barely heard and applauded, but humbly and piously submitted to, and obeyed in the Lord, that musst be your truest present glory, and the means of your everlasting Peace and Joy.

