


Right Worshipful,
THis First Part of this Treatise was written under your Roof, and there∣fore I present it not to you as a gift, but as your own: Not for your Pro∣tection, but for your Instruction and Direction; (for I never perceived you possessed with that evil spirit, which maketh men hear their Teachers as their Ser∣vants, to censure their Doctrine, or be humored by them, rather then to learn.) Nor do I intend this Epistle for the publishing of your Vertues: You know to whose judgment you stand or fall. It is a small thing to be judged by mans judgment: If you be sentenced as Righteous at the Bar of Christ, and called by him the Blessed of his Father; it matters not much, by what name or title you are here called. All Saints are low in their own esteem, and therefore thirst not to be highly esteemed by others: He that knows what Pride hath done in the World, and is now doing, and how close that hainous sin doth cleave to all our Natures, will scarce take him for a friend, who will bring fewel

to the fire, nor that breath for amicable, which will blow the coal. Yet he that took so kindly a womans box of oyntment, as to affix the History to his Gospel, that where-ever it was read, that good Work might be remembred, hath warranted me by his example, to annex the mention of your Favors to this Treatise, which have many times far exceeded in cost that which Judas thought too good for his Lord. And common ingenuity commandeth me thankfully to ac∣knowledg, That when you heard I was suddenly cast into extream weakness, you sent into several Counties to seek me in my quarters, and missing of me, sent again, to fetch me to your house, where for many moneths I found a Hospital, a Physitian, a Nurse, and real Friends, and (which is more then all) daily and importunate Prayers for my recovery; and since I went from you, your kindnesses still following me in abound∣ance: And all this for a man that was a stranger to you, whom you had never seen before, but among Souldiers, to burden you: And for one that had no witty insinuations for the extracting of your favors, nor impudency enough to return them in flatteries; yea, who had such obstructions betwixt his heart and his tongue, that he could scarce handsomly express the least part of his thankfulness; much less able to make you a requital. The best return I can make of your love, is in commending this Heavenly Duty to your Practice; wherein I must intreat you to be the more diligent and unwearied, because as you may take more time for it then the poor can do, so have you far stronger temptations to divert you; it being extreamly difficult for those that have fulness of all things here, to place their happiness really in another life, and to set their hearts there, as the place of their Rest; which yet

must be done by all that will be saved. Study Luke 12.16. to 22. and 16.19, 25. Matth. 6.21. How little comfort do all things in this world afford to a depart∣ing soul? My constant prayer for you to God shall be, That all things below may be below him in your heart, and that you may throughly master and mortifie the desires of the flesh, and may daily live above in the Spirit, with the Father of Spirits, till you arrive among the perfected Spirits of the Just.

