



SIR,
I Am not a little sensible of the great Obligations you
laid upon the Reverend Author of this following Nar∣rative,
of which neither was his Sense small. 'Tis
well known to me and others, how great a Veneration he
had for your deceased Father, whom he took to be one of
the liveliest Instances and Emblems of Primitive Christi∣anity
that ever he was acquainted with. Neither am I
ignorant of the very great Respects he deservedly bore to
your Self and Family.
The remembrance of your so firm and generous adhe∣rence
to him, in the Day of his Trial and Distress, seems
to me greatly to justifie your Title to the Dedication of this
Account of the Person and Labours which you so greatly va∣lued,
so publickly own'd. He took your resolute Appearance
for him, as a delightful demonstration of your great Re∣spects
to his great Master, and for the same Master's
sake unto himself. He ventur'd his All for God, and you
expos'd your Self for him, to the severely trying Entertain∣ments
which he met with in open Court, from Men of
Place and Figure in that Day; wherein their indecent
Carriages reflected great Honour both on him and you, tho'
not a little Disreputation was thereby contracted to them∣selves.
Had not the Reverend Author plac'd great Confidence
in you, so great a Trust as his last Will and Testament re∣pos'd
in you, had never been your Lot. To be Executor
to two such Excellent Persons, as Mr. Baxter and Mr.

Boyle, fixes great Honour upon your Name, and can∣not
but raise great Expectations in the World from you, of
answering that Character which it appears you had ob∣tain'd,
with two Persons of so great Eminence. But
(Sir) Give me leave to tell you, that the Eye of God is
upon you: and that his Claims and Expectations must be
answer'd by you. Men judge charitably; but God judges
of us as we are indeed. God cannot be deceiv'd; Men may.
Pardon me, if I add what he once said to me concerning
my own self; Sir, I think I know you, but I am
not sure I do. The Word came close to me, and it
may possibly be of use to you: it may awaken us both in∣timately
to consider, to whose Iudgment we all must
stand.
The Lord fulfil in you and your hopeful Issue, all the
good pleasure of his Goodness, and the Work of Faith, La∣bour
of Love, and Patience of Hope with power, so as to
heighten and compleat your Faithfulness and Figure in your
Generation: This is the Prayer and Hope of,
Right Worshipful,

