



My Lord,
COuld my excuse have sa∣tisfyed
you, this Ser∣mon
had been confined to
the Auditory it was pre∣pared
for: I cannot ex∣pect
that is should find
that Candor and favour
with every Reader, as it did with the
Hearers. When it must speak to All, the
guilty will hear, and then it will gall. In∣nocency
is patient in hearing a reproof, and
charitable in the interpretation; but Guilt

will smart and quarrel, and usually
make a fault in him that findeth one in
them. Yet I confest this is but a poor ju∣stification
of his silence, that hath a Call to
speak. Both my Calling and this Ser∣mon
would condemn me, if on such
grounds I should draw back: But my Back∣wardness
was caused by the reason
which I then tendred your Lord-ship as my
excuse, viz. Because here is nothing but
what is common, and that it is in as com∣mon
and homely a dress. And I hope we
need not fear that our labours are dead, un∣less
the Press shall give them life. We
bring not Sermons to Church, as we do a
Corps for a burial: If there be life in them,
and life in the Hearers, the connaturality
will cause such an amicable closure, that
through the Reception, Retention, and ope∣ration
of the soul, they will be the immortal
seed of a life everlasting. But yet seeing
the press hath a louder voice then mine,
and the matter in hand is of such exceeding
necessity, I shall not refuse upon such an

invitation, to be a rememberancer to the
the world, of a Doctrine and duty of such
high concernment: thongh they have heard
it never so oft before. Seeing therefore
I must present that now to your eyes, which I
lately presented to your ears, I shall take the
boldness to add one word of Application in
this Epistle, which I thought not seasonable
to mention in the first delivery; and that
shall be to your Lordship and all others in
your present case, that are elected members
of this expected Parliament. Be sure to re∣member
the interest of your soveraign, the
great Lord Protector of Heaven and Earth:
And as ever you will make him a comforta∣ble
accompt of your Power, Abilities, and
Opportunities of serving him, see that you
prefer his interest before your own, or
any mans on earth. If you go not thither
as sent by Him, with a firm resolu∣tion
to serve him first, you were better sit
at home: forget not that he hath laid
claim to you, and to all that you have, and
all that you can have, and all that you can

do I am bold with all possible earnestness, to
entreat you, yea as Christs Minister to re∣quire
you, in his Name, to study and remem∣ber
his business and interest; and see that it
have the chief place in all your consultati∣ons:
Watch against the incroachments of
your own carnal interests, consult not with
flesh and blood, nor give it the hearing
when it shall offer you its advice. How sub∣tilly
will it insinuate, how importunately
will it urge you, how certainly will it marr
all, if you do not constantly and resolvedly
watch! O how hard, but now happy is it to
conquer this carnal self: Remember still
that you are not your own, that you have
an unseen Master that must be pleased, who∣ever
be displeased; and an unseen Kingdom
to be obtained, and an invisible soul that
must be saved, though all the world be lost.
Fix your eye still on him that made and
redeemed you, and upon the ultimate end of
your Christian race; and do nothing wilful∣ly,
unworthy such a Master, and such an
end. Often renew your self-resignation,

and devote your self to him; sit close at his
work, and be sure that it be His, both in the
Matter, and in your Intent. If Con∣science
should at any time ask, (Whose
work are you now doing?) or a man
should pluck you by the sleeve, and say, (Sir,
Whose Cause are you now pleading?)
See that you have the answer of a Christian
at hand; delay not Gods work till you have
done your own, or any ones else: You'l best
secure the Common-wealth and your own
interest, by looking first to His. By negle∣cting
this, and being carnally wise, we have
wheel'd about so long in the Wilderness, and
lost those advantages against the Powers of
Darkness, which we know not whether we
shall ever recover again. It is the great
astonishment of sober men, and not the least
reproach that ever was cast on our holy Pro∣fession,
to think with what a zeal for the
work of Christ, men seemed to be animated
in the beginning of our disagreements; and
how deeply they did engage themselves to
him in solemn Vows, Protestations, and

Covenants; & what advantages carnal self
hath since got, and turned the stream another
way! so that the same men have since been
the instruments of our calamity, in breaking
in pieces, and dishonouring the Churches of
Christ; yea and gone so neer to the taking
down (as much as in them lay) the whole
Ministry that stand approved in the Land:
O do not by trifling, give advantage to the
Temper to destroy your work and you toge∣ther.
Take warning by the sad experiences
of what is past; bestir you speedily and
vigoruosly for Christ, as knowing your oppo∣sition
and the shortness of your time: Blessed
is that servant whom his Lord when
he commeth shall find so doing. If
you ask me wherein his interest of Christ
doth consist? I shall tell you but in a few
unquestionable particulars. 1. In the main,
that truth, godliness, and honesty, be coun∣tenanced
and encouraged, and their con∣traries
by all fit means suppressed. 2. In
order to this, that unworthy men be remo∣ved
from Magistracy and Ministry, and

the places supplyed with the fittest that can
be had. 3. That a competent maintenance
may be procured where it is wanting, especi∣ally
for Cities and great Towns, where more
Teachers are so necessary in some proportion
to the number of souls, and on which the
Country doth so much depend. Shall an age
of such high pretences to Reformation, and
zeal for the Churches, alienate so much, and
then leave them destitute and say, It can∣not
be had? 4. That right means be used
with speed and diligence, for the healing of
our divisions, and the uniting of all the true
Churches of Christ (at least in these Na∣tions;
and O that your endeavours might be
extended much further) to which end I
shall mention but these two means of most
evident necessity. 1. That there be one
scripture-Creed, or confession of Faith,
agreed on by a general assembly of able Mi∣nisters
duly and freely chosen hereunto,
which shall contain nothing but matter of
evident Necessity and Verity. This will
serve 1. For a Test to the Churches, to dis∣cern

the sound Professors from the unsound
(as to their doctrine) and to know them
with whom they may close as Brethren, and
whom they must reject. 2. For a Test to
the Magistrate, of the Orthodox to be encou∣raged,
and of the intoller ably Heterodox,
which it seems is intended in the 37. Arti∣cle
of the late formed Government, where all
that will have liberty, must profess (faith
in God by Jesus Christ) which in a Chri∣stian
sense must comprehend every true
fundamental, or Article of our faith: And,
no doubt, it is not the bare speaking of those
words, in an unchristian sense that is in∣tended.
(As if a Ranter should say,
that himself is God, and his mate is Jesus
Christ.)
2. That there be a publique establishment
of the necessary liberty of the Churches, to
meet by their Officers and Delegates on
all just occasions, in assemblies smaller or
greater, (even National when it is neces∣sary)
Seeing without such associations and
communion in assemblies, the unity and con∣cord

of the Churches is not like to be main∣tained.
I exclude not the Magistrates in∣terest
or oversight, to see that they do not
transgress their bounds. As you love
Christ, and his Church and Gospel, and mens
souls, neglect not these unquestionable points
of his interest, and make them your first and
chiefest business, and let none be preferred
before him, till you know them to be of more
authority over you, and better friends to you
then Christ is. Should there by any among
you that cherish a secret Root of Infidelity,
after such pretences to the purest Christiani∣ty,
and are zealous of Christ lest he should
over-top them, and do set up an interest in∣consistent
with his soveraignty, & thereupon
grow jealous of the liberties & power of his
Ministers, and of the unity and strength of
his Church; and think it their best policy
to keep under his Ministers, by hindering
them from the exercise of their office, and
to foment divisions, and hinder our union,
that they may have parties ready to serve
their ends: I would not be in the Case of

such men, when God ariseth to judge them,
for all the Crowns and Kingdoms on earth!
If they stumble on this stone, it will break
them in pieces: but if it fall upon them, it
will grind them to powder. They may seem
to prevail against him a while when their
supposed success is but a prosperous self-de∣stroying:
but mark the end, when his wrath
is kindled, yea, but a little: and when these
his enemies that would not he should raign
over them, are brought forth and destroyed
before him, then they will be convineed of
the folly of their Rebellon: in the mean
time let wisdom be justified of her Children.
My Lord, I had not troubled, you with
so many words, had I not judged it probable
that many more whom they concern may
peruse them. I remain,
August 5.
1654.

