



Worshipfull and the rest Beloved,
THE chief part of this following Discourse, being preached a∣mong you, and that upon an occasion which you are obliged to consider, (Isa. 57. 1.) being called to publish it, I thought it meet to di∣rect it first to your hands, and to take this opportunity, plainly and seriously to exhort you in some matters that your present and everlasting peace is much concerned in.
Credible fame reporteth you to be a people not all of one mind, or temper in the matters of God: but that 1. Some of you are Godly, Sobe, and Peace∣able: 2. Some well-meaning and zea∣lous, but addicted to divisions. 3. Some Papists. 4. Some Hiders, seduced by your late deceased neighbour Clement Writer, (to whom the Quakers do ap∣proach in many opinions,). 5. And too many prophane and obstinate persons, that are heartily and seriously of no Re∣ligion, but take occasion from the di∣visions of the rest, to despise or neglect the Ordinances of God, and join them∣selves to no Assemblies.
1. To the first sort (having least need of my exhortation,) I say no more, but, As you have received Christ Je∣sus the Lord, so walk ye in him, rooted and built up in him, and stablish∣ed in the faith, as ye have been taught, abounding therein with thanksgiving: and beware lest any man spoil you by deceit, &c.] Col. 2. 6, 7, 8. Walk as

a chosen generation, a royal Priest-hood, a holy Nation, a peculiar people, to shew forth the praises of him that hath called you out of darkness into his mar∣vellous light; having your conversation honest among the ungodly, that where∣as they are apt to speak against you as e∣vil doers, they may by your good works which they shall behold, glorifie God in the day of visitation; For so is the will of God, that with well doing you may put to silence the ignorance of foolish men, 1 Pet. 2. 9, 11, 12, 15. Your labour and patience is known to the Lord; and how ye cannot bear them which are evill, but have tried them which say they speak from the Lord, and are Apostles, and are not, and have found them lyars; even the wo∣man Jezabel, that is suffered to teach and seduce the people, calling her self a Prophetess, who shall be cast into a bed of tribulation, and all that commit adultery with her, except they repent; and her children shall be killed with

death; and all the Churches shall know that Christ is he which searcheth the reines and hearts; and will give to every one according to their work. As for your selves, we put upon you no o∣ther burden, but that which you have already; Hold fast till the Lord come, Rev. 2. Be watchfull, that ye fall not from your first Love: and if any have declined and grown remiss, remem∣ber how you have received and heard, and hold fast, and repent, and streng∣then the things that remain, which are ready to die, lest your Candlestick should be removed, Rev. 3. 2, 3, &c.] And beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness; but grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 17, 18. And I beseech you brethren, do all things without murmurings and disputings, that ye may be blameless, and harmless, the Sons of God with∣out rebuke in the midst of a crooked

and perverse Nation, among whom you (and your brethren) shine as lights in the world, Phil. 2. 14, 15. And if in well doing you suffer, think it not strange, but rejoyce that ye are partakers of the sufferings of Christ, that when his glory shall be revealed, ye may be glad also with exceeding joy. If ye be reproached for the name of Christ, ye are happy, for the Spirit of glory and of God rest∣eth upon you, being glorified on your part, while he is evil spoken of on theirs, 1 Pet. 4. 12, 13, 14.
2. To the second sort (inclinable to divisions) let me tender the Counsel of the Holy Ghost, Jam. 3. 1. My brethren be not many Masters (or Teachers) know∣ing that ye shall receive the greater con∣demnation.] The wisdom that is from above, is first pure, and then Peaceable, gentle and easie to be intreated, full of mercy & good fruits, without partiality, and without hipocrisie: And the fruit of Righteousness is sown in peace, of them that make peace. Who then is the

wise and knowing man amongst you? Let him shew out of a good conversation, his works with meekness of wisdom. But if ye have bitter envying and strife in your hearts, glory not, and lye not against the truth: This wisdom de∣scendeth not from above, but is earth∣ly, sensuall, devilish: For where en∣vying and strife is, there is confusion, and every evil work.] Look on those Assemblies, where the people professing the fear of God are of one heart and mind, and walk together in Love and holy Order, and people give due ho∣nour and obedience to their faithful Guides; and compare them with the Congregations where professors are self∣conceited, unruly, proud, and addict∣ed to ostentation of themselves, and to divisions: and see which is likest to the Primitive pattern, and in which it is that the power of godliness prospereth best, and the beauty of Religion most appears, and Christians walk as Chri∣stians indeed. If pride had not brought

the heavy judgment of infatuation or in∣sensibility on many; the too clear dis∣coveries of the fruits of divisions in the numerous and sad experiences of this age, would have caused them to be abhorred as odious and destructive, by those that now think they do but tran∣scend their lower brethren in holiness and zeal. [I beseech you therefore brethren, by the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, that you all speak the same thing and that there be no divi∣sions among you, but that you be per∣fectly joyned together in the same mind, and in the same judgment, 1 Cor. 1. 10.] The God of patience and consolation grant you to be like minded one towards another, acording to Christ Jesus; that ye may with one mind and one mouth glorifie God,] Rom. 15. 5, 6. And I beseech you brethren, to know them which labour among you, and are over you in the Lord, and admonish you: And esteem them very highly in love for their works sake, and be at

peace among your selves, 1 Thes. 5. 12, 13. And mark those that cause divisions and offences, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, & avoid them Rom. 16. 17. And if there be any consolaton in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fel∣lowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfil ye our joy, that ye may be like minded having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind: Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but in lowliness of mind, let each esteemo∣ther better then themselves. Look not every man on his own things (his own gifts and graces) but every man also on the things (the graces and gifts) of o∣thers; Let this mind be in you which was in Christ Jesus, who being in the form of God, thought it not robbery to be equal with God; but made him∣self of no reputation (or, emptied himself of all worldly glory, Isa. 53. 2, 3, 4. As if he had had no form or comliness, and no beauty to the eye, for which we should desire him: but was despised

& rejected of men, & not esteemed,) Phil. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. It is not (as you ima∣gine) your extraordinary Knowledg, Zeal, and Holiness, that inclineth you to di∣visions, and to censuring of your brethren; but it is Pride, and Ignorance, and want of Love: and if you grow to any ripeness in Knowledg, Humility, Self-denial, and Charity, you will bewail your divide∣ing inclinations and courses; and reckon them among the greater and grievous of your sins, and cry out against them as much as your more charitable and expe∣rienced brethren do.
3. To the third sort, (the Papists) I shall say nothing here, because I cannot ex∣pect they should read it and consider it: and because we are so far disagreed in our Principles that we cannot treat with them on those rational terms as we may do with the rest of the inhabitants of the world, whether Christians, Infidels or Heathens. As long as they build their faith and salvation on this suppositi∣on that the eyes, and taste, and feel∣ing

of all the sound men in the world, are deceived in judging of Bread and Wine; and as long as they deny the certaine experience of true believers (telling us that we are void of Charity and unjustified because we are not of their Church;) and as long as they fly from the judgment and Tradition of the ancient and present Church (unless their small part may be taken for the whole, or the major Vote;) and as long as they reject our appeal to the holy Scriptures: I know not well what we can say to them which we can expect they should regard, any more than musick is regarded by the deaf, or light by the blind, or ar∣gument by the distracted. If they had the moderation and charity impartially to peruse our writings, I durst confi∣dently promise the recovery of multi∣tudes of them, by the three Writings which I have already published, and the more that others have said against them.
4. And for the fourth sort (the

Hiders, and the Quakers) I have said enough to them already (in my Book a∣gainst Infidelity and those against Popery and Quakers,) but in vain to those that have sinned unto death.
5. It is the fifth sort therefore that I shall cheifly address my speech to; who, I fear are not the smallest part. It is an astonishing consideration to men that are awake, to observe the unreasonable∣ness and stupidity of the ignorant, care∣less, sensual part of men; How little they Love or Fear the God whom their tongues confess; How little they va∣lue, or mind, or seek the everlasting glory, which they take on them to be∣lieve; How little they fear and shun those flames which must feed for ever on the impenitent and unholy; How little they care or labour for their im∣mortal soules, as if they were of the Religion of their beasts: How bitterly many of them hate the holy wayes com∣manded by the Lord: while yet they pretend to be themselves his Servants, and

to take the Scriptures to be his word: How sottishly and contemptuously they neglect and sleight the Holiness without which there is no salvation; Heb. 12. 14. How eagerly they desire and seek the pleasing of their flesh, and the matters of this transitory life, while they call them vanity and vexation; How madly they will fall out with their own salvation; and from the errours and sins of Hypo∣crites or others, will pick quarrels a∣gainst the Doctrine, and Ordinances, and waies of God; as if other mens faults should be exceeded by you, while you pretend to loath them. If it be a sin to crack our faith by some par∣ticular error, what is it to dash it all to peices? If it be odious in your eyes, to denie some particular Ordinance of God, what is it to neglect or Prophane them all? If it be their sin that quarrel in the way to Heaven, and walk not in companie as love requireth them; what is it in you to run towards hell, and turn your backs on the holie Laws

and waies of God? If it be so lamenta∣ble to the Nation and themselves, that so many have faln into schism and dis∣order; what is it then that so many are ungodlie, sensual, and worldlie, and have no true Religion at all, in sin∣cerity, and life, and power? Ungodli∣ness is all Heresie transcendently in the lump, and that in Practice. A man that is so foolish as to plead that Arsnick is better then bread, may yet live himself if he do not take it: but so cannot he that eateth it instead of bread. Hereticks only in speculation may be saved: but practical hereticks cannot. You think it hainous to denie with the mouth that there is a God, who made us, and is our only Lord and Happiness (and so it is.) And is it not hainous then to denie him with the heart and life; and to denie him the love and obedience that is Properly due to God? It is odious idolatrie to bow to a creature as to God; and is it not odious to love, and honour, and o∣bey a creature before him, and to seek it more

eagerly, and mind it more seriously then God? If it be damnable Infidelity to denie Christ to be the Redeemer, it is not much less to turn away from him, and make light of him and refuse his grace, while you seem to honour him. If it be damnable blasphemy to deny the Holy Ghost; what is it to resist and re∣fuse him when he would sanctifie you, and perhaps to make a scorn of holiness? If it be Heresie to denie the holy Ca∣tholick Church, and the Communion of Saints; what is it to hate the Holy members of the Church, and to avoid, if not deride, the Communion of Saints? Be not deceived, God is not mocked: A mock-Religion, and the name of Christianity will never save you. Do you know how near you are to judge∣ment, and will you fearlesly thus heap up wrath, and lay in fewel for the ever∣lasting flames? Do you know how spee∣dily you shall wish in the bitterness of your souls, that you had heard, and pray∣ed, and laboured as for your lives, and

redeemed your time, and obeyed your Teachers? and yet will you now stand loitering; and quarrelling, and jesting, and dallying in the matters of salvation? and will you live as if you had nothing but the world to mind, when you are even readie to step into the endless world? O Sirs, do you know what you are doing? You are abusing the living God, and wronging the Lord Jesus, and trampling upon that mercy which would comfort you in your extremity, a drop of which you would then be glad of: You are grieving your poor Friends, and Teachers, and preparing for your endless grief. Alas, what should a faithfull Minister do, for the saving of your souls? He seeth you befooled in your security, and carelesly passing on towards Hell, and cannot help it: He sees you posting to your misery, where you will be out of the reach of all our exhortations, and where mercie will not follow you to be accepted or rejected: and though he see you almost past re∣medie,

he cannot help you. He know∣eth not, when he speaks to you, whe∣ther ever he shall speak unto you more, and whether ever you shall have another call and offer; and therefore he would fain speak effectually if he could; but it is not in his power. He knows, that the matter sticks all at your own wills, and that if he could but procure your own consent, to the most reasonable and ne∣cessary business in the world, the work were done, and you might scape the e∣verlasting flames: And yet this is it that he cannot procure! O wonderful, that any man should be damned; Yea that many men, and most men should be damned, when they might be saved if they would, and will not! Yea that no saying will serve to procure their con∣sent, and make them willing! That we must look on our poor miserable neigh∣bours in Hell, and say, they might have been saved once, but would not! they had time, and leave to turn to God, and to be holy and happy as well as others, but

we could never prevaile with them to consent, and know the day of their visi∣tation! O what should we do for the saving if careless, senseless souls? Must we let them go? Is there no remedie? Shall Ministers study to meet with their necessities, and tell them with all possi∣ble plainness and compassion, of the evil that is a little before them, & teach them how they may escape it? Why, this they do from day to day, and some will not hear them, but are tipling, or idle∣ing or making a jeast of the Preacher at home, and others are hearing with pre∣judice and contempt, and most are hard∣ned into a senseless deadness, and all seems to them but as an emptie sound: and they are so used to hear of Heaven and Hell, that they make as light of them as if there were no such States! Alas, that while millions are weeping and wailing in utter desperation, for the neglecting of their day of grace, and turning away from him that called them, our poor hearers at the same time should

wilfully follow them, when they are told from God what others suffer! Alas, that you should besleepy & dead under those means, that should waken you to prevent eternal death! and that ever you should make merry so near damna∣tion, and be sporting your selves with the same kind of sins that others at the same hour are tormented for? And is such madness as this remediless, in people that seem as wise as others for worldly things! Alas, for any thing that we can do, experience tells us that with the most it is remediless! Could we reme∣die it, our poor people should not wil∣fully run from Christ, and lie in the flames of Hell for ever. Could our per∣swasions and entreaties help it, they should not for ever be shut out of Hea∣ven, when its offered to them as well as others. We bewail it from our hearts before the Lord, that we can entreat them no more earnestly, and beg not of them as for our lives to look before them, and hearken to the voice of grace

that they may be saved. And a thou∣sand times in secret we call our selves hard-hearted, unmerciful, and unfaithful, (in too great a measure) that speak no more importunatelie for the saving of mens souls, when we know not whether we shall ever speak to them any more. Is this all that we can say or do in so ter∣rible a case, and in a matter of such weight as mens salvation! The Lord forgive our great insensibilitie, & awaken us, that we may be fit to waken others; But yet for all this, with grief we must complain, that our people feel not when we feel, and that they are senseless or asleep when we speak to them as seriously as we can, and that tears and moans do not prevail, but they go home and live as stupidlie in an unconverted state, as if all were well with them, and they were not the men we speak to.
O that you knew what a fearful judg∣ment it is, to be forsaken of God, be∣cause you would have none of him; and to be given up to your hearts lusts, to

walk in your own Counsells, because you would not hearken to his voice, Psa. 81. 11, 12, 13. and to have God say, Let those wretches be ignorant, and careless, and fleshly, and worldly, and filthy still, Rev. 22. 11. O that you knew (but not by experience) what a heavie plague it is to be so forsaken, as to have eyes that see not, or seeing do not percieve; and to have ears that hear not, or to hear and not under∣stand, and so to be unconverted and un∣healed, Mark 4. 12. and to be hard∣ned and condemned by the word, and patience, and mercies that do soften and save others, and should have saved you! Take heed lest Christ say, [I have sent them my messenger, long e∣nough in vaine; From henceforth ne∣ver fruit grow on them: Because they would not be converted, they shall not.] Take heed lest he take you away from means, and quickly put an end to your opportunities. You see how fast men pass away, but little do you know how

manie are lamenting that they made no better use of time, and helps, and mer∣cies while they had them. O hear while you may hear, for it will not be long: Read while you may read, and pray while you may pray, and turn while you may turn, and go to your Christian friends & teachers, and enquire of them, what you must do to be saved, before enquiring be too late. Spend the Lords Day, and what other time you can re∣deem, in holy preparations for your end∣less Rest, while you have such a happie day to spend. O sleep no longer in your sins, while God stands over you, lest before you are aware you awake in Hell. Patience and Mercie have their appoin∣ted time, and will not alway wait and be despised. O let not your Teachers be forced to say, [We would have taught them publikelie and privatelie, but they would not: We would have Catechi∣zed the ignorant, and exhorted the neg∣ligent, but some of them would not come near us, and others of them gave

us but the hearing, and went away such as they came.] If once by forfeiting the Gospel the Teachers whom you slight be taken from you, you may then sin on and take your course, till time, and help, and hope are past.
The providence that called me to this work, was some warning to you. Though it was not the calling away your Teacher, it was a removing of his helper, a pattern of meekness, and god∣liness, and charitie; and he is left the more disconsolate in the prosecution of his work. God hath made him faithful to your souls, and careful for your hap∣piness: He walks before you in humilitie and self-denial, and Patience, and peaceableness, and in an upright in∣offensive life: He is willing to teach you publicklie and privatelie, in season and out of season: He manageth the work of God with prudence & modera∣tion, and yet with Zeal, carefullie a∣voiding both ungodliness and schism, or the countenancing of either of them:

Were he not of eminent wisdom and in∣tegritie, his name would not be so un∣spotted in a place where Dividers, and Disputers, Papists, and Quakers, and so manie bitter enemies of godliness, do watch for matter of accusation and re∣proach against the faithful Ministers of Christ. As you love the safetie and happiness of your City, and of your souls, undervalue not such mercies, nor think it enough to put them off with your commendations and good word: It is not that which they live, and preach, and labour for; but for the Conversi∣on, Edification, and Salvation of your souls. Let them have this, or they have nothing, if you should give them all you have. The enemies of the Gos∣pel have no wiser Cavil against the painful Labourers of the Lord, then to call them Hirelings, and blame them for looking after Tithes, and great matters in the world. But as among all the faithful Ministers of this Countrie, through the great mercie of God these

adversaries are now almost ashamed to open their mouths with an accusation of Covetousness: So this your Reve∣rend, faithful Teacher, hath stopt the mouth of all such calumnie, as to him. When I invited him from a place of less work, and a competent maintenance, to accept of less then half that mainte∣nance, with a far greater burden of work among you, he never stuck at it, as thinking he might be more serviceable to God, and win that which is better then the riches of this world. And if now you will frustrate his expectations, and disappoint his labours and hopes of your salvation, it will be easier for So∣dom in the day of judgment then for you. Alas how sad is it to see a faith∣ful Minister longing and labouring for mens salvation, and manie of them neg∣lecting him, and others picking ground∣less quarrels; and the proud unrulie sel∣fish part, rebelling and turning their backs upon their Teachers when ever they will not humour them in their own

wayes, or when they deal but faithfullie with their souls! Some (even of those that speak against disobedience, conven∣ticles, and schism,) turn away in disdain, if their Children may not be needleslie baptized in private houses, and if that solemn Ordinance may not be celebra∣ted in a Parlour-Conventicle. How manie refuse to come to the Minister in private to be instructed or Catechised, or to confer with him about their nece∣sarie preparation for death and Judge∣ment! Is not this the case of manie a∣mong you? Must not your Teachers say, He sent to you, and was willing to have done his part, and you refused? Little will ye now believe how heavie this will lie upon you one day, and how dear you shall pay for the causless grie∣ving and disappointment of your guides. It is not your surliness and passions that will then serve turn to answer God. Nor shall it save you to say, that Mi∣nisters were of so manie minds and wayes, that you knew not which of them

to regard: For it was but one way, that God in the holy Scripture did prescribe you: and all faithful Ministers were a∣greed in the things which you reject, and in which you practicallie differ from them all. What? are we not all agreed, that God is to be preferred before the world? and that you must first seek the Kingdom of God & his Righteousness? & that no man can be saved except he be converted and born again? and that he that hath not the Spirit of Christ is none of his, Mat. 6. 33 John 3. 3, 5. Mat. 18. 3. Rom. 8. 9. and that you and your housholds should serve the Lord, Josh. 24. 15. Are we not all agreed that the Law of the Lord must be your delight and that you must meditate in it day and night? Psal. 1. 2, 3. and that you must be constant and fervent in Prayer? 1 Thes. 5. 17. Luke 18. 1. &c. and that all that name the name of Christ, must depart from iniquitie? and that if you live after the flesh ye shall die? 2 Tim. 2. 19. Rom. 8. 13. You shall find one day,

that it was you only, & such as you, that practicallie differed from us in these points; but we differed not in these, or such as these, among our selves. I ne∣ver read that a man shall not see God, because he is Episcopal, Presbyterian, Independant, no nor Anabaptist: or because he readeth not his Prayers, or such like: But I read that no man shall see God without holiness, Hebrews 12. 14.
It will not serve your turn in judge∣ment, to say that you were for this side, or that side, and therefore you hearken∣ed not to the other side; as long as all those sides agree in the necessitie of ho∣liness which you neglect. Why did you not learn of your own side, at least to forsake your tipling, and swearing, and worldly-mindedness, and to make it the daily trade of your lives to pro∣vide for life everlasting, and make sure work in the matter of your salvation? If you had learnt but this much of any side, you would cast away your siding more,

and have loved and honoured them that fear the Lord, of what side soever, Psal. 15. 4. and have contemned the ungod∣lie as vile persons, though they had been of your side. The Catholick Church is One, and containeth all that heartilie and practicallie believe in God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, the Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier, and live a holy heavenlie life. Leave off your siding, & keep this blessed simple Unity▪ & you will then be wiser then in a passion to cast your selves into Hell, because some fall out in the way to Heaven.
Nor will it serve your turn at the bar of God, to talk of the miscarriages or scandalls of some, that took on them to be godly, no more then to run out of the Ark for the sake of Cham, on out of Christs familie for the sake of Judas. What ever men are, God is Just, and will do you no wrong; and you are cal∣led to Believe in God, and to serve him, and not to believe in men. Nothing but wickedness could so far blind men,

as to make them think they may cast off their love & service to the Lord, because some others have dishonoured him: Or that they may cast away their souls by carelesness, because some others have wounded their souls by particular sins. Do you dislike the sins of Professors of Godliness? So much the better: We de∣sire you not to agree with them in sin∣ning: Joyn with them in a Holy life, and imitate them so far as they obey the Lord; & go as far beyond them in avoid∣ing the sins that you are offended at, as you can, and this is it that we desire. Supose they were Covetous, or Liars, or Schismatical: Imitate them in holy duties, and fly as far from Covetousness, Lying, and Schism, as you will.
You have had Learned and Godly Bishops of this City: Search the wri∣tings of those of them that have left any of their labours to posterity, and see whether they speak not for the same substantials of faith and godliness, which are now Preacht to you, by those

that you set so light by. Bishop Lait∣mer, Parrey, Babington, &c. while they were Bishops; and Rob. Abbot, Hall, &c. before they were Bishops, all Excellent, Learned, Godly men, have here been Preachers to your Ancestors: Read their Books, and you will find that they call men to that strictness and holiness of life which you cannot abide. Read your Bishop Babington on the Command∣ments, and see there how zealously he condemneth the Prophaners of the Lords Day, and those that make it a day of idleness or sports. And what if one man think that one Bi∣shop should have hundreds of Churches under his sole jurisdiction, and ano∣ther man think that every full Parish-Church should have a Bishop of their own, and that one Parish will find him work enough, be he what he will be, (which is the difference now amongst us) is this so heinous a disagreement, as should frighten you

from a holy life which all agree for?
To conclude, remember this is the day of your salvation: Ministers are your Helpers: Christ and Ho∣liness are your way: Scripture is your Rule: the Godly must be your company, and the Communion of Saints must be your desire: If now any scandals, divisions, displeasures, or any seducements of secret or open adversaries of the truth, or tempta∣tions of Satan, the world, or flesh whatsoever, shall prevaile with you to lose your day, to refuse your mercies, and to neglect Christ and your immortal souls, you are con∣quered and undone; and your ene∣my hath his will; and the more con∣fidently and fearlesly you brave it out, the more is your misery; for the harder are your hearts; and the harder is your cure; and the surer and sorer will be your damnation. I have purposely avoided the enticing words of worldly wisdom, and a stile

that tends to claw your ears, and gain applause with aery wits; and have cho∣sen these familiar words, and dealt thus plainly and freely with you, because the greatness of the cause perswaded me, I could not be too serious. Whether many of you will read it, & what success it shall have upon them, or how those that read it will take it, I cannot tell: But I know that I intended it for your good; and that whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear, the Ministers of Christ must not forbear to do their duty, nor be rebellious themselves: but our La∣bours shall be acceptable with our Lord, and you shall know, that his Ministers were among you, Ezek. 2. 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. [Yet a little while is the Lightwith you: Walk while ye have the Light, lest dark∣ness come upon you; for he that wal∣keth in darkness, knoweth not whither he goeth.] Joh. 12. 35. O take this warning from Christ, and from

