



THat this world is Vanity and Vexation,Eles. 1.1 is no need to tell: your more then fourscore years apiece can preach Labour and Sorrow.Psal. 19.1 The Lord hath sufficiently wea∣ned us (if at least we will not be guilty of wilfull folly) from the frothy milk of this world; he hath not spared his mustard, wormwood and gall: And, as if that were not sufficient to take off our doting appetites, he hath even taken the world it self quite from us; we have no breasts to suck, no world to love. Oh! what a sweet ad∣vantage have we now (had we but wisdome and grace to improve it) to fix our loves only upon God and Heaven, now we are freed from other suitors? Why doe we not advance our longings thither, where we may be yet more secure from Plunder and Sequestration? Here we have a little, (though a very little, besides our lives) there we shall have nothing that Theeves can medle with. We have (I be∣lieve we have) long agoe learn'd, to be willing to live, and yet con∣tent to die, if God so please: surely we have been trewants, if by this time we cannot adde one line to that lesson, and now be willing to die, and yet content to live, if God so please. Tell me (for ingenuously I know not) what is there that may make us in love with Life, or in fear of Death? For the first (love of the present world) I do not much suspect you; you have been sufficiently knock'd off from that dotage. Against the second, there is none but wants incouragements. That King of feares, and fear of Kings, That ,Io, 18.14. That mighty Mawkin, That terrible Scare-crow, That ashcolour'd Vizard, is many times ready to put us Children besides our little wits. One good preservation against the frights of this Bug-bear, is to get acquaintance with the Skeleton: so have I known a fair Lady, and a Coy, by familiar convere, with an hard-favour at last, by degrees to like and love. Why not so here? Surely ignorance of Death, of∣times is one (if not the only) cause we are squeamish; did we but
know whence she is, and whither she tends, we should bid her better welcome. These Meditations were my comfort as well as my im∣ployment in my late long sicknesse: I present them to you now, as an expresse of my duty and thankes for your care and cost from my Child∣hood untill now; for even yet (such is the will of God, whose justice I see quite through the malignity of the world) I feed upon part of that little bread which is scarce sufficient for your own nourishment. I hope and wish your Firkin and cruse may not be spent till the in∣fluence of Heaven send peace and prosperity to our King and Country. I know this present will be pleasing for my sake, I wish it may be pro∣fitable for your own. You cannot but every day (one way or other) be put in minde of your dissolution; you have pricks in the flesh, the Messengers of Death to buffet you, and no intreaty can take them off, but they and you must remove together. I wish you may improve these and other Meditations so to your comfort, that at last, even Death it self may be your consolation. The God of Heaven blesse and keep you in his faith, in his fear, the Lord preserve and restore our King, and in his good time send us peace, in the mean time send us patience; God forgive and convert our Enemies; and once more look gratiously upon our Land and Nation. Amen. Amen

