



My dear Friends,
IF either I or my labors have any thing of pub∣like use or worth, it is wholly (though not onely) yours. And I am convinced by Pro∣vidence, That it is the Will of God it should be so. This I clearly discerned in my first coming to you, in my former abode with you, and in the time of my forced absence from you. When I was separated by the miseries of the late unhappy war, I durst not fix in any other Congregation, but lived in a military unpleasing state, lest I should forestal my return to you; for whom I took my self reserved. The offers of greater worldly accommodations, with five times the means which I receive with you, was no temptation to me once to question whether I should leave you: Your free invitation of my return, your obedience to my Doctrine, the strong affection which I have yet towards you above all people, and the general hearty return of Love, which I finde from you, do all perswade me, that I was sent into this world, especially for the service of your souls. And that even when I am dead, I might

yet be a help to your salvation; the Lord hath forced me quite besides my own resolution, to write this Treatise and leave it in your hands. It was far from my thoughts ever to have become thus publike, and burdened the world with any writings of mine: Therefore have I oft resisted the requests of my reverend Brethren, and some Superiors, who might else have commanded much more at my hands. But see how God over ruleth and crosseth our resolutions.
Being in my quarters far from home, cast into extream languish∣ing (by the sudden loss of about a Gallon of blood▪ after many yeers foregoing weakness) and having no acquaintance about me, nor any Books, but my Bible, and living in continual expectation of death, I bent my thoughts on my Everlasting Rest: And because my memory through extream weakness was imperfect, I took my pen, and began to draw up my own funeral Sermon; or some helps for my own Me∣ditations of Heaven, to sweeten both the Rest of my life, and my death. In this condition, God was pleased to continue me about five moneths from home, where being able for nothing else, I went on with this work, which so lengthened to this, which here you see. It is no wonder therefore, if I be too abrupt in the beginning, seeing I then intended but the length of a Sermon or two: Much less may you wonder, if the whole be very imperfect, seeing it was written, as it were, with one foot in the grave, by a man that was betwixt living and dead, that wanted strength of nature to quicken Invention or Affection, and had no Book but his Bible, while the chief part was finished; nor had any minde of humane ornaments, if he had been furnished. But, O how sweet is this Providence now to my review! which so happily forced me to that work of Meditation, which I had formerly found so profitable to my soul! and shewed me more mercy in depriving me of other helps, then I was aware of! and hath caused my thoughts to feed on this Heavenly Subject, which hath more benefited me, then all the studies of my life!
And now, dear Friends, such as it is, I here offer it you; and upon the bended knees of my soul, I offer up my thanks to the merciful God, who hath fetched up, both me and it, as from the grave, for your ser∣vice: Who reversed the sentence of present death, which by the ablest Physitians, was past upon me! who interrupted my publike labors for a time, that he might force me to do you a more lasting service, which else I had never been like to have attempted! That God do I heartily bless and magnifie, who hath rescued me from the many dangers of four yeers

war, and after so many tedious nights and days, and so many doleful fights and tidings, hath returned me, and many of your selves, and re∣prived us till now to serve him in peace! And though men be ungrate∣ful, and my body ruined beyond hope of recovery, yet he hath made up all in the comforts I have in you! To the God of mercy, do I here offer my most hearty thanks, and pay the vows of acknowledgment which I oft made in my distress, who hath not rejected my prayers, which in my dolor I put up, but hath by a wonder delivered me in the midst of my duties; and hath supported me this fourteen yeers in a languishing state, wherein I have scarce had a waking hour free from pain; who hath above twenty several times delivered me, when I was neer to death: And though he hath made me spend my days in groans and tears, and in a constant expectation of my change, yet hath he not wholly dis∣abled me to his service; and hereby hath more effectually subdued my pride, and made this world contemptible to me, and forced my dull heart to more importunate requests, and occasioned more rare dis∣coveries of his Mercy, then ever I could have expected in a prosperous state. For ever blessed be the Lord, that hath not onely honored me to be a Minister of his Gospel, but hath also set me over a people so will∣ing to obey, and given me that success of my labors, which he hath denied to many more able and faithful; who hath kept you in the zeal∣ous practice of godliness, when so many grow negligent, or despise the Ordinances of God; who hath kept you stable in his Truth, and saved you from the spirit of Giddiness, Levity, and Apostacy of this age; who hath preserved you from those scandals, whereby others have so hainously wounded their profession; and hath given you to see the mis∣chief of Separation and Divisions, and made you eminent for Vnity and Peace, when almost all the Land is in a flame of contention, and so many, that we thought godly, are busily demolishing the Church▪ and striving in a zealous ignorance against the Lord. Beloved, though few of you are rich, or great in the world, yet for this riches of mercy to∣wards you, I must say, Ye are my Glory, my Crown, and my Joy: And for all these rare favors to my self and you, as I have oft promised to publish the praises of our Lord, so do I here set up this stone of re∣membrance, and write upon it, Glory to God in the highest: Hither∣to hath the Lord helped us: My flesh and my heart failed, but God is the strength of my heart, and my portion for ever.
But have all these Deliverances brought us to our Rest? No: We are as far yet from it, as we are from Heaven. You are yet under

oppression and troubles, and I am yet under consuming sickness: And feeling that I am like to be among you but a little while, and that my pained body is hastening to the dust: I shall here leave you my best advice for your immortal souls, and bequeath you this counsel as the legacy of a dying man, that you may here read it, and practise it, when I am taken from you: And I beseech you receive it as from one that you know doth unfainedly love you, and that regardeth no honors or happiness in this world, in comparison of the welfare and salvation of your souls; yea, receive it from me, as if I offered it you upon my knees, beseeching you for your souls sake, that you would not reject it, and beseeching the Lord to bless it to you; yea, as one that hath received authority from Christ to command you, I charge you in his name, as ever you will answer it, when we shall meet at judgment, and as you would not have me there be a witness against you, nor all my labors be charged against you to your condemnation, and the Lord Jesus your Judg to sentence you as rebellious, that you faithfully and constantly practise these ten directions.
1. Labor to be men of knowledg and sound understandings. A sound judgment is a most precious mercy, and much conduceth to the soundness of heart and life. A weak judgment is easily corrupted; and if it be once corrupt, the will and conversation will quickly follow. Your understandings are the in-let or entrance to the whole soul; and if you be weak there, your souls are like a Garison that hath open or il-guarded Gates; and if the enemy be once let in there, the whole City will quickly be his own. Ignorance is virtually every error; therefore let the Bible be much in your hands and hearts: Remember what I taught you on Deut. 6.6, 7. Read much the writings of our old solid Divines; such as Perkins, Bolton, Dod, Sibbs, especially Doctor Preston: You may read an able Divine, when you cannot hear one; especially, be sure you learn well the Principles of Religion. Begin with the Assemblies lesser Catechism, and then learn the great∣er; and next Master Balls, with the Exposition; and then Doctor Ames his Marrow of Divinity (now Englished) or Ushers. If you see men fall on Controversies, before they understand these, never wonder if they are drowned in errors. I know your povertie and labors will not give you leave to read so much as others may do; but yet a willing minde will finde some time, if it be when they should sleep, and especially it will spend the Lords day wholly in these things.

O be not ignorant of God in the midst of such light! as if the matters of your salvation were less worth your study, then your trading in the world.
2. Do the utmost you can to get a faithful Minister, when I am taken from you; and be sure you acknowledg him your Teacher, Overseer, and Ruler, 1 Thess. 5.12, 13. Acts 20.28. Heb. 13.7, 17. and learn of him, obey him, and submit to his doctrine (except he teach you any singular points, and then take the advice of other Ministers in trying it.) Expect not that he should humor you, and please your fancies, and say, and do as you would have him; that is meer Independencie, for the people to rule themselves and their Rulers. If he be unable to Teach and Guide you, do not chuse him at first; if he be able, be ruled by him, even in things that to you are doubtful, except it be clear, that e would turn you from the truth; if you know more then he, become Preachers your selves; if you do not, then quarrel not when you should learn; especially submit to his pri∣vate over-sight, as well as publike Teaching. It is but the least part of a Ministers work, which is done in the Pulpit: Paul taught them also from house to house, day and night with tears, Acts 20.20, 31. To go daily from one house to another, and see how you live, and examine how you profit, and direct you in the duties of your families, and in your preparation for death, is the great work. Had not weak∣ness confined me, and publike labors forbidden me, I should judg my self hainously guiltie in neglecting this. In the Primitive times, every Church of so many souls as this Parish, had many Ministers, whereof the ablest speakers did preach most impublike, and the rest did the more of the less publike work (which some mistake for meer Ruling Elders:) But now Sacriledg and Covetousness will scarce leave maintenance for one in a Church; which is it that hath brought us to a loss in the nature of Government.
3. Let all your Knowledg turn into Affection and Practice; keep open the passage between your heads, and your hearts, that every Truth may go to the quick. Spare not for any pains in working out your sal∣vation: Take heed of loitering, when your souls lie at the stake; Favor not your selves in any slothful distemper; Laziness is the damnation of most that perish among us. God forbid you should be of the mad opinion of the world, That like not serving God so much, nor making so much ado to be saved; All these men will shortly be of an∣other minde. Live now as you would wish you had done at death and

judgment. Let no scorns dishearten you, nor differences of opinion be an offence to you: God, and Scripture, and Heaven, and the Way thither, are still the same. It will do you no good to be of the right Religion, if you be not zealous in the exercise of the Duties of that Religion. Read oft the fifth and sixt Chapters of the third part of this Book.
4. Be sure you make conscience of the great Duties that you are to perform in your families. Teach your children and servants the knowledg and fear of God; do it early and late, in season and out of season. Pray with them daily and fervently; remember Daniels example, Dan. 6. and the command, 1 Thes. 5.17. Read the Scrip∣ture, and good Books to them; restrain them from sin; keep not a servant that will not learn, and be ruled. Neighbors, I charge you as you will shortly answer the contrary, before the Lord your Judg, That there be never a family among you that shall neglect these great Du∣ties. If you cannot do what you should, yet do what you can; especi∣ally, see that the Lords day be wholly spent in these exercises. To spend it in idleness, or sports, is to consecrate it to your flesh, and not to God, and far worse then to spend it in your Trades.
5. Beware of extreams in the controverted points of Religion. When you avoid one Error, take heed you run not into another; speci∣ally if you be in heat of disputation or passion. As I have shewed you, I think, the true mean in the doctrine of Justification and Redemption, so I had intended to have writ a peculiar Treatise with three Columns, shewing both extreams, and the truth in the middle, through the body of Divinitie; but God takes me off. Especially beware of the Errors of these times: Antinomianism comes from gross igno∣rance, and leads to gross wickedness; Socinians are scarce Christians; Arminianism is quite above your reach, and therefore not fit for your study in most points. The middle way which Camero, Ludov. Croci∣us, Amraldus, Davenant, &c. go, I think, is neerest the Truth. Separation comes from Pride and Ignorance, and directly leads to the dissolution of all Churches. That Independency which gives the people to govern by vote, is the same thing in another name. Anabap∣tists play the Divels part in accusing their own children, and disputing them out of the Church and Covenant of Christ; and affirming them to be no Disciples, no Servants of God, nor holy, as separated to him; when God saith the contrary, Levit. 25.41, 42. Deut. 29.10, 11, 12, &c. Acts 15.10. 1 Cor. 7.14. I cannot digress to fortifie

you against these Sects: You have seen God speak against them by Judgments from Heaven. What were the two Monsters in New England but miracles? Christ hath told you, By their fruits ye shall know them. We mis-interpret, when we say, he means by fruit, their false doctrine; that were but idem per idem. Heretikes may seem holy for a little while, but at last all false doctrines likely end in wicked lives. Where hath there been known a society of Anabap∣tists, since the world first knew them, that proved not wicked? How many of these or Antinomists, &c. have you known, who have not proved palpably guiltie of lying, perfidiousness, covetousness, malice, contempt of their godly Brethren. licenciousness, or seared Consci∣ences? They have confident expressions to shake poor ignorant souls, whom God will have discovered in the day of trial: But when they meet with any that can search out their fallacies, how little have they to say? You know I have had as much opportunitie to try their strength, as most: And I never yet met with any in Garison, or Army, that could say any thing which might stagger a solid man. You heard in my late publike dispute at Bewdley, January 1. with Mr. Tombs, who is taken to be the ablest of them in the Land, and one of the most moderate, how little they can say even in the hardest point of Baptism; what gross absurdities they are driven to, and how little tender Consciencious fear of erring is left among the best.
6. Above all, see that you be followers of Peace and Vnitie, both in the Church, and among your selves. Remember what I taught you on Heb. 12.14. He that is not a son of Peace, is not a son of God. All other sins destroy the Church consequentially; but Division and Separation demolish it directly. Building the Church is but an order∣ly joyning of the materials; and what then is disjoyning, but pulling down? Many Doctrinal differences must be tolerated in a Church: And why? but for Vnitie and Peace? Therefore Disunion and Separation is utterly intolerable. Beleeve not those to be the Churches Friends, that would cure and reform her by cutting her throat. Those that say, No Truth must be concealed for Peace have usually as little of the one, as the other. Study Gal. 2.2. Rom. 14.1. &c. Acts 21.24, 26. 1 Tim 1.4. and 6.4. Tit. 3.8, 9. I hope sad experi∣ence speaks this lesson to your very hearts, if I should say nothing. Do not your hearts bleed to look upon the state of England? and to think how few Towns or Cities there be (where is any forwardness in Re∣ligion) that are not cut into shreds, and crumbled as to dust by Separa∣tions

and Divisions? To think what a wound we have hereby given to the very Christian name? How we have hardened the ignorant? Confirmed the Papists? And are our selves become the scorn of our enemies, and the grief of our friends? And how many of our dearest, best esteemed Friends, are faln to notorious Pride, or Impietie? yea, some to be worse then open Infidels? These are Pillars of Salt; see that you remember them. You are yet eminent for your Vnitie, Stedfastness, and Godliness; hold fast that you have, that no man take your Crown from you. Temptations are now come neer your doors; yet many of you have gone through greater, and therefore I hope will scape through these: Yet least your temptations should grow stronger, let me warn you, That though of your own selves men should arise, speaking perverse things, to draw disciples after them, Acts 20.30. yea, though an Angel from Heaven should draw you to divisions, see that you follow him not. If there be erronious practises in the Church, keep your selves innocent with moderation and peace: Do your best to reform them; and rather remove your dwellings, if you cannot live innocently, then rend the Church. It must be no small Error that must force a Separation. Justin a holy learned Martyr (In Dialog▪ cum Tryphone) (who was converted within thirtie one yeers of Johns death, and wrote his first Apologie within fiftie one; and therefore it is like saw Johns days,) professeth, That if a Jew should keep the Ceremonial Law (so he did not perswade the Gentiles to it as necessary) yet if he acknowledg Christ, he judgeth that he may be saved, and he would embrace him, and have communion with him as a Brother: And Paul would have him received that is weak in the faith, (and not unchurch whole Parishes of those that we know not, nor were ever brought to a just trial,) You know I never con∣formed to the use of Mystical, Symbolical Rites, my self, (but onely to the determination of Circumstantials necessary in genere,) and yet I ever loved a godly, peaceable Conformist, better then a turbulent, Non-Conformist. I yet differ from many in several Doctrines of greater moment then Baptism, &c. (As my Aphorisms of Justifi∣cation shew, which I wrote to cut the unobserved Sinews of Anti∣nomianism, and open the true Scripture Mean in that point, and which I am more confirmed in the truth of now, then ever, by the weakness of all that I can yet hear against it;) and yet if I should zealously press my judgment on others, and seek to make a partie for it, and disturb the Peace of the Church, and separate from my

Brethren, I should fear lest I should prove a fire-brand in Hell, for be∣ing a fire-brand in the Church. And for all the interest I have in your Judgments and Affections, I here charge you, That if God should give me up to any factious Church-rending course (against which I daily pray) that you forsake me, and follow me not a step.
And for Peace with one another, follow it with all your might: If it be possible, as much as in you lieth, live peaceably with all men, Rom. 12.18. (mark this) When you feel any sparks of discontent in your brest, take them as kindled by the Divel from Hell, and take heed you cherish them not. If the flames begin to break forth in Censoriousness, Reproaches, and hard Speeches of others; be as speedy and busie in quenching it, as if it were fire in the Thatch of your houses: For why should your houses be dearer to you then the Church, which is the house of God? or, then your souls, which are the Temples of the Holy Ghost? If any heart-burnings arise, do not keep strange, but go together, and lovingly debate it, or pray together, that God would reconcile you; or refer the matter to your Minister or others; and let not the Sun go down on your wrath. Hath God spoke more against any sin, then unpeaceableness? If ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father forgive you (which made Endovicus Crocius say, That this is the measure and essential propertie of the lest degree of true Faith, Syntag. lib. 4. cap. 16.) If you love not each other, you are no Disciples of Christ; nay, if you love not your enemies, and bless not them that curse you, and pray not for them that hurt and persecute you, you are no Children of God. The Wisdom from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easie to be intreated, &c. Jam. 3.17. O remember that piercing example of Christ, who washed his Disciples feet, to teach us, that we must stoop as low to one another. Sure God doth not jest with you in all these plain Scriptures? I charge you in the Name of Christ, if you cannot have peace otherwise, That you suffer wrongs and re∣proaches, that you go and beg peace of those that should beg it of you, yea, that you beg it on your knees of the poorest beggar, rather then lose it. And remember Rom. 16.17, 18.
7. Above all, be sure you get down the pride of your hearts. For∣get not all the Sermons I preached to you against this sin. No sin more natural, more common, or more deadly. A proud man is his own Idol; onely from pride cometh contention. There is no Lving in peace with a proud person: Every disrespect will cast them into a Feaver of

discontent. If once you grow wise in your own eyes, and love to be valued and preferred, and love those best that think highliest of you, and have secret heart-risings against any that disregard you, or have a low esteem of you, and cannot endure to be flighted, or spoke evil of▪ never take your selves for Christians, if this be your case. To be a true Christian without Humilitie, is as hard as to be a man without a Soul. O poor England! How low art thou brought by the Pride of Ignorant Zealots! Dear Friends! I can foretel you, without the gift of prophecy, That if any among you do fall from the Truth, mark which are the proudest, that cannot endure to be contradicted▪ and that vilifie others, and those will likely be they: And if ever you be broke in pieces, and ruined, Pride will be the cause.
8. Be sure you keep the mastery over your flesh and senses. Few ever fall from God, but flesh-pleasing is the cause: Many think that by [flesh] the Scripture means onely our in-dwelling sin, when alas, it is this sensitive appetite that it chargeth us to subdue. Nothing in the world damneth so many as flesh-pleasing, while men generally chuse it as their Happiness in stead of God. O remember who hath said, If ye live after the flesh ye shall die; and Make no provision for the flesh▪ to satisfie its desires, Rom 8.5 6, 7. and 13.14. Think of this when you are tempted to drunkenness, and gluttony, and lustfulness, and worldliness; and when you would fain have your dwellings, and states more delightful. You little think what a sin it is, even to please your flesh, further then it tends to help you in the service of God.
9. Make conscience of the great duty of reproving, and ex∣horting those about you: Make not your souls guilty of the oaths, ignorance, and ungodliness of others, by your silence. Admonish them lovingly and modestly, but be sure you do it, and that seriously. This is the first step in Discipline. Expect not that your Minister should put any from the Sacrament, whom you have not thus admonished once and again. Punish not before due process.
10. Lastly, Be sure to maintain a constant delight in God, and a seriousness and spirituality in all his Worship. Think it not enough to delight in Duties, if you delight not in God: Judg not of your duties by the bulk and number, but by this sweetness. You are never stable Christians till you reach this. Never forget all those Sermons I preached to you on Psal 37.4. Give not way to a customary dulness in duty: Do every duty with all thy might; especially, be not slight in secret Prayer and Meditation: Lay not out the chief of your

zeal upon externals, and opinions, and the smaller things of Religion. Let must of your daily work be upon your hearts: Be still suspicious of them; understand their mortal wickedness, and deceitfulness, and trust them not too far. Practise that great duty of daily watching; pray earnestly, That you be not lead into temptation. Fear the begin∣ings and appearances of sin. Beware lest Conscience once lose its tenderness. Make up every breach between God and your consciences betime. Learn how to live the life of Faith; and keep fresh the sense of the love of Christ, and of your continual need of his Blood, Spirit, and Intercession: And how much you are beholden and en∣gaged to him. Live in a constant readiness and expectation of death; and be sure to get acquainted with this Heavenly Conversation, which this Book is written to direct you in; which I commend to your use, hoping you will be at the pains to read it, as for your sakes I have been to write it: And I shall beg for you of the Lord, while I live on this Earth, That he will perswade your souls to this blessed Work, and that when death comes it may finde you so imployed, that I may see your faces with joy at the Bar of Christ, and we may enter together into the Everlasting Rest. Amen.

Kederminster,
Jan. 15. 1649.
