


My LORD,
TIs not in regard of my Obligations to you, though I own them with grate∣ful acknowledgments; 'tis not in regard of your late most deserved advancement, though I heartily rejoyce at it: 'Tis in regard of your intrinsick Goodness, that this Dedication begs your acceptance, and humbly offers it self to you. Before Lordship and Paternity were added to your Honourable Titles, you was intitled to this book: your Dignities being dig∣nified
 by you. I considered not their eminency, but the eminency of your Vertue and Piety. I know, My Lord, that you aim at a better reward than this World can give; but that a great light set on a high place cannot be hid from the eyes of Men, Angels alone should re∣joyce in the brightness of yours: you shun praise as much as you de∣serve it: you neither desire nor want any thing of Fame. But, My Lord, I wanted a living ex∣ample of a sincere and devout lover of JESƲS to exemplifie my Discourse: and though (God be praised) many more might be found in this Church, yet you are one of the fairest and most attra∣ctive: insomuch that though it be easier to write than to do well, yet a better Pattern of a Religious
 Life might be drawn from your actions than from my directions.
My Lord, I have just cause to fear that I have indulged my ge∣nius too far, and perhaps some will think that I would have God∣liness to be Shorn, and Devotion a Recluse from the World, which is far from my thoughts or desires: though I must confess that at first I intended a much different and less defective Treatise on this so good a subject had not other neces∣sary helps as well as abilities been wanting. However at the best I could have added nothing to such persons as your Lordship. The Holy flames of Divine Love that burn in your heart have too much light and fervency to have recei∣ved any increase from me: and therefore I have not aimed at any
 thing higher than only to assist the weak and fix the inconsiderate. But, My Lord; though I cannot in the least profit you by this my poor labour, yet its being own'd by you may be very advantagious to me. Your Reverend and much Honoured name will not only cre∣dit and recommend my Book, but also promote its design of winning affectionate Servants and Lovers to JESƲS. This I know you will rejoyce to do: Wherefore in presenting my Book to your Lord∣ship, I humbly beg your blessing on it and its Author, Who is with due respect and affection,

