


RIGHT HONORABLE,
AS there is no Grace that giveth more glory to God, so there is no Grace that hath Rom 4. 20.

more honour from God then Faith: Who though he doth all our work for us, and there∣fore should have all the glory from us; yet is pleased that Faith should go away with the praise of that which himselfMark 5. 34. only doth. Daughter thy Faith hath made thee whole, saith Christ to the woman, that by the touch of his garment received virtueHeb. 11. 29, 30. from him and was healed. By faith the Israelites passed through the Red-sea, as on dry ground. By faith the wals of Jericho fell down. When we know that the Waters of the one, and the Bulwarks of the other obeyed the soveraign authority of the Word of Gods command. Yea further, as there is no Grace that brings more glory to God, so there is no

Grace that yeelds more benefit to us then Faith: It is a Grace as the most usefull, so the most successefull, and of the largest capacity for our good. As thouMat. 8. 13. hast believed, so be it done unto thee, saith our Saviour to the Centu∣rion. He that is inlarged in his faith cannot be straightned in his comfort. Through Faith God the Father is our portion, God the Son is our pledge, God the Holy Ghost our earnest; Heaven our home, Holinesse our way, the Angels our gard, the Saints our company, the World our servant, and the Pro∣mise under seal our security. And what would we, what can we have more? yea such is the large capacity of this Grace of Faith, that could we be rich in

that grace, we might have our wils even with an overplus. OhMat. 15. 28. woman, saith our Saviour to the woman of Canaan, great is thy faith, be it unto thee even as thou wilt. Luther was so strong in faith, and therefore so powerfull in Prayer, that when Frederick Myconius his dear friend was sick, he prayed for his recovery, and used these words, Hoc peto & volo, & fiat voluntas mea, This I aske, and this I will, and let my will be done; a while after My∣conius recovered according as he had prayed. Whereupon Justus Jonas said of Luther, Iste vir po∣tuit quod voluit, That man could have what he would.
Now the reasons why through faith we may have what we will, and more then we will, are these three.

First, Because by Faith we live the best life in this world; From life to life, how vast a distance is there? from the life of the highest Angell to the life of the lowest Mushrome, how great a diffe∣rence? 1 There is the life of Vegetation, and that is the life of Plants. 2 There is the life of Sense, and that is the life of Beasts. 3 There is the life of Reason, and that is the life of Men. 4 There is the life of Faith, and that is the life of Saints. Now according to the kinde of life, such is the capa∣city of the creature. The life of a Beast is more excellent then the life of a Plant, and there∣fore more capable of good. The life of a Man is better then the life of a Beast; and the life of

a Saint far above the life of aProv. 12. 26 meer Man. The righteous is more excellent then his neighbour, saith Solomon; and therefore more capable of good, the good of the body and the soul, the good of this life and of that which is to come. As we have believed, so shall it be done unto us, much faith, and much comfort, whilst we live: rich in Faith, and rich in Glory, when we shall go hence and be no more seen.
Secondly, Because other Graces make us like unto God, as Wisdome, Holinesse, and Righteousnesse; but Faith makesJoh. 1. 12. us Sons of God: As many as re∣ceived him, to them he gave power to become the Sons of God, even to them that believe in his name. And if we be Sons, we are capa∣ble

of an inheritance incorrup∣tible and undefiled, and that fa∣deth not away, reserved for us in the heavens; For if Sons,Rom. 8. 17. Heirs, Heirs of God, and co▪heirs with Christ, who is heir of all things. Such a man is capable of being heir to an Esquire of a vast estate; not because he is like him, but because he is his Son. Other graces make us like unto Christ, as Humility, Zeal for Gods glory, and Love to the Brethren: but Faith makes us members of Christ: and it is our membership, our union to Christ, our communion with Christ, that makes us capable of all that grace and glory that he hath for us, for he is only the Saviour of his body. A painted arme and a woodden legge are like those

members, but they draw no vir∣tue from the head. It is, because we by faith live in Christ, andJoh. 1. 16. grow up with Christ, That of his fulnesse we receive grace for grace.
Thirdly, Because Faith is a grace by which we venture upon the willingnesse and power of Christ to save and succour us. Every true believer is a Mer∣chant adventurer, whose returns must be greater then his ven∣tures, or he cannot live; even so it is with every believer, if God whose thoughts are above our thoughts, should not send in to our Faith more then we come for, we should live butMark 2. 5. barely. The believing Palsie man and his friends, venture upon Christ for health; but when

Christ saw their faith, by which they brake through all difficul∣ties (for they would uncover the roof of the house where he was, rather then not come to him) he gave him health, and the pardon of his sins too, which was more then they came for. The Prodigal son ventures farLuk. 15 22. upon his Fathers love, yet craves no more but the place of an hi∣red servant; but he is entertai∣ned as a Son, he is clad with the best robe, and fed with the fatted Calfe; he hath a Ring for his hand, and Shooes for his feet, very rich supplies not only for necessity, but sober delight, which was more then he desired. Jacobs sons venture into EgyptGen. 45 25, 26. for Corn in a time of Famine, and they return with Corn, and

Money in their sacks, yea with very good news at last, Joseph is alive and Governour of all Egypt. Even thus it is with a believer that can in a straight venture upon God in Christ ac∣cording to a promise; his re∣turns are often above his ven∣tures. Faith is the greatest ga∣thergood in the world; for it is not only according to our faith, but often abo ve our faith. When the prayers offai th are answered mercies are multiplyed. When Solomon through faith beg'd of God for a wise and understand∣ing heart, by which he might be able to judge his people; God gave him wisdome, and more∣over riches and honour more then any King had before him, or should have after him, so that

his returne was far above his venture.
Are these things so? what an happy condition are they in then that believe in the name of the Lord Jesus? and who would not upon these terms make it good to their own souls, that they have obtained this precious grace of Faith? And that they have this grace, I know no better evidence then this, That they have high thoughts of it, and set a great price upon it. Now undoubted∣ly such as have a true esteem of faith, will improve all times and talents, will imploy all means for the service of their faith, that they may abound therein. And what better means can be used for the advancement of faith in the growth and strength

of it, then a rich treasure of ex∣perience; every experiment of Gods favour to us, being a good prop for our faith for the fu∣ture.Psal. 74. 14. Thou breakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces (saith the Psalmist) and gavest him to be meat to the people inhabiting the wildernesse: that is, Thou (O Lord) didst overthrow Pha∣raoh and his Host in the Red∣sea: which experiment of thy power and goodnesse, was as meat to the people in the Wil∣dernesse, which might uphold their hearts in the midst of those many evils that were ei∣ther feared by them, or infli∣ted on them in that vast, and howling desert. God hath, and doth, and will, is the language, and should be the constant tone

of faith amongst all the Saints of God. So did Jacob plead with God when he was ready to meet with his brother Esau; With my staffe I passed over thisGen. 32. 10, 11. Jordan, and now I am become two bands. Deliver me I pray thee from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau. So did Da∣vid argue before Saul, I slew the1 Sam. 17. 36. Lion and the Bear, and this uncir∣cumcised Philistine shall be as one of them. So did aged Paul rea∣son, I was delivered out of the2 Tim. 4. 7, 18. mouth of the Lion, and the Lord shall deliver me from every evill work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly Kingdome, to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen. Now doubtless such as will be well stored with such a treasure of experiments, had need keep a

constant Diary by them of all Gods gracious dealings with them.
To commend which duty to such as desire to grow in this grace of Faith, and abound therein with thanksgiving, is (Right Honorable) the main scope of this present Subject, which I have taken the boldness to dedicate to your Honors; and do humbly pray that it may passe abroad under your Name and Patronage. If any aske why I trouble the Presse, that in these dayes is so opprest with a glut of Books. I answer, that it was not out of any vain humor of mine to appear in Publick, who am so far privy to mine own wants and weaknesses, that I may truly say, not onely as

St. Paul, I am lesse then the leastEphes. 3. 8. of all Saints; but as Ignatius once said of himself, Non sum dignus dici minimus, I am not worthy to be called the least: So that I could never judge my self able to write any thing that might endure the test of your judicious eyes, or the censure of this criticall age. But indeed, that which principally hinted to this service, was partly a desire I had to promote a common good; being very confident that such Christians who walk much with God, and observe him in the wayes of his Providence, may be provoked to this duty, and reap much good thereby. For without doubt, this work here commended, is very use∣full, though the duty be seldome

practised, because the subject is rarely handled. It is as untro∣den a path, as ever I have gone; who have had scarce a little day hole of light to direct me, much lesse a Cloud of witnesses, or a Pillar of fire, or a Star to guide me. Partly, and indeed, that which chiefly incouraged me hereunto, was the memory of those great favours which I have received from both your Honors; the one my most No∣ble Patron, Qui curat oves ovi∣umque Magistros, A true friend to the Church of God, and the Ministers of it. The other, my most bountifull Benefactor. Nor would I give your Honors thanks in aurem vel in angulo, but so publickly that I may have as many eye-witnesses of my hear∣ty

acknowledgement of your goodness, as there may be cour∣teous Readers of this Book. And do presnme that if your Honors will be pleased to throw away an hour or two in the perusall of these lines, you may be hence encouraged more and more to observe God in the wayes of his providence, and keep some me∣morials by you of his goodnesse to you and yours; which may much encrease your faith in him, enlarge your love to him, and fortifie your hearts against the evils of these times. Confidius a Senator of Rome, one day boldly told Caesar, That the Senators durst not come to Councell for fear of his Souldiers. He replyed, Why then doest thou goe to the Senate? He answered, Because

my age takes away my fear. Anti∣ent Christians should be very bold and couragious in evill days, because they are or should be stored with much experience, which will much encrease their faith, and abate their fears. God in rich mercy to you and many others, hath added to your lives many daies, and your hoary heads are a crown of glory to you, be∣ing found in the way of righte∣ousness; and therefore you are by this time I hope above the fears and flatteries of all the world. Now that the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath abounded toward you both, not only in the outward comforts of Honor and Wealth in the eyes of men, but that which is far bet∣ter, in the knowledge of God

and practise of holinesse before his Saints, would make you per∣fect to do his will, and work in you an encrease of all those graces of his Spirit, that do un∣doubtedly accompany salvati∣on; that you may live in his fear, die in his favour, rest in his peace, and rise to his glory; is, and shall be the pray∣er of

