


My Lord,
THat wrangling and violence some have used, for the Faith, as they pretended, hath been much to its prejudice; and hath appear'd to be rather for a Secular Interest. Fighting for the Gospel is as preposterous, as if a man should fight, to shew his meekness and patience. It is that contention with God and our selves, which I here recommend, that hath had the approbation of the best Ages of the Church, and been blest with success.
The state of things as they are at pre∣sent, doth severely admonish us of our for∣mer miscarriages, and our present duty.
'Tis seen that a furious and ungovernable Spirit, which some have miscall'd Zeal, is of pernicious consequence. God Almigh∣ty, to keep us within the bounds of our du∣ty, and make us seek our safety in its per∣formance, would not permit unlawful means any ways to conduce to the pre∣servation of his true Religion.
Long experience hath now shew'd us, that to disturb the Peace in Church and State, to break the ties of Allegiance, and disobey the Church, promotes nothing but Licentiousness and Irreligion. So that 'tis to be hop'd, they that have lik'd and follow'd those methods, are now sensi∣ble of the iniquity and the mischief of them; and that the remembrance of their mistakes and misdoings, will make them now the more humble and quiet; and effectually persuade them to the Union and Obedience of this Church, whose Doctrine is the Creed, or Christianity
it self; whose Government is truly Apo∣stolick; and whose Rituals and Devo∣tions are most Primitive and Pious.
An understanding man would blush to own himself before the Christian World to be of such or such a Sect, and to confess that his publick Worship depends upon the abilities and extemporary effusions of a person not inspired; besides the mis∣chief of such divisions, there is a shame that goeth along with them. But the Church of England, as now establish'd, hath had many cheerful Martyrs and Confessors: Many wise and good men glory to own Her for Mother, and dare profess and justifie, that according to that way She prescribes, and some count Heresie, so they worship the God of their Fathers. God Almighty hath ap∣pointed that devout Prayers & good Lives should at first propagate, and ever after preserve the Religion of the Bles∣sed
Jesus: If we but double our Zeal in these, we shall infallibly secure its Pu∣rity, and still make it flourish.
To excite us to this duty, I preach'd the ensuing Discourse; to the same end, I make no doubt, Your Lordship com∣manded it should be made publick: Your approving the good Design, made You pass-by the defects of its manage∣ment; My Lord, I have obey'd, much pleased that we have Magistrates who so much countenance and befriend Religi∣on, as to accept of such mean endea∣vours for the service of it.
May the succession of them still pre∣serve Peace, and promote Truth and Righteousness; and may Your Lord∣ship, after a long and prosperous life in this World, obtain the endless and perfect Bliss of a better. So prayeth heartily

