


CHrist Jesus, the1 Tim. 6. 15. Prince
of Princes, bless your
Highness with length
of Days,Rev. 12. 13. and an in∣crease
of all Graces; which may
make you truly prosperous in this
life, and eternally happy in that
which is to come.
Jonathan shot1 Sam. 20. 20. three Arrows, to
drive David further off from Saul's
fury: And this is the third Epistle
which I have written to draw your
Highness nearer to God's favour, by
directing your heart to begin (like
Josiah) in your2 Chron. 34. 3. youth to seek
after the God David, (and of
Jacob) your Father. Not but that

I know, that your Highness doth this
without mine admonition; but be∣cause
IQui monet ut facias, quod jam fa∣cis, ipse mo∣ne do Laudat, & hortatu comprobat acta suo. 2 Cor. 8. 7. would with the Apostle
have you to abound in every grace,
in faith and knowledge, and in all
diligence, and in your love to Gods
Service and true Religion. Ne∣ver
was there more need of plain
and unfeigned admonition: for the
Comick, in that saying, seems but to
have prophesied of our times, Obse∣quium
amicos, veritas odium pa∣rit.
And no marvel, seeing that we
are fallen into the dregs of Time,
which being the last, must needs be
the worst days. And how can there
be worse, seeing Vanity knows not
how to be vainer, nor Wickedness
how to be more wicked? And where∣as
heretofore those have been counted
most holy, who have shewed them∣selves
most zealous in their Religi∣on;Matth. 15. 1.
they are now reputed most dis∣creet,
who can make the least pro∣fession
of their Faith.2. Tim. 2. 4. And that these
are the last days, appears evi∣dently;
because the security of mens
eternal state hath so overwhelmed

(as Christ foretold it should) all sorts:
that most who now live, are become
lovers of pleasures, more than lo∣vers
of God: and of those who pre∣tend
to love God, O God! what
sanctified heart can but bleed, to be∣hold
how seldom they come to
prayers? how irreverently they
hear God's Word? what strangers
they are at the Lord's Table:
what assiduous spectators they
are at Stage-plays? where (being
Christians) they can sport themselves
to hear the Vassals of theExemplum accidit▪ muli∣eris, Domino teste, quae Theatrum a∣diit, & inde cum daemo∣nio diit. Ita{que} in ex∣orcismo cùm oneraretur immundus spiritus quod ausus est fi∣delem aggre∣di: constan∣ter & justis∣simè quidem (inquit) feci: In meo eam inveni. Tert. de spect▪ lib. cap. 26. Therefore Tert. in cap. 6. calls the Stage, Dia∣boli Ecclesi∣am, & Cathe∣dram posti∣lentiarum. Devil
scoffing religion, and blasphemously
abusing Phrases of holy Scripture on
their Stages, as familiarly as they use
their Tobacco-pipes in their bib∣ing-houses.
So that he who would
now days seek in most Christians
for the power, shall scarce almost find
the very shew of godliness. Never
was there more sinning, never less
remorse for sin. Never was the Judge
Jam. 5. 9. Rev. 11. 20. nearer to come, never was there
so little preparation for his coming.
And if the Bridegroom should now
come, how many (who think them

selves wise enough, and full of all
knowledge) would be found foolish
Virgins,Matth 25. 8. without one drop of the
Oil of saving Faith in their Lamps?
For the greatest Wisdom of most
Men in this Age, consists in being
wise; first, to deceive others, and in
the end to deceive themselves.
And if sometimes some good Book
haps into their hands, or some good
motion cometh into their heads,
whereby they are put in mind to
consider the uncertainty of this life
present; or how weak assurance
they have of eternal life if this were
ended: and how they have some se∣cret
sins, for which they must needs
repent here, or be punished for them
in Hell hereafter; Security then
forthwith whispers the Hypocrite
in the Ear, that though it be fit to
think of these things, yet, It is not
yet time; and that he is yet young
enough (though he cannot but know,
that many millions as young as him∣self
are already in Hell, for want of
timely repentance.) Presumpti∣on
warranteth him in the other

Ear, that he may have time here∣after,
at his leisure, to repent: and
that howsoever others die, yet he is
far enough from death, and there∣fore
may boldly take yet a longer
time, to enjoy his sweet pleasures,
and to encrease his wealth and
greatness: And hereupon (like So∣lomon's
sluggard) he yields him∣self
to a little more sleep,Prov. 6. 10. a little
more slumber, a little more fold∣ing
of the hands to sleep, in his
former sins; till at last Despair (Se∣curity's
ugly hand maid) comes in
unlooked for, and shews him his
Hour-glass; dolefully telling him,
that his time is past: and that no∣thing
now remains but to die, and
e damned. Let not this seem
strange to any, for too many have
found it too true; and more with
out more grace, are like to be thus
sooth'd to their end; and in the
end, snared to their endless perdition.
In my desire therefore of the com∣mon
salvation;Jude ver. 3. but especially of your
Highness's everlasting welfare, I
have endeavoured to extract (out of

the chaos of endless controversies)
the old Practice of true Piety,
which flourished before these Con∣troversies
were hatched: which
my poor labours (in a short while)
come now forth again, the 42. time,
under the gracious protection of
your Highness's favour; and by
their entertainment seem not to be
altogether unwelcome to the Church
of Christ. If to be pious, hath in all
ages been held the truest honour:
how much more honourable is it, in
so impious an age, to be the true
Patron and Pattern of Piety?
Piety made David, Solomon, Je∣hoshaphat,
Ezechias, Josias, Zerub∣babel,
Constantine, Theodosius,
Edward the VI. Queen Elizabeth,
Prince Henry, and other religious
Princes to be so honoured,Eccles. 7. 1. that
their Names (since their deaths) smell
in the Church of God like a preci∣ous
oynment,Eccles. 4. 21. and their remem∣brances
sweet as honey in all
mouths, and as Musick at a Ban∣quet
of Wine: when as the lips of
others who have been godless and

irreligious Princes, do ot and
stink in the memory of God's
People. And what honour is it for
great Men to have great Titles
on Earth, when God counts their
names unworthy to beLuk. 10. 20. written in
his Book of life in Heaven?Rev. 17. 8.
It is Piety that embalms a Prince
his good name, and makes his face to
shine before Men, and glorifies his
soul among Angels. For as Moses
his face, by often talking with God,
shined in the eyes of the People,Exod. 34. 29, 30. so
by frequent praying (which is our
talking with God) and hearing the
Word, (which is God's speaking
unto us) we shall be changed from
glory to glory,2 Cor. 3. 18. by the Spirit of the
Lord, to the Image of the Lord.
And seeing this life is uncertain to
all, (especially to Princes) what ar¦gument
is more fit, both for Princes
and People to study, than that which
eacheth sinful man to deny him∣self
by mortifying his corruption▪
hat he may enjoy Christ, the Author
of his salvation: to renounce these
false and momentary pleasures of

the world; that he may attain to the
true and eternal joys of heaven: And
to make them truly honourable
before God in Piety, who are now
only honourable before Men in va∣nity?
What charges soever we spend
in earthly vanities; for the most
part, they either die before us, or we
shortly die after them: But what
we spend likeMatth. 26. 13. Mary in the Practice
of Piety, shall remain our true me∣morial
for ever. For,1 Tim. 4. 8. Piety hath
the promise of this life, and of that
which shall never end. ButPrincipibus ad salutem sola satìs ve∣ra est pietas, absque illâ verò nihil est vel exercitus, vel Impera∣tois fortitu∣do, vel appa∣ratus reli∣quus Zozom. Eccles. Hist. lib. 9. c. 1. with∣out
Piety there is no internal com∣fort
to be found in Conscience, no
external Peace to be looked for in
the World, nor any eternal happi∣ness
to be hoped for in Heaven. How
can Piety but promise to her self 
zealous Patron of your Highness
being the sole Son and Heir of 
gracious and great a Monarch
who is not only the Defender of the
Faith by title, but also a Defende
of the Faith in truth, as the Chri∣stian
World hath taken notice by hi
learned confuting of Bellarmine

ever spreading Heresies, and his sup∣pressing
in the blade of Vorstius's
Athean blasphemies? and ow ea¦sie
is it for your Highness to equal (if
not exceed) all that were before
you in Grace and Greatness? if you
do but set your heart to seek, and to
serve God, considering how religi¦ously
your Highness hath been edu∣cated
by godly and vertuousThe Ho∣nourable Sir Robert Cary Knight, and the religis Lady Cary his Wife. Mr. Thomas Mur∣ray▪ Sir James Fullrton. Go¦vernours
and Tutors: as also that
you live in such a time, wherein God's
Providence, and the King's Reli∣gious
Care have placed over this
Church (to the unspeakable comfort
thereof) another venerable Jehoiada▪
2 Chron. 24. 16 The gracious Archbishop of Cant . that doth good in our Israel
both towards God and towards
his House: of whom your Highness
at all times in all doubts may learn
the sincerity of Religion, for the
Salvation of your inward Soul;
and the wisest counsel for the di¦rection
of your outward state: And
to excite you the rather, to the zealos
Practice of divine Piety; often sup¦pose
with your self, that your High¦ness
hears your Religious Father

James, speaking unto you, as some∣times
holy David spake to his Son
Solomon:1 Chr. 28. 9. And thou Charles my
Son, know thou the God of thy
Father, and serve him with a per∣fect
heart, and with a willing
mind: for the Lord searcheth all
hearts, and understandeth all the
imaginations of the thoughts: i
thou seek him, he will be found
of thee: but if thou forsake him,
he will cast thee off for ever.
To help you the better to seek and
serve this God Almighty, who
must be your chief Protector in life,
and only comfort in death: I here
once again, on my bended knees, offer
my old Mite new stampt into your
Highness'shands: daily for your
Highness offering up unto the most
High, my humblest prayers; that
as you grow in age and stature, so
you may (like your Master Christ)
increase in wisdom and favour
with God and all good men. This
suit will I never cease: in all other
matters I will ever rest,

