



My Lord,
THE fairest Excuse I can find for this Pre∣sumption, is, That the Modern Publications of Plays, are like the Roman Buildings, under the Umbrage of some Houshold Deity, Erected over some Portico, to Fence and keep all safe within. And indeed, as Plays are but Piles of Wit, the Structure of Ingenuity, a Noble Name in the Frontispiece, is much the same Domestick Guardian; at least, for my own part, I have made the most proper Choice of such a Tutelar Power in your Lordship. For where shou'd the Muses seek Covert and Protection,

but there, where both Apollo and Minerva are Your Lordships Hereditaries; whilst you spring from those Veins that so entirely Entitle and Quality You for a Mecoenas?
And whilst Bonduca stands so shelterd under Your Lordships Protection, I must say, 'tis a Fabrick of An∣tiquity; a Foundation of that Celebrated Poetical Architect, the Famous Fletcher: But with several Al∣terations, besides the two First Acts New Writ.
But whilst I make this bold Address to Your Lord∣ship, there are two Considerations requisite to an E∣pistle Dedicatory: The Present, and the Hand that makes it. For the First of these, 'tis the Off-spring of Beaumont and Fletcher, I lay at Your Lordships Feet; and under that Name, the very Parentage stamps that Merit upon it, as should carry its own Safety; for methinks when Great Authors revive, they should have no Ordeal to pass either to the Stage or the Press. Both Censure and Malice should stand Awed and Silenced there; insomuch that instead of Supplicati∣ons, either to the Audience, or Readers good Hu∣mour and Smiles; on the contrary, they should en∣joy all the Benefits of the Great Dead, be past any Danger of the Criticks Purgatory, in an immediate state of Felicity: And consequently by the Canons of the Muses, as well as the Churches Rubrick, to be above the want of Prayers.
Besides, as the Present I make Your Lordship, is all our own Native Growth; the History of a British Heroine; it carries some more favourable Recommen∣dation to your Lordships Acceptance: For where can our Noblest English Memoirs be more gracefully

or more suitably lodged, than in the Hands of the Noblest English Honour? And it has this further Ad∣vantage, as being an English Story; That the Glo∣ry of Worthies and Heroes sounds sweetest, where the Musick is Tuned at Home.
But for the Unworthy Hand that makes the Pre∣sent (my other Dedicatory Consideration) There e∣ven Poetry it self is at aloss for an Apology; nay the very Player almost Blushes too. 'Tis true, my Lord, Your Lordship has vouchsafed to Grace and Encourage our willing Endeavours with Extraordinary Smiles, being that Condescension and Goodness in You, that shew Your Lordship is resolved not to suffer the Gemms of your Nobleman's Coronet, to outdazle the Sparks of the Gentleman, that Shines thro' your whole Conversation.
And to tell the Truth, my Lord, You have so Ex∣alted and wrapt us up with Your Lordships Generous Favours; that as Pride is naturally its own Trumpet; my, very Vanity alone is Argument and Encourage∣ment sufficient to make this Publication to the whole World, of the Infinite Obligations due to Your Lordship, from,
My LORD, 
