



SIR,
WHen almost every tri∣fling Treatise that comes aboad, is for the upholding of some interest, and partial de∣signe, I cannot be thought to run that course in the publishing of these few Sermons, which being deliverd at that time when our English earth was labii unius;Gen. 11.1. (com∣pared with that Babel of discord which hath since been raised among us) are besides, of that argument, as not to engage the Authour of them
 in any controversie, As being onely against sin, the common enemy; To encounter which, We have all rea∣son to be united, being all the sons of Adam, and carrying about us these fleshly lusts,1 Pet. 2.11 which war against the soule.
And yet herein peradventure, I shall not escape the contradiction of some, that will needs exempt them∣selves from the number of sinners; that have made of late, new work for Preachers; even to defend their preaching against sin; as if that were now forsooth, become a vain and needlesse labour.
The effects of which doctrine we have felt already, and and should do more, were it not for the piety of some, that dare be good in evill times, and stand in the gap, to stop the Sea from breaking in.
Among these few▪ I do not pre∣sume to intrude my self; save only
 to applaude, and encourage the chief Builders in this work; or at most to supply them with some materialls in the building. For the perfecting whereof, every men labourer may be serviceable in his degree; As they that brought but Goats hair,Exod. 35.23. and Badgers skins, to the furnishing of the Tabernacle.
And if in order hereunto, these ensuing discourses, by the blessing of God, may contribute, though in the least; I have the aime intended by me, and more then that, if choo∣sing your Worship for my Patron, they may express in some small measure the great obligation where∣in I stand endebted to you, who were pleased to admit me unto the tuition of (then) your Honourable charge, and since, your Son in Law, the Earl of Down, unto whose ver∣tuous education (besides your sage
 precepts, and grave example) no cost, or care on your part was wanting, Ordering your family with such discipline, as it might seem a School of morality. Then transplanting him to the University, where he was placed in one of the most eminentChrist-Church. Colledges, and had the happinesse of sitting daily in the midst of the Doctors, both hearing them, and asking them questions.
When my attendance on his Ho∣nour expired, your generous bounty (that is wont to remunerate faithful service beyond the contract of a yearly salarie, even with a standing, and permanent largesse) was pleased to settle me in a competent Benefice, for te exercise and encouragement of my Ministery. Where the Cure of my pastorall charge witholding me from waiting on you, and pre∣senting you so frequently with the
 fruits of my calling, as my duty and wishes do prompt me thereunto; I adventure to supply that enforced defect with the tender of these few Sermons. The first and last whereof may seem by spec all interest, to re∣late unto you in the Dedication. The first entreating of the infirmi∣ties of that great servant of the Lord (who made choice of so weak a vessel to impart his grace unto the world) may represent as in a glasse, your bodily weaknesse; whom the same great God hath strangely pre∣served beyond many of abler con∣stitution, both to magnifie his strength in weaknesse, and to com∣mend the vertue of temperance, which hath the blessing of the right hand, length of dayes, attending on it.Prov. 3 16.
The last containing directions for youth, and delivered in your audience, may serve to acquaint the
 world with the care that was taken by those instruments appointed by you, for the culture of that noble plant: and withall, may communi∣cate these directions to others that are concerned in the ordering of youth, that amidst their methods, and arts of instruction, this One thing necessary, be not omitted, to bring them up in the nurture,Eph. 6.4. admonition of the Lord,
For the rest, I will not presume to forestall your knowing judgement, which (having by long experience proved, how great it is) I might justly feare, (amidst so many excel∣lent books, as you converse with) to present such poor unfurnished papers unto so sharp, and discerning an eye, but that I well know your Candor is such, as to take that favourably, which is well meant, and to enlarge a meane oblati∣on
 with the bounty of your kind and gracious acceptance,Sict nec in victimis licet optimae sint auroque praefulge∣at, Deorum est honos, sed piâ ac rectâ voluntate veneran∣tium. Sen. de benef. lib. 1. cap. 6. therein re∣sembling the divine property, which esteems not so much the costly sacrifice, as the pi∣ous intention of the votarie.
In which confidence, I commend them, such as they are, unto your perusal, and your self, with your nearest Relatives, unto the grace of Almighty God; Beseeching him who is rich in mercy (which even the richest stand in need of) to con∣tinue, and increase his blessings upon you, and your whole family, in this life present, and to consummate them with glorious eternity in his heavenly Kingdom.
SIR,

