



SIRS,
I Know not to whom I could Address these Leaves more properly than to You; who have been so dismally concern'd in the dreadful Effects of the late Con∣flagrations: Such deep Sufferers by the Hellish Practises herein more fully than ever yet discovered.
You have suddenly and unexpectedly seen a glorious City laid waste, Your own Habitations turn'd into Rubbish, your Estates destroyed, your dear Incomes of your many years hard Labour and careful Industry, All in few moments swept a∣way and consumed by devouring flames, together with some of Your dear Relations and faithful Servants; whilst Your selves and Families reduc'd from a plentiful, a com∣fortable Trade and Fortune over-night, to the extremest misery next Morning,

without an House to shelter You, Goods to Accommodate You, or setled Course of Trade to support You? Have been forc'd (many of You in Old Age) to Begin the World anew; and remain Exposed to all the Hardships and Inconveniences of want and poverty?
The Authors and Promoters of All these Your deplorable Calamities have been no other than those Common Bontefeu's of Christendom, The general Disturbers of the Peace and Happiness of Europe, and Pests of human Society, I mean those subtle, active and most cruel Engineers of the Roman Hierarchy, who having long been Big with the Project of a Fifth-Monarchy, intending to make all the World slavishly to truc∣kle to their Tripple Crown'd Idol at Rome, did meerly in order thereunto contrive Your Destruction: For as they wellknow, England to be the Bull-work of Liberty, Protestanism, and (indeed I may justly add) Christian Faith in General, throughout the world: The main Bank, that hinders the Sea of Rome from over-whelming all Christian Nati∣ons with an Universal Inundation of Tyranny and Superstition: So they are not in∣sensible, what a mighty Influence LONDON hath to obstruct their Designs upon England: In so much, That I have heard not a few of the Principal of them frequent∣ly protest, That until That City were Ruined or brought low, it was impossible, But All their Attempts on this Nation must prove Abortive.
How rigorously, how unweariedly have they endeavoured this? I shall say no∣thing of their Politick By-strooks, Their promoting by Influenc'd Counsels Wars at Sea to interrupt Your Commerce, Their Setting up a New Algier (and perhaps more for∣midable and mischievous than the Old One) on the other side the Channel: Their Multiplying Buildings in the Suburbs and Out parts, thereby to drain away the Trade, and having stock't many of those Colonies with people of their own Gang, hope to be able in time to out number and overpower You. These and a thousand other little Stra∣tegems for Discouraging, &c. I shall not insist upon, but only instance, as my present bu∣siness, Their horrid Design of Burning and Destroying Treacherously this CITY. This they counted a Master-piece of their Cunning, not doubting, when they had laid this Noble City in Ashes: But that they should soon after have buried Your Religion too in the same Ruines: But notwithstanding all their facinorous Performances and more Cursed Attempts God in his Infinite Mercy hath Restor'd the One, and hither∣to preserv'd the Other: Both as it were by Miracle. Let therefore the Remembrance of SIXTY SIX be engraven in Indelible Characters on the Hearts of the Posterity, To make them abhor Popery, and detest such vile Incendiaries: Let it remain a Monu∣ment of Gratitude to God, Caution to England, and shame to Rome, in after times, when even that stately and durable PILLAR (Erected for that Purpose) shall by the Re∣volutions of many Ages be decayed.
Indeed could you be so shamefully Ingrateful as to forget it, These restless Furies will not suffer You: But still with fresh Alarms and Exploits Awaken Your Memories. 'Twas a shrewd Item they bestow'd on You: But a few Years since, when Grove and his Irish Ruffians consumed so great a Part of Your Neighbourhood in the Borough of Southwark (not to mention other smaller Attempts.) But above all, They have given You, and the whole Nation such a Catholick Memorandum in their detestable Plot, lately discovered just before it was ripe for Execution, as I trust shall never be for∣gotten, wherein though All these three Kingdoms, nay the whole Protestant-Interest throughout the World was Essentially Concern'd, yet none should have drank more deep of that Cup of Misery, which they had prepared than You the Protestant In∣habitants of This (by them hated) CITY and Parts adjacent: For as soon as ever the

Fatal Blow had been given against the pretious Life of our dear and dread Sove∣raign, they would immediately have proceeded to a Second Devastation, first upon the Dwellings, and next upon the Persons, and then what Horrors and Calamities, what a Sea of Blood and Chaos of Confusion, You All, long 'ere this should have been involved in? Whilst these Sons of Cruelty had been Acting over their Parisian Tragedy and Irish Butcheries amongst You, is no less easy to Imagine, than lamen∣table to have seen, and Intollerable to have felt.
I am not ignorant, how strenuously they make it their Business to deny not only their being any way privy to these Mischiefs of FIREING, but likewise all other their Traiterous Designs: And I scarce know which is greatest, Their Impudence in com∣mitting horrid Villanies, or in out-facing them, when they are done. The Despe∣rate Protestations of Innocence, lately made by some of them at the place of Ex∣ecution, hath (I am informed) mightily unsetled some Peoples Heads, and a few For∣mal contrived Speeches have been so prevalent as to make weak Women, and wea∣ker Men begin to stagger. and ready to imagine they died for Crimes they might not be guilty of.
But as for my own Part, I bless God, I am throughly satisfied in the TRUTH of every Tittle of the Evidence, I have given against them, and every of them, and have no checks or guilt on my Conscience on that Account, nor would in the least be guil∣ty of that bloody Perjury, that might tend to the Taking away any mans Life wrongfully, for more than all England is worth: But if I have Erred in any Case, it was on the contrary hand in Speaking the least of Things and Persons, so for the satis∣faction of others, I desire them to consider, besides the Joint Testimonies of so many Witnesses, speaking to different Times, Persons, Places and Circumstances, yet all ex∣actly agreeing in the main, without the least Contradiction of Falshood, that ever could be found after so many strict Examinations before Persons of the greatest Judg∣ment and Quality, and so many cross and insnaring Questions started by the Prisoners, to which they freely Answered; I say besides all this, and several other Corrobora∣ting Particulars I would have them consider, 1. How Customary it is with this sort of Men, in all Cases where they are over-taken by Justice; to go out of the World with solemn Asseverations of their Innocence; there being, I verily believe scarce a President to be given in our Age, of any Papist that suffered for any Crime what so∣ever, who confest the same at his Death, especially if he received absolution before; For I do averr it to be their Doctrine, that when a Man hath committed any Vil∣lany, and hath been thereof absolv'd by a Priest, if he be afterwards call'd into Questi∣on touching that Fact; he ought not to cast a Scandal on the Church, whereof he is a Member, by acknowledging himself to have been guilty; but may lawfully swear and protest in the presence of God, and the world, that he is as Innocent thereof as the Child unborn, and all this without any Equivocation, or mental Reservation since tis their Beleif, and so they teach and are taught, that they are then so really, and absolutely innocent, even as when they came into the World, the crime being wholly taken off from them by Absolution; much more may they do it in this Case where what they are charged with viz. a Resolution, to murther a Prince whom they count an Heretick, and so declared by the Pope, subvert his Government; and introduce the Roman Religion; as so far from being by them esteemed any Treason or Crime, that they look upon it to be their Duty and Meretorious.
2. 'Tis palpable, that all these fine Speeches were studiously prepared by Con∣federacy, and Copies industriously spread abroad before they were spoken by the Prisoners, their Agents and Friends; and they are contrived but just like so many Scholars Exercises on the Theme, set by their Grand Master, Provincial Whitebread.

Not with the Freedom of Dying Men that spoke the Truth, and Dictates of their Consciences, but so elabourately flourisht over as might best work on the Affecti∣ons of the Ignorant Hearers; and serve the Turn of their Party, for where there is so much Art, there is always some design. Had not Hill just such another made Speech in the very same Strain and Method, which he was to spake at his Death like a Parrot? Sure, they are very dim-sighted that cannot see through such Impostures.
3. Do these doubting Gentlemen, really believe there was any Plot at all? Were Mr. Colemans Letters forged by others, and put by Magick-Art into Six Boxes; and and yet his Hand so curiously counterfeited, that he himself could not chuse but own it, and his Servants swear it, &c. Either you must believe all these and many other down right Absurdities, or else confess that by those very Letters it evident∣ly appears, that there was on foot a damnable horrid Plot to subvert the Govern∣ment, and introduce Popery; and can you think Mr. Coleman alone undertook that Mighty Work? (as himself calls it) Or if he had Accomplices, who more proper? who more ready than the Traitors that lately suffered; for when did the Jesuites stand out, when there was any Game to play for on the Interest of the Pope and Church of Rome? Not to mention, that the Matter is almost acknowledged in Peter's Letter taken with Harcourt; wherein a Consult is appointed the 14th. of April 1678 and mention made of great Caution to be used by the Fathers in coming to it, lest the Design there to be transacted and managed should be discovered which in its own Na∣ture required secresy: By this Letter (not found till the other day the Witnesses evi∣dence, first given so long since, that there was such a Consult, and at that time, is undeniably confirmed; and that there was some great Design to be consulted of there that required much Caution and Secresy, is likewise confest; how reasonable than is it to believe the Witnesses in this Case; thot then and there, the Death of the King was consulted of, and resolved upon: That being a Design that indeed requi∣red in its own horrid Nature such Caution, and Secresy, and the Conspirators be∣ing not able to assign any other Design, they had there of such a Nature; nor could they give any sensible Intrepretation of those Patents sent to Whitebread mentioned in another Letter, taken with Harcoat, by which was meant the Commisions for Forces to carry on this Hellish Rebellion.
4. What think you, was there ever such a Man as Sr. Edmundbury Godfry, was he not murthered? and who can fall within the Suspicion of any probable Imagina∣tion to have done it, but the Papists that is these Traytors and their Instru∣ments? which now is more plain upon them than before; for if they had not been the Procurers of it, how was it possible, that the same Night that worthy Gentle∣man was Murthererd? Harcoat should write word thereof into Stafford-shire; whereas his Death was not known in London by any, but those concerned in it, till Five Days after.
But why should I trouble my self, to demonstrate that tis Light at Noon-day, be∣cause Bats and Moles are and and will be Blind? His Most Gracious Majesty, is sa∣tisfied, as appears by several of his Royal Proclamations; Both Houses of Parlia∣ment is fully satisfied, as is evident from their Votes expresly made on that occasi∣on; The Right Reverend Fathers in God, my Lords The Bishops, in particular no doubt are satisfied, as is plain by the Form of Prayers prescribed to be used on the last Fast. All the learned Judges of the Land generally present at the Late Try∣als; the Judicious Gentle-Men of the several Jurys, (both upon their Oaths, as well as the Evidence) and all intelligent Auditors (except Papists) are intirely satisfi∣ed and if there be yet any others that are not; I do not doubt, but in due time (for

as there yet are diverse things behind the Curtain) there will be such open plain Sun∣beam discoveries made, as shall certainly convince them, unless like Papists, they shall at once refuse to believe, either their Reason or their Senses.
As to the Discourse, which I here present you with; The First part is an Account of what I know, and was actually imployed in by the Benedictines and Jesuites for con∣triving, promoting and carrying on of Fires in and about this City; the rest consists of Affidavits Informations, &c. of others touching matters of the same nature, of which some tis true, have been formerly published, but many of them imperfectly, o∣thers now almost out of Print, or not common to be had; and all before scatteringly set forth in several Books; These I thought fit to insert together here for the ful∣ler satisfaction of the present Age, and Posterity; to which is added some Account of Latter Fires, and several Observables that occurred relating thereunto not before made publick; All which I conceive may be both welcom and useful in this Juncture:
TWO Things I would particularly Advertise You to Take Notice of.
The FIRST is the several ways, whereby these Mischievous People begin and promote Fires, which indeed are so various, that 'tis difficult to Enumerate them all: But we know they have practised these that follow, viz.

1. By Fire-Balls put in with Poles or otherwise through Holes, or open places into Houses; as at Mr. Farriners House which began the Great Fire.
2. By hard Fire-balls thrown through Glass-windows, as at the Smiths in Black-Friars.
3. By flinging the said Balls, or other Combustible Matter fired into Cellars through the Bars, or Grates, where they are left without Shutters, as at the Oyl-Mans in Southwork.
4. By firing their own Lodgings, as the French-man did in Shoe-Lane, in the time of the Great Fire; and likewise, the two Peters near Safron-Hill.
5. By hiring Cellars in dangerous places, filling them with Combustibles, and then firing them, which was a Course they much advised me to.
6. By Firing Haylofts, as in Smithfield.
7. By Strangers faining Errands, as in the Temple.
8. By untiling Houses, Breaking Windows, &c. and there putting in their Com∣bustibles.
9. By getting into Empty Houses and Setting them on Fire, as in Budge-Row. 1670.
10. By Creeping into back-yards and firing stacks of Bavins, Reed, &c. as at Lime-House.

11. By going into Victualling-Houses, and leaving behind them Trains for Firing, as at the Cooks in Fetter-Lane and in Southwark.
12. By Consederate Servants, as lately at the Attorneys in the same Lane.

And That such FIRES may be the more Destructive, when be∣gun, their Instructions are,

1. To do it in select Places amongst Old Buildings, and where Engines can∣not play.
2. To FIRE the Water-Houses, and get the New River-Water stopt, if they can, for that time near that Place.
3. To have Some of their Chief Friends thereabouts, that may misadvise Great Persons, That they may blow up Houses, where it is not necessary, or where rather it will do harm by Opening a Passage for the FIRE.
4. To have some of their Active Instruments, who under pretence of helping may scatter FIRE BALLS in contiguous Houses, and break down the Win∣dows, Roof, &c. to let in the FIRE more easily.
5. To have others attending, that shall cry out against French and Papists; and mightily pitty the People, thereby getting to be trusted with Removing of Goods, and so to plunder and steal; or if they find an oportunity to fire HOUSES at a Distance.
6. Curiously to observe WIND and TIDE in all Attempts, as likewise Frosts, and very dry Times, and chuse Sundays for doing the business, because then there is the least Water.

The other Thing I would advise You of, is not to Conceit, because the PLOT is discovered in some measure, and some few of Them brought to Justice, That there∣fore now You are secure, and that They will desist from such Attempts: For I know their Nature and Principles so well, That I dare assure You on the contrary, They will be more Active and Virulent now than ever: And for some proof of this be pleased to consider, How many FIRES have either actually hapn'd, or been de∣sign'd, or begun, though by Providence, prevented, since the Discovery of the PLOT.
As,


At Limehouse, Septemb. 18.
At the Temple.
At St. Pauls Church-yard.
Fetter-Lane, Apr. 10.
Near New-Inn.
Ship-yard.
Southampton Buildings.
Gray-Hound-Tavern in the Strand under a Chair.
Golden-Lane.
Vinegar-yard.
Crown-Court at the lower End of Chancery-Lane.
At the Water-house.
In the Minories.
At New-Prison.

All these and probably many others, that I never heard of, have been since the be∣gining of September last; so that you see, they are still going on with the Trade of Twexbury-Mustard-Balls, when ever they have an opportunity; it will therefore concern all Protestants, to be careful and cautious to prevent such mischeifs from these wicked Incendiaries, who still swarm about this Town, thinking themselves more safe here, than in the Country, and better able to hold correspondence, &c.
I know well, with what Envy and Malice they behold the City; and that they will leave no Villany unatempted, to lay it once more Level with the Ground, unless possibly seeing it so gloriously Rebuilt, and upon consideration of late Circumstances, they should think it now better Hubandry to preserve it for their own use, as Harcoat the Tower, than to destroy it, and so invert the other of their Design, and strive first to Depopulate and Massacre its troublesom Inhabitants; that so themselves and their French Friends may take Possession of these Noble Structures; and quietly enjoy the Accomodation of the Hereticks Pains and Charge, as the Jewes those of the Cananites: this I am certain of, thas you are continually to expect from them the

worst, that a most improved Subtilty joyned with the most Implacable Malice, Both egg'd on with vast Bats of Profit and Power, and sharpned with the Fury of blind Zeal and Thirst of Revenge, can either contrive or execute.
To prevent which nothing can be more effectual than Union, and a good under∣standing amongst all Protestants, though of different Perswasions.
To obviate the ill Art of this common Enemy, whose Instruments by a Thousand Devices dayly seek to exasperate you one against another: you must study to cement, as much as they to divide; But above all, let no Jesuitical Impressions howsoever maskt; be able in the least to Impair the Loyalty to the King, or wheadle you into any tumultuous disturbances; you can no way gratifie, or serve their Interest, more than by such a wicked Folly; this is the Point they would gain upon you; (and which they have pusht on so unhappily elsewhere) and then infallibly you shall bear the whole Odium of their Hellish-Plot.
May the God of Heaven ever preserve His Majesty from the open violences, and secret Assassinations of these Bloody-minded Men, as likewise from their subtle Insinu∣ations; may the same Omnipotent Power Bless and Protect these Nations in gene∣ral, and the City of London in particular, that his Majesty may have a long and Prosperous Reign; the Protestant Religion flowrish, and the Designs of Rome be blasted, discovered and confounded; Is, and shall ever be the Hearty Prayers and Endeavours of him,

