



SIR,
DEdications are like Love, and no Man of Wit or Eminence escapes them; early or late, the Affliction of the Poet's Complement falls upon him; and Men are oblig'd to receive 'em as they do their Wives;

For better, for worse; at lest, with a feign'd Ci∣vility.
It was not Want of Respect, but Fear, that has hitherto made us keep clear of your Judgment, too piercing to be favou∣rable to what is not nicely valuable. We durst not awaken your Criticism; and by begging your Pro∣tection in the Front of a Book, give you an Occa∣sion to find nothing to de∣serve it. Nor can this

little History lay a better Claim to that Honour, than those that have not pretended to it; which has but this Merit to recom∣mend it, That it is Truth: Truth, which you so much admire. But 'tis a Truth that entertains you with so many Acci∣dents diverting and mo∣ving, that they will need both a Patron, and an Assertor in this incredu∣lous World. For however it may be imagin'd that Poetry (my Talent) has

so greatly the Ascendant over me, that all I write must pass for Fiction, I now desire to have it un∣derstood, that this is Rea∣lity, and Matter of Fact, and acted in this our lat∣ter Age: And that, in the Person of Tarquin, I bring a Prince to kiss your Hands, who own'd himself, and was receiv'd, as the last of the Race of the Roman Kings; whom I have often seen, and you have heard of; and whose Story is so well

known to your self, and many Hundreds more: Part of which I had from the Mouth of this unhap∣py great Man, and was an Eye-Witness to the rest.
'Tis true, Sir, I pre∣sent you with a Prince un∣fortunate, but still the more noble Object for your Goodness and Pity; who never valu'd a brave Man the less for being unhap∣py. And whither shou'd the Afflicted flee for Re∣fuge,

but to the Gene∣rous? Amongst all the Race, he cannot find a better Man, or more cer∣tain Friend: Nor amongst all his Ancestors, match your greater Soul, and Magnificence of Mind. He will behold in one English Subject, a Spi∣rit as illustrious, a Heart as fearless, a Wit and Eloquence as excellent, as Rome it self cou'd produce. Its Senate scarce boasted of a bet∣ter States-man, nor Au∣gustus

of a more faith∣ful Subject; as your Im∣prisonment and Suffe∣rings, through all the Course of our late National Distractions, have suffi∣ciently manifested: But nothing cou'd press or de∣ject your great Heart; you were the same Man still, unmov'd in all Turns, easie and innocent; no Persecution being able to abate your constant good Humour, or wonted Gal∣lantry.

If, Sir, you find here a Prince of less Forti∣tude and Vertue than your self, charge his Miscar∣riages on Love; a Weak∣ness of that Nature you will easily excuse, (being so great a Friend to the Fair;) though possibly, he gave a Proof of it too fatal to his Honour. Had I been to have form'd his Character, per∣haps I had made him something more worthy of the Honour of your Pro∣tection:

But I was ob∣lig'd to pursue the Mat∣ter of Fact, and give a just Relation of that part of his Life which, possibly, was the only reproachful part of it. If he be so happy, as to entertain a Man of Wit and Busi∣ness, I shall not fear his Welcome to the rest of the World: And 'tis only with your Pass∣port he can hope to be so.

The particular Obliga∣tions I have to your Bounty and Goodness, O noble Friend, and Patron of the Muses! I do not so much as pretend to acknowledge in this little Present; those being a∣bove the Poets Pay, which is a sort of Coin, not currant in this Age; though perhaps may be esteem'd as Medals in the Cabinets of Men of Wit. If this be so happy to be of that Number, I desire

no more lasting a Fame, than that it may bear this Inscription, that I am,
SIR, 
