



Great and Puissant Queen,
IF in Ancient Times, Hero's were Ho∣nour'd with Publick Monuments, when they had perform'd any Extraordinary Atchievements, to the end the Memory of their Actions might be preserved to Posterity, and their Off-spring the more inflam'd to imi∣tate their Virtues; If the Romans, among o∣ther the best regulated Governments, strove, as they did, to excel all others in celebrating the Renown of their Kings, their Emperors and fa∣mous Captains, by erecting to their Honour sumptuous Statues, lofty Pyramids, and Mag∣nificent Triumphal Arches, when those Hero's return'd Victorious to Rome; What then can be done too much at this time, Great and Vir∣tuous QƲEEN, to Honour at the Hague the Entrance of WILLIAM III. Your most Illustrious Husband? He, who by his Glorious Deeds has quite defaced whatever those Demi∣gods, so much celebrated in History, perform'd
 of most Transcendent. For whatsoever ren∣der'd so famous those Prodigies of Antiquity, they only did in favour of their Country, or ra∣ther to get themselves a Name, but MIGHTY QƲEEN, WILLIAM the TRIƲMPHANT, had no other aim in all his Enterprizes, but to advance the Glory of the King of Kings: He was never capable of unjust Ambition, or desire of Rule: Only his Compassion upon the Miserable, Suffering in a good Cause, and his de∣sire to deliver 'em from the yoak that Tyran∣ny would have impos'd upon their Consciences, were the sole Motives that rowz'd him up to Action. The many Dangers to which he has already expos'd his Life to defend the Rights of Justice, are too well known to all the World, for me to enlarge upon 'em. 'Tis true Great QƲEEN, I have here a spacions Field to fill these Pages with the due Encomiums that be∣long to our Matchless Heroe, and Your Ma∣jesty. For what Great Things might not be said of Your Wisdom and Prudence, Your Resoluti∣on, and the Mildness of Your Government, when in his Absence You held the Reins of So∣vereign Rule. But besides that, I know You are above the reach of common Praise; I have not Eloquence to acquit my self, as the Gran∣deur and the Excellency of the Subject require. Tha's a work for the Bold stroaks of the most accomplish'd Masters of Wit and Learning. 'Tis for them to take upon 'em the Care of ma∣king known to Posterity the Eternal Honor,
 which the Heroe of our Age has acquir'd by the Favourable Revolution in England. To which they may also add, the happy Change of the de∣plorable Face of the Affairs of the Ʋnited-Provin∣ces in the year 1672. There is no body but knows the Miseries into which they were then plung'd, even within two fingers breadth of utter Ruine, when this Great Prince, being made Governor-General, made it his chiefest Care to raise their drooping Hopes, and forc'd a King no less Po∣tent than Ambitious to restore the Usurpati∣ons of his Unjust War. But MIGHTY QƲEEN, What might not also be farther said of You? There is no body but knows, besides the Gran∣deur of Your Soul, how deeply sensible Your Majesty was of the unheard of Cruelties, under∣gone by the persecuted Protestants in France, who were driven by the Tempest into these Happy Provinces; where they not only found an assured Sanctuary under the Protection of the Sovereigns of the Government, but where they found the frequent and Extraordinary Marks of your Majesty's, as also of that Generous Prince's Bounty, whm Heaven ordained to be your Husband. You have both Labour'd so effectually for the Welfare of the Church, that it is plainly to be seen that God united your Majesties together on purpose to be the steady Pillars of it. Nor is this enough, Great Queen, It behoves me also to add, that the most solid Part of Europe looks upon You Two, as the Principal Instruments that Heaven has made
 choice of to break the Fetters of her Slavery. The Earnestness of so many Sovereign Princes to be your Allies, is a Sacred Proof of this same Truth. To which we might also farther add what so many Princes verify'd, in waiting on his Majesty upon his first Return from England to the Hague, where they altogether formed one Court, the most splendid that has been seen for many Ages. But I wander too far: my aim is Humbly to beg Your Majesties Pro∣tection of these few Sheets, in hopes of your Gracious acceptance; as being not only a Col∣lection in part of the great Atchievements of the Princes of the House of Nassau, Your Glo∣rious Ancestors, but of those of his Britannie Majesty, Your Illustrious Husband, I was willing to believe that by representing to your Royal View, the Homage that was paid him, and which he had deservedly acquir'd, I should in some measure discharge my Duty to your Majesty; and that You would be so Gracious as to permit me, with a most profound Respect to stile my self,
GREAT QUEEN,

