



GENTLEMEN,
YOUR known Love to our Church, and Loyalty to your Prince, render you deservedly esteemed by all that have a value for each, and was our encouragement to shelter the following Papers under your Names. We are forced in a Christian Country (Quis temper at à lachrymis?) to contest for Christianity, and appear Advocates for our Antient and English Government, against a sort of Men who are risen against the LordThe Apostles preached Christ that was crucified within, and not another—for the other is the Anti∣christ—Now I say, if there be any other Christ but he that was crucified within, he is the false Christ, Geo. Fox's Great Myst. p. 205. Do you read that there were any Kings since the days of the Apostles, but among the Apostate Christians?—We know that these Kings are the Spiritual Egyptians got up since the days of the Apostles. Geo. Fox in his several Papers given forth, &c. See Brief Discovery, p. 16.
The Priests of the World are Conjurers, Thieves and Robbers, Antichrists, Witches, Devils, Scarlet-coloured Beasts; really they are Blood-hounds, says Geo. Fox. See Pennyman's Quakers Contradictions, p. 3. Sect. 7. And Richard Crane stiles them, Antichrists, Decei∣vers, Sorcerers, ravening Wolves, and Babylons Mer∣chants. See Will. Mather's Appendix to his Answer to the Switch, p. 10,
11. and his Anointed, reproaching them both as Antichristian. As for the Ministers of Christ, they, upon all Occasions, have been sufficient∣ly reviled by them; and we doubt not but 'twas spoken by way of Contempt, when George Whitehead at every turn calls us
Priests, and in his Title Page stiles us the Three Norfolk Priests, he very well know∣ing that the common People have an ill apprehension of the Word, tho very ho∣nourable and worthy in it self, and of great esteem in the first and Primitive days: For who can deny (says a most LearnedMr. Jos. Mede, l. 1. Disc. 5. p. 27. Man of our own) that the word Priest is corrup∣ted of Presbyter? our Ancestors the Saxons first using Preoster, whence by a farther con∣traction came Preste and Priest; the
High and Low Dutch have Priester; the French, Prestre; the Italian, Prete; but the Spaniard only speaks full, Presbytero. A Name which those two great Apostles of our Lord, St.Pet. 5. 1. 2d and 3d Epist. of St. John v. 1. Peter, and St. John, were pleased to call themselves by; and  signifies both in our. Holy Books, and amongst the GreekCor. 5. 20. Ephes. 6. 20. See Scapula & Steph. Thes. Writers, to perform the Office of an Embas∣sador; and sure, both the Name and the  Persons were in great esteem with the Christians of the best and earliest Times,Epist. ad Smyrn. p. 6, 9. ad Ephes. p. 19. ad Magnes. p. 31, 33. ad Phil. p. 43. ad Trall. p.
48, 50, 53. Edit. Voss. whenas Ignatius scarce wrote an Epistle wherein he gave not some Marks of Honour to them, stiling them
the Council of God, charging the People to reve∣rence and obey them as the Apostles, and in holy things to do nothing without theirs and their Bishops Advice. But had the Word been a stile of Reproach, we should have worn it as our Crown, since it was for vindicating the great Truths of the Gospel, and discovering the Blasphemies of those who would introduce another: for when our Saviour was so coarsly used, yea, blasphemed by a new Race of Scribes and Pharisees, should his Disciples, as St. Peter, stand a far off, whilst they buffet and spit upon him, that were in construction to deny him, or at least to say, we know not the Man; how could we but (with the Lydian Prince, who, tho dumb before, broke silence when he saw his Father ready to be assassinated) cry out, 'tis our Saviour, and our holy Books, the Scriptures, Oh! do not vilify and blaspheme them. God knows we wou'd not imitate St. Peter's rashness (no more than his cowardice) draw a sword to cut off an Ear, no not so much as an Hair of their Heads; our hearts desire is with holy Paul, that they may be saved, that they may own their Blasphemies, and repent of them (if it be posiible for Infallibility, or Perfecti∣on, to acknowledg Sin or Error) and that they would take the Advice of a great tho Heathen Woman, Mat. 27.
19. to meddle no more so wickedly and blasphemously with the Holy Jesus.
We know it has been the usage of many to turn their Dedications into Pane∣gyricks on their Patrons, and sometimes deservedly too, great Merits calling for just Acknowledgments as a due return, and to encourage others to become imitators of them: but tho your Worth would afford us a large Field to expa∣tiate in, your Modesty forbids our very entrance upon it, since to do you ju∣sticeIgnat. Epist. ad Trall.
p. 49. Edit. Voss. herein, would, we are sure, render you very uneasy; like the holy Mar∣tyr who underwent a Penance when he heard himself commended.
Gentlemen! You had our Votes, and you shall not want our Prayers, That God would by his Grace establish you in all Goodness, and continue you, whilst in this Station, the true Representatives of the best and worthiest part of your Country, in a just Zeal for the Established Religion, and a ready support of the Antient Government of our Church and State, which is the only way wherein we can manifest our selves
May 10. 1700.

