




Much honoured,
THe sweetnesse of Communion with God (whereby Saints taste and see how good the Lord is) is more clearly discerned by their own per∣sonall experience, than can be de∣clared by any verball expressions. This was the highest pitch of Adams happinesse, during his estate of con∣created integrity, that hee was admitted to the enjoyment of this grand priviledge; what is it then for any of his fal∣len Off-spring, to be restored to this great exaltation? And yet we know that Beleevers, by faith in Christ, are reinsta∣ted



in this advancement, and are many times inabled to say, and that feelingly,. 1 Joh. 1.3. truly our fellowshp, (or our Commu∣nion) is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. This is the Heaven of Heavens, to Saints Triumphant, and Heaven here on this side Heaven, to Saints Militant, Ex∣pectants of Heaven hereafter.
Vnutterable is the Contentment that man finds some∣times in his Cordiall acquaintance, with an Antient, Fast and Religious Friend, to whom he may freely, and fully unbosome himself, and from whom he may receive suitable, and seasonable advice, with all candor and faith∣fullnesse, upon all occasions. Now if words cannot to the life hold out that satisfaction that man findeth in his con∣verse with man, like unto himself, is it any wonder, if I am not able fully to display that heart-ravishing delight, which the renewed soul meeteth withall, whilest it nou∣risheth humble and holy Communion with God, the high and lofty one that inhabiteth Eternity? It is a∣greed on by all, that holy familiarity with him is full of spirituall solace; though all my language be too short, com∣pleatly to describe before you, how satisfactory and con∣tentfull it is. How sweet are those holy Parlies with God in praier, and how pleasant their returns? far plea∣santer to a gracious, than the returns of ships (richly laden with rarest Commodities) to a Carnall heart; how de∣lightfull are the droppings of the Sanctuary, whereby the souls of Saints become as watered Gardens, as so many Edens, and whereby they come to hear of joy and gladnesse, so that the bones which God at any time hath bro∣ken begin to rejoice?
How ensuring are the Incomes of the Spirit, in that sealing Ordinance of the Lords Supper, wherein the truely penitent and beleeving Soul, looking up to Christ,

(by the Eye of Faith) whom hee hath peirced, and be∣ing in heavinesse for him, &c. receives the pledge of the Remission of his sins, and of all other Covenant-Mercies, which more exhilerates him with heart reviving joy, then the sight of a Pardon doth, a condemned Malefactor?
It was upon this account that the heart of David was filled with such Pantings, as the Hart after the water∣brooks, to come and appear before God in soul-revi∣ving Ordinances, and that Marquesse of Vico Galea∣tius that eminent Confessor, when offered Golden Mountains of Honours, and Riches, how resolutely did he reply, their mony perish with them that think all the honours of Italy, &c. to be worth one hours Communion with God at Geneva, a place wherein Religion flourished. Now how abundant that worthy and experimentall Christian was (to whom you owe your extraction, as bran∣ches to their root) in nourishing communion with God, and how sweet hee found it, both in his life, and at his death, I need not relate to you in speciall, who were full well ac∣quainted with the manner of his holy Conversation in his Life, and of his comfortable departure at his end. My sute to you is



Honoured Lady,
Who have made such E∣minent progresse in Grace, Labor yet more and more to imitate your deceased Fa∣ther, in walking in all the waies of holiest Communion with God, treading dayly in his steps of Soul resigna∣tion, Faith, Patience, Charity, Zeal, and all o∣ther



Christian graces, whereof he left an ex∣emplary Copy to you and your hopefull Issue to write after. I need not suggest that it is constancy which is the Crowning grace.


Honoured Sir,
Though you have attain∣ed as yet to a little more than a fourth of the days that your Indulgent Grand-Father arrived at, yet hee hath left you, as a Coheir of his Estate, so I hope of his graces also; strive therefore that hee may in all his soul-adorning endow∣ments,



live in you, that as hee (and many others) looked upon you with a hope∣full eye, whilest hee lived, so the world may see you more and more, to answer all those blooming hopes, now he is removed from you.



To conclude, my humble addresse to you both is, that you would be mindfull of all the holy Counsells and savory advertisements wherein he abounded towards you, and a∣mong others those that he communicated to you frequently by his letters, and forget not that Letter (added unto his life) whereby being dead he yet speaketh to you, and then doubt not, but there will bee a full return into your bo∣somes, of all the prayers which he so fervently and fre∣quently darted up to Heaven in your behalfs, which is the perswasion
Of 
Decemb. 24. 1655.
