



My Lords and Gentlemen,
THere needs no Rhetorick to illustrat the many and great Advantages, that accresces to a Nation by the diligent Practice and due Incouragement of Husbandrie. The thing speaks for it self: Neither need I tell you, how Worthy, Noble and Excellent an Im∣ployment it is, for those whom GOD hath bles∣sed with large and opulent Heretable Posses∣sions. It is indeed an Imploy below no man, no not of Kings and Princes; The Holy Writ records the same of Uzziah, as one of his best Characters. Cicero in his Cato major, treats very largely of it, and in his most excellent Book of Offices, penned for his Son Marcus to di∣rect him in his Youth, Life and Conversation: He says, that of all Beneficial Industrie, certainly there is not any thing more agreeable or more worthy of a man of Honour and Reason, than the Culture and Improvement of the Earth.
Of the Excercises of Husbandrie, Hiero, Phi∣lometer Attalus and Archelaus, all Kings, have writ most fully; Zenephon and Mago have done the like and besides them Cato, Varro, Pliny, Col∣lumella, Virgil, Cressentius, Palladius, and many

others of later times, not a few of the Antients have placed the summum bonum in them, and have deified these men, who were most famous in that Profession, as Appollo, who red the Herds of Ad∣metus King of Thessaly, Mercury and his Son Da∣phnis, Pan and Protheus.
Virgil calls Husbandmen fortunate, and Horace Blessed; to fortifie this, the Oracle of Delphus pronounced Aglaus the most happy man (when the Potent and Rich Croesus did expect the Ho∣nour,) and that because he had a little Farm in Arcadia, and never stirred from it; it is therefore no dishonour, for your Honours to apply your selves this way, which was so highly Honoured among the Antients, which was no ways shame∣ful, for many Roman Emperors, and most Potent Kings, not only to direct (which is all I require of you) but also to Till, Sow, Graft and Plant their own Lands; This did Dioclesian, and At∣talus, having voluntarly quited their Empires to follow this Course of Life. Cyrus also, that great Monarch, when his Friends came to see him, was wont to Glory in nothing more than in a Garden of his own Planting. Seneca Plant∣ed Plain Trees (a Tree indeed which I recommend to be Planted near Gentlemens Houses, and on their Avenues) and digged Fish-ponds with his own hands, he delighted to be no where more willingly then in the Fields, where he is said to have studied that most excellent Book of Morals; In a Word, it was thought so truly Honourable, that the most Noble & Ancient Families had their Rise and Sirname from some particular Countrey

Imployments, as the Fabii-Lentulii, the Ciciroes, Pi∣sos, from these Grains, the Bubulci, Statilii, Tauri, Pomponii, Vituli, Vitelli, Porcii, Catoes, Aunii, Ca∣prii, and many others, from their different Her∣dings; and tho' Cornelius Agrippa in his Vanity of Sciences, doth abundantly Satyrise all other Im∣ployments, yet he hath nothing to say against this, but that it is the effect of Sin, that makes us be at all this pains, which we must all acknow∣ledge.
I must confess, that I am very well satisfied to see so much Industry of late, about the Dwel∣ling-Houses of the most of the Nobility, and Gen∣try within this Kingdom; As also, so great Prone∣ness and Inclination for Trade, and shal be very sorry, if they meet not with due Incouragement from the Government.
I am glad also, to hear, that His Majesty is not very well pleased with our vaging Abroad, nor with our Unnecessar and Expensive Court At∣tendancies.
All these things makes me to hope, that your Honours will set up, for what is the real and true Interest of your Countrey, and for that which in time, will tend to your own particular Profite, and the Aggrandizing of your Families.
And really, when I now consider the great Scarcity that hath happened for several years by∣gone, next unto the just Judgement from GOD upon us for our Sins, I must impute it in part, to our great neglect of Husbandrie, and there∣fore, as the sensible effects of the sad Calamity, ought to be a Spur to all sincere Christians to humble themselves for their Sins, which bring

on such Judgements, so it ought to be an Incite∣ment to all those, whom God hath blessed with Estates to Double their Diligence in the Im∣provement of their Grounds, and that not only by precept but example, that the Land be not reduced to utter Misery.
I shal not multiply words upon this matter, tho' the Theam be very large and capacious, the Subiect matter being so obvious to every man: But shall only say a few things.
Husbandrie inlarges a Countrey, and makes it as if ye had conquered another Countrie adjacent thereto; And I am sure, a Conquest by the Spade and the Plough, is both more just, and of longer continuance, then what is got by Sword and Bow.
Husbandry gives lmployment to many poor people, and sure they are much better imploy∣ed so, then under the masquerade name of a Sol∣dier in time of peace
Husbandry breeds up and accustoms men to Labour, which as it keeps a Nation from many Vices, which are the ordinar Concomitants of Idleness; So when necessity requires, it fits and enables them for warlike Performances, much better then by any formal, idle, lazie way of Driviling; and this Cato and Vegetius affirms.
The Romans thought it no Disparagement to take their Generals from the Plough, and they thought it no dishonour to return to the same again; they thought toil and labour to be the best way of excercising their Soul∣diers, and this their Camps, Ways, Thea∣ters, Baiths, Aqueducts, and Form of Mili∣tary

Discipline, which consistted of long March∣es, speedily performed, under the load of Weighty Armour, both Offensive & Defensive, as also Provision; doth abundantlie testifie.
In fine, Husbandrie is the Stock, and Trade the Improvement of that.
Husbandrie is the Foundation, and Trade the Superstructure.
Husbandrie furnishes Materials for Trade, and maketh Barter go for Money, so that we Trade with our Goods, and bestows our Mo∣ney at Home, amongst our own People, which still tends for the further Improvement of our Lands.
Up then brave Youths, leave off Courts and Politicks, especially when at so great distance from you, and in another Kingdom▪ Follow Husbandrie and Trade, two necessary Twins, who like Man and Wife, ought not to be se∣parated.
To what a prodigious greatness do ye see other Nations have come to, who, before the Union of the two Crowns, were not to be accounted much above us, and this all by Hus∣bandrie and Trade, which we have hitherto neglected, whether by a plain and singular stupidity, or by some other ill made Bargains, I shal not venture to determine.
If you fall to this then in good earnest, lay∣ing aside the general advantage to the whole Nation, I am perswaded you shal find more pleasure and profit this way, then in the old troden Path to London, and in time this old Distict verified.

Non minor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri
Casus in est illic, hic erit artis opus.
Which strain'd to our purpose, may run thus.
Its no less vertue to improve our Lands,
Then to gain more from other Bankrupt-hands.
The first's true management, the others lot,
Be not then wise behind hand, as the Scot.
Go on then Noble young Men, and by your Example, let the People under you see how to do; For I must say again, we are all more taken by Example, then by Precept: I have indeed good hopes of this rising Generation, and I hope they shal both see their Predecessors Errors, and fall upon good Mediums to redeem their evil spent time, and thereby shall evite the Conse∣quences of many poor unfortunate Courtiers; as the Poet expresseth it,
Vitam animas, opera & sumptus, impendimus aulae.
Proemia pro meritis quae retributa putas?
Aula dedit nobis rescripta votata papiro,
Et sine mente sons & sine corde manus
Paucos beavit aula, plares perdidit
Sed & hos quoque ipsa quos heavit perdidit.
I shall trouble your Honours no further, now that I think I have used Reason enough to per∣swade you to so good and necessar a Work; But in case of obstinacy, that I may leave you with∣out excuse, and that I may have this to say for my self, that neither Rhime nor Reason could convince you, of what is infallibly both your Du∣ty and Interest: I shall conclude with, and set before you, the Opinions of two very famous Courtiers, Horace and Buchannan, the one a fa∣vorite

of the favorite Maecenas, and the other of the Earl of Murray, commonly called the good Regent.





Beatus ille, qui procul negotiis
Ut prisca Gens mortalium,
Paterna rura bobus exercet suis,
Solutus omni foenere.


Before Ambition, Malice, Envy, Strife,
Had found the way to shorten humane life:
Before the use of Gold came in Request,
Solid Contentment was mans only Guest;
Before vain Titles, and a Court were Known,
Man lived Tranquilly on what was his own,
He owed no Debt, neither had ought to crave,
Save what from his own Lands he hop'd to have.
His Fathers Lands therefore with care he plowes.
With lowing Bullocks, them in time he sowes
With hopeful Grain, which quickly doth afford,
A just requital to its frugal Lord.
So all his Val's with Fruitful Corn abound,
His Pastours green with Flocks are chequered round.


Non excitatur cassico miles truci:
Nec Horret iratum mare:
Forumque vitat, & superba Civium
Potentiorum limina.


Nor is he rais'd by Mars his hot allarm,
Neither from angry Neptun fears he harm,
He shuns Law Suits, and so needs not attend
In Anti-Chambers of big looking Men,


Ergo aut adultâ vitium propagine
Altas maritat populus:
Inutilesque falce ramos amputans.
Feliciores inlerit.


But as his Vines grow up he doth apply
Both Art and pains them carefully to ty
To some straight Pole he pruins the fruitful (Vine,
The Barren he roots out, and plants again.


Aut in reducta valle mugientium
Prospectat errantes greges:
Aut pressae puris mella condit amphoris;
Aut tondit infirmas oves;


Sometimes in bending val's, he's pleas'd to see
The bellowing wandering Herds feed quietly,
At other times the woolly Flocks he shears,
And the sweet honey from its Comb he clears,
And stores it up for the enshewing years.


Vel cum decorum mitibus pomis caput:
Autumnus arvis extulit;
Ut gaudet, insitiva decerpens pyra,
Certantem & uvam purpurae;


But when long look't for Harvest shews his head
Adorn'd with Fruits of which we stand in need
How doth he joy to pull the grafted Pear,
And clustred grapes, which smallest twigs do bear
Whose purple colour doth by far excell
The purpled robes of Kings on earth who dwel.


Qua muneretur te, priape, & te, pater.
Sylvane tutor finium.


Therefore to the Preipus praise redounds;
And to Sylvanus the Guardian of our bounds.


Libet jacere modo sub antiqua ilice;
Modo in tenaci gramine.
Labuntur altis interim ripis aquae
Queruntur in Sylvis aves.
Fontesque lymphis obstrepunt manantibus:
Somnos quod invitet leves.


For by your care we free from anxious thoughts
Safely rest under the Oaks Shaddie Boughs;
Anone in some green Meadow down we ly,
While from high Banks the pearled Streams gly'd by.
As carefull Nurse, when Babes go to their rest,
Chant furth some Sonnet such as please them best.
So do the Birds their Tenor, Trible, sing
Amidst the Groves, while Fountains murmuring,
Does beat a Counter Bass, and doth intrap
The painful Plow-man in a quiet nap.


At cum tenantis annus hibernus jovis,
Imbres, Nives{que} comparat,
Aut trudit aecreis hinc & hinc multa cane.
Apros in obstantes plagas.
Aut ameti levi rara tendit retia,
Turdis edacibus dolos;
Pavidumque leporem, & advenam laqueo gruem
Jucunda captat praemia.


But when cold Winter comes with Rains and Snows,
His hoarie Head with purled locks he shows
By Jov's command, then doth the painful Swain,
Order his subtile toils, and then doth train
By force of cures the wildest Boars therein,
Or else by slighter Nets, whole Nights doth watch,
The hungry Black-bird in his Snares doth catch
By Gins the fearful Hare and Stranger Swan
Falls as a victim to she Husband-man.


Quis non malarum quas amor curas habet,
Haec inter obliviscitur?


Amidst these pleasures innocent and just
Who will not soon forget the ills of Lust.


Quod si pudica mulier in partem juvet,
Domum atque dulces liberos:
Sabina qualis, aut perusta solibus,
Permicis uxor appuli:
Sacrum & vetustis extruat lignis focum
Lassi sub adventum viri:
Claudensaue textis cratibus laetum pecu
Distenta siccet ubera:
Et horna dulce vina promens dolio
Dapes inemptas apparet:


But if you have a Chaste and Virtuous Wife,
The true support and comfort of mans life,
Who bears her part in your Domestick cares,
And manages your Childrens small Affairs,
Like to Sabina, or brave Appules Dame,
Who by Sols Rays lovely, but black became,
Her Houshold fire with seasoned wood does burn
As she attends her wearied Lords return.
She also doth the skipping Ewes restrain
Within their twisted Folds, that she may drain
Their well stored Duggs of all their Milkie gain.
So from sweet Hog-sheads cleaned she draws her Wine,
Both fresh and brisk, that he & she may dine.
On unbought Danties neatly cookt in time.


Non me lucrina juverint conchylia,
Magisve rhombus, aut scari,
Si quos Eois intonata fluctibus
Hiems ad hoc vertat mare;
Non afra avis descendat in ventrem meum,
Non attagen jonicus
Jucundior; quam lecta de pinguissimis
Oliva Ramis arborum
Aut herba lappathi prata amantis, & gravi
Malvae salubres corpori
Vel agna festis caesa terminalibus,
Vel haedus ereptus lupo.


Lucrinas Oysters, nor the Turbot Square,
Neither the Scarian Fish, the gild-head rare
May with these Dainties any ways compare,
The Scarian Fish is said to chaw the Cood,
And may be found after an Eastern Flood,
And is accounted most delicious Food,
I have no Gust for Affricks choisest Fowl,
The Asian Black-Cock I love with my Soul,
And yet in pleasant taste it can't compare
With a green joicie O ive pulled with care,
Nor with a Lamb kill'd at abounding Feast,
Nor with a Kid catcht from a Ravenous Beast.
When drest and disht by fair Sabinas Laws,
With wholesome mallos Meadows Sorrel sauce,


Has inter epulas, ut juvat pastas oves
Videre properantes domum▪
Videre fesses vomerem inverum boves
Collo trabentes languido:
tosque vernas, dius examen Domus
ir cum reuidentes lares.


Amidst your Banquets when with ease you see,
Your fathed flocks come home, most joyfully:
Also your Oxen when their labours done,
With wearied necks chaff'd by the Showers, and Sun,
Their revers'd Plows lay down at their re∣turn.
The numerous Off-spring of your homely Cell
Thus by your care in Riches doth excell
All others wants by change you can supply,
Thus happily you live, and thus you die.


Haec ubi locutus: faeneratur Alphius,
Jam jam futurus rusticus,
Omnem religit Idibus pecuniam:
Quaerit Calendus ponere.


By this Discourse Alpheus highly charm'd,
And for a Countrey life is bravely arm'd,
Recals his Money, and resolves no more
To be a scourge and Tyrrant to the poor.
But in a Four-nights time his mind doth change
And in its wonted Usuries doth Range
To take from Flesh what is bred in the bone,
All men may see how hardly it is done.









Ficta crudelis pietas tyrranos,
Impios mores stola simbritatae
Celati in pano tenui recondit
Nuda se virtus tuguri sub umbra
Rustici, nec se titulis superbis
Vendit: insanosque fori tumultus
Ridet, & plausus popularis aurae
Nec iliens magni foribus pritoni
Assidet vitae tacitos beatae
Rure secreto sibi no a tantum
— Exigit annos.




