


THE unjust Sentence this Play met with before very par¦tial Judges in the Acting, will, I'm pretty sure, he rev by the more unprejudic'd Readers and it's evident, M will exert it self so far, as to justify my Presumption in i¦dicating it, notwithstanding its smell success, to you. Sir  whom I must always profess the highest Esteem and Value, sp from that Nobleness of your Nature that takes a God-like Delight in redressing the Misfortunes of em more than fly to You for their unhappiness; a generous Soul indeed, never gives a greater Proof of her Excellence, than in her Protection of the so for tho suffering Merit challenges a Regard from all, yet it  with it from none but such as you, Sir, who are so Emi for tha Vertue, which more than all the rest, commands the Esteem and Veneration of the Thinking World, your Generosity I mn,  which gives the most perfect Touches of that likeness, man can have to his Almighty Original; for those are but rv awkard Copies of him that want it. 'Tis, I may say, the very Essence of
 God, who with our Beings, dispenses the grateful Knowledg of himself in the Benefits he bestows.
The narrow Virtues of the Old Philosophers, were rather Vi∣ces, if winnow'd well, form'd to gratify their Proud, Lazy, Su∣periority, at the Expence of all the Publick Duties incumbent on mankind, whom they pretend to Purge from his Passions, to make him happy, by that means to amuse our Curiosity with Chyme∣ra's, whilst we lost our real Good, will still naturally flow from those Springs of Pleasure, Honour, Glory, and Noble Actions, the Passions given us by Heaven for our common Good. But their own Practice generally shew'd the Vanity of their Emperic Boasts, when they Buried all the Nobler Pleasures of the Mind in Ava∣rice, and Pedantick Pride, as Lucian has pleasantly made out in Hermotimus.
Those Notional Excellencies that divert us from, or weaken a Publick Spirit, are always False and Hypocritical, that under a gaudy out-side, conceals a rotten Carcass, full of Infectious Di∣stempers that destroy the noblest end of our Being, The doing good to one another. Vanity has always been the Refuge of little Souls, that place their Value in a false Greatness, Hyppocrisie and great Titles What a seeming Holiness does for the Avaritious, De∣signing Saint; Titles do for the proud Avarice of the meer Man of Quality, cheaply Purchasing a Respect from the many; but 'tis the Generous man only that sixes himself in the Hearts of the most valuable part of mankind, where proper Merit only is esteem'd, and the Man, not his Equipage, and Accidental Ap∣purtenances respected.
The Application of this, I shall leave to all that know you, Sir, who are all sensible what Virtues you make your Darlings, and choice of Virtue shews the Nobleness of our Temper, as much as Choice of Friends, the degrees of our Understand∣ings; and if that be true that most men choose those Virtues which are nearest a-kin to their Darling Vices, I'm sure 'twill be a strong proof, that ev'n your Failings (for ev'ry Man has his share of them too) are more Beneficial to the world, than the Vertues of a numerous part of Mankind. In Collonel Codring∣to indeed, we find the true Spirit and Bravery of Old Rome, that d pises all dangers, that in the Race of Glory thou art the
 Noble Chace. Nor can the manly Roughness of your Martial Temper (Fierce to none but your Countries Foes) destroy that ingaging sweetness your agreeable Conversation abounds with, which heightened with so large a share of Wit, Learning, and Judg∣ment, improves as well as delights; so that to have known you any way, must give us some advantage or other. This it was that encourag'd me to dedicate this Play, Sir, to you, of which I may venture to say more, and with more assurance, than if it had been my own.
Mrs. BEHN was a Woman so Accomplish'd, and of so Esta∣blish'd a Fame among the Men of Sense, that I cou'd not sup∣pose a very severe treatment from the Town, which has been very indulgent to the Performances of others, especially when, be∣sides the Reputation of the Author, the Play it self had an In∣trinsic Merit; for we find it full of Humour, Wit, and Variety; the Conversation Gay and Genteel, the Love, Soft and Pathetic, the incidents Natural, and Easy, and the Conduct of the Plot very Justifiable. So that I may reasonably impute its miscarriage to some Faction that was made against it, which indeed was very Evident on the First day, and more on the endeavours em∣ploy'd, to render the Profits of the Third, as small as could be.
It suffer'd not, I'm sure, in the Action, nor in Mr. Ver∣bruggen's reading of some of his art, since he lost nothing of the Force of Elocution, nor Gracefulness of Action; nor in∣deed can I, with Justice to my self, impute it to any part that I ventur'd to add to the Original; for all the Alterati∣ons which I made were in the first Act, in removing that old bule ab Whigg and Tory, (which was the Subject of most of the Second Scene) and placing the Character of a Rake-bell in its room, which was so little, that it could not Influence a more Capricious Audience, to the Damning of the whole. There might indeed be some objections about the Plot, but not very Rational, I think; I'm sure, at least, 'tis the first Play, for some Years, could be quarrell'd at for having too much Plot. In the Editi∣on however, I have put in a great deal, which the length of the Play oblig'd me to cut out for the Action.

Here, Sir, if the Play had been my own, I should have com∣plain'd that the Town had its favourite Fools, as well as favou∣rite Wits, and that Comedy or Farce from any other hand, wou'd no more go down with them, than their favourites will with true Judges that read, not see'em. I should have had indignati∣on enough, perhaps, to've rail'd at the Criticks of all Degrees, and Denominations of Box and Pit, nay, Galleries too, and told 'em that they were so conceited of their own Wit, that they cou'd take no pleasure in hearing that of another, or that Wit in a Play seeming to affront the Parts of the Audience, they suffer'd their Resentment to destroy their Satisfaction. This, and a great many other Satyrical Reflections, which are Natu∣ral for a Disappointed Poet to make, I shou'd then have vented; but being satisfy'd, that the Reputation of Mrs. BEHN is not af∣fected by the malicious Endeavours of some of my Enemies, I now present it under your Patronage, Sir, to the more competent Judges; Proud of the Opportunity of Offering you an occasion of so agreeable a Province, as the Protection of the unfortunate, and letting the World know how much I am, Sir,

