



My Lord,
SInce the World is grown so Nice and Critical up∣on Dedications, and will Needs be Judging the Book, by the Wit of the Patron; we ought, with a great deal of Circumspection, to chuse a Per∣son against whom there can be

no Exception; and whose Wit, and Worth, truly Merits all that one is capable of saying upon that Occasion.
The most part of Dedications are charg'd with Flattery; and if the World knows a Man has some Vices, they will not allow one to speak of his Virtues. This, my Lord, is for want of thinking Rightly; if Men wou'd consider with Reason, they wou'd have another sort of Opinion, and Esteem of Dedications; and wou'd believe almost every Great Man has enough to make him Worthy of all that can be said of him there. My Lord, a Picture-drawer, when he intends to make a good Picture, essays the Face many Ways, and in

many Lights, before he begins; that he may chuse, from the several turns of it, which is most Agreeable, and gives it the best Grace; and if there be a Scar, an ungrateful Mole, or any little Defect, they leave it out; and yet make the Pi∣cture extreamly like: But he who has the good Fortune to draw a Face that is exactly Charming in all its Parts and Features, what Colours or Agree∣ments can be added to make it Finer? All that he can give is but its due; and Glories in a Piece whose Original alone gives it its Perfection. An ill Hand may diminish, but a good Hand cannot augment its Beau∣ty. A Poet is a Painter in his

way; he draws to the Life, but in another kind; we draw the Nobler part, the Soul and Mind; the Pictures of the Pen shall out-last those of the Pen∣cil, and even Worlds them∣selves. 'Tis a short Chronicle of those Lives that possibly wou'd be forgotten by other Hi∣storians, or lye neglected there, however deserving an immor∣tal Fame; for Men of eminent Parts are as Exemplary as even Monarchs themselves; and Vir∣tue is a noble Lesson to be learn'd, and 'tis by Comparison we can Judge and Chuse. 'Tis by such illustrious Presidents, as your Lordship, the World can be Better'd and Refin'd; when a great part of the lazy Nobi∣lity

shall, with Shame, behold the admirable Accomplishments of a Man so Great, and so Young.
Your Lordship has Read in∣numerable Volumes of Men, and Books; not Vainly for the gust of Novelty, but Knowledge, excellent Knowledge: Like the industrious Bee, from every Flower you return Laden with the precious Dew, which you are sure to turn to the Pub∣lick Good. You hoard no one Perfection, but lay it all out in the Glorious Service of your Religion and Country; to both which you are a useful and necessary Honour: They both want such Supporters; and 'tis only Men of so elevated Parts,

and fine Knowledge; such no∣ble Principles of Loyalty and Religion this Nation Sighs for. Where shall we find a Man so Young, like St. Au∣gustine, in the midst of all his Youth and Gaiety, Teach∣ing the World divine Precepts, true Notions of Faith, and Ex∣cellent Morality, and, at the same time, be also a perfect Pattern of all that accomplish a Great Man? You have, my Lord, all that refin'd Wit that Charms, and the Affability that Obliges; a Generosity that gives a Lustre to your Nobi∣lity; that. Hospitality, and Greatness of Mind, that in∣gages the World; and that admirable Conduct, that so

well Instructs it. Our Nation ought to regret and bemoan their Misfortunes, for not be∣ing able to claim the Honour of the Birth of a Man who is so fit to serve his Majesty, and his Kingdoms, in all Great and Publick Affairs: And to the Glory of your Nation be it spoken, it produces more considerable Men, for all fine Sence, Wit, Wisdom, Breeding, and Generosity (for the gene∣rality of the Nobility) than all other Nations can Boast; and the Fruitfulness of your Virtues sufficiently make amends for the Barrenness of your Soil: Which however cannot be in∣commode to your Lordship; since your Quality, and the

Veneration that the Commonal∣ty naturally pay their Lords, creates a flowing Plenty there—that makes you Happy. And to compleat your Happiness, my Lord, Heaven has blest you with a Lady, to whom it has given all the Graces, Beau∣ties, and Virtues of her Sex; all the Youth, Sweetness of Nature; of a most illustrious Family; and who is a most rare Example to all Wives of Quality, for her eminent Piety, Easiness, and Condescention; and as absolutely merits Re∣spect from all the World, as she does that Passion and Re∣signation she receives from your Lordship; and which is, on her part, with so much Ten∣derness

return'd. Methinks your tranquil Lives are an Image of the new Made and Beau∣tiful Pair in Paradise: And 'tis the Prayers and Wishes of all, who have the Honour to know you, that it may Eter∣nally so continue, with Addi∣tions of all the Blessings this World can give you.
My Lord, the Obligations I have to some of the Great Men of your Nation, parti∣cularly to your Lordship, gives me an Ambition of making my Acknowledgments, by all the Opportunities I can; and such humble Fruits, as my In∣dustry produces, I lay at your Lordships Feet. This is a

true Story, of a Man Gallant enough to merit your Prote∣ction; and, had he always been so Fortunate, he had not made so Inglorious an end: The Royal Slave I had the Honour to know in my Tra∣vels to the other World; and though I had none above me in that Country, yet I wanted power to preserve this Great Man. If there be any thing that seems Romantick, I be∣seech your Lordship to consi∣der, these Countries do, in all things, so far differ from ours, that they produce unconceiva∣ble Wonders; at least, they ap∣pear so to us, because New and Strange. VVhat I have men∣tion'd I have taken-care shou'd

be Truth, let the Critical Rea∣der judge as he pleases. 'Twill be no Commendation to the Book, to assure your Lordship I writ it in a few Hours, though it may serve to Excuse some of its Faults of Connexion; for I never rested my Pen a Moment for Thought: 'Tis purely the Merit of my Slave that must render it worthy of the Honour it begs; and the Author of that of Subscribing herself,
My Lord,
Your Lordship's most oblig'd and obedient Servant,

