



Right Honourable,
Right Worshipfull,
VPon the 14 of April last, you being in Court of Com∣mon-councell
assembled, made choice of a Committee
of Aldermen and Commoners to prepare a draught
of A Remonstrance and Petition to both Houses of
Parliament, and to present it in Court, to be there either approved
or altered, as upon debate should be judged meet.
In obedience thereunto, the said Committee upon the 20 of May
following, presented it in Common-councell, where every
branch thereof was taken apart and by it self into serious Conside∣ration,
and after three dayes debating in open Court, it was by
consent and approbation of the Court finished, and upon the 26 of
May, in the name of the Lord Major, Aldermen, and Com∣mon-councell
presented to both Houses of Parliament. Since
which time two Libells have been Printed against the said Re∣monstrance,
the one call'd, A moderate Reply to the City
Remonstrance, the other entituled, The Interest of England
maintained; In one of which it is charged to carry a full com∣plyance
with His Majesties wonted Declarations against the
Parliament; and in the other, That a great part of the main
Sticklers in it, are such as were alwayes backward to the
Parliament, and forced to pay their Fifth and twentieth part;
with many other foolish, foule, and false aspersions in them both:
Whereupon, (though the unmeetest, because the unablest of many
others) I adventured the Vindication of it; In answer whereof,
ad in further opposition to the said Remonstrance, one Mr. J. P.
hath since published a Book named, The City Remonstrance
Remonstrated, calling it a hard-hearted Remonstrance, and
a Remonstrance invective against the Parliament, &c. And

in Page 29. charges mee for saying smething (but instances in
nothing,) concerning the King, the Lords, and the power
of the Commons, and what my carriages have been not ve∣ry
long since in Common-councell, &c. and doth thereby, as
it were, in a tacite way, call the Court to testifie against me. All
whch, hath occasioned me this second time to put pen t Paper, in a
further Justification of your Remonstrance, and also of its
Vindication, and to a clearing of my self from those many charges
of mutation and change, which (to beget a dsesteem of what I have
written in Vindication of the Remonstrance) hee hath laid a∣gainst
me.
My intention in this my addresse unto your Lordship, to the wor∣thy
Aldermen, and to all the rest of the Common-councell, is,
neither to exasperate you against the person of my opposite, nor yet to
seeke protection from you for my self or Books; for if what I have
written be not cocordable to Truth and true Reason, let both mee
and them fall before my Antagonist.
But being thus publkely charged that I should (not very long
since) speak something (but what it is, hee saith not) in Common-councell,
&c. as if it were crosse or contrary to some passages in the
Remonstrance, or to what I have written in the Vindication
thereof, for saith he, It makes them that heard it, and observe
what your Carriages are now, stand with admiration and
amazement at your wheeling thus about.
I oe therefore humbly crave leave to present this my Justifica∣tion
of your Remonstrance, and its Vindication to your Lord∣ship,
and to the whole Court of Common-councell, and doe ap∣peal
to all of you in generall, and to every one of you in particular,
t estifie against me, if at any time since I had that undeserved
honour and happinesse to be a member of this Court, there ever fell
any one word from me, so much as savouring of such things, as by
this Mr. J. P. I am charged to speak in your presence, and I shall
ever remain

