


SIR,
I Have perused your Book, entituled, The City
Remonstrance Remonstrated, or an answer to
my Vindication of the said Remonstrance, wher∣in
I perceive you have been very ready to receive
whatever Reports, either true or false have been brougt unto
you concrning my carriage in matters of Religion, even from
the day of my birth to the publishing of your Book, and
taking them upon trust, (for you have not the least knowledge
of any one of the particular, and many of them relate, I think,
to the time before you were born,) without ever speaking one
word to me about them, (though wee are professed, and have
been long acquainted ntimate Friends, and to the best of my
knowledge and remembrance, not any time the least offensive
word ever passed between us, and now are so neare neighbors
that whenever you peased, in lesse then one quarter of an hour
you might freely have communicated to me whatever you hd
a desire to bee satisfied in) you have, as I coneive, to weaken
my esteem, and to render what I have written to bee the more
invalid, divulged them to the world.
Two thngs I desire i love to represent unto you in this,
First, if all that you have written of mee were true, the con∣trary
wherof I shall easily prove when I come to the particulars;

yet I beseech you consider how irregular this your proceeding
against me is, and contrary to the rule given by our Saviour
Christ, for you and mee and all Gods people to walke by, in
Math. 18. 15, 16, 17. If thy brother trespasse against thee,
goe and tell him his fault between thee and him alone,
if he shall heare thee, thou hast gained thy brother, &c.
and mind that of Solomon, Prov. 15. 18. A man that bea∣reth
false witnesse against his neighbour, is a maul, a
sword, and a sharpe arrow. Secondly, I pray al∣so
remember how exceedingly your selfe, and all your
friends the Antipresbyters, have distasted, and by word of
mouth often with much dislike, blamed Mr. Edwards for
medling with personall matters, notwithstanding his way of
writing in this kind, is much different from this of yours, as
being of practises and matters within these few years, since they
went into that way of Independency, and as hee conceives,
flowing from their principles (and not as you in this, of things
raked up through the whole course of their lives) being also
professedly to discover the errors of the times (viz Hereies,
Blasphemies, &c.) and thereby to preserve the people from
the evill of them.
Now I pray you put this question seriously to your own soul,
whether the same act done in the same kind by Mr. Edwards
against the Independents, &c. be a vice and blame worthy,
and yt being done by Mr. J. P. against a Presbyterian or a
Remonstrant, be a vertue, and worthy commendation; think
seriously of it, and then receive such an answer as your owne
heart shall dictate to you.
You know Mr. J. P. how carefull I was of your good name,
when about four monehs since a report was brought unto mee
cncerning some opinions of yours in matters of Religion
(whether true or false I now argue not) that presently by a god∣ly
intimate friend of yours and mine, viz. Mr. James Russell,

I did privately, without the least divulging them abroad, make
you acquainted with it: And that very morning after your
Book came forth against me▪ the like report was again pub∣likely
brought unto mee in the presence of sundry witnesses;
but in sead of taking revenge of you (which God hath forbid∣den
me, Rom. 12. 19. saying, Avenge not your selves,
but rather give place unto wrath, for it is written,
Vengeance is mine, I will repy saith the Lord) ei∣ther
by spreading them by reports, or printing them
to your dsparagement, I did pesently, in the presence of
Mr. James Story, who also heard them reported, tell them
to you, remembring that of Solomon, Prov. 1. 9. He that
repeateth a matter separateth very Friends; and desiring
to follow our Saviours counsell, Matth. 7. 12. Whatsoe∣ver
you would that men should do to you, doe yee even
so to them; and I hope I shall ever make it a rule for me to
walk by, viz. to doe as I would be done unto, and not as
I am dealt with.
And therefore in the examination and answering of your
Book, I will (though much provoked by you, yet) by Gods grace
indevour to be as free from pasiion or retaliation as possibly I
can, well remembring that David, when Shimei cursed and
railed upon him, observed much good from God in Shimei his
great evill, and said, So let him curse, because the Lord
hath said unto him, curse David; who shall then say,
wherefore hast thou done so? 2 Sam. 16. 10. So I heartily
desire, without the least reluctancy of Spirit against you, as
the instrument seriously to observe, and truly to bee sensible of,
whatever is from God in all that you have said, and to lay my
selfe in the dust in giving God the glory, both in the acknow∣ledging
of any error justly charged upon mee, and of his
mercy in my recovery. And I trust that through the goodness
of▪ God I shall yet get much good out of that which perhaps you

intnded, and therefore divulged for mor evill, setting be∣fore
me as a pattern in this to walke by the practice of our
Lord Christ, recorded for our example in 1 Pet. 2. 21, 23.
Who when hee was reviled, reviled not againe, but com∣mitted
himselfe to him that judgeth righteously; and
with freedome of spirit I do heartily both praise the Lord, and
thanke you for your plaine dealig with mee in any thing
wherein as you professe, you really and singly intended my spi∣ritua
good, and pray the Lord to give you repentance, and to
pardon you in every thing wherein in this transaction you
have done otherwise.
Thus with the reall demnstration of y true love and affe∣ction
to you, I crave your leave to goe on to the answearing of
your Book, earnestly desiring that if yet after all wee cannot
agree in judgement and opinion, we may still close together in
heart and affection, which (whatever the event shall prove)
shall alwayes bee the desire, prayer, and endeavour of

