


Madam.
SOme Authors call their Books their Chil∣dren, all sure must own them for their Conceptions. This of mine is but a Daughter, begotten then, when yours lay sick at Dorchester; and born, by the help and Midwifery of your obliging and Testimo∣nial Letter, from Spargrave. But, having been sick almost as long as yours hath been well, she is but slenderly grown, and none other but a plain English Girle. But I hope what she wants in learning, she will make up with com∣mendable simplicity; and that although her worth may come short, yet her honesty will hold out. I know very well, Madam, that you need neither her▪ nor my service. 'Tis both of us that want your Testimony, or rather, that give you our humble thanks that we want it not.

My Daughter is now going abroad to service, and she most gratefully acknowledgeth, that no∣thing could have more encouraged her, to seek her fortune, than the hope she hath, of her being the better accepted where-ever she comes, because so Grave a Matron, and so Honourable a Lady, as you, Madam, have passed your Word, that hitherto she hath been just and true in her deal∣ing. The Hebrews, Madam, do express the Female Sex by a word whose root signifies to forget, and the Male by Memory. And (what∣soever Mr. Loss his judgment of me may be) I was willing so far to have approved my self Masculine, as remembring that I also am a Man, and do erre, to hae devoted my Daughter (though she speaks of wrong, and injuries done to myself, and their just vindication) unto oblivion and forgetfulness, and hence (which would have been monstrous in Naturals, but is frequent enough in Artificials) this Child stuck at the Birth a∣bove twelve months; and if my threatning to be out against him in print, if my showing unto my Adversary himself what it was that I had against him; if my leaving my Papers with him three or four weeks together, many months since, and that before any body had perused them; if my answering of his Latine Letter, in Latine, as they are both appended at the end of this Book; if my imploying others to speak with him▪ and to demand satisfaction; if my sending

for himself, but to no purpose; if my speaking with his own Son, and making him sensible, but in vain; if my offering to refer it to whom he pleased; if my naming his nearest & best friends; if my readiness to appeal to four Physicians, my naming them, the time, the place, and giv∣ing him notice of it, but he would not come: If any, if all of these could have prevailed to have made him sensible of a publick shame like to befal him, or could have awakened his Conscience, and made him sensible, that in justice he ought to have given me all the satisfaction he could for my wounded credit; this Daughter of mine had proved abortive, and had never seen light: But when my patience and forbearance could work nothing, not so much as a visit from him, or once speaking to me about the business, when I perceived that he still justified himself, and that my not-coming out against him, was interpreted as proceeding rather from the consciousness of my own impotency and guilt, than of his. At this throw at last the Child was born; and whether she will prove a plague to her Parent, and a dishonour; or may serve to cherish, and nurse up his wounded Reputation and Credit, Time will show. Mr. Loss is angry with her, that she is not a Scholar, and doth not speak Latine, perhaps it is because she speaks too plain English: but I have promised him a Son here∣after, that hath been at School and can write

Latine. In the interim, I tell him, that in my opiniom, one Mother-tongue is enough for a Daughter; besides, she is to wait upon you, Madam, and therefore she must not speak an unknown Tongue, she pleads more for Truth than Learning; and appeals rather to your Vertues, than the abilities of some great Scho∣lar. She designs not any Feast unto the Learn∣ed, nor to visit the Universities, as Mr. Loss his Latine Observations, who himself yet never was there, at least as a member of either of them, but determines to make out Matters, Fact, and to prove by witness, that he hath not truly stated your Daughter's case. To contend with him whether He or I can write best Latine, would be pedantick, and too much like himself, for he hath the wit to tell us that formerly he was a petty School-Master at Dantzik; and he wisely relates this himself, upon as wise an oc∣casion, in his 26th Obs. and 1st Book; that the world may know, that he cannot only write Latine, but teach it for a need; and that Phy∣sicians may see the reason, why he is so Magiste∣rial in consultations. To vie with him, whether He or I be the abler Physitian, would be as un∣worthy Me as Him; for this is a query too par∣ticular, and very unhandsome between any two, and is not wont to be agitated but between en∣vious and proud persons: for Scholars disputes should be about things, and not about persons.

Yea, and although in the case of a particular person, Physicians may differ in their opinion, and perhaps each think he hath all reason on his side; yet it is very base, for either of these to begin to print this case, and to condemn the o∣ther, were he never so guilty. For Example, This Gentleman, without giving me the least Item thereof, calls me to a publick account, for a private Consultation, and says of me, that in the particular case of your Daughter, my Pra∣ctice had neither Method nor Reason in it. For, though it be against the Laws of Logick, to infer a general conclusion, for a particu∣lar instance. Yet how prone are people, and apt to conclude that all my Practice is such? until I some ways vindicate my self from this asper∣sion? Answering his Objections, and chasti∣sing his Insolency, by canvasing his Art and Method, in my Animadversions: and divul∣ging either his, or my own ignorance therein. The Matters of Art, which I have toucht on in this Book, they are not very intricate or dispu∣table: I am confident, Madam, you your self can easily understand, and judg of them, as they are presented to you in English, much more Scholars, if any of them think them worthy of their perusal, though they be not here in La∣tine. For, the Matters of Fact which I am to prove, by your self, your Daughter, and all that were with her in her sickness, to

Countrey People in a Countrey Town, these of necessity were to be put in English; and to have put the other in Latine, would have made the Book a Linsey-Woolsey piece of work. Any one that reads, may judg, though he understand no Latine, whether Mr. Loss hath writ truth or falshood; whether he doth not often mistake, and sometimes contradict himself; whether he understood some of those Authors himself quotes; whether he hath done prudently, or so much as honestly, so to divulge all his Patients names, as he hath done; courting and flattering some, shaming others, and grosly abusing some o∣thers: whether he loves and always honoured Medicus Alius, that hath privately so many times slandered him, and at length publickly put him (as far as in him lay) to an open shame. These things, Madam, are as plain, and as easie to be understood here, as the English Tongue; they need not be judged by a Conclave of the Learned, or a Colledge of Physicians. Alas, our private concerns put together, are not worthy of their taking notice of, and therefore I have not Dedicated my Book to any of them, but to you, Madam; whose Testimony will be most prevalent before a Jury of good Men and Women in and about Dorchester: The very same, that but a little while since, when that most worthy Gentleman your Husband Thomas Moore Esq was High Sheriff of our County, were witnesses

of both your Magnificence and Bounty, and how handsomly ye managed and carried off with applause that publick solemnity, with what No∣bleness and Grandeur it was acted, and yet with what Courteous Affability likewise, and Prudence. To you, Madam, that are a Gentle∣woman of no ordinary Abilities, and that have a Ladyes skill in Physick also, and that make use of better Physicians than either of us; To you, who have done nothing else towards our Controversy, but given me a civil answer unto a Letter which I sent unto you, touching parti∣culars in your Daughter's sickness; To you, that by better parts, and a greater reach, can pierce deeper, and see farther into the depth of a Physicians parts and honesty, than many o∣thers, who are easily imposed upon, with the formality of some self-will'd and self-conceited Gentleman, who must be adored and bowed un∣to, whether he be right or wrong; To you, that are in your self alone a Complication of Witnesses; for many that were then about you, when your Daughter lay sick, both friends and servants can witness, if there were need thereof, that what you have writ in your Letter to me, is truth; To you, that being the tender and very affectionate Mother of our Patient, made it your business to look after your Daugh∣ter, and to attend unto what we said or did: you were present therefore, and would be so to

all our Consultations and Discourses; and heard both parties, and considered them well. To you, that when I beg'd of you, rather to follow Mr. Loss his advice, than mine; urging, that he was an Elder Physician, and your older Ac∣quaintance of many years standing, whereas un∣til that day wherein you sent for me, you had never seen my face; answered that you would side with me because you thought I spake most Reason; which was probably the founda∣tion of Mr. Loss his writing this Observation of your Daughter's case against me: To you Madam, whom the whole Country round about do honour and respect; To you, of whom Mr. Loss himself hath given this Character in print, in his 25th Observ. and 3d Book: That you are a Lady not only of great Birth, but of greater Vertue, being fully accomplished and adorned with all the comliness of Vertues: in which he hath spoken so much commendation of you, that he hath left nothing for me to add, but that I believe you highly deserve it. Lastly, To you Madam, whom while every body honours, I am much more bound so to do, and whilst I live, readily to acknowledg my self,
Madam,

