



Most Honoured Cousin,
I Am bound to you since a long time with such particular Obligations, and my Duty ties me to you with such strict Bands, that there is no Man in the World, besides the own Brothers of my
Dear Spouse but I ought to prefer you before him. I have dedicated to them the two first. Books of the World Bewitch'd, and amongst all my Friends, whose Names I intend to prefix to each part of the French Translation, I have made choice of you for this, that is, the first of all, and going to be publish'd. It's above thirty years since I have the Honour to be acquainted with you, and about fifteen, since I am allied to you by your Marriage with the Lady Hen∣riette Fullenia, the nearest Cousin of my Spouse, both from Father and Mother's side. It's likewise very near twenty years, since I was so happy as to see you a Mem∣ber of the first College of the States of Friesland, on whose direction the good or had success of my Affairs depended at that time. When occasion has offer'd it self, I receiv'd from you Testimonies of a just favour and an ingenious distincti∣on. Your Marriage tied more strictly the Bands of the Friendship you had for me; and I have had the pleasure to see it lasting to this day. You gave me late∣ly an obliging proof of it, when you were pleas'd to present from me to his Highness,
Prince Henry Casimir of Nassau, He∣reditary Governor of our common Coun∣try, &c. my Friesland's Divinity; which I had taken the liberty to dedicate to him. For I was not in a capacity of presenting it my self; because the great Employments of his Higess calling him at every mo∣ment to different parts of his Govern∣ment, I could not be sure so much as an hour of the place, where I might meet with him. This circumstance procur'd me the Honour of receiving by the next Post a Letter from that Prince, contain∣ing very express Marks of his Affection; in which he also declar'd, that my Dedi∣cation had not been unpleasant to him. But I have still another reason that in∣gages me to present you with the Transla∣tion of this Work, with which you seem'd very much pleas'd. It's your particular Concern in the Affairs of the Churches, in whose Tongue 'tis written, and in ge∣neral in all those of our Holy Religion: To this you incessantly apply your self with a Zeal worthy of Imitation and Ad∣miration, discharging still in the Walloon Church of your City, the Honourable Fun∣ction of Elder, which you have formerly
discharg'd many times; as well as in the Church of your Mother Tongue. Farther, I thought fit to cause this Trea∣tise to be Translated my self, lest some others should undertake it, having been advis'd, that the Translation of it had been begun in this Town, nd elsewhere, without my knowledge; which however is happen'd, but since the late Synod of North-Holland; the proceedings that were made against me, having only been of use to excite the curiosity of the pub∣lick, as to this matter. And therefore I have prevented the designs of those, who intended to make this Translation, and provided at the same time, lest any should appear under my name, without my consent, and my revising of it, as I may assert that I have done this. It comes from a Frenchman, who has carefully apply'd himself to the study of our Tongue, and seems to me to understand his own ve∣ry well. For tho' I am not conver∣sant with it so far, as to have Transla∣ted my own Book my self: yet I think that I am able to judge, that I should not have better succeeded, nor more ex∣presly have render'd my own Thoughts,
if I had been in a capacity of underta∣king it. Besides, this Translation being almost verbal, because the quality of the Work required it; It is so much the more difficult, and worthy that its de∣fects should be over-look'd. I think at least, that no other difference will be perceiv∣ed, betwixt it and the Original, but that of the Tongue; no real change having been made in it. I own that several matters of Fact have been added, and inserted in divers places of this Book; but no∣thing has been left out, so that the Rea∣der shall have no occasion of complain¦ing of his Losses; but rather of being glad of the new advantages that ac∣crue to him. I also have added after the Preface, an Abridgement of the whole Work, as a preliminary, that gives a general view and notion of it, inclu∣ding in substance, the Contents of the three last Books, that are to be succes∣sively Translated; the second being alrea∣dy far advanc'd. I only earnestly wish, that you may be as well satisfied with my Dedication, as I am with this Translati∣on. So that all that I have to do, is to commend you, and all your Friends and
Relations, to the Grace of God, which I heartily beg of you all. But lest any French Copy, of any of these Four Books, should be publish'd under my name, be∣sides, those that are printed in this Townt for Peter Rotterdam, the first of which is dedicated to you; I declare that I own no other, but such as are subscribed by me, as this is, wherein I assure you with my own Hand, that I am,
Most Honoured Cousin,

Was Subscribed in the Original, Amsterdam, July 18, 1693.
