



SIR,
WHEN first I apply'd my Thoughts to write the Story of these Times, altho' I were not ignorant at this Laborious Work of mine, what∣er it were, would be obnoxious to va∣us Censures, This however was my fort, that I know my self spurred ward, not by Ambition or vain Glory, t by the Reward attending a good Con∣ence: And I was in hopes, that the blic Animosities being allay'd and inguish'd by a long series of Time, the ve of Truth would one day get the up∣per hand; more especially, You reigning King, who by the particular Favour of Heaven, having subdued the Monsters of Rebellion, and eradicated the Fuel of those Factions that have long laid us waste, became the Restorer of Peace to France; and with Peace have linkt two Things together thought incompatible by others, Liberty and Soveraign Power. Add to this, that we first set our Hands to this Attempt, at a time, when we could not but bewail the Causes of the Civil War invelopp'd in the Private Affections and Desires of Ambitious Men, and all hopes of Peace excluded from Public Counsel

and Advice; and for that reason, thought it so much the more lawful for us to speak freely, yet on this side Envy or detraction, naked Truth. But as this Work went forward, which being begun in the Camp, amidst the confused Noises of Trumpets and Sieges, grew up to Bulk in your Court, and now among the Hur∣ry and Clamours of the Barr, and the delays of Travel, has reach'd your Reign, I perceiv'd my Inclinations far different from what they were at the beginning. For then my Mind intent on the Variety and Importance of the Trans∣actions to be related, and seeking Respite from the Public Calamities, was wholly taken up in Meditation and Writing. And this has brought a fear into my thoughts, that what I wrote, surround∣ed with the clattering of Armes, and which might then perhaps be acceptable, or at least not unworthy of Excuse, will now, that our Commotions are appeas'd, not only be less pleasing, but offensive to the morose and difficult Ears of some Persons: it being the general default of Human Kind, that men are more prone to do ill, than to hear of Evil Acti∣ons committed. But in regard it is a Law most exactly to be observ'd in Histo∣ry, for the Author not to presume to ut∣ter Falshoods; yet on the other side, to be bold and daring in the delivery of Truth, I made it my business with all my might to dig for Truth, abscon∣ded often, sometimes more profoundly ingulph'd in the Animosities of contend∣ing Parties; and thus dig'd up, deliver it sincerely to Posterity: no less careful, left prevaricating in so just a Cause, through a preposterous Affectation of pru∣dence I should injure the Felicity of Your Time, but seldom known, wherein every man is permitted to think what he plea∣ses, and to speak what he thinks. For my own part, how far I am from Dissi∣mulation, I hope is well known to those who are acquainted with my Person and my Manners. Nor have I liv'd so ob∣scurely, that the most Partial can be ignorant of my candid and upright deal∣ing in Public Actions. For after once Your Prowess and Your Clemency had re∣duc'd us to a peaceful Reconciliation, I so absolutely forgot all personal Inju∣ries, if any had been offer'd, and so free∣ly laid aside the least Resentment of 'em both privately and publicly, that I may justly assure my self, that no man will have occasion to reproach my defect of Equanimity and Moderation in what re∣lates to the Remembrance of things past. I might call those to witness, whose names will frequently occur in these following Books; who when they have wanted my Assistance in any thing rela∣ting to that Imployment by You entrusted to my management, have always found me ready to do 'em any kindness that might not brand me with Corruption. What therefore upright Judges ought to do, when they debate the Lives and For∣tunes of Men, that did we also, when first we undertook this History: often in∣terrogating our Conscience, whether it were touch'd with a smarter sence than usual, that might turn us aside from the fair Path which we propos'd to follow. To that purpose have I soften'd, as much as in me lies, the Harshness of some Things by smoothness of Expression; I have every where suspended my judgment

and avoided all Digressions: Lastly, I have observ'd a plain and naked man∣ner of Writing, that by my Stile I might shew my self no less exempt from Disguise and Ostentation, than from the Partialities of Hatred and Favour. On the other side, I beg both of my own Countrymen and Foreigners, that shall peruse these Sheets, that they bring no∣thing of Prejudice along with 'em, nor pronounce sentence upon this Labour of Mine, till they have diligently read it over. I will not deny, but that it is a Task superiour to my strength; and that the due performance if it requires many Ac∣complishments which in me are wanting. But the Public Good and my ardent De∣sire to serve my own Generation and suc∣ceeding Ages, prevail'd with me beyond all other Considerations; and when I consulted the satisfaction of that passion, I rather chose to be accompted inconsi∣derate than ungrateful. Nor am I so anxious for what may be thought of my Sincerity, in reference to which I am not Conscious of any thing that can be laid to my charge; or of my Industry, in ex∣cusing the defects of which I despair not so much of your Clemency, or the Candor of the Reader, as I am afraid, lest what I make the Greatest part of my History, may be tedious and irksom to most Peo∣ple, who being out of Danger, as they believe, themselves, or are either not so just in censuring the Miseries, or else over-remiss and unconcern'd for the Calamities of others. For to those other Mischiefs, with which this Age, in Ho∣stility with Vertue, abounds, that fatal Discord has joyn'd it self, occasion'd by Religion, which, for almost this whole whole Century, has turmoil'd the Chri∣stian world with continual Wars, and will continue still to vex, unless timely Remedies, and other than hitherto have been employ'd, be carefully apply'd by those whose chiefest Interest it is to ma∣nage that Affair. For we have learnt by Experience, that Fire and Sword, that Exilement and Proscriptions have rather exasperated, than cur'd the Di∣stemper deeply rooted in the Mind: and therefore not to be reliev'd or heal'd by Medicines that only work upon the Body, but by sound Doctrine, and sedulous In∣struction, which being gently infus'd, perswades an easie passage to the Mind. All other things are subject to the San∣ctions of the Civil Magistrate, and conse∣quently the Sovereign Prince; Religion only admits not of Dominion, and ne∣ver enters the Seat of human Judgment, but when rightly prepar'd by a well grounded Opinion of the Truth, assisted by the accession of Divine Grace. Tor∣ments prevail not to enforce it; they but confirm the Obstinate, rather than subdue, or perswade. What the Soics have so haughtily boasted of their Wis∣dom, much more justly may we assert of Religion; that where People are deeply affected with it, Torments and Grief are little fear'd or valu'd, and all other In∣conveniences whatever, are overwhelm'd and vanquish'd by that same Fortitude, inspir'd by Zeal and Devotion. All the sufferings that Mankind is liable to un∣dergo can never terrify 'em. All the Misfortunes and Calamities that are dreadful to Human Frailty, they never complain of Enduring. They know their strength, and whether falsely or truly, if

once assur'd of Heavenly support, they be∣lieve themselves sufficiently able to bear the burthen. Let the Executioner stand at their Elbow; let the Tormentor appear with his Irons and his kindled Fires, it will not shake their Perseverance: nor will they consi∣der what they are to suffer, but what they are to do. The source of their Felicity remains within 'em; and whatever happens from without is but a fly-blow, and only grazes the surface of the skin. If Epicurus, bran∣ded among other Philosophers for the im∣purity of his life, had such a high notion of a wise Man, that burning in Phalaris's Bull, he would cry out, 'Tis pleasant, and concerns not me at all; can we be∣lieve a character less signal due to their Courage, who a hundred years since contemn'd and slighted all manner of Tor∣ments, all the inventions of Cruelty for Religions sake? O that they would not be the same again, upon as terrible a Prose∣cution of the same inhumanities? 'Tis worth the while to hear what one among the rest both said and did, when ty'd to the Stake on purpose to be burnt to death; how first he fell upon his knees and sung a Psalm, which the Flames and Smoak could hardly interrupt; and when the Executi∣oner, to mitigate his terror, would have kindl'd the Fire behind his back, Come hither, said he, and kindle it before my Face: for had I fear'd a little scorching, I had never been brought to this Place, which it was in my power to have avoided. In vain therefore, men by Torments labour to suppress the Zeal of those that meditate innovations in Religion; which do but rather harden their minds to sufferings more painful, and more daring undertakings. For when others have sprung up out of the Ashes of o∣thers, and that their number has increas'd, their Patience turns to Fury: no longer Suppliants, as before, they then begin to be importunate and trouble some Expostu∣lators and Demanders; and they who fled from cruelties before, have of their own accords betaken themselves to Arms. This we have seen in France for forty years to∣gether, and little less in Germany. And things at length were brought to that ex∣tremity, that the growing Mischief could not be lopt off with the punishment of two or Three, which at first perhaps might be securely done. But when once it had or'e spread whole People, whole Nations, and consequently the greatest part of Europe, in vain the Civil Sword is then made use of; it requires the weapons of spiritual warfare to mow down the Harvest of Op∣pression. They ought to be instructed, and invited to friendly Colloquies and Conferences, where Equity and Modera∣tion preside. This did St. Austin, writ∣ing to Proculianus, a Sectary of the Donatian stamp. He it was, who also in∣terceeded for 'em to Donatus, Proconsul of Africa, that they might not be put to death. Believing it became the professors of true Religion not to recede from their prepetual resolution of surmounting Evil by Acts of Lenity. And in another place, he writes to the President Caecili∣anus, that the Aposteme of sacrilegious vanity was rather to be cur'd by impressions of Fear, than to be cut off by the Sword of Revengeful persecutions. Therefore in that splendid Epistle to Boni∣face, he adds, that in Causes of this na∣ture, where by reason of the Fatal scissures of Dissention, not this or that single Person

runs a hazard, but whole Communities of people lye liable to ruin, there ought to be a Relaxation of Severity; and that the greater evils were to be redressd by the more indulgent applications of Charity. Which Opinion so far prevail'd in the Church, that the sentence was more than once transcrib'd into Gratian's Decree. St. Austin therefore, a Person both of a pious and meek spirit, thus delivers his Sen∣timents, that the Career of those Mischiefs was not to be stopt by rigour, by vi∣olence or domineering Authority; and more advantageous progresses would be made, rather by instructing than com∣manding; rather by admonition, than menaces; and that multitudes of sinners were after that manner gently to be dealt with, severity only to be inflicted upon the transgressions of a Few. Or if they who are superior in command are sometimes con∣strain'd to make use of threats, that they ought to be utter'd with a real grief and sorrow for the miscarriage of the Offender; and that the Terror of Vengeance should e deriv'd from Scripture; not to render their own authority formidable, but that it may appear to be the awful voice of God threatning his Judgments upon Trans∣gressors from their Lips; as he writes in his Epistle to Aurelius, the Bishop. And certainly, if we have a love for Truth, f necessity we must acknowledge, that  all the ancient Monuments of sacred Antiquity we find not any approv'd exam∣ple extant of capital punishment inflicted upon Sectaries; and that the Primitive hurch had always in abomination the ef∣sion of Blood. Or if such an accident ll out at any time, the Bishops truly pi∣s, manifested still their detestation of the Fact. As appear'd in Priscillian, who having spread the Poyson of his pernicious Doctrine among the Churches of Gaul, but more especially in Aquitaine, together with his Followers, was in the year 383. put to Death at Treves, by Maximus, otherwise a good Prince, only that he had usurp'd the Empire from Gratian, whom he depriv'd of his Life at Lyons. The St. Martin had obtain'd a promise from the Emperor, that nothing Bloody or Cruel should be acted against the Guilty; and had earnestly exhorted Itacius, and some other sticklers to desist from their accusations. For all the rest of the Bishops blam'd the violence of their proceeding, as unjust and unbecoming Christians. And tho Itacius, after the fact perfidi∣ously committed, fearing the scandal of it would fall upon his Shoulders, had with∣drawn himself; yet afterwards he was condemn'd by Theognistus. Nor was it without great reluctancy, and by con∣straint of pressing necessity, that St. Mar∣tin could be perswaded to hold Commu∣nion with the Itaian Party. In like manner St. Ambrose, who was sent at the same time to Maximus by Valentini∣an, the Brother of Gratian who was put to Death, testifies in his relation, that when he was at Treves, he refrain'd the company of those Bishops that sided with Itacius, who demanded that they who deviated from the Faith might be punished with Death. Afterwards, when those hair-brain'd Prelates had prevail'd with Maximus to send certain Tribunes into Spain with Plenipotentiary Power to enquire after Hereticks, and being appre∣hended to punish 'em with loss of Life and Confiscation of Estates, the same

St. Martin never left the Emperor, till he had obtain'd a revocation of that in∣humane Decree. For it was the care of that pious Bishop to set free, not only the Christians, who were to be molested un∣der that pretence, but even the Hereticks themselves. Foreseeing in his mind, that that same Tempest, were it not diverted, would cause a great depopulation of the Faithful: there being then but little dif∣ference made between the sorts of Men, when only the Eye was judge of the di∣stinction, and Hereticks were mark'd out rather by the paleness of their Looks, or by their Habit, than by their Faith and Doctrine.
However, after Priscillian was put to death, the Heresie propagated by himself, was so far from being er adicated by the severity of his punishment, that it gathered strength and spread it self more and more; and his Followers who before had honour'd him as a Holy Person, began to adore him as a Martyr, remov'd the bodies of those that suffer'd, into Spain, and solemniz'd their Obsequies with extraordinary Pomp. Nay, they carry'd on their Superstition to that degree, that it was accounted a most sa∣cred Oath to swear by Priscillian: which occasion'd so cruel and so long continu'd a Division between the Bishops of the Gallican Church, that fifteen years Bloody contention could hardly put an end to; while the people of God, and all good men were in the mean time expos'd to Affront and Obloquy. Which words as often as I read in Sulpitius Severus, who wrote the History of that Age with equal Elo∣quence and Fidelity, I call to mind the years of my childhood, when at the begin∣ning of the Commotions about Religion, men were mark'd out by the Eye for Slaughter; not upon any suspicion of their manners, or of the corruption of their past Lives; but only out of a particular malice to their looks, or the fashion of their Clathes; and what with their heats of Contention and Animosities, what with favours ill bestow'd, the pusillani∣mous Fear, Inconstancy, Drowsiness, Sloth and Arrogancy of those that sat at the Helm of Affairs, the Kingdom was rent into Factions, and Religion it self pushe almost to the brink of the Precipice by the Troubles and Agitations of the State.
After St. Marcin's time, more modera∣tion was us'd in the Church toward those that deviated from the Faith; whom they only either Banish'd or Fin'd, but always spar'd their Lives. So that in the year 1060, when certain of the followers of Berengarius Archdeacon of Angiers went about sowing his Doctrine in the Territo∣ries of Liege, Juliers, and other parts of the Low Countries, Bruno, Archbishop of Treves, thought it sufficient to expel 'em out of his Diocess, never thirsting af∣ter their Blood.
Nor were they, after this, more severely handl'd by the Church, till the time of the Vaudois; against whom when the most exquisite of Torments little prevail'd, but that the mischief was rather exasperated by the remedy unseasonably appli'd, while their number encreas'd, compleat Armies were set on foot, and a War of no less bulk was decreed against 'em, than that which our Ancestors wag'd against the Saracens; the event of which was, that Murdred, Massacred, Chas'd from their habitati∣ons, Plunder'd of their Goods, and de∣spoyl'd of their Estates and Signiories, their

Persecutors gain'd a depopulated Country, but not a Convert that was thereby con∣vinc'd of his error. Some there were who had defended themselves at first by force of Armes; who being vanquish'd by supe∣rior power, fled into Provence, and the Alps adjoyning to the jurisdiction of France, where they met with a sort of skulking holes, wherein to shelter their Lives and Doctrine: others retir'd into Calabria, where for a long time they settl'd themselves, even till the Pontificate of Pius IV. Some wander'd into Germany, and fix'd their Habitati∣ons in Bohemia, Poland and Livonia; while another Remnant, turning West∣ward, sought for sanctuary in England. And from some one of that number 'tis thought that John Wickliffe descended, who for a long time taught Theology at Oxford, where after various Contentions and hot Disputes about Religion, he died a natural Death, above 300 years ago. Natural indeed., and yet more fatal to him then his common mortality: for that several years after his decease, the Magistrate order'd him to be taken up again, arraign'd him, and caus'd his Bones to be publickly burnt. After that time started up several other Sects that have continu'd till our Age, wherein after the severity of Torments in Vain experi∣enc'd, the contest flam'd out from private Disputes into open Wars, and Rebellions of numerous multitudes, both in Germany, England and France; uncertain whether o the greater detriment of the publick ranquillity, or Religion it self: such a chism being form'd and corroborated, nd too long neglected by those, in whose power it was, and whom it behov'd to have apply'd proper Remedies in time.
These Things, of so great consequence, I have not so largely insisted upon, with a design to revive that so often harrass'd Question, Whether Hereticks ought to be punish'd with death; which neither my Time nor my Profession will admit of. My aim is only to shew, that those Prin∣ces have acted most prudently and most conformably to the Institutions and Maxims of the Primitive Church, who have ra∣ther chosen to extinguish the conflagra∣tions of War about Religion, with dis∣advantageous conditions of an amicable composure, then to continue the desolati∣ons of an obstinate contest, not to be determin'd but by the uncertain chance of absolute Conquest. This Ferdinand, a most prudent Prince foresaw; who hav∣ing learnt by experience, in the furious and dangerous Wars of Germany, un∣der his Brother Charles the Fifth, the ill success of the Emperors Armes against the Protestants, no sooner attain'd the Imperial Diadem himself, but he re-estab∣lish'd the Peace of Religion by a solemn Decree, which he afterwards ratisi'd se∣veral times. And father observing, that greater progresses were made in matters of Religion by friendly Confe∣rences, as he himself had experienc'd in the Dyets held at Ratisbonne and Wormes, he resolv'd a little before his death, and immediately after the breaking up of the Council of Trent, to follow the advice of his Son Maximilian, a Prince of great wisdom; and to satisfie the Protestants who were not at that Assembly, design'd

to have granted 'em another Conference: In order to which, the Emperour made choice of George Casander, a person no less moderate than learned, in a friendly Conjunction with the Protestant Doctors, to examin the Articles of the Confession of Auspurgh, that were in Dispute. But the Crazie Constitution of that worthy man, and the soon ensu∣ing Death both of the one and the other, e'd Germany the Fruit of so Noble a Determination. After the Example of the Germans, the Nobility of Po∣land cook the same Course in their Re∣publick.
 Immanuel Philibert, Duke of ▪ after he was restor'd to the an∣cient Possession of his lost Territories, by vertue of the Pece concluded with us, having rashly engag'd himself, to his great Dammage, in a War with the Vaudois of Piemont, (whether it were to raise his Reputation in Italy, or to gratifie others at the Expence of his own Jeopardy, it matters not) made amends for his mistake by a Timely Repentance; granting the free Exercise of their Re∣ligion to his, otherwise, Innocent People, and afterwards no less religiously obser∣ving the Articles which he had conclu∣ded with 'em.
I now come to what concerns our selves, and am going about to handle a sore, which I am very much afraid will draw no small inconvenience upon me, for only lay∣ing my Finger upon it. But since I have enter'd into the discourse, that I may dispatch in a word, I shall take the Li∣berty, allow'd under your Reign, frank∣ly and ingenuously to declare, That War is by no means a Lawful way to extirpate Heresie out of the Church. For the Pro∣testants of this Kingdom, whose Number and Credit daily lessen'd in time of Peace, have always gather'd strength in times of War and Division; and whether out of a preposterous Zeal, or through Am∣bition, and a Desire of Innovation, it has been the pernicious Errour of our States-men to renew their Designs of ex∣tirpating the Protestants by Wars often inauspiciously begun, and as frequently unluckily compos'd▪ to the great hazard of our Religion. What need of Words? The thing it self speaks loud enough. For after various Troubles and Commotions, and during those, innumerable Cities, in every Corner of the Kingdom, wrested from the Public, no sooner was Peace restor'd by the Restitution of those Places in 1563. but 'twas a wonder to see what a suddain Serenity once more overspread the Nation. How joyful was that Four Years Interval to all Good Men! While our Religion sate safely protected, and most Excellent Laws, of which France will never have cause to repent, were made by a most upright Moderator of Justice and Equity. But then, the Fa of France again declining, we began  grow weary of the Publick Security esta∣blish'd by those wholesom Constitutions, and spurning from us Peaceful Coun∣sels, threw our selves into a War,  only Fatal to the whole Realm, but  the Advisers of it also. They who were present at the Ʋnfortunate Conference at Baionne, are sufficiently sensible what persons I mean. For from that  forward, while we were still deluded and cajol'd by foreign Fraud, all things we carried on by Artifice and Force of Arm

Then it was, that the Duke of Alva being sent with a Potent Army into Flanders, after Margaret of Parma, who had govern'd those Provinces with Extraordinary Moderation, had by tacit compulsion laid down the Regency; then it was that Alva mingled all things with Fire and Sword; erected Fortresses in every Corner, sapp'd the Public Liberty with unheard of Impositions for the sup∣port of the War, and breaking in upon their Immunities, reduc'd opulent Cities to meagre Poverty, like strong Bodies e∣maciated by depriving 'em of Nourish∣ment. But these harsh and unadvised Counsels, the fruits of Precipitation, were attended with the despair of the Peo∣ple, and lastly with Revolts. Which how∣ever for a time appeas'd, ended in this at length, that the larger and more a∣bounding Part, and most commodious for Navigation, wherein the Wealth of those Provinces chiefly consists, being as it were mangl'd and dismember'd from the rest of the Body, acknowledges now no So∣veraign Authority, but that of the States General, and wages auspicious War with all the Force of Spain. Which misfortune of the Spaniards, Francis Balduin, one of the most famous Lawyers of this Century, fearing long before, ad∣iz'd the Peers of the Low Countries to petition Philip, that he would vouchsafe their former Liberty of Conscience to the Protestants every where turmoil'd and harass'd; and sur∣ease the Rigour of Torments and In∣isitions after suspected Persons. And  this purpose he wrote a Treatise in French, whorein he prov'd by dint of enuous Arguments, that the Affairs of Religion, disquieted and tormented by restless Controversies, would sooner be compos'd by Conferences, and an equili∣brium observ'd among the Dissenters, than by violence and force of Arms. Where∣in if they persever'd, he foresaw that the strength of the Protestants, then but inconsiderable, and here and there dis∣pers'd, would be united by Factions; and that from verbal Contests they would be∣take themselves to Arms and Revolt. I have the more willingly recited this Prophecy of a Low Country-man, con∣cerning the Low Countries, more espe∣cially to your Majesty, for that he, ha∣ving at first embrac'd the Protestant Faith, yet afterwards upon diligent per∣usal of the Fathers, having alter'd his Opinion, nevertheless preserv'd the same Moderation of mind; so as not to be transported with an Implacable Hatred, as many are, against those whose Do∣ctrine he had relinquish'd; but by a rare Example of Christian Charity, foreign to this Age, admonish'd by his own Errour, to compassionate the failings of others, and to make it his whole Business▪ that what had been done amiss out of preci∣pitancy, and desire of innovation, might be redress'd by reviving the Practice of better Antiquity. With these sentiments and resolutions returning out of Germa∣ny into France, he found his Counsel no less prudent than pious, readily embrac'd by your most serene Father, in whose Court he held an honourable Employ∣ment; sometimes admitted into Council, and made choice of to take care of your Natural Brother's Education.
Away then with those Ostentatious Vaunts, to the Dishonour of the Gallick

Name, so frequent in the mouths of ma∣ny aspiring to a higher strain of Zeal then other Men, and boasting that they never subscrib'd to any Treatise of Peace with Hereticks. Let 'em consider, what became at length of all their egregious Counsels, and lament at leisure the loss of so many Flourishing Provinces, and the Ruous Dissipation of their own Estates consum'd by Tumult and Sedition, o seuster'd by Conquest. How glad   be now to learn from our Ex∣ample, what with so much Affectation they before detested! What would they  to redeem the Loss of so many Years, which had they profitably employ'd a∣gainst the Common Enemies of Christen∣dom, they had expell'd those Infidels long e're this out of Hungary, and both Mauritaia's, to their Immortal Ho∣nour, and no less to the Advantages of Profit.
But I am afraid, the same Impru∣dence which we blame in others, may be justly laid to our Charge, while either spurr'd on by our own precipitate Fury, or push'd forward by the Evil Counsels of those I have already mention'd, we have pamper'd the Occasions of most pernicious Disturbances; wherein we have seen our Cities sackt, our Churches levell'd with the Earth, Churches which the Rage of former Commotions spar'd; whole Pro∣vinces laid waste; old Animosities, that Peace had lull'd asleep, reviv'd; Suspi∣tions encreas'd, and Arms laid down to be resm'd with more Implacable Ran∣cour. Yet after all these foul Enormi∣ties committed, at length a Peace was concluded, which the more pretious it ought to have been, so much the sooner was it violated by an Act, scarce ever to be Expiated, unless Heaven, and that is all we dare to wish, would be pleas'd to bury it in Eternal Oblivion; I mean the Massacre perpetrated two Years af∣ter, wherein, Great Sir, Your self, of old by Heaven design'd to re-establish the Languishing Affairs of France, had like to have been envelopp'd.
After we were got clear of this same Formidable Caphareus, we fell in among several other formidable Rocks, against which with equal Imprudence we Ship∣wrackt our selves, Heaven's incens'd Wrath not long procrastinating, but re∣venging the Impieties of France by the Death of a Generous Prince, misguided rather by the pernicious Counsels of others, then sway'd by his own Inclina∣tions. What did his Successors? Re∣turning out of Poland, the Emperour Maximilian and the Republick of Ve∣nice, in whose Territories he rested by the way, besides their Magnificent En∣tertainments, gave him sincere and wholsom Counsel; which he contemning, at his entrance into the Kingdom, pre∣ferr'd a wicked War, which they dis∣swaded, and from which the suppliant Protestants implor'd him to desist, before a su'd for Peace. But soon repenting, he chang'd his mind, and at the end of three Years made an Edict of Pacifica∣tion, which he peculiarly call'd his own, and which was attended with a seven years profound Peace, unless it were for some slight Insurrections and Incursions of the Soldiers: otherwise, no Important Commotions on either side. Till certain Persons impatient of Ease, and not en∣during that Peace had brought the Af∣fairs

of France to such a Condition, as not to land in need of their Assistance, kindled an unseasonable and mounful War, to which the King perniciously ad-viz'd and by a fatal Mistak suffer'd himself to be drawn in: and though Your self at first were the pretended Mark, against which those Armes were turn'd, yet all their Fury fell at length on his own Head. I tremble, when I call to mind that Execrable Parricide, no less to the eternal Infamy of the Gallic Name, then to the indelible Infamy of those that so inhumanly chuckl'd at it: which doubt∣less had involv'd the Kingdom, and toge∣ther with the Kingdom, Religion it self  ruin past recovery, had not You, Great Sir, reserv'd for these unhappy times by e unlookt for Favour of the Almighty atching over our safety, like a well fix∣ed Column, supported the tottering Commonwealth; and by Your Courage opt the Headlong Wheel of Public Ca∣mity ready to crush in pieces what ever rowl'd over. Yet all this while have stified by Your own Example, that all ings else what ever are subject to Hu∣an Laws, but that Religion only, as have already said, is neither to be com∣ll'd or lorded over. For having been strain'd from Your Infancy to struggle th so many Adversities, in the midst Civil Wars; having been surrounded  several Armies at the same time; ter so many Battels won and lost (for was then equally mischievous to vanquish le vanquish'd) tho' you had all along fore, like a stout Soldier fighting in his nk, stood stedfa to your first Religion, to be shaken either with hopes or fears, length however at a time when you found that all things gave way to your Prowess, you surrenderd of your own accord to the humble Prayers of Your Subjects, and in the full Career of Victo∣ry, suffering Your self to be overcome, return'd to the Religion of Your An∣cesters. Yet after that, You still pre∣serv'd the same sedateness of Temper and Moderation of mind, which you had always experienc'd so beneficial to your self. For thus perswaded, you recall'd the Edicts which had been publish'd in despite of your Predecessors against the Protestants, and consequently against your self. And after a Peace, to your loud Fame concluded not only with your Subjects, but with Foreigners, you by a Third confirm'd two former Edicts in fa∣vour of the Protestants, whereby you re∣stor'd 'em to their Houses, their Estates and their Honours; and dignifi'd seve∣ral with the highest Employments in the Kingdom. For it was your firm belief, that all Animosities asswaging by degrees, the Concord ratifi'd by the Edicts, would be more readily observ'd among Dissenters in Opinions, and that Serenity and Tran∣quillity being restor'd to the Minds of Men, all Heats and Passions, like a scatter'd Storm, dispers'd, People would be able with more sedateness to discern what in Religion was best to be made choice of, as most conformable to Anti∣quity. And indeed, this was the Course which those Holy Fathers always thought most proper to take with those, who either out of hatred, or sway'd by Errour, ran astray from the Rule and Communion of the Church: to the end they might make it appear, that they were rather led by Charity then any desire of violent

Conquest. And upon these Considerations it was, that St. Augustin ever calls the Pelagians Brethren; and that Optatus of Milevum no less affably treats the Do∣natists. For this reason it was, that St. Cyprian, before them, was wont to say, that as it was his hearty wish, so it was always his advice and counsel to the Church, if possible, never to suffer any of the Brethren to perish; but to foster in her Bosom, like an Indulgent Mother, all without distinction, as one Body of People agreeing in their judgments. For indeed there are many among those that are separated from our Communion, who, that I may use St. Austin's words, would in order to their private Resolutions return, were once the Storms allay'd. But seeing 'em continue, or else fearing lest they should grow more outragious upon their reunion, they continue their Inclinations to advise and comfort the weak; still without sepa∣rating from their particular Congrega∣tions, defending till death, and by their Testimony upholding that Faith which they know to be taught in the Catholick Church. Yet all this while they patient∣ly suffer, for the sake of the Church's Peace, the Contumelies and Injuries of∣fer'd on both sides, and by their Example teach us, with what sort of Zeal, Since∣rity and Charity, God is to be serv'd.
Ʋpon these Considerations, as well taught by my own Experience, as con∣firm'd by Your Example, that 'tis my duty to consult the Peace of the Church, I have abstain'd from all bitterness of language: I mention the Protestants with honour; more especially those that excell'd in Learning. Nor have I conceal'd the Vices of our own People; as being of the same Opinion with all vertuous Men, that they are infinitely deceiv'd, who believe, in reference to the manifold Heresies which at this day torment the World, that there is a more Contagious Malignity in the evil Intentions and Artifices of their Teachers and Followers, than in our Vices and Impieties. And I am verily per∣swaded, to the best of my judgment, that the only way to provide against Both Mis∣chiefs, as well the Deviations of the Dis∣senting Party, as our own Enormities, would be to remove from the Church and State all manner of Traffic and Brokage; That Vertue be rewarded; that Person who excel in Piety, Doctrine, Learning, and Sobriety of Manners, such as have given proof of their Prudence and Mode∣ration, should be advanc'd to the most sacred Functions: that no new Ʋpstarts, persons of no value, but such as fear God and hate Covetousness, should be preferr'd to secubar Dignities, not for favour  by purchase, but only upon the recommen∣dation of their Vertues. Otherwise, when good and Bad are admitted without di∣stinction, 'tis evident that the Reign  Peace will be but of short continuance; and that those Cities of necessity must ∣rish, whose Rulers are not able to distin∣guish the Vertuous from the wicked;  suffer, according to the Proverb, wh the Bees should only enjoy, to be devour' by Drones.
There is nothing, Sir, more opposite  that Fidelity which in the first place  owe to God, and next to Your self, an the People subjected to your Empire,  that are entrusted with the Highest Em∣ployments and Preferments in the King∣dom, than the hope of filthy Gain. Were

which if we commence our entrance into the Magistracy, 'tis to be fear'd that that will prove the Cynosure of all our Thoughts and Cogitations; and that at length, blinded with Avarice, and laying aside all care of Honesty and Justice, we shall falsifie the Trust which God, Your self, and your Subjects have consided in us. Avarice is a cruel, inhuman, and insa∣iable Monster, that never cries, It is enough; and therefore not to be endur'd. Tho' the Golden Mountains of Persia, the Treasures of both Indies were added to the mmense Heaps of France's Opulency, You ould not have wherewithal to satiate the reedy Maw of Covetousness. For Vices know o Bounds; their motion is restless; al∣ays rowling headlong, and never cease ut with their own perdition. On the other de, Vertue, according to the saying of imonides, resembling a Cube, stedfast∣ withstands all Shoggs of Fortune and Human Casualties; and subjecting it self  Nature, that varies after several ways e manifold Chances that befall the Life  Man, preserves the Mind and Con∣ience free and uncorrupted, contented ith it self; sufficient of her self for all ings. Restore but to this same Vertue, hich thus forms the Minds of Men, her  Luster and Dignity, and you will ve an overflowing Plenty liberally to ward the Truly deserving, without rd'ning your Exchequer, or laying hea∣ Impositions on your People.
That the same Care may be taken in e Church, if it be not directly under r Majesties Administration, certain∣ it is a part of Royal Sedulity to be ur∣t, to entreat, request, and interpose ur Authority with those on whom the Burthen lies, that there be no neglect on their side. Assume to your self this Glo∣ry, Sir, to which new Encomiums be∣long; and ponder this continually in Your Royal Thoughts, that this blessed Ease and Leisure, which we now enjoy, together with Your self, can never otherwise be expected to be Diuturnal, than by stre∣nuously employing this Interval of Peace, by the Almighty so favourably granted, to the Advancement of his Glory, and Composing the Divisions of Religion. 'Tis a Great Thing which I propose to Your Majesty; nor at this time, in the Opini∣on of many, who contented with their pre∣sent condition, disrelish wholsom Counsels against future Inconveniencies, to be too hastily undertaken. But Great Rewards attend Great Enterprizes; and a sublime and Towring Genius, the Gift of Heaven conferr'd upon Your Majesty, can never stoop to common Attempts. Certainly, after the suppress'd llcentiousness of Riot and Rapine, and particular Families con∣fin'd to moderate Expences proportionable to their Incomes, in which respect France is more beholding to Your Majesty, than can be exprest, You can revolve in Your thoughts nothing more worthy the sublime Pinacle and Station where you govern, than to compose and reduce into Order the Laws of God and man, all in confusion through the Civil Broils of so many Years. Whence You will doubtless reap this high Advantage, that the Wrath of God in∣cens'd against us being thereby atton'd, and the Bishops and Magistrates strenu∣ously labouring in the several duties of their Employments, Candor and Sincere Cha∣rity will prevail against Hypocrisie and Dissimulation; the Laws will combat

Avarice and Luxury; which two contend∣ing Vices the depravity of the Age has intermix'd: good Manners will be esteem'd and improv'd; Modesty and Chastity, hitherto contemn'd and derided, will re∣gain their Ancient Reputation; and last∣ly, that Vertue recovering her lost Honour, the Adoratin, Luster and Authority of Money will abate.
These are Your own Wishes, Mighy Sir. For I have often heard 'em from Your own Lips, when you have profess'd your self ready to purchase so great a fe∣licity to the Kingdom with the Mutila∣tion of Your own Limbs. These are the wishes of all Your most faithful Subjects: and this is my sence of the Common-Weal. Wherein, if I have been somewhat too prolix; or if I have us'd too great a li∣berty of Speech, you will vouchsafe your pardon to an Innocent Person, bred up under that Liberty, the Restoration of which to our Country is a debt we owe to Your Majesty, and who had not otherwise presum'd upon Your Royal Patience, but that he deem'd himself oblig'd to fix some∣thing by way of Preface at the Portal of the Work; in some measure to restrain the Assassmations of Calumny, and heave off the Burthen of Envy from his Shoulders.
But when I thought that what I had hitherto said, either in excuse, or defence of my Labours, had been sufficient, my Friends admonish me, that there will be some who will object against me, that I might have spar'd such an exact Comme∣moration of particular things relating to our Liberties, Immunities, Laws and Franchises; affirming it no less to the dis∣advantage of Your own, and the Dignity of the Kingdom, then Injurious to Private Persons. To which, altho' there be a∣bundant matter of Answer, yet should I enlarge my self too far: I am afraid, lest many should think I affected an Occasion to fight with Goblins; or if I should be altogether silent, lest Carping and Cen∣sure should lay hold of the Opportunity: I shall therefore, as to this matter, de∣liver my self with all possible succinctness.
So season'd by Tradition to me from my Father, a most worthy Person, as all men knew, to him from my Grand-Father and Great Grand-Father deliver'd; so pre∣par'd, and with such Inclinations I en∣ter'd into the Administration of the Commonweal, that next to my Duty to God, there was nothing that I esteem'd dearer to me, or more sacred, then that Love and Duty which I ow'd my Country; and that all my other private Affections, all other Considerations were to give way to that. For so I always most rigorously perswaded my self, that my Country, ac∣cording to the Opinion of the Ancients, was a second Deity, and the Laws of my Country a sort of other Deities, which whosoever violated, under a sought for pretence of Piety, were liable to all the Penalties of Sacriledge and Parricide. These Franchises, these Laws, upon which this Kingdom being founded, had advan∣c'd it self to such an extended Grandeur of Dominion and Power, if there be any, and would to God there be not, who work under Ground to sap and ruin, when all their open Force proves vain, and suc∣cessful, may we nere be deem'd worthy of the Gallic Name, who e're we are that would be thought true Patriots, if we do not might and main oppose the Incroaching Mischief, more especially while You reign.

For it is the voice of our Ancestors, men highly eminent for Religion, that this is that Celestial Pledge of publick safety; This, that other Palladium of Franco-Gallia, which so long as we can keep, there is nothing to be suspected from Fo∣reign Treachery: but being once lost, nothing can be secure from their Attaques. Wherefore, should it happen, through sloath or stupidity, that these Ancilia should e stolen from us, there is no question to e made, but the same Person that wick∣dly commits the Theft, like another U∣ysses, Master of Pelasghian Fraud, ill certainly suborn another Sinon, to et admited into France some other fatal Horse, cram'd full of armed Enemies; d by that means depopulate the most urishing part of Europe, with the same onflagration that laid Troy in Ashes. ut God avert it for the future: for hile you live and govern, and while eaven preserves the Dauphin safe, ere's uo such dire Misfortune to be r'd.
And here it might be justly expected, t we should tell the World how much  have deserv'd of the Republic; and t we should enlarge upon your Praises, whom we are beholding for our Lives,  the enjoyment of our Country and E∣es. No more perhaps, then what they  with reason require from us, who sure the undertaking rather by the ousness of the subject, then the mean∣ of my capacity. But besides that I gn'd not any Panegyric here; 'tis n, You take more pleasure in the ledge of what you have done, then e loud Applauses of Haranguing E∣nce.
Your Majesty, sprung from the most noble and Ancient Family of all that ever Scepters held, and deducing Your more certain Original from Male descent, by Birth a Pyrenaean, grew up, under the Education of Adversity, in the midst of War; by providence protected, your In∣fancy escap'd the treacherous Ambuscado's of Your Adversaries. Your early Youth, and riper Manhood, 'both, became a Terrour to your Enemies. At last in the most furi∣ous heat of Hurry and Confusion you were brought to the King, or sent for by him, from the farthest part of Aquitaine, to the end no other but the Lawful Heir might possess the vacant Throne; and va∣cant suddainly it was. Having obtain'd the Crown, you temper'd Soveraign Au∣thority with an Alloy of Clemency and Humility, choosing rather to win the alie∣nated Affections of Your Subjects by acts of Favour and Kindness, then to ride 'em with the Curb of fear. And such was the Confidence that men, before your mor∣tal Enemies, repos'd in their now acknow∣ledg'd Soveraign, that they thought them∣selves more safe in Your Mercy, then se∣cure in the strength of their own Arms; and were not so sorry to see themselves van∣quish'd, as they were glad that You were the Victor. Of Suppliants they became Friends and familiar Acquaintance: and the Delinquents were more deeply sensible of their past Offences, then you were ap∣prehensive of their Injuries. Your readi∣ness to pardon was such, that they repent∣ed they did not sooner acknowledge their Errour. But what other way for them, who saw that the rapid course of Your Victories could not be stemm'd by any Oppo∣sition, but of their own accords to submit

to Your Majesty, whom nothing could withstand, and rather to trust the Clemency of the Victor, then to try the doubtful Chance of Batte? For your Prowess seem'd to have restrain'd even Fate it self, in such a manner, as that it seem'd to have fix'd the events of War, and clipt the Wings of Victory, to prevent her flight from Side to Side. Not, but that to all this uncon∣troul'd Prosperity, your Vigilance, your Indefatigable Industry, your patient en∣during Heat and Cold, your neglect of other dyet then the Place or Season affor∣ded, your Diligence in the Trenches, your Military Labours day and night, your marching through tempestuous Showers and Storms of Hail and Snow, your short Re∣poses, Naps on Horse-back, sometimes on the Ground, and other Personal Vertues mainly contributed and assisted. Thus by your own Example, the most alluring way of commanding Obedience, you still pre∣serv'd that exactness of Discipline, which by others is hardly maintain'd, where want of Pay breeds mutiny and disorder. By this felicity You every where became so terrible to Your Enemies, that tho, for the most part superiour in number, and all o∣ther supports of War, they thought it suf∣ficient to defend themselves within the Walls of their fortified Towns and Cities; and lookt upon their bare Defence as an Atchievement no less Glorious, then for You to vanquish in the Field. So that 'tis no wonder, that after so many hainous offences against your Majesty committed, they should so greedily embrace an Oppor∣tunity of Reconciliation offer'd 'em by Hea∣ven it self, out of a certain hope of sincere pardon, and no less afraid of Victory al∣ways abiding on Your side.
But if it be so, that War has render'd You so formidable to your Enemies; the publick Tranquillity shows you no less accep∣table to those You have receiv'd into fa∣vour; while the encourag'd Arts of Peace are every where revv'd by Rewards and Immnnities. Witness the vast and last∣ing Piles in every Corner of the Kingdom rear'd within so short a space of Time; a∣dorn'd with Statues of imcomparable work∣manship, exquisite Pictures, and costly Tapestries, where the Figures seem to speal and move; eternal Monuments to Poste∣rity of the Greatness of Your Soul, and Your desire of Peace. But above all things we return Your Majesty Thanks, for restoring the Muses to their Seats from whence they were expell'd by the Barbary of the War, and for the reflourising St of the Parisian Academy, under You Auspices restor'd to former Reputation, by your Addition of a signal Embellishment▪ in calling thither Isaac Caesabon,  second Luminary of this Age, and entrust∣ing him with the Custody of your  Royal Library. By all which Acts  Princely Munificence it may appear,  the uninterrupted course of so many L∣rels was not so much Your Encouragement to more Ambitious undertakings, a  cultivate Peace among your Neighbours and to restore Tranquillity and Repose  your Subjects tyr'd and almost worn  with the vexation and turmoile of  preceding Wars.
Continue and prosper then, Great S in your most generous purpose; and pro∣ceed to establish that Peace, which  have procur'd your Kingdom and  Country at the Expence of so much  and Labour, by restoring the Authority

of the Laws, as already you have been begun to do: and be assur'd, that the Mind, the Soul, the Counsel and Authority of a Commonweal reside altogether in the Laws; and that as a Body without a Soul, so nei∣ther can a City, without Laws, make use of er Organs, her Nerves, her Blood and Mem∣bers. Consequently that the Magistrates and Judges are but the Ministers and In∣terpreters of the Law; and lastly that we are all the Servants of the Law, to the nd we may be truly Freemen, and enjoy he Blessing of our Liberty.
In hopes of obtaining this Liberty under our Reign, and taking advantage of the me recover'd by Your Means, in the ge∣neral Hurry and Confusion, and after ur Troubles were compos'd, I wrote the History of this Age, the first part of which  now make publick to the World, and de∣icateit to Your most August Name, for ma∣ny reasons of greatest Consequence, both  reference to my own Person, and the thing it self. It would have argu'd me angely ingrateful, not to acknowledge y Advancement, begun by your Prede∣cessour of Blessed Memory, and by your Majesty still dignifi'd with greater Advan∣tages of higher Preferment. And because as continually attending both in the Camp  at the Court, Your Majesty entrust∣ me with several Commissions of Impor∣tance; by the management of which I at∣tain'd to the Knowledge of many things quisite to carry on the work which we had been in hand. This farther Advantage o I had from my familiar converse  several Illustrious Personages grown  in the service of the Court, more di∣ently to examin the Truth of many things at were publish'd upon several occasions concerning our Affairs in various Anony∣mous Pamphlets. And thus I improv'd my knowledge, during my Attendance on your Majesty, in the midst of publick Business, till the Duty of my Employment constrain'd me into this Workhouse of the Law. The honour of my being known to Your Majesty is of no fresh date: For it is now above twenty years ago, that I was sent with other Commissioners of Parliament by the deceased King, to attend Your Majesty in Aquitaine; at what time You were pleas'd to vouchsafe me particular Demon∣strations of Your Particular Favour and Benevolence. And since that, I presum'd to a peculiar Considence, that the Fruits of my Wit, if it were possible for so barren a Plant to bear any, would not be unac∣ceptable to Your Majesty. But there is yet another more important Reason why this Work should be devoted to Your Majesty; for that he who undertakes an Enterprize so full of Danger, must of necessity stand in need of powerful support against the Detractions of repining Calumny; nor could I desire a more piercing Judgment then Your Majesties, wherewith you go∣vern your own Affairs, to examin the Truth of all those Great Transactions which I have transmitted to future Ages. For to Your Censure, as it behoves me, I dare be bold to stand; whether you com∣mand me to impart the rest, or stifle what I have already publish'd; which indeed cannot be said so much to be made public, as to be laid at your Feet, a Specimen to be rejected or approv'd. What ever you ordain or command concerning it, shall be to me in place of a Celestial Oracle. Nor do I question, but whatsoever you allow will be unanimously suffer'd to pass cur∣rant

over all the World. Or if there be any who are not pleas'd with your unerring Approbations, they must be such who hav∣ing been advanc'd to high degree by the Freaks of Fortune, yet never doing any thing worthy to be remember'd in story, think it an Injury to themselves, when there is a true accompt given of all mens Acti∣ons. But as I should wrong my Reputation by a compliance with their unjust desires, so neither will my Conscience permit me wick∣edly to bury in silence their Vices, generally in conjunction with the ruin of the State.
I cannot make a better Conclusion of this Preface, then with my vows and wishes. Great God, the Author and Giver of all our Blessings, who with thy only Son, together with the Holy Ghost, art God in three Per∣sons, yet one in Goodness, Wisdom, Mercy and Power, always one in all things; who wast before all things, and wilt be Eternally in all things; who by thy Prudence disposest and govern'st lawful Dominion, without which, nor any private Family, nor City, nor the whole Race of all Mankind, nor Nature it self, by thee created out of Nothing, can pre∣tend to any thing of stedfast and durable; Thee, with the Prayers of the whole King∣dom I implore, and most humbly adjure, that what thou hast vouchsaf'd to France and consequently to all Christendom, thou wouldst be pleas'd to appropriate the same to us; and as an accumulation to thy Blessings to make 'em Diuturnal. In order to which, we put up to thy sacred Throne but this one Supplication more, which com∣prehends all the rest, that thou wouldst preserve the King and the Dauphin. For upon their safety, we must acknowledge that our Peace, our Concord, our Security, our Wealth and Welfare, and what ever else is desirable on Earth, depend. To which purpose direct his Counsels to rule with moderation that Empire which he has rescu'd from Destruction: while the Young Prince springs up, like an auspicious Tree that grows upon the Banks of some deli∣ghtful River; to the end he may prove a Protecting Shade to our Children's Chil∣dren, under the security of which to be at leasure to improve the more noble Arts of Peace, and promote both Learning and Piety. Grant that both may raign toge∣ther over France, in that order which is most acceptable to all good men: that by their means, the pristin Sincerity and Re∣ligion, the Ancient Manners, the Institu∣tions of our Ancestors, and the Laws of our Country may be restor'd to their Primitive luster; that all new Monsters of Sects, new Fictions of Religions, and other Forgeries of Artifice and Ambition to inveagle and corrupt the weak▪ and inadvertent, may be utterly confounded; and that at length all Schism and Discord remov'd, Peace may be establish'd in the House of God, quiet i Consciences, and security in the Common∣weal. Lastly we invoke and beseech thee, most Great and Merciful God, through the Grace of thy Holy Spirit, without which we neither are, nor can do any thing, that as well they who are now living, as Genera∣tions to come, when they shall read what I am now preparing to declare to all the World, may meet with nothing deviating from that Liberty, Truth & Fidelity which becomes a sincere Historian; and that my whole Work may be as free from the suspi∣cion of Adulation and Envy, as it is from any Constraint or Necessity of being Partial.
