



READER,
CHrist Jesus the true Prophet saith, Beware of
false Prophets which come to you in Sheeps
cloathing, but inwardly they are ravening
Wolves: Yee shall know them by their
fruits, Matth. 7. 15. And was ever such fruit brought
foth in any age? And in the 23 of Matth. he cryes Woe
to the Hypocrites; and they were such as devour Widows
hòuses, and for a pretence make long Prayer: And was
ever such devouring of the houses of Widows? therefore
shall they receive greater damnation. And Peter in his
2 Epistle, chap. 2. he discribes false teachers to be such as
through covetousness, and with feigned words make Mer∣chandize
of the People; and was ever such Merchandize
made of the People? Now these and such like be the fruits
of the corrupt tree, and of the false Prophets, Hypocrites,
and false Teachers: But the man of God doth flee such
things, and doth follow after Righteousness, Godliness,
Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness, I Tim. 6. 11. And they
who were Ministers of Christ, though they had power to eat
and drink, I Cor. 9. 4. the Labourer being worthy of his

meat: yet saith the Apostle we have not used this power;
but suffer all things lest we should hinder the Gospel of
Christ: for better (saith he) were it for me to die, than
that any man should make my rejoycing vain: what then
is my reward? Verily, that when I Preach the Gospel I
may make the Gospel of Christ without Charge, that I a∣buse
not my power in the Gospel, vers. 18. Now these be
the fruits of the good tree, and of the true Ministers of
Christ, who saith by their fruits ye shall know them.
Now Reader, with a single eye read the late practices, and
some of the fruits of several of the most godly Mini∣sters
(as they are called) in the Northren parts of this Na∣tion:
And let that of God in thee, which calls upon thee
to do to all men as thou would be done unto, judge of
them by their fruits, whose Ministers they are: By their
fruits (saith Christ) ye shall know them: The true Mi∣nister
of Christ he used not his power, to take what the
power did allow him; but thou shalt finde that many of
these men who are called godly Ministers, have not only
used their power (as they call it) the Law of the Nation)
but abused their power, and in many particulars exceeded
the Law: the Statute which speaks of treble damages,
which is their power, which gives three pence for a peny,
which is much, which were they but men, they would not
exact, or take more than they call theirs: And were they
Christians, or Ministers of Christ, they would not seek
their own, but every man anothers wealth, 1 Cor. 10. 24
For the Ministers of Christ did not seek theirs, but them,
2 Cor. 12. 14. For the Children ought not to lay up
for the Parents, but the Parents for the Children: But
these have made themselves manifest by their actions that
they are no Fathers, they are so unnatural; but cursed
Children as Peter speaks of, 2 Pet. 2. 14. And now see

the Scriptures fulfilled and witnessed, which saith, Call
to remembrance the dayes that are passed, how that after ye
received the light ye indured a great fight in afflictions,
partly while ye were made a gazing stock, both by re∣proaches
and afflictions, and partly white ye became com∣panions
of them which were so tossed to and fro, and such
took joyfully the sooyling of their Goods, knowing in
themselves, that in heaven a better and more enduring
substance was laid up for them: Therefore ye despised
ones, in whom, and upon whom the Scriptures are fulfil∣led
and fulfilling; who have received the light where∣with
Christ Jesus, the Covenant of light and life, hath
you enlightened, and in it believed; cast not away your
confidence, which hath great recompence of reward, for ye
have nced of patience, that after ye have done the will of
God, ye may receive the promise, I or yet a little while,
and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry: Now
the just lives by Faith, but if any man draw back, my soul
shall have no pleasure in him, saith the Lord, but ye are
not of them who draw back unto perdition, but of them
that believe to the saving of the soul; in your unity is
your strength, and in your faithfulness doth he rejoyce,
who is one with you in his measure.

