



May it please your Grace,
THese little Tract∣ates, as they de∣rive their being from your Graces command; so (like rivolets to the Sea) doe they returne to you againe. Accept them as the first fruits of your owne Industry upon the Au∣thour; who must ever acknow∣ledge he owes himselfe also.

What Epist. 31. Paulinus writes to St. Augustine, Os tuam fistulam aquae vivae, & venam fontis ae∣terni merito dixerim, cujus de∣siderio sitivit in te anima mea, & ubertate tui fluminis inebriari terra mea concupivit, was indeed the cause of my thirsting also, and the Load-Stone that gave mee a happy draught in your service, many yeeres agon out of my native soyle into this Kingdome, which, me thinks, this yeer by your absence hath suffered a great Ecclipse, and yet wee cannot grudge the Church in this floting age, such a Steeres man, nor so pious a Prince, so pretious an Eare∣ring. That which is related of the fore-named Father, Eras. in Ep. ad Arc. Toled. an op. August & Possidō. de vit. Au∣gust. In ip∣sâ mensâ potius dis∣putationem quam opu∣lationm dligbat. Mensam habebat hospitibus expositam, sed frugiferis sermo∣nibus, magis quam exquisitis e∣dulijs

opipuram, semper de re quadam frugifera commentaba∣tur, ut non minus animi convi∣varum reficerentur quam corpo∣ra, is so well knowne to bee your Graces daily practice, that it needes no further appli∣cation, the offals of whose Discourse carefully gathered up, were able to perfect a Di∣vine to every good worke. In a word, Ibid. Quasi De∣us voluerit in August∣ino tanquā in una ta∣bulâ vivi∣dum quod∣dam exem∣plar Epis∣copi repre∣seatare om∣nibus vir∣tutum nu∣meru abse∣lutum, &c. Erasmus his descrip∣tion of him, by what S. Paul requires in a Bishop, mee thought in the reading (muta∣to nomine) it was your owne Picture, by which if others in this age had beene drawne, I beleeve the office had never beene so much as questio∣ned.
The very subjects of both these Discourses were they wrote by whomsoever, could

not but claime an Interest in your Grace. The Conversion of Sinners, by a Constant Prea∣ching, who (unlesse a Stranger in Israel) but must acknow∣ledge to bee your Character. Nay, this and much more, is no newes to Fred. Spanhemi∣us Profes∣sor of Di∣vinity in Geneva (dubiorum Evangeli∣corum par∣te tertia) in his Epi∣stle Dedi∣catory, largely P. Bertius in tabul. Geo∣graph. Speaking of Dublin and the Colledge, addes this on∣ly, Fameuse pour la presence de Iacobus Ʋsserius Theo∣logien honime de gran le crudition & piete, & sur tout celebre par ses escrits, natif. de Dublin. Ioan Selden, marmor Arundell in editionis causa, Reverend ss Anti∣stes Jacobus Usserius Archiep Armachanus, vir summâ pietae, judicio singulari, us{que}, ad miraculum doctus, & li∣teris severioribus promovendis natus, &c I. Casaubonus, Abrah Scultetus, Cambden: with divers others. By which, it is evident, that if some so advanced have mis∣carried, the fault hath not bin (as the vulgar appre∣hends) in the soyle, but in the seed: Et hisce commemo¦randis, nos vel utilitati publicae grat ulamur, vel divinae benignitati gratamur. Vt est enim modestiae, non agnos∣cere laudes, ita gratitudinis, non tacere viros, per quos Deus tanta commoda largitur humano generi. Strangers, whose large Relation from abroad may prevent any further from home, onely 'tis no flattery to attest it. Your continued Mot∣to

of 1 Cor. 9 16. Vaemihi si non evangeli∣zavero, both in your Episco∣pall and Archiepiscopall seals, is as worthy of memory, as i∣mitation, where that Woe may light I know not, but surely S. Pauls 2 Cor. 4.8. reposita est mihi corona, will bee your portion. How little your Grace affects these kinde of expressions, I am not now to learne, And for my selfe, let this be my plea against any mis-judgings in others, Egregia virtutis ex∣empla ve∣luti lumen in edito po∣nenda sunt, ut omnibus praeluceāt, multosq, ad aemulatio∣nem accen∣dant. Rare examples ought to bee set up like Mat 5.15, 16. lights, where they may be seene; and in the words of S. Paul, I wish it might bee a Rom. 11.14. meanes to provoke to emulati∣on those which are my flesh, and might save some of them, Lu. 10.37 Fac¦tu similiter, is the onely inten∣ded morall: Be still the Honor of your Nation, the sacred first fruites of this Colledge, the

Prime light of this our Israel, where (according to Ioshua's wish) you may like the Sunne stand still in the Firmament of our Church, till all the ene∣mies of it, be made its foote∣stoole. So prayes many thou∣sands, and among them, as ha∣ving most cause,

Drogheda Aprill. 28. 1641.
