



Most Noble and Puissant Lords,
IF I do  follow here the example of those Writers,  place a study'd Panegyrick upon those  whom they have made choice for tors, at the beginning of their Works, twas  fear of ill success that hinder'd me, had I had any such design, nor of exposing my self to the Distaste that has been long since taken against such kind of undertakings. I must confess I have no great reason to build much up∣on my Eloquence, but I might find in the abounding Treasure of the Subject, wherewith to supply the defect of my Skill and Parts:

and I might hope withall to please the Reader, since I should have an opportunity to tell him those things which he rarely sees in writings of the like Nature. 'Tis a difficult thing at this day to force into such an Eulogy those bold stroakes of Wit or Rhetorick, that might adorn it with any Graces of Novelty: more especially most people believe that Truth very seldom appears in such Applauses. But it would be an easie thing for me to do something more then usual upon the Subject which I should have in hand; in re∣gard that tho my Praises were never so transcendent, they would never be look'd upon as suspected or excessive. There would need no more for me then to consider YOUR NOBLE PUISSANCES, as an August Body, to which all the Merit of the Illustrious Members that compose it, is due. It would be easie for me by this means to adorn my Discourse with a thousand Ornaments not common to the World: neither, would any Per∣son presume to suspect me of rearing the Glory of All together too High:seeing that if we should take asunder every one of those who rae calld to those Eminent Dignities, we should find in his Name, in his Endowments, in his Employments and his Services, as many several Subjects for a just and law∣ful Panegyrick. But I know well, MOST NOBLE and PUISSANT LORDS, that solid Virtue is not ambitious of these vain Oblations. Only

vulgar Souls are intoxicated with such per∣fumes. They who have a Soul truly Great, choose rather to be profitable to the Publick by their noble Actions, then to hear either their Persons or their Conduct extolld. I make no question, but your NOBLE PUISSANCES, deem it far more worthy of your selves to engrave your Elogies in the Hearts and Memory of the People by your Sage and Prudent Government, then to read 'em in an Epistle Dedicatory. Therefore not to engage my self in a labour that would be o way grateful to YOUR MOST NOBLE PUISSANCES, I will only give you an ac∣compt of the reasons which embolden'd me to present you this Piece, which I have now trans∣mitted to publick View. I have not so good an Opinion of my self, MOST NOBLE and PUISSANT LORDS, to imagine that the Fruits of my Labours are Offerings that merit your Acceptance. But the Nature of the Sub∣ject which I handle in this History, dedicated to Your Lordships, may serve to excuse the liberty which I take to lay it under the Protection of YOUR MOST NOBLE PUISSANCES: and after a full Examination, it may be easily ac∣knowledg'd, that in reason and justice it could have been no other where address'd. It contains a Recital of the misfortunes which in France have befallen those, who for these fourscore and ten

Years have liv'd in that Kingdom under the Faith of the most solemn Edict that ever was published. It represents what they suffer'd, till the Revocation of that Law, which had been so long the Buckler of their Religion, and the Bulwark of their Li∣berty. It shews several thousands of Families by Violence and Injustice reduc'd to abandon the Advantages and Delights of their Native Country; and to seek, on every side, a Sanctuary for their Persons, and Repose for their Consciences. 'Tis true that in all parts of Europe, whereever these Per∣secuted Professors of the true Christian Faith have been led by Providence, they have receiv'd great marks of the compassion and good will of Fo∣reigners: but in no State or Kingdom were they receiv'd with more tenderness, nor cherish'd with more affection than in this. The Charity of our Thrice Potent Soveraigns made hast to meet their Petitions. Upon their arrival, they found all man∣ner of succour ready at hand. They shar'd, as I may say, the Conveniencies and Riches of the Country with the Inhabitants, by the free and li∣beral participation which they met with. They no sooner breath'd the Air of these Countries, but they tasted the Abundance of it. They also whom the common Tempest had cast on other Shores, were sensible of this Heroick Beneficence: not only because it was a leading example to others, but because the effects of it were not enclos'd

within the limits of these Provinces. If the first Honour of this extreme Bounty be due to our Soveraigns, whose Zeal and Piety became o sig∣nal by such a Glorious Testimonial; it cannot be deny'd, at least, MOST NOBLE and PUISSANT, LORDS, but that the second belongs to your selves. You found, you distributed the Funds whence these Immense Profusions of Charity were drawn. Twas by the hands of YOUR MOST NOBLE PUISSANCES, that so many Professors of the Christian Faith, so many persons of Great Quali∣ty, so many Pastors and Teachers, so many ruin'd Fa∣milies, so many people of both Sexes, which the Per∣secution had reduc'd to utmost Exigency, have hither∣to receiv'd, and still receive all necessary Succour and Relief. In the midst of such Prodigious Expences, occasion'd by a hideous War, The care which you take for the Publick does not slackn your Diligence for the Consolation of so many affli∣cted Innocents: and your inexhaustible Charity does the same in procuring them an easie and comfortable Life, which your Indefatigable Vigi∣lance performs in suffering nothing to be want∣ing to the Commonwealth in her lawful designes. After all this, there is no question to be made, most NOBLE and PUISSANT LORDS, that it is no more than justice to Dedicate to your selves the History of those whose miseries you so generously asswage and soften. As it will make

an Apology for their Innocency, so it will also magnifie, your Bounty and while it makes it ap∣pear that neither Seditions nor Conspiracies, nor Civil Wars drew upon the Reformed these dread∣ful Misfortunes, so will it also publish to the World, that your Favours are so much the more worthy of Immortal Applause, by how much it was impossible to place 'em better; that a compas∣sion truly Christian produc'd 'em; and that you did not relieve those disconsolate Families, but because you compassionated an Affliction which they had no way deserv'd. I may likewise farther add, MOST NOBLE and POTENT LORDS, that in presenting this History to your Lordships, I do not take so much upon me a liberty which has need of an Excuse, as an Opportunity to acquit my self of a necessary Homage. 'Tis a mark of acknow∣ledgement, which all the Refugees in some measure offer to your Lordships by my Hands, as it were to make the Returns of succeeding Ages to YOUR MOST NOBLE PUISSANCES, of those Thanks and Testimonies of their Gratitude, which are due to your Lordships. And I dare presume to say, that they make use of my Pen to make this Protestation to your Lordships, that it is not so much their design to preserved to Posterity the remembrance of those Sufferings, as the Me∣mory of that relief and those consolations which your Lordships afforded 'em. Nor do I hazard any

thing in taking upon me to be answerable for their Intentions and their Thoughts, in regard the con∣formity of our common condition ought to inspire into us all an equal sence of Gratitude for the Boun∣ty of our Generous Protectors, whose Succour and Assistance was so seasonable and so comfortable to us. Besides, it is no difficult thing for me to reach the Sentiments of other peoples hearts, on this par∣ticular occasion. They loudly enough express themselves, and every where declare, that they are beholding for their Lives and their Repose, solely to your Lordships Bounty. As for my own part, MOST NOBLE and PUISSANT LORDS, I wish to see this Work of mine may be kindly re∣ceiv'd in Publick, not so much for my own, as for the Interest of YOUR MOST NOBLE PUIS∣SANCES. And it would be less a pleasure to me, to see my own Name consecrated to Eternity, if my Writings may acquire the priviledge of pretending to it, then to Immortalize your Glory, by infor∣ming future Ages, what share you had in the re∣lief of so great a number of unfortunate Sufferers. But if my endeavours cannot soar to such a height, it will suffice me, MOST NOBLE and PUISSANT LORDS, to obtain at least one thing which I as∣pire to, as the Lawful Recompence of my labour; That in pursuance of that extraordinary Favour nd good Will, of which YOUR NOBLE PUISSANCES give such Proofs to all the World,

you would be pleas'd to accept this History which I present your Lordships, with as a Testimony of my Profound Respects, and as an engagement to be all the days of my Life, with as much Zeal, Submission, and Sincerity as the Heart of Man is capable to express,

April 10. 1693.
