


My Lord,
ALL the World doth grant our Understanding and Will are the Two chief Faculties of our Soul; and your Lordship knows better than my self, that as the Actions of our Understanding, consider'd as able to be directed to Discourse well of all things, are the Object of Logick: So the Actions of our Will, consider'd as able to be
 guided to Vertue, are the Object of Moral Philosophy. For as the whole Logick consists in these three Actions of our Mind, to Think well, to judge rightly, and to reason clearly: So the whole Moral Science may be reduced into these three points, to live honestly, to offend no body, and to render what belongs to every one. Whosoever then knows well how to apprehend the things pre∣sented to his Imagination, to make a sound Judgment of them, and to draw true consequences from them, he may justly be called a good Logician: Likewise whoso∣ever knows how to rule his Will, so that he doth nothing but just and vertuous Actions, he doth cer∣tainly possess the whole of Moral Philosophy.
Your Generosity, my Lord, in receiving kindly my other little Books, obliged me long since to give your Lordship a small Ac∣knowledgment
 for your former Favours; and if I have deferred it unto this day, it is because I had not so fit a Subject as this to be dedicated to your Lordship, whose Understanding is extraordinary in Matters belonging to Knowledge, and whose Will is always inclined to produce vertuous Actions. But in manifesting your Merit, it may be I betray your Modesty, and perhaps I offend, when I endea∣vour to please. Although your Lordship should be angry with me, yet I cannot omit here these Qualities of Yours, so well known in this Kingdom. For those that have the Honour to be acquaint∣ed with your Lordship, are not ignorant that your Mind is adorn∣ed with curious Notions; and those that had the delight to read your Writings, do altogether confess, that your Thoughts are rich, that your Expressions are strong, that
 your Words are Emphatical, and that you are Apollo's Favourite. All England knows your Zeal for the truth of Religion, and for the Laws as they are established in this Kingdom, as also your generous natural Disposition, which always prevents those that expect Favours from you. It is well known that you do not confound Appearance with Truth; your Conscience is not Erroneous; you are an Ene∣my to all the foppish Devotion of Rome; and to say all in Two Words, there is nothing in you but what is Solid and Glorious. Is not the Choice, which Their Majesties have made of your Lordship, in trusting you with the most consi∣derable Places of this Kingdom, a convincing Proof that all I have said is Truth without Flattery?
I conclude this Epistle, humbly entreating your Acceptance of this small Work. I hope you wil re∣ceive
 it kindly, since it is a Sub∣ject, which you both perfectly un∣derstand, and much delight in: I hope also your Lordship will be pleased with my Endeavours to make plain to the meanest Capa∣city this troublesom Art of Logick, wherein, as well as in Moral Sci∣ence, I think I have done more then has yet been done in either of the Languages, towards the ruling of Thoughts, Words, and Actions. Pardon this Presumption; Live long and Happy, and give me leave to publish that I am,
My Lord, 
