



Dear Nephew,
I Present these ensuing short Practical Discourses to your Perusal; and that not only when you would use a Me∣dicine to prevent a Surfeit of doing nothing in a Long Vacation, but when you are well compos'd, and retire from other Business to speak with your own Heart: And if so, then as a word spoken, so a few Sheets read in such a Season, may prove both sweet and whole∣som, delightful and useful.
You have been lately plac'd in the view of a Fair Estate; but I advise and en∣treat you, not to fix your foot there

with this Print from it, namely, Soul take thine ease, &c.
You know what a scurvey Name was given to him who was rich to him∣self, and not towards God. And let the Consideration thereof, cause you to desire that these outward Enjoyments may rather shine upon you in an Oblique Way, which the Philosopher says is the Cause of Generation, than in a perpetual direct Line, which makes what is beneath it dry and fruit∣less. This Condition may cause you to be barren in the best Concerns; but the former, (well manag'd by Devotion and Meditation) will make you abound in every good Work.
And when you thus Quest after Pro∣ficiency, be caution'd against puting a Remora to your Progress by Singula∣rity; and be not in the List of those who had rather be guilty of their own Erroneous Inventions, than rest con∣tented with a Derivative and Impu∣ted Learning.
In Religious Matters you know, that The  Euripid: the most simple or unmix'd way is the most infallible; and the , simplex sermo est veritati connaturalis: And there∣fore in the Mysteries of Piety and Re∣vealed Truth, you must think it very improper to assist your Understanding in prying thereinto, by any new invented Cartesian Spectacles.
And as for an Over-rational Hu∣mour, when such a swelling Prudentius gives this Note of the Philosophical Theologists of his Age: Fidem  dis∣secant ambagibus, ut quisque Linguâ est ne∣quior, solvunt, ligant∣que quaestionum  per Syllogismos ple∣ctiles: Vae captiosis Sy∣cophantarum Strophis  Vae, Versipelli astutiae  Also read Lactant. De fals. Sapient. Imposthume is bred in that Head, that it may not infect the Eye of your Soul, re∣member that Question, What hath the Chast to do with the Wheat? And forget not, That as Reason useth Lo∣gick for its Servant, so doth Faith Reason: And also that, in Lo∣gicis Argumentum facit fidem; but in Theologicis, Fides facit Ar∣gumentum.  And you may make a two∣fold

Remark concerning High-flying Philosophical Religionists; namely, That Simon Magus lost his Feet by affecting Wings: And that, Ex ta∣lium hominum Ingeniis, omnes haereses animantur, as was observ'd by Tertullian, lib. 1. advers. Marcion.
These Colloquies are plain and familiar, and drawn mostly from Holy Writ, which declares all God's Will to you in what you must believe and do: And as far as they conspire herewith, they have Food in them to nourish all the Faculties and Operations of Man's Soul: They are solid for Information, and soft for Perswasion: They can enlighten his Mind, and incite his Will, and give eve∣ry Affection its due limit; and when any of them ( through unbridled Mettle) shall outrun it, they strive to hank it in with a silken Snaffle.
Upon these, and such matters, fix your Knowledge chiefly; for though you seek any other after the best manner,

and to the best end, that is, critically and rationally to find out what Real Content it can give to your Understanding, and use the two greatest Engines and Instruments of Discovery, viz. Labour and Pru∣dence; yet it cannot make you happy: For that which can do so, must bear a pro∣portion to all the Wants, Desires, and Capacities of your Soul, and must also be of an equal Duration with it, and neither of these is to be found in any other Knowledge. This is so apparent, that as 'tis said, Nequaquam opus est Argumentorum Plaustra hùc ad∣vehere.
Your Education hath been in a Learn∣ed Society; and I rejoyce that your Skill thereby in some choice Matters, hath not render'd you unworthy of it: But if you shall proceed to add a better Skill in a more excellent way than that of Men and Business; You will not only prove an Ornament to your Family and Coun∣try,

but may hope for that Love, and Blessing from God, which will, and can only make you truly happy. I am,
Dear Nephew, Your very Affectionate Unkle,

