


(Most renowned Brethren, and Friends:)
I Am provoked in my mind, after long deli∣beration, to publish this Work, being commanded in my first undertaking there∣unto, by my aged Father, an ancient member of this Society, who having met with this Au∣thor in his Travels in Italy, e∣steemed it as a great Treasure, and too good indeed to be con∣cealed;
 which being in old and curt Latine, cost me not a little pains to put it into smooth English; and yet I never over∣read the Work but I had com∣fort in it, and thought it worth all my pains. I have also been much encouraged by the com∣mendations I have heard of the Book, by the learned Dr. Guinn, and Dr. Andrewes, in their publique Anatomy Le∣ctures at our Hall, as also by that exact Anatomist Doctor Wharton, who hath had the perusing of it, and is pleased to prefix his Epistle to it. And now considering the great want there is of such a Work, that may be as a Directory to young Practizers in Anatomy, how to dissect from part to part, and how studious most ingenuous men are of this Art; as also how mysteriously those that
 have it doe conceal it, I am, I say, provoked to thrust forth this Work into the world; by the help of which for the three Venters and general parts, and Muscles of the Body of Man and Woman; as also by a little Treatise of Master William Molins, of the Anatomical Administration of Muscles, which hee calls , (which I also commend to the industrious Practitioner in A∣natomy) I am not ignorant what a great light of experience may bee gained to the diligent hand of such who doe industri∣ously labour in this Science. I have also added a fit Etymon to the names of the parts in their place, from diverse Au∣thors, besides those inserted by this Author, because it is both pleasant and profitable, and stomably observed in Ana∣tomy
 Lectures. By the help of which Book, I am of opinion, that the ingenuous Chirurge∣on may be enabled, not only to Dissect from part to part, but also (where more excellent Physicians are not to bee had) to explain and read upon the parts, to the satisfaction of a Country Auditory; which ef∣fects hoping the Lord will crown this work withall. I take leave humbly to subscribe my self,
From my house in Southwark, Febru. 25. 1659/60.

