


Grace and Peace from Him, that Holdeth the Seven Stars in his Right Hand, and walks in the midst of the Seven Golden Candle∣sticks, and hath the Seven Spirits of God.
IT is to you, My most Reverend, and Dearly Honoured Fathers, and Brethren in Christ, that in the Second place, as in due order, I Present the following Discourse; Not because you know not the Truth, but because you know it, and that no Lye is of the Truth, and so according to the Apostles prescription concerning Pro∣phesying,1 Cor. 14. 29. are able to Judge, when a divine Revelation by way of Ex∣position, as well, as of Immediate Inspiration is given to Any One. Not, as you well know, that you can add, or take away from what hath the Evidence of Divine; when you find that, Suffrage, and Joynt Pub∣lication, Blowing the Trumpet and Giving warning is Your All.
I therefore Communicate to you Apart, the , the particular Good Tydings, I declare, least if I am not able to under∣goGal. 2. 2. your Test, I had, or should Run in vain, But I am able, if I may so allude, to be Baptiz'd with that Baptism, and to Render an Apology with Meekness, and Fear to any, that shall most severely Examine me of the Hope, I Promulge, through his Grace, that I Trust in, to work in me Mightily to that purpose. I onely Fear Prejudging without Hearing; I know I have not onely Believ'd, and therefore Spoken, but that I have Prophesied according to theRom. 12. 6▪ Analogy of the Faith at once given to the Saints; according to the Doctrine of Godliness, and the Symmetry of All Scripture Prophecy, the Light of which hath from God shone into me, above what I can express; As the Prophets of Old, Divinely mov'd, were more Inwardly assur'd of being Sent, then They could expose to Others.
I would Humbly offer that one Credential, concerning the Time, Times, Half Time to strict Judgment; What greater Argument, the Spirit of God design'd, That Time should be search'd, then givingDan. 7. 1 it so peculiarly to the little Horn, call'd so disertly by Him; The Beast, and to the Beastian Times in the Revelation, and to no other; And why search'd, if not to be found? And is not the Dividing and Multiplying among Themselves those Characters, according to precise certain Epochs of the First Time and of the Half Time, even Mathematical?
Let none therefore say the Book is Seal'd, or I am not Learn'd;Isai. 29.   Acceptance with God tho' the Things being of diffi∣cult
 Interpretation, require greater Attention. Especially, You will not say so, Most Reverend, and Learned, whose peculiar office It is to Search the Scriptures; And you know, Daniel, and the Revela∣tion are Scripture; And Loe I present you the Book unseal'd, by the Assistance of Him, who prevail'd to Open the Book of Seven Seals.
And now, How would this so near Appearance of the Chief Shep∣herd, oblige us to Feed the flock of Christ, not as Lords, nor for Filthy lucre, but as Ensamples of the Flock! Pet. 5. 2.
How would this Doctrine of the Kingdom, Open a door wide and Effectual to all manner of Re-Reformation, and to a new and Apostolick mission for the preaching the Everlasting Gospel, as by the speed of an Angel flying through the midst of Heaven?Rev. 14. 6. It will be so anon within a Prophetical last Half Hour of the Three Days and a Half, if not just now.
How would this preserve us from Grudging one against another,ames 59. and cause our Moderation one towards another to be known to All, Because the Judge is before the doors, and the Lord at Hand;hil. 4. 5. How would it cause us to cease to De-Synagogue one another soev. . 8. proper to the Synagogue of Sathan, especially when for Indifferents, least we come to worship at the Feet of Them, we have endea∣vour'd to shut the Door upon, and to acknowledge Christ lov'd them! Lt us then Hasten to the Philadelphian State of Purity, Love, and Peace; And so the God of Love and of Peace, shall be with us. For this cause I bow my Knees to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom the whole Family of Heaven and Earth is call'd.
I most Humbly and Earnestly Recommend to you also the assisting and Furthering of me in this work of the Gospel, according to my Humble Petition Prefix'd who am (however otherwise most justly) through the Riches of his Grace as in an Isle of Patmos,  the word of God and for the Testimony of Jesus Christ.
And as Prostrate upon the ground, I most earnestly beg pardon of Heaven and Earth, Acknowledging my self Less then the least of All the Ministers of the Gospel, and not worthy to be call▪d a Mi∣nister of Christ, but by the Grace of God I am what I am; and I have Labour'd more Abundantly in this great point, thro' the assistance of that Spirit, who Divides to all as He will, and because He will.
Most Reverend, and Dearly Loved, and Honoured Fathers and Brethren.

