


TO Their Majesties is most Humbly presented These Discourses of Repentance, exten∣ding to National Reformation, in order to the Kingdom of Christ. Into which are inserted Considerations upon the late Earthquake in Jamaica, and the later Motion of the Earth in Lon∣don, and other Parts in the Na∣tion,
 and beyond the Seas: And all this on greatest Right and Due. For who, as Religious Prin∣ces, are so concerned in Publick Reformation according to all the Precedents of Scripture? Who, as Protestant Princes, are Interest∣ed in the Kingdom of Christ? of which the Protestation against Papal and Antichristian Abo∣minations, and Usurpations, was a Preparation; even for that Kingdom of Christ; tho at the distance of 180 Years, styled in Prophecy, Half Time, near expi∣ring into the Succession of that Kingdom; when Reformed Princes, truly so, shall not lose, but highly gain in Glory; Who,
 as Good, and, indeed Gracious Princes, are so deeply affected in publick Judgments, unhappy Re∣volutions; or general Mercies and happy Revolutions; foreboded by Earthquakes or Gentle Moves of the Earth? For they are Nur∣sing Fathers and Nursing Mo∣thers of their People. And of what Princes can we hope or promise our selves better than of their so Ʋnited Majesties, Two-One in True Religion? As there∣fore the Supream Majesty was pleas'd to give particular Dire∣ctions to Themselves of those Tremblings of Earth; whether for Judgment and Repentance; or for Mercy; in their Port in
 Jamaica; styl'd Royal; and in this their Capital City; and not only so, but peculiarly in the Camp Royal in Flanders; So All these Discourses upon All, are most Humbly and with profound Obeysance first laid at their Ma∣jesties Feet; as having the first National Episcopacy committed to them from God in Succession to Constantine the first Christian Prince; in much greater and tru∣er Right, than the Popes have their Primacy from Peter; or his Hierarchy their Episcopacy, from the Apostles; And next it is Presented to the National Episcopacy so Constituted by their Majesties; even as an Evan∣gelical
 Ministry, is, I hope, more immediately committed to them by Christ; wherein being near to Christ; as in their National Episcopacy to their Majesties; they can, and I doubt not, will Represent to them what is accor∣ding to his Gospel by this Mi∣nistration. For wherein have we in the History of Scripture found a greater Configuration of the happiness and stability of Times? than when David's, and Na∣than's; Jehosaphat's, Micaiah's, and Jehaziel's; Joash's and Iehoiadah's; Zerubbabel's, and Joshuah's; Nehemiah's and Ez∣ra's have been conjoin'd! And in Church History, than when
 Constantine's and Athanasius's; Theodose's and Ambrose's; the Protestant Princes and Luther's &c. and in our Nation; than when such as K. Edw. VI. and Cranmer, &c. or Q. Eliz. & Jewel, &c. have been Ʋnited in Pub∣lick Reformation. And oh that at such a time as this, General Reformation by Both might be tinctur'd with the Knowledge of the Kingdom of Christ; when (by the Sure Word of Prophecy (deeply to be search'd,) it is so near; How great Honour would be return'd from hence! All which is most Humbly Prayed by

