


My much Revered.
I Most Humbly, and in a deep sense of my own Ʋnwortiness, yet Take upon my self to be a Minister of Jesus Christ, to Recommend to you the most Profund, and Serious Setting your Hearts to Measure, to the utmost we can Attain, this Pattern of Ezekiels Temple, and Throne; And that You would to that End beg of God the Use of the Reed (of much more value then Pastoral Staves, Crosiers, or the much disputed Power of the Keys,) till He comes, whose Right indeed the Keys are, with the Golden Reed; which is the Measure of the Full Stature of the Mystical Man Jesus Christ, that is, the Angel of the Covenant; even Jehovah in our Nature; whom we seek coming by Himself into Himself the Temple, and Throne.
In this Pattern undoubtedly lie Hid the Treasures of the many ways Vari∣ated wisdom of God, till It be shown by the Church to Principalities, and Powers: All Dates therefore of Time are Given, as I shew, by this Temple in its various States, till at the Ascension of Christ It was Rear'd, and Anoint∣ed; as Appears in that Vision, Rev. c. 4. c. 5. But as the Apostle speaks in a like case; It is in Heaven, and there Reserv'd; But a Counter part is Given on Earth in such proportions, as Infinite Wisdom hath Thought fit, In as much as He permitted, and Swore to permit an Apostasie, or Mystery of Iniquity to have Time, Times, and Half a Time, and to Work Early in order to it.
There are therefore Four Living Creatures, Revel. 6. sent as it were out of this Temple, with their Voices, Come and see this Temple, and Throne in the Gospel Frame; The First had only the High Great Note of Thunder in the First Preaching of the Apostles; While in that Time, the Mighty Man of War, the Lord is his Name, went forth Conquering, and to Conquer: Then Things Flatted; Yet while the Living Creatures were in Motion, the Apostolic Ministery was yet Continuing; Till at the Beginning of the Fourth Seal, the Last Voice was Given out; And They ceas'd just at the Death of Alexander Severus. Who as a Renownedly Just Prince, was ordained by God, to be in his Just Ballances, a Symbol of the Half Time of the Church Pure, or at the Equipoiz of it Purity, according to Ezek. 46. v. 9. &c. From that Time It Declin'd, yet so that there were Emissions from the Temple in Heaven not yet shut, and Appearances from it, the Apostasie not being entred.
But at the First Trumpet, the Apostasie of 1260 Days or Years entred; Then that Temple was Measur'd, and shut, c. 11. 1. and the Court with∣out cast to the Gentiles to be Trodden under Foot. This lasts till the Se∣venth
 Trumpet, and is not expir'd by Seven Times, or Years, viz. till 97.
From that Time, All Church States shall Return more and more to the Apo∣stolical First State; The Temple in Heaven being Open'd, and the Ark of Testament, and Tabernacle of Testimony more and more also seen; Till the Voice comes out of this Temple in the Seventh Vial; IT IS DONE, or All Prophecy is Fulfill'd in Vengeance on the Defilers, and Desolators of the Sanctuary; especially That Last, and Great one, the Antichristian Papacy; And then a Voice from the Throne, It is done in this Temple, Throne, and City coming down from Heaven in the New Jerusalem, Rev. 27. 6.
Our duty is therefore in the mean Time, to come as near as we can to the Pat∣tern; as it were in our Inward, Secret Temple worship, viz. of every ones Pri∣vate Judgment; For a High open One of Uniformity, we cannot yet Attain, what∣ever we may Think; And to See, that we do All according to it, by keeping Close to all that is Written without Least Additionals, seeing All Shades are Taken from Heavenly Things Themselves; Who then can Appoint them, but He who Alone hath the Proto-Type?
We ought also with all the Love, Condescension, Forbearance of one Another in our Dissents, to be Assistant one to Another; While the Temple is yet shut, and we in a Dark Place as to a Publick, though not a Private Glory; And not to fall out, and wrong one Another, because we see not yet as in that Opened Temple we shall, and are All Brethren now moving to it.
To you therefore, who seem to me to be Pillars, and of whom I have Great Con∣fidence, You shall be Pillars in that Temple, and shall go out no more; Having in some Measure observ'd your Doctrine, manner of Life, Purpose, Faith, Long-Suffering, Charity, Patience, by your Sermons or Writings, or more particular Knowledge of some of You; To You I first present This, as it were, Affixing Prophecy, as of old to the Pillars of the Temple, to make it most notable; And have made bold to Represent as in a Figure in you thus Join'd, however seemingly distant, the High union that ought to be now, and shall be of All such e're long, in the Churches of Christ.
And I Hope You will not, and I Beseech You do not Slight these Toings, as Fan∣cies, For I Rest upon the very Testimony of Jesus Christ, (which you know is the Spirit of Prophecy) and I Trust, that God hath enabled me (my only Pro∣vince,) to Transferr from Scripture to Scripture, and to Lay All, together by Words and Symbols of the Holy Spirit, which in such a Chain did never yield to a Phan∣tasm, especially Agreeing so with All History.
Now that God would make to You, and to all His Churches this discourse, a Shewing of the Pattern, Bless'd by Himself; That we may be Ashamed of our present, even our Best, as a Low, and Defiled State; is the Humble, and Ear∣nest Prayer of
My most Revered,

