



IT is a lovely thing (saith the Philosopher) to . Arist. benefit one, but to doe good to a nation, it is a thing divine. Your Excellencies love to Eng∣land, in not counting your blood, your life deare to preserve it; the eminencyes in your person of vertue and valour, of courage and courtesie, of greatnesse and goodnesse, of mercy and meeknesse, of admirable prudence, and unwearied patience, the worthy deeds already done unto this Nation, by your providence; all these obligeth all true English hearts, to beare a part in the Natio∣nal acknowledgment of your worth, and in accepting what is done by your Excellencie with all thankefulnesse. Your noble candor may be pleased then, to pardon this presumption of dedication, in a stranger to your knowledge, but an honourer of your ver∣tues; the rather, because the obscurest clot upon the fallow, re∣flects something of the sunne beames, as well as the mountaines, as the whole globe. These ensuing meditations are now mustered, to attend the Campe: and if the banner of your protection over∣spread them, he shall be comforted, who by them desires princi∣pally to comfort the Natio, yea the world. For if it be true as

Saint Augustine writes, that if one drop of the joyes of heaven should fall into hell, it would swallow up all the bitternesse of it: Tanta est dul∣cedo caeleslis gaudij, ut si una guttula difflueret in infernum totam amari∣tudinem infer∣ni absorberet, August Rom 5. 3. Rom. 8 37. Heb 10 35. Deut. 33. 26. 27. it may be hoped then, that a few drops of heavenly joyes, here presented [under your Excellencyes countenance] to my Coun∣trymen, ingulphed in an hell of outward miseries, may availe to allay their bitternesse, and cleare their eye sight (as Ionathans was after his tasting honey) to see thorough an hell of horror, their heavenly recovery. It is Englands present duty, to rejoyce in tribulations, to triumph under terrors, to confide under con∣flicts, to expect salvations, to veiw God by the eye of faith, as a refuge, as interwining us in his everlasting armes of preserva∣tion, as healing our breaches, as stanching our wounds, as pre∣paring all rankes among us, to enjoy a perpetuall unity, peace, amity, joy and jubilee, in despite of hell and Rome. All this God will do for us in righteousnes, but by terrible things. And during his pouring vialls of wrath upon the Antichristians, the English Church (with the other reformed) must stand on a sea of glasse mingled with fire. She shall apparantly see (as in a glasse) An∣tichristian Rev. 15. 2. 3. tumults, rising like wave after wave, yet Christ cal∣ming them, and causing all attempts ebbe into emptinesse, come to nothing. She shall stand on a sea mingled with fire: enduring hot service from inward contentions, and outward afflictions: these a while shall heat her, but not fire her; scorch her, but not rost her; bruise her heele perhaps, in some losses, but they shall not breake her, nor crumble her, into a totall desolation: for the ten King∣domes must stand by an unalterable decree, to undo Antichrist, Rev. 17. from the 12, to the end. though they a while may seeme to favour and fight for him. And she shall stand with the harpes of God, singing the songs of Moses songs of judgement, praises; for every new judgement upon her troublers, and destroyers: and singing too, the song of the lamb, songs of mercie, prayses, for every new deliverance, vouchsafed her from on high. All blessings from the omnipotent Lambe (who warreth against Antichrist, and will conquer) are craved for your Excellency, by all the reall lovers of this Nation, among Minimorum minimus Ter∣tul. ad Tral¦lian. whom I rest the meanest of Christs ministers, and to
July. 20 1644.
Your Excellencye most humbly devoted in all Christian service,

