


THE following Exposition is most hum∣bly Presented, with all Regards of Reverence and Honour, which the Laws and Ʋsages of this Nation have Affix'd to so Great a Character and Station; and to the Personage in it, with sincerest Veneration of the Exemplary Piety, Holiness of Conversati∣on, Largeness of Mind and Understanding, Sagaciousness of Reason, and Truly Christi∣an Equanimity, Condescention, and Evan∣gelical Catholickness of Spirit, so Illustrious in Him before all the Churches of Christ at this Time; and according to the full Per∣swasion of the Offerer; who therefore Be∣seeches the Acceptance of Himself, and of what is Presented.
And seeing such a Station is a large Province of doing Good; and that a Servant of God ought to improve it as so; There is nothing can be more Earnestly or Humbly Desired, then that this Exposition of so Grand a Portion or part of Scripture, may, if it should be con∣vinced
 of Falshood, or Contrariety to the Glory, Wisdom, Truth and Holiness of the Giver, be Redargued in the same manner, It is endeavour'd to be Argued; not with Re∣spect to circumstantial Mistakes, or Over∣sights, from which nothing in the present state is Free, and without any personal References to the Expositor (who before hand lays himself Prostrate) which can neither add nor take away from substantial Truths: For so is the Apostolick Precept to an Evangelick Per∣son seated in Authority to do it; to Reprove by Elenchizing or Argumentation; when the merit of the case requires it; But if on the o∣ther side what is written be upright, and words of Truth; such a Person will, I doubt not, take care that He that hath so Laboured in the word and Doctrine may receive the double Honour al∣loted by Christ; These are obligations on Him, that is entrusted with a Gospel Oeconomy.
Now the Concernment is very great, viz. The Exposition of the Prayer so universally Styled The Lord's Prayer; Both because the Prayer is an inestimable Treasure, and even Treasury to all Christians; and that in its very
 Repetition, it is made so essential to the Form of Publick Worship in this (as it owns it self) National Church, and by Law Established.
The Exposition is also Levelled to the Highest Point of Christianity; If it be; as it is declared; so supreme a Truth of the Gospel, as the Kingdom of Christ, peculiar to Him as the Messiah, as the great Son of Man is; who hath it written on his Ve∣stim, and on his Thigh, King of Kings, Lord of Lords; Not only as He hath unchangeably a Kingdom, as the eternal Word, or as He now hath All Power in Heaven, and Earth. But in a visi∣ble glorious Kingdom, the Kingdom of the Thou∣sand Years; that great Festival of Tabernacles,Nehem. 8. 15. that shall be celebrated with everlasting Joy, with Lawrels, Olives and Palms, with all the Glory, Verdure and Flourish of Paradise, when the Pal∣lace of the highest Heaven shall be, as it were, left for that Time; the Glory and Throne of God and of the Lamb shall come down with the New Jerusalem into the New Heaven above, and into the New Earth beneath, as in Heaven and on Earth, according to this Prayer. This Tabernacle-stateRev. 2. 13. of God with, and comming down to be with men, Not They with him; gives style to this Feast of
 Tabernacles, so renowned by the Prophet Zecha∣ry, c. 14. Because it is not the everlasting Pallace, but the Tabernacle of a thousand Years; at the end of which, as a Kingdom Deliver'd up, It is drawn up again to God All in All, and All Tabernacle-State ceases; And seeing now, as is most constantly Affirmed, This Kingdom, according to an exact Calculation of Scripture-time, shall be in its Succession, and to prepare for its Glory within five Summers; and that as in the Sermon upon the Witnesses Rising, herewith Printed; There shall be the Avant-Courriers of that Succession, all along these very Five Years: This solemn Appeal, ac∣cording to the Greatness and Dignity of the Sub∣jects Treated of, is Presented to such an Angel, in the Church of Ghrist as is Tuly Hoped, in whom the National Episcopacy and Pastoral Office draws to a Point, and Unit, and so is Pre∣sented to All in Him, By

