


Most Dread Soveraigns. Most Reverend and Noble Lords. Most Worthy Senators and Patriots.
THE Great God of Heaven having made known of old, even to Pagan Princes, by his Ser∣vants the Prophets, what should come to pass hereafter, concerning the Kingdom of
 his Son, and the cleansing of his Sanctu∣ary, his truly Catholic Church; He hathDan. 8. 14. enabled me, the most unworthy of all his Ser∣vants, the least of Saints, and the chiefest of Sinners, for the last five years to search, and to understand by Books the number of years,Dan. 9. 2. He would accomplish in the Patience or Delay of the Kingdom of Christ, and in the De∣solations of his Sanctuary; I having then cer∣tain knowledge, that the. Accomplishment of those years is, as near, as 1697, Have believ'd it my Duty, in Fear of God, who hath committed the Dispensation to me; as also in Allegiance, and Fidelity to the Su∣preme Government of these Nations, to make publication of the Time; and also to explain All those Symbols, wherein the Di∣vine Prophesie hath been, though more hid∣denly, yet as certainly, when justly concerted, conveyed, as by plainest words; and to make Dedication of it to the Soveraign Govern∣ment of this Nation, with a lowest Obei∣sance, as the meanest of Subjects; and yet with the Assurance, arising from the Evi∣dence of Sacred Truth; that so the Prophe∣sie
 might be known in the Grand Pretori∣um, or Pallace of the Nation, and thereby in all other Places.
The View presented is worthy the pro∣foundest Consideration of the Greatest Princes, Statists, and Divines; Four Universal Mo∣narchies, which have one after another, borne such sway in the World; and whose Mo∣narchs caus'd their Terror in the Land of the Living, for near Daniels TwentyEzek. 32. 17. &c. Dan. 8. 14. Three Hundred Evenings, and Mornings, prophetically multiplyed into years; but most of Them being gone down into the Pit, have laid their Swords under their Heads, with their Iniquities on their Bones; and to Rise with them, if Enemies to the Kingdom of God; and herewith, the An∣tichristian State for above these last twelve hundred years, with the Monarchs of the Ancient Imperial Roman Territories, who have for most of the space given their PowerRevel. 17. 17. to the Beast; But some have already, The Rest shall Renunciate to that Adulterous Church; and though some of them now with a High
 Hand cause their Terror in the Land of the Living, yet They shall without Repen∣tance beare their Shame also in going down to the sides of the Pit; But how much more does that indeed Ʋniversal Kingdom of Christ at the end of these Four deserve Thought, that shall receive These, and many more Kingdoms into its Bosom, and it self never End, and that within so few years.
It is therefore Princely Wisdom, and No∣bleness to search, and to command, thatActs 17. 11. search be made into the Scriptures of the New and Old Testament, whether These Things be so or no; Not that Divine Oracles can be over-rul'd by a Counsel of Angels, or Men; but that by the Divini∣ty of Holy Records the certainty of theProv. 22. 21. Words of Truth may be Receiv'd; For the more They are examin'd, the more evi∣dent their Truth will be; And least, (the Things being indeed so) so Grand a Prote∣stant Assembly should under-value Them, and Know with Disadvantage hereafter; so Great a Prophesie hath been among Them,Ezek. 2. 5. and They Rejected it.

 And why should it be thought incredi∣ble, that the God of Heaven, the Reveal∣er of Secrets should so near the Time make Known, as He hath always done, by whom He pleases, the Great Things, that are to come to pass so shortly.
God hath honour'd this Nation, with a most stupendious mirror of Providence, concern∣ing the Expiration of the Papacy so nigh at Hand; why may He not be pleas'd to Honour it also with such a Glass of Pro∣phesie, that by the Understanding of the Times, our Israel may know what it1. Chron. 12. 32. ought to do, and All the People be most devotely at their Command, both as to Af∣fairs Ecclesiastical, Civil, Military! for the steerage of All which the Consideration of the Kingdom of Christ so near would be as the Pole-star.
For that an Account of All may be Render'd with Comfort to that Univer∣sal Kingdom so nigh Approaching, what Purity in our Religion, Holiness, Justice, Mercy, Amendment of Life, Reformation
 of Manners, Contempt of the World, Magnanimity, Moderation of Church-Power, Brotherly Love is necessary; even in preparation to so Glorious a Revolution?
Now the Eternal Wisdom and Coun∣sellor give his Urim, and Thummim to the Evangelical Ministry of the Nation; a Divine Sentence into the Kings Lips that His Mouth in this Matter may not Transgress in Judgment; a Spirit of Judg∣ment, to them who sit in Counsel; and an Ear to his Churches, to Hear, what the Spirit sayeth to them; that so a People in these Nations may be made ready, prepa∣red for the Lord, and a High way for our God; So prayeth
GREAT SOVERAIGNS, And Supreme Councel,

