


Srs.
THe Dedication of the ensueing Modell of the Holy Citty doth most properly belong to you, as being the Lords Heritage and Servants: In the old Administration, The Sons of Aron had Thirteene Cittyes and the Levites eight and Fourty, but in the New and better Administration the Servants of Jesus haue not one Citty to dwell in amongst all the Kingdomes of the Earth. Methinks I heare you Speaking as the Sons of the Prophets to Elisha vizt: Loe the Place where wee dwell is to strait for us, Let us goe unto Jordan and take thence every one a beame, and Lett us make a Place there where wee may dwell. Tis certaine your Place is to Strait, and though Some of you haue roome too much, yet others (unhappy unequallity) haue noe Place at all. I could Present you with a Catalogue of all the Evills you haue suffered for many yeares, and of the many evills▪ the world hath sufferd by you. But Prima abiêrunt, & Ecce nova facio omnia, Old Things are passed away, and loe I make all things New, Saith Christ in the Revel: I shall omit mentioning the forma Evills and proceed to the remedying of them. And doe here present you with a modell of a New OEconomie, and tis this. I haue appointed you a Citty in each Nation and Kingdome to dwell in, where in you shalle liue peaceably and quietly, and shall be sufficiently provided for of all things necessary for your holy Functions, soe that all Temptations shall be taken away from you of acting or moveing irregularly; From this Citty placed in the midst' of each Nation, you are to goe or ride out, as it shall please you, every month by turnes, and heale each Nation, and on the Bells of your horses shall be wrote Holynesse to the Lord. The Kings & Princes of the world and all Temporall Governments will find their accott. in building
 you such a Citty, for tis not to be expressed what happinesse will accrue to them and to all the world thereby: This Citty will put an end to all the miseryes the World labours under on account of Religion And wee shall heare from you rideing on your Red, white, and Speckled Horses that Joyfull Report mentioned in the 1st. cap. of the Prophet Zacha. & 11. verse. Wee haue walked to and fro thorow the Earth, and behold all the Earth sitteth still and is at Rest. If this be the glorious effects of your circular Preaching as wee haue all the reason in the world to thinke it will. Tis no wonder that the Kings of the Earth will bring their Glory and honour into this Citty, not onely as it is a Citty dedicated to the honour of God, but as it is a Citty whose Inhabitans will establish Peace and Tranquillitty in their Kingdoms. It was in the heart of King David, to build God a House, and though God had not commanded it, yet he most graciously accepted his good intentions. But it has not yet been in the heart of any King to build God a Citty they haue built themselues Cittyes for their owne honour and glory. Is not this Great Babylon that I have built for the House of the Kingdome, by the might of my Power and for the honour of my Majtye▪ Thus speakes the proud Emperour Nebuchadnezzar, and he spoake rhe truth, he had built Babell for the honour of his Majty. And many are the Cittyes, whieh both the Heathen and Christian Emperours haue built for their owne honour, and haue put uppor them their owne Names, as Caesarea, Allexandria, Constantinople, &c. but wee find not one by the Name of Deople or Christople. When I consider how in a speciall manner Gods hath set Crownes on many Christian Princes heades, and has raised some from a Private station to the highest dignity, and giuen them Severall Kingdomes and many Thousand Cittyes, I say when I consider this, it makes me wonder, to find none returning back one single Citty by way of gratitude to the Donour. Pudet haec opprobria nobis &c. Tis True They haue built and ginen him Severall Houses, But what is a House or a few Houses A magnificent and Royall Citty would be more Suitable to the Majtie of Heaven and Earth then a House? Besides in this Citty he hath said shall be noe Temple, plainely insinuateing that the Temple Admi∣nistration should be ended and be changed into that of a Citty. To me it seemes to be a most Just and reasonable Thing That in Every Nation and Kingdom God the Giuer and Governour of all should haue one Citty built and dedicated to his Honour, wherem his Seruants who wait in his Courts and Minister at the Altar should be honourably provided for, that their Lineings and fortunes may noe more be precarions, and subject to the Will of men, as to the Shame of Christianity they are at this day. I could men∣tion what evill hath befaln the World on accont of Gods Ministers being-chosen by men and not by Lot, and by haueing their allowance and de∣pendance from Man, but I shall here omit it haueing spoaken of it in another
 place. I could heartily wish that Christian Kings and Princes and all Tem∣porall Governments would Seriously consider on this Point. Who can tell but that their building Such a Citty, in which the Dispensers of Gods Graces and Blessings to each Nation, may dwell, may be as Sweet incense in the Nostrills of God in and some measure attone him, to stop the Rage of Fire and Sword which at present layes somany of their owne Cittyes wast? I will hope there fore, That (as Dauid Thought of building Gods a House) soe that Some King or other, whom God shall deliner from many Trou∣bles, and bestow on him Crownes and victory over his Enimyes, and shall Establish him on his Throne in Peace, will thinke of so holy a worke, and with a most gratefull heart build a Royall Citty to the God of Heaven, as a Pattern and Example to other Princes. And tis my oppinion that That Prince who first sets his hand to so holy a worke will as far exceed all others, as a Citty shall exceed a house or Temple, T'or as Soloman exceed all other Kings of his Time. To you Therefore the Preachers of the Gospell who are to be Inhabiters of this Citty, To you, whose interests are soe unhappily mixt in Temporalls, To you who haue beene soe much abused, and who haue abused so much, To you who are, and haue beene soe unhappily and unequally provided for in this Late Administration, I addresse my selfe; And make it my Request, that instead of writeing, disputing and Preaching one against another, and instead of makeing partyes and Factions, and stirring up Kings and Princes and the Particular States where you dwell to defend your Controversyes and interests; That you rather apply your selves to dispose and move the Hearts of Prince and People to the building you a Citty, wherein you may liue peaccably, and out of wen. you may with ease and Comfort dispence the pure word of God to Each Nation. This will be more for the Honour of God, for your interest and happinesse, and for the interest peace and Happinesse of each King and People. And who then is willing to consecrate his Service this day unto the Lord? The 1 Cron. 29 cap. & 5 verse. This to me seemes to be a more pleasing Text then, Curse ye Meros, or Some others that I could Name, I recommend you to the Demonstration of Truth in the modell of the Citty and followeing Pages, and will not further adde, onely when your Citty is built, and you are in your Possessions, I hope you will be very Thanke full to God, ands not be alltogether unmindfull of


