


SIR,
THIS Sermon, which at first was the meer product of your earnest desires, and then (for the greatest part of it,) the subject of your favourable and candid attention at Lin∣colone; is now by your more earnest impor∣tunity, seconded with the powerfull request of the Honourable and Reverend Judges; (though not without some timorous, and reasonable reluctancy) presented to your hand. When the Prophet Elijah was taken up into Heaven, there was a double portion of his Spirit conferred upon Elisha, who succceded him in his Prophetical Of∣fice.
Had some such (though much in∣ferion) measure of the Learning, Piety, and Spirit of that Right Reverend Fa∣ther in God, Robert, late Lord-Bishop of Lincolne, been imparted to me, who, by his undeserved favour and choice, had the honour to succeed him (when he was taken up into an higher Orb of the Church, and too soon after, from us, into Heaven) in his care and charge at Boothby-Painel; I should then with more chearfulness and alacrity, have presumed to publish this dis∣course; hoping it might find, a little of that acceptance and approbation; which his most excellent Sermons, have justly merited amongst the best of those, that have, for some years past, honoured and enriched our Eng∣lish Nation. But indeed, Sir, I am as far short of him in those his real excellencies, as I am, in time and stature. A very stri∣pling, and puny, to that Man of Parts and Learning. He left me his Rectory,
but not his Spirit, either of Teaching, or Ru∣ling: And though I have his Table, Stool, and Candlestick, yet if I thought my self, one jot the more learned for them; I should be no wiser than he was, who (as Lucian reports) that he might be taken for an eminent Philosopher, bought the Earthen Lamp of Epictetus, at no less rate or price than three hundred drachma's. I must there∣fore acknowledge, I am as unworthy to write after him, as I was to succeed him; and beg your belief, that the great reverence I have for his Name and Memory, and those many obliging encouragements, he vouch∣safed me, whilst he lived; have made me more unwilling to appear in public; least I should derogate any thing, from that name and honour, he hath appropriated to Booth-by-Painel: Where you have an undoubted right, to succeed in the possessions and patro∣nage, of your honoured Father, and that worshipfull and excellent Person, Thomas
Harington Esquire, your Religious Grandfather; as being the true Heir, not only of his Inheritance, but (which is far better) of his Pious conformity and Loyalty. To him Doctor Sanderson dedicated some of his Sermons, and was most affectionalty esteemed, by him, for them. What pro∣tection and favour he vouchsafed to the Right Reverend my Predecessor; I have good hopes you will not deny to his hum∣ble successor, and that which he doth now present unto you; especially since both are your own, by a double right or obligation, of desire and service. Not to detain you any longer with this mean address. May the God of Grace and Mercy, replenish both your self and your truly Pious and Virtuous Consort; with all spiritual and temporal blessings in this life; and Crown you with those which are eternal in the life to come, is the earnest and daily prayer of,
Trin. Coll. Sept. 17. 1678.
Sr,

