



MY LORD,
WE see in Your Lordship such a plain and familiar Example of that Wisdom which SOLO∣MON preaches in the Book of EC∣CLESIASTES, that I am invited thereby to this boldness of prefixing Your Lordship's Name before the Pa∣raphrase I have made upon it, and upon the Book that follows it.
A Wisdom, which hath raised Your Mind above the deceitfulness of Ri∣ches, and of all Worldly Glories: a Di∣vine Wisdom, which hath raised You above your self; and made the faith∣ful service of God, and of the King, the sole scope of all Your Endeavours.
It is a token surely of the Divine fa∣vour towards us, and ought to be rec∣koned
among the felicities of our So∣vereign's Reign, that a Vertue so active and laborious in doing good, is placed in such a wide and capacious Sphere, as that wherein Your Lordship moves. From whence Your influences are no less powerful than they are benign: stirring us up to industry, and quick∣ning us, by Your own great Example, to do our Duties uprightly and un∣weariedly in our several Stations.
Some small service I hope I have per∣formed in the Explication of these two holy Books. In the first of which (ac∣cording to the ancient Opinion) the foundation is laid for a due progress unto the other: the Mind not being fitted for such sublime thoughts, as lye hid under the Figures, in the Book of Canticles, till it hath learnt by the Ec∣clesiastes, the vanity of all earthly En∣joyments; and, by looking down up∣on them with contempt, be disposed to value heavenly Blessings. To this
purpose Origen discourses in his Pre∣face to the Song of Songs.
Which is a Depth into which I have adventured to dive, though it hath been famous, as one speaks, for the shipwrack of many great Pilots: who went too far, as I conceive, and sought for more there than is to be found; and therefore miscarried. Which Rock I have carefully avoided; and steered my Course by such a clear and certain Direction (which I thought I espied in other holy Writings) that if I have kept my eye stedfastly fixt up∣on it, I am satisfied hath not misled me, but carried me to the right sense of this admirable Piece of Divine Poetry.
Which I trust I have made so evi∣dent, that if the Readers will seriously consider the Rise and Ground I have taken for my Exposition: even they who have made bold to prophane this Book with their wanton imagina∣tions, will hereafter look upon it with reverence.

If in any Part of this difficult Work, I have mistaken my way Your Lordship I know hath the Goodness, not only to pardon the errours of my weakness, but, to accept of the sin∣cerity of my endeavours to do Ho∣nour to the Holy Scriptures: by re∣presenting them, to the best of my power, in their native Beauty, that is simplicity, unto the eyes of those, who have the heart to make them their Study.
Praying God to continue Your Lord∣ship a long Blessing to this Church, by Your prudent, steady and obliging Conduct, in the Government of us, who have the happiness to be under Your particular care; I remain,
MY LORD, 
