



My Lord,
THough I have not pursued the de∣sign, which I have long had in my thoughts, of making some publick acknowledgment of my obligations to your Lordship, for placing me, when I thought not of it, in this Station which I hold in Covent-Garden: yet I have onely deferred it, till the most proper opportunity, as it seems to me, for this small expression of my gratitude. For I could not have prefixed your Lordships Name to any Work of mine, which I
believe would have been so acceptable, as this wherewith I now present you; de∣siring it may remain as a lasting Testi∣mony of the sense I have of the favours I have received from your Lordship. Whom as I have always observed to have a par∣ticular Veneration and Affection for the holy Scriptures, so I know to be a con∣stant Reader of them: And therefore humbly offer this assistance to your Lord∣ship for the understanding of the oldest Book (as I have shown) of that Sacred Volumn, which, I am confident, you esteem above all earthly Treasures.
There have been many large Volumns written for its Explication; which will cost abundance of time and pains to per∣use; and after all, the design and scope of the Whole may not be understood, while the Readers mind stays so long, in the several Parts. I have therefore taken quite another course, and only given the sense of it in a compendious, but perspicuous, Paraphrase (or Meta∣phrase rather, as the Ancients would
have called it) which is not much longer than the Text, put into other words. It would have been more easie to have in∣larged it, than it was to make it thus short: which I the rather chose to do, not meerly because it will be more usefull for those who have little leasure, or less money; but because thereby I have pre∣served, I perswade my self, the Majesty of the Book; and made it still look not like the Word of a man, but, as it is in∣deed, the Word of God.
Which I could never have presented to your Lordship and the World, more seasonably than now; when the State of our affairs is so dangerously perplexed, that we cannot stand upright, nor pre∣serve our souls from sinking into the sad∣dest fears, or discontents, or some such troublesom passion, without a strong con∣fidence in the most Wise, Just, and Merci∣full Providence of the Almighty: which Orders things, in unsearchable ways, to the good of those that stedfastly adhere unto him in faithfull Obedience. Which
is so admirably represented in this holy Book, that one cannot read it seriously, and not be moved to resign the conduct of our selves and all that concerns us unto God's most blessed will and plea∣sure; to wait patiently for him, as the Psalmist speaks, and keep his way; not to be disheartned by any trouble that befalls us, much less forsake our integrity: but still expect the End of the Lord, as S. James speaks, i. e. the issue to which he will bring our troubles; perswading our selves that he is very pitifull, and of tender Mercy. And therefore, as He doth not love to grieve us by laying afflic∣tions on us; so is wont many times to bring the greatest good out of the grea∣test evil: and to produce it by such un∣expected means, as shall surprise us with the greater admiration of his Wisedom and Goodness.
For a great Reader of Ancient Wri∣ters tells us, he hath observed in the Histories of all Ages, that the great e∣vents which determine the fate of great
Affairs, do happen less frequently ac∣cording to design, than by accident and occasion. Our enterprizes here below are derived from above; and we but Engins and Actors of pieces that are composed in heaven. Homo histrio, Deus verò Poeta est. God is the Sove∣reign Poet, and we cannot refuse the part which he appoints us to bear in the Scene. All our business is to act it well; chearfully complying with his Orders concerning us, and submitting our selves to the direction of his Providence.
To which, and all other Religious courses, did we more heartily apply our selves, there is no doubt but that in this Book we might read God's gracious in∣tentions towards this Church and King∣dom. Which his most mercifull Providence would bring, as he did his Servant Job, through all these clouds which now in∣compass us, into a splendor incomparably beyond all that, wherein hitherto we have appeared. Why should we despair of it, when he shews by the unexpected discove∣ry,
which he hath made, of the designs of our Enemies against us, that he hath no mind to cast us off; if we will not carelesly cast away our selves, by the continued neglect of our duty to him?
God of his infinite goodness, awaken all our hearts to make such a good use both of that deliverance, and of our pre∣sent distress (which is so great, that we see no way out of it, but by his power alone to whom Job owed his resurrection) that we may, in the issue, be the more happy and the better established, for having been so miserably unsetled. In which pray∣er, I am sure your Lordship will cordial∣ly joyn with,
My Lord, 
April 19.79.
