



MADAM,
THere were anciently so many Noble Women, as well as Men, who, even then made the stu∣dy of the Scripture their delight, when Christian piety began to decay; that a great part of S. Hierom's pains was bestowed in opening the meaning of them to Blesilla, Marcella, Melania, Paula and her Daughter Eustochium, with several other eminent Roman Ladies: whose Songs (as he writes to Asella)
were nothing but Psalms; whose discourse was the Gospel; whose pleasure
 was continence; and whose life was fa∣sting and abstinence.
More particularly he addressed his services of this kind, to the last of those Ladies, Eustochium; to whom he gives an Epithet, importing her prodigious industry, with the most fervent desire, in the study of hea∣venly knowledge: and therefore in∣scribed to her the most elaborate of all his Commentaries upon the Pro∣phet Isaiah (as he did afterward those upon Ezekiel) which were sent her by parts in XVIII. Books; before every one of which there is a solemn Preface to her.
By whose example, and to heigh∣ten that esteem and love of Divine Wisedom, wherewith, in an age of folly and vanity, God hath alrea∣dy inspired your excellent mind, I have presumed to dedicate to your GRACE this small Work of mine;
 wherein, with no small labour, I have expounded the most usefull Book of the PROVERBS.
Which commends it self to your Grace's acceptance, both by the
ex∣cellence of the matter; containing (as the words are VIII.
6. XXII. 20.) most noble and princely things; choice Maxims, built upon the old∣est Observations, and that will stand firm and be found true, as long as the world endures: and from the dignity and splendour of the Authour; whose illustrious name and pedigree, is set down on purpose (as S. Basil thinks) in the entrance of the Book, to give the greater Authority to his words.
It is SOLOMON, to whom the Lord himself said, 1 Kings III. 12. Behold, I have given thee a wise, and an understanding heart, so that there was none like thee before thee, neither
 after thee shall any arise like unto thee: And again, it is recorded of him there, IV. 29, that God gave Solomon wisedom and understanding exceeding much, and largeness of heart, even as the Sand that is on the Sea shore. For as the Sand of the Sea incompasses all the Coasts of this World wherein we inhabit; so did his Mind com∣prehend all things as well Humane as Divine.
This is that Admirable person, to the study of whose rare Wisedom I invite your Grace: which that it may be had in greater Veneration, the name also of his Mighty Ance∣stour, saith the same S.
Basil, is ad∣ded in the title unto his own: to put us in mind that he was the Wise Son of a Wise Father and Prophet, who from his infancy had instructed him in the holy Writings, and made him fit to succeed him in his Throne.
 That likewise contributes not a little to the weight of these Instructi∣ons, that the Authour of them was a KING; and a
King in the holy City of God, whose Authority he had; which being a name of regu∣lar and legal power (as the same Fa∣ther still observes) it is manifest that the Precepts delivered by such a per∣son, and one who was truly worthy of that high title of a King, are of the greatest worth and moment: because they have respect to nothing but merely the common benefit, and publick good; and cannot be suspected to have been framed and composed with any aim at private interest. For that is the difference, saith he, between a Tyrant and a King: that the former hath regard onely to himself in all that he doeth and designs; but the other consults the profit and welfare of those whom he governs.
 So that, in short, this is the Work of him, who was truly invested with that threefold glory, which the An∣cients ascribe to
Trismegistus; the power of a King, the illumination of a Priest, and the learning of a Philoso∣pher.
But the excellence of this Book will be best understood by the seri∣ous perusal of it; which will disco∣ver it to be a Magazine of all sorts of Wisedom: so full of golden Sen∣tences (as King
James gives its cha∣racter in his Instructions to his Son) and moral Precepts, in all things that concern our conversation in this world, as among all the prophane Philosophers and Poets, there is not to be found so rich a Store-house of Natural Wisedom, agreeing with the Will and Divine Wise∣dom of God.
 And therefore it is most worthy the constant study of all persons, who would accomplish themselves with the most usefull knowledge: but of none more, than of those that are Great, whom
Solomon instructs how to be Greater, and to make their Greatness also lasting and durable: and especially of such whose Under∣standings are Great and Capacious; able to penetrate into the depths even of the Civil Precepts and Advertise∣ments contained in this Book;
sprin∣ging (as our great Advancer of Lear∣ning speaks) out of the most profound secrets of Wisedom, and flowing over in∣to a large field of variety.
In which I am confident your Grace will delight to walk: whose exquisite Judgment cannot but find the highest entertainment, in weigh∣ing the Wisedom, as well as the Truth, and Usefulness of these Pa∣rables:
 and whose Vertue and Pru∣dence disposes the hours of your life with such order, as not to let you want time, both to ponder them your self, and to instill them also in∣to the Mind of your Children.
Whose future happiness depends, upon their being early seasoned with such Principles as these: which will be the most effectual Preservatives against the infectious air wherein we breathe: and a Treasure of such in∣estimable price, as will keep their Minds from being corrupted, by all the briberies of Fortune (as we call it) or from being dejected at any cross turn of it; which, in this world, must be sometimes expected.
For such is the inconstancy of all humane things, such is the frailty even of our own bodies, as your Grace hath been lately taught by a tedious Sickness (from which I most
 heartily congratulate your Grace's happy recovery) that we love not our selves, if we seek not after a bet∣ter Good, which is firm and perma∣nent: a good that can withstand corruption; and defend it self against the force of time, and all the acci∣dents of this World.
In the prosecution of which su∣preme Good, I commend your Grace to the blessing of the Almighty; who always favours the least desires of be∣ing good, and therefore will never desert your sincere indeavours of it: which are not unknown to Him, while you prefer the Closet to the Theatre, and look more to the inside of Vertue, than to its outward ap∣pearances.
But I forget my self; and stand in need of a pardon for this long Ad∣dress: which I shall the more easily obtain, if your Grace please to be∣lieve
 nothing emboldned me to it, but the opinion I have that your Goodness is as unlimited as my de∣sires to approve my self, what I stand bound by many obligations to be,
May it please your Grace,

