



My Lord,
AMongst Consolations, it is not the least, to repre∣sent to a Mans self, like Examples of Ca∣lamity in others. For Examples give a quicker Impression, than Arguments; And besides they certifie us that, which the Scripture also tendreth for satis∣faction; That no new thing is happened unto us. This they do the better, by how much the Examples, are liker in circumstances, to our own Case; And more especially, if they fell upon Persons, that are greater, and worthier, than our selves. For as it savoureth of Vanity, to match our selves highly, in our own conceit; So on the otherside, it is a good sound Conclusion, that if our Betters have sustained the like Events, we have the less cause to be grieved.
In this kind of Consolation, I have not been wanting to my Self, Though as a Christian, I have tasted (through Gods great goodness,) of higher Remedies. Having therefore, through the Variety of my Reading, set before me, many

Examples, both of Ancient and Later Times, my Thoughts (I confess) have chiefly stayed upon three Particulars, as the most Eminent, and the most Resembling. All three Persons, that had held chief place of Authority in their Countries; All three ruined, not by War, or by any other Disaster, but by Justice, and Sentence, as Delinquents, and Criminals; All three famous Writers, insomuch as the remembrance of their Calamity, is now as to Posterity, but as a little Picture of Night-work, remaining amongst the fair, and excellent Ta∣bles, of their Acts, and Works. And all three (if that were anything to the matter,) fit Examples to quench any Mans Ambition of Rising again; For that they were every one of them restored with great glory, but to their further Ruine and Destruction, ending in a violent Death. The Men were, Demosthenes, Cicero, and Seneca; Persons, that I durst not claim Affinity with, except the Similitude of our Fortunes had contracted it. When I had cast mine Eyes upon these Examples, I was carried on further to observe, how they did bear their Fortunes, and principally, how they did employ their Times, being banished, and disabled for Publick Business: To the end, that I might learn by them; And that they might be, as well my Counsellours, as my Comforters. Whereupon I happened to note, how diversly, their Fortunes wrought upon them, especially in that point, at which I did most aim which was the employing of their Times, and Pens. In Cicero, I saw, that during his Banishment, (which was almost two years,) he was so softned, and dejected, as he wrote nothing, but a few Womanish Epistles. And yet, in mine opinion, he had least reason of the Three, to be discouraged: For that al∣though it was judged, and judged by the highest kind of Judg∣ment, in form of a Statute, or Law, that he should be ba∣nished; And his whole Estate confiscated, and seized; And his houses pulled down; And that it should be highly penal, for any Man, to propound his Repeal; Yet his Case, even then, had no great Blot of Ignominy, but it was thought, but a Tempest of Popularity, which overthrew him. Demost∣henes contrariwise, though his Case was foul, being condem∣ned for Bribery; And not simple Bribery, but Bribery in the Nature of Treason, and Disloyalty; yet nevertheless took

so little knowledge of his Fortune, as during his Banish∣ment, he did much busie himself, and intermeddle with mat∣ters of State; And took upon him to Counsel the State, (as if he had been still at the Helm,) by letters; As appears by some Epistles of his, which are extant. Seneca indeed, who was condemned, for many Corruptions, and Crimes, and banished into a solitary Island, kept a Mean; And though his Pen did not freese, yet he abstained from intruding into Matters of Business; But spent his time, in writing Books, of excellent Argument, and Use, for all Ages; Though he might have made better Choice, (sometimes) of his Dedi∣cations.
These Examples confirmed me much in a Resolution, (whereunto I was otherwise inclined,) to spend my Time wholly in Writing; And to put forth that poor Talent, or half Talent, or what it is, that God hath given me, not as heretofore to particular Exchanges, but to Banks, or Mounts of Perpetuity, which will not break. Therefore having not long since, set forth a part of my Instauration; Which is the Work, that in mine own judgment, (Si nunquam fallit Imago,) I do most esteem; I think to proceed in some new paris thereof. And although I have received from many Parts beyond the Seas, Testimonies touching that Work, such as beyond which I could not expect at the first, in so abstruse an Argument; yet nevertheless I have just cause to doubt, that it flies too high over Mens Heads: I have a purpose therefore, (though I break the order of Time,) to draw it down to the sense, by some Patterns of a Natural Story, and Inquisition. And again, for that my Book of Advancement of Learn∣ing, may be some Preparative, or Key, for the better opening of the Instauration; Because it exhibits a Mixture, of new Conceits, and old; whereas the Instauration, gives the new unmixed, otherwise than with some little Aspersion of the old, for tastes sake; I have thought good to procure a Translati∣on of that Book, into the General Language, not without great and ample Additions, and Enrichment thereof; Espe∣cially in the Second Book, which handleth the Partition of Sciences: In such sort, as I hold it may serve, in lieu of the First Part, of the Instauration, and acquit my promise in that

part. Again, because I cannot altogether desert, the Civil Person, that I have born; Which if I should forget, Enough would remember; I have also entred into a work touching Laws; Propounding a Character of Justice, in a middle term, between the Speculative, and Reverend discourses of Philosophers, and the Writings of Lawyers, which are tied, and obnoxious to their particular Laws. And although it be true, that I had a purpose, to make a particular Digest, or Recompilement, of the Laws, of mine own Nation; Yet because it is a Work of Assistance, and that, that I cannot master by mine own Forces, and Pen, I have laid it aside. Now having in the Work of my Instauration, had in con∣templation, the general Good of Men, in their very Being, and the Dowries of Nature; And in my Work of Laws, the general good of Men likewise, in Society, and the Dow∣ries of Government; I thought in duty I owed somewhat unto mine own Country, which I ever loved; Insomuch as although my Place, hath been far above my desert, yet my Thoughts, and Cares concerning the Good thereof, were be∣yond, and over, and above my place: So now being (as I am) no more able to do my Country Service, it remained unto me, to do it Honour: Which I have endeavoured to do, in my Work, of the Reign, of King HENRY the Seventh. As for my Essayes, and some other Particulars of that na∣ture, I count them, but as the Recreations of my other Studies, and in that sort purpose to continue them; Though I am not ignorant, that those kind of Writings, would, with less pains, and embracement, (perhaps,) yield more Lustre, and Reputa∣tion to my Name, than those other, which I have in hand. But I account the Vse, that a Man should seek, of the pub∣lishing of his own Writings before his Death, to be but an untimely Anticipation of that, which is proper to follow a Man, and not to go along with him.
But revolving with my self, my Writings, as well those which I have published, as those, which I had in hand, me thought they went all into the City, and none into the Temple; Where because I have found, so great Consolation, I desire likewise to make some poor Oblation. Therefore I have cho∣sen an Argument, mixt of Religious and Civil Considerati∣ons;

And likewise mixt between Contemplative, and Active. For who can tell, whether there may not be an Exoriere ali∣quis? Great Matters (especially if they be Religious) have (many times) small beginnings; And the Platform, may draw on the Building. This Work, because I was ever an Enemy to flattring Dedications, I have dedicated to your Lordship; In respect of our ancient, and private Acquaintance; And because amongst the Men of our Times, I hold you in espe∣cial Reverence.

