



Most Excellent Soveraign,
AMongst the Degrees and Acts of Soveraign, or rather Heroical Honour, the First, or Second, is the Person, and Merit, of a Lam-giver. Princes that govern well, are Fathers of the People. But if a Father breed his Son well, or allow him well, while he liveth, but leave him nothing at his Death; whereby both he, and his Chil∣dren, and his Childrens Children may be the better; Surely the care and Piety of a Father, is not in him compleat. So Kings, if they make a Portion of an Age happy by their good Government, yet if they do not make Testaments, (as God Almighty doth,) whereby a Perpetuity of Good may descend to their Country, they are but Mortal and Transitory Benefactors. Domitian, a few days before he died, dream't, that a Golden Head did rise upon the nape of his Neck. Which was truly performed in the Golden Age, that followed his times, for five Successions. But Kings, by giving their Subjects good Laws, may (if they will) in their own time, joyn and graft this Golden Head, upon their own Necks, after their Death. Nay they may make Nabuchadonozors Image of Monarchy, golden from Head to Foot. And if any of the Meaner sort of Politiques, that are sighted only to see the worst of things, think; That Laws are but

Cobwebs, and that good Princes will do well without them, and bad will not stand much upon them; The Discourse is neither good, nor wise. For certain it is, that good Laws, are some bridle to bad Princes; And as a very Wall about Government. And if Tyrants (sometime) make a breach into them, yet they mollifie even Ty∣ranny it self; As Solons Laws did the Tyranny of Pisistratus: And then (commonly) they get up again, upon the first Advantage of better times. Other means to perpetuate the Memory, and Me∣rits of Soveraign Princes, are inferiour to this. Buildings of Temples, Tombs, Palaces, Theaters, and the like, are honourable things, and look big upon Posterity. But Constantine the Great gave the Name well to those works, when he used to call Trajan, that was a great Builder, Parietaria, Wall-Flower; Because his Name was upon so many Walls. So if that be the Matter, that a King would turn Wall-flower, or Fellitory of the Wall, with cost he may. Adrian's vein was better; For his mind was to wrestle a fall with Time; And being a great Pro∣gressour through all the Roman Empire, when ever he found any Decaies of Bridges, or High-ways, or Cuts of Rivers and Sewers, or Walls, or Banks, or the like, he gave substantial order, for their repair with the better. He gave also Multitudes of Charters, and Liberties, for the comfort of Corporations, and Companies in decay. So that his Bounty did strive with the Ruines of Time. But yet this, though it were an excellent Disposition, went but (in effect) to the Cases and Shells of a Common-wealth. It was nothing to Vertue or Vice. A bad Man might indifferently take the benefit and ease of his Waies and Bridges, as well as a good; And bad People might purchase good Charters. Surely, the better Works of Perpetuity in Princes, are those, that wash the in-side of the Cup. Such as are Foundations of Colledges, and Lectures, for Learning and Education of youth; Likewise Foundations and Institutions of Orders and Fraternities, for Nobleness, Enterprise, and Obedience, and the like. But yet these also, are but like Plantations, of Orchards, and Gardens, in Plots and Spots of Ground, here and there; They do not till over the whole Kingdom, and make it fruitful, as doth the Establishing of good Laws and Ordinances; Which makes a whole Nation, to be as a well ordered Colledg, or Foundation.
This kind of Work, in the memory of Times, is rare enough to shew it Excellent; And yet not so rare, as to make it suspected, for Impossible, Inconvenient, or Unsafe. Moses, that gave Laws to the Hebrews, because he was the Scribe of God himself, is fitter to be named for honours sake to other Law-Givers, than to be numbred or ranked amongst them. Minos, Lycurgus, and solon, are Examples for Themes of Grammar Scholars. For ancient Personages, and Characters, now adays, use to wax Children again; Though that Parable of Pindarus be true; The best thing is Water. For Com∣mon and Trivial Things are (many times) the best; And rather despised upon Pride, because they are vulgar, than upon Cause, or Use. Certain it is, that the Laws of those three Law-Givers, had great Prerogatives. The first, of Fame; Because they were the

Pattern amongst the Grecians. The second, of Lasting; For they continued longest without alteration. The third; of a Spirit of Re∣viver; To be often oppressed, and often restored.
Amongst the seven Kings of Rome, four were Law-Givers. For it is most true, that a Discourser of Italy saith: There was never State, so well swadled in the Infancy, as the Roman was, by the vertue of their first Kings: Which was a principal Cause of the wonderful growth of that State, in after times.
The Decemvirs Laws, were Laws upon Laws, not the Original; For they grafted Laws of Grecia, upon Roman Stock, of Laws, and Customs. But such was their success, as the Twelve Tables, which they compiled, were the main Body of the Laws, which framed and weilded the great Body of that Estate. These lasted a long time, with some Supplementals, and the Pretorian Edicts in Albo; Which were in respect of Laws, as Writing Tables in respect of Brass; The one to be put in and out, as the other is permanent. Lucius Cornelius Sylla reformed the Laws of Rome. For that Man had three Singu∣larities, which never Tyrant had, but he. That he was a Law-Giver; That he took part with the Nobility; And, That he turned Private Man, not upon Fear, but upon Confidence.
Caefar long after desired to imitate him only in the First; For otherwise he relied upon new Men: And for resigning his Power, Seneca describeth him right: Caesar gladium citò condidit, nun∣quam posuit. Caesar soon sheathed his Sword, but never put it off. And himself took it upon him, saying in scorn of Sylla's Resignation. Sylla nescivit literas, dictare non potuit. Sylla knew no letters, he could not dictate. But for the part of a Law-Giver, Cicero giveth him the Attribute. Caefar, si ab eo quaereretur, quid egisset in Togâ; leges se respondisset, multas & praeclaras tulisse. If you had asked Caesar, what he did in the Gown, he would have answered, that he made many excellent Laws. His Nephew Augustus did tread the same steps, but with deeper print, because of his long Reign in peace; Whereof one of the Poets of his time saith;

Pace datâ terris, animum ad Civilia vertit:
Jura suum, leges{que} tulit justissimus Author.

From that time, there was such a Race of Wit and Authority, be∣tween the Commentaries and Decisions of the Lawyers, and the Edicts of the Emperours, as both Laws and Lawyers were out of breath. Whereupon Justinian in the end recompiled both; And made a Body of Laws, such as might be weilded; which himself calleth gloriously, and yet not above truth; The Edifice or Structure of a sacred Temple of Justice; Built indeed, out of the former Ruines of Books, as Materials, and some Novel Constitutions of his own.
In Athens they had Sexviri, (as AEschincs observeth,) which were standing Commissioners; Who did watch to discern, what laws waxed unproper for the Times, and what new Law did in any

branch cross a former Law, and so Ex officio propounded their Re∣peal.
King Edgar collected the Laws of this Kingdom, and gave them the strength of a Faggot bound, which formerly were dispersed: Which was more glory to him, then his Sailing about this Island, with a potent Fleet. For that was, as the Scripture saith, Via navis in mari; The way of a Ship in the Sea; It vanished; but this lasteth. Alphonso the Wise, (the ninth of that Name,) King of Castile, com∣piled the Digest of the Laws of Spain, Intituled the Siete Parti∣das; An excellent Work, which he finished in seven years. And as Tacitus noteth well; That the Capitol, though built in the begin∣ings of Rome, yet was fit for the great Monarchy that came after; So that Building of Laws sufficeth the Greatness of the Empire of Spain, which since hath ensued.
Lewis the eleventh had it in his mind, (though he performed it not,) to have made one constant Law of France; Extracted out of the Civil Roman Law, and the Customs of Provinces which are vari∣ous, and the Kings Edicts which with the French are Statutes. Surely he might have done well, if, like as he brought the Crown, (as he said himself,) from Page; So he had brought his People from Lacquay; Not to run up and down for their Laws, to the Civil Law, and the Ordinances, and the Customs, and the Discretions of Courts, and discourses of Philosophers, as they use to do.
King Henry the Eighth, in the twenty seventh year of his Reign, was authorized by Parliament, to nominate 32 Commissioners, part Ecclesiastical, and part Temporal; To purge the Canon Law, and to make it agreeable to the Law of God, and the Law of the Land. But it took not effect. For the Acts of that King were (commonly) rather Proffers, and Fames, than either well grounded, or well pursued. But I doubt, I erre in producing so many examples. For as Cicero said to Caesar, so may I say to your Majesty; Nil vulgare te dignum videri possit. Though indeed this well understood is far from Vulgar. For that the Laws of the most Kingdoms and States, have been like Buildings of many pieces, and patched up, from time to time, according to occasions, without Frame, or Model.
Now for the Laws of England, (if I shall speak my Opinion of them, without partiality, either to my Profession, or Country,) for the Matter and Nature of them, I hold them Wise, Just, and Mo∣derate Laws: They give to God, they give to Caesar, they give to the Subject, what appertaineth. It is true, they are as mixt, as our Language, compounded of British, Roman, Saxon, Danish, Norman Customs. And surely, as our Language is thereby so much the richer; So our Laws are likewise by that Mixture, the more compleat.
Neither doth this attribute less to them, than those that would have them to have stood out the same in all Mutations. For no Tree is so good first set, as by transplanting, and Grafting. I remember what happened to Callisthenes, that followed Alexanders Court, and was grown into some displeasure with him, because he could not well brook the Persian Adoration. At a Supper, (which with the

Grecians was a great part Talk,) he was desired, (the King being present,) because he was an Eloquent Man, to speak of some Theme; Which he did; And chose for his Theme the praise of the Macedonian Nation; Which though it were but a filling Thing, to praise Men to their Faces, yet he performed it with such advan∣tage of Truth, and avoidance of Flattery, and with such Life, as was much applauded by the Hearers. The King was the less pleased with it, not loving the Man, and by way of discountenance, said; It was easie to be a good Oratour in a pleasing Theme; But saith he to him; Turn your stile; And tell us now of our faults, that we may have the profit, and not you the praise only: Which he presently did, with such Quickness, that Alexander said; That Malice made him Eloquent then, as the Theme had done before. I shall not fall into either of these extreams, in this subject, of the Laws of England. I have commended them before for the Matter, but surely they ask much amendment for the Form; Which to reduce and perfect, I hold to be one of the greatest Dowries, that can be confer'd upon this King∣dom. Which Work, for the Excellency, as it is worthy your Ma∣jesties Act, and Times; So it hath some circumstance of Propriety agreeable to your Person. God hath blessed your Majesty with Po∣sterity; And I am not of opinion, that Kings that are barren, are fittest to supply Perpetuity of Generations, by perpetuity of Noble Acts; But contrariwise, that they that leave Posterity, are the more interessed in the Care of Future Times; That as well their Progeny, as their People, may participate of their Merit.
Your Majesty is a great Master in Justice, and Judicature; And it were pity, the fruit of that your Vertue, should not be transmitted to the Ages to come. Your Majesty also reigneth in learned times, the more, (no doubt,) in regard of your own perfection in Learn∣ing, and your Patronage thereof. And it hath been the Mishap of Works of this Nature, that the less Learned Time, hath (sometimes) wrought upon the more Learned; Which now will not be so. As for my self, the Law was my Profession, to which I am a Debter: Some little helps I have of other Arts, which may give Form to Matter; And I have now, (by Gods merciful Chastisement, and by his special Providence,) time and leisure, to put my Talent, or half-Talent, or what it is, to such Exchanges, as may perhaps exceed the Interest of an Active Life. Therefore, as in the beginning of my Troubles, I made offer to your Majesty to take pains in the Story of England, and in compiling a Method and Digest of your Laws; So have I performed the first, (which rested but upon my self,) in some part; And I do, in all humbleness, renew the offer of this lat∣ter, (which will require Help and Assistance,) to your Majesty, if it shall stand with your good pleasure, to imploy my Service therein.
