



Madam,
THough this Survey of Purgatory address it self to all Roman Catholikes in general, yet is there not the person to whom it is more pe∣culiarly devoted, nor indeed any, from whom it may with more confidence look for shelter and entertainment then your self.
For were it a meer stranger to you, yet am I so well ac∣quainted with your noble hu∣mour, and civility to all your guests, as not to despair of a
 friendly wellcome. But since it was so lucky as to receive its first birth, or at least to begin to breath our English Aire un∣der your roofe, it is certainly there it may best challenge countenance and protection, now it comes to appear abroad and expose it self to publick view. And if I mistake you not, you are neither so wedded to the pleasures of this transi∣tory life, as not to be more concerned for what passes in the other world, nor so taken up with Playes and Romances (the usual employment of your sex) but that you can lend an eye or an ear now and then (and with delight too) to spi∣ritual discourses, though run∣ning in a lower strain, not so agreeable to the quaint Palats of our times. Howsoever I
 dare promise you here no un∣pleasant entertainments; I am sure at least you are read a very pleasing lecture in the last Survey. For while you see the way for you to scape Pur∣gatory chalked out, you will clearly find your self already in it, as practising most of the twelve means there prescri∣bed. To say nothing of the rest (in which no doubt you have a large share) I cannot but take notice of two of the most important, I mean your singu∣lar charity to the poor & your patient suffering for a good cause. Your loyalty (and your noble Consorts) to God and your King, even when you saw others to renounce both, was very remarkable, and I think I may safely say (with propor∣tion to your Estate) you were
 as great sufferers upon this score, as the worst of times could produce. And yet you were never so great loosers your selves, but you could still have the heart to spare a very liberal proportion to relieve others. I could bring instances, and enlarge my self upon each particular, did not your mo∣desty give me a silent check. I will only then conclude with leaving you this comfortable satisfaction to know you are in the ready way to redeem a good part of your Purga∣tory in this life, if not all, as he most heartily wishes you may, who must ever subscribe himself,
Madam

