


Honoured Sirs,
THAT I make bold to Entitle You to the Patronage of the following Plain Discourse, I think needs no other Apology, but to mention, That it was first Preached, and is now made Publick, at Your Request.
You have undertaken a Difficult Work, and (thorough the Goodness of God) made some Considerable Advances in it, in Circumstances that were enough to have Disheartned a Piety and Courage less
 than Yours. And I hope you have found, and, by the Blessing of Heaven upon Your Honest Endeavours, will find, that the farther You go on in this Service, the more your Difficulties will abate, and the more Your Encouragements (those especially of the Best sort) will increase.
I have endeavoured to lay before You Plain Scripture-Rules for Your Manage∣ment of this Weighty Business, and to represent to You the manifold Obligations You lie under to Persevere in it. I hope I have herein spoken nothing but Words of Truth and Soberness, even such Truths as all Wise and Good Men, of the most differing Parties (Alas! that we cannot avoid still using the unhappy word Party!) are agreed in.
And if any will call this Canting, they shall (for me) enjoy the sole Privilege of adhering to their own, beloved, and long-accustomed Dialect: For when Men are fallen out with God and their own Consciences, with Reason, Authority, and Sobriety, it is no Wonder if the Light of Scripture-Truth, any thing warmly applied, set them a raving. The worst I wish such, is, That they may awake and
 come to themselves in time; else they will e're long know (what they will not now consider) that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God, Heb. 10. 31.
It was, I confess, some Discouragement to me in both Parts of this Ʋndertaking, (but especially the latter) that I was to manage this Weighty Argument after so many, of every way greater Abilities, and who had, in a sort, exhausted the Subject. Yet since I could not, without being rude to You, and unfriendly to the Truly-good Cause You are engaged in, decline it; I shall leave the Judgment of this Confessedly-mean Performance, to the Pious and Candid Readers, with∣out being concerned at the Scoffs of De∣bauched and Profane Persons, with whom, the Apostle St. Peter hath foretold us, these last Days should abound, 2 Pet. 3. 3.
That the following Sermon may be bles∣sed of God, for the strengthening of Your Hands in the present Eminent Service You are imployed in; That You may, all of You, approve Your Hearts unto God, and Your Actions to the Consciences of Men;
 That all Mountains may become a Plain before You; That the present Inhabitants of this Place, and even late Posterity, may reap the Happy Fruits of Your Good Endeavours; That we may be as Emi∣nent for Real Holiness and Brotherly-Love as we have long been for the Re∣markable Care of a Gracious Providence about us, is, and shall be, the Earnest Prayer of,
Gentlemen,

