



SIR,
I Here humbly offer into your Royal Hands a Message sent from Heaven for your Majesties acceptance. Written it is in the mystical Chara∣cters of Two Diseases, and partly upon your Royall Hands, which now heal one of these Diseases, and shall do the other. The signification whereof in summe is to shew, How miserable your Kingdomes have been through want of your Roy∣al Father first, and since of your Majesty; How hap∣py these your Dominions shall most certainly be

made by your Religious, Just, and Merciful Go∣vernment; and lastly, what shall be done by Al∣mighty God for you here upon the earth, in recom∣pence of your Royall Fathers our Late Soveraigns precious blood, your Majesties Wrongs and Affli∣ctions, your Constancy in the true Religion against so many Temptations, your Maintaining of the Honor of God in your religious care of Gods Wor∣ship, and your Compassion and Love toward your Majesties poor oppressed Subjects. Nor let it seem more strange unto your Majesty, that Diseases should portend such great matters, than a Star, that Star, which with the next rising Sun after your joy∣ful Nativity, shining with the glorious Sun as glo∣riously in his ascension, and even at mid-day, should designe your Majesties Person, and future Glory, which undoubtedly it did. For there is a similitude and proportion betwixt sins and calamities on the one side, and bodily Diseases on the other; for both disquiet and disease us; as likewise therefore be∣twixt the healer of the one, and the taker away of the other.
Far be it from me, Gracious Soveraign, to require from your Majesty credit to what I shall affirm (nor is it just I should) upon my bare assertion. Let your Majesties Reason and Royall Wisedome

judge, whether that I deliver be probable or not. For such Reason as is grosse and depra∣ved, or meerly Naturall, cannot pierce into those deep matters, but such which is fine, and yet helpt and directed by rule of Holy Scrip∣ture. For Ignorance, Prejudice, and Rashness cannot, and Interest will not discern these My∣steries.
Let not the meanness of the discoverer discre∣dit the truth of these things to your Majesty, which may call to minde, that the glad tidings of our Saviours Nativity was by the Angels first made known to Shepherds.
If I shall speak (Royal Soveraign) in some places very freely, or peradventure too boldly, give me leave, or pardon me, Merciful Prince, who being a great King, cannot but be very sensible what a crime it should be for a credited Messenger to temper the Message of the King of Kings.
It now remains, that these things which are to come be beleeved, that Almighty God be entreated, and have the Glory of all; on your Majesties part, that you prepare your self for the embracing so great Hopes; on your Sub∣jects, that we all repent, and with humble thank∣fulness for so great mercies toward us, our Love

and Reverence toward so blessed a Prince our Soveraign be encreased. And that all this may be done, is and shall be the continual prayer and earnest endeavour of,

