


SIR,
IN regard of your near alliance to the Subject, and dear ac∣quaintance with the Author of this Sermon, you may challenge of right the Dedication of these Lines: And indeed they were long since yours, being immediately upon her death presented to your selfe, and your vertuous Consort her Daughter; so you are in every respect worthy of them, only my fear is they are unworthy of you. Yet let them not now in your as∣censions be unwelcome to you, seeing when the distance was not so great I thought you right welcome to them.
Now both that Elogie in the fore-going Funerall Sermon, and those due expressions in this insuing Funerall Elegie, want not the best example for their warrant. The Royall Prophet David wept and mourned over Amer, and by his pathetike Oration melted all the people into tears; nay they wept a second time; as how could they contain, when they heard the moving words of a lamenting Prophet, and saw the swollen eyes of a tender-hearted King? Part of his Oration was, Know you not that there is a Prince and a great man this day fallen in Israe? so the day of this Ladies Fuerall there fell a Matron, and though not so great, yet (which is much better) a good woman and Mother in Israel. So fo my Elegi, that sweet singer of Israel is also my Pattern, for he lamented with the like, yet far surpassing Lamentation over Saul and Jonathan, part whereof I ere insert, as I long agoe translated it,
VVeepe, ye Isacian Daughters, weepe
O're Saul, who did so bravely eepe,
And cloath you all in Skarlet trimme,
And in all pleasures made you swimme.
'Twas he about your Robes did fuld
Those msse Cbains of beaten Gold,

 Yet all these were but glistring trifles, or if treasures, yet onely Treasure on earth, subject to Moaths, Rust, and Theeve▪s, but the adorning of this Matron was not in the plaiting of the haire, or of wearing of gold, or putting on of Apparell, but in the hidden man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of1 Pet. 4. 5. a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price: and in this she surmounted all the Daughters of your City, as also in many golden rules, and in a shining example. Nor was she onely the wife of tht Merchant, who is known in the Gates when he sit∣teth among the Eldes of the People, Prov. ult. 23. but she her self also was that Merchant who considered a field and bought it, even that field with hidden Treasure, Mt. 13. 44. for which (as the Merchant man for the Pearl, ver. 36) she sold al that she had to purchase. In∣deed, the Kingdome of Heaven was her Treasure and her Pearl, which he body hath ill in hope, her soule in possession, and both shortly shall enjoy in perfect fruiion. If we love her, and would bee with her, let our care be to go to her, seeing she shall not return to us. In the mean time our tears for her may be wip'd from our eys, since all tears are wiped from hers: that which is required of us, is, our repenting for sinne, not lamenting for her, not our mounfull ex∣gressions, but our chearfull imitaion. The Epigrammatist did thus revive his old friend Prisus, upon the death of Saloninus;
Sed defire, nefs: num qui te Prise, reliquit,
Vivit, qua veluit vivere prte mis.
'Twere sinne to weepe: since he for whom you grieve,Mart. Epig.
Lives in that part wherein he wish't to ive.
She is now where she long long'd to be; her desire was to be dis∣solved, and to be with Christ; with whom we leave her.
Thus it becomes us to set forth the vertue and praises of her, who set forth the praises and vertues of him, who hath called us out of darknesse into his marvellous light. I is observeable in that Text, that the word tanslated Praises, sgnifieth also Vertues (as in the margin) whch sewes, that only Vertue is Prise-wothy; so the royall Preacher, The woman that feareth the Lord she shall bee praysed, not her favor for that is deceitfull, not her beauty, for that is vanity, but her fear is commended, and her vetue highly prized, ver. 10. Especially, if she excell in vertue, Psal. 16. 3. as the righteous do, The righteous is more excellent then his neighbor, Prov. 12. 36.
 and a man of understanding is of an excellent Spirit, 17. 27. by which we understand, the Fear of God, for this is called that good Understanding, Psal. 3. ult. the praise wherof endures for ever. And this grave and understanding Matron is that Righteous one, that Mulier strennua, that wise and vertuous woman, which the wise man so much enquireth after, and having found advanceth her above all her fellows. Many Daughters have done ve tuously but thou surmountest them all: thus it pleaseth him who hath called the Poor of this world to be rich in Faith, to make the weaker vessels strong in Faith; and Daughters of Abrahm, whose Daughters they are as long as they do well, do vertuously, especially, if they excell in thus doing: and indeed this doing vertuously is that Practicall, not Speculative beauty on which we should bestow all our amorous and imbellishing phrases, in the highest strains and expressions of commendation and glory. Excelling vertues shall have extolling praise. Now for her, such were her perfections that I know not whe∣ther she more illuster her Sex, by communicating her immanent gra∣ces unto others, or obscure it, (as the greater light the lesse) by her eminent brightnesse out-shining others; so that I hope it were no disparagement to Greatnesse though I should apply that vers. which was sung of the Lady Elctesse, to this Elect Lady of the same name,
Tell me if she was not dsign'd,
The Eclipse and Glory of Her Kinde.
Thus we ought, in the best manner we an, to honour them that fear the Lord, but above all to honour him who hath put this feare into our hearts, that we may not depart from him: so ceasing fur∣ther to praise her, let us never cease to praise God for her, and pray unto him for our selves, that we may be follwers of her, even as shee was of Christ. Now if there be any of her sisters that do vertuously, yet not so vertuously, think much that we have bin so liberal in her commendations, let them know, that first we only do her right; and secondly, that we have done them no wrong; for the commendati∣ons of one is not the disparagement, but rather should be the inou∣ragement of another; and to them we only say, Go and doe like∣wie. Thus having commended her, I now commend you and yours to the protection of the Almighty, desiing you to patronize, and kindly to accept of the weak indeavours of
Jan. 20: 1644

