




THE many multiplied Favours you have continually shewed to my self and Family, obli∣geth me to make this acknow∣ledgment thereof, by presenting to you all this little Testimony of my true Love

and real Gratitude, humbly praying for your kind Acceptance and diligent Peru∣sal. Let me mind you, and my self no less, That we are come towards the Even∣ing of our Days: The Contents of this Book, by the assistance of the Holy Spirit, may help us in making due preparation for our latter end; in which, I doubt not but you are daily engaged. The Sun of our Life is going down on our outward man: You, my most dear Kinswoman, as well as my self, have been kept several Years upon the Graves mouth, and have been many times brought back from the brink of the Pit: Oh, that the Sun of Righteousness might shine on our inward man, that therein we may be renewed day by day. Our God hath tryed our Faith and Patience, and made us more than or∣dinary Monuments of his Mercy and Goodness; oh, that He would make us Instruments of his Praise and Service: What further Tryals our Heavenly Father will call us unto we know not; may it please him to help us, that our Faith and Patience may have their perfect Work: He will have Glory, and we shall be Gainers. It hath pleased our good GOD to call us off from the enticing, lying, dy∣ing

Vanities of this present Evil World, for our advantage, I hope; what have we to do now, but to give all diligence to make our calling and election sure. Lord, pardon former negligence, and help us to get on the Wedding-garment of Christ's Righteousness and Holiness, that we may bid our blessed Bridegroom wel∣come.


May I obtain the Favour from you to spend a little of your little unexpired time in reading this small Book, and pray for a Blessing on what you read.
I am sure the Contents do nearly con∣cern you all: You are all travelling to another Country, Eternity is at hand, your Account is near, Time is precious, so are your Souls; the World is vain, the Heart is deceitful: Oh, could I prevail with you to spend some time in close Self∣examination, in constant heavenly Medi∣tation, in Watchfulness, in Self-denyal and Mortification, you would much en∣gage me, and advantage your own Souls. I pray the Blessing of God may go along

with this poor piece; there are many have better Heads, and better Hearts may do better.
Now, that you all, and your Relations old and young, may be taken into the Co∣venant of Grace, and may grow up in all things in Christ Jesus; that after our wearisom Pilgrimage in this Wilderness World, we may at last enter into the Pro∣mised Land, and enjoy that everlasting Rest, purchased by the most precious Blood of our dearest Lord, and there live with him for ever, is the earnest Prayer of

Aug. 1. 1693.

