



SIR,
YOur desires were wont to tend so much to the Publick good, that your Virtuosi would think I wanted Philan∣thropy as well as Civility, if I should refuse to comply with such as your Letter brings me. I send you therefore the Propositions of Monsieur de Bils Englishéd out

of low Dutch, at my request, by such a Person as you will rea∣dily think can translate very well, though he can better write things worthy to be translated; when I shall have told you that his name is Mr. Pell. The design avow'd to be aim'd at in the Propositions, and much more the matter of Fact, with∣out which they might appeare extravagant, made the Print (I confesse) very welcome to me. For though in some Papers I formerly told you of, I had mentioned divers things I had intended to try, and some that I had already observ'd, in order to the preservation of Animal

substances, and the making some of them more durable Subjects for the Anatomist to deal with: yet besides that most of the ways I proposed to my self were as yet little more then bare Designes, I never aim'd at, (and scarce so much as hop'd for,) such strange things as in this Paper the ingenuous Publisher of it tells us he hath already actually per∣formed. And therefore I sup∣pose that it will not be unwel∣come to you, if not having had the opportunity to see the effect of this Gentleman's skill my self, and being sufficiently indisposed to believe or affirme any strange thing that I have not seen; I

annex the other Paper you lately desir'd of me. I mean that where∣in the Proposers Dutch print came inclos▪d to me from the Hague. For besides that it con∣taines something of Particular; it comes from a French Gentle∣man whose Testimonie may well be considerable in matters of this nature; for he is one of that se∣lect Society of Parisian Philoso∣phers of which You and I have sometimes discoursed, and you will finde a celebrating mention made of him in the life of Gas∣sendus, (whose Friend and Dis∣ciple he was.) And his curiosi∣ty leading him to imitate divers of the old Greek Philosophers,

who travail'd through many Countreys only to enrich them∣selves with what knowledge they could meet with in them, he went purposely to visit Mon∣sieur de Bils, soon after he had left England; which he lately travers'd, and in his passage honour'd me with severall of his visits. I am so willing that You should be as wary as I in admitting unlikely things in∣to your belief, that in putting the French I received into En∣glish, I have been (purposely to avoid straining his expressions) more careful to do right to his Words then to his Style. And as for those things that appear

to have been left out by me, they are some of them such matters as concern not our Proposer and others but such Complements as require rather my Blushes then my Translating. The con∣sent you desire of me to publish the Proposalls in our Language I must not refuse you. For 'tis the least we owe to a Person that hath endeavour'd to oblige man∣kinde, and to those that are wil∣ling to encourage such endea∣vours, by acquainting the ingenu∣ous here with his Propositions, to strive to procure him Subscri∣bers, and to afford them the op∣portunity of encouraging and assisting so useful a Work as This

(supposing the truth of the Histo∣rical part of the Paper) is like to prove. It may also be hop'd that the noise of such Discoveries a∣broad will rouse up our ingenuous Men at home, and excite them to endeavour to emulate if not sur∣passe them: and to keep up that reputation for Anatomical dis∣coveries and skill that this Na∣tion hath of late deservedly en∣joy'd. Nor will it be amiss by the same means to give as many of those in Authority as may hap∣pen to read what the States of Holland have done in favour of a Stranger, occasion to take no∣tice what countenance neighbour∣ing Magistrates, that are not

thought unpolitick neither, are forward to give to those designs that aime at the advancement of Reall Learning. Which may perhaps invite those that can do it, to give encouragement to the English Wits; which I am groundedly confident want no∣thing but encouragement, to per∣form things in this kinde that would really advantage the pub∣lick, as well as highly gratifie such persons as Mr. Hartlib and his

 Octob. the 13. 1659.
