


My Lord,
IT is now somewhat above fifty yeares from the day that this Rectory was be∣stowed on me, by the singular bounty of your ever admired and most honorable Grand-father, then our great Lord Chancellour. And ever since I have en∣joyed it with much comfort, under the favourable aspect of your Noble Father, and the gracious influence of your own continual goodness. In which regard I am sorry, that I could not so freely and fre∣quently gain the opportunity to tender my bounden duty and thankfulnesse; partly, by the crossenesse of the Times; part∣ly, by the crasynesse of my age; and partly, last year, by the ap∣pointment of our late and learned Diocesan requiring me

to preach at his Visitation; and yet when the time came he confessed, that by the multitude of an Old mans cares after∣ward he had quite forgot it. So that I was put off till our next visitation; upon the fourteenth of October last, at Alis∣bury, then to preach this sermon. Where it was so respect∣ed by the greater part of the Auditors, that they desired a copy thereof, whereby it might be further published. Ʋpon which motion I made some pause, till I was more encouraged by some judicious persons of higher rank and reputation, to get the sermon longer liv'd, then the short time, wherein it was uttered. Wherefore seeing it is now come to the Press, I humbly implore the shelter of your constant favour & goodness, for leave to present and dedicate it to your right Honourable Patronage and protection; in token of the fide∣lity which I owe to our gracious God, loyalty to our dread Sovereign, charity to our native Countrey, zeal to the glo∣rious Gospel of our blessed Saviour, and peace of his Church, with the duty and devotion, in which I am deeply ingaged daily to seek and sue for the health and happinesse of your excellent person, with your virtuous consort, and all the No∣ble branches of the hopefull Family; toward whom I rejoice in all concurrences of dutifull correspondence, still to con∣tinue,

Ched. this March 26. An. Dom. 1663.
