


HONOVRABLE,
I Hope whiles I revive your vertuous Ladies memory, I need not fear to renew your so∣row, which is not so much worn away with Time, as born with Christian Fortitude, and allayed with discretion. Againe, you have happily repaired your losses, (and in the same kind) by a second Rebecca; so you are comforted after her death, who (living) was Mother in Israel, as Israels Father was after the death of his Mo∣ther. Adde to this, that all private Crosses are to be forgotten, yea and present Blessings scarce to be injoyed, when wee remember our publique calamities. So Pbineas his wife was more affected wiih the taking of the Ark, then with the death of either Husband or Fa∣ther; nether would she forget her sorrow, though a Man-child was born into the world. Such was (not the wilful humour, but) the gracious temper of that good Hittite, who would neither eate nor drink, nor go down to his house or wife, whiles the Ark and Judah abode in the Tents, and his Lord Joab and his servants lay in the open fields, counting that unlawfull, which was onely unseasona∣ble. Pardon I pray you, this digression, which yet is not altogether impertinent to this ensuing Funerall Subject, seeing the whole Kingdome is almost turned into one Funerall. The righteous pe∣rish, and none layeth it to heart; where, though the departure of the Righteous is much to be lamented, yet much more the apathy and seslesnesse of the miserable Surviver.
But to return and resume our former Subject. As she wa a ecel∣lent Pattern of many divine graces, so especially she exceld in this tenderness & compassion, which, with the rest of her holy vertues, I need not pourtray and represent unto your view, seeing you fully know them by a long and sweet experience▪ & have their Idea still before your eyes: & this also is done to my hand in this just Panegy∣rick by a better Orator, who was your vigilant Pastor, & my reverend acquaintance, in whom those rich endowments, which he describes in your worthy Consort, did also shine in an eminent manner, so that changing onely the Psrson, it may serve for his own Funerall Sermon; for as in water face answereth to face, so their hear is both washed with water and the same holy Spirit, were alike spirituall
 and holy. He being dead, yet speaketh in his Sermon, and she being dead, yet liveth in our affections and memory. & remaines a lively pattern of heavenly conversation. Her excelling vertues he sets forth, not in excellency of words, but with the Apostle in the de∣monstration of the Spirit and of Power. Neither could his medita∣tions & composure be very exact and perfect, seeing this his pre∣gnant issue was to be delivered the day after the conception: and though he had more time for preparation, yet he was not like those who prick their words, (as birds set their feathers, or nice women their curles,) in a quaint & curious order; for this savours more of affectation then of affection, & of ostentation, then truth & sinceri∣ty. There are many whos& Sermons are halfe a yeer in contriving, then vented in one hour, & forgotten in another; (like painted Pa∣geants erected against the Kings Coronation, which after much pains & time spent in decoring, are taken down when the day of Solemnity is over,) and these are they who like those Jews, John. 5. 44. seek honor one of anther, & seek not the honour which cometh from God only, especially the chief Rulers among them did love the praise of men more then the praise of God, Joh. 12. 43. whereas not he that commendeth himself (as such plaunble, but unprofita∣ble men would do) is approved, but whom the Lord commendeth, 2 Cr. 10. ult. But the sole aime of our Orator is, to glorifie God, to do your Consort right and us all good, by setting forth in plain, yet patheticall language, her holy life, for our happy imitation: and though his time of preparation was very short, yet his Semons very full; for he being a present man alwayes furnished, had his quiver full of divine meditationss which he culd readily open upon every opportunity, and it becomes every one of us to expose the tender parts of our hearts to such wounding, yet healing arrows, which receive this soveraign quality from the Sun of righteousness which hath healing in his wings. Now for this particular Sermon, certain∣ly it is much eclipsed, from that primitive lustre which it had when it was presented viva voce before you: for his tongue was he pen of a ready writer, but not the pen of any writer could match his ready tongue; for he was very quick boh in his tongue and in his mind, full of holy affections to sanctifie his learning, and full of choice leaning to beautifie his holinesse. Thus much I thought good o write in his honour, who so much honoured you & yours. But I feae me I have weaied you, so now remit yu to the refre∣freshm of his comfortable Sermon, which I make bold to commend to your Patrnage, you and yours to the Almighties protection, and ny poor endeavrs to your Lordships acceptation. So rest,

