



Der and welbeloved friend,
AS thou at in thy self a rare Iewel, a most precious Stone, one of a thousand, ea, of ten thousand, being compared with the many thousands of cmmon Stones, I mean, external Professors in the visible Church, who rest on a bare name, and of whom that is verified in every Nation, which our Saviour saith, Mt. 20 16. Many are called, but few chosen; and of many of which, that is also too true in every generation (and oh that it were not too mani∣fest in this also) which Paul observed in his time, Phil: 3.18, 19. For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you, even weeping, that they are the ene∣mies of the cross of Christ, whose end is destruction, whose god is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind early things. And as to Christ thy Lord most comely, as a Lilie among thorns, being is love a∣mong the daughters, Cant 2.2. So also, thou in a pecial way art the dearly beloved and longed for, the joy and crown, of every sincere servant of Christ in the Gospel, Phil. 4.1. Thou art, if not the only, yet the chief object of their labours, their work being either to confirm and strengthen thee in thy way, that thou may so stand fast in the Lord, or remove impediments, make crooked thing straight, and so prepare the way of the Lord before thee, or to guide thee by the light of Gods Word in the dark night of temptation and desertion: Now, as we are confident these Sermons were preached at first by that blessed serious labourer in the work

of the Ministry, Mr. Hew Binning, with a special eye to the advancement of sincere seekrs after fellowship wh God▪ and seriously Heaven-ward tending Christians amngst his hear∣s, So to whom shall we diret this posthumous▪ and als, unperfected wor, but to thee (O serious Cristan) who makes it thy work not only to sk after the knowledge of d in Christ, in a meer speculative way that thou may know, and therein rest, a if thy wk were done, but also to fllow after the enjoyment of that known God, and believed  Si∣our, and all the promised priviledges of grace in his lfe, and of eternal glory in the life to come; To thee escially be∣long these precious soul-ravising tuths delivered in these Sermons. Two things, we knw, thou hast determined thy soul unto, and fixed thine eye on, as thy am and mak in thy geneation▪ viz. the light of knowledge, and the life of pra∣ctice; as to knowledge, we are confident that with the A∣postle Paul, 1 Cor. 2.2. Thou ha determined to know nothing but Christ, and him crucified, and as to practice, with the said Apostle thou prayes, that thou may be sincere and without offence till the day of Christ, being filled with the fruits of righteousnesse, which are by Jesus Christ unto the glory of God▪ Phil. 1.10, 11. And that hou may be blmelesse an hrmlesse, the Son of God, without rebuke i the mist of a crooked and perverse nation, shining as a light in the world, Phil. 2.15. Now in reading these Sermns thou shall perceive, that to help thee in both thes, hath ben the very scope and design of this srio Preacher; dsest thou to know Jesus Christ the Lord of life, either accding to his eternal subsistence in the infinit understanding of the ther, as Go, or as to his appearance in the flesh, as Man, or fitnesse as Meditor, to econcile the to God his Father oth in respect of wilingness and ability to save, then here thou shall behold him deline at

to the life: Would thou be clearly informed aent the only true and sure foundation of fellowship with God, the way of intertaining it, the honour or happinesse of it, and sweet frus of it, that fulnesse of joy that accompanies it, here sha thou find so clear a light as shall rejoyce thy soul: Would tho be fortified against the inursions and recursions of sin an Satan, then come to this Magazine, and be furnished bdatly: desirest thou to have thy sol ncreased in the  of God, and to see manifst demonstratio of  love in Christ to thee, o then turn in hither▪  gt satisfion to thy souls desires: f thou desrest with David, to hate  with a perfect hatred, here, if any where, thou shal  thy desire: yet let none think that we limit the  an usefulness of these Sermons to sero Christians , an so by consequence exclude all others fro ay ope of  in reading them: Nay, we declare that thoug  deyable that on did write this Epistle wth a peci∣al repect to the spirual advantage of serio ; and that this holy Preacher also, had this same design, et e da be bold to  all of what degree soever, to the serio peusing of them, assuring them that in so doing, they all not find their labour in vain in the Lord; for her are such pregnant demonstrations of a Deity, infinit, eternal▪ ipotent, incomprehensible, gverning all things by the wor of his powe, as ma dash the boldnesse of the most  raphy∣scally notional, or propanly practical Atheist, and wit con∣viction of spirit mke him cry out, as Psal. 73.22. So fooli  beast before thee: Here  such clear  lenesse of sin, of its direct opposition to a holy God, and his most holy will, of its wofull soul dning effects, as may convince the most prophane and stout-harted carnalist, and awake him out of his soul- of security and presumption: ere are so glori∣ous

evidences of Gods free and inconceivable love to the world, in Christ Jesu the Son of his love, as are able to inlighten with the light of consolation the sadliest dejected and  down soul under the apprehension of the curse and wrah of God due to it for sin, and raise it up to the hope of mercy in and through so clearly a revealed Saviour: In a word, here are to be found convictions for Athests, piercing rebkes to the prophane, clear instructions to the ignorant, milk to bes in Christ, strong meat for the strong, strength to the weak, uickning and reviving for such s faint in the way, reratives for such as are in a decay, reclamations and loud oesses after backsliders to recall them, breasts of consolations for Zions mourners, whether under the first convictions of the Law, and pangs of the new birth, or under the chllenges and compunctions of heart for recidivation and relapses after conversion, even while they are groaning nder the power and burden of the body of death, Rom. 7. And to add no more, here are most excellent counsels and di∣rections to serious seekers of fellowship with God to guide them in their way, and help them forward to the attainment of that fulness of joy which is to be had in fellowship with the Father and the Son. That the Lord may blesse all such to whose hands these Sermons shall cme, with blessings suit∣ble to their souls condition, esecially (the serious Chri∣stian.) for whose soul furtherance and advancement these Sermons were first Penn'd, and now Printed, is the most af∣fectiona desire of

