


THis Sermon lately recommended to Your Ladyships Ear from the Pulpit, is now presented to Your Eye from the Press; and it comes to Your Hand as now it should do, dressed up, like Se∣cond Mourning, in Black and White. 'Tis hoped that this Dis∣course, being now not transient, but fixed; if often read and du∣ly weighed, will by degrees, if not quite remove, yet at least, much abate the Excess of Sorrow, which the subject of it hath occasio∣ned.
'Tis true you have lost a Child; and for such losses Nature requires and Grace allows some Tears, but Reason and Religion too, forbid too many. In this Case our Eye should be like an Alem∣bick; which softly distils some gentle Drops; but not like an o∣pen Flood▪gate, which pours out a Deluge. A perfect Indolence and Insensibility for the Death of our near Relations, would ar∣gue us to be no better than sottish Stoicks; but an Excessive Sor∣row would be an evidence that we are not such Christians as in∣deed we must be. For, to Mourn without Measure, is no less than to shew our selves dissatisfied with the Providences of God to which a meek submission is due, because they are always most Wise, Just, and Holy.
'Tis granted, that You have lost such a Daughter as was more Ingenious than the most of Women, and more Religious than the most of Ladies; One that helped to Support the World by Her Prayers, and Reform it by Her Example; but what then? Me∣thinks Your Reflections upon Her Eminent Vertues, and the Glori∣ous Consequences of them, should rather Sweeten than Imbitter Your Thoughts of Her Mortality.

 And will Your Ladyship Reply to all this, that the Curcumstance of Time doth add such an aggravation to Your loss, that You know not how to bear it? Indeed Your Excellent Daughter, like an Early Rose, was cropt, tho' not in Her First Bud, yet in the Prime Flow∣er of Her Age; but did you love her, and yet think that she could be happy too soon? Her Passage thro' this World to a Better be∣ing very Safe, can you grieve that it proved so quick? Is it Your trouble that a Child of Yours should become a Glorious Saint too Early? Will you still take on and Mourn, because Your young Daughter hath got the start, out-run her Mother, and hath first arrived at Heaven?
But perhaps your sharpest sting which Wounds you deepest, doth yet stick behind; I mean, that this young Lady, whom you have lost or rather parted with for a little while; was Your only Daughter, nay, Your only Child, the Centre of Your Love, the very Quintessence of Your Delight and Pleasure; and if so, how can you bear her departure from you?
Pray tell me, how patiently did Job bear the death of all his Children at once, who did not die according to the course of Nature, as your Daughter did, but on a sudden, without any warning of it, without any actual Preparation for it? With what Alacrity of Mind did Abraham stretch forth his Hand to cut the Throat of his only Son, when God required his Blood for a Sacrafice? Nay, did not even God Himself for Your sake freely give his only Son, and will not you Resign up to him Your only Daughter; and the rather, because he called for her to her great Advantage?
For the Text, Chosen to be the Subject of this Discourse, doth plainly tell you, Blessed are the dead, that die in the Lord. But who are they? Certainly they who live in the Lord, i. e. by the Power of his Grace, according to those Rules, which he hath gi∣ven us, and that Example, which he hath left us; and was not
 Your Daughter one of that Blessed Number? Are you not con∣vinced that she was free from Vice, and full of Vertue, Pious towards her God, just towards all Mankind, and as to the Poor, Charitable, I had almost said, even to a Fault; now, since She thus liv'd in the Lord, She must needs die in the Lord too; and consequently you may pronounce Her Blessed.
'Tis observable that the Text doth not say, They that die in the Lord, shall be blessed hereafter. But they are blessed actual∣ly, and at present Real Saints yet alive, have a Title to Eternal Glory only in Reversion, but departed Saints have it in Pos∣session; and since that is Your Daughters Case, shed no more Tears, unless they be Tears of Joy, Superlative Joy indeed, that you have a Child, who is now more happy in Abraham's Bosom, than She ever was, or ever could have been in Your own; a Child, who now dwells with God, and Converses with those Glo∣rious Angels, who are the Peers of God's Kingdom, and the No∣bles of the Court of Heaven; a Child Inrolled in the List of Glo∣rified Saints, and is become one of that Coelestial Choir, who Sing Hallelujah to Him, that Sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb for Ever.
In short, the Text saith of all departed Saints, they rest from their Labours; from all the painful Services, Toils, Drudge∣ries, and Troubles of this miserable World; and if so, methinks the Meditation of Your Daughters Eternal Rest, should not In∣terrupt, but rather Sublimate and Advance Your own, even till that Blessed day shall come, wherein you and your Daugh∣ter, and all Righteous Souls shall meet again in that Place of Bliss, and part no more for ever.
And as the present Enjoyment of her Happiness, so the very manner of her first Entrance into it, should be a great Satisfaction to you, Her Life being so Divine, Her latter
 End was not only Safe, not only Comfortable, but Illustri∣ous; She did not pass like common Mortals thro' the Sha∣dow, but through the Sun-Shine of Death. For, during Her Sickness, especially upon Her Devout Reception of the Holy Sacrament, She was so Transported with Joy, so Ravished with the fore-tast of Heaven, and the near Prospect of Her then approaching Glory; as if with Good old Simeon She had already embraced Her dear Saviour in Her Bosom; as if with St. Paul She had been rapt up into Paradise; as if with St. Stephen She had seen Heaven opened, and the Son of Man standing ready to entertain Her.
Thus She lived and thus She died without the least reluctan∣cy; Her Lamp expired without a Blast, Her Glass most free∣ly run out without a Shake; to Her, under such blessed Cir∣cumstances, to die was nothing else but to lie down in Her Bed and fall fast a Sleep.
Now since Your dear Daughter hath so happily Closed Her own Eyes, be pleased Good Madam, as to Tears, to Shut up Yours; be pleased to bespeak Your self and all Your Mourn∣ers, as a Spartane Lady once did in the same Case. Flete alios, &c. Go Weep for others, My Daughter doth need no Tears. So Prays at the Throne of Grace, for Your Ladyships Health and Happiness, both in this World and the next,
Honoured Madam

