


THe preaching of the Sermon, which I here present you with, and the choice of the Text preached on, at the Funeral of Mr. Francis Bowtel, your deceased Father, were (as you inform me) his dying Requests, and conceived in his Breast some time before: But had the choice of the Preacher, and the Text been left to me, I should have chosen a Newcomen, or an Harris for the Preacher, And know you not that a great man is fallen this day in Israel, for the Text.

The Task was so much the harder, and more difficult for me to undertake, because confined to so little time, at so great a di∣stance, in the depth of Winter, in a croud of Business, and also having never preached on the Text before. But verba morientis— his Desires were as Commands to me; and therefore since it was, as it was, I must humbly beg of you, to receive the Sermon as it is, without emendation or correction.
The Reason why I refused to print it, when desired by one, or both of you, was; be∣cause then I was utterly averse to that work: but now being drawn thereunto, I cannot but account my self obliged to conjoyn this with some others, that I may lie no longer under the censure of Ingratitude, and also, that the memory of so worthy and remark∣able a Person, may be revived and perpe∣tuated.
I know, that Funeral Sermons, are (most∣ly) made but matters of form, and men come to them, as to a great Feast. The first course, wherein God is most concern'd, is lightly passed over: The second, wherein Man is represented, is (commonly) most ex∣pected, and stood upon: but herein I was prevented, and 'tis like, did frustrate the expectation of my Auditors; partly, by rea∣son
of my short acquaintance with him; and partly, that I might not give an alarm to my own people at home, and provoke their Spirits to accuse me of partiality in serving them up with the first, without the second; even at the Funerals of some persons of great worth, for true Piety and Godliness. And yet I hope without offence, I may take liberty to write that of him now, which I did not then speak. As to his natural Pedigree, I shall not con∣cern my self, nor the Reader with it, for his spiritual is chiefly in mine eye, as that which speaks him to be one of the remarkable men in the Text, whilst living, and dying; for those that knew him better then my self, cannot but say this of him, that he was a Perfect and an Ʋpright man. He had the external form of Godliness, and a name to live: for, as he was a constant attendant upon publick Ordinances of Divine Worship, where he could enjoy them, and whilst in health and strength; so his Gesture and Behaviour therein was reverent and de∣cent, suited to their nature and kind. His Speech was seasoned with Salt, that it might administer Grace to the Hearer. Yea, (as I have been informed) when he went forth to take an oversight of Servants and Day-Labourers, or when he met with poor people
in his way, he would be speaking to them of the things of God, and that which con∣cerned their eternal peace; A rare Practice in a Gentleman. As to the Education of his Children, and bringing them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, I hope, that the sobriety, temperance, and gracefulness of yours (Dear Sir) and your Sisters Lives, are the genuine fruits thereof; and yet this is not all. For to the outward form (without question) there was the inward power. He was nobly descend∣ed, being born again, not of Bloud, nor of the will of the Flesh, nor of the will of Man, but of God: Yea, stampt with the Divine Image, made partaker of the Di∣vine Nature, and richly adorned, and beau∣tified with the gifts and graces of Gods holy Spirit: So that he did not act meerly from external motives, but from internal prin∣ciples, that could not be hid; and hence it was, that he was filled with the fruits of Righteousness, and like a Tree planted by the Rivers of water, bringing forth his fruit in due season: Or rather a Tree plant∣ed in the House of the Lord, and flourishing in the Courts of our God, still bringing forth fruit in old age, so that his Gray Hairs were a Crown of Glory to him, being found in the way of Righteousness.

He lived about ninety six years a natural life, began the very day of his Death in Sabbath-work, and finished the work of his Natural Life with the ending of the day, and so went to his eternal rest, in the bo∣som of his dear Jesus; he lay down, and slept in the Lord. But, as he did not live (though he lived long) undesired, so he did not dye unlamented; witness the Throng and Concourse of serious Christians, that accompanied his Corps to the Church, where his Body was interr'd, and laid to rest, (and that in sharp weather, in a bitter Even∣ing) with a silent and grave deportment, as true Spiritual Mournerrs are wont to do, at the Funeral of some eminent and re∣markable man. Leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent—
Honoured, My design is not to renew your grief, on the one hand, nor to flatter you on the other, but to be your Remembrancer, and to put you in mind of those things which you know, and are well assured of, being Eye, and Ear-witnesses thereof, that you may be stirred up to make a right use of his holy Example and Copy, which he left behind him, and with you in particular, to imitate and write after. So shall you approve your selves to be of the number of the remarkable
ones on the Earth, and your End shall be in Peace. I have nothing more to add, but that I am

Stow-Market, De∣cemb. 2. 1673.
