




Much Honoured,
THose that know my Relation to you, the Interest that you have in this place, and those Obli∣gations, which your Kindnesses to my self and Family, have laid upon me, will not wonder at the Dedication of my first fruits of Printing to you. You were the Instruments (under God) of my removal from a forraign County to this place, where most of these Sermons (which are now exposed to publick view) were preached: Under your Patronage and Wing, have I now lived (for the space of above ten years, in many re∣spects) a comfortable, and pleasurable life.
For here I have enjoyed a large oppor∣tunity of Preaching, in season, and out of season, the glad tidings of Peace, and the Gospel of Salvation. For (through Grace) I can say it, that I prize my Li∣berty (in this respect) above the Living, and my Work (though hard to flesh and bloud) above any worldly advantage. Here I have seen the goings of God, yea, power and glory in the Sanctuary. Here some have been enlightned, convinced, and awakened out of a dead sleep; and others strengthened to run the Christian Race, that is set before them. Here are broken Reeds, and smoaking Flax; yea, here are some newly planted in the house of the Lord, who (I hope) will flourish in the Courts of our God. So that I make no question, but many do at this day, sound forth the praises of God, for guiding and disposing of your Heart, to take care of this great place. You opened the door, and the Lord hath made it effectual. You sent an Earthen Vessel hither, and the excellency of the power hath been of God, let him have all the glory. Not unto us, not unto us; But unto thy Name, O Lord, be the praise. But, O dear Sir, Do you account it your Honour to be used still as an Instrument
(under God) of doing good, and of being made serviceable to his Church, in your Stations; that the Children unborn may bless the Lord for you. This is the way to eternize your Name, to draw down Heavens blessing upon your Person and Estate; yea, to attain the happiness, and comfort of Soul-ravishing smiles, from the well-pleased face of the great Majesty of Heaven. Go on and prosper, let your last works be as good, if not bet∣ter then your first; and in all, encourage your self in the Lord your God. My first Subject now Printed, tells you, that when your Flesh and Heart fails you, God will be your strength; and I hope your own experience bears witness thereunto. That trust that was committed to you, when you was made High Sheriff of the County of Suffolk: The great loss that you su∣stained by the Fire, in the Metropolis of our Nation, together with other re∣markable losses, and charges at the same time, did require a more then ordinary influence for your support and relief: But I am well assured, that the chearful∣ness of your Countenance, and wise con∣duct of your Affairs, under those heavie pressures and burdens, speak forth no∣thing
less then a divine support, and seasonable relief. But to my Labours upon Psal. 73.26. I have added that Ser∣mon which I preached upon your request at the Assizes holden at Bury St. Edmunds, March 27. 1669. And all I do now de∣dicate to you, as a Testimony of my thankfulness for those many Kindnesses, which you have conferr'd upon me. However, by this Inscription, the Book is become yours, with this humble and hearty desire, that it may not only re∣ceive grace and favour from you, but that by your diligent perusal thereof, you may receive Grace from it. So prayes

Stow-Market De∣cemb. 2. 1673.
