


May it please your Lordship,
IT was the crying Sin, as well as the ill fate of the late times, to run down our Church by traducing, quarrelling and defaming her Bishops; whereby their Ministery and Govern∣ment became not only ineffectual, but con∣temptible: But (thanks be to God) our Age begins to recover it self, and to pay that re∣verence and submission as of old belonged un∣to them; which according to Ignatius Epist. ad Magn. cap. 3., is
 , to give them all de∣ference and regard, Epist. ad Trall. cap. 2. & 3. , and to become obedient to them, as unto Christ, whose Vicars and Vicegerents they are.
Now what Success your Lordship met with (first, by sending your Letter to us, afterwards by coming in Person among us) may suffici∣ently be evidenced from the many Thousands, who flock'd unto our Communions, as if it had been to the Pool of Bethesda to be healed there; as also from those numerous Crouds, who presented themselves to your Lordship, to be confirmed by You, as if there had been no less Virtue in Your hands, than was in Saint Paul's, when he cured the Sick. A number perhaps as to both, greater than the present Age hath seen! which made Your coming a∣mongst us seem to some, not unlike that of Paul's and Barnabas's among the Lystrians; when they cried out, The Gods are come down among us in the likeness of men; and upon their return (as convinced of their former mi∣stakes) to take up Calvin's Lib. de ne∣cessit. reform. Eccles. words and say, Talem nobis si exhibeant Hierarchiam, If we may have but such an Hierarchy, and such
 Bishops in it; Tum nullo non Anathemate dignos, then we should count no Anathema too great for such that should refuse their Communion, or renounce their Presidency.
May You go on with the same Piety, Pru∣dence and Zeal, as You have begun; and I doubt not, but before your Comperts are done, or you come amongst us again (so ready are the People, so well resented Your Service, and so acceptable Your unwearied Care) there will remain nothing, or but little, to set in order.
Excuse this Address, and accept it (I pray You) with the same candor, as You did this Sermon; being it self of too hasty a producti∣on to see the light, had not Your Lordship commanded it abroad: To whom I shall ever submit my self, being, as in all duty bound,

Long Melford, Suff. May 13. 1686.

