



NO time can wear out the memory
of those favours which I have recei∣ved
from your hands; You were of
the first that gave me a visit, when
few durst adventure themselves un∣der
the same roof, being by the good providence
of God, necessitated to leave a place sorely af∣flicted
with the Pestilence; and labouring under
a Feaver, wherewith presently on my departure
God pleased to afflict me: and were eye-witnes∣ses
of the mean accommodations, which in those

straits could be provided for me and my reve∣rend
brother, with both our wives and families,
all cast upon the same condition at that time; &
you made it appear that your eyes affected your
hearts, in giving a free invitation to me, and
those that had dependance upon me, to your
house, assoon as with security we durst adven∣ture
over any mans threshold, where for many
moneths we had free and liberal entertainment.
If Paul in an Epistle did remember the like from
Onesiphorus (with special observation, that he
was not ashamed of his chaine) my heart must
needs have checked me, if having opportunity
of Epistling according to received custom, you
should have been forgotten. I shall not be
ashamed of the language of beggers, if they have
learnt it from such a hand; The Lord grant unto
you, that ye may finde mercy from the Lord in that
day. In your house I had not only leisure to
make a good progresse in this Work, but singu∣lar
accommodation from your accomplisht Li∣brary.
So that you have not only a deserved
interest in the Author, but in the Work it self;
upon sight of one part, you have often called up∣on
me for publication of the whole. So that if
the Reader reap any benefit, he may see how

large a share in the thanks is yours. I know you
affect not Panegyricks, neither am I fitted for
them, nor was ever accustomed to them. There
is much published to the world of one of you in
the life of your reverend Father, to whom I have
often in my thoughts applied that of Doctor
Hall concerning learned Whittaker; Who ever
saw him without reverence, or heard him without
wonder? Having led the Reader through his
glory, they adde: And yet his name with the
lively picture of his person lives, in his worthy
sonne, Master Samuel Hildersam; whose learning
Cambridge knew, when he was Fellow of Emmanu∣el
Colledge; and whose present Ministerial labours, and
pious conversation at West-Felton in Shropshire, do
perpetuate the honour of his Reverend Father; whose
memory he doth much reverence; and whose rich
vertues both personal and ministeriall he doth hap∣pily
imitate. And it is not little that is said
of the other, where it is remembred, that
you were propounded by him, for a meet wife
for his dearest sonne; and recorded that he was
heard with affection to ingeminate these words;
Never man had a kinder daughter in Law. To
be a follower of such a precident, and to be
found worthy of such a Testimony, is a great∣er

glory, than all the noble blood that ran
through the veines of the greatest of either of
your Ancestors. Let this small piece finde a
roome in your Study and Closet, and testi∣fie
to the world that gratitude lives in the
breast of
From my study in
Tamworth, No∣vemb.
4. 1652. 
