



Right Reverend,
WHile in a Charitable desire of the Churches and the whole Kingdoms Peace, I first meditated the matters treated of in these ensuing Papers, though but for the Excitation and Encouragement of a lesser Auditory; and was afterwards perswaded, that if sent abroad, they might (through the Divine

Blessing) conduce in some measure to the benefit of more: I was thereupon willing to cast in this poor mite of mine into the common Treasury. For this cause, and merely to this end, without any other respect that my heart knows, or any the least desire to gall or grieve the Spirits of any; I do here humbly offer my Well-wishings of this kind, to the publick view, beseeching our Gracious God, the God of Love and Peace, so to blesse my weak (but cordial) endeavours, that they may find in the first place, acceptance with Him, and then (through his power) a prevalency with Them, who together with my Self (though of the meanest and lowest rank) are concerned in this holy and great Affair.
It is not Ambition, but Reverence, that hath induced me to send them thus forth under Your Lordships Patronage, and so to transmit them (as through Your hands) to the Prudent Considerati∣on of my Reverend Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry; especially those whom it hath pleased God, and (next under him) our Dear Sove∣raign, to recommend unto Your Lordships care. Nor do I herein presume to give Instructions, or to prescribe Rules to them, that are in my own just

esteem so much my Betters, (alas, who am I, that in so Grave and Venerable a Society of Learned men, should harbour but a thought of so doing?) No, the bent of my Soul is, with a soft and gentle breath to quicken up their Holy Zeal, and humbly to beseech them (every one in his Place and proper Station) to imploy the choicest of their greater and more flourishing Abilities, to∣ward the allaying of those unkindly heats, and the making up of those destructive breaches, which the irregular fancies of this loose age, (through the just Judgement of God upon us for our sins) have brought upon the Nation, to the downfull (al∣most) of our Religion, and consequently the un∣doing of this once flourishing, and (let me speak it, on the one side without Envy, and without Flattery on the other) truly Apostolical Church of England.
Unity in the Church, if founded upon Truth, is a sweet Ornament, and a great support: and truly, whatever some may conceive, I believe the wiser sort will Judge, that a decent and wholesome Uniformity is a special help, as to the first beget∣ting, so to the constant preserving of that Unity. Whereas, on the other side, a Lawlesse Multifor∣mity

(such as that was which of late years hath born so great a sway, and by an impetuous violence carried down all before it) may justly be reputed among the greatest and soarest Enemies of that de∣sirable accord, which Christianity perswades.
How Dolorous and Direfull the effects have been of this many-headed Monster, to the great disturbance of our Peace, and the dissolving (well∣nigh) of that goodly Order which St. Paul com∣mended in the Church at Colosse, chap. 2. 5. yea, and how much the Un-brotherly contending for some fancied particles of a Negative Supersti∣tion, in reference to the mere outward Administra∣tion f our Holy Things, hath sharpened, I say not only the Tongues and Pens, but the Swords and Pikes of the mis-guided Multitude, our own dear experience can sadly recompt, and the late twice∣repeated Insurrection of a Rebellious Crew (whose design, it seems, was to have ingaged us once more in a Desperate and Bloody War) doth suf∣ficiently demonstrate.
The truth is, no better Fruit can be expected from such a Tree. And therefore, what lesse can the consideration hereof work in us, (after an humble Recognition and penitent Contrition, in re∣ference

to our own manifold demerits) than a Prudent and Zealous care of contributing what we can toward the Quenching of these unnatural and intestine Flames, together with our most instant and hearty Prayers unto Almighty God, for his Gracious Direction, and Fatherly Benediction, in and upon our diligence and endeavour that way. And, oh that it would p'ease the Divine Goodnesse (in whose hand are the hearts of all men) so to inlighten our minds, and fasten our affections upon the Fundamental and Essential points of Faith and Godlinesse, that, laying aside these fierce dis∣putes, and heart-dividing contentions about Cir∣cumstantial Niceties, we might all meet and joyn together in a just and Peaceable Consormity, and so (at once) exercise our Piety to God, our Sub∣mission to Authority, and our affectionate respects of love and kindly assistance one towards another, ever studying (as much as in us lies) the preser∣vation of the Unity of the Spirit, in the bond of Peace; the best and readiest way (as wise men deem) to silence the Clamours, prevent the De∣signes, and (if the good pleasure of God be such) to rectifie the Apprehensions, and reconcile the Hearts of the yet-remaining Sanballats, Tobi∣aos,

and Geshems of the time, who by force and fraud, do what they can to interrupt and hinder us (as their Fathers sometime did that good Ne∣hemiah) in repairing the Ruines, and raising up the Walls of our English Jerusalem.
And in Order to all this, that Your Lordship and the rest, who labour under you in this part of the Spiritual Vineyard, may thrive and prosper in your Holy Undertakings, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ so Blesse and Crown your acti∣ons with good successe, that his Name in all things may be glorified, his Truth setled, his Peace resto∣red, your Souls blessed, and the whole Church every day more and more both comforted and enlarged! So prayes,
My Lord, 
 From my Study in Barnstaple, Jan. 21. 1660.
