



LOud and piercing are the cryes and groanes under the burden of those pressures which the hand of God hath brought upon his people: The yoke of their transgression is bound by his hand, they are wrea∣thed, and come upon their neck: These need not to be presented to your eyes or eares. The frequent changes which you have seen, and visits of men skilfull to destroy, have given you abundant and wofull experience: yet I account it among one of Gods mighty works that your sorrowes, by his over-ruling provi∣dence, are so stinted, that the rage of men hath not brought them to a greater height: While you have tasted of Justice, you are not shut out from mercy and compassion: when I might not speake to you, I have held it my dutie to speake for you: In the midst of all,Ier. 18.20. this must be our rest, That the Lord of hosts is with us,Psal. 46.11. the God of Jacob is our refuge. Having a Covenant of Grace to plead, we may say as Israel of old, See we beseech thee, we are all thy people.Isai. 64.9. And as posteritie is not the least of our care, to seek a right way,Ezra 8.21. as for our selves, so for our little ones, that a generation to come,Psal. 102.18. a people that shall be created may praise the Lord: So it is of the greatest of our comforts, that posteritie, our little ones, and those that shall be born, are bound up of God in the same promise, And that, in one and the same plea, we may seek to the Throne of Grace, for more then one age at once. When God had spoke to David of his house for a great while to come, revealing it to him,
that he would build him an house;2 Sam. 7.19, 27. Therefore hath thy servant (saith he) found in his heart to pray this prayer to thee. The pro∣mise was the ground, on which his prayer was bottom'd. Take off the promise of God to your houses for time to come, and the foundation of your prayers for posteritie is shaken. This was the endevour of some among you, who are of those that lye in wait to deceive, scattering in the dark such doctrines that will not beare the light; which occasioned these present meditations, which you once heard delivered in your eares, and now are presented with some advantage (for more full consideration) to your eyes: I had encouragements to make them publike, especially by the fruit, with which (through Gods mercy) I have understood, they were crowned in a way, that I least expected, and being of right your due, as a free-will offering then tendered I could seek no other, nor greater Patron. I am more ambitious of your happinesse, then the favour of those that are placed highest. I have served you for Christ a double apprentiship of yeares almost compleat; which time hath seemed to some to have added more then a third to the yeares of the dayes of my pilgrimage; This is to me the strongest engagement of affections, and shall so remaine. If there have been but one new born, or so much as a cubite added to the stature of any towards the measure of the fulnesse of Christ, I have suffici∣ent; And having not another Legacie, I must commend to you, or rather you unto the Word of Gods Grace, which is able to build you up, and give you an inheritance among all them which are sanctified; still praying that the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus Christ, the great Shepheard of the sheep, through the bloud of the everlasting testament, make you perfect in all good works, to doe his will, working in you that which is pleasant in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be praise for ever and ever. Amen.

