


SIR,
THe Ornaments of Nature are so many and marvellous, that they not only submit the mind of man in a devote honor to that being that pre∣serveth this variety, in so sweet con∣sort; but force also our thoughts to pursue the inquest of the several ties & dependencies of this beautiful pro∣portion, that at last we may come to the knowledge of things in their cau∣ses and connexion. This Pythagoras most properly termed Philosophy. And indeed Nature hath not been in this, neither in any other of her works empty; but hath bestowed on us largely all means fit for the accom∣plishment of our wishes. Amongst which Experience and Reason deser∣vedly

challenge precedency: Expe∣rience being beholding to Chance & Imitation, is pleased to impart her Observations to Reason; who not being discourtious, doth assist her with her own Principles; and so mustereth in the fields of Learning Noble Squadrons of Conclusions, against their common enemy, Ignorance.
This is vigorously illustrated by the Relation of famous Galen; A Viper by chance being stifled in Wine, and a Leprous person drinking it, was cured. A Philosopher hearing it, used the same means, and was rid of the same Malady. Chance in the one, and Imitation in the other, assert∣ed the experience: Which reason now in others makes plausible use of.
From this Base is the Noble Frame of Medicine raised to so great a mag∣nificence: For the Ancients being by event or advice delivered from their sickness; hung up votive Tables in the Chapels of their Gods, drawn with the Liniaments of their Disease

and Remedy. Out of these approved, yet scattered Records, did the Divine Hippocrates gather those Theorems, which all Posterity adore and imbrace as the highest Master-piece of this skill.
And our Author seems in this his Treatise of the Elder to tread the foot-steps of that more then mortal old man: For here, as in a curious Land-skip, he hath clearly and metho∣dically represented to your view, the Experiments and vertues of this humble Shrub; whether by chance discovered to the Commons, or by improvement to the rational. In whose ragged Coat are contained, I dare averr, rarer and safer Medicines, then the rob'd Indies enrich us with; and though they seem but homely; and the Products of Pesants; yet are more safe and effectual for out bodies and diseases, then the most renowned Exoticks: For Nature with a plentiful Horn hath provided each Climate proper Medicines.









This being considered by the inge∣nious, it will not only press upon them a thankful remembrance of the Author for gathering; but of you also for procuring the Translation of these Experiments.
This Translation owes you its Life, and lies prostrate at your feet, to be exposed, or cherished. If it please you, 'tis all the Translator desires; if not, 'tis all he could do in these rough and rugged hils, where even the com∣mon elements are barbarous. But he knows you are ready to entertain any foundling of his, though full of deformities, thereby to encourage him for better births: Wherefore he be∣seecheth; you will take this Paper-in∣deavor, as a fragment of the great du∣ty he owes you, till he be able in more worthy expressions, to declare himself,
SIR, 
At the Camp in Athol, June 30. 1651,
