



BEing well informed that there is a Pious, Good, Commendable Work for maintaining near forty Poor, or Fatherless Children, Born all at, or near Highgate, Hornsey, or Ham∣sted: We whose Names are subscribed
 do engage or promise, That if the said Boys are decently Cloathed in Blew, lined with Yellow; constantly fed all alike with good and wholsom Diet; taught to Read, Write, and Cast Accompts, and so put out to Trades, in order to Live another day; Then we will give for one Year, two or three (if we well like the design, and prudent management of it) once a Year, the sum below mentioned: But if we be not fully satisfied, that the said Boys are all of them true Ob∣jects of Charity, or are in the least neglected to be taught the holy Scri∣pture, and Fear of God by good Dis∣cipline, frequent Catechizing, and or∣derly going to the Publick Church every Lord▪s Day, Forenoon and After; then we will not mind this our pro∣mise in the least, or contribute any thing at all to it: But hoping that the work may be good, take Root, find many friends, last long, be commend∣able in future Ages, we be enclined to do as above mentioned, not know∣ing
 but that a Kernel may become a Tree, and a thing of small beginning prove popular and praise-worthy to the Honour of our Protestant Religion, and in time find many Benefactors: Also it standing so exceeding well and near this City's famous Hospitals, which were not half so great as now. However, this little Infant being the first erected thing in our names, and Dedicated to us as a Pious Work, wor∣thy of Encouragement; we are not willing it should wholly die, but to try the Expedient, believing all good Works to be good, and not to be re∣pented of, in Life, Death or Eternity, but the surest sign of true love to God, and Faith in our Lord Jesus Christ.
And now 'tis ten to one but some of your near Acquaintance, as well as your great Relations, may say, Pray Madam let us trouble you with a small sum, or a few Guynies to this good Work, hoping it will be no sin to add a little Charity to your Ladiship. And in such a case you may for the ease of your
 memory, set it down in one of these Lines below, and so you will be sure not to forget or wrong us. Now a Lord or Gentleman's money will do almost as well for our School as your Ladiships, only we will still ascribe all to your Honour.
For God's sake do not object any thing, but read and see whether these Scriptures do not all seem to be for us:
The night comes when none can work (that is, at Death) Joh. 9. 4.
Be merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful.
Lay up Treasure in Heaven, Matth. 6. 20.
He that soweth sparingly, shall reap sparingly, 2 Cor. 9. 6.
Make ye friends of the unrighteous Mammon, that when ye fail (that is, when ye depart this world) Christ may receive ye into his everlasting ha∣bitation. Luk. 16. 9.
He that observes the wind shall not sow, or he that regardeth the clouds
 shall not reap, (that is, he that makes excuses and objections) Eccl. 11. 4.
But cast your Bread upon the waters, and after many days you shall find it, Eccl. 11. 1.
Give, and it shall be given to you, Luke 16: 38.
Charge them that are rich in this world, that they do good, and not trust in uncertain riches, but be rich in good works, 1 Tim. 6. 17.
Blessed is he that considereth the Poor; the Lord shall preserve him alive, when he lay sick; and not deliver him into his enemies hands, but he shall be blessed in the Earth, Psal. 41. 1, 2.
And now he that gives in Life, car∣ries his Lanthorn before him, & makes his own hands and eyes Executors.
The Great Ladies do allow their House-keeper one bottle of Wine, three of Ale, half a dozen Rolls, and two Dishes of Meat a day, who is to see the Wilderness, Orchard, great Prospect, Walks and Gardens, all well
 kept and Rolled for their Honour's Families, and to give them small Treats according to discretion, when they please to take the Air, which is undoubtedly the best round London.
Three or four short Reasons why you Noble Ladies should not let this little School-house die:
1. It is but little yet you have done for Christ, or the Honour of Religion, being cumbred with many things, like Martha, you neglect the best.
2. In this you imitate the best two Princes that ever Reigned in this Realm, Queen Elizabeth, and Edward the sixth, who founded most of the great Hospitals.
As for Queen Elizabeth, she hated Popery, made Christ's Righteousness her Rock, loved the Parliament, City and Dutch (a Cord hardly to be broken.)
3. It stands so well, and is really dedicated to you who are the choicest Flowers in Nature: What is beloved like you English Ladies? no mortals
 more happy, if sin do not hurt you. Others have not the hand and purse. Others have not the Climate. Others have not such Husbands as your Right English Nobles are, or were many of them heretofore. No such Noble Seats as most of yours be. You have every one a Canaan, Milk, Honey, and the holy Gospel preacht; and may that ever be, and your lives exemplary, whilst the Sun, Moon and Stars endure.
But pray Madams, why should Old Sutton's brave Hospital, such and such Hospitals flourish, but yours die; yours who are certainly the best and great∣est Ladies in the whole world?
May God Almighty bend your hearts to us Poor Boys, who will ever pray for you and all yours.
