



Right Honourable,
THis Sermon had waited upon you sooner, had not some interveening accidents, and occasions hindred. At length, such as it is, It here humbly presents it selfe unto your Honour. And truly my Lord, you have all the reason in the world to own it; for it's more yours then mine. It was your desire (which with me hath, and ever shall have the force of a command)

that brought it, first into the palpit, then into the presse; yea so much as the very Text and all was your choice; which to me is a mighty rock of confidence, that you earnestly de∣sire to know what it is God requires of you in your place; being willing to doe it; and I am sure you have power. And these three compleat a good Magistrate: Skill to govern, Power to manage that Skill, & will to actuate both. Much of that blessed work, I was then such an earnest and hum∣ble suiter for, I already see happily accomplished. Your pi∣ous care for the more strict observation of the Lords Day; Your unparalleld zeale for the suppressing of swearing, drunkennesse, and other the like God-provoking, Land-devouring, Soul-damning abominations: your vigorous activity, fidelitie, sinceritie, for the Reformation, preserva∣tion, good every way of this great Citie shall stand upon record to your everlasting Honor. When I think of it, I can∣not choose but say with Ezra.Ezra. 7.27. Now blessed be God, who hath put such a thing as this into your heart. And then pray with David,1 Chron. 29.18. Keep this for ever Lord, for ever in the thoughts of the heart of thy servant! Iam. 5.2.To be instrumentall in the refor∣mation, though but of a family, yea though but of a parti∣cular person, 'tis the most choicest, and most glorious piece of service that can possibly be accomplished by the sonnes of men: but to be instrumentall in the reformation of a Ci∣ty, and such a City, so populous, so exemplary, so influen∣tiall into the whole Kingdom; Dan. 12.3.Oh the heighth, the depth, the breadth, the length of this dignity!Luk. 1.16. The Lord give you an humble heart, that you may not be exalted above measure, through this aboundant honour he hath put up∣on you; which is such, that truly, my Lord, were there no other end for which you live but this, yet in this you have great cause to blesse your selfe in God; and in his name we blesse you.
And now, what remaines but that you gird your sword upon your thigh, and ride on? that you advance still for∣ward, and do nobly, for your selfe, your people, and your God? Consider I beseech you, how great the trust is, this Citie hath committed to you: It has given you the Keys, the Sword. The Safetie, the Government. They have all cast themselves (as it were) at your feet, saying, This is the man we will have to rule over us. Thus shall it be done unto the man, whom London will honour, and thus has it been done to you. And now, will not you honour London my Lord, that has thus honoured you? And wherein can you honour it more, then in reforming it? It was the ho∣nour of that Citie Jerusalem, above all other Cities in the World, that it was the Holy Citie.Mat. 4.5. Oh that it might be Londons honour! To say London is rich, or London is wise, or London is strong, this is something: But to say London is holy, this is more then all.Ier. 9.23, 24. Let not the wise man glory in his wisdome, nor the strong man glory in his strength, nor the rich man glory in his riches: but let him that glorieth, glory in this that he understands and knows me, saith the Lord. This will make it honourable in the eyes of God, in the eyes of the Saints of God;Deut. 4.5, 6, 8. yea, and in the eyes even of the verie ene∣mies of God. You cannot honour the Citie more, then by endevouring to make it a holy Citie. And my Lord, as e∣ver you seriously minded and intended any thing, I beseech you mind and intend this. Its the thing wee looke for at your hands. Its the thing you must doe, or doe what you will, what you can, you doe just nothing. Doe! nay, you undoe every thing. Reform us my Lord, or you ruine us. what a perfidious thing were it, for your Honour to betray the Citie? My Lord, reform it, or you betray it. And your late solemne Covenant; and the Oath upon Oath you have

taken since, ô what mightie ingagements should they be upon your spirit? The vows of God are upon you my Lord; so that its no arbitrary thing. Necessitie is laid upon you, and wo to you, if you doe it not. Yet again, reforme London my Lord, and you reforme England. If London be wicked, ungodly, prophane, how will prophanesse flow from it, as from a fountain, into the whole Kingdom? And on the other side, if London be pious, religious, well orde∣red, well governed, reform'd, how will all the Counties, Cities, Villages, Places round about, by its example, be encouraged likewise to a Reformation? Once more (and I will use the mightiest argument in the world, and that which so raisd the brave spirit, of that great Apostle, to such invincible patience & unwearied activeness for Gods glorie and the Churches good) 2 Cor. 5.14Let the love of Christ constrain you. I read of holy Job, that being a man in authoritie (as you are) he was such a terrour to wicked and ungodly men, that they durst not shew their heads, but were glad to Iob 30.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.flie into woods, wildernesses & solitary places; and there hide themselves in clifts, and rocks, and holes of the earth, and cut up mallows among the bushes, and Juniper roots for their meat. It's a copie penn'd for you my Lord, by Gods own hand; write after it. I know you feare not the face of man. Your Honour knows what it is to lie in a prison for your Countries good. Beare not the sword in vain. Draw it and cut off those that wil not otherwise be reclaim'd. Make wicked and ungodly men af∣fraid of you. Let not Drunkards dare to goe reeling and staggering in the streets; nor Swearers dare to open their mouthes in oaths and blasphemies in the streets; nor chil∣dren & others dare to be playing up & down the streets on the Lords Day. Aaron may speak: but it is Moses Rod that does the wonders. Wee that are Ministers may cry out a∣gainst

these things: but you have power in your hands. Let not sin dare any longer to affront Word and Sword.
Its a pretious oportunitie God has put into your hands, improve it. You may do more good, and bring in a greater revenue of glorie to God now, in a few houres, then it may be you shall ever be able to do again in many yeeres. Close your eyes against all discouragements. Laugh in the face of difficulties. Passe by with generous magnanimitie and brave contempt the derisions of men, viler then the earth.Iob. 30.8. You are high in place and office: Be higher in affection and reso∣lution. To the worke in good earnest, and goe thorough stitch with it. Everie eye that looks upon you, will blesse you. The prayers of all Gods people will be for you. And, though we will not presume to say to you, as Nestorius said to the Emperour, Socrat. lib. 7.29.Mihi ô Imperator, terram tu haereticis pur∣gatam tribue; & ego tibi coelum retribuam, Give us London purged of Drunkards, Swearers, Sabboath-breakers, &c. and wee'll give you Heaven: Yet Jesus Christ shall say, Well done good and faithfull servant. And not onely wee that now live, but succeeding ages shall call you blessed. Your name shal be like a pretious ointment to the children; yea, to the childrens children that are yet unborn.

