



WEre it absolutely necessary for him that should write of Eloquence to be per∣fectly Eloquent, I would easily confess my self too rash in this enterprise: But having seen often those treat knowingly of Painting, that never held Pencill; and Cicero remarking that Aratus, by the comon consent of learned men, wrote excellently of the Heavens & Stars, though he was no celebrated Astronomer; I'm encourag'd to say, Why then may not I too dis∣course of Eloquence, without being a Orator?
Galen that great Master of Physick, who wrote so learnedly of every part of that Science, was little seen in the Practick; Nor

are those, that discourse best of the embattailing Armys, and differencing military functions, alwaies the best Warriers, or the most daring. The like may happen in this subject, that he, who is able to set down the Rules and Laws which ought to be observ'd in Speech or stile, may notwithstanding find himself defective in the application, and so may be said to give that to others, which he has not himself.
The conceits of the mind are Pictures, whose Interpreter is the tongue, and the order of Gods Creatures in themselves, is not only admirable and glorious, but Eloquent; he then, that could apprehend the consequence of things in their truths, and deliver his apprehensions as truely, were a perfect Orator; Thus Cicero; Dicere recte nemo potest nisi qui prudenter intel∣ligit.
Eloquence is equally fortunate in taming Passions and in charming senses: she imitates Musick, and makes use of the voice of Orators to enchant the Eares, with the cadence of Pe∣riods, and the harmony of Accents; whilst the gestures, apt motions, Natural Aire, and all those graces, which accompany exact Recitation, steal away the Heart by the eyes, and work won∣ders upon the will. But Eloquence is chiefly grounded upon Wisdom, & Wisdom arises prin∣cipally from a due pre-consideration of all our

actions; Hence that excellent saying of a mo∣dern French Author, Il est impossible de bien dire, sans avoir bien pensé, 'tis impossible to speak well, without having first well considered what to speak. And Plotinus says, 'tis wisdom to think upon any thing, before we execute it.
Now, as 'tis certain, that No harmony, can appear in his thoughts, nor soundness in his reason, whose speech is faltering and preposte∣rous: So likewise no clearness nor perfection in that Fancy, which delivers it self by a confus'd abortion. Great is the disparagment which flows from the defailance of the Tongue: it not only dishonours the person of the Speaker, but even sullys the opinion of his reason and judge∣ment with a disrepute, and oft-times renders the very truth suspected.
If then it so befall our verball expressions, which are transient and less lyable to censure, and where one hansome expression may excuse a number of solaecismes; how shall that person be esteem'd prudent, whose pen layes him wide open in a fungous and sordid stile; how shall we expect ingenuity from him, whose leisure and Genius, assisted with the examen of his eyes, yeild us no spirit in his writing? He that has worth in him and cannot express it, is a Ca∣binet keeping a rich Jewell and the key lost, sayes a modern. Author; whereas a good stile,

with choise matter and embroidery of well chosen words, is like a beautifull Woman with a virtuous Soul, who attracts the eyes and charmes the hearts of all beholders.
This excellent faculty of speech ha's bin in high esteem even from the very infancy, & will be to the end of the World; For in sacred Story we read,Prov. 16.21, 24. the wise in Heart shall be called prudent and the sweetness of the lips increaseth understanding: Pleasant words are as an honycomb; sweet to the soul and health to the bones. Hence 'twas, an an∣cient Author maintained, that Pericles (the Orator) was no less Tyrant in Athens then Pysistratus; without acknowledging other dif∣ference, then that this exercis'd his Empire armed, the other without armes, by the sole terror of his speech, which Aristophanes com∣par'd to a thunder bolt, as Homer did that of Vlisses to a Torrent, that beares down all with its violence. And 'twas said of old, that the tongue of Cyneas (the fam'd Scholler of De∣mosthenes) conquer'd more Citties, then the sword of Pyrrhus, the valiant King of Epire.
To have said thus much, of the much more might be added in behalf of this charming Fa∣culty, and of the disadvantage commonly attending those who are unskill'd in it, may serve as an inducement to the youth of both

Sexes (for whose benefit this little Work is chiefly intended, and to their acceptance conse∣crated) to make the perusall of it their sub∣servient Recreation for vacant houres, this wth little study, will not only facilitate your dis∣course into the moding language of these times, but adapt your pens too with a quaint & fluent stile, then which no qualities (with confidence I speak it) can render you more accomplish'd.
Here shall you be furnisht with all necessary materialls and helps in order to the acquiring so great a treasure; such helps as have bin ad∣vised and often wisht for, but never before pu∣blished.
I. The first part containes a more exact English Rhetorique, then has been hitherto extant, comprehending all the most usefull Fi∣gures, exemplifi'd out of the Arcadia and other our choisest Authors.
II. In the second part, you have formulae ma∣jores or Common-places, upon the most usual subjects for stile and speech; The use and ad∣vantage whereof is asserted by my Lord Bacon, who (in his Advancement of learning) sayes thus; I hold the diligence and pain in colle∣cting Common-places to be of great use and certainty in studying; as, that which aids the memory subministers copy to invention, and contracts the sight of judgement to a strength.
III. In the third place you shall find For∣mulae minores (as my Lord calls them) lesser formes, which he then reckon'd among the de∣fects in our Language, and sayes, they are as it were, the Portals and postern dores of stile and speech, and of no smal use.
IV. Lastly, you have a Collection of Letters and addresses written to, for, and by severall persons, upon emergent occasions; with some particular Instructions and Rules premised, for the better attaining to a Pen-perfection.
The Formula's are but Analects, which like the Humble-bec I gather'd in Spring time out of the choisest Flowers of our English Gar∣den; nor have I in the Rhetorick or Letters transplanted much from my own barren Semi∣nary; I may say to some noble Correspondents, what the Poet did of old in a like Case, sic vos non vobis — But, you will easily distinguish Tinsill from better mettal: what is mine will appear to be so, by the Bluntismes that fre∣quently occur, the rest are of better allay; So that, if the defects of my own Essayes be but pardoned, the rest I am confident will abide the touch, and pass for Sterling.

