



MAy it please your Lordship,
Having perpe∣tually before my eyes the aymable and commen∣dable qualities of my most lovelie and most be∣loved consort, of vvhom it pleased God latelie to deprive me in the prime
 of her age (to my unspea∣kable grief, and irrepara∣ble discomfort) and ha∣ving found some conso∣lation in reducing in vvri∣ting part of vvhat my me∣morie did suggest unto me of her, for to serve me insteed of a pourtrait, u∣pon vvhich I might often passe my vieuvv, thereby in some sort to mitigate the excesse of my tor∣menting sadnes, much better than others in the like case use to doe vvith lesse livelie and more cor∣poreall
 representations: I thought good, vvhat I had so set dovvn at first vvith no other intention, than to remaine vvith myselfe, and to serve o∣nelie for mine ovvn use and consolation, to pu∣blish the same unto the vvorld; partlie for to acquit vvhat is due to her vertues, deserving a farre statelier monument; and principallie for the ad∣vantage and edification of others; hoping that her example may serve
 as a povverfull motif, vvhereby many vvilbe stirred up to the practise of true vertue and pietie, in the same manner as these lines (free from all amplifications and rhe∣toricall ornaments, and consisting of a bare and plaine narration vvithout all artifice) vvill hold forth to have been done by her. And as all those, vvho have knovvn her, can beare me vvitnesse, that I have said nothing her, but the naKed
 truth; so in particular your Lordship, vvho ha∣ving lodged vvith us un∣der the same roof, and come to the same board vvith us, for the space of vvell neere three yeares, have seen in her conver∣sation all those qualities verified, vvhich here I re∣late of her: vvhich hath incouraged me, to dedi∣cate these lines unto your Lordship, thereby to put them past all contradic∣tion vvith such, as have not at all been acquainted
 vvith her, and vvho upon my bare record might cōceive, that my pen had not been so much guided by unbiassed truth, as by an over-favourable and pre-occupated affection.
And forasmuch as some passages of this treatise vvill receive some light by the knovvledge of the accident that hath taken her avvay, and of the manner that it made an end of her; it vvill be good to give a compendious relation of the same, before I come to the maine matter.
 Having been married to me at Dublin on christmas day in the yeare of our Lord 1642. and brought me three children (the youngest vvhere-of, beeing a girle, borne here in Paris on the 13. of Septem∣ber 1646. is onelie alive) she miscarried last yeare on the 27. of April, vvithout anie evident cause▪ and having conceived again about the 12.  14. of August, she vvent∣on happilie till the first of March, vvithout anie other acommoditie, than that she vvas excessive big, more than
 vvith anie former child she had been, verie un-able to vvalke or stirre, and subject to frequent faintings; for vvhich last accident having been let blood in the arme on the 19. of November, she vvas some vveeks the better for it. For the rest, she had her health vvonderfull vvell and a farre better appetite, than she had had vvith anie of her former children; the vvhich did so fill her veines, as it caused the aforesaid ex∣cessive bignes▪ and nature beeing overburdened vvith
 blood, discharged itselfe on the first of March in the eve∣ning, of a suddain, and vvithout anie the least pre∣ceding commotion of mind or bodie, of part of it, in that impetuous manner, as in the space of lesse than halfe an houre she lost more than tvvo ound▪ and hauing continued to loose some more blood for the space of an houre longer, and begun to bleed afresh the next morning, she had nine ounces of blood dravv∣e from her out of her right arme; vvhich presentlie
 stayed her bleeding. But she had another fit the 13. of March, though nothing so copious as the first; and  third on the 22. of the same month, much more moderate yet, and such vvas also the fourth, vvhich came on the first of April. The tenth of April she had a fifth shed much vvhat of the same quantitie as the second: and the 12. of April at night of sixth, a verie greate one, the blood for a greate vvhile running from her iust like a spiggot. The 15. of the same
 month, beeing saturday, she had a seaventh fit, farre mo∣re furious than any of the former, so as in lesse than halfe an houres time she lost 10. or 12. pound of blood; continuing also to bleed some vvhat for tvvo or three houres after; by the end vvhere-off the bleeding vvas stanched, she hauing been let blood in the arme, and manie good re∣medies given her invvardlie, and applied outvvardlie, by me and the midvvife, vvith the joint advice of Doctor Sarrasin, an ancient and fa∣mous
 practioner. Yet she had another little shed the same day about tenne of the clock at night, a second about the same houre the next morning, beeing sunday; and a third at one the clock in the afternoon▪ and from that time the blood having stayed on her till the next day, monday the 17. of April, at seaven a clock at night, then again, notvvhitstanding a greate manie of most excellent remedies, both outvvard and invvard, that had been ad∣ministred to her eversince sa∣turday
 at noon, (during vvhich time also she had not stirred out of her bed, and been plied vvith such exqui∣site nourishments, as are fitting and usuall in the like cases) the blood burst dovvn in as greate an abundance as ever: vvhereby her veines, so much emptied alreadie, ha∣uing been utterlie exhausted, it so abated her strength, as casting her from one fainting fit into another, vvithout anie thorough throvvs, for to bring-on labour, but onelie some vveak beginnings of it
 (to the contrary of vvhat the midvvife vvith us had hoped and expected) she ne∣ver came to herselfe again but gave up her ghoste some three houres after the begin∣ning of this last fit, and about tenne of the clock at night having kept her sences till vvithin a quarter of an houre afore she died, and her speech till vvithin lesse than halfe an houre. And this last halfe houre she vvas vvonderfull calme and quiet, vvhere-as for the space of somevvhat more than halfe an houre
 before she had grievouslie tossed; her heart beeing loath to yeeld to the approches of death, because not at all abated by anie sicknes. For after every one of those sheds, that she had had from the beginning, even after that late and grievous one on sa∣turday, and after the subse∣quent ones on sunday; she did still recover herselfe again vvithin a fevv houres, and vvould be very heartie, ea∣ting her meate vvith as good an appetite and digestion, as if she had ailed nothing.
 And having got a greate deale of good sleep the last night of her life, that be∣tvvixt sunday and monday, she vvas so cheerfull and light some, not onelie in the morning, but all the day aster, as if she had had no harme at all▪ and vvhere-as she had companie most part of the afternoon, she talked and vvas merry vvith them in the same manner, as any vvell bodie might have done. Insomuch as Doctour Sarra∣sin, vvho vvent not from her till a little before seaven
 of the clock at night (hauing been upvvards of an houre vvith her) vvent avvay full of most comfortable hopes, and assured me at parting, that there vvas nothing at all to be feared for her. For although she had not felt the child stirre at all since satur∣day at noon, vve made the lesse matter of that, because that it having lyen still aster severall of the former fits in the same manner for the space of 24. houres, and longer, it vvas still come to itselfe again: so as there vvas cause
 to hope for as much at the time. As for vvhat she said and did in those last houres of her life, and hovv she con∣cluded it in relation to God and her soule, that vvill find a place in some part of the follovving Discourse; the vvhich let us begin novv.
