



READER,
I Am not concerned to enquire why other Persons have
given such accounts as they have, of the main Pro∣position
laid down in the Reasonableness of
Christianity, &c. of the Design that Author had in
publishing his Treatise, and of the Reason why he ob∣served
the Method he hath taken to clear and prove the
great Point treated of there. It may suffice to declare why
I apprehend that his Proposition, his Design, and the
Reason of his Method are very different from what they
have represented them; which in short is, because I
cannot help it. The Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, &c. being perfect Master of his own No∣tions,
hath expressed them in such perspicuous and proper
Terms, I must offer Violence to my own Understanding
and Reason, to put that Construction on them, which
some have assigned them.
The worthy Author of the Animadversions, &c. ha∣ving
very particularly related what he took to be the De∣sign,
&c. of the Author of the Reasonableness, &c. oc∣casioned
my setting down all along as I read his Account,
what I conceived was the Design, &c. of the aforesaid Au∣thor;
and my making some Observations on what he of∣fered

in answer to those Passages he quoted out of the Rea∣sonableness
of Christianity, &c. which are now pub∣lished
to prompt others to peruse attentively that excellent
Treatise, and to make themselves Masters of the Truths
there delivered; and because I am perswaded that neither
the Doctrines delivered in the New Testament, nor
Christians, can have their full Right done them, till Peo∣ple
do understand and entertain the great Point insisted on
in the Reasonableness of Christianity, &c. and do pre∣serve
themselves under the Influence and Conduct of it. It
is a Notion, that tends not so much to gratify some Peo∣ple's
Ambition, and serve their secular Interest, as ano∣ther
may; But it is more adapted to the Advantage of
pure and undefiled Religion, and will contribute more to
Christians Growth in Scripture Knowledge, and all God∣liness
of living, and to their rational Comfort and good
Assurance, than any other Notion I am acquainted with.
One thing which hath occasioned many to entertain a
Prejudice against the Reasonableness of Christianity,
&c. I conceive is a wrong Notion they have imbibed con∣cerning
those Composures we call Creeds, viz. Their
fancying that all the Articles contained in all, or some of
the Creeds, are absolutely necessary to be explicitely believed
to make Men Christians. Concerning which, I shall ob∣serve.
1. That not one of the Authors we have, who wrte
in the first Century after Christ, doth make any mentin
of a Creed in their Days. So that we cannot have ay
certainty that there was any such thing, during the Fir
Hundred Years after Christ, though we are very sure the
were Christians during that space.
2. Creeds were not originally designed to relate wha
Articles were absolutely necessary to be explicitely believe
to make Men Christians (though some did afterward
turn them to that purpose) but to direct the Clergy, an
those who were to instruct Christians in the Matters of Religion,

what Heads, Points, or Articles and Doctrines
of Faith they were to take particular Care to discourse of▪
and insist on in order to their building up Believers in
their most Holy Faith. Of this very good Evidence might
be produced from Antiquity, if there were occasion.
3. We have no certainty concerning the precise Number
of the Articles which did make up the First Creeds. We
are certain that some of the Articles that now constitute
the oldest Creeds we have any Knowledge of, were not at
first in them, but were afterwards added on particular
occasions.
4. A Doctrine's being placed in a Creed, is so far from
making the explicite Belief of it, absolutely necessary to
make Men Christians, that it doth not make it an Object
of Christian Faith. No Doctrine is an Object of Chri∣stian
Faith, but what Iesus Christ or his Apostles have
taught. And a Christian's Faith must be grounded on E∣vidence
that he or his Apostles have taught it. Now
the placing of a Doctrine in a Creed, doth not make
it a Doctrine that Christ, &c. have taught, nor doth
it sufficiently evidence that they have taught it. A Chri∣stian
as such, is not to believe any Doctrine because it is
in a Creed; though when he is convinced that Christ, or
his Apostles have taught such or such a Doctrine, which
is placed in a Creed, he is to believe it. He that should
say that Faction first occasioned Men's composing of Creeds,
and that the Abuse of Creeds hath contributed no small
Assistance to the maintaining and keeping up of Factions,
would not be wholly disbelieved. Creeds are of great
use, if they be used aright. We may say of a Creed as
the Apostle doth of the Law, 1 Tim. 1. 8. We know
that it is good, if a Man use it lawfully.
I hear that some who (having a Mind to talk of what
they do not understand) apply themselves to rail against
the Reasonableness of Christianity, &c. in that
Phrase, with which the worst of Men made such a Noise

under the late Reigns, affirming confidently upon their
own Word, that it is contrary to the Church of Eng∣land.
If these People are capable of thinking, would
they exercise that Faculty to any good purpose, they might
easily perceive that when Iesus Christ and his Apostles
have determined a point, it is the most scandalous and
wicked Aspersion that can be devised, to pretend to intro∣duce
the Church of England in opposition to them. Had
these People that respect for, and would they pay to the
Church of England that Deference which is due to her,
they would not prostitute her venerable Name at every
turn, in Imitation of those bad Persons who neither be∣lieving
in our Blessed Saviour, nor in the Living God,
do constantly prophane their Sacred Names, when ever
they have a mind to give vent to some unreasonable
Passion.
There is one thing which should particularly recom∣mend
the Reasonableness of Christianity, &c. to
good Christians, and for which they can hardly set too
great a value on it, viz. That it fully resolves some Dif∣ficulties
in our Saviour's Conduct (which I think) were
never throughly cleared to the World, till it was pub∣lished.
Some time after the following Observations were sent
to the Press, I met with some Papers writ by Mr. Ed∣wards,
against the Author of the Reasonableness of
Christianity, &c. and against my self; but to pass
them over without saying any thing of them, is the
greatest Civility that can be expressed to that Writer,
by

