



THe Spaniard Mendosa may seem to have reason on his side, when he saies,
El Ambition de la Emprenta es una Colpa que no basta arrepentirse:
Ambition to be in Print, is a fault past repentance. Which he goes about to make good, by asserting, that,
Una dia es siempre Maestro del otro; y contra lo que si scribe oy, estarà Manana quien sabe mas:
One day is Master of another, and whatsoever is writ∣ten to day, there will be somebody who will know more to morrow. And this he likewise seeks to prove, saying,
Y quien no supo menos Ayer?
And who knew not less yesterday? But all this is but a seeming truth, and nullum simile est idem. For, as for his first Position; If Knowledge be the thing of this World which is most to be aspired unto, (as certainly it is) to impart this Knowledge unto others, is so far from being a fault, as it is rather a great piece of charity, which is truely said to cover a great many faults. Does not our Saviour say, No man lights a Candle to set it under a Bushel? And if monopolizing any earthly commodity, be an adjudged grievance; to monopolize Learning, is questionless the worst of monopolies. In the next place, what he brings for proof of this his position, may

receive this answer: That if nothing should be written to day, there would but few know more to morrow. And so likewise for answer to his question of our yesterdaies knowledge, it would be as much as that of this day, had nothing been either said or done yesterday. But alas! I am not so happy as to be concern'd herein; who not having any thing of mine own worthy of my Countrey∣men, doe but present them with that in English, which was written many years ago in Italian; and part where∣of (though not above the fourth part, and some of that but in part also) hath been formerly Printed in our Lan∣guage by some others, who may peradventure have for∣born publishing the rest of the Ragualia's, or Advertise∣ments, which you have fully and faithfully here laid down before you; as not thinking them all so highly sea∣soned, nor so full of salt, as those which they have pickt out, and which belike made more for their then present purpose. But as for my part, I must confess, that after ha∣ving at the desire of some friends, fallen upon this Trans∣lation, I found so much Gusto in it, and not any thing that without injury to my Author, I thought I could leave out; as I shal believe them to be of a queasie and deprav'd sto∣mack, who shall not find enough therein to please their palats: For my Author is an Ambodexter, plaies rarely well at the Back-Sword, gives sometimes very home and sharp Stockadoes; and in fine, laies about him hard on all sides, without any fear (Marry I cannot say as usually it follows) or Wit: For believe me, you will find no lack of that in him, but sufficient to please all Parties, howsoe∣ver they stand affected. And having said this, I leave him to your further perusal, hoping that the more you read him, the better you will like him, as did, and doth,

