



SIR,
IT is too well knowne to you,
how for no lesse then foure
or five yeares, (by the just
hand of God upon me for
my many Sins; and, perhaps, more espe∣cially,
for my presumption upon my power
over my passions, and my phancy; which
I have most prefidently expressed, when∣soever
my friends bade me beware, how
I yeelded to them) I have been in a
manner buried alive in melancholy, and

spent my dayes in vanity. My distemper
was such, as did not onely render me
indisposed, by study to gather more
knowledge then I had before, (being not
able for whole moneths together, to per∣swade
my selfe to take a booke in hand;
and for severall yeares, if I had read any
thing, to tell you what I had read:) But
also made me to loose a very great part
of that which I had already gathered.
And therefore I doubt not, but my Ac∣quaintance
and Country men, what ever
they may think, and say too, sometimes,
against mee for idlenesse: yet after a ve∣ry
few serious thoughts, doe abundantly
excuse me. It is true, It was one of those
things, which in my melancholy, my deje∣cted
spirit dwelt longest upon, that I had
done God, and my brethren no ser∣vice,
having lived so long. But after a

yeare or two, It pleased the Lord (who, I
cannot say, did ever hide himselfe in my
trouble, or despise my affliction; but was
ready to know me in all my adversity)
to set me in a way, wherein I might spend
my time better, and passe thorow with
more ease, some of the rest of those wea∣risome
dayes, which he had appoin∣ted
for me. He gave me a subject to
meditate upon (wherein he dealt suit∣ably
with my distemper, as well in
the employment, as the subject: being
fitter for meditation, then reading)
The Mirth of a Christian Life, (in op∣position
to those who disparage it with re∣ports
of melancholy & sadnes.) VVhich
accordingly I undertooke, and commit∣ted
my meditations (such as they were)
to paper. VVhen some yeares were past:
you may remember, that the last winter,

you told me in your letter, that my mo∣ther
desired much to see those meditati∣ons
printed. I resolved, considering the
sickly condition she was then in, thoug
they were never so unworthy the publike
view, to satisfie her desire. But before 
had set upō the busines, it thus happened.
Being in a Booksellers shop, and looking
upon a treatise of God's Promises;
I asked the Bookeseller, whether he
knew of any Treatise of his Threats
Being answered (contrary to my ex∣pectation)
that he knew of none; I was
the more earnest to inquire further. And
so I did; but could heare of none. VVhere∣upon
I told my Bookeseller, that I re∣solved
forthwith to read over the Bible,
and make a collection of them my selfe;
and, if it pleased God to incourage me in
it, to print them. Now the Lord did en∣courage
me, and that exceedingly (as I

shall shew you in my preface to the Rea∣der;)
so that I have finished my worke
quickly, and brought you savory
meat, such as, I hope, you love. You had
had it long since, had it not been longer in
the Printers hands, then it was in mine
owne. But I hope it is not too late now. I
had another reason, besides naturall and
civill obligation, why I chose to dedicate
this booke to your selfe. And that was
this, viz. because I conceived the contents
of it more proper for your family, then
for any that I knew; in regard we have
had more mercies then other families, and
as I feare, have abused them to securi∣ty.
The truth is, a booke of this nature is
very proper for the whole Nation; be∣cause
there have beene so many judge∣ments
of God in the Earth, and in our
owne Land; and yet we have not learned

righteousnesse. The Lord grant, that as
many as yet remaine, may heare and
feare, and may henceforth commit no
more such evils, as they have com∣mitted.
But I have held you too long.
And therefore I will conclude, with
this humble request, that as often as you
meet with any faylings in this booke, you
will beare with them in that manner, as
you have been wont to beare with them
in the authour: so as never the lesse to ac∣cept
of the unworthy gift of
C.C.C. Jun. 29,
1652.

