




I Present this Discourse to you, as a publick Testimony that I am not unmindful how much I am obli∣ged to you all, for your great Love and Respects to me, from my Infancy to this time: And in an especial man∣ner to you Mrs. Cooke, for the Mo∣therly Affection, Care and Tender∣ness you have constanstly Manifested towards me, through my Childhood and Youth, and are pleased still to continue. I forbear receoning up par∣ticular
Obligations, because too nume∣rous for so slow a Pen. I know you delight more in shewing Kindness and doing Good, than others would in ha∣ving the World told that they do so. The Subject treated of in this little Book, I am sure is very grateful to you all, and I am confident you will not be offended with my Discourse, because so familiar. It is a very sad and afflicting Reflection to a serious Christian, that there are such multi∣tudes who plainly appear to take no tolerable care of their own Souls, tho they profess the best Religion, and are furnished with eminent Advantages: For, The Earth which is so Watered, and beareth Thorns and Briars, is Rejected, and is nigh unto Cursing, whose end is to be Burned. But Beloved, I am per∣swaded better things of you, and things that accompany Salvation, Heb. 6.8, 9. It very much concerns you all to take care I be not mistaken in you, and to use your utmost Diligence to bring forth Fruit in some proportion to the
Labour and Pains which have been bestowed on you. You have enjoyed the Labours of that eminently holy Person and faithful Minister, Mr. Cooke, whose love to, and care of Souls, and zeal for their Salvation was such, I am not acquainted with any words that are significative enough to express them. And therefore if you do not much exceed others in Divine Love, and all the Fruits of Righteousness and Holiness, you do not fully answer the Means with which you have been favoured. I am willing to remember you of your Old Pastor, that you may thereby be induced to reflect upon your selves, and be quickned to give such diligence to make your Salvation sure, as he was always pressing you unto. Were the excellent Treatises he left behind him, Published, they would contribute much to keep those things always in your Remembrance, which he mainly insisted on whilst he was Living, and to establish you in the Truths and Duties you know and
have been practising. He was the greatest instance of an indefatigable faithful Minister, and practical Belie∣ver, I was ever acquainted with. He was diligent and industrious, even to a Prodigy. His Humility and Modesty did exceedingly veil his intellectual Me∣rits. Few could comprehend the time he spent and the pains he took in his Study, much less the proficiency he made there. He had strong Natural Parts, a great Memory, a quick Appre∣hension, was very Thoughtful, and dived very far into whatsoever he ap∣plied his Mind unto. He was the most void of all kind of Affectation (so far as my Knowledge doth extend) of any meer Man. His Learning, Mini∣sterial Labours and exemplary Piety, were such, could the World be fur∣nish'd with an exact faithful Account of his Life, I am perswaded it would yield as grateful and pleasing Enter∣tainment to the learned part of the World, and be as profitable to all Peo∣ple, who have a serious sense of true
Piety, as any thing that can be Pub∣lished. But I doubt those who knew him best, Died before him; and as for those who were acquainted with him and do Survive, I suspect some were not observant enough, and others did not know him long enough to understand very many of the most material Passages which would be necessary for such a Composure. In∣deed he did so conceal himself, I very much question whether any Man was ever in a capacity to do him Right. Yet, a sull Collection of the many great things his Friends remem∣ber, and which he could not hinder People from observing, would be of extraordinary use unto the Publick: Tho the whole Relation thereof would not comprehend the half of what he deserved should be said, to perpetuate his Memory, and encourage a laudable Imitation. If this hint may prompt those who knew him, to recollect them∣selves, and jointly apply themselves to such a Work; I shall have this Satis∣faction,
that I have been instrumental to put them on Acts of Friendship and true Piety, and have contributed a little to oblige the Publick. You are commanded not to be Slothful, but fol∣lowers of them who through Faith and Patience, are Inheritors of the Promises, Heb. 6.12. And I propound unto you Mr. Cooke, as a great Pattern you should imitate in variety of Instances, which are within your reach, and pertain to the Stations you are in, as well as in the whole general tenor of his Conver∣sation. I shall therefore pass over in Silence many very considerable things I know concerning him, which must not by any means be omitted, by one who would attempt to write his Life. I must not therefore insist on his Learn∣ing: And indeed he who would do him Justice as to that, must be fur∣nished with a much greater measure of it, than I can hope to attain unto. Yet, let me take liberty to mention one thing, viz. That his skill in the Ori∣ental Languages was such, it procu∣red
him a respect above many Persons of great worth, from the Famous Bi∣shop Walton, whose eminent Talent lay in that sort of Study. A very worthy Author (whom I am obliged to Love and Honour greatly for his substantial solid Learn∣ing,Conformists 4th. Plea for Noncon∣formists. p. 109. but especially on the account of his ex∣emplary Piety, and more than common Zeal for the good of Souls) hath told the World, That Bishop Walton would speak Civilly to Mr. Cooke, tho he told him unless he would Conform, he could not help him. I have particular reason to say, that when he spake those words, he did it with in∣timations of great Regret; and that amongst other reasons of his Respect to Mr. Cooke, common to others for whom that Great Man had a Kind∣ness, notwithstanding they had dif∣ferent Sentiments from him, about some Matters, it was Mr. Cooke's great knowledge in these Languages, which did peculiarly commend him to that
Bishop. Here I am to take notice, that Mr. Cooke was a Nonconformist, and so had different Sentiments about some inferior, and less substantial, ra∣ther meerly accidental Matters (a∣bout which all deserving and good Men have not the same Apprehensi∣sions) from what I have, and many more have, whom I greatly Reve∣rence. His differing Judgment about these Matters, served him for his own Conduct. But he manag'd his Dissent from Conformists, with that Candor and Christian Temper, he highly de∣served Love and Respect from all Con∣formists who were endowed with true Piety, or indeed had any share of common Ingenuity. He did not abuse his Dissent to Uncharitableness and Censure; nay, he could not en∣dure to hear a deserving Conformist Reflected on. I remember once, a Person of no small Abilities, and Mr. Cooke's particular Friend, happen'd ac∣cidentally to reflect on a Conformist, on the account of his being a Confor∣mist,
Mr. Cooke immediately reproved him with some keenness; the other Per∣son replying, I believe what I said, is true: Mr. Cooke presently Silenc'd him, desiring him the with some earnestness of Speech to observe the Apostle's Rule, Hast thou Faith? Have it tothy self, Rom. 14.22. I must also pass over in Silence, Mr. Cook's unwearied and indefatigible Labours in the work of the Ministry, in Praying, Preaching, Expounding the Holy Scriptures, Catechising, and Per∣sonal Converse from House to House; tho in these things he very well de∣serves to be imitated by all Clergy∣men of what sort soever. An exact Relation of Mr. Cooke's Loyalty would make a Volume, and represent him so considerable on that account, I do not question, but most would be apt to suspect the possibility of finding a com∣pleat Parallel in the Records of Hu∣man History. His Loyalty was not like that so much talked and boasted of some Years ago, an empty Name, used to cover—. His Loyalty was
truly Christian. He knew how to suffer with Patience and Meekness, and with a temper of Soul very agreeable to that of the Holy Jesus, whose Ambassador he was, and whose Example he followed. And he did actually suffer in that manner, both for and under the same Government. True Loyalty is a necessary property of a good Christian and faithful Subject. And I know not any one who hath lived within your Memory, who so well deserved your imitation in this excellent Qualification, as your ancient Pastor. This is indeed a Topick which de∣serves to be enlarg'd on, because the thing has been so horribly Counterfeited, and the Name so shamefully, yea, more than villain∣ously Abused. But I forbear, because should I expatiate, I may find my self obliged to drop some Expressions which would prove uneasie to certain Persons, who have hap∣pened to bring themselves under such Cir∣cumstances, they perceive it possible for Men of haughty Spirits, who have ridi∣cul'd the plea of Conscience, who have been very daring, contemptuous and tru∣culent in their Behaviour and Carriage, to have some tender Places. And I am not willing to exasperate any Man, if I may avoid it, with Innocency. He Governed his Family with great Prudence, and with
much Strictness. I think no Man ever at∣tended more diligently to the interest of Religion in a Private Family, than he did. Every Morning and Evening after he had with his Family briefly implored the Divine assistance in Prayer and Praise, and a Blessing with that part of the Holy Scrip∣tures which was then to be read, a Psalm, or part of one was Sung, then a Chapter (in the Old Testament in the Morning, and in the New Testament in the Evening) was read, which he Expounded, reporting the principal parts of which it did consist; then he gave an account of the substance of it, in as few words as the matter and parts of it would permit, afterwards explained the greatest Difficulties which did occur; and in the last place shewed, what useful Instructions were especially to be taken notice of. And then he spent at last a quar∣ter of an Hour in Prayer and Praise, usu∣ally improving much of the Chapter that was read, into matter for the one or the other. He was an extraordinary Person for all the parts of Prayer, tho commonly he did very much abound in confusion of Sin, in admiring the Divine Excellencies, and in praising of God for his Benefits of all sorts. On all occasions he was very impor∣tunate for the Church of God, and that
the Kingdom of Christ might be Enlarged. He had no Child of his own, but did freely take into his Family three or four Children, for whom at his own Charge, he provided Food, Lodging and Raiment, and whom he instructed in Religion and Human Learning, in order to their attaining to serve their Generation according to the will of God. These and the Servants he Catechised twice every Week, explaining every thing with a peculiar easiness, for the helping them to understand every particu∣lar. When he could not any longer attend on his publick Ministry, he did not grow Idle, but performed most parts of it in his own Family, with the same care and dili∣gence he was accustomed to use in Publick, tho there were not one Person more, than those of whom his Family did constantly consist. He was a very strict Consciencious observer of the Lord's Day. His Family was constantly to have their Worldly Bu∣siness dispatched by four or five of the Clock in the Afternoon of Saturday. Then he bestowed an Hour and an half or more with his Family, in explaining and apply∣ing one or more Verses of some Chapter in the Bible, (going over the Chapter, and usually the Book in order) and in Prayer. After that, every one in the Family
was to go to his own Apartment for some time, either to learn the Catechism, or for private Reading and Devotion. About Eight of the Clock they Supped, and after that, he dismissed his Family, according to his every days Custom. He was always up early on the Lord's Day. Every one read a Chapter in the Morning; he then spent at least an Hour and an half in ex∣pounding one or more Verses of a Chapter, and in Prayer. Then he and his whole Family went to Church, (I speak now of the time after his publick Ministry ceased.) About a quarter of an Hour after they were returned home, he Prayed with his Family, repeated the Sermon they had hear'd in Publick, and Preached and Prayed as he was wont to do in Publick before he was Silenced. A little time being allowed for Dinner, he and his Family went again to Church, and allowing after their return home, more time for every one in Retire∣ment, he performed the same Religious Exercises he had performed betwixt com∣ing from Church in the Forenoon, and going thither in the Afternoon. Every one in the Family having after Sup∣per given an account of what they remem∣bred, he concluded the day always with singing a Psalm, and with solemn enlarged
Praise and Thanksgiving. He went through all this Labour and Work with un∣accountable vigor, cheerfulness, and fervour of Spirit. The Visits he made were usually very short, and most of the time was spent in pious Discourse, or Prayer. He would be exceedingly uneasie if he heard any Per∣son spoken of Reproachfully. He would not by any Means permit any of his Friends and Acquaintance to use any harsh words concerning any Person who had unexcu∣sably injured him. If he heard of their doing so, he would be sure to reprove them sharply. He was very free in reproving his Friends and Relations, and all those with whom he was Acquainted, as occasion required, and in cautioning them against the appearances of Evil. His Humility was almost Astonishing; and he fortified him∣self to a strange degree against every thing he could suspect might so much as have a tendency to tempt him to have even a moderate Conceit of himself. I wrote to him once and used the word Reverend to him; he sent me by the next Post a very Pious Letter, wherein he gave me a Repri∣mand for that word, and desired me if I thought fit, to use that word to others, yet not to use it any more to him. He was wont to be mightily concerned when ever
he heard of the outward Prosperity of his Friends, that they might be provided a∣gainst, and secured from the temptations which attended such a Condition. And when ever he heard of their Adversity, or being any way Afflicted, how earnest were his Prayers that their Afflictions might be Sanctified to them! His Abstinence, Mor∣tification, Self-denial, and the strict Watch he kept over himself, together with the heedful regard he had to Divine Providence in all Instances, would appear truly won∣derful, could I give a full Relation of them. He did every Week set apart one whole day for private Fasting and Humiliation. He kept a constant Diary for his own pri∣vate use, which he wrote in Latin, but in such a Character, I am perswaded no Man beside himself, could read an intire Passage. His Charity (considering what he had to live on, and what has been already said of it by the Bye) was as stupendious as any thing else. He would strain to the utmost to relieve the Indigent. What multitudes of Catechisms, &c. did he Buy to give to the Poor! And how much Mony he be∣stowed on poor Families, which he fre∣quently Visited, that he might Instruct, Counsel, Exhort, and Comfort them, none can tell. For he distributed his Charity
with all the Secrecy he could devise Great numbers of poor People were continually relieved at his Door. I believe no Man was ever more forward than he, to contri∣bute to the utmost of his Ability to promote any Charitable design. I never heard that any seemingly poor Person ever met him, and ask'd an Alms of him, who went away from him without good Advice, and a larger testimony of his being affected with his appearing Poverty, than could reaso∣nably be expected from him. But often did he enquire after, and seek out Objects and Opportunities for doing good in this kind. His regard to Righteousness and Justice, was so exact and tender, peradven∣ture the like hath scarce been heard of. I could name a Gentlewoman of good Quality in Chester, who offered Mr. Cooke some Monies, at a time when his Circum∣stances were indeed very mean, but he re∣fused to accept of it, which occasioned her to urge him more earnestly to accept of it, as a testimony of her Respect to him; but he would not be prevailed with to receive it; telling her at last, that he understood her Husband had some Creditors when he Died, and that they were not all as yet fully satisfied, and he could not in Con∣science receive Mony from her for his own
use, whatever his Straits might be, as long as he knew her Husband's Debts were un∣paid. He was a great follower of Peace. He was extraordinary plain in his Habit, and void of every thing that could look like Flattery; but truly Civil, Courteous and Obliging, tho a perfect stranger to that Ceremoniousness, which it may be the want of his habitual Honesty and Integrity, hath brought so far into Fashion, as even to be esteemed an Accomplishment. He was a great Enemy to the Pomps and Vanities of this evil World, and perhaps the exactest observer of the Baptismal Vow, that any (at least) of these latter Ages of the World have produced. Thus far have I spoken from my own Knowledge of that excellent Person, and do but put you in remem∣brance of what you more fully know. That Mr. Cooke continued this course of Life, these Religious Exercises, and his Weekly Fast, to the very Week in which he Died, I have been certified by one of you, a little after his Decease. And that he was very patient and submissive under his last Visi∣tation, being never heard to utter one com∣plaint; that he spent the remainder of his strength and time in Pious Discourse on certain portionns of Holy Scripture, and in pithy fervent Prayers, till he actually re∣sign'd
up his Spirit into the hands of his beloved Jesus; which was about two or three of the Clock in the Morning of the Third of July, 1684. and 73d. year of his Age.
The more you resemble that holy Man in all those Instances which pertain to your selves, and wherein he was a faithful fol∣lower of the Lord Jesus Christ, the more succesfully will you work out your own Salvation. You will be disposed to yield up your Souls to God in due time, in such a calm and comfortable manner, he resigned up his Soul. You will be prepared to enter into that Rest and Joy, you have such a∣bundant cause to conclude he entred into the possession of almost Nine Years ago. Those things which ye have both learned and received, and heard and seen in him, (agreeable to the Gospel of Christ) do, and the God of Peace shall be with you. This comprehends the best Advice I can give you, and the substance of the sincerest Prayer tendred unto God on your behalfs,

Styple, June 8th. 1693.
