



Honourable and Beloved;
AS this Sermon came from you into the
world, so now it returnes from the
world to you again: your approba∣tion,
and request (which is com∣mand
enough) encouraged me to,
and in the publication; and your
Patronage shall be all the shelter I
will seeke, in case of detraction. I know the matter will
displease many, because here the Church of God is put upon
acting against the Antichristian Synagogue, and partie:
but I matter not these mens displeasure: for I professedly
seeke, and presse a disappointment of their designe, and a
dissipation of them, so farre as they drive it on wittingly,

and willingly against the Lord and his Christ. There is a
generation of men who pretend daily to pray (as they are
taught) Thy kingdome come, and yet their plots and en∣deavours,
are against nothing more, then the coming of
Christ his kingdome: ihe enlightning of these mens eyes,
or the binding of their hands is chiefly aimed at, in the en∣suing
Discourse: for the present therefore I am resolved
not to waigh what they censure, because I looke upon them
either as blinded, or wrong byased, and so neither a con∣siderable
partie, nor indifferent Iudges. If the plain∣nesse
of the style be either questioned, or blamed, my answer
is ready, it was chosen on purpose, that if any good do issue,
upon either, the preaching, or publishing of this peece, the
praise may be of, and to God, not the weake and unwor∣thy
Instrument. These notions found acceptance with you,
in the delivery, and therefore, though now they may want
that life and vigour which then they seemed to have, yet I
hope (for Gods not mans sake) they will finde a propor∣tionable
acceptation with your eyes, to that of your eares:
some enlargements of particulars which you heard in the
Pulpit are here possibly omitted, for memory may faile me
to gather up these fragments. All the materials are faith∣fully
laid together, only one use in the close, (as proper to
the point, and necessary for these times) is briefly added.
If singularitie in point of offensive Armes be laid to my
charge, I reply, that now men generally call for, and enquire
after newes, and though this may seeme to suit these wan∣ton
wits in the publication, yet the Text cleares it, to be an
old truth; novell onely in case of discovery. And the
truth is, this best suits my genius, for I wholly desire to be
the disciple of old truths, and have no heart to tamper or
be taken with them, who affect to be masters of new here∣sies:
as there are too many (who through faire shews, but
without doubt, for base ends) doe trouble the Church with

their fond fancies, and new fangle toyes, in these turbulent
times: but I leave them to their justly deserved censure,
with the Apostles wish,Gal. 5. 12. would to God they were even cut off
that trouble us, and to the Church of God with the same
Apostle I write thus.Rom. 16. 17. Now I beseech you Brethren, marke
them that cause divisions, and offences contrary to the Do∣ctrine
which you have received; and avoyd them. Oh!
that whilest we hunt thePsal. 0. 13. Boares which out of the wood do
waste the Lords vineyard, we would also have an eye to en∣deavour
the catching of thoseCant. 2. 15 Foxes, those little Foxes,
that spoyle the vines. For though they come to us in sheeps
cloathing, yet inwardly they are ravening wolves. Short∣ly
thus, I see not but malignants of the new garbe in the
Church, may do as much hurt as those of the old one, in the
State. Let me not for this be thought, an enemy to the en∣deavoured
Reformation, it is the desire of my soule to see it
up, in its full beautie, and strength, onely I would have old
Babylon broken down, and all new Babels kept down, that
whiles we have voted, and vowed out by-past superstition,
we may not be obstructed, or burthened in the worke of the
Lord, with new Iesuitic all plots of faction and schisme, lest
whiles men plead for libertie, they turne Libertines: and
after we have covenanted; sincerely, really, and constant∣ly,
(through the grace of God) to endeavour, that the
Lord may be one, and his name one in three kingdomes, we
be not found by every mans seeking, and setting up himself,
to neglect the keeping of the union of the spirit in the bond
of peace, and instead of advancing the Lord Iesus, to be the
beginners and fomentors of confusion, in all the Churches
of Christ. But from this occasionall digression Ireturne.
And if the needlesnesse, or tardinesse of my paines in this
subject, be laid in the way of that profit which might other∣wise
be reaped hereby, I would remove this obstacle thus,
although this be but to write Iliads after Homer, yet all

men either have not seene, or will not make use of, or cannot
understand the Labours of the more Learned: these there∣fore
may be usefull to some, and I have my aime, if either
for condiction, or confirmation, I can benefit any, though
they be the meanest of the people for parts, or place. And I
might have been sooner in print, if I durst have thought
any thing the Lord had imparted unto me, worth publique
view, or any wayes able to stand up against a generall cen∣sure:
but since you worthy Patriots may not be non-suited
by him who is unexpressibly engaged to your, and the Coun∣tries
service, and that I must out and abroad, among the
croud of other scriblers, these Lines through Gods mercie
may prove in good time for kent, (where they were bred,
and for which, they are chiefly published,) although other∣wise
they be too late for Christendome. I will not any longer
stand or stay to answer for my selfe, by a larger Apologie, I
must leave my defence in other things to you most industri∣ous
Gentlemen; And I shall thinke my Lot very strange,
if you (who under God) have been the Saviours of the Coun∣tie,
cannot shelter me among so many, especially since (for
desires to doe good) I feare not Tongue, if I can escape Gun∣shot.
It will be happinesse enough to me, most faithfull Pa∣triots,
if upon the review of these my unworthy Labours,
your spirits be heightened into action against the enemies of
the truth; It is an honourable service, for you to spend and
to be spend in. And by quickning you hereunto, my hope is
to see you every way successefull, under Boaz his blessing,
of doing worthily in Ephratah, and being famous in Beth∣lehem.
In confidence whereof I make bold to subscribe my
selfe,

