



My Lord,
IT were reason enough for a Dedication that I had knowne your Lordship in your tender yeares; for whosoever hath knowne you at any time, must needs ho∣nour
and love you, but hee that inwardly now knowes you (as I doe) must honour and admire you; and I have so many Titles to make mee honour you, that I have the greatest reason in the world to Dedicate my whole selfe unto you.
Be pleased to accept this peece, first, of my Bo∣ethius, whom I by many reasons may cal mine, having studied him at least these forty yeares, and used at many meanes and helps of Commen∣tators and Interpreters as I could get, to make him wholly mine. At last, I found mine owne Genius made me the best Interpreter of him, which worke I now Dedicate to you, that if you please, my Lord, under your name to let it come to publike view, it may, if not, it may rest in si∣lence.
I once saw and perused a translation of it in∣to English, a very good one, Dedicated to my Lady your Mother, in manuscript. I wish I might come to the view of that againe; it is at least thirty yeares since I saw that: I have now sent your Lordship to peruse a good Translation of him in English Print, signed with G. G. but no
more of his name can I learne, or whether be be dead or alive; but I dare sweare it was not GEORGE GARRARD, whether hee bee so lear∣ned or no, I knowe not, but for all his modesty if it had beene his, the world should have taken more notice of his name, who published himselfe GEORGE GARRARD the Bowler.
My worke shall have the signatures of S. E. according to the fashion of the Innes of Court which are the best Courts now.
HENRY Earle of SOUTHAMPTON your re∣nowned father, tam Marre quam Mercurio, was of Lincolns Inne, and hath left in that Chappell an everlasting monument of his bene∣ficence and Piety: the whole Roofe was his Timber, such is not now to be had for a hundred pound. FRANCIS Earle of RUTLAND, FRAN∣CIS Earle of BEDFORD, FRANCIS Earle of WESTMORLAND, IOHN Earle of BRIDGE∣VVATER, and his father ELLESMERE, who by his study there became great Chancellor: and was for two dayes together Lord high STEVVARD of England. GEORGE Earle of RUTLAND, and I believe IOHN now Earle of RUTLAND, FRANCIS Earle of CHICHES∣TER;
your late father in law, was of Lincolnes Inne in my time, and his brother Mr. ROBERT LEIGH. The Lord VISCOVNT CRAMOND betetr knowne by the name Lord RICHARD∣SON, the first of them by his study there ray∣sed himselfe and family. The Lord MAR∣QVES DORCHESTER, is now of Grayes Inne, a very learned Gentleman: and his Brother PIERPOINT is of Lincolnes Inne now also, a very learned Gentleman. And I, quoth the dog, may come in the reere of the Nobility to make one, who have beene a Dunce there, be∣cause I never gate mony by the Law, ever since 1612. now forty two yeares. I had almost for∣gotten my Brother Dunce, who neither got any money by the Law, but hee danced not there long Sir BEAVCHAMP Saint IOHNS, wee were ad∣mitted both in oue night. All these were of Lincolns Inne, Sir HENRY COMPTON also, and some more that I cannot now remem∣ber, and multitudes of other Inns of Court. But these are enough to make that Position good, there are now no such Courts in any place of England.

 Yet I hope to make them more glorious when they are made Academies of Musicke, and all the Musicke of the world shall bee made English. A worke I have now in hand, and finde it very fezible, I have made some progresse in it. Then I hope my friends will not pronounce mee an absolute Dunce in all things, though neither by this doe I intend to get money. I am in Love with God and goodnesse and not with Mammon. Pereat Pecunia, male para cum coacerva∣tore ejus. Ergo Auguris votum teneo. Nec paupertatem nec divitias, ne in des pectum aut contemptum veniam ex pauperte, nec in superbiam & obliviscentiam Dei per accu∣mulatas divitias.
This is enough if not too much for an Epistle; so now I take the boldnesse to kisse your hands my Lord for a farewell, who have been long in kissing them by this Epistle. And I remaine

12 Sept. 1654.
