


My Lord,
THese Arguments and Reasons were the Shield wherewith Derodon Publick Pro∣fessor in Philosophy, in the Academy of Aurange withstood the Assaults of A∣theists, which swarmed in several places of Europe, about the time that this Land was full of them; which they themselves made plain and evident to all the World, when by an Example, without example, they made a mock at Laws, Justice, Religion, and God himself, by Embruing their prophane hands in the never enough lamented blood of the true Protector of Laws, Justice and Subjects, the Pat∣tern of Religion and Piety, and Gods true and lawful Vicegerent in these Three great King∣doms. He delivered first in his School Disputa∣tions, the Objections of Atheists, and furnished his Auditory with Mediums wherewith they might in a Syllogistical way Encounter these
Monsters; and afterwards Imparted them to his Countrey in his own Tongue: In the which, be∣ing fallen into my hands, I looked upon them as a Jewel, which I have since kept close by me, both be∣yond Sea, and here at home. And now seeing we live in an Age wherein we may very well take up the Prophets complaint, The wicked walk on every side, Ps. 12. v. 8. and say of most men in this our Bitish Israel, what the Apostle of the Gentiles said concerning the Cretians, That they are unru∣ly, vain Talkers, and Deceivers, who subvert whole houses, (and if they could whole King∣doms) teaching things which they ought not; and that they profess to know God, but in works deny him; being abominable and dis∣obedient, and unto every good work reprobate, Titus 1. v. 10, 11, 16. I have thought it my Duty to frame these Arguments in a known Tongue, to the People of this Land, that first both they and my self, may use them against this wicked brood, as Phinehas did his Javelin against the wicked and prophane Zimri, and impudent and brazen faced Cozbi, Numbers 25. v. 7, 14. And secondly, that both all debauched and ignorant persons, if they will take the pains to read over this small Tract, being convinced by the truth and solidity of these Rea∣sons; the one, that there is a glorious God, be∣fore whose Judgment-Seat they must (one day) all appear, and in whose hands it is a fearful thing to fall, they may receive Instruction rather than Sil∣ver, and Knowledge rather than choice Gold, Prov. 8. v. 10. and so grow in grace and in the knowledge of God and our Lord Jesus Christ. And the other, that they may no more look upon the
Heavens and the Elements, as bodies of eternal du∣ration and continuance; nor live in this present world as if there were no death to cut off the thr of their sensual Lives; no Graves wherein the pampered Carcasses must be turned into dust a ashes, and become the meat of worms; nor  Judgment-day, wherein they must all stand befor the Throne of that God, who is a consuming fire Hebr. 12. v. 20. but have grace, whereby they ma serve God acceptably with reverence and god∣ly fear: and like the Thessalonians, from their I dols they may be turned to God, and from their Errors and wilful blindness, to serve and adore the true and living God, 1 Thess. 1. v. 9, 10.
If these two sorts of men, who dote and rely too much upon Nature, may be convinced of their Er∣rours, ignorance and lewd life, by casting their eyes upon, and seriously considering the weight of these Natural Reasons: like Galen, who was wrought upon by an Anatomical Observation, I have attained half the end I intended in this Work: But if these Arguments, with the blessing of him whose Being they demonstrate, may dis-thronize out of the hearts of others (I mean the refined and professed Atheists) that grand Impiety of theirs; so that (whether publickly or privately) they may fall down before the Throne of God, and trem∣bling and astonished, cry out with Saul, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do, Acts 9.4, 6. Then shall I have reaped the fruit I expect of this Labour.
My Lord, I hope this small Tract will be useful to all sorts of persons, but especially to the young
Plants, in the two famous Nurseries of this King∣dom, OXFORD and CAMBRIDGE, wo are every day fitting themselves for the Work of the Sanctuary. For if they will seriously consider the necessary Conclusions of these Arguments, they shall clearly see the invisible things of God, even hs eternal Power and Godhead, and understand tem from the Creation of the world, Rom. 1.20. and so be brought to remember their Creator in the days of their youth, Eccl. 12.1. and withal shall be furnished with such weapons as will conquer both Scepticisme, sometimes too too much enter∣tained in the Schools; and the foulest of all Im∣pieties Atheism: which though not taught and de∣fended openly, yet by a subtle pretended way of ar∣guing, Cognitionis causa, and sometimes by a cunning railing at the holiest things, is unhappily instilled in the hearts of young people.
My Lord, I will not excuse my self for the un∣dertaking of this small Work, for I have learned this true Position, among other Axiomes in the Universities, both here and beyond Sea, Non nobis solum nati sumus, We are not born for our selves alone, but our Countrey challengeth an Inte∣rest in us, our Friends and our Posterity, do lay claim to us: Yet such wicked days are come upon us, though a man for glory to God, love to his Posterity, good will to his Countrey, or other honest motives, makes private things publick, for the common good of the Church and State, he is seldom praised of any, but reproved of many, and condemned or censured of all malicious persons. Bonum quo communius, eo melius, hath been
and will be a true Moral Principle, though some scorn to put it in execution: We know the best Master that ever man served did reprove and con∣demn him for an evil and ungracious Servant, that hid his Talent in a Napkin, refusing to put it forth to his Masters use and advan∣tage.
My Lord, I humbly beg your Lordships par∣don for assuming perhaps more liberty than is fit, in presenting this short Treatise to your view, and to your Lordships patronage, yet trusting upon your Lordships goodness for a liberal acceptance. Nature and your Noble Birth, hath tought you. that to be generous is to be vertuous: but sure it is, that Wisdom, Learning and Piety have per∣fected Natural Disposition in you; so that I may say, the slenderer the Present, and the meaner the Giver is, the more will it commend the favourable Acceptance, and the noble Receiver. To such Eminent persons as your Lordship is, both by Birth, Dignity, and Vertue, men do not so much give the Thing it self which they present, as in it make tender of their hearts, love, duty and dearest regards. All which I here humbly present to your ships goodness, Commending you to the good∣ness of Him that so highly hath honoured you, and besceeching Him to heap up more and more all his Blessings upon your Person, Place and Re∣lations, to the glory of his Name, the good of our Church, and the encouragement of Learn∣ing and Piety; the Joy and Comfort of your heart in this life: which I earnestly pray may be
long and happy, and to the Eternal peace and joy of your Soul, in the day of the great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls.

