



Right Honourable,
A Publick spirit is a rare and excel∣lent spirit, honour'd of GOD, esteem'd of Man; its a piece of GOD in Man, or Man seeking himselfe in GOD. Its a spirit above the world, because above it selfe. We reade of many of the Heathens, who were renowned for their publicknesse of spirit. And certainely it was an excellent spirit which was in them, but it was short of the true spirit: it held forth a god, though it fell below the true God; Publicknesse of spirit speaks a god, when privatenesse of spirit makes it selfe a god. Its proper alone to God to work from himselfe, and to himself, to be the spring whence, and the sea whither all his actions tend; but it is not for man. He that makes himselfe the principle of work∣ing,
and the end of working; that (like a circular line) begins from himself, and ends in himselfe, doth pull downe God, and set∣teth himselfe in Gods stead. Like the spark in the fire, or the drop in the sea; so our good doth more consist in God then in our selves. He that seeks to be something out of God, begins to be nothing; but he that can be nothing for God, findes himselfe all in God, and God all to him.
Right honourable, among those who have excelled in this publicknesse of spirit in our dayes. And have sought God and the good of these bleeding kingdomes, in separation, nay in opposition to themselves; we finde your Honour in the front, uncorruptedly up∣right—And it is but a manifest of your ancient spirit in former times, when not many durst; and few would appeare, to own religon under contempt, we have had bad dayes before, then dayes of sin, now dayes of trouble; and these dayes of trouble, they are but the births of those dayes of sin. Then you were a patron to the good, now a patriot to the whole. In the former you were a shelter in these a Saviour; before a succour to reli∣gion, now an assertor of it. In which worke, your honour hath had a part burthensome e∣nough, but suitable to the greatnesse of your
spirit, fitted to incounter with difficulties: you have laine at the breaches; seen the won∣ders of God in the deepe, beene the terror of the sea, the comfort of the land: and we have therefore been so secure at land, because our hearts have securely reposed in you at sea: Your worke is great, but your rewards are glorious; the hardest services shall have the best rewards: nay, is there not something of a reward in this? that God will own us, that God will honour us to worke for him. My Lord I know your head and hands are full, yet give me leave in this presse of imploy∣ments, to present to your honour the state of our Church under the notion of A tos∣sed ship upon a stormy sea making to safe har∣bor: under that notion these poor thoughts may finde accesse to you, and come under your honours protection. The Ship is the Church of God, the Sea the world, the the contrary windes, men of contrary spi∣rits, the storme, our present troubles, the la∣ding precious, religion, property, liberty, and what ever is deare; the passengers, our selves, the harbour which we make towards, is nothing but peace with reformation. The windes have been and do continue high, the sea stormy, our dangers great, and we have been forced to cast much of our lading over∣board
to preserve the rest, and save the ship. In these our straits many distrusting the safety of the ship, have let down a Cock∣boat, and sought to shift for themselves; Some sinfully, all shamefully; others who see their good folded up in the whole, & de∣sire not to out-live their precious lading, do still abide in the ship: some labouring at the sterne, others at the oare; every one their hands full.—But though our work is hard, our dangers great, yet is it not with us, as with the Apostle, past all hopes of saving, Acts 27.20. There is yet hope if we looke downward, we are not yet so low as to hope against hope, Rom. 4.18. If we were, yet there is hope in the God of hope. And indeed there is our stay, we have anchord too much downward, we have rested upon that which by very resting upon hath proved uncom∣fortable and unprofitable to us: disappoint∣ment and shame are the deserved ends of creature trusts: oh that wee could now anchor upwards! upon that GOD who is the Rocke of Ages, an everlasting rock; a rock so deep that no floods can un∣dermine, & so high that no waves can reach. This is our comfort in our straits and trou∣bles here below, that there is yet sea-roome enough in the infinite goodnesse of God for
faith to be carried full saile upon. Nothing should pose our faith, but what poseth God: Nothing is too big for God to do; and why shold any thing be too big for us to believe? Things marvellous to us, are yet easie with God; things wonderfull to us are yet fami∣liar with him, as he tels us Zach. 8.6.—It is our hope that God is risen, nay, gone forth, and is now travelling in the greatnesse of his strength to bring redemption to his Chur∣ches, to work deliverances for his people. Let us stand and admire him in his going forth: Loe this is our God! we have waited for him and he will save us: this is the Lord,
Isay 25:9. we have waited for him, and we will be glad in his salvation: Let us put our selves into a po∣sture fit to receive mercy, and then stand still and see the salvation of our God: stand still in believing, yet indeavour in working; we are to fix our eyes, but use our hands. Through God we shall doe valiantly,—for he shall tread downe all our enemies for us. We, but wee through God—It is the speech of one, Use means as if there were not a God to helpe, look up to God as if not a man to help. Cer∣tainly not to use meanes is to tempt God, and to trust in meanes is to provoke God. It is a lesson worth learning, not to swell in the injoyment, nor to sink in the want of crea∣ture
reliefes, to be nothing in our selves in the presence of meanes, and to be all in God in the absence of them. But let me not be a burthen to your honour in the entrance.— My Lord, I have only this to say; you have done much for God, and God hath now put advantages into your hands of doing more; it will be your honour here,
ies bre∣vis opus multum, merces magna, pater fa∣milias ur∣get opera∣rii ne sint pigri. and your happi∣nesse for ever, if God do please to make you instrumentall for the spreading of the light of the glorious Gospell of Jesus Christ, in∣to those dark Westerne parts of the world; pitty it is that the Garden of the World should want the Sunne of the World; that those places which abound in al things, should want that which should bee the crowne and comfort of their abundance. It is my earnest prayers, that God of his mer∣cy would give you a single heart and an in∣dustrious hand to work for him, and him∣selfe eye your labouts, write a booke of re∣membrance of them: be your counfell in straits, your protection in dangers, your comfort in life, your Saviour in death, and after death, the God of your posterity also, that mercy may be intailed to your house for ever. And this is the earnest and hearty prayers of him, who is

