



MADAME,
BEsides the relation of my Em∣ployment to your whole
Community in generall, and the
 many obligations which I have to
yourself in particular, I had ano∣ther reason which determin'd my thoughts to make choice of your name and that of your Spirituall Daughters to appear in the Fron∣tispiece of this little work. And that is: I was ever of opinion that all Books of this kind challenge it as their Birth-right to be dedi∣cated unto persons of eminent
ver∣tue: for otherwise, it were a sin against
Iustice, to present holy things unto those whose
life is quite contrary to all the Maximes of Christian Perfection. This sup∣posed, MADAME, it was not soe much a choice as a kind of necessity in me, to dedicate this little tran∣formed Piece unto yourself cheif∣ly,
 and secondarily unto all those vertuous
Persons who have the happines to live under your pious
Conduct. For, although vertue is practicable in all states and con∣ditions, yet we must grant that none can be said to practise it in a higher degree, (whatsoever the Adver∣saries of the
Catholick Church dare unreasonably murmur to the contrary) then such as following the Evangelicall Counsels have willingly and joyfully abandonned all the Charms of the world, to embrace a
Monasticall retirement and therein to consecrate the re∣mainder of their Lives to love, serve, & praise God without cease or interruption: a life which hath more of Angelicall solitude, then
 Terrestriall conversation. Vpon this ground, I had reason to pre∣sume, this little Treatise (which hath nothing of mine but that it speaks English) would not be wholly neglected by such devout Souls, who willingly accept any thing that may contribute to their advancement in vertue. I had this
Interest also in it, that I durst flatter myself to have given it unto those who are soe much my friends as to be ready to pardon greater faults then such as may have bine committed in this
Translation.
Now as for the Book itself, I hope, you will find the
matter pious and solid: and consequenly worthly the reading and application  all sort of persons who aspire unto
 Heaven. The Authour, as I am credibly informed by those of his own Order, is a Person of no com∣mon vertue: and I should not fear to be argued of
untruth, if I should tell the World, that his late Pro∣motion to that eminent dignity he now holds in the Church, was more a reward of his vertue and learning, then a Gift of
fortune blindly conferred on him for his birth and friends. His
Book then not degenerating from his Person, and his
words not contradicted in his life, I hope you will have a double satisfaction in reading good Things originally delivered by soe good a man. I will say no more of my Authour, but leave you to judge of the rest by the Book itself.
 Tis true, it may seem at first sight more proper for secular persons & such as are still entangled in the occasions and vanities of the world, then such as are already withdrawn into the secure harbour of a Mo∣nasticall life: It is more fa∣miliar then studyed, more Prac∣ticall then
speculative, more ap∣propriated for the purgative then
unitive way. However I am per∣suaded, there are many
instru∣ctions in it, which are common to all states and conditions. And indeed to say the Truth, As I doe not love our pretended Illuminees and imaginary Saints, soe I doe not much affect imaginary Wri∣tings; Books that will sooner make one
mad then make one a
 Saint. Certainly, there is more profit in a little intelligible Piety, then in whole volumes of un-intelligible Raptures, and Chimericall Elevations. I like those who take more care to live well, then to be esteemed
Devotes: who take more pains to doe good Works, then to fancy high no∣tions: who are more diligent to mortify their
Passions, then to fill their heads with unprofitable
Con∣ceits. This Book is for such: And therefore,
Madame, having no reason to doubt but that you and all those who live under your La∣dy-ships direction are of my opi∣nion in this Point, I was moved to hope a favorable acceptance of this little (though well-meaning) Pre∣sent
 from him who is and will ev be in all dutifull respect,
MADAME,

