


HOw hath thy cruel modesty betray'd
To dark Imprisonment this beautious Maid:
And rob'd thy Country of so rich a piece.
As honoured Italy, and out did Greece,
While in obedience to thy strict command
She silent languisht, This Come was Trans∣lated long  go by M.  S. and lay by, as also  was Pasto Fido, wh was ne  Translate and set fo by Mr. R Fanshaw yet could understand
And speak our Language perfect, as her own:
A virtue not oth' Sex, but hers alone.
Her Sister in Imprisonment got ree
But ow'd to other hands her Liberty,
And had such taking Ayres, that she was grown
The Courted Beauty here as soon as known:
Nor needst thou fear, this meets unequal grac,
Being hr equal boh in birth and Face:
She's no exposed Issue, but as we
When Pictures shewen, done by great ands, do se
Without severe xamining apart
The Colours, Postures▪ Symetrie and Art.
Crie a rare piece, so much to Fame we owe
Of th' Authors skil confirmed long ago;
So when her Fathers name as gret as theirs,
For Liming souls, and paintin loves and fears
Is read upon her Front the Noble piece
Hath doubl estimate, that's God, and His.
Break frth then Innocent swetness, and shine bright
As the fair Mon, The N supposed mediately prcede t opening o Scene,  the Mor immedia succeedi in which Pastoral gins, bi  one full  horror,  other of  light, b describe the first  Scene. which a succeed that Night
So dark and hideous, that men thought the Sun
And Nature at a stand, their last course run;
When taught by fear th' amazed world did say
There needed new Creation to make day,
Which yet sprang with such swetness and delight
They wisht there never would succeed a night
Shine forth so fair; and teach our wanton youth
To hate their perjuries, and honour truth.
That the soft Virgins may no more complain,
Mens falshood, and their wronged loves made vain;
But let thy great example strike an awe
Into their souls, as binding as the Law.
Which may into both Sexes still dispense
In Love, success; in Wisdome, innocence.
Taught by thy virtues thus, they both will pray
No Night may ere ore take thy glorious day.
Which long and fair I as a Prophet could
Foretel should last, and as a Poet would
Create new Fate for thee, were thine not great.
But thou hast perfect temper, and thy heat
Drawn from the Sun and purer part oth' Sky
Predicts, and causes immortality.
And not to be by lines describ'd and shown
Less Artful and Immortal then thine own.
I. H.
