



THE Protestant Party in this Land, though they admit of many subdivisions amongst themselves, by reason of differences in Opi∣nion and Judgment about Modes and Forms of Worship (such Disagreements having likewise been, even in the Purer dayes of the Apostles them∣selves) yet do all Unite in their joint Prayers and Supplications to God Almighty, for your Ma∣jesties Life, and Safety; your Majesties Interest in them all being very Considerable (if you please to im∣prove it,) and I pray God to direct your Majesties heart to Protect, Value, and Esteem them, that your Majesties Interest may be only aimed at, by all your Loyal Protestant Subjects. I know this is an ex∣traordinary time, and things verge towards a Crisis, wherefore if my zeal for your Majesties Service, as well as Gratitude for my Pardoned Life, doth some∣what transport me to some indecencies in my Address to your Majestie, I hope, as formerly, I shall obtain your Majesties Gracious Favour.
This Nation is very sensible, how often your Majesties Life hath been threatned by the Romish Faction. I have heard Sir Thomas Gascoigne say, That though some were discovered and Executed for the Plot, yet they would never give over, until you were taken off; I confess I have been often present in Popish Cabals, where it hath been repre∣sented as a chief part of their Policy to alienate Your Majesties Affection from Your Parliament; for then (as I have heard them alledge) Exasperations and Discontents would grow high on each side, and Your. Majestie would be weakned in the greatest part of Your Defence; so that the Love of Your People would be alienated and estranged from your Ma∣jesties Interest. For no Home-bred Disturbance can ever rationally do Your Majestie any hurt, as Long as you have Parliamentary Assemblies to second and stand by you. For then they did conclude that your Majesties Sword would cut on both sides, and they thought themselves happy if it did cut but on one side, as they were pleased to Term it, when Your Parliament was Dissolved, which procured much rejoycing among the Romish Party.
Being but an Inferiour Person, 'tis above my Sphear to advise, but my Prayers shall not be want∣ing, That God would mightily Protect Your Ma∣jesty against all Machinations, and Attempts of Wicked Men, made against either Your Life or Go∣vernment. And that he would continue You an Eminent Example of Piety, Vertue, and Good∣ness to Your People, (who walk as much by Pat∣tern as Precept) according to the example of Jeho∣saphat, whose heart was lifted up in the wayes of

the Lord, to Your Establishment and Comfort here, and Eternal Bliss hereafter. For, God be∣ing an Your side, all the Projects of Your Adversa∣ries, though seemingly not disappointable by human art, are but weak and impotent things, and subject to a demolition by the least breath of his Mouth, who hath suffered them to proceed so far towards the Destruction of Prince and People.

