



Sir,
I Have at length o∣bey'd your Com∣mands, only I wish the Instance had bin more considerable: though I cannot but much approve of the designe and of your ele∣ction in this particular work, which is certainly the best that is exstant upon this Subject, notwithstanding the plenty
 which these late years have furnish'd us withal. I shall for∣bear to publish the accident which made you engage me upon this Traduction; because I have long since had inclina∣tions, and a design of commu∣nicating some other things of this nature from my own ex∣perience: and especially, con∣cerning the Ornaments of Gar∣dens,
&c. Because, what re∣spects the Soyle, the Situation and the planting is here perfor∣med to my hand with so muh ingenuity, as that I conceive there can very little be added, to render it a piece absolute and without reproach. In or∣der to this, my purpose was
 to introduce the least known (though not the least delici∣ous) appendices to Gardens; and such as are not the Names only, but the Descriptions, Plots, Materials, and wayes of contri∣ving the Ground for Parterrs, Grotts, Fountains; the propori∣ons of Walks, Perspectives, Rocks, Aviaries, Vivaries, Apiaries, Pots, Conservatories, Piscina's, Groves, Cry∣pta's, Cabinets, Eccho's, Statues, and other ornaments of a Vigna, &c. without which the best Gar∣den is without life, and very defective. Together with a Treatise of Flowers, and Ever-greens; especially the Pa∣lisades and Contr-Espaliers of Ala∣ternus, which most incompara∣ble
 Verdure, together with the right culture of it, for beauty and fence, I might glory to have been the first propagator in England. This, I say, I intended to have published for the be∣nefit or divertisement of our Country, had not some other things unexpectedly interve∣ned, which as yet hinder the birth and maturity of that Embryo.
Be pleased, Sir, to accept the productions of your own Com∣mands; as a Lover of Gardens you did promote it, as a Lover of you I have translated it. And in the mean time that the Great ones are busied about Governing the World (which is but a Wilder∣nesse)
 let us call to minde the Rescript of Dioclesian to those who would perswade him to re-assume the Empire. For it is impossible that he who is a true Virtuoso, and has attain'd to the felicity of being a good Gardener, should give jealousie to the State where he lives. This is not Advice to you who know so well how to cultivate both your self and your Garden: But because it is the only way to enjoy a Garden, and to preserve its Reputation. Sir, I am

