



SIR,
WHen I had ended this lit∣tle unlaboured Piece, the Watch, Iresolv'd to dedicate it to some One, whom I cou'd fancy, the nearest approacht the charming Da∣mon.

Many fine Gentlemen I had in view, of Wit and Beauty; but still, through their Education, or a natural Propensity to Debauchery, I found those Vertues wanting, that shou'd compleat that delicate Chara∣cter, Iris gives her Lover; and which, at first Thought of You, I found center'd there to Perfection.
Yes Sir, I found You had all the Youth of Damon; without the for∣ward noisy Confidence, which usually attends your Sex. You have all the attracting Beauty of my young He∣ro; all that can charm the Fair; without the Affectation of those, that set out for Conquests (though You make a Thousand, without know∣ing it, or the Vanity of believing it.) You have our Damon's Wit,

with all his agreeable Modesty: Two Vertues that rarely shine toge∣ther: And the last makes You conceal the noble Sallies of the first, with that Industry and Care, You wou'd an Amour: And You wou'd no more boast of either of these, than of your undoubted Bravery.
You are (like our Lover too) so discreet, that the bashful Maid may, without Fear or Blushing, venture the soft Confession of her Soul with You; reposing the dear Secret in Yours, with more Safety, than with her own Thoughts. You have all the Sweetness of Youth, with the So∣briety and Prudence of Age. You have all the Power of the gay Vices of Man; but the Angel in your Mind, has subdu'd you to the Ver∣tues

of a God! And all the vicious, and industrious Examples of the ro∣ving Wits of the mad Town, have only serv'd to give you the greater Abborrence to Lewdness. And You look down with Contempt and Pity on that wretched unthinking Num∣ber, who pride themselves in their mean Victories over little Hearts; and boast their common Prizes with that Vanity, that declares 'em capa∣ble of no higher Joy, than that of the Ruin of some credulous Unfor∣tunate: And no Glory like that, of the Discovery of the brave Atchiev∣ment, over the next Bottle, to the Fool that shall applaud 'em.
How does the Generosity, and Sweetness of your Disposition de∣spise these false Entertainments,

that turns the noble Passion of Love into Ridicule, and Man into Brute.
Methinks I cou'd form another Watch (that shou'd remain a Pa∣tern to succeeding Ages) how divine∣ly you pass your more sacred Hours, how nobly and usefully you divide your Time; in which, no precious Minute is lost, not one glides idly by; but all turns to wondrous Ac∣count. And all Your Life is one continu'd Course of Vertue and Ho∣nour. Happy the Parents, that have the Glory to own You! Hap∣py the Man, that has the Honour of your Friendship! But, Oh! How much more happy the fair She, for whom you shall sigh! Which sure∣ly, can never be in vain. There will be such a Purity in Your Flame:

All You ask, will be so chaste and noble, and utler'd with a Voice so modest, and a Look so charming, as must, by a gentle Force, compel that Heart to yield, that knows the true Value of VVit, Beauty, and Vertue.
Since then, in all the Excellen∣cies of Mind and Body (where no one Grace is wanting) you so re∣semble the All-perfect Damon, suf∣fer me to dedicate this Watch to You. It brings You nothing but Rules for Love; delicate as Your Thoughts, and innocent as Your Con∣versation. And possibly, 'tis the only Vertue of the Mind, You are not perfectly Master of; the only noble Mystery of the Soul, You have not yet studied. And though they

are Rules for every Hour, You will find, they will neither rob Heaven, nor Your Friends of their Due; those so valuable Devoirs of Your Life: They will teach You Love; but Love, so pure, and so devout, that You may mix it, even with Your Religion; and I know, Your fine Mind can admit of no other. VVhen ever the God enters there (fond and wanton as he is, full of Arts and Guiles) he will be reduc'd to that Native Innocency, that made him so ador'd, before inconstant Man cor∣rupted his Divinity, and made him wild and wandring. How happy will Iris's VVatch be, to inspire such a Heart! How honour'd under the Patronage of so excellent a Man! VVhose VVit will credit, whose

Goodness will defend it; and whose noble and vertuous Qualities so justly merit the Character, Iris has given Damon: And which is believed so very much your Due, by
SIR,

