


To the most Excellent, Mr. Christopher Clauser, the most Lear∣ed Doctor of the Tygurine Phi∣sicians and Philosophers, HEALTH.
THe best and most excellent thing of every true Physician, is, Wel to know his own proper Medi∣cinal Verity; and withal, Whe∣ther he be a possessor of his own Arcanum, or not; Even as thou O Christopher, the best of the Tigurine Physicians, dost not make use of ought in the Medicinal Facul∣ty, without Judgement, and an exact Con∣science, (which is not causelesly said to be a thousand Witnesses:) But as concerning the Power or Authority whereby I exercise my self in this my Monarchy, 'tis thus: My Medicinal drivings and forcings are born in me out of my Countrey Soil: As Avicen

was the Arabians Physician, Galen the Perga∣mensians, and Marsilius the best of the Itali∣an Physicians, even so the most fruitful Ger∣many her self hath chosen me to be its ne∣cessary Physician; for even thou thy self knowest, That Experience her self is (as it were) the Mother of every Physician, and also verily is of all my whole Monarchy. Besides, thou knowest that every Countrey hath its own Laws and Customs, and moreo∣ver, that no Stranger or Alien can be well united with the Senators of another Coun∣trey; nor can a Contrary (that is, a meer Stranger) be ever well joined together with another Contrary: From this observe, that thou compares Hypocrates to Me, Me to A∣verois, and compare Rhasis together with Us three, viz. Each according to his own coun∣trey
Forasmuch as the Arabians and Graecians, together with the Germans, do stand in an e∣qual Poise, no otherwise then as the Triple Horehound; and they do make the Ambergreese of Germany and Graece, equal with Storax and Turpentine, Balsom and Mummie; nor art thou ignorant that every Countrey contains in it self the Matrixes of its own Element, and exhibits to its own self that which is necessa∣ly: For there is in Arabia the Ambergreese of its own Countrey: And although a (hal∣dean

Rose be haply no wayes comparable to a Rose of Arpinum, yet what is this to the sick∣nesses themselves? For a Rose is alwayes a Rose of its own Countrey: Just so every Na∣tion produceth to it self its own proper and peculiar Physician, and that out of its own Archeus: For every Necessity affords Industry (alias, things necessary) to its Workman: But the self-same Necessity, is as it were both a Master and Parent of every Physician; therefore the Italians may excuse themselves from using the Graecians, and the Germans may from them both: For each of these have their necessities to themselves, and likewise a pecu∣liar Helper of that Necessity, viz. of the na∣ture of that proper Nation: Nor is there a∣ny need for any one to follow the Dreams and Customs of the Arabians or Graecians, but the so doing is the Error or Ignorance of the Countrey, and a Peregrine Arrogance; verily this is negligently done of them, and as it were, dreamingly, without any Reason, and uncompulsively, beside either Opportunity or Necessity; from which things a Physician is (notwithstanding) to be begotten.
But he that is (by reason of such like do∣tage and carelessness) stirred up from the necessity of his Countrey, to be a Physician, he at length is a perfect Physician of his own Nation, and plainly is the very Hypocrates, the

very Avicen; and finally, the Lully himself of that Countrey: Albeit, I do not (in this place) therefore praise them to this end, as if they were born from necessity; for (and this I shall pass by in ilence) their own Countrey could not sustain the Errors of them: For I pray, What help did Rsi; afford Viea? What did Savanarola profit Friburgh? What did Arnoldus the Suevians? What doth enti∣lis, of the Countrey of St. James, and the Tru∣sane Commentaries, help the Msntan Physicians? What doth Avicen help all these; for as much as even the health alone of the sick is to be considered. This therefore is that Faculty I write of, which even my Countrey her self hath given Me, and that very thing is by the Necessity which I spake of, out of which I am begotten. Therefore I dedicate unto Thee, even whatsoever is in this Book, that thou mayest have it committed to thee in Print. But I am perswaded that after a while some unskilful Fellow or other will Reply to these Books of mine, and my self answer them a∣gain: For from thence will be plainly mani∣fested, and evidently known on both sides, the necessity of every Physician, and the heal∣ing of the Sick: But as for those whom I most dearly love they perhaps will briefly give the interpretations of some obscure places in these my Writings; but not those, viz. the very

oldest of my Foxes: For my Troop, forsooth, of the Physicians, is cut and torn a pieces; for one part of them is of a deceitful Tongue, the other part of Heart and Tongue. Questi∣onless thou understandest what I drive at; I will send thee very suddenly some Descrip∣tions, together with my amending of the Colcotharine Oyle. Take this in good part, and always be careful to act the part of a friend. Farewel.
From Basill, the 4th. of the Ides of ber. An.
1526.
