



Honourable and
See Mat. 5 9. Blessed Patriots:
AS it was meere duty that first moved mee to preach these Sermons, so it is bare neces∣sity that doth now inforce me to print them; they were preached when I saw the ma∣ny blessed probabilities and first-fruits of refor∣mation, which God and the King by your hands, did reach forth unto this Nation. For although I did conceive my selfe to be one of the least, and last in the Ministry, as not having yet attained to more yeeres of mine age, then
there are dayes in some Monehs, yet I thought my selfe old enough to
Mat. 21.8, 9 cry Hosanna to your proceedings, and with those Children in the Gospell, to strow these my two Branches in the way of approaching reformation. For how could I further that worke more effectually with God, then by a sacrifice of thankesgiving? or with men, then by the Doctrine of Activity? and these two, are the generall Contents of both my following Discourses. In the first of them, I doe but write an History (Epitomie rather) of the Lords mercy, our Soveraignes goodnes, and the prosperous paines of this happy Par∣liament. In the latter, (which was first preached) I doe presse mine auditory to bring Bellowes, and Fuell, to the
Mal. 3.2. refiners fire, and to stand close to the particulars of our blessed Vow and Pro∣testation. Neither doe I wade further in any point then I have a clue from your proceedings to leade me safely backe againe. Thus it was meere duty that first moved me to cry Hosanna.
But alas, as we reade in that Gospell concer∣ning Christs riding into Ierusalem,
Mat. 21.15. that when the Chiefe Priests and Scribes saw the wonderfull things that he did, and the children crying in the Temple and saying Hosanna, they were sore displeased; so I had no sooner began to deliver these notes in pub∣like,
but presently I heard, read and felt, the dis∣pleasure of a like generation of opposites sorely kindled against me. Troubler, Pestilent, Scismati∣call, nay Faction, Sedition, Treason, these were some of the common titles that by word and writing, were given both to the Preacher and the Ser∣mons. But my comfort is, that the same Epi∣thites, so unjustly wrested, have beene cast upon far better Ministers, long agoe. Thus
1 Kin. 8.17. Ahab to Elij th,
Act. 24.5, 6, &c. Tertullus and the Iewes against S. Paul, and he
Luk. 23 1, 2. Scribes and Pharisees against Christ himself. As for the Ecclesiasticall authority which did con∣vent me for these Sermons, (for convented I was,) although I found them and their adhe∣rents like
Jud. 16.19. Sampson when his head was shaven, And that their might to punish Innocence was taken away from them, yet I did plainely reade so much in their frownes and threats, as doth inforce me to beleeve, that if ever their locks do grow againe, I may expect the
ver. 2, 29, 30 house about mine eares, for the prevention of which mis∣chiefe, my selfe am perswaded by friends. These my notes are thus enforced by enemies, to lye at your feete for justice, and if I be found an of∣fender, or have committed any thing in these papers worthy of death or of bonds, I refuse not to suffer, but if there be none of those things
whereof these accuse me, nay if (contrariwise) the maine cause of their malice should appeare to be this, namely that my Sermons are too true, too Parliamentary; then I doe leave it to your grave wisedomes to consider, whether or no, the
Psal. 69.9. reproaches of them that reproached me do seeme (I feare to name it) even to fall up∣on your proceedings, the summe (therefore) of mine humble Epistolary Petition is this: If your high Tribunall shall acquit mee for this worke, that then you would further be gratiously pleased to vouchsafe your Parlia∣mentary protection, that so both my selfe, and Treatises may go abroad without danger, and if this Honourable House shall daigne so much as to defend these my Blossomes from those Birds, I doe here vow and devote my future fruites, yea, stock and all to your honourable service, meane while I shall continue in prayer that the Wonderfull Counseller, the Prince of Peace, would still direct, protect your Counsells, Persons, carrying you forward over the necks, yea (as hitherto he hath done) upon the, backs of his and your enemies, to the ac∣complishment of that worke which he hath given you to doe.

From my Study in Excester, Feb 5. 1641.
