



Right Honorable,
IT is an high prerogative of nature, and priviledge of Grace, when Good is annex'd to Greatness: And it is better to be without this than not to be great in goodnesse. But when both meet in one, they make a glorious, and an happy conjunction, commanding by a secret power both imitation and honour: Men usually honour those that are great, whose natures lead them to imitate the Good.
My honour'd Lord, though I am a stranger to your Person, yet not so to your fame; and though you may justly wonder at my hardy attempt in fronting this Treatise with your noble Name, yet in this forward act I want not a President, even the learned Austine,Lib. 4. c. 14. Quem non no∣veram facit, sed amaveram bo∣minem ex Do∣ctrinae fam, &c. who in his Confessions makes an acknowledgement to God of a piece of boldnesse in dedicating a Book to a great Oratour of Rome, by Name Icherius, whose face he had never seene. However, if this be objected as a crime, I cannot but promise to my self your Lordships pardon, especially when your Goodnesse shall reflect upon the Spring of this hasty motion: It was the prevailing importunity of the dearest friends of our late reverend Deane, which forced me to the Presse, and put me upon this bold Dedication, that so they might give to the World a cleare Expresse of their

gratitude to your Lordship, for your high favours to the most renowned Doctour now deceased, who was a Magazen of Learning, and an exact Modell of vertue, a Picture of Pati∣ence, and a Patterne of Devotion.
It addes not a little to your Lordships honour, that you had relation to Him as your Tutour, who ever had an high esteeme of your noble Person, thus not unknown to me, who know that men (not rancord with envy) usually love in others what they see in themselves; and therefore He, whom Combar loved and honourd, must needs be rare and excellent.
My Lord, all that I humbly beg is this, that your Honour would grace Him now dead with your Tuition, who living did adorne you with His in our Society; which owes much to your Lordship in promoting Him to be Master of it, who was it's happy Crown and Glory. In that promotion my selfe with many others had a share; and as a Testimony of a thank∣full brest, I humbly crave your Honours acceptance of this ensuing Worke, which falls as short of the Deceased's merit, as He outstripp'd the men of this proud Age in knowledge, and sweetnesse of Spirit.
With it your Lordship has a tender of my most hearty De∣votions; I shall ever supplicat the Almighty, that when you have finished your Course with the glory of those two Graces, which are oft joynd in theRev. 2.19. 13.10. Heb. 6.12. Scripture, and like Eros and Anteros in the Fable live and die together, I meane Faith and Patience, you may inherit a blessing in the Land of Pro∣mise, the. Chrys. Haven of everlasting rest and happinesse: This is the unfained wish of

Jan. 9. 1654.
