



Right Honourable,
IT was ever a grand ma∣ster-piece of prudence in Patriots and State-Gover∣nours, whilest they were to encounter in an ho∣stile way with forraign enemies, to secure all home-bred dissensions, as

knowing that a bosom or domestick enemy is most dangerous.
Lib. 4. de Bel. Jud.It is recorded by Josephus, that the intestine broils amongst the Jews, e∣specially those of the Zelots, were so great, that Vespasian on purpose de∣ferr'd the siege of Hierusalem, be∣ing informed that they promiscuous∣ly murdered one another, so that the less work was left for the Sword of the Conqueror.
Thus those  (as he calls them) Seditionists, subdued them∣selves before their City was besieged, and entred by Vespasian. Moreover, I have read of an old prophetick saying, That our glorious and now flourishing City of London should be destroyed by it self. Sin and Faction within the walls of it may (which God divert) effect that which was prophesied: and may it please God so to enlighten the eyes of all that inhabit it, and other parts of his Majesties Dominions, as to be perswaded of this Truth, that if there be , if crying sins that strike at Heaven, out-brave God, to

the shame of men, if such be suffered to go unpunished in this Kingdom, then, though our walls were as high and strong as those of Babylon, though our Hosts or Armies were as nume∣rous as those of Sennacherib, 2 King. 18. or that Persian King Xerxes, whose Souldiers, when they shot their Ar∣rows in the face of their enemies, are said by the Historian to have turn'd the day into night, and darkned the Sun, all the like, or greater, forces and bulwarks, cannot hinder Gods vengeance or revengeful Justice from breaking in upon our Nation to waste and destroy it, if sin or sins of a deep stain, or high provoking nature reign among us; especially after the recei∣ving of great blessings, and enjoy∣ing many undeserved mercies by a special design, or ordination of the Divine Providence: of which our most gracious Soveraign being very sensi∣ble (to an high degree of gratitude to God his Defender and Restorer) was pleased, for the prevention of future calamities in his three Kingdoms, to

direct an Order to the truly Noble the now Duke of Ormond, the Lord Stew∣ard of His Majesties Houshold, for the rectifying of all manner of disorders; and, by the assistance of his Officers of the Green-cloath, to suppress all kind of debauchery and vice in any per∣son of what Degree or Quality soever. Besides this, his Sacred Majesty hath by a late Proclamation, dated the thir∣tieth of May, 1660. declared his holy and just displeasure against dis∣solute and profane men, hoping (they are his own words) that all persons of Honour, or that are in Authority, will assist His Majesty in discountenancing such mens vices, and punishing them according to the established Laws for their enormities. To His Majesties hopes and pious desires in that Procla∣mation, give me leave to subjoyn my most humble Supplication to your Honours, that, because (as the Roman Oratour styles all Magistrates) you are designed by your high place and cal∣ling to be the Commonwealths Phy∣sicians, Hedges against profaneness,

and the firm Banks to keep us from an inundation of trouble and confusi∣on, which may arise from Sects, Schismes, and Heresies, you would be pleased to crown your renowned, matchless, and most loyal actings, for the good and wel-fare of our most glorious King and Church, with this religious resolution, to issue forth a strict and special Order against that Epidemical, Soul murdering, and State-confounding sin of Swearing, which is the Captain, Leading-General sin of this Nation; for which (if it be not speedily checked, and stifled by the powerful hand of Justice) we shall grow as infamous now and in after-ages, as the Asiaticks were for Pride, the Carthaginians for Treache∣ry, and the Scythians for Drunkenness.
The hainousness of this Sin I shall discover in the ensuing Treatise, as being most injurious to God, scanda∣lous to our Neighbour, and hurtful to our Selves: it carries with it a con∣tempt of Gods person as well as of his precept, and that in a publick manner▪

which three aggravations are not to be found in every sin. To which if we adde a fourth, which is the frequen∣cy and commonness of it, it will appear then to be the master-sin of this Nati∣on, as it is set in the front of other horrid sins, Hos. 4.2. Men break the Sabbath but once in a week, but Swear and blaspheme they do every day, every hour, (I wish I could not say almost) every moment: It is so com∣monly practised, that, through daily custom and imitation, it hath crept into the mouths of young Boyes and Children, which is to be bewailed with a Ieremies Lamentation.
Now for the better Remedy of so great a Malady, which has distemper'd our Kingdoms great Body, though I dare not prescribe to your greater Wisdom, yet let me request you to call to mind that grave and wise Counsel of Carolus Caraffa in the Council (or rather Conventicle) of Trent, who said there (and that most truly) that when the Civil Magistrates & Gods Ministers do accord, and draw in

one yoke, then is the Church and State best governed. So then, if all the Ministers of Gods word were enjoyn'd, as his Maje∣sty ordered by a Proclamation, Aug. 13. 1660. to turn the edge of their Spirits, & declame (at the least once a month) in their Sermons against this Goliah, this monster-sin, and if the Magistrates in all places would stir up themselves to a more lively and active execution of the Statute against those who shall in this sort presume to blaspheme, by taking Gods most holy Name in vain, if this course were once strictly under∣taken, and all Informers against such foul-mouth'd blasphemers encoura∣ged for their pains, by receiving a part of the mulct drawn out of the others purses; if this course were once un∣dertaken, and constantly in all places followed, we should find, to Gods glo∣ry and our great comfort, that the fear of shame and punishment (which with most men is more prevalent then the love of God) would chase away all profaneness from their mouths. 

. Chrys.Horeil. 14. Through fear of punishment a long and inveterate custom of sin hath oft-times been omitted, that strong band hath been broken, and the sinner converted.
Under the old Law, he that blas∣phemed the name of the Lord was stoned to death, Levit. 24.16. The severity of forraign Christian Kings and Prin∣ces against such Blasphemers is set down in the midst of my Treatise: Some were burnt in their Lips with hot Irons, some order'd to be drown'd, others were beheaded, and punish'd with the confiscation of their goods, and loss of their lives: thus dealt an Earl of Flanders, by name Philip, with profane Swearers. To all which I must adde (as a most exemplary piece of Justice, which I wish were observed and practised in His Majesties Royal Family) that famous Decree of that good King Henry the fifth, the whip of France and the scourge of Vice, in whom Piety and Valour did (as they do in our renowned King) meet toge∣ther:

he decreed by a Special Order relating chiefly to his Court, which might I suppose have an Influence up∣on the whole Kingdom, That every Duke for each Oath should pay forty shillings, a Baron twenty, Knights and Esquires ten, every Yeoman three shillings and four pence, ordinary Servants two pence, (which was ac∣counted a great mulct in those days) the younger sort of Boyes and Pages were well whipt for this offence: and this Law was so well executed, that, all the Nation over, very few were heard to swear an Oath.
This I intimate, wishing that the same or the like strictness of Severity might meet with the looseness of this Ages Impiety, and hoping that persons of worth and preeminency (whose re∣putations, in the scale of Honour, weigh down the rate or weight of punishment) will reform without it, and scorn to have their Nobility blot∣ted, and their mouths defiled with that unprofitable, cursed, crying sin, which is the badge of debaucht Ruffians, the

cognisance of accursed miscreants, who are branded by the Prophet David with this black mark of being Gods enemies,Ps. 139.20. and the continual practice of the De∣vils in Hell, and damned Spirits, who Curse, Swear, and Blaspheme God in the midst of their Torments. This is the sole Language of those Infernal Inhabitants: the which that it may no longer rest or nest in the Tongues of prophane Rabshakehs, who are the. Chrys. worst of the worst Subjects, the most pernicious enemies to the State and Church, for that in a manner by their sharp Tongues they clip the wings of Mercy, hindering it from flying to us with blessings, and quicken the pace of Iustice, to proceed in a speedy exe∣cution of curses and heavy judgments upon us; that their mouths may be stopped, and by execution of the Sta∣tutes (which is their life) this com∣mon sin of Swearing receive its deaths wound, that there may be no more blaspheming in our Streets, nor within our private Walls, that this glorious Reformation may be through∣ly

wrought and effected in our Land, I shall to these my weak endeavours in Print add the assistance and strength of my Prayers to the great God of Hea∣ven the Lord of Lords, for a continu∣ance and multiplication of blessings upon all your publick designs and godly undertakings; that from your Honoured Persons, who (next to His Sacred Majesty, who is the Upper) are the Nether Springs of Iustice,Amos 5.24. Iudgment may run down as waters, and righteous∣ness as a mighty stream, to the bearing down of all profaneness, whereby God is dishonoured, and to the advance of Piety and Religion, that his holy Name may be glorified by us. This is, and shall be ever a part of the daily Devo∣tions of him who is a well-wisher to the Peace and flourishing happiness of this Kingdom, and

Dec. 9. 1661.
