

THough History were little significant to o∣ther Men, yet it ought to be read by Prin∣ces. There is no better way to discover to them the various effects and consequences of Passions and Interests, Times and Conjunctures, good and evil Councils. Histories are only composed and made up of such actions as they are engaged in, and in them every thing seems to be done for their Ʋse. If experience be necessary for them to obtain that prudence which may enable them to Reign well, there can be nothing of greater advantage to their instruction, than to join to the examples of former Ages, their own daily experiences: Whereas other∣wise they most an end learn only to judge of the dan∣gerous affairs that occur to them, at the expence of both their own Subjects and Glory. But by this Re∣lief of History, without hazarding any thing, they in∣form their judgments by past Events. When they see even into the most secret Vices of Princes, notwith∣standing all the deceitful Flatteries given them in their Lives, exposed to the Eyes of all Men, they blush at the vain Joys and Pleasures, which such adu∣lation
 raises in them, and sensibly find that there can be no true honour, but where there is a just merit.
Besides it would be a shame, I do not say to a Prince alone, but in general to any Man of sence and worth, to be ignorant of humane kind, and of the memora∣ble Changes that have happened in the World, through all the Succession of Time. If we do not learn from History how to distinguish Times, we shall represent Men under the Law of Nature, or under the Writ∣ten Law, to be such as are under the Evangelick Law; we shall speak of Persians conquered by Alexander, as of those victorius Persians under Cyrus; we shall make Greece as free in the time of Philip, as in that of Themistocles, or Miltiades; the Roman People as fierce under the Emperors as under the Consuls; the Church in as great Tranquillity under Dioclesian, as under Constantine; and France labouring under the Convulsions of their Civil Wars in the time of Charles the Ninth, and Henry the Third, as puis∣sant as in the time of Lewis the Fourteenth, which, being reunited under so great a Monarch, by it self triumphs over almost all Europe.
Now, Sir, it was to avoid these inconveniences, that you have read so many Histories both Antient and Modern. It was requisite in the first place to make you acquainted with the Sacred Pages, and therein to read the History of the People of God, which serves as a good Foundation to Religion. Nor have you been suffered to be ignorant in the Greek, or Roman Hi∣story; and which was most important to you, you
 have been carefully instructed in the History of this great Kingdom, which you are obliged to render happy. But lest these Histories, and those you are yet to learn, should work any confusion in your mind, there is nothing more necessary, than distinctly to re∣present to you, but as contractedly as we can, all the whole Series of Ages.
This way of Ʋniuersal History is, in regard to the Histories of every Country and People, what a general Mapp is to the particular ones. In the latter you see only the whole description one Kingdom, or Pro∣vince by it self; but in the Ʋniuersal Mapp you learn how to situate those parts of the World in the whole: You see what Paris, or the Isle of France is in the Kingdom, what the Kingdom is in Europe, and what Europe is in the Ʋniverse.
So likewise particular Histories represent to you what things have happened to such or such a People, with all their Circumstances: but to understand the whole clearly, you must know what relation every Hi∣story can have to others, which is done by such a way as this is, in short, where at one glance of your Eye, as it were, you may see all the order of time.
Such an Abridgment, Sir, gives you a very great sight. You see all precedent Ages laid, as I may say, before you in a few hours: You see how Empires have succeeded one the other, and how Religion in is dif∣ferent Estates hath equally balanced and supported it self, even from the beginning of the World to this pre∣sent time.
'Tis the effect of these two things, I mean, that of
 Religion, and that of Empires, which ought to be deeply imprinted in your memory; and as Religion and Political Government are the two hinges on which all humane Affairs do turn, to see what con∣cerns these things in a small abridged Volume, and to discover by this means the exact order and event thereof, is to comprehend in his thoughts whatsoever is great and glorious among Men, and to hold, as I may say, the thread of all the Affairs of the World.
And as, when you look upon an Ʋniversal Map, you may presently go off from your own native Country, and from the place which bounds you, and run thro' all the habitable Earth with all its Seas and Countries, which may give a great entertainment to your thoughts: so by looking upon such a Chronological Abridgment, you may go away from the narrow confinements of your own time, and extend your self into all Ages.
But as, to help ones memory in the knowledge of places, we must keep in our minds certain chief Towns and Cities, round which we are to place all the rest, according to their several distances; so in the order of Ages we must remember certain Times Memorable for some great event and action, to which we are to bring all the other.
This we call an Epocha, from a Greek word that signifies to pause upon, because we stay our selves there to consider, as at a place of rest, whatsoever hath happen∣ed both before and since, and by that means do avoid the Anachronisms, that is to say, that sort of Error which makes the confusion of time.

We must first fix but upon a small number of Epo∣cha's, such as, in the times of antient History, are A∣dam, or the Creation; Noah, or the Deluge; the cal∣ling of Abraham, or the beginning of God's Alliance with Man; Moses, or the written Laws; the taking of Troy; Solomon, or the building of the Temple; Romulus, or the founding of Rome; Cyrus, or the People of God delivered from the Captivity Baby∣lon; Scipio, or Carthage overcome; the nativity of our blessed Saviour; Constantine, or the peace of the Church; Charlemaine, or the Establishment of the new Empire.
I make this Establishment of the new Empire under Charlemaine, as the end of the antient History, be∣cause it is there that you will find the antient Roman Empire wholly to conclude and end. And therefore I stay and fix you at so considerable a point of the Ʋniversal History. The continuance shall be presen∣ted to you in a Second Part, which I design shall bring you to the Age, which the Immortal actions of your Father make illustrious, and to which, the ardour you show of following so great an Example, makes us, yet to hope a new lustre may be added.
The Design of this first Discourse is divided into Three Parts.
After this general Explication of the design of this Work, I find there are three things necessary for me to do, to draw all the profit I hope for from it.

First of all, I must attend you thro' all the Epocha's which I have laid down, and if you please to observe with me in this Brevity the principal Events which I shall fix to every one of them, I shall habituate your mind to put these Events in their place, without any other re∣gard than to the order of Time. But as my main de∣sign is to make you observe in this efflux of time, that of Religion, and that of great Empires: After I have shewed you, according to the course of years, how these things have gone on together, I shall particularly be∣take my self with some necessary reflections, to consider first of those which give us to understand the perpe∣tual duration of Religion, and then come to the other which discover to us the causes of the great Changes and Revolutions which have happened in Empires.
After this is done, you will find that what part of antient History soever you read, all will turn to pro∣fit and advantage. There will not any action or mat∣ter pass you, but you will perceive the effects of it. You will admire the Consequences of the Councils of God in the Affairs of Religion: You will also see the chain of humane Affairs, and by that will know with how much of reflection and prudent foresight they ought to be governed.
