


THis Booke hath the fate which the
modesty of Antiquity did assigne
to their Bookes, which is, not to
be extant till the Death of the
Authr, declining thereby the
pesumption of an assumed and a
sawcy Immortality, and owing this new life, which
by their remaining labours they received, to the Be∣nefit
and Commendation of Posterity. These Poems
are secure in themselves, and neither fear the tongue
of the Detractor, nor desire the praise of the Encomi∣astick,
their one worth can best speak their own merit,
but this it shall be lawfull for me to insert, that in
one Book and of so small a bulke you shall seldome see
more contined,
— He doth swell
Not with th'how much he writeth, but th'how well.
You shall find in this System the Idea of Poetry at
large, and in one garland all the flowers on the Hill of
Parnasus, or on the banks of Helicon.
The high, the fluent, and the pathetick discourses
of his lovers, and the transformation of them after

their death into precious stones, into Birds, into Flow∣ers,
or into Monuments of Marble, you shall finde
hath allusion to Ovids Metamorphosis, which in
Ovids own iudgement was the best piece that ever he
composed, and for which with most confidence, he doth
seem to challenge to himself the deserved honour of a
perpetuall Fame.
The strength of his fancy, and the shadowing of it
in words he taketh from Mr. Marlow in his Hero
and Leander, whose mighty lines Mr. Benjamin
Iohnson (a man sensible enough of his own abilities)
was often heard to say, that they were Examples fitter
for admiration than for parallel, you shall find our Au∣thor
every where in this imitation. This the one.
Some say fair Cupid unto her inclin'd,
Mourn'd as he went, and thinking on her pin'd.
And in another place,
And as she went, casting her eyes aside,
Many admiring at her beauty dy'd.
This the other,
And mighty Princes of her love deny'd,
Pin'd as they went, & thinking on her dy'd.
You shall finde also how studious he is to follow him in
those many quick and short sentences at the close of his
fanc, with which he every where doth adorn his wri∣tings.
The weaving of one story into another and the sig∣nificant
flourish that doth attend it is the peculiar
Grace of Sir Philip Sidney, whom our Author doth
so happily imitate, as if he were one of the same Inteli∣gences

that moved in that incomparable Compasse.
His making the end of one Verse to be the frequent
beginning of the other (besides the Art of the Trope)
was the labour and delight of Mr. Edmund Spe∣cer,
whom Sir Walt Raleigh and S. Kee Dig∣by
were used to call the English Virgill, and indeed
Virgill himself did often use it, and in my opinion
with a greater grace, making the last word only of his
Verso to be the beginning of the Verse following, as
— Sequitur pulcherrimus Astur
Astur equo sidens, & vesioloribus armis.
Virgill hath nothing more usuall than this gracefull
way of repetition, as those who are most conversant
with him, can readily witnesse with me. Our Authors
making use of one and the same Verse in several places
is also taken from Virgill, as you shall often find in his
Georgicks, which he would never have let passe (being
full twelve years in the compleating of that work) if
he had conceived it would have bin looked upon as an
imperfection either of two much Haste or Sloth, and
this also is often to be found in Homer.
You behold now how many, and what great Exam∣ples
our Author hath propounded to himself to imitate,
if it be obiected, that it is a disparagement to imitate
any, be they never so excelent (according to that of Ho∣race)
O imitatorum stultum pecus; It is no ab∣surdity
to make answer, that Horace wrote that in a
criticall hour, when he abounded with a hypercrytical
sense for if you please to look upon the Fragments of
those Greek Poets, which in many books are inserted

at the end of Pindar, you shall undoubtedly find that
Horace hath translated as much of them as are now
extant word for word, and put them into the first book
of his Odes, which is very easie in this place to be re∣presented,
but that it is much beyond our room, and
a little besides our subiect.
But more fully to satisfie the obiection, it may be an∣swered,
that in this Horace had no relation at all to
the words or fancy of the Imitator, but to these new
numbers, and measures, which he first taught the Ro∣man
Muse to tread, and this makes him so much to
magnifie himself.
Libera per vacuum posui vestigia princeps.
The works of Virgill are nothing else but mere Imi∣tations
in his Eclogues he followeth Theocritus,
in his Aeaeids, Homer, in his Georgicks he imi∣tateth
Hesiod, which he conceiveth to be so far from
his preiudice, that he esteemeth it his glory.
Ascraeum{que}Virg. Georg. lib. 3. cano Romana per oppida
carmen.
And yet because the same subiect was not treated on be∣fore
by any Latine Poet, you may observe how confi∣dent
he is of himself:
—Iuvat ire viam quâ nulla priorum
Castaliam molli deducitur orbita clivo.Lib. Georg 2.
These praelibations may serve not only to discharge our
Author, but to raise him above those accusations which
peradventure some distemper'd Criticks might have
charged him with. The other part of his invention is
intirely his own, smooth yet smart, and as clear as it

is active! Now when all this shall be done at nineteen
years of age, and out of a desire onely to please you,
what entertainment should you give unto it? with what
flowers should you crown his memory, who brought so
many flowers to crown your delight? Take them, and
peruse them, his leaves invite every hand to turn
them over; The young men may read them for their
Information, and with some sympathy of affection;
The old men for their Recreation, The Ladies may
learn them by heart, and repeat them to one another,
for this the Muses, upon their credit, have given me
in charge to impart unto them, That whatsoever they
shall lay forth on his praises (the Book readover)
they will finde it paid back to them in the rec∣koning.

