



Sad Sir,
BEing a stranger to your person, I shall bee secured (I presume) from prejudice, and freed from the worlds censure, whilst it cannot be imagined, or said without an high guilt of malice, that, in compiling this work (which I did too at others re∣quests) I aimed at any other interest, or had any design, but onely the glory of God in the manifestation of his mercy and justice.
I confesse, Sir, I had a little acquaintance with your mourn∣ing penne in a most Christian and Fatherlike letter to your sor∣rowing condemned Son, Dated Aug. 20. wherein you acted the part of a tender Father, and more, of a Divine, as appears by your large and pious exhortations, advising him not to despair of mercy and forgivenesse; For that mans sinne cannot be so great but God's mercy is greater, and that Hell is only full of impenitent souls, pressing him to beware of self-deceiving, to deal plainly and clearly with his God by judging and con∣demning himself for his matchlesse sin, and not to doubt, but upon his humble and hearty sorrow for it, he should find that made good to his soul which the Theef upon the Crosse
 heard from the sweet lips of our Lord Jesus, This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. Besides this to him, I had the sight of two Letters more, by you written to the honored, Sir Humphrey Tufton, Knight and Baronet, Sheriffe, &c. one dated August 15. the other 16. "Wherein you did most humbly beg and intreat, (it is your own phrase) that he would be pleased to respite the execution for a short time, upon this ground, (which was the chiefest cause of your earnest request) that it might conduce much to the good of your Son's poor soul: And of this you were assured by a few lines from me, the night before he should have suffered, and so fallen into the bosome of Aeternity, which that it might be of joy and everlasting happinesse, was the sub∣ject of your prayers and pen, which joyned issue with our Mi∣nisteriall actings and assistances, of which he had (by Gods blessing) a plentifull measure.
You said well in your Letter to him, that it was not all the prayers, and tears, and cries of all the godly Ministers a∣bout him, nor the earnest beggings of your selfe his Father, nor the Churches publick intercessions, which could work his conversion, and obtain a pardon for him, unlesse his heart went along with ours, and combined with our holy endea∣vours; unlesse he begg'd it of God himselfe with earnest sup∣plications, you said truely, that all would be in vain. The hottest Sun cannot make a dead Tree live; nor the strongest blowing kindle fire in a dead cole: if there be no sap in the root, the Sun doth but dry, and not enliven the Tree; and if no heat of fire lies under the Ashes, all the blowings will never make it to burn. (These are your own words.) Then bespea∣king your Son, you adde this; I hope thou hast some sparks of grace in Thee, though deeply buried under a world of rub∣bish: and I hope all those gody bellowes (you mean the breath of the Ministers) will blow that away, and make thy fire of true repentance, and godly sorrow burn clear, and make thee able truly to say with the prodigall, Father I have sinned a∣gainst Heaven, and against Thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy Son: Then he will embrace thee in the armes of his mercy, he will feast thee in his heavenly mansions, and say
 unto thee, Thou wert lost but now art found, thou wast dead to sin, but now thou art alive in Christ, &c. Oh happy sad∣nesse, if it produce this joy! Oh happy death if it procure thee this blessed life! Happy change, to leave a sinfull world, and a sea of misery, to go to an haven of blisse, &c. These are the breathings of your Soul; and as you presaged and wished; there we hope your converted Son is now beholding the glorious face of his Lord Jesus. Now Sir, Who but the malitious (who look with a squint eye upon all good intents and actions) will not say, that you had in you towards your provoking son, the same bowells that David had in him towards his Absalom? Who can imagine that he can be guilty of discouraging severity to his child, to whom he used too much cockering indulgence in his life, and of whom he was so charitably carefull and for∣giving before his death. I confesse that the sweetest Wines turn to the sharpest vinegar, and the best love, abused into hatred, and the worst displeasure. An act of disobedience, and contempt of command, from one whom we have admitted into a deep affection, is ever entertain'd with greater dislike, repaid with frownes, neglect, and slighting. Thus a command from you his Father, in reference to his elder Brother, being not obeyed, forced you to a paternall severitie, to threats, &c. which were not a sufficient ground to provoke him to that bloody act, un∣lesse a melancholy passion (h being deeply in love with a fair Gentlewrman) together with a Diabolicall suggestion, had (Gods grace for a time deserting him) possessed his heart, and carried on his hand to attempt and act so horrid a sin.
Sir, You do like a Christian in the close of your Letter to him, in charging your selfe with a fault, for which it may be, God brought on you this heavy judgment: It was old Elie's sin, your too much softnesse and gentlenesse: Do so no more my Son, was Eli's, 1 Sam. 2.14. the same your oft, and soft expression (as you attest) to him: You say, You ought to have gone higher, and I believe you did when you went to your heavenly Father by prayer, for amending what was amisse in him; but to go higher in passion, might have made you fallen lower in his, and your friends estem: And it is a piece of your Sonnes glory, that
 in all his sufferings, restraints, and high provocations from one of your unworthy servants, he never discovered any passion or impatience, but meekly, with a composed countenance, used to pray for him, and the rest of his barbarous revilers, and say, God forgive them.
A moderate correction and reproofe, carried on with mode∣ration, becomes the persons of Masters to their Servants, Tutors to their Pupills, and Parents to their children. Too much se∣verity, and too much remissenesse from them, hath destroyed many: Some hearts like clay, are hardened by the Sun-shine of favours and gentlenesse: To say with that old Eli, Why do ye so? to say this (and no more) with a gentle voyce, when the sin deserves the thunder of a bold and Majestick reprehension, or more; such an easie reproof doth encourage wickednesse, and makes it measure it selfe by that sleight censure, and thinks it selfe light, because it finds no greater weight from its reprover. As it is with ill humors, that a weak Dose doth but stirre and anger them, and not bring them off: so it fareth with sins acted by inferiors, some whereof being of a greater magnitude, and deeper stain, get growth and encrease by remissenesse. To trouble you no more with a farther glosse upon your confession, I shall only adde this as a caution to all parents: They that are indulgent, are cruell to themselves and their posteritie: Had you been more severe, you might have had two Sons living to be the prop of your family, and lesse sorrow, which is augmented, by your reflecting on your indulgency and loving care of them, which by them was (as it seemes) abused, and not improved to that height of pietie, as was by you, their Father, intended. I hope this complicate sin in you and them hath met with a grati∣ous pardon from the God of mercy, your Father, which is in heaven, who will in his good time drie up the stream of your sorrow, which now runs full, so that I conceive it vaine to oppose counsell, or to go about to stop that torrent, which will runne over the banks of nature, and never cease, till it be bounded with grace and comfort from the God of patience. I confesse such losses (the losse of Children) when they come single afflict us, but when double, astonish and overwhelm our
 Spirits even to impatience. A Wife is a mans self divided, Chil∣dren himself multiplied, and at one blow to loose all, is enough to batter the greatest courage, and it is a mercy if that man bee not with immoderate grief distracted.
But good sir remember that saying of that brave Spartane La∣dy, who hearing of the death of her two Sons in one day, one∣ly replyed thus with an undaunted courage (though in another language) peperimortales; What newes is it for those that carry death in their names and natures to die? no more hath it befallen them then was expected: But so was not your Sons death, it was sodain and unexpected, and as providence or foresight abates grief, and discountenances a crosse, so now that you could not foresee this bloody storm, by so much must your grief be aug∣mented: I professe I mourn with you in secret, and at this hour tears are ready to mingle with mine Ink, and could I mitigate your sorrow by bearing a part with you, I wish my burden might be your ease; but let me tell you, that now is the tryal of your spirit and Christianity, you are now in the lists, set upon by a Lion and a Bear, two of Gods fierce afflictions, one Sonne murthered, another executed, notwithstanding this, shew your fortitude and patience; and hereby approve to us in this great difficultie and heavy strait, that you have all this while been a Christian in earnest. Resigne up your self and all that you have to God, to be disposed by him the doner according to his good will and pleasure, say with those humble ones to Saint Paul, the will of the Lord be done, Acts 21.14. And be ready to suffer patiently more for him, who hath done and suffered so much for your salvation: Our Lord Christ for the glory that was set before him, endured the Crosse, and despised the shame, Heb. 12.2. This text your Son had in his mouth a little before his death, and what I then said to him, I repeat to you, so long as glory may redound to God by his shameful death upon a Gibbet, do you take comfort and glory in it. Resolve hence-forward to act what the noble Matron in St. Hierom once said, and did, when she had at one time the corps of her dead husband, and the bodies of her two onely Sons slain in the field exposed to her view, onely replyed thus with weeping eies, by this I
 shall learne to take off my heart from the world, and serve my God with more attention and greater devotion, being more fre∣quent n praier and reading of his holy word. Thus did she, and thus if you do, putting into practice that counsell which Da∣niel gave to the King of Babylon, Dan. 4.24. Then will God when he sees it fit (and the times being in his hands, his sea∣sons are best) Then will God turn the darknesse of your sor∣row into brightnesse of joy, your sadnesse into comfort, he will do by you as he did by Job, He will blesse your latter end more then your beginning, and in the end of your daies you shall close up your eies with full assurance of enjoying the soul-ravishing presence, and beholding the saving countenance of Christ in Heaven. Where when you shal see your Son (with greater sinners then he that repented) crown'd with immortality and advan∣ced to glory, you shall have a just cause to say and sing with them in the Revelation, Chap. 15.3. Great and marvellous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy waies thou King of Saints. Chap. 7.12. Blessing, and glory, and wisdome, and thanksgiving, and honour, and power and might be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen. To this God Almighty the God of Consolation, who is able to comfort and to keep you from falling, and present you faultlesse before the presence of his glory with ex∣ceeding joy, I commend your sad soul, and rest

From my Brothers house in Teston,
24. Aug. 1655.

