



SIR,
THat these Leaves have loitered so long, is not their fault, but their fate: come∣ing through the fire to you, where they had like to have met with their
Ʋrn, while they were pre∣paring this account of your Sister's Funerals. The best on't is her fame might have spared them, being as little increased by them, as Infinity is capa∣ble of addition. Had they been all lost, it could have been no detriment to that Name, which rescues it self, carries its Balme with it, and is its own preservative.
And now, SIR, these Escapes of Ruine apply to you, to secure them a life against all future
hazards, and contingen∣cies. It is their glory they may entitle them∣selves to a Patron, who had the courage to under∣take the Patronage of his Countrey, his Orphan Countrey, and that in the most desperate dayes of thriving Rebellion. They have forgot themselves, that remember not with passion that Loyal attempt of yours, with that excel∣lent person, the now Lord De-la-Meere, for our re∣demption and disinslave∣ment; to whom the
whole Kingdom still owe their acknowledgement, as possibly they might have done their recovery, had not God reserved our De∣liverance to be the work of his own immediate hand, in that meek and peaceful method, which ravisheth our thoughts to this very day. It was you, whom Honour commanded as far then, as the Oath did the Roman Souldiers of old,—Pugnabo pro sacris & cum aliis, & solus.
Judg. 5.18. You then (as sometimes Zebulon and Nephtali)
jeoparded your lives un∣to death in the high pla∣ces of the Field. I should not be just to your merit, if I should speak of you at a lower rate, than that trium∣phant Prophetesse,
v. 9. My heart is to the Princes of Israel, that offered themselves freely. My heart, and many hearts more, were then, and are still towards you, and towards God for you, in Prayers then, now in Praises. And I may say, (but let
me first begge leave of your modesty to say so) That as Saint Augustine seemed to be borne an Antidote to his poyson∣ous Contemporary Pela∣gius: So were you, to your pestilent Countrey∣man
Bradshaw.—whom no Pen can write without blot∣ting, no tongue menti∣on without spitting; The Margin take his Name, and the mischief his Memory; whilst your Name is written in Hea∣ven, and still repeats the flourishing Ages it hath
past on Earth in an in∣terminate succession, till the last Flames shall re∣duce the World. And may the Amen himself make good the Votes of,
SIR, 
