


YOƲR Highness sees the twelve Epocha's which I have followed in this Abridgment: I have chained to each of them the principal matters that are dependent thereon. You may now without any great difficulty dispose of, ac∣cording to the order of Time, the great ac∣cidents of the Antient History, and range them (as I may so speak) each under its proper Standard.
I have not in this Abstract forgot that celebrated distinction which the Chronolo∣gists make of the continuance of the World in 7. Ages. The beginning of every one of them serves us for an Epocha: If I have mixt any others with them, it is that so things may be more distinct, and that the order of time may be opened to You with less confusion.
When I speak to You of the order of Time, I do not pretend, My Lord, that You should scrupulously charge Your memo∣ry with all the dates; much less that You
 should concern Your self with all the nice disputes of the Chronologists, where most an end they differ but in a very few years. There is no question but that this conten∣tious Chronology which scrupulously is ta∣ken up about those small matters hath its use; but that is not Your object, and is of very little service to enlighten the mind of a great Prince. I would not be too re∣fined upon this discussion of Time, but in the calculations I have already made, I have still followed that which has appeared to me the most probable, without troubling my self to be Guarranty for it.
In the supputation of years which is made since the time of the Creation down to Abraham, we had best join with the LXX. which makes the World older, whereas the Hebrew makes it younger by many Ages: Although the Authority of the Original Hebrew seems as if it ought to carry it, yet it is a thing so indifferent in it self, that the Church, which hath with St. Jerom, followed the supputation of the Hebrew in our Vulgar Translation, hath left that of the LXX. in its Martyrology. In effect, what matter is it for History either to diminish, or to multiply void Age, where also there is nothing to give an ac∣count of? Is it not enough that the times, where the dates are important, have their
 fixed Characters, and the distribution of them be supported on certain foundations? And tho' even in those times there should be a dispute about some years, it should scarce ever make us perplexed and uneasie. As for instance, if we should put it some years sooner or later when Rome was founded, or our blessed Saviour born, You must own that such a diversity makes nothing to the course of Histories, nor to the accomplishing of the Councils of God. You must be careful to shun the Anachro∣nisms which ruffle and embroyl the order of Affairs, and leave the others to the dis∣putes of the Learned.
I will not further oppress Your memory with the account of the Olympiads, tho' the Grecians, who make use of that, render them very necessary for the fixing of Times. It is fit You should know it, that You may, when there is occasion, have recourse to it: But it will be sufficient to keep to the dates which I propose to You, as being the mos simple, and the most followed, which are those of the World to Rome, those from Rome to Jesus Christ, and those from Jesus Christ to all succeeding Genera∣tions.
But the true design of this Abridgment is not to explain to You the order of Time, tho' it be absolutely necessary in the read∣ing
 of all Histories, and in shewing how they relate to one another. I have told You, My Lord, That my principal Object is to make you consider in the order of time, the course of the people of God, and that of great Empires.
These two things roul together in this great Movement of Ages, where they have, as I may say, one and the same course. But it is needful, to understand them truly, to detach them sometimes one from the other, and to consider whatsoever hath relation to each of them.
