







Right Honorable,
MAY it please your honours, to give me leave to become your humble remem∣brancer; That when Joshua, that religi∣ous, wise, faithfull, and valiant Cap∣taine, Generall of all the Armies of Is∣rael, had conquered one & thirty Kings, and by Gods assistance, setled the Lords people in the promised land, to witnesse his care of piety, as well as of peace, He calleth for all Israel, for their Elders, their Heads, their Judges, and for their Officers, and mindeth them of the mighty works the Lord had done for them, and pressed them upon that account, to stir up their af∣fections,
to love the Lord their God, and to feare him and serve him in truth and sincerity; yea, to put away their false gods, and false worship from amongst them. And we read likewise of faithfull Samuel, that hee jud∣ged Israel all the daies of his life, and hee went from yeare to yeare in Circuit, to Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh, and he judged Israel in all those places, and his returne was to Ramah, for there was his house, and there he judged Israel, and there he built an Altar unto the Lord Thus here you see, there was both Justice and Piety in this holy man of God, and Israel was blessed in such a Judge. We cannot but acknowledge, that the Lord hath done great things in these Nations, and wee doe enjoy peace and plenty, and many mercies, which we have not prized nor improved as we ought to the best advantage, for Gods glory, and our own good. Un∣der his Highnesse protection, and the present Govern∣ment, through the grace of God, every man may sit quietly under his own vine and fig-tree, without feare of plundering, a happiness which in few yeares past we did not enjoy; Yea, we have good Lawes, and ho∣nourable religious Judges and Magistrates, to see Ju∣stice executed, and right done between man and man; and wee enjoy our comfortable Liberty of preaching and hearing the Gospell of Christ; Yet can we not say, there is no complaining, nor cause of complaint in our streets. The Church and people of God have met with enemies in all ages:
Cant. 2.2. As is the Lillie amongst the thorns, so is my beloved among the daughters, and as it was of old, so it is in these our daies; the Church and people of God, especially Gods faithfull Ministers, suffer persecu∣tion, by two sorts of people. The first, prophane Ran∣ters, Atheisticall men, Drunkards, Gamesters, and igno∣rant blind soules, such as neglect publike Ordinances in these times of liberty, and have no right principle of grace and goodness in them: These make it a delight to exercise their malice against the Ministers of Christ: These would rob and spoile them to the uttermost, if it
were in their power: And this we can witness we have found true by troublesome experience. Againe, there is another sort of people, which travell up and downe the Nation, under the name of Quakers, as the Jesuits and seminary Priests have used to doe secretly; so these now openly disswading and seducing our peo∣ple all they can, from commitig to our Churches, or meeting houses, calling our Churches, Idols Temples; All our services to God in praier, preaching of the word, and other Christian exercises, ordinary, and ex∣traordinary; when wee seeke the face of God for the peace and welfare of the Nation, for the prosperity of our Navie and Armies, both by sea and land, or our prai∣sing God for his mercies we do enjoy. All these (say the Quakers) are but Idol-worship,
In a Quakers book called a Discovery of a threefold state of Antichrist by Samuel Bal∣livant &c. and beastly servi∣ces; and all the faithfull and godlie Ministers of Christ, without exception, are thieves; our maintenance by Tithes, Antichristian, and unlawfull: Yea they call us Conjurers, Antichrists, witches, devils, liars, a viperous and serpentine generation, blasphemers, scarlet coloured beasts, Babylons Merchants, whited wals, painted Se∣pulchres; and whatsoever the true Prophets of God, or Christ our Saviour did justly call the false Prophets, wicked priests, and Scribes, and Pharisees, those names do these rayling and reviling Quakers give to the god∣ly, painfull, learned and faithfull Ministers of Christ in the Nation, disswading our people from hearing us, or giving heed to any thing we preach, disturbing us in our publike ministrie. And what can we call this but a per∣secution, like that of those wicked men against the good Prophet Jeremie; Come say they, and let us smie him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any of his words? Jer. 18.18. And what is persecution, if this be not? Yea such is the malice of these Jesuited Quaking adversaries against the ministers of Christ, that we have just cause to feare, they had some designe before this day, to have brought to pass bloody projects to our ruine, had not God our most high protector, and his
Highness under God, been provident to prevent those common mutinies, and insurrections, which in all ap∣pearance, had been plotted against this Nation, and the good people thereof, and then we doubt not but our Quaking, and our prophane atheisticall adversaries, like Herod and Pontius Pilate against Christ, would both have agreed against us to our destruction, if the Lord our good God should not preserve us. What constructi∣on else can wee make of those bitter threatnings, not only in words and to our faces (one of the Quakers tel∣ling me,
Thus I was threatned by E. S. a Quaker since dead. that I was plundered formerly by the Caval∣liers, but it should not be long, but my house should be pulled downe, and I thrust out of doors.) But to the same effect also in their written papers,
A description of the true and false Temple, page 45. Nayler in his false relation. and printed pamphlets: Howle ye Priests (say some of them) the Lord is comming to beat up your quarters by his sword and fire, and great shall be the slaine of the Lord. And God is risen to cut you off (saith James Nayler himself.) And the former concludes, alas, alas poor Priests, your downfall is near at hand, subscribed, published by Tho∣mas Aldam, Benjamin Nicolson, and John Harwood. And another of them, the Lord is comming to beat up your quarters, all ye proud Priests, and downe with this deceiver, tith-monger and robber, and down with this Idols Temple, as if they would stir up the people to pull down our Churches, and to destroy all the faith∣full Ministers of the Gospell in the Nation, on a sudden; and this subscribed as an Oracle from heaven, written from the Spirit of the Lord. I let pass divers others; But I humbly conceive in these Alarums, it is fit the Ministers of Christ should be awakened, as to be faith∣full in their places, and to walke believingly, holily, and humbly with God, so to seek timely for protection and safety in the Lord, and to whom under God, should we seek, but to that high power and authority, and to those honourable Judges and Magistrates, whom the Lord in his most wise providence, hath raised up, and set over us, for the punishment of evill doers, and for the praise
of them that doe well; and we acknowledge Gods goodnesse, that he hath moved the heart of his High∣nesse,
His Highnesse Declaration, November 21. 1655. to take notice of the abuse of that Liberty of Con∣science, as by others, so by these our adversaries, who make too bold, thereby to disturbe and persecute Gods faithfull Ministers; yea under pretence of honouring God, to dishonour and contemne the honourable Jud∣ges and Magistrates in the land, keeping on their hats, when they are called to answer before them, and refu∣sing to give any respect or outward shew of reverence to them: Yea, such they are, as in their blind zeale, to an imaginary reformation, and conceited or pretended obedience to Christ,
Richard Farn∣worth, a Qua∣ker, in a pam∣phlet of his, &c. would perswade people to cast away, not only the good and wholsome lawes, but all our learned Lawyers (as well as Divines) be they never so pious, honest and faithfull (of which blessed be God we have many in the land) yet these must be banished also, as unfit (say they) for any Christians to make use of; and as if all going to law (though upon never so just grounds) were unlawfull for any that professeth Chri∣stianity, without which, and the assistance of our ho∣nourable Judges, and good Magistrates, what lawlesse, wicked lives would a multitude lead? And we that are the faithfull ministers of Jesus Christ, have cause fur∣ther to acknowledge Gods goodnesse, in stirring up his Highnesse (under God) our supreme Protector, with his honourable Councill,
His Highnesse proclamation, Feb. 15. 1654. to send forth his late Proclama∣tion, against such prophane Ranters and Quakers, to prohibite the disturbance of us Ministers and other Christians in our solemn assemblies. Since which Pro∣clamation (blessed be God) wee have had much more quietness in our exercises of religion, and congregati∣ons, then formerly we had: But yet we are not without malicious enemies, prophane persons, as ill as Quakers; And therefore to whom under God, and his Highness under him, should we apply our selves, but to you my honourable Lords, and to all other the honourable. Jud∣ges Magistrates and Officers, who are appointed for the
preservation of the peace and welfare of the Nation; And especially I am bold to apply my selfe to you my honoured Lords, in more particular, whose great Abili∣ties, Wisedome, Justice, Goodness, and Faithfulness, which I have observed in a serious examination of such causes, which in your Circuits (and in particular, in se∣verall Assies at Darby) have come before your ho∣nours for tryall; your judicious discerning between things that differ, between right and wrong, between a petty frivolous action, brought by a malicious adver∣sary, brought only to vex a poor man; your discounte∣nancing of malice, and that abuse of the good Lawes; your just sentences given to the honour of God, the good lawes of the land, and to the comfort of poore men oppressed. These things have encouraged me to dedicate this my defence of the Scriptures, & vindica∣tion of the honour of Magistrates, Ministers, and others according to their place & dignities. Unto your honors, and all that have power and authority in the execution of Justice, and preservation of piety, and the peace of this Common-wealth, humbly supplicating the conti∣nuance as of his Highness, so under him, of all your pro∣tections, and favourable aspects upon, and unto all Gods faithfull Ministers, to maintaine them in that which is their just rights, against their malicious adversaries; yea to defend and maintaine the honour of magistracy,
Rom. 13.1. as an Ordinance of God, for the comfort and safety of his people, and to defend Christ, and the truth of the Go∣spell of Jesus; to defend the honour and glory of the Lord (the most high Protector of his Church) against all open prophaness, and odious heresies, and abomina∣ble blasphemies whatsoever, that it may appeare, we are a people taught by Christ, as the truth is in Jesus, and that the Lord of Hosts may appeare for us as our Protector to the end, even till Shilo come againe. Most humbly praying in my daily addresses to the throne of grace, not only for my selfe, but for all my reverend bre∣thren, the godly, faithfull ministers of the Gospell of
Christ, that the Lord will more and more fill our hearts with his spirit of grace, wisedome, holiness and zeale, that we may in a right way of holiness,
Iude 3. meekness and truth, contend for the faith that was once delivered to the Saints, that our own lives may be as becoms the Go∣spel of peace, that we may win others to walk in peace and holiness, and by our own good conversation,
1 Pet. 2.15. put to silence the scandals of malicious, & the ignorance of foolish men, that God wil give repentance, & free par∣don in Christ to all our Adversaries, who complain of us as contentious; because (though after long sufferings) we seeke in a just and lawfull way to recover our due and just Rights, which they unjustly detaine from us; desiring if it be the will of God, that they may obtaine salvation in the Lord Jesus, and be delivered from wrath to come and that one day they may enjoy a hap∣py and peaceable communion with us in glory, and to conclude, daily powring out my soule to God, That the Lord, the great Protector of Sion, will be pleased to preserve his Highness and Honourable Councell, and you my Honourable Lords, and the rest of the Honoura∣ble Judges, Justices, Magistrates, and other Worthies, who are Actors for Piety and Peace, to Gods glory, and the benefit of these Nations, together with this whole Common wealth, in Truth, Unity and Peace, long to continue.

London, Feb. 26. 1655.
