



May it please your Majesty,
I most humbly presume to lay at your Feet, this my true and loyal Infor∣mation of the Earl of Tyrones Trea∣sons against your Sacred Person. Some there are who did ill in transgressing a∣gainst your Majesty, but did well in re∣penting and detecting their own and the foul Crimes of others. As to the latter of these in being a Discoverer, I account my self happy: as to the former, doubly

that Providence gave me the means to discover without ever being disloyal. What I was, and what my Progenitors always were, I am, a true and faithful Subject to my Prince. Nor was it any other motive then my Allegiance and disdain of treacherous propositions that urg'd me to a speedy Discovery. From whence I hope I shall not offend your Majesty, if I claim that advantage to my self of being the first that openly appear∣ed in this detection in Ireland, the first that cut the Knot for others to unravel the mistery of this deep Design. And I also hope the rude dress of my Informa∣tion will shew how void it is of subtlety or contrivance. I must confess, I did not think to meet within your Majesties Do∣minions with so severe and cruel usage, for doing my Duty to my Soveraign. But so severe it was, that had I been the Guilty person, I could not have met with more, while the grand Criminal tri∣umph'd over me in those Calamities with which his power had almost over∣whelmed me. And in this Condition such was the Terror that lay upon our

Friends, that they of equal Rank durst not afford me the Comfort of their kind Visits, nor they of superior quality ap∣pear to give me any Countenance. How∣ever, having now made my appeal to the Fountain of Justice, Your Royal self, I make no question, but the great preser∣ver of Kings, will for your sake main∣tain the Innocency of my Proceedings, as being only such as tended to the pre∣servation of your Majesty, and the de∣tection of your secret Enemies, according to the Dictates of my Religion and alle∣giance. Not desiring longer to live, then while I may be able to approve my self,
May it please your Majesty,

