


My Lord,
SPrings tend not more naturally to the Ocean, than this

Treatise to your Lord∣ship, The rise and Ori∣ginal of it.
What I have collected, the faults excepted, hath been much out of your own Observations, writ in a Stile, your Lord∣ship must pardon, that it may live.
When I first visited your Spaw, I approacht its Avenues with some prejudice, being not con∣vinc't of the Efficacy of

Waters (though I have observed some, and read of more) in comparison of a well order'd Method in Physick, which I still favour: Though in pertinacious obstructions, and diseases, that must be long hewing down, na∣tive to those Parts through which the wa∣ters may pass, incline much to their use, especi∣ally if Patients (nause∣ating variety of Medi∣cines)

can comply with These, as more natural and obvious to their Con∣stitutions.
And here by the way, I cannot approve of such fictitious waters, as some by a pretended skill, in opposition to natural Spaws, say they can apt to this or that distemper. No, I am not convinct that Art (though in some great Masters of it, it may arise to a wonderful

Excellency) can yet ever so deliciously compose me∣dicines as to equal the re∣fin'd Spirits, which God and Nature hath with so much Curiosity mixt in the Bowels of the Earth.
A truth Fallopius seems to deny, hac ratione du∣ctus, quod ob eorum so∣liditatem (speaking of concrete Minerals) nihil ab iis abradi possit; which

Julius Caesar Claudinus in his ingressu ad infir∣mos (p. 373.) clearly confutes, aswell from their first as their second quali∣ties; with whom our Learned Jorden in his discourse of Baths, and mineral waters (p. 63.) agrees, that before Mi∣nerals have their full Consistence, whilst they are in solutis principiis, as earth, juice, or vapours (afterwards indeed they

will need some Medium, or Corrosive to unite them with the water) they may be communicated with water, non qua Talia sunt (to inforce Claudi∣us his words) secundum suam substantiam, sed per soluta sua Principia, terras (scil.) succos & vapores.
And hence I account the waters of Israel bet∣ter than Abanah and

Pharpar Rivers of Da∣mascus; God having on Those bestowed a Bles∣sing, He denied these, his hand having more im∣mediately in those divine∣ly temper'd, what Art in these can but grosly imi∣tate.
And▪ yet I do not deny that from the Family of Minerals, many powerful and Noble medicines may, and are daily by

Art fram'd to eradicate distempers; in which par∣ticular none certainly was ever happier than our Learned Willis, the Atlas and strength of Physical improvements, which being mixt with common water, as a Ve∣hicle to carry them off, may effect good Cures, so Alcoholiz'd; But not with like facility, and so little Disgust as your Lordships and o∣ther

Spaws proe: The Abuse of which have many times pro∣phan'd their use: So that they, who would effectually drink of Spaws, must also con∣sult judicially about the manner, there being (as the Lord Verulam ex∣cellently observes) many Medicines which by themselves would do no Cures, but being or∣derly applyed produce

great ones, Nat. Hist. p. 16.
And here I would not be mistook, as if by a ju∣dicial consulting of the manner of drinking these Spaws I insinuate such a necessity of advising alwaies with Physicians, as no Dose could effe∣ctually be took without them: No, that were to supply the defect of practice by the Commen∣dation

of the Spaw, to foment Distempers, and then allay them: An Artifice too mean, and dis-ingenuous, however so specious and practica∣ble.
I know the Poor (for whose Relief these Spaws seem providenti∣ally to be found) may re∣sort hither beneficially on small preparations, ha∣ving robust bodies, na∣tures

which with a little help, can work out po∣tent Diseases; And the Rich (coming advised by their Physicians) may likewise receive infinite good, according to the qualifications prefac't) unless extraordinary sym∣ptoms arise, which in some measure too, they may be prepar'd for; That water being weak, and poorly impregnate, if not infici∣ously, which ever and a∣non

requires medicines to actuate its vertues, or to remove bad effects.
I know, Medicinal Springs were never more pretended to than of late; Nor shall I deny such their content, Qui ip∣sos inflatis buccis orbi commendant.
That which I have more to add, as to your Lordships Spaw, is only,

that I believe Time, the Mother of Experience will commend it to Poste∣rity, especially whilst your Charity Accommodates the Poor, as your Exam∣ple animates others.
I mention not Time, as if the experience of 20 years in the general, as well as four years particular ob∣servation, were not suffici∣ent to evidence the Vir∣tues of your Lordships

Spaw; But that a great∣er Concourse to it may (without the nicety of a∣ny) set a larger Seal on its power and energy.
More might be insisted on, but I fear I have tres∣past too long on your Lordships Patience, a virtue I would not further wound.
Long may you Live, the Glory of your Fa∣mily!

Your Countrys Preservation! and your Soveraigns Repose, and Confidence! That at length, though late, you may be Crown'd with Martyrs, and the im∣marcible Reward of Loyalty, and a good Conscience! I am,
My LORD, 

