



SIR,
THE wonders that God has done by Your Ministry in England and Ireland, makes me hope that the History of the Vaudois will not be unaccepta∣ble, and makes me take the liberty of presenting Your Majesty with it. You will in it, as in a fine mirror, clearly see the wonders God has done for the preservation the of Chur∣ches of Piemont, and the calm they enjoyed from the time of the Apo∣stles when they received the do∣ctrine of the Gospel, till the year

1488, that Pope Innocent the VIII. caused the Croisade to be published against them. The number of those that took upon them the Badge of the Cross, were 18000 men of re∣gular Troops, and 8000 Voluntiers of Piemont, which were all intirely defeated by a handful of Vaudois. Ever since that time they have been continually persecuted and disturb∣ed with cruel wars: But as they fought the battel of God in defend∣ing his truth, so it visibly appeared that the God of battel was with them, and fought for them, with∣out whose aid it had been impossi∣ble for them to have performed such extraordinary exploits, and gained so many victories over their Ene∣mies, who were often times twenty or thirty, sometimes a hundred a∣gainst one. Your Majesty shall see the cruel persecutions that the Ene∣mies of the Gospel have made them to undergo, and the constancy with which the Martyrs have sealed this

Celestial Verity with their Blood. If the Enemies had any advantage over them, it was only then in vio∣lating the Publick Faith, which should be inviolably sacred among men. In conclusion, Your Maje∣sty will be astonished, how so few have been able to subsist in the Val∣leys of Piemont, till the year 1686, being surrounded with such puis∣sant Enemies, cruel, full of diaboli∣cal artifices, without Faith, without Law; but if their subsisting be mi∣raculous, their return and re-esta∣blishment is no less: One may see every where that it's the work of God and not of men. I could not, Sir, address this my Little Work better to any than to Your Majesty, who has seen the God of Armies march before you, as anciently he marched before the Camp of Israel, and as he marched, and yet marches before them who are the subject of this History. You maintain, as they, Sir, the Cause of God, and

you fight for his Truth, and there is no doubt but that he is with you, and fights for you, and with you; the happy success of Your Enter∣prizes puts it beyond all doubt. I pray God with all my heart, that he may preserve Your Majestys Sa∣cred Person, that he may give you a flourishing and happy Kingdom, and bless all Your Just Designs to his Honour and Glory; this is the Ardent Prayer of him, who with the most profound respect, is
SIR, 
