



Honoured and beloved,
IT hath pleased the Lord of the
Harvest in his wise and good
Providence, to allot my Work
and Service (if it be worth the
name of Service) to that Citie
which God hath made not one∣ly
your habitation, but also your
charge; I am pleased with my
lot, not onely as it is from the
Lord, but as it is among you: I must acknowledge
(and hereby do) that I have found that affection and
respect from you as becomes a Minister of Christ; and
I have endeavoured to give you a testimony, that I
have not sought my own profit, but the profit of ma∣ny,
that they might be saved, (if I may use the words
of so great an Apostle concerning my self) I have
been induced partly by way of acknowledgement and
respect, but especially by the sense of my duty, as a
Minister, to offer to your reading and consideration the
substance of a Sermon lately preached among you,
which I hope (through Divine blessing) may be usefull
to you. You who are awakened cannot but be sensible
how easily, and how quickly the Word spoken slips

from you. It is soon gone from us who study it, and
write it, and speak it; you have lesse advantage to re∣tain
it, who hear it but once, unlesse the peculiar Pro∣mise
and Blessing made to the Word Preached, do be∣friend
you. I am jealous over you (I hope) with a
godly jealousie, least through inadvertency of mind, un∣sutablenesse
and unprepardnesse of heart, earthlinesse of
affection, seconded with Satans depths and devices, this
counsell given you concerning Oathes may be forgotten.
I know you have almost daily need to consider of this
subject, being frequently called to actions relating
thereunto, and it is now in your power daily, or at
least frequently, to peruse it: If you walk in the vio∣lation
of the Oathes of God that are upon you, it will
not be charged upon me, I have delivered my own
soul, and endeavoured to deliver yours. I have but
two words further to speak unto you at this present;
First, that you would more frequently and diligently
attend the preaching of the Word, The Power of God
unto salvation. It pleaseth God out of his bounty and
good will to you, to afford you besides the publique
Ordinances on the Lords day, a weekly Lecture, which
I apprehend to be very much neglected, and I have of∣ten
heard the paucity of hearers laid as a reproch upon
the Citie, by well disposed strangers. I pray consi∣der
your selves and those that are sorrowfull for the so∣lewn
assembly to whom the reproach of it is a burthen▪
Zeph. 3. 18. You may plead our unworthinesse whe
preach unto you, but that Plea I doubt will not be ad∣mitted
at the great Barr; there is not the meanest o
the Ministers of Christ by whose labours you migh
not profit, if the defect were not in your own hearts▪

Remember that Divine Institution and Blessing are the
main advantages in hearing the Word, not the Gifts of
the Speakers, or the capacitie of the Hearers. God is
pleased most frequently to concurr with the plainest,
(I had almost said the meanest) gift, in the conversion of
men, that the glory might be of God, and not of men. I
am sure you cannot plead want of leisure, through mul∣titude
of trading & worldly imployment, I wish it were
more; and truly I think there is no better way to help
it, then to deal liberally with God in publike Duties.
First, he hath secured you that you shall be no loosers,
by that promise made to the Israel of God, Neither shall
any man desire thy Land (that is, thou shalt sustain no
dammage,Exod 34. 24. the Lord is thy security) when thou goest up to
appear before the Lord thy God. Nay, I think you may
safely applie that passage of the Lord to his people,
Hagg. 2. 18. Consider the day that the foundation of the
Temple was laid, consider it, from this day will I blesse
you. Trie the Lord, or rather trust the Lord. You com∣plain
of great decayes, and they are visible; You Sow
much, and bring in little, &c. Consider your wayes;Hagg. 1. 6, 7. whe∣ther
you be not defective in that which concerns the
House of God. The second is this, that you would stu∣die
by all means to preserve peace and unitie among
your selves, by delivering up unto perpetuall oblivion all
inveterate envies and enmities; to that end that Magi∣strates
would equally and gently (as to Brethren) admi∣nister
justice, (I mean onely such a gentlenesse as to ex∣ecute
the Law with a Gospell spirit) that the people
would submit themselves in the fear of God, & not wear
out the spirits of their Rulers by their cumbrance and
strife; but turn some of their complaints into prayers,

to which they are obliged by the sacred Rule1 Tim 2. 1, 2. It is easier
to blame then understand the work and weight of Magi∣stracy
and Ministery, especially when they have to deal
with a people that are poor & foolish, and know not the way
the Lord, nor the judgement of their God, Jer. 5. 4. And
lastly, it will tend much to unity, that you be very care∣full
what Ministers are planted among you, such as
give some evidence of the Spirit of God dwelling in
them, whose fruits are love and peace; such as are desi∣rous
of Reformation, least superstition, vanitie and
strife proceed from them who should be the greatest
promoters of Knowledge Truth and Peace. I will de∣tain
you no longer, if I have erred in what I have
written to you, impute it to the largenesse of my affe∣ction
to the Citie, which may possibly have intrenched
upon my understanding in what I have said.2 Cor. 13. 11. Finally,
brethren, farewell: Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of
one minde, live in peace; and the God of love und peace
shall be with you.
Yorke, March, 15.
1655.

