


Right Honorable,
IT is the Observa∣tion of that Kingly Preacher,Eccl. 11.7. Wise So∣lomon the Great: Truly, the Light is sweet, and a plea∣sant thing it is for the eyes to see the Sun; but certainly, much more pleasant and precious is the light of the Lord Jesus Christ, that most
 glorious Sun of Righteousnesse,Mal. 4.2.  who doth arise to those that fear Jehovahs Name, with healing in his wings;Ioh. 1.9. . who was and is that Light, that true Light, that light∣neth every man that cometh into the world; Light of  illuxit, he hath shined forth. that shining forth or enlightning Light, which communicateth true Light to every one who hath been, is, or shall be truly enlightned with the light of Nature, Grace or Glory; for even that natural light of the understanding, and heavenly wis∣dom which our first Parents had with the Image of God in Paradise before their fall;Gen. 1.27. it was from God the Father of Lights,Iam. 1.17 in and by the Eternal Son of God, that increated Light,Ioh. 10.31. Phil. 2.7 co-equal with the Father, and by him, together with the Fa∣ther and the blessed Spirit, was all other light (as all things else) cre∣ated;Ioh. 1.3. Gen. 1.3. for without him was nothing made that was made. Outward
 light and inward, they are both from the true Light,Col. 2 3. in whom are hid all the Treasures of the Wis∣dom and knowledge of God; and from that true Light and his ful∣nesse,Ioh. 1.16 we all receive the light of whatsoever Grace we have; whe∣ther of Gods Free grace and love in Christ, of the grace of know∣ledge, Faith, or of Obedience to God or men, to Princes, Magi∣strates or Governours,Ps. 82 6. Ioh. 10.34, 35. who are under God, and as Gods upon Earth, who Rule and govern to Judge Righteous and true Judge∣ment for the Lord;2 Chron. 19.5, 6. which if they do,2 Sam. 23.4. they shall be as the light of the Morning when the Sun ariseth, as a Morning without Clouds, as the tender grasse springing out of the Earth by clear shining after Rain: But if they Judge unjustly, as the great God sets them up,1 Sam. 2.6, &c. Dan. 4.33, &c. & 5.30, so he pulls them down at his pleasure; wit∣nesse the Babylonian, Persian, Graecian,
 and other Mighty Emperours, Em∣pires, States and Kingdoms of the world.
And, Right Honorable and Chri∣stian Senators, as true light, espe∣cially the light of Christ is excel∣lent, sweet, pleasant and profitable, directing the mindes of men in the Religious wayes of Truth, and right obedience to the just, and lawful commands of all Superiors: So is darknesse and blinde igno∣rance, as odious, base and hurtful, not only to men in particular, but to Kingdoms and Nations in gene∣ral. The Pope and Papacy poli∣tickly made Ignorance the Mother of Devotion;D. Aug. in Ps. 33. Erat in illis reg∣num ig∣norantiae id est reg∣num Er∣roris. but learned Au∣gustine calleth it the Mother, not of Devotion, but of Error; and that Kingdom where Ignorance raign∣eth the Kingdom of Error, igno∣rance blindly leading men to blinde Obedience, many times to the ruine of themselves and others.
 The sad evidences of this deplora∣ble ignorance I my self have found in not a few of that Congregation and County, (where above twenty years I lived a Preacher of the Go∣spel, a presser and Practizer of this Duty of Catechizing) and where I met such ignorance,1 Cor. 5.1. as is not fit to be named amongst Christians: One affirming blindely (upon Exami∣nation) That none had died for him, nor should any die for him, he would stand between God and himself; yet after when I told him that Christ died for him, he wept for joy. Another, That the Sun shining in the Firmament was the Son of God that died for him. A third averring, There was no hell, and that her soul should go to Hea∣ven like a white Dove (although she did not know the way to Heaven: other hoped to be saved by our La∣dy: And multitudes ignorant of the knowledge and light of Christ,
 in any competent measure to meet Christ in the Sacrament, or to walk comfortably with Christ in their lives, or indeed necessary to salva∣tion.
And the woful effects of this blinde Popish ignorance, I my self have found by sorrowful experi∣ence also; and that almost in the beginning of our English Trou∣bles (this lamentable Civil War) The Kings Majesty no sooner set up His Royal Standard at Not∣tingham (within twenty miles of my Habitation) but divers of these blinde, ignorant, prophane, and Popishly affected, of the baser sort (I speak nothing of the Superiours) they prepare for War, make haste towards the Standard; and pre∣sently the ROUND-HEADS (a name they quickly learned) were threatned with Plundring, Fire and Sword; my self, with divers other well-affected to Religion, the Kings
 Majesty, Parliament and Kingdom, were constrained to flie our houses, from whence, ever since, I have lived a banished man, these having not yet been for any space of time, either safe or comfortable abiding.
And if was not long after that, but by such like Popish ignorant Souldiers, and in particular, by a Commander in the Earl of New-castles Army, a Papist (since dead) I was Plundred, not only of my Goods and Study of Books, above twenty years in gathering, and my house Barbarously torn in pieces & spoiled, standing to this day a spe∣ctacle to witnesse truth (to the shame of blinde, ignorant, pro∣phane, and Popish malice of Ma∣lignant Enemies) I am sure to my losse of more Hundreds of pounds then for present I am willing to glory in. But which was worse,Heb. 10.34. my Manuscripts, near thirty years Studies and pains night and day,
 rent in pieces and taken away, the greatest part then, and the rest af∣ter from a Garrison of the Parlia∣ment,W. Man∣or. taken by the same Earl of Newcastles Army. And for all my losses (besides what will be due to me upon the Publike Faith) I ex∣pect no recompence but from the Lord, except it please God to setle the Kingdom in Truth and Peace; and to enable Your Honorable Houses of Parliament, according to Your Religious Declarations, to take notice of my losses, as of others my Brethren and Compani∣ons in the same Tribulations (Your faithful Friends) and to direct a way of Reparation, as to Your Wisdoms and Piety shall seem most convenient. That Declara∣tion of Both Kingdoms, although I cannot say it was an encourage∣ment unto me, because I had lost all before; yet I may say it was a a ground of comfort in faith and
 hope, that the Lord would work mightily for these Kingdoms, and so there might be some expectation of outward good, and Repara∣tion again in Gods due time to me or mine. (I must beg pardon for this digression).
And yet this I cannot but de∣clare,Hos. 4.1, 2. Prov. 29.18. That I am assured this abo∣minable, blinde, prophane, super∣stitious ignorance (not only in that, but in other parts of the Kingdom) was one principal occasion of these and the like sad miseries, both to me and many Thousands in the Land;Ioh. 16.1, 2, 3. especially the Religious part, who have commonly been the objects of the Malice and Ra∣pine of these ignorant, prophane, or Popish persons (besides their oppressions by other men, not Re∣ligiously affected).
Now, if Your Honours ask me, What hath been or is the cause of this ignorance? In all humility
 I Answer from my own experi∣ence, I am certain a principal cause was and is want of Catechizing:Acts 20 22. First, by Ministers in their particu∣lar Congregations: And secondly, by Parents and Masters in their particular Families,Gen. 18.18, 19. without which I conceive it impossible to cure this deadly Malady of base igno∣rance, or ever to have the common sort of people know how to serve or obey either God or man,Isa. 27.11. & 29.11, 12. ac∣cording to the light of Christ, and good Laws Established in a King∣dom: As the Eunuch said unto Philip,Acts. 8.31. How shall I understand, ex∣cept some man shall guide me? So may it be said of such kinde of un∣catechized people. But is not the fault then in Ministers? I Answer, assuredly it is in great part,Jer. 10.21. & 5.31. & 6.10. & 29.12. Isa. 56.10, &c. Ezek. 34.1, 2, 3, 4. though not altogether. First, in many idle, carelesse, unconscionable, Mini∣sters, who have had means suffici∣ent to maintain them, and common
 knowledge enough to instruct in the Principles of Religion, but wanted Grace to perform their du∣ties, and in particular this duty of Catechizing.
Secondly, in too many others,Ier. 23.1, 2. Zac. 11.16, 17. blinde, ignorant Ministers, who have neither maintenance suffici∣ent, nor grace or abilities to per∣form their duties ns they ought,Iudg. 17.10. 1 Kin. 12.31. like Micahs Levite, or Jeroboams Priests, of the basest of the Peo∣ple. And how can it be expected there should be Preaching and Ca∣techizing in a right order, where Ministers have but twenty Nobles, or Ten pounds a year for their maintenance, and twenty or thirty pounds a very high rate (in esteem of some men) where some have been constrained to keep common Ale-houses to get a livelyhood (as they professed in my hearing) and I have seen proved upon Oath in the High Commission, where not
 so long since that I can forget their kindenesse, in three years attend∣ance, Commissions and Hearing, it cost me Three hundred pounds at least, of my own purse, besides my losse of my time, and this for my Preaching too often (as they Judged) and keeping Fasting and Praying too long, spending the most of the day, an offence un∣sufferable (as some learned in that Court were pleased at my sentence then publikely to aver) although it was in the Plague time, and when I thought I had both Kingly & Epis∣copal Authority sufficient:From the King, A Pro∣clmatiō. And an Order from the Bishops for the Fasts. And I am sure I Fasted and Prayed no o∣therwise then with my Congrega∣tion, but as now is the constant Monethly practise of this Hono∣rable Parliament, and the Religi∣ous party in the Kingdom; but all that saved me little in that Court; There was blinde ignorance there, as well as amongst those poor ig∣norant
 Ministers I spoke of before; and such Ministers Ale-house kee∣pers, I my self have known in some places, where there are great impropriations, appropriated in times of Popery to Deans and Chapters, and leased out to such as receive the profits, but take no care at all for the souls of the peo∣ple (and too many of them yet in the hands of such who now are or have been open Enemies to the Parliament) so that the people pe∣rish for lack of knowledge;Hos. 4.6. be∣cause for lack of convenient main∣tenance they want Ministers faith∣fully to Preach and Catechize, as becometh the Ministers of Christ.
Verily, every one will say the disease is lamentable; But how can this be remedied? fit mainte∣nance provided? or faithful Mini∣sters procured to Preach and Cate∣chize the people in this great King∣dom? I Answer as Bernard once
 did in another matter,Bern. in Cant. Non est meae humilitatis dictare vobis. It is not for my humility, Right Honorable, to Dictate any thing nor was I called amongst my Reverend Brethren to Advise) and except the golden Scepter of Grace be held forth un∣to me,Esth. 4.11. & 5.2. I may seem to have pre∣sumed too far already. But since it hath pleased the Lord of Hosts so highly to honour You, Give me leave, I most humbly beseech You, as a poor (though a weak and un∣worthy) Minister of Jesus Christ, and as Gods Ministers have been in Ancient time unto Mighty Prin∣ces) in all humility to became a Remembrancer,Isa. 62.6, 7. as I have many times been unto God for You, so now unto You for God.
You well know faithful Abra∣ham, that great Conquering Prince (over four Kings at once) that Re∣ligious Father of his Family,Gen. 14.9, &c. how careful he was to instrust and Cate∣chize
 his Houshold; and the Lord taketh special notice of it,Gen. 18.18, &c. and makes him one of his secret Coun∣sel. Christian Kings, Princes and Magistrates are the Fathers of the Common-wealth; and it is a high honour the Lord exalteth them un∣to, to take care the Common-wealth (which is their Family) be Catechized in the knowledge of the Lord, and of his will in Christ.2 Kin. 19.8, &c. 2 Chron. 29.11. & 33.29, &c. Yea, somtimes to admonish and charge the Lords Ministers to per∣form their duties in the work of the Lord, as those good Kings Jehoshaphat, Hezekiah,Eusebius in vita Constant. and Josiah did in their dayes, Constantine the Great, and other Christian Princes in later Ages. Yea,Isa. 49.23. to be as Nur∣sing Fathers, and Nursing Mothers to Christs Church.
In the Primitive times the Church was exceeding vigilant for this duty of Catechizing, they had their Catechumens: Noble
 Theophilus was Catechized in the way of the Lord:Luk. 1.4. . for so the Greek importeth, That thou maist know the truth of those things in which thou hast been Catechized.Acts 18.25. And Apollos was Catechized; and many Catechumens were after in the Church; therefore they had their Catechists or Catechizers also after the Apostles times,Cyprian, Epist. 24. Eusebius Eccl. hist. lib. 3 c. 12 their Docto s audientium (as St. Cyprian calls them) Teachers of the Ca∣techumens; such a one was Pante∣nus, such was Origen, Clemens A∣lexandrinus, and others.
And for this end, divers holy and learned men have both in An∣cient and Modern times composed Catechisms, as helps and further∣ances for this excellent work.
Heb. 5.12. & 6.1, 2, 3.The Apostle to the Hebrews sets down a brief Catechism, contain∣ing the first Principles of the Ora∣cles of God.
Learned Hierom tells us there
 was a Catechism written by Cyril Bishop of Jerusalem, and another by John, Bishop of the same place,Betulaeus, Com. ad Lact. lib. 2. cap. 11. which Betulaeus mentioneth in his Commentaries upon Lactantius.
I passe many other in after Ages, our late learned Writers, Mr. Cal∣vin, Musculus, Peter Martyr, Ur∣sinus, Bucanus, Beza, Danaeus, Zan∣chius, Alstedius, Mr. Virel. Our Eng∣lish, Mr. Nowel, Mr. Perkins, Mr. Egerton, Mr. Dod, Mr. Baal, Mr. Downame, Mr. Allen, Dr. Twisse, Dr. Majer, and many other labori∣ous workmen in the Lords Vine∣yard: What are their sums of Di∣vinity but Catechisms, some larger some lesse? and all witnesse as their desire, so their approbation of this most necessary work of Cate∣chizing.
Now the great benefit that I have found by experience in this way of Catechizing, excellent light somtimes communicated to
 poor aged people, as well as Chil∣dren. And my experience of the present necessity of all that true light, which is or may be afforded by any of the Lords Servants, La∣bourers in his Vine-yard, the bet∣ter to prevent Ignorant and Scan∣dalous persons from approaching the blessed Sacrament, and to re∣move dark ignorance, and give light to heal the diseases of poor wandring souls, hath moved me to cast my Mite into Christs Treasu∣ry,Luk. 21.1, &c. and to hold forth in this Cate∣chism following, what Light I have received from Christ, to lead unto Christ: on whom, waiting in use of all good means, a fulness of light may be communicated in Gods good time to poor hungry souls, and that to their joy un∣speakable and full of glory.1 Pet. 1.8.
I most humbly present it to Your Honours, not that I think any thing of mine in it is worthy of
 such an Honour; but what is in it of the Lord Jesus Christ, and his Spirit of Truth and Grace, to whom all the Honour belongs: Nor that I am not perswaded of Your Honorable and Religious care already, for what is or may be fitting in this kinde: Nor to pre∣vent the learned and godly labours of any of my Reverend Brethren, the Religious Assembly of Di∣vines, whose indefatigable endea∣vours I pray God to direct and blesse to his glory and the good of his Church; but to be a light to those who stand in present need, and want better directions.
And to conclude,Luk. 2.32. Ioh. 1.9. that the true Light of Christ may more fully shine forth into darkned souls, longing after Light,Isa. 8.20. and all false Lights daily and more duly be dis∣covered; that the true light Christ Jesus and his commands may be more fully followed,Is. 9.6, 7. and all false
 light of Error or Heresie avoided; that the light of the Sun of Righte∣ousnesse may not only more richly enlighten Your Honours, who are as so many glorious Stars in the fir∣mament of the Common-wealth; but may shine gloriously in all the dark corners of the Land:Mat. 4.15, 15. that as the glorious God hath so highly Honoured You already to begin and lay the foundation stone in the beautiful building of his House, the blessed work of Reformation; so he will Honour You further to lay the Top stone thereof;Zac. 4.7. that all the Christian Princes and Churches in the world may with rejoycing cry, Grace, Grace unto it. And all this by the strength of the great Jehovah: For nor by might nor by power,Zac. 4.6. but by my Spirit saith the Lord of Hosts.
That Your Excellencies may be enabled in Gods due time to take particular notice of the Thousands of Churches or Congregations in
 the Kingdom, which want not on∣ly learned, able, faithful and hono∣rable Pastors and Teachers to Preach and Catechize, and hold forth the light of Christ unto them; but want honorable and comforta∣ble maintenance or encouragement fit for so honorable and great a work of the Lord Christs Ambas∣sadors the faithful Ministers of the most high and mighty Prince the Lord Jesus Christ.
In a word, that if it be the will of God, our Soveraign Lord & King Charls may be truly enlightned by the light of Christ to see the false light of all evil counsels, either from his own heart, or any others, and may return fully convinced in conscience, and rest fully satisfied by his evident experience of the mighty works of Jehovah the great God of Battel, in the most faithful Counsels of thi High, Honorable, and Highly Honoured Parlia∣ment;
 that He and His Posterity may love and Honour You and Yours from Generation to Gene∣ration, as those who have been His best and most faithful Counsellors; that Gods blessing may be upon all the three Kingdoms; that Truth & Peace, Unity and Unanimity in the true light of the Lord Jesus, with the God of Truth and Peace, of Love, Unity and Unanimity may dwell amongst us in Grace, until that great King Christ shall come in the Clouds of Heaven, and tran∣slate us all with all his Saints unto Eternity in Glory. All which is and shall be the most humble, faith∣ful, sincere and hearty Prayer of

London, from my Study in Sepulchres, May 1. 1646.
