


Right Honorable and Beloved in the Lord Christ,
THe many burning and shining lights my Reverend Brethren, the faithful Ministers of Christ in this Fa∣mous City, most graciously holding forth the blessed Light of Christ in their constant Preaching the Gospel of your Salvation, Eph. 1.13. with their glorious abilities
 and readinesse to Catechize and instruct both yong and old,Acts 20.20. in publike, and from house to house, known to many of your selves by sweet experience, and to my self by assured evidence, might well seem to commend my silence, rather then this seeming presumption to be a Remem∣brancer to you, or a furtherance of the necessary Duty of Catechizing, to this Illustrious, and (to this day) wonderfully preserved City. But love and duty on my part, and hope of Christian acceptation on yours, emboldens me to declare my desires and endeavors for a blessed increase of the true light of Christ amongst your dwellings, and in your several Families: Me thinks my heart is indicting of a good matter, and I cannot but speak the things that pertain to Londons Peace.Duo sunt Reipubli∣cae Chri∣stianae firmamē∣ta veritas & pax praefat. Synopsis purioris Theolog. &c. Truth and Peace are said to be the stays and pillars of a Christian Common-wealth, and so they must needs be of a Christian City; yea, of the Church of Christ, the communion of Saints. The Prophet Zachary prefers Truth in the first place, and makes Peace to follow in order; I may joyn a third, as a concomitant or accompanying Grace, this is Vnity and Vnani∣mity, especially in the true light of Christ, all to go hand in hand together; a Brotherly walk∣ing in the light of Truth, revealed by Christ in the sacred Scriptures: Behold how good and joy∣ful a thing it is, for Brethren to dwell together in Unity.Zac. 8.19 Ierusalem is builded as a City that is com∣pact, or at Vnity in it self: So is London this glorious City,Ps. 133.1. & 122.3 Honorable and Honoured Chri∣stians; and my daily Prayer is and shall be, that as it is in your beautiful Habitations in many parts of it, so it may be united, and con∣tinue
 to be as one glorious building in your mindes, hearts, wills and affections, and princi∣pally in that blessed light of Truth and true Religion. I would to God there were not too many different lights, glimmering like Glow-worms in dark corners, leading aside sometimes some of your dearest Consorts, your beloved Children, Servants and Apprentices into wayes of different, if not contrary walkings from the true light of Christ, breeding Divisions even in Families, the most Ancient Common wealths: One chief Reason I am assured is want of Catechizing in the Principles of Reli∣gion, and their duties in particular. To recover sight and prevent the following of by lights in time to come, I am bold to commemorate the excellent practise of Catechizing, not only in publike Congregations, but in private Fami∣lies; and to bring a light from Christ for this end, hath been my desire and endeavour in this Iewel of Christian Divinity, I commend it to your Lordship, and to you Honoured Fathers of this precious and populous City, and to you Religious Worthies, Parents and Masters of Famlies, and to you the particular, my beloved the great Congregation of Sepulchres, to whom the Lord in his good Providence was pleased by your free Election to call me, and this two years and upwards to continue me an Assistant Teacher: If it be not so perfect for method or matter as might be expected; besides that, my intention at first was only to give light to a right preparation for the Lords Supper, and not to enlarge my self so fully in the Principles of Divinity, my constant Preaching these two years
 since I began this work, beging for three parts of the year three times a week at least, and the rest twice or more, besides my attendance both on the publike Service, and other special occasions may plead my excuse.
Now that the light of Christ may by the help of this or my lesser Catechism, or any other Labours of the Lords faithful Servants shine forth more and more gloriously in all your souls and several Families, that they may be enlightned as so many particular Churches of Saints; that Christ may walk in the midst of them, as of the seven golden Candlesticks,Rev. 2.1. Eph. 2.19. that you may be found Citizens with the Saints, and of the houshold of God; that being truly lightned by the true light of Christ in the Church Mili∣tant, you and yours with the whole Israel of God in all the Families of this City and King∣dom, may shine as blessed lights for ever in the Church Triumphant, is and shall be the daily Prayer of

From Sepulchres London, May 2. 1646.
