



SIR,
TO gratifie your Curiosity about Phosphorus's, as much as I can without indiscretion at present do, I must, in the first place, take notice to you, That though Phos∣phorus's may well be distinguish'd in∣to two sorts; Those that may be stil'd Natural, as Glow-worms, some sorts of rotten Wood and Fishes, and a few others, and Those that are properly Ar∣tificial: yet waving, at present, further mention of the former sort of Bodies, that without manifest heat shine in the dark, (which absence of sensible heat distinguishes Phosphorus's from com∣mon Fire and Flame;) I shall now

confine my Discourse to the latter sort, and tell you, That as far as I have hitherto observ'd, those factitious shi∣ning Bodies that do or may pass under the name of Phosphorus's, may be re∣duc'd to two principal kinds, one of which may be subdivided into two or three, so that in all they will amount to three or four.
The first of these consists of such Bodies as shine only by the help of External Illustration, or (if you please) such Bodies, as being expos'd to the beams of the Sun, or those of a vigo∣rous Flame, will retain a Lucidness, and continue to shine some time in the dark. Of this kind is the Bolonian Stone, skilfully prepar'd; and of this sort also is the Phosphorus Hermeticus of Balduinus, of whose Phoenomena, but not the way of making it, the Au∣thor has given the Learned World an account. This Phosphorus was there∣fore very welcome to divers of the Curious, because the Bolonian Stone was for some years before grown very

rare, even in its own Countrey, Italy, which scarceness, an ingenious Travel∣ler, then lately come out of those Parts, told me he imputed to the death of the Person that us'd to prepare the Stone at Bologna, without having left a sufficient account of his way of ma∣king it lucid. And the Phosphorus of Balduinus, which, or the like, may be made (as I have tryed) both of Chaulk, and another substance, seem'd to me, when the Preparation succeeded best, to catch the External Light (if I may so speak) far more readily than the Bolonian Stone: For I remember I have had one, that being freshly made, would within about half a minute of an hour be manifestly excited, and as it were kindled; so that being presently remov'd into a dark place, it would re∣tain a very sensible Light, for so many times as long as it had been expos'd to the beams of the external Light; and this (if I much misremember not) was even when that external Light was but the flame of a Candle.
But, on the other side, whereas I

have more than once or twice observ'd, with trouble, that these Phosphorus's could very hardly be preserv'd for any long time, (which I was apt to impute to the action of the insinuating Air) so that some of them in not many months, and others even in a few weeks (or perhaps days) would ap∣pear crack'd, and lose their vertue of being excited by the beams of Light; the Bolonian Stone, skilfully prepar'd, would retain its vertue of being exci∣ted for a much longer time: For I re∣member (whatever Learned Men have deliver'd to the contrary▪) I had a small piece of it, which, though I kept it negligently enough in an ordinary little wooden Box, retain'd its vertue for several years after I had it, which was not till a great while after it was first prepar'd. What I have further observ'd concerning the Phosphorus Hermeticus, I have not now the leisure to acquaint you with.
But besides this first kind of Phos∣phorus's, that, to be able to shine, must

have their Faculty excited by the beams of the Sun, or those of some other actually shining Body: There is another sort, which needs not be pre∣viously illustrated by any external Lu∣cid, and yet continues to shine far lon∣ger than the Bolonian Stone, or the Phosphorus of Balduinus. This, by some Learned Men has been call'd, to discriminate it from the former, a Noctiluca, which, though in strictness I cannot think it as proper a name as could be wish'd, since the other Phos∣phorus will shine in the Night as well as the Day, if it be excited with the flame of a culinary Fire, or of a large Candle; yet since the name has been received by several, and since 'tis not easie in our Language, to express the thing clearly in one word, I shall (though for Brevity, as much as Di∣stinction-sake) admit the use of this name▪ yet without forbearing some∣times to substitute for it that of a Self-shining substance, which is more expres∣sive of its nature: Of this substance, Mr. Daniel Krafft, a German Chymist▪

shew'd His Majesty two sorts or de∣grees. To the first of which, I took the liberty to give the name of Con∣sistent (or Gummous) Noctiluca, not in that sense, wherein the word is op∣pos'd to Soft, for this substance was at least as yielding as Bees-Wax in Sum∣mer; but as the word Consistent is em∣ploy'd as equivalent to Firm, and op∣pos'd to Liquid and Fluid. By reason also of its somewhat viscous Texture, not very unlike that of Gum of Cher∣ries, and some others newly taken from the Tree, it may be call'd, The Gummous Noctiluca: And, I am inform'd, that on the score of its uninterrupted action, 'tis call'd by some in Germany, The Constant Noctiluca; which title it does not ill deserve, since this Phospho∣rus is much the noblest we have yet seen. For though there were not much of it, and though it were kept by it self in a little Vial, well stop'd, it would, without being externally excited, in∣cessantly shine, as he affirmed, both day and night. Yet the Light it afforded seem'd but little, if at all, more vivid,

than I have sometimes observed in the Liquor of Glow-worms, and some other Phosphorus's of Nature's produ∣cing: Nor had the Possessor enough of this substance to invite his consent to any Trial to improve it, the quan∣tity he had at London, scarce exceeding in Bulk the Kernel of an Almond.
Besides this Gummous Noctiluca, Mr. Krafft had a Liquid one, that, per∣haps, was made only by dissolution of the former in Water, or some conve∣nient Liquor; but the Lucidness of this, was not permanent like that of the other, as I have noted in another Paper: but within no very long time, especially when 'twas divided into smaller portions, and left expos'd to the Air, would expire or vanish.
But besides the Gummous and the Liquid Noctiluca hitherto mentioned▪ I know not whether we may not add a third kind, that we our selves lately prepared, which seems to be of a some∣what differing nature, both from the Consistent, and the Liquid Noctiluca

newly describ'd, at least as far as I observ'd their Phoenomena. For this of ours would not shine of it self, like the constant Noctiluca, nor yet in that manner that the liquid Noctiluca did; but the bare Contact of the Air, with∣out any external Illustration or Heat, would immediately produce a Light, (which might easily be made to last a good while in a well stop'd Vessel:) And, which is considerable, the Sub∣stance that shin'd, was not the Body of the Liquor included in the Vial, but an Exhalation or Effluvium mingled with the admitted Air: for both which Reasons, I gave it the name of Aerial Noctiluca.
These are the several Phosphorus's, that I have yet had opportunity to see, but, for ought I know, their variety may extend somewhat further, because I have heard of a Paper printed in Germany by an ingenious man, whose name (if I mistake not) is Elsholez, wherein particular mention is made, in an Historical way, of the German

Noctiluca: But this Paper I cannot yet procure, and therefore you would do well to consult it, if you can get it; and I am not averse from thinking, that future Industry may discover some new kinds or variations of self-shining Substances, that will deserve new names, and among them, perhaps, that of Solid Noctiluca's.
Having said thus much of the seve∣ral sorts of Artificial Phosphorus's, I shall be very brief in speaking of their Inventers, whereof I have but an im∣perfect information. For though I find it generally agreed, that the Phos∣phorus Hermeticus was first found and published to the World, by the learned and ingenious Balduinus, a German Lawyer; yet as to the Gummous and Liquid Noctiluca's, I find the first in∣vention is by some ascrib'd to the abovemention'd Mr. Krafft, (though I remember not, that when he was here, he plainly asserted it to himself;) by others, attributed to an ancient Chy∣mist, dwelling at Hamburgh, whose

name (if I mistake not) is Mr. Branc, and by others again, with great con∣fidence, asserted to a famous German Chymist in the Court of Saxony, call'd Kunckelius. But to which of these so Noble an Invention, as that of the two German Noctiluca's, is justly due, I nei∣ther am qualified nor desirous to judge; and therefore, without preju∣dicing any Man's Right, I will proceed to that, which, I presume, is the chief thing you would know of me, name∣ly, An Account of the Occasion and Steps of my own Attempt to make a Noctiluca. Concerning this I shall give you the following Narrative, wherein, though my urgent Avocations will not (I fear) permit me to be other than immethodical, yet I shall not de∣cline to mention some circumstances that I know may be omitted, because they will not, perhaps, be found so barely Historical, but that they may prove of some use to a less Sagacity then yours, in an enquiry into a Sub∣ject, wherein I cannot yet plainly tell you all you could wish to know, and

which is both New and Abstruse, as well as Noble.
After the experienced Chymist Mr. Daniel Krafft had, in a Visit that he purposely made me, shewn me and some of my Friends, both his Liquid and Consistent Phosphorus, being by the Phoenomena I then observ'd, (and whereof the Curious have since had publick noticeThis Clause refers to one of the Philo∣sophical Col∣lections pub∣lish'd by the ingenious▪ Mr. Hook, who hath therein inser∣ted verbatim the Paper he received! from Mr. Boyle.) made certain, that there is really such a factitious Bo∣dy to be made, as would shine in the dark, without having been before illu∣strated by any lucid sub∣stance, and without being hot as to sense: After this, I say, I took into conside∣ration by what ways it might be most probable, to produce, by Art, such a shining substance. To seek for which I was both inclin'd, and hopeful to be somewhat assisted, because I had lying by me, among my yet unpublish'd Notes of the Mechanical Origine of di∣vers

qualities, a Collection of some Ob∣servations & Thoughts concerning light. Light. And I was (also) the more encou∣rag'd to attempt somewhat this way, be∣cause having, at Mr. Kraffts's desire, im∣parted to him somewhat that I dis∣cover'd about uncommon Mercuries, (which I had then communicated but to one Person in the World) he, in requital, confest to me at parting, that at least the principal matter of his Phosphorus's, was somewhat that be∣long'd to the Body of Man. This in∣timation, though but very general, was therefore very welcome to me, because, though I have often thought it pro∣bable, that a shining substance may, by Spagyrical Art, be obtain'd from more kinds of Bodies than one: yet de∣signing, in the first place, to try if I could hit upon such a Phosphorus as I saw was preparable, the Advertisement sav'd me (for some time) the labor of ranging among various Bodies, and directed me to exercise my industry in a narrower compass. But there being divers parts of the Humane Body, that

have been taken to task by Chymists; and, perhaps, by me as carefully, as by some others, my choice might have been distracted between the Blood, the solid Excrements, the Bones, the Urine, and the Hair, of the Humane Body; if various former Tryals and Speculations upon more than one of those Subjects, had not directed me to pitch upon that, which was fittest to be chosen, and of which, as I had formerly set down divers Experiments and Observations, so I had made provision of a quantity of it, and so far prepar'd it, that it wanted but little of being fit for my present purpose. But before I had made any great progress in my design, I was by divers Removes, Indispositi∣ons of Body, Law-Suits, and other Avocations, so distracted, or at least diverted, that I laid aside the prosecu∣tion of the Phosphorus for a long time. And when afterwards I resum'd it, though I wrought upon the right matter, yet I was diverted from the right way, by a Process that I recei∣ved from Beyond Sea, as a great Arca∣num,

that would certainly produce the Noctiluca aspired to, for partly upon this account, but more, because I saw that the chief Ingredient in this Pro∣cess, was that which I, with reason, took to be the best matter, I was in∣duc'd to pursue the prescrib'd method for some months, but without success; the true matter being, as I concluded, too much either alter'd or clog'd by the additional Ingredients that were design'd to improve it; besides, that the degree of Fire, though a circum∣stance of the greatest moment, was overlook'd, or not rightly prescrib'd. However, adhering to the first choice I had made of a fit matter, I did not desist to work upon it by the ways I judg'd the most hopeful▪ when a learn∣ed and ingenious Stranger, (A. G. M. D. Countreyman, if I mistake not, to Mr. Krafft) who had newly made an Excursion into England, to see the Countrey, having, in a Visit he was pleas'd to make me, occasionally dis∣coursed, among other things, about the German Noctiluca, whereof he soon

perceiv'd I knew the true matter, and had wrought much upon it. He said something about the degree of Fire, that made me afterwards think, when I reflected on it, that that was the only thing I wanted to succeed in my endea∣vors. And there was the more reason to think so, because for want of a due management of the Fire, we had divers times fail'd, of making the Phosphorus of Balduinus, not only after we had more than once wrought upon the right matter, but after we had actually made the Phosphorus. Wherefore when he left London, having yet some quan∣tity of the matter in such readiness, that it needed but the Fire to let me see what I ought to think of the hint the ingenious Traveller had given me, I caus'd the tryal to be renew'd, which, proving unsuccessful, diminish'd much of my stock of prepar'd matter, but it did not so discourage me, as to hinder me from reiterating the Attempt (with∣out much varying it) with a good part of what remain'd. And though at this time also, all the care and dili∣gence

that could be employ'd, did not hinder an unlucky miscarriage, that kept the tryal from being fully satis∣factory; yet being confident upon the nature of the thing, I would not be∣lieve the skilful Laborant, when he told me with trouble, that what I ex∣pected, was not at all produc'd: But going my self to the Laboratory, I quickly found, that by the help of the Air, or some Agitation of what had pass'd into the Receiver, I could, in a dark place (though it was then day) perceive some glimmerings of light, which, you will easily believe, I was not ill pleas'd to see. And now you have the History of my pursuit of the Liquid Phosphorus, that has made some noise among the Curious: But I freely confess, that the success, though wel∣come, was not so full as I aim'd at, for I obtain'd no such consistent Phospho∣rus as that whereof Mr. Krafft shew'd me, as I formerly told you, a small par∣cel. But as I was willing to think that this defect may be imputed to the cracking of the Retort, before the

Operatien was quite finish'd, so I hope another Distillation in a more luckily chosen Vessel, may make me amends for the newly mentioned Miscarriage, and thereby enable me to discover other, and perhaps nobler Phoenomena of our shining substance, than hitherto I have been able to observe. Especially considering, that the same misfortune, that I hope was the principal cause of my missing the Noblest thing I aim'd at, the Constant Noctiluca,  me so little even of liquid matter, r my purpose, that I have not dared▪ for fear of wasting it, to try several things with it, that I presume may be of good use in an enquiry into the nature of this light, and perhaps also of light in general. And because I fear by what I have observ'd, that, though the Ves∣sel had not crackt, yet the matter di∣still'd would have afforded but a small proportion of lucid substance, I am the more unwilling to fall upon this troublesom work again, till, besides other requisites, I be provided of a competent quantity of a matter which

I fear contains but very little of the desired substance. However, I have endeavoured to make that use of our Experiment, such as it was, that though the Noctiluca it produc'd, be not per∣haps so lucid as that of Mr. Kraffts, yet it may prove as luciferous as his hath hitherto been, since (as you will see hereafter) I have found a sub∣stance that needs the Air, and nothing but the Air to kindle it, and that in a moment.
In this Narrative I have been the more particular, that it may shew you, (what I hope may make you amends for the length of it) that an inquisi∣tive Man should not always be deter'd by the difficulties, or even disappoint∣ments he may meet with, in prosecu∣ting a Noble Experiment, as long as he judges himself to proceed upon good and rational grounds.
The Ʋses that may be made of Noctiluca's, especially of the Consistent, are not, in probability, all of them to

be easily foreseen and declar'd; espe∣cially by me, who have not yet had time and ability to make those im∣provements of self-shining substances, that, by the assistance of the Father of Lights, I hope will, in process of time, be attained. If the lucid vertue of the Constant Noctiluca could be (as I see not, why it may not be) considerably invigorated, it may prevent a great deal of danger, to which Men of War, and other Ships are expos'd, by the necessity Men often have to come in∣to the Gun-Room with common flames or fire, to take out Powder, which has occasion'd the blowing up of many a brave Ship. Our Light may, perhaps, be of use to those that dive in deep waters; and also may very safely and conveniently be let down into the Sea, to what depth one pleases, and kept there a long time, to draw together the Fishes that are wont to resort to the light of a Fire or Candle; as in di∣vers parts of Scotland and Ireland is well known to the Fishermen, who get much profit by this resort. The same

self-shining substance which in our Aerial Noctiluca affords a light, that, as faint as it yet is, was able, when I wak'd in the night, to shew me di∣stinctly enough the bigness and shape of some joints of my fingers, and to discover itself in the shape of a Capital Letter (of the Alphabet) that was cut out of a piece of black'd Paper pasted upon the Vial; this light, I say, may probably, (at least when some∣what invigorated) suffice to shew the hour of the night when one wakes, (with eyes unaccustomed to light) if it be plac'd, instead of a Lamp or Candle, behind an Index, where the Figures employ'd to mark the Hours are cut out. It may also serve to make a guide knowable at a good distance off, in spite of tempestuous Winds and great Showers, and this in the darkest night. Divers ludicrous Experiments, very pleasant and surprizing, may be made with the Noctiluca, by him that has enough of it. But these Trifles, though very pretty in their kind, I pur∣posely pass over: as also an use that

may be of great, but I fear of mis∣chievous, consequence; reserving what I have further to say of the usefulness of these self-shining substances, till time shall give me more information, and leisure. In the mean while I shall on∣ly intimate, that probably the utilities that so Subtle and Noble a Substance may be brought to afford in Medicine, may be more considerable than any of its other particular uses; and that though our Noctiluca had none of these, yet it may be highly valuable, if it shall (as in all likelihood it will) be found conducive to discover the nature of so Noble a Subject, as Light, whose Encomiums would require more time than I can allow this writing. And perhaps they will seem needless, when I shall have observ'd, that Light was the first Corporeal thing the great Creator of the Universe was pleased to make; and that (as our excellent Bacon has well noted, to another pur∣pose) he was pleas'd to alot the whole first day to the Creation of Light alone, without associating with

it in that Honour, any other Corpo∣real thing.
These things being premis'd, I shall proceed to what I chiefly intended in this Paper, viz. the mention of the Observations themselves; as soon as, to facilitate the understanding of them, I shall have advertised you, that though I fear 'twill always be difficult to get out without loss, the self-shining sub∣stance rais'd by Distillation, yet in our Experiment, because the Vessels would not hold out intire to the last, we had more difficulty, than even we expected, to get out the luciferous matter, and were fain to save, as much as we could of it, by small parcels, in distinct Vials. Whereof that which was first em∣ploy'd, though it was judg'd to have receiv'd the vigorousest portion of the shining liquor; yet for a Reason I else∣where intimated, (and because it was not at hand, when I had first the oppor∣tunity to use it) I thought fit to make my Tryals with the Noctiluca, I had sav'd in the second Vial; setting aside

some more faint and aqueous liquor, that was afterwards sav'd in a third Vial; and a thicker stuff that remain'd upon the Paper, when some of the li∣quor had been put into it to be filtra∣ted. Which Paper was kept in a fourth Glass, which, though (that it might admit the Paper and adhering luciferous stuff) it was wide-mouth'd, yet was it kept carefully stopt. Of the Phoe∣nomena I observ'd in the second of these four Glasses, I shall, God permitting, at this time, give you a short account; designing, if my haste will give me leave, to add some Particulars, that I may afterwards observe in those Por∣tions of our Noctiluca, that were recei∣ved in the three other Glasses.
