



Right Honourable,
I Believe your Lordship in your Search and Survey of the Mysteries of Provi∣dence, with which you entertain your Privacy, have often with great amaze∣ment considered, how many strange and admirable Effects, do daily pro∣ceed from small and ignoble Causes; for not only Thunder, Rain, Lightning, and other com∣mon Phaenomena, which do astonish the World, have their whole Make and Composition, from a seemingly casuall and undesigned Concourse, of Light and Fleeting Clouds; but likewise largest Rivers are fed by secret and conceal∣ed Springs; and the World it self, if traced and resolved into its most visible Originall, is framed of Atomes; and the Earth, which is vulgarly conceived to be the Basis and Center of the Universe, is, as God himself is pleased
to express it, hung upon Nothing; and yet, by that Al∣mighty Hand which fixed it, it is made stable and firm enough, to endure unmoved all that Hurry and Variety of Mutation, wherewith the rolling Motion of the Hea∣vens, do daily threaten it.
What wonder your Lordships Contemplation, hath begot in viewing the Works of Nature, I doubt not but hath been continued, when you descended from them to behold the Works of Art; especially the Civil Policies of States and Kingdomes; in which, as your Lordship hath been alwayes most knowingly conversant, so you can from the deepest and best grounded Experience evince, that though Earthly Empires, (I mean such as are not guided by Christian and truly-Religious Principles) have an Outward Semblance of a Substantiall and Lasting Greatness, yet the Basis which doth support the whole Politicall Frame, is but some State-trick or other, some little Expedients found out to amuse the Vulgar, whose Folly must be pleased, or else they will never be go∣verned.
But how far the Wit of man, can advance it self, to imitate the Works of God, even those of a Creative Pow∣er, the making Something out of Nothing, is in no Policy more discernible, than in that deep and wise contrivance of subtle men, the Papacy; the Body of which hath a pleasing Aspect, and is set out with a very specious Gloss; all the Parts do seem extreamly well-proportioned; there is a strange Linking and Confederacy of all its Principles; and to the Eye of a Superficiall Beholder, it presents no∣thing but a beautifull and comely Outside. But if any be so curious, as to look beyond its Varnish and first Ap∣pearance; should we pry into the Foundation of this
Goodly Structure, we shall find it, like the Island of De∣los, alwayes Floating; or rather, like the Earth, to hang upon nothing; For the Pope's Infallibility, or the Churches Authority, or some such fond Chimera, is all the Basis which doth under-prop this Building. Things that are so confidently asserted, and yet upon triall so shamefully begged, that were not the world, in Gods just Judgement, given over to a vicious and Lazy Cre∣dulity, all that is built upon such thin and empty Fallacies would not subsist one moment; but for the present, the Arts of planting a devout Ignorance, have so farre prevailed, that the world doth hugge its Bondage; and men finding a great deal of ease in being quietly de∣ceived, they are content to worship the Beast, and are an∣gry that any should fright them from embracing a Religi∣on, which hath made the way to Heaven so very plaine and easie, that, whatsoever becomes of the Seeing, they that are Blind enough shall be sure never to misse of it.
It is now, My Lord, some scores of Yeares since we of this Nation have by Scripture-Light discovered all the Frauds and Cheats of this Mistery of Iniquity; and yet it seems all mens eyes are not opened, for some of late have pleaded for Popery, and for that which is the chief Bulwark of it, the Popes Authority, with as good a grace (if Railing and needlesse Rhetorick may deserve that name) as if they had never been answered.
Rushworth Di∣al. 1. One in his great heat of zeal, or something worth, doth tell us, That Questions about the Popes Authority o∣ver Bishops, of Bishops over Priests, and of Priests o∣ver the Laity, are of no small moment. But he that goes about to destroy this Hierarchy, aimeth at nothing lesse then an Utter overthrow of Religion. Which are but
Bellarmines words in English,
Bellar. Praef. and, if in stead of the word Religion they had said Popery, they had spoke nothing but the Truth, since that is bottomed onely in the Popes Authority.
Fiat Lux—de∣dicated to the Countess of Arundell, and twice Printed. Which a late namelesse Au∣thor so farre cryes up, that he ventures to speake words, which no sober man would owne. In my Judge∣ment, saith he, Christ our Lord hath no lesse showne his Divinity and Power, in the Pope, than in himself. And again, All things considered I may truly say that Christ in the Pope and Church,
Pag. 376, 377, &c. is more miraculous than in his own Person. And yet farther, as if those expressions were too modest Blasphemy, and not barefaced enough, he goes on, The first great Fundamentall of Christian Re∣ligion, which is the Truth and Divinity of Christ, had it not been for the Pope, had failed long agoe in the world. Whereupon enlarging himselfe, he addes whence I may truly say, that Christ is the Popes God, for if the Pope had not been, and proved so resolute an Assertour, Christ had not been taken for any such person as he is believed this day. And so in a boaste concludes, This I will boldly say and am assured of, that if the Pope be not an Unerring Guide in affaires of Religion, all is lost. For a man once rid of the Controll of his Authority, may as easily deride and as solidly confute the Incarnation, as the sprinkling of Holy-water, nor could the reason of the world confute them. While I relate such kind of Passages as these which I tremble to mention, I hope your Lordship will pardon my zeal, if I complaine a little, that Treatises of a farre more innocent Nature, are sharply censured, while these open Impieties doe scape unpunished; as if our Lawes were keen onely against the Asserters of Christian Liberty, but had no edge at all against the
Broachers of Antichristian Blasphemy.
Since then the Pope's Infallibility, is that Name of Blasphemy, which makes all its Patrons so bold and Irreligious; since that is the Bottomlesse Pit, out of which all this Deadly smoke doth issue: I have here, ac∣cording to your Lordships commands, endeavoured to show the Vanity and Ridiculousnesse, as well as Impiety of that opinion. In which if I have not answered your Lordships expectation, as to the exactnesse of my stile and strict manner of my Reasoning, I shall not wonder: since no Industry of mine can be sufficient to satisfie your Lordships accurate and unequalled ability in Judg∣ing: But if I have showed my diligence, and left no Ar∣gument unanswered, how plainly and inelegantly soever, I hope then your Lordship will let my willingnesse to o∣bey, compound for the failings in my Obedience; since, if the Enemy be killed, it is all one, as to the truth of the Victory, whether it was done by a Rough Stone, or by a Polished Sword; nor was David's conquest the lesse esteemed, because he vanquished Goliah onely with a sling.
And now, My Lord, before I conclude, I should crave leave to tell the world, how Good, as well as how Great, you are. I should borrow so much Language from Common Fame, and the Generall Voice as to declare that for Wisdome, to Direct; for Eloquence, to Expresse; for Diligence, to Execute; very few equall, and none exceed your Lordship. But since what is truth in it self, and would be Justice in others, in me, because of my Relation, may be esteemed flattery; I shall turne my Praises of, into Prayers for you, that your Lordship may be alwayes fixed upon the Rocke of Ages, and in
all your walkings acknowledg that God, who onely is Infallible; That Christianity may ever steere your actions, and all your other Politicall and Morall excellencies may still vail and doe Homage unto a knowing Piety; that with your truly Religious and Excellent Lady, together with your most Hopefull and Virtuous Children, you may be long preserved a Good and Great Example, is and shall be the constant Prayer of
My Lord, 
Drury-Lane April 19th. 1662.
