



SInce the Bishop of Derry has been pleas'd in his late Admonition to You, almost wholly to wave the Argument between Us, and to turn this Debate about your Worship into a Dispute about Matters of Fact; nay, since he has frequently ap∣peal'd to your own Consciences for the Truth of what he has said concerning you, acknowledg∣ing, That it wou'd be odd for him to think of imposing on you in matters you know so well, and that he can only hope to prevail on you by the Integrity of what he saith, [See Admonition, p. 141, 148, 158, 159, 187, 188.] I thought I cou'd not reasonably refuse to concur with him in referring the decision of this part of our Controversie to your selves, as the most competent and proper Judges, the Mat∣ters controverted relating to your own or your Mini∣sters publick practices. And I may do it with the greater assurance, because you'l find all that I now as∣sert attested by your own Ministers, (besides the par∣ticulars relating to your Communions attested by such as are Elders, or principal Members in your Congre∣gations.) And as they must doubtless know these Matters better than the Bishop can do, who is never present at their Worship; so I may justly presume they are not so prodigal of their Reputation to the World, as to avouch so many things as True, which all their Hearers cou'd convict 'em of Falshood in, if they
 were not. I confess 'tis something hard that the Bi∣shop shou'd thus put 'em to this double labour, of pro∣ving their Practice by Affidavits, as well as defend∣ing it by Arguments. But when one is once engag'd with such unreasonable Disputants, there is no decli∣ning even such drudgery as this. For since the things which the Bishop objects against you are such as him∣self supposes, will prove scandalous to all that pro∣fess Christianity, If those Objections be founded on palpable mis-reports of your Practice, sure the just esteem of so many Christian Pastors and Churches deserves a modest Vindication. And indeed this Vindication had not been deferr'd so long, if the mul∣tiplicity of the Particulars to be enquir'd into had not retarded it beyond expectation; and your Ministers were unwilling to run into so many Mistakes as the Bishop has unhappily done, by giving too hasty ac∣counts of these Matters upon slight Informations. I shall therefore freely leave this part of our Debate (which now lies between the Bishop and your own Ministers) to your impartial Examination. And that those excellent Churches you are Members of, may under the vigilant care of such laborious Pastors, im∣prove their external Rest and Peace, by walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Ghost, and thereby be both edify'd and multiply'd, is the hearty desire of
Dear Brethren,

