



AS this Sermon was Preach't at your Request, so since you have thought the Publication of it might be useful to promote the success of that Excellent Work you are Engaged in, I have herein also comply'd with your desire. For tho' I am ve∣ry sensible how far so mean a discourse falls beneath the Dignity and Importance of so great a Subject; and how little Credit or Advantage your Pious Undertaking can derive from the recom∣mendation of so inconsiderable a Name, yet I have too hearty an Affection to this blessed Cause to be backward in contributing my utmost (tho' but a small Mite) towards the Advancement of it. But I greatly rejoyce that there are some do espouse it, the Eminency of whose Character and Station renders 'em capable of giving greater Reputation and Encouragement to it. As to this Discourse, I have, upon the Review of it, observ'd, That something might have been added to Vindicate the present Me∣thod of Connecting one sort of Offenders from the Censures 'tis too commonly loaded with. But having more fully offer'd something to that purpose in another Discourse (viz Concern∣ing Profane Swearing and Cursing) then the limits of my time wou'd allow in this Sermon, I must referr the Reader thi∣ther. For your selves 'tis matter of great satisfaction and Joy to all that wish well to your worthy Design to find the Regularity of your Methods in Executing it, so answerable to the real Excel∣lency of it. For I have as yet heard of no well-grounded Com∣plaints of any illegal stops you have taken, or of any that can justly pretend to have suffer'd by any false Informations. I doubt not you will continue the same exactness and Care in all your fu∣ture proceedings; and give none the least ground to charge you with going beyond the bounds of the Laws of Man in your zeal to sup∣press the Violation of the Laws of God. And since your Enter∣prize is so truly Religious and your Management of it so unex∣ceptionably fair, I am not without hope that this Discourse may convince some that have hitherto contented themselves with only
wishing well to it, of their indispensable Obligation to join with you, and become more active in it according to their capacity and opportunities of being serviceable to it. And there is the greater need of a considerable Addition to your Numbers, because your Zeal must not be confin'd to this City while this necessary Work is so wofully and generally neglected in other parts of the King∣dom. For it will require your utmost united interest and applica∣tion to engage so many in this Design as may be capable of set∣ting it on foot in most of our populous Towns. And yet till that be done, you cannot expect the Reformation will be General and truly National; So that without this, there will be great dan∣ger lest those Vices that seem now like a routed and flying Ene∣my, should again rally their forces, and at last defeat all your hopeful attempts for the crushing of 'em. Let then the present sa∣tisfaction of your being so highly serviceable to the undoubted in∣terest of your Blessed Lord; Let the view of his own bright Ex∣ample, of whom it was so justly said, That the Zeal of God's House had eaten him up; Let the certain prospect of a future and glorious Recompense; Nay, let the consideration of that gra∣cious providence of God that has hitherto smil'd upon your En∣deavours, and given you the comfort of beholding already so happy Effects of 'em, reconcile you to all the continued hardship and self-denial, the difficulties and toil of so great an Ʋndertaking. Be not weary of well-doing, but prosecute this glorious Work with an unshaken Resolution and persevering Constancy, till your great End be attain'd, till the Interest of Religion and Vertue triumph over that of Irreligion and Vice, and these publick Sins become as unfashionable and rare as they are detestable and pernicious. And that the Great God whose Cause you so strenu∣ously continue to maintain, may unite your Hearts in the firmest bonds of mutual Love, That he may prosper your pious Endea∣vours with more remarkable success here, and crown 'em here∣after with his Heavenly Reward, is the hearty prayer of,

