


THere present you in the name of God, & of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, with a short Epitomie of that fiery law, and that everlasting Gospell (Deut. 33.2. and Rev. 14.6.) which shall be preached to them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kinred, and tongue, and people, and that immediately upon the downfall of Babilon, see vers. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12. as by reading these 6 verses you may plainly see, for af∣ter the Angell flying in the midst of Heaven, having the everlasting Gospell, &c. The next that followed proclaimed Babilon is fallen, is fallen, &c. And so the third Angell followeth threatning the Judgment and wrath that should certainly befall them that wor∣shiped the Beast and his Image, or receive his mark in their foreheads, or on their hands, see vers. 9, 10, 11, 12. And that all these things are the successe or effects or at lest part thereof upon the 7th Angell sounding of his Trumpet, see Chap. 11.15. And that time shall be no longer till the mistery of God be finished, but till the seventh Angell should sound his Trumpet, see the Oath of the Angell, Chap. 10, 5, 6, 7. And this 14 Chapter being held forth to us as part of
 the effects upon the 7th Angells sounding, as that by reading the Chapters is cleere and manifest; I shall not need to make any further proof that Babilon shall fall upon the holding forth of the everlasting Gospel. I mean when it is so preached and so received as the everlasting Gospell, for such is the Gospell of Jesus Christ, it is both a Gospell to wit glad-tidings, and it is the Gospell, the glad-tidings, to wit the only glad-tidings that are everlasting; to them that dwell on the earth, and therefore shall be preached to every na∣tion, kinred, and tongue, and people; Saying (more∣over) fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his judgment is come: and worship him which hath made heaven and earth, and the sea, and the fountaines of waters, see Chap. 14.6, 7. And this al∣so is Gospell, for it is glad-tidings when the hour of his Judgment is come, and his advice is good, to fear God, &c. And in regard he is said to say it with a loud voyce. It is intimated that it should be more audi∣bly spoken, and more generally heard and received then it had been formerly, and that by all nations, kinreds, tongues, and peoples. And it may not be un∣profitable to consider, that it is said and sworn by the Angell, that in the dayes of the voyce of the 7th An∣gell, when he shall begin to sound the mistery of God shall be finished, as he hath declared to his ser∣vants the Prophets, see Chap. 10.7. Not that all should be finished when he shall begin to sound; for in that there is a beginning it implieth a continuance; And it is said also that in the dayes of the voyce &c. the mistery of God shall be finished: Now how many dayes the voyce of this sounding shall continue it is not easily determined, being only held forth in the plu∣rall number without limitation: But this is certain,
 that when he shall begin, his sounding shall continue till the mistery of God be finished.
Now see the first effects or what is fully concluded on, and voted in the Church, and by the four and twenty El∣ders when the 7th Angell begun to sound Chap. 11.15, 16, 17, 18, 19. And it evidently appeareth, that the King∣doms of this world shall certainly become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall (thenceforth) reign for ever and ever. For which there is thanks ren∣dred by the holy Elders, because he had taken to him his great power, and had reigned, and how, the nations were angry, &c. see and read the verses, for they doe concern us if we be christians indeed, and not in shew only, and that in these dayes, and for our great comfort and incou∣ragement in the wayes of God, they are held forth to us. For hath he not begun, hath he not already taken to himselfe even his great power, and hath reigned amongst us; Hath he not given a bannor to them that fear him, Psal. 60.4. Hath he not begun, and shall he not make an end, 1 Sam. 3.12. Hath he not already whett his glittering sword, and hath not his hand already taken hold of vengeance; And shall he not fully recompence his adversaries, and repay them that hate him, see Deuter. 32.40, 41, 42, 43. And hath he not owned this nation, yea even this of Eng∣land, and that as first, yea and also above others, yea even any nation now under Heaven; And that for his own cause sake, though not for our worthinesse, but for respect to his name, the which through his grace was owned by us against his adversaries; Yea and that by a strong hand, and a stretched out arme, many a time giving victory to a few against their double number, and that to weake and despised ones against the strong and potent, and that be∣yond our hopes and expectations, or the fears of our ad∣versaries, and that by sea and land. And why should we
 think that he will repent him for his choice of us before any nation now under heaven. The Apostle telleth us his gifts and callings are without repentance, Rom. 11.29. And though he will oblitterate the names of such out of his book of life (as he said unto Moses) who sin against him (Exod. 32.32, 33.) yet he will be mercifull unto his land and to his people. And therefore he saith: Re∣joyce oh ye nations with his people, for he will avenge the blood of his servants, and will render vengeance to his adversaries, and will be mercifull to his land and people, see Deut. 32.43. And of this we may be confident that he that hath begun will certainly make an end, before he break off from us whom he hath owned as a peculiar people in a nationall way, and that above any nation un∣der heaven, as once he did to Israel of old. And will bring us to rest and settlement in spite of all opposers, either forraine or domestick. And he will give victory on the Lambs side, together with them who are the called, & chosen and faithfull. His heart is towards the governors of Israel, who have jeoparded their lives (to maintaine his cause) upon the high places of the field; with Zebu∣lon and Napthali, see Judges 5.9.18. for they offered themselves willingly amongst the people, and have not loved their lives even unto the death, Rev. 12.11. And therefore rejoyce ye heavens (that is to say ye Churches, militant and triumphant) and ye that dwell in them, but woe to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the Sea; (that is to the world) for the Devill is come downe a∣mongst you, having great wrath, because he knoweth that he hath but a short time, vers. 12. to wit, till he must be inclosed in the bottomlesse pit, that he shall not deceive the nations any more till a thousand years shall be fulfilled, see Rev. 20.1, 2, 3. Yea woe unto the world because of offences, for (though) it must needs be that
 offences shall come, yet woe to that man by whom the offence cometh, see Mat. 18.7. Doubtlesse it hath ever been dangerous to give any offence either to Jew, or Gen∣tile, or to the Church of God, see 1 Cor. 10.32. but much more now in these latter dayes wherein the Lord hath be∣gun to avenge his Elect, who cry unto him day and night, for now he hath begun, he will certainly hold on, and a∣venge them speedily, as hath been proved before, Luke 18.7, 8. And therefore it is the advice of our blessed Saviour, to take heed that we despise not one of those little ones, yea one of the least of those little ones that beleeve in him, and the reason is rendred, because that in heaven there Angels doe alwayes behold the face of their Fa∣ther which is in Heaven; For they are all ministring spi∣rits sent forth for the good of them who shall be heires of salvation; and will readily accomplish what the will of God shall require them to doe. For they alwayes behold his face to know his will concerning his servants, that they might accomplish it concerning all his Elect over whom they have Charge, see Matth. 18.10. Mark 9.42. Heb. 1.14. Psal. 103.20.
Now if it be so much danger to offend but one of the least of those little ones, that beleeve in Christ, as that it were better for him that a milstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were cast into the depth of the Sea, &c. How dangerous is it to offend his Embassadors that are sent unto us in the name of the Lord, for the good of our souls; Is it not said, He that receiveth you recei∣veth me, and he that receiveth me receiveth him that sent me; And he that despiseth you despiseth me, and he that despiseth me, despiseth him that sent me; But how few is there in these our dayes that regard these words, or at least so regard them as to caution them as they ought in these respects. Are not the words of men in
 authority as Magistrates and Officers, and masters much more regarded then these words of Christ. They that are under command, under any authority, either civill or mil∣litary, will quickly say we are so commanded, and we must obey else it will be worse for us, we shall be turned out of office, or out of our service, or places else, or those our su∣periours will be offended with us, and for such like reasons which in such cases are good and wise, and but our duty, but how few is there that are so wisely subservient to the commands of God, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, and to take his counsells and admonitions, and lay them to heart, and own them as a rule for regulation of all their wayes. But if you please to read with seriousnesse of spirit, but this little Treatise, you will easily perceive how much we are short of obedience, and subserviencie to the commands of Christ, yea even the best of us all, and so what need there is to make it our businesse to indeavour a redresse, what in us lyeth, in our places and callings, and to provoke one another to love and good works which are so much wanting. And for this end I have directed it to you who are in highest authority, though I therein speak not to you only, but to all that are or professe themselves to be christi∣ans indeed, & not in shew only: that you & all such might incourage and induce what in them lieth to a cordiall uni∣formity of hearts and affections in the wayes of God. For though it is a thing that cannot possibly be compelled to by humane authority, yet it much conduceth and helpeth for∣ward when the eyes of authority are bent that wayes. The incouragement of authority in well doing, is a strong inducement to the doing of it. And so is likewise their own example no lesse available with ingeneous spirits, see 1 Pet. 2.14. The Lord grant that you may make it your bu∣sinesse when you come to deale in matters of religion. To accord our differences as much as may be, and to settle
 peace both in Church and state, what in you lyeth; And in so doing the Lord will assist you and blesse your indea∣vours for the good of these nations to all posterities: which is the earnest desire of

