



Honoured Friend,
IT was at your request, and the earnest re∣quest of some of your Friends, that I was induced to publish these following Sermons. The reason whereof I suppose to be, because your heart was (in some measure) opened to, and affected with the voice of Christ in his Word, when you heard it. I must confess, the matter or subject herein treated of, is very sweet and precious, and such as may well warm the frozen heart of any, that hath the least drachm of sincere love, either of complacency in, or com∣miseration to Christ. To see how ready Christ is to condescend to the requests of his Spouse, how sweetly, and with what melting  irresistible Arguments, he wooes her; ho and plenti∣ful he is in the emanations of his Grace and Kindness towards her: And then on the other hand to consider, how sleightly she looks upon him, how little account she makes of him; and how she makes him dance attendance at her door,

with many other circumstances of her unkind∣ness: and withal to consider the danger and hazard which she runs, by her unkind behavi∣our towards Christ: These Considerations (which are the subject of the ensuing Discourse) being seriously weighed by a Soul that hath any love for, or breathings after Christ (among the number of which, I hope, I may truely reckon you) cannot choose but in some measure awaken the sleepy Soul, and warm the cold and frozen Af∣fections. This effect I perceive the Word had upon you; for which you owe the thanks and praise to the Spirit of Grace, which accompanied the Word to your heart, and gave it entertain∣ment there. For man speaks only to the ear, it is God that speaks to the heart: You having therefore tasted the sweetness of this Word your self, desired the communication of it to others, who had not the opportunity (with you) to hear it; and in order thereunto, the publication of it. Your designe I must own to be good: for Grace (where it is in truth) is not only of a dif∣fusive nature, (spreading it self through the whole man) but also of a communicative nature; wish∣ing that all by-standers might likewise taste that sweetness, which it self is much delighted with. Grace desires not to eat its morsels alone, but if any Banquet be given in by Christ, or any re∣freshment by his company, the Soul cries out to

by-standers, O taste and see how good the Lord is! He is altogether lovely. Come, therefore, and I will tell you what he hath done for my Soul. But (though your designe be good, yet) the weakness and insufficiency of the Author, might well have pleaded an excuse. For it is pity that such a sweet and precious sub∣ject should be rendred despicable, by being handed into the world by so weak, rude and unpolished an instrument, as I must of necessity confess my self to be. For I am sensible, that many times the Truths of Christ suffer in the world, through the weakness of the Instruments that hand them to us. However, yet (sometimes) it pleaseth God, By the mouths of babes and sucklings to perfect his own praise; that the work may ap∣pear to be not of men, but of God. Leaving therefore the work in Gods hand (who is able to do what he pleaseth with and by it) and waving the consideration of mine own weakness, I con∣descend to your request, and make bold to cast this my poor mite into Gods Treasury: Say∣ing to you and to all courteous Readers, as Peter to the Cripple, Acts 3.6. Silver and Gold have I none; but such as I have, give I unto you. I hope the food is wholesome, though it be but plainly and meanly dressed. And though it may fall into the hands of some, whose curious sto∣macks may loath such plain and homely diet;





yet possibly it may fall into the hand of some poor creature, who is hungry, humble, and of a contrite Spirit, and trembles at Gods Word. Some poor hungry Soul may (perhaps) here meet with meat, though there be little sawce to he had: And if any poor Soul shall reap benefit by my poor labours and endeavours (I hope) I shall bless God for owning such a worthless creature, in so glorious a work. And (if it do good) the less of the instrument, the more will there be of God seen in it. I beg of you therefore, and of all candid Readers, into whose hands this small Treatise may come, their and your serious per∣usal of it, with their Prayers to God for a bles∣sing upon it: what you finde of humane weakness in it, pardon and pass it by: whatever you finde of God in it, minde it and apply it. And the very God of Heaven powerfully influence it with his blessed Spirit, that it may do your Souls good, and that you may readily open to Christ now, that he may open to, and own you, at Death and Judgment. Which is the humble and earnest Prayer of

