



My Friends,
COnsidering how convenient and be∣neficial little Books are for such as cannot reach the Price of bigger; I here present you with an Explication of the Creed, Lord's-Prayer, and Ten Commandments, as small as the Subject will permit: And being that (in my Iudgment) the Creed cannot be better or shorter Para∣phras'd

than the most Learned and Iu∣dicious Prelate Dr. Pearson has done it; I have transcribed mine from thence, that those most sound and necessary Truths might not be confined to those alone who are able to purchase that most Learned Work. And that the meanest capacity might not lose the Knowledge of such a safe and wholesome Exposition; I have changed the more Eloquent and Diffi∣cult Words, for such as are more Plain and Obvious. The Lord's-Prayer is the same in Substance that I delivered to you Three Years ago, when I Cate∣chized the Children; which I have now Expounded in the Form of a Prayer, that the Poor Man may upon any pres∣sing occasion, know how to Express him∣self at large upon any Petition. The Precepts of the first Table, you know I Expounded to you all the last Summer
till Advent; the Heads of which (ba∣ting the Points in Controversy) I here present you with: And those of the se∣cond I shall in due time Treat of, if God prosper my Studies; in the mean

while (to compleat the Exposition) I here give you the Substance of them. And being that in several Discourses immediately after Christmas last, I did press the necessity of a daily Service to God from the Words of Zacharias, Luk. 1.74, & 75. I have added a short Morning and Evening Form to be used before and after your daily Work, A Prayer against the Temptation of the Flesh, to any particular Sin, to keep your Bodies in subjection to your Rea∣son. Another for your use in the time of Sickness. And when at other times you shall have particular occasion for other Services, I have given a short Direction where to be furnished in the Psalms. And this I did, not to hinder any that are a∣ble from buying Books of more peculiar use, but to comply with the necessities of those that are not; of which I am very sensible there is too great a number. I had no other inducement to meddle with this, but my Charity to the Souls of the Poor, for whom Christ died as well as for the Rich: And if hereby I shall

gain but one Soul, I shall thank God for making me an Instrument of so much good: And if none be better'd by it, yet I have this satisfaction, that I have endeavoured for God's sake, and your own, to shew my self

