



Worthy Sir,
THough the manner of my Life and nature of my Studies doth lead me to affect a more then ordinary Retired∣ness and Privacy, yet I neither am, nor ought to be so great a stranger to the passa∣ges of Providence amongst us, as not to take notice what great things it hath pleased God of late to doe for this Nation; if not by com∣pleating our hopes, yet at least by preventing our fears, and bringing us within some nearer view of Settlement: Whilest others there∣fore are taken up with celebrating the Au∣thors, and magnifying the means of our deli∣verance: I have a little made it my businesse to search into the cause of our Danger; which
if once rightly stated, will be a direction for our present Senators, to secure themselves a∣gainst that Rock, on which the Ship of the COMMON-WEALTH hath almost been ruined. And herein there was no need of any long study; for who does not see, that the too free venting of all sorts of Opinions, and that by all sorts of men, how ignorant and unconcerned soever, will, if not re∣strained, for ever keep us a Divided, and consequently, make us an Unsetled People? Amongst those many Principles, which are now let loose upon us, (to exercise the Faith and Patience of this last Age) there is none that I know of, which doth either more imme∣diately conduce to the ruine of all Civil Go∣vernment, or had a greater influence, in the pretences at least, of the Actors, upon our late unwarrantable Disturbances, then this which I have here endeavored to confute. For let this once be granted, that our Saviour is a Temporal Prince, and that onely those have a right to Govern who have by Faith an Inte∣rest in him, presently a door is opened to all manner of Rebellion and Treason; nay, there can be no such Crimes in the World, if Reli∣gion,
and a design to advance our Saviours Kingdom, be once made the pretence to autho∣rize them. Indeed the consequents are so fa∣tall and horrid, and the remembrance of Munster Affairs (which were acted by the same spirit) so fresh,
Sleid. lib. 10. and re∣cent, that it might almost seem needless to en∣deavor any other confutation, then a bare re∣lating of that Story.
But Sir, that I may take here that liberty, which you have hitherto always indulged me, of speaking my thoughts: I never yet looked upon that way of confuting an Error, which the Arminian Writers do usually tread in, to be either Rational or Convincing; I mean, by urging the Inconveniences and ill Consequen∣ces of the Doctrine we dispute against: For it is one Question, What is true? and another, What is convenient? and after all those Tra∣gical Inferences, wherewith men seek to af∣fright unwary and unobserving Readers, yet this will be an eternal Axiome, That truth is truth, let the consequences be what they will; and the more harsh and repugnant any Do∣ctrine, if plainly revealed, seems unto Natu∣rall Reason, the greater is our Faith, and the
more signall our Obedience, if we notwithstan∣ding do submit unto and embrace it. In pro∣secution therefore of this Design (which I have laid down to my self, as the onely satisfactory way of deciding all Controversies in Divinity) I have not inquired so much how dangerous, or how destructive and ruinous the contrary Do∣ctrine is, as how it is written; and so have proceeded by direct proof, to shew that their Opi∣nion who would have Soveraignty founded upon that bottom, is utterly unscriptural; for that it is unreasonable, I think none makes any que∣stion. And therefore I hope this Treatise may be useful for those who erre, not knowing the Scriptures, and following the sound of words, have not leisure, nor perhaps ability, to look in∣to the sense of them. Had I consulted my own credit, I might have made this Discourse more plausible, by filling up my Pages with the Au∣thority of ancient Writers; but I purposely for∣bore, both because those, for whose sakes I main∣ly publish it, are not acquainted with any thing of Christianity, more then their English Bibles do instruct them in; and likewise because I thought it needless, having so much of Divine Authority for my Text, to croud humane Testi∣monies
into the Margin; since such mixtures doe usually make a good Cause suspected.
Sir, Whatever it is, I humbly present it to you, and doubt not, how rude and inartificial soever it seems, but it will finde entertainment among those who love seasonable Truths, if you please first to honor it with your Acceptance: Whose Piety, Prudence, Integrity, and Zeal for your Countrys Liberty and Welfare, have as much advanced you in the Esteem and Judge∣ment of all sober and unprejudiced men, as your many personal Favours in the Heart and Af∣fections, of,
Worthy Sir,

Ch: Ch: Jan. 26. 1659.
