



AS I first Preach'd, so I now Print the following Sermon at Your Request; though I am sensible that I can add nothing new, to what hath been already Publish'd by my Brethren, who went before me on this Oc∣casion;
from whom You have had that just Encouragement which Your Cause deserves, and those prudent Directions, which if  follow, You cannot err in the Manage∣ment of it.
Notwithstanding which, I have been pre∣vail'd upon, by considering that in such a Case as this, the concurring Judgment and Approbation of many who think and say the same thing, may the more effectu∣ally tend to the promoting Your Design, of which I freely own my self an Encou∣rager, and shall think I have done a good Work, if any thing I have offer'd in this Discourse may contribute thereunto.
I have taken care in this Case to do nothing rashly or inconsiderately; but af∣ter having weigh'd, as well as I could, the Arguments for, and the Objections against Your Ʋndertaking; the former of which do, in my Judgment, very much outweigh the latter.
That Vicious Men should declare open∣ly against Your Attempt, is not at all to
be wonder'd at: 'Tis what they reckon their Interest, as well as their Inclination to do. And if some who are truly Vir∣tuous and Pious, have entertain'd any Prejudices likewise, 'tis not very strange, since I believe hardly any Extraordinary and truly Generous Design was ever yet set on Foot in the World, but what was at the first suspected either as Imprudent, or Impracticable, by Men of otherwise good Judgment and Meaning.
However, there is this observable Dif∣ference between the Censures which Bad, and which Good Men pass upon You. The former do it from an Aversion to the End which you propose: The latter only doubt concerning the Means which you use; Doubt, I say, for after all 'tis generally no more, they being rather shy of enga∣ging themselves, than forward to censure those who do; nay, they cannot but in∣wardly wish You good Success, whilst they forbear to assist You; all which makes me conclude, that they are not perfectly in∣form'd of the Methods You take, or at least have not thoroughly consider'd them,
and that when they have, they will alter their Judgments.
That open Prophaneness and Lewdness ought to be supprest, they agree with you; (for what serious and good Man does not from his heart detest those scandalous Practices, which You endeavour to re∣form?) The only Question then is, How this may be effected? Now all that I would desire of such Persons at present is, that they will not object against the course You take, till they can themselves propose a better.
But after all, What can be plausibly objected against this, when, as the End is highly fit, nay, necessary to be pursued, so 'tis done by the Encouragement, and according to the Directions both of Divine and Humane Laws? So that what St. Paul saith in another Case, may be repeated in this, We know that the Law is good, if a Man use it lawfully. But of this I will add no more to what I have said in the Sermon it self.

 Only upon this Occasion, I cannot for∣bear expressing my satisfaction, in obser∣ving two hopeful Prognosticks of a Better Generation to succeed the Present.
One is, that Spirit of Genuine and Primitive Christianity, which hath of late so evidently exerted it self in con∣siderable Numbers of the Establish'd Com∣munion, especially of the younger sort of both Sexes; as appears not only by their attending the Publick Devotions, particularly the Holy Communion, with the greatest Se∣riousness and Reverence; but also by a true Christian Simplicity, Modesty, Humi∣lity, Charity, Zeal and Courage, which, those who have occasion more intimately to Converse with them, have frequently observ'd among them.
The other is, that Zeal mixt with Pru∣dence, which so many both of the Esta∣blish'd Communion, and of those who in some few things differ from them, have jointly exprest, towards the suppressing of Vice.

 And I cannot but look upon it as the Duty of those of our Function, to lay hold of every Opportunity of encouraging and directing Persons, who are of them∣selves so well dispos'd.
That it may please Almighty God to bless and prosper these good Beginnings, and to give success to your honest and worthy Endeavours, is the hearty Prayer of,

