



Right Honorable,
SO rarely is PALLAS Shield borne by the Noble, or supported by Such whose Emi∣nence might Revive her decayed hopes: as Brittaines Pernassus (on which, never were more inhabitants planted, and Ho∣mer-like, more usually expulsed) is growne despicable in herselfe, be∣cause protected by none but her∣selfe.
 Hinc ferrea Tempora Sur∣gunt—: wanting their Cherishers (those Heroicke Patrons) whose countenance in former times made the Studies of the Learned more pleasant (having their Labours by such approbation, seconded.) Yet in these times (my Honourable Lord) we may find some royall Seedes of pristine Nobility (wherin we may glory) reserved, as it were, from so great ruines, for the preservation of Learning, and the continuance of all vertuous Studies; amongst wch your Noble Selfe, as generally repu∣ted learned, so a profest friend to Such as be studious of Learning: a character which ever held best cor∣respondency with honour, being a favorite to them who can best de∣fine
 honour: expressing to the life, what proprieties best concord wth so exquisite a Maister-piece.
It is observed, that all the Roman Emperours were singular in some peculiar Art, Science, or Mystery: and such of the Patricians as could not derive their native descent (wth the particular relation of their An∣cestours most noble Actions) were thought unworthy to arrogate any thing to themselves by their Ver∣tues. These Romanes were truely Noble, bearing their owne Annals ever with them, eyther to caution them of what was to be done, or excite them to prosecute what was by them commendably done: nor knew they Honour better limned, or more exactly proportioned,
 then when it was beautified by the internall Ornaments of the Mind. Many I know (my good Lord) whose greatnesse is derivative from their Ancestours unto themselves, but much Eclypsed by their owne de∣fects: and Plants which had a No∣ble-Grafter, use now and then to de∣generate. But so apparant is Your Lustre, it borroweth no light but from your-Selfe; no eminence but from the Lampe of Your Honour; which is ever ready to excite the Vertuous to the undertaking of labours wel-meriting of their Coun∣trey, and generally profitable to all Estates. In Subjects of this nature (my Honourable Lord) I cannot find any more exact then these Surveies of Histories; many we have depra∣ved:
 and every lascivious Measure now becomes an Historian. No stu∣dy in his owne nature more deser∣ving, yet more corrupted none is there. O then, if those ancient Romans (Mirrours of true Resoluti∣on) kept their Armilustra with such solemnity, feasts celebrated at the Surveyes of their weapons: We that enjoy these Halcyon dayes of Peace and Tranquillity, have reason to reserve some Time for the solem∣nizing this peaceable Armour of Hi∣stories; where we may see in what bonds of Duty and Affection we are tyed to the Almighty, not only in having preserved us from many hostile incursions, but in his conti∣nuing of his love towards us. We cannot well dijudicate of comforts
 but in relation of discomforts: Nor is Peace with so generall ac∣ceptance entertained by any, as by them who have sustained the ex∣treamities of Warre. Many pre∣cedent experiments have we had, and this Isle hath tasted of misery with the greatest; and now revived in her selfe, should acknowledge her miraculous preservation, as not proceeding from her owne po∣wer, but derived from the Supreame influence of Heaven; whose power is able to Erect, Support, Demolish, and lay wast, as he pleaseth: Hinc Timor, Hinc Amor! Hence wee have arguments of Feare & Love! Feare from us to God; Love from God to us: Cause we have to Feare, that subject not our understan∣dings
 to the direct Line and Square of Reason, but in our flourishing Estate (imitating that once renow∣ned Sparta) who was — Nunquam minus faelix, quam cum faelix visa —; Abuse those excellent gifts we have received, contemning the menaces of Heaven, and drawing upon our selves the viols of Gods wrath, heavier diffused, because longer delayed. We should re-collect our selves, and benefit our ungrate∣full minds with these considerati∣ons: that our present felicity be not buried in the ruines of a Succeeding Calamity.
These Histories (my noble Lord) be the best representments of these motives. And in perusing Dis∣courses of this nature (next to the




 Sacred Word of God) we are strange∣ly transported above humane ap∣prehension, seeing the admirable Foundations of Common-weales planted (to mans thinking) in the Port of security, wonderfully rui∣nated: grounding their dissolution upon some precedent crying sinne, which layd their honour in the Dust, and Translated their Empire to some (perchance) more deserving people. Here Civill Wars, the Originall causes of the Realmes subversion: There Ambition bred by too long successe: here Emula∣tion in Vertue, the first Erectresse of a flourishing Empire: There Parasites, the Scarabees of Honour, the corrupters of Royally disposed affections, and the chiefest Engi∣neres
 of wrack and confusion, buzzing strange motions in a Princes Eare, occasioning his shame, and their owne ruine. Here States happy, be∣fore they rais'd themselves to the highest type and distance of happi∣nesse. And generally observe we may in our Humane Compositions, nothing so firme as to promise to it selfe Constancy, so continuate as to assure it selfe perpetuity, or under the Cope of Heaven, any thing so solid as not subject to Mutabi∣lity.
This Survey (my Lord) have I presumed to Dedicate to your Ho∣nour, (sprung from a zealous and affectionate tender) not for any meriting Discourse which it com∣prehends, but for the generality
 of the Subject: and Native harmony wherein Your Noble disposition so sweetely closeth with it.
Your Protection will raise it a∣bove it Selfe, and make me proud to have an Issue so highly Patroni∣zed: It presents it Selfe with Feare, may it be admitted with Favour: So shall my Labours be in all duty to Your Honour devoted, my Prayers exhibited, and my selfe confirmed

