



HIGHLY HONOVRED;
PIety, as it hath the promise, so it renders the best deblazon to the House of Honour. In which highest ascent of Heraldry, (for all other Titles or Gradations appear irreall and shady;) Vertue the greatest Signall and Symboll of Gentry, is rather expressed by goodnesse of Person, then greatness of Place.
For, howsoever the bleere-ey'd Vulgar honour the Purple more than the person, descent more then desert, title then merit: that adulterate Gentility,Ne levier tibi culpa fuit crevis∣se per Orbem; Grande Satis Genti Crimen boxore frui. Sta. which degenerates from the worth of her Ancestors, derogates likewise from the birth of her Ancestors. It is true indeed, that Desert hath at all times had some sinister eye darting on it: especially, where Malignant spirits held it a sufficient Crime, to grow great. For these, forth of a restlesse ambition, were ever interposing a Cloud betwixt de∣serving men and the Sun-rising.Altius Surgen∣tes, innocentes licet, Comitatur Suspicio. Tacit. But so strongly fenced were they with integrity: and so richly furnished in principles of Theory, and Humane Phylosophy, as they accounted it too light an encounter to enter Lists with such Opponents;Majori invidas foveam parat; quam ne devi∣tet, unâ corruet. Minutius. whom they held so far unworthy of their hate, as they pittied their weaknesse. Their spight fell infinitely below their spirit; their spleane beneath their Scorne. For such was their quicknesse and vivacity of Spirit, as they could look Death in the face with more cheerfulnesse, then those Spungy Puffins could brook Competition: or idolize their adulterate Greatnesse.
Now, for this attractive Object of Honour, as it has been Gods good∣nesse, lineall descendence, and your Princes especiall Observance, in re∣lation to your incomparable Father, to advance you to it; So has it been hitherto your happinesse, in this your hopefull proficience and gracefull

initiation to businesse, to entertaine Humility and Integrity for your Re∣teiners, the better to preserve you in it. This is the way, as your genuine Candor and noble experience hath found it, to make all good men, your Friends: and to admit none to repine at your rising, but vertues Foes.
And such Censorious Pursuers of their eminentest actions, have our Heroick'st Spirits in all ages patiently suffered: Making use of them as necessary Monitors, to put them in minde how to compose and regulate the posture of their greatnesse.
And these were such, whose infant Effeminacy, youthfull Delicacy, or native liberty had estrang'd them from the knowledge of Morall or Di¦vine Mysteries: so as, they might be well compared to the Ostrich, who (as the Naturall Historian reports) hath the wings of an Eagle, but never mounts: So These had the Eagle-wings of Contemplation, being indued with the intellectuall faculties of a reasonable Soule; yet either intangled with the light Chesses of vanity, or trashed with the checker'd pozes of Selfe-conceipt and Singulariy, they never mounted above the verge of Sensuall pleasure.
But I am here to tender unto your Honours judicious view, a Gentleman, quite of an other garbe: a Compleat Academick, a Civiliz'd Scholler, and a Scholastick Courtier. One whose Education hath made formall enough, without apish formality: and conceiving enough, with∣out selfe admiring arrogancy. A good Christian in devout practising, no lesse than Zealous professing; yet none of the forward'st in discour∣sing on Religion. For He observes (as long experience & Select acquain∣tance have brought him to be a judicious Observer) that Discourse of Re∣ligion hath so occupied the World, as it hath well-neere driven the pra∣ctise thereof out of the World. Where most men have more of tongue than life: and more ready to dispute than live: Seeking rather to be accompted. Eloquent Orators, then Sincere Christians: Scholists than Practists.
He esteemes such onely happy, who are of that number whom the World accounts Fooles, but God, Wise men. He understands, that whatso∣ever is sought besides God, may so imploy the Minde, as it may be oc∣cupied, but never satisfied. He observes the whole Fabrike of humane power; and he concludes with the Preacher; Ecquid tam vanum?
He notes how the Flesh becomming obedient, behaveth her selfe as a faithfull Servant to the Soule: This governeth, the other is governed; This commandeth, the other obeyeth. Finally, he summes up all his Ob∣servations with this: He that Sigheth not while he is a Pilgrim, shall never rejoice when he is a Citizen.
This is the Graduate in this Academy for Gentry, whom I have here a∣gaine presumed to recommend to your protection: and to you he makes recourse, not so much for shelter, as honour; (having sole interest in it by right from your Father:) For his Title, it exempts him from servile bashfulnesse, being a Person so freely indenized, so compleatly in∣dowed.
Neither can He do lesse then ingenuously collect, how by your Fa∣thers

gracefull Patronage; (whose obliged servant I was in his life; and faithfull Remembrancer in his death:) He has been cry'd up with a generall suffrage: attesting withall, that no prejudicate Critick, whose use it is never to judge of the purity of a Lampe, till it expire in the Soc∣ket, durst assaile him; since his Honours improved Command, arched with so integrious a Protection, did secure him. Nor is He changed from what he was, although improved by this new Edition: Nor hopes he to fide you otherwise, then your prudent Fathers reflexions ever were; (whose imparalel'd parts and immerited favours to me,Mancipia  lectionis cum fint. shall reteine a constant Anniversary in me;) to the Muses, and their refined Fancies a profest Guardian.
Now, if any of those corky Censurers, Qui Mercurium in linguâ non in Pectore gerunt, shall chance to accoast my Gentleman: I resolve me, his Education hath made him so accomplished at all Assayes, and his conversing with the most piercing'st judgements, hath brought him to that pefection, as he can discerne of what mould or temper these Criticks are;For my Dedi∣cation, in stead of all unneces∣sary excuses of presumption; I wil cloze brief∣ly with this constant Reso∣lution: "Though to your Title there be Honour due, "It is Your Self that makes me Honour you. concluding, Voces sunt, praeterea nihil, as is said of the Nighting all. This onely resteth; If I limne him to the life, in spite of Censure, he will merit the Patronage of Honour: if I faile in my Art, (as I dare not presume of my strength) it is in your Honour to impute the fault rather to the Pen than the Man; whose intimate affection to your Lordship, will quickly sweeten and attemper the rigidst Censure: and signe an easy indulgence to such an obsequious errour.

