



Madam,
HOw ready I am to receive your Commands, but withall how un∣fortunate in obeying them, may be easily judged by the coming forth of this Treatise; where I find I have only made my weakness publick, when I intended ser∣vice, and being so much divided betwixt my duty to the Dead, and my obligations to the living, yet I am in neither able to pay. However I may presume to venture the Worlds tryal in subjects of this nature, where I have ample Merit and great vir∣tue to describe: for so men can charge me with poverty of words, but not with false∣hood:
and though my Labours be mean, yet I know such a Fate attends Worth, that it not only secures its own Fame, but pro∣tects others that speak of it. To tell your Ladiship whom I design by this, is to injure my Lords Memory, and your goodness; since both of you require from me a parti∣cular acknowledgement, though both be a∣bove my testimony. I should not here be willing to waken your griefs, nor recall to your remembrance past accidents, were I not sufficiently convinced of your Faith in an affliction. This is a School, wherein you have been long with my Lord bred up; but whereas it might be imputed to the strength of your love, that you could with him go∣vern all other misfortunes, it must be now meerly ascribed to the strength of Religi∣on, that you can without him conquer the last. A severe Blow! sensibly felt by look∣ers on, but much more by your self, that placed all your glory in his life: and yet to be able to kiss the Rod, in all that ten∣derness
of passion, which both your Sex and affection had raised, this argues a high temper of a Christian; and makes me: doubt which is greater, the loss, or your constancy in bearing it. Yet that courage you show in suffering, is not more eminent, than the Noblenesse of your cares; which as they signally appeared in my Lords life time, so afterwards in your performance of all rights to his body; when you bore along through strange Lands that Image of Sorrow, as if you would have an exercise of your love and your patience together. This was a Travel taught Friends Grief, and Ene∣mies Reverence; when they reflected up∣on the Greatness of the Person there repre∣sented, and the Piety of the Conveyer; that the Wisdome of a State should be shut up in a Hearse, and the Joyes of your Ladiship there enclosed. But there are other parti∣culars I could mention, wherein you are as nearly concerned: for whatever praise is due to a Devout Life, to an Exemplary
Discipline, to a Loyal Love, or a Resolute Faith, that your Ladiship may justly chal∣lenge: of all which I could give the world pregnant proofs, but that I know, as it is the comfort of your grief to read my Lords Character, so 'tis the affliction of your Virtue to read your own. Therefore laying aside this Theme in compliance to your will, yet in what relates to my self I shall heg leave to publish to the World the great sense I have of those many favours I have received both from my Lord, and your Ladiship: who have alwayes lived with an equal love as to your selves, and with as equal a concern to oblige others; amongst whom none more reckons himself a Debtor than
Madam

