



MADAM;
SOme moneths are past, since I made bold to recommend to my Right Honourable LORD your Husband, an ENGLISH GENTLEMAN; whom hee was pleased, forth of his noble disposition to receive into his Protection. Into whose most Honourable service he was no soo∣ner entertained, & upon due observance of his integrity approved; then upon ap∣provement of his more piercive judgement, hee became gene∣rally received. Out of these respects, my most Honourable Lady, I became so encouraged, as I have presumed to preferre unto your service an ENGLISH GENTLEWOMAN, one of the same Countrey and Family, a deserving sister of so generous a brother: Or (if you will) a pleasing Spouse to so gracious a Lover. Whom, if your Honour shall be but pleased to entertaine (and your noble Candor is such, as shee can expect nothing lesse) especially, seeing her exquisite feature takes life from his hand, whose family claimes affinity with your fathers house; you shall find excellently graced with sundry singular qualities, beautified with many choice endowments, and so richly adorned with divers exquisite ornaments, as her atten∣dance

shall be no derogation to your Honour, nor no touch to your unblemish'd Selfe, to reteine her in your favour. The living memory of your thrice noble and heroick Father, may justly exact this addressement of mine to his Daughter: of whom my Father sometimes held such neare dependance, being ever cheer∣ed by his countenance, and highly obliged to his goodnesse. This Memoriall made mee confident of a Patronesse; and so much the rather, being to preferre a Maid so complete and richly qualified, as shee could not chuse but deserve highly from the hand of so noble a Mistresse. Sure I am, the sweetnesse of her temper, sorts and sutes well with the quality or disposition of your Honour: For shee loves without any painted pretences to be really vertuous, without any popular applause to be affably gracious, without any glorious glosse to bee sincerely zealous. Her Education hath so enabled her, as shee can converse with you of all places, deliver her judgement conceivingly of most persons, and discourse most delightfully of all fashions. Shee hath beene so well Schooled in the Discipline of this Age, as shee onely desires to reteine in memory that forme which is least affe∣cted but most comely; to consort with such as may improve her Knowledge and Practise of goodnesse by their company; to entertaine those for reall and individuate friends, who make actions of piety expressivest characters of their amity. Diligent you shall ever find her in her imployments, serious in her advice, temperate in her Discourse, discreet in her answers. Shee be∣stowes farre more time in eying the glasse of her life, to rectifie her errors, if there be any, then the glasse of her face in wiping off such outward staines as might blemish her beauty. Neither in preserving that, is shee altogether so remisse, as not to reteine that seemely grace in her feature, as may put her in remembrance of the unexpressive beauty and bounty of her Maker. Neate she goes usually in her Attire, which shee puts on with more care then cost. And to these she addes such a well-seeming grace, as shee bestowes more beauty on them, then she receives from them. Phantasticke habits or forraine fashions are so farre from taking her, as with a sleight but sweet contempt they are dis-valued by her. She wonders how a wise state should imploy so much time in inventing variety of disguises to disfigure their Shape. This makes her desire rather to be out of request with time, then with a civill and well-composed mind; whose honour it is to be prized more by her owne internall worth, then any outward weare. Constant shee is in her Behaviour; wherein shee affects little, but observes much; With a bashfull admiration shee smiles at these civilized simpring Dames, whose onely glory

it is to affect a kind of reserved state; which, as they hold, con∣sists principally in a mine'd speech, set looke, or ginger pace▪ Shee loves alwayes to bee her selfe, nor to entertaine ought which may estrange her from her selfe. So as, there is nothing in the whole posture of her Behaviour, but with a native gracefull propriety doth infinitely become her. Take upon her to instruct others, she will not, such is her Humility; albeit, every mo∣ving posture which comes from her, may be a line of direction unto others to follow her. Complement she affects not, as the world takes it. The word in his owne native and unborrowed signification is good, and in that sense she admits it; but to bee restrained to an inforced formality, shee cannot relish it. Whence it is, that shee prefers the incomparable Liberty of her mind, be∣fore the mutable formality of a deluded age. Shee desires to bee Compleat in the exercise of goodnesse; to improve her Honour not by titles but a lovely and lively proficience, graced with a continuate practise in all vertues. Shee cannot indure this later introduc'd kind of Complement, which consists in Cringies, Congies, or supple Salutes. A cheerefull modesty is her best Complement, which shee ever weares about her as her chiefest or∣nament. Decency shee affects in her Cloathes, affability in her Discourse; shee hath made a covenant with her eyes never to wander, nor intentively to bestow themselves on any other ob∣ject than the glory of her Maker. A proper personage is no such attractive motive to her eye, to make her loose her selfe. What∣soever shee undertakes beseemes her, because shee affects nought but what naturally becomes her. Her beauty is her owne; and whatsoever else may better accomplish her. Her pathes are evenly vertuous; her desires truly religious; Piety is her pra∣ctise; which shee expresseth so fully in every action; as the whole course of her well-disposed life is not so much as justly conscious of the least aspersion. So highly shee values her Estimation, as shee will not engage it to suspition. Promises cannot tempt her, nor hope of advancement taint her. She won∣ders one should preferre a conceit of being great, before a desire of appearing good. Protesting Lovers shee holds for no better then deceiving Lures. Bee their vowes of service never so incessant, their assaults never so violent; her resolves have vow'd her con∣stant. Hope of Profit cannot surprize her, nor thought of Plea∣sure vainely delude her. Estimation shee holds her highest grace, with which untainted shee purposeth to goe to her Grave. Shee knowes how to fancie; and in her she reteines what she fancies most; A chaste soule: this is that shee loves, and with which shee cheerfully lives. Shee was never yet acquainted with a passionate

Ah me; nor a carelesse folding of her armes, as if the thought of a prevailing Lover had wrought in her thoughts some violent Distemper. So seriously doth shee taske her selfe to imploy∣ment, as shee never reserves so much time as to treat of so light a subject. Yet she unfainedly vowes, that if it be ever her fortune to make her Choice, her constant affection must never admit any Change. To be Generous in every action, hath beene ever the height of her ambition. Howsoever she might boast of Des∣cent, her desire is to raise it by Desert. Shee holds, no family can be truly Generous, unlesse it be nobly vertuous. Her life must ex∣presse the line from whence she came. She scornes to entertaine one thought below her selfe: Or to detract from the glory of that house from whence she came. As the blood that streames through her veines was nobly derived, so must it not by any action or affection drawne from the rule of her direction, become corrupted. For Honour, she admits it, but seldome or never ad∣mires it; the Staires by which shee meanes to clime to it, must be faire and firme, or shee will never mount them. She rather ad∣mires the Ages folly; while shee observes how many hazard their high-priz'd liberty, for a vading glimpse of popular glory. Her desires are higher seated, where they are only to be sated. A secure State consists not in styles but vertues, which are Honours surest stayes. Therefore her highest Honour reflects on her Crea∣tor, wherein she is so farre from fearing,Such, to your Honour, is her zealous af∣fection, as she makes it the sole Apology of her Pre∣sumption: which she weaves up in this Dimen∣sion: To serve some GREAT ONES I've been oft∣times woo'd, But HERS I'm vow'd that is both GREAT and GOOD. wherein she is so farre from fearing, as she is ever wishing more Corrivals. THIS is the GENTLEWOMAN whom I have presumed here to present unto your Ladiships service, whose sweet converse will at retired houres afford you choicest solace. Neither should you ranke her amongst the lowest of your me∣ney, will it displease her, such is her Humility: for she hath lear∣ned as well to obey as command. Nor will she spare for any paines, so her diligence may please. Only (Madam) be pleased to shine upon her with the gracious raies of your favour, to shrowd her bashfull endeavours under the wings of your Honour; and entertaine her blushing approach with your benigne Censure. So shall you find a constant desire of requitall in her; and en∣gage Him, whose intimate Zeale to your Honour recommended her,

