



My Lord,
YOu have made that saying true, which heretofore was spoken, Amicus Plato, and Amicus Socrates, but amicissima Veritas; I love Plato wel, and Socrates too, but Truth better than either of them; yea, than
both of them. The hearts of Gods people blesse you, and God for you, and we hope your zeale for Truth against every opposite Error, shall still provoke ma∣ny.
Confes. lib. 12. Veritatem celare, est aurum sepelire, To conceale Truth, is as to bury gold, saith Austin: And Bernard convincingly, Si propter timorem mortis tacere Veritatem impietas est, quomodo non est major impietas, propter miserum ven∣trem & honoris vani spem tacere Veritatem? Videtur meliorem facere gratiam panis & ho∣noris,
Bernard. quam gloriam Veritatis; If for the feare of death to conceale a Truth be sin and wickednesse; ô what a sin is it, for the bellies-sake, or some such sinister end to dissemble it?
Truth in 1 Petition. 2 Presence. 3 Possession. My Lord, Inquisitio Veritatis est ejus petitio, scientia Veritatis est ejus praesentia, sed creditio Veritatis est ejus possessio; Truth when sought after is excellent, when found and knowne it is yet more lovely, but when beleeved and practised too, it becomes ours in possession.
Faith, what? And indeed, what is Faith, but I be∣leeve? that is, I understand and conceive of it for a truth, I assent unto it in my Judgement to bee a truth, I consent unto it in my will as good, and build mine eternall comfort on it as good for mee; this act of beliefe carries the whole soule with it. It is pleasant to stand upon the shore, and see the Ships
tossed in the troubled Ocean; to stand upon a Castle safe, and see a pitch'd Battaile fought, in the va∣riety and successe thereof; to stand upon a rock and see (so it bee with pity, and without pride) the Errors, wandrings, mists, clouds, and stormes, which are below in the valley of this world. Your Lordship hath like a stable Christian stood fast in God, and in the power of his might, while you have seen many (too many) tossed to and fro with the wind of every Doctrine. Doubtlesse, every godly,
Movet mens pia in charitate, quiescit in pro∣videntia, non vertit denique nisi super pols veritatis. truly godly mind moves in charity, rests in provi∣dence, and doth not turne, but upon the poles of Truth, while the portion of wicked men will bee; that they deceive, and are deceived. Mixtures of falshood,
Simile. I may fitly resemble them to that allay which is in gold, silver, or pewter, it may indeed make the met all worke somewhat the better, but it abasth it much; even so our notionall mixtures may indeed in preaching, presse, &c. make things take the better among giddy heads, but they abase Divinity, and render men delighting therein too full of levity and emptinesse.
Gods attire if hee did dwell among men. It was wont to bee said of our Learned Criticks, That if God himself were to dwell in humane shape amongst men, hee would take light for his body, and truth for his soul.
This City hath been exceedingly honoured in sen∣ding
out Champions to fight for Truth abroad, wherein with what gallantry and successe our Lon∣doners have behaved themselves, Chronicles will not conceale in after times, and there are yet private Anniversaries of thankefull remembrances for Newbery,
The 20 of Sep∣tember, that day this Sermon was Preached. &c. And it will bee no little Fame to this City also, to have it recorded, that in the time of such a one, and such a one severall Lord Majors of London successively, Heresies, Schismes, Se∣ctaries were suppressed, or at least not so countenan∣ced, as that the tares overgrew the wheate in Gods Field;
Salvian. Dum mali esse volunt, Verita∣tem esse nolunt, qua mali condemnantur; but let Truth prevaile, and let it be glorious. Of all pieces of our Spirituall armour, Truth is resembled unto a girdle, Ephes. 6. for indeed, Truth should incompasse us about;
Truth foure∣fold. And a fourfold Truth, scil. of judgment, heart, speech, action, is required of eve∣ry Christian. My Lord, the Lord of Lords take a double portion of the Spirit of Paul, and put it on you, and on all them that shall succeed you, that you may withstand them to the face, which goe not with a right foot unto the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Non bene vivitur,
Holy life, what and how? ubi non bene de Deo credi∣tur, Aug. A holy life is indeed nothing else, but the infusion of holy truths. The Spirit opening
generall truths to a Christian, hath another worke also, and that is to reveale our particular interest in those truths, and to breed speciall faith, whereby wee may make them our owne: that so where sa∣cred truths are truly apprehended, there may be an impression in the soule, suitable to the things be∣lieved. The Lord make our believing of God Al∣mighty, to bread an impression of dependence, reve∣rence, &c.
Some dispute of Faith, some preach it, some sweare by it, but few live thereby. the belief and knowledge of Christ cru∣cified, to bee a crucifying knowledge; of Christ ri∣sing, a raising knowledge; of Christ abased, an aba∣sing knowledge to our soules, and so of all truths else whatsoever. The good Prince George Anhalt, (who in Luthers time became a Preacher of the Gospel) intending to comfort his brother Prince John, raiseth strong consolations for him from the last three Articles of the Creed, Remission of sinnes, resurrection of the body,
Comfort in trouble, what and how? and life everlasting. There is one Article before these three, and that is the Communion of Saints, which we beleeve too, but finde as little influence from in these our dayes, as from any truth that ever our Lord Christ left us; and reason I know none thereof, but that there is so much of that knowledge which puffeth up, and so little of that love that edifieth. Hee that strives for Error strives for Satan against
God,
A holy strise. he that strives for victory, strives for himself against other men; but hee that strives for truth against errour, helps the Lord against Gods enemy and his too, namely, Satan the Father of lies. And this specially,
Bonum, benè, God loves Ad∣verbes better than Adjectives if withall hee handle Gods cause according unto God; A man shews most knowledge and understanding in the matter of truth, but most grace in the manner of handling of it with reve∣rence, holinesse, and modesty.
Your Lordship hath so behaved your self in your Yeare, that I doubt not but it will turne to your accompt before God, and amongst us your Name shall be as an Oyntment poured forth: Jesus Christ blesse you more and more with sin's decreases, and graces increases, that you may bee perfect and in∣tire, wanting nothing; So prayeth

