



FOR Christs, and your sake, this plain Trea∣tise (which about two years since was compo∣sed for a more private use) is now by the importunity of divers of the LORDS Servants, held forth to publick view. And though a sense of my own weaknesse, and
 great unworthinesse might have de∣terred me from this undertaking; yet the excellency, weightiness, and suitablenesse of the Subject to your present conditions (which will I hope make way in your hearts for its entertainment,) hath en∣couraged me to present it to your considerations.
Its chief design and aime is to lift up the SON OF MAN, who both in his Person, Merit, Spirit, Ordinances, and Servants, is (by more than ordinary unbelief, profa∣nesse, superstition, persecution, and abounding of all sorts of iniquity) so greatly despised and rejected of men; yea (to the great reproach of Christianity) of those that in words professe to magnifie him above all.

How it will be accepted, and of what benefit it will be to you, who as yet are his ENEMIES in your minds by wicked works, (Col. 1.21.) I know not. This I can say, in all the Reproofs, Cautions, Counsels, and Exhortations, I have had it in my heart, earnestly to desire to be instrumentall to deli∣ver some of your souls at least, from perishing in your disobe∣dience and rebellion against CHRIST: For though you say peace and safety, while you walk in the imaginations of your own hearts; yet great is the danger that you are in, through your pro∣voking this MIGHTY ONE against you. How easily, and suddenly can He break you with
 his rod of Iron, and dash you in pieces like a Potters Vessel? (as Psalm. 2.) And what though through his patience and long-suf∣fering, you should walk many years in the wayes of your hearts, and in the sight of your eyes; yet know, you must at last, (and how soon, you cannot tell,) appear be∣fore the Judgement Seat of this Mighty One, that you may receive the things done in your bodies, according to what you have done, whether it be good or bad, (2 Cor. 5.10.) And what account will you then be able to give to him of all your pride, covetous∣ness, and some of you of your cur∣sing, swearing, deceit, drunkenness, malitiousnesse, uncleannesse, con∣tempt
 of his Ordinances, persecuti∣on of his Servants, and other high and horrid wickednesses, scarce to be paralelled among the worst of Heathens. O fear and tremble before the true and living GOD against whom you have sinned; trust not in your power, policy, friends, honours, estates, and such like worldly enjoyments, which will not profit, nor help at all in the great day of the wrath of the Lamb, (Prov: 11.4.) I shall leave with you Luthers Caution to some in his dayes: viz: Take heed you be not found among those roaring haughty Gentlemen, and Heaven-breakers, who do resist the Holy Ghost, and Gods Word, and boast of their own strength and ability.

And further, in the spirit of meeknesse, love and pity, I beseech you so to consider and lay to heart the things that are here following written, touching the GREAT KING OF THE WHOLE EARTH, as to humble your selves under his Mighty hand, to trust in his mighty name, and to be obe∣dient to his holy will; that (your sins and transgressions being blot∣ted out,) you may in the end be made partakers of his Heavenly Kingdome and Glory. AMEN.
And You the FAITHFƲL, and precious servants of the LORD, especially the least, and weakest of the flock, who are fea∣ring and ready to faint under the
 weight of present pressures, and ap∣prehension of future troubles; For your furtherance, and joy of faith in this Wilderness, I have set my selfe to demonstrate the MIGHTI∣NES, and ENGAGEMENT of CHRIST to HELP you in all Conditions.
And though I may truly say, I have not told you one halfe of the Greatness of his power, and wis∣dome; yet, I hope, what is here in much weakness displayed before you, shall become mighty through God, in some measure to support and comfort you in your several so∣litudes and sufferings here below, such being the portion here of all that will live Godly in Christ Je∣sus, 2 Tim: 3.11. Acts 14.22.

Which that it may be, I entreat you not cursorily to reade, (as the manner of most is;) but seriously to weigh and carefully to hide in your hearts, the words of truth, contained in this Book.
And because I would not detaine you from the perusal of what fol∣loweth, I onely, yet earnestly beseech you, by all the help you have recei∣ved from Christ, by all the conso∣lation you have in him, and by all the hope you have of future Glory through him, that you give all dili∣gence to walk more worthy of that grace wherein you stand, by being more serious, spiritual, humble, and holy in all manner of conversa∣tion; especially now when you are made to eate the bitter fruits of for∣mer
 wantonness. Oh sin no more, lest worse things come unto you. O love, and serve the Lord Jesus Christ, not in word, and in tongue, (the common, and onely sacrifice of most that are called Christians) but in deed, and in truth.
In a word, be very faithfull to him; make his work, your busi∣ness; his commandements, your Rule; his life, your example; his SPIRIT, your HELP; his name, your refuge; and his glory, your end: And if you do these things, you shall never fall.
Now, what is here humbly offe∣red for common good, may (by a blessing from on high) be of some use for the turning of the feet of some sinners from the wayes of
 wickedness; and for the streng∣thening the weak hands of some Saints in the work of righteous∣ness, to continue therein unto the end, to the Glory and praise of this MIGHTY ONE, the LORD JESUS CHRIST; is the prayer of

From my Study in Norwich this 2d of the 4th Moneth June. 1662.
