



Honored, and Beloved in our Lord Jesus.
IT is not want of respect that I seem thus to crowd your Names to∣gether, I owe more than an Epistle to each of your Names, but be∣cause God hath made you one, though branched into several Habitations, I take the boldness to present this work to you, as unto one Family: It
 is written of the Stork,Ciconiae mos est, unum è pullis relin∣quere Domui qua nidulata est. Ludo Vives. that she useth to leave one of her Young ones to the House where she made her nest, and upon that account some of my labors do belong to your Family, where I studyed, and from whence I Preached them: some of you and yours have often desired the Publishing of these Notes, and being Prin∣ted, whither should the Press send them but to your Door? you are the Family with whom I have had the honor to con∣verse much whilst living; and now the Blossoms of the Grave are upon me, I dedi∣cate these Notes unto you, that by them I may live and speak with you when my Head shal lie under the Clods: you are a Family whom the Lord hath blessed and raysed not only to a great estate in the world, but to the saving knowledg of his Son, our dear Savior, and whom should I serve and honor but those whom God ho∣nors and blesseth?
1. That Family is not far from blessing, which hath Godly Children, Children trayned up and seasoned with the Grace of Christ from the Cradle; The Lord blessed the House of Obed-edom, and wherein did that blessing consist? the Scripture tells us. 1 Chron. 26. That some of his Children were Porters in the House of God, others were mighty Men of Valor, able Men for strength and
 service, and the reason is given ver 5. For the Lord blessed him, So that Children useful and serviceable both in Church and State are a great blessing unto a Family. à  quia filius est aedifi∣cium patris. The Hebrews say, that Children are the Fathers building, and indeed he builds wisely that doth lay the Foundations of his House in a Godly Seed. Loe, Children (saith the Psalmist) are an heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the Womb are his reward, as Arrowes in the Hand of the mighty, so are Children of the youth, blessed is the Man that hath his Quiver ful of them; Espe∣cially where these Arrowes are wel headed & wel hearted too. And upon this account it is good for great Families to have good Ser∣vants: For, corrupt Servants do debauch Children, and debauched Children do scat∣ter Brimstone upon the House of their Fa∣thers.
2. Neither is that Family an unblessed Family which is strict in the observation of the Sabbath or the Lords day; God hath blessed that day that he might bless them who do keep that day: hereby England hath been blessed with the power of godliness more than other Nati∣ons; My Sabbath, (saith God) shall be a sign between me and thee.Servasti diem Da∣minicam? Christia∣nus sum 'intermittere non possum. And in the Primitive times when a Christian was asked whether he had kept the Lords day, his answer ge∣nerally was, I am a Christian, I cannot neg∣lect it; as if the observation of the Lords
 day were the badg of a Christian: this is the Girdle of al our Duties, and in respect of this Girdle I may say, Ungirt, unblessed; the vallies of the week day are blessed by the upper springs of this day; and as the Commandement doth especially poynt at, and look wishly upon the Master of the Fa∣mily, (saying, Neither thou, nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, &c.) So doth the blessing also.
3. Blessed is that Family which doth industri∣ously seek to build the House of God and the House of the Poor; David did but intend to build Gods House, and the Lord promised him to build his House. The Egiptian Midwives spared the Israelites Children, whereby the Poor Families and Houses of the Israelites were built, And the Lord dealt wel with the Mid∣wives and made them Houses, Exod. 1.20.
4. Neither is that Family far from blessing which is a friend to the Ministry. Receiving, hiding, and refreshing the paynful, and faithful Ministers and Preachers of the Gos∣pel; The Lord give mercy (saith Paul) to the House of Onesiphorus, for he hath refreshed me, Not once and no more, but, he hath oft refreshed me: nor did he do this because I followed him and sought him out, but, he sought me out very diligently and found me And in the day of my greatest affliction he was not ashamed of me, for he was not asha∣med
 of my Chains, wherefore the Lord grant unto him that he may find mercy in that day; and give mercy unto the House of Onesiphorus. 2 Tim. 1.16.17.18. He that receiveth a Prophet (saith our Savior) in the Name of a Prophet, shal receive a Prophets reward, and what is the reward of a Prophet but to profit by the Prophet, and to have a share in his Venture, and in al that good which he doth by his Ministry.
5. A praying Family also is a precious Family and blessed,Nisi Dominus aedifi∣caverit domum frustra laborat quisquis eam aedificat, Psal. 127. Non enim dicit, Do∣minus aedificat domum nomine scilicet labo∣rante, sed ita, nisi Do∣minus aedisica verit fru∣stra laborat perinde ac si diceret, labore quidem opus est, sed hujus conatum frustra sumi si solus erit, non enim laboris sedulitas sed Dei benedictio rem faecundatet omnia per∣ficit. Luther farrago Epistol. especially where Prayer and paynes, Religion and Righteousness, Fru∣gallity and Liberallity are in conjunction: some are much for payns taking, and Little for Prayer; Others are much for Prayer, and little for paynes taking; some are much for Religion, and little for Righteousness; others are much for Righteous dealings, and little for Religion; some are much for Frugallity, & little for Liberallity; others are much for Liberallity, & little for Frugalli∣ty; but blessed is that Family, where Prayer and paynes, Religion and Righteousness, Frugallity and liberality meet and dwel together under one Roof
Now those things I have seen amongst you: Only, as heretofore so now labor to abound therein more and more, that you and your Family may be as the field which the Lord blesseth. And as God hath
 raised you to an outward greatness in the world,Nec quicquam in te mutaverit fortunae amplitudo nisi ut prodesse tandundem posses et velles. Plin. Epist. ad Vespas. so let your hearts be great for God, that what Pliny reported of Vespasian, may be truely said of you; your abundance hath changed nothing in you, but this, that your power to do good is now made an∣swerable to your wil; counting it greater mercy to lay out for God, than to lay up for your selves, for it may be when you come to die, you wil have more comfort in what you have laid out for God, than in what you have laid up for your Children. And why should we not give that to God by an act of our Faith which he gave to us by an act of his Love?
And as for your Children, if I might not exceed the bounds of an Epistle, I would say to them.
1. Children, O Children know your Fathers, & the God of your Fathers, Know your parents, for that is the first Comandement with Pro∣mise, & you shal honor your selves in hono∣ring them.Camerar. oper. sub∣cis. Centur. 1. cap. 66. Its recorded of the Catanenses, that they made a Stately Monument of king∣ly Magnificence, in, remembrance of two Sons, who took their Aged Parents upon their Backs and carried them through the Fire when their Fathers House was al in a Flame. And of al the Birds, the Stork hath the Name for the good Bird, and why? but because the younger of them do help
 and bear up the Elder, their weak Parents; pia avi, cicons eximia inest pietas: etonim quan∣tum temporis impen∣derint foetibus edu∣candis, tancum et ip∣sae à pullis suis invi∣cem aluntur Solinus, cap. 11. Schind. Parentes senectute confectos humeris suis gestare dicuntur. Avenar. but though your Parent is to be honored, yet your God is more to be honored. If you know God when you are young, God wil know you when you are Old; remem∣ber therefore your Creator in the daies of your Youth: and your Creator wil re∣member you in the daies of your Age.
2. Take heed of youthful sins, for the sweet sins of our Youth, do bite sore in our Age.
3. Get an inward principle of Grace in your own Soules, For if you live on your Parents Root, when your Parents die, your goodness wil die too; and therefore look wel to the laying of your Foundation, which is not to be laid in disputation but Humilati∣on.
4. Be not unwilling, to bear the Yoak in the daies of your Youth, For he that can carry a calfe when he is Young, wil carry an Ox when he is old: Affliction gives you under∣standing, it is the School of Experience.Vituli triturantes quotidir ligantur vi∣tuli mactandi quoti∣die in pascuis libere relinqountur. August. The Oxen that are for use, are kept tied up, when those that are fatted for the Shambles are let loose into the Pastures to feed at their pleasure.
5. Be not too confident of what you can do or wil do; Young Men are apt to be too confident, as Old Men are apt to be too fearful; but the best Swimmers are the soonest drowned, because of
 their confidence: wherefore in all thy waies acknowledg the Lord, and leane not to thine own understanding. Pro. 3.
6. When you come to the great turns of your life, be sure that you make a right choyce, For every Man is as his choyce is, if there be any Dirt on the Hands, it wil appear in the Knuckles, the turning places; and if there be Dirt in your Lives, it wil be found, and appear in your great turns.
7. Let your dwelling place be, where God dwels, and he dwels where his Ordinances are, For there he records his Name; but though you live under Ordinances in regard of your Station, yet live above them in re∣gard of your affection, passing through them unto Christ, and through Christ, into the Bosome of the Father; it was not Davids sling that killed Goliah, but the Name of God in the use of the sling.
8. Seek not great things for your selves, in this world, For if your Garments be too long, they wil make you stumble, and one staff helps a Man in his Journey, when many in his Hands at once hinder him; but labor to do great things for God,Infima pars faelici∣tatis perfectae est ter∣rena faelicitas. Austin. and God wil do great things for you; Terrene or earthly Faelicity, is the lowest Part of perfect Faelicity.
9. Be much in private Prayer, for the more you come to God, the more welcome you
 are, his Customers have the best Penny∣worths; and if God do much for you in the Morning-duty, do much for him al the day after;A prece principium. and if you have little from God in the morning, walk humbly all the day after.
10. Let your company be alwaies such as you may get good from, or do good unto; When you are alone, think of good things; and when you are in company, speak of good things.
11. Keep the truth, and the truth will keep you.
12. And whatever mercy or blessing you re∣ceive, trace it to Heaven Gates, and to Christs Blood; For it flowed from Christs Blood, and leades you to Heaven; And the God of peace, that brought again from the dead, our Lord Jesus, that great Shepheard of the Sheep, through the Blood of the everlasting Covenant, make you all (Parents and Children) perfect in every good work to do his wil, working in you, that which is wel pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever.

