



VV. RR. FF.
Such being the distemper of this Age, that onely good Bookes, and such as are most proper to cure, in the very roote, its disorders, doe stand in need of Protection: You cannot in iustice, as it seemes to mee, refuse yours to this, the compo∣sing and publishing wherof at this time was an effect of your
 V. R. Paternities order and commands. Now those very Commands with so much Aduice and zeale vnanimously made, are a very strong Proofe that this Booke (for as much as concernes the substantiall Doctrine therein contained) is such an one, so perfectly good & Medicinall, as that I neede not doubt, and indeed should be sorry it should haue any other fae then the hatred of all those that loue darknes more then Light. As for whatsoeuer faults may haue hapned through my want of skill in the compiling, I doe not desire such Patrons to them. Yet truly there hath not bene vvan∣ting all the diligence and care that I vvas capable of to prouide that so excellent Instructions should not be too much disparaged by the second copying and nevv fashion and dresse vpon them. The paines herein taken vvill appeare to be not very ordinary, to any one that shall consider hw difficult a matter it is out of such a vvorld of Treatises, (vvritten vpon particular subiects for the speciall necessi∣ties and vse of certaine deuout Persons, vvithout any ye or designe in the Authour of affording materialls for an entire Body of Spirituality) to frame such a Body not at all de∣fectiue, and with prs not vnproportionable. Novv I must confesse that though conscience alone, and duty to your VV. RR. Paternities vvould haue had sufficient influence on mee to preuent negligence: yet I had moreouer one Motiue besides to heighten my diligence, vvhich vvas Gratitude: For to the admiration and loue of these Excellent Instru∣ctions I ovve not only the hastning of my Reconciliation  the Catholick Church (as on this very day, being the Vi∣ile of the Feast of S. M. Magdalen, in the Office of the H. nquisition at Rome) but aso the happines of being a Mem∣ber
 (through vnworthy) of your Holy Congregation. It may notvvithstanding fall out, that vvith all my endea∣uours I may faile of giuing satisfaction in the point of Art: But that I haue not bene vvanting in the principall condition, of Faithfullnes, besides the testimony of mine ovvne coscience, I haue that also of persons learned and pious, to vvhm the Writings of the Venerable Authour haue bene perfectly knovvn and familiar.
I vvill doubtlesse seeme strange to others, but not to your Paternity (V. R. F. President) that so pefct Instru∣ctions for Contemplation should proceede from one that had spen  his vvhole Life in the laborious Employment of the Apostolick Mission. But your V. R. Paternity by expe∣rience knovve, that those vvho sincerely giue themselues to seee Almighty God by pure, Spirituall Prayer, vvhat euer their Employments be, vvill vvithout any preiudice to them, neuer vvant opportunities to meete and conuerse vvith Him in Solitude. Now from such Conuersations it is, that there doe proceede from the Father of Lights such Illustrations as not only giue a Splendour to the Persons themselues, but by reflexion also serue to guide others.
The Solitude that our Venerable Authour enioyed, vvas by his ovvne election, among freinds, Penitents and Disci∣ples. But Gods holy Spirit lead your V. R. Paternity into a Desart far more suit of horrour indeed, but vvithall far more instructiue: a Solitude of Prisons and Dungeons; among Enemies to Religion and Humanity: Where yet by the Light and force not only of your Learning, but also your De∣uotion &c, you could found Churches of Conuerts.
A more sufficient and proper Patron therfore and Iudge
 could not be found, then your V. R. Paternity, of Instru∣ctions of this Nature. So that from you it is that all others your Religious Subiects receiuing them, vvill through Gods grace dayly vvith their encreasing feruour by their good practise and example recommend them to others abroad also.
VV. RR. FF.
From my Cell in the Con∣uent of S. Gregories in Doway
this 21. of Iuly 1657.

