




(Much esteemed in the Lord.)
HAving made choice of the
three first Chapters of the
Revelation to be the subject
of a weekly Exercise in the
place where God hath set me,
(if he shall please so long to continue
my life and liberty till I have finished this
taske,) and having through his assistance

passed through the first fifteene verses,
it pleased his providence so to dispose, as
that the sixteenth came to hand upon that
verie day, on which some, and (as I since
understood many, of you were assembled
together for the Ordaining of certaine
Candidates for the Ministery. Being in num∣ber
parallel to the Starres in my Text,
(however one of them, as it happeneth
sometimes to the Starres,) appeared not.)
With this providential Syncronisme I was
then somewhat affected, looking upon
the Subject I had in hand, as far more su∣table
to that audience where you then
were, (and my self should have been, had
not bodily imfirmity, not daring to con∣flict
with the difficulty of the season,
hindred,) then that to which I was then
preaching. And hereupon it is, that I have
beene since induced to communicate
unto you these my Meditations, which
here I put into your hands; wishing that
they may be as useful to you, and others
of my Brethren elsewhere, as they are
seasonable and needful for the present
times. I shall not neede to minde you
of what I presume you cannot but be
sensible, what designes there are at this

day on foote against your sacred function,
either to render it null, or else contemptible;
either of which will serve the Devils and
the Iesuites turne well enough for the
exterpating of Gods true Religion.
Against these you shall finde that in this
Treatise, which serveth to animate and
beare up your spirits. Onely let it be
your care to answer the first of these
Emblems here held forth; that you be
Starres. First, such as are placed by God
in the firmament of his Churh, (where∣unto
that Ordinance of a solemn Ordination
is so necessary a requisite, as that I sup∣pose
no moderate and well advised spirit
will blame what you in this juncture of
time have done, though happily therein
all things have not beene so regular as
might have beene wished.) And being
thus placed, then let it be your care and
indeavour to approve your selves in mea∣sure
worthy of that honour, shining as
Starres, giving light to this darksome
world by your doctrine and example, being
(like the Pleiades) sweetly influentiall,
unto those over whom God hath set you.
And then with confidence put your selves
into the hands of this Son of man com∣mitting

your lives, livelyhood, Libertie,
labours to the care and custodie of this
your Archbishop, who being  the
Chiefe Shepherd, will have an eye, as to
the Sheepe, so to the Shepherds. In whose
hand, as I find you in my Text, so I leave
you, resting
Yarmouth
Decem.
11. 1655.

