



(Much esteemed in the Lord)
IT is now Thirty seven years, since I was by a Divine Providence, sent to exercise my Ministeriall Function among you; my first entrance within your Walls, being upon the same day that your late Dread Soveraign KING CHARLES the First, was there with great Solem∣nitie, and with the Universal Accla∣mation and Joy of all that were pre∣sent, Proclaimed. And of this my

entrance, I hope I may without boast∣ing say unto you, what Paul doth of his, unto his Thessalonians, 1 Thes. 2. 1. that it hath not been altogether in vain. It having been my desire to follow his steps, in making what im∣provement I might of such liberty and opportunity as the same provi∣dence hath been pleased to put into my hand, in speaking to you the Gos∣pel of God. And that these my poor labours might be the more effectual, not dying in the are, not perishing in the hearing, I have adventured to expose some of them to a publick view; that so, by this Sacrifice of∣fered up unto God and his Church, being dead, I might yet speak, and preach being silent. And upon the same account it is that I do now send these Meditations after them: Where∣in you shall meet with a Subject, which (if you will believe your Apostle) is worthy of all acceptation. Such I am sure is the matter here held forth▪ what ever the manner of handling it be; it containing in it, the sum and

substance of the Gospel, which being brought home, as here it is by this chosen Vessell, by a particular Appli∣cation, it cannot but bring abundant Consolation to the Soul of every truly penitent sinner: Such experience had this our Apostle of it; and so have many others after him. Among whom I meet with a memorable instance in that renowned Martyr of Christ, Mr. Thomas Bilney, who in a Letter of his to Cubert Tonstall Bishop of London, (as Mr. Fox in his Mar∣tyrology hath Related it) giveth this account of the manner and means of his own Conversion. Hearing (saith e) of the New Testament, which was first set forth by Erasmus, and under∣standing it to be eloquently done by him, being allured rather for the Latin then for the word of God, (for at that time, I knew not what it meant) I ought it even by the good providence of God, as I do now well understand and perceive. And at the first read∣ng (as I remember) I chanced upon his Sentence, (O most sweet and com∣fortable

Sentence to my Soul) the first Epistle to Timothy the first Chap∣ter, It is a true saying, and worthy of all men to be embraced, that Christ Iesus came into the world to save sin∣ners, of whom I am the chief.
This one sentence through God's in∣struction and inward working, which I did not then perceive, did so exhi∣larate my heart, being before wound∣ed with the guilt of my sins, and be∣ing almost in despaire, that immedi∣ately I felt a marvellous comfort and quietness, insomuch, that my bruised bones leaped for joy.
Thus have you a Probatum est af∣fixed to this Receipt, which being taken in, and rightly digested, I doubt not but it will be found a Soveraign Cor∣dial to whoever it is that shall make use of it. Onely take heed that your Souls be duly prepared for it, by a true sight and sense of sin, that so you may see and feel, the need you have of Iesus Christ, and be excited willingly to receive him, not only as a Saviour, but also as a Soveraign;

to be Ruled and governed, as well as Saved by him. Being thus disposed, now let me invite you to come, and suck this Breast of Consolation, which you have here held forth unto you, re∣ceiving and lodging this Divine truth in your hearts, remembring it, medi∣tating of it, believing it, applying it to your selves, and practising what you are here directed and excited to; which whilest you do, let my prayers go along with my poor endeavours, that through the concurrence of grace, they may be made effectual unto you, and who ever else shall make use of them, for that end for which they have been designed. In the assured hope whereof I rest,
YARMOUTH, March 30. 1662.

