



(Highly and deservedly honoured in the Lord,)
YOu see what Matters they are I have here to deal with; Not Civill, but Religious: The former of these I leave to the wise Providence of that Most High, who ruleth in the King∣dome of men, and giveth it to whom∣soever he will, Dan. 4. 17. The latter I look upon as properly within the Sphere of my sacred function. And being so, I

have taken occasion to deal therewith ac∣cording to the exigence of the present Times: which being themselves unsta∣ble, are apt to render those that live in them like unto themselves, as the Ship doth the Passengers that are imbarked in it. Hence is it that vertiginous distem∣pers (as to a secondary cause of them,) are grown so Epidemical in this our Climate at this day; that in this our Heaven (so the Church is frequently stiled in the Book of Revelations) there should be so many Planets, wandring Stars (it is St. Jude's word, Jude 13.) to be seen in eve∣ry quarter of it; so many every where carried about with divers and strange doctrines, to the no small disquietment of the Church, the high dishonour, and great prejudice of Gods true Religion, with the eminent indangering of their own soules. That you are not in this number, this you owe to that Grace, by which the Heart of man is established. And that you may not be so, is my design in this Treatise: where∣in I have, according to my weak skill, done (or at least endeavoured to do) what becometh a spiritual Physician, Opened the Nature, assigned the Causes, disco∣vered the Danger of, and prescribed a

Remedy proper and Soveraign for, this Malady. And these my good Intentions I do here present to a publick view; desi∣ring (what I do not wholly despair of) that they may be in some degree useful and suc∣cessfull, if not for the reclaiming of those who are already turned aside from the way of truth, yet for the preventing of the like deviations in others. Which that they may be, let them not want the additional Ingre∣dient of your Prayers: For which I shall rest

Yarmouth, March 19. 1654.
