



MADAME.
If I had not any pressing obligation (as I haue many) to take all occasions to acknowledge both my worthy esteeme and resentment also for your many fauours: Yet without iniustice I could not but returne vnto your Ladishipp &c. these Instructions about the Prayer of Contemplation, which from your full store I first receiued. I could wish it had bene in my power to commend them to the liking and practise of others, as the admirable Piety of the Ven. Au∣thour (whose memory will alwayes be in Benediction with you) did to yours. But being able to boast no other vertue in this matter, but only diligence and fidelity (asserted by your Ladiships owne testimony:) I should doubt that the vnworthines of the Compiler would to their disparagement-preuayle against the Excellency of the Authour, and his ar∣gument,
 were it not that I am confident that a view (appa∣ret to all that know that Conuent) of the many most blessed effects that they haue produced there, will haue the force to recommend them to strangers, and to defend them against contradictours. Your great Charity (RR. DD.) makes you thinke your selues not vnbeholding to mee for dispersing thus abroad to all that will accept them, these your richest Ie∣wells, your most delicious prouisions, your most secure ar∣mour, that is, all that makes your Solitude & Scarcity &c. deserue to be the enuy of Princes Courts, the Habitation of Angells, and Temples of God himselfe: For Prayer is all this, & more good then your selues can expresse; and yet you can expresse more then any others but such as your selues can vn∣derstand. Since therfore you haue bene pleased to say I haue obliged you by this publication, let my recompence, I beseech you, be to be sometimes thought of in your Prayers, that I may become seriously mine owne Disciple, and learne by this Booke to pray as you doe: and that this Worke may inuite the Readers, whoeuer they be, only to make a Tryall (though at first but euē out of curiosity) whether wee haue boasted too largey of the Treasures here exposed: This if through the Diuine assistance they shall doe, it may be hoped that many vnawares to thēselues will become Conuerts not only to Piety but euen to Catholick Truth and Vnity. And surely none will suspect that any danger can come from Pure Spirituall Prayer.
Madame and RR. DD.
Doway: this 23. of Iuly. 1657.

