



(Much esteemed in the Lord),
WHat signall Testimonies of your real and cordial affection to your dread Soveraign, King Charls the second, you have lately gi∣ven, as at his happy Restauration to the exercise of his Regal Go∣vernment in this and the Neighbour-Nations, so now again on the day of his Royal Coronation; my Eyes and Ears, among many others, have been witnesses. And, according to my bounden Duty, it hath been my desire and endeavour to powre some Oyl upon this flame, by making choice of such Sub∣jects to preach upon at those Seasons, as I apprehended to be very sutable to those Solemnities. The former of which (entred upon June 28, 1660. and af∣terwards prosecuted in diverse Sermons,) was that of the Psalmist, Psal. 118.22, 23. where we find mention made of a Stone, which being first rejected, was afterwards advanced. The Stone which the Builders refused, is become the Head-stone of the Corner: This is the Lord's doing, and it is marvailou in our Eyes. Which how fitly it agreed, as to David in a Metaphorical, and to Christ in a Mystical sense; so also to our dread Soveraign, aptly expressing the great and wonderful Change, as of theirs, so of his Condition: as also what use they who hear of the one, and behold the

other, are to make of both, I then shewed you. The other is this of the same Pen, which writing after the like manner, giveth an account to the World of a two-fold Tribute, that should be paid to King Solomon as the Shadow, and to King Jesus as the Substance▪ viz. Prayer and Praise. Both which being due from all Subjects to their lawful and Gracious Soveraigns; are not to be detained, but readily yielded. And so let thm be by you, as unto Jesus Christ your Supream; so to his Servant, your subordinate Head and Governour under Him. Which that they may be, I do here present you all with what some, and many, of you lately heard touching the latter of these (wanting leisure to transcribe the former): desiring that it may make a deep impression upon your Spirits, so as being minded of this your Duty, you may approve your selves truly Loyal Subjects unto both. Thi that you may do, shall be the prayer of him, who i

From my Study, May 3, 1661.
