



(Much esteeemed in the Lord.)
THe last year, I sent forth
a Groan, a Groan for Is∣rael;
I now here second
it with Tears, Tears for
Ierusalem. And whe∣ther
there be cause for
both these, I appeal to
you, whom God hath in any measure
made sensible of the present state of the

land of your Nativity, and specially of the
Church therein. When Nehemiah heard
that sad report concerning Ierusalem, that
the remnant which were left therein were
in great affliction and reproach, and that
the Wall thereof was broken down, &c. It
came to passe (saith he) when I heard these
words, that I sate down and wept, and
mourned, Neh. 1. 4. And is not this the
Condition of the poor Church of God
among us in this Nation at this day? Is
not the Wall thereof broken down? All
Church-Government levelled? By rea∣son
whereof all kind of dangerous and
damnable Errours and Heresies, and en∣ormious
practises, with unbrotherly
and unchristian divisions, have broke
in upon us, to the rendring of us a
scorn and derision to the Nations round
about. Thus doth Englands sore run
in this night of her Affliction, and ceaseth
not, her calamity every day increasing.
And yet (which is no small addition
to her misery,) how few are there who
so lay it to heart, as to seek out for
cure and remedy? Nay, how many
who refuse it being offered? not indu∣ring
to hear of any such thing as Church-Government.

Insomuch as the servants
of God, some and many of them, may
take up the like complaint concerning
this Nation, that Babylons friends once
did concerning her (Ier. 51. 9.) We would
have healed her, but shee is not healed.
Nay, that which is far worse, shee re∣fuseth
so to be. So deplorable, and almost
desperate, is her condition now become.
Now in this case what shall Sions friends,
do? What? desert and forsake her?
This indeed is the resolve of Babylons
friends there. Let us forsake her (say they,)
and let us goe every man into his own Coun∣trey,
for her Iudgment reacheth unto heaven,
and is lifted up unto the skies; They will
give her over, and every one shifteth for
himselfe. But far be such thoughts from
all the servants of God in this Nation.
How ever (it must be acknowledged) they
have cause enough to feare the event,
having so many sad symptomes before
their eyes, yet (not knowing but that
there may be hope in Israel concerning
this thing) let them not in the day of her
adversity forsake their Mother, in whose
womb they were conceived, and whose
breasts have given them suck; But let

them with faith and patience, yet looke
out, look up (for from thence must come
Englands cure,) being importunate with
the God of Israel, that he who hath in
his just judgment for our unfruitfulnesse,
broken down the hedge of his Church a∣mongst
us, so as the Boar out of the wood
doth waste it, and the wild beast of the field
doth devour it, would in his free grace and
mercy, return and look down from heaven,
and visit this vine, and the vineyard which
his own right hand hath planted. Which
that all may be excited to do, is the design
of this small Treatise. To which end if it
may be in any degree serviceable to any.
I have that I aimed at. In the hopes
whereof I rest,
Great Yarmouth,
Feb. 2. 1655.

