



SIR,
I Have, long since, studied in these anti-ingenious Times, to finde out a Man, that might, at once, be both a Judge and Patron to this Issue of my Old age, which needs both. And my blessed Stars have flung me upon You: In whom both those Attributes concentre and flourish: Nor can I yet finde a reason, why I should present it to You (it being below your Acceptance or Censure) but onely my own Confidence; which had not grown to this forwardnesse, had it not been incouraged by your Goodnesse. Yet we all know, Beggars use to flock to great mens Gates. And, though my Fortune has cast me in that Mold, I am poor and proud; and preserve the humour of him, who could not beg for any thing, but great Boons, such, as are your kinde Acceptance and Protection. I dare not say (as my Brethren use) that I present this, as a Testimoniall of my Gratitude or Re∣compence for your Favours: For (I protest) I conceive it so far from quitting old Engagements, that it creates new. So that, all, that this Play can do, is but to make more Work; and involves me in Debts, beyond a possibility of Satisfaction. Sir, it were a folly in me, to tell you of your Worth, the World knows it enough; and are bold to say, Fortune and Nature scarce ever club'd so well. You know, Sir, I am old, and cannot cringe, nor Court, with the pow∣der'd

and ribbanded Wits of our daies: But, though I can∣not speak so much, I can think as well, and as honoura∣bly as the best. All the Arguments I can use to induce you to take notice of this thing of nothing, is, that it had the luck to tumble last of all in the Epidemicall ruine of the Scene; and now limps hither with a wooden Leg, to beg an Alms at your hands. I will winde up all, with a Use of Exhorta∣tion, That since the Times conspire to make us all Beggars, let us make our selves merry; which (if I am not mistaken) this drives at. Be pleased therefore, Sir, to lodge these harmlesse Beggars in the Out-houses of your thoughts; and, among the rest, Him, that in this Cuckoe time, puts in for a Membership, and will fill the Choyre of those, that Duly and truly pray for you, and is,

