



IN Epistles Dedicatory, sometimes men render an account to the world, by what Principles they were Led to such a worke Sometimes they maintaine and strengthen, what they have done, by New Arguments. Some∣times

ad captandam Benevolentiam, they pre∣sent their whole Designe, in a briefe Epi∣tomy, that so they may invite the Rea∣der. But I shall doe None of These.
The first I need not: For if the Ten Kings must hate the Whore, Eate her flesh, and Burne her with her fire; Will not every good Christian offer himselfe a ready Servant to This Worke, a Willing Souldier under this Standard?
The Second, I cannot; without questi∣oning my owne Diligence, or (which is worse) my Readers Gentlenesse: Either of which every Writer carefully shunneth.
The third I will not, left I be injurious to my selfe: For, Humane Nature is ever Novorum avida; and the Soule of vast comprehension; the Booke therefore would seeme but Crambe bis cocta, to All that read the Epistle; and but create a nausea to Those that had already gathe∣red all, by viewing the Breviate.
If it be the Glory of a King's Daughter to be clothed in Needle-worke; surely This

poore Birth will need more then Fig∣leaves, to make it Beautifull. When it is Cloathed with its Best Robes, It will not be worthy to appeare in so Great a Pre∣sence. How much lesse then, when pre∣sented only in a bare and naked Sceleton?
The Worke then of These Lines, is to lay prostrate at Your Feet (most Noble Lords, and Gentlemen) the Retirements of Your Humble Servant in the Last Re∣cesse.
If you shall aske mee, how I dare take the boldnesse to interrupt Your more se∣rious Thoughts, with These Things of Little Worth: All I shall plead for my selfe is but This, the bow must be some∣times unbent; and if then This Pam∣phlet may be called for, it is all I aspire to. For, Your Protection, and Your Patronage, not Your Trouble, is My Request: Of which being no whit Doubtfull; with all Humility commen∣ding

This to Your Noble Favour; Your selves and Counsels to the Almighty; I crave leve for ever to remaine

