



My Lords, Ladies, and Gentlemen, &c.
THe Philosophers speaking of happiness, were divided into two hundred eighty eight opinions, every one intending something, yet resolving upon nothing; and therefore the man in Plutarch hear∣ing them wrangle about (summum bonum) the chiefest good, one placing of it in this, and another in that, went to the Market and bought up all that was good, hoping that among all he should not miss of happiness, and yet he mist it; true happiness being too great and too glorious a thing to be found in any thing below real holiness.

All men in the general desire to be happy, but all men do not desire in this or that particular, or in this or that way to be happy; here there is an infinite difference, quot homines tot sententiae, so many men so many minds.
A desire of happiness is planted in all men by the constitution of nature; this is so intrinsecal, and so innate in nature, it is so ingraven in it, that even the fall of Adam, as great as it was, hath not blotted it out.
This desire of happiness is left in man for a stock to graft holiness on: God grafts the plant of Grace upon the stock of nature.Gen. 29.20. to the 27. Indeed Happiness, like Rachel, is so fair and so beautiful a thing, that every one is apt to fall in love with it, and earnestly to desire it; yea many there be, that would serve twice seven years to enjoy it; but by the standing Law of that heavenly Countrey above, the younger sister must never be bestowed before the elder; you can never enjoy fair Rachel, Heaven and Happiness, except you are first married to tender-eyed Leah, real holiness; he that will have heaven, must have union and communion with Christ: and he that will have union and communion with Christ,2 Cor. 6.14, 15. must be holy. For what fellow∣ship hath righteousness with unrighteousness? and what communion hath light with darkness? And what concord hath Christ with Belial? Of all the ma∣ny thousands that have travelled to happiness, there is not one to be found but hath travelled thither in a way of ho∣liness. Now the drift, the scope of this following Treatise, is to make men holy, that they may be happy: it is to make men gracious on earth, that they may be glorious in heaven. Now to prevent all mistakes, rash censures and miscon∣structions, I judge it very convenient and necessary be∣fore I go any further, to acquaint the Reader plainly and
 honestly with those Arguments that have prevailed with me to Dedicate this Book to all sorts, ranks and degrees of persons, rather then to any single person, or to any one sort or rank of men whatsoever: And they are these six,
First, Because all sorts and ranks of men are faln  from that Primitive holiness that once they had:Psalm 14.3. Rom. 3.12. Qui te non habet Domine Deus, totum perdidit. Bernard. There are five things that we have all lost by our fall in Adam. First, we have all lost that holy image that God had stampt upon us, and so we are become vile. Secondly, we have all lost our Son-ship, and so we are become slaves. Thirdly, we have all lost our friendship with God, and so we are become enemies. Fourthly, we have all lost our communion with God, and so we are become strangers. And fifthly, we have all lost our glory, and so we are be∣come miserable. Some say that the naked body of man was so glorious in his estate of Innocency, that all the beasts of the field admired it, and thereupon did homage to him. O how glorious was his soul then! Certainly if the Cabinet was so glorious, the Jewel within it was much more glorious; But how glorious soever man was in his primitive estate, it is most certain that he is now so sadly faln from the highest pinacle of glory, to so low a step of misery, that God sometimes sds him to the Pismire to learn instruction;Prov. 6.6, 7. and sometimes he sends him to the Stork and the Swallow to make a right improve∣ment of precious time;Jer. 8.7. and sometimes he sends him to the Ox and to the Ass to learn knowledge;Isa. 1.3. and sometimes he sends him to the Fowls of the air to learn confidence; yea and sometimes he sends him to the very Lillies and Grass of the field,Matth. 6.25, ult. to learn how to live without carking and distracting cares. It is true, mans first estate was a state of perfect holiness,Gen. 1.27. he being made in the image of
 God, and after the likeness of God. It was an estate of perfect light,Gen. 2.20. knowledge, prudence, wisdom and under∣standing; It was an estate of very great honour and dig∣nity, and therefore the Psalmist (speaking of man in this estate) brings him in with a Crown of glory and honour upon his head.Psalm 8.5. Thou hast crowned him with glory and honour. Mans first estate was so stately an estate, that he was not so much below the glorious Angels, as he was above all other creatures. God made him the Sove∣raign Lord of the whole Creation,Gen. 1.26. Psalm 8.6, 7, 8. God gave him an abso∣lute Dominion and Authority both of Sea and Land, and all creatures in both were subjected to him. Such was the exquisite beauty and perfection of his body, that from the crown of his head to the soles of his feet, there was not the least blain or blemish; his outward man was cloathed with all such requisite beauties and abilities that might render him lovely and comely to every eye. In a word, mans first estate was a state of perfect happiness, all with∣in him, and all without him, and all about him, spoke him out to be compleatly blessed; there was nothing within him, but what was very sweet and desirable; there was nothing without him, but what was very delightful and amiable; neither was there any thing about him, but what was ser∣viceable and comfortable.Lam. 5.16. O but now by his fall, his crown is faln from his head, and from the heads of all his poste∣rity; for Adam was a publick person, he was the Prince of all mankind; and though all mankind was not actu∣ally in his loyns when he fell, yet they were all potentially in his loyns when he fell. If two Kings make a league, and the one break it, he makes not only himself but all his Subjects lyable and obnoxious to all the calamities and miseries that shall follow thereupon. Adam was our com∣mon Father, and we are all his Sons and Daughters:
 Now we know by the Law of inheritance, that if the Fa∣ther forfeit his Lease, he dis-inherits his posterity. Now Adam forfeited his Lease (as I may say) and divine Ju∣stice took the advantage of the forfeiture, and so hath turned all his posterity out of doors. So that there is now no way under heaven to be happy, but by being holy; all sorts and ranks of men are faln in Adam, and there is no way to rise but by Christ and holiness, &c.
A second Reason why I dedicate this Treatise to all  sorts and ranks of persons, is, because the matter contain∣ed in this book, is of the greatest and highest concernment imaginable, to all ranks and degrees of men, from the greatest Emperour that ever set upon a Throne, to the meanest and the poorest wretch that ever lay upon a Dung∣hill: And doubtless that which is of such a marvellous importance to all, may very justly and reasonably be dedi∣cated to all.
A third reason why I dedicate this Treatise to all  sorts and ranks of persons, is, because God intends to save some of all sorts, ranks and degrees; though greatness and goodness do not alwayes meet, yet greatness and goodness do sometimes meet; and though riches and religion do not alwayes meet, yet riches and religion do sometimes meet; though not many wise, yet some wise;1 Cor. 1.26. though not many mighty, yet some mighty; though not many noble, yet some noble, shall be called, sanctified and saved. Look as the Sun in the Firmament doth cast his light and warmth upon all sorts, ranks and degrees of men:Matth. 5.45. So doth the Sun of righteousness shine upon the understandings and consciences of all sorts, ranks and degrees of men, and by his secret and spiritual influences, he warms and cheers the hearts of high and low, rich and poor, noble and ig∣noble. Abraham was very great and very gracious:
 Joseph was very high, and very holy: Job was very rich, and very righteous.It is a strange sying in Lp∣sius, The names of all good Princes (saith he) may easily be engraven or written in a small Ring. Lips. de co∣stantia, lib. 2. cap. 25. Though most of those Kings and Princes that we read of in Scripture were bad, very bad, yet some of them were good, yea very good. Some of them were as famous for grace, righteousness, and holiness, wit∣ness David, Asa, Josiah, Hezekiah, Jehosaphat, &c. as Saul, Jehoram, Jehu, Ahab, and others of them were infamous for all unrighteousness and wickedness. God for the glory of his own grace, and the honour of his Sons blood, will have some of all sorts, ranks and degrees sanctified and saved: and upon this very ground he en∣gages his servants to pray for all sorts, ranks and degrees of men, in 1 Tim. 2.1, 2, 3, 4. Now where God is re∣solved to save, there he is resolved to sanctifie: where he is resolved to make happy, there he is resolved to make ho∣ly. And therefore I look upon my self as many wayes ob∣liged to have so large a heart for God, as to do all I can to help on the salvation of all sorts, ranks, and degrees of men in the world. My hearts desire and prayer for Eng∣land is,Rom. 10.1. Pauls Copy is not to be de∣spised, but imitated. that her Princes and Nobles may be sanctified and saved, and that her Gentry may be sanctified and saved, and that all the people of the Nation may be sanctified and saved. I look upon my self as engaged to do all I can by my pen and prayers to help make England holy, that so England may be truly happy: For of this I am most cer∣tain, that if God will but make England a holy Nation, it is not all the powers on earth, nor all the powers of hell, that shall ever make England a miserable Na∣tion.
  A fourth Reason why I thus Dedicate this Treatise as you see, is, because my former poor labours and endea∣vours have been acceptable to some of all ranks and de∣grees, and they have been blest to some of all ranks
 and degrees; and I have been encouraged, whetted and stirred up by some on all hands, once more to cast in my Net, and now I have done it; O that it may issue in the drawing of many souls to Christ, and in the making of the gracelesse gracious, the prophane holy, and in the making of those that are holy, to be yet more holy, &c.
A fifth Reason why I thus Dedicate this Treatise as  you see, is, because though all men are bound to be holy, yet the great, the rich, the noble, and the honourable of the earth, are bound above all other men in the world to be holy.Reader if thou art one that standest upon thy birth, no∣bility and greatness, do thy self that favour, and thy soul that right, as to read from page 343. to page 447. be∣fore thou goest any further. God hath laid upon them greater obligations and Tyes to holinesse, then he hath upon any other men under heaven; and this you may see so clearly and so fully proved in this Book, (from page 433. to page 447.) that neither the world nor the Devil, as cunning and as learned a Devil as he is, will ever be able to disprove. This reason alone is sufficient to justifie my present pra∣ctice.
My sixth and last Reason why I thus Dedicate this Treatise as you see, is, that it may be a blessed Testimony and a standing Witnesse for Christ (in this day of bla∣sphemy,  prophanesse, loosnesse,Isa. 43.10, 12. chap. 44.8. and wickednesse) against all sorts, and ranks of persons into whose hands it may fall, who notwithstanding all that is here said, shall con∣tinue obstinate and impenitent in their ungodly courses and practises, as men resolved rather to go to hell then to heaven, and to be for ever unhappy, rather then they will be holy. Wo, wo to them for ever, that had rather be Satans bond-slaves then Christs free-men, that had ra∣ther be vessels of wrath then vessels of honour, and that had rather be fire-brands of hell then glorious Saints in heaven.Ephes. 2.12. Rom. 9.22. And so I have done with those reason that may satisfie the Reader concerning my Dedication of this
 Treatise to all sorts, ranks and degrees of persons.
Having premised these things in the general, give me leave to say, That if this Treatise should fall into the hands of any of the Learned Judges of this Land, or in∣to the hands of any of the Justices of this Nation, I would then take the humble boldnesse to offer this to their most serious consideration, viz. That if they would dis∣charge the duties of their places, so as to give up their accounts at last with joy and cheerfulness to the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, it highly concerns them to study this doctrine of holinesse, yea to fall in love with ho∣linesse, and highly to prize it, and earnestly to presse after it, and to be restlesse in their own spirits, till they have experienced the powerful operations of holinesse in their own souls; for till then, they will never be able so to ad∣minister Justice and Judgement as becomes those that have the name of God, and the name of profession upon them, and that judge themselves to be in a higher Form then those Heathens were, who were famous for justice and righteousnesse,Cato, Fabricius, Scipio, Camby∣ses, &c. (and yet never heard of a Christ nor sal∣vation by him) and as becomes those that would not stand trembling and quaking in the great and terrible day, when Christ the Lord-chief-Iustice of heaven and earth shall passe a righteous and impartial judgement upon all the Judges and Justices that ever were on earth.Joel 2.11, 31. Acts 17.31. 2 Tim. 4.1, 2.
Where justice is, God is, and where God is, there is no want of men or fortitude, said Herod at the head of his Army, the bet∣ter to encou∣rage his soul∣diers.My Lords and Gentlemen, you know that the wisest Prince that ever set upon a Throne, hath told us that Righteousnesse exalts a Nation, Prov. 14.34. It is not valour in war, but righteousnesse; it is not policie in Government, but righteousnesse; it is not wittinesse of in∣vention, but righteousnesse; it is not civility in behaviour, but righteousnesse; it is not antiquity of forms, but righteousnesse; it is not largenesse of dominion, but
 righteousnesse; nor it is not greatnesse of command,Iustice is con∣servatrix Hu∣manae conjun∣ctionis, quae ad beatitudinem via est, &c. Amos 5.24. The Hebrew word Veiiggal∣chat is here rendred run down, is from  Galal, that signifies to roul down f eely, plenti∣fully, plainly, vigorously, constantly: Where justice thus rouls down, all the world shall never make that Nation miserable. but righteousnesse that is the honour and the safety, that is the renown and the security of a Nation: That Nation that exalts righteousnesse, that Nation shall be certainly exalt∣ed by righteousnesse. It is not Achitophels policy, it is not Jeroboams calves in Dan and Bethel, it is not Jehues pompous zeal, it is not Goliahs sword, it is not rich Mines of Gold and Silver, nor Magazines, nor Ar∣mies, nor Counsels, nor Fleets, nor Forts, but Justice and Righteousnesse that exalts a Nation, and that will make a mean people to become a great, a glorious, and a famous people in the world. The world is a Ring, and Righteous∣nesse is the Diamond in that Ring: The world is a body, and Righteousnesse and Justice is the soul of that body. Ah England, England, so long as judgement runs down as waters in the midst of thee, and righteousnesse as a mighty stream, thou shalt not die but live and bear up bravely against all gain-sayers and opposers; but if in∣justice shall grow rampant, and thou shalt brandish the sword of Justice in the behalf of the friends of Baal, Balaam, and Bacchus, and turn the wheel upon the righ∣teous; if the sword of justice shall be a sword of prote∣ction to the desperate swearer, and to the cruel oppressor, and to the roaring drunkard, and to the cursing monster, and to the Gospel despiser, and to the Christ contemner, &c. and shall be a devouring sword to the upright and peaceable in the Land, Divine vengeance will dig thy grave, and divine Justice will tumble thee into it, though all the Nations of the earth should labour to prevent it. It is a base and ignoble spirit, to pity Cataline more then to pity Rome; to pity any particular sort of men, more then to pity the whole: It is cruelty to the good, to justifie the bad: It is wrong to the sheep, to animate the Wolves:
 It is danger (if not death) to the Lambs, not to restrain or chain up the Lyons; but from all these vanities the Lord deliver all your souls. And O that you would for ever remember this, that as the constitution of a mans bo∣dy is best known by his pulse; if it stir not at all, then we know he is dead: if it stir violently, then we know him to be in a Fever: if it keep an equal stroak, then we know he is sound, well, and whole; so the estate and constitution of a Kingdom or Common-weal, is best known by the manner of executing justice therein: for justice is the pulse of a Kingdom; if justice be violent, then the Kingdom is in a Fever, in a very bad estate; if it stir not at all, then the Kingdom is dead; but if it have an equal stroak, if it be justly and duely administred, then the Kingdom is in a good, a safe, and sound condition. When Vespasian asked Apollonus, What was the cause of Nero's ruine? he answered, That Nero could tune the Harps well, but in Government he did alwayes wind up the strings too high, or let them down too low; The Application is easie.
Now having premised thus much in the general, give me leave to tell you, that there are eight special Rules that you are carefully and faithfully to observe in the admini∣stration of Justice and Righteousnsse. And how you will be able to act sutable to those Rules without a Spirit of holinesse, without principles of holinesse, and without an experience of the powerful influences and operations of holinesse in your own souls, I cannot for the present un∣derstand.
  Now my Lords and Gentlemen, the first Rule that you are to observe in your administring of Judgement and Ju∣stice,Psalm 82.1, 6. Luke 20.21. Mat. 22.16. is this, You must do Justice impartially: you are cal∣led Gods, and in this you must be like to God, who is no
 acceptor of persons:Audi alteram partem, said Lotharius the second Duke of Saxony. he accepts not the rich man because of his Robes, neither doth he reject the poor man because of his Rags. Deut. 1.17. Ye shall not respect persons in judgement, but you shall hear the small as well as the great; you shall not be afraid of the face of man,Bona est mise∣ricordia, sed non quum est contra judici∣um, Aug. Mercy is good, but not when it is contrary to judgement. for the judgement is Gods: and the cause that is too hard for you, bring it unto me, and I will hear it. And so in Levit. 19.15. Ye shall do no unrighteous∣ness in judgement; thou shalt not respect the person of the poor, nor honour the person of the mighty: but in righteousness shalt thou judge thy neigh∣bour. The great man is not to be spared for his might, nor the poor man for his misery: It is neither the great mans power, nor the poor mans meanesse,The Judges in Aegypt were pourtraied without hands and without eyes, to signifie that they were not to take bribes, nor to accept mens persons. that a Judge is to mind in judgement. A Judge, a Justice, must never out of carnal pity cry out, Oh he is a poor man; nor yet out of base fear cry out, Oh he is a great man. Their eyes are to be alwayes upon causes, and not upon persons. The statues of the Theban Judges were made without hands and without eyes, to intimate to us, that as Judges and Justices should have no hands to receive Bribes, so they should have no eyes to see a friend from a foe, a brother from a stranger. And it was the O f the Heathen Judges, as the Orator relates, Audiam accusatorem & reum sinc affectibus & personarum respectione. I will hear the Plantiff and Defendant, with an equal mind, without affection and respect of persons. In the twelfth Novel of Justinian, you may read of an Oath imposed upon Judges and Justices, against inclining or addicting themselves to either party: yea they put them∣selves under a deep and bitter execration and curse in case of partiality, imploring God in such language as this, Let me have my part with Judas, and let the
 leprosie of Gehezi cleave to me, and the trembling of Cain come upon me, and whatsoever else may astonish and dismay a man, if I am partial in the ad∣ministration of Justice. That was a famous act of ju∣stice that was performed by Canutus King of Den∣mark, who when one of the twelve Thieves that he had condemned, pleaded that he was of the Royal blood, sath the King, It is reason some favour should be shewed to this person; whereupon he commanded that he should be hang∣ed on the highest Gibbet, which was done accordingly. It was Cato's complaint of old,Cato, ap. Gell. l. 11. c. 18. The Roman Orator ob∣served, that the force of justice is such, and so great, that even Thieves and Robbers, both by Sea and Land, who live upon in∣justice and rapine, yet cannot live upon their trade without some practice of it among themselves. that those that robbed private men, were clapt up and laid by the heels in cold irons: but, saith he, publick thieves that wrong and rob the Common-wealth, they sit in scarlet, with gold chains about their necks. And the Scythian Philosopher hath long since complained, that Laws were like Spiders webs, that would take flies, but not Wasps or Hornets; his meaning was, that if poor mean men offended, they should be sure to be punished; but gret men that were the ma∣kers of Laws, they might be breakers of the Laws, and yet never smart for it. In all ages some or others have poured out sad complaints aganst partial justice. Pi∣late that unjustly condemned Christ, was afterwards kickt off the Bench by Caius the Emperour for partial justice, and for grief and shame he became hs own exe∣cutioner. O Sirs, God will one day kick such Judges and Justices,Psal. 9.17. and Psalm 11.5. not only off the Bench, but into hell who make a Trade of partial justice, except there be sound repen∣tance on their sides, and pardoning grace on his. O that all the Judges and Justices of the Land would for ever remember, what the wisest Prince that ever swayed a Scepter saith, in Prov. 18.5. It is not good to accept the person of the wicked, to overthrow the righte∣ous
 in judgement. It is not good, that is, it is bad,By the figure Liptote, much is to be under∣stood, when there is but little said. it is very bad, yea it is so exceeding bad, as that it can hardly be expressed or uttered: it is so great a wickednesse, it is so horrid and so hideous a wickednesse, yea it is so hel∣l sh a wickedness, as can hardly be imagined, as can rare∣ly be declared. The Poet in the (Greek) Epigram taught the silver Ax of justice that was carried before the Ro∣man Magistrate to proclaim, If thou be an offendor, let not the silver flatter thee: if an innocent, let not the Ax affright thee. The Athenian Judges judged in the night, when the faces of men could not be seen, that so they might be impartial in judgement. I have read of Zaleu∣cus, that impartial Law-giver and Judge among the Locrians, how that he made a very severe Law against Adulterers: viz. That whosoever should be found guilty thereof, should have both their eyes put out; Now it so fell out, that his Son proved the first offendor: forthwith sentence was pronounced, and execution ready to be done, whereupon the people earnestly intreated the Judge his fa∣ther that he would pardon the fact, who upon serious de∣liberation, put out one of his own eyes, and one of his sons, and so shewed himself to be both a tender Father, and an upright and impartial Judge at once. O Sirs, it is your wisdom and work, yea it is as much your glory as it is your duty, to be impartial in all your administrations of Ju∣stice, and not to favour friends or relations, nor to fear the frowns of enemies, but to proceed impartially accord∣ing to the merits of the Cause that is before you. But,
Secondly, As you must do justice impartially, so you must  do justice speedily. Jer. 28.12. O house of David, thus saith the Lord, execute judgement in the morn∣ing, and deliver him that is spoyled out of the hand
 of the oppressor, lest my fury go out like fire, and burn that none can quench it, because of the evil of your doings.Ezra 7.16. After examination, execution is to be done with expedition: When men cry out for justice, justice, you must not cry out Cras, Cras, to morrow, to morrrw; you must do justice in the morning; Noon justice and evening justice is not so acceptable to God, nor so honour∣able to your selves, nor so advantagious to others, as morning justice is. You are called Gods: and as in other things,Ioel 3.4. Gen. 19. Num. 16. Psalm 101.8. The Persian King had one about him, whose office it was to mind him every morning of his cha ge, saying, Arise O King, and have an eye to those affairs for which the great God hath made you King, and dispatch them. so in this, you should be like to God, who is speedy and swift in the exercise of Justice, as you may see by com∣paring the Scriptures in the margin together. To delay justice, is worse sometimes then to deny justice; it is an evil thing and a dangerous thing, when Magistrates, Judges and Justices, are as long a bringing forth their Verdicts, as the Elephant her young. Delayes of justice makes many more irreconcileable: It makes the Clyent often go with an heavy heart, an empty purse, and a thred∣bare coat: It fetcheth heavy sighs and groans from the hearts, and a Sea of tears from the eyes of the delayed and oppressed. Magistrates, Judges, and Justices, should be alwayes ready to do justice: they should be alwayes at leisure to do justice. I have read of one of the Kings of Persia, how that he would many times alight off from his horse to do justice only to a poor body. It were well if all Judges and Justices would write after this Copy, to be rea∣dy to do justice and judgement at all times, and upon all occasions. O Sirs, you may have time to live, even when you have out-lived your seasons and opportunities of do∣ing justice and judgement; and what a hell will then your lives be to you? To prevent this hell, it is good to do ju∣stice in the morning. I have read of a very poor woman, who was very earnest with King Philip of Macedon to
 do her Justice, but he deferred her,Plutarch. Apo∣thegm. in vita Dometrii. and told her that he had no leisure to hear her: she replyed then, Why have you leisure to be King? The poor woman thought that they were very unmeet to be Kings and Judges, who could not be at leisure to do justice, when the necessities and miseries of poor creatures cryed aloud for Justice, Ju∣stice. I have read of a famouus passage of Theodorick King of the Romans, who when a widow came to him with a sad complaint,The Poets feign Justice to be the daughter of Jupiter, whom he hath set o∣ver the world to revenge those injuries that one man doth to ano∣ther, &c. that she had a suit depending in the Court three years, which might have been ended in a few dayes: the King demands of her the Judges names; she tells him; he sends a special command to them to give all the speedy dispatch that was possible to the widows cause, which they did, and in two dayes determined it to the widows liking: this being done, the King calls for the Judges, and they supposing that they should have both ap∣plause and reward for their expedition, hastened to him full of joy: but after the King had propounded several things to them about their former delayes, he commanded both their heads to be struck off, because they had spun out that Cause to a three years length, which two dayes would have ended. Here was Royal Justice indeed. O that all the Magistrates, Judges, and Justices of the Na∣tion, would every morning lay Prov. 13.12. warm up∣on their hearts. Hope deferred maketh the heart sick: but when the desire cometh, it is a tree of life. The Hebrew word Memushshacah, that is here rendred deferred, is from Mashach, that signifies to draw out at length: men are short-breathed, and short-spirited, and hopes hours are full of eternity: and when their hopes are drawn out at length, this makes their hearts sick; and ah what a world of such sick souls lies languishing at Hopes Hospital all the Nation over, yea
 all the world over. Hope in this Text is put for the good things men hope for; now when the good things men hope for (be it justice or a quick dispatch, &c.) are deferred and delayed, this makes the poor Client sick at heart. A ling∣ring hope alwayes breeds in the heart a lingring consum∣ption. The harder travel hope hath, and the more strong∣ly it labours to bring forth, and yet is deferred and delay∣ed, the more deadly sick the Client grows. But when the desire cometh, that is, when the thing desired, wished and looked for, be it justice, be it righteousnesse, be it successe, &c. is gained, it is a Tree of life; or rather as the He∣brew hath it, is a Tree (Chajim) of lives. All sorts of lives, and all the comforts and contents of life, are wrapt up in the enjoyment of the thing desired. He that hath these things granted to him, that are earnestly desired by him, is once more put into a Paradise. Wilful delayes in justice, makes the Iudge unrighteous, Luke 18.6. But,
  Thirdly, As you must do justice speedily, so you must do justice sincerly;Isa. 61.8. you must do justice out of love to justice. When the golden Angels appear to draw you to perver ju∣stice,Acts 8.20. you must say as Peter did to Simon Magus, Thy money perish with thee. Deut. 16.20. That which is altogether just shalt thou follow, that thou mayest live, and inherit the Land which the Lord thy God giveth thee. Or rather as the Hebrew hath it,  Tsedek, Tsedek; Iustice, Iustice shalt thou follow, that is, pure Iustice shalt thou follow. The streams of justice should be alwayes pure and clear. Justice, Justice shalt thou follow; that is, all manner of Justice shalt thou fol∣low, and nothing but Justice shalt thou follow; and thou shalt follow Justice sincerely, exactly, carefully, and con∣stantly: thou shalt be not seemingly just, but really just;
 not hypocritically just, but intirely just; not partially just, but universally just; not just to some, but just to all; not transiently just, but perpetually just; not sometimes just, but alwayes just; and so much the Geminating of the word Justice, Justice, imports. Prov. 21.15. It is joy to the just to do judgement. This argues much sincerity and integrity in a mans spirit, when he doth not only do judgment, but joyes to do judgement; it is a va∣nity to do justice slightly, lightly, wantonly; but it is an honour to do justice from a principle of divine joy; he that joyes to do judgement, he will do justice sincerly, he will do justice out of love to justice; and indeed there are no Judges, there are no Justices to those that do justice out of love to justice. Mazarinus complaineth of Forraign Judges, that they too much resembled the blood-stone, which hath a special property to stanch blood, but as Jewellers ob∣serve, it puts not forth this vertue, unless it be let in or covered over with silver, and so applyed to the vein: but certainly these men were far from doing justice sincerely, from doing justice out of love to justice. Some Judges and Justices there have been, who for the cleanlinesse of the conveyance, would like Mendicant Fryars, touch no mo∣ney themselves, but have a boy or a Clerk with a bag to receive it for them: Certainly these were as far from do∣ing justice out of love to justice, as heaven is from hell, or as the Pope, the Turk and the Devil, are from being real Saints. Doubtlesse many Magistrates, Judges, and Justices have found that a gift blindeth the wise,Exod. 23.8. and perverteth the words of the righteous. Golden dust hath put out more eyes then it hath done good to hearts. O this golden-wedge, this silver squinsie hath made many men silent and speechlesse in good causes. Titus Vespa∣sian was so delighted in doing of justice, that if a day
 had past over his head wherein he had done no  of ju∣stice, he would cry out, Amici, diem perdidi: O my friends, I have lost a day. And so Epaminondas a Hea∣then, though he was very poor, and often tempted with great bribes and presents to be unjust, yet he refused and scorned all, and would commonly say, that if the cause were good, he would do it without a bribe, because it was good; but if the cause was bad, he would not meddle with it for a world. These Heathens will one day rise in judgement against all such corrupt Judges and Justices, that will not do justice without a bribe. If this Treatise should fall into the hands of any such, I would then let them know, that God will one day make good that dreadful word against them, that you have in Job 15.34. For the Congregation of hypocrites shall be desolate, and fire shall consume the Tabernacles of bribery; Or as the Septuagint reads it, of men that take gifts fire shall consume: or rather as the Hebrew hath it, Fire shall eat the Tabernacles, it shall feed on their Tabernacles as gree∣dily as a hungry man doth feed on his meat. O, the sum∣ptuous buildings and brave structures that have been built by the hands of bribery, shall be set on fire by a hand of justice.Prov. 10.2, 3. and chap. 3.33. If bribery brings in a thousand one year, Divine justice will cast away two for it the next year. God will one day burn up on both hands, all the comforts, and all the con∣tentments, and all the enjoyments of corrupt Magi∣strates, Judges, and Justices. I have read of a Polonian Judge, that stood up very stoutly and resolutely a long time for a poor Plaintiff against a rich Defendant: but at last he received from the Defendant a great summe of money, stamped with the usual stamp of that Countrey, which is a man in compleat armour; and at the next Session in open Court, he adjudged the Cause in the favour of the
 Defendant: and being sharply blamed by his friends for it, he shewed them his large bribe, and demanded of them Who could stand out against so many men in compleat ar∣mour? Ah England, England, it would be better with thee, if this spirit did not still survive; but alas, what good will all these mens men in armour do them in the great day of our Lord, when the thoughts of all such cor∣rupt Magistrates, Judges, and Justices, shall be exceeding∣ly troubled, their countenances changed, their hearts ter∣rified, their consciences awakened, their souls amazed, and their knees dashed one against another! O that all Judges and Justices would for ever make Isa. 5.23. their daily companion, Wo to them which justifie the wc∣ked for a reward, and take away the righteousness of the righteous from him. I have read of Sysamnes a covetous tenacious Judge, who for filthy lucre pronounced a false sentence; whereupon Cambyses King of Persia commanded him to be killed and flead, and his skin to be nailed over the Tribunal: and then he commanded his son to sit as Judge there, that so this sight might arm him against all injustice, and be a terrour to all that succeed∣ed him. If Princes did but exercise such Royal justice upon all corrupt covetous Judges and Justices, justice would be had at a cheaper rate, and poor men would not be so often put to pawn their Coats, nor rich men would not so often empty their Purses, nor mortgage their inheri∣tances. But,
Fourthly, As you must do justice sincerly, so you must  do justice deliberately: you must have one ear for the De∣fendant, and another for the Plaintiff,Deut 17.4. or else you will tell the world at once, that you are both weak and wicked. Deut. 19.17, 18, 19. vide. It argues much weakness and emptiness of spirit, to judge a matter before all is
 heard that can be said.Job 29.16. Jobs piety and prudence shined forth eminently in this, that the Cause that he knew not, he searched it out. Before God would pronounce judge∣ment upon Adam,Gen. 3. he first examins him, and propounds several interrogatories to him: And in those two great and famous acts of justice, when God confounded Babels builders,Gen. 1. and chap. 18. and rained hell out of heaven upon Sodom and Gomorah, he tells you that he will go down and see. You are called gods; in this it is as much your glory as it is your duty, to imitate the great God. Though Solomon was in all his glory, yet he had patience to hear both what the mother and the harlot had to say. The Holy-Ghost puts the fool upon him that answers a matter before he hears it, Prov. 18.13. It was the usual custom of Philip King of Macedon, to step one of his ears whilest the accuser was speaking, that so he might reserve it for the defend∣ant. I have read of some who have deeply suffered both in their civil liberties, and in their consciences, for their rash and hasty passing of judgement upon others. Why hath God given the Judges of the earth two ears, and but one tongue,  that they should be swift to hear, and slow to speak? I have read of Lewis King of France, that when he had through inadvertency granted an unjust suit, as soon as ever he had read those words of the Psalmist, Blessed is he that doth righteousness at all times,Psalm 106.3. he presently recollected himself, and upon better thoughts gave his judgemnt quite contrary. Certainly all acts of justice ought to flow from mature deliberation: All Ma∣gistrates, Judges, and Justices, in their administrations of justice and judgement, should wisely observe by what principles they act, and by what Rules they act, and by what Authority they act, and in what manner they act, and to what ends they act: and how all these important
 things can be done without serious deliberation, I cannot for the present understand. Justice in the Emblem is represented with a Ballance in the one hand, and a Sword in the other, to note that matters must be first delibrately weighed in the Ballance, before Judgement can be passed. He that only useth the Sword and not the Ballance, may smite an innocent Naboth, and acquit a guilty Ahb. The Civil Law concludes it very unreasonable for any man to give Advice or Judgement before he hath conside∣red and weighed the whole Cause.Civile dig. 4. de legis sena∣tusque consul. And therefore by your own Laws you are bound to deliberate before you give Judgement: Unlesse you will tell the world, that you, even you, are unreasonable men, who above all others should be the Masters of the greatest reason as well as men of the greatest measures of grace and holinesse. But,
Fifthly, As you must do Justice deliberately, so you  must do Justice resolutely, couragiously, valiantly. As soon as Joshua came into the office of Magistracy, God charges him no lesse then three times (in a breath as it were) to be very couragious, in Joshua 1.6, 7, 9. A Judge that is timerous, will quickly be treacherous: A Judge that is fearfull, can never be faithful. Solomons Throne was supported with Lyons, to shew that Magi∣strates should be men of courage and mettal. The Athe∣nian Judges sate in Mars street,Acts 17.22. Job 31, 31, 34. to shew that they had Martial hearts, and that they were men of courage and mettal. Job was a Judge of rare courage and magna∣nimity; nothing could fear him, nothing could daunt him, nothing could terrifie him, nothing could discourage him from doing Justice and Judgement. The Graeci∣ans placed Justice betwixt Leo and Libra to signifie that as there must be indifferency in determining, so there
 ought to be courage in executing. Where there is cou∣rage without knowledge, there the eye of Justice is blind; and where there is knowledge without courage, there the sword of Justice is blunt. Judges and Justices should be men of courage for God and godlinesse: Why should not the standard be of steel, and the chief posts in the house be heart of Oak? I have read of Agesilaus how that he was by all concluded fit to be made their King, but that he halted. Men of the best & choicest accomplishments, if they are not couragious and magnanimous, but lame and halting, they are no wayes fit for Magistrates. Judges and Justices should have Martial Spirits, high Spirits for Justice and Righteousnesse. Every Judge, every Justice should have a Lyons heart, an Eagles eye, and a Gyants arm. Such men whose hearts are faint, whose heads are dull, whose ears are heavy, whose eyes are dim, whose hands are weak, and whose feet are lame, are more fit to sit in a Chimney corner, then to sit Judges and Justi∣ces upon the Bench. It hath been long since said of Cato, Fabritius, and Aristides, that it was as easie to remove the Sun out of the Firmament, as to remove them from Justice and Equity, they were men of such couragious and magnanimous Spirits for Justice and Righteousnesse, No scarlet Robe doth so well become a Judge, as holy courage and stoutnesse doth. I have read of Lewis the eleventh King of France, who going about to establish some unjust Edicts, which when some of his chief Cour∣tiers perceived, they went altogether to him in Red-Gowns: the King asked them what they would have: the President La Vacqueri answered, We are come with a full purpose to lose our lives every one of us, rather then by our connivency any unjust Ordinance should take place: The King being amazed at this Answer, and at the cou∣rage,
 constancy and resolution of those Peers, gave them gracious entertainment, and commanded, that all the for∣mer Edicts should be forthwith cancelled in his presence. Courage and resolution may prevent many a Publick mis∣chief and misery. But,
Sixthly, As you are to do Justice resolutely, couragiously,  so you are to do Justice and Judgement exactly.Exod. 23.6, 7.13. The Egypti∣ans had a no∣table practise, when their Judges were set, they caused the Image of a divine Nu∣men by them called truth, to be hung about his neck, who sate next unto the Judges, to make them the more exact and heedfull in Iudgement. 2 Chro. 19.5, 6, 7. And he set Judges in the Land, throughout all the fenced Cities of Judah, City by City. And said to the Judges, Take heed what you do, for ye judge not for man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the Judgement. Wherefore now, let the fear of the Lord be upon you; Take heed and do it, for there is no ini∣quity with the Lord our God, nor respect of person, nor taking of gifts. God is exact in all his wayes, and he is exact in all his works: he is exact in all his promises, & he is exact in all his threatnings: he is exact in all his Re∣wards, and he is exact in all his punishments; he is exact in the exercise of his mercy, and he is exact in the exer∣cise of his Justice: And therefore you that are called Gods, should in this be like God. O Sirs, some by force, others by flattery; some by large presents to your relations, and others by promising great rewards to your selves may indeavour to corrupt you, and blind you, and induce you to judge rashly, inconsiderately, irregularly, &c. And therefore you have the more cause to be exact in transacting all your judicial affairs. O remember, that the most sharp & pierc∣ing eye of God is still upon you! O remember, that the severe eye of Jesus Christ, who is the Judge of Judges, is never off of you; And the Angels those Princes of glory, are very strict Observers of you. When the Ethiopian Judges were set in their seats of Judicature, certain empty chairs were placed about them, into which they conjectured the holy
 Angels came and were spectators of all their transactions; and this they thought would work such an awe, such a dread, such a care, such a fear, and such a resolution in them that they could not but manage all their Judicial proceedings with much exactnesse and heedfulnesse. And as the Angels have their eyes upon you, so Satan hath al∣wayes his eyes upon you,Cave, spectat Cato, was a watch-word among the Romans. O how much more should Cave, spectat Dominus, be a watch-word amongst you! he hath alwayes a watchfull eye, an envious eye, a malitious eye, a crafty eye, and a reveng∣full eye upon you; witnesse his disswading you sometimes from your duty, and witnesse his distracting and disturb∣ing of you whilest you are in your duty; and witnesse his accusing of you for the neglect of your duty; and witnesse his endeavours to pride you, and puffe you up upon the dis∣charge of your duty. And as the eye of Satan is upon you, so the eyes of good men are upon you, and the eyes of bad men are upon you: And if all this doth not bespeak you to be very exact and accurate in all your Judicial transactions, I know nothing. My Lords and Gentlemen, if all this will not do, then remember that the lives, liber∣ties, consciences, rights, priviledges, estates and interests of persons (next to God, and Christ, and Grace) are the most choice and precious, the most desireable and delecta∣ble Jewels that men have in all the world, and therefore you had need be very exact and accurate in all your Judi∣cial transactions. Yea once more, remember that God will one day bring you to an exact account concerning all your Judicial proceedings: That same mouth that tells you that you are Gods,Psalm 82.6. Heb. 9.27. tells you also, that you must die like men: And after death comes Judgement. You that now call others to Judgement, shall shortly be called to Judgement your selves:Acts 17.32. you that now sit in Judgement upon others, shall ere long be Judged by him that will Judge the world in righttousness. My Lords and
 Gentlemen, give me leave to tell you,Tennes the son of Cyrnus, (who was worshipped as a god) was so strict and ex∣act in Judge∣ment, that he caused an Ax to be held over the witnesses heads, to exe∣cute them out of hand, if they were taken with falshood; and from thence was the Pro∣verb, Tenedia bipennis. that that Judge to whom you must be responsible, is no ignorant Judge, nor no covetous Judge, nor no partial Judge, nor no fearful Judge, nor no doating Judge, nor no trifling Judge, though such there may be in the world; but he is an omniscient Judge, an omnipotent Judge, an impartial Judge, a holy Judge, a couragious Judge, a serious Judge, a severe Judge, an unbiassed Judge, a righteous Iudge, and a reso∣lute Iudge. Alas Sirs, it is not your scarlet Gowns, nor your Titles of honour, nor your great estates, nor your in∣terest in Princes, nor your noble relations, nor your ap∣plause among men, that will stand you in stead when you shall stand before that Iudge that is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. ult. Well Gentlemen, remember this, there is never a professing Iudge nor Iustce in the world, that will be able at last to give up their accounts with joy, and to stand in judgement when the Lamb shall sit upon his Throne, but such as have made it their great businesse to take the spirit of the Lord for their guide, and to set up the glory of the Lord as their great end, and to make the Word of the Lord their principal Rule, and to eye the example of the Lord as their choicest and chiefest pattern; and therefore it is much to be feared, that the numher of such Iudges and Iustices, that will be able to stand before the Iudge of all the world, will be but few. But,
Seventhly, As you must do justice and judgement ex∣actly;  so you must do justice to others, as you would have others do justice to you. For Judges and Justices to do as they would be done by, is the Royal Law, the golden Rule, and the Standard of equity. Judges and Justices should think of others, as they would have others think of them; and speak of others, as they would have others speak of them; and do to others, as they would have others do to
 them.Mat. 7.12. Severus the Emperour had this Scripture often in his mouth; and whensoever he punished any of his souldiers for offering of in∣juries to o∣thers, he still commanded this Scripture to be pro∣claimed by the Cryer. Whatever by the light of nature, or by the light of conscience, or by the light of Scripture, a Judge, a Ju∣stice, would have another do to him, the same must he do to another. In all just things (for so this Law of Christ is only to be understood) we must do to others, as we would have others do to us; as we would have others carry it equally, justly and righteously towards us, so we must car∣ry it equally, justly, and righteously towards others: and as we would not have others to wrong us in our names, estates, rights, liberties, lives, so we must not wrong others in their names, estates, rights, liberties, lives, &c. This Law of Christ is the summe of all righteousnesse; it is the foundation of all Justice and Equity. Self-love doth so commonly blind the sons of men, that to judge righteously, they must change the person, they must put themselves in others room. All Princes, Judges, Justices, Parents, Masters, Subjects, Servants & Children should so act in their relations, as they would have others act in the correlation. All injustice will be repaid one time or ano∣ther; and therefore men had need be just, and do to others as they would have others do to them. I have read of a Citi¦zen of Comun in the Dukedom of Farrara, who being cast into prison upon suspiton of murder, his wife could get no promise of his deliverance, unlsse she would give the Captain, whose prisoner he was, two hundred Ducats, and yield her body to his pleasure; which, with the con∣sent of her husband, she did; but after the Captain had his desire, he notwithstanding put him to death. The Duke Gonzala hearing of it, commanded the Captain to re∣store the two hundred Ducats to the widow, with an ad∣dition of seven hundred Crowns; then he enjoyned him to marry her presently, and lastly, before he could enjoy his new wife, the Duke caused him to be hanged for his
 treachery and injustice. Sometimes in this life, injustice is repaid upon the heads of unjust Judges. My Lords and Gentlemen, before I close up this head, give me leave heartily to recommend to your Justice, those wrongs and injuries which more immedately strike at the honour and glory of the great God. God hath put his name upon you, Psalm 82.6. I said that ye are gods: yet it must be granted that you are gods in a smaller letter, mortal gods, gods that must die like mn; all the sons of Ish, are sons of Adam. And as God hath put his name upon you so he hath made you his Vice-Royes. 2 Chron. 19 6. Ye judge not for your selves, but for the Lord.Rom. 13.2. Exod. 16.7, 8. 1 Sam. 8.7. And therefore God takes all affronts that are done to you, as done to himself, as you may see by comparing the Scri∣ptures in the margin together. And God hath provided for your honour among men. Exod. 20.28. Thou shalt not revile the gods,Rom. 13.7. Josh. 4.14. (i. e. the Magistrates) nor curse the Ruler of thy people. I have read of Fabius Maximus, who highly reverenced and honoured his own son, being Consul: this Heathen will one day rise up in judgement against all such that scorn to give to Magi∣strates that honour that by the fifth Commandment is due unto them.2 Pet. 2.9, 10. 1 Sam. 10.2. Iude 8.2. 1 Sam. 8.7. And God is very severe in revenging the wrongs that are done to you: He interprets all the inju∣ries that are done to you, as done to himself. And why then will you not revenge the wrongs and injuries that are done to the great God? Give me leave, Gentlemen, in the behalf of the great God, a little to expostulate with you. Shall the least dishonourable word that is spoken against an earthly Prince be severely punished? and shall all those horrid and hellish blasphemies by which the Prince of the Kings of the earth is dishonoured and re∣proached all the Nation over, passe unobserved?Rev. 1.5. Shall all
 affronts that are offered to Embassadors, be deeply resented and justly censured, as high indignities done to the Prince that employed them? And shall the Embassadors of the great God (I mean such as are called, commissionated, spirited, gifted and graced for that high office by God himself) be scorned, defamed, injured, reviled, and on all hands evilly intreated? and yet no man say, Why do you thus wickedly,2 Chron. 36.15. ult. to provoke the great God to your own destruction? Shall it be looked upon as noble and neces∣sary justice, that all insurrections in the State be punished as Rebellion? and shall those who are daily up in open arms against the great God, and that daily bid defiance to him, to his Son, to his Ordinances, to his people, to his word, and to his wayes, escape without the least lash, the least censure? Shall those that rob their neigbours (though it be but to the value of five shillings, yea lesse) be indited, examined, condemned and executed? and shall others that rob God of his glory, of his Sabboths, and of his service, &c. escape without the least shaking of the rod, or without the least danger of the whip? Shall all prophansse, loosnesse and wickednesse be winked at, yea countenanced and encouraged, notwithstanding his Ma∣jesties most Zealous, pious and renowned Declaration a∣gainst it? and shall real holinesse and the power of god∣linesse, be on all hands scorned, discountenanced, opposed and reviled, and yet no man say, What means these things? Well, my Lords and Gentlemen, for ever re∣member this, All those sins that are in this Land com∣mitted, which by your just power and gracious examples might have been prevented, all those sins in the great day shall be charged upon your accounts; and therefore it highly concerns you with all your might to brow-beat wic∣kednesse, to discountenance ungodlinesse, and to improve
 your power to the uttermost for the suppressing of all pro∣phanesse, and for the countenancing, encouraging, and promoting of real holinesse, that so you may give up your accounts at last with joy. I have read of King Ethel∣bert, how that by his godly example, and by his counte∣nancing and encouraging such as were godly, and by his discountenancing of prophanesse and wickednesse, he drew this whole Kingdom once to look after godlinesse. Oh my Lords and Gentlemen, if you would be but shining ex∣amples and patterns of holinesse to the Nation; if you would but in good earnest put forth your utmost power for the encouraging of godlinesse, and for the suppressing of prophanesse: O what a holy Nation, yea what a happy Nation should we have! King Cyrus commanded the chief officers of his Army to keep a strict hand upon them∣selves; for saith he, that is the best way in the world to keep the whole Army in good order: the application is easie. But,
Eighthly, In the exercise of justice, you must look that  justice and mercy, that justice and clemency go hand in hand. Prov. 20.28.Prov. 29.14. Psalm 101.1. Mercy and truth preserve the King: and his Throne is upholden by mercy: Some read the words thus,It is usual in Scripture, by Truth, to un∣derstand Iu∣stice. Mercy and justice preserve the King, and his Throne is upholden by mercy. All justice will not preserve the King, nor all mercy will not preserve the King; there must be a mixture both of ju∣stice and mercy to preserve the King, and to uphold his Throne; and to shew that mercy is more requisite then ju∣stice, the word Mercy is doubled in the Text. Justice without Mercy turns into rigour, and so becomes hateful; Mercy without Justice turns into fond pity, and so becomes contemptible. Look as the rod of Aaron and the pot of Manna were by Gods command laid up in the same Ark,
 so must mercy and justice be preserved intire in the bosom of the same Magistrate,King John thought to strengthen himself by gathering a great deal of money toge∣ther, but neg∣lecting the exercise of mercy, cle∣mency and lenity, he lost his peoples affections, and so after many endless tur∣moyles, he came to an unhappy end. Iudge, and Iustice. Mercy and justice, mildnesse and righteousnesse, lenity and fidelity, are a safer and a stronger guard to Princes and People, then rich Mines, munitions of Rocks, mighty Armies, powerful Navies, or any warlike preparations. It is very observable that Christ is called but once the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, in the book of the Revelation, and that is in chap. 5.5. but he is called a Lamb no lesse then nine and twenty times in that book: and what is this, but to shew the transcendent mercy, clemency, lenity, mild¦nesse and sweetnesse that is in Jesus Christ, and to shew that he is infinitely more inclined to the exercise of mer∣cy, then he is to the exercise of justice. It is true, Magi∣strates, Judges and Justices, should be Lions in the execu∣tion of justice; and it is as true, that they should be Lambs in the exercise of mercy and clemency, mildnsse and sweetnesse: And the more ready and inclinable they are to the exercise of mercy, where mercy is to be shewed, the more like to the Lamb they are. Seneca hath long since observed, that the custom of anointing Kings, was to shew that Kings should be above all other men of the greatest sweetnesse and mildnesse; their anointing being a sign of that Kingly sweetnesse and mildnesse that should be in them. Nero's speech hath great praise, who when he was to subscribe to the death of any condemned man, would say, Utinam nescirem literas, I wish I did not know how to write. But,
  Ninthly and lastly, you must do justice proportionable to the nature of the offence; your penalties and punish∣ments must be alwayes suitable to the offence; to punish any fact more severely then it deserves, is alwayes inju∣stice to the offendour: for so far innocency it self suffers,
 as any man is punished beyond the demerit of his offence;I have read of the River Nilus, that if it either ex∣ceed or be de¦fective in its due over∣flowings of the land of Egypt, it causeth fa∣mine: the application is easie. Cleobulus, one of the seven Sages, was wont to say, that Medio∣crity was without compare. and to punish lesse then the Fact deserves, may be of dan∣gerous consequence to the publike. The Roman Fasces were a bundle of rods with an Ax in the midst, to signifie the equity of Magistrates in punishing some only with reds, and others with the Ax; the Romans had their rods for lesser faults, and their Ax for capital crimes. Justice is then remiss, when it spares where it ought to punish; and Justice is then too svere, when it punisheth where it ought to spare. Extream right often proves extream wrong: he that will alwayes go to the utmost of what the Law al∣lows, will too too often do more then the Law requires; it is rare, very rare, to see a man dance upon the brink of the pit, and not to tumble in: A rigid-severity often mars all; equity is still to be preferred before extremity. To inflict great penalties and heavy censures for light offences, this is to kill a Fly upon a mans fore-head with a Beetle. In the French History, there is mention made of an old Courtier that would needs depart the Court, and retire himself to a private life; the King desired him before he went, to leave his advice in some general Rules, what was best to be done in the Government of the Kingdom. Upon which motion, he took a fair paper, and wrote upon the top of the leaf, Moderation; and in the middle of the leaf, Moderation; and at the bottom of the leaf, Mo∣deration; signifying thereby thus much to the King, that the best way in the world to have his Crown set fast, and to keep his Kingdom safe, was to manage throughout all his affairs with moderation. And there is nothing more evident in Scripture and History then this, that many by scruing the pegs of Government too high, have broke all in pieces about their ears.
Now my Lords and Gentlemen, there are five things
 or Rules that will be of singular use to help you in this case, to steer such a course as may be safe and honourable to you; and as may render you a mercy and a blessing to the Nation.
  And the first is this, never make those things to be sins, which God never made to be sins; to make those things to be sins, which God hath made to be no sins, is to make gods of your selves; yea it is to lift up your selves above God himself, as if you were more holy, more wise, more just, and more righteous then the holy one of Israel is. Indeed the Papists, that are will-worshippers, and com∣monly highly conceited of their own wisdom and worth, they frequently transgresse this Rule with their Touch not,Col. 2.21, 23. taste not, handle not; which things have indeed a shew of wisdom in will-worship, &c. but why should you? why should you? who have a higher profession up∣on you, and a more clear Gospel-light shining every day more strongly upon you. But,
  Secondly, Never make those things to be absolute and necessary duties, that God hath nowhere declared to be such.Isa. 33.22. Jam. 4.12. Such things that do neither fall under a general nor a particular command of God, may not be imposed upon the consciences of men as absolute and necessary du∣ties to be performed by them; a faithful observing of these two Rules, would prevent a multitude of sins, a sea of sor∣rows, and a world of troubles. But,
  Thirdly, In all your administrations of justice, take the Authority of the Word with you: this will yield you most comfort, most peace, most security, and most boldnesse, in the great day of your account. But,
  Fourthly, Never put off your own souls with any such pleas or arguments now, that are not pleadable in the Court of conscience, when you shall lie upon your dying-beds;
 nor that are not pleadable before the Court of hea∣ven, when you shall stand before Christs Judgement-feat. But,
Fifthly and lastly, In all your administrations of justice  and judgement, be sure that you act nothing upon the ac∣count of any command, commission, or authority under heaven, that you dare not own, plead and stand by before the great authority of heaven, when the King of Kings shall make a narrow inspection into all your Judicial pro∣ceedings, and accordingly passe judgement upon you. What though this command, and that commission, and the other authority may bear you out in this world, yet if they are too weak to bear you out in the other world, you will curse the day that ever you were born, and wish that you had rather been a turning of spits, or lying under an hedge, or a begging at the rich mans door, then that you had ever sate in seats of Judicature, to act upon such grounds, as are no wayes pleadable before the Lord Jesus Christ, when he shall come in the glory of his father, with all his holy Angels, to judge all the Kings, Princes, Nobles, Judges and Justices of the earth. My Lords and Gentlemen, if these five things or Rules were but sincerely, seriously, resolutely, and constantly followed, no heart can conceive, nor no tongue can expresse the hai∣nous sins, the sore troubles, and the dreadful calamities, and woful miseries that thereby would be prevented. And thus my Lords and Gentlemen, I have done with those special Rules that you are carefully, diligently, faithfully, and constantly to observe, in all your Judicial administra∣tions; but how you will be able to act suitable and answer∣able to these Rules without a spirit of holinesse, without a principle of holinesse, and without an experiment of the powerful operations of holinesse in your own souls, I am
 not able to see;If you please to read from page 433. to page 447. you will find ma∣ny more weighty ar∣guments to move you to labour after holiness. and therefore how much it stands you upon that want that holinesse, that this Treatise holds forth, to study holinesse, to love holinesse, to prize holinesse, to countenance holinesse, to encourage holinesse, to promote holinesse, and to be restlesse till you have experienced the power, and life, and sweet of holinesse in your own hearts and lives, I must leave you to Judge. And O that after all this pains that I have taken upon the account of your immortal souls, I may not have cause to complain, as once Marcus Antonius did, Alas (saith he) those Graces which the Deity sent down as so many pillars to stay up humane Societies, viz. Faith and Modesty, Ju∣stice and Verity, they found such cold entertain∣ment in the world, that they are fled back to heaven. I shall follow these weak endeavours with my best prayers, that you may all put on holinesse as a Royal Robe, and that all your Judicial administrations may savour of a spirit of holinesse, and of the power and prevalency of holinesse, that so you may be as high in happinesse above others, as you are now in power and place exalted above others.
If this Treatise should fall into any of their hands who call and account themselves the only Ministers of Jesus Christ; I mean such, who preach rather to please then to profit; to tickle the ear, then to awaken the conscience; that are better at fleecing of their Flocks, then they are at feeding of their Flocks;Ezek. 13. read it throughout. Mat. 23.23. Mat. 15.1, 10. that seek more mens goods, then their good; that set up mens Traditions above Gods own institutions; that prefer humane commands, before di∣vine commands; that are very zealous and warm for Mint, Anise, and Cummin, but are very cold, carelesse and negligent in the great and weighty matters of the Law, viz. Judgement, Mercy and Faith. That can blesse God in the Church, and blaspheme him in the Tavern:
 That prefer musick in the Church,Gentlemen, if you please to turn to page 296, 297, 298, 299. of this book, you will find more matter that concerns you. before singing of Halle∣lujahs in heaven: That prefer a fat Benefice before an interest in an heavenly inheritance: That can kneel de∣voutly behind a pillar, and in their drunken fits rail as stoutly against a post: That pretend a grea deal of reve∣rence to the name of Jesus, and yet in their lives do daily crucifie the Lord Jesus: That with Judas, can kisse Christ, and betray Christ in a breath: That pretend much kind∣nesse to the head, and yet shew nothing but unkindnesse to the body: That preach as if they had no mind to go to heaven, and live as if they were resolved to go to hell: That feast their own bodies, but starve their peoples souls: That are very devout upon a Saints day, but very loose and prophane upon the Lords day: That think it a greater sin to eat flesh in Lent, then it is to lie with their neigh∣bours wife: That speak ten words for themselves, and hardly two for Christ; and that instead of preaching up holinesse, and promoting of holinesse, and countenancing and encouraging of holinesse, do all they can to discounte∣nance holinesse, to brow-beat holinesse, to keep down holi∣nesse, to bespatter holinesse, to work men out of love with holinesse, and to hinder the growth and encrease of holi∣nesse; O that these men would seriously consider, how un∣like to the Ministers of Jesus Christ they are: Do but look into a Scripture glass, and you may easily see that Hell is not more unlike to Heaven, nor sin more unlike to grace, nor Satan more unlike to God, then you are unlike to the holy, conscientious, painful, &c. Ministers of Jesus Christ. Several Authors in Print have proved this to my hand at large, and therefore I shall not enlarge upon it; only give me leave to say, that Gods holy things ought to be handled with fear and reverence, rather then with wit and dalliance: Spiritual niceness is the next degree to
 unfaithfulnsse.See my Pre∣cious Rmedies against Satans Devices, from page 349. to page 357. And see my Unsearchable Riches of Christ, from page 291. to page 314. Ministers must not be like the drug that the Physitians say is hot in the mouth, and cold in the operation: hot in the Pulpit, but cold, carnal, and care∣lesse in their conversations. Those that stand before Princes, must be exact in their carriages. God appointed both the weights and measures of the sanctuary to be twice as large as those of the Common-wealth; to shew that he expects much more of those that serve him there, then he doth of others. The souls of Priests, (I may say of Mini∣sters) must be purer then the Sun-beams, saith golden∣mouth'd Chrysostom. Gay things in a Sermon are only for men to gaze upon and admire: What are high strains and flashes of wit, new minted words and phrases, but like gay weeds and blew-bottles to the good corn? Do∣ctrine is but the drawing of the bow, application is the hitting of the mark: How many are wise in generals, but vain (en dia-lgism is) in their practical infe∣rences! A general Doctrine not applyed, is as a sword without an edge, not in it self, but to others; or as a whole loaf set before children, that will do them no good. A garment fitted for all bodies, is fit for no body: and so that which is spoken to all, is taken as spoken to none. Aarons bells were golden bells (Dulce sonantes) sounding pleasantly, and not as sounding brasse or tinkling Cym∣bals, as many of the carnal Clergy of this Nation are this day. Many there be that account themselves the only Mi∣nisters of Jesus Christ, that are but like empty Orators, that have a flood of words, and but a drop of matter; of whom we may truly say, Multa loquuntur & nihil di∣cunt; they speak much, and yet say nothing, because they say nothing to the purpose. When the Lacedemonian in Plutarch heard how sweetly the Nightingale sang: O, said he, that I had this Bird, surely it is a rare dish; but
 when he had taken it, and eat it, and found nothing but a little picking meat, he concluded with that proverbial saying, Voxes & praeterea nihil: Now I see that thou art a meer voice and nothing else. How applicable this is to many Preachers in these dayes, who have good lungs, but bad brains, and worse hearts and lives, the prudent Reader may easily see. John the Baptist was a burning and a shining light, as well as a voice: His Sermons were stuft with divine and weighty matter, &c. and not filled up with big words, or strains of wit. Many there be that have Johns voice in the Ministry, that have not that heat and life that John had in his Ministry. That great Orator (Demosthenes) himself could say, that the riches of Greece did not consist in words. The Oracle would have King Philip of Macedon to use silver lances in winning an impregnable fort, &c. But it is not for Ministers to use golden sentences, strong lines, frothy wit, in winning of souls to Christ; for it is iron and not gold that killeth in the encounter: it is the steel sword, and not the golden sword that winneth the field.Job 38.2. We to such Preachers that darken counsel by words without know∣ledge, that affect sublime notions, obscure expressions, uncouth phrases, making plain truths difficult, and easie truths hard: that seek abstrusities, and love to soar aloft in dark expressions, and take pleasure to shoot their ar∣rows over their hearers heads. The heathenish Priests had their Mythologies and strange canting expressions of their imaginary unaccessible Deities, to amaze and a∣muse their blind superstitious followers, and thereby to hold up their Popish and Apish Idolatries in greater venerati∣on. And is not this spirit now revived among many? Certainly men of abstracted conceits and sublime specu∣lations, are but wise fools, and commonly they are as er∣ronious
 as they are curious: Such as mind more the hu∣moring of their hearers fancies, then the saving of their souls, do little consider that of Seneca, Aeger non quae∣rit medicum eloquenem sed sanantem: Sick men are not bettered by Physitians sugared words, but by their skilful hands. The sword of the spirit never wounds deep, till it be pluckt out of the gaudy scabards of hu∣mane eloquence. Mr. Greenham speaking of non-Resi∣dents, wisheth that this Motto might be written on their study doors without, and walls within, on all their books they look on, on all the beds they lie on, and on all the tables they sit at, &c. The price of blood, the price of blood, the price of blood. A Preachers life should be a Commentary upon his doctrine; his practice should be the counterpane of his Sermons: heavenly do∣ctrines should alwayes be adorned with a heavenly life.
Preachers are the Glass, the School, the Book,
Where peoples eyes do learn, do read, do look.
Gentlemen, by these short hints you may see, as in a glasse, if you will not put a cheat upon your own souls, how unlike to the true, holy, and faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ you are. O Sirs, do not you know that the holy Scriptures (that never spoke Treason nor Sedition) do clearly evidence, that an ignorant, prophane, scan∣dalous, superstitious, insufficient, and soul-flattering Clergy, are the greatest Pest, Plague, Affliction, Judge∣ment, &c. that can befall a people, as you may easily see by comparing these Scriptures together, Mich. 2.11. Isa. 30.10, 11. Jer. 5. ult. Lam. 2.14. Isa. 9.16. Ezek. 3.18. Jer. 23.9, 18. Ezek. 13.22. Jer. 6.14.
 and chap. 27.14, 16. 1 Thes. 5.3. Jer. 14.13, 14, 15, 16. Isa. 28.7, 8. Ezek. 34. throughout. Rom. 2.21, 22, 23, 24. Other judgements, as sword, famine, pestilence, burning fevers, agues, &c. cannot separate between God and mens souls; for men may have very sweet and high communion with God under the sorest of those judgements. Other afflictions and judgements may spring from the fatherly love of God, and from a gracious de∣sign of good to his people. Rev. 3.19. Prov. 3.11. Heb. 12.5.6, 7, 8. Psalm 89.30, 35. Job 7.17, 18. but this is a sad fruit of Gods judicial Anger and severe Indignation against a people. Other judgements often issue in mens seeking of the Lord, and in mens returning to the Lord. Isa. 26.16, 17. Hosea 5.14, 15. compared with chap 6.1, 2, 3. and chap. 2.6, 7. but this judge∣ment frequently issues in mens forsaking of the Lord, and in their running from God, and in their walking contrary to God, and in the hardening of them against God, and in an everlasting shutting of them out from the presence of the Lord: as you may see by comparing of these Scri∣ptures together. Matth. 15.14. Luke 6.39. 1 Thes. 5.3. 2 Thes. 1.7, 8, 9, 10. Matth. 23.13. Do not you know that where there is no vision, the people perish? Prov. 29.18. Jipparang, that is here rendred perish, is from Parange, that signifies to be made naked, to be made bare and uncovered. They are made naked as souldiers are among the shot and weapons of their ene∣mies, when their armour is not on their backs; or they are naked as people that are stript of their garments, and ex∣posed to perish by cold in the Winter, or to be scorched or roasted by heat in the Summer; or they are naked, i. e. they are made the objects of shame and contempt to all that look upon them: or they are made naked, that is, of
 the grace,Exod. 32.25. blessing, and protection of God: or they are naked, that is, say others, they are forsaken and cast off; for every one forsakes and casts off naked persons, they will have nothing to do with them: Others render the words thus, The people will keep holy-day, they will have nothing to do but to weep and wail, or, they will do nothing that is good; Others thus, The people shall be stripped naked, they shall be left as a City without walls, exposed to the fury of the enemy, as a body without clothes, open to wind and weather. Others carry it thus, The people shall be discovered; it will then appear what is within, whe∣ther grace or sin; it will then be discovered, what pant∣ings, breathings, hungerings, and longings there be in souls after God, and Christ, and holinesse, and Ordinan∣ces, &c. Pagnin thus, The people will grow barbarous, rebellious, &c. as experience in all ages hath fully de∣monstrated. Others thus, The people shall be of no esteem, of no repute, no body will prize them, no body will value them, no body will regard them; men set no price, no value upon naked persons. Others thus, The people shall be dispersed, scattered, shivered and shattered; and this in all Ages hath been too apparent. Others thus, They shall be drawn away with errours: they shall either be starved, or else poysoned with God-dishonouring, Christ-denying, Scripture-debasing, Conscience-wasting, life-polluting, and soul-damning opinions; it is concluded on all hands, that it shall go ill, very ill, with that people that want vi∣sion, that want serious, sincere, faithful and powerful preaching; for where there is no vision, no serious, sincere, faithful and powerful preaching, there the people perish certainly, undoubtedly, there they go tumbling to hell thick and three-fold; and this is evident in the Text, where there is no vision, the people perish; he doth
 not say they may perish, but they do perish: or they are in danger of perishing, but they do certainly perish. Where there is no serious, conscientious, faithfull, powerfull preaching, there the people grow abominably wicked; as wofull experience tells us: And what the issue of that will be, you may see in Psalm 9.17. The wicked shall be turned into hell,See Psalm 11.6. and all the Nations that forget God: or as the Hebrew hath it, the wicked shall be turn∣ed into, into hell, that is, they shall certainly be turned into hell; yea, they shall be turned into the nethermost hell, into the lowest dungeon in hell.
Where vision fails, there men perish temporally; when vision, when preaching ceased among the Jews, O the dreadfull calamities and miseries that came upon that people! how soon did God burn up all their outward com∣forts, contentments and enjoyments on every hand, 2 Chron. 15.3, 5, 6. compared with Ch. 13.9, 10, 11. and Chap. 36.15. — ult. Mat. 23.37, 38. They shut their eys against all that light that Christ and his Apostles brought amongst them: and what was the Issue of this? why about 40 years after Christs Ascension the Romans came and took away their City, and sold thirty of them a penny, as Josephus writes, &c. and ever since that time, (which is above sixteen hundred years ago) they have been scattered as Dung over the face of the whole earth.
Where vision fails, there men perish totally:Rom. 6.16.17, 19. both the bodies and the souls of men perish, where serious, consci∣entious preaching fails, Hos. 4.6. My people are de∣stroyed for want of knowledge: The Chaldee rende∣reth it, they are besotted and so fitted for destruction. The Papist say, that ignorance is the Mother of devotion: but this Text tells us that it is the Mother of destructi∣on.
 The Heathens were wont to say, that if their God Jupiter would destroy one, he would first besot him: So these people were first besotted, and then destroy∣ed.
Where vision fails, there the people perish insensibly and unexpectedly: they flatter themselves that God is made up all of mercy, and will not believe but they shall go to heaven, till they awake with everlasting flames about their ears, as you may see in Sodom and Gomorrah.
Where vision fails, there men perish suddenly: In a moment they go down to hell, Job 21.13, 14, 15. As the travail of a woman comes suddenly upon her when she least expects it,Prov. 24.22. Deut. 7.4. so everlasting pains and torments come suddenly upon poor sinners when they least expect them. 1 Thess. 5.3. As God rained hell out of heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah on a sudden:Gen. 18. Matth. 24.37, 38, 39. 1 Sam. 15.32. and as he swept away the Old world on a sudden: and as Samuel cut-off Agag on a sudden, when he concluded that the bitterness of death was past: so God casts sinners to hell on a sudden, he sweeps them away on a sudden, he cuts them off on a sudden; and when they say Surely the bitternesse of death is past, and everlasting wrath is past, and hell is past, and eternal ruine is past, then on a sudden God cuts them off, and gives them their portion with Devils and damned Spirits, &c.
Where vision fails, there men perish inevitably, irre∣coverably, 1 Thess. 5. And they shall not escape, Prov. 6.15. Therefore shall his calamity come suddenly, suddenly shall he be broken without remedy. Here is their dismial doom, they shall not be only bruised, but broken, yea, they shall be suddenly broken when they least look for it, when they do not at all dream of it, or dread
 it; and this without remedy, they shall be so broken, as that there shall not be so much as a pessibility of making them up again; if a man lose his estate, his friend, his child, this lsse may be made up again; but if a man once lose his soul, there is no repairing nor making up of that lesse.
Where there is no vision, there men perish everlasting∣ly, there they perish eternally, 2 Thessal. 1.7, 8, 9. Jude 7.
Do not you know that God will require the blood of all their souls at your hands, that perish either by your insuf∣ficiency, or neglect, or bad examples! Ezek. 3.18, 19, 20. Thou shalt surely die; Moth Tamuth, in dying thou shalt die; that is, thou shalt certainly die, thou shalt eternally die, The Antients commonly interpret it of the death of the soul.
Do not you know that a man were better have the blood of all the men in the world upon him, then the blood of one soul upon him? For there is no blood that cries so loud, that will lie so heavy, and that will sink a man so deep in hell, as the blood of souls. I say as the blood of souls.
Do not you know that there are no men upon the face of the earth, that are by office so strictly, so strongly, so uni∣versally, so indispensably, and so signally engaged to prize hoinesse, to countenance holinesse, to encourage holinesse, to promote holinesse, and to practise holinesse, as the Mi∣nisters of Jesus Christ are? Do not you know that Mini∣sters are called Angels in respect of their offices?Rev. 2. Psalm 104.9. now Angels are spiritual creatures, their communion is spiri∣tual, their food is spiritual, their delights are spiri∣tual, their minds are spiritual, their affections are spiri∣tual, and their exercises are spiritual; and in all these re∣spects
 Ministers should be like to the Angels; but are not many of them spiritual mad men in these dayes? be∣ing nothing lsse then what they professe to be; spiritual men in a mockery;Hosea 9.7. such as many light slight souls call a Spiritual Pig, that is the poorest, the leanest, and the worst of all the ten, such a one as hath no substance in it. So these have no substantial goodnesse, no substantial holinesse at all in them; whereas in holinesse they should as far ex∣ceed all other men, as the Angels in holinesse do exceed them.
Do not you know, that there is no rank nor order of men on earth that have so enriched hell, that have been such benefactors to hell, as the ignorant, insufficient, pro∣phane, scandalous and superstitious, Clergy? In times of Popery letters were framed and published as sent from hell, wherein the Devil gave the carnal, ignorant, insuf∣ficient, scandalous and superstitious Clergy of those times no small thanks for so many millions of souls as by their means were daily sent to hell.
Do not you know, that all the true faithful Prophets, Apostles and Ministers of Jesus Christ, that are menti∣oned in the Old and New Testament,2 Chron. 36.15. Jer. 7.25. chap. 25.4. & 35.15. chap. 11.7, &c. 2 Corin. 11. &c. were men of the greatest holinesse; and men that made it their greatest businesse and work in this world, to keep down a spirit of prophanesse and wickednesse, and to countenance, encou∣rage and promote holinesse! O how diligent, O how fre∣quent, O how abundant, O how constant were they in the work of the Lord, that prophane persons might be made holy, and that those that were holy might be made more and more holy! yea that they might perfect holinesse in the fear of the Lord,In a Sermon before King Edward the sixt. &c. Bishop Latimer speaking of the Clergy of his time, tells us, that many can away with praesunt, but not with bene; if that bene were out of
 the Text all were well; if a man might eat the sweet and never sweat, it were an easie matter to be a Preacher; if there were not opus but bonum, all were well too. But every Clergy man is or ought to be , that is, saith Augustine, Nomen operis, to be a Steward and Over-seer in Gods house; and that is an office of great labour, trust and employment. Stewards and Over-seers commonly eat their bread in the sweat of their brows, and after much beating of their brains; but how unlike to such Stewards and Over-seers the Clergy are that I am now expostulating with, I must leave the Christian Reader to judge. Ernestus Duke of Lunebury, caused a burning Lamp to be stamped on his coyn, with these four letters, A. S. M. C. by which was meant, Aliis serviens me∣ipsum contero: By giving light to others, I consume my self. And such were the Lords faithful Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers of old: and such are all his faith∣ful, laborious, and conscientious Ministers now: But how unlike to the one or the other they are, that now I am rea∣soning with, you may easily perceive, by comparing them together. I have read of the Nobles of Polonia, that when the Gospel is read, they clap their hands upon their swords, and begin to draw them out, intimating by that Ceremo∣ny, their resolution to defend the Faith, and their willing∣nesse to hazard their lives for the Gospels safety. The faithful Prophets, Apostles and Ministers of old, were willing to sacrifice themselves for the Gospels sake: but how many are there in these dayes, that are more ready and willing to make a sacrifice of the Gospel for profit sake, and preferment sake, and honour sake, and lusts sake, &c. then they are to make themselves a sacrifice for the Gospel sake! and how unlike these are to the faithful, conscientious Ministers of Jesus Christ that have
 been in all Ages, I must leave you to judge.
Do not you know that Pharaoh had that tender regard of his cattel, as that he thought none fit to be their Ru∣ler, their Over-seer, but such as were known men of activi∣ty?Gen. 47.6, 7. Pharaoh would have none to be his Cowherds, but men of activity, men of skill, men that were prudent and diligent, ingenuous and industrious. Shall Pharaoh be so careful for his Cows, and shall not others be as care∣ful for souls? What man is there under heaven that hath the use of his reason, his wits, &c. that when he is to travel, would take a fool, an Ignoramus for his guide: and that when he is sick, would send for a Moun∣tebank to be his Physitian: or that when he is to ride a dangerous way, would make choice of a Coward to defend him: or that when he hath a Law-suit, would make use of a Dunce to plead it: or that when he hath a suit of cloathes to make, would send for a bungling Taylor to make it? surely none. And why then should not men be as wise for their souls?
Do not you know that that sort of persons that now I am a speaking of, have been the greatest instruments of bringing the greatest calamities and miseries, and the sorest desolations and destructions that ever have been brought upon Cities, Nations, Kingdoms and Countries! Compare the Scriptures in the margin together,Jer. 26.8, 9, 11, 14, 15. Lam. 4.11, 12, 13. Amos 7.10, 11. 1 Kings 22. 2 Chron. 18. and then let conscience speak. And who is so ignorant as not to know that it was the High-Priests, Scribes and Pharisees that brought the innocent blood of our Lord Jesus Christ upon that once great and glorious Nation of the Jews, to their utter destruction and desolation, about forty years after Christs Ascension, when the Romans came and took their City, and practised the greatest severity and cruelty imaginable upon them, as Josephus and other Historians
 shew? In the Marian dayes, and in the Massacre of the Protestants in France, how great a hand this sort of men had that I am now a reasoning with, all the world knows. And so the Pagan Priests stirred up the Pagan Empe∣rours to be desperate Persecutors of the people of God that were within their Empires; which occasioned. Tertul∣lian to give that good counsel to Scapula a Pagan perse∣cutor; God (saith he) will surely make inquisition for our blood, and therefore if thou wilt not spare us, yet spare thy self: if not thy self, yet spare thy Countrey, which must be responsible when God comes to visit for blood.
Do not you know that his Majestie hath very Chri∣stianly, Zealously, argumentatively, and smartly declared against drunkennesse, lewdnesse, prophansse, &c. and that he hath declared that his resolution is and shall be to promote the power of godlinesse, to encourage the Exer∣cises of Religion, both publick and private, to take care that the Lords day be applyed to holy Exercises, without unnecessary divertisements; and that insufficient, neg∣ligent and scandalous Ministers be not permitted in the Church?
Do not you know that when the great Shepherd our Lord Jesus Christ shall appear,1 Pet. 5.2, 3, 4: Ezek. 3.17, 18, 19. that he will call you to a particular and exact account for every soul that hath mis∣carried under your charge, either by reason of your igno∣rance, insufficiency, prophanesse, loosnesse, or superstition, &c. and how will you then be able to stand in that day? &c.
Gentlemen, if you say you know not these things, and that they are Riddles and Mysteries to you, how dare you say that you are the Ministers of Jesus Christ? But if you shall say that you know very well that these things are
 certainly true, yea that they are such clear and undeny∣able truths, that no Devil can deny, and yet shall con∣tinue in your ignorance, insufficiency, prophanesse, loos∣nesse, superstition, &c. what man on earth is there that hath but read the Scriptures, and that can but write his own name, and that would not be begged for a fool in fo∣lio, will believe you to be the true faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ?
Well Gentlemen, I have read of Alexander the great, how that he had a souldier of his name that was a Coward, which when he understood, he commanded him either to fight like Alexander, or else to lay down the name of Alexander: So say I to you, Gentlemen, either preach as the Ministers of Jesus Christ ought to preach, viz. plainly, spiritually powerfully, felingly, fervently, frequently, &c. and live as the Ministers of Jesus Christ ought to live, viz. heavenly, graciously, holly, humbly, righteously, harmlesly, and exemplarily, &c. Or else lay down your very names of being the Ministers of Jesus Christ, and put no longer a cheat upon your selves, nor upon the people, by making them believe that you are the only Ministers of Jesus Christ, when you have nothing of the Spirit of Christ, nor of the Anointings of Christ, nor of the Grace of Christ, nor of the life of Christ in you. Gentlemen, if this counsel be seriously minded and faith∣fully followed, it will turn more to your accounts in the great day of our Lord Jesus, and do you more good then, then all the profits, preferments, and honours of this world can do you good now: But if you shall slight and despise this counsel now, I shall be found a true Prophet to your wo and misery in that great day, &c.
If this Treatise should fall in the hands of any Ladies and Gentlewomen (as I suppose it may) that have not
 yet experienced the sweet and powerful operations of holinesse in their own souls, I would then say,
Ladies and Gentlewomen, your souls are as precious, and as immortal, and as capable of union and com∣munion with Christ here, and of an eternal frui∣tion of Christ hereafter, as the souls of any men in the world are. I have read a sad story of one Bochna, a woman which had but two sons in all the world; and whilst she was walking with the one towards the River, she heard the other crying out, and hastening back, she found a knife sticking in his side, which killed him immediately: then she made haste to the other child, but he in her absence was fain into the River and drowned, and so she lost both her sons at once. Now Ladies, this is your very case; every one of you have two children (as I may say) a soul and a body, a life eternal, and a life temporal; and O what a dreadful and unspeak∣able losse would it be to lose both these at once? and yet as certain as there is a God in Hea∣ven, you will lose them both without Holi∣nesse.
All know, that know any thing of Scripture or History, that there have been many great Ladies and Gentlewomen, that have been great lovers of holinesse, and great delighters in holinesse, and great prizers of holinesse, and great admirers of holi∣nesse, and great countenancers of holinesse, and great encouragers of holinesse, and great promoters of holinesse, and great followers after holinesse, and great experiencers of the sweet and powerful opera∣tions of holinesse in their own souls. And O that this might be all your honour and happinesse, to be
 in all respects as famous for holinesse, as any of your sexe hath been before you.
Christ hath prayed as much for your souls, as he hath for the souls of others; and he hath paid as much for your souls, as he hath for the souls of others; and he hath sweat, and wept, and bled as much for your souls, as he hath for the souls of others; and he hath suffered, and satisfied as much for your souls, as he hath for the souls of others; and he hath purchased and prepared as great and as glorious things for your souls, as he hath for the souls of others, if you will be but a holy people to him; and what doth all this speak out, but an unspeakable readinesse and willingnesse in Jesus Christ to sanctifie you, and save you, as well as others?
A man might write volumes on this sub∣ject; there is so much said in Scripture and History upon this ac∣count; but in an Epistle a touch must suffice, &c.All knowing men can tell you, that many La∣dies and Gentlewomen in all Ages, have been very famous for all Natural, Moral, Spiritual and Ac∣quired excellencies; yea more famous then many men that yet have done worthily in their Genera∣tion; and by their attainments you may easily see what is possible for you to attain unto, both in respect of gifts and grace. Of all things, graci∣ous examples are most awakening, convincing and encouraging; for in them you may see that both the attainment of holinesse, and the exercise of holi∣nesse, is possible, though difficult; in eying of ex∣amples, it is alwayes best to eye the highest, the holiest and the worthiest examples; for as he that shooteth at the Sun, though he falls short of his mark, yet will shoot higher then he that aimeth only at a shrub; so those that set up the highest examples of
 holinesse for their mark, for their imitation, will certainly attain to greater degrees of holinesse, then those that propose to themselves the meanest and the lowest examples of holinesse for their pattern and imitation.
Well, Ladies and Gentlewomen, do you think that it is good going to hell,Isa. 33.14. 2 Thes. 1.7, 8, 9, 10. that it is good dwelling with the devouring fire, that it is good dwelling with everlasting burnings, that it is good for ever to be separated from the presence of God, Christ, Angels, and the spirits of just men made perfect? that it is good for ever to lie a sweltering under the wrath of an infinite just God, and to abide for ever and ever under those pains and torments that are end∣lesse, easelesse, hopelesse and remedilesse? and that it is good to be associated, and fettered with Devils and damned spirits to all eternity? O no, this can∣not be good; for the very serious thoughts of these things are enough even to raise a hell a this side hell in our hearts. O then, Ladies and Gentle∣women, pray that you may be holy; hear that you may be holy; read that you may be holy; and with all your might presse after holinesse, and pursue hard after holinesse, as after the one thing necessary; for with∣out holinesse you will as certainly go to hell, as ho∣ly persons shall certainly go to heaven; and this you will find as clearly and fully proved in this following Treatise, as heart can wish.
O that you would for ever remember this, that without all peradventure you shall never be saved, unlesse you are sanctified; you shall never be truly happy, unlesse you are really holy: except God should do five things that are not possible for him to do:
 viz. 1. Change his purpose. 2. Make null and void his decree. 3. Make a new Gospel. 4. Find out a new way to heaven. And 5. ungod himself. God must undo himself and ungod himself, if ever he make you happy before he hath made you holy: and therefore O what infinite cause have you to read this following Treatise, and to study this Trea∣tise, and to meditate on this Treatise, and to pray over this Treatise, and to look up to heaven for counsel and strength to make such an improvement of the means, helps, and directions that are here prescribed for the attaining of holinesse, as that you may be made really holy, that so you may be everlastingly happy! And to quicken and encourage your hearts in this work, I could heartily wish, that as soon as you have read over the Epistle, you would read from page 433. to page 447. for there you will finde many Arguments that are of a particular concernment to your selves, and that ought to be no small obligations upon you to work you to pursue after holinesse with all your might, &c.
If this Treatise should fall into the hands of any faithful, serious, gracious, conscientious, labori∣rious Ministers hands, (as I suppose it may) I would then say, Reverend Sirs, let my weak en∣deavours be a spur, a provocation to you to lay out your choicest and your chiefest gifts, parts, strength, time and opportunities to promote holinesse of life, and holinesse in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and in all your sacred Communions. Certainly, had we all eyed holinesse more, and preached holinesse more, and practised holinesse more, and cryed up
 holinesse more, and encouraged holinesse more, and countenanced holinesse more, the countenance both of God and man might have been set more plea∣singly towards us, then they are this day. When once maintenance comes to be more in Ministers eyes then holinesse; and when their studies and endeavours are more to make men Proselytes to this or that way, this or that form, this or that party, then to make men holy, it is no wonder if God writes out bitter things against them. I doubt not but providential dispensations have bad such a teaching vertue in them, as to lead you to lay your fingers upon several such like sores, and to mourn over them, and to justifie the holy One of Israel who is holy in all his wayes, and righteous in all his works.
Truly Brethren, I have alwayes lookt upon the great work of the Ministry to lie in two things; First in making unholy men holy: and secondly in making them that are already holy, to be more and more holy. First to beget holinesse, and then to nurse up holinesse; first to bring souls to Christ, and then to build up souls in Christ, is without all peradventure the work of works that should be most in every Ministers eye, and that should al∣wayes lie nearest and warmest upon every Ministers heart, &c. And through grace I have reade this my grand design in the course of my Ministry, and throughout all my writings; and now it yields me that joy, that comfort, that content, and that satis∣faction, that I would not be without for all the world. Besides, I know it will turn most to my account at the great day. O that all of you that yet
 have any opportunities and advantages in your hands to preach the everlasting Gospel, would make this your great businesse to promote holinesse, and to exalt and lift up holinesse in the world: For as this great principle of holinesse shall gain ground upon the hearts, consciences and lives of men; so all the things of Antichrist, and all the Trade of Antichrist, and all those grand mis∣chiefs and miseries that threaten the sons of men, will fall before it, as Dagon fell before the Ark.
If this Treatise should fall into the hands of any of Gods sanctified ones, of what degree or rank soever they are of, as I suppose it may fall into the hands of many such, I would then say, Dear friends, In this Treatise you will find many strong Motives to provoke you to perfect holinesse in the fear of the Lord, and many special Means to enable you to perfect holinesse in the fear of the Lord, and many evidences whereby you may cer∣tainly and infallibly know whether you have at∣tained to any considerable highth of holinesse, or no; and in the opening of these things, you will find that great Doctrine about degrees of Glory in Heaven to be Asserted and Proved, and the Ob∣jections against it to be fairly dismissed, &c.
Reader, If thou art one that to this very day art in an unsanctified estate, and an enemy to holi∣nesse, or a scoffer at holinesse, or a a secret de∣spiser of holinesse, or a desperate opposer of holi∣nesse, or a bitter persecutor of holinesse, then I would commend this following Treatise (before any
 I know extant in the world) to the service of thy soul, for I know none that is so calculated and fit∣ted up for that purpose as this is. Read and judge. This I will assure thee, O thou unsanctified soul, that the grand design of this book is thy salvati∣on; it is to make thee really holy, that thou mayest be eternally happy; and of this thou may∣est be confident, viz. that I shall follow these poor labours with my earnest prayers that they may be blessed to the internal and eternal welfare of thy soul, and that they may issue in the conviction, conversion, and salvation of thy soul. I shall send this Treatise forth into the world with Jacobs blessing and prayer for his sons,Gen. 43.14. God Almighty send thee mercy in the sight of the man, &c. in the sight of the proud man that he may be hum∣bled, and in the sight of the hardened man that he may be softened, and in the sight of the carnal man that he may be spiritualized, and in the sight of the polluted man that he may be washed, and in the sight of the unsanctified man that he may be sanctified, and in the sight of the ignorant man that he may be enlightened, and in the sight of the stubborn man that he may be bowed, and in the sight of the unconverted man that he may be changed, and in the sight of the lost man that he may be saved.
Christian Reader, I suppose by this time that I have almost tired thee in reading, as I have my self in writing, and therefore I shall presently draw to a close; only before I take my leave of thee,
 give me leave to say, that I am much of Car∣thagena's his mind, who to those three things which the Antients held impossible, saith, that to find a Book Printed without Errata's, should un∣doubtedly have been added as a fourth impossible, if the Art of Printing had been then invented, though the Author had Briareus his hands, and the Printer Argus his eyes. Notwithstanding all the care that hath been taken, thou wilt find figures misplaced, and some mispointings, with some other mistakes of the Printer: I hope the ingenuous Rea∣der will cast a mantle of love over the mistakes of the presse, and do me that right and himself that curtesie as to correct such errours of the Presse that the second Impression may prevent. Seneca I remember is railed upon by slanderous tongues for the faults of Nero his Schollar. And the scapes of Quintilians Schollars, are imputed to Quintilian himself; but I know the Christian Rea∣der that is daily sensible of the Errata's of his life, hath not so learned Christ.
Reader, I do not offer thee that which cost me nothing: This Treatise that now I put into thy hand, is the fruit of much prayer and serious study: If thou findest any profit and benefit by it, give Christ all the glory; the crown of praise be∣comes no head but his; only when thou art in the Mount, let me lie near thy heart: O pray earnest∣ly, pray fervently, pray frequently, and pray un∣weariedly, that I may have much of the fresh an∣nointings of the holy Spirit, that my communion
 with a holy God may every day rise higher and higher, and that all my transactions both before God and man may savour of some highths of ho∣linesse: So thou wilt the more strongly oblige me to be

