



SIR,
IT is not unusuall to those who write bookes, to make choice of some noble friends to whom to dedi∣cate them. My ambition is to present you with the Dedication of this. The great respects which I had from your dear Father to the last gasp of his breath, continu∣ed and augmented by you, have put me forwards to retribute (to his memory, to your owne merits) in such a way as I am able.
Sr. There is great profit in reading of books, if a good choice be made of them. Historicall books will accomplish a gentleman: for an history is not improperly defined to be , a commemoration containing an exposition of some matter or thing, which hath been acted or done upon the stage of the world. So that by history
 we do as it were live, and have lived at all times, and in all places, conversing with all sorts of peo∣ple, knowing the manners and severall constitu∣tions of all nations, and are present in all the oc∣currences of times by-past, as if they were now in action. But a Christian hath his unum necessa∣rium, and that is to know Christ, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his suffe∣rings, being made conformable unto his death. No historicall knowledge therefore more perti∣nent unto him then that whereby, according to the Scriptures of the Divine canon, he shall know the gratious administration of Gods covenant with mankinde; shall see Christ in the Originall promise, and in all the promises, sacraments, sacri∣fices, and sacred ceremonies, visibly set forth and represented in the legall worship, and by persons ordained to minister in the same, together with sa∣cred places and functions till his coming in the flesh, to fulfill all that which was promised, and mystically shewed concerning himselfe. And then shall behold him in the flesh, as he was by divine dispensation: shall hear his heavenly doctrine, see his wonderfull works and miracles; and how he abolished the old testament, instituted the great and mysterious sacraments of the new. And how (having done all those things which were first re∣quisite for him to do) he suffered, was buried, de∣scended into hell, rose again the third day from the
 dead; and having been conversant with his dis∣ciples for the space of forty daies after his resur∣rection, he transferred the keyes of the kingdome of heaven from the Legall to the Evangelicall priesthood, giving ample commission to his Apostles to go into all the world, and to teach and baptize all nations; and then ascended into hea∣ven, where he sitteth on the right hand of God, and maketh intercession for his Church.
A sound faith requireth a right understan∣ding: for the things which we do not rightly under∣stand, we cannot rightly believe. Therefore though to believe and to apply the great and most mysterious work of mans redemption to our selves effectually that we may be saved, is the gift of God by the holy Ghost through faith; yet to inform the understanding, the history o∣pened and cleared according to the Scriptures, is most necessary. This is that which I have endea∣voured to do, in such a method as I conceive most proper for the subject so transcendently myste∣rious and divine, carefully observing the periods of the times, and with what brevity and perspicu∣ity I could: to remember the learned of those things which they know, and to teach the un∣learned some things which they do not know; a∣voyding in all things curiosity and ostentation of language. Ʋpon the principall matters concur∣ring with the history, (the explication whereof
 is more requisite) I have insisted more largely. And as for those things which cannot positively be defined or stated, (because not clearly evidenced in the Scriptures) Ut potui, explicavi; nec ta∣men ut Pythius Apollo, certa ut sint & fixa quae dixi: sed, ut homunculus, probabilia conjecturâ sequens. Therefore must I apologize with the author of the Macchabaean history; for, If I have done well, and as is fitting the story, it is that which I desired; but if slen∣derly and meanly, it is that which I could at∣tain unto. 2 Mac. 15.38.
Sir,

