


Right Honourable,
IT is not my design to blazon your Worth, or write a Pa∣negyrick of your Praises; your brighter Name stands not in need of such a shadow as mens Applause to make it more renowned in the World; native Worth is more respected than adventitious Glory: your own works Prov. 31. 31. praise you in the gates. It is London's Honour and Happiness, Tranquility and Prosperity to have such a Magistrate that bears not the Sword of Justice in vain, and that hath not Rom. 13. 4. brandished the Sword of Justice in the defence of the friends of Baal, Balaam, or Bacchus. My Lord, had your Sword of Ju∣stice been a Sword of Protection to desperate Swearers, or to cruel Oppressors, or to deceitful Dealers, or to roaring Drunkards, or to cursing Monsters, or to Gospel-despisers, or to Christ-contemners, &c. might not London have laid in her Ashes to this very day? yea, might not God have rained Hell out of Heaven upon those Parts of the City that were standing Monuments of Gods mercy, as once he did upon Sodom and Gomorrah? Wo to that sword Gen. 19. that is a devouring sword to the righteous, to the meek, to the upright, and to the peaccable in the land. O happy Sword! Psal. 35. 19, 20. under which all sorts and ranks of men have worshipped God in peace, and lived in peace, and rested in peace, and traded in peace, and built their habitations in peace, and have grown up in peace. Sir, every man hath sit under your Sword as under
 his own Vine and Fig-tree in peace. Words are too weak to express how great a mercy this hath been to London, yea, I may say to England. The Ancients set forth all their gods with Harps in their hands, the Hieroglyphick of Peace. The Gre∣cians had the Statue of Peace with Pluto the God of Riches in her arms. Some of the Ancients were wont to paint Peace in the form of a Woman with a horn of plenty in her hands, viz. all blessings. The Orator, hit it when he said, Dulce nomen pacis, the very name of Peace is sweet. No City so happy as that wherein the chief Magistrate has been as eyes to the blind, legs to the lame, ears to the deaf, a father to the fatherless, a husband Job 31. to the widow, a Tower to the righteous, and a Terrour to the wicked.
Certainly Rulers have no better friends than such as make The three things which God minds most, & loves best below Heaven, are his Truth, his Worship, and his People. conscience of their ways: for none can be truly loyal, but such as are truly religious, witness Moses, Joseph, Daniel, and the three Children. Sincere Christians are as Lambs amongst Lyons, as Sheep amongst Wolves, as Lillies amongst Thorns; they are exposed more to the rage, wrath, and malice of wicked men, by reason of their holy Profssion, their gracious Principles, and Practices, than any other men in all the world. Now did not God raise up Magistrates, and spirit Magistrates to owne them, to stand by them, and to defend them in all honest and just ways, how soon would they be devoured and destroyed? Certainly the Sword of the Magistrate is to be drawn forth for the natural good, and civil good, and moral good, and spiritual good of all that live soberly and quietly under i Stobaeus tells us of a Persian Law, Stobaeus serm. 42. p. 294. that after the death of their King every man had five days li∣berty to do what he pleased, that by beholding the wickedness and disorder of those few days, they might prize Government the better all their days after. Certainly had some hot-headed, and little-witted, and fierce-spirited men had but two or three days liberty to have done what they pleased in this great City during your Lordships Mayoralty, they would have made sad work in the midst of us. When a righteous Government fails, then, 1. Order fails, 2. Religion fails, 3. Trade fails, 4. Justice fails, 5. Prosperity fails, 6. Strength and Power fails, 7. Fame and Honour fails, 8. Wealth and Riches fails,
 9. Peace and Quiet fails, 10. All humane Converse and So∣ciety fails. To take a righteous Government out of the world, is to take the Sun out of the Firmament, and leave it no more a , a beautiful Structure, but a , a confused Heap. In such Towns, Cities, and Kingdoms where righteous Govern∣ment fails, there every mans hand will be quickly engaged Gen. 26. 12. against his brother. O the sins, the sorrows, the desolations and destructions that will unavoidably break in like a Flood upon such a People.
Publick Prsons should have publick Spirits, their gifts and There is a great truth in that old Ma∣xim, Magi∣stratus virum indicat. In my Epi∣stle to my Treatise call'd A Cabinet of Choice Jewels, the ingenious Reader may find six Argu∣ments to en∣courage Ma∣gistrates to be men of pub∣lick Spirits. goodness should diffuse themselves for the good of the whole. It is a base and ignoble Spirit to pity Cataline more than to pity Rome, to pity any particular sort of men more than to pity the whole; it is cruelty to the good to justifie the bad; it is wrong to the Sheep to animate the Wolves; it is danger (if not death) to the Lambs not to restrain or chain up the Lyons: but, Sir, from this ignoble Spirit God has delivered you. The Ancients were wont to place the Statues of their Princes by their Fountains, in∣timating that they were (or at least should be) Fountains of the publick Good. Sir, had not you been such a Fountain, men would never have ben so warm for your continuance. My Lord, the great God hath made you a , a publick Good, a publick Blessing; and this hath made your Name pre∣cious, and your Government desirable, and your Person honoura∣ble in the thoughts, hearts, and eyes of all people. Many (may I not say most) of the Rulers of this World are as Pliny speaks of the Roman Emperors, Nomine Dii, Natura Diaboli; Mon∣sters, not men; Murtherers, not Magistrates: such a Monster was Saul, who hunted David as a Partridge, slew the innocent Priests of the Lord, ran to a Witch, and who was a man of so narrow a Soul, that he knw not how to look or live above himself, his own interests and concernments. The great care of every Ma∣gistrate Exod. 32. 10, 11. 32. Nehem. 5. 6. to 19. Psal. 137. 5, 6. Acts 13. 36. should be to promote the publick Interest more than their own, as you may see by comparing the Scriptures in the Margine together. 'Twas Caesars high commendation, that he never had himself after the World had him for a Governour; his mind was so set on the ublick, that that he forgot his own private Af∣fairs. The Stars have their brightness, not for themselves,
 but for the use of others. The Application is easie.
My Lord, several Philosophers have made excellent and Carneades, A∣ristotle, Socra∣tes, &c.
The Roman Orator hath long since ob∣served, that the force of Justice is such, and so great, that even Thieves and Robbers both by Sea and Land, who live upon in∣justice and ra∣pine, yet can∣not live upon their Trade without some practice of it among them¦selves.
Cleobulus one of the seven Sages was wont to say, that medio∣crity was without com∣pare.
The very Heathen could set so much divine glory in the face of a Ma∣gistrate, that he styled him , the living Image of the ever∣living God. Magistrates are (as Nazi∣anzen expres∣ses it) Pictures drawn of God. Every Magi∣strate, though in never so low a place, bears the I∣mage of God; a Penny bears the Image of the Prince as well as a Shil∣ling. Magi∣strates are not immortal Dei∣ties, neither have they e∣verlasting God-heads, Those gods, as they had a be∣ginning, so they must have an end. Quicquid ori∣tur, moritur. There is a Mene Mene on them, their days are numbred, their time is computed. Hercules his Pillar stands in their way. Non datur ul∣tra. legant Orations in the praise of justice: they say that all Ver∣es are compreended in the distribution of justice. Justice, saith Aristotle, is a Synopsis and Epitome of all Vertues. All I shall say is this, the world is a Ring, and justice is the Dia∣mond in that Ring; the world is a body, and justice is the soul f that body. It is well known that the constitution of a mans body is best known by his pulse; if it stir not at all, then we know he is dead; if it stir violently, then we know him to be in a Fever; if it keep an equal stroke, then we know he is sound, well, and whole: So the estate and constitution of a City, King∣dom, or Common-weal is best known by the manner of execu∣ting justice therein; for justice is the pulse of a City, King∣dom, or Common-weal; if justice be violent, then the City, Kingdom, or Common-weal is in a Fever, in a very bad estate; if it stir not at all, then the City, Kingdom, or Common-wealth is dead: but if it hath an equal stroke, if it be justly and duely administred, then the City, Kingdom, or Common-weal is in a good, a safe, and a sound condition. When Vespasian asked Apollonius what was the cause of Ne∣roes ruine, he answered, that Nero could tune the Harp well, but in Government he did always winde up the strings too high, or let them down too low. Extreams in Government are the ready way to ruine all. The Rons had their Rods for lesser faults, and their Ax for capital crimes. Extream right often proves extream wrong: he that will always go to the utmost of what the Law allows, will too too often do more than the Law requires. A rigid severity often mars all: Equity is still to be perferred before extremity. To inflict great penalties and heavy censures for light offences, this is to kill a flye upon a mans forehead with a Beetle. The great God hath put his own Name upon Magstrates, Psal. 82. 6. I said that ye are gods Yet it must be granted that you are gods in a smaller letter, mortal gods, gods that must dye like men; all the sons of Ish are sons of Adam. Magistrates must do justice impartially; for as they are called Gods, so in this they must be like to God, who is no accepter of persons, Deur. 1. 17. Levi. 19. 15.
 He accepts not of the rich man because of his Robes, neither doth he reject the poor man because of his Rags. The Magi¦strates eyes are to be always upon causes, and not upon persons. Both the Statues of the Theban Judges and the Statues of the Egyptian Judges were made without hands and without eyes, to intimate to us, that as Judges should have no hands to re∣ceive Bribes, so they should have no eyes to see a friend from a foe, or a brother from a stranger in judgment. And it was the Oath of the Heathen Judges, as the Orator relates: Audi∣am accusatorem, & reum sine affectibus, & personrum respectione; I will hear the Plaintiff and the Defendant with an equal mind, without affection and respect of persons. In the twelfth Novel of Justinian, you may read of an Oath im∣posed upon Judges and Justices against inclining or addicting themselves to either party; yea, they put themselves under a deep and bitter execration and curse in case of partiality, im∣ploring God in such language as this: Let me have my part with Judas, and let the Leprosie of Gehzi cleave to me, and the trembling of Cain come upon me, and whatsoever else may astonish and dismay a man, if I am partial in the administra¦tion of justice. The Poet in the (Greek) Epigram taught the silver Ax of justice that was carried before the Roman Magi∣strates to proclaim, If thou be an offende let not the silver flatter thee; if an innocent, let not the Ax  ight thee. The Athenian Judges judged in the night, when the faces of men could not be seen, that so they might be impartial in judg¦ment My Lord, your impartiality in the administration of justice in that high Orb wherein Divine Providence hath pla∣ced you, is one of those great things that hath made you high and honourable in the eyes and hearts of all that are true lovers of impartial justice. Some Writers say, that some Waters in Macedonia being drunk by black sheep, change their fleece into white: Nothing but the pure and impartial administration of justice and judgment can transform black mouth'd, black-handed, and black hearted men into white. There is nothing that sweetens, satisfies, and silences all sorts of men like the Isa. 1. 23, 24. administration of impartial justice: the want of this brought desolation upon Jerusalem, and the whole Land of Jury, and
 upon many other flourishing Kingdoms and Countries, as all August. de Ci∣vitate Dei, lib. 10. cap. 21, &c. lib. 4. cap. 4. Lipsius de con∣stan. l. 2. c. 13. know that have but read any thing of Scripture or History. S. Austin plainly denies that ever the Romn Politie could be called properly a Common-wealh, upon this ground, that, Ubi nn est Justiti, non est Rspublica; he calls Common wealths without justice, but magna Ltocini: or in Lipsius his lan∣guage, Congeries, Confusio, Turba: 'tis but an abuse of the word Respublica, Common-wealth, where the publick Good is not consulted by an impartial justice and equity, 'tis but a confused heap, a rout of men; or if we will call it so at present, it will not be so long without impartial justice, partly because injustice 1 Kings 12. 1 Sam. 8. 3. and oppression makes the multitude tumultuous, and fills the peoples heads with dangerous designs, as you may see by compa∣ring the Scriptures in the Margine together; and partly because it lays a Nation open and obuoxious to the wrath and vengeance of God, as might easily be made good by scores of Scriptures. Impartial justice is the best establshment of Kingdoms and Common-wealths. The King by judgment establisheth the See Numb. 25. 11. 2 Sam. 21, 14. land, Prov. 29. 4. It is the best security against desolating judgments. Run ye through the streets of Jerusalem, and seek in the broad places thereof, if ye can find a man, i there be any that executeth judgment, and I will pardon it, Jer. 5 1.
My Lord,  the Honour of a Magistrate to do justice impartially, so i s the Honour and Glory of a Magistrate to do justice speedily. Jer. 28▪ 12. O house of David, ths sih the Lord, execute judgment in the morning, and deliver him that is spoiled out of the hnd of the opprssr, lest my God is very speedy and swift in the execution of Justice. Joel. 3. 4. Gen. 19. Numb. 16. Ezra 7. 20. In this as in o∣ther things it becomes Ma∣gistrates to be like to God. sury go out like fie, nd burn that none can quench it, be∣cause of the evil of your doings. After examination, execu∣tion is to be done with expedition. When men cry out for justice justice, Magistrates must not cry out crs, cra, to morrow, to morrow. Magistrates must do justice in the morning; neiher noon-justice, nor afternoon▪justice, nor evening-justice, nor night-justice is so aceptable to God, or so honourable to Magistrates, or so advantagious to the people, as morning-justice is: to delay justice is worse sometimes than to deny justice; 'tis a very dangerous thing for Magistrates to be as long a bringing forth
 their Verdicts as the Elephant her young. Delay of justice makes many more irreconcileable; it makes many men go up and down this world with heavy hearts, empty purses, and thred bare coats. I have read of a famous passage of Theo∣dorick King of the Romans, who when a Widow came to him with a sad complaint, that she had a suit depending in the Court three years, which might have been ended in a few days; the King demands of her the Judges names, she tells him, he sends a special Command to them to give all the speedy dis∣patch that was possible to the Widows Cause, which they did; and in two days determined it to the Widows liking: this be∣ing done, the King calls for the Judges, and they supposing that they should have both applause and reward for their expedition hastned to him full of joy; but after the King had propounded several things to them about their former delay, he com¦manded both their heads to be struck off because they had spun out that Cause to a three years length, which two days would have ended. Here was Royal justice, and speedy justice indeed, Psal. 101. 8. I will early destroy all the wicked of the land, Summomane, I will do morning-justice. Festinanter, so Ge∣nebrad, I will hastily do it. Justice should be on the wing; delays are very dangerous and injurious. Prov. 13. 12. Hope deferred, maketh the heart sick; the Hebrew word Memush∣shacah that is here rendred deferred, is from Mashch that signifies to draw out at length. Men are short-breathed and short-spirited, and Hopes hours are full of Eternity, and when their hopes are drawn ou at length, this makes their hearts sick; and Ah, what a world of such sick souls lyes lnguish∣ing at Hopes Hospital all the world over. Hope in the Text is put for the good things hoped for. Now when the good things men hope for (be it justice or a quick dispatch, &c.) are deferred and delayed, this makes the poor Client sick at heart. A lingring hope always breeds in the heart a lingring Con∣sumption; Julius Caesars quick dispatch is noted in three words; Veni, vidi, vici, I came, I saw, I overcame. the harder travel hope hath, and the more strongly it labours to bring forth, and yet is deferred and delayed, the more deadly sick the Client grows. The speedy execution of justice is the very life and soul of justice. Amos 5. 24. Bu let judgment run down as waters, and righteouses as a
 mighty stream. The Hebrew word Veiiggal that is here ren∣dred run down, is from Galal, that signifies to rowl down free∣ly, plentifully, vigorously, constantly, speedily, as the grea Bil∣lows of the Sea, or as waves rowl speedily over the Rocks. Judgment and Righteousness like a mighty stream should bear down all before it. Fiat justitia, tuat orbs, let justice be done, whatever come of it. Deut. 16. 20. That which is altoge∣her just shalt thou follow, or rather as the Hebrew hath it , Tsedek, Tsedek, justice, justice shalt thou follow, that is, all manner of justice thou shalt follow, and nothing but ustice shalt thou follow, and thou shalt follow justice sincerely out of love to justice, and thou shalt follow justice exactly with∣out turning to the right hand or the left; and thou shalt follow justice resolutely in spite of the world, the flesh, and the Devil; and thou shalt follow justice speedily without delays or excuses. A Magistrate that has the sword of justice in his hand, must never plead, there is a Lyon in the way. My Lord, this will be your Honour while you live, and your Comfort when you come to dye, that whilst the Sword was in your hand, you did justice speedily as well as impartially: You did justice in the morning, and justice at noon, and justice in the afternoon, and justice at night; what has been your whole Mayoralty, but one continued day of justice? Who can sum up the many thousand Causes that you have heard and determined, and the many thousand differences that you have sweetly and friendly com∣posed and ended? If the Lawyers please but to speak out, they must ingenuously confess, that your Lordship has eased them of a great deal of work.
My Lord, as it is the Honour and Glory of a Magistrate to do justice speedily, so it is the Honour and Glory of a Magi∣strate to do justice resolutely, couragiously, valiantly. It is observable, that as soon as ever Joshua came into the office of Magistracy, God charges him no less then three times (in a Josh. 1. 6, 7. 9. breath as it were) to be very couragious. A Magistrate that is timorous, will quickly be treacherous. A Magistrate that is fearful, can never be faithful. Solomons Throne was supported with Lyons, to shew that Magistrates should be men of metal and courage. The Athenian Judges sate in Mrs Acts 17. 22.
 street, to shew that they had Martial hearts, and that they were men of courage and metal. The Grecians placed justice be∣twixt Leo and Libra, to signifie that as there must be indiffe∣rency in determining, so there ought to be courage in executing. Where there is courage without knowledge, there the eye of ju∣stice is blind; and where there is knowledge without courage there the Sword of justice is blunt. A Magistrates heart, a Judges heart and his Robes must be both dyed in grain, else the colour of the one, and the courage of the other will quickly fade. Why should not the Standard be of steel, and the chief posts of the house be heart of Oak? It hath been long since said of Cato, Fabricius and Aristides, that it was as easie to remove the Sun out of the Firmament, as to remove them from justice and equity; they were men of such couragious and magnanimous spirits for justice and righteousness. No Scarlet Robe doth so well become a Magistrate as holy courage and stoutness doth. As bodily Physitians, so State-Physitians should have an Eagles eye, a Ladies hand, and a Lyons heart. Cowardly and timo rus Magistrates will never set up Monuments of their Victo∣ries over sin and prophaneness. It is very sad when we may say of our Magistrates as the Heathen did of Magistrates in his time, they were very good, si audeant quae sentiunt, if they Cic. de Mil. durst but do what they ought to do. My Lord, had not the Lord of Lords put a great spirit of courage, boldness, and re∣solution Rev. 1. 5, 6. Chap. 1. 14. upon you, you had never been able to have managed your Government as you have done, counting the various winds that have blown upon you, and the several difficulties and dis∣couragements that have risen up before you.
My Lord, once more give me leave to say, that in a Magi∣strate justice and mercy, justice and clemency ought to go hand Truth in Scri∣pture is fre∣quently put for Justice. in hand. Prov. 20. 28. Mercy and truth preserve the King, and his Throne is upholden by mercy. All justice will not preserve the King, nor all mercy will not preserve the King, there must be a mixture both of justice and mercy to preserve the King, and to uphold his Throne; and to shew that mercy is more requisite then justice, the word Mercy is doubled in the Text. Justice without mercy turns into rigour, and so be∣comes hateful: Mercy without justice turns into fond pity,
 and so becomes contemptible. Look as the Rod of Aaron and King John thought to strengthen himself by ga∣thering a great deal of money together, but neglecting the exercise of mercy and ju∣stice, clemen∣cy and lenity, he lost his peoples affe∣ctions, and so after many endless tur∣moyls, he came to an unhappy end. he Pot of Manna were by Gods own Command laid up in the same Ark; so must mercy and justice be preserved intire in he bosom of the same Magistrate: mercy and justice, mild∣ness and righteousness, leniy and fidelity are a safer and a stronger Guard to Princes and people then rich Mines, Mu∣nitions of Rocks, mighty Armies, powerful Navies, or any warlike Preparations. It is very observable, that Christ is called but once the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah in the Book of the Revelation, and that is in Chap. 5. vers. 5. But he is called a Lamb no less then nine and twenty times in that Book; and what is this, but to shew us the transcendent mercy, clemen∣cy, lenity, mildness, and sweetness that is in Jesus Christ; and to shew that he is infinitely more inclined to the exercise of mercy then he is to the exercise of justice. It is true, Magistrates should be Lyons in the execution of justice, and it is as true that hey should be Lambs in the exercise of mercy and clemency, mildness and sweetness; and the more ready and inclinable they are to the exercise of mercy, where mrcy is to be shewed, the more like to Christ the Lamb they are▪ God is slow to anger, he abounds in pity, though he be great in power. Seneca hath long Psal. 68. 18. Psal. 103. 13, 14. Hosea 11. 8. Vide Aug. de civit. Dei, l. 5. cap. 26. Orosius lib. 7. cap. 34. since observed, that the Custom of anointing Kings was to shew that Kings above all other men, should be men of the greatest sweetness and mildness, their anointing being a sign of that Kingly sweetness and mildness that should be in them. Theodo∣sius the Emperour, by his loveliness and clemency, gained many Kingdoms. The Goths (after the death of their own King) beholding his temperance, patience, and justice mixt with mercy and clemency, gave themselves up to his Government. When Cicero would claw Caesar, he tells him, that his Valour and Victories were common with the rest of his Souldiers, but his clemency and goodness were wholly his own. Neroes Speech hath great praise, who in the beginning of his Reign, when he was to subscribe to the death of any condemned person, would say, Uinam nescirem literas, I wish I did not know how to write. I know there are a thousand thousand cases wherein severity is to be used: But yet I must say, that 'tis much safer o account for mercy then for cruelty; 'tis best that the sword
 of justice should be always furbisht with the oyl of mercy. My Lord, in the management of your Government you have been so assisted and helpt from on high, that stoutness and mildness, justice and mercy, justice and clemency hath like a silver thred run through all your Mayoralty, and by this means you have very signally served the Interest of the Crown, the Interest of the City, the Interest of the Nation, and that which is more then all the rest, the Interest of your own Soul. Rigour breeds rebellion. Rehoboam by his severity, by his cruelty lost ten Tribes in one day, 1 Kings 12. 16.
My Lord, your prudence, justice, and moderation, your burn∣ing zeal against the horrid, hideous, heady vices of this day, your punishing of Oaths, Drunkenness, and the false Ballance, your singular Sobriety and Temperance in the midst of all your high Entertainments, your Fidelity and Activity, your eminent Self-denial A self-seeking Magistrate is one of the worst of Plagues and Judgments that can befal a people; he is a Gangrene in the head, which brings both a more speedy and a more certain ruine, then if it were in some inferior and less noble part of the body. in respect of your Perquisites, your unwearied Endeavours to see London raised out of its Ruines, and to see the Top-stone laid, your great readiness and willingness to spend and be spent for the publick Good: these are the things that have made your Name as a precious Oyntment, and that have erected for you a noble living Monument in the breasts and hearts of all sober se∣rious Christians: these are the things that have made you the Darling of the people. Let all succeeding Lord Mayors but manage their own Persons, Families, and Government as you have done by divine assistance, and without a peradventure they will have a proportionable interest in the hearts and affections of the people. For, my Lord, 'tis not barely the having of a Sword of Justice, a Sword of Power, but the well management of that Sword that makes most for the interest both of Prince and Peo∣ple, and that gives the Magistrate a standing interest in the hearts and affections of the people. My Lord, the generality of people never concern themselves about the particular perswasions of this or that Magistrate in the matters of Religion, their eyes are upon their Examples, and upon the management of their Trust and Power for publick Good; and they that do them most good, shall be sure to have most of heir hearts and voices, l their private opinions in the matters of Religion be what they will.
My Lord, I have not so learned Christ, as to give flattering
 Titles to men; the little that I have written, I have written in Job 32. 22. the plainness and singleness of my heart, and for your Lordships comfort and encouragement in all well doing, and to provoke all thers that shall succeed in your Chair, to write after that fair Copy that you have set them, which will be their Honour, Lon∣don's Happiness, and Englands Interest. Plutarch said of Demosthenes, that he was excellent at praising the worthy Acts of his Ancestors, but not so at imitating them. The Lord grant that this may never be made good of any that shall succeed your Lord∣ship. Carus the Emperours Motto was, Bonus Dux, bonus Comes, A good Leader makes a good Follower. The complaint is an∣cient in Seneca, that commonly men live not ad rationem, but Seneca de vita beata, cap. 1. ad similitudinem. Praecepta docent, exempla movent, Pre∣cepts may instruct, but Examples do perswade. Stories speak of some that could not sleep when they thought of the Trophies of other Worthies that went before them: the highest Examples are very quickning and provoking. O that by all that shall succeed your Lordship in the Chair, we may yet behold our City rising more and more out of its Ashes, in greater splendour and glory then ever yet our eyes have seen it, that all sober Citizens may have eminent cause to call them the Repairers of the Breaches, Isa. 58. 12. Chap. 61. 4. Amos 9. 14. Ezek. 36. 33, 34, 35, 36, 38. Dan. 9. 25. and Restorers of our City to dwell in. Concerning Jerusalem burned and laid waste by the Assyrians, Daniel foretold that the streets and the walls thereof should be rebuilded, even in trou∣blesom times. Though the Assyrians have laid our Jerusalem waste, yet even to a wonder, how have the Buildings been carried on this last year?
My Lord, the following Treatise which I humbly dedicate to your Lordship, has been drawn up some years: the Reasons why it has been buried so long in oblivion, are not here to be inserted; the Discourse is sober and of great importance to all that have been burnt up, and to all whose Houses have escaped the furious Flames. Whilst the remembrance of London's Flames are kept alive in the thoughts and hearts of men, this Treatise will be of use in the world. My Lord, I do not dedicate this Tra∣ctate to your Lordship, as if it stood in need of your Honours Pa∣tronage; I judge it to be of Age both to plead for it self, and to defend it self against all Gain-sayers. Veritas vincit, ve∣ritas
 stat in aperto campo. Zeno, Socrates, Anaxarchus, My Lord, some sacrifice their labours to great Maece∣nas's, that they may be a∣ton'd to shield them from potent Antagonists; but these Ser∣mons which here I present to your Ho∣nours perusal, being only the blessed Truths of God, I hope they need no arm but his to defend them. &c. sealed the lean and barren truths of Philosophy with the expence of their dearest blood, as you may see in the Heathen Martyrologie. O how much more should we be ready to seal all divine Truths with our dearest blood, when God shall call us forth to such a Service! My Lord, I humbly lay this Treatise at your Lordships foot, to testifie that Love and Honour that I have in my heart for you (both upon the account of that intrin∣secal Worth that is in you, and upon the account of the many good things and great things that have been done by you) and publickly to testifie my acknowledgment of your Lordships unde∣served Favours towards me. My Lord, of right this Treatise should have been in your hands several months since, and in that it was not, it is wholly from others, and not from me. If your Lordship please but to favour the Author so far as to read it once over for his sake, he doubts not but that your Lordship will oftner read it over for your own Souls sake, and for Eternities sake, and for London's sake also. My Lord, by reason of my being remote from the City several weeks, I have had the ad∣vantage but of reading and correcting two or three sheets; and therefore must beg your Lordships pardon as to all the neglects and escapes of the Press. A second Impression may set all right and straight.
My Lord, that to your dying day you may be famous in your Generation, and that your precious and immortal Soul may be richly adorned with all saving Gifts and Graces, and that you may daily enjoy a clear, close, high, and standing Communion with God, and that you may be filled with all the fruits of Righteousness and Holiness, and that your Soul may be bound up in the bundle of Life, and crowned with the highest Glory in that other World, in the free full, constant, and uninterrupted Enjoyment of that God who is the Heaven of Heaven, and the Glory of Glory, is, and (by divine Assistance) shall be the earnest prayers of him who is,

