




Honoured Friends:
CHristian Friendship makes such a knot, that greatIts the saying of Euripides, that a faithful Friend is better than a calm Sea to a weather beaten Mariner. Alexander cannot cut. It was well observed by Sir Francis Bacon, That old wood is best to burn, and old Books best to read, and old Friends best to trust. It was a witty saying of the Duke of Buckingham to Bi∣shop Monton, in Richard the III. his time, Faithful Friends (saith he) are in this age for the most part gone all in pilgrimage, & their return is uncertain. They seem to take away the Sun out of the World (said the Heathen Oratour) who take away friendship from the life of men, and we do not more need fire and water then true Friendship. In this Epistle I shall endeavour so to ac∣quit my self, as becomes a real Friend, a cordial Friend, a faithful▪ Friend, and a Soul-friend, as to your great and everlasting concernments, that it may go well with you for ever and ever.
Sir, the points that are handled in this following
 Treatise (and in the first part) are of as high, choice, necessary, noble, useful and comfortable a nature, as any that can be treated on by mortal man. The four things which God minds most and loves most, are, 1. His ho∣nour. 2. His worship. 3. His People. 4. His truth. Sure∣ly their souls must needs be of a very sad complexion, who can read the great truths that are here opened and applyed, and not, 1. Dearly love them. 2. Highly prize them. 3. Cordially bless God for them. 4. Seriously pon∣der and meditate upon them. 5. And not frequently and diligently study them, and make a gracious and day∣ly improvement of them.
The Covenant of Grace and the Covenant of Redem∣ption are a rich Armory, out of which you may furnish your selves with all sorts of spiritual weapons, where∣with you may encounter Satans temptations, wiles, de∣vices, methods, depths, stratagems. Nothing of Sa∣tansEph. 6. 11. 2 Cor. 2. 11. Revel. 2. 24. can stand before the Covenant of Grace and the Co∣venant of Redemption, well understood and well ap∣plyed.
In the Covenant of Grace and the Covenant of Re∣demption,2 Sam. 23. 5. Isa. 54. 9, 10. Jer. 32. 38, 39, 40, 41. Zach. 9. 11. Heb. 13. 20. that is past betwixt God the Father and our Lord Jesus Christ, you will find many rich and rare cor∣dials, which have a strong tendency to preserve all gra∣cious souls from desponding and fainting, 1. In times of afflictions. 2. In times of temptations. 3. In times of de∣sertion 4. In times of sufferings for Christs sake and the Gospels sake. 5. In times of opposition. 6. And at the time of death and dissolution; There are no comforts nor cordials that can reach the souls of Christians in their deep distresses, but such as flow from these two Cove∣nants, the more it concerns all such Christians to study these two Covenants, and to be well acquainted with them, that so they may the more readily have recourse to such cordials, as their present estate and condition calls for.
In these two Covenants you will find much matter, which has a strong tendency, 1. To inflame your▪ love
 to God and Christ, and all in the Covenant of Grace.Psal. 116. 1. 9. 16. Psalm 3. 2 Sam. 23. 5. Psal. 103. 17, 8. Psal. 111. 5, 9, 17. Gen. 1. 2. 2 Cor. 2. 14. Galat. 6. 14. 2. To strengthen your faith. 3. To raise your hopes. 4. To cheer your souls. 5. To quiet and satisfy your con∣sciences. 6. To engage you to a close and holy walking with God. 7. To provoke you to triumph in free grace, and in the Lord Jesus Christ. 8. To sit loose from this world. The riches and Treasures that are wrapt up in both these Covenants, are so great, so sure, so durable, and so sutable to all believers, as may well deaden theirRevt 12. 1. hearts, to all the riches and glories of this lower world.
In these two Covenants every sincere Christian will find, 1. A special salve for every spiritual sore. 2. A spe∣cial remedy against every spiritual malady. 3. A special plaster against every spiritual wound. 4. A spiritual ma∣gazene to supply all their spiritual wants, and 5. A spi∣ritual shelter under every spiritual storm. In these two Covenants you will find food to nourish you, a staff to support you, a guid to lead you, a fire to warm you, and springs of life to cheer and refresh you.
In this Covenant of Grace and the Covenant of Re∣demption,'Twas the say∣ing of an emi∣nent Saint on his Death-bed, that he had much peace, and quiet∣ness not so much, from a greater measure of grace than other Chri∣stians had, or from any imme∣diat witness of the spirit, but be∣cause, he had a more clear un∣derstanding of the Covenant of Grace than ma∣ny others, ha∣ving studied it, and preacht it so many years as he had done. you may clearly see the wisdom, counsel, love and transactions between the Father and the Son sparkling and shining, there being nothing under Hea∣ven that contributes more to the peace, comfort, assu∣rance, settlement and satisfaction of sincere Christians than such a sight, the main reason why so many gracious souls are so full of fears, doubts, darkness and disputes about their internal and eternal estates, is because they have no more clear and full understanding of these two Covenants; and if such Christians would but more se∣riously buckle to the study of those two covenants, as they are opened and applyed in the following Treatise, their fears and doubts, &c. would quickly vanish, and they would have their triumphant songs, their mourning would soon be turned into rejoycing, & their complaints into Hallelujahs. Neither do I know any thing in all this world that would contribute more to seriousness, spiri∣tualness, heavenlyness, humbleness, holyness and fruit∣fulness,
 then a right understanding of these two Cove∣nants, and a Divine improvement of them. There are many choice Christians, who have alwayes either tears in their eyes, complaints in their mouths, or sighs in their breasts; and O, that these above all others would make these two Covenants their daily Companions! Let these few kinds suffice concerning the following Treatise.
Now, Sir John, I shall crave leave to put you and your Lady a little, in mind of your deceased and glorified Father. He is a true Friend (saith the Smyrnean Poet ofPonder upon that Deut. 13. 6. Thy friend which is as thine own soul. old) who continueth the memory of his deceased Friend. When a Friend of Austin's dyed, he professed he was put into a great streight, whether he himself should be wil∣ling to live or willing to dye: he was unwilling to live, because one half of himself was dead, yet he was not willing to dye, because his Friend did partly live in him, though he was dead. Let you and I make the applica∣tion as we see cause; your glorified Fathers Name and Memory remains to this day as fresh and fragant as the Rose of Sharon, among all those that fear the Lord, andCant. 2. . had the happiness of inward acquaintance with him. The memory of the just is blessed, but the name of the wicked shall not; In the Original it is, The memory of the justProv. 10. 7. Mmoria just , So Bat.  benam  servasso, , Plant. If I may but keep a good Name, I have wealth e∣, saith the Heathen.  in benedictionem, shall be for a blessing; the ve∣ry remembring of them shall bring a blessing to such as do remember them. The Moralists say of Fame, or of a mans good Name: Omnia si perdas famam servare memento,
Quâ semel amissâ postea nullus eris. i. e. Whatsoever commodity you lose, be sure yet to preserve thatHeb. 11. 1, 39. A good renown is better than a golden Girdle, saith the French Proverb. jewel of a good Name. This jewel among others, your ho∣noured Father carried with him to the Grave, yea to Hea∣ven. There is nothing raises a mans Name & Fame in the World like holyness: The seven Deacons that the Church chose, were holy men, Act. 6. 5. and they were men of good report, V. 3. They were men well witnes∣sed
 unto, well testified off, as the Greek word imports.The Persians sel∣dom write their Kings Name but in characters of gold, throughout the Old and New Testament: God has written the Names of just men in golden characters, as I may speak. Cornelius was a holy man, Act. 10. 1, 2, 3, 4. and he was a man of good report among all the Nation of the Jews, V. 22. Ananias was a holy man, Act. 9. 10, 20. and he was a man of a good report: Act. 22. 12. Gajus and De∣metrius were both holy men, and of a good report, wit∣ness that third Epistle of John. The Patriarchs and Pro∣phets were holy men, and they were men of a good re∣port, Heb. 11. 1, 2. For by it the Elders obtained a good report, their holyness did eternalize their Names. The Apostles were holy men, 1 Thes. 2. 10. and they were men of good report, 2 Cor. 6. 8. Now certainly it is none of the least of mercies to be well reputed and re∣ported of: next to a good God, and a good con∣science, a good report, a good name is the noblest blessing. It is no great matter, if a man be great and rich in the world, to obtain a great report, but with∣out holyness you can never obtain a good report. Holy∣ness, uprightness, righteousness, will imbalm your names, it will make them immortal. Psalm 112. 6 The righteous shall be in everlasting remembrance. Wicked men many times out live their names, but the names of the righteous out live them. Holy Abel hath been dead above this five thousand years, & yet his name is as fresh & fragrant as it1 John 3. 12. was the first day he was made a Martyr▪ When a sincere Christian dyes, he leaves his name as a sweet and as a la∣sting scent behind him, his Fame shall live when he is dead: This is verified in your precious Father, who is now a sleep in Jesus, 1 Thess. 4. 14.
Now you both very well know, that there was no Christian Friend, that had so great a room in his heart, in his affections, as I had, and you can easily guess at the reasons of it; neither can you forget, how frequently, both in his health, sickness and before his death, he would be prssing of me to be a Soul-friend to you, and to improve all the interest I had in Heaven for your in∣ternalMat. 25. 33. and eternal good, that he might meet you both in that upper world, and that you might both be found
 with him, at the right hand of Christ in the great day of the Lord. I know that your glorified Father, whil'st he was on earth, did lay up many a prayer for you in Hea∣ven. My desire and prayer is, that those prayers of his may return in mighty power upon both your hearts, and having a fair opportunity now before me, I shall en∣deavour to improve it for the everlasting advantage of both your souls; and therefore let my following coun∣sel be not only accepted, but carefully, faithfully and di∣ligently followed by you, that so you may be happy here, and blessed hereafter.
The first word of counsel is this: Let it be the princi∣pal care of both of you, to look after the welfare of your precious and immortal souls. If your souls are safe, all is safe; if they are well, all is well; but if they are lost, allMat. 16. 26. The Soul is a greater mircle in man, than all the miracles wrought a∣mongst men, saith Augustine. is lost, and you lost and undone in both worlds. Christ that only went to the price of souls, hath told us, That one Soul is more worth than all the world. Chrysostom well observeth, That whereas God hath given us many other things double, viz. two eyes to see with, two ears to hear with, two hands to work with, and two feet to walk with, to the intent that the failing of the one might be supplyed with the other; he hath given us but one soul, if that be lost, hast thou (saith he) another soul to give in recompense for it? Ah Friends, Christ left his Fathers bosom and all the glory of Heaven for the good of souls, he assumed the nature of men for the happyness of the soul of man, he trod the wine-press ofIsa. 63. 3. John 17. Luke 23. 34. Math. 6. 28. his Fathers wrath for souls, he prayed for souls, he payd for souls, and he bled out his heart-blood for souls; The soul is the breath of God, the beauty of man, the won∣der of Angels, and the envie of Devils; 'Tis of an An∣gelical1 Pet. 5. 8. nature, 'tis a heavenly spark, a celestial plant, and of a Divine off-spring. Again weigh well the , the incomparable price, which Christ payed for the redem∣ption of the soul; what are the riches of the East or West-Indies, the spoil of the richest Nations, rocks of1 Pet. 1▪ 18, 19. Diamonds, mountains of gold, or the price of Cleopatra's
 draught, to the price that Christ laid down for souls?1 Pet. 1. 18. 19. 1 John 1. 4, 12. Heb. 22. 23. The soul is a spiritual substance, capable of the know∣ledge of God, of union with God, of communion with God, and of an eternal fruition of God. There is no∣thing can suit the soul below God, nor nothing that can satisfie the soul without God, nor nothing that can save the soul but God. The soul is so choice, so high and so noble a piece, that it Divinely scorns all the world in point of acceptation, justification, satisfaction, dilecta∣tion and salvation; Christ made himself an offering forHeb. 9. 11, 12, 13 14. Cap. 10 10, 14 Ga. 4 4, 5, 6. Heb. 2. 8. sin, that souls might not be undone by sin; The Lord dyed, that slaves might live; The Son dyed, that ser∣vants might live, The natural Son dyed, that adopted sons might live; The only begotten Son dyed, that ba∣stards might live; Yea the Judge dyed, that malefactors might live. Ah Friends, as there was never sorrow likeIsa. 53 3. Gal. 2. 20. Christs sorrow, so there was never love like Christs love, and of all his love none to that of soul-love, to say much in a little room. The spiritual enemies, which daily warEph 6. 11, 12. 1 Pet. 2. 11. Heb. ult. Rom. 1. 17. 1 Cor. 11. 23. 27. against the soul; the glorious Angels, which hourly guard the soul, and the precious ordinances, which God hath appointed as means both to convert, and nou∣rish the soul. The soul is capable of a Crown of life; Rev. 2. 10. Of a Crown of glory, 1 Pet. 5 4. Of a Crown of righteousness, 2 Tim. 4. 8. Of an incorruptible Crown, 1 Cor. 9. 25. The Crowns of earthly Princes stand asQueen Elisabeth is said to swin to her Crown through a Sea of sorrow. a Sophisters cap, on one side of the head. Many may say of their Crowns as that King said of is, O Crown more noble than happy! In the time of Galienus the Empe∣rour, Anno Christi 260. there were thirty Competitors on foot for the Roman Crown and Throne, who con∣founded and destroyed one another. A Princely Crown is oftentimes the mark for envy and ambition to shoot at: Henry the VI. was honoured with the Crowns of two Kingdoms, France & England, the first was lost through the faction of his Nobles, the other was twice plucked from his head. Earthly Crowns have so many cares, fears, vexations and dangers, that daily attend them
 that oftentimes they make the heads and hearts of Mo∣narchsProv. 27. 4. Doth the Crown en∣dure to all gene∣rations. Heb. To generation and generation. ake, which made Cyrus say, You look upon my Crown and my purple robes, but did you but know how they were lined with thorns, you would not stoop to take them up. But the Crowns that immortal souls are capable of, are Crowns without crosses, they are not attended with care of keeping, or fear of losing; there are no evil persons, nor evil spirits, that haunt those Crowns. Darius that great Monarch, fleeing from his e∣nemies, he threw away the Crown of gold from his head, that he might run the faster: but a sincere Chri∣stian1 Pet. 1. 5. is in no danger of losing his Crown, 2 Tim. 4. 8. His Crown is laid up in a safe hand, in an omnipotent hand. Now what do all these things speak out, but the preciousness and excellency of the soul? Once more, the excellency of the case or cabinet, viz. the body, inti∣mates a more than ordinary excellency of this Jewel; the body is of all materials the most excellent; how does David admire the rare texture and workmanship of his body! I am wonderfully made, I was curiously wrought inPsal. 139. 13, 15. the lowest parts of the earth. When curious workmen have some choice piece in hand, they perfect it in private, and then bring it forth to the light, for men to gaze at, so here: The greatest miracle in the World is Man, in whose very body (how much more in his soul) are mi∣racles enow (betwixt head and feet) to fill a volume. One complains, that men much wonder at the highAustin. The Stoick thought, it was better to be a fool in the form of a man, than wise in the shape of a beast. mountains of the Earth, the huge waves of the Sea, the deep falls of Rivers, the vastness of the Ocean, and at the motions of the Stars, &c. but wonder not at all at their wonderful selves. Galen, a prophane Physician and a great Atheist, writing of the excellent parts of mans body, he could not chuse but sing an Hymn to that God, whosoever he were, that was the Author of so excellent and admirable a piece of work; he could not but cry out, Now I adore the God of Nature. Now if the Cabinet be so curiously wrought, what is the Je∣wel that is contained in it? O how richly and gloriously
 is the soul embroydered! How Divinely inlaid and en∣amel'd is that! Princes impress their images or effigies upon the choicest mettals, viz. gold and silver: God hath engraven his own Image with his own hand uponGen. 1. 26. Damacen. Angels and Men. The soul is the glory of the Creation, a beam of God, a spark of celestial brightness, a vessel of honour, a bird of Paradise, a habitation for God. The soul is spiritual in its essence, God breathed it in, God hath invested it with many noble endowments, he hath made it a mirrour of beauty, and printed upon it aGen. 2. 7. Heb. 12 9. Eccles. 12. 7. Zach. 12. 1. surpassing excellency. The soul is spiritual in its object, it contemplaces God and Heaven; God is the orb and center where the soul doth fix, God is the Terminus ad quem, the soul moves to him as to his rest: Return to thy rest, O my soul; this Dove can find no rest but in this heavenly Ark, nothing can fill the soul but God, nothing can quiet the soul but God, nothing can satisfie the soul but God, nothing can secure the soul but God, nothing can save the soul but God: The soul being spiritual God only can be the adequate object of it; The soul is spiri∣tual in its operations, it being immaterial doth not de∣pend upon the body in its working; the rich and rare endowments, and the noble operations of the soul speak out the excellency of the soul. The soul (saith one) hathAristotle. a nature distinct from the body, it moves and operates of it self, though the body be dead, and hath no depen∣dence upon, or coexistence with the body; The soul hath an intrinsecal principle of life and motion, though it be separate from the body. And doth not the immor∣tality of the soul speak out the excellency of the soul, a∣gainst that dangerous notion of the souls mortality? Consult the Scriptures in the margin; and seriously andLuke 23. 43. 1 Thess. 4. ult. Phil. 1. 23. Acts 7. 59. frequently think of this one argument (among a multi∣tude of arguments that might be produced, to prove the immortality of the soul) That which is not capable of killing, is not capable of dying; but the soul is not ca∣pable of killing, ergo. Our Lord Jesus proves the minor proposition, that it is not capable of killing, Fear notLuke 12. 4. them
 them that kill the body, and after that have no more that they can do. Therefore the soul not being capable of killing, is not in a possibility of dying; the essence of the soul is Metaphysical, it hath a beginning but no end, it is Eter∣nal à parte post, it runs parallel with Eternity; the soul doth not wax old, it lives for ever, which we cannot affirm of any sublunary created glory. To conclude this first word of counsel, what Job saith of wisdom, I may fitly apply to the soul; Man knows not the price there∣of,Job 28. 13, 16, 17. it cannot be valued with the Gold of Ophir, with the precious Onyx, or the Saphir, the Gold and Chry∣stal cannot equal it, and the exchange of it shall not be for Jewels of sine Gold. O my Friends! it is the great∣est wisdom, policy, equity, and Justice, to provide for your precious souls, to secure your precious souls, for they are Jewels of more worth than ten thousand worlds, all the honours, riches, greatness, and glory of this world are but chips, toyes, and pibbles to these glorious pearls. But
The second word of counsel is this, as you would be safe here, and saved in the great day of the Lord; asAct 2. 20.  22. 21.  poth. 1. 15. Jo 13. 15. 2 Cor. 2. 11. you would be happy here, and blessed hereafter, take up in nothing below a gracious acquaintance with Christ, a choice acceptation of Christ, a holy relyance upon Christ, a full resignation of your selves to Christ, and a real and glorious union with Christ; If you do you are lost and undone in both worlds.
First, Some take up in a name to live, when they are dead, dead in trespasses and sins, dead God-wards, andRevel. 3 1. Ephes. 2. 1. dead Christ-wards, and dead Heaven-wards, and dead holyness-wards. The Sadducees derive their name from Zeduchim or Zadducaeus, a just man: But the worst Men, saith the Historian, got the best names. The Alcoran of the Turks hath its name from brightness (Al in the Arabick, being as much as Kazan in the Hebrew, to shine or cast forth in brightness) when it is full of darkness and fraught with falshoods. It will be but a poor comfort to any, for the world to commend them as gracious, if

God condemn them as graceless; for the world to com∣mend them as pious, if God condemn them as impious; for the world to commend them as sincere, if God con¦demn them as hypocrites. But
Secondly, Some take up in a form Godliness, when2 Timoth. 3. 5. they are strangers to the power, when they deny, yea when they oppose and persecute the power; such Mon∣sters this Age has abounded with, but their seemingActs 13. 45, 50 goodness is but a Religious cheat.
Thirdly, There are some that take up in their ReligiousMatth. 9. 22. Luke 18. 12. Cap. 13. 26. Matth. 6. cap. 23. Luke 36. 15. Ezeck. 33. 31, 32. duties and services, in their praying, fasting, prophesying, hearing, receiving; they make a God, a Christ, a Saviour of their own duties & services; this was the undoing and damning sin of the Scribes and Pharisees, and is the un∣doing and damning sin of many thousands in our dayes.
Fourthly, There are many that take up in their com∣mon gifts and parts, in a gift of knowledge, and in a giftMath. . 22. Rom. 2. 17. 21. 1 Cor. 12. eb. 6. 45. of teaching, and in a gift of knowledge, and in a gift of teaching, and in a gift of utterance, and in a gift of me∣mory, and in a gift of prayer, and this proves ruinous and destructive to them.
Fifthly, There are many that take up in their riches,Prov. 10. 15. Psalm 73. 19. Matth. 20.—26. Divibus i  qui , Rich mens wealth proves an hinde¦rance to their happiness. Eccles. 5. 13. James 5. 1, 2. prosperity and worldly grandure and glory. Prov. 18. 11. The rich mans wealth is his strong City; it is hard to have wealth and not trust to it. Mat. 19. 24. Wealth was ne∣ver true to those that trusted it. There is an utter uncer∣tainty in riches, 1 Timoth. 6. 17. A non entity, Prov. 23. 5, 6. An impotency to help in an evil day, Ze∣phan. 1. 18. An impossibility to stretch to Eternity, unless it be to destroy the owner for ever: There is nothing more clear in Scripture and History, than that riches, prosperity, and worldy glory hath been commonly their portion, who never have had a God for their portion.Luke 16. 25. Rices are called thik clay, Hal. 2. 6. which will sooner break the back than lighten the heart. It was an excellent saying of Lewis of Bavaria, Empe∣rour of Germany: Hujusmodi comparandae sunt opes, quae cum naufragio simul enatent, Such goods are worth getting, and owning, as will not sink or wash away, if a ship-wrack happen. Solus sapiens dives, Only the Wise man is the rich man, saith the Philosopher. Another saith, DivitiaeAustin.
 corporales paupertatis plenae sunt, That earthly riches are full of poverty, they cannot enrich the soul; for oftentimes under silken Apparel there is a thred-bare soul.
He that is rich in conscience sleeps more soundly, than he that is richly clothed in purple.
No man is rich which cannot carry hence, that whichAmbros. lib. 8. Ep. 10. he hath; that which we must leave behind us, is not ours but some others.
The shortest cut to riches is by their contempt; it isSeneca. great riches not to desire riches, and he hath most that covets least. If there were any happiness in riches, the Gods would not want them, saith the same Author.
When one was a commending the riches and wealth of Merchants: I do not love that wealth, said a poor Heathen, which hangs upon ropes; for if they break, the ship miscarrieth, and then where is the Merchants riches?
If I had an Enemy (saith one) whom it was law∣fulLatimer. to wish evil unto, I would chiefly wish him great store of riches, for then he should never enjoy quiet.
The Historian observes, that the riches of Cyprus in∣vitedTacitus. the Romans to hazard many dangerous fights, for the conquering of it.
Earthly riches, saith one, are an evil Master, a trea∣cherousAugustine. Servant, Fathers of flattery, Sons of grief, a cause of fear to those that have them, and a cause of sor∣row to those that want them.
I have read a famous story of Zelimus, Emperour ofThe Turkish Hi∣story. The Poets feign∣ed Pluto to be the God of Riches, and Hell, as if they were inse∣parable, Homer. Constantinople, that after he had taken Egypt, he found a great deal of treasure there; and the Souldiers coming to him, and asking of him what they should do with the Citizens of Egypt, for that they had found great Trea∣sure among them, and had taken their riches? O, saith the Emperour, hang them all up, for they are too rich to be made slaves; and this was all the thanks they had for the riches they were spoiled off. What more con∣temptible
 than a rich Fool, a golden Beast, as Caligula called his Father in law Syllanius? Not but that some are great and gracious, rich and righteous; As Abraham, Lot, Job, David, Hezekiah, &c.
It is said of Shusa in Persia, that it was so rich that theSaith Cassiederus. stones were joyned together with gold; and that in it Alexander found seventy thousand Talents of gold. If you can take this City (saith Aristagorus to his Soul∣diers) you may vie with Jove himself for riches; the ri∣ches of Shufa did but make the Souldiers the more de∣sperate in their attempt to take it.
By these short hints you may see the folly and vanity of those men, who take up in their riches. But
Sixthly, Many there are that take up in their ownIsa. 64. 6. righteousness, which at best is but as filthy rags; thisRom. 10. 2, 3. Matth. 5. 20. was the damning sin of the Jews, and of the Scribes and Pharisees; and is the undoing sin of many of the Profes∣sors of this Age.
Seventhly, Many there are that take up in their ex∣ternal Church priviledges, crying out, the Temple ofJer. 7. 4, 8, 9, 10, 11. the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, when they have no union nor communion with the Lord of the Temple. These forget that there will come a day, when the Chil∣drenMatth. 8. 12. of the Kingdom shall be cast out. It would be very good for such Persons, to make these five Scriptures their daily companions, Matth. 22. 10, 12, 13, 14. Luke 13. 25, 26, 27 28. Rom. 2. 28, 29. Gal. 6. 15. Jer. 9. 25, 26. That they may never dare to take up in their outward Church priviledges, which can neither secure them from hell, nor secure them of heaven. But
Eightly, Many there be that take up in common con∣victions: Judas had mighty convictions of his sin, butMatth. 27. 4, 5. Numb. 23. and Numb. 24. they issued in desperation. Balaam was mightily en∣lightned and convinced, in so much that he desired to dye the death of the righteous; but under all his con∣victions he dyed Christless and graceless. Nebuchad∣nezzar had great convictions, yet we do not read thatDan. 4. 3 1, 32 ever he was converted, before he was driven from the
 society of men▪ to be a companion with the beasts of the field; he had strong convictions, 1. by Daniels interpre∣tingDan. 4. 31, 32. of his dream. Dan. 2. 47. 2. He told Daniel, That his God was the God of Gods, and a Lord of Kings, and a reveiler of secrets; and yet presently he fell into gross Ido∣latry, Dan. 3. and strictly commanded to worship the golden Image that he had set up; and as if he had lost all his former convictions, he was so swelled up with pride and impudence, as to say to the three Children, when they Divinely scorned to worship the Image he had set up, What God is there that can deliver you out of my hand? Verse 15. Saul had great convictions, I have1 Sam. 26. 21, 25. sinned, return my son David, I will no more do thee harm, &c. And Saul lift up his voice and wept; and he said un∣to David, Thou art more righteous than I, for thou hast1 Sam. 24. 16, 17, 18, 19. rewarded me good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil: But these convictions issued in no saving change, for af∣ter these he lived and died in the heigth of his sins. Pha∣raoh had great convictions: And Pharaoh sent, and cal∣ledExod. 9. 27. Cap. 10. 16. for Moses and Aaron, and said unto them, I have sin∣ned this time: the Lord is righteous, and I and my people are wicked. And again, Then Pharaoh called for Moses and Aaron in haste; and he said; I have sinned against the Lord your God, and against you: But these convictions is∣sued in no reformation, in no sound conversion, and therefore drowning and damning followed. Cain was under convictions, but went and built a City, and lostGenes. 4. his convictions in a crowd of worldly business. Herod and Felix were under convictions, but they went of,Mark 6. 20. Acts 24. 25. and never issued in any saving work upon their souls. O how many men and women have fallen under such deep convictions, that they have day and night cryed out of their sins, and of their lost and undone Estates, and that they should certainly go to hell, and be damned for ever, so that many good People have hoped, that these were the pangs of the new birth; and yet either merry company, or carnal pleasures and delights, or much worldly business, or else length of time have
 wrought off all their convictions, and they have grown more prophane and wicked then ever they were before. As water heated, if taken off the fire, will soon return toAristtle. its natural coldness, yea becomes colder after heating than before, this hath been the case of many under con∣victions: I shall forbear giving of particular instances. But
Ninthly, Many take up in an outward change and re∣formation, they have left some old courses and sinful practices, which formerly they walked in &c. and there∣fore they conclude and hope, that their condition is good, and that all is well, and shall be for ever well with them; they were wont to swear, whore, be drunk, prophane Sabbaths, reproach Saints, &c. but now they have left all these practices, and therefore the main work is done, and they are made for ever. I confess sin is that abo¦minableJer. 41. 4. Matth. 1. 2. thing which God hates, and therefore it is a very great mercy to turn from it; to leave one sin is a greater mercy, than to win the whole world; and it is certain that he that doth not outwardly reform, shall never go to heaven; he that doth not leave his sins heJob 22. 23, 26. can never be happy here, nor blessed hereafter, and yet it is possible for a man with Herod to reform many thingsMark  2. Mat. 26. 20, 21. 22 1 Thes. 5. 23. and yet be a lost and undone man for ever as he was. Ju∣das was a very reformed man, but he was never inward∣ly changed, nor throughout sanctified. The Scribes and Pharisees were outwardly reformed, but they were not inwardly renewed. A man may be another man than what once he was, and yet not be a new man, a new crea∣ture. When a sinner is sermon-sick, O! then he will2 Cor. 5. 17. 2 Pt. 2. 20, 22. Dst. 5. 5, 6, 7, 8. leave his sins, but when that sickness is off, he returns with the dog to his vomit, and with the sow to her wallowing in the mire. Sometimes conscience is like the hand-writing upon the wall, it makes the sin∣ners countenance to change, and his thoughts to be trou¦bled, and the joints of his loins to be loosed, and his knees to smite one against another; and now the sinner is all for reforming, and turning over a new leaf, but
 when these agonies of conscience are over, the sinner re∣turns to his old courses again, and often times is two∣fold more a Child of Hell than before. There was aMatth. 23. 15. man in this City, who was given up to the highest wic∣kednesses, on his sick bed conscience made an Arrest of him, and he was filled with such wonderful, horrour and terrour, that he cryed out day and night, that he was damned, he was damned, he was damned; and when he had some small intervals, O what large pro∣mises did he make! what a new man, a reformed man he would be! but when in time his terrors and sick∣ness wrought off, he was seven-fold worse than before. Sometimes the awakened Sinner parts with some sins, to make room for others; and sometimes the Sinner seems to give a Bill of divorce to this sin and that, but it is only because his bodily strength fails him, or be∣cause he wants an opportunity, or because there is a more strict eye and watch upon him, or because the sword of the Magistrate is more sharpned against him, or be∣causeJames 4. 3. he wants fuel, he wants a purse to bear it out, or because some Company, or some Relations, or some Friends lye between him and his sins, so that he must either tread over them, or else keep from his sins; or because he has deeply smarted for this sin, and that his name has been blotted, his credit and reputation stained,Prov. 6. 32, 33, 34, 35. his Trade decayed, his health empaired, his body wa∣sted, &c. By these short hints it is evident, that men may attain to some outward reformation, whose states and hearts were never changed, and who were never ta∣ken into marriage union with Christ. But
Tenthly and lastly, many take up in a party, as of old some cryed up Paul as the only deep Preacher, and o∣thers cryed up Apollos as the only eloquent Preacher, and1 Cor. 1. 10, 11, 12, 13. many cryed up Cephas as the most zealous Preacher; We are for the Church of England, say some, we are for the baptized People, say others, we are for the Presbyterian government, cry some, we are for the congregational way, cry others. I have so much ingenuity and charity,
 as to judge, that some of all these several parties and per∣swasions are really holy and will be eternally happy, are gracious and will be glorious, are sanctified and will be saved, are now governed by Christ and will be hereafter glorified with Christ. Judas was one of Christs party,Mat. 26. 20. to the 26. (if I may so speak) and yet he had no part nor portion in Christ. Demas was one of Paul's party, and yet he2 Tim. 4. 10. plaid the Apostat, and turn'd an idolatrous Priest at2 Tim. 1. 15. Thessalonica, as Dorotheus saith; And Phygellus and Her∣mogenes were of Paul's party, but were only famous for1 Tim. 1. 19, 20. their recidivation and Apostasie. Hymeneus and Alexan∣der were of Paul's party, but they made shipwrack of faith and a good conscience. The five foolish VirginsMat. 25. 1, 2, 12. were in society with the wise, and were accounted as members of their association, and yet the door of Hea∣ven was shut against them. Many light, slight and vain persons went with the Children of Israel out of the LandExod. 1. 38. Num. 11. 4. of Egypt, even a mixt multitude that imbarkt in the same bottom with them, and yet never arrived at the Land of promise. O my Friends, it is not a mans being of this party or that, this Church or that, this way or that, this society or that, that will bring him to Heaven with∣out1 Pet. 1. 4. He. 1. 2. 1 John 5. 12. a spiritual conjunction with Christ; he that would enjoy the Heavenly inheritance must be espoused to Christ, the heir of all things: For he that hath the Son, hath life, and he that hath not the Son hath not life. This marriage union between Christ and the soul, is set forth to the life throughout that Book of Solomon's Song, though the marriage-union between Christ and the soul,Cant. . 16. 1 Cor. 6. 17. Eccl. 11. 6. be imperceptible to the eye of reason, yet it is real; things in nature work often insensibly, yet really, we do not see the hand move on the dial, yet it moves; the Sun exhales and drawes up the vapours of the Earth insensi∣bly, yet really. Now this marriage-union between Christ and the soul includes, and takes in these following particulars.
First, This marriage-union between Christ and the soul does include and take in the souls giving a present
 bill of Divorce to all other lovers, Sin, the world andConsult these Scriptures: Hosea 14. 8. Isa. 2. 20. Cap. 30. 22. Psalm 45. 10. Exod. 12. 33. Isa. 59. o. C. 3. 3. Satan: Are you seriously and sincerely willing for ever to renounce these, and be divorced from these? there is no compounding betwixt Christ and them; sin and your souls must part, or Christ and your souls can never meet; sin and your souls must be two, or Christ and your souls can never be one; you must in good earnest fall out with sins, or else you can never in good earnest fall in with a Saviour; the heart must be separated from all other lo∣vers, before Christ will take the soul into his bed of loves; Christ takes none into marriage-union with himself, but such as are cordially willing, that all old former leagues with sin and the world shall be for ever broken and dis∣solved; your cordial willingness to part with sin, is your parting with sin in Divine account; you may as soon bring East and West together, light and darkness together, Heaven and Hell together, as bring Christ to spouse himself to such a soul, as has no mind, no will, no heart to be divorced from his former lovers; 'Tis a foolish thing for any to think of keeping both Christ and their lusts too; it is a vain thing for any to think of sa∣ving the life of his sins, and the life of his soul too; If sin escape, your soul cannot escape; if thou art not the death of thy sins, they will be the death and ruin of thy soul. Marriage is a knot or tye, wherein persons are mu∣tually limitted and bound each to other, in a way of con∣jugal separation from all others, and this in Scripture isProv. 2. 17. called a Covenant. So when any one marries Christ, he doth therein discharge himself in affection and subje∣ction from all that is contrary unto Christ, and solemn∣ly Covenants, and binds himself to Christ alone, he will have no Saviour and no Lord but Christ, and to him will he cleave for ever, Psal. 63. 8. Acts 11. 23. But,
Secondly, This marriage-union with Christ doth in∣cludeJohn 1. 12. Acts 5. 31. Coloss: 2. 6. Weigh well these Scriptures: Psalm 12. 3. Psalm▪ 5. 5. Hosea 2. 7. and take in a hearty willingness, to take, to re∣ceive the Lord Jesus Christ for your Saviour and Sove∣raign. Are you willing to consent to the match; 'tis not enough that Christ is willing to enter into a mar∣riage-union
 with us, but we must be willing also to en∣terMany can chuse Christ as a Re∣fuge to hide them from dan∣ger, and as a Friend to help them in their need, who yet refuse him as a Husband. into a marriage-union with him. God will never force a Christ, nor force salvation upon us, whether we will or no; Many approve of Christ, and cry up Christ, who yet are not willing to give their consent, that he, and he alone shall be their Prince and Saviour; though knowledge of persons be necessary and fit, yet it is not sufficient to marriage without consent, for marriage ought to be a voluntary transaction of persons; in mar∣riage we do in a sort give away our selves, and elect and make choice for our selves, and therefore consent is a ne∣cessary concurrence to marriage. Now this consent is no∣thing else but a free and plain act of the will, accepting of Jesus Christ before all others to be its Head and Lord, and in the souls choice of him to be its Saviour and So∣veraign; Then a man is married to Christ, when he doth freely, and absolutely, and presently receive the Lord Jesus; not, I would have Christ if it did not pre∣judice my worldly estate, ease, friends, relations, &c. or hereafter, I will accept of him when I come to dye, and be in distress, but now when salvation is offered, now while Christ tenders himself, I now yield up my heart and life unto him. But,
Thirdly, This marriage union with Christ includes and takes in an universal and perpetual consent, for all time, and in all states and conditions. There is (you know) a great difference between a wife and a strumpet, a wife takes her husband upon all terms, to have, and to hold, for better and for worse, for richer and for poorer, in sickness and in health, whereas a strumpet is only for hire and lust, when the purse is emptied, or the body wasted and strength consumed the harlots love is at an end, so here: That acceptance and consent which tyes the marriage knot between Christ and the soul, must be an unlimited and indefinite acceptance and consent, when we take the Lord Jesus Christ wholly and entirely, without any secret reservations or exceptions; That soul that will have Christ, must have all Christ, or no
 Christ, [For Christ is not divided.] That soul must en∣tertain1 Cor. 1. 13. Rev. 14. 4. Psal. 66. 12. him to all purposes and intents, he must follow the Lamb wheresoever he goeth, though it should be through fire and water, over mountans and hills, he must take him with his cup of affliction as well as his cup of consolation, with his shameful cross as well as his glo∣riousHeb. 2. 3. crown, with his great sufferings as well as his great salvation, with his grace as well as his mercy, with his spirit to lead and govern them, as well as his blood to redeem and justifie them, to suffer for him as well as to2 Tim. 2. 12. Acts 21. 13. Rom. 14. 7, 8. reign with him, to dye for him as well as to live to him. Christianity (like the wind Caecias) doth ever draw clouds & afflictions after it. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus2 Tim. 3. 12. shall suffer persecution, A man may have many faint wishes and cold desires after godliness, & yet escape persecution, yea he may make some assays & attempts, as if he would be godly, and yet escape persecution, but when a man isThe common cry of Persecu∣tors hath been Christianes ad I cns, within the first 300. years after Christ, upon the matter all that made a profession of the Apostles Doctrine, were cruelly murder∣ed. thorowly resolved to be Godly, and sets himself in good earnest upon pursuing after holyness, and living a life of Godlyness, then he must expect to meet with afflictions and persecutions, who ever escapes, the Godly man shall not escape persecution in one kind or another, in one degree or another; He that is peremptorily resolved to live up to holy rules, and to live out holy principles, must prepare for sufferings; All the Roses of holyness are surrounded with pricking Briars: The History of the Ten Persecutions, and that little Book of Martyrs, the 11. of the Hebrews, and Mr. Fox his Acts and Mo∣numents, with many other Treatises that are extant, do abundantly evidence, that from age to age, and from one generation to another, they that have been born after the flesh have persecuted them that hath been born after theGal. 4. 29. spirit, and that the seed of the Serpent have been still a multiplying of troubles upon the seed of the Woman; But a Believers future glory and pleasure will abundant∣ly recompense him for his present pain and ignominy: But such as will have Christ for their Saviour and Sove∣raign, but still with some proviso or other, viz. That they
 may keep such a beloved lust, or enjoy such carnal plea∣sures and delights, or raise such an estate for them and theirs, or comply with the times and such and such great mens humours, or that they may follow the Lamb only in Sun-shine weather, &c. these are still Satans bond∣slaves, and such as Christ can take no pleasure nor de∣light to espouse himself unto. But,
The third word of Advice and Counsel is this, viz. Put off the old man, and put on the new: Consult the Scri∣pturesCol. 3. 9, 10. Eph. 4. 22, 23, 24. Gal. 6. 15. 1 Pet. 2. 2. in the margin. You must be new Creatures, or else it had been better you had been any Creatures than what you are. 2 Cor. 5. 17. If any man be in Christ he is a nw Creature, old things are past away, behold all things are become new. The new Creature includes a new light, a new sight, a new understanding; Now the soul seesPsal. 38. 4. Cant. 5. 10. sin to be the greatest evil, and Christ and holyness to be the chiefest good: When a man is a new Creature he hasCol. 3. 11. a new judgment and opinion, he looks upon God as his only happyness, and Christ as his all in all, and uponProv. 3. 17. the wayes of God as wayes of pleasantness. The new man has new cares, new requests, new desires. O that myActs 2. 37. Cap. 16. 30. soul may be saved; O that my interest in Christ may be cleared, O that my heart may be adorned with grace, O that my whole man may be secured from wrath to1 Thes. 2. ult. come. The new man is a man of new principles, if you make a serious inspection into his soul, you shall find a principle of faith, of repentance, of holyness, of love,Phil. 1. 20. Acts 11. 18. 1 Thes. 4, 9. Phil. 4. 1. 1 Cor. 4. 12. of contentment, of patience, &c. There is not any one spiritual and heavenly principle respecting salvation, but may be found in the new Creature; The new man ex∣periences a new combate, and conflict in his soul: TheGal. 5. 17. Rom. 7. 2. flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit luteth against the flesh. I see another law in my members warring against the law of my mind. The new man experiences a combate in every faculty; Here is the judgment against the judg∣ment, and the will against the will, and the affections against the affections: And the reason is this; because there is flesh and spirit, sin and grace coexistent and co∣habiting
 in every faculty of the soul, renewing grace is in every faculty, and remaining corruption is also in e∣very faculty, like Jacob and Esau stugling in the same womb, or like heat and cold in the same water, and in every part of it: The new man also combates with all sorts of known sins, whether they be great or small, in∣ward or outward, whether they be the sins of the heart, or the sins of the life; and besides, the conflict in the new man is a daily conflict, a constant conflict; The new Creature can never, the new Creature will never be at peace with sin, sin and the new Creature will fight it out to the death, the new. Creature will never be brought into a lague of friendship with sin; The new man is a man of a new life and conversation, alwayes a new life attends a new heart, you see it in Paul, Mary Magdalen, Zacheus, the Jaylor, and all the others thatSee 1 John 3. 14. 2 Cor. 6. 14. Psalm 120. 5. Psalm 139. 1. Psalm 42. 4. are upon Scripture record. The new man has new so∣ciety, new company, Psalm 119. 63. I am a Companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep thy pre∣cepts. Psalm 16. 3. My goodness extends not to thee, but to the Saints that are in the Earth, and to the Excellent in whom is all my delight. Holy society is the only society for persons of holy hearts, and in that society can no had ra∣ther hae no Companin than a had one. man delight until God renew his heart by grace. Many men be as the Planet Mercury, good in conjuction with those that are good, and bad with those that are bad, these are they that do Virtutis stragulam pudefacere, Put honesty to an open shame. Cloaths and Company do oftentimes tell tales in a mute, but significant language. Tell me with whom thou goest, and I will tell thee what thou art, saith the Spanish proverb. Algerius, an Italian Martyr, had rather be in prison with Cato, than with Caesar in the Senate-house. But to conclude this word of Counsel, the new man walks by a new rule; As soon as ever God has made a man, a new creature, he pre∣sently sets up a new rule of life to walk▪ by, and that is no other but that which God himself sets up for his People to walk by, and that is his written Word, Isa. 8.
 20. To the Law and to the testimony. Psalm 119. 105. Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. Verse 133. Order my steps in thy word. Galat. 6. 16. And as many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them and mercy, and upon the Israel of God. This rule he sets up for all matters of Faith, and for all matters of fact. The word is like the stone Garamantides, that hath drops of Gold within it self, enriching of every soul that makes it his Rule to walk by. Alexander kept Homers Iliads in a Cabinet, embroidered with Gold and Pearls; and shall not we keep the Word in the Cabint of our hearts, that it may be alwayes ready at hand as a Rule for us to walk by? Well Friends, what ever you do forget, be sure that for ever you remember this, viz. that none can o shall be glorious Creatures, but such as by grace are made new Creatures. But
The fourth word of advice & counsel is this, Labour to be more inwardly sincere than outwardly glorious. [ThePsalm 5. 13. Re. 3. 1. 15, 16, 17. Kings daughter is all glorious within.] O labour rather to be good than to be thought to be good, to live than to have a name to live; what ever you let go, be sure you hold fast your integrity: A man were better to let Friends go, Relations go, Estate go, Liberty go, ife go, and all go, than let his integrity go. [God forbid that I shouldJob 27. 5, 6. justifie you, till I die I will not remove my integrity from me, my righteousness I will hold fast, and I will not let it go: my heart shall not reproach me so long as I live.] Job is high∣ly and fully resolved to keep his integrity close against all assaults of Enemies, or suspicions of Friends. Jobs in∣tegrity was the best Jewel he had in all the world, & this Jewel he was resolv'd to keep to his dying day. It was ni∣ther good men, nor bad men, nor devils that should baffle Job out of his integrity; and though they all pulled and pulled hard at his integrity, yet he would not lt it go, he would hold fast this pearl of price what ever it cost him. The sincere Christian, like John Baptist, will hold his in∣tegrityMar 6. though he lose his head for it. The very Heathens loved a candid and sincere spirit, as he that wished that
 there was a glass in his breast, that all the world might see what was in his heart. Integrity will be a sword to defend you, a staff to support you, a star to guide you, and a cordial to chear you; and therefore above all get∣tings get sincerity, and above all keepings keep sincerity as your crown, your comfort, your life. But
The fifth word of comfort and counsel is this, Be true to the light of your consciences, and maintain and keep up a constant tenderness in your consciences; a tender conscience is a mercy more worth than a world: Con∣science is Gods spye in our bosoms, keep this clear andActs 21. 16. 2 Cor. 1. 12. tender, and than all is well: Act nothing against the dictates of conscience, rebel not against the light of con∣science: You were better that all the world should up∣braid you and reproach you, than that your consciences should upbraid you and reproach you: Beware of stif∣lingJob 27. 5, 6. conscience, and of suppressing the warnings of con∣science, lest a warning conscience prove a gnawing conscience, a tormenting conscience. The blind ManMark 8. in the Gospel, newly recovering his sight, imagined Trees to be Men: And the Burgundians, as Comines re∣ports, expecting a Battel, supposed long Thistles to be Lances; thus men under guilt, are apt to conceit every Thistle a Tree, and every Tree a Man, and every Man a Devil. Take heed of tongue-tyed consciences, for when God shall unty these strings, and unmuzle your consciences, conscience will then be heard, and ten con∣sorts of Musick shall not drown her clamourous cryes. Hearken to the voice of conscience, obey the voice of conscience, and when conscience shall whisper you in the ear, and tell you, there is this and that amiss in the house, in the habit, in the heart, in the life, in the closet; don't say to conscience, conscience be quiet, beActs . 24, 25. still, make no noise now, I will hear thee in a more con∣venient season. The Heathen Oratour could say: A recia conscientia ne latum quidem unguem discedendum,. in Offi. A man may not depart a hairs breadth all his life long from the dictates of a good conscience. Will not this Heathen
 one day rise in judgment, against those who daily cruci¦fie the light of their own consciences. But
The sixth word of advice and counsel is this, Mak it the great business of your lives, to make sure suchSee my Treatise on Assurance, & there you will find how you may secure some∣thing that will go with you beyond the grave. things as will go with you beyond the grave. Riche and honours, and offices, and all worldly grandure won't go with us beyond the grave. Saladin a Turkish Em∣perour, he was the first of that Nation that conquered Jerusalem, lying at the point of death after many glo∣rious victories, commanded that a white sheet should be born before him to his grave, upon the point of a Spear, with this proclamation: These are the rich spoils which Saladin carrieth away with him, of all his tri¦umphs and victories, of all his Riches and Realms that he had, now nothing at all is left for him, to carry with him but this sheet. It is with us in this world, as it was in the Jewish fields and vineyards, pluck and ea they might what they would while they were there▪ but they might not pocket nor put up ought, to carry with them: Death as a Porter stands at the gate, andDeut. 23. 24. 25. strips men of all their worldly wealth and glory. Athe¦naeus speaks of one, that at the hour of death devoured many pieces of gold, and sewed the rest in his coat, commanding that they should be buried with him. Her∣mocrates being loath that any man should enjoy his goods after him, made himself by Will Heir of his own goods: These muck-worms would fain live still on this side Jordan, having made their gold their God, they cannot think of parting with it, they would if possi∣ble carry the world out of the world: But what saith the Apostle? [We brought nothing with us into this world,1 Timoth. 6. 7. and it is certain (see how he assevereth and assureth it, as if some rich wretches made question of it) we can carry nothing out] nothing but a winding sheet. O how should this alarm us! to make sure our calling and ele∣ction,2 Pet. 1. 1. 2 Cor. 5. 17. 2 Sa. 23. 5. 1 Thess. 5 3. 2 Cor. 1. 12. to make sure our interest in Christ, to make sure our Covenant-relation, to make sure a work of grace in power upon our souls, to make sure the testi∣mony
 of a good conscience, to make sure our Son-ship,Gal. 4. 5, 6, 7. Rom. 8. 15, 16. our Saint-ship, our Heir-ship, &c. for these are the on∣ly things that will go with us into another world. In the Marian persecution there was a Woman, who being convened before Bonner (then Bishop of London) upon Acts and Monuments. the trial of Religion, he threatned her that he would take away her Husband from her: Saith she, Christ is my Husband. I will take away thy Child: Christ, saith she, is better to me than ten sons. I will strip thee, saith he, of all thy outward comfort: Yea, but Christ is mine, saith she, and you cannot strip me of him. Assurance that Christ was hers, and that he would go with her beyond the grave, bore her heart up above the threatsHeb. 10. 34. of being spoiled of all. When a great Lord had shewed a sober, serious, knowing Christian his Riches, his sta∣tely Habitation, his pleasant Gardens, his delightful Walks, his rich Grounds, and his various sorts of plea∣sure; the serious Christian turning himself to this great Lord, said: My Lord, you had need to make sure Christ and Heaven, you had need make sure something, that will go with you beyond the grave, for else when you die you will be a very great loser. O my Friends, I must tell you, it highly concerns you to make sure something that will go with you beyond the grave, or else you will be very great losers, when you come to die. God having given you an abundance of the good things, and of the great things of this world, beyond what he has given to many thousands of others. But
The seventh word of advice and counsel is this, Look upon all the things of this world, and value all the things of this world now, as you will certainly look upon1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31. them and value them when you come to lye upon a sick bed, a dying bed; when a man is sick in good ear∣nest, and when death knocks at the door in good car∣nest, O with what a disdainful eye, with what a wean∣ed eye, with what a scornful eye does a man then look upon the honours, riches, dignities, and glories of this world! If men could but thus look upon them now, it
 would keep them from being fond of them, from trust∣ing in them, from doting upon them, from being proud of them, and from venturing a damning, either in get∣ting or in keeping of them. But
The eight word of advice and counsel is this, In all places and companies carry your soul-preservatives still about you, viz. A holy care, a holy fear, a holy jea∣lousie,Prov. 4. 23. Cap. 28. 14. Genes. 6. 9. Cap. 39. 9, 10. Psalm 17. 4. Psalm 18. 23. Psalm 39. 1, &c. a holy watchfulness over your own thoughts, hearts, words, and wayes. You know that in infectious times men and women carry their several preservatives about them, that they may be kept from the infection of the times. Never were there more infectious times than now, O the snares, the baits, the infections that at∣tend us, at all times, in all places, in all companies, in all employments, and in all enjoyments, so that if we do not carry our soul-preservatives about us, we shall be in eminent danger of being infected with the pride, ill customes, and vanities of the times wherein we lve. But
The ninth word of advice and counsel is this, Live not at uncertainties as to your spiritual and eternal e∣states;See my Box of precious Oint∣ment, in that Glass you may read the state of your souls. there are none so miserable as those that are stran∣gers to the state of their own souls. It is good for a man to know the state of his Flock, the state of his Fa∣mily, the state of the Nation, the state of his Body; but above all to know the state and condition of his own Soul. How many thousands are there that can give a better account of their Lands, their Lordships, their Ri∣ches, their Crops, their Shops, their Trades, their Mer∣chandize, yea of their Hawkes, their Hounds, their Misses, than they can of the esate of their own Souls? O my Friends, your souls are more worth than ten thou∣sandMatth. 16. 26. worlds, and therefore it must be the greatest pru∣dence, and the choicest policy in the world, to secure their everlasting welfare, and to know how things stands between God and your souls, what you are worth for Eternity, and how it is like to go with you in that o∣ther world, whilst a Christian lives at uncertainties as
 to his spiritual and everlasting estate, as whether he has grace or no grace, or whether his grace be true or coun∣terfeit, whether he has an interest in Christ or not, a work in power upon his soul or not, or whether God loves him or loathes him, whether he will bring him to Heaven or throw him to Hll: How can any Christian who lives at so great an uncertainty, delight in God, re∣joyceJob 27. 10. Phil. 4. 4. 2 Cor 2. 14. Phil. 1. 23. ever more, triumph in Christ Jesus, be ready to suffer and desirous to die? All men love to be at a cer∣tainty in all their outward concernments, and yet how many thousands are there that are at a marvellous uncer∣tainty, as to the present and future state of their precious and immortal souls. But
The tenth word of advice and counsel is this, Set the highest Scripture examples and patterns before you of grace and holiness for your Imitation; In the point of1 Cor. 4. 16. Gen. 12. Cap. 21. Numb. 12. 3. Joshua 1. Psalm 18. 23. Faith and Obedience set an Abraham before you; in the point of meekness set a Moses before you; in the point of courage set a Joshua before you; in the point of upright∣ness set a David before you; in the point of zeal set a Phinehas before you; and in the point of patience set a Job before you; make Christ your main pattern, [Be ye followers of me as I am of Christ.] And next to himJames 5. 11, 12. 1 Cor. 11. 1. set the patterns of the choicest Saints before you for your Imitation; the nearer you come to those blessed co∣piesPrecepta decent, exempla movnt, Precepts may in∣struct, but exam∣ples do perswade that they have-set before you, the more will be your joy and comfort, and the more God will be honoured, Christ exalted, the Spirit pleased, Religion adorned, the mouths of Sinners stopped, and the hearts of Saints re∣joyced: He that shooteth at the Sun, though he shoot far short; yet will shoot higher than he that aimeth at a shrub; it is safest, it is best to eye the highest and worthiest examples. Examples are 1. More awake∣ning than precepts. 2. More convincing than precepts.Heb. 11. 8. 3. More encouraging than precepts; and that because in them we see that the exercise of Godliness, though difficult, yet is possible when we see men subject to like passions with our selve to be so and so mortified, self∣denying,
 humble, holy, &c. what should hinder but that it may be so with us also? Such as begin to work with the needle, look much on their sampler and pat∣tern; it is so in learning to write, and indeed in learn∣ing to live also. Observe the gracious conversations and carriages of the choicest Saints, keep a fixed eye up∣on their wise, prudent, humble, holy, and heavenly de∣portment; write after the fairest copy you can find, la∣bour to imitate those Christians that are most eminent in grace. I shall conclude this head with that of the Hea∣then: Optimum est majorum sequi vestigia si rectè praecesseSences. rit, It is best to tread in the steps of those who are gone in a safe and good way before us. But
The eleventh word of advice and counsel is this, Be much in the most Spiritual exercises of Religion: There are external excercises, such as hearing, praying, sing∣ing,Isa. 1. 11, 12, 13, 14. 1 Timoth. 4. 8. Matth. 6. receiving, holy conference, &c. Now custom, con∣viction, education, and a hundred other external con∣siderations may lead persons to these external exercises: But then there are the more spiritual exercises of Reli∣gion, such as loving of God, delighting in God, priz∣ing of Christ, complyance with the motions, counsels, and dictates of the Spirit, living in an exercise of grace, triumphing in Christ Jesus, setting our affections upon things above, meditation, self-examination, self-judging, &c. Now the more you live in the exercise of these more spiritual duties of Religion, the more you glorifie God, the more you evidence the power of grace, and the in∣dwellings of the Spirit; and the more you difference and distinguish your selves from Hypocrits, and all unsound Professors, and the better foundation you lay for a bright, strong and growing assurance. But
The twelfth and last word of advice and counsel I shall give you, is to make a wise, a seasonable, a sin∣cere, a daily, and a through improvement of all the Ta∣lents that God has entrusted you with. There is a Ta∣lent of time, of power, of riches, of honour, of great∣ness that some are more entrusted with than others are,
 the improvement of these is your great wisdom, and should be your daily works: You know you are but Ste∣wards,1 Cor. 4. 1, 2.  and that you must shortly give an account of your Steward-ship: And O that you may make such aLuke 16. 1, 2, 3, 4. faithful, and full improvement of all the great Talents that God has intrusted you with, that you may give up your account at last with joy and not with grief. Some Princes have wished upon their beds that they had ne∣ver reigned, because they have not improved their power for God and his People, but against God and his People; and some Rich men have wished that they had never been rich, because they have not improved their riches for the glory of God, nor for the succour and relief of his suffering Saints. A Beggar upon the way asked something of a honourable Lady; she gave him six pence, saying: This is more than ever God gave me. O says the Beggar, Madam you have abun∣dance, and God hath given you all that you have, say not so good Madam. Well (says she) I speak the truth, for God hath not given but lent unto me what I have, that I may bestow it upon such as thou art: And it is very true indeed, that poor Christians are Christs Alms-men, and the Rich are but his Stewards, into whose hands God hath put his monies, to distri∣bute to them as their necessities require. It is credi∣bly reported of Mr. Thomas Sutton (the fole Founder Church History of ∣tain. of that eminent Hospital commonly known by his name) that he used often to repair into a private Gar∣den, where he poured forth his prayers unto God, and amongst other passages was frequently over-heard to use this expression: Lord thou hast given me a libe∣ral and large estate, give me also a heart to make good use of it; which was granted to him accordingly. Ri∣ches are a great blessing, but a heart to use them aright is a far greater blessing. Every Rich man is not so much a Treasurer as a Steward, whose praise is more how to lay out well, than to have received much. I know I have transgressed the bounds of an Epistle, but love to
 your souls and theirs, into whose hands this Treatise may fall, must be my Apology.
Sir, If you and your Lady were both my own Chil∣dren, and my only Children, I could not give you bet∣ter, nor more faithful counsel, than what I have given you in this Epistle, and all out of a sincere, serious, and cordial desire and design, that both of you may be hap∣py here, and found at Christs right hand in the great day of Account, Matth. 25. 33, 34.
Now the God of all grace fill both your hearts with1 Pet. 5. 1 Gal. 5. 22, . 23. Eph. 1. 3. all the fruits of righteousness, and holiness, and greatly bless you both with all spiritual blessings in Heavenly places, and make you meet helps to each other Hea∣ven-ward, and at last crown you both with ineffable glory in the life to come.

