



Gentlemen,
THe wisest Prince that ever sate upon a Throne hath told us,
Prov. 21.11 That a word fitly spoken is like Apples of gold in pictures of silver, or as the Hebrew hath
it, a word spoken () up∣on his wheels, that is, rightly ordered, placed, and circum∣stantiated. Such a word is of all words the most excellent, the most prevalent, and the most pleasant word that can be spo∣ken: such a word is indeed a word that is like Apples of Gold in Pictures of Silver; of all words such a word is most precious, most sweet, most de∣sirable, and most delectable. O Sirs, to time a word, to set a word upon the wheels, to speak a word to purpose is the pro∣ject of this Book. Though all truths are glorious, yet there is a double glory upon seasona∣ble truths; and therefore I have made it my great business in this Treatise to hold forth as seasonable a truth, and as weighty a truth, and as com∣fortable
and incouraging a truth as any I know in all the Book of God. The Mother of King Cyrus willed, that the words of those that spoke unto her son, should be in silk, but certainly seasonable words are alwayes better than silken words.
Every prudent husbandman observes his fittest seasons to sow his seeds, and therefore some he sowes in the Autumn and fall of the Leaf, and some in the Spring and renewing of the year; some he sowes in a dry season, and some he sowes in a wet; some he sowes in a moist clay, and some he sowes in a sandy dry ground, as the Holy Ghost speaks,
Isa. 28.25. He sow∣eth the Fitches and the Cum∣min, and casteth in Wheat by measure. And so all spiri∣tual
husbandmen must wisely observe their fittest seasons for the sowing of that immortal seed that God hath put into their hands, and such a thing as this is I have had in my eye; but whether I have hit the mark, or mist it, let the Chri∣stian Reader judge.
One speaking of the glory of heaven, saith, That the good things of eternal life are so many, that they exceed num∣ber, so great that they exceed measure, and so precious that they are above all estimation, &c. the same may I say con∣cerning the Saints portion, for certainly the good things that are in their portion, in their God, are so many that they ex∣ceed number, so great that they exceed measure, and so preci∣ous that they are above all esti∣mation.

The same Author in one of his Epistles hath this remarka∣ble relation, viz. That the same day wherein Jerom died, he was in his Study, and had got pen, ink, and paper to write something of the glory of heaven to Jerom, and sud∣denly he saw a light breaking into his Study, and smelt also a very sweet smell, and this voice he thought he heard. O Augustine, what doest thou? dost think to put the Sea into a little vessel? when the hea∣vens shall cease from their con∣tinual motion, then shalt thou be able to understand what the glory of heaven is, and not be∣fore, except you come to feel it, as I now do. Certainly, the glory of heaven is beyond all conception, and all expression, and so is that portion that is
a little hinted at in the follow∣ing Discourse. And indeed a full description of that God that is the believers portion, is a work too high for an Aaron when standing upon Mount Hor;
Num. 20. & ch. 33. Deut. 32.49. and chap. 34.1. Isa. 6.3. or for a Moses, when standing on the top of Nebo after a Pisgah prospect; yea, it is a work too high and too hard for all those blessed Sera∣phims that are still a crying before the throne of God, Ho∣ly, holy, holy is the Lord of Hosts. No finite being, though never so glorious, can ever be able fully to comprehend an infinite being. In the second Verse of the sixth of Isaiah we read that each Seraphim had six wings, and that with twain he covered the face of God, with twain his feet, and with twain he did sly, intimating
(as one well observes upon the place) that with twain they covered his face,
Vide Origen on the Text. the face of God, not their own face, and with twain they covered his feet, not their own feet; They covered his face, his beginnig being unknown; they covered his feet, his end being incom∣prehensible, onely the middle are to be seen the things which are, whereby there may be some glimmering knowledge made out what God is.
Eccl. 7.24. There are many depths in God which our shallow reason cannot fathom; & indeed it is the credit of our Reli∣gion, and the glory of our God, that he is un∣searchable The wise man hit it, when he said, That which is afar off, and exceed∣ing deep, who can find it out? who can find out what God is? The knowledge of him a priori is so far off, that he whose arm is able to break even a bow of steel is not able to reach it; so far off, that he who is able to make his nest with the Eagle is
not able to sly unto it. And so exceeding deep that he who could follow the Leviathan could not fathom it; that he who could set out the center of the earth, is not able to find it out; And who then is able to reach it▪ In a word, so far off, and so deep too, that the Depth saith, it is not in me, and the Sea saith, it is not in me; it is such a deep to men and Angels as far exceeds the capacity of both. Augustine speaking to that question,
August. de fide contra Arrionum, cap. 6. what God is? gives this answer; Surely such a one is he, who when he is spoken of, cannot be spoken of; who when he is con∣sidered, cannot be considered of, who when he is compared to any thing cannot be compa∣red; and when he is defined groweth greater by defining of
him.
Such are not onely good Scholars, but also great Scholars, who have learned content∣edly to be ignorant where God would not have them knowing. If that great Apostle that learned his Divinity a∣mong the Angles, yea, to whom the Holy Ghost was an immedi∣ate Tutor, did know but in part, then certainly those that are most acute and judicious in divine knowledge, may very well conclude, that they know but part of that part that was known to him. As for my own part, I dare pretend but to a spark of that knowledge that others have attained to; and yet who can tell but that God may turn this spark into such a flame as may warm the hearts of many of his dear and pre∣cious ones. Much is done many times by a spark.
O Sirs, catch not at the present profits, pleasures, pre∣ferments, and honours of this world, but lay up a good foun∣dation
for the time to come, provide for eternity, make sure your interest and propriety in God. It was an excellent say∣ing of Lewis of Bavyer, Em∣perour of Germany, Such goods (said he) are worth getting and owning, as will not sink or wash away, if a Shipwrack happen. How many of you have lost your all by Shipwracks? and how hath divine provi∣dence by your multiplied cros∣ses and losses taught you that the good things and the great things of this world cannot be made sure. How many of you have had rich inheritan∣ces left you by your fathers, besides the great portions that you have had with your wives, and the vast estates that you have gained by Trading; but what is become of all? is not
all buried in the deep, or in the grave of oblivion? O the unconstancy, and the grand impostury of this world! Oh the flux and reflux of riches, greatnesse, honours, and pre∣ferments! how many men have we seen shining in their world∣ly pomp and glory like stars in the Firmament, who are now vanished into smoak or Co∣mets? How hath the Moon of many great mens riches and honours been eclipsed at the full, and the Sun of their pomp gone down at noon?
It was (saith the Historian) a wonderful precedent of the vanity and variety of humane condition to see mighty Exerx∣es to float and sly away in a small Vessel,
Justin. who but a little before wanted Sea-room for his Navy. The Dutch to express
the worlds vanity and uncer∣tainty have very wittily pictu∣red a man with a full blown bladder on his shoulders, and another standing by pricking the bladder with a pin, with this Motto, Quamsubito, how soon is all blown down? I am not willing to make the Porch too wide, else I might have given you famous instan∣ces of the vanity and uncer∣tainty of all worldly wealth, pomp, and glory, from the Assy∣rian, Chaldean, Persian, Gre∣cian and Roman Kingdomes, whose glory now lies all in the dust. By all this it is most evident that earthly portions cannot be made sure, they make themselves wings, and they fly away, Prov. 23.5.
O but now God is a portion that may be made sure. In the
time of the Marian Persecuti∣on,
Mr. Fox, Acts and Monum. there was a woman who be∣ing convened before bloody Bonner, (then Bishop of Lon∣don) upon the trial of Religi∣on, he threatned her that he would take away her husband from her: Saith she, Christ is my husband; I will take away thy child, Christ, saith she, is better to me than ten sons; I will strip thee, saith he, of all thy outward comforts, but Christ is mine, saith she, and you cannot strip me of him. A Christian may be stript of any thing but his God, he may be stript of his estate, his friends, his relations, his li∣berty, his life, but he can never be stript of his God. As God is a portion that none can give to a Christian, but himself; so God is a portion that none can
take from a Christian but him∣self; and therefore as ever you would have a sure portion, an abiding portion, a lasting portion, yea, an everlasting portion, make sure of God for your portion.
O Sirs, that you would judge that only worth much now, which will be found of much worth at last, when you shall lie upon a dying bed, and stand before a Judgment-seat. O that men would prize and value all earthly portions now, as they will value them when they come to die, and when their souls shall sit upon their trembling lips, and when there shall be but a short step between them and eternity, O at what a poor rate, at what a low rate do men value their earthly porti∣ons then certainly it will be
their very great wisdome to value their earthly portions now as they would value them then. And O that men would value this glorious, this match∣lesse portion that is held forth in this Treatise now, as they will value it and prize it when they come to die, and when they come to lanch out into the ocean of eternity. I have read of a Stationer, who being at a Fair, hung out several pictures of men famous in their kinds, among which he had also the Picture of Christ, upon which divers men bought according to their several fancies; the souldier buyes his Caesar, the Lawyer his Justinian, the Physi∣cian his Galen, the Philoso∣pher his Aristotle, the Poet his Virgil, the Orator his Cicero, and the Divine his Augustine;
but all this while the picture of Christ hung by as a thing of no value, till a poor Chap∣man that had no more money then would purchase that, bought it, saying, Now every man hath taken away his God, let me have mine too. O Sirs, it would make any gra∣cious, any serious, any ingeni∣ous, any conscientious beart to bleed to see at what a high rate all sorts and ranks of men do value earthly portions, which at best are but counterfeit pi∣ctures, when as this glorious portion that is here treated on hangs by as a thing of no va∣lue, of no price; most men are mad upon the world, and so they may have much of that for their portion, they care not whether ever they have God for their portion, or no:
Give them but a Palace in Pa∣ris,
The Duke of Burbone. and then with that French Duke they care not for a place in Paradise: Give them but a messe of pottage, and let who will take the birthright; give them but Manna in a wilder∣nesse, and let who will take the land of Canaan; give them but ground which is pleasant and rich, and then with the Reubenites they will gladly take up their rest on this side the Holy Land; give them but their bags full,
Luke 12.16-22. and their barns full, and then with the rich fool in the Gospel, they can think of nothing but of ta∣king their ease, and of eating, and drinking, and making merry. So bruitish and fool∣ish are they in their under∣standings, as if their precious and immortal souls were good
for nothing, but as salt to keep their bodies from rotting and stinking.
O that these men would se∣riously consider, that as a cup of pleasant wine offered to a condemned man in the way to his execution; and as the Feast of him who sate under a naked sword hanging perpendicular∣ly over his head by a slender thread, and as Adams forbid∣den fruit, seconded by a fla∣ming sword, and as Belshaz∣zars dainties overlooked by an hand-writing against the wall, such and onely such are all earthly portions to those that have not God for their porti∣on.
Well, Gentlemen, remember this, there is no true happinesse to be found in any earthly por∣tions;
Solomon having made a critical enquirie after the excellency of all creature-comforts, gives this in as the ultimate extraction from them all, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. If you should go to all the creatures round, they will tell you that happinesse is not in them: If you should go to the earth, the earth will tell you that happinesse grows not in the furrows of the field. If you go to the Sea, the Sea will tell you, that happinesse is not in the Treasures of the deep; If you go to the beasts of the field, or to the birds of the air, they will tell you, that happi∣nesse is not to be found on their backs, nor in their bow∣els; If you go to your bags or heaps of gold and silver, they will tell you that happinesse is
not to be found in them; If you go to Crowns and Scepters, they will tell you that happi∣nesse is too precious and too glorious a Gemme to be found in them.
As it is not the great Cage that makes thn bird sing, so it is not the great estate that makes the happy life, nor the great portion that makes the happy soul. There is no true comfort, nor no true happinesse to be drawn out of the standing pools of outward sufficiencies; all true comfort and happiness is onely to be found in having of an all-sufficient God for your portion, Psal. 144.15. Happy is that people that is in such a case, yea, happy is that people whose God is the Lord. And therefore as ever you would be happy in both
worlds, it very highly concerns you to get an interest in God, and to be restlesse in your own souls till you come to enjoy God for your portion.
A man that hath God for his portion, is a none-such,
This you will finde fully clea∣red up in the follow∣ing Trea∣tise. he is the rarest and the happiest man in the world, he is like the morning-star in the midst of the clouds, he is like the Moon when it is at full, he is like the flower of the Roses in the Spring of the year, he is like the Lillies by the Springs of waters, he is like the branches of Frankincense in the time of Summer, he is like a vessel of massie gold that is set about with all manner of precious stones.
Nothing can make that man miserable that hath God for
his portion, nor nothing can make that man happy that wants God for his portion: the more rich, the more wret∣ched; the more great, the more gracelesse; the more ho∣nourable, the more miserable that man will be that hath not God for his portion. The Sodomites were very wealthy; and who more wanton and wicked than they? the Egyp∣tians, and Babylonians were very rich, great, and potent in the world, and what greater oppressors and persecutors of the people of God than these: O the slavery, the captivity, and the woful misery of the people of God under those cruel Tyrants! Have not the Nimrods, the Nebuchadnez∣zars, the Belshazzars, the A∣lexanders, and the Caesars, &c.
been commonly the Lords of the world? and who so a∣bominably wicked as these? no men for wickednesse have been able tomatch them, or come neer them.
It hath been long since ob∣served to my hand,
Dan. 7. that Daniel sets forth the several Monar∣chies of the World by sundry sorts of cruel beasts, to shew that as they were gotten by beastly subtilty and cruelty, so they were supported and maintained by brutish sensu∣ality, craft, and tyranny.
I have read of a Lacede∣monian that said, that they well deserved death that did but quench Tyranny, they should quite have consumed it with fire: But whether he hit the mark, or mist it, let the
Reader judge. Well, Sirs, you may be the Lords of this world, and yet you will cer∣tainly be miserable in another world, except you get God for your portion. The top of mans happinesse in this world lies in his having of God for his portion. He that hath God for his portion, enjoyes all; and he that wants an interest and propriety in God, enjoyes nothing at all.
Gentlemen, I have read of an Heathen, who seeing a sud∣den Shipwrack of all his wealth, said, Well, Fortune, I see now that thou wouldest have me to be a Philosopher. O that you would say under all your heavie losses and crosses: well, we now see that God would have us lay up treasure in heaven,
Matth. 6.19, 20. we now see that
God would have us look after a better portion than any this world affords; we now see that it highly concerns us to secure our interest and pro∣priety in God; we now see, that to enjoy God for our por∣on is the one thing necessary. Have not many of you said, nay sworne, That if you might but see & enjoy the delight of your eyes, that then you should have a sweeping Trade, and abound in all plenty and pro∣sperity, and grow rich and great, and glorious in the world, and be eased of everie thing that did but look like a burthen, &c. If it be indeed thus with you, why do you so complain, murmur, and repine? and why do many of you walk up and down the Exchange and streets with tears in your
eyes, and with heavinesse in your hearts, and with crack't credits, and thread-bare coats, and empty purses? and why are so many of you broke, and so manie prisoners, and so manie hid, and so manie fled? But if it be otherwise, and that you are sensible that you have put a cheat up∣on your selves (I say not upon others) and that as you have been self-flatterers, so you have been self-deceivers, the more highly it concernes you to do your selves, your souls that right, as to make sure God for your portion: For what else can make up those woful disappointments under which you are fallen.
It is a sad sight to see all the arrows that men shoot to fall upon their own heads, or
to see men twist a cord to hang themselves, or to see men dig a pit for others, and to fall into it themselves; and it tis but justice that men should bake as they brew, and that they which brew mischief should have the first and the largest draught of it themselves.
Now the best way to prevent so sad a sight, and so great a mischief, is to get God for your portion: for when once God comes to be a mans portion, then all things shall work together for his good, Rom. 8.28. and then God will preserve him from such hurt∣ful and mischievous actings. The whole World is a great Bedlam, and multitudes there are that think madly, and that design madly, and that talk madly, and that act madly,
and that walk madly. Now as you would not be found in the number of those Bedlams, it highly concerns you to get God for your portion, that so you may be filled with that wis∣dome that may preserve you from the follie and madnesse of this mad world.
Gentlemen, The following Sermons I preached in the year 1660. at Olaves Breadstreet, and God blest them then to those Christians that attend∣ed on my Ministry, and I hope he will blesse them also to the internal and eternal welfare of your souls to whom they are now dedicated. They are much inlarged; the profit will be yours, the labour hath been mine: I judge them very sea∣sonable and suitable to present dispensations, else they had
not see the light at this time. Curiosity is the spiritual a∣dultery of the soul; curiosity is that green-sicknesse of the soul, whereby it longs for no∣velties, and loaths sound and wholsome truths; it is the E∣pidemical distemper of this age and hour.
And therefore if any of you are troubled with this itch of curiosity, and love to be wise above what is written, and delight to scan the choice my∣steries of Religion by carnal reason, and affect elegant ex∣pressions and Seraphical noti∣ons, and the flowers of Rheto∣rick, more than sound and wholsome Truths, then you may ease your selves (if you please) of the trouble of rea∣ding this following Treatise; onely remember this, that the
prudent Husband-man looks more and delights more in the ripenesse, and soundnesse, and goodnesse of the Corn that is in his Field, than he doth at the beauty of the Cockle; and remember, that no man can live more miserably than he that lives altogether upon Sawces; and he that looks more at the handsomnesse than he doth at the wholsomnesse of the Dishes of Meat that are set before him, may well passe for a fool.
Well, Gentlemen, for a Close remember this, that as Noah was drunk with his own wine, and as Goliah was beheaded by his own sword, and as the rose is destroyed by the canker that it breeds in it self, and as Agrippina was killed by Nero,
to whom she gave breath; so if ever you are eternally de∣stroyed, you will be destroyed by your selves; if ever you are undone, you will be undone by your selves; if ever you are scourged to death, it will be by rods of your own making, and if ever the bitter cup of damnation be put into your hands, it will be found to be of your own preparing, min∣gling, and imbittering.
Behold, I have set life and death, heaven and hell, glory and misery before you in this Treatise: and therefore if you will needs chuse death rather than life, hell rather than heaven, mi∣sery rather than glory:
What can be more just than that you should perish to all eternity. If you will not have God for your portion, you shall be sure to have wrath for your portion, and hell for your portion, &c.
Well Sirs, remember this at last, every man shall onely thank his own folly for his own bane, his own sin, for his own everlasting shame, his own iniquity, for his own endlesse misery.
I have now no more to do, but to improve all the interest that I have in Hea∣ven, That this Treatise
may be blest to all your souls and that you all experience what it is to have God for your portion: for that will be my joy as well as yours, and my Crown as well as yours, and my glorying as well as yours in the great day of our Lord Jesus. And so I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace,
Acts 20.32. which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among them that are sanctified. And rest,
Gentlemen, 
