



Grace, Mercy and Peace be multiplyed upon you and yours. SIR,
MUch might be said (were it necessary) for the Dedication of Books unto persons of worth, interest, service and honour; this having been the constant practise of the best and wisest of men, in all the Ages of the world: And therefore, I need not make any farther Apology, for my present practice.
What is written is permanent, litera scripta manet, and spreads it self farther by far, for time, place and persons, than the voice can reach. Augustine, writing to Volusian, Aug Epist. 1. ad Vs. saith, that which is written, is always at hand to be read, when the reader is at leysure. There are those that think (and as they conceive from Scripture grounds too) that
 the glory of the Saints in heaven, receives additions and encreases daily, as their holy walk, and faithful service, when here on earth; doth after they are gone, bring forth fruit, to the praise of God, amongst those that are left behind them: If this be so, what greater encouragement can there be, to write, print, preach, and to walk holi∣ly in this world?
I must also confess, that, that general acceptation that my former labours have found, both in the Nation, and It was a saying of , concern∣ing his first por∣traicture: I  liked, I will raw  be∣ie  this. in forreign parts; and that singular blessing, that has attend∣ed them from on high, hath been none of the least encou∣ragements to me, once more to cast in my Mite into the common Treasury. Besides I am not unsensible of your candid esteem of some forme endeavours of mine in this kind; neither do I know any way, wherein I am more capacitated to serve the glory of God, the interest of Christ, the publick good, reproached truths, and the interest of the Churches in my Generation, than this, as my case and condition, is circumstanced: And I am very well sa∣tisfied, that there is nothing in this Treatise, but what tends to the advantage, comfort, support, settlement, and encouragement of those, whose concernment lies in peace and truth, in holiness and righteousness, through∣out the Nations.
Sir, The points here insisted on, are of the greatest use, worth, weight, necessity, excellency, and utility imagina∣ble; they are such, wherein our present blessedness, and our future happiness; yea, wherein our very all, both as to this, and that other world, is wrapped up. It will be Du. 30. 15, 19. cap. 32. 47. your life, honour and happiness to read them, digest them, experience them, and to exemplifie them in a suitable con∣versation; which that you may, let your immortal soul lye always open to the warm, powerful and hourly in∣fluences 2 Cor. 5. 9.  We ambitiously la∣bour we count it our highest ho∣nour and glory to  accepted of God. of heaven.
Let it be the top of your ambition, and the height of all your designs, to glorifie God, to secure your interest in Christ, to seve your Generation, to provide for Eter∣nity, to walk with God, to be tender of all that have
 Aliquid Christi, any thing of Christ, shining in them, and so to steer your course in this world, as that you may give Mat. 25. 21. up your account at last with joy: All other ambition is base and low. Ambition (saith one) is a guilded misery, Brnard. Cardinal Burbon, would not lose his part in Paris, for his part in Pa¦radise: Act. and mon. Fol. 899. a secret poyson, a hidden plague, the Engineer of deceipt, the mother of hypocrisie, the parent of envy, the origi∣nal of vices, the moth of holiness, the blinder of hearts, turning medicines into maladies, and remedies into dis∣eases. In the enthronization of the Pope, before he is set in his chair, and puts on his triple Crown, a piece of tow, or wad of straw is set on fire before him, and one ap∣pointed to say, sic transit gloria mundi, the glory of this Act 25. 23. world is but a blaze. St. Luke calls Agrippa's pomp , a phantasie or vain shew; and in∣deed, all worldly pomp and state is but a phantasie, or vain shew. St. Matthew calls all the world's glory, , Mat. 4. 8. an opinion: and St. Paul calls it, , a Mathe∣matical 1 Cor. 7. 31. figure; which is a mere notion, and nothing in substance: The word here used, intimateth that there is nothing of any firmness, or solid consistency in the crea∣ture; it is but a surface, out-side, empty thing: all the beauty of it, is but skin-deep. Mollerus, upon that Psal. The Roman built Virtue's & honours Temples close together, to shew, that the way to true ho∣nour, was by Vir¦tue, Aug. 73. 20. concludeth, that men's earthly dignities are but as idle dreams; their splendid braveries, but lucid fanta∣sies. High seats are never but uneasie, and Crowns are always stuffed with Thorns; which made one say of his Crown, Oh Crown, more noble than happy: shall the spirit of God, the grace of God, the power of God, the presence of God, arm you against all other sins, evils, snares, and temptations, as you are by a good hand of heaven, armed against worldly ambition, and worldly glory:
Sir, you know he was a Saul that said, honour me be∣fore 1 Sam. 15, 30. 2 King. 10 16. the people; and he was a Jehu that said, come, see my zeal for the Lord of hosts: and they were three Irish Kings, that rebelled in Henry the second's days; being derided for their rude habits and fashions: and they were some of the worst of Cardinals, that, when they were
 like to die, would give great summs of money for a Car∣dinal's Easmus writes that he knew some such Cardi∣nals. hat, that they might be so stiled upon their tombs: And they were the Romans, and other barbarous nations, that were most ambitions of worldly honour and glory: And he was a Julius Caesar, whose excessive desire of ho∣nour, made him to be mortally hated by the Senators, and all others. God grants no man a pattent for ho∣nour, durante vita, but durante bene-placito (as the Law∣yers speak) during his life, but during his own good plea∣sure. All worldly honour and glory is subject to mu∣tability: Honours, Riches and Pleasures, are the three Dei∣ties, that in these days, a world of men adore, and to whom they sacrifice, morning and evening, their best thoughts; and these, for their unparallel'd vanity, may well be called the vanity of vanities: Worldly honours Ecls. 1. 2. are but a more conceit, a shadow, a vapour, a feather in the cap, without substance or subsistence, and yet the most powerful charm of Satan, whereby he Iulls men to sleep, in the Paradise of fools; to cast them, when they are awake, into the bottomless pit of eternal woe: For had not Satan hold them to be the strongest of all his tempta∣tions, he had not reserved them for his last battery, a∣gainst Mat. 4. 8, 9. the constancy of our blessed Saviour, as he did: And although this roaring Cannon of his could not pre∣vail against Christ, the Rock of Ages; yet, how many cap. 16. 18. thousands in these days, are captivated and deluded, by the glorious glistering of worldly honours: Men of great honour and worldly glory, stand but in slippery places: Adonibezek, a mighty Prince, was made fellow-com∣monner Judg. 1. 7. Dan. 4. 28. with the Dogs: And Nebuchadnezzar, a mighty Conquerour, was turned a grazing among the Oxen: and Herod was reduced from a conceited God, to the most Act. 12. 23. loathsome of men, a living carrion, arrested by the vilest creatures, upon the suit of his affronted Creator; the lice did fully confute his Auditory, and triumph over his Throne. A great Haman is feasted with the King one Hest. 7. 10. day, and made a feast for Crows the next, In all the Isa. 23. 9. Ages of the world, God hath taken a delight to stain the
 pride of all the glory of this lower world: see it in a few instances.
Valerian, The Roman Emperour, fell from being an  Emperour, to be a foot-stool to Sapor, King of Persia, as often as he took horse.
Bibulus the Consul, riding in his triumphant Char∣riot; by the fall of a Tyle-stone from a house, was  made a Sacrifice, before he could reach the Capitol, to offer up there the Bulls and Garlands he had pre∣pared.
Aurelianus, The Roman Emperour, brought Tetri∣cus  his opposite, and the brave Queen Zenobia of Palme∣rina in Triumph to Rome in Golden chains.
Sejanus, That podigious favourite, on the same day  that he was attended by the Senate, on the same day he was torn in pieces by the people: Seneca, speaking of him, saith, that he who, in the morning, was swollen with Titles, ere night there remained not so much as a mam∣mock of flesh for the hang man to fasten his hook in.
Belisarius, a most famous General under Justinian the  Emperour, after all the great and famous services that he had done, he had his eyes put out in his old age, by the See Decad. pag. 649, 650. Empress Theodora; and at the Temple of St. Sophy, forc∣ed to beg: Date panem Belisario, &c. Give a crust to old blind Belisarius, whom virtue advanced, but envy hath brought into this great misery.
Henry the fourth, Emperour, in sixty two Battels, for  the most part, he became victorious; yet he was de∣posed, and driven to that misery, that he desired on∣ly a Clerk's place in a house at Spire, of his own build∣ing, which the Bishop of that place denied him: where∣upon, he brake forth into that speech of Job; Miseremi∣ni Job 19. 21. mei amici, quia manus dei tetigit me: have pity upon me, oh my friends, for the hand of God hath touched me, he died of grief and want.
Bajazet, a proud Emperour of the Turks, whom  Tamberlain a Tartarian took prisoner, and bound him in chains of Gold, and used him for a foot-stool, when he
 took horse; when he was at table, he made him gather crums and scraps under his table, and eat them for his food.
Dyonisus King of Sicily, was such a cruel Tyrant, that  his people banished him; after his banishment, he went to Corinth, whee he lived a base and contemptible life: At last he became a School-master; so that, when he could not tyrannize any longer over men, he might over boys.
Pythias was pined to death for want of bread, who, 9. Turk. Histry, pag. 220. once was able to entertain and maintain Xerxes his migh∣ty army.
Great Pompey had not so much as room to be buried  in, and William the Conqueour's Corps lay three days unburied, his interment being hindred by one that claim∣ed the ground to be his.
Caesar having bathed his sword in the blood of the Se∣nate,  and his own Countrey-men; is after a while, mise∣rably murdered in the Senate, by his own friends, Cassius and Brutus.
King Guillimer, a potent King of the Vandals, was 12. Prptus reports this of him. brought so low, as to enteat his friend to send him a spunge, a loaf of bread, and a harp; a spunge to dry up his tears, a loaf of bread to maintain bis life, and a harp to solace himself in his misery.
A Duke of Exeter, who, though he had married Ed∣ward 13. Philiple Cmines saw him thus beg. the fourths sister, yet was seen begging bare foot in the Low-countreys.
The Emperour Nero promoted Tygelenus to the great∣est 14. See Tacus in O∣tho's Life. dignities of the Roman Empire, but it was because he had been the private Agent to his base and lascivious delights, for which he was justly deprived of his honours and life, by Otho the Emperour.
By all these instances (and many more that might be produced) it is most evident; that worldly glory is but a breath, a vapour, a roth, a phantsm, a adow, a re∣flection, an apparition, a very nothing: Like the Incubs or night mare in a dream, you imagine it a substance a
 weight; you grasp at it, and awake, and 'tis nothing. Pleasue and wealth will abide a sense or two; the one a touch or taste, the other a sight of the eyes; but this of glory can neither be felt, seen or understood. The Philo∣sophers are at strife among themselves, where to fix it in any being or existence, whether in Honorante, or in Hono∣rato, the giver or the taker; the inconstancy and slipperi∣ness of it, is discernable in the instances last cited. It hath raised some, but hath ruined more; and those (com∣monly) whom it hath most raised, it hath most ruined: Sir, if there be any thing glorious in the world, 'tis a mind that divinely contemns that glory; and such a mind I judge and hope God hath given you. I have hinted a little at the vanity of worldly glory, because, happily this Treatise, passing up and down the world, may fall into the hands of such as may be troubled with that Itch; and if so, who can tell but that that little that I have said, may prove a soveraign salve to cure that E∣gyptian Botch, and if so, I have my end.
Sir, Let nothing lye so near your heart in all the world, as these eight things: 1. Your sins, to humble you, and abase you at the foot of God: 2. Free, and rich, and soveraign grace, to soften and mlt you down Col. 1. 10, 11, 12, 13. Phil. 4. 12, 13, 14. al. 2. 20. 1 Cor. 15. 10. 2 Cor. 12. 10. Psal. 119. 105. Amos 6. 3, 4, 5, 6. . 1. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. into the will of God: 3. The Lord Jesus Christ, to as∣sist, help, strengthen, and influence you to all the du∣ties and services, that are incumbent upon you: 4. The blessed Scriptues, to guide you, and lead you, and o be a lamp unto you feet, and a light unto your paths: 5. The afflictions of Joseph, to draw out your charity, mercy, pity, sympathy, and campassion, to men in mi∣sery: 6. The glory and happiness of another world, to arm you, and steel you against all the sins, snares, and temptations; that your high places, offices, and circum∣stances may lye you open to: 7. The grand points in this Treatise, which, being laid upon your heart by the warm hand of the spirit, are able to make you wise unto salvation; and to secure your precious and im∣mortal soul, against those pernicious and most dan∣gerous
 (may I not say damnable) errours and opini∣ons, 2 Pet. 2. 1. that are preached, printed, and cryed up in the vain world: 8. The interest of Christ and his people, which will be your honour whilst you live, your joy and comfort, when you come to die, and your Crown of 1 Thess. 1. 19. 20. rejoycing in the great day of our Lord.
Sir, I shall not so far disgust you, as to tell the world how many several score pounds of your money hath pas∣sed through my hands, towards the relief, refreshment, support and preservation of such; who, for their piety, and extreme poverty and necessity, were proper objects of your charity; but shall take this opportunity to tell you (and all others, into whose hands this Treatise may fall) that of all the duties of Religion, there are none, 1. More commanded, than this of charity, pity, com∣passion Prov. 3. 9, 10. Eccles. 11. 1, 2. Gal. 6. 10. 2 Cor. 8. 3, 4, 5. cap. 9. 1, 2. Isa. 58. 7. to the 13. ponder upon it. Mat. 25. 34, to vers. 41. and mercy to men in misery, especially to those of the houshold of faith: 2. There is no one duty more highly commended and extolled, than this: 3. There is no one duty, that hath more choice and precious pro∣mises annexed to it than this: 4. There is no one duty, that hath greater rewards attending it, than this: E∣vagrius a rich man, being importuned by Sinesius a Bi∣shop, to give something to charitable uses, he yield∣ed at last, to give three hundred pounds; but first took bond of the Bishop, that it should be repayed him, in another world, (according to the promise of our Sa∣viour, Mat. 19. 29. with a hundred-fold advantage:) Before he had been one day dead, he is said to have appeared to the Bi∣shop, delivering in the bond cancelled, as thereby ac∣knowledging that what was promised, was made good. It is certain, that one days being in heaven, will make a sufficient recompence, for whatsoever a man has given on earth.
Neither shall I acquaint the world with those parti∣cular favours and respects, which you have shewed to my self; but treasure them up in an awakened breast, and be your remembrancer at the throne of grace. Only, I must let the world know, that I owe you more than
 an Epistle; and if you please to accept of this mite in part of payment, and improve it for your souls advan∣tage, you will put a farther obligation upon me, to stu∣dy, how I may farther serve the interest of your immor∣tal soul.
Let the lustre of your prudence, wisdom, charity, fi∣delity, generosity, and humility of spirit, shine glorious∣ly, through all your places, offices, abilities, riches, em∣ployments and enjoyments; for this is the height of all true excellency: and that it may be so, remember, for ever, that the eyes of God, of Christ, of Angels, of Jer. 16. 17. Job 34 21. Prov. 5. 21. Jer. 32. 19. Heb. 4. 13. 'Tis a saying of the School-men, quic quid est in deo est in deo est ipse deus. Devils, of Sinners, of Saints, of Good, of Bad, are al∣ways fixed upon you; God is all ear to hear, all hand to punish, all power to protect, all wisdom to direct, all goodness to relieve, all grace to pardon, and he is To∣tus Oculus, all eye to observe the thoughts, hearts, words, ways and walkings of the children of men. As the eyes of a well drawn picture are fastned on us, which way soever we turn; so are the eyes of the Lord. Zeno a wise Heathen, affirmeth, that God behold even the ve∣ry thoughts of men: Athenodorus, another Heathen, saith, that all men ought to be careful of the actions of their life, because God was every where, and behold all that was done. Of all men on earth, Magistrates and Ministers had need pray with David, Teach us thy sal. 27. 1. way, O Lord, and lead us in a plain path, because of our enemies; or nearer the Hebrew, because of our observers: in all the Ages of the world, there have been Sauls and Doegs, who have looked upon God's Davids with an evil Jer 20. 10. eye, and watched for their halting: there are multitudes that will be still eyeing and prying into the practices, offi∣ces, carriages and conversations of Magistrates and Mi∣nisters, the more it concerns them to watch, pray, act and walk like so many earthly Angels, in the midst of a crooked, perverse and froward Generation. Phil. 2. 15.
Wise and prudent Governours are an unspeakable mercy to a Kingdom or Commonwealth; which Je∣thro well understood, when he gave Moses that good
 counsel: To make choice out of the people, of grave and able men, such as feared God, men of trath hating cove∣tousness; Exd. 18. 21, 22.  ti∣rum in a, is a maximas true as old. and to make them rulers over thousands, and rul∣ers over hundreds, over fifties, and over tens: But in the Nations round, how rare is it to find Magistrates qua∣lified, suitable to Jethro's counsel. Alphonsus, King of Spain, coming very young to the Crown; some ad∣vised, that seven Counsellors might be joyned to go∣vern with him; who should be men fearing God, lovers lovers of Justice, free from filthy lusts, and such as would not take bribes: To which, Alphonsus reply∣ed; if you can find seven such men, nay, bring me but one so qualified, and I will not only admit him to govern with me, but shall willingly resign the Kingdom it self to him. Wicked policies are ever de∣structive to their Authors; as you may see in Pharaoh, Exd. 1. 10, 22. 2 Sam. 16. cap. 23. 23. Est. 7. 10. in Achitophel, in Haman, &c. As long as the Roman Civil Magistrates, Senators and Commanders of Ar∣mies, were chosen into places of honour and trust, for their noble descent, their prudence and valour; their State did flourish, and did enlarge its Domini∣ons, See Livim De∣. more in one Century of years, than it did in three, after these places of honour came to be venal, and pur∣chased by concession: For then men of no parts, were for money, promoted to highest dignities: whereup∣on civil contentions were fomented, factions encreas∣ed, and continual bloody intestine Wars maintained; by which, the ancient Liberties of that State, were suppressed; and the last Government of it, changed into an Imperial Monarchy. As long as the chief of∣ficers of the Crown of France, and the places of Ju∣dicature of the Realm, were given by Charles the fifth, surnamed the wise, to men of Learning, of Wisdom, and Valour, in recompence of their Loyal∣ty, virtue and merits, that Kingdom did flourish, with peace, honour and prosperity; and the Courts of Par∣liaments See the History of France. of France, had the honour, for their Justice and equity, to be the Arbitrators and Umpires of all
 the differences that happened in those days, between the greatest Princes of Christendom: But when these places of honour and trust were made venal, in the reigns of Francis the second, Charles the ninth, and Henry the third, and sold for ready money to such as gave most for them; then was Justice and Equity banished, and that flourishing Kingdom reduced to the brim of ruine and desolation, by variety of facti∣ons, and a bloody Civil War: The wicked Counsel given by the Cardinal De Lorraign, and the Duke of Guise his brother, to Charles the ninth, King of See the Massa of Par n the Inetory of France. France, to allure all the Protestants to Paris, under co∣lour of the Marriage of Henry de Bourbon, with Mar∣garet de Valois, the King's sister, to have them all as in a trap, for to cut their throats in their beds, as they did for the greatest part; proved fatal to the King, to the Cardinal, and the Duke: For the King, by the just judgment of God, died shortly after by an Issue of blood, which came out of his mouth, ears and nostrils, and could never be stopped; and the Cardinal and the Duke were both slain by the Commandment of Henry the third, in the Castle of Blois. The barbarous policy of Philip the second, See the  King of Spain, to banish two or three hundred thou∣sand Mores, with their wives and children, under colour of Religion, on purpose to confiscate all their Land, and to appropriate the same to his demesns, was fa∣tal to him, and to all the Spanish Nation; for, by the just judgment of God, he was eaten up of lice, and the Spanish Nation never thrived since, &c. Were it not for exceeding the bounds of an Epistle, I might shew, in all the Ages of the world, how destructive the wicked policies of Rulers and Governours, have been to themselves, and the States and Nations under them, &c. But from such policies, God has, and I hope, will for ever deliver your soul. Sir, the best policy in the world, is to know God savingly, to serve him sincerely, to do the work of your Gene∣ration
 throughly, and to secure your future happiness and blessedness effectually, &c.
Sir, I do not offer you that which cost me nothing, or little, God best knows the pains, the prayers, and the Mal 1. 13, 14. sdy, that the midwifing of this Treatise into the world hath cost me; in the midst of tryals, troubles, temptati∣ons, afflictions, and my frequent labours in the Ministry. The truths that I offer for your serious consideration, in this Treatise, are not such as I have formerly preached, in Commonly, men preach those points first, that afterwards they print: but not knowing how long the door of liberty may be o∣pen: I have sent this Treatise in∣to the world. Eph. 5. 15, 16. ol s 4. 5. Eccl  9. 10. one place or another, at one time or another; but such as at several times, the Lord has brought to hand: and I hope, in order to the service, and saving of many, many souls. And should you redeem time from your many and weighty occasions, and live to read it as often over, as there be leaves in it; I am apt to think, you would never repent of your pains, when you come to die, and make up your account with God. Sir, I must, and shall say (because I love and honour you, and would have you happy to Eternity) that it is your greatest wisdom, and should be your greatest care, to redeem time from your worldly business, to acquaint your self more and more with the great and main points of Religion, to serve your God, to be useful in your day, and to make sure and safe work for your soul to escape hell, and to get heaven. Sir Thomas More, one of the great wits of that day, would commonly say, there is a Devil called negotium, business, that carries more souls to hell, than all the devils in hell beside. Many men have so many Irons in the fire, and uk. 10. 40, 41, 42. When one pre∣ented Antipater King of Macedo ia, wich a book treating of hap∣piness; his answer was on Scholazo, I am not at lea∣sure. The Duke of Alva had so much to do on earth, that he had o time to look up to heaven. are cumbred about so many things, that upon the matter, they wholly neglect the one thing necessary, though I hope better things of you. The stars which have the least circuit, are nearest the pole: and men that are least per∣plexed with a croud of worldly business, are commonly nearest to God. Sir, as you love God, as you love your soul, as you love Eternity, as you would be found at Christ's right hand at last, and as you would meet me with joy in the great day of the Lord, make much conscience of redeeming time daily from your secular affairs, to be
 with God in your closet, in your family, to read the Scriptures, to study the Scriptures, and such men's writ∣ings that are sound in the faith, and that treat of the great things of the Gospel. 'Tis dangerous crying cras, cras, to morrow, to morrow; Mannah must be gathered in the morning, the orient Pearl is generated by the morning∣dew: There is nothing puts a more serious frame into a man's spirit, than to know the worth and preciousness of time. Time (saith one) were a good commodity in hell, Bernard. Blessed Hop, was spare of diet, sparer of words, & sparest of time. And Bradford counted that hour lost, where in he did not some good, by his tongue, pen or purse. A Heathen could say, he liv∣ed no day with∣out a line: that is, he did some∣thing remarkable every day. Mak Cato was wont to say, that there were three things which he abhor∣ed: 1. To com∣mit secrets to a woman: 2. To go by water, when he might go by land: 3. To spend one day idle. Plutarh. and the traffick of it most gainful; where, for one day, a man would give ten thousand worlds, if he had them. One called his friends thieves, because they stole time from him; and certainly, there are no worse thieves, than those that rob us of our praying seasons, our hearing sea∣sons, our mourning seasons, &c. There was an eminent Minister, who would often say, that he could eat the flesh off his arm, in indignation against himself for his lost hours.
It was good counsel, that an ancient Christian, that is now triumphing in glory, gave to another, who is still a∣live, be either like Christ or Mary: The first was always doing good, the latter was still a receiving good: this is the way to be strong in grace, and to be soon ripe for glo∣ry. Certainly, time is infinitely precious, in regard of what depends upon it; What more necessary than repen∣tance? yet that depends upon time, Rev. 2. 21. I gave her space to repent of her fornications: What more desirable than the favour of God? This depends upon time, and is therefore called the acceptable time, Isa. 49. 8. What more excellent than salvation? this likewise, depends up∣on time, 2 Cor. 6. 4. Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation. Pythagoras saith, that time is anima coeli, the soul of heaven: But to draw to a close, what can there be of more worth, and weight, and moment, than Eter∣nity? it is the Heaven of Heaven, and the very Hell of Hell; without which, neither would Heaven be so desi∣rable, nor Hell so formidable. Now this depends upon time, Time is the Prologue to Eternity, the great weight
 of Eternity hangs upon the small wire of Time: Whether our time here, be longer or shorter, upon the spending of this depends, either the bliss or the bane of body and soul to all Eternity; This is our seed-time, Eternity is the harvest; whatsoever seed we sow, whether of sin or grace, it cometh up in Eternity; whatsoever a man sow∣eth, Gal. 6. 7, 8. 2. Cor. 9. 6. the same shall he reap. This is our market time, in which, if we be wise Merchants, we may make a happy exchange; of earth, for heaven; of a Valley of tears, for a Paradise of delights. This is our working time, I must work the works of him that sent me, the night cometh, Joh. 9. 4. when no man can work; according as the work is we do now, such will be our wages in Eternity: Though time it self lasts ot; yet whatsoever is everlasting, dependeth upon it; and therefore, should be carefully improved to the best advantage for our souls, and for the making sure of such things as will go with us beyond the grave.
Shall your Lady live to be an honour to God, to be wise 1 Pet. 3. 3, 4, 5. 1 Tim. 2. 9, 10. Eph. 6. 4. Prov. 31. 1, 2, 3, Gal. 4. 19. 1 Tim. 1. 5, 6. Isa. 44. 3, 4. cap. 59. 21. Psal. 112. 1, 2. Eph. 1. 3. for Eternity, to be a pattern of piety, humiliy, modesty, &c. to others, to be a joyful mother of many children, and to bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord; Shall you both live to see Christ formed up in your Off-spring, and to see their souls flourish in grace and holiness, and God bestowing himself, as a portion, upon them; Shall you all round be blessed with all spiri∣ual blessings, in Heavenly places, in Christ; and shall you all round, be crowned with the highest glory, happiness and blessedness in the world to come; Shall you all live in the sense of divine love, and di in the sense of divine favour. Now, to the everlasting arms of divine pro∣tection, and to the constant influences of free, rich Gal. 5. 22, 23. and sovereign Grace and Mercy, he commends you all; who is,
Sir, 
