



Honoured and Beloved in our Lord Jesus,
THough I croud your Names together, yet I owe more than an Epistle to each of your Names; but the Lod having made you near and dear one to another, more wayes than one, I take the boldness to present this Treatise to you jointly. Here is no∣thing in this Book that relates to the Government of Church or State: The design of this Treatise is to shew what men are worth for Eternity, and how it is like to
 go with them in another World.Granctensis tells of a wo∣man that was so affected with souls miscarry∣ings, that she besought God to stop up the passage into hell with her soul and body, that none might have en∣trance.
O anima! Dei insignita imagi∣ne, desponsata fide, donata spiritu, &c. Bern.
O divine soul! invested with the image of God, espoused to him by faith, &c. There are none of the sons of men, but bear about with them precious and im∣mortal souls, that are more worth than ten thousand thou∣sand worlds; if the soul be safe all is safe, if that be well all is well, if that be lost all is lost. The first great work that men are to attend in this World, is the eternal safety and security of their souls; the next great work is to know, to be assured, that it shall go well with their souls for ever. And these are the main things that are aimed at in this Discourse. The soul is the better and more noble part of man; upon the soul the Image of God is most fairly stampt; the soul is first convert∣ed, and the soul shall be first and most glorified; the soul is that spiritual and immortal substance that is capable of union with God, and of communion with God, and of an eternal fruition of God. Plato though a Hea∣then, could say, That he thought the soul to be made all of eternity, and that the putting the soul into the body, was a sign of great wrath from God.
Each living corps must yield at last to death,
Pindarus.And every life must leese his vital breath.
The soul of man that only lives on high,
And is an image of Eternity.
The Romans, when their Emperors and great Ones died, and their bodies were buried, they caused an Eagle to mount on high, thereby to signifie the souls immortality and ascent. He gave good counsel, who said, Play not the Courtier with your soul; the Courtier doth all things late, he rises late, and dines late, and sups late, and repents late. A Scythian Captain having for a draught of water delivered up his City, cryed out, Quid perdidi, quid prodidi? What have I lost, what have I
 betrayed? So many at last will cry out, What have I lost, what have I betrayed? I have lost God, and Christ, and Heaven, and have betrayed my precious and immortal soul into the hands of divine Justice, and into the hands of Satan. Who these men are that will at last thus cry out, this Treatise does discover. I have read that there was a time when the Romans did wear jewels on their shoes: Most men in this day do worse, for they trample that matchless jewel of their souls under feet; and who these are, this Treatise does discover. One well ob∣serves,Chrysost. That whereas God hath given many other things double, two eyes to see with, two ears to hear with, two hands to work with, and two feet to walk with, to the intent that the failing of the one might be supplied by the other; but he hath given us but one soul, and if that be lost, hast thou (saith he) ano∣ther soul to give in recompence for it? Now, who those are whose souls are in a safe estate, and who those are whose souls are in danger of being lost for ever, this Treatise does plainly and fully discover.Psal. 15. Psal. 144.15. To describe to the life who that man is that is truly happy in this world, and that shall be blest for ever in the other world, is the work of this ensuing Treatise. The grace of the Covnant in us is a sure evidence of Gods entring into the Covenant of grace with us. To be in a gracious state is true happiness, but to know our selves to be in such a state, is the top of our happiness in this world. A man may have grace, and yet (for a time) not know it.1. Joh. 5.13. The child lives in the womb but does not know it. A man may be in a gracious state, and yet not see it;Psal. 77. Psal. 88. he may have a saving work of God upon his soul, and yet not discern it; he may have the root of the matter in him, and yet not be able to evidence it. Now to help such poor hearts
 to a right understanding of their spiritual condition, and that they may see and know what they are worth for ano∣ther world, and so go to their graves in joy and peace, I have sent this Treatise abroad into the world. Will you give me leave to say,
  First, Some men of name in their day have laid down such things for evidences or characters of grace, which being weighed in the ballance of the Sanctuary will be found too light. But here a mantle of love may be of more use than a lamp; and therefore,
  Secondly, Many, yea very many there are, whose graces are very weak, and much buried under the earth and ashes of many fears, doubts, scruples, strong passions, prevail∣ing corruptions, and diabolical suggestions, who would give as many worlds as there be men in the world (had they so many in their hands to give) to know that they have grace, and that their spiritual estate is good, and that they shall be happy for ever. Now, this Treatise is fitted up for the service of these poor hearts; for the weakest Chri∣stians may turn to many clear and well-bottomed eviden∣ces in this Treatise, and throw the Gantlet to Satan, and bid him prove if he can that ever any prophane per∣son or cunning hypocrite under heaven had such eviden∣ces, or such fair certificates to shew for heaven, which he has to shew. The generality of Christians are weak, they are rather Dwarfs than Gyants,1 Pet. 2.2, 3. 1 John 2.12, 13, 14. Isa. 40.11. they are rather bruised Reeds than tall Cedars, they are rather Babes than men, Lambs than sheep, &c. Now, for the service of their souls, I have been willing to send this Treatise in∣to the world; for this Treatise may speak to them when I may not, yea when I cannot, yea which is more, when I
 am not. Famous Mr. Dod would frequently say, He cared not where he was if he could but answer these two Questions. 1. Who am I? And, 2. What do I hear; am I a child of God, and am I in my way? But,
Thirdly, Some there are who are so excessively and  immoderately taken up with their Signs, Marks and Evi∣dences of grace, and of their gracious state, &c. that Christ is too much neglected,Where Christ was born, they were all so ta∣ken up with their guests, that he was not minded nor re∣garded; when others lay in stately rooms, he must be laid in a manger. Luke 2.7. and more rarely minded by them, their hearts don't run out so freely, so fully, so strongly, so frequently, so delightfully towards Christ as they should do, nor as they would do, if they were not too inordinately taken up with their Marks and Signs. Now for the rectifying of these mistakes, and the cure of these spiritual maladies, this Treatise is sent into the world; we may and ought to make a sober use of characters and evidences of our gracious estates, to support, comfort, and encourage us in our way to heaven, but still in subordi∣nation to Christ, and to the fresh and frequent exercises of faith upon the person, blood, and righteousness of Jesus. But O! how few Christians are there that are skil'd in this Work of Works, this Art of Arts, this Mystery of Mysteries. But,
Fourthly, Some there are who in these dayes are given up to Enthusiastical Fancies, strange Raptures, Reve∣lations,  and to the sad delusions of their own hearts, crying down with all their might all discoveries of Belie∣vers spiritual estates by Scripture Characters,2 Thes. 2.9, 10, 11. Marks and Signs of Sanctification, as carnal, and low, and all this under fair pretences of exalting Christ, and maintaining the honour of his Righteousness and Free∣grace, and of denying our selves, and our own righteous∣ness.
 Though sanctification be a branch of the Covenant of grace as well as Justification,Jer. 33.8. Ezek. 36.25, 26, 27. yet there are a sort of men in the world, that would not have Christians to re∣joyce in their sanctification, under a pretence of reflect∣ing dishonour upon their free justification by Christ. There are many who place all their Religion in opinions, in brain-sick notions, in airy speculations, in quaint dispu∣tations, in immediate Revelations, and in their warm zeal, for this or that form of worship. Now, that these may be recovered, and healed, and prevented from doing further mischief in the world, I have at this time put to a helping hand. But,
  Fifthly, No man can tell what is in the breasts, in the womb of divine Providence;The Brathman∣ni had their graves before their doors. The Sybarites at Banquets had a deaths head delivered from hand to hand by every guest at the Table. The Egyptians in the midst of their Feasts, used to have the Anatomy of a dead man set before them, as a memorandum to the guests of their mortality. The poor Hea∣then could say, that the whole life of man should be medi∣tatio mortis, a meditation of death. Dwell upon that, Deut. 32.29. Prov. 27, 1. no man can tell what a a day, a night, an hour, may bring forth. Who can sum up the many possible deaths that are still lurking in his own bowels, or the innumerable hosts of external dan∣gers which beleaguer him on every side? or how many invisible arrows flie about his ears continually? and how soon he may have his mortal wound given him by one of them, who can tell? Now, how sad would it be for a man to have a summons to appear before God in that other world, before his heart and life is changed, and his evi∣dences for heaven cleared up to him? The life of man is but a shadow, a post, a span, a vapour, a flower, &c. Though there is but one way to come into the world, yet there are many thousand wayes to be sent out of the world; and this should bespeak every Christian to have his evi∣dences for heaven alwayes ready and at hand, yea in his hand as well as in his heart, and then he will find it an easie thing to die. The King of terrors will then be the King of desires to him, and he will then travel to glory
 under a spirit of joy and triumph. We carry about in our bodies the matter of a thousand deaths, and may die a thousand several wayes several hours: As many senses, as many members, nay as many pores as there are in the body, so many windows there are for death to enter in at. Death needs not spend all his arrows upon us, a Worm, a Gnat, a Fly, a Hair, a stone of a Raisin, a ker∣nel of a Grape, the fall of a Horse, the stumble of a Foot, the prick of a Pin, the pairing of a Nail, the cutting one of a Corn; all these have been to others, and any of them may be to us, the means of our death within the space of a few dayes, nay of a few hours. Don't it therefore highly concern us to have our evidences for heaven cleared, sealed, shining and at hand. Naturalists tell us, That if a man sees a Cockatrice first, the Cockatrice dieth; but if the Cockatrice sees a man first, the man dies. Certainly, if we so see death first as to prepare for it, as to get our evidences for heaven ready, we shall kill it; but if death sees us first, and arrests us first before we are pre∣pared, and before our evidences for heaven are cleared, it will kill us everlastingly, it will kill us eternally. Time travelleth with God's decrees, and in their season brings them forth; but little doth any man know what is in the womb of to morrow, till God hath signified his will by the event. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou knowest not what a day may bring forth. That man that knows what himself intends to bring forth, does not know what the day will bring forth; the next day is not so neer the former in time, as it may be remote from it in the effects of it. Seneca could say,Seneca, Epist. 102. Nihil est miserius dubitatione venientium, quo evadunt; There is no∣thing more miserable than the doubtfulness of things to come, to what they will come. Providence in this life is
 the Map of changes,Ezek. 1.16. the picture of mutability. Who can sum up the strange circumferences, and rare circuits and labyrinths of providence. Providence is as a wheel in the midst of a wheel, whose motion, and work, and end in working, is not discerned by every common eye. Three dreadful judgments God hath lately visited us with, viz. Sword, Pestilence and Fire; but who repents? who smites upon his thigh?Isa 1.16, 17. Psal. 106.23. who finds out the plague of his own heart? who sayes, what have I done? who ceases from doing evil? who learns to do well? who turns to the most High? who layes hold on everlasting strength? who makes peace with God? who throws himself into the gap? &c. Are not multitudes grown much worse after judgments than they were before? Don't they bid higher defiance to heaven than ever? and therefore, who can tell what further controversie God may have with such a people, especially considering that terrible Scripture, Levit. 26.14. to the 34. vers. with scores of others that sound that way. Were our forefathers alive, how sadly would they blush to see such a horrid degenerate po∣sterity as is to be found in the midst of us? How is our forefathers hospitality converted into riot and luxury, their frugality into pride and prodigality, their simpli∣city into subtilty, their sincerity into hypocrisie, their charity into cruelty, their chastity into chambering and wantonness, their sobriety into drunkenness, their plain-dealing into dissembling, and their works of compassion into works of oppression, &c. And may we not fear, that even for these things God may once more visit us. The Nations are angry, and we are low in their eyes; our enemies are not asleep abroad, and are not we too secure at home? and what further conclusions may be in the world, who can divine? I point at these things only to
 provoke all those into whose hands this Treatise may fall, to make sure work for another world, to make sure their evidences for heaven, and to keep their evidences for life and glory alwayes sparkling and shining, and then I am sure the worst of calamities, the sorest of judg∣ments, shall but translate them from earth to heaven, from a wilderness to a paradise, from misery to glory, & from mixt and mutable enjoyments, to the pure & ever∣lasting enjoyments of God, Christ, the Angels and the spirits of just men made perfect, Heb. 12, 22, 23, 24. But,
Sixthly and lastly, In this Treatise, as in a Glass,  all sorts of profane persons, and all sorts of self-flat∣terers, and all sorts of hypocrites may see, 1. That their present state and condition is not so safe, nor yet so happy as they judge it to be. Again, in this Treatise, as in a Glass, all sorts of profane persons, and all sorts of self-flatterers, and all sorts of hypocrites may see, 2. The happy and blessed state of the people of God, against whom their spirits rise and swell, &c. Again, in this Treatise, as in a Glass, all sorts of profane persons, and all sorts of self-flatterers, and all sorts of Hypo∣crites may see, 3. What those things are that they need, and that they ought to beg of God. Again, in this Treatise, as in a Glass, all sorts of profane persons, and all sorts of self-flatterers, and all sorts of hypocrites may see, 4. What those things are, without which they can neither be happy here nor hereafter. Now, were there no other Reasons for my sending forth this Trea∣tise into the world, this alone might justifie me.
But Honoured and Beloved, before I close up this Epistle, give me leave to say, That there are two sorts
 of men that my self, and all the world, are bound, 1. Highly to prize. 2. Cordially to love. And, 3. Great∣ly to honour above all other men in the world, and they are these: First, men of publick spirits. Secondly, men of charitable spirits, men of merciful spirits, men of tender and compassionate spirits.
  First, Men of publick spirits, my self and all others are bound, 1. Highly to prize. 2. Cordially to love. And, 3. Greatly to honour above all other men in the world, and that,
  First, Because a publick spirited man is a common good, a common blessing; all in the Family, all in the Court, all in the City, all in the Countrey, fare the better for that Christians sake that is of a publick spirit. All in Laban's family did fare the better for Jacob's sake;Gen. 30.27. & 19.21, 22, 23, 24. & 41. &c. and all in the City of Zoar did fare the better for Lot's sake, and all Pharoah's Court, and the whole Countrey of Egypt did fare the better for Joseph's sake. Sodom was safe whilst Lot was in it; Eliah was a man of a publick spirit,2 King. 2.12. and he was the chariots and horsemen of Israel; Moses was a man of a publick spirit, and he often di∣verted ruining judgments from falling upon Israel.Psal. 106.23. Num. 16.46.49. Phineas was a man of a publick spirit, and he takes up his Censer and stands between the living and the dead,Though I do not, I dare not say, that every publick spirit is a gracious spirit, yet this I must say, that every gracious spirit is a pub∣lick spirit. and the Plague was stayed. Men of publick spirits are publick mercies, publick blessings; a man of a publick spirit is () a publick, diffusive blessing in the place where he lives; men of publick spirits are the true Atlasses both of Church and State, they are the Pillars on whom all do rest, the Props on whom all do lean; do but overturn these Pillars, and all will fall about
 your ears, as the house did about the Philistines when Sampson shook it; wrack but these, and Kingdoms, and Commonwealths shall be quickly wrackt them∣selves. When Metellus heard of the death of Scipio Africanus a man of a publick spirit, he ran out into the Market-place and cryed out, O Citizens, come forth and consult what is to be done, for the walls of your City are fallen down. But,
Secondly, Because publick spirited Christians are  most like to Christ, and to the choicest and most excel∣lent Saints.John 17. Heb. 2. Isa. 63.3. Rom. 8.30, 31, 32, 33. Heb. 7.25. John 14.1, 2, 3, 4. Acts 10.38. Phil. 2.4, 5. Christ made himself poor to make others rich, but men of narrow souls make others poor to make themselves rich. 1 Cor. 6.8. 2 Cor. 8.9. Christ left his Fathers bosom for a publick good, he assumed our nature for a publick good, he trod the wine-press of his Fathers wath for a publick good, he died for a publick good, and he rose for a publick good, he ascended to heaven for a publick good, and he conti∣nues in heaven for a publick good; when he was in this world he went up and down doing good, he healed o∣thers but was hurt himself, he fed and filled others but was hungry himself; Christ was all for a publick good. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others. Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus. Though self be a great stickler, yet he that will write after Christs Copy, must neglect himself to serve others. That Christian acts most like Christ, who prefers the publick interest before his own private interest. The Stars have their bright∣ness not for themselves, but for the use of others; and the Sun hath her shining light, but not for her self, but for others. In the natural body every member is diffu∣sive, the eye conveys the light, the head spirits the liver, blood, &c. And why should it not be so in the politick body also? And as Christ, so Moses was a man of a
 publick spirit, when God made a very fair profer to him, that he would make him a great Nation,Exod. 32.10, 11, 12. So Num. 14 4, 10, 13, 14. if he would but stand Neuter till he had revenged himself upon a rebellious people; but Moses had no mind to preser∣ment upon those terms, he preferr'd the publick good before his own honour, profit and advancement, and therefore follows God closs, and never gives over plead∣ing for them till he had procured their pardon,Ver. 13.14. and turned away the wrath of God from them. So Joshua was a man of a publick spirit.Josh. 19.49. When they had made an end of dividing the Land for inheritance by their coast, the children of Israel gave an inheritance to Joshua the son of Nun among them. Joshua might have served himself first, and he might have taken as large an Inheritance as he had pleased, but he preferr'd the good of the people before his own; he who had di∣vided the Land to others, was himself contented with very mean preferment, for his inheritance was among the barren Mountains,Hierom. as some observe. So Jehoiada was a man of a publick spirit;2 Chron. 24.16 you read that they buried him in the City of David among the Kings, because he had done good in Israel, both towards God and towards his house. Men of publick spirits shall be honoured both living and dying.Neh. 5.14, 15. So Nehemiah was a man of a brave publick spirit, he holds on twelve years together in pub∣lick work upon his own cost and charge.Esther 4.16. So Esther was one of a publick spirit, and therefore she takes her life in her hand, and goes in to the King with an If I perish, I perish. And so Mordecai was a man of a publick spi∣rit. Mordecai the Jew was next unto King Ahashuerus, and great among the Jews,Esth. 10.3. and arcepted of the multitude of his brethren, seeking the wealth of his people, and speaking peace to all his seed. Mordecai was more mind∣ful
 and careful of his peoples peace, prosperity and welfare, than he was of his own concernments. And so Dvid was a man of a publick spirit, for after he had served his own generation he fell asleep.Acts 13.36. The spirit of the Lord has put this upon record for Davids honour and our imitation. Davids soul did not live in a narrow Bowling-alley, he was not a man of so poor, low and narrow a spirit, as to make himself the center of his designs and actions. David was a man of a generous, noble spirit, the publick good lay nearest his heart, and to serve his generation he was willing to spend and be spent. The publick spirited man of all men is most like to Christ, and to those Worthies who were once glo∣rious on earth, and are now triumphing in heaven. The Apostle speaks of some who are lovers of themselves, 2 Tim. 3.2. and who are seekers of themselves, Phil. 2.21. and who are minders of themselves, Phil. 3.19. They mind earthly things. Of all these we may say as God speaks of Israel, Israel is an empty vine,Hos. 10.1. he brings forth fruit unto himself; yea of all these we may say, that light is not more contrary to darkness, heaven to hell, glory to shame, than these are contrary to Christ, and to those precious servants of his who are crown'd and chronicled in the blessed Scriptures for their publick spi∣ritedness and publick usefulness in the world. But,
Thirdly, Men of publick spirits are rare men, excel∣lent  men, of all men they most resemble God,Mat. 5.45. Vir bonus ma∣gis aliis prodest quam sibi. who does good to all; there are none so excellent and truly ho∣nourable as these. All the Instances cited to make good the second particular evidences this, to which I may add that of Daniel, who was a man of a publick spirit, and of that excellent spirit, as that he carried the Bell
 from all the Presidents and Princes of Darius his Court. Dan. 6.3. Then this Daniel was preferred a∣bove the Presidents and Princes, because an excellent spirit was in him, and the King thought to set him over the whole Realm. I might give you many other Instances from the Patriarchs and Apostles, but what need that, when blind nature speaks so loud in the case. Men of publick spirits have been very excellent and honourable in the very eyes of all the Heathen. Take a few Instances among the many hundreds that might be produced. M. Attilius Regulus was a man of that publick spirit,In Austins ac∣count he was the gallantest of all the old Romans. that he valued neither State nor Life to serve his Countrey and preserve his own honour; he got very much for his Countrey, but little for himself, seven Acres of Land being all that ever he had; he was a man highly honoured among the Romans.
Titus Vespasian was a man of a publick spirit, he governed so sweetly, moderately and prudently, that he was generally termed Delitiae humani generis, the de∣light of mankind; he was greatly honoured whilst he lived, and when he died the people wept so bitterly for him, as if they had been resolved to have wept out their yes.
Curius Dentalus was a man of a publick spirit, and very victorious; when his Countrey was setled, he was found at dinner feeding hard on a few parched Pease, when the Ambassadors were sent to tender him a great sum of gold, which he refused, saying, He had rather be at his pease, while they whom he ruled over had the gold, than he to have the gold and they the Pease When some unworthy persons once accused him for keep∣ing
 back somewhat from the publick, he brought forth a wooden platter, and did swear, That it was all he had reserved to himself of the spoyls. He was had in great honour and reputation among the people.
That Pilot dies nobly (saith Seneca) who perish∣eth in the storm with the Helm in his hand.
Aristides was a man of a publick spirit; after the overthrow of the Persians, when there was a Mass of treasure, gold, silver, and rich apparel, he would not touch it, nor take so much as one farthing of it to himself, he was in high esteem among the people.
Tully in his Book of Scipio's dream, brings in a dead Father (now in heaven as he supposed) encouraging his son to do service for his Countrey (wherein himself had given him a most noble and notable example) upon a very high consideration, viz. There is a most sure and certain place in heaven for every man that shall procure the weal of his Countrey, either by freeing it from peril, or increasing the happiness of it any way. To hear a Gen∣tile tell of heaven, as of a thing certain; to hear him tell of certain places provided there for those that should do vertuously, to have the service of ones Countrey pressed on his soul with so celestial an argument, what matter of wonder and admiration is it!
Another speaking of men of publick spirits, saith, Such ennobled spirits, they are the dear off-spring,Cicero. the delight and care of God; a divine race it is, from the heavens they come down to us, and to the hea∣vens again when ever they take their leaves of us, shall they triumphantly return.

A Cataline sayes the Satyrist) a trouble of man∣kind grows as the weed,Jur. almost every where; but a Bru∣tus, a worthy Patriot, that bears the welfare of others, the true prosperity of his native Land upon his heart, and sets his eyes perpetually thereon for good; such an one is a rare jewel, worthy of all honour and embraces where ever he is found. Men of publick spirits of all men,1 Sam. 2.30. do most exalt the Lord, and honour the Lord, and therefore the Lord first or last will most exalt them and honour them. In all the Ages of the world, and in all the Nations of the world, men of most publick spirits have been best beloved, and most highly honoured. A man of a narrow spirit is like the Hedge-hog, that ne∣ver goes abroad but to gather what he can for himself, who ever suffer by it; but a man of a publick spirit is like the Pellican that draws out her own blood for the good of others, and therefore the light of nature as well as the Law of grace, will lead men by the hand to ho∣nour such.
  Fourthly, Men of publick spirits do most and best answer to one of the noblest and highest ends of their creation.Doth the Bee gather honey for it self? Doth the Sheep yield wool for it self? Doth not all creatures serve the com∣munity. Non nobis solum na∣ti, said the Heathen. By the Law of creation every man is bound to serve the publick, to serve his generation. A nar∣row, a private spirited man is a shame to his Creation, because he walks so contrary to the great intendment of God in it. 'Tis a base and unworthy spirit, for a man to make himself the Center of all his actions. The ve∣ry Heathen man could say, That a mans Countrey and his Friends, and others, challenge a great part of him. That man sins against the very Law of his being, who is swallowed up in his own, private interests. Men of publick spirits should not bear the sword of justice
 in vain, for by the Law of creation they are bound so to handle it as to be a terror to evil doers,Rom. 13.3, 4 and a praise to them that do well. 'Tis cruelty to the good to spare the bad, 'tis wrong to the Sheep to let the Wolves alone, 'tis the death of the Lambs to spare the Lions. If you will pity Cataline (sayes one) pity Rome much more; let the whole have a share in your pity rather than a part. (Pereat unus magis quam unitas) better have one inju∣rious person sit mourning, than a whole Nation lan∣guishing, &c. Men of publick spirits should be for the ease of all, and the peace of all, and the comfort of all, and the encouragement of all, and the safety of all. But this Age is full of Droans and Cyphers, and of spiritless, lifeless men, who look at nothing, who design nothing, who aim at nothing, and who endeavour no∣thing, but how to raise themselves, and greaten them∣selves, and inrich themselves, and build up themselves, though it be upon others ruinnes. How many are there who are so swallowed up in their own interests and private concernments, that Gallio-like, they care not whether the publick sink or swim.Acts 18.7. These put me in mind of Jo∣thams Parable.Judg. 9.8, 9, 10, 11, &c. The Trees went forth to anoint a King over them. They go to the Olive, to the Fig-tree, and to the Vine; but shall I leave my fatness, saith the Olive? shall I leave my sweetness, saith the Fig-tree? and shall I leave my wine, saith the Vine, and go up and down for other Trees? This is the very temper, spirit and carriage of many in our day: If you go to them and desire them to lay out themselves for the publick good. What say some, shall we leave our ease, our pleasure, our profits? And say others, Shall we run this and that hazard? Shall we lose such and such friends, and create to our selves such and such enemies, to serve other men,
 to save other men, to advantage other men? we cannot do it, we will never do it. Learned Tully was a zealous Patriot and lover of his Countrey; he wished two wishes (though he never saw either of them effected) one was, That he might see Rome setled in its just liberties; and the other was. That he might see every mans estate poportionable to his affection and love to the publick. Deubtless if Tullies wish might take place in our times, the purses of many would be more empty, and the publick Coffers would be more full. But,
  Fifthly, Of all men on earth, there are none that have such a stock of prayers going for them as men of publick spirits. Men of publick spirits are not only most highly prized, and cordially loved, and greatly honour∣ed, but they are also most upon the hearts of all sober and serious Christians, when they are in the Mount with God. The lives of such are most desirable, and the deaths of such will be most lamented, who make it their business to serve their generation.2 Chron. 21.20 Men of publick spirits shall never die as Jehoram did, undesired and unlamented. Men of publick spirits lye most open to snares, tempta∣tions, and oppositions, &c. This all sober Christians well understand, and therefore they can't but pray hard for such: The names, the lives, the liberties, the estates, and all the concernments of men of publick spirits alwayes lye nearest their hearts, who lye neerest to the heart of Christ. Men of the greatest name, and of the greatest renown, and that have had the greatest stock of prayers going for them all the world over, have been men of publick spirits. But,
  Sixthly and lastly, When Christians of publick spirits
 come to dye, their publick spiritedness and general use∣fulness will be no small comfort and cordial to them. Nehemiah was a man of a publick spirit, and accord∣ingly he pleads it with God. Think upon me,Neh. 5. ult. See Chap. 13.22. O my God for good, according to all that I have done for this people. This was that which sweetned death to Hezekiah, I beseech thee, O Lord, to remember now, how I have walked before thee in truth,2 King. 20.3. Acts 13.36. and with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. And when David had served his generation, he fell asleep. Sleep is not more welcom and sweet to a labouring man, than death is to him who has made it his business, his work sincerely and faithfully to serve his generation. Such Magistrates,2 Tim. 4.7, 8, 9. John 17. Ministers and Christi∣ans who have made it their business according to their dif∣ferent measures faithfully to serve their generation, have found the King of terrors to be but the King of desires to them; when death to men of narrow, selfish spirits, hath been like the hand-writing upon the wall,Dan. 5.5, 6. very ter∣rible. Many score Instances might be produced out of Hi∣story to evidence this. Take one for all. Henry Beau∣ford that rich and wretched Cardinal, Bishop of Wn∣chester, and Chancellour of England (a man swallowed up in self interest) in the Reign of Henry the Sixth, when he perceived that he must dye,Acts and Mon. fol. 925. and that there was no remedy, O! how terrible was death to him? and, O! how did he murmur, and fret, and vex at death, that his riches could not reprieve him till a further time? For, saith he, wherefore should I die being so rich; if the whole Realm would save my life, I am able either by policy to get it, or by riches to buy it. Fie upon death (saith he) will not death be hired? will money do nothing? I might instance in men of a higher rank,
 but then I should exceed the bounds of an Epistle.
The second sort of men, that my self and all others are bound. 1. Highly to prize. 2. Cordially to love. And 3. Greatly to honour: Are men of charitable spi∣rits, men of merciful spirits, men of tender and compas∣sionate spirits. The Hebrew word for godly  signifies merciful, to note that the godly man is the merciful man, and the merciful man is the godly man. Loving kindness is an ingredient unto godliness. The godly man is frequently called Chasid, gracious or merciful; it notes one that hath obtained mercy, goodness, grace, piety and benignity from the Lord, and that is pious, kind,The Italian form of beg∣ging is, Do good to your selves. gracious and merciful to others. Though charity, bounty, is the most compendious way to plenty, and giving to getting, and scattering to encreasing, and layings out to layings up, Prov. 11.24. There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth. Ver. 25. The liberal soul shall be made fat, and he that watereth shall be watered also himself: Yet how few in our dayes do ho∣nour the Lord with their substance?Prov. 3.9. Mic. 4.13. how few look a this as a duty, to consecrate any part of their gain unto the Lord, or of their substance to the Lord of the whole earth? Most men now carry it as if God himself had last his propriety, and as if there were no rent-penny due to his poor. But yet some there are, who have liberal hearts and open hands;Deut. 15.11. some there are, who do open their hands wide to the poor and needy. Now, here give me leave to say,Mat. 25. Prov. 31.8, 9. That these, 1. Discharge their consciences in the duty of charity, 2. These rightly improve the ta∣lents of mercy, with which they are intrusted. 3. These treasure up a stock of prayers,Job 29.13. 2 Tim. 1.16. both for themselves and theirs; the blessing and the prayers of them that were ready to perish will come upon them and theirs. 4. These
 evidence the liveliness of their faith, James 2.17. Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead being alone. Ver. 18. Yea, a man may say thou hast faith, and I have works; shew me thy faith without thy works, and I will shew thee my faith by my works. Ver. 26. For as the body without the spirit is dead, so faith without works is dead also 5. These take the surest way, the readiest course to assure their own souls of Gods eternal favours and mercies to them, 1 Tim. 6.17. Charge them that be rich in this world. Ver. 18. That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate. Ver. 19.Aeterna vitae, vera vlta. Aug. Lay∣ing up in store for themselves a good foundation a∣gainst the time to come, that they may lay hold on eternal life. Charitable Christians are as wife Merchants, happy Usurers, parting with that which they cannot keep, that they may gain that which they cannot lose. 6. These take the surest way to draw down more outward mercies upon themselves. The fountain is not diminished,Pedagog — 3. c. 7 Clemens, Alex. but augmented by giving water to the thirsty. The widows oyl did increase by running; we do not lose, but in∣crease our mercies by imparting of them for God's ho∣nour, and the comfort and benefit of others.Luk. 6.38. Give (saith Christ) and it shall be given to you, good measure, pressed down, and shaken together, and running over, shall men give into your bosom. The Jews more large and loose garments, so that they could bear away much in their bosoms. Hence this expression, into your bosom. The meaning is, That the Lord will largely reward the beneficence of his people; yea, that he will so reward them, that they shall perceive that they are rewarded. Ho∣nour the Lord with thy substance,Prov. 3.9, 10. so shall thy Barns be filled with plenty, and thy presses shall burst out
 with new wine. God will certainly bless their substance, who honour him with their substance. The Jews at this day,Godw Heb. ntiq. 27.7. though they are not in their own Countrey, and though they have not a Levitical Priesthood, yet those who will be reputed Religious amongst them do distribute the tenth of their increase to the poor,The safest chest is the poor mans Box. God will never for∣get your chari∣ty to his, Heb. 6.10.
Cicero could say, that to be rich is not to possess much, but to use much
And Seneca could rebuke them that so studied to en∣crease their wealth, that they forget to use it. being perswaded that God doth bless their increase the more; for they have among them a very elegant Proverb to that purpose; De∣cima ut dives fias, Pay thy tythes that thou mayest be rich. The poor mans hand is Christs Treasury, and he shall not lose his reward that casts his mites into that Treasury. It is fabled of Midas, that what ever he touched he turned it into gold. But this is most sure, that whatever the hand of charity toucheth, it turneth it into gld; be it but a cup of cold water, nay into heaven it self, Mat. 10.42. And whosoever shall give to drink, un∣to one of these little ones, a cup of cold water only, in the name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward. Cold water having not fuel to heat it, cold water which cost not the charge of fire to warm it. A Sea of pleasures, a heaven of bles∣sings attends men of charitable minds, though their charity can extend no further than to a cup of cold wa∣ter; for God measures mens deeds by their minds, and not their minds by their deeds. The Kenites in Sauls time, that were born many Ages after Jethro's death received life from his dust, and favour from his hospita∣lity, nay, the very Egyptians, for harbouring, and at first dealing kindly with the Israelites, though without any re∣spect to their righteousness, were preserved by Joseph in that sore famine, and kindly dealt with ever after by Gods special command. I have read a story of one Eva∣gi a rich man, who lying upon his death-bed, and be∣ing
 importuned by Sinesius, a pious Bishop, to give some∣thing to charitable uses, he yielded at last to give three hundred pounds, but first took bond of the Bishop that it should be repaid him in another world; but before he had been one day dead, he is said to have appeared to the Bi∣shop delivering in the bond cancelled, as thereby acknow∣ledging, that what was promised was made good. Whe∣ther the Relation be fabulous or not, I shall not now stand to determine; but this is certain, that all acts of charity shall be certainly and signatly rewarded. Several Writers observe, that the ground is most barren nearest the golden Mines; and experience tells us, that many who are enriched with fair estates, are most barren in good works, but this will be bitterness in the end. He that shall consult two Scriptures (among many others) will conclude, that he that hath a withered hand has no honest heart, 2 Chron. 31.10. 1 John 3.17. The wealth that such men have, is but as Aristotle calls it,Arist. Rhetor. l. 2. c. 6. Foelix amen∣tia, a happy madness, because they are so taken up with their wealth, that they neither know what they are, nor what they do. Josephus writing of the waters of Egypt, saith, That they were blood in the hands of an Aegyp∣tian, but water in the hand of an Israelite. Wealth in the hand of a worldling, is like blood in the hand which is good for nothing;Josephus. but wealth in the hand of a chari∣table Christian is like water in the hand, which may be of use both to a mans self and others. By what has been said, there is nothing more evident than this, viz. That men of publick spirits, and men of charitable spirits, of all men on earth, are, 1. To be most highly prized. 2. Most cordially loved. And 3. Most greatly honoured, &c.
Gentlemen, those that shall read what I have writ in this Epistle, concerning publick spiritedness and chari∣tableness,
 and know you well, they know how to make the Application without any further direction from me. Sir John, I must crave leave to say, that it is and will be your honour and comfort, both in life and death, and in the day of your account, that in all the great Places, Offices and Employments unto which divine Providence has called you for divers years together, you have laid out your time, your strength, your estate for the publick good; when others have been serving themselves upon the pub∣lick, you have been a serving of the publick. Sir, 'tis your great mercy and happiness, that you can stand forth and say; as once Samuel did, Behold, here I am, wit∣ness against me,1 Sam. 12.3. whose Ox have I taken? or whose Ass have I taken? or whom have I defrauded? whom have I oppressed? or of whose hand have I re∣ceived any bribe to blind mine eyes therewith? Your prudence and moderation before your Mayoralty, and in it (when you had many a narrow bridge to go over) and after it, to this day will never be forgotten by all sober Citizens. Sir, the French History tells us, that when an old Courtier would needs depart from the Court, and retire himself to a private life, the King desired him to leave his advice in some general Rules, about the Go∣vernment of his Kingdom: Upon this motion of the King, the old Courtier took a sheet of white paper, and writ upon the top of the leaf Moderation, and in the middle of the leaf Moderation, and at the bottom of the leaf Moderation, intimating to the King, that the only way to keep his Kingdom in Peace and Prosperity, was to manage his Government throughout with a spirit of Moderation. When Vespasian asked Apollonius what was the cause of Nero's ruin; he answered, That Nero could tune the Harp well, but in Government he
 did alwayes wind up the strings too high, or let them down too low. Both of your staying in London in the time of the last great Plague, when death peep'd in at every win∣dow, and when most Magistrates, Ministers and Peo∣ple were fled from their Habitations (the terror of the Lord and of his judgments being very great in that day, upon all sorts and ranks of men) and that chiefly, main∣ly (if not only) upon the account of publick service, and that nothing might be wanting on your side, to preserve poor creatures from perishing. The old Romans for les∣ser services than you did in these dismal dayes, have set up many a statue of brass; but the Lord is faithful, and will not forget to reward your work, your great work, your hazardous work, and that matchless love and bowels that you shew'd to very many that were impoverished for want of Trade, and to very many that lay in a sick, languish∣ing and dying condition: How free, how full, how sea∣sonable, how sutable, how impartial, how constant, and well regulated your charity then was, and since hath been, is very well known to God above, and to some faithful friends still alive; but all will out in the great day.Mat. 25. I know you don't love that your left hand should know what your right hand doth,Chap. 6.3. and therefore I shall not provoke you by sounding a Trumpet.Ezek. 1.8. & 10.8. The Angels have their hands under their wings, they do much good, and yet make no noise. There are some in the world that are like to them; the Violet grows low and covers it self with its own leaves, and yet of all flowers yields the most fragrant smell to others. There are some charitable Christians that resemble this sweet flower.
Gentlemen and Ladies, your respects and undeserved favours, that have been many wayes manifested unto
 me, hath emboldned me to Dedicate and present to you this Treatise as a real Testimony of my unfeigned love, service, gratitude and desires to promote the inter∣nal and eternal welfare of all your precious and immor∣tal souls: And wherein could I (or any body else) be more truly serviceable to you than in endeavouring to pro∣mote your assurance of eternal salvation, which is the grand Design and Project of this Book.1 Pet. 5.1. Now, the God of all grace fill all your hearts with all the fruits of righ∣teousness and holiness,Gal. 5.22, 23. unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding,Heb. 10.22. and of faith and hope in this Life, and at last crown you all (and all yours) with ineffable glory in the life to come. To the everlasting arms of his protection, and to the perpetual influences of his grace and mercy in Christ, he commends you all, who is to you all

