


MAY it please your Grace,
The Catholic Religion has been twice char∣ged with foul crimes and errors, before the
 supream Tribunal of our Nation, in two dis∣tinct books, presented by my Antagonist to his Excellency the Earle of Essex; It's just I put in my answer before the same Tribunal, which I humbly present to your Grace: and tho I may not expect a favorable doom for the cause I defend, from so vigorous a stickler of the Church of England, as your Grace has in all occasions appeared; yet I may expect a check of the affront cast by my Adversarie vpon your noble Predecessor the Earle of Essex, and vpon your Grac's own Person; I accused him of impiety in having passed his sentence of eternal damnation against his Mecoenas, the Earle of Essex's Ancestors, who almost all dyed in the Roman Catholic Religion, in which, he saies, ther's no Salvation: in his Reply he denies that execrable Position to have dropt from his pen; but in the 2. Chap. of this Treatise I prove evidently it did, and that it follows vnauoidably out of his Prin∣ciples; does not the Author of such a Position deserve your Grac's frown? And tho your generous contempt of the Envious of your glory, may forgiue him the injury he does to your own Person; but, may it please your Grace, you will permit vs to be deeply concern'd for the wrong of so eminent a person, who, by the general acclamation of our Realm, is the
 Darling of the Commons, the Ornament of our Peers, the Cabinet of our Soveraign, the Oracle of the State, and so prime a Pillar of the Protestant Church (worthie to be of a better.) One of the glories of your most illustrious Family, May it please your Grace, is to haue had in it a Saint of so incomparable a courage in the defence of Gods cause; of so vndaunted a constancy in persecutions and adversities, as S. Thomas Arch Bshop of Canterbury, by surnam Becket; in whose kinred the Butlers of Ireland did euer yet religiously glorie; the world revered him as a most renowned Saint, which name he pur∣chas'd with the price of his blood; My Adver∣sary blots your Grac's Scutchon, by effacing out of your family this glorious Saint; he was he saies, no Real Saint; he was but only a Titular one; your Saints, saies he, are but Titular Saints, who purchas'd their Titles by public authority, as Earles and Lords do theirs pag. 228.
Nor is this the only injury he does your Grace; the world was persuaded your Reli∣gion was Protestancy, and nothing els but Protestancy; and I believe your Grace would esteem it an affront, to say your Reli∣gion is Quakerie or Presbitery; but Dr. Sall is so kind to your Grace, as to giue it you
 in print; for he prefixes this Title to his 12. Chap. against N. N. The large extent of Christian Religion professed in the Church of England; and there runs vpon all the Sects of the world, Lutheranism, Presbitery, Hugonotism, &c. and saies all are the Christian Religion professed in the Church of England. Your Grac's Religion is the Christian Religion of the Church of Eng∣land; and the Christian Religion professed in the Church of England, saies our Doctor, is Presbitery, Quakerie Lutheranism and all other Sects; consider, may it please your Grace what a Religion my Adversary gives you, One and the Same Religion with the Quakers, Seekers, Mukhultonians. No Protestant in England will deny he is In, and Of a Fallible Church; but no Protestant in England, I believe, will, acknowledge he is of a Fals Church, actually plung'd in hor∣rid errors; but if the Religion of the Church of England be one and the same with all those Christian Sects, which profess contradic∣torily opposit Tenets, it must be a fals Church, and deeply plung'd in innumerable errors.
May it please your grace, if the Protes∣tant Church be such as my Adversary setts it foorth, I wish you out of it with all my soul; and because I know its not much better, what
 euer dress, he or any other may give it, Par∣don me, May it please your Grace, that without any If or And I wish you in that which is the only true and Saving Church; that as your Grace is the Best of subjects, you may be the best of Christians, and for an earthly Transitorie Dukedom, which coms short to your vnparallell'd Merits, you may enjoy an euerlasting Diadem, which is the constant Prayer of,

