


Wise Senators and Faithful Patriots,
GOD having promised to make all things New,
is now performing of it: Empire and the Go∣spel
have finished their Voyage, and are now
about to return from whence they first set out.
You have many things of great moment be∣fore
You, but that of Time justly challenges a place amongst
the first. The Sands of a New Aera are now running, the
last Glass of Time being turned: Empire has made us a
Visit, and will stay some Time with us, and we shall mea∣sure
out Law and Time to other Nations. We have long gone
by a corrupt Reckoning, but all things are to become New;
Time and our Coin seem to be joynt Petitioners and beg to
be Regulated together, that one may give Testimony to
the other? The Regulation is not only very Honourable
and Profitable, but very Feasible; The Royal Society would
quickly perform it; And when is it more suitable, than
when a New Empire Commences? This Noble Work
would perpetuate your Memory till Time should be no lon∣ger.
It would also be very Profitable, for there might be
put what Price on the New Ephemeris You pleased; and

every Family throughout the Kingdom being obli∣ged
to take one, a vast Sum would be raised for the Kings
Use. To say it would be very Troublesome, is no Argu∣ment;
an Old House was never pull'd down without trou∣ble
and dust: When things are made New, and the House
new Built, all the labour and trouble is compensated. Cae∣sar
thought it worth his while to Correct it, and he took
not his Aim amiss, for it has been a Faithful Register of his
Fame: I could wish the King a Partner in the same Repu∣tation.
But whether the present Conjuncture will admit
of it or no, I can assure you it will not be long before it be
done: For there is a New Calendar Commenced in Hea∣ven:
Christs Reign is actually Commenced. The Head
of the Image was in the East, the Feet are in the West;
and Here the Stone first falls upon them; and this is the
Reason of all our present Confusions; which will continue
till all the old Building is pulled down. Satan put his Metal
four times in the Fire, and 'tis yet but a Lump of Dross: But
now the Son of God takes the work in hand, and has ap∣pointed
You his chief Workmen. That He would give
You the Spirit of Understanding to go thorow Your pre∣sent
Undertakings, is the Prayer of

