

TO My Worthy and Esteemed FRIENDS, Mrs. Elizabeth Drinkwater. Mrs. Susan Bell. Mrs. Hannah Bourne. Mrs. Ma∣ry Taylor. Mrs. Anne White. Mrs. Elizabeth Juxon. Mrs. Rebecah Juxon. Mrs. Mary Baxter. Mrs. Deborah Shepherd. Mrs. Anne Clemons. Mrs. Mary Sionior. Mrs. Anne Snell. Mrs. Anne Ellis. Mrs. Margaret Cutlèr. Mrs. Patience Cartwrigh. Mrs. Mary Shaw. Mrs. Phillip Garret. Mrs. Margaret Winfield. Mrs. Hannah Pippet. Mrs. Mary Chanlor. Mrs. Mary Scot. Mrs. Katherine Ʋsher. with their Husbands. &c. All Happiness both here, and hereafter:
Honoured and Beloved in our Dear Lord Jesus.
I HAVE crowded your names to∣gether in one Epistle, not from any want of re∣spect unto you, for I owe to each of you more
 than an Epistle; nor because you are in one particular Fel∣lowship, for so you are not; but partly because the Lord hath made you one with him∣self, in the Son of his love; and partly because the Lord at se∣veral times, and in several wayes hath exercised you all in the Furnace of Affliction; and partly because this Epistle may reach you all, and speak to you all, when I cannot, or when I may not, or which is more, when I am not.
Dear Friends, many and great have been the breaches that the Lord hath made upon your persons, upon your neer and dear Relations, and upon your sweetest comforts and contentments: There is not one of you but may truly say with Job, He breaketh me with breach upon breach, Job. 16.
 14. God hath chastised you all round with various Rods; and O that the Lord would help you all to hear the Rod, and him who hath appointed it.
Now that you may, give me leave a little to open and apply to your particulars that
Mic. 6. 9.
The Lords voyce cryeth unto the City, and the man of wisdom shall hear thy Name: Hear ye the Rod, and who hath ap∣pointed it.
The matter that I shall of∣fer to your consideration from this Scripture, will be not on∣ly of special concernment to your selves, but also of high concernment to all sorts and ranks of men and women, in this sad Day, when the Sword
 devours on the one hand, & the Pestilence rageth on the other hand.
The Lords voice cryeth unto the City. Tremelius turns it thus, The voice of the Lord doth preach unto this City (for what the matter is, thy Name seeth) Hear ye the Rod, &c. This City, viz. Jerusalem, and so consequently to all the Is∣raelites; for in this City all Offices and duties of godli∣ness and humanity were more religiously performed, or to be performed, than in any o∣ther place, because of the pre∣sence and majesty of God that was amongst them: But thy Majesty seeth what wickedness is practised amongst them, as is evident in the Verses follow∣ing.
Cryeth, The word is from Kara, which signifies, First,
 To Cry aloud, or, to make a noise, Isa. 58. 1. Cry aloud, there is Kara: The word sig∣nifies to Cry so loud, as that all may hear, that have ears to hear. Secondly, The word signifies, Openly to proclaim, preach, or publish a thing, Exod. 33. 19. I will Proclaim the Name of the Lord before thee: Here is the word Kara. Third∣ly, The word signifies, To Cry out, Gen. 39. 15. I lifted up my voyce and cryed: Here is Kara. The Hebrew word  hath nine other significa∣tions in Scripture; but because they are not pertinent to what is in my eye, I shall pass them by at this time.
And the man of Wisdom shall see thy name. Vethushiia pro∣perly signifies Essence; and therefore according to the Hebrew, the words should be
 read thus, And the man of Es∣sence shall see thy Name, &c. that is, he that is a man indeed, he that is not a sot, astock, a stone. Most men are men of folly, and so not worthy of the name of men; but as for such as are truly wise, they shall see thy Name. There is a great measure of spiritual Art, of Holy and Heavenly Wisdome required, both to enable a man to hear the voice of the Rod, and to understand the language of the Rod: This Wisdom is too high for a fool, Prov. 24. 7.
Shall see thy Name. Now the Hebrew word here used  may be better derived from Jare, which signifies to feare, than from Raah, that signifies to see, and so the words will run smoothly thus, The man of wisdom, or of essence, shall fear
 thy Name, considering that, 'tis majesty it self that cryeth, and that he is immediately to deal with God himself, and not with a poor, weak, mortal worm.
Hear ye the Rod. The word Hear, is from  Shamang, which signifies, First, To mark, observe, and attend, to what is said, Gen. 29. 33. The Lord hath heard that I was hated; that is, he hath marked it, he hath observed it. So here, O mark the Rod, O observe the Rod, O attend to what is spo∣ken by the Rod. Secondly, The word signifies, to under∣stand what is spoken, so Gen. 42. 23. They knew not that Jo∣seph understood them: In the Hebrew 'tis, that Joseph heard them. Now to hear the Rod, is to understand what is spo∣ken to us by the Rod. Third∣ly,
 The word signifies, to be∣lieve a thing reported to be true, so Exod. 6. 9. They hearkned not unto Moses, that is, they did not believe the re∣port that Moses made. Hear the Rod, that is, believe the re∣port the Rod makes. The Rod reports, that of all evils, Sin is the greatest evil; and that of all bitters, Sin is the greatest bitter; O believe the report of the Rod. The Rod reports that God is angry, that God is displeased; Oh believe its report. The Rod reports the creatures to be meer vanity and vexation of Spirit; O be∣lieve its report. The Rod re∣ports our neerest and dearest comforts, contentments, and enjoyments to be mixt, muta∣ble, and momentary; O believe its report. The Rod reports Sin to be vile, and the world to be
 vain, and Heaven to be glori∣ous, and Christ to be most pre∣cious; O believe its report. The Hebrew word hath three other significations, but being that they are not proper to our purpose I shall pass them by.
The Rod. The Hebrew word Matte that is here rendred Rod, hath these three signifi∣cations. First, It denotes Pow∣er and strength, Psal. 2. 9. A Rod of Iron. Secondly, It de∣notes Rigid and harsh Govern∣ment, Isa. 14. 5. The Lord hath broken the staffe, or Rod of the wicked, that is, their rigorous and cruel Government. Nebu∣chadnezzar sorely afflicted the Children of Judah, he was a Rod that brake them in pie∣ces, and ruled over them with much rigour in Babilon. Thirdly, It denotes sore affli∣ctions,
 and heavy Judgements, Psal. 89. 32. I will visit your transgressions with a Rod. And thus you are to understand the word Rod in the Text.
And him that hath appoint∣ed it. 'Tis God that appoints the Rod, and ordaines it for the revenge of the quarrel of his Covenant. The Hebrew word Jegnadah signifies pro∣perly to appoint, or constitute. 'Tis God who appoints the Rod, and who constitutes it to do what service he pleaseth. 'Tis God that hath not only a permissive, but also an active hand, in all the afflictions that come upon his People.
And let thus much suffice for the opening of the words.
Now though this choice Garden affords many sweet Flowers, yet I shall only pre∣sent you with one, which is this, viz.
 That all the Afflictions, troubles, and tryals, &c. that God layes upon his People, are his Rod, and that 'tis their highest and greatest concern∣ment, to hear the voyce of the Rod, and to take out those Lessons that God would have them learn by the Rod.
For the opening and clear∣ing up of this important Point, I shall endeavour these two things.
First, To shew you in what respects Afflictions are like un∣to a Rod.
Secondly, To shew you what those special Lessons are, that you are to learn by the Rod.
For the First, In what re∣spects are afflictions like unto a Rod?

 I Answer, In these seven respects Afflictions are like un∣to a Rod.
First, The Rod is never made use of, but when no fair means will prevail with the Child. 'Tis so here, God never takes up the Rod, he never afflicts his People, till he 2 Chron. 36. 15,—ult. Mat. 23. 37, 38. hath tryed all fair wayes and means to humble them, and reform them: And when none of the offers of grace, the ten∣ders of mercy, the wooings of Christ, the strivings of the Spirit, northe smart debates of Conscience will awaken them, nor work upon them, then God takes up the Rod, and sometimes whips them till the blood comes. But,
Secondly, Parents choose what Rods they please to cor∣rect their Children with. The Child shall not choose what
 Rod he pleaseth to be corre∣cted with, O no: 'Tis the prerogative of the Father to choose the Rod; the Father may choose and use either a great Rod or a little Rod, a long Rod or a short Rod, a Rod made up of Rosemary branches, or a Rod made up of green Birch: 'Tis so here, God chooseth what Rod, what Affliction he pleaseth to exer∣cise his people with. You Lev. 26. Deut. 28. Lament. 3. 9,—18. read in the Scripture of very many Rods, but they are all of Gods choosing, Amos 3. 6. Is there any evil in the City and hath not the Lord done it? Though there be many Rods to be found in the Ci∣ty, yet there is not one of them, but is of Gods choosing, Ruth. 1. 13. It grieveth me much for your sakes, that the hand of the Lord is gone out
 against me. vers. 21. I went out full, and the Lord hath brought me home again empty; why then call ye me Naomi, see∣ing the Lord hath testified against me, and the Almighty hath afflicted me? Isa. 45. 7. I form the light, and create dark∣ness: I make peace and create evil: I the Lord do all these things. Mic. 1. 12. For the in∣habitants of Maroth, waited carefully for good; but evil came down from the Lord unto the Gates of Jerusalem. David was whipt with many Rods, Psal. 39. 9. Job. 1 but they were all of Gods own choosing. And Job was whipt with many Rods, but they were all of Gods own choos∣ing. But,
Thirdly, Parents take no pleasure, they take no de∣light to use the Rod. Every lash the Father gives the
 Child, fetches blood from his own heart: The Father cor∣rects the Child, and sighs o∣ver the Child; he whips the Child, and at the same time weeps over the Child. No∣thing goes more against the Parents heart, nor against their hair, than the bringing of their Children under the Rod of Correction; 'Tis so here, Lament. 3. 3. For he doth not afflict willingly (or as the Hebrew runs, he doth not af∣flict, Millibbo, from his heart) nor grieve the Children of men. You often read, that he delights in mercy; but Mich. 7. 15. where do you once read, that he delights in severity, or in dealing roughly with his Peo∣ple? God very rarely takes 2 Chron. 36. 16. Jer. 5. 19. up the Rod, but when our sins have put a force upon him. 'Tis grievous to God, to
 be a grieving his People; 'tis a pain unto him, to be a punishing of them, Hos. 11. 8. How shall I give thee up, Ephra∣im? how shall I deliver thee, Israel? how shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine heart is tur∣ned within me, my repentings are kindled together. My Ju∣stice, saith God, calls upon me to rain Hell out of Heaven up∣on thee, as once I did upon Sodom and Gomorah; but then Mercy interposeth her four several hows, how, how, how, how, how shall I give thee up? God puts these four patheti∣cal interrogations to himself, because none else in Heaven or Earth could answer them. The Prophet brings in God speaking after the manner of men, who being provoked a thousand thousand wayes, by
 the vanities and follies of their Children, think to give them up to take their own courses, and to look no more after them; but then their bowels begin to work, and their hearts begin to melt, and they begin to interrogate them∣selves thus, How shall we give up these Children? for though they be disobedient Children, yet they are Children; how can we turn them out of doores? how can we disown them? how can we disinherit them? for though they are rebellious Children, yet they are Children, &c. Af∣flictions are called Gods work, yea, his strange work; his Isa. 28. 21. act, yea, his strange act, as if God were out of his element, when he is afflicting or cha∣stising his People. But.

 Fourthly, The Rod is smart∣ing, grievous, and troublesom; and so are afflictions to our natures, Heb. 12. 11. Now no chastening for the present seem∣eth to be joyous but grievous. Flesh and blood startles, and is troubled at the least trouble. Affliction is a sort of Physick, that makes most sick. Some write that Tygres will grow mad, and tear their own flesh, Plutarch lib. de su∣perstition. and rend themselves in piec∣es, if they do but hear Drums or Tabours sound about them. Were not Job and Jeremiah Job. 3. Jer. 20. such Tygres, who in the day of their afflictions did more than curse the Day of their birth? O what a bitter cup, what a heavy burden was af∣fliction to them! Job 10. 1. My Soul is weary of my life. Job 7. 15. My Soul chooseth strangling and death rather
 than life. Psal. 6. 6. I am wea∣ry with my groaning. Psal. 69. 1, 2, 3. Save me, O God, for the waters are come in unto my Soul. I sink in deep mire, where there is no standing. I am come in∣to deep waters, where the floods overflow me. I am weary of my crying, my throat is dryed: mine eyes fail, while I wait for my God. Doubtless many good men have sat under Eli∣as 1 Kings 19. 4. his Juniper, wishing them∣selves out of the World (if it might stand with Divine plea∣sure) that they might rest from their sins and sor∣rows, and be rid of their ma∣ny burdens and bondages, looking upon life little better than a Hell, were it not for the hopes of a Heaven hereafter. But,
Fifthly, When Parents take up the Rod into their hands,
 they will not lay it down, till Rodolphus the Empe∣rours Mot∣to was, (Omnia eoe voluntate Dei.) All must be as God will have it. And this should be every Christians Motto un∣der the Rod. they have subdued the spirits of their Children, and brought them to submit and to kiss the Rod, and to sit still and quiet before them. 'Tis so here, when God takes up the Rod, he will not lay it down, till he hath brought us to lye quiet∣ly at his feet, Lev. 26. 40, 41, 42. If they shall confess their iniquity, and the iniquity of their fathers, with their trespas, which they have trespassed a∣gainst me, and that also they have walked contrary to me; And that I also have walked contrary unto them, & brought them into the Land of their enemies; if then their uncir∣cumcised hearts be humbled, and they then accept of the punishment of their iniquity, Then Will I remember my Co∣venant with Jacob, and also
 my Covenant with Isaac, and also my Covenant with Abra∣ham will I remember: and I will remember the Land. When God takes up the Rod, his Children must either bow or break; they must say, the Jer. 5. 3, 6. Lord is righteous, they must kiss the Rod of Correction, or else destruction will come like a Whirle-wind upon them.
'Tis reported of the Lyon, that he spares those creatures, that fall down before him, and submit unto him; but as for those that endeavour to run from him, or to contend with him, those he tears in pieces. 'Tis just so with the Lyon of the Tribe of Judah, as you may see in that Hos. 5. 14, 15.
King Edward riding furi∣ously Acts and Mon. in Edward I. after a servant of his,
 that had highly displeased him, with a drawn Sword in his hand as purposing to kill him; seeing him submit, and on bended knee suing for his life, did not only put up his Sword, but also spared him, and received him into his favour. The King of Kings will never put up his sword when once he hath drawn it, till his People fall on their knees, & submit unto him. God never left chastising of Ephraim Jer. 31. 18, 19, 20. till he had brought him to his bow, till he had made him submit and kiss the Rod. But,
Sixthly, Afflictions are cal∣led a Rod, in respect of the hand that layes them on. Though Affliction be a Rod, it is a Rod in a Fathers hand. John 18. 11. The Sword is in the Judges hand, and the Cudgel is in the Masters hand, but the Rod is in the fathers hand, Heb. 12.
 6, 7, 8, 9. When Balaams Ass Num. 22. 29. offended him, he wished for a sword to slay him: But so doth not God; when we doe most highly provoke him, he doth not take up a Sword to slay us, but only a Rod to scourge us and chastise us, as indulgent Fathers do their dearest Children. But,
Seventhly and Lastly, Affli∣ctions are called a Rod, in re∣gard of the ends to which they serve. A Rod is not to kill, but to cure; 'tis not for de∣struction, but for correction. When David gave a full com∣mission to his Souldiers against Absolom, 'Twas not to slay him, but to restrain him; 'twas not to ruine him, but to re∣duce him to his former obedi∣ence. The Application is ea∣sie. We can as well live with∣out our daily bread, as with∣out
 our dayly Rod. Now the ends of taking up the Rod are these.
First and more generally, 'Tis for the good of the child, and not for his hurt: 'Tis so here, God takes up the Rod, but 'tis for the good of his People, Gen. 50. 20. But as for you, ye thought evil against me; but God meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much people alive. Divine goodness did so over-master the plotted ma∣lignity of Josephs Brethren, as that it made a blessed medi∣cine of a most deadly poyson. Jer. 24. 5. Thus saith the Lord the God of Israel, like these good Figs, so will I acknowledg them that are carried away Captive of Judah, whom I have sent out of this place, into the Land of the Chaldeans for their
 good. When Israel was dis∣missed out of Egypt, 'Twas with Exod. 11. Gold and Ear-rings. And when Judah was dismissed out of Babylon, 'twas with great gifts, Jewels, and all necessary Utensils. So Rom. 8. 28. And Ezra 1. we know that all things work together for good, to them that love God, to them who are the Called according to his pur∣pose. This Text like Moses his Tree, cast into the bitter waters of Affliction, may make them sweet and whol∣some to drink of. But,
Secondly, and more particu∣larly, The Rod is to make the Child sensible of his folly and vanity, Pro. 10. 13. In the lips of him that hath understand∣ing wisdom is found: but the Rod is for the back of him that is void of understanding. So 'tis here, God takes up the
 Rod, but 'tis to make his Peo∣ple sensible of their folly and vanity, 'tis to make them look up to him, and to look into Conscience, and to look out to their Conversations. Scho∣la Crucis, is Schola Lucis. Gods house of correction is his school of instruction; his lash∣es are our lessons, his scourges are our School-masters, and his chastisements are our adver∣tisements. Isa. 26. 9. Psal. 94. 12 Pro. 3. 12, 13. Job. 36. 8, 9, 10. Hence both the Hebrews and Greeks express chastening and teaching by one and the same word (Musar Paideia) because the latter is the true end of the former, according to that in the Pro∣verb, Smart makes Wit, and vexation gives understanding. Afflictions are a Christians Looking-Glass, by which he may see how to dress his own Oculos quos peccatum claudit, paena appe∣rit. Greg. The eye that sin shuts, af∣flictions o∣pen. Soul, and to mend whatsoe∣ver
 is amiss: They are Pills made up by a heavenly hand, on purpose to clear our eye∣sight. 1 Kings 17. 18. And she said unto Elijah, what have I to do with thee, O thou man of God? art thou come unto me to call my sin to remembrance, and to slay my Son? If God had not taken away her Son, her sin had not been brought to remembrance. It was the Speech of an holy man in his sickness, In this Disease (said he) I have learned how great God is, and what the evil of sin is; I never knew to purpose, what God was before, nor what sin was before. The Cross opens mens eyes, as the tasting of Honey did Jonathans. Here (as that Martyr phrased it) we are still a learning our A B C, and our lesson is never past Christs Cross, and our walking
 is still home by weeping Cross. But,
Thirdly, The Rod is used to prevent further folly, mis∣chief, and misery, Prov. 23. 13, 14, With-hold not correcti∣on from the Child; for if thou beatest him with the Rod, he shall not die. Thou shalt beat him with the Rod, and shalt de∣liver his Soul from Hell. It is said of the Ape, that she hug∣geth her young ones to death, so many fond Parents by not correcting their Children, they come to slay their Children. The best way to prevent their being scourged with Scorpi∣ons in Hell, is to chastise them with the Rod here: So God takes up the Rod, he afflicts and chastiseth his dearest Children, but 'tis to prevent soul-mischief and misery, 'tis to prevent pride, self-love,
 worldliness, &c. Paul was 2 Cor. 12. 7, 8, 9. one of the holiest men that e∣ver lived on earth, he was cal∣led by some, an earthly An∣gel, and yet he needed the Rod, he needed a thorn in the flesh to prevent pride, witness the doubling of those words in one verse, least I should be exalted above measure, least I should be exalted above mea∣sure. If Paul had not been buffetted, who knows how highly he might have been ex∣alted in his own conceit? Pru∣dent Physitians do often give their Patients Physick to pre∣vent Diseases; & so doth the Physitian of souls by his dear∣est Servants, Job 33. 17, 19. Job 40. 4, 5. Hos. 2. 6, 7. He is chastened also with pain upon his bed, and the multi∣tude of his bones with strong pain. That he may withdraw man from his purpose, and hide
 pride from man. Afflictions are the Lords Drawing-Play∣sters, by which he draws out the core of pride, earthliness, self-love, covetousness, &c. Pride was one of mans first sins, and is still the root and source of all other sins. Now to prevent it, God many times chastens man with pain, yea, with strong pain upon his bed, Job 34. 31, 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I will not offend any more. That which I see not, teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no more. The burnt Child dreads the fire. Sin is but a bitter sweet; 'tis an evil worse than Hell it self. Look as Salt brine preserves things from, putrefy∣ing & as salt Marshes keep the Sheep from rotting; so sancti∣fied Rods, sanctified Afflictions,
 preserves and keeps the Peo∣ple of God from sinning. But,
Fourthly, The Rod is to purge out that vanity and fol∣ly that is bound up in the heart of the Child, Prov. 22. 15 Foolishness is bound in the heart of a Child, but the Rod of cor∣rection shall drive it far from him. The Rod is an Ordi∣nance, as well as the Word; and such Parents that use it as an Ordinance (praying and weeping over it) shall find it effectual, for the chasing away of evil out of their Childrens heart. Eli and David were two very choice men, and yet by their fondness on one hand, and neglect of this Ordinance on the other hand, they rui∣ned their sons, and whether they did not undo their souls, I shall not at this time stand to
 enquire. When Moses cast a∣way his Rod, it became a Ser∣pent; Exod. 4. 3. and so when Parents cast away the Rod of corre∣ction, 'tis ten to one but that their Children become the brood of the Serpent. Prov. 13. 24. He that spareth his Rod hateth his son; but he that loveth him chasteneth him be∣times. Not only the care, but also the cure of the Child, so far as the Rod will reach, lyes upon the hands of the Pa∣rent.
Now Afflictions are like a Rod in this respect also, for as they are sanctified, they cleans and purge away the dross, the filth, and the scumb of the daughter of Zion, Isa. 1. 25. And I will turn my hand upon thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and take away all thy tinn. Isa. 27. 9. By this therefore shall the
 iniquity of Jacob be purged, and this is all the fruit to take away his sin. Dan. 11. 35. And some of them of understanding shall fall (that is, into great Afflictions) to try them, and to purge them, and to make them white, even to the time of the end. All the harm the Dan. 3. 23, 24. fire did the three Children (or rather the three Champi∣ons) was to burn off their cords. Our lusts are cords of vanity, but the fire of Affli∣ction shall burn them up. Zech. 13. 9. And I will bring the third part through the fire, and will refine them as Silver is refined, and will try them as Gold is tryed: they shall call on my name, and I will hear them: I will say, it is my People, and they shall say, the Lord is my God. Sharp Afflictions are a fire to purge out our dross, and
 to make our graces shine; they are a potion to carry away ill humours, they are cold frosts to destroy the vermine, they are a tempestuous Sen, to purge the Wine from its lees; they are like the North Wind, that dryeth up the vapours, that purgeth the blood, and quickens the spirits; they are a sharp Corrosive to eat out the dead flesh. Afflictions are compared to Baptizing and washing, that takes away the filth of the Soul, as water doth the filth of the body, Mat. 10. 38, 39. God would not rub so hard, were it not to fetch out the dirt and spots that be in his Peoples hearts.
Fifthly, The Rod serves to improve that good that is in the Child, Prov. 29. 15. The Rod and reproof giveth wis∣dom, but a Child left to him∣self
 bringeth his Mother to shame. So Afflictions they serve to improve our graces, Heb. 12. 10. For they verily for a few dayes ehastened us af∣ter their own pleasure, but he for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness, that is, that we might more and more be partakers of his holiness. Vers. 11. Now no chastening for the present seem∣eth to be joyous, but grievous: nevertheless, afterward it yield∣eth the peaceable fruit of righ∣teousness, unto them that are exercised thereby. Hence 'tis that the Saints glory in tri∣bulation, Rom. 5. 3, 4. And not only so, but we glory in tribu∣lations also, knowing that tri∣bulation worketh patience; and patience, experience; and ex∣perience, hope. Grace alwayes thrives most when Saints are
 under the Rod. When Chri∣stians are under the Rod, then their graces do not only bud, but blossome, and bring forth fruit as Aarons Rod did. The Mum. 17. 8, snuffing of the Candle, makes it burn the brighter. God beats and bruises his links, to make them burn the brighter; he bruises his spices, to make them send forth the greater Aromatical savour.
Bernard compares Afflicti∣ctions to the Tezel, which though it be starp and scratch∣ing, it is to make the Cloath more pure and fine. The Jews were alwayes best, when they were in an afflicted con∣dition. Well-waters arising from deep springs, are hotter in the winter, than they are in the summer. Stars shine brightest in the darkest nights. Vines grow the better for
 bleeding; and Gold looks the brighter for scowring. Ju∣niper smels sweetest, when in the fire. Cammomile the more you tread it, the more you spread it. O Sirs, this is a re∣al, and a rare truth, but sel∣dome thought on, viz. that God will sometimes more car∣ry on the growth and improve∣ment of grace by a cross, by an affliction, than by an ordi∣nance, James 1. 3, 4. James 4. 8, 9. Afflictions ripen the Saints graces, 2 Cor. 1. 5. First or last God will make every Rod, yea, every twig in every Rod, to be an Ordinance to every afflicted Saint. By Afflictions God many times revives, quickens, and recovers, the decayed graces of his People. By Afflictions God many times enflames that love that is cold, and he strengthens that
 faith that is failing, and he puts life into those hopes that are languishing, and new spi∣rits into those joyes and com∣forts that are withering and dying. Musk (say some) when it hath lost its sweetness, if it be put into the sink amongst filth, it recovers its sweetn again: So doth smart afflicti∣ons recover and revive our de∣cayed graces.
I have read a story of a Sexton, that went into the Church at night, to rob a wo∣man, who had been buried the day before with a Gold ring upon her finger (accord∣ing to her desire); now when he had opened the Grave and Coffin, and loosed the sheet, he fell a rubbing and chafing her finger to get off the Gold Ring, and with rubbing and chafing of it, her spirits retur∣ned
 (she having been but in a swoon before) and she re∣vived, and lived many years after. Smart Afflictions are but the rubbing and chafing of our graces. The smarting Rod abaseth the loveliness of the world, that might entice us, it abates the Iustiness▪ of the flesh within, that might incite us to vanity and folly, and it abets the spirit in his quarrel to the two former: All which tend much to the recovering and reviving of de∣cayed graces. But,
The Sixth end to which the Rod serves, & that is, to try the child, to make a discovery of the spirit of the child. Some Pa∣rents never see so much of the badness of the spirits of their Children, as they do when they bring them under the Rod; and other Parents ne∣ver
 see so much of the good∣nesse of the spirits of their Children, as they do when they chastise them with the Rod: 'Tis so here, when God afflicts some, O the pride, the stoutness, the crosness, the hardness, the peevishness and stubborness of spirit that they Exod. 5. 2. Jer. 44. 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. discover! Isa. 1. 5. Jer. 5. 3. When he afflicts others, O the murmuring, the roaring, the complaining, the howling, the fretting, the vexing, and the Amos 4. 6,—13. quarrelling spirit that they discover! Num. 14. 27, 29, 36. Deut. 1. 27. Isa. 58. 3, 4. Isa. 59. 11. Hos. 7. 14, 15. Jon. 4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 9. Sometimes when God afflicts his dearest People, O what a spirit of Faith, what a spirit of Prayer, what a spi∣rit of Love, what a spirit of Patience, what a spirit of meekness, what a spirit of
 humbleness, what a spirit of submissiveness do they disco∣ver! Job 13. 15. 2 Chron. 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 12. Isa. 26. 16, 17. Hos. 5. 14, 15. Job 1. 20, 21, 22. Lev. 10. 1, 2, 3. 1 Sam. 3. 18. 2 Kings 20. 16, 17, 18, 19. And at other times when God af∣flicts his poor People, O what a spirit of unbelief, what a spi∣rit of slavish fear, what a spi∣rit of impaciency, what a spi∣rit of displeasedness, &c. do they discover! Gen. 15. 2, 3. Gen. 12. 13, 19. Gen. 20. 2, 5. Gen. 26. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Psal. 31. 22. Psal. 116, 11. 1 Sam. 21. 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. Job. 3. 3,—13. Jer. 20. 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. By smart Afflictions God tryes the graces of his People, and dis∣covers what is in the spirits of his People, Deut. 8. 2. Psal. 66. 10, 11. Rev. 3. 18. 1 Pet 1. 6, 7. The fire tryes the Gold, as
 well as the Touch-stone. Dis∣eases try the Art of the Physi∣tian, and Tempests try the skill of the Pilot. Every smarting Rod is a Touch-stone, both to try our graces, and to discover our spirits. Prudent Fathers will sometimes cross their Children, to try, to discover, the dispositions of their Chil∣dren: Heb. 12. 5,—21. And so doth the Fa∣ther of Spirits deal sometimes with his Children.
The manner of the Psylli (which are a kind of People Plin. lib. 28 of that temper and constituti∣on, that no Venom will hurt them) is this, if they suspect any Child to be none of their own, they set an Adder upon it to sting it, and if it cry, and the flesh swell, they cast it a∣way as a spurious issue, but if it do not quatch nor cry, nor is never the worse for it, then
 they account it for thei own, and make very much of it. The Application is easie. But,
The seventh and last end of the Rod, Is to prepare & fit the Isa. 48. 10. chastised for greater services, favours and mercies. Many a Child, and many a servant had never been so fit for emi∣nent services as they are, had they not been under a smart∣ing Rod. 'Tis very usual with God, to cast men into very great Afflictions, and to lay them under grievous smart∣ing Rods, that so he may pre∣pare and fit them for some high and eminent services in this world. Joseph had never been so fit to be Governour Gen. 41. 40, 41, 42, 43, 44. of Egypt, and to preserve the visible Church of God alive in the World, if he had not been sold into Egypt, if his feet
 had not been hurt in the Gen. 45. 7, 8. stocks, and if the Irons had not entred into his soul. Nor Moses had never been so fit to be a Leader, and a Deliver∣er of Israel as he was, if he had Gen. 50. 20. not been banished Fourty Yeares in the Wilderness be∣fore. Nor Davids Crown had never sat so well, nor so close, nor so long on his head, as it did, had he not for some years before been hunted, as a Partridge in the Wilder∣ness. Nor the Three Children (or rather, the Three Cham∣pions) would never have been fit for so high a Rule, had Dan. 3. 29, 30. they not been first cast into the fiery Furnace. Nor Daniel, for that exceeding high honour, and glory, and greatness, to which he was exalted, had he Dan. 6. 25,—ult. not been first cast among the Lyons. And so had Esther
 never been a poor Captive-Maid, she had never been a Queen, and so had never been instrumental in the preserva∣tion of the Church of God in her day. Heman was one of the best and wisest men in 1 Kings 4. 31. the World (in his day), and this God brought him to, by training of him up in the School of Affliction, as you may evidently, see in that 88. Psalm. That of the Apostle in 2 Cor. 1. 4. deserves to be writ∣ten in letters of gold, Who com∣forteth us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort them which are in any trouble, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. Mark that word, able. O 'tis one of the hardest and noblest works in all Christia∣nity, to be able divinely to comfort others that are in
 troubles; and yet by suffer∣ings God fits and prepares his People, for this noble and dif∣ficult service.
Luther was of Opinion, that to comfort a distressed Con∣science, was a greater work, than to raise the dead to life. And yet by inward and out∣ward sufferings, God fits his People for this great work.
And thus you see, in what respects Afflictions are compa∣red to a Rod.
The second thing I am to do, is to shew you those speci∣al Lessons, that you are to learn by the Rod, (or if you please,) by the raging Pestilence.
Now they are these,
The first Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod, or by the raging Pestilence, is to know, what the particular
 message or errand is, which the Rod hath to deliver to you in the day of your distresse and trouble. Your first work is to do as David did, in that 2 Sam. 21. 1. He humbly en∣quires of the Lord, to know the particular reason why he sent a Famine amongst them. You must do as Job doth, Job 10. 2. Shew me, O Lord, where∣fore thou contendest with me. Job would fain know the rea∣sons of the controversie be∣tween God and him. One well observes on the Text, that Job was very destrous to know, whether God did afflict him for sin, or for tryal, not to satisfie his curiositie but, his Consci∣ence. Elihu's counsel to Job must here take place, Job 34. 31, 32. Surely it is meet to be said unto God, I have born chastisement, I will not offend
 any more. That which I see not teach thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no more. Job it seems was yet in the dark, as to the particular cause or reason, why the Lord had so grievously afflicted him; and therefore he is very im∣portunate with God, that he would graciously point out the sin, for which he had so sorely smitten him. Thy pro∣ceedings, saith Job, to my un∣derstanding, seem to be very strange and severe; I am more heavily afflicted than others, and yet I do not know where∣in I have sinned more than others: Why I should be con∣demned and cast, without a Tryal, why thou art so hot against me, and why thou hast multiplied so many un∣heard of miseries upon me, and why thou hast so greatly
 subjected me to the saddest and sourest censures of others, as if I were the worst of sinners, and the basest of hypocrites, I know not: And therefore O Lord, I humbly desire, that thou wouldest not deal with me according to thy absolute Power, but let me know the true grounds and causes of all my heavy sorrows and mise∣ries. And so he is at it again, in that Job 13. 23. How many are mine iniquities and sins? make me to know my transgres∣sion and my sin. My plagues, O Lord, are unparalel'd; if my sins are such let me know it, saith Job. My calamities transcend the calamities of all others; if my sins do so, let them not be hid from mine eyes, O Lord. My load, O Lord is heavier than others; and therefore if my sins are
 greater than others, let me see them, let me understand them: Infirmities and weaknesses, I confesse, do hang upon me, they are inherent in me, and they do too often issue and flow from me; but as for en∣ormities or wickednesses, nei∣ther my censorious Friends, nor yet my worst enemies, no, nor yet my own Conscience, will ever be able to make a∣ny just, or clear proof against me: O Lord, I have many spots upon me, but if there be any upon me that are not the spots of thy People, let me see them, let me know them, that I may abhor my self, and justifie thee, and that I may say, my Friends are righteous in their censures, and I have done wickedly before the Lord. Sometimes Afflictions are sent only for tryal and instruction,
 and not at all for sin; this is evident in the case of Job, and in the case of the Blind man, whose afflictions, though they were very great and grievous, John 3. 9. yet were they not for sin, but for tryal.
Now though this be true, yet it must be granted, that Mic. 1. 5,—10. commonly sin is the meritori∣ous cause, the procuring cause of all Afflictions. Sin ordina∣rily is the Original and Foun∣dation of all our troubles Amos 2. 4, 5, 6. and chastisements, Psal. 89. 30, 31, 32. If his Children for∣sake my Law, and walk not in my Judgements; if they break my Statutes, and keep not my Commandements: Then will I visit their transgression with the Rod, and their iniquity with stripes. Jer. 2. 19. Thine own wickedness shall correct thee, and thy back-slidings shall
 reprove thee: know therefore and see, that it is an evil thing and bitter, that thou hast for sa∣ken the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, saith the Lord God of Hosts. Amos 3. 2. You only have I known of all the Families of the earth; therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities.
Quest. But what course must we take? what meanes must we use, to find out that particu∣lar sin, for which God corrects us, or, which hath brought the Rod upon us?
Answ. 1. Observe what that sin is, that thy Conscience doth most upbraid thee with, and check thee for. Consci∣ence is Gods Preacher in the Gen. 42. 21. Chap. 50. 15, 16, 17. bosome. Now observe what that particular sin is, that Con∣science doth most smartly and roundly correct, and chastise
 thee for, for 'tis ten to one but that is the sin, that hath brought the Rod upon thee. The voice of Conscience, and the voice of the Rod, do usu∣ally eccho one to another. 'Tis very rare to find a differ∣ence between the language of Conscience, and the language of the Rod. Conscience is Gods Deputy, Gods Spie, Gods Notary, Gods Viceroy; and therefore do not despise the voice of Conscience, do not turn off Conscience, as Felix turned off Paul. If the se∣cret Acts 24. 25 cry of Conscience be, O this is for thy Pride, or this is for thy Passion, or this is for thy Self-love, or this is for thy earthliness, or this is for thy carnalness, or this is for thy hypocrisie, or this is for thy formality, &c. it will be thy wisdome to subscribe to
 the secret cry of Conscience. But,
Secondly, Seriously observe what that sin is, that thy soul would have spared above all, that thy soul is most unwilling to leave, and bid an everla∣sting farewel to. Observe what thy right hand sin, thy Mic. 6. 6, 7. Est. 5. 13. bosome sin, thy constitution sin, thy complexion sin is, for 'tis a hundred to one, but that God hath sent the Rod; for the subduing of that very sin. Commonly by the Rod God points at the mortifying of that particular sin, to which the heart stands most strongly in∣clined. But,
Thirdly, Observe what that sin is, that doth most maim and mar thy confidence and 1 John 3. 20, 21. boldness, in all thy addresses and approaches to God; for doubtlesse that is the sin,
 that God would subdue and bring under by the Rod. But,
Fourthly, Observe what the affliction, what the pain, what the disease, what the pu∣nishment is, that you are un∣der; for sometimes a person may run and read his sin in his very punishment, Judges 1. 7. Threescore and ten Kings ha∣ving their thumbs and their great toes cut off gathered their meat under my Table: as I have done, so God hath requited me. Now shall Adonibezek, a Hea∣then Prince run and read his sin in his punishment; and shall not a Christian much more? shall not grace do as much as blind nature? Look as a man may sometimes guess at the disease of the Patient, by the prudent observing of the Physitians Bill; so may he
 sometimes guess at the parti∣cular sin that God would have destroyed, by the punishment that is inflicted. God usual∣ly, first or last, meets with men, and payes them home in their own coyn: Is the Judg∣ment shame? then the sin was pride; is the Judgment want, fa∣mine? Hos. 2. 8, 9. then the sin was abuse of abundance; is the Judg∣ment oppression? then the sin was unmercifulness; is the Judgment loss of Children? then the sin was inordinate love to them. Eli and David were too indulgent to their Children; and therefore they were punished in them and by them: Is the Judgment sick∣ness, or want of health? then the sin was, either the abuse of health, or the non-improve∣ment of health: Is the Judgment a famine of the Word? then the
 sin was, slighting and loath∣ing of the word: Is the Judg∣ment War? then the sin was abuse of peace: Is the Judg∣ment a blind, cold, carnal, pro∣phane, formal, drunken, su∣perstitious Clergy? then the sin hath been slighting, negle∣cting, undervaluing, and de∣spising, an able, knowing, zea∣lous, spiritual, and powerful ministry: Is the Judgment, a worshipping of God in a lazy, dry, dull, dead, formal, custo∣mary way, according to the inventions and traditions of the Elders? then the sin hath been mens not worshipping of John 4. 23, 24. God in spirit and in truth, and with that zeal, spirit, life, warmth, and fervency, as he requires: Is the Judgment, the breaking of the commu∣nion Rom. 12. 11. of Gods People, and scattering of them into holes
 and corners, as it was in Ahabs, Judg. 6. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and Jezabels, and Gideons days? then doubtless the sin hath been a slighting, undervalu∣ing, neglecting, or forsaking of Christian Communion, or else a non-improvement of Christian Communion. But,
Fifthly, Observe whether you have not been very faul∣ty towards others, in the ve∣ry things you now suffer your selves. Do others wrong you in your names, estates, re∣lations, callings, dealings? &c. lay your hands upon your hearts, and ask them, whether you have never wronged o∣thers, as others now wrong you. Doe others rashly judg Isa. 33. 1. Rev. 13. 10. Jmes . 13 Gen. 50 15, 16, 17. you, and bitterly censure you, and falsly accuse you, and un∣justly condemn you? if they do, reflect upon your for∣mer carriages towards others;
 and if you must plead guilty, throw the first stone at your Mat. 7. 1, 2. selves, and say with Adonibe∣zek, As I have done, so God hath requited me. Let every lash of God upon you, put you in mind of your deportment towards others, when God hath given them Gall and Wormwood to drink. But,
Sixthly, Observe what that sin is, that thou canst not en∣dure Prov. 1. 25, 30. Prov. 12. 1. Pro. 17. 10. Prov. 9. 8. Pro. 15. 12. should be touched, or re∣proved, or spoken against. Ah how proud, how impati∣ent, how passionate, how mad are many, when you come to touch their right-eye-sin. When you come to touch them in the tender part, O then they fume, and swell, and rage, and take on like men and women out of their wits, as you may see in the Scribes and Pharisees, who were so
 angry and mad with Christ, that they sought his death; and all because he was still a pointing at the Toads in their bosomes, viz. pride, vain-glo∣ry, hypocrisie, and self-righ∣teousness: O they could not endure that the sharp Rasor of reproof should come neer their sorest part. Certainly that Christian must be under a very high distemper, that cannot but smite a righteous man with reproach, for smit∣ing him with a reproof. Though gracious reproofs are choice Physick, yet few sto∣machs can tell how to bear them. Most Christians are for lenitives, few for are corro∣sives. David was glad of a healing reproof; but there are Psal. 141. 5. but few Davids alive. Who is angry with the Physitian for prescribing a bitter poti∣on?
 and yet, ah how angry are many Christians, when they come to fall under holy re∣proofs, especially if there be any of that sharpness and cut∣tingness in them, that the Apo∣stle exhorts to, in that Tit. 1. 13. Now doubtless the voice of the Rod is this, Soul take heed of that sin, that thou canst not endure should be touched Labour mightily with God to get that particu∣lar sin mortified, that thou canst not endure should be reproved. But,
Seventhly, Observe what sin that is, that doth most hin∣der Psal. 50. 16, 17. thee from closing with the precious promises, and from living upon precious promises, and from improving of preci∣ous promises, and from trea∣suring up of precious promi∣ses, and from appropiating of
 precious promises to thine own soul; and it is very pro∣bable, that for the subduing of that sin, the Lord hath vi∣sited thee with his fatherly Rod. But,
Eighthly, Observe what sin that is, that did most sting and terrefie thee in an evil day, as when thou hast been Gen. 42. 21 under some loathsome disease, or tormenting pain, be it stone, gout, or burning fea∣vour, or when thou hast been in some eminent danger, or when thou hast had a sentence of death upon thee, and there hath been but a short step be∣tween thee and eternity. Doubtless that sin, which hath lain as a heavy load upon thy Conscience in the dayes of thy former distresse, that is the sin that God would have effectually conquered, and
 brought under by his present Rod. But,
Ninthly, Observe what parti∣cular sin that is, that doth most hinder thee in holy duties and services, and that doth most interrupt thee in thy Commu∣nion with God, enquire what particular sin that is, that thy Eze. 33. 31. heart is most apt to run after, when thou art on the Mount of holy duties. Whilest the Disciples were healing diseas∣es, and casting Devils out of other mens bodies, the proud white Devil was stirring in their own souls, as is evident by that gentle rebuke that our Saviour gives them in Luke 10. 20. In this rejoyce not, that the spirits are subject un∣to you; but rather rejoyce be∣cause your names are written in Heaven. There is no Du∣ty that a Christian performs,
 but one white Devil or ano∣ther, one lust or another, will be still dogging and following of him to that Duty. There is no publick Duty, there is no family duty, there is no pri∣vate duty, that a Christian performs, but either that white Divel, Pride, or that white Devil, Hypocrisie, or that white Divel, vain-glory, or else some one or another white Devil will follow the Soul, hard at heel to it. Now mark what that particular sin is, that most haunts thy soul, when thou art in Religious duties and services, and it may be that is the very sin that God would have subdued by the Rod. But,
Tenthly, Observe what sin that is, that the rest of your corruptions are most service∣able to, and that they most at∣tend
 upon: Mark what sin that is, that all other sins doe most bow the knee to: Mark that sin that hath a command∣ing power over all other sins, that saith to one, go, and he go∣eth, & to another, come, and he cometh: Mark what sin that is, that is still uppermost, and that all other sins do most mini∣ster to. You know when a man hath a great wound in his bo∣dy, all the ill humours will run thither. Observe what sin that is, that all the ill humours of the soul do most run after, for 'tis very likely that that is the very sin that God would have brought under by the Rod. But,
Eleventhly, Observe what that sin is, that your hearts are most apt to hide, and cloak, & cover over with the most spe∣tious, and fair pretences. Saul
 had a covetous desire, and he 1 Sam. 15. 20, 21. covers it over with fair preten∣ces, as that the people would have it so, and that what was spared was for sacrifice. Cae∣sars favour was the great Mat. 27. 24. darling in Pilates eyes, but he covers all over with washing his hands. The Scribes and Pharisees were exceeding co∣vetous, but their long prayers, Mat. 23. as a cloak, must cover all. Ju∣das also was a man of the same mind and mettle with them, What need this wast, why was not Mat. 26. 8, 9. John 12. 5, 6. this oyntment sold for three hun∣dred pence, & given to the poor? This he said, not that he cared for the poor; but because he was a thief, and had the bag, and bare what was put therein. Ju∣das (as Tertullian thinks) was pretty honest till he carried the bag; but no sooner was he in office, but he puts Conscience
 out of office, but all must be covered over with a cloake of charity. Observe what sin that is, that you are most apt to cast the Silk, or the Satin mantle over, and 'tis ten to one, but that is the sin that God would have brought under by the Rod. But,
Twelfthly and lastly, Ob∣serve what that sin is, that thou art most easily overcome by. Dalilah could easily overcome Sampson, when all the world besides could make no con∣quest upon him. The Apostle Heb 12. 1. bids us, lay aside the sin that doth so easily beset us. There are some sins that find more easie approaches to us, and more easie acceptance with us, & accordingly they do more easily captivate us. Observe what that sin is, that you doe most readily and easily open
 the door to, and doubtlesse that is the sin that God would have mortified and subdued by the Rod.
The Second Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by Pray turn to these Scriptures 2 Chron. 28. 10. Jer. 8. 6. Ezek, 7. 15, 16. the raging Pestilence,) is deep∣ly to judg your selves, and greatly to humble your souls, for that sin or sins that hath brought the Rod upon you, thus David did in that 2 Sam. 24. 10, 17. When you have found out the Achan that hath brought the Rod upon you, stone him to death, and lye humble and low under the Rod, and then the Allmighty will be graciously pacified, and sweetly reconciled unto you.
The Third Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod, (or by the raging Pestilence,) is to view the Rod on every side;
 if there be bryers on one side of the Rod, there is Rosemary on the other side of the Rod; if there be wormwood and gall at one end of the Rod, there is sweet honey at the o∣ther end of the Rod, as there was at the top of Jonathan's 1 Sam. 14. 43. Rod.
If we should come into a Painters or a Limners shop, and see a Picture half drawn, it might trouble us and startle us, if it did not fright us and amaze us; but yet when the Picture is perfected, compleat∣ed, and finished, it may prove a very beauteous, lovely, tak∣ing piece. The Application is easie. Look as every Judg∣ment, every Affliction, every Rod hath its black, dark side; so every Judgement, every af∣fliction hath its bright side to. Mow 'tis the wisdom of a
 Christian to look on the bright side of the Rod, the Cloud; as well as 'tis his work, to look on the dark side of the Rod, the Cloud: When a Christi∣an looks upon the dark side of the Cloud, he should be humbled and abased; but when he looks upon the bright side of the Cloud, he should be comforted and cheered. He James 5. 11. that is still a looking on the briery side of the Rod, will be very apt to fret and faint un∣der the Rod; but he that looks on the Rosemary side of the Rod, as well as the briery side of the Rod, he will bear up pa∣tiently, gallantly, and cheerful∣ly under the Rod. The voice of the Rod is Look on both sides, Look on both sides. But,
The fourth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod, (or by
 the raging Pestilence,) is to look on the Rod, not abstract∣ly, from the hand that holds it; but conjunctively, with the hand that holds it, thus Heze∣kiah did, 2 Kings 20. 16, 10, 18, 19. Thus Aaron did, Lev. 10. 1, 2, 3. Thus Eli did, 1 Sam. 3. 11,—19. Thus David did, Psal. 39. 9. Thus Job did, Job 1. 20, 21, 22. Yea, and thus Jesus did, John 18. 11. Shall I not drink the Cup that my Fa∣ther hath given me to drink. Though the Cup was a bitter Cup, a bloody Cup, yet seeing it was put into his hand by his Father, he drinks it off, with a Father I thank thee. The Rod in its self sounds nothing but smart and blood to the Child; but the Rod in the hand of a Father sounds nothing but love, kindness, and sweetness, Rev. 3. 19. Whom he loves he
 chastens. You should never look upon the Rod, but as it is in the hand of your heavenly Father, and then you will ra∣ther kiss it, than murmur un∣der it. But,
The Fifth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod, (or by the raging Pestilence,) is to cleave and cling close to God under the Rod. O how doth the Child cling and hang up∣on his Father when he takes up the Rod; let such a Child-like Spirit be found in you, when the Father of Spirits takes up up the Rod. When the Rod was upon Davids back, O how doth he cleave to God, even as the Wife cleaves to her Hus∣band; for so much the Hebrew word Dabak in that Psal. 63. 8. imports. So when Job was un∣der the Rod, O how doth he cling about God! Job. 13. 21.
 Though he slay me, yet will I trust in him. Job will hang up∣on a killing God. So the Church in that Psal. 48. 15, 16, 17, 18, &c. So those hundred fourty and four thousand that had their Fathers names written in their foreheads, Rev. 14. 1,—6. O Friends, you never shew so much Child-like love, nor so much Child-like ingenuity, nor so much Child-like inte∣grity, as you do shew when under the smarting Rod, you are found clinging about the Lord, and hanging upon the Lord by an exercise of grace. When Antistenes held up his Staffe, as if he intended to beat on of his Scholers out of his School, the Scholar told him, that he might strike him if he pleased, but he should never find a staffe of so hard wood, as should ever be able to beat him
 him from him. When no Staff, no Rod, no Affliction, can drive us from Christ, it is a sure ar∣gument that we have profited much in the School of Christ. But,
The Sixth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod, (or by the raging Pestilence,) is to prepare to meet the Lord whi∣lest the Rod is in his hand, Am. 4. 12. Therefore thus will I do unto thee, O Israel: and be∣cause I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God, O Isra∣el. Now there is a two-fold preparation.
The First is a Negative pre∣paration, and this lyes in tak∣ing heed of sinning against Light and Conscience; for those sins that are against a clear Light, and an awakened Con∣science, are most wounding, wa∣sting, terrifying, and damn∣ing.

 Secondly, There is a Posi∣tive preparation, and that con∣sists in repentance & returning to the Lord, and in abasing and humbling your selves before 2 Chron. 7. 14. the Allmighty. As there is no running from God, so there is no contending with God; for what is the chaff to the Whirlwind, or the stubble to a consuming fire? And therefore the voyce of the Rod is, Pre∣pare to meet the Lord in a way of faith, and repentance; pre∣pare to meet the Lord in an exercise of grace; prepare to meet the Lord with pray∣ers, and tears, and strong cryes. But,
The Seventh Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging Pestilence,) is to acknowledge Gods soveraign power and authority over the Rod, to bow it, or break it, or
 burn it, or take it off, or lay it more or less on, as he pleas∣eth. Mic. 6. 13. Deut. 28. 58, 59, 60, 61. All diseases and sicknes∣ses are under the command of God, they are all his Sergeants, his servants, to execute his pleasure: That Mat. 8. 5. is an observable Text; Christ tells the Centurion, that he would come and heal his ser∣vant; the Centurion tells him, that he was not worthy that he should come under his roof, only if he would but speak the word, his servant should be healed; For (saith he vers. 9.) I am a man under Authority, having Souldiers under me: & I say to this man go, and he go∣eth; and to another come, and he cometh; and to my servant do this and he doth it. Now when Jesus heard this, he mar∣velled, and said to them that followed, Verily, I say unto you,
 I have not found so great faith, no not in Israel, vers. 10. But wherein did the greatness of the Centurions faith appear? why, in this very acknowledg∣ment, that all diseases were to Christ as servants, and that they were as much under the command of Jesus Christ, as a∣ny servant under heaven is under the command of his Master: When Christ bids them go and afflict such a man, they go; and torment such a man, they go; and kill such a man, they go; and so when he calls them off, they come off at his call. Dear Friends, it is a very great point of faith to believe these five things.
First, that God is the author of all the diseases, malladies, and sicknesses, that be in the World, and that he sets them on and call them off at his own
 good will and pleasure, Amos Lev. 26. Deut. 28. 3. 6. Is there any evil in the Ci∣ty, and hath not the Lord done it? He speaks of the evil of punishment, and not of the e∣vil of sin. It was a mad Prin∣ciple among the Manichees, who refer'd all calamities to the Devil for their author, as if there could be evil in the City, and the Lord have no hand in it.
Secondly, It is a great point of Faith to believe, that all diseases and sicknesses are li∣mited by God, in respect of places. God sent diseases of all sorts into Egypt, but he forbad them Goshen, Exod. 8. 20, 21, 22, 23. Chap. 9, 23, 24, 25, 26. Ponder seriously upon these Scriptures. Gods shoot∣ing his arrows into one Town, and not into another, into one City, and not into another, in∣to
 one Kingdome, and not in∣to another, into one family, & not into another, doth suffici∣ently evidence, that all diseas∣es, and sicknesses, are limited by the Holy One of Israel, in respect of places.
Thirdly, It is a very great point of Faith, to believe that all sicknesses, and diseases, are limited by God in respect of persons; that they are so, is evident in that Psal. 91. 3,—8. Isa 65. 12. But who lives in the faith of this truth? Some∣times in the same house one is infected, and the other is not; sometimes in the same bed, the one is smitten, and the other is not; sometimes at the same table, the one is taken away, and the other is left, &c. and this doth roundly evidence and witness, that all sicknesses and diseases are limited by
 God in respect of persons, as well as in respect of places. But,
Fourthly, It is a great point of Faith, to believe that all diseases and sicknesses are li∣mited by God in respect of the degrees to which they shall a∣rise. That God that sets bounds to the raging Sea, and that saith unto it, Thus far shalt thou go, and no further; that God sets bounds to all raging diseases and sicknesses, and saith unto them, thus far you shall go, and no further: He sets bounds to the Feaver; he saith to it, go and scorch and burn up such a body so much, and no more; and to the Drop∣sie, go and drown such a body so much, and no more; and to the raging Pestilence, go and weaken such a body so much, and no more; and to the
 Stone, go and torment such a body so much, and no more. But,
Fifthly, It is a very great point of Faith, to believe that all diseases and sicknesses are limited by God, as to their con∣tinuance: God saith to one disease, go hang upon such a man, so many years; to another, go hang up such a man but a few years; and to another, go hang upon such a man but a year; and to another, go hang upon such a man but a few months; and to another, go hang upon such a man but a few weeks; and to another, go hang upon such a man but a few dayes; and to another, go hang upon such a man but a few hours, &c. and accord∣ingly it cometh to pass. But,
The eighth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod, (or
 by the raging Pestilence) is, to Gal. 5. 24. 1 Cor. 7. 29, 30, 31. Eccl. 1. 2. Prov. 23. 5. Jer. 45. 4, 5 get more weaned, and more mortified affections to all worldly comforts, content∣ments, and enjoyments. A man never comes to experience so much of the emptiness, the no∣thingness, the uselesness, the vanity, the mutability, the im∣potency, the insufficiency, and the uncertainty of all worldly comforts, and enjoyments, as when he comes to fall under the Rod. The constant cry of the Rod is, Be dead to the profits, pleasures, honours, and applauses of the world, be dead to relations, be dead to friends, be dead to every thing below a living Jesus. But,
The ninth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging Pestilence) is, to get assurance of greater, and better things, than any this
 world doth afford. That say∣ing Heb. 10. 33, 34. is as true, as it is old, viz. That the assurance of an eter∣nal life, is the life of this tem∣poral life: But having spoke so much of this particular in my Treatise on Assurance, which is now in your hands, I shall satisfie my self with this hint at present. But,
The tenth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging Pestilence,) is, not to despise the Rod, Heb. 12. 5. My Son, despise not thou the chastening of the Lord. The Greek Word  that is translated despise, signifies the littling of a thing: O do not little the Rod, do not lessen it, do not slight it, do not make a tush at it, do not set light by it, do not say, I will not regard it, he that doth, shews him∣self, rather to be a Roman, than
 a Christian. Now because there is such a desperate aptness & proness in many to make light of the Rod, it will be your wisdom seriously to lay to heart these four particulars.
First, That it is an immedi∣ate hand of God; and there∣fore not to be despised: 'Tis a Am. 3. 6. Deut. 28. 58, 59, 60, 61. sad and sinful thing to despise the mediate hand of God; but 'tis more sad and sinful to de∣spise the immediate hand of God. But,
Secondly, 'Tis a mighty hand of God, 1 Pet. 5. 6. Hum∣ble your selves under the migh∣ty hand of God, that he may ex∣alt you in due time. Certainly Am. 4. 10. 11. Ez. 38. 22, 23. that heart must be mightily wicked, that dares despise the mighty hand of God. But,
Thirdly, 'Tis an angry hand of God; and therefore do not despise it, Psal. 90. 7. For we
 are consumed by thy anger, and by thy wrath are we troubled. Vers. 11. Who knoweth the power of thine anger? even ac∣cording to thy fear, so is thy Num. 16. 46. Ez. 33. 27, 28. 29, Deut 29. 22. 23, 24. 25 wrath. Shall Devils tremble under his angry hand? Yea shall they roar, as the Sea un∣der his  wrathful hand, as that Greek word . im∣ports, in that James 2. 19. And will you presume to despise his angry hand? the Lord for∣bid. but,
Fourthly and lastly, Consi∣der, that it is a holy hand, it is a just and righteous hand, it is a faithful hand of God; and therefore do not despise it, Jer. 29. 17, 18, 19. Lev. 26. 25. Jer 14. 12, 13, 14. 15. 16 Psal. 119. 75. I know, O Lord, that thy Judgmentt are right, (or righteousness) and that thou in faithfulness hast affli∣cted me. Vers. 137. Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright
 are thy Judgments. Certainly none but unholy persons will be so impudent, as to despise Gods holy hand. Well,
The Eleventh Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging Pestilence,) is, not to be discouraged un∣der the Rod, Heb. 2. Nor Jer. 27. 13. 2 Sam. 24. 10, 17. faint when thou art rebuked of him. First, It is a Rod in a fathers hand; and therefore do not faint under it. Secondly, God will do much good by the Rod; and therefore do not faint un∣der the Rod. Thirdly, You could not have been without the Rod; and therefore do not faint under the Rod.
Fourthly, The Rod that is now upon, is not according to the greatness of Gods anger, nor according to to the great∣ness of his power, nor accord∣ing to the strictness of his Ju∣stice,
 nor according to the de∣merits of your sins, nor accord∣ing to the malitious desires of Satan, nor according to the de∣signes, plots, and contrivances, of wicked and unreasonable men, nor according to the ex∣tensiveness of your fears, for you have feared worse things than you feel, nor according to that Rod that hath been upon the Primitive Saints, nor accor∣ding to that Rod, that many thousands of the precious sons and daughters of Zion are un∣der in other parts of the world, and therefore do not faint un∣der the Rod, do not be discou∣raged under the Rod.
Fifthly, by fainting under the Rod, you will gratifie Satan, re∣proach religion, render your selves unserviceable, and make work for future Repentance; and therefore do not faint un∣der the Rod. But,

 The Twelfth Lesson that you 2 Chron. 32. 25, 26. Lev. 26. 40, 41, 42. Mic. 7. 9. Lam. 3. 30. Luke 21. 10. are to learn under the Rod (or by the raging Pestilence) is, humbly to kiss the Rod, and patiently & qui∣etly to lye under the Rod, till the Lord shall either give you a graci∣ous or a glorious deliverance from it. What is the Rod, and what is the raging Pestilence, to the horrors of Conscience, to the flames of hell, or to an everlasting separation from the presence of the Lord, and 2 Thes. 1.  8, 9. from the glory of his power? And therefore put your mouths in the dust, and be silent before the Lord. He that hath deserved a hanging, if he escape with a whipping, hath no cause to murmur or complain; and we that have deserved a dam∣ning, have little cause to murmur or complain of a whipping, yea, though it should be with a Pestilen∣tial-Rod. But,
The thirteenth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod or by the raging Pestilence) is, highly, fully, freely, and signally to justifie the Lord, and to think well of the
 Lord, & to speak well of the Lord, under the Rod; to that purpose consult these Scriptures, Psal. 119. 75, 137. Neh. 9. 33. Ezr. 9. 13. Lam. 1. 3, 5, 7, 8, 10, 4, 15, 18. Dan. 9. 12. 14. 2 Kings 20. 16, 17, 18, 19. Jer. 12. 1, 2. Psal. 129. 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Psal 22. 1, 2, 3. Psal. 97. 2. But,
The fourteenth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging Pestilence) is, personal refor∣mation. When the Rod smarts, & the Pestilence rageth, God expects that every man should smite upon his thigh, and turn from the evil of his doings, 2 Chron. 7. 13, 14. If I shut up heaven, that there be no rain, or if I command the locusts to devour the Land, or if I send Pestilence among my people: If my people which are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray, & seek my face, & turn from their wicked wayes; then will I hear from hea∣ven, & will forgive their sin, & will heal their Land; that is, I will remove the judgments that are upon the Land, & I will confer upon my reforming people all those favours & blessings that they stand
 in need of. Consult these Scriptures, Ezr. 10. 14, 19. 2 Chron. 30. 8, 9. And chap. 29. 8, 10, 15, 16. But,
The Fifteenth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging Pestilence) is, to make God your habitation, your shelter, your refuge. Ponder seriously upon these Scriptures, Psal. 91. 2, 9, 10. Psal. 90. 1. Psal. 71. 3. Psal. 57. 1. They dwell most safely, most securely, most nobly, who dwell in God, who live under the shadow of the All∣mighty, and who every day lodge their souls in the bosome of eternal loves. But,
The Sixteenth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or the ra∣ging Pestilence) is, to set up God as the great object of your fear, Psal. 119. 119, 120. Isa. 8. 7, 8, 13, 14. com∣pared. When the Judgments of God are either threatned or executed, feared or felt, it highly concerns us to lift up God, as the main object of our fear; we should fear the hand that layes on the Rod, more than Job 13. 11. Jer. 36. 24. the Rod it self. When God takes up
 the Rod, when he draws his sword, and when he shoots his Pestilential arrows amongst us, O how highly doth it concern us to fear before him with a child-like fear, with a reverential fear, with a fear that for∣tifies the heart against sin, and with a fear that fits the Soul for duty, & that draws, yea drives the soul to duty. But,
The seventeenth lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging Pestilence) is, to expect Gods singular presence with you, and his admirable protection over you. Consult these Scriptures, Isa. 43. 2. Dan. 3. 24, 25. Gen. 39. 39, 40. Psal. 23. 4, 5. Psal. 91. Isa. 63. 9. Isa. 26. 20, 21. Ezek. 9. 4, 6. God is above his peo∣ple, and beneth them, Deut. 33. 25, 26, 27. He is under them, and over them, Cant. 2. 6. He is before them, & behind them, Isa. 52. 12. & chap. 58. 8. He is on the right hand of his people, and he is on the left hand of his people, Psal. 16. 8. Psal. 121. 5. Ps. 118. 15, 16 Exod. 14. 22, 29. God is round about his people, Psal. 34. 7.
 Psal. 125. 2. And God is in the midst of his people, Zech. 2. 5. Psal. 46. 5. Psal, 12. 6 O the safety, the security of the poor people of God, for God is above his people & beneth them, he is under them & over them, he is before them & behind them, he is in the front, & in the rear, and he is round about them, and in the midst of them. But,
The eighteenth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging Pestilence) is to live every day in a fresh, choice, & frequent excer∣cise of grace. Consult these Scrip∣tures, Psal. 91. 2, 3, 4. Jer. 39. 17, 18. Mic. 7. 7, 8, 9. Psal. 40. 1, 2. Hab. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. Jer. 30. 1. That man that lives dayly in an exercise of grace, that man lives every day in heaven on this side heaven, what-ever af∣fliction or judgment he is under.
The Ninteenth Lesson that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging Pestilence) is, to quicken up your hearts to seek the Lord by ex∣traordinary wayes & means, viz. by fasting & prayer. Consult these
 Scriptures, Num. 16. 46,—ult. Psal. 106. 23, 29, 30. Isa. 22. 2, 3, 4, 5, 12, 13. Jon. 3. 5,—ult. 2 Chron. 12. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Kings 21. 21,—ult. Joel 2. 12, 13, 14, 15. 16, 17. But,
The Twentieth, and so the last Lesson, that you are to learn by the Rod (or by the raging pestilence) is, To prepare for death, it is to be in actual readiness to dye. Ah Friends, every ach, every pain, every disease, is one of deaths warning pieces. There is not a head-ach, not a tooth-ach, not a gripe, not a grief, not a fall, not a wrench, not a plague-sore; but is a divine warning to man, to prepare to die. 'Tis a soleemn work to die, and therefore we had need prepare to die. 'Tis a work that is to be done but once; and therefore we had need prepare to do that work well, that is to be done but once. In this world, we hear often, & pray often, & read often, and medi∣tate often, & eat often, & drink of∣ten, Job 14. 14. Heb. 9. 27. and that which is worst, we sin often; but we must die but once. Death will try all our graces, & all our experi∣ences, & all our evidences, & all our com∣forts,
 & all our attainments, and all our He that would see more of this, may read my String of Pearls, and the Fune∣ral Sermon that is at the end of my Book of Assu∣rance. enjoyments; and therefore we had need to prepare to die. Though there is no∣thing more certain than death, yet there is nothing more uncertain than, 1. The time when we shall die. 2. The place where we shall die. And 3. The manner how we shall die; as whether we shall die a sudden death, or a lingring death, or a violent death; or whether we shall fall by the sword abroad, or by famine or pestilence at home, or whether we shall fall by this dis∣ease or that; and therefore we had need be alwayes in an actual readi∣ness to die. No man shall die the sooner, but much the easier, and the better, for preparing to die: And therefore let us alwayes have our loins girt, and our lamps burning. As death leaves us so Judgment will find us; and there fore we have very great cause to se∣cure our interest in Christ, a chang∣ed nature, and a pardon in our bo∣somes; that so we might have no∣thing to do, but to die. Except, we prepare to die, all other preparations will
 do us no good. In a word, Death is a change, a great change, 'tis the the last change till the resurrection, 'tis lasting, yea, an everlasting change; for it puts a man into an eternall condition of happi∣ness or misery; 'tis an universal change, all persons must pass under this flaming Sword. That Statute Law, Dust thou art, and unto dust thou shalt return, will Gen. 3. 18. sooner or later take hold on all mortals; and therefore it highly concerns us to prepare for death.
And thus I have shewn you these Lessons that you are to learn by the Rod. The Lord grant that your souls may fall under those fresh, those choice, those full, and those constant influences and communi∣cations of his holy Spirit, as may enable you to take out those twen∣ty Lessons that I have laid open before you. I confess the Epistle is large, but do but consider your own conditions, and the present dispen∣sations under which we are cast, & then I suppose you will not call it by the name of, a tedious Epistle.
Dear Friends, the following dis∣course
 on Closet-prayer, I heartily re∣commend to your serious perusal: I have many reasons to hope, that when you have once read it over, you will be more in love with Clo∣set-prayer than ever, & that you will set a higher price upon Closet-prayer than ever, & that you will make a better and fuller improvement of Closet-prayer, than ever yet you have done. Consider what I say in my Epistle to the Reader, & labour so to manage this little Treatise, that now I put into your hands, that God may be glorified, your own souls edified, comfored & encoura∣ged in the wayes of the Lord, and that you may be my Crown and joy, in the great day of our Lord Jesus. So 1 Thes. 2. 19, 20. wishing that the good will of him that dwelt in the bush, may abide upon you and yours for ever, I take leave and rest,
Dear Friends,

