


Doctor,
I Am heartily glad that a Person of your Learning
and Parts has taken up the Cudgels against the whole
College of Physicians; and notwithstanding your
great Modesty have set your Face against so Learned and
Ingenious a Society. I must confess, I have a prety
good stock of Confidence my self, and perhaps dare at∣tack
any single Person whatever, nay even Mr. Bays him∣self,
but to attack such a Body of Men of Learning and
Sense, I must yield is a Task only fit for your Manage∣ment,
who I dare boldly say can rail as bluntly as any
Oyster-Wench at Billingsgate. Therefore as you have
began to make 'um appear a parcel of Sots, and perjured
Villains (as your witty Queries seem to import) I beg
the Favour of you to go on without any Consideration (as you
have done already) and perhaps in time you may prove
'um all Whores, and Rogues, Vagabonds, Persons that
had neither Fathers, or Mothers, and what not? For if
any can prove it, I believe it must be you, no Body else
daring to attempt to prove Matters of so great Conse∣quence,
because they want your Learning and Knowledg
to go through with it. Take only this Caution, Dear
Doctor, in the Management of your Affairs: Let not the
Multitude of Business distract your Regular Thoughts
(your Head being a little out of order sometime) lest
you grow apt to forget what you have said of 'um be∣fore,

and as you have in the Lump call'd 'um a parcel of
Perjur'd Villians, so don't publickly talk and say that the're
about 10, or 12 Honest Fellows amongst 'um. This w'ont do
my Friend; to say they are all Rogues, and some of that
All are honest Men, is a little Illogical, neither doth it sa∣vour
much of an University Education, thô it may suit
well enough perhaps with Yours. The Irish Evidence
that ignorantly swore a Person of Quality into the Popish
Plot, thought he could make no juster Retaliation to him
than by swearing of him out again. Now if you intend
to follow the steps of this worthy Evidence, and as you
have stigmatized the Fellows of the College with abun∣dance
of hard Names, so to make 'um amends you will
endeavour to give 'um as good Characters as Moral Ho∣nesty
and Christianity obliges you to do; I think you
propose a fair method of Reconciliation, and perhaps even
against their own Inclinations, out of meer Compassion,
and not respect to your Merit, they may vouchsafe to ad∣mit
you into their Society. This Advice, my Friend, I
think is very seasonable, and were I a Member of the
Colledge I would endeavour all I could to procure your
Admittance upon your Submission: but if you will still
continue in an obstinate and perverse Humour of railing,
I think you will justly forfeit that good Opinion which
Indifferent Judges have of the Hardship of your Case (if
any such there were) and be fit only to be bray'd in that
necessary Instrument of your former Profession, a Mortar.
These are the real Sentiments of,

