



MY LORD;
I present vnto your Exllency a vindi∣cation of both Churchs, vvhich a viper has endeauoured to byte, that the Catholick has bred in her bosom; to follovv the
Truth (if vve belieue him) he forsooke all that vvas Deare vnto him, he might haue vsed that phrase of S. Peter since that vvhat he had to forsake, vvas but Net∣lyke; but iustly may vvee think he ex∣pected from Your Excellency, as S. Peter had from Christ, a return of a Seat; not such as Peter obtained, but as the children of Zebedee did pretend. But your Excel∣lency, vvhose Decrees are liuing Ecchos of the Royal sentiments, vvill adiudge him rather a Chalice to drink, than a Seat to exalt him; a Chalice, I say, such as the Royal Piety of King Iames prescribed to those of his blasphemous opinion, in the meeting of his Clergy at Southampton: VVee detest in this point the cruelty of the Puritans, and iudge them vvor∣thy of fyre, vvho affirm, that in the Po∣pish Religion a man may not be saued.
My Lord, all sober men of both Religions desire the execution of this sentence, against this impious assertion, pronounced in your
Excellencies hearing, and giuen vnto you in print (to profane both your eares, and eyes vvith a repeated blasphemy) by a late Re∣uolted from our Church, and that, not only for a reuenge of the iniury don to your Ex∣cellency in particular, in adiudging your Noble Ancestors (vvho allmost all dyed in that Profession) vnto Hell; nor for con∣demning his ovvn to the like misery, (if, for being of the simple sort, he vvill not plead for their saluation) but for the iniury don to Christian Piety, to vvhich that Po∣sition is contrary in the iudgment of all learned Protestants.
But vvhat makes this execrable Position vnpardonable in our Aduersary, is that his ovvn vvords accuse him to speake a∣gainst his conscience: pag. 116. he saies, Their Tenets are inconsistent vvith sal∣uation, though ignorance may haply excuse many of the simple sort, but not such as knovv, or vvith due care and en∣quiry, may knovv their error. By this he
exclues all VVyse men of our Profession from saluation, and affords it only to the simple sort, or those vvho haue an inuin∣cible ignorance. That heerin he speakes against his conscience, its most apparent; for in his discourse he often styles Tho∣mas Aquinas a Saint; the first Reformers, and Passionat Sectaries degraded the Saints of their Canonization, but Mr Sall, as yet, retains the respect due to their glorious memory. VVhateuer he might say of others, he knovvs vvell that S. Thomas Aquinas vvas of the Roman Religion, a fryer of S. Dominicks Orders; None of the simple sort, or that could be inuincibly ignorant, being vvell vers'd in Scripture and an Eminent Master in most sciences; He belieued, professed, and taught our Tenets of Real Presence, Purgatory, &c. He vvas then in Mr Salls iudgment a Saint reigning in Heauen, and at the same tyme is condemned by him to hell, because he belieued and professed Tenets inconsi∣stents
vvith saluation: is not this to spea∣ke against his conscience?
He had vvit, My Lord, to vnderstand, he could not iustify his separation from our Church, if in our Church there vvas not somvvhat, inconsistent vvith saluation: for to separat from the true Church, vnder pretence of her being guilty of som errors, and of reforming her, by purging her from those errors, if the errors be not quite dam∣nable, and inconsistent vvith saluation, is so far from being lavvfull, that such Refor∣mers cannot be excused from Schism: All things should be endured (saies S. Denis of Alexan. apud Euseb. Hist. Eecl. l. 6. c. 25.) rather, than to consent to the di∣uision of the Church of God; and saies Iren. l. 4. cont. Heret. c. 62. No so im∣portant Reformation can be made, as the Euil of Schism is pernicious, for if those Errors be consistent vvith saluation, then they are no necessary cause obliging to a separation; the separation from the
true Church is Schismatical and damnable, vvhen there is no need, or necessary cause for separating; consequently, to separat from the true Church for Errors vvhich are consistent vvith saluation is a most dam∣nable Schism. Mr Sall felt, perhaps, the force of this consideration, and to iustify his separation from the Church vttered that horrid blasphemy of errors in her inconsi∣stent vvith saluation.
May it please, Your Excellency to con∣sider vvhat an iniury he does to your cause in seeking to iustify it by an assertion so contrary to your Church, and so odious to your Excellencies Piety, That there is no saluation in the Catholik Church, That her errors are inconsistent vvith saluation. It's far from your Excellencies Piety to belieue that S. Thomas Aqui∣nas, admired by the VVord for his learning and sanctity, vvas condemn'd to Hell, and yet he belieued and taught the Real Pre∣sence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament:
it's therefore no error inconsistent vvith saluation. Your Excellencie vvill not be∣lieue that S. Augustin is in Hell, vvho professed and taught the Tenet of Purga∣torie, as appears in his Ench. c. 119. lib. 9. Conf. c. 13. and lib. de Haeres. c. 53. vvhere he condemns Aetius as an Heretick, for denying sacrifice should be offered for the dead. Purgatory therefore is no Error in∣consistent vvith saluation: Your Excellen∣cie vvill not patiently heare any man to say that S. Hierom is eternally damn'd, and yet he thaught the veneration and vse of the sign of the Cross Epist. ad Dem. and the veneration of Relicks of Saints lib. cont. Vi∣gil. S. Chrysostom praied and exhorted to pray to Saints Hom. 43. in Gen. Hom. 5. & 8. in Mat. and must vvee say that Chrysostom is damn'd to Hell? These are the Errors, vvhich Mr Sall affirms to be in∣consistent vvith Saluation; These are the Tenets, in vvhose Profession he sayes, no VVyse and Learned Man can be saued,
impiously condemning to Hell the fore∣mentioned, Saints vvhich the Christian VVorld reueres for the Pillars of the Chnr∣ch, and not only them but all VVyse men Seculars and Ecclesiastick of all precedent ages to Luther, if inuincible ignorance did not excuse them, vvhich they could not pre∣tend, nor can vvee imagin they could haue, being the most learned Doctors of Gods Church.
If this Treatise did contain nothing else but a check of this rash and impious asser∣tion, it vvould not be vngratefull to your Excellencie; but had I left any thing vn∣examined of vvhat he treats in his discour∣se, he vvould interpret my silence his ovvn Victory, and flattering himself vvith a fond persvvasion of the euidence of his argu∣ments, vvould think vnansvverable, vvhat∣euer vvere not ansvvered. And though he touches but lightly the Controuersy of the Necessity of an infallible liuing iudge of Controuersies; yet for the respect I ovvn to
Your Excellencie I endeauour to fathom this question: I say for the respect I ovv to your Excellency, for vvanting nothing to an accomplisht happiness vnder your Excy's Gouernment, but Vnity of subiects in Faith and Communion, the greatest obli∣gation I can cast on them, and testimony of my Duty I can exhibit vnto your Excel∣lency, is to shevv, by vvhat means vvee may attain to that Vnity; vvhich is no o∣ther, than a liuing infailible Iudge, from vvhom vvee are to receiue the true fence of Scripture. I vvish my endeauors may be as successfull, as my inclinations are reall to shevv my self in all occasions,
MY LORD,

