



Great Potentate, under the
Administration of JESUS,
THis Address at first may seem an Enthusia∣stical
Strain, but upon farther perusal it will
be found otherwise. Christ being Adult, or
of Age, in his Church, in her Favour gives
the Kingdoms of this World to whom he plea∣ses.
During His (or Her) Minority, Satan Ʋsurped the
Power, and Let his Whore a Lease thereof for 1260 Years.
But these Expiring, All the Kingdoms of the World Devol∣ved
upon him, as Lord in Chief, Heir of All Things, and
Head over All to the Church. The Time of this Grand
Devolution, happened in the Time of our late Harvest, when
He sent aO. C. Bold Herald to Claim His Right, and to Demand
of The Guardians or Two Old Anointed Ones, their Staves of
Authority: These Staves are Power Spiritual and Temporal,
called by the Prophet Beauty and Bands: These the Herald
took and Cut in Sunder before all the People, thereby Cancel∣ling
the Old Covenant which God had made with them. This
Publick Act was a most Solemn Act of Abolition, and Abroga∣ted
Representatively all the Powers in the World.

The Old Cedar and Vine being thus Lopt, the immediate
succeeding Powers were to be considered no otherwise but as
Parents, or Adminicula to the Two New Branches, or Two
New Anointed Ones, represented by the said Prophet by Two
Olive Branches. The Power and Promises belong to These, who
are to Minister or Stand before The LORD of the Whole
Earth, under the Dispensation of a New Covenant: These are
foretold by the Man whose Name is the Branch, and Joshua;
The One is to be a King on his Throne, and the Other is to be a
Priest upon his Throne; And the Counsel of Peace is to be be∣twixt
them both.
GREAT SIR,
You are the Man whose Name is the BRANCH: The Tree
of Monarchy was Planted in the East, but was Cut Down in
the West, and You are the Branch that grows in its Room. The
Lord of the Ʋniverse hath Preferred You before all the Kings
of the Earth: His Ship run A-drift, and You are the First
Pilot He has Chose to Steer It. Your Commission is to Drive
the Wild Beasts out of His Forrest, that His Flocks may Feed,
and lie Down in Safety; And there is no Doubt but He will
Assist You in it
Now since He has Presented You with the First Staff, and
Honour'd You with the First Fruits of Power, That he would
also Honour You with the First Fruits of His Spirit, and Enable
You to perform all His Good Pleasure, Is the Hearty Prayer of

