



May it please your Worship,
'TIS not long, since thrusting such Books as this in∣to the Press, was like thrusting ones hand in∣to a nest of Hornets; when

neither Innocence, nor Maje∣sty, nor any thing that's sa∣cred, could be sufficient Fence against the pungent and veno∣mous Detractions of a waspish sort of Sectaries. And then indeed it was but needful, in behalf of such Books as this, to ask the Patronage of some such as your self; whose stanch Loyalty in the late distin∣guishing and perilous times, those days of Danger and Re∣buke, was yet so truly Heroick, as to dare to look Faction in the face, and oppose it even then, when most Insolent and Domineering. A practice on grounds of Reason so truly Generous; on grounds of Chri∣stianity so Religious, as

makes your late Promotion, a due Debt to your Merit, as your Merit is to your self. But now blessed be God, that by wonted Miracle of Preser∣vation, has made the King great in his Salvation; has in great measure given him the Hearts of his Subjects, and the Necks of his Ene∣mies; has turned our threat∣ned Captivity back; and made our English Zion like to be the praise of the whole Earth.
So that now the design of this Dedication, is cheifly this, To publish to the World my grateful acknowledgment of your great Favours, presuming that the good design of this

little Book, will help to sa∣tisfie for its great defects; especially, if it be interpreted, as Divines interpret Parables, Quae non sunt argumenta∣tive ultra suum Scopum: The Scope or Intention of it, being no more than such an imperfect Schismatology, as may instruct but the vulgar Reader, in some little of that great agreement between the Modern Schismaticks, and those of Old; which I take to be a Novel expedient, whereby to endeavour (as every honest man ought) the exposal of that pernicious Sin of Schism, the depluming of that Church mon∣ster of all such thievish Bra∣very, and popular Decoy, as

erroneous conscienciousness, and specious Pretensions to Sancti∣ty beyond holier Persons than themselves; to expose this vile Sin to the publik view (like Aesops Crow) to be reviled and hooted at, as the very pest of Societies, and bane of Christianity, fatal to Churches and Kingdoms, detestable and odious to God and Good Men; worse (said the Fathers) thanDionys. ap. Euseb. l. 6. Idolatry,Opt. l. 1. Sacriledg, orChrysost. ad. Eph. p. 823. Heresie, and yet now a days so little made Conscience of. This is chiefly the design of this little Book, and my ac∣knowledgments to your Worship is the design of its Dedication; as also to beg the encourage∣ment of your Worships Appro∣bation;

and to contribute a wish to the long continuance of your happiness here, and the compleatment of it here∣after; which is, honoured Sir, the hearty prayer of

