


HAd I not observed thatPlempius, Cabeus, &c. Purblinde men have discoursed well of Sight, and someDr. Harvy. without Issue excellently of Generation; I, that was ne∣ver Master of any considerable Garden, had not attempted this Subject. But the Earth is the Garden of Nature, and each fruitfull Countrey a Paradise. Dio∣scorides made most of his Observations in his March about with Antonius; and Theophrastus raised his Generalities chiefly from the Field.
Beside, we write no Herball, nor can this Volume deceive you, who have handled theBesleri Hor∣tus Eystetensis. massiest thereof; who know that threeBauhini Theatrum Botanicum, &c. Folio's are yet too little, and how New Herbals fly from A∣merica upon us: from persevering Enquirers, andMy wor∣thy Friend M. Goodier, an ancient and learned Botanist. old in those singularities, we expect such Descriptions; whereinAs in Lon∣don and divers parts, whereof we mention none, left we seem to omit any. Eng∣land is now so exact, that it yields not to other Countreys.
We pretend not to multiply vegetable divisions by Quincuncial and Reticulate Plants, or erect a new Phytology. The Field of Knowledge hath been so traced▪ it is hard to spring any thing new. Of old things we write something new: if Truth may receive ad∣dition, or Envy will have any thing new; since the Ancients knew the late Anatomicall discoveries, and Hippocrates the Circu∣lation.
You have been so long out of trite Learning, that 'tis hard to finde a Subject proper for you; and if you have met with a Sheet upon this, we have missed our intention. In this multiplicity of writing, bye and barren Themes are best fitted for Invention; Subjects so often discoursed confine the Imagination, and fix our conceptions unto the Notions of Fore-writers. Beside, such Dis∣courses allow excursions, and venially admit of collateral Truths, though at some distance from their principals. Wherein if we

sometimes take wide liberty, we are not single, but erre by greatHippocrates de Superfoeta∣tione, de Den∣titione. example.
He that will illustrate the excellency of this Order, may easily fail upon so spruce a Subject, wherein we have not affrighted the common Reader with any other Diagrammes then of it self, and have industriously declined illustrations from rare and unknown Plants.
Tour discerning Judgement, so well acquainted with that St∣dy, will expect herein no Mathematicall Truths, as well under∣standing how few Generalities andRules with∣out excepti∣ons. U finita's there are in nature. How Scaliger hath found exceptions in most Ʋniver∣sals of Aristotle and Theophrastus. Now Botanicall Max∣imes must have fair allowance, and are tolerably currant, if not intolerably over-balanced by Exceptions.
You have wisely ordered your Vegetable delights beyond the reach of exception. The Turks, who pass their days in Gardens here, will have Gardens also hereafter, and delighting in Flowers on Earth, must have Lilies and Roses in Heaven. In Garden-Delights it is not easie to hold a Mediocrity; that insinuating pleasure is seldome without some extremity. The Ancients veni∣ally delighted in flourishing Gardens; many were Florists that knew not the true use of a Flower; and in Plinie's days none had directly treated of that Subject. Some commendably affected Plantations of vertemous Vegetables, some confined their delights unto single Plants, and Cato seemed to dote upon Cabbage: while the ingenuous delight of Tulipists stands saluted with hard lan∣guage, even by their ownTulipomania, Narrecruijd, Laurenberg. Pet. Hondius in liv. Belg. Professors.
That in this Garden-Discourse we range into extraneous things, and many parts of Art and Nature, we follow herein the example of old and new Plantations; wherein noble spirits contented not themselves with Trees, but by the attendance of Aviaries, Fish-Ponds, and all variety of Animals, they made their Gardens the Epitome of the Earth, and some resemblance of the Secular Shows of old.
That we conjoyn these parts of different Subjects, or that this should succeed the other, your judgement will admit without im∣pute of incongruity; since the delightfull World comes after Death, and Paradise succeeds the Grave; since the verdant state of things is the Symbol of the Resurrection, and to flourish in the state of Glory, we must first be sown in Corruption. Beside the ancient

practice of Noble Persons, to conclude in Garden-Graves, and Ʋrns themselves of old, to be wrapt up in Flowers and Garlands.
Nullum sine venia placuisse eloquium, is more sensibly under∣stood by Writers then by Readers; nor well apprehended by either, till Works have hanged out like Apelles his Pictures; wherein even common eyes will finde something for emendation.
To wish all Readers of your abilities, were unreasonably to mul∣tiply the number of Scholars beyond the temper of these Times. But unto this ill-judging Age, we charitably desire a portion of your Equity, Judgement, Candour, and Ingenuity; wherein you are so rich, as not to lose by diffusion. And being a flourishing Branch of thatOf the most worthy Sr Edmund Ba∣con, prime Baronet, my true and noble Friend. Noble Family unto which we owe so much ob∣servance, you are not new set, but long rooted in such Perfection; whereof having had so lasting confirmation in your worthy Con∣versation, constant Amity and expression, and knowing you a se∣rious Student in the highest Arcana of Nature, with much ex∣cuse we bring these low Delights and poor Maniples to your Trea∣sury.

 Norwich, May 1.
