



WOrthy Senators; I (though far un∣worthy) having patched and peeced the Fine-spun∣cloath of the Prince of Poets,
 Divine Du-Bartas smooth elo∣quence, with my home-spunne ragges and course materials, and framed thereof a peece of rough Poetry, for my retired thoughts to repose in; presented the same in private to my judicious loving Master, the right Worshipfull Sr. James Cambell the senior Alderman of this famous City; which I had no sooner brought forth, but this Annuall World so closely followed those Poeti∣call Meditations, that I could not rest satisfied in my mind, till I had likewise produced it: and so after some pleasing labour and travell in divers Authours, I brought it to this maturity, and because they are as Twins, joy∣ned
 them both together, and pla∣ced the yonger before the elder, even as Jacob was by his father preferred before his brother E∣sau. But being conscious of mine owne inabilities I was unwilling and very fearefull to come into publique view, especially now in these curious times, wherin many strive to vent the froth of their owne Inventions into the presse. Therefore I did intend to stifle and smother these abortive Notions in the wombe that bore them, and keepe them for mine owne private use. But it so hap∣pened that some friends of mine having had the perusall of them perswaded and so overswayed me with their importunate solicita∣tions
 that to satisfie their de∣sires I am even compelled to put them into print. Yet fearing to meet with some envious Mo∣mus, who thouh he doe no good himselfe, delights to mocke and deride others, or some carping Zoylus, who to get himselfe fame and credit, will disparage other mens labours; I am bold for the safegard of this little Cottage, which I erected for my owne retired thoughts & recre∣ation (as by the frame thereof may appare) to seeke for shelter against the blustrous stormes of such Calumniators tongues and pennes under the roofe of your Honour and Worships protection▪ because I am not unknowne to
 most of you, by reason of my a∣tendance upon my said Master; who, as God hath prolonged his life to be called Pater Civitatis, so I doe humbly acknowledge he hath beene Nutritius meus for the space of 17. yeeres and up∣ward. Therefore in confidence of your favourable acceptance of these worthlesse expressions of my affections, I shall ver remaine,

3. Junii 1641. Dies Ascentionis Dom. nostri & salvatoris in Coelis.
