



Right Worshipful,
THis Sermon lately Preached in your hearing, I now present to your sight and Patronage; not doubting but it will find a benigne eye, where once it met with such an eare. The appointment, and command of the Magistrates of Ipswich made it my Duty, as a Servant to that Incorporation, to prepare a Sermon for the Publick Meeting of the County; which was no sooner Preached, but your Worship∣full selves, together with many other Noble and Worshipful Persons, were pleased to give me a courteous Summons, that you might signifie your favour towards me, and joynt desires of reading the Sermon ye had that day heard; how much I craved your excusing favour, as to Printing, ye
 can witness, and my conscience witness, my real heartiness in that request; and so confident was I, that the Noble Ingenuity of Gentlemen (espe∣cially such as know my distempers, which unfit me for any work, that tye me to a Chair) would pardon the omission of what is now done, that I had laid by all thoughts of penning this Ser∣mon for the Press, 'till it almost became too late to take them up: which I had not done, had not my Sermon been misreported, and made to speak many things which were never spoken by me in the Pulpit.
My aime was, to follow truth in order to Peace: In this I have the rejoycing, that the testimony of my Conscience affords; though it hath been my unhappiness, in passing between extreams, to meet with blowes on both ears; possibly too much conciseness, if not abrupt∣ness, that I was sometimes forced upon in preaching, being crouded up into a strait corner of time, might occasion mistake in some Au∣ditors. So far as this was my fault, or ra∣ther my happiness, I have labour'd the amend∣ment, and remove of it, by some amplifications in the Printing; which I have so mannaged,
 that the Sermon may be acknowledged by all that were ingenious hearers, to be the same for main substance and purpose which they heard. I know not of a word added, that alters the sence of any thing I delivered, nor do I remember a sentence spoken in the Pulpit that is here left out.
Such as it is, Honoured Sirs, (together with a thankful acknowledgment of the obligations that your favours and civilities have laid upon me) I humbly offer it to ye, as Gentlemen most concerned in that meeting of the Country that gave occasion for the Sermon. If there be any thing in it, that savours of unsound Doctrine, or ignorant zeal, I pray God shew me my mistake; keeping both you, and others in the mean time from erring with me: But what ever is in it of Doctrine according to Godliness, and tending to the real furtherance of purity, and peace; my Prayer shall be, That it may find fa∣vour and true acceptance in your eyes and hearts; so shall ye find favour, and good understanding in the sight of God and man.
The Wisdome from above, that we hear of by St. James, is the same that is mentioned
 by our Saviour, as a mother in the Israel of God: Her genuine off spring are but few, but the children that she hath will justifie her: She hath been grosly abused by some that have worn her childrens cloaths, and this hath brought her into so much contempt with wany in the world, that instead of abstaining from all appearance of evil, they scorn and abhor the very appearance of that, which the Apostle terms, the power of godliness, and hate the garment that is not spotted with some profaneness.
Evagrius telleth of one Symiones, who being a man of great Wisdome, miscarried in this, that to avoid the danger of vain-glory, he made it his usual practise to personate a fool when he came in company; but is there not a generation of worse contrivers, who behave themselves as if they purposely studied irreligon, and profaneness, that they may make sure to escape the suspition of hypocrisie? whilst in the mean time, with a sufficiency of confidence, they can condemn all as a brood of hypocrites, that have any thing in them of true Christian zeal, and are of a right, godly, and strict Conversation.
The Lord give ye, and all other worthy Gen∣tlemen,
 to quit your selves like men and Chri∣stians, in a faithful and couragious owning of that wisdome that is truly pure: and a∣mong other services that lye upon your hands, to use your best endeavours to rebuke and frown to death that spirit of profaneness, that, with too much daring boldness, lifts up his head in the land. Let all the world see that honourable Birth and Ex∣tract, that principles of Loyalty, Legality, and civil order, are far from being inconsistencies with the most attaineable heights of heavenly-minded Christianity, of holy zeal for God, and through reformation. Be lively patterns of it in your own Persons and Families, and vigorous promo∣ters of it in others. Such Friends and Cham∣pions of pure wisdome will loose nothing by it; for she promotes them that exalt her, and will bring to honour them that embrace her; to the heads of such she gives an Or∣nament of Grace, and will deliver to them a Crown of Glory, Prov. 4.8,9.
Ye have had time enough, worthy Patriots, to consider and lay to heart the miserable convul∣sions of your beloved Native Country, the woful jeopardies we have been exposed to in all that is
 dear to us, as Christians, and men. Ye have now, amongst other Honourable and Worshipful Per∣sons, a large opportunity, by the miraculous Pro∣vidence of God, put into your hands for healing the breaches, and setling the foundations of the Land: and blessed be God, that we can now say, We have a Parliament that may do us good if they will: Up, and be doing, and the Lord be with you. The difficulties that are before ye cannot be in∣considerable; ye have a skein of Silk in hand, to bring to rights, of which I may truly say, That it hath been the work of divers years past to per∣plex, and ruffle it; if any thing be done to pur∣pose, the wisdome that must guide ye must come from above; lift up your voices for it, that ye may understand righteousness, and judg∣ment, and equity, yea, every good path.
O let it not be out of your thoughts, that the eyes of God, Angels, and Men, and of your own consciences are intent upon ye; think often on us your poor Country men, who are full of expecta∣tions, waiting to see what God the Lord will do for us, by means of your wisdome, faithfulness, and courage; and let me take the boldness to put you in remembrance, that ye are now the Stewards of
 God for us; and that it concerns ye, as ye love your own Souls, so to mannage all your Parliamen∣tary actions, as if ye were assured at the instant of the Parliaments dissolution to be summoned by the most High, to give an account of your Stewardship. The Lord give ye a right under∣standing of the Times, to know what ought to be done in all concernments of Church and State. If ye know these things, happy shall ye and the Na∣tion be if ye do them: Take Hezekiah for an example, 2 Chron. 31.21. Who, in every work that he began in the service of the House of God, and in the Law, and in the Com∣mandments to seek his God, he did it with all his heart and prospered. That it may be thus with you, it shall be the Prayer; that it will be thus, it is the hope,
Right Worshipful,

