



AT my Return, after Four and Twenty Years ab∣sence from my Country, I desired nothing more than to review my Papers, that were dispersed, and many ways injured by the Iniquity of the Times: For I found, that the over-Officiousness of my Friends, to precipitate the Publication of what was yet unfit to see the Light, and that excessive Liberty which Trans∣cribers take to Censure the Works of other Men, had altered many Things, and corrupted others, according to their several Humours. But whilst I was endea∣vouring to remedy these Disorders, the sudden and unexpected Solicitations of my Friends broke my Mea∣sures; all of them, as if they had Conspired together, Exhorting me to lay aside Things of less Weight, that rather delight the Ear than instruct the Mind, and apply my self to Write the History of our Nation, as a Subject not only suitable to my Age, and sufficient to Answer the Expectation of my Country Men; but deserving great Commendation, and most fit to pre∣serve ones Memory to succeeding Ages. Amongst other Reasons, which I omit, they added, That though Bri∣tain be the most Famous Island in the World, and every part of its History contain most Remarkable Things; yet, scarce one was to be found in any Age, who durst attempt so great a Work, or had acquitted

himself, as the Subject deserved. Neither was it the least Inducement to this Vndertaking, that I hoped my pains herein would not be unfitting for, nor unac∣ceptable to, you. For it seemed to me Absurd and Shamefull, That You, who in this Your tender Age, have Read the Histories of all Nations, and retain very many of them in Your Memory, should only be a Stranger at Home. Besides, an incurable Distem∣per having made me unfit to discharge, in Person, the Care of Your Instruction, committed to me, I thought that sort of Writing, which tends to the Information of the Mind, would best supply the want of my At∣tendance, and resolved to send You Faithfull Counsel∣lors from History, that you might make use of their Advice in Your Deliberations, and imitate their Vir∣tue in Your Actions. For there are amongst Your Ancestors, Men Excellent in every Respect, of whom Posterity will never be ashamed; and, to omit others, You will hardly find in History, any one Worthy to be compared with our David. And if the Divine Goodness was so Liberal to him, in those most wretched and wicked Times, we may with Reason hope, That You may be (as the Royal Prophet says) A Pattern of all those Excellencies, which Mothers de∣sire in their Children, when they give them their best Wishes; and that this Government, which seems to be hurried on to Ruin and Destru∣ction, may be supported, 'till the time shall come, when all Sublunary Things having finished the Course ap∣pointed them by Gods Eternal Decree, shall arrive at their designed Period.
Edinburgh,
Aug. 30.
