



Honoured Friend,
WHereas accidentally (or rather as I hope, the Event will shew, providentially) I met with a small Tract Wrote many years since, but by whom, I know not, there being no name to it, Entituled, Liberty of Conscience Asserted and Vindicated, &c. being the 1st. Part of this Treatise: and having found it upon perusing, such an Emi∣nent Piece upon that Subject (at least in my apprehension) that I thought my self oblieged to Publish
 the same, both for the Information of the Magistracy, and such with whom the Execution of the Penal Statutes is left and committed: and also in favour of the Nonconfor∣mists in general, even of all Perswa∣sions amongst Protestant Dissen∣ters, who desire to live a quiet and peaceable Life under the Govern∣ment, who for Conscience sake, can∣not Conform to the Established Rules, Orders, Cannons, and Constitutions, and other Ceremo∣nies of Prelatical Institution for Worship and Discipline, and yet do, and desire to live a peaceable Life in all Godliness and Honesty under the Government; in both which respects, if diligently read and perused, I am perswaded it will be of good Service and Information.

And when I came to a Resolution to Publish the same, I thought it my Duty to Dedicate it to thy self, of whose Moderation I have had many years Experience, & of thy Christian Charity towards such as differ from thee in some Points of Religious Matters, of which I can produce ma∣ny Witnesses, to wit, all my Friends in the County of Suffolk, who lately stood Convict of Recusancy in the Exchequer, wherein thou didst not act the Part of the Proud Pharisee, who Salute their Brethren only; nor yet of the Priest, who can with∣out any sense of Pitty easily pass by, without taking any notice of the Suffering of others; nay, of∣ten times are the Cause of their Sufferings: But like the Merciful and Sympathizing Samaritan, took
 notice of our threatned Ruine, and prevented it, &c.
I am not unsensible, that many, yea, very many, are against Liberty of Conscience, and especially those of the Spirituality (so called) as a Thing intollerable and unsuffera∣ble, and not for the Kings Interest; and their Arguments for Force and Compulsion, and Corporal Punishments to be inflicted on the Nonconformists, are not a few; insomuch as that they too much re∣semble proud Haman, who in his Address to King Ahasuerus, cryed out in great Enmity, and said, There is a certain People scattered a∣broad, and dispersed amongst the People in all the Provinces of thy Kingdom, and their Laws are divers from all People, nei∣ther
 keep they the Kings Laws; Therefore it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them, &c. As in Esther, the 3d. and the 8th. And for a full Replication to all their Ar∣guments, Either against Liberty of Conscience, and the free Exercise of it, in Matters purely Spiritual, and a Christian Forbearance, and mutual Condiscention to such as dif∣fer from them in some Ceremo∣nies & other Notions in Church-Discipline and Order, AND FOR Corporal Punishment, Impositions, and Antichristi∣an Force upon Conscientious Dissenters for some Differences in Matters of Oppinion, I refer them to the First Part of this Treatise, wherein, in my Apprehension, the
 Answer lyes ready to all their Alli∣gations. Thus having discharged my Duty to my Country in general, and to thee in particular, I conclude, and rest a Lover of Peace, desiring the Continuance of it in this World, and that which is to come, both for my self, Neighbours, and as many as persue it. And Remain thy Friend in what I may or can.
Mildenhall, the 25th. of the 12th. Mo. 1681.

