


SIR,
THE Collecting into One Volume Several Choice Poems that were first Printed singly, met with so kind Reception as encourag'd the Publishing of the following Pieces together. Amongst the Former your celebrated Duel of the Stags made a Princi∣pal Figure; as indeed it will always shine a fixed Star in the highest Orb of English Poetry. Great and Eminent as you are in other Stations, yet I hope, Sir, you will not disdain to be Register'd amongst the Sons of Apollo. The Off-springs of your Muse are so Beautiful, that Great Britain is proud of 'em; and if you are not equally pleas'd with 'em, 'tis the first Instance of your Indifference towards any thing that does Honour to your Country. She glories that your Genius has not been confin'd to any single Walk of Poetry, but travers'd all its Provinces, and (like Hercules) every where erected Pillars and Trophies, to be gaz'd upon with wonder by Posterity. Nature and Art are equal sharers in all you Write; and whatever the Subject has been, Invention, Spirit, Manly Sense and Iudgment are never wanting to adorn it. You are, Sir, deservedly Admir'd for the Ingenuity of your Own Works, and no less for your generous Candour to the Performances of Other Men. You are no rigid Censurer of
 their Faults, but their Excellencies never escape your Obser∣vation. This is the Noblest Part of Criticism, as requiring not only a discerning Apprehension, but a Goodness of Temper which is not always found in Persons of Wit.
But, Sir, besides the Honour you have done the Muses in theiroown Faculty, you have further advanc'd their Reputation, by shewing the World, that a Poet can likewise be a States∣man and Patriot of his Country. To your Knowledge in all the Liberal Sciences, you have acquir'd that Nobler Skill in the Constitution of our Government, and exerted it upon all Occasions in behalf of English Liberty and Property. You have not contented your self with the private Exer∣cise of Iustice and Generosity, but have shewn a Publick Spirit, employing your great Sense and Sagacity in mat∣ters of National Importance. What you have written with relation thereunto, and what has been spoken by you in Debates of Vastest Consequence, had no small Influence on the Sefflement of our State. These are inviting oc∣csions for Pegyrick, but above my small Capacity: Whereoe I return to my first Design of presenting to you the following Collection of Poems amongst which I know but One that needs any Apology. But I have atton'd for Tha, by procuring to be here Publish'd an Ode on her le Majty, (never before Printed) which, perhaps, is the  Picture of her Virtues that has been drawn. I was only permitted to know that the Author is a Person of Quality; which appears by that easy and agreeable Air, by that Justnss and Decency, both in Thought and Expression, that shies through every Stanza.
Sir, I shall no farther respass on your precious Minutes, only to beg Pardon for this Address, and Permission to Sub∣scribe my self,

