



Honourable Sirs,
IF the publication of this Sermon shall
be supposed to contribute nothing,
that may advance the Interest of
Christ and his People; but to prove rather
an unnecessary addition to that Nauseus
disease of Pamphlets, which the stomack
of the Nation is already sick of: your
selves are my witnesses, how many Hono∣rable
persons are bound to divide the in∣convenience
(or guilt) of it amongst
them.

This yet, I confoss, is a supposition,
which I expect no entertainment for but
with that part of the Nation, which is at
enmity with the Happiness of the whole.
And even into these, how untooth some sovr
i prove, et who cantel but tra
wholesome? God, I am sure is able to per∣swade
them by as mean a moagelas ,
that it is by no meanes advieable to lay
a mine under thoe founaatons, when they
must perish to the ruines o; nor to fly in
their faces that would prevent the spring∣ing
of it.
The rest, when they look upon it
coming to them (as all Sermons doe, or
should) in the name of Almighty God,
will, I hope, believe, and ccmply with
all that is of God in it, for the sendes
sake.
Such as are conversant enough with
that invaluable pair of blessings which is
the subject of this discourse, to see the
Nations Happiness, and their own wrapt
up in it, will find a Remember aneer, Such
as wish well to the Land of their Nativity,
and would contribute to the Happiness of

it, if they knew which way, will find and
Iner, as of their  and interest.
For your selves, although I shall per∣haps
have more  at my obe∣dince
 which hath
troubled the Press with this Paper, then
I had to suffer the continued repetition
of it: I have yet this relief, that I shall
hereby  one evidence of your
great affections to the Happiness of the
Nation, your unwillingness that any expe∣dient
(though the meaest of a thousand)
to remember them wherein it doth con∣sist,
and how it is to be provided for,
should fall to the ground.
When you so earnestly desire the
world should know, that you look upon
it as your duty to promote Religion and
Righteousness: 'tis an offer of very conside∣rable
security, that you constantly do
and will practise it. You received not
your many Talents for any purpose that is
lwer then this: nor can you imploy them
to any advantage that is higher. Your
Master is not like, by any other improve∣ment,
to receive his own with so much

usury. Whose Honour and Interest, that you
and all of your Quality, Parts, Power,
Trusts, Places, and Imployments, may
in all your designes and acting, sincerely
aime at, is in the daily Prayers of

