



IT is a true Saying of the Philosopher (Right
Honourable, and my very good Lord)
That there is nothing wherein there is Life, but
it hath either Motion or Action; and such is
the condition of Man, that a greater measure
of both is imposed upon him, to humble him,
than upon many other Creatures: The whole
course of his Life being compared unto a Pil∣grimage,
in which state a man can presume up∣on
no certain Continuance. For, as a Tra∣veller
that intendeth to finish his Journey, stays

not in his Inn, but desires more to be upon
his Way than in his Bed; so it is with Man,
who cannot possess himself in rest, from the
time of his Birth until his Death, and often∣times
is troubled with needless and unprofitable
Labours, to attain unto his Ends; which got,
both they and he perish. Let Alexander, that
great Emperour, be a president of this; who
with much Labour, having got a great E∣state,
enjoyed it but a short time: and you
may read in this Treatise, with what intolera∣ble
pains Antigonus Epiphanes endeavoured to
establish his Kingdom to him; and yet in
the end purchased little but a lamentable
Death. There is none of the Patriarchs,
Princes, Judges, Kings, Prophets, Apostles,
or others mentioned in the Scriptures, that
could make evident in the whole course of
their Life, any better than a laborious and
tedious Pilgrimage. With what pains did
Abraham wander from Chaldea into the
Land of Canaan? How was Moses tor∣mented
in the Wilderness, almost to the

loss of his Soul? but absolutely never to
come into the promised Land. And for
David, how miserably lived he, when he
could not trust his own Friends? This is
the state of man; and to say truth, he
differs in little (beside Reason) from other
Creatures; and that either lock'd up in si∣lence,
or not express'd in some memorable
Action, makes him so much the more ca∣pable
of Misery; being only able to distin∣guish
of Joy and Fear.
Now that these things may be the more
apparent, I have endeavoured to collect, out
of the Works of others, this Treatise; where∣in
is briefly described the Travels of all the
Patriarchs, Iudges, Kings, Prophets, Princes, &c.
together with the condition of Cities, Coun∣treys,
Islands, and other memorable places,
as they are mentioned in the Old and New
Testaments. All which, that I might express
that Duty which hath a long time lain con∣cealed,
I have wholly dedicated to your Lord∣ships
Service; humbly intreating your fa∣vourable

Acceptance of my Pains; that so
being shrouded under your Honour's Prote∣ction,
they may the better withstand the ad∣verse
Opinions of such as please to censure
them.

