



HAving by the Book prefixed, laid before the Magistrates, and others concerned, a clear Demonstration, and many weighty Arguments for Liberty of Conscience, to all Protestant Dissenters, who desire to live a peaceable Life under the Government. I am now come to treat on the Religious Differences amongst us the People called Quakers, and therein to vindicate the Christian-Quakers (who re∣tain their Primitive Principles) and defend their Plea for Liberty of Conscience from the Calumny and Reproach which the In∣novators have put upon both it and the Pleaders thereof; as if the Tendency there∣of was to introduce Loosness, Ranterism, or the like sort of Abominations; all which we detest and deny: And in the Intro∣duction to the Accus. &c. they have
 Sentenced William Rogers to be no Quaker, by which they mean, no Christian; for if I may be in their account a true Christian, and yet no Quaker, then what damage is it to be no Quaker: So that as the Baptists and others (about the Year 72. by their Dialogues, and otherwise) rendred us no Christians, because our Creed lay not litte∣rally in their 8th. Article of Faith: So doth the Apostate and Innovator endeavour to Unchristian the true Christian-Quaker. And the two principal Reasons that can be al∣ledged against us, are; First, our Nonsub∣mission and Nonconformity to the New Order of the Women, Erected by G. Fox, and Confirmed by a London Yearly-Meet∣ing. And Secondly, That their way of com∣pelling, and Antichristian way of Proceed∣ing to bring to, and force a Uniformity, is by us slighted and contemned, and publish∣ed in Justification of our Plea for the Liber∣ty of the exercise of our Conscience in Matters Spiritual. I say these two are the grand Rea∣sons for which they render us no Quakers, & (as I said) consequently in their Esteem, no Christians. Whereupon we, the Calumi∣nated Abettors of the Cause of Truth, can do no less than call to you, the BEREANS of our Age, not to believe every wandring Book that is put forth against us, but read and examine the Matter, and before you
 pass Judgment; see what we can say for our selves in Defence of our Christian-Plea for Liberty of Conscience: and for which Reason, I choose to Dedicate the Ensuing Tract in the first Place to you, expecting your Impartial Examination, &c. For as William Penn very well says in his Epistle to you, the Noble and Examining BERE∣ANS, (who usually hear both Sides,) in the Front of the Book, Entituled the Christian-Quaker, and his Divine Testimony Vindicated, &c. So we find it Experimen∣tally, viz. The Insatiable Thirst of men after Religious or Civil Empire, hath fil∣led almost every Age with Contest — There is something in Man that prompts to Religion, and such as stand not in the TRADITIONS of Men, nor any meer Formality. But Man, that he may not loose the Honour of a Share — with an unwarrantable Activity, so Adul∣terates by an Intermixture of his own Conceptions with their Divine Dictates, and purer Discoveries; SO Sophisticates, that at the last they become more his own Workmanship than the Truth's: And so fond is he of this Child of his Brain, that like some Antient Tyrants, he will rather cut his way to the Throne by a violence upon all others Consciences,
 than not put a Crown upon Its HEAD.
And how far these Tyrannical Proceed∣ings have been used by our New Spiritual Lords, may in part be seen by this follow∣ing Discourse, which to you the Search∣ing BEREANS, I choose first to Dedicate the same, who am a real Lover of your Ex∣ample, and a Member of your So∣ciety.

