



Right Honourable,
WHereas the Quakers, for many Years, have presented their Books and Papers to the Parliament under many fair Shews, whilst the Tendency of their Doctrine is to Sub∣vert Christianity; and I being sensi∣ble thereof, think it my Duty to God and my Country, both as a Christian, and Free-born Englishman, to discover the same; and therefore to obviate some Objections, I do most hum∣bly beg Leave to Apologize for my self in this Affair, since by many Books of the Quakers I have been represented as an indigent Person, a Mercenary Agent, one that is prompt on by other, a Judas, &c. and
 thereupon I am greatly desirous to ac∣quaint your Honours, that I am no such manner of Person: And as a De∣monstration thereof, I have somewhat to offer in my own Defence, which is briefly this.
I came of a good Yeoman Family, and have lived in good Repute all my Days, having had a competent Estate of near a Hundred Pound a Year, besides Stock; and that whilst I was a Quaker, I was of good Repute and Esteem amongst them; I enter∣tained their Teachers with no little Charge, I put Cloaths on the Backs of some, and Money in the Purses of others: I was Register to their Month∣ly and Quarterly Meeting about Six∣teen or Eighteen Years together, to which I rode Fifteen or Sixteen Miles every Month, and all this freely, as themselves know, if they would speak: I was Prisoner for the Cause of Qua∣kerism Three Years and Four Months, and for Meetings I suffered by Fines and Distresses more than One Hun∣dred Pound; and when we built a
 Meeting-House, (for before Meeting were at my House) I gave 20 l. towards it; and to that Day all freely, with∣out any Retribution; all which con∣sidered, might abate the edge of their Defamations, and lead them to keep to the Matter in Controversie: And since (upon a sight of their Errors) I left them, I have been Useful, but ne∣ver Mercenary; I have born all Town-Offices, as Overseer, Constable, and Church-warden; I have been of∣ten an Assessor, and sometimes Colle∣ctor of His Majesty's Taxes, serv'd on Juries of Life and Death, as well as Nisi Prius; in all which places I have discharged my Trust free from any Accusation.
And since I have more narrowly looked into their Principles, and found them to be Pernicious to both Church and State, I have first used all pri∣vate Means to Reclaim them: But when they persisted therein, and would justifie, excuse, and defend all things, whether agreeable to the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apo∣stles,
 or in Contradiction to them, I have thought it my Duty to discover their Pernicious Ways, and therein I have proceeded upon a Principle of Ju∣stice, and can with good Conscience say, that from first to last, no Cler∣gyman in the Kingdom ever asked or desired me to write one Book, Page or Line, against the Quakers, nor have any one Man (Clergy or Laity) seen this Book till printed; tho' I do grant, that by my Constan∣cy of Writing for more than Twenty Years together, and by the Charge of Printing, together with other Los∣ses incident to Tradesmen, I have been reduced; and I am not ashamed to acknowledge, that the Gentry, the Justices of Peace, the Clergy, and some Protestant Dissenters, have ex∣tended their Bounty towards my Sup∣port; and which, the Quakers them∣selves do to their own People: And if this be Cause sufficient to render me a Judas, or Mercenary, they have ma∣ny Mercenary Judas's among themselves.

I have read in the Book of Esther, That when Haman designed the De∣struction of the Jewish Church, then in Captivity, how Queen Esther ap∣peared in the Defence thereof, say∣ing, Esther 3.6, 14, 16. I will go in to the King, which is not according to Law, and if I Perish, I Perish. And it is in the remaining Story of Esther in the Greek and Latin Copies, Cap. 13. Mordecai appeals to God thus, Thou knowest, O Lord, that it was nei∣ther of Malice, nor Presumption, nor of any Desire of Glory that I did this, &c.
And when I came to understand the Pride and Cruelty of George Fox and his Accomplices, which was equal to that of Haman, who in Oliver Crom∣well's time (as by their Books appear) were for Slaying and Banishing all the Clergy in the Kingdom, and how averse they ever were against Liberty of Conscience (as elsewhere I have shew∣ed) as also what Enemies they were to the Holy Scriptures and Ordinan∣ces of our Saviour, namely, Baptism and the Lord's Supper, damning the
 Ever-blessed Trinity to the Pit of Hell, and divers other Blasphemies, too ma∣ny here to relate; I was stirred in my Spirit to appear in Defence of our Holy Religion, which their Doctrine tends to overthrow; saying with Queen Esther, If I Perish, I Perish; and can appeal to God, as Mordecai did, say∣ing, Thou knowest, O Lord, that it was neither of Malice, nor of Presumption, nor any Desire of Glory, that I did this, &c. And who knows but for such a time as this, I was deliver'd from them by the good Hand of Providence.
And (Right Honourable) that which is chiefly defir'd by me, is, (and that in Concurrence with many Thousands of good Christians) that the Quakers may be examined, whether what I object against them be so or no; and if found true upon them, that they may then be obliged to Retract and Con∣demn what is Erroneous, as well as Dangerous; and this is no Persecuti∣on: Nor do I know of any who desire any Alteration of the Act of Tolerati∣on.

I have likewise read the Story of Bell and the Dragon, wherein the Fraud of the Priests of Bell is set forth; who pretended (as our Quakers do) that they served in the Temple freely; and that their God Eat up all the Provisi∣on set before him: But upon Examina∣tion it was found far otherwise. Even so I make this offer, and that on the Terms of Daniel's Proposition, to make it appear (notwithstanding the Qua∣kers Loud Clamours against the Clergy, for their Tythes, and other Dues, set apart by Law for their Maintainance, whilst they Serve at the Altar) that Ten of the Quakers Teachers have re∣ceived more Gifts than Fifty of our Episcopal Divines, Rectors of Parishes, in the Counties of Suffolk and Norfolk; only by strewing a few Ashes on the Floor, or something Equivolent. But as the Priests of Bell, were too powerful for Daniel, without Assi∣stance from the Government; even so are the Quakers for me. I can only discover the Riddle, and propose a Me∣thod to try them by; but cannot bring
 the Matter about to bring proof there∣of, without Assistance from the Go∣vernment. But as Daniel by his three∣fold Medicine, Pitch, Fat, Hair, boil'd together, by God's Blessing, burst in sun∣der the Babylonians Dragon, their other Idol-God; even so have I been Instru∣ment l, with the help of Pen, and Ink, Paper, well prest together, and applied Warm, with God's Blessing, Burst in sunder the Quakers great Idol, their Darkness within, (which they call Light). So that their Infallibility is flown one way, and their Sinless Per∣fection another; their Spiritual Dis∣cerning they pretend to [so as to know who are Saints, and who are Devils, and who are Apostates, without speak∣ing a Word] this way, and their Mi∣racles that way. And if to bring this to pass, I have sometimes taken the freedom of the Prophet Elijah, 1 King. 18. who speaking to the Prophets of Baal, in a Holy Derision of them and their Idol Gods; said, Ver. 27. And it came to pass at Noon, that Elijah mocked them and said, Cry aloud, for he is a
 God, either he is Talking, or he is Pur∣suing, or he is in a Journey, or peradven∣ture he Sleepeth, and must be Awaked, &c. if then I have taken such freedom, with the false Quaker Prophets, and their Dumb Idols, which can neither See, Hear nor Understand, much less dis∣cern who are Saints, who are Devils, or who are Apostates, without speak-ever a Word; or if I have with the Woman of Tekoah, 2 Sam. 14. by way of Metaphor, brought about a Form of Speech, with design to get the Quakers examined, whether what have been Objected against them, be true or not; I hope it is Pardonable, since in all Ages in the World, the same Cause leads to the same thing. For I do Believe, (and not without Ground) That as there never was a People, since Simon the Sorcerer, pretended to such High Prophetical Attainments; so likewise there never was a Sect of Falser Prophets since the time of Elijah, nor that ever held such Blasphemous
 Principles as their Books set forth: And they say they are the same still, their Principles the same, and not changed.
Be not deceived (I beseech you) by the Quakers, who appear like the Pharisees, Fair and Beautiful even like Painted Se∣pulchers; Remember the Subtilty of the Gibionites, Josh. 9. how they by their Dissimulation deceived good Joshua, and all the Princes of the Congrega∣tion of Israel: The Quakers tell you they own the Scriptures to be given by Divine Inspiration; but mean not one word of it, like other Christians; for so they own their own Books.
They tell you they own a Scripture Trinity, but mean not a word of it: This is a Matter (Right Honourable) of great weight; and your Honours will find it as difficult a thing, to gain the true meaning of the Quakers, touch∣ing the Divine Authority of the Holy Scriptures, and their Belief of a Scrip∣ture Trinity, as Constantius the Em∣perour found it, in the Examination of Arius the Heretick, to get his true meaning, touching the Faith of one
 Substance: For the Quakers (as did Arius) mean as they have written; but how? Namely, in their own Books; I mean of that sort they read in their Meetings, and keep close among them∣selves; one of which I have herein Reprinted. In these sorts of Books they deny the Scriptures to be the Written Word of God; For it is (say they) a Rotten Foundation, Dust, Death, and Serpents Meat. In like manner they dissemble the Doctrine of the Trinity, when they pretend to own it; whilst in their Books they Damn it to the Pit and Lake. All this, and much more, I offer to make appear, who am, with all Submission,
Right Honourable,

