




TWas you, my Dear Friend, with whom I first enjoyed the Pleasures of Friendship, and 'twas you that first invited me; though not into the Garden of the Hesperides, yet into a Field of great Usefulness, and infinite Delight; where, after the



Fatigue and Embarrasment of a troublesome Employ∣ment, like the wearied Tra∣veller, I have often at Night lain down, and refreshed my tired Spirits. If I have there∣fore nodded in the following Pamphlet, be you my Wit∣ness and Excuse.
But whatever it is, to you, Dear Sir, of right it belongs, being that good Friend, that first shewed me my Faults, and moved me to a Study, which has given me a true Prospect of the Trifles of Life, and how much more valuable the Unseen Things are, than those our Senses daily converse with. For,



As the kind Heavenly Genius when we go
Out of that Path appointed us below;
Mov'd with great Pity t'our declining State,
Do's softly whisper, Turn; ere 'tis too late:


So my Leander, when I went astray
From the unbeaten Path of Ver∣tues Way,
Swifter than Lightning dart∣ing from a Cloud,
Stretch'd forth his hand. —

But I forget I am in pub∣lick, and that this is not my Province.


This shew, that the Body is too gross to enjoy a refin'd Pleasure, and that the Affe∣ctions of a man given to the Delights of Contemplation and Search, are too lofty to be allur'd down to sensual En∣joyments. Aquila non capit Muscas. Des Cartes expresses it well: Voluptas quam percipi∣mus ex intuitu rerum, quas oculi cernunt, minimè aequiparanda est cum illa, quam adfert notitia illa∣rum quas Philosophando invenimus. The Pleasures of Sense, are in no sort comparable to those, which the Mind en∣joys by Knowledge and Philosophy. So that Philo∣sophy and Religion, or the latter alone, have truly the better on't in this Life, as well



as the next. God bids fairer for our Service, than all things else besides.
But to do Justice to both; I must acknowledge the Sen∣sualist has Pleasures and Di∣versions (such as they are) more ready and at hand, than a man of Thought and Re∣tirement. The one had need but look out, and he sees something that is ready to fill up the narrow Faculties of Sense presently, whilst the o∣ther must go farther off, and with great industry find out an Object that is noble e∣nough to divert and entertain him. The Pleasures of the one, are like Diamonds, rare∣ly to be found; but of the



other, like Pebbles, every where to be had. Yet this Advan∣tage the Learned and the Wise, the vertuous Philoso∣pher, when advanced to some Height, has over the other, that he carries his Pleasures with him, in the Streets, or in the Fields, or even in disagree∣able Company, can find use∣ful and pleasing Thoughts, both to delight and improve his Mind; who not only dares be alone, but finds infinite Pleasure in the Contemplation of the several parts of the Uni∣verse; to whom, with Jacob, the World is a Bethel; for he can turn the Darkness of a Dun∣geon, into the Light o a Di∣vine Palace, and behold Na∣ture ascending and descending,

like the Angels on the Ladder. But not to pretermit any of the excellent Advantages the Dissolute enjoy.
The one, I must confess, more constantly gains his Point, than the other; for what with his sordid Flattery, and Baseness of Spirit to∣wards the Great and Haugh∣ty, his Insolence towards the Modest and Humble, and o∣ther mean and disingenuous Arts towards all, he obtains what he desires. But did a Beggar gain a Crown by such means, he were not worth my Envy; for when a little Affliction befalls such an one, so loose is his Constitution, by the unsetledness of his Princi∣ples,



(if a constant Byas to Baseness of Spirit may be cal∣led unsetled,) he dissolves under the weight of a little misfortune; a few Weeks im∣prisonment puts an end to his Life: But how does the Ver∣tuous sit smooth and sedate, whilst Lightning invades his Eyes, and Thunder his House? Who though he would dis∣solve in Tears, for the least voluntary Sin, yet would not shrink to see the World in a general Conflagration; who goes out of this Life with the same Joy a man goes to see his affectionate Friend. Give me the man, who having secur'd the Divine Love by an universal Obedience, car∣ries his own Heaven with



him where-ever he goes; that can see in every Field enough of the Divine Wisdom to fill all the Powers of his Soul with a lasting Joy and Plea∣sure. Compar'd to these, how mean are the Thoughts of a last Night's Debauch, or the expecting ones of ano∣ther? How sordid the Con∣templation of many Bags, and how empty the Titles of Honour? For my part, I have not Sence enough to di∣stinguish any real difference between a Feather in a Child's Cap, and a Riband cross the Shoulders of a Man. Ah! how foolish is Mankind to neglect the solid Joys of Wis∣dom and Philosophy, for the Rattles and Trifles of Life!



So that (the next World a∣part) with great Truth I may affirm, That the most voluptu∣ous Man alive, enrich'd with the Fancy of Aristippus, or a Lord Rochester, that does in∣dulge his Senses with all the Art that Wit, Health and Riches can lay together, that has all the Court which the Devil in Nature, is capable of making to him; falls infi∣nitely short of the Pleasures of a Man, that has a good Understanding, well govern'd Affections, and but a mode∣rate Fortune to enable him to enjoy the Pleasures of Phi∣losophy, and to exert his Re∣ligion in the pleasing Offices of Charity and Affection.


The Cynicks and Stoicks will charge me with a surplus of Ingredients to the constitution of Happiness; but I conceive their Notion of it to be Ro∣mantick and Fanciful; but that of the Peripateticks and Epicu∣reans sober and wise. For Externals, in the hands of a wise man are good Instru∣ments even of Beatitude; and Pleasure and Pain must have some difference even in the opinion of a Philosopher that is conversant in the World. 'Tis a foolish thing to make Vertue the Object of a wise man's choice, and then set it above his reach, at least above his desires; Vertue Thus high the Cy∣nicks and Stoicks advanced Vertue, whose sole Reward, which it self brought, they held sufficient to conquer the Miseries of Pain and Want. I mean,



stripp'd of Health and Neces∣saries, and clogg'd with Pain and Misery, without the Pro∣spect of a future Life. But the Cynick indeed had Wit, when being blam'd for giv∣ing a Pattern above Human Life, said, he was like the Singing Masters, who sung a Note too high, that their Scholars (who would natu∣rally fall short of their Ma∣ster) might reach a true Pitch.
I must confess, when I con∣sider the Lives, not only of the Cynicks, but others of the Pagan Philosophers, and to what a Noble Height they advan∣ced their Minds, meerly by the due exercise of their Un∣derstandings;



how meanly and contemptibly they look∣ed upon sensual Pleasures, to that degree, that the former trampled upon Riches and Honour as vile things; An∣tisthenes, the Father of them, saying, he had rather be mad, than given to Sensuality; and Heraclitus contemn'd his Body, esteeming it as Dross, taking care for the Cure on∣ly as God should command him, to use it as an Instru∣ment; and this not as a sudden Fit or Passion, or De∣clamation of Wit, but as a setled Principle rooted in their minds, and exerting its Fruit and Effects in their Lives: I blush both for my self, and other Christians, to



think how impetuously we pursue the things of this Life, and how coldly those of a better.
It may be enough to make a Christian asham'd, even in Heaven, to see Hermes, Py∣thagoras, Socrates, Plato, and the whole Crowd of vertu∣ous Heathens there, bearing the Honourable Badges of Mortification, and the No∣ble Scars of Reproach, and Wounds, for Vertue's sake, as a Sacrifice pleasing to God; whilst the Christian, at a di∣stance, beholding in himself the Marks only of Professing his Religion, where there was no danger in the doing it, and having received much,



gave a little, and lov'd with Sincerity; and yet how few are there reach this Pitch? What Christian is there from the Debauchee to the Profes∣sor, that conquers a Lust, subdues a Passion, or resists a charming Temptation Christi gratia? If the Lascivious grows chaste, 'tis not because his mind is changed, but his Spirits are weak, and his Blood low: But how did Socrates, of fierce and chole∣rick, become calm and sedate by Philosophy? And can Philosophy do more than Chri∣stianity?
But why do I say this to you, my Dear Friend, who know all this, and your own Me∣rits



too (or you would want Judgment) and are yet con∣tented in a low Sphere, grate∣ful to the Almighty under a narrow Fortune; whilst you see others, that set no Bounds to their Actions, with a mean Understanding acquire Riches and Honour. I know it is easie for the Rich to speak fine things of a low state; what Physick it is to the mind, and how it reduces the Fever in the Soul, to a good Temper. But for a man that is generous in his Nature (which Plato tells us, is the best kind of Nobility) and who would embellish his mind with all the Useful Knowledge and Learning that can be had, to be stop∣ped



in this commendable Am∣bition, against the Career of his Desires, and to acquiesce, requires the Philosophy of an humble mind, which is often a stranger to the Learned. This is more difficult than to conquer Kingdoms.
Fortior est qui se —
You are therefore the tru∣ly great Hero I have chose to defend this Essay, which (tho' it has been disbelieved by all, because not considered by the learned, nor understood by the Vulgar) you will do, neither by the dazling splendor of a bright Star and Garter, nor the clashing and thundering Noise of Swords and Guns,



nor by your ten Thousands, but by the soft Voice of Rea∣son and Philosophy, which is more valuable to the Wise and Vertuous.
Adieu, Dear Sir, and may you enjoy a calm and serene Mind, flat and languishing towards the World, but active and vigorous, and full of Hopes towards Heaven. May the Light of Wisdom and Knowledge fill you full of all Joy and Ecstasie; and as no Variation of Fortune, has, or ever shall alienate my Af∣fections from you; so let 'no Disappointment abate your Zeal for the Honour of our most Munificent Benefactor, (for whom you can never do



too much,) since He always chuseth best for us, and ne∣ver denies us, but for our greater Good. I am (what Words need not express)

