



Honoured and Reverend Gentlemen,
HAVING herein collected my Experience, both of the Do∣ctrine and Discipline of the Schism of Quakerism, shewing the Ten∣dency thereof, from Matter of Fact, I thought it but my Reasonable Service to offer the same to your Judicious Perusal, and Christian Consideration; that so, ac∣cording to the Apprehension you shall have, touching the Premises, you may put your helping Hand, not only to a farther Confu∣tation of the Quaker-Arguments, (which yet is needful enough) but also for the regaining of such as (who thro' the Cun∣ning
 Slights and Plausible Pretensions of these Seducers) are misled, and carry'd away; and thereby not only vindicate the Christian Religion, but defend the Church of England from the most horrible Scandals, cast upon both, by the Quakers.
I need not acquaint you with the great Labour, and unwearied Pains, our Pro∣testant Divines have taken to Regain such, who have been seduced to Adhere to the Romish Religion, and the vast number of Volumes, writ on that Account, and not without Good and Great Success, as we see this Day, Thanks be to God: But behold! Here is a NEW ROME arising, which Builds on the same Bottom, i. e. INFALLIBILITY, &c, and whose Principles were first Hammer'd at that Forge, and Coyn'd at that Mint, and are carrying on by the same Craft and un∣suspected Policy; and as Dangerous to the Reformed Religion, which our Martyr'd Ancestors suffered in the Flames for, as Rome Her Elder Sister. (And this you should see, had they but Power; an Instance of which is their Proceedings in Pensil∣vania.) But notwithstanding all this, how few are concern'd hereat? How few lay it
 to Heart? This is Cause of Lamentation and Astonishment; and yet, when I consi∣der how long I my self was deceived by them, I do the less marvel; especially, con∣sidering what Equivocations and Reserve they make in their Arguments, whether Verbal, or in Writing; how Industrious they are to hide themselves, and their Te∣nets, expressing themselves in Dubious Terms, that want Explication; pretending to Seriousness, Sincerity, Plainness, &c. when none so Insincere, so Deceitful, and False in the World, as in a Thousand Things I could mention; whereby it is manifest, that they are the false Prophets which Christ foretold of, Matth. 24.24. Aad therefore, if what I can contribute towards the Discovery of this Painted, as well as Disguised Harlot, may be useful to the Church of God, and the Ministers thereof, in bringing forth my known Ex∣perience, I shall be glad, and rejoyce therein.
I cannot but know, that herein you will meet with many Deficiences, for want of Parts and Learning, requisite to such a Work: But since your Generosity is so mixed with Christian Charity, as to accept
 the Will for the Deed, as in my former Essays, I have at this time presumed to present this Rough Draught to your Per∣usal, and as my Mite, to cast it into your Treasury; hoping, that until the Quakers can justly charge me with a False Quotation, (which, as they never yet could do, so I hope they never shall) this may pass under your Patronage, as a Defence against the Quakers Invectives; and it may be, when I cannot speak for my self; especially, when there is not a Man of you, but are Sharers with me in the same Reproaches for the Gospel's sake. Thus, Reverend Sirs, begging your Pardon for this my Presumption, I Humbly Subscribe my self,

Milden-Hall, Aug. 10. 1698.
