



My Lord,
I Humbly conceive it my duty to discover to your Lordship what I ap∣prehend may be of dangerous consequence either to Church or State: And this emboldens me to offer the ensuing discourse to your Lordships pious consideration. I must humbly confess 'tis a great presumption upon your Honours Patience and Patronage: But that which (amongst other things) gives me encouragement hereunto, and which I hape may plead my ex∣cuse, at least extenuate my offence, is the Quakers frequent Dedications and Presentations of their Books to the King, Lords and Commons, and other Magistrates, from year to year, one Sessions of Parliament after another, for thirty or forty years together, beseeching, begging, and craving their aid, support and authority; whilst in their Books to their Disciples they utterly disclaim any such seeking to outward authority: But instead there∣of, when not suiting their Interest they'll Impeach and Condemn their pro∣ceeding as Antichristian, and Arraign, Try and Condemn the Learned Protestant Clergy, as inconsistent to Christianity. Thus, like the Cameli∣on, they can turn themselves into all colours, their Books being of two sorts, carrying two different faces: And it was by this method that the Arians of old deceived the Emperor Constantius, who at last made Laws in their behalf, against the Orthodox. And that this is no new Artifice your Lord∣ship may observe from the book of Exodus; that notwithstanding Moses was divinely inspired and gifted witb Miracles to confirm his Commission, yet the Magicians by their Magick Act and cunning Intreagues came very near him in shew: likewise Simon Magus, Acts 8. by his Sorcery and
 Juggling Tricks, so bewitched the Samaritans, that they gave great heed to all he said. And History sufficiently informs us what hard work the Protestants had to confute the Papists, whose Books were like the Quakers, of two sorts, professing in one sort, what they utterly rejected in the other sort: And this made Bishop Jewel in his Defence to the Apology, &c. propose to his Reader, viz. Good Reader, if thou wilt examine our doings, I beseech thee search and prove what hath been wrote on both sides, and do not suffer thy self by shews and shifts to be beguiled, for what man will seem to deal so uprightly as a Juggler; he will strike up his sleeves, make bare his arms, and open his hands and fingers, and bid thee behold: And thou wilt think him to be a good plain man, and marvel thou shouldst possibly be deceived, and yet indeed his whole design is nothing but to deceive thee: and the more simply and plainly he would seem to deal, so much the more he will deceive thee, otherwise he were no Juggler, &c. And to this agrees that no∣table saying of Ireneaeus, in his third Book against Hereticks, viz. Whilst Heretick speak like the faithful, they not only mean otherwise than what they say,  clean contrary: And by their Tenents, full of Blasphemy, they destroy the Souls of those, who with their fair words suck in the poyson of their foul opinions. And no marvel (saith St. Paul) for Satan himself is transformed into an Angel of Light; there∣fore it is no great thng if his Ministers also be transformed as the Mi∣nisters of Righteousness, whose end shall be according to their works, 2 Cor. 13.14.
And, my Lord, being sensible of the Quakers method, not only of their unw y'd sollicitation of the Members of Parliament, both Lords and Commons, for many years; but also in sending their Books into all Coun∣ties, Shires, Cities, Towns and Villages in England and Wales, as well as parts beyond the Seas, I thought it my duty to let the World know their principles from their Printed Books: For, as simple as they look, and as innocent as they seem to appear, for deep subtilty they outstrip both Jew and Jesuit; and notwithstanding their many and great pretences to meek∣nes charity, and long-suffering, there is not a more uncharitable and cens  people under heaven. I am
My Lord,

