


Christian Friends,
SInce there are none Recorded in holy Scripture, on whom the Holy Ghost conferr'd so Honourable a Character, as the Bereans of that Age; [In that they searched after truth Impartially, and when they found it, Embraced it readily; and for which they were justly accounted Noble:] Therefore it is, that to you the Progeny of that worthy Stock, and Noble Bereans of this Age, that I chuse to Dedicate the ensuing Discourse; and therefore I beg of you not to degenerate from the Example of your Progenitors; if you do, you are no longer true Bereans: And to such I do not Design this work; if you do not, I may assure my self of the justice of a fair Inquiry, and an equal Judgment.
I remember the Athenians, June the 14th. 1692. by their Tenth Question, demanded of the Quakers where to find their Creed, or an Account of their Re∣ligion: Will you [said they] Subscribe to any of the three Creeds, Nicean; Athanasian, or Apostolical? If not, Will you give us one of your own, that the World may know what to make of you.
To this, I find Geo. Whitehead, and others, in their Answer, stiled, The Doting Athenians, &c. saying, Come and see, come into the true Light and see, and you may find our Creed, &c.
Now, lest the way to find out their crooked Creed, which lies dispersedly in their Pamphlets, should prove too hard a Task for the searching Bereans, I thought it needful to lend them my hand; and that it may the more plainly appear, not to relate either to the Nicean, Athanasian, or Apostolical Creeds; I think it necessary to recite the sum of the Apostolical Creed, which includes the substance of the other two; and which is believed by all Christians, whether called Epis∣copalians, Presbyterians Independants, and Baptists; for when contraries meet, their disagreement does the more manifestly appear. viz.


I Believe in God the Father Almighty, And in Jesus Christ his only Son; who was born of the Virgin Mary; who suffered under Pilate; was Crucified, Dead, and Buried; Rose again the third Day from the Dead, And Ascended into Heaven, and sitteth on the Right Hand of God in Majesty on High; As an Advocate, making Intercession for us: And I believe that from thence he shall come to judge both the Quick and the Dead: I believe in the Holy Ghost, the Lord and Giver of Life, who proceedeth from the Father and the Son, who with the Father and the Son together is Worshipped and Glo∣rified, who spake by the Prophets; And I believe one Catholick and Apostolick
 Church: I acknowledge one Baptism for the Remission of Sins; I look for the Resurrection of the Dead, And the Life of the World to come, Amen.
To God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, be Glory, Honour, Pow∣er, Might, Majesty, and Dominion for evermore, Amen.
Now Noble Berean, whether Christian or Quaker, for some such I hope their are in every Society: If thou doubt or question the soundness of this recited Creed, pray examine, and read these following Scriptures for thy Information and Satis∣faction, Luke 2.10.11. Acts 5.30, 31, 32. and 10.39. to 40. Acts 1.9. Micah 5.2. Psal. 2.7. and 16.10. Zeck. 9.9. and 11, 12, 13. Mark 1.10. Acts 2.22. to 32. Numb. 24.17.19. Duet. 18.15. Isa. 9.6, 7. Luke 24.4.51. John 20.12. Matt. 28.2. Acts 3.13. to 32. and 4.10, 11, 12. Heb. 7.25. and 9.24. John 17.20, 21. 1 John 2.1, 2. And here thou wilt find that he that was born of the Virgin, the Glorious Angels call'd Christ, the Lord: And you will find that the holy Apostles said, him that you slew, and hanged on a Tree; him hath God exalted to be both a Prince, and a Sa∣viour; yea, and Christ the Lord, whose Body was not of a Perishing Nature, for it saw no Corruption: And that all the Prophets gave witness to this Jesus Christ the Saviour of the World. Now, if on the contrary you find in the Qua∣kers Creed, that they believe, and say, that they cannot call him Christ, who thus was born of the Virgin, who was by wicked Men slain, and hanged on a Tree; if you find them to say his Body was of a perishing Nature; and if you find, as you may perceive p. 78, 79. of this Treatise, that the Quakers Pro∣phets give witness to G. Fox, instead of this Christ; that they call him G. Fox, the Branch, the Star, the Son of Righteousness; and put the North of Eng∣land for the Town of Bethlehem; then maist thou have cause to think that their Notions invert the Faith, and seek to overturn the Christian Religion: Read, Try, and Judge.



A Question to the Professors, p. 33.NOW the Scriptures do expresly distinguish, between Christ and the Garment which he wore, between him and the Body, in which he came; between the Substance which was vailed, and the Vail which vailed it: Lo I come, a Body hast thou prepared me, there is plainly he, and the Body in which he came. There was the outward Vessel, and the inward Life; this we certainly know, and can never call the Bodily Garment Christ; But that [Heavenly Treasure] which appeared, and dwelt in the Body.


Come into the Light, and see if this Creed of theirs be not contrary to the Te∣stimony of the Blessed and Glorious Angels, Holy Apostles, Blessed Martyrs, and true Confessors for these 1600 Years; here you may see, if you will but come into the Light, (I mean to the holy Apostles Writings) wherein they differ from all Christians; they cannot call his Body Christ, only a Garment, a Vail, a Vessel. What! Did the Prophets fore-tell that a Virgin should conceive, and
 bring forth a Garment? Is this their Scripture Language, they so often call for, in Opposition to the Trinity and Sacraments? Oh horrible Blasphemy! But to this agrees John Whitehead's Doctrine, in their Book, The Quakers Refuge fixed, &c. p. 37, 38. viz. Nothing which was Mortal was called Christ.




A Quest. &c. p. 22.IF I, or any one else, have felt the saving Arm of the Lord re∣vealed in us: If we have felt a measure of the same Life, Pow∣er, and Anointing, revealed in our Vessels, as was revealed in his; Is it not of the same Nature? Is it not the same thing? Is not Christ the Seed? And is not this Seed sown in the Heart? Now if this Seed spring, and grow up in me, into a Spiritual shape and form: Is not Christ then formed in me? If I be ingrafted into, and grow up in it; Am not I in∣grafted into Christ? And do I not grow up in him? And is not this the same Christ that took upon him the Body of Flesh, and offer∣ed it without the Gates of Ierusalem? Is there any more than one? Or is there any other than he? Is Christ devided? is there one Christ within, and another without?


Come and see, thou searching Berean, and behold the Quakers Creed: They cannot as in the first Branch of their Creed, call him that was born of the Virgin, Christ; him that by wicked Hands was slain, and hanged on a Tree, Christ. And no marvel, if the same Christ that offered up that Body, or Gar∣ment, or Vail, or Figure, (as they frame it) be in them, as they say it is, even the very same that suffered Death at Jerusalem. Oh horrible Blasphemy!




A Quest. p. 20.TO whom do the Names and Titles of Iesus and Christ, chiefly, and in the first place belong? Do they belong to the Body, which was took by him, or to him who took the Body?— For that which he took upon him was our Garment, even the Flesh and Blood of our Nature, which is of an Earthly perishing Nature. And p. 27. Is not the Substance, the Life, the Anointing, called Christ, where∣ever it is found, doth not the Name belong to the whole Body, and every Member in the Body, as well as to the Head, so that the Name is not given to the Vessel, but to the Nature, to the Heavenly Treasure, to that which is of Him in the Vessel.


From the Premises, pray observe, though they propose this Branch of their Creed, by way of Query; yet do but turn it, and you shall observe the true and natural consequences of it is: 1. That the Name Iesus and Christ do not so properly belong to the Body, as to the Treasure in the Body; here they seperate
 that which GOD hath for ever joyned together;See their Book, viz. The malice of the Independant A∣gent, p. 23. Con∣fusion, and whereas they say that His Body was of an Earthly perishing Nature, read Acts 2.27. and 13.35. and their Error soon appears. And the Name Christ (say they) belongs to the whole Bo∣dy, as well as to the Head; yea, and to every Member of the Body, so that they having the Light, the Treasure, the Life of Christ in them; even the same that suffered Death at Jerusalem, to be in them: And the Name Christ, not properly belonging to that Body, which suffered Death at Jerusalem, as aforesaid, &c. The Name by their Logick, belongs to every believ∣ing Quaker; so that there is as many Christs, by their Doctrine, as there is believ∣ing Quakers. Oh horrible Blasphemy! Read Matt. 24.24.




G. F.'s News coming up out of the North, p. 14. 15. 34.A Word to all you Deceivers, who deceive the People, and Blasphemers, who utter forth your Blasphemies, and Hypocrisies; that tell People of a Sacrament, and tell them it is the ordinance of God. Blush, blush and trem∣ble— you who live in the Witchery, and bewitch People. Page 14. So Dust is the Serpents Meat; their original is but Dust, which is but the Letter, which is Death; their Church is Dust, and their Gospel is Dust; which is Matthew, Mark, Luke and John; which is the Letter, p. first, Written from the Mouth of the Lord, from one who is Naked; and stands Naked before the Lord, Cloathed with Righteous∣ness,G. W. Behold your Creed, and view your Book, Antichrist in Flesh, &c. p. 24. and blush for ever; for take away your new word Holy, and your needless word but, and your Change is answered fully. whose Name is not known in the World, risen up out of the North, which was Prophesied of, but now it is fulfilled; the Army is coming up out of the North, p. 15. I am the same Door that ever was, the same Christ to day, yesterday, and for ever.



Come and see the Quakers sensorious Creed, their uncharitable Creed, their Blasphemous Creed, First, they believe the Publick Ministers are Deceiv∣ers, Blasphemers, Hypocrites and Witches; and why so? because they tell People of a Sacrament, and that Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, is the Gospel of Christ; away with it all, say they, 'tis Dust, your Sacrament is Dust, your Or∣dinance is Dust, which is the Serpents Meat, your Church is Dust, your Gospel is Dust, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John is Dust; which is the Serpents Meat, which is Death, &c. But Secondly, who is this that says so?See Antichrist in Flesh, &c. p. 24. Why, 'tis Geo. Fox, who says he unites from the Mouth of the Lord; who stands Naked, who is cloathed with Righteousness, as with a Mantle: Yea, invisible George, for if you will believe him, his Name is not known in the World: Oh horrible Lye! there was not ten Mens Names in England known better. Well, But
 this is not all, he is risen out of the North, which was Prophesied of, and is now fulfilled: O notably done! And let me for once make Proclamation; O yes, O yes, Can George Whitehead, William Penn, or any Man else tell me what Prophet it was from Genesis to the Revelation, that Prophesied of Geo. Fox's rising out of the North; and that he should be such an Imposter, as to call the holy Scripture Dust, which is the Serpents Meat; and be the Head Sect∣master of such a compound of Heresies, as hath almost filled the World. If they can, let them come to me, and I will give them Content for their searching; for I profess I cannot find one Verse, unless you will accept of Mat. 24.24. and by what follows, it should be that very Scripture; for p. 15. viz. the last recital of this fourth Branch of their Creed, G. Fox writes thus of himself, I am the Door that ever was; the same Christ yesterday, to day, and for ever, &c. Here is Christs words fufilled, who said, There shall arise false Christs, and false Prophets, and shall shew great signs and wonders, insomuch, that if it were possible, they shall deceive the very Elect, &c. And this Pro∣phesie is fulfilled in this our Day, and happy are all who escape their Delusions: And that G. Fox, upon his own, and the Quakers Principles, can mean no other but the Christ in him, viz. In proper Language, he himself is the Christ he there speaks of; first, because he doth not say, I am the Door, saith Christ; no, he takes it wholly and solely upon himself, and therein he was the more like himself: See his Book, styled, Saul's Errand to Damascus, &c. p. 7. The old Man cannot endure to here the new Man speak, which is Christ; And Christ is the way: And if Christ be in you, must he not say, I am the way, the Truth and the Life, &c. I think this very place may serve as a Key to unlock their Misterium Magnum; Christ in them, which in their sence,See the second Branch of your Creed. is in the same manner that he was in him that suf∣fered: And to put all out of doubt, that they do so mean, see their Book, styled, The Watcher, &c. p. 37. To the end of all Disputes and Arguments I am come; for before they was, I am, &c. Saith James Parnell, now who would think but that James herein told a notorious Lye; in saying he was come to the end of all Disputes and Arguments, when Geo. Whitehead, and my self also, are two Witnesses, that they are not yet ended, though James hath been dead more than Twenty Years; Again, that he should say, before all Disputes and Arguments was. I am, when Disputes and Arguments was thousands of years before J. Parnell was born, even in Moses's time: and yet J. Parnell upon the Quakers Creed, and Blasphemous Princi∣ples told no Lye; for ye must Interpret the I am to be Christ in him: As in the days of Christ, when the Jews told him, John 8.57. Thou art not yet Fifty Years old, and hast thou seen Abraham? Christ answered him, ver. 58. Verily, verily, I say unto you, before Abraham was, I am. Now upon our Christian Creed, this was true in Christ, but Abominably false, and Blas∣phemous Lye, in Parnell: O dreadful, I tremble to behold these unheard of Blas∣phemies. See also Josiah Coal's Testimony, for E. Burroughs, printed in his Works in Folio, viz. He (E. B.) was a Man, endued with the Almighty
 Power of God, which lived and reigned in him, and the Treasury of pure divine Wisdom was opened in him, &c. This is the most they will allow to be in him; they will grant that in him that suffered upon the Cross, there was the Heavenly Treasure, the Substance, the Life, the Anointing, the Power: but I do not remember that ever they granted the Almighty Power to be in Christ; I am sure not more Eminently than in themselves. But that it may yet further appear, that our dear Saviours Prophesie, as above, is fulfilling, which says, There shall false Christs, and false Prophets arise, &c See Soll. Eccles Lying wonder, and false Prophesie, of the Death of John Story,Very like that of G. Whiteheads to S. B. viz.
O John Story! What hast thou done against the Lord, and thy own Soul! thou hast divided the Her∣ritage of the Lord, and the good Ordinances which Christ Iesus hath set up in his Church, (i. e.) Womens Preaching, and Womens Meetings;The Christ in them ordained these Ordi∣nances: but Christ that was born of the Virgin, ordained Bap∣tism and the Lord's Supper; now chuse which Christ ye will follow and obey. therefore will the Lord throw Contempt upon thee, and if thou dost not repent speedily, miserable will be thy end.— If ever thou findest Mercy with the Lord, go home to the North with speed, and break up the divided Meetings, which thou and John Wilkinson have been Instrumental to di∣vide from the Body of our Lord Iesus Christ:Mark the Christ in G. Fox, for he is the first Founder of the Womens Meetings, which Soll. Eccles calls the Body of our Lord Jesus Christ. See de. chr. Liber∣tate, &c. 2d. part, p. 33. to 70. —The Anger of the Lord is chiefly against thee: and thou art bound with two Bonds; for the Church and Brethren have bound thee on Earth, and thou art surely bound in Heaven: And this is the Testimony of Jesus to thee; neither shalt thou be able to get from under these Bonds, till thou art reconciled to the Brethren: O haste to to the Work abovesaid, least the wrath of the Lord overtake thee, before it be done, and be re∣conciled to Geo. Fox, who is Gods Friend, and the Servant of the living God, and great Apostle of Jesus Christ, haste away to the North, for thy time is short; and go quickly thou and thy Brother, if possibly you may bring again to the Body of Jesus Christ, those ye have scattered, least that their Blood be required at your hands: Arise quickly, and be going, For this is the word of the Lord to thee, That this year shalt thou John Story dye, because thou hast taught Rebellion against the living God.
The first Day of the first Month, 1677.


See the first part of Babels Builders unmask¦ing themselves, by Thomas Crisp, p, 15.


Oh the Impudence of this Imposture, and false Prophet of G. Fox: In that,
First, he avouched Womens Meetings to be the Good Ordinances of Jesus Christ, which he had set up in his Church.

Secondly, In saying, that to the reconciled to the Body of the Quakers, which he deemed to be the Body of Christ, was the only way to find Mercy.
Thirdly, In delivering that great Lye in the Name of the Lord. This year shalt thou John Story dye, who at that time was very ill, and not like to recover; but it pleased God that he lived about four years after.
Fourthly, This was he, even he, that burnt his Fiddles on Tower-hill.
Fifthly, This was he, yea, even he, that went as a great sign, and notable wonder, stark naked, with a Pan of Coals on his Head to Bartholomew-Fair, enough to deceive the very Elect (as Christ said) if it were possible.
Sixthly, This is he, who in his Musick Lector, &c. p. 22. said, viz. I do af∣firm, that if John (the Apostle) had said he had been a Sinner, he had lyed.
Seventhly, This is he; yea, even that false Prophet, who writ thus of G. Fox, his Master, viz. A Prophet indeed,— it was said of Christ, he was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew him not; So it may be said of this true Prophet, G. Fox, whom John said; he was not. Quakers Chal. p. 6.
Now, Reader, Upon our Christian Creed, this is down-right Blasphemy: But according to the Quakers Principles, it harmonizes with their Creed, which is doubtless the very reason why they never to this day condemned it by publick Censure; mark the fifth Branch of their Creed, which is as followeth.




THE Light, Christ,The Great Mist. &c. by G. Fox, p. 254. by which all things were made and created, glorified with the Father before the World began, which the Scripture testifies of, is above the Scripture, before the Scripture was; they that be not in this Christ, are Reprobates, in which the Scripture end, and testifie of; and so is Christ, the same yesterday, to day, and for ever; that the Saints came to witness within them, not another Christ, nor many Christs, &c.



Now who can blame Soll. Eccles upon the Quakers Creed, for saying, first, That G. Fox was in the World; secondly, that the World was made by him; thirdly, that the World knew him not; as to the first, my self and Thousands more can bear him witness; as to the second, according to their Creed last recited, the same Christ, by which all things were made and Created, is in them; which, if true, then that proves sufficiently what Eccles says; and as to the third, see p. 1. of G. Fox his own Book, call'd, News coming out of the North, &c. which says, viz. Writ from the Mouth of the Lord, Cloathed with Righ∣teousness, whose Name is not known in the World, risen up out of the North; which, if true, who can blame Sollomon: For though he was not a wise Man, he was a Prophet, I mean, one of Geo. Fox's Prophets. Ac∣cording to the old Proverb, as was the Master, so was the Man, viz. Both
 false Prophets, false Pretenders, and great Impostors: Indeed, G. White∣head in his Vindication of Solomon, in his Book, Serious Search, p. 58. does a little complain, in a little failer in Syntax; but to amend it, (and to help Sollomon Eccles, John Blackling, and other Idolaters in the right word∣ing the Matter) he says Judgment fixed, &c. p. 19. For I affirm, G. Fox doth deny the same in reference to himself, as a perticular Man or Person, whose Days and Years are limited, only the truth of the Immortal Seed, Christ in him, he stands to maintain against all Opposers and Persecu∣ting Gain-sayers and Apostates: See also his Innocency against Envy, &c. p. 18. to the same purpose; so that had Solomon said, the Light in G. Fox was in the World, and the World was made by him, and the World knew him not; he had then acted according to their innate Principle, and suitable to their Creed, which had been, I say, equally Idolatrous and Blasphemous.



A brief Discovery of a Three-fold Estate of Antichrist, p. 15.ALL teaching which is given forth by Jesus Christ, is to bring up the hearers to Perfection, even to the Measure, Stature, and Fulness of Christ; this the Scripture witnesseth, and I witness the Scripture, fulfilled in me, G. Fox.
See your Book, Inti∣tuled, A New England Fire∣brand quenched; being an Answer to a Book, put forth by Mr. Roger Williams, intituled, Geo. Fox digged out of his Burrow, &c. in two parts, containing 488 pages in Quarto; one thing is worthy of observation, that where the said Firebrand takes notice of G. Fox's great Mistery; Yea, and may well also be ashamed of the said Firebrand, which is as full of Errors almost as Leafs, and yet G. VVhitehead in the second part, p, 236, assists G. Fox what he can with a Marginal Note, &c. of which, perhaps more hereafter.It is no horrible Blasphemy, to say the Soul is a part of God, &c.
G. Fox's Answer to the Westm. Pet. p. 33.If ever you own the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles Writings, you will own our Writings which are given forth by the same Spirit and Power.
Truths Defence, &c. p. 21 to 24.You might as well have condemned the Scriptures to the Fire, as our Queries for our giving forth Papers o Printed Books; it is from the immediate Eternal Spirit of God, p. 92. we are elected to Salvation, we have the Witness within us, Praises be to the Glorious Lord God for ever, who hath elected and chosen us before the Foundation of the World: But thou (meaning the Querist:) art or∣dained of old for Condemnation and Perdition among the ungodly ones, and art a Reprobate, one that hates Christ, and art blind.
Saul's Errand, &c. p. 8.He that hath the same Spirit that raised up Jesus Christ from the Dead, is equal with God: See also G. F.'s great Mystery, p. 78, 127. 283. where their being equal with God, is not denied,Saul's Er∣rand, p. 14. but strongly implyed; Christ is the substance of all Figures, and his Flesh is a Figure.

All that do study to raise a living thing out of a Dead, to raise the Spi∣rit out of the Letter, are Conjurers, and draw Points and Reasons, and so speak a Divination of their own Brain, they are Conjurers and Diviners, and their Teaching is from Conjuration, which is not spoken from the Mouth of the Lord, the Letter of the Scripture is carnal, and the Letter is Death, and killeth. p. 7.
And as for any being moved of the Lord, to take away your Hour-Glass from you,G. Fox's great Mistery, p. 77. by the Eternal Power it is owned.
The Priests of the World are, 1. Conjurers, 2.A brief Discove∣ry, &c. p. 7.8.9.10. Thieves and Robbers, 3. Antichrists, 4. Witches, 5. Devils, 6. Ly∣ars, 7 A Viperous and Serpentine Generation, 8. Blas∣phemers, 9. Scarlet coloured Beasts, 10. Babylon's Merchants, 11. Whited Walls, and painted Sepulchres, 12. Ravening Wolves, 13. Greedy dumb Dogs, 14. Eminent and Ambitious Pharisees.


Come and see once more this dark dismal Antichristian and Uncharitable Creed of these deluded Souls; the Contents of this sixth Branch thereof follow∣eth, viz 1. They, like the Pharisees, hold a sinless Perfection; yea, G. F. said he witnessed being come up to the Measure and Stature, and Fulness of Christ: 2. If ever we own Christ or his Apostles, we must necessarily own them, yea, and their Writings too, they being equivalent with the Apostles Writings: 3. They affirm, that as Quakers, they are elected and chosen before the Foundation of the World. And contrarywise, they Sentence and Condemn their Opposer the Que∣rist; being of a contrary Opinion, and as such, without shewing any other Cause; to be a Reprobate, ordained of old for Condemnation and Perdition, one that is Blind, and a Hater of Christ: 4 They do assert such as have the eternal Spirit, to be equal with God; which Spirit they say, they themselves have, and by it they give forth their Papers and Printed Books: 5. They assert the Flesh, or Body of Christ, to be but a Figure, which elsewhere, they call'd a Garment, and say, they cannot call him Christ: 6. They say the holy Scipture is Carnal, Dust, Death, and Killeth, and that studying therein, is Conjuring: 7. They Justi∣fie Fellony, under a pretence of being moved by the Spirit of God: 8. Its lament∣able to behold their Incharity, in calling the publick Ministry without exception, restriction, or distinction, Conjurers, Thieves, Robbers, Antichrists, Witch∣es, Devils, Serpents, Vipers, Blasphemers, Wolves, Beasts, Dogs, &c. Surely 'tis needless to enlarge; especially in an Epistle, (since their erroneous Creed is manifest, and that by this time the Athenians; and all wise Men, who are not wilfully blind, may know what to make of them; for the Tree is known by the Fruit) least I make the Porch bigger than the House.
Thus (Courteous Reader) I have, as it were, led thee by the Hand thro' the crooked Paths; and by ways of the Quakers intrioate Wilderness, and be wildred, wild, and unheard of extravagant Notions, dangerous Errors, and pernitious Principles: Not to have thee in Love with them; no, that it is not my
 design, but to beware of being Insured by them, as I once was. And thus much, touching the Quakers Creed, which is neither Nicean, Athanasian, nor Apo∣stolical; but I affirm it to he Antichristian, Blasphemous, Idolatrous, if not a Compound of all Heresies: For,
If as they write, they do believe indeed,
Then I affirm, this is their Creed:
Who can with safety them believe?
Who Write and Print, the Simple to deceive?
Object. But some may say, its true, their Creed is very well set forth from the words of their own printed Principles, and you give them a fair opportuni∣ty to meet you, to make their exceptions against what you charge upon them, and their Principles; yet this Method, I presume they will not take, but rather chuse to use their old Method of Printing; thinking by their false glossing, and Jug∣ling tricks to cast a Mist over the Minds of the Simple, as in their Answer to the Quak. unmask'd, &c. They think they have done; and therefore I desire to know what Method is best to use, when I come into their Company.
Answ. What you say is very true; they can write fair and plausable, holding forth one thing to their People, and another thing to the World. See p. 78. to the end, and by the Authority of their Yearly Meeting, impose these Contro∣versial Books upon their Countrey Friends; I was the last Month at Melton-Mowbery,(The Quaker's Book-seller in George-yard.) in Leicester-shire, where one Thomas Earl, a Quaker, dwells; and he told me that Thomas Northcot sent him some Books, wrote against me, but he sent them back; Tho. Northcot sends them to him again; tells him, his Commission, viz, that the Yearly Meetings, Order was, that two of a sort should be sent to every Meeting: He returned them again, and would not be imposed upon; for which he is to be commended, and all such manly Men. However, by this we may observe, that their own People begin to be weary of their Books, and that the Press begins to be Burthensome, notwithstanding their publick Purse, &c. Well, but to the Method,
I know of no better Method to advise to: And to use my self, than what William Penn did once excellently; chaulk out; in his Book, styled, A Ca∣veat against Popery, &c. which is, first, to shew the Papists their Errors, as I have done the Quakers; next, to shew their double dealing, viz. one thing to the World, and are indeed another to themselves, and their under Graduits; all which I have set forth as the practice of the Quakers, and lastly, call them to recant, and condemn them to their errors, before he will either take their words, for what they say, or trouble himself more with them, whose Methods I purpose to take; pray here W. Penn to (his late Friends,) the Papists, p, 5. Tho' to argue against a Tribe of Men, who esteem all reason carnal, and Scripture imperfect, might rightly be judged a meer beating the Air.— Yet, to prevent those who may be deceived, and if possibly to reclaim such as are; and lastly, to clear my own conscience, most of all in my Eye, &c.

Now, how far my old Friends, the Quakers, resemhle Will. Penn's late Friends, the Papists, in accounting both Scripture and Reason, both Carnal and im∣perfect, I leave to the Judgment of all Christians, who shall read their Creed, and other passages in this Treatise, which I have fairly quoted, and kept to the sence of what they write. Again, p. 3. of his Caveat, &c. They are grown so complisant, as none seem more exasperated at Persecution, than themselves [whilest the very Fathers of it] decrying the fierce∣ness of some Countreys, [whose Incendiaries they were, and still are.] Nay for all their venerable esteem of the Pope's Infallability, they have not stuck to censure his roaring Bulls [though procured by their own means:] That many unacquainted with their practices, are ready to believe them what they say themselves to be; whose Morral is, to have two strings to their Bow, to be Ambo dexter, and furnisht with mean∣ings, to suit the compass of all occasions.
Now, As this was a most grand piece of Hypocrisie in W. Penn's, (now Friends,) the Papists, so it is the same in my old Friends, the Quakers, of which for these three Instances of his: I could give Thirty, had I room to inlarge. See p. 78. to the end of this Treatise, to avoid repetition: Next for his method, a Caveat, &c. p. 35. To conclude, If we would not receive a Thief until he has Repented; let the Papists (yea, and Quakers too) first recant his volumnious Errors, not known in Scriptures; nor ever heard of for 300 (nay, respecting the Quakers, we may say 1600) Years together after Christ, &c.
And altho' I do not approve of all W. Penn hath writ (who sometimes have writ against Popery so warmly, as no Man did exceed him; yet when 'twas like to be Rampant here, his Applause thereof was too apparent) yet in this case, I like his method, and do intend to abide by it.
Object. But some may say, if their Tenents be thus bad, as their own Books sets forth; would it not be a proper Method to go to their Meet∣ings, and there to make it manifest to, and before their young Disciples.
Answ. I sent a Letter to them, sometime in July last, of the same Import; and though I have a Propriety in their Meeting-House, as set forth, p. 51. yet they not only refused to grant, that I might freely come; but in that they have their Religion, as they call it; established by Law, as they Dream; they gave me threatning words, &c. An Abstract of the Letter, they sent me, is as followeth, viz.

FRAN. BUGG.
Thine received, I conceive, that neither thy Twenty Pounds in the House, nor the Covenant with our Friends, dated, 1688. will justifie thee for taking up the time, (by us set apart to worship God:) In controversie; either as a Subject under the present Government, or as a Christian: For darest thou say, that the Settlement by Law of an undisturbed worship to all Dissenters, is not good and commendable, and that a penalty upon the Violators thereof is not just. Francis, be∣ware
 of such consequences, and disturb our Meetings no more, least such thy pretended Vindication, proves thy great disadvantage, both as a Man, and as a Christian, &c.



Joshua Bangs,
I dare not say, but that a Settlement by Law of Gods worship, is good and commendable. And I am glad you so deem it, and be∣gin to own your Establishment by Law; though I must tell you, that yours is rather indulg'd, than establisht, and you stand upon your good behaviour: And as to your second Proposition, (i. e.) That a Penalty upon the Violators of it just: I agree with you also; but withal, I must tell you, that neither that Law, that thus settle and esta∣blish you (of which you make a great boast) nor yet your License either doth, or can take away my Right in the Meeting House, &c. But if you, according to your new Opinion, did always account it commendable to have God's Worship establisht by Law, and a Pe∣nalty upon Violaters of it is just; do not you therein condemn your Brethren, whose ancient practice was frequently to disturb the establisht Worship of God: And do you not therein justifie the practice of such as Whipt, Stockt, Imprisoned, and Fined your Brethren for vio∣lating and disturbing such a Worship, so establisht by Law: Yea, you acquit them of the Sin of Persecution, with which you formerly charged them: but now you begin to threaten me to beware of the consequences which may fall on me, both as a Man, and a Chri∣stian, &c.
By which Letter from Josh. Bangs, 'tis plain what they would be at, had they Power; which, God grant they never may: But if they had, so long as my property in the House remains, so long God permitting me Life and Health, I shall at times visit them, in order to shew them their Errors, still resuming my frequent Challenge: That if they will give me a Months notice, I will meet any four, six, or ten of their ablest Preachers, in Milden-Hall, and prove them guilty of the Errors in this Book, laid to their Charge.
Thus (Noble Bereans) have I finished my Epistle to you, in which I have truly and fairly stated the Quakers Creed, shewed the way how to deal with them; and by their recited Letter, what they would be a, had they Power; so that unless they publickly recant of their Errors; and under the Hand of six, or more, of their Chieftains, condemn their pernitious Principles, have nothing to do with them; beware of their gilded Pills, and remember Ireneus's saying, Whilst Hereticks speak like the Faithful; they not only mean otherwise than they say, but clean contra∣ry; and by their Tenents full of Blasphemy; they destroy the Souls of
 those, who with their fair words, suck in the Poyson of their foul Opinions: See his third Book against Heresies, &c. and now shall con∣clude with these words I writ in 1668. viz.
To write no more, I long since did intend,
But none but God knows now when I shall end:
For still I find, when I think all is done,
As much to write, as when I first begun.
Sept. the 7th. 1692.




