



My Lord,
NEver any Pieces more wanted so great a Name, as your Lordships, to cover their faults, if the Composition of them is survey'd, nor more de∣serv'd it, if the Nobility of their Subjects is consider'd, than these Essays, which now beg your Lordships Protection. If the Ma∣nagement of them resembled the Matter they are employ'd about▪ they might appeal to your Lord∣ships Judgment, as a Critick, not fly to your Goodness, as a Patron▪ But as I am conscious of the num∣berless

defects of these Discour∣ses, so am I equally sensible that your Lordships Writings and Worth have gain'd you such a settled Esteem amongst all Per∣sons, ▪whose Esteem is valuable, that if it is possible to guard an ill Writer from his just Doom, your Lordships Character may ensure him. And certainly if any faulty Performances carry their excuses along with them, these may lay claim to Pardon, since they are wholly design'd to promote Truth, Virtue, and Piety, how defective soever they are on other regards. Even the Imperfections of them may per∣haps be useful, as Nature serves her self of the most contemptible Means to bring about wonderful Ends; for by not appearing such, as so good Themes would suggest to Persons of excellent

Parts, they may provoke them to draw their more artful Rens in so just a Cause, and to substitute better Discourses in their places, and to rescue these illustrious Subjects from so rude Hands as mine, by employing their successful Wits in defend∣ing them. It will be Felicity e∣nough for me, if I can so far contribute towards producing a good Writer, as to be his Foyl, and to shew that in others, which I cannot make my self.
I hope these Exercitations will not be look'd on as quite use∣less, tho' something of the same kind with most of them, has ad∣vantageously appear'd in several Languages. For some of the Arguments, I think, are not ab∣solutely old, and tho' their Mat∣ter is sometimes so, yet the Form or Dress is always new.

It may often be as hard to trace from whence the Materials were taken, as in a Wine-Vessel, to shew from what Grape each drop of Wine was press'd.
In one or two of these Dis∣courses I have had Authors of note in foreign Languages in my view, which are so well known, that it is superfluous to name them. This, I fancy, needs no Apology, since a Critick, as ex∣cellent, as severe, has made it al∣lowable above a thousand Years ago, where he affirms, That the using the Works of other Learn'd Men for our Patterns, and to govern our Inventions by, . Longin.  Sect. 11. p. 57. Edit. Langbaine. is no more stealth, than one's taking the Manners, the Pi∣ctures, or any other Pieces of

Work done by another, for our Models to copy after.
If the Opinions which I op∣pose, are rather those of anci∣ent, than modern Writers, it is because I look upon those to have greater strength than these, and in divers places the latter to have only transcrib'd the for∣mer; tho' neither are our mo∣dern Writers past by without consideration.
If I differ from great Men in some Punctilio's, I believe it is generally where I can produce others of equal remark, of my Sentiments; and I desire to ex∣press my Dissent with all ima∣ginable deference and regard, and to pay the utmost Honour to those admirable Personages, whom I am so bold as to con∣tradict. Notwithstanding which I am very willing to submit all

to riper Judgments, declaring that I make these Attempts publick, more with a desire to invite others to inform me, than with the presumption of in∣forming others. If your Lord∣ship had seen these small Tracts before they went to the Press, as you have done since they came from it, when you were pleas'd to encourage me to ad∣dress them to your Lordship, they might have come abroad much more correct, more wor∣thy your Lordship's Patronage.
As to the time of giving these Essays light, it cannot be ill chosen, when our Established Religion is attack'd by Scepticks, Deists, and others of that Rank: and therefore, as in a publick In∣vasion, every person is commission∣ed to put himself into a posture of Defense; and if the dumb

Lydian Prince had his Tongue loos'd by the violent Passion and Effort to save his Royal Father, insomuch that he could utter an apt and significant Reprimand against the Assassin, if we believe an . Herod▪ in Clio, p. 36. Sect. 85. Edit. Gale. Historian who sometimes relates things incredible; so 'tis no time to be silent when our com∣mon Mother, the Orthodox and Catholick Church, is in every part assaulted by prophane and irreligious Pens? The Lydian's speaking indeed preluded to the ruin of his Father's Grandeur, and one of the most flourishing Monarchies in Asian But our Church, by the Divine. Bles∣sing, needs not to fear any thing, from any Omen, while such as your Lordship preside over her.
As to what Censures may pass upon me, for venturing these Papers into a World which is so extreamly fond of Detraction, I shall endeavour to bear them with patience, if these may prove serviceable to any good de∣sign. I care not how many speak ill of them, if they have the happiness to do good to one single Person, to reform one Vice, or to rectify one Error. I shall gain more by this, than I shall suffer by that; and if they can be Patroniz'd from Con∣tempt, your Lordships Name can Patronize them.
If the Esteem, Deference and Honour which the Offerer has for your Lordship, can give a Va∣lue and Price to the Offering, this Present which I make your Lordship, would by them be much rais'd above its true proportion.

To give your Lordship all the Instance which at present I can of my Veneration, I shall (a∣gainst the common Mode of De∣dications) abstain from pretend∣ing to draw your Lordships Character, not only because your Lordships Piety and Modesty dis∣allow it, nor likewise because a Panegyrick would be an unsuit∣able Introduction to the Nature of my Subjects, but because I cannot reach the height of my Theme, nor draw such daring, majestical Lines, as may di∣stinguish your Lordships resem∣blance from others. No: let your Lordships Praises lie where they are, written deep in the Hearts of all those, who wish well either to Religion or Lear∣ning. It is enough for me to ad∣mire at an awful distance what I dare not offer to describe.
I shall close my over-tedious Address, with expressing my satisfaction that I have the Hap∣piness to be the first who have in this publick way congratula∣ted your Lordships Accession to your new Diocese, (to which you were nominated by the wisest of Princes, to comfort it, for the loss of that famous Man, Your Learned Predecessor,) which that You may long adorn with those Virtues and Excel∣lencies which shine in Your Lord∣ship, shall always be zealously wish'd for, by
My LORD,

