



Honoured Sisters,
'TIs far from me to despise you, or to do any thing to your re∣proach. I know you are beloved of God for the sake of Christ, and that you stand fixed for ever by Faith upon the same foun∣dation with us. I also know that the Lord doth put no difference be∣twixt Male and Female, as to the communications of his Saving Graces, but hath often made many of your Sex eminent for piety; yea, there hath been of YOV, I speak now of ordinary Christians, that for Holiness of life have out gone many of the Brethren: Nor can their vertuous lives but be renown and Glory to YOV, and conviction to those of VS that have come behinde you in Faith and Holyness. The love of Women in Spirituals (as well as Naturals) oft times out∣goes that of Men.
When Christ was upon Earth, we read not that any Man did to, and for him, as did the Woman that was a sinner, Joanna, Su∣sanna, and many others, Luk. 7.36, 37, 38. Chap. 8.1, 2, 3.
And as they have shewed themselves eminent for piety, so for Chri∣stian valour and fortitude of minde, when called of God to bear wit∣ness to, and for his Name in the World: as all Histories of that Nature doth suficiently testifie. They were Women, as I take it, as well as Men, that were tortured, and that would not accept of deliverance that they might obtaine a better resurrection, Heb. 11.35. Where∣fore I honour and praise your eminencie in vertue; and desire to be provoked by the exceeding piety of any of you, in all Holy conversation and Godlyness.
And although, as you will find, I have not with out a cause, made a Question of the Lawfulness of your assembling together, by your selves, to perform, without your Men, solemn Worship to God: Yet I dare not make your selves the Authors of your own mis∣carriage in this. I do therefore rather impute it to your Leaders, who whether of a fond respect to some seeming abilities they think is in

you for this, or from a perswasion that you have been better then themselves in other things, or whether from a preposterous zeal, they have put you upon a work so much too heavy for you: I shall not at this time concern my self to inquire into. But this is certaine, at least 'tis so in my apprehension, that in this matter you are tempted by them to take too much upon you.
I am not insensible but that for my thus writing, though I there∣by have designed your Honour and good Order, I am like enough to run the Gantlet among you, and to partake most smartly of the scourge of the Tongues of some, and to be soundly Brow-beaten for it by others: Specially by our Author, who will finde himself immediatly concerned, for that I have blamed him for what he hath irregularly done both with the Word, to you, and me. I look also to be sufficiently Scan∣dalized, and counted a man not for Prayer, and Meetings for Prayer, and the like, but I will labour to bare them with Patience, and seek their good that shall be tempted to abuse me.
I had not, indeed I had not spoke a Word to this question in this manner, had not Mr. K. sent his Paper abroad, and amongst us, for the encouraging this practise with us, in Opposition to our peace. I do not say he designed our breach, but his Arguments tended thereto; and had not our People been of a wise and quiet temper, his Paper might have set us into a Flame. But thanks be to God we are at quiet, and walk in love, notwithstanding the Lifts that have been to make us do otherwise.
There are also the mouths of some opened against me for this, who lie at wait for Occasions, and shew that they are glad to take them before they are given by mee: to whom I now shew by this ensuing discourse, that I had a reason to do what I did.
I commend you to God, and to the Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among them that are Sanctified by Faith in Jesus Christ: to whom be Honour and Glory for ever.
And remaine your Faithfull Friend and Brother to Pray for you, to love you in the Gospel, and to do you what Christian Service I can.

