



WHen first it pleased You to require our service in Preaching at Your late Publike Fast, we resolved to close our eyes against all Clouds of discourage∣ment arising from our owne unwor∣thinesse and insufficiency, and to set our selves wholly to seek what the Lord would command us to deliver in his Name, at such a time, to such an Honourable and awfull Assembly, with a totall deniall of our selves.Psalm. 82.
And albeit we should have beene glad to have beene spared this exposing of our selves to the publike view; yet, You appointing otherwise, we hold it equall that the joynt entreaty of the Representative Body of the whole Communalty of the kingdome should bee regarded, and have chosen rather that others should censure us of weakenesse, than You should charge
 us with Disobedience: Your Request being no lesse than a command; and Your acceptance sufficient to give value to things of themselves both meane and worthlesse.
Wherefore, according to our Duty so willingly as the consciousnesse of our slender performances would permit, we obey Your Order, and doe now, although somewhat late, humbly offer these two plaine Sermons (for, who expects other in a Fast?) at the footstoole of Your Tribunall, as a lasting Monument of Our Gratitude for Your encouraging Approbation of, and solemne Thankes for our weake endeavours in the preaching of them.
If in some places wee have taken that just liberty which all others have done before us, we trust it shall not be imputed; so long as in the most materiall passages we have kept to the very words which at first we used, so farre as was necessary; and have not wit∣tingly swerved an haires bredth from the sense and substance in the residue.
Wee have indeed pared off some Repetitions, which in speaking had their use, the more to inculcate, and the better to set on the matter, but would not have been so gratefull in Writing, because Readers account every thing too long that hath any thing too much. We have
 likewise contracted some expressions, which in discour∣ses of so much length, could hardly be so concise as we desired, Memory being not alwaies at hand to give birth to every Conception of our minds in such formes as wee intended. And some few things we have added, where straites of time, or defect of memory made some balkes in the first delivery.
What ever our performances be, we humbly leave them in Your hands, and under Your Honourable Pro∣tection, which we are bold to expect, because they are by Your own Act drawne from us, and that in a time so queasie and distempered as can hardly beare that food, or Physik which is needfull for it. Seldome doth a wise Reproofe, a necessary Exhortation, or wholsome Do∣ctrine meet with an obedient Eare.
The God of Heaven steere all Your weighty con∣sultations by his own Counsell, to his own Glory; cover You still under his own Wing, and make You the most accomplisht, best united, and most successefull and glorious house of Commons that ever sate in that High Court; but chiefly in the effectuall endeavour∣ing of a further Sanction of, and stronger Guard about our true Palladium, the true Religion, already estab∣lished among us; in the perfecting of the Reformation of it; in the erecting, maintaining, protecting, and in∣couraging
 of an able, godly, faithfull, zealous, profitable, PreachingThis was our joynt & earnest suit to You, in Preaching; and we now again beseech You to set your hearts and hands to this work, as Benhail, Obadiah and other Prin∣ces in Iudah did. 2 Chr. 17.7, 8, 9. Ministery, in every Parish Church and Chappell throughout England and Wales; and in the in∣terceding to the Kings sacred Majesty for the setting up of a Faithfull, Iudicious, and Zealous Magistracy, where yet the same is wanting, to be ever at hand to back such a Ministery: without either of which, not only the power of Godlines will soone degenerate in∣to formality, and zeale into Lukewarmenesse; but, Popery, Arminianism, Socinianisme, Prophane∣nesse, Apostacy, and Atheisme it selfe will more and more croud in upon us, and prevaile against us, doe You all You can by all other meanes.
And now, commending You to God and to the Word of his grace,Acts 20.32. which is able to build You up further, and to give You an inheritance a∣mong all them which be sanctified; and these our Labours to his further blessing, whereby all may speedily be brought under the line of his Covenant, which is our safety;The Summe of both Ser∣mons. that he may continue with us, which is our Glory; and we with him, which is our happinesse: we rest,

