



My Lord,
THE many favours your Honour hath vouchsafed unto me, altogether unde∣serving, may justly command a pub∣like acknowledgement thereof to the whole world; But that which doth especially encourage me to seek for your Protection,

in the publishing of this Treatise, is your unfained love of, and stedfast continuance in the Truth: So that those two things which Pythagoras said, made a man compleat, , to doe good to others, and to embrace truth, may without flattery be affirmed to be in your Lordship. And as for the latter, Paul speaks it as a great commendation, that the true faith did dwell in Lois,2 Tim 1▪5. which denoteth a stable and firm permanency, as the Apostle else∣where saith, Sinne dwelleth in him. In some mens breasts, Truth is only a sojourner, and their assent to it passeth away (as the Psalmist speaks of our life; like a tale that is told. Now herein Christ speaks of a peculiar priviledge to the Elect, that it is not pos∣sible for them to be deceived by false Prophets (if it were possible to deceive the very Elect) which is to be understood of a totall and finall seduction:Mat. 24.24. Thus also when the Apostle had mentioned the Apostacy of Hymenaeus and Philetus, he interposeth by way of comfort to the godly,2 Tim. 2.19. neverthelesse the foundation of the Lord standeth sure, having this Seal, the Lord knoweth who are his; and no wonder, if the truths of Christ are worthy of all hearty ac∣ceptation, seeing they are wholly by supernaturall revelation, in which sense, some say, Christ is called ,Ioh. 1.1. the Word, because he revealed the will of his Father to us; but in another respect are we to take heed how we decline from the truths of God, because they are the inlet and first instrument of our Sanctification and Salvation,1 Tim▪ .4. Ioh▪ 1▪7.17. God would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of

the truth; Sanctifie them by thy truth, thy Word is truth; and our regeneration is described patly by the renewing of our minde,Ep. 4.23. so as corrupt distillati∣ons from the head are apt to putrifie the vitals, so Errours and false Doctrins do quickly corrupt our practce. One thing more I make bold to recom∣mend to your Lordship, that besides the bare re∣ceiving of the truth, there is (as the perfection of knowledge) the acknowledgement of truth after god∣linesse,Tit. .1. Eph. 4.21. and the learning of truth as it is in Jesus Christ; which is, when the truths we beleeve have a savoury and powerfull effect upon us, and no∣thing causeth our abode in the truth so much as the experimentall efficacy of it upon our hearts.Heb. 13 9. It is good (saith the Apostle) to have the heart esta∣blished with grace and not with meats. One would have thought the Apostle should have said it is good to have the heart established with sound Do∣ctrine, because he exhorteth them not to be carri∣ed aside with every winde of Doctrine; but he saith Grace rather then knowledge, because this is the choicest Antidote against falshoods; Tantum scimus, quantum operamur, we know no more (viz. favourily, clearly, and stedfastly) then we have pow∣erfull practice of: Now of all supernaturall truths the doctrine of Justification hath no mean excellen∣cy, this is the article which Luther said reigned in his heart; In this is a Christians treasury of hope and consolation: and because the Antinomians, whose opinions may be stiled as those of Epicurus were, , (inticing Syrens of a mans fleshly

minde) have put their dead flies in this precious Box of ointment, I have endeavoured to select this precious Gold from their drosse. Though the matter I handle be in part controversall, yet it is also in a great measure practicall. The greatest mercy I can wish to your Lordship, is this glorious priviledge of Iustification, in which only, and not in riches, ho∣nours, or any earthly dignity, consisteth true and perfect blessednesse, as David a King, doth heartily, and with much affection acknowledge, Psal. 32.1. and Paul by vertue of this Iustification, Rom. 8. tri∣umphs over all adversity and trouble whatsoever. Of which glorious happinesse that your Lordship may be made partaker, is the Prayer of

