


SIR!
IT is only Heaven, that is stored with lovely Creatures, better than Old-England.
Nevertheless, your Absence is more than a little Grievous. So, as the want of a Diamond useth to be; even when it drops from a Jewel, wherein it leaves very illustrious Con∣stellations.

Howbeit, in their pensive Thoughts your Friends have very Cordial Drops. They have to consider, that your Travel is not Extravagance. That your Transplantation is for Cul∣ture. And, what is more;
That, through the Grace of God, you do keep the rare Sobriety, which you carried with you. And, do gain the rich Literature which you went for. That you have made Ge∣neva to value her self, upon your Proficience there. And do not lose your Time at Milan.
Insomuch that your Native Land grows big with Expectation. Expec∣tation to receive her Treasure again, and with a noble Interest. To have you, e're it be long, in Parliament Robes. And, to have such service of your Endowments, as may add lustre to the bright Names, both of CHEEK and of RUSSEL.

Such as may make the STATE and the CHURCH your Debtors. And, not admit it to be said of your choice Parts, as a Commoner of this Na∣tion said of an unhappy Lord's; that God gave the Use, but the Devil gave the Application.
For this, the best of Mothers is in∣stant in Prayers. Her Honour's Clo∣set and Chappel, keep smoking with Sacred Incense for this. The excel∣lent Bathsheba is thus active for her dearest Lemuel. Hoping, that in convenient Season, she shall have the Royal Psalmist's Cause to take up the most desirable part of his words; Bles∣sed be the Lord God of Israel, who hath given me such a Son, mine Eyes even seeing it.
Neither is her Ladyship alone, in this Divine Service. Offerings, and whole Burnt-Offerings, do also as∣cend
from other Altars. Particu∣larly, he is one of your Orators, who is the Author of these following Pages.
Pages, which, by Dedication he maketh your own; for want of better means to acknowledg his Obligations, and to express his Affections to Mr. CHEEK. And the rather, because he hopeth, that, by the Blessing of the Almighty, their Words of Truth and Uprightness, will be Nails to fasten, and Goads to quicken, your laudable Vertues. Which is the only Ambiti∣on, of
SIR,

