



That disown their Portion and Good Things in this Life, and being written in the Earth; — Jer. 17.13.
That receive the Word of their Blessed Saviour from his most un∣worthy Minister;
And by their religious Zeal do provoke many of Inferior Rank;
Grace and Peace be multiplied from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ.


Ladies,
THis Book is not cloathed with soft Raiment. It doth not wear Joseph's coloured Coat. But it claimeth his celebrated Name. Zapnath Paaneah, a Revealer of Secrets. For it discover∣eth the things which are most Need∣ful and most Difficult to be known. It displayeth no less things than the STATES and CONDITIONS of Souls. And presenteth divine Pre∣scriptions for making both of them good.
Wherefore I have presumed to make it yours. And to beseech your Honours and Ladiships to do me the favour, to admit it to be your Mi∣nister, a Clerk of your Closets, and a Servant unto your Soliloquies and Sacred Communings with your selves therein.

Ladies, This I have done of my Gratitude and Piety, against many Contradictions of my Modesty. Yet without one blush, for the Plainness wherewith I array divine Truth. Be∣cause, Diamonds suffer loss by Painting; and Gold needeth not to be gilded. New-Testament Divinity wants no sound of Sackbut and Psaltery. Preachers rich Language, holdeth many Poor: and that which Men will call Poor, maketh many Rich.
The Christians unto whom I do more statedly Minister, do care for no Apes and Peacocks from Ophir. But prefer wholesom Food, above finest Fea∣thers. And I am well sure, Your Ladi∣ships are none of those, that take him for the King, who wears most Lace and Ribband on his Cloaths. Or him for the Divine, whose Periods are most gay with Wit and Elegance.

I dare no more to Flatter, than to Murder. But I must take leave to mention that great Grace of God in you, which alone can warrant this my Boldness with you. In my own defence, I do here say it; I have ob∣served you to relish Manna without Quails. The words of Eternal Life, without the enticing ones of Man's Wis∣dom. To reverence the Ark of God, there where it hath been covered with Badgers Skins. To be far from dreaming that your Saviour is Divi∣ded. Or confined unto any Dividing Party, that crieth, Lo he is HERE or THERE only.
Admirable Grace! And so much the more, by how much bigger you are in this World. For Greatness and Goodness meet not often. The Obli∣gations of great Persons unto their Maker's Service, are Superlative. But so are their Temptations from it, also.
And as these latter do always Over∣take, they do almost always Over∣come the former. So that, the Su∣pream Landlord hath most of his Rent from Cottages: Courts, and greatest Houses do pay him least. It is said that the natural Heavens are more di∣stinctly seen in some low Vaults, than upon high Mountains. But it is every ones observation, that the Third Hea∣ven is best seen by People of lower Place. There is no actionable Scanda∣lum Magnatum in the Holy Bible. But there we read, that, Not many of them are Called. That it is rare that Camels do (off with their Bunches, and) pass through the Needles eye. That, as Bees are drowned in Hony, the Rich are choaked with their Prosperity.
They do know, that there is no Armour against Fate. That Peerage is no Protection against Death's Arrest. And Imperial Crowns exempt not the
Heads that wear them, from the common Golgotha. Their eyes see that earthly Gods die as other Men do. The Misery is, they put off the day, which, otherwise than in imagination, they cannot put off. They take serious Re∣membrancers for mis-timed Tormentors. Or else make their Answer, with the more audacious madness of Laugh∣ter. And dub them all for Cow-hearts, that tremble at our sound of a World to come. Especially, if they do any more than Tremble. If they come to argue, [not, Let us Eat and Drink, but,] Let us Believe, and Repent, for to Morrow we Die. Notable Pastime among them, maketh such Language as that rare Gentleman's; who, (with Five hun∣dred Pounds for charitable Uses,) sent a Letter to Sir Edwin Sands, thus Subscribed,



It is true, dying hours do change the colour and taste of earthly Gran∣deurs. Then they receive a little sight, when their Eye-strings are ready to break. Then they believe the invisi∣ble Judge, and his Tribunal, who be∣fore were blind to Sunshine, and deaf to Thunder. And then when they can swallow no other Cordial, some do call for the Gospel. Then, when, if the blessed Fountain thereof doth give forth his Grace, it can be known only unto himself. We do all know there is but one, if one instance, in all the holy Scripture, of a Man receiving his spiri∣tual, and parting with his natural Life, upon the same day.

Ladies,
This is a Lamentation; and I doubt not but it is religiously yours. Yet is there a relict Honour of our Nation, even as to your high Order in it, which
we have to Congratulate. Namely, that, with the best KING on the earthly Globe, we have a QUEEN of serious Religion, and of Honourable Women not a few.
In which Constellation may your Honours and Ladiships, long and bright∣ly shine! And, Living and Dying, be renowned Witnesses of these Eternal Truths; sc. That this sinful World is not supreamly Eligible; that the Heavenly Mansions are by no means Contemptible; and that the Passage from hence unto them is not invincibly Terrible!
So Prayeth, in the sense of his deep Obligations,
Honourable Ladies, 

