



Brethren,
YOu would not Excuse, you must therefore Accept this small Labour. Were it not for the Writing, I would not Name it a Labour. The Meditation and De∣livery of it were very Pleasure to me. He knows it, who knoweth
what my Heart feels in my Hopes of Benefiting you; and in my Di∣scernments thereof.
I have contracted it; and the rather, because my late Sermon of Early Conversion is gotten into ma∣ny of your Hands I presume.
Under the Law, he that built a new House was to make a Battle∣ment for the Roof of it; lest any walking on the Roof, should through their Imprudence fall from it. Deut. 22.8. God was not satisfied, to have Householders only forbear Pushing Men down. But Com∣manded them to make Provision against their own falling down. So that no Man should easily come un∣to hurt in their Families. None should slip, if he would not wil∣fully
leap down headlong, over the Battlements. Believe it, my dear∣est Friends, the Law is still in force. God is not content that your Chil∣dren be not by you put upon sinful courses. He Commands that they be by you kept from them. That you set up such Spiritual Battle∣ments in your Houses, as shall make it hard for a Child to fall into them. I have directed you how to make those Battlements. If you set them up, and your children will leap over them into Hell, yet your own Souls are delivered. If you do not set them up, their Blood will be re∣quired at your Hands. To pre∣vent their Perdition and your Sor∣row thence, I have prepared for them, that which I must trust you to deliver unto them.

My Life is spent in Prayers and Pains for you and them. I hope, I do not Live a day, wherein I have not the help of your Holy Prayers. You do by this time know my need, and my desire also.
May every of you be Blessed in your children, and your children in you. May all the Graces of the Blessed Spirit, all the Promises of the Gospel-Covenant, and all the Joys of the Heavenly Mansions, be the Lot of your Inheritance, and of theirs. I am

