



MADAM;
TO these small Fragments, I inscribe this proper Name of Yours. For which I have a great Example, and valuable Reasons.
My Example is John the Divine; who hath inscribed a short Collection of sacred Learning to an Elect Lady. And, my Reasons are these:
Your Ladiship hath been such a Reader, that you are become a Judg of Books; as a grave Antient speaks of a rare Lady in his Age. Neither is it questioned, but your religious Principle gives you a more than common Savour of my Divine Arguments. And, as confident I am, that Sophronia's Name will attract Readers; and her holy Prayers may fetch a Blessing from Heaven on their Reading!
Full well her Ladiship seeth the sore need. Our Age being one very fruitful of Religi∣ons, and barren of what is truly Religi∣ous. One that has been contending so long for bare Garbs and Dresses of Religion, that it has very little left it more than Dresses, Garbs, and Modes of Religion.
It is come to that pass, that Fools fear not to shoot their Bolts. And, they who say it not with their Lips, do say in their Lives, that, There is no God. Our The∣ists be generally Atheists; and do shew plain∣ly, that tho their Clamour be against Three Persons, their Wrath and Spite is against One God! Insomuch, that Nullitarians is a much more proper Name for them than Unitarians. Surely, Goats, whatever Milk they give, are Brutes. And, Panthers, tho they have wonderfully sweet Scents, are very ill Creatures. Some of our Deists are open-handed to the Poor; one of them espe∣cially, with his own or other folks Money. And, as Faustus Socinus before him, he is complaisant and sweet even to such as de∣test and oppose his Heresy. Joining himself in the Society for Reformation of Manners. But, scarcely is there one Snake of them, whose Poison is not seen through his best painted

Skin! Immoral Poison, I mean; and such Impurity, as speaks no good will to Deity. And, it is worthy to be remembred, what a great Man, who was in danger of being taken in their Pit, did put to Socinus himself, and his Followers. If your Doc∣trine be the Truth,Nullâ pietatis commendatione, &c. Scrupuli ab excellenti Viro propositi, inter Oper. Socini. how comes it to be so, that it is contended for by no Men of any good Name for Piety, any Praise for exemplary Life and Conversation? but the contrary they are, who set forth your Opinions.
The Holy Scriptures are complemented a little; but not reverenced at all, by the Many. The Socinian prefers his Light of Reason; as the Quaker doth his Light within. Which is but the same Farthing-Candle, differently denominated. And, not a few bold Sparks say plainly, They are but of Men, and not from Heaven.
Surely, Sophronia, the Arch-Bishop of Mentz did long ago speak all their Hearts. At the Diet of Ausburg, in the Year 1530, lighting on a Bible, and reading a while in it, he very honestly professed, that he knew not well what Book it was, but he saw plainly that it made against the Papal way.
Miserable is the manner, in which our common Protestants do read the Sacred Scripture. There is no doubt, but the Transgression of it saith within Sophro∣nia's Heart, There is no Fear of God before so irreverent Eyes! And, her La∣diship will not blame me, for sending forth these Antidotes in days of such Contagion. If it be my fault that I send forth no more, that Fault shall as soon be mended as it is made to appear. Indeed St. Austin ad∣viseth to much Writing in a time of much Corruption: that in the plenty of Books all Men may find what will best sute their different Palats. But whither runs my Pen?
MADAM;
Ʋnder the most sensible Obligation of your very singular Favours, I am ever praying, that great may be your Reward in Hea∣ven. And, in all Sincerity, I shall conti∣nue to be

Bridges-street near Covent-garden, July 1. 1697.
