


Courteous Reader,
THough this be a small Treatise, yet it doth
present thee with things of the greatest, and
most weighty concernment, even with a Discourse of
Life and Death to Eternity: opening, and clearing,
by the Scriptures of God, that the time is at hand,
when, there shall be a Resurrection of the Dead,
both of the just and unjust; even of the Bo∣dies
of both, from the Graves where they are,
or shall be, at the approach of that day.
Thou hast also in these few lines, the order and
manner of the rising of these two sorts of People,
wherein is shewed thee with what Body they shall
then rise; as also their states and condition at this
day, with great clearness.
For here thou shalt see the truth, and manner of
the terrible Judgement, the opening of the Books,
the examining of Witnesses, with a finall conclusion
upon good and bad. Which, I hope will be profi∣table
to thy Soul that shall read it. For if thou
art godly, then here is that which will through Gods
blessing, incourage thee to go on in the faith of the
truth of the Gospel; but if thou art ungodly, then
here thou mayst meet with conviction: yea, and that
of what will be without fail, thy end, at the end of
the World: whether thou continue in thy sins, or re∣pent.

If thou continue in them, blackness, and
darkness, and everlasting destruction; but if thou
repent and believe the Gospel, then light and life,
and joy, and comfort, and glory, and happiness, and
that to Eternity.
Wherefore let me here beg these things at thy
hand.
First, That thou take heed of that spirit of
mockery, that saith, 2 Pet. 3. 4, 5. Where is the
promise of his coming?
Secondly, Take heed that thy heart be not over∣charged
with surfeiting and drunkenness, and the
cares of this life, and so that day come upon thee
unawares. Luke 21. 34, 35.
Thirdly, But be diligent in making thy Call∣ing
and Election sure; that thou in the day, of
which thou shalt read more in this Book, be not
found without that glorious Righteousness that will
then stand thee instead, and present thee before his
glorious presence, with exceeding joy; to him be
glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, World with∣out
end, Amen.

