



SIR,
THERE is a Frenzy abroad, of which Men do together Adore the Pipes, and Neglect the Foun∣tain. Make great court to his Ministers, and slight the King; the King eternal. Worshipping the
Stars that do lead to Christ, and crucifying to themselves afresh, the Christ that they lead unto; yea, by Unbelief and Disobedience, putting him to open Shame. But, I must Hope better things of You. And believe it to be your Love of Christ, that constrains you to receive a Paul, and an Apol∣los, as an Angel of God, yea as Christ himself.
Wherefore, as your extraordinary Kindness to another renowned Saint hath been told to the World by in∣comparable Pens;
By Mr. Bax∣ter , and by Dr. Bates in Dedicat. Epistles. I do resolve, that where∣soever this Sermon shall be read, your like Affection to our heavenly FLEMING shall have its Me∣morial.

Very deeply I am impressed with your Favours done unto both: For their Love was eminent, and much exceeded the Fame of it, to a Man Born to Reproach. And not pre∣tending to be Richer than his Brethren, in any other Treasure.
A Love to be wondered at; had it not been so known, that God is Love. And that, therefore, Love is Godliness. And, where God∣liness abounds, Loving-kindness overflows. As we see in Angels, that do flagrantly Love the least of Abraham's Children. And highly honour the meanest of sanctified Worms.
As for the Former, Jonathan must needs have known his David; and the World will by and by have his Life in Folio to read. And,
as concerning the Latter, as little as any Man do you need to be told, with what a Fulness of God he was filled. Sir, Your wondring Eyes were your Witnesses. The great Love he bare you, gave you more than common Knowledg of him; whose Humility and Modesty hid him so, that he was not much known, unto those who knew him most. As Ezekiel speaks of other Angels, his Wings so covered his Feet. How∣ever, so much you saw, that, as very well you might, you singularly loved him. And esteemed his Love unto you, to be of that Kind which is most valuable next unto God's own Love.
For the Information of others, somewhat is said of this Man of
God, in the following Pages. Where∣to I can add this, which was said of the famous Antonine; He hath this Praise crowning all the rest, that he hath no Gain-sayer of his Praises. I hear not of any Dust to be blown off from this Diamond.

Honoured Sir;
Two or three of your Letters to me, bewailed the World's Loss, the Church's, and Your own, in the Departure of holy FLEMING. Nor do I doubt, but the best of the Church, and World do lay it to heart. Even, generally, all that hear, how much Light, and Salt, and Balm, is taken from a needy Age.

For your Relief, and others, this is all in this Place to be said. It is elsewhere shewn, how we may hold Departed Saints in our Sight and in our Service.
Commemora∣tion of Saints departed, on Heb. 13.7. If the Course there pre∣scribed be duly follow∣ed, I am certain that this Saint's Death shall not be on∣ly his own Gain: But his As∣cension to Heaven, shall be made to further our Conversation therein. And notably contribute unto the Victo∣ry, Joy, and Triumph of Faith, which this Sermon describes.
Thereto I dismiss you, without any Sallies of Flattery; the com∣mon Sin and Scandal of Dedica∣tions. It must be confessed, that if all Praise of Sir Henry Ashhurst be Flattery, Old England and New
are overrun with that Leprosy. And, the Israelites are much more sick of its Plague, than the Egyptians be. The Name of ASHHURST was left richly perfumed by your excellent Father. And, I hear not but it is so kept by your Self and your Right Ho∣nourable Brother.
Sir William A. Lord-Mayor. O∣therwise, you had before this time loudly heard of it. For they do sink deepest, who fall from Pinacles highest; they who were at first the best An∣gels, are now the worst Devils, saith Du Moulin. And by the Old Law, you had been condemned to be burnt for the Profanation of such a Father's Name.
Comprehenditur cum filiâ filius, &c. Calv. Lev. 21.9.

Surely the Sun must have looked Pale, and the Spheres have cast out their Stars, if such as You and my Lord had forsaken your God, and the God of your Fathers! And had left no better to be said of you, than Philostratus says of Perinthius; Barely, that he was the Son of Rufus.
But, Sir, as you very well know; my Office is to bring low all Mountains and Hills; not, the contrary. And, as my own Heart sweetly knows, my Ambition is to Edify, not Magnify you; to serve your Faith, not your Fame; which, as it less needs it, doth less deserve it. Much rather would I provoke you to one good Work, than make known all that ever you did. And be the meanest Instru∣ment
to make you a better Man, than a Trumpet to proclaim you a good one.
Plain dealing is a Jewel; and will appear so one day, though now there be much more of it at the Mill than about the Throne. And, I do account that Earthly-Gods themselves are seldom so richly treat∣ed, as my Friends that be enter∣tained with these Complements. Sc. That, BARONETS must perish without the New-Birth. That, A Repenting Lazarus is of better Estate than a Jovial Dives. That, A Grain of holy Faith is worth more than a Mountain of pure Gold. That, In the Day of Judgment, Christ will be A∣shamed of the Greatest, that are now Ashamed of Christianity.
That, Royal Heads, Honourable, and Worshipful Ones, must wor∣ship God's Majesty, or bear his Fury! That, There is no Safety for the Highest on Earth, with∣out Trust in the most High in Heaven. That, They shall suf∣fer eternal Death, who Love not Christ Jesus above the rich∣est Life. That, No Greatness can save them from Vengeance, who deny Christ Reverence. That, Whatever their Rank is in this World, their Portion shall be everlasting Shame, who do not all that they do to God's Glory. That, The most Pro∣sperous who will not submit to God's Afflicting-hand, shall not escape his Revenging-hand! That, If they Love not their Enemies,
and Bless them that Curse them, and Do good to them that Hate them, and Pray for them that Despitefully use them, and Per∣secute them; they shall not be the Children of God. Finally, that, Whosoever of them shall Live without Dying Thoughts, he shall Die without Living Comforts!


SIR,
My Prayers cease not to Ascend for You, your Pious Consort, and eminently Hopeful Branches: May You ever be more and more Ho∣nours to them; and They be more and more Joys unto You. May nei∣ther of You, now sleep in the Af∣ternoon; for to that Time of Day it is come in your Lives! And may
both of Them, have their Noon and Evening answerable to their fair Morning. May Self-denial be Your and their Business; without which, all Religion is but your Play: May your Prosperity neither slay, or so much as wound you; in your Eye may the Paradises which have no Tree of Life in them be contemned, though they are possessed. May great Roots under Ground make you great Trees above it; rich Truth in the inner-parts make you rich in good Works. May you pre∣fer Heaven above Earth, as mani∣festly as others prefer it above Hell! Not accounting your selves to have much profited in Christianity, till you count that you have nothing else to profit much in. And always re∣membring, that if you take not the
Kingdom of Heaven by force, the Kingdom of Hell will take you by it. May the Mercy of the Lord rest upon the Family of the Ashhursts, and his Righteous∣ness be to their Childrens Chil∣dren.
Under many Obligations, and in sweet Hopes, thus prayeth,
SIR, 

