



THIS Branch of Directions hath been thought likely to bear good Fruit; and the more, because it puts forth in so ill Times. Ill Ones, as they are called by those through whose Means they are so made.
I have taken the Weather-side of them; and made their worst Winds to blow good unto my Arguments. Which are more than a little strengthned, by the
 Decays of our Foreign and Home-trade, and their consumptive Effects.
Vexation, the Hebrews say, gives Understanding. And Oppression is known to have made mad Men wise, as well as wise Men mad. Who dares say, that there is no place for our hope of the Experiment? It was in a howling Wil∣derness, that Israel was taught the Law; it may be, in this howling and murmur∣ing state of ours, we shall be better taught the Gospel.
Being perswaded to make publick this Essay, it liked me jointly to salute you in this Entry. So expressing my dutiful Regard to your Souls, in my ministration unto others; wherein I cannot own my self short, when it hath not been thus ex∣press'd. An eldest Brother should be as a Father, said one; unto whom I as∣sent. And having inscribed another small Writing to your Nephew and Nieces, I resolved to mete like Measure, and inscribe this to your selves: Who are as truly dear unto me, and from whom I am as undivided in Joys and Sorrows, as from those Apples of my Eyes.

You will all join with me in the Doxo∣logy, to which I am carried by the thoughts of you. Good is the Lord, whose we are, and whom we serve. Let our Father's House say, His Mercy endureth for ever. For,
In his good Pleasure and rare Mercy, we, the Children of his Servants do continue, every one of us. We conti∣nue in the Land of the Living, and in the House of God. None buried, none dead while he liveth, or Excommuni∣cated. None is gone down to the Dust, in the sense of the Psalmist, (Psal. 22.29.) not one sunk into ignominious Po∣verty. As on the other hand, no one is of the very Fat of the Earth; no one hath his House full of Silver and Gold. God hath chosen for all, what Agur chose for himself, neither Poverty nor Riches. Not one Name infamously stained; not one Body deformed; not one Limb or Sense disabled. Ʋnto every one is a Help-meet; a Covering of the Eyes,Gen. 20.16. Ezek. 24.26. that is the desire of them.

We are Children so beloved for our Father's sake, and Mother's: For sake of the Covenant made with them by their God: VVho hath brought upon us, that which he promised them for us. There faileth not ought of any good thing which the Lord spake unto them, and for which they trusted him.
Signally illustriously trusted him; Chu∣sing rather to suffer Afflictions with the People of God, and to make us par∣takers of their Sufferings at Malborough, than to enjoy the Opulence of Colling∣burn-ducis for a Season: To name no more, well known in Wiltshire.
Let our Seal be set, God is true! The Just Man walks in his Integrity, and his Children are blessed after him!
And let this Vote pass into an Act; He is our God, we and our Houses will serve him; He is our Father's God, and we will exalt him.
So shall we do, if these Rules be fol∣lowed. I mean, with these Cautions ta∣ken; viz. That God's Glory be the highest End of our Obedience; and
 we do not obey ultimately for Self-ends. That our Reward which we dutifully expect, be not look'd for as our Me∣rit; but we still acknowledg that our Ser∣vices deserve not a drop of Water, while we conclude that Grace will follow them with the Rivers of God's Pleasure.
My Prayers ascend incessantly for you and your little Ones. Nor hath our God greater Blessings, than those that I ask him for you. And of you all, chiefly for that Family which Provi∣dence hath placed most remotely from us, in another Kingdom. Ʋnto which we all owe peculiar Offices of Love, where∣to I must hope none will ever be difficult, but all continue most forward.

