



May it please your Majesty!
OLD Times have said, the King of England, is King Devils.

But, with much more Reason, it will be said so by Posterity, if in your Reign we do behave our selves Obstinately.
For Demoniacks we must be, and Fiends Prodigious, if we break the dear Bonds which God and your Majesty lay on us. Our Ancestors had never such Cloven Feet as we shall shew, if we kick now.
Now that, God hath saved us out of Egypt, by you his Moses. Out of Babylon, by you his Cyrus. And, from the worst of Arrows-shot, by you the Shield. The Shield full often exposing it self to be broke to pieces, to keep us in whole Skins.

Now that, by the very sound of your Name, the Almighty hath struck down our Domestick Tar∣tars. By your Magnanimity, hath made the Boyn more memorable than Marathron. And put a Hook into the Nose of the most Christi∣an Leviathan. So keeping our Jerusalem, from being turned in∣to an Acheldama.
Now that, Divine Grace hath made you in very Truth, De∣fender of the Faith. And, you are in Act, as well as in Office, Utri∣us{que} Tabulae Custos. With our other Enemies, delivering us from our most unmerciful Selves. Calling a Fast, far more Holy than Lent; by forbidding your Protestants, to eat up one anothers Churches, as they had used to do.

Now that, after all, the Lord of Life and Strength, holdeth your Soul in Life, and your Bow in Strength. Tho, of your Heavenly MARY, the World was no longer wor∣thy. And, tho your Martyrdom, and therein our Ruin, hath been sought without ceasing.
Sought by the right Roman Rule. By Mariana his Quâcun{que} Arte, and by Bellarmine his Omni Ratione. And that, both in your Summer-Camps, and in your Winter-Quarters. Insomuch, that, altho you never saw Fear, but in your Enemies Fa∣ces; yet, for our Protestant Reli∣gion's sake, you have stood in Jeo∣pardy every Hour, if I may not say, you have been killed all the Year long!

Great Sir!
It were now to be hoped, that the evil Spirit might be driven out of the Land. That a Sober, Righteous, and Godly Age might commence. And, that English Men might, a∣bove all Men, Fear God and Ho∣nour their King. But only, that which still Letteth will Let, till it be taken out of the Way.
Namely, the Irreligion and Vice of Men of high Degree. Men, so wild-grown, that they will nei∣ther do your Majesty the favour, to let you swear the next Oath. Nor be so kind to their fellow Subjects, as to keep their Profaness unto them∣selves.

Men, who, like poisoned Foun∣tains, diffuse their Venoms. From London to the Mount, murder our Morals. And, ridiculing all Laws, Human and Divine; and teach∣ing Men so to do; do Debauch the better inclined Nation. Where∣fore,
The Application of your Roy∣al Wisdom to the reclaiming of them, is most humbly intreated. Inasmuch as their Reduction would be your whole Realm's Reformati∣on. And, would hugely lessen the Distance betwixt Heaven and this Earth.
A more glorious Service, there is not for you to do under the Sun. There being no such Py∣thon
as Rich Mens Sin is, for any Apollo to conquer. For this Service therefore, you have as many Petitioners, as you have Subjects who are of serious Religion. And, which have got∣ten the Victory over the BEAST, and over his Image, and over his Mark.
Of these Christian Catholicks is he, who doth not dedicate this un∣deserving Book; but only commend its most meritorious Cause, unto the best King in this World. The King least needing to be taught, (tho he may need to be put in Remembrance) that Kings and Subjects are invulnerable, but by their own, and by each others Sins!

In which confidence, not for Wrath, but for Conscience-sake, he is,

