



My Excellent Friends,
IN the days of old time, Religi∣ous Men did set up Stone Monu∣ments, in the places where they received extraordinary Mercies. That custom obtains not in Christian practice. Otherwise I had hastned to Build one in your delicious Bayford place. In your Bethel there, and my Children's Bethlehem. The House of their Bread for a long time. Bread, blessed to be the Staff of a very sinking and almost hopeless life in one of them.
A Paper Memorial I have thought bet∣ter than none. And do hereon inscribe my acknowledgments unto the Father of Mercies, and to your selves his In∣struments. Blessed be God, and blessed be you from God! Amen and Amen! Unto the divine Grace, be Sacrifices of praise for ever. Unto your selves, be the Joy of a good Foundation against the time to come! The Holy Ghost so names
your works of Beneficence; or as some Criticks construe it, a Bill of Contract; by vertue whereof you have your fi∣nal Judge made your Debtor, and the Day of Judgment ensured to be the Day of Payment. The Hebrews do call Alms by the name of Salt, for its preserving and sweetning power. And the great Alphonsus used to say, that he kept the very things he bestow'd. Implying, that, by honouring God with his substance, he did not Alienate it, but Confirm his Propriety, in it. By your liberal things towards me devised, I am made a witness of your sacred Unanimity. May your reward be great, pressed down, sha∣ken together, and running over.
Of this Discourse whereto I have prefixt your Names, I have many ways ex∣pressed my humble thoughts. That great Man, whose weighty ones follow in his Letter unto me here annexed, is the only one from whom I have received much light in the Argument. I never heard one Sermon hereof; nor read ma∣ny Lines, except in a Chapter of his Life of Faith. A Chapter worthy to be written in Cedar, and to be read as long as Letters last. And if I could have given to my Friends, half the number of those
Chapters, that I can of these Sermons, I should not have now sent them abroad, after so many Months confinement in my Closet. I think I should have let them pass through no more Honour and Dishonour, good Report and evil Report, than had fallen upon them in the Preaching. Of your candid acceptati∣on, I have no doubt in my Breast; and therefore make no needless intreaties for its welcome in your House.

My great Benefactors,
My daily Prayers ascend for your Per∣sons, and your numerous and lovely Branches. Prayers, that all the Trea∣sures of Divine Love may be the reward of your Families Love unto mine. That you may, all, be reaping to Eternity, the Kindnesses you have vouchsafed to the Apples of my Eye. And that all the days of your Lives, your Treasures, Hearts, Companions and Conversations, may verily be where this Discourse directs them! That, as your selves, your Chil∣dren may become, all of them, eminent instances of the possibility of Camels running through the Needles Eye; of Rich Folks entering the Kingdom of Heaven.
That if your long Prosperity abide, it may not slay, or so much as wound you. And if Adversity do overtake, it may ne∣ver overcome you. Finally, That the least of Christ's Ministers that have ob∣tained Mercy to be Faithful, may be made no unprofitable Servant to your holy Joy of Faith. Even


From my Study in Bridges street in Covent-Garden, Aug. 28. 1690.
