



WHen first I understood that You had de∣signed only my selfe to preach unto You at that Great and happy Solemnity upon the Fifth of November last, I in∣larged my Provision, because there was no other to second me in that Service.
But when I came to set before You what the Lord had brought to my hand,The Tumults in Ireland. I found You so o∣ver laid with businesse of such high importance as would hardly permit You to hear any sermon at all. This constrained me to contract the two first Parts of my Sermon, and wholly to suppresse the third; except the last branch of the last Vse, which I found meanes to affix to my second Point.
It was far from my thoughts, and above my hopes, that such a mangled Peice should gaine such Acceptance with You, as to be held worthy of Your Thankes, or of Publique View.
But seeing Your pleasure is, to Order the Publishing it, I obey. Only I have now added the remainder
 of that Provision, with which I could not at first present You, by reason of those Indispensable Oc∣casions then pressing on You.
The Lord of Heaven direct all Your ways, make them plaine before You, prosper You in them, and hold all Your hearts firme to Himselfe and in Vnity among Your selves; set You more effectually upon, and carry You more strongly through that most necessary (and of all other most Important) Work, even the Perfecting of the Reformation of this Church (by the assistance of a free Nationall Synod, if Your wisdomes should so thinke meet) for the fur∣ther securing of our Religion from Corruption in Doctrine, from Pollution in Worship, from superstiti∣on in Ceremonies, from Exorbitancy and Tyranny in Ecclesiasticall Government and Discipline, and from Anarchy and Confusion (under a false guise of Christi∣an Liberty) which is farre worse than Tyranny.
Hee also make You all more zealous to settle a Ministery worthy of the Glorious Gospell of Christ in every Congregation, and a sufficient maintainance for all faithfull Labourers therein. He raise You higher and higher in honour with God and Man, and carry You stil in his Bosome till hee hath brought You to Glory. All of which, is, and shall be the incessant prayer of

