



Worthy Mistris,
I KNOW it is an unwelcome mes∣sage to be the Herauld of ill newes. Such tidings are like the Amale∣kites to David; or Jonah's Sermon to the Ninivites administring nothing but
sorrow. But when withall I apprehend your goodnesse and wisdome, how it can make the best use of the losse of your nearest friends, J am the more emboldened to present these unwelcome and unworthy lines to your kind acceptance. It is an unalterable law like that of the Medes and Persians:
Serius aut si∣tiùs mtam properamus ad unam. sooner or later we all hasten to the same end. Mans dayes are numbred, his period of time appointed, and his bound he cannot passe. David and Jonathan must part, Jacob and Rachell must be separated, and though Ruth and Naomi be never so endeered friends, yet death will divide them. All flesh is grasse, and all the glory of man as the flower of the field. The grasse withereth, the flower fa∣deth, and so must the rarest pieces of nature re∣turne to dust. It's true, you have lost a most lo∣ving sister in law, the Church a gracious Saint, the poore a deare friend: yet must all rest con∣tented seeing it is by the determinate hand of God. It had been a great happinesse that so glo∣rious a starre might have longer shined (if God had so pleased) in the Orbe where once shee gave such a comely lustre. But seeing now we are de∣prived

of her light, I meane that comfort and sweet society which was enjoyed in her presence, we must rest contented, and labour to see the hand of God in it; whose will is the rule of his actions, and is therefore pleased to adde one member unto the head to live for ever with him∣selfe. As those that would inhabit the land of Canaan, were to wade through the banks and streames of the river Jordan with Josuah. So they that will arive at that Canaan which is a∣bove must wade first through the river Lethe here with their guide and forerunner Jesus. Let it therefore comfort you that she is with her Sa∣viour, and now nothing remaines but her ver∣tues as lively monuments of her eternall worth. In which Catalogue J will mention but one,
Humilitas virtus Chri∣stianorum 1a, 2a, 3a. Aug. Epist. which was her Humility, rarely to be found in persons of her ranck. Her goodnesse having learned that this grace is the first, second, and third stayre of true Christian nobility. By this she hath now ascended to happinesse. For the high and lofty one (as the Prophet speakes,) that inhabiteth e∣ternity, delighting to reside in an humble soule, hath eternized her worth; and therefore would
suffer her no longer to dwell in so unworthy a countrey, but thinking her more fit for a greater honour, and a better place hath crowned her in his owne kingdome. May it please you therefore to give leave to publish to the world under the Convoy of your worthy name, this meane, but faithfull testimony of my dutifull affection and unfeigned estimation of those saving graces, which (J am perswaded) were lodged in her noble Brest. This is the first time that ever I set to sea in this publick manner, that e∣ver my name came into the Printers stocks. And had it not been out of conscience of my thankfullnesse to my blessed friend of ever∣deare memory, rather to enliven her worth then to spread my owne. J would still have kept my owne private way, and never have rode in the common dust. But so abounding was her goodnesse, that I could not rest con∣tented to bury her fame in my owne brest, but must endeavour to erect a monument of her in paper to all the world. And first to you most vertuous Mris, whom I humbly crave to lodge these pocre endeavours in your good o∣pinion
and the rather for her sake whose good∣nesse yet sparkles in your eyes. And the Image of whose vertues is in this little Codicill re∣presented to you; so shall you oblige me who am

