



I Should labour much in my excuse, even to my own Judg∣ment, of the highest boldness, in daring to present these Pa∣pers to your Highness, if there were not some relieving Circumstan∣ces, that give me hope, it shall not be disagreeable to your higher Good∣ness. There is nothing can see the light, which hath the name of Spain in it, which seems not now proper∣ly yours, ever since it pleased you to honour that Country with your presence. And those very Motives to the Roman obedience, which had been represented unto you there, in case you had given way to the pro∣pounding them, are in these Letters

charitably and calmly examined; Be∣tween a couple of Friends, bred in the same Colledge (that of the foun∣dation of Sir Walter Mildway of bles∣sed Memory, whom with Honour and Thankfulness I name) chosen his Scholars at the same Election, lodged in the same Chamber, after Ministers in the same Diocess. And that they might be matchable abroad as well as at home, Attendants in the same rank as Chaplains, on two ho∣nourable Ambassadours of the Ma∣jesty of the King your Father in Fo∣reign parts; the one in Italy, the other in Spain. Where, one of them having changed his Profession, and received a Pension out of the Holy Inquisition House, and drawn his Wife and Children thither, was late∣ly often in the Eyes of your High∣ness: Very joyful I suppose to see you there, not more I am sure, than the other was solicitous to miss you here. These passages between us I have hitherto forborn to divulge, out of the hope of further answer from Mr. Waddesworth, according to his Pro∣mise; though since the receipt of my last (being silent to my self) he ex∣cused him in sundry his Letters to others

by his lack of Health. Nor should I have changed my resolution, but that I understand that presently after your Highnesses departure from Spain, he departed this Life. Which News, though it grieve me as it ought in re∣spect of the loss of my Friend, yet it somewhat contenteth me, not to have been lacking in my endeavour, to the undeceiving a well-meaning man tou∣ching the state of our differences in Re∣ligion; nor as I hope to have scandali∣zed him in the manner of handling them. And conceiving these Copies may be of some publick use, the more being lif∣ted up above their own meanness by so high Patronage, I have adventured to prefix your Highnesses name before them. Humbly beseeching the same, that if these Reasons be too weak to bear up the presumption of this Dedication, it may be charged upon the strong desire some way to express the unspeakable joy for your Highnesses happy return into England, of one amongst many thou∣sands,

