



THAT I appeared no sooner in the Croud of Mourners, to condole with you in your publick loss; it was because I would not rudely disturb the motions of so just a sorrow. It hath been long observed, that during the prevalency of excessive grief, the soul hath no leisure to attend to those advices; which (when the floods of sorrow are a little dried up) are not on∣ly seasonable but advantagious. May what is here then, modestly presented to your impartial view, be like the Rod of Moses to divide the waters of sor∣row, or like the Mantle of Elijah to restrain those sloods of your immoderate grief, which will be too rea∣dy to overflow their banks, if Reason and Religion do not prevent by a seasonable interposure. But I am very willing to perswade my self that Almighty God hath wrought your hearts to such a chearful temper, as may give an obedient welcom to this so
smarting an affliction; that even whilst you weep, you may yet smile upon the Rod of your Heavenly Father, whose stripes you do so tenderly suffer; and enabled you also to bring your minds to a willing and contented acquiescency in the wisdom of divine appointments: how cross and contradictory soever they may seem to rebellious nature. 'Tis easie in∣deed for those whose bones are full of marrow, to be joyful, but for the bones which God hath broken to rejoyce, is questionless the praise of Divine Mercy; to be not only patient, but praiseful under so severe and killing a dispensation, is certainly the highest pitch of Christian Fortitude; to smile upon afflicti∣on, and under its severest pressures, to sing when others shriek, will eminently bespeak you a singular pattern of holy chearfulness.
Yet withall understand and know, that the ingenu∣ity of Christianity doth allow you to express your sor∣rowful resentments of the absence and loss of your useful Friend: and it is a truth by the common consent of all mankind acknowledged, that there is no burthen so absolutely intolerable to humane na∣ture, as the death and separation of those whom Gods Honourable Ordinance hath conjoyned and made one, the bonds of Matrimonial Love, being stronger than those of Nature. How often have we seen men of noble and gallant spirits, able to scorn inju∣ries, and bravely to conquer, yea to revenge them∣selves upon the base attempts of malice; by not vouch∣safing so much as to take any notice of them: yet how have their generous minds been disconsolately dejected, when the doleful tidings of their Relati∣ons death have first surprized them? The victori∣ous
David, who was no whit astonished at the great Goliahs valour, nor his Attendants rage, but with an undaunted resolution (though but a Stripling) encounters with him, and utterly overthrows him; yet when the sad and sudden news came of the death of his beloved Jonathan, sorrow like a thick Cloud sate upon his Countenance,
2 Sam. 1.26. and the bitter anguish of his painful soul constrained him to cry out, I am di∣stressed.
Yea, the holy Jesus, that grand exemplar of pie∣ty, who always submitted to his Fathers will in all things, and therefore could never be subject to the corroding thoughts of discontent, yet he by his own practice, shewed the propensity of our natures to grief and sorrow, for the loss of those whom we highly va∣lue and dearly love; he himself passionately weeping when his beloved Lazarus lay asleep in the silent dormitory of the Grave,
St. Joh. 11.35. and the chorus of Mourn∣ers stood lamenting him.
Christian Religion doth not destroy humane passi∣ons and natural affections, which were originally planted in innocent nature, and were afterwards found in Christs spotless nature; yea so far are they from being sinful, that they are highly useful when kept (as they ought to be) under the Lock and Key of Reason: then it is that our passions become un∣lawful, when they become excessive, and grow impa∣tient of restraint by the superiour powers and facul∣ties of mans soul, when the dictates of reason pre∣vail nothing, but the Prince Lackeys after the Ser∣vant, and passion usurps the Throne, whose place is no higher than the Foot-stool.

Thus I observe good Jacob guilty of too much in∣dulgence to his natural affection, when he sorrowfully cries out like a man resolved to exasperate his own miseries,
Gen. 37.35. I will go down into the grave, unto my Son mourning: for the truth is, as the ex∣cess of any passion is sinful and injurious, so im∣moderate sorrow is particularly hurtful to the li∣ving, and dishonourable to the dead; neither is it an argument of more Love, but an evidence of less Grace.
You may please to remark the difference between the Egyptians mourning,
Gen. 50.3. & 10. compared. and Josephs for his Fa∣ther Jacob; they mourned seventy days for the old Patriarch, he but seven days for his own Father: What! Did Heathenism outdo Religion? or had strangers more natural affection than his own Bowels? I hope not so. But Josephs piety prevails above his passion, and the certain knowledge of his holy Fathers joyful resurrection (which they were ignorant wholly of) administred more matter of comfort, than his death could occasion sorrow. Joseph knew that im∣moderate Tears were the prodigality of affection; he knew the unprofitableness as well as the impiety of a sullen sorrow; he knew that could he have melted himself into tears or by weeping have occasioned a second Deludge, yet all would have been in vain. Orpheus in the Ethnick Mythology could make Trees and Stones dance after the Musick of his Harmoni∣ous Lute, yet could not with all his Melodious Har∣mony reduce his deceased Friends from the power of the Grave: for the house of death is like the Lyons Cave, from whence there are no returning Foot∣steps.

Seeing then that the Supreme Majesty (whose paths are in the labyrinths of Ʋnsearchable Wisdom, and whose footsteps are like the track of a mighty ship in the over-swelling Ocean, past finding out) hath by the late issue of his Providence declared his will, it is most reasonable that this declaration of Gods will should satisfactorily determine yours: for remember that when God rings changes in a Town, he well knows how to make Musick thereby to his own Glory: and in the intervals of passion, let me beg of you to consider, that a just and pious imitation of his holy example, whom God hath removed from you, is the important duty which now lies incumbent upon you, with a persevering diligence to perform.
To Inform and Convince you how highly account∣able you are to almighty God, both for the long en∣joyment of his Ministry, and also for the happy ad∣vantage of his example, is the honest design of the following Sermon: and also to let this censorious age, (in which some persons are so overgrown with the Anti-Episcopal Jaundice, that their Eye can see no∣thing in a Conformist, but what is discoloured and of a different tincture) understand and know that you had a Conformist for your Minister, who rendred so∣lid Religion amiable, by a Conversation in all things worthy of it; who did by a Regular Piety, a strict Sobriety, a Catholick and diffusive Charity, render Religion venerable to the world; one whose whole time, strength and parts, were piously devoted to God and his sacred Service.
Moses, I observe, was in one particular priviledged by God above all other holy persons: their souls (in common with his) at death have Angels for their
Convoy towards the Mansions of Bliss and Glory: but he had an Angel for his Sexton, who buried his Body in an unknown place, lest the Israelites should superstitiously Idolize and adore it: There would be no fear at all of any such offensive adoration on your part, were I able (as indeed I am not) to draw to the life the fair Effigies of your absent Minister, who was, like Moses, faithful in all Gods house whilst he lived, and not unlike him at his death; his meek soul gliding from him in a fine imperceptible vehicle, and he dying as the modern Jews by tradition tell us Moses did, ad Nutum Dei, & Osculo Oris ejus, at Gods beck, and as it were with a kiss of Gods mouth; It was no more betwixt God and them but this, Go up and dye.
To conclude then, May all your practices appear to the world in a faithful compliance with what was truly imitable and praise-worthy in him. May the living Example of your dead Minister, be exemplifi∣ed in the lives of you his People. May you daily dress by his Glass, and walk in his pious and devout Foot-steps. May you all meet him with astonishing Joy, and behold him also with unutterable delight and comfort in the day of your great Audit, this is and ever shall be the hearty and affectionate supplication of

Mildin, Decemb. 10. 1679.
