



Right Honourable,
IT is the Promise of the All-Glorious God, to Honour those that Honour him; there be four special ways, whereby God Honours Men.
First, When he raiseth them out of nothing, worse than nothing, yea, from the very depth of Hell, to a height of Heavenly Honour, Happiness and Holiness in Christ Jesus, where∣by he makes them more Excellent than their Neighbours, Prov. 12.26. more Excellent, not in degrees only, but in kind; more Excellent in their Birth, for they are Born again of the Word, and of the Spirit; more Excellent in their Thoughts, more Excellent in their Af∣fections, more Excellent in their Practices, more Excellent in their Lives, in Regard of Gods Favour towards them; and more Ex∣cellent
 in their Death, their Death is sweet to them: All True Christians are truly Right Honourable, and Truly Royal: They are Loyal Subjects, and a Royal Priest-hood, 1 Pet. 2.9. They are really the lowest, yet the highest People, Exod. 19.6. Lowest in their own Sense, highest in Gods sight, Rev. 1.6. and 5.10.
Secondly, God Honours Men, when he gives them Hearts to serve him, in a Faithful and Fruitful Subjection to his Will. The Ser∣vice of God, is not only Duty, but also our Priviledge and Preferment. Hence Theodosius Gloryed more in that he was a Servant of Christ, than being Emperour of the East.
Thirdly, God Honours Men, when he ra∣ses Men to places of Eminency above others: And makes them Faithful, in employing their power for God, and Piously prudent in their publick Deportment.
Fourthly, But the highest Honour shall be hereafter in Heaven, when the Saints shall be filled brim full, with Grace and Glory. We can∣not Honour God, until he hath Honoured us: We cannot give glory to God, until we have received glory from him; because he first Ho∣nours us; Grace is Glory, 2 Cor. 3.18.
Sir, God hath Honoured your Family, with the Truest Honour in Christ, Rom. 8.30. Your Ancestors have been Right Honou∣rable,
 for Piety, Virtue, Religion and Zeal to Gods Glory; and God hath made you a Honourable Branch, of that Honourable Fa∣mily, and hath given you a Heart to Honour him again. Some Families are valued from Antiquity, who can pretend Title to Religion or Virtue in themselves or Ancestors; but your Honour is truly valuable on both accounts, and indeed from Religion, and Exemplary practice of Godliness, the Blessing on Fa∣milies and Persons, is to be expected. Wick∣edness and Debauchery, hath lain so long on some Families, as a Moth, until they are altogether gangren'd; and as the Degeneracy of some Families in Religion and Morals, is too, too palpable, it's to be likewise feared, their Extirpation may be as Conspicuous, and it ought to be Matter of Humiliation, that Impiety hath been so Predominant, without Parallel, in the late Reigns; From the inexcu∣sable Incouragement at the Helm; that the most Considerable Families in these Nations, have been Sullyed with the blackest Stains of Vice, so that Morality hath been accounted pedantry, and Religion Bafouned and Ridi∣culed. And it must be allowed the Glory, as well as the Mercy of some, who have not been carryed away in such a Deluge. And your Honour by the special Conduct of Providence, hath been preserved in your in∣tegrity,
 as an Exemplary Stock to graft upon, for the future Propagation of Religion.
These following Sheets, being a Collecti∣on of the private Meditations of a Gentle∣man, Born and Educated in the Kingdom of Scotland, near to your Honours Antient Mannor of Crathis; In his Solitude, when by Providence, he was restrained from the Exercise of his Talent, in the way of his Profession and Education; and only intended for the use of himself, and Family. But whilst in his Confinement, he was visited by some Christian Friends, as well of Sa∣cred, as Civil Profession, and these Sheets coming occasionally to be by them viewed and approved of; The Author was Impor∣tuned to Print the same, as containing ma∣ny particulars, which might tend to the Ad∣vancement of Religion. But for several Rea∣sons, he was Averse; as First, his then Cir∣cumstances could not bear the Charge of the Press; Secondly, He hath truly observed, that the sincere Affections to Religion in Life and Practice, is so decayed, that what∣ever is wrote on that Subject, unless varnished under the Name of some Author Eminently in Vogue, the same is implicitly vilified; and he intending not to be known, and considering, if known, his Name might not be Authentick, to give Reputation to
 the Truth of the Writing, however valua∣ble in it self. Thirdly, That as Books are valued not so much for the matter they con∣tain, as the Fame of the Author, or Patro∣ciny of some Eminent Person, he found him∣self at a loss, to whom to Dedicate, fearing in this Degeneracy of zeal for God, his Dedication might be construed avarice, ra∣ther than desire of a Patrone.
These Sheets lying thus in their Swadling-Cloaths, and like to perish in Darkness, and I being Familiarly acquainted with the Author, and finding that in them the most Nervous parts of Practical Relegion, were Ju∣diciously Treated and Methodized, I was in∣duced from Zeal, in Advancing Religion, to Solicite the Authors Permission to Publish these Sheets; and the rather, for what was his Discouragement, in want of Patron, was my Encouragement, that I might Presume up∣on your Honours Favour on this behalf.
The Author having appositely Intituled this Treatise (The Anatomy of Man) as being a Series of the whole State of Man, from his Creation, to his Eternal Rest in Glory, and I having the Happiness to be so well acquainted with your Honours zeal, for the Kingdom of Christ, and of your Knowledge in all the Mystical and Practi∣cal parts of Religion, your Serene Judg∣ment
 to distinguish, and your Charity to Encourage good Intentions, and Indulge Es∣capes, I could no where find a safer Sanctuary for (the Anatomy of Man) than in your Ho∣nours Protection. Neither could I, without the Violation of greatest obligations, omit this Oblation to your Honour; and if I may be justified from the false Imputation of flat∣tery, I can boldly aver, your Honour is duly Intituled to such Patrociny, not only from the long Series of your Judicious, Just, and Honourable Ancestors; but also from your own Exemplary Espousing, Pro∣tecting and Encouraging of Religion; and Constant, Holy, Affection to the Gospel of Jesus Christ.
Therefore Right Honourable, through your gentle Hands, I commend this Treatise to the World. It is not necessary that I should give it an account, why I seek so far from home! God hath wrought my Heart, to Love those that Love him, and Honour those that Honour him: And distance of Place, cannot Abridge my Duty. With all this, I would the World should know, I am one, amongst those many, who truly Ho∣nour you for your Virtues. In Testimony whereof, I make this Dedication to your Worthy Name, and Honourable Person, which I beseech you to accept of, as an
 Acknowledgment of that Debt I owe, and the unfeigned desire I have of your Souls Welfare.
Let these Sheets as hopeful Twins, find shelter under your Wings, and Protection under your Roof. If your Honour approve of them, and find in them the Anatome of the Title, and that they may be of use to the present, and after Generations, your Countenance is implored thereunto as a Lu∣stre, which in some measure, may supply Omissions or Defects of the Author. And as he is sond of your Patrociny, and will gratefully acknowledge the Honour of it, I must needs own my Renewed Obligations, in the Acceptance of this my Address; and shall by Divine Assistance, never be wanting, to Wish and Pray for the Increase and Con∣tinuance of Grace, Honour, and Prosperity to your self, your Pious, Honourable Wor∣thy, and Zealously Religious Lady, and Hopeful Succession, as the indispensable Du∣ty of,

