



Madam!
IT is too notorious, That the most usual pretensions of Epistles Dedicatory, are pa∣tronage from, and their real Scope flatteries of the Per∣sons to whom they are directed. For the former, 'tis an apparent vanity; in that a Worthy Work needs it not, and an Unworthy neither deserves, nor is capable of it. For the latter, as it ill be∣comes the entrance of so serious and searching a Subject, as that
 of this Book, and the impartial simplicity of a Minister of Di∣vine Grace and Truth: So I am confident, it would be entertain∣ed by your Ladiship with distaste and contempt. Madam, To say my errand in short, I do but pay to your Ladiship the Legacy of my reverend Brother, and your dear Friend in, and Minister from the Lord Jesus, who is now at ever∣lasting rest; A Legacy worthy his bequeathing, and your Ladiships accepting. Yet it is not only a Legacy of Love, but also a Debt of Justice, both which Obligati∣ons▪ he was not insensible of, when he designed and ordered the offering of this excellent Ser∣vice more peculiarly to your La∣diship, than to any other. You were not so little acquainted with
 him, as not to know him to be a Person immured▪ in his Study, and strongly (I wish, I could not say too strongly) inclined to so∣litude and privacy. Otherwise, his large Talents of Grace, and Ministerial Abilities, might have rendred him conspicuous, and met with very large acknowledg∣ments from the truly godly and intelligent, not only to himself alive, but to his Pious and Deso∣late Widow, and his Children after his Decease. Madam, I must beg your pardon (if it be a fault), that I omit not to con∣firm what I said of the Justice of this Dedication; for what can be more just, than to render those la∣bours (next to Gods) primarily to your Service, who did so bountifully minister to the reve∣rend
 Authors subsistence in his greatest straits, equally to, if not beyond any other mortal; so that this work is in no small respects your own, and a reaping the bles∣sing you have sowed. But to make it your own beyond the in∣terest a meer Dedication can give you, a sensible remembrance of the Spiritual Bondage, and a gracious experience of the Spiritu∣al Freedom treated of in this ex∣cellent Discourse, will exceedingly conduce.
Madam, I shall not undertake the unnecessary task of com∣mending the Book, it being com∣mendation enough to its self, where it meets with a Spiritual and Judicious taste. Only I shall say, That the Author speaks like
 one that hath felt and experien∣ced what he speaks, in his own Soul. I shall add no farther, only com∣mend you to God, and to the word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among all them that are sanctified; and subscribe my self,

