


My Reverend and dear Brethren,
THESE Discourses were at first prepared for you, and were delivered to you among a great many more on other Subjects on several occasions: they were so well received by you, that many of you desired that you might have them copied out for a more lasting use. This has set me on publishing these that follow, they relating to Four different sort of men with whom you may be engaged.
The first is against Atheists and Libertines, who grow to be so bold and insolent, that it is of the last importance, that you should be well furnish'd with Answers to those Objections with which they make the greatest noise. This is the Pest of the Age we live in, the most dangerous as well as the most contagious of all others: It strikes at all, and corrupts the whole Man, as well as it dissolves all the bounds of Nature and Society. This promises such an Indemnity, and gives so entire a liberty, that depraved Inclinations and Affections will be always of its side; and it has some specious things to alledge, the No∣velty and Boldness of which, makes them pass for Wit and Good Humour, which will be always taking to those who want and desire supports and excuses for sins, Upon all these ac∣counts, and chiefly upon the fatal progress which this Blasphemous Spirit of Infidelity has made among us, it becomes us to consider these matters well, that we may be throughly acquainted with all those depths of Satan, and know what to answer to all those false shews of Wit or Reason, as wall as to the more petulant demands by which that prophane Crew study to undermine and beat down all Religion.
One of their common Topicks, is the decrying all Mysteries; and in this they fall in to the same opposition with the Socinians, tho upon very different designs. For the Socinians run down all Mysteries, and think they can make it appear, That those passages of Scripture by which they are commonly proved, have another meaning; whereas Libertines do it, being persuaded that they are indeed contained in the Scriptures; and therefore they hope that they will gain their main end of decrying all Revealed Religion, if strong prejudices are once formed against Mysteries; and yet they are at the same time consider'd as parts of the Chri∣stian

Religion, and are believed to be contain'd in the Scriptures. I must also do this right to the Socinians, as to own that their Rules and Morality are exact and severe; that they are generally men of Probity, Iustice and Charity, and seem to be very much in earnest in pressing the obligations to very high degrees of Virtue. Yet their denying all secret Assistances, must cut off the Exercises of many Devotions, that give a softness and tenderness to the mind; which if once extinguish'd, it must of necessity draw after it a dry flatness over all a man's thoughts and powers; their denying the certainty of God's foreseeing all future events that depend upon the freedom of a man's Will, must very much weaken our Confidence in God, our patience under all misfortunes, and our expectations of a deliverance in due time. Their Notions of another state, do also take off much of the terror under which Bad men ought to be kept, and lessen the Ioys of Good men; On all these accounts, their Opinions seem to have a great Influence upon practice; but with lation to the great Article of Christianity con∣cerning the Person and sufferings of Iesus Christ, their Doctrine gives so different a view of this Religion in its most important Head, that either we have been guilty of a most Irreli∣gious prophanation, in esteeming one to be God, and giving him all the Acknowledgments and Adorations that belong to the Great and Eternal God, who yet is a meer Creature; or they must be no less guilty, who if he be the Great and the True God, do look on him only as a Creature, and yet offer him all divine Honour and Worship: and if his Death was only a pattern, or any thing else than a true propitiatory Sacrifice, then we who look on it as our Propitiation and Redemption, who claim and trust to it, as our Ransom and Atone∣ment, do very impiously raise its value beyond the Truth, and fix our Confidence, with re∣lation to our Peace with God, upon a false foundation. Whereas on the other hand, If God has set forth his death as a Propitiation for the forgiveness of sin, then they are guilty of black Ingratitude, and of defeating the chief design of the Gospel, who so far detract from its value, as to reckon it only a patern of dying, a confirmation of the Gospel, and necessary preliminary to a Resurrection. Upon all these accounts it is that I could never understand the Pacificatory Doctrines of those who think that these are questions in which a diversity of Opinions may well be endured without disturbing the Peace of the Church, or breaking Communion about thm. They seem to be the Fundamentals of Christianity, and therefore I thought it was very neces∣sary for me to give you a ful and clear Instruction in this matter.
The 3d. Discourse relates to that upon which the whole Cause of Popery turns; for if they are Infallibe, it is to no purpose to dispute about any thing else: and if they are fallible, their pretending to Infallibility, is of it self a just prejudice against their whole Church, and a∣gainst all their other Doctrines, when they claim to so high an authority without good grounds. Since therefore this is the most Important part of all our Controversies with that Church, and since it is that to which they always turn themselves by which they gain Prosclites, and estblish their own Votaries, and set them out of the reach of all Convistion, the understanding of this matter in its full extent, seems to be a very necessary piece of study. We are apt upon a little Interval of quiet to forget the practices of that Church; and because we do not think of them, we may be apt to fancy that they think as little of us: but they do still pursue their point with an unwearied diligence. They never give over, but when one design fails, they either study to retrieve it, or to set another on foot, with an Industry that ought to awaken us, and keep us always on our guard. The Numbers of their Emisaries are great and their Zeal is ever warm and active; therefore we must never lose sight of them; and above all th other points of Controversy, we must study to be most particularly conversant in this, and expert at the management of it.
The Fourth Discourse relates to the various Bodies of the Dissenters among us, and all the different grounds upon which they separate from us. The Toleration that the Law gives them, does not alter the nature of things, nor make an unjust Separation to be one whit the lawfuller than it was when they were under a severe Yoke. The Law only gives a Civil Im∣punity, and does not punish: But the Cause of the Separation is the same that it was, and is neither better nor worse, whether the Separation is punished or not. They are now left to themselves, and are so much the freer in their choice, the less restraint is put upon them. Therefore it was never more seasonable than it is now, to set the whole matter in a true light

before all that may be concerned in it, that they may weigh it the more impartially: And the less uneasy we seem to be, at the ease which the Law gives them, we may have there∣by the greater advantages in endeavouring to bring them back to the Communion of the Church, by shewing both their obligations to it, and the weakness of those Reasons which have led them to depart from it.
I think it is not necessary to say more, for justifying the choice that I have made of these four Heads, as the first Essay that I offer you, of a great many other Discouses, with which I have entertained you, when I have desired you to meet in the severl parts and different Divisions of my Diocess: Some head of Divinity being proposed as the Subject of a Confe∣rence, I have enlarged upon a great many among you, and have laid bafore you all that my Studies and Observation could suggest; and after that, have led you to discourse freely upon it, This has seemed to me a proper method for awakening your Enquiries, and for en∣creasing your Knowledge: And those meetings have been so well kept by you, and the Dis∣courses so carefully attended to, that it has given me no small encouragement to go on still in the same method, And as your thinking that you have profited by my Labours, is a full and rich recompence, that does abundently overbalance any pains they may put me to: So it is for your sake that I do now publish these Discourses; and as they prove acceptable or useful to you, I may, perhaps, publish others hereafter,
Certainly, next to a true sense of Divine Matters, and the inward belief and impressions of Religion, Study, and a desire of useful knowledge, is that which becomes our Profession the best. It is that which enables us both to understand our business, and to do our duty. It is the noblest entertainment, and the best preservative from idleness, and from all that dulness and weariness, all those excesses and disorders that arise out of it. The mind will be always working, and if we do not let it fly at nobler game, it will either sink into a feeble∣ness and stupidity, or look out for such Diversions as do offer themselves, without a scru∣pulous regard to their unsuitableness to our Caracter. These draw men down to a vicious familiarity with bad men, and do fatally engage many to share with them in bad practices: either they make us much the worse, or at the least we seem to be so to others, when we thow away much of our time in levities, which do often end in gross Immoralities. In which the World will be apt to give us a large share, often without a pretence, but to be sure, if there is the least shadow for it, the chief part of the blame will be cast on us. Nor will it be easy for us to be blameless, and without rebuke, unless we maintain the other part of the Character given by St. Paul, that as becomes the sons of God, We shine as lights in the world. And I may well conclude, That a serious application to study, is the best fence, both of the Probity, and of the Reputation of a Clergy-man: It both teaches himself all the parts of his duty, and creates to him that esteem which is necessary to support him in the discharge of it.
And therefore, my dear Brethren, I do with all possible Earnestness call upon you, to study to maintain the high Reputation for Learning, of which the Clergy of this Church has been so long possessed; and to give your selves time and leisure to peruse and digest the Learned Productions of those Great Men among us; and not to be proud, or to boast that we belong to a Body that has produced Men so deservedly admired, both by Friends and Enemies, while we our selves are so little like them, that we are not a whit the wiser or the learneder for all that they have left us. Some hours every day well placed would soon bring us under such habits, that it would not be easy, if possible, for us to live out of all commerce with Learning, and the learned World. I know the unhappy state of many depauperated Benefices, puts it out of the Incumbent's power to furnish themselves with Books; as much as their narrow Circumstances indispose them for making use of them, if they had them. This is a crying grievance, and looks too like a scorn put on the Gospel, when those who Minister in Spiritual things are so slenderly supplied in Temporals, that nothing but extreme Necessity can induce Men to serve in such Cures, who are put to wrestle still with the same necessity, especially if they have Families that grow upon them. But as we have at present just Grounds to hope, and to give you cause likewise to hope, that if God blesses us with calm and setled times, effectual Remedies should be found out to that great misery, under which

many of you languish, which must needs give very sad and afflicting thoughts to those who observe it, and who ought to watch over you, and to take care of you; so the best method to move our Princes, and to dispose the Nation to take pity on you, is for you to take heed to your selves, and to the Flocks that are committed to you; to follow your Studies and your Labours more diligently, and to raise your own Character by your Exemplary Lives, and the painful discharge of your Duties. This, and this only, will draw down the blessings of Heaven upon your Persons, and your Labours; this will make your very Enemies to be at Peace with you, and will force those who do now despise you, to esteem you, and to count you worthy of double Honour, of a larger and easier subsistence.
I will employ the rest of this Discourse in pressing upon you one great part of your duty, in which, as I am glad that so many among you set a good Example to their Brethren, so I do earnestly wish that all the rest may follow it: It is, To express an affectionate and hearty zeal for their Majesties, and their Government; and to endeavour to keep your Peo∣ple always in mind of the extream Miseries, as well as of the visible Dangers of Popery and Tyranny. This must still be remembred as a lasting honour to this Church, That some years ago, there was in a day of Trial, so noble an Opposition given to that Religion, and the steps that were then made to bring it in upon us. We are still in the struggle, and are stran∣gely mistaken, if we imagine the Danger is past. We plainly see the Clouds return after the Rain; and a Relapse into that State would make the latter end much worse than the begin∣ning: The Hope which then supported, and afterwards delivered us, would no more soften our Miseries with the prospect of better Times. The Rage, as well as the Power of our Ene∣mies, would be much encreased; and there is no doubt to be made, but that those who have no Religion, whose numbers, God knows, do swell vastly, would hope to atone for all that has been done with the change of their No-Religion, for that to which their Interest should lead them. And if ever God, for our great and crying Sins, is provoked to visit us in so terrible a manner; we, who have been hitherto the most favoured of all the Churches of God, must become the most miserable. Whither can we fly for shelter, or where can we promise our selves either Retreat or Relief?
The prospect of such a Calamity seems to be one of the blackest of all that has been since the World begun; and yet how tamely do many look for it; while others with a fury that is as much without bounds, as it is without sense, are endeavouring to bring on that Evil Day; to make the Nation grow weary of its Deliverance and present Quiet, and return back into Egypt. While they spread so many False Reports, with a Spite that is as restless as it is insolent; shall we at such a time stand as neutral, and unconcerned, while all is at stake? Shall it be said, That whereas some years ago, during the Debates concerning the Exclusion, we sided so openly, and with a Zeal that shewed it self on all occasions, and in Instances which were better forgotten than remembred; yet now when all that can concern us, either as we are Men, and Englishmen, or as we are Christians, and the Ministers of the Church of England, is in such eminent danger, we seem to let all Parties fight it out the best they can, while we only do what is enjoined, and express neither affection nor zeal.
I will not offer to say any thing to convince you of the Lawfulness of the present Con∣stitution: For I cannot admit so bad a thought of any of you, as to imagine that you could take the Oaths, and continue to perform Divine Offices, Ordinary and Extraordinary, unless you were fully satisfied in your Consciences concerning the Lawfulness both of the one and of the other. This is so black an Imputation, to suppose that Men of common Probity, not to say, Men that ought to be the Paterns, as well as the Instructers of others, should swear an Oath and adhere so long to it, which is an interpretative renewing of it, ever till it is openly retracted, and should in those frequent returns of daily Prayers, besides the special Offices of Fasts and Thanksgiving-days, offer up Devotions to God contrary to their Persuasions, that no man is capable of so heinous, and so continued a Prevarication, unless he is either a determinate Atheist, or a man of a seared and hardned Conscience. Now as this is of so odious a nature, that indeed it is not easy to find words severe enough to set it out by; so supposing men once convinced of the Lawfulness of our present Scituation, it is very extraordi∣nary

if they are cold and unconcerned in a Point, which when it is once yielded to be lawful, is unquestionably of the greatest importance and consequence possible.
If Liberty and Religion are valuable things; and if they are not, what is valuable? If the maintaining the Purity of the Christian Religion, free from Idolatry and Superstition, from Imposture and Cruelty; if the maintaining a Church that without partiality, is to be preferred to any Church now in the World; and if the keeping out of a Religion, which is without partiality the worst of any that carries the Name of Christ; If the preserving a Government that is just and mild, that is guided by Law, and that maintains Property, and that leaves Mankind to all the Liberties of a free-born Nature, and of a well Consti∣tuted Society: And if the withstanding an absolute and Despotical, an Arbitrary and Violent Tyranny, that tramples on all thinge Sacred and Human, that oppresses Liberty, and de∣stroys Property, and that makes men Slaves, and treats them as brute Beasts; If, I say, all these things are well weighed, then we must conclude, That we owe the utmost degrees of affection and zeal to Their Majesties, and to Their Government: We ought to make all our People sensible, both of the Happiness that we do now enjoy, and of the Miseries that we are preserved from, by Their means, and under Their Protection. We ought to set Popery and Slavery before them in their true Colours, with all the light and life that we can give them: We ought to set our selves against those false Brethren, that pretend they are of the Church of England, but are not; and are of the Synagogue of Satan, which in its strict notion signifying an Adversary, we may without any breach of Charity affirm, that they associate themselves to the Enemy of our Nation, and of our Religion; whose Per∣son, Government, Forces and Successes, they are always magnifying, on design to intimi∣date such as can be wrought on by their false Surmises. These things we ought to repress and oppose on all occasions with the Spirit and Courage that such matter require.
It is Stupidity and not Patience to be cold and luke-warm, while England and the Pro∣testant Religion are in the last struggles whether they must live or die. If God does not bless so good a Cause in all the steps it makes, with the Success that we ought to desire and pray for; we should teach our people not to murmur, nor aggravate matters, not to sink or despond, but to consider how much our sins have provoked God's Wrath, how small a share we bear of those devouring Calamities that have ruin'd so great a part of Europe; while we only bear the Charge, but feel few of the Miseries of War. If some years are less pros∣perous than others have been, we ought to reflect on former Successes, and the ill use that we have made of them, which may have provoked God to change his methods: and yet take all together, it must be acknowledged, that we have had of late more publick Blessings and fewer Misfortunes, than any Nation under Heaven. Can one reflect on the Blasphemy and Infidelity, the dissolution of all good Morals, and the Impieties and Vices of all sorts that are among us, and not wonder rather, that we have not been made a scene of Earth∣quakes and Ruins, as Sicily, Malta and Jamaica have of late been. It is to these sins that we ought to turn the minds of our people, when they are at any time dejected with ill success; we ought to call upon them to repent of, and to reform their ways: and when that is done, or even set about, we may then hope that God will change his methods towards us; and continue his Gospel among us, together with the Blessings of a Iust and Wise Government, and of Peace and Plenty.
These are Subjects on which we ought to dwell much, and Preach often. But that I may not dismiss this matter, without any thing that looks like an Argument; I will open to you two great Precedents, which you have often heard me enlarge on with much seeming satis∣faction: and because you have thought that I laid them out in a more particular manner, than you had otherwise met with them; I will now spread them out before you: and that the rather, because Arguments from Examples, and authorised practices, have upon many Accounts a stronger Influence, than general reasonings. Matters of Fact are easier appre∣hended, and more capable of full proof, than points of speculation; which do more easily bend to any turn, that a Man of Wit may give them, than meer Facts, which are stubborn and sullen.
The first of these is taken from the History of the Maccabees, which I desire you will con∣sider

by these steps. That the Jews became the Subjects of the Kings of Babylon by the Entire Conquest which Nebuchadnezzar made of that Nation; that after the end of 70 Years, they continu'd to be subject to Cyrus, who tho he sent them back to rebuild their Temple, and tho his Successors suffer'd them both to finish that, and to rebuild and enclose Jerusalem, yet they continu'd still to be the Subjects of the Kings of Persia; this was transferred to Ale∣xander the Great, when he conquer'd that Empire: And finally, they fell to the share of the Kings of Syria, and were their Subjects above 140 Years. They proved hard Masters to them: Antiochus Epiphanes robb'd the Temple in the 143 Year of the Seleucida; a great Massacre followed;1 Macc. 1.20, 24, 25. but these were particular Acts of Tyranny; and so tho there was great mourning upon this, yet it was submitted to: For certainly the Peace of Mankind, and the Order of the World require, that special acts of malversation, and even of Trranny, should be born, rather than that we should shake an established Constitution: But in the year 145. he went on to a total Subversion of their Religion, by an Edict which required that they should forsake their Law,V. 41. V. 54. V. 57. and become one People with him: In pursuance os which, the Altar at Jerusalem was defiled; Idolatrous Altars were set up in all their Cities, and every Man was to be put to Death that still adhered to the Law of Moses. Here then were Subjects brought under a general Sentence of Death, unless they should depart from the Laws of God: special Oppressions and violent Acts of Cruelty were submitted to; but when they saw themselves in∣volved all in the same common fate, they defended themselves.
Mattathias not only refused to join in the Idolatry that they had set up, but killed both him that went to offer the Sacrifice and likewise the King's Commissioner; upon which the Historian adds this Reflection, Thus dealt he zealously for the Law of God, like Pianehas; he a nimated his Children to follow his Example,2 ch. 24, 25. V. 26. and to trust in God; but he vouched no immediate warrant that he had from God: He charged his Children to be zealous for the Law, and to give their Lives for the Covenant of their Fathers; to be valiant, and to shew thm∣selves Men in behalf of it,V. 50. V, 64. V. 67, 68. for by it you shall obtain glory; and he ordered them to take unto them all that observed the Law, and to revenge the wrong of their People; to Re∣compence fully the Heathen, and to take heed to the Commandment of the Law. Upon this followed the Wars of the Maccabees, in which they never pretended to any special Au∣thority from any Prophet: On the contrary, their History tells us, That they laid up the Stones of the Altar, that had been prophaned by Idolatry, in a convenient place, till a Pro∣phet should come to shew what should be done with them.4 Macc. 46. Thus then we see Subjects de∣fend themselves against their Prince, when he designed a total Subversion of their Religion: and for this they vouched no immediate nor extraordinary Authority.
But to give this Argument its entire force, We must next see upon what reason we may conclude, that this was a justifiable, and by consequence an imitable Action. As for this, tho I think it is scarce necessary to enlarge much on an Apology for the Maccabees, their Wars having born such a venerable sound in a course of so many Ages;11 Dan. 31, 32, 33, 34. yet to pursue the matter fully, we find a Prophesy concerning them in Daniel, which is by all Commentators Ancient and Modern, applied to them, that alone seems to import a full Iustification of them; after mention is made of a King that should defile the Sanctuary, and take away the daily Sacrifice, and set upon it the abomination that maketh desolate; to that, this is added, and such as do wickedly against the Covenant, shall he corrupt by flatteries: but the People that do know their God, shall be strong, and do exploits. And they that understand among the People, shall instruct many; yet they shall fall by the Sword, and by flame▪ by capti∣vity, and by spoil many days: And when they shall fall, they shall be holpen with a little help; but many shall cleave to them with flatteries. As these words import a plain Pro∣diction, in terms of approbation of the Wars of the Maccabees, so all the Commentators that I have yet seen, without exception, do apply them to them
There are also many Commentators who do apply likewise to them, those words of the Epi∣stle to the Hebrews, Who out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight, and turned to flight the Armies of the Aliens:11 Heb. 34. And there is a particular resemblance observed be∣tween these words, and some Phrases that occur in the Books of the Maccabees: Yet I con∣fess those words are not so express as the former, nor are they so Universally expounded in

this sense. But to conclude this matter, The Authority of those Books, as it is an Argument of full force against those who acknowledge them to be Canonical; so since by the Articles of our Church, these Books are to be read for example of Life, and for the Instruction of manners; tho it doth not apply them to establish any Doctrine;Art. 6. and since we read so many Lessons taken out of the Apocrypha: These must be acknowledged to be Books of great, tho not of Divine Authority. And tho according to the Article of our Church, the arguing from any one passage in them is not to be allowed; yet if Subjects standing on their own defence, in the case of a total Subversion, is to be esteemed Rebellion, then we bind up with our Bibles, and recommend to our People, two Books that set out a History with great pomp, and with an Air of much Piety, which was no other than a down right Rebellion.
To this, the only answer that I have ever yet seen made, is, That the Iewish Dispensation being founded on Temporal Promises, whereas the Christian Religion is a Doctrine of the Cross, things of this kind might have been Lawful among them, tho they are not so to us: and that the rather, because by a Practice that was authorised, from the Example of Phinehas, and the praise given him for it, private Men might among the Jews, when the Magistrate was remiss, fall upon Offenders, and punish them, especially in the case of Idolatry. This is all that seems to be offered with any colour of Reason, to take off the Argument from the practice of the Maccabees: and therefore the considering and stating it aright, will deter∣mine the whole matter. First, then, The true Arguments against Resistance being drawn from the Magistrates having the Sword from God, together with all the Topicks that belong to that head, they are equally obligatory to all Nations, and all Religions; it being no part of any special Doctrine delivered in the New Testament, but arising from the Attributes of God, and the Peace and Order of the World, which did bind Jews as well as Christians: tho there are indeed Specialties in the Christian Religion, that do enforce this the more, and ag∣gravate the transgression of it more apparently. So that if Subjects defending themselves in the case of a Total Subversion, (it must ever be remembred, that I am now only arguing upon this Supposition) is the sin of Rebellion, it was a sin to the Jews, to the Maccabees in particular, as well as it is a sin to Christians. As for that of the Zealots, tho at first appearance it seems to be of some force, yet when examined it will be found to have very little in it. If we consider the first Authorities for Zealots, we shall find, that the Jews stretched this matter beyond all bounds; so that to their mistakes about it, they owed a great part of their last fatal Miseries, which ended in their ruin. This matter has been also too implicitly taken by many Christian Writers from them. The first beginning of Zealotism was in the Instance of Phinehas his killing Zimri and Cosbi; but before this was done, Moses,25 Num. 5. who was the chief Ruler, did command all the Judges of Israel, that every one should slay his men that were joined to Baal-Peor. Phinehas was one of these Judges;3 Num. 32. 20 Num. 28. for as Eleazar had been set over the Tribe of Levi when his Father was High-Priest, so Aaron being dead at this time, and Eleazar made High-Priest in his stead, Phinehas was now over the Tribe of Levi; and thus Moses Command was in particular directed to him; therefore though the Zeal with which he executed it, was highly acceptable to God, yet it was exactly Regular, since Moses had given a general Order for it.
After this followed some Instances of Men eminently authorized by God, by the Gifts of Pro∣phecy and Miracles, who did in some Cases punish Idolaters; such was Samuel's hewing Agag in pieces, in execution of the Divine Command; and Elijah's ordering all the Priests of Baal to be killed,1 Sam. 15.33. after he had by an astonishing Miracle proved that Jehovah was the true God, and that he was his Prophet. This was suitable to their Dispensation, which being a Theocracy,1 Kings 18.40. an authorized Prophet might well have entred upon the Functions of the Ma∣gistrate, when the King himself was in fault, and the Law was openly profaned. Upon the same grounds our Saviour, after his Miracles had openly declared that he was sent of God, did whip the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, when they had profaned the Court of the Gentiles, and had made that House of Prayer a Den of Thieves.21 Mat. 13.
Thus it is plain, That none of the Presidents from the Zealots of the Old Testament, could justify private Men, such as Mattathias and his Children, to do any thing that was of it felf irregular and unlawful. Phinehas his practice was a Precedent for acting in the matters of

their Law with much spirit and courage, but it could not justify any man who should presume to do that, which was not otherwise lawful for him to do; and though the Spirit of the Christian Religion is very different from the Spirit by which Elijah and other Prophets under the Old Testament were acted;9 Luke 55, 56. as our Saviour told his Disciples, particularly in this, that whereas in the one, Prophets did immediately by Miracles, or otherwise, punish some Offenders; in the other, all was to be managed with a Spirit of Gentleness and Charity; yet after all, the lasting Rules of Morality and Human Society, were the same then that they are now.
This Instance, I think, does fully justify those who, seeing a total Subversion of our Religion so far advanced, that the Pope's Authority was publickly owned, and that all the Laws that secured it, were declared to be under a Dispensing Power, which was in it self a total Subver∣sion of our Constitution, did think it lawful to accept of a Deliverance, to concur in it, and to assist towards it.
The other Instance is taken from the first beginnings of Christianity's being the Legal and Authorized Religion of the Roman Empire; and from the first Council that is esteemed General, where a Precedent is laid down, that is, no less full for justifying those who tho they did not con∣cur in procuring our Deliverance, yet have since closed in it, with all humble Gratitude and Obedience to those whom God made the Instruments in so great a Work.
After Constantine and Licinius had given out those Edicts at Milan, by which the Chri∣stians had full liberty both for their Belief and Worship, and had all the Rights and Immu∣nities of other Corporations granted them, Licinius being still in his heart an Enemy to that Religion,Eus. Chron Theoph. Anonim. Vales. began in the Year 319, to persecute the Christians: He durst not, for fear of Constantine, fall upon them openly; but his Intentions being well understood by his Ministers, the Governours of the Provinces committed in many places great Cruelties. He likewise turned the Christians first out of his Houshoud, and next out of all his Armies. He made a Law against relieving such as were in Prison,Eus. l. 10. c. 8. by which those who relieved them were to be punished as Complices of their Crimes. He apprehending that most of the Bishops wisht well to Constantine, and that in their hearts they were set against himself, went on by degrees in his design against them,Eus. de Vit. Con. l. 1. c. 5. c 53. he by one Edict, forbade the Bishops to meet together, or to meddle with the Concerns of one another's Churches. By another, he designed to expose them to Scandal and Scorn. He forbade Men and Women to meet together to worship God, or Bishops to visit Women; or Women to come to be instructed in their Schools; and appointed that Women only should instruct Women. He also forbade their holding Assemblies within Cities, and ordered them to meet in the open Fields. Some Churches were pulled down by his Orders,Eus. l. 10. c. 8. and others were shut up; and his first Suc∣cesses made him resolve on a general Persecution: For not only Eusebius, but both Socrates, Sozemen,De vit. Con, l. 2. c. 2. cap. 3. and several other Writers, do all affirm, That there was no general Persecution begun, but that there were visible steps made towards it. When all this was represented to Constantine, he was much affected with it; and resolved to help the oppressed, and thought it was a pious and holy Action to save a mulitude, by the destroying of one Person: For he saw no other way was left to relieve the Oppressed;. and his engaging in a War with Licinius, was by the Bishops of the East, that is, Licinius's own Subjects, ascribed to an immediate Conduct and Providence of God.Eus. l. 10. c. 8. It is true, Eutropius puts this upon Constantine's Ambi∣tion, and his aspiring to be the single Monarch of the World: This is also insinuated by Aurelius Victor,Lib. 10. Principa∣tum totius Orbis af∣fectans. and more fully set out by Zosimus; whose hatred both of Constantine, and of the Christian Religion, breaks out into so many Partialities, unbecoming an Historian, and engages him into so many Stories that are evidently false, that little regard is due to any thing he says.
I will not enlarge upon the War that followed, only I must observe, that tho Constantine as the Senior Emperour, had the precedence of Licinius; yet he had no sort of Authority over him: So here two Princes, both equally Sovereigns of the Roman Empire, Colleagues and Brothers-in-Law, for Licinius had maried Constantine's Sister, were engaged in a War: the quarrel was not a general persecution; but such steps made, as did plainly discover there was one intended. A Peace soon after followed. The Cement of it was, The declaring Lici∣nius's Son Licinian Caesar, who was then 21 years of Age; this put him in the Succession.

But a second Rupture followed quickly after that. Licinius's hatred to the Christians being rather encreased than abated, since he observed that they all loved Constantine; This proved fatal to Licinius, for he was totally defeated at Andrianople the 3d of July 324. and after some fruitless Attempts, he was forced to put himself in Constantines hand, on the 18th. of September following. Whereupon he was sent to live a private man at Thessalonica: but Constantine understanding that he could not rest, ordered him to be put to death, in the be∣ginning of the Year 325. Now we are in the next place to see what was the sense of the whole Church, of this Transaction: I confess we ought not to take it singly from Eusebius, for he is rather a perpetual Encomiast of Constantine, than his Historian, but we have a much more certain and Authentical Authority for this: Constantine in the same year in which he had put Licinius to death, and had taken no notice of Lucinian, tho but a year before made Caesar by his own Act, called the first General Council to meet at Nice:Eus. Vit. Const. l, 3 c. 12. For in his Speech to them, he tells them, that he had given Orders to call them together, as soon as he had overcome the Tyranny. The Council made no Exceptions to Constantine as an Invader; they did neither enquire after Lucinian, nor complain of Licinius's Fate: On the contrary, When Constantine came in and harangned them, Eustathius of Antioch did entertain him with a Panegyrick, full of high Commendations; and another seems to have been made by Eusebius, blessing Almighty God upon his account; which Speeches pronounced in full Council,Theod. l. 7 De Vit. Const. l. 3 c. 11. are at least a strong Presumption, that they all approved of the War, and rejoiced in i the deliverance. This is yet more evident from the 11th. Canon of the Council, in which they reflect upon the late Tyranny of Licinius, which shews that tho his death, and the ruin of his Family, must have naturally given some Compassion for one that was then scarce cold, and that had so lately been their Prince: for almost that whole Council consisted of those who had been the Bishops in his share of the Empire; yet they considered the danger they and their Religion had been in under him, and their deliverance by Constantine, as vastly superiour to their Ties to him; so that there was an Universal Ioy over the whole East upon the Successes of Constantine.
The having adhered to Licinius, and taking part with him in the War, tho he was then actually their Prince, was a matter of such Scandal and Infamy, that Constantine in a Letter which he writ to the Nicomedians against Ensebius their Bishop,Theod. l. 1. c. 20. reproaches him with this, That he had been always in Licinius's Councils and Secrets, that he had all along stuck to him, and had treated himself with Reproach; that he had imployed Spies to pro∣cure Intelligence to Licinius, and that he had given him all sort of Assistance, except the bearing of Armes for him: all which Constantine affirms he is ready to prove, by some Priest and Deacons who had adher'd to Eusebius, and whom he had taken Prisoners. And thus we see what the sense of the whole Church in one of its best Ages, and of the first General Council, was of a Deliverance procured by one Sovereign Prince's attacking, dethroning, and possessing himself of the Empire of another, who had not yet set on foot a General Perse∣cution, but had only violated the Laws, which the Christians, had for the security of their Religion, had committed many Acts of Injustice and violence against them; and had declared his Intentions so visibly, that there was all possible reason to conclude that a General Perse∣cution was coming on. Not a Bishop, nor a Priest, stood out against Constantine; not so much as a private Christian was of Licinius's Party: All went into the Revolution, and re∣joiced in their Deliverance,
I will not go on to shw how parallel that Case was to ours; the attempt were as needless, as it might seem invidious: Only I may well conclude, That it is not easy to imagine how we can be better assured of the sense of the whole Church in any point, then we are of the sense of the Christians of that Age, in this particular.
I have not said any thing to justify my putting Constantine's prevailing over Licinius in the Year immediately before the Council of Nice, tho Baronius puts it six before it. But it is visible that he has disordered the whole History of Constantine, on design to maintain his being baptized at Rome, with other unjustifiable things; besides that, Eusebius's Chronology in this particular, as it is of authority of it self, without any other support, so it is fully confirmed by the dates of some Laws in the Code, and several other Circumstances.
It should be hoped that so great and so plain a Precedent should conclude those who have made the Primitive Church their Pattern; and who have always reckoned this one of the special Glories of the Church of England, that she built upon, and conformed her self to the first Ages of Christianity. I have now opened these two Precedents very particularly to you; they seemed to weigh much with you when I have laid them out to you in some Conferences that I have held with you upon this Subject. I hope you will both feel the force that is in them, and and will be able to manage them with more advantage now that you have them lying before you.
To conclude all. I do charge you by all the Authority I have over you, and beseech you by all the Interest that I have in you, to set your selves wholly to your Studies and La∣bours; to be earnest in Prayer, to continue in it, and to join fasting with it: Search the Scriptures diligently, give your selves to reading and meditation, and be you wholly in them; that so your profiting may appear unto all men; and watch over the Flock committed to your charge: Be instant in season, and out of season; to instruct, admonish, exhort and reprove; and by so doing, you shall both save yourselves, and them that hear you: In doing these things, you shall always have the most constant Assistance, and the most earnest Prayers of,
My Reverend and Dear Brethren,

8. Decem. 1693.
