



May it please Your Sacred Majesty,
THE following History being a Re∣lation of Your Royal Fathers Counsels and Affairs in Scotland, I hope for an easy Pardon of my Presumption in offering it to Your Majesty. Your Concern in a Work that relates so much to the King, Your Blessed Father, moved You to look on it, and read some parts of it; and after You had honoured it with a Character too advantageous for me to re∣peat, You were Graciously pleased to allow me Your Royal Licence, not only to Publish it, but to Address it to Your Self: and therefore I hope Your Majesty will favourably Accept this tribute of my Duty, which with an humble Devotion I lay down at Your Feet.
My Zeal for Your Majesties Honour and Ser∣vice engaged me first in this Work, and the same Passion which I derived from my Education, and still governs my Heart and Life, makes me now Pub∣lish it. For nothing does more clear the Prospect of what is before us, than a strict Review of what is past; which I have laboured to make with all pos∣sible Fidelity and Diligence. I know I shall not escape Censures, since few can bear a true and

free History; but as I have set down nothing for which I have not Authentick Vouchers, so I have observed Your Majesties Acts of Oblivion and In∣dempnity, as much as could consist with the Laws of History, and have avoided the naming of Persons upon Ingrateful Occasions. But no Precaution can secure one from severe Challenges that writes so near those Times, while many Persons concerned are yet alive: yet if Your Majesty continues to ho∣nour these Memoires with Your Royal Approba∣tion, I shall easily bear them.
SIR, You have here a true Account of the Ser∣vices and Sufferings of two of Your Subjects, who dedicated themselves to Your Majesties Interests, and became Sacrifices for them. The Elder of these Bro∣thers had not the honour of being known to Your Ma∣jesty, yet he lost his life in Your Reign. The Young∣er survived as long as he could serve Your Majesty: but when he saw his Life like to be unprofitable to Your Service, it became uneasy to himself, which made him so prodigal of it in Your own sight. And Your Majesty does his Memory the Honour of remembring him still with the highest expressions of Esteem and Acknowledgment which a King can be∣stow on a Subject.
They had that Unblemished Loyalty conveyed to them from their Ancestors as the Entail of their Family, which has always payd an Uninterrupted Fi∣delity to the Crown, and they have transmitted it as an Inheritance to those who have succeeded them, who have already given great Demonstrations of most sincere and Loyal Duty to Your Majesty.
That God of his Infinite Mercy may preserve Your Majesty, and bless you with Wise Counsels, Obedient Subjects and Prosperous Undertakings, and after a long and happy Reign on Earth, may Crown You with an Incorruptible Crown of Glo∣ry, is the daily Devotion of,
May it please your Sacred Majesty,

London, the 21st of October, 1673.
