



SIR,
NEW found Lands and Countreys ac∣crew
to the Prince, whose Subject
makes the first Discovery; And ha∣ving
retriev'd a World that had been
lost, for some thousands of Years, out
of the Memory of Man, and the Records of Time,
I thought it my Duty to lay it at Your Majesty's
Feet. 'Twill not enlarge Your Dominions, 'tis past
and gone; nor dare I say it will enlarge Your
Thoughts; But I hope it may gratifie Your Princely
curiosity to read the Description of it, and see the
Fate that attended it.
We have still the broken Materials of that first
World, and walk upon its Ruines; while it stood,
there was the Seat of Paradise, and the Scenes of the
Golden Age; when it fell, it made the Deluge;
And this shapen Earth we now inhabit, is the
Form it was found in when the Waters had retir'd,

and the dry Land appear'd. These things, Sir, I
propose and presume to prove in the following
Treatise, which I willingly submit to Your Maje∣sty's
Iudgment and Censure: being very well satis∣fied,
that if I had sought a Patron in all the List of
Kings, Your Contemporaries: Or in the Roll of
Your Nobles of either Order: I could not have
found a more competent Iudge in a Speculatitn of
this Nature. Your Majesty's Sagacity, and
happy Genius for Natural History, for Observa∣tions
and Remarks upon the Earth, the Heavens,
and the Sea, is a better preparation for Inquiries of
this kind, than all the dead Learning of the
Schools.
Sir, This Theory in the full extent of it, is to
reach to the last Period of the Earth, and the End
of all things; But this first Volume takes in only so
much as is already past, from the Origin of the Earth▪
to this present time and state of Nature. To de∣scribe
in like manner the Changes and Revolutions of
Nature that are to come, and see thorough all suc∣ceeding
Ages, will require a steddy and attentive Eye,
and a retreat from the noise of the World; Especially
so to connect the parts, and present them all under one
view, that we may see, as in a Mirrour, the several
faces of Nature, from First to Last, throughout
all the Circle of Successions.
Your Majesty having been pleas'd to give encou∣ragement
to this Translation, I humbly present it to
Your Gracious Acceptance. And 'tis our Interest,
as well as Duty, in Disquisitions of this Nature, to
Address our selves to Your Majesty, as the Defen∣der

of our Philosophick Liberties; against those
that would usurp upon the Fundamental privilege
and Birth-right of Mankind, The Free use of
Reason. Your Majesty hath always appear'd the
Royal Patron of Learning and the Sciences: and 'tis
suitable to the Greatness of a Princely Spirit, to fa∣vour
and promote whatsoever tends to the enlarge∣ment
of Humane Knowledge, and the improvement
of Humane Nature. To be Good and Gracious,
and a Lover of Knowledge, are, methinks, two
of the most amiable things in this World; And that
Your Majesty may always bear that Character, in
present and future Ages, and after a long and pro∣sperous
Reign, enjoy a blessed Immortality, is the
constant Prayer of

