



MADAM,
HAVING had the honour to present
the first part of this Theory to Your
ROYAL UNCLE, I pre∣sume
to offer the Second to Your
Majesty. This part of the Subject,
I hope, will be no less acceptable, for certainly 'tis of
no less importance. They both indeed agree in this,
That there is a WORLD made and destroy'd in
either Treatise. But we are more concern'd in what
is to come, than what is past. And as the former
Books represented to us the Rise and Fall of the First
World; so These give an account of the present Frame
of Nature labouring under the last Flames, and of
the Resurrection of it in the New Heavens and
New Earth: which, according to the Divine Pro∣mises,
we are to expect.
Cities that are burnt, are commonly rebuilt more
beautiful and regular than they were before. And
when this World is demolish'd by the last Fire, He
that undertakes to rear it up again, will supply the

defects, if there were any, of the former Fabrick.
This Theory supposes the present Earth to be little
better than an Heap of Ruines: where yet there is
room enough for Sea and Land, for Islands and Con∣tinents,
for several Countries and Dominions: But
when these are all melted down, and refin'd in the ge∣neral
Fire, they will be cast into a better mould, and
the Form and Qualities of the Earth will become Pa∣radisical▪
But, I fear, it may be thought no very proper ad∣dress,
to shew Your Majesty a World laid in ashes,
where You have so great an interest Your Self, and
Such fair Dominions; and then, to recompence the
loss by giving a Reversion in a Future Earth. But if
that future Earth be a second Paradise, to be en∣joyed
for a Thousand Years; with Peace, Inno∣cency,
and constant health: An Inheritance there will
be an happy exchange for the best Crown in this World.
I confess, I could never perswade my self that the
Kingdom of Christ and of his Saints, which the Scri∣pture
speaks of so frequently, was design'd to be upon
this present Earth. But however, upon all supposi∣tions,
They that have done some eminent Good in this
Life, will be sharers in the happiness of that State.
To humble the Oppressors, and rescue the Oppressed,
is a work of Generosity and Charity that cannot want
its reward; Yet, MADAM, They are the greatest
Benefactors to Mankind, that dispose the World to
become Vertuous: and by their example, Influence,
and Authority, retrieve that TRUTH and
JUSTICE, that have been lost, amongst men,
for many Ages. The School-Divines tell us, Those

that act or suffer great things for the Publick Good,
are distinguish'd in Heaven by a Circle of Gold about
their Heads. One would not willingly vouch for that:
but one may safely for what the Prophet says,
which is far greater: namely, that They shall shine
like Stars in the Firmament, that turn many to
Righteousness. Which is not to be understood, so
much, of the Conversion of single Souls, as of the
turning of Nations and People, the turning of the
World to Righteousness. They that lead on that
great and happy Work, shall be distinguish'd in Glory
from the rest of Mankind.
We are sensible, MADAM, from Your Great
Example, that Piety and Vertue seated upon a Throne,
draw many to imitation, whom ill Principles, or the
course of the World, might have led another way.
These are the best, as well as easiest Victories, that are
gain'd without Contest. And as Princes are the Vice∣gerents
of God upon Earth, so when their Majesty
is in Conjunction with Goodness, it hath a double Cha∣racter
of Divinity upon it: and we owe them a double
Tribute, of Fear and Love. Which, with constant
Prayers for Your MAJESTIES present and fu∣ture
Happiness, shall be always Dutifully paid, by

