



SIR,
WEre Patrons bound to Defend Books they never saw, as Seconds are, to Fight Men they never heard of, I shou'd not have Presum'd to have made You a Dedication; for I am Oblig'd to tell the World of my Misfortune.

You never saw one Line of these Elegies, and so are absolutely dis∣engag'd from all Inadvertencies, Faults, and Follys, of what Na∣ture soever. And tho' Men are generally as fond of the Issues of their Brain, as those of their Bo∣dy, and partially give it for them∣selves, without Fault; I am not so Conceited of mine, as to think I have writ without Mistakes, tho' there is none that I know of.
You may remember, in July last, when I made you a Visit about Peterborough, I told you I had some Papers of this Nature in some Friends Hands in Town and wish'd I had had em then, to have taken your Thoughts: Not

long after, I received them, and had no reason to alter my Design of Publishing 'em, at one time or another: Then I show'd them to some of my Acquaintance in the Countrey, and several Persons a∣greeing in the same Opinion, I took up this still desperate Resolu∣tion of Printing. It has been a Humour in all Ages, but I be∣lieve never so Ʋniversal as now, for Men to think it a Detra∣ction from their own Character, to give another Man his; and when Homer has been Burlesqu'd, Virgil Travestied, Waller Cri∣ticis'd on, and Cowley Condemn'd, no Body must take it ill. Cow∣ley▪ was a Man of Admirable

Wit, and his Writings will Chal∣lenge a Respect, 'till our Poets are inspir'd. Waller indeed writ with more Art, and was the first of our Countrey-men that Affected that agreeable Smoothness, which with his large Share of Wit, makes his Poems perpetually Entertain∣ing. But those that Rail for no other Design than to be thought Critiques, are fond of a Charact∣er they are not able to maintain: And tho' they are a great part of Mankind, they are of so different a Complexion from the better part of Mankind, that they have as little Respect as Modesty, and it's no Reflection to be out of their Favour.

When I first began these Ele∣gies, the only Motive to me was my Diversion, and to Persue the Design of Entertaining my self, I Choose this way of Imitation, which admits of more Liberty: And tho' the Alterations are not great, nor many, yet they are too many for a strict Translation. Besides this, I had another Reason, which Pre∣vail d with me, more than my Ease, and that was Ovid s ex∣tream Sense of his Misfortunes, in a hundred places of his Elegies: He is so Melted with his Sorrows, that his Complaints discover a Weakness, which is better hid. Ovid's was indeed a very hard Case as could be, and it's no Won∣der

if the Affection he had for his own Countrey, the passionate Ten∣derness for his Wife, and Family, together with the dreadful Appre∣hensions of the barbarous People he was going to, if all these shockt his Resolution, and made him write his Fears; and it is rather to be wish'd he had done it sel∣domer, than to be wonder'd he did it at all.
The true Occasion of his Ba∣nishment, as far as I can learn, has been a lasting Secret, and men of his own time could but Guess; the most probable Con∣jecture to me, is, that he suffer'd not so much for his own Fault, as Caesar's, that he was Consci∣ous

of something that made Cae∣sar uneasie; I don't think it was any Familiarity with Livia, or Julia, that gave him Augustus's Displeasure, and those Verses,
Cur aliquid vidi? cur noxia lumina feci,
Cur imprudenti cognita culpa mihi est.
signify no more, than that he was unfortunately Privy to some disho∣nourable Action of Caesar's, and he durst not trust him at home. Had his Crime been of so high a Nature, as to have wrong'd him in his Wife, or Daughter, Banish∣ment had not been Punishment enough: And had it been Livia, he durst not so much as have mention'd her; but we find him

in the second Book of his Elegies, which he writes to Augustus, particularly commending his Livia.

Livia sic tecum sociales impleat annos,
Quae nisi te, nullo conjuge digna fuit,
Quae si non esset, caelebs te vita deceret,
Nullaque, cui posses esse maritus, erat.

But this is still Conjecture, and all the Proofs that can be Amass'd of either side, amount to no more; and therefore I shall leave the Reader to his Liberty, with∣out pretending to determine from any of 'em. But whatever was the Occasion of his Banishment, he was Treated with great Re∣spect by those of his own time, and his Writings have been

judg'd very Fortunate, by those of several Ages since. The two Seneca's, Marcus and Lucius, Velleius Paterculus, Quintilli∣an, Cornelius Tacitus, Martial, Statius Pampinius, Angelus Po∣litianus, Erasmus, Julius Scali∣ger; these and a great many more have all interested themselves in the Commendations of Ovid, and are more than Common Autho∣ritys.
And now SIR, if you can find any thing in the following sheets that may Divert you, when Tired with, or Indisposed for bet∣ter Studies, I shall have the greatest part of my Design, and

only want your Pardon for this Freedom,
SIR, 
