



SIR,
ABout two or three months ago a Noble Lady gave me your Book with a Letter that ad∣dressed it to me, wherein after some ci∣vilities I was desired to peruse the Book, and made hope I should reap great ad∣vantages from it; and indeed if I had not learned from the Inspired Preacher that there is nothing new under the Sun, or had been easily catched to believe Novelties, a Title and Preface that pro∣mised so much should have made me apprehend I had got sent me the Philo∣sophers stone in Divinity; and truly so short, so sure, so easie and so general a Method as you think you offer for curing and preventing all distempers about Religion, deserved to be enter∣tained with equal degrees of Joy and Astonishment. What a happiness were it to Mankind after all the expence

of Bloud, all the toyl and sweat of Care, all the Speculations and Labours of the Learned, and the Industry and endeavours of Statesmen for resolving the doubts and difficulties about Reli∣gion, to find a shorter and a safer way to get out of that trouble? But as the high pretences and promises of the Spa∣giricks make sober people afraid to meddle with them, and do oft bring disesteem and neglect on the Medicines, because they are overvalued: so I am afraid your Book shall have the same fate with clearer and unpossessed minds.
And I must confess my self strongly prejudiced against these hudling Me∣thods, so that I always apprehend some Legerdemain from them. And the Ti∣tle of your Book did very naturally lead me to this thought, it being a form of Speech we in England call a Bull, A Ra∣tional way to convince without any Dispute, for a Rational way of Conviction is when upon a full hearing and consider∣ing all can be said on both sides of any debate, the evidence of Reason deter∣mines our perswasion. And to form an

opinion after we have only considered the grounds of one side, is as unequal and unjust, as for a Judge to pass sen∣tence when he has heard but one party. Now Disputing is only the considering with an even ballance what all parties say, and the suspending our Verdict till they have finished their Evidence. It is therefore no Rational way but a blind and unreasonable one that bars Dispu∣ting; nor can it be a Conviction, but only a prepossession when we are led into any Opinion, before all that can in reason be said hath been examined by us. But I suppose by Dispute you meant the eager and hot contests of wrang∣ling Disputants, who espousing a party do with all the tricks and disingenuities of Sophistry and the petulant Incivilities of rude treatment, manage debates as persons more concerned for glory and victory than for truth; and rather than confess an escape and disclaim an error, will with all the trifling arts of their embased Logick, defend every thing which either they themselves have once said, or that party they adhere to has maintained.
But as I passed from your Title through your Preface to your Book, I must freely confess I did not find in it such fair and clear Reasoning as you pro∣mised; and I saw you had a great deal of reason to avoid Disputing: for no∣thing but a blind easie yielding to what you delivered could save your Book from being rejected. And this seemed to me so obvious, that I judged it needless to engage in any Answer to it, and so laid it aside. But a few days ago a wor∣thy and learned friend of mine told me many wished some would be at the pains to Answer it, and desired me to do it; and when I told him how it was brought to my hands, he thought I was under some obligation to send you the reasons that lay in my way and kept me from yielding to this new Method of Conviction. I was the more easily perswa∣ded to it, that my present circumstances did leave me at a greater freedom of dis∣posing of my time than I have enjoyed for some years.
The starched formality of Dedicati∣ons is as much out of esteem with me, as out of date in this freer age; but it was

natural to address this to your self though utterly unknown to me, by any other Character than what your Book gives of you, and so I am in no hazard of making personal reflections. I shall first give you my sense of your Method in all the Six points you go through, be∣fore I take any notice of what is in your Preface, which I shall consider last of all, and with the same breath shall offer a Rational way of managing all Disputes about Religion so, that after a full hearing of what may be said we may arrive at a clear and well grounded Con∣viction in matters of Religion. I hope you will consider what I go to lay before you with a mind calm and undisturbed, and believe that in this I am acting the part of one who is sincerely

