



Dear Friends,
I Having had much Exercise and care upon me in Collecting, and for the Publishing these Books in this Volumn; at length, after much Travel & Diligence, for the effecting this Impression, they are through the Assistance and Providence of God (as I may well say) brought forth and finished for you and your Children, and such as are moderate and well-affected, who shall desire any of them. The reason why this Work hath been so long unfinished, was partly the difficulty of Printing, and partly it being also thus voluminous and weighty, and partly since I began the Printing of this, many other things of Truth's Concern∣ment intervened, which required expedition in the publication: how∣beit, this Work hath long lain as a matter of weight upon my spirit, to use my utmost endeavours for its accomplishment; and greater de∣sires thereof could not be in any of you, then in my own particular; I ha∣ving Travelled both to answer and serve Truth, as also the desires of ma∣ny Friends herein, whom also I have been willing and desirous to serve in that true Love which stands in the Life and Truth of our God, who requires faith∣fulness of us all, that we may remain living Witnesses in our several Places this short time of our Pilgrimage; and in the end, lay down our Heads in Peace, and Assurance of a Crown of Life and Glory, as our Everlasting Reward; for this is the End that crowns all, The Diligence and Works of the Faithful.
And I having been an Eye and Ear Witness of the Faithfulness, Va∣lour and Courage of this Faithful Servant and Prophet of the Lord E. B. in his powerful Testimony, and effectual Ministry, which the Lord did bless with a very Glorious Success unto me, and many more; have found my self the more oblieged for the divulging of these his Works, which, though many of them were given forth in the time of his

Youth, soon after the Lord first raised him up, and when the disco∣very of Truth was in its infancy, both New, Strange and a Wonder∣ment to many in our Age (it being after such a long time of Darkness, and Night of Apostacy) yet the Power of the Lord, which then broke forth, was very Mighty, both in him, and his dear Companion in the Gospel Fr. Howgill, who were sent in the beginning amongst us, in this City of London; where, though they met with much Opposition and Gain-saying by perverse spirits, and formal Professors of all sorts, who denied and resisted the Power of Codliness; yet the Lord so accompained these his two faithful Servants and Ministers of Righteousness, as to the confound∣ing the wisdom of the Wise, and stoping the Mouthes of many contentious Opposers, and convincing of Gain-sayers; yea, the Lord did manifest 1 Cor. 12. 9. and perfect his Strength through Weakness, even through Instruments dis∣pised and coutemptable in the Eyes of the Proud and Exalted of the 1 Cor. 1. 27 World; out of the Mouthes of Babes did the Lord ordain Strength; and Psal. 8. 2. through Simplicity did his wisdom speak, both in this his faithful Witness E. B. and divers other in the beginning: So that let none contemn, the honest Plainness, and harmless Simplicity of any of his first Writtings or Books here inserted; for many are living Witnesses, that the Power and Wisdom of God, did then (even while he was young and tender every way) appear, and shew it self in him, through such plainness and Simplicity, to the confounding, and overturning the wisdom of many that were high and lofty, who conceited themselves wise with their opposition of science (falsly so called.)
And it may not be unnecessary for Friends, and their Children to read and peruse these Testimonies, Informations and Vindication of Truth, where they are in way of Controversie (with many others of like na∣ture) given forth by the Servants of the Lord, in Truth's Vindication, the Perusal and Reading thereof may be of Service both to you and yours, you being in the Light and Inspiration of the Almighty, which gives Understanding, from which all Scriptures or Writings that are given, are profitable to the Man of God for his Accommodation, and ought not to be slighted, whether they be in plain Testimonies, or in Vindications and Answers: For though many are come to a particular Satisfaction in the true Light, which is the Rule of the Understanding, and know so much of Christ, as to die for him, yet cannot so well dispute for him, though that be necessary, and few given up and accomplished for that Service; & therefore there may be need for more to apply their hearts to Wisdom, as to be furnished in every respect, to stand up for the Truth against its Opposers, to convince Gain-sayers, and stop the Mouth of Ini∣quity, where ever it opens it self against the Righteous, to pervert the right Wayes of God and his Truth; since the Labours and Works of this valiant Souldier of Christ are here manifest to your view, and to conti∣nue on Record, as permanent Monuments of his Service for the Lord, and as Tokens of God's Love to many; it being also apparently mani∣fest, how plainly and eminently many of his Prophesies came to pass, and were fulfilled upon the Heads of the persecuting Powers, Rulers and

Government of O. C. and others of that Affinity, who trod in the same Path; who resisted God's Power, in not removing Oppression from off the Innocent.
It is not my place much to endeavour E. B's applause in many words, because I cannot add to him, or what he hath done, thereby; nor yet to his Faithfull Companion Francis Howgill, or his Works, which many do al∣so desire might be Collected and Published, as these are; for indeed he al∣so wrote many weighty things, and of much Service to the Truth, which would be a very conderable Volmun, that will require both much Care, Charge, and Industry to publish in Print; and therefore it would be of much Service to Truth, if Friends would so consider the weight thereof, as to encourage such a Work of value and worth; for many know what a great Sufferer F. H. was; and how he lay many years in a bad Prison at Appleby in Westmoreland, for the Testimony of Jesus, and of a good Conscience, for that he could not Swear; so that in the same Prison, under the Hands of his Persecutors, he cheerfully, and with much Satifaction and Peace, gave up his Life, and ended his Dayes in Peace. Oh! the remembrance of these two Faithfull Witnesses, who both died Sufferers, being Prisoners for Truth, is never to be forgotten.
And thus, Dear Friends, as the Salutation of our dear Brother E. B. ac∣cording to his desire, while in the Body, I recommend unto you this Volumn of his Books, with my Love in the Truth to you all, being therein

London, the 1st of the 2d Moneth, 1672.
