



IT is not my Ambition to appear in
Print, that hath prompted me to
this Work; for none can be more
averse from such a thing than my

self, as too conscious of my Inability in
that kind, but the Advice and Impor∣tunity
of some, upon Considerations re∣specting
Gods Glory and the Publick
good and Interest of Souls, have com∣pell'd
me to do what is otherwise con∣trary
to my own Inclination; and in∣deed
when I had pondered all the cir∣cumstances
of that Affair, I am about
to relate, and found, that the hand of
God was eminently therein; that it was
a rare and greatly affecting instance of
Divine Power and Grace; that what
hath already been openly known, hath
made some awakening, and serious Im∣pressions
on the Minds of People, and
knowing that no Body was so throughly
acquainted with the whole as I am,
having spent much of my time with
him in Prison for three or four Days,
I do therefore for these, and other Rea∣sons,
present this following Narrative to
the World.
The Lord knows my design purely is
to Revive, and Inculcate more what
you have either seen or heard of so
wonderful a Providence. Oh that what

I write may be as Goads and as
Nails fastened by the Masters of
Assemblies, Eccl. 12. 11. And I hope
you that were the Visitours of this
Poor Man, and you his Fellow-Prisoners,
have not so soon forgot his Expressions
at several times in your hearing. To
the end they may never be forgotten
by my self, nor you, I publish them.
Let me appeal to your own Conscien∣ces,
did not his Words, his Looks,
his Actions declare, that he was in
good earnest for Eternity? Ah! Death
will make Men serious, when it shall
please God to set the Consideration of
it home upon the Heart of a Poor Sin∣ner.
Cannot you remember how oft, some
of you at least, have heard him admire
the Grace of God, that touched his
Heart with a feeling sence of his Sin?
Did you never hear him say, I have
a bleeding Heart for Sin? I am sure
some of you did; Oh let there not be
wanting in Wisbech Town, or Goal,
Hearts bleeding for Sin, while there is
a Heart there. What say you Sinners?

what were your thoughts when you be∣held
this Poor Penitent? Did you think
to continue in your Sins, or to forsake
them? If the former, who can express
and sufficiently lament the hardness of
your Hearts, and misery of your State?
But if the Latter, now put your then
good Resolutions into Practice. Oh that
Conviction and Conversion Work may
not expire in Wisbech with this Poor
Creature, but let the Exhortation he
gave to some of you the Night before
his Death, be ever in your Memories
fresh, and lively. The Lord make it
effectual to you, and all others that shall
hear of it. Repent, said he, and turn
to God speedily, Do not drive it off
so late as I did. Let it be now.
Mine is a late Repentance, though I
hope not too late. He was convinced
to the Quick, that in sound Conversion
there must be Repentance towards God,
as well as Faith in our Lord Jesus
Christ, and would oft say; I expect
Salvation at the Hands of God, on∣ly
for the sake of Jesus Christ, my
sweet Saviour, that Immaculate Lamb:
Yet must I earnestly seek, and beg

it at his Hands, with a truly Peni∣tent
Heart, bleeding for Sin, and I
hope I do; it is my earnest desire to
do so. Imitate him in this; may it not
be in vain, that Providence brought
him hither to suffer Condign Punishment,
who had been once before condemned to
die at Lincoln: Oh that this one Soul
may be the first Fruits of a plentiful
Harvest of Souls! So prays heartily,

