



My Lord,
THAT vertuous Cava∣lier Signor Sagredo, when he left England, presented me with this Triumph

of his Country, which I here send your Lordship, but in another Tongue. With what successe I have made it English, it is not for me to judge, since it is a vanity given to all men, who make ver∣ses, to think them good. What the worth of these is, you, my Lord, who have so refined a taste, who know the nature and propriety of every thing, and understand Ita∣lian, as if you were born at Flo∣rence, will be best able to deter∣mine.
I need not tell your Lordship, who are ignorant of nothing, what a great difference there is in Tran∣slating; that nothing is more easie,

and nothing more difficult. To translate an Argument or Dis∣course, which consists of matter, requires no more, than a command of the Tongue, into which one translates; and a reasonable under∣standing of that, out of which one does it: So that any man so quali∣fied, if he want not judgment, may translate such things successefully. But to turn a Poem, the beauty of which lies not in the matter, but in the words, in the aire and dresse, into another tongue, asks not judg∣ment onely, but invention too; in∣somuch that he shall never tran∣slate a Poem well, who cannot make one. Nor is judgment and

invention all, in doing it well there is a kinde of luck too, which will not fall under any rule; a cer∣tain felicity, which is given one∣ly to some particular spirits. For the thoughts and designe of this piece, I am not to answer, since they are none of mine: If I have given it an English Genius, defa∣ced as little as may be the Origi∣nal, and native beauty of it, and put it into such words, as Buse∣nello would have done, if he had been an Englishman, it is all that can be expected from me.
With the English, I have sent your Lordship the Originall, that you may not onely judge, whether

it be well painted, but whether it be a faithfull Copy, and imitate the Italian life. You will easily dis∣cern, my Lord, where I have wrongd Busenello, and where, if I have not wrongd him every where, I have done him right.
I could have wished, my Lord, that instead of sending you the actions of other men to read, I might have read your own; I mean, those great actions, of which you have all the seeds in your mind, and want nothing but a field to sow them in, some noble occasion to put them forth. That Courage, Judgment, Eloquence, Know∣ledge of things past, Intelligence of

the present, Foresight of the fu∣ture, acquaintance with Books, understanding of Men, and a Ge∣nius made for businesse: To this, sweetnesse of Manners, a generous and obliging Nature, a taking Meen, that grace which distingui∣shes a great Person in a Croud, and makes him regarded when he is by himself, when he has none of his train and followers about him; invincible Courtesie, inviolable Friendship, and perfection in that great Science, which is so little un∣derstood, of Offices and Conver∣sation Ʋertues, my Lord, which in Rome would have made you a Consul, and banished you, if you

had been born in Athens. No tumor, no grimnesse, nothing di∣rected to ostentation, but all natu∣rall, and uncounterfeited Vertue. But amongst so many great quali∣ties, it is not fit I should forget that, which is an ornament to all the rest, your Lordship's Mode∣sty, which it may be will be offen∣ded at this license which I have taken to commend you, though I have said nothing, but what you, my Lord, must needs be conscious of: For though they, who have the most merit, have alwaies the least arrogance, they cannot want an in∣ward assurance of their own worth, and satisfastion in it, which is the

great reward wherewith Vertue paies her followers, and sustains the minde, when the applause of men, the fa∣vours of fortune, and all things without us, fail us.
What ever opinion your Lordship has of this Tran∣slation, I am confident you will take delight in the sub∣ject of it. For how can you, who have such mighty inclinati∣ons to do great things, but be pleased to hear of them? How can a soul, so inflamed with the love of vertue, but re∣joyce to see Vertue prospe∣rous? to see Art subdue

Power, and Conduct tri∣umph over Advantage? In one respect, it may be, your Lordship may read this with some displeasure, such a dis∣pleasure, as would not let Themistocles sleep, when he heard of the victories of Miltiades; a displeasure a∣rising from a generous emu∣lation, to think, that others should have such occasions for the exercise of their ver∣tues, when you have none for yours: to think, that others should spend their time, in procuring safety and happi∣nesse to their afflicted Coun∣try,

and immortall glory to themselves, when you sit with your arms folded, in a Closet, or a Garden, and waste your Youth in the shade amongst books and trees.
Besides the noble Persons which are here celebrated, there is something else, it may be, that will entertain your Lordship. I imagine, you will be pleased to hear Bu∣senello discourse to Libe∣ri, the rarenesse of his art, and the incredible things that are done by Painting; to see such a description of

Colours, expressing Na∣ture to the life; and then Words with as great a life, expressing those Colours. Me thinks here is no ill Idea of those two noble Si∣sters, Poesy and Picture, the Sciences of Words and Colours. And which of them, my Lord, in your judgment, deserves to be preferd? which of them, shall we be∣lieve, imitates Nature best? and which has the advantage of the other, silent, or talking painting? But I will leave your Lordship with Buse∣nello,

to determine that question, and beg pardon for my confidence in this Addresse. If I have done ill to engage the name I most honour, in the protection of a Stranger, who it may be, through my misrepresenting him, will be but ill received, I know your Lordship will forgive me: My indiscreti∣on cannot be so great, as your Generosity: You, who have a goodnesse to pardon injuries, will easily excuse failings, especially when they proceed from right in∣tentions,

and from a heart so full of affection to your Person, and reverence to your Vertues, as that of
My Lord

