



Madam,
SEeing Custom seems to plead prescription, and most Wri∣ters, Religious or Prophane, make bold to prefix some Great Name before their Writings, the better to Com∣mend them to the World: I having these Papers by me, designed for the Press, and not being willing to break Custom, and ha∣ving as much need of Protection as any, was not long in determining, but quickly made choice of your Ladyship, partly emboldned thereto, by your thankful Acceptance of a former Tract. My Ends in this Dedication is not to Interest you in any of my Errors, or Mistakes; if any such be found, let them be charged upon me; and I assure you, when they
 are Discovered, I shall be ready to throw the first stone at them; and were I Conscious of any such, I should be loath to prefix yours, or my own Name before it: Neither is it that I think you need it, for I know not of any thing herein contained that you are Ignorant of; however it may not be un-useful to mind you of the things you know, Phil. 3.1. 2 Pet. 1.12. Neither is it to tell the World how much I am ingaged to you, and to the Wor∣thy branches of your Family; for though I own your Courtesies thankfully, yet I know they were not bestowed to this End, that o∣thers should take Notice of them. But it is to let the World know, how High an Esteem I have of you, and that I think you are fitter to Judge of Writings of this Nature than ma∣ny others, it being but a real History of your own daily Practice. And also that I may point out unto the World (who are better led by Example, than by Rule) a Pattern for their Imitation, for in you they may see these Directions reduced into Practice, which otherwise they may think inpracticable: And also that the World may be convinc'd (who in this looser Age is apt to think the contrary) that Gentility, and true Piety may Lodge to∣gether in the same Breast; and that our Age, as well as the Apostles, 2 John 1.13. doth afford some Elect Ladies, and that they may not think that Gentility and Debauchery are termius convertabiles; and he that owns one, must own the other also: but that there are
 some (and alas! too few) Noble, and Generous Spirits, that the Temptations of the Devil, nor the Allurements of the World, neither Riches, Honours, nor Pleasures, can draw, or drive away from Christ. And, Madam, though those that know you, take Notice of many Excellent Qualifications in you; as Hu∣mility, Self-denial, Prudence, Temperance, Charity, &c. Yet real Holiness, true Piety, and the power of Godliness, is the most fra∣grant Flower in your Garland, and the most Orient Jem that doth Adorn you; without which the rest would not be so resplendant; for by Sincerity Virtues are Adopted Graces. The World, I know, is as always it hath been, not only out of their way, but also out of their Wits in matters of Salvation, and stark blind in Spirituals, and only dote upon gilded Vanitie, and Worship a Golden Calf; yet the time is coming, their minds will change when they shall see all their Glory, how high soever it flye, vanish like Smoak before their Eyes into nothing. Now, they take them all to be Fools, or Mad men, that run Counter to the Courses of the World, and the Corruptions of the Times; and most men had rather be Honourable, than Religious; Great, than Good. But when they have cast up their Accounts at Death, they will find there was a mistake in the Reckoning: They will then see Holiness was the best Fashion, though lest worn; and that all the Pomp in the World was but gilded Rottenness, a dead
 Carkass stuff'd with Flower; and that at Death all the Gold in the Indies signifies no more than a handful of Dirt or Dung. The Time is at Hand (and long it cannot be) that one Dram of Grace will be worth a World; and one glymps of God's Favour worth a Thousand Crowns and Kingdoms. Humility and Self-denial are two Soul-adorning Graces, though seldom seen worn in the Breast of great Persons; they are the first Lesson Taught in the School of Christ, though few ever take them out; they are Beautiful in Great men, as well as Poor: And submissive Devotion in Religious Duties doth not wrong Majesty it self. Virtue is better than a Thousand Escutch∣ions; and 'tis true Nobility where God is the top of the Kin, and Religion lyes at the bot∣tom. 'Tis a greater Honour to be a Child of God, than to be Born of Princes; and to be Espoused to Christ, speaks more of Honour, and Happiness, than the World can conferr. Riches of themselves make not the Souls bet∣ter or worse; neither doth God think ever the better of men for Wealths sake, except they take Christs Counsel, and make Friends with this Unrighteous Mammon, and by this means have their Riches made up into a Crown for their Head in the World to come. If these things seem Questionable to any, a little time may resolve the doubt, when it will plainly appear, that a bare profession of Re∣ligion will serve no mans turn for Salvation, Mat. 7.22. & 25.1,2, &c. The Lamp of
 Profession may Light a man to Death, never to Heaven. Madam, I Write not these things for your Instruction, but I had need to speak them out, that others may hear. My Prayers to God are that you may go on in Honouring him, who hath Honoured you. And improve all for his Glory, from whom you have recei∣ved all; knowing you cannot do too much, or suffer too much for him, who hath done so much, and suffered so much for you; you cannot buy this Gold too dear, the World you may buy too dear, and most men do with the loss of their Souls.
Madam, as to this unpolished Piece, though I am conscious to my self of many wants, yet I hope a Will to do good is not wanting: He that did receive a Turtle for a Sacrifice, when a Lamb was wanting, and a little Goats Hair, when no Butter was to be had; and com∣mended the Widdows mite, when she had no more, I hope will receive this when he knows I have no better; where but little is given, of him less will be required. The Subject I know is necessary, if not spoiled in the handling; though the Ring look dusk, yet the Diamond will sparkle. Multiplicity of contrary Stu∣dies, and other Imployments, as most that know me can Witness, might, perhaps, have pleaded my Excuse for Writing, (as indeed it did satisfie me for several Years) so I hope it will plead my Excuse for coming forth in so homely a dress. When Paul beheld the Ido∣latry of the Athenians, his Spirit was moved;
 and when I beheld the formality of Professors, no wonder, if, with Crassus dumb Son, I spake, when I saw my Father wronged. A∣mong all the Objection I could think of that might come in against this my well-meant La∣bour, I found none that said it was impossible it should do good, I am sure none can justly Object it was not intended for good; those that really desire to lead a Holy life, I hope will own it; as for others, those that have neither good word for God, nor for his ways, I can∣not expect they should have any for me; how∣ever, my witness against them will be upon Record. Madam, if you have better at hand, you may bestow this upon some wanting Soul, for whose sake it was Written. I have not further to add, but desire of God in these de∣clining Times, when Atheism, Prophaness, Superstition, and Debauchery are too much in Fashion, that he will keep you and yours from the Temptations laid in your way; that you may shine as Stars of the first Magnitude to enlighten this dark Hemisphere, that you may grow in Grace, as you grow in Years, and may be presented blameless at the Com∣ing of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; that your Interest in Christ, and Title to Glory, may be cleared up, that when you come to dye, you may have nothing to do but to dye, and resign up your Soul into the Hands of Christ; these are the desires, and shall be the Prayers, of him who is,
Madam,

Eaton, Nov. 2. 1674.
