



Right Worshipful,
THese ensuing Meditations, which were first Preached, at your de∣sires, upon occasion of your sad parting with that sweet and hopeful Little one, in whose life so much of your Comfort and life were Gen 44. 30. bound up, I make bold, now again, to offer to you, from the Press. Not out of any ambition that I have to be in Print: For I know there are so many excellent Sermons, and other Treatises, already extant, in English, upon almost every Subject in Divinity, that (with many Readers) the great choice they have, doth even hinder choice, and makes them uncertain what to read. Besides, I am a little acquainted with the Genius of this Age, which is hardly taken with any thing but what is new, or at the least, trim'd up after the new Mode and Dress; an humor, which as I have not learned, so neither do I much care to learn the Art of pleasing. All that I have aimed at in this small Piece (how far I have attained it, I am no competent Judge) is to clear up, and handle known and practical truths, in a plain and convincing way, so as to work upon the Conscience, with which we Ministers are chiefly to deal: to shew what Reason there is, why we should take all well that God doth: and how the Soul may be framed to Silence and Submission under Gods correcting hand, in his sharp∣est Dispensations. You will (I doubt not) accept of what I here do offer you, as in other respects, so because you shall here find mention of that Dear One of yours, who, when alive, was accounted by you as your Crown; Prov. 17. 6. and had so much room in all your hearts; and who, though he be gone hence out of sight, (to be seen no more by you in this World) will not (I believe) in hast, be out of your minds. I know, you meet, every day, with something or other that still represents him to your thoughts; and your sores being often rubb'd, by those Remembrances, are apt to bleed a fresh. But here (I hope) you shall find not only what may occasion your rumi∣nating upon your loss, but that also which (by the blessing of God) may conduce to quiet and compose your Spirits, to asswage your grief, and by degrees to raise you above it, if not to make you forget your sorrow alto∣gether. The truth is, the Considerations here suggested are of unspeakable use to support the Soul, not only under such a cross as this of yours (which yet I confess is heavy) but under all griefs and troubles whatsoever. In which respect, these Cordials, which were (in the first place) prepared for you, may serve for others of Gods Sons and Daughters of affliction, to re∣vive and chear them also in their sufferings.

Of my Address, at this time, to you (if any desire a further Reason) this is the account. There being some necessity of printing this Sermon, I was very willing to take the opportunity of presenting you with it, as a Testimonial (little things, you know, do often signifie great matters) of my very great obligations to you. The truth is, this piece (I would it were more worthy for your sakes) is yours upon a double account; both be∣cause it was preached at your desires, and with reference principally, to comfort you under the sad affliction before-mentioned: and because you have made the Author himself yours by your manifold favours to him. To the Right Worshipful Sir John; my honoured Patron, I owe my presenta∣tion to this place, which (though I had also a concurrent, and unanimous call from the people, without any contradiction) he freely conferred upon me, being moved to it by that good opinion of me, which he was pleased to entertain, without any suit of mine, or solicitation of any other in my be∣half. Here I do (I bless God for it) by his means enjoy a comfortable sub∣sistence, and eat not the bread, either of direct or indirect Simony: a mer∣cy, Epist. Ded. be∣fore the Book of his reverend Father, called The Doctrine of Fasting, &c. which (Reverend Mr. Samuil Hildersam tells me) many of our Cloth do not (the more is the pity) through the corruption of the times enjoy. Since that, I, and mine have, from you and yours, upon all occasions, re∣ceived very many favours, and real kindnesses; among which, I account that respect you have alwayes shewed, and the countenance you have given to my Ministry, not the least. So that I have had cause, and still have to bless God for you, who hath (by you) freed me from much opposition, o∣thers of my Brethren have (in the late times) met with, and vouchsafed me much encouragement in my work, they have wanted. This I (here) willingly do, and upon all occasions shall make a thankful acknowledge∣ment of, and having no better way to express my gratitude, shall do it by my prayers for you, and serviceableness (as I am able) to your souls.
The God of Heaven requite all your love, and multiply his mercies up∣on you and yours, his distinguishing mercies specially; make up your late sad loss by giving to you, and continuing with you other Sons (as hope∣ful) in the room of that dear one, whom he hath taken to himself: how∣ever vouchsafe you a name better than that of Sons and Daughters, teach you to live by Faith, give you more and more to know what belongs to Esa 56. 5. 1 Joh. 1. 3. Communion with the Father, and the Lord Jesus Christ (a favour, in com∣parison of which no outward mercy is worth the mentioning) and take de∣light to use you, and yours after you, as blessed Instruments of his Honor. This is the unfeigned prayer of

Cotteslrook, April 10. 1662.
