



Worshipful and Right Honourable,
I Have made bold here to present you with a Discourse of Death, or rather with a Discourse with my self concerning Death. I am not ignorant that 'tis an un∣pleasing Theam to declaim upon before many of the great ones of the times, who fear
Death more than Hell it self, as believing it to be a Reality; when God and Devil, Heaven and Hell, they would believe are Fictions: The apprehension of Death puts them into a cold sweat; it makes them tremble, not much unlike to Belshazzars hand-writing upon the wall;
Dan. 5.5, 6. Mat. 8.29. and whosoever minds them of it, doth but torment them before the time; but such as wink, and then conceit Death doth not see them, will ere long find their mistake. But had I imagined you had been of this Gang, I should not have prefixt your Name to these Papers: They are intended for a Cordial against the fear of Death, but such as those should be perswaded to fear it more. But the Image of God, and those divine qualifi∣cations which accompany salvation, appear∣ing in you, I thought these Meditations, nay nor Death it self, would not startle you. For let me tell you, without flattery, that there are some qualifications in you that draw the eyes of the world after you, yea draw out their affections to you; such as Justice, Tem∣perance, Prudence, Charity, &c. These, as they are rare in our times, in persons of your rank, so they are lovely; but there are other qualifications, such as Piety and Holiness, the Image of God, and the Graces of his Spirit, that make you lovely both to God and good men; these the World take no
notice of, at least love not in you; for they eem Grace and Holiness no better than renzie or Madness: But the time is coming, e greatest Gallants would be glad to be und in this Garb, which now is grown so uch out of fashion; they are now, like Da∣ocles, sporting themselves amidst their inties, and priding themselves in their incely Attendants, but forget the Sword at hangs over their heads, ready every mo∣nt to end their dayes together with their ner. But though God hath given you ndance of these outward things beyond ny others, yet you take them not, as they e, for your portion, but say of them as ther of the Cardinals Hat when offered the Pope, God shall not put me off with h poor triffes; or as Galeacius, that lian Marquess, when offered great riches forsake his Religion, Let their Money ish with them, that hold all the Wealth he world worth one dayes communion h Christ. You seek after better Riches;  as Solomon found out by Experience,
Eccles. 1.14. at all was Vanity and Vexation of spi∣ so you can write a Probatum est upon  I know you lye under great Temptati∣, but I hope Gods grace to you (as it was the Apostle) will be sufficient;
2 Cor. 12.9 and 'tis small measure of Grace will make you




digest Prosperity without a surfeit. I spea not these things to lay a stumbling-block o pride before you; I stand in my own appre∣hensions too near the brink of Eternity to b guilty of this folly, and can say, 'tis your Hu∣mility that makes you lovely in my eyes:  know the way to throw you down, is to lif you up; and whosoever brings fuel to th fire, is your Enemy and not your Friend but seeing your works praise you in th gates,
Pro. 31.31. as Solomon saith of the good Hou wife, why should not I and others praise yo for them, as he doth her; that God may  glorified, your hands strengthened, and othe encouraged by your Example to do the lik hoping you will shine more and more unto t perfect day,
Pro. 4.18. untill you come to shine as t Sun in the Kingdom of your Father?
Mat. 13.4.
Now there are two or three things whi you may desire to be satisfied in, in order  this Dedication: As first, Why I write up this Subject? And to this I answer: That Discourse of this nature can never be out season; for as soon as we are born, we a subject to die: And as 'tis suitable for  Times, so also for all Persons, none  exempted; and we have no greater work doe, than to prepare for Death: 'Tis g therefore for us,
1 Cor. 15.31. with the Apostle, to d daily; that is, every day be expecting Dea
and preparing for it. But more particularly, God was pleased to exercise me for a long ime together with various distempers, in∣somuch that I despaired of life, and received in my self the sentence of death, and was disabled for other concerns; and although my distempers were not so violent as to hreaten a sudden dissolution, yet being so complicated, and continuing so long without check, notwithstanding all the means that were used, and I felt Nature so fast decay, that I thought God had spoken by this Pro∣vidence to me, as sometime to Hezekiah,
2 King. 20.1. Put thy house in order, for thou shalt die and not live: And it being my Cly∣masterical year, I thought it would prove fatal to me, as it had done to many old per∣sons; and these apprehensions were much heightned by the continued rumors we then had, and still have, of Popish Plots, and ur intended Massacre, and a little fastened also by Melancholy Conceits; so that be∣tween the one and the other, I raised this Conclusion, My dayes were cut off, and my life drew near to a period; but whether a natural disease, or a violent hand would do my work, I was at a loss: Sometimes I con∣cluded for the one, and sometime for the other, according as my disease or our weekly News prevailed. However, this put me on
to have more serious thoughts of Death and Judgment than I usually have had; and I thought it my Interest to make preparation for death, yea for the worst of deaths; and therefore I did often ask my self this questi∣on, What if Death should come? What if I should be brought to the Stake for Christ? what comfort could I find? And consider∣ing my memory was treacherous, being much disabled by my distemper, lying much in my head, I wrote down the Answer as my mind dictated; and when God gave me any lu∣cida intervalla, any breathing times, I lost few of them, but can say with the Philoso∣pher, Nulla dies sine linia, no day pass'd but I did something; and thus in a little time the materials for this Structure were ga∣thered together; yet in a rude, confused and disorderly Chaos, suitable to my distract∣ed Thoughts and disturbed Fancy, suited also to my end, to have recourse thereto in my necessity. But when through Gods bles∣sing upon my endeavour, those fogs were a little blown over, and my bodily strength a little restored, I began to think that the fear of Death was not my distemper alone, but an Epidemical disease; yea that some, and those not of the worser sort, through the fear of death are all their life-time subject to bondage;
Heb. 2.15. and considering also the pre∣sent
at state of the Nation, which in the eyes  prudent persons is not free from danger  Foreign Invasion, or Domestick Insur∣ction, I began to think an undertaking of is nature might not be unsuitable, and to any not unwelcome; and hereupon I review∣ my scattered Papers, set them in order, d polished them, if not as I should, yet as  could, presuming a good Stomack (and for ch I write) will digest wholsome meat, ough not modishly drest: Those that are wil∣ng to live holily as well as dye happily, to ve to the Lord, and if cal'd to it, to die r the Lord, yet are not without their ears and doubts, these be they that I would nimate; but those that esteem the appear∣ance of Vertue better than the Vertue it self, I have here nothing to say to them, let them also think the appearance of Hap∣piness better than Happiness and Heaven it lf. However, my end drawing near, as I ay without the Spirit of Prophesie foresee, I was willing to leave upon record what my present thoughts of death are, what I found benefit by, when in mine own apprehension I lay upon my death-bed, and what I hope may comfort others in the like condition. If it be objected, that many learned Treatises are written by able Divines upon this Sub∣ject, 'tis granted; and yet notwithstanding
all those great Lamps, many are in th dark, and who knows but my small Taper may be useful to light some one or other in some dark corner of the house? the Lesson is not sufficiently taught, that is not sufficient∣ly learnt: Those that have no better, may make use of this; those that have, may be∣stow this upon some one that wants it.
But you may demand, why I prefix your Name to these unpolisht lines? Truly, those that know you and your worth, and know me and my Engagements to you, need not wonder that I dedicate a Book to you, but ra∣ther that I did it no sooner. That the present is so mean, the reason is, I had no better at hand, and I hope you will accept the will for the deed, and herein imitate God him∣self,
Exod. 35.5, 6. who accepted of a little Goats hair, where there was neither Gold nor Silver to be had  I was also encouraged hereunto by your rea∣dy and thankeful acceptance of some for∣mer discourses from me; and therefore have imitated herein that which is fabled of Pan the Rural God, who coming before Apollo to shew his Art, played upon his Oaten Reed, and being at first uncontrolled, he took courage, and plaid louder and louder: so it fares with me, when one check from you would have spoil'd my Musick. But that I present you with a Book of this nature, my Answer
is ready: Discourses of this nature are never ut of season. Solomon tells us,
Eccl. 7.2. 'Tis better go to the house of mourning than to the house of feasting, for this is the end of all flesh, and the living will lay it to heart. 'Tis true, you are in the flower of your age, and your bones are full of marrow,
Job 21.24. yet may you be cut off in your full strength; and Solomon adviseth such to remember their Creator in the dayes of their youth,
Eccles. 12.1. & 11.8. before the evil days come, before the dayes of darkness come, for they are many. My design in this Dedication is not that you should pro∣tect it; if it be Truth God will protect it, if not, man cannot do it; let it therefore stand or fall accordingly: neither desire I hereby to escape the just reproach due to me for the ill handling hereof, yet would I de∣sire that those that have death in their eyes, as I had, and not those upon the Ale∣bench, that put far from them the evil day, may be my Judges. Neither is it because I think you have more need of such a discourse than others have, that I send it to you: I know you too well to have such a conceit; but it is to testifie the great respect I have for you, and hereby to acknowledge those debts that I cannot pay, when I am not able to give you any thing worthy your self. I would wil∣lingly further you in your great design, and
put a weapon into your hand against you come to fight against your last enemy, Death; and yet I send you this as a Tenant doth a present to his Landlord, not to relieve his wants, but to testifie his dependance, and as an ear∣nest of his future service. I know you need not with Philip King of Macedonia to have a Monitor to mind you of your Mortality: I send it, as a bad Debtor when he cannot pay the Stock, he payes the Interest, or at least acknowledges the debt, and begs a long∣er time of payment; so 'tis with me. Fain would I avoid the title of Ingratefull, which sounded so harshly in the ears of the Heathen, that they thought it to be the worst of sins; Ingratum dixeris, omnia dixeris. I look up∣on you to be well skill'd in those mortifying Meditations, and as deeply learned in self-resignation of your will to Gods, as most are. The ground of my confidence is this; when God in a little time had made you both Fa∣therless, (a loss which Thousands in England have cause to bewail) and as if this cup had not been bitter enough, took away about the same time your only Son, which might have been the staff of your age, the stay of your Family, and the preserver of your Name; though you were deeply sensible of this great breach God had made upon you, yet carried your selves with so much moderation, Christian
Fortitude, Discretion and Patience, without the least murmuring, repining, or shew of dis∣content, but with chearful submission to the ill of God, that I clearly saw death was o stranger to you, and that you had learnt he Apostles lesson,
1 Thess. 4.13. Not to mourn as men ithout hope for those that sleep in the ord: you imitated David, who when his n was living, fasted and prayed, but hen dead,
2 Sam. 12.18. held his tongue and said no∣ing, because God did it: Or said as b, at the death of all his children,
Job 1.21. he Lord gave, and the Lord hath ta∣en away, Blessed be the Name of the ord. To mourn for our Relations is doubt∣ss our duty, to mourn immoderately (as achel) and will not be comforted, is doubt∣les;s a sin, and implyes we think God hath onged us in taking away our Relations without our leave; or serves to bespeak us  have more wisdom than God hath, and  know better than he when 'tis best for hem to dye, and when their work is done. these considerations made me think these Meditations would not startle you, nay your own Death would not affright you; and yet considering that death is an enemy to Nature, and that you were Flesh as well as Spirit, and though the Spirit were willing yet the Flesh s weak, I thought it would not be unsuit∣able
to put this weapon into your hand, in this conflict between the Flesh and the Spirit; for death sometimes comes with a grisly look, and terrible aspect: for, as a Heathen saith, of all Terribles Death is most terrible; and therefore the Scripture calls him the King of terrors,
Job 18.14 and experience shews that he is a terror to Kings:
Psal. 55.4. David complains, the ter∣rors of death compassed him about; and the apprehensions of death struck a greater than David into an agony: Christianum agere non est hominem exuere; when we become Christians, we cease not to be men. Now though we cannot quite root out the fear of death, yet Christians may and many doe much abate it, yea and chuse it rather than life upon any sinful terms; those under great sufferings refused deliverance,
Heb. 11.36 that is, upon any unlawful terms. The love of Christ in the Martyrs was hotter than the fire they burnt in; yea this made Paul willing not only to be bound, but to dye for Christ; yea desire to be dissolved and to be with him: so that although I think you have not so much need of a work of this nature as many have, yet I cannot think 'tis altogether useless; for you lye under greater temptations than many others, and have stronger gusts of wind to grapple with than low Shrubs; and haply Christ may cost you more than others, have∣ing
more to lose; and the world breaks many a match between Christ and the Soul: those that are rich fall into temptation;
1 Tim. 6.9 Luk. 18.23 remember the young man that parted with Christ upon this ground, and Demas that chose the world before him. 'Tis easier to steer a small Vessel in a storm than a great Ship, this may be thrust into any Creek or Harbour, where a tall Ship cannot ride: Cantabit vacuus co∣ram latrone viator: Oh Death,
Ecclus. 41.1. how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that lives at ease in his Possessions, and hath pro∣sperity in all things! We may say of you as the people did of David,
2 Sam. 18.3. If many of us fall, it signifies little; the Enemyes great de∣sign lyes against such as you; those that fall high, their fall will be the greater, and a great deal of Grace is necessary to support a great man: Till a man can see an empti∣ness in the Creature, and a fulness in Christ, and enough in Heaven to, make amends for all his losses upon Earth, he will not be brought to lose all for Christ. It was no small measure of Grace that made Galeacius teave the Marquesdom of Vico, and come to Ge∣neva for the Gospel sake. I know we live in such times as Salvian did, when Religion and Godliness are accounted a shame to Gentility, and a blemish to Nobility; and those very Ingredients, let their other quali∣fications
be what they will, will render the worlds greatest Favourites unlovely in their eyes.
1 Sam. 2.30. But those that honour God, God will honour, and those that despise him shall be lightly esteemed. St. Bernard tells So∣phia, That it was a greater honour that God made her one of a few, than that she descended from Noble Parents; the one was Gods distin∣guishing Badge, the other a common favour. Solomon tells us, A vertuous Woman, her price is above Rubies, and no doubt a ver∣tuous Man is as precious; but 'tis a good con∣junction where Grace and Greatness meet, for although a Diamond hath the same vertue o the Dunghill as in a Gold Ring, or the richest Cabinet, yet not so seemly: Grace loseth not it Vertue in a Country Clown, yet is it mo∣splendid in a great man; and such a one thu qualified, is capable of bringing more Glor to God, and doing more good in his Genera∣tion, than a poor man can: Religion in grea persons, as 'tis most Rare, so 'tis most Con∣spicuous; 'tis like a Beacon upon an hill, eve eye is upon it; and the Country imitates th Court: Qualis Rex, talis Grex. Greatne makes men capable of doing God more work or the Devil more service: The great  need not be ashamed of going in th Fashion, for Grace is the fairest Flower  their Garland; for none wear those Jewel
but the Spouse of Christ. It was more ho∣nour to David to be Gods Servant than Israels King; 'tis more honour to be in Co∣venant with God, than to have Royal blood run in our Veins; to be an Heir of Hea∣ven, than to be Heir to a Kingdom; to be the Children of God, than to be the Chil∣dren of Nobles:
Isai 43.4. since thou wast precious in my sight (saith God) thou wast ho∣nourable: For Nobility it self is mortal, and many Noble Houses and Families dye and come to nothing, but Grace is longer liv'd: My desire is, that seeing God hath written Va∣nity upon the Creatures, that you may be able to read it, and so may hang loose to the World; and so use it as not to abuse it. And seeing Death is certain, and the time of Death uncertain, that you will learn to dye daily, that when Death comes you may look upon it without Horror or Di∣straction: In the mean time,
Heb. 12.1, 2. that you may run the Race that is set before you, yea, so run that you may obtain; and with Christ endure the Cross and despise the Shame,
1 Cor. 9.24. that you may sit down with him in his Kingdom of Glory; that you may keep your Garments unspotted in the World, and have your Loyns girded, your Lamps alwayes Burning, and you your selves in a Centinel posture; that at what hour so∣ever
your Lord and Master comes, you may be found Watching: my desire is, that while you live you may shine as Stars of the first Magnitude in this our dark He∣misphere, that your Lives may be exempla∣ry, and your last Works better than your first; and when you shall be gathered unto your Fathers, it may be in a good Old Age, as a shock of Corn in its season; that while you live, you may shine as the Sun in his strength, until you set in the Infi∣nite Ocean of endless Bliss, and lye for ever in the Bosom of your dear Redeemer, there to receive a Reward for all your pains and labour of love; and that those tender Plants which God hath given you, may be watered with the dew of Heaven, and may become Trees of righteousness, even Pillars in the House of God; and that in your Family there may never want those that may own Christ in sincerity: And that the remaining part of your time,
Phil. 3.13, 14. 1 Tim. 6.12. forgetting what is past, you may reach forth unto those things that are before, pressing to∣wards the mark, for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus; and fight the good fight of Faith, and lay hold on eternal Life: These are my Desires, and shall be my Prayers; and if these fol∣lowing Meditations conduce any thing to
the furtherance hereof, I have my desire; and who knows but some poor drooping Soul may receive benefit by it? the Seed may spring when the Seedsman is dead. And thus much in Answer to the Question, Why I Dedicate it to you? If you demand, why I prefix both your Names? I will answer with Jerom in the like case, Jungat Epistola quos junxit conjugium, charta non divi∣dat quos Christi nescit amor; God hath made you not only one Flesh, but also one Heart, and it is the concern of the one as well as of the other: And thus having spoken to you jointly, give me leave to speak a few words to you severally and apart.
Sir, I shall first Address my self to you, whom your Countrey hath made choice of to serve in Parliament, and have intrusted you with their Estates, Liberties, Privi∣ledges, Lives and Religion; Oh! what an Ingagement lyes upon you to be faithful in your Trust; and what a blurr have some in that relation brought upon themselves of late dayes? that for private Interest have betrayed their Trust: But Sir, those that know you, are free from these fears; you may easily see what confidence they have in your Fathers Family, when all his three Sons, besides Sons in Law, are chosen and Intrusted, as also other Relations, not only
in this, but in the last Parliament also: Go on Sir therefore couragiously, and the Lord will prosper you; seek to set a stop to the deluge of Sin that is breaking in upon us, or otherwise God will pour out a deluge of Judgments also; God will stand by those that stand for him, and though you may lose something for him, you shall never lose by him: 'Tis your Duty to deny your self, and private Interest, when it comes in competition with Gods Cause and your Countreys good: Put your shoul∣ders to the work, and if England be not reform'd, you shall not lose your Reward; Who knows but God will honour you now chosen with the Work, at least you shall be honoured for the work? The time was, Jerusalem had been spared had there been one man to stand in the gap to execute Judgment and Justice in it:
Jer. 5.1. &c. There is now an opportunity put into your hand, a Ta∣lent to improve, and God stands by to see how it is improved:
Numb. 21.18. It is left upon recor to the honour of the Rulers in Israel, that the Princes digged the Well, and the Noble digged it with their staves: These stave are imagined to be Ensigns of honour, which here they employed to a publick good; an 'tis a brand laid upon the Nobles of th Tekoits,
Nehe. 3.5. That they laid not their Neck
to the work of the Lord; and I wish none of our Nobles bear that reproach. My desire is, that you be not only blessed, but a blessing in your Generation; and though your pains be great, and your cost not small, yet remember whose the work is, and who will be your Pay-master; one who can make up all your losses, and whose is all that you expend in this service; and imitate herein your dear Father, who was a pub∣lick spirited man, and for works of Piety and Charity, hath left such an Example, that I despair ever to see the like done by any one in those parts of England; he is now reciving his reward, and I doubt not but he hath left a Blessing behind upon his Posterity, which his Children and Childrens Children shall inherit to many Generations.
And to you, Madam, one word more and I have done: Though you are a Branch of a Noble Family, yet are you much more En∣nobled by your second Birth, yea more no∣bly Born than of Flesh and Blood; for God is your Father, Jerusalem which is above your Mother, Christ your elder Bro∣ther, yea the Glorified Saints your Brethren and Sisters: so that you are more happy in your New Birth than eminent in the first; A vertuous woman (saith Solomon) her price is above Rubyes: The Children of Prin∣ces
and Nobles are the Foundation-stones whereupon Kingdoms are founded,
Pro. 31.31. but had you not been polished by God himself, you had never been one of those choice Stones that must beautifie the New Jerusalem: My desire is, that God will give you more Sons, for those two which you have so free∣ly lent to the Lord; at least give you a Name better than that of Sons and Daugh∣ters: When Death comes, it must be Grace and not Titles of Honour that then will dignifie you; and Humility and Self-deni∣al, which many think now unbeseeming  Gentleman, will be greater Ornaments that Jemms and Jewels, lofty Titles and Coat of Arms; though these are not to be con∣temned, yet the other are to be prefered Now if these poor Meditations conduce an thing to the increasing of your Grace, th strengthning of your resolution to live in th Lord, and to the Lord, and if he require it,  dye for the Lord, I shall think my pains we bestowed, and my time well spent: And the it may be so, is the desire, and shall be th Prayer of him who is, and resolves to be,
SIR, MADAM, 

Eaton, Octob. 21. 1680.
