



SIR,
THere is no need we pass the Seas to seek a Countrey of Prodigies, our Own will furnish Instances

enough of Men that would be thought more Merciful than God Himself; who not finding in their Hearts how to condemn themselves or o∣thers to Eternal Pains, will not apprehend how God should find it in His. The main To∣picks insisted on by those so tender dispositions in order to the extinguishing the Everlast∣ing Fire are, First, The Finity of Sin, that in its own Nature cannot Merit an Infinite Pu∣nishment. Secondly, The Nature of Punishment, which is for Castigation and A∣mendment, wherewith the Perpetuity of it cannot con∣sist. Thirdly, The almost Invincible Tenations that even Christians (Weak and

Impotent as they be) are surrounded with, which renders the state of Abso∣lute Perfection that only has the Promise of Blessedness, Unattainable by most of them. And is it not Hard that Poor Souls so very ea∣sily diverted from the Way to Heaven, (though they have it shown them,) should for ever be condemn∣ed to such a Hell! Fourth∣ly, The more Tremendous Circumstances of the Hea∣then, that never heard of Jesus Christ the Way, Truth and Life, who would be treated with Severity, with Rigour to Astonishment, if, for not Proceeding in a Path which they were never Ac∣quainted

of, They should be Damned to Eternal Tor∣ments. In a word, How can it comport with the Infinite Goodness, Love, Kindness, and Fatherly Bowels, of which Almighty God doth make Profession to the world? And who can once think that Tender Mercies, that Compassions that never fail, should suffer Him so quiet∣ly, without Remorse, with∣out Pity, to behold his Own Offspring Frying in Eternal and Unquenchable Flames!
You see Sir, how hard a Task that Person has, and in how large a Field he is to Expatiate, that will Esta∣blish Perpetuity in Infernal

Torments; which was in∣deed the only thing design∣ed by me at first, but I found my self in Prosecuti∣on of that Design, instead of framing only one Dis∣course, if I would not have that One Defective, Obli∣ged to Digress into several. Wherefore, I resolved to per∣mit my Thoughts the liber∣ty to range into the common Places of Hell, of Punishment in general, of Humane Im∣perfection and the Evangelical Righteousness, and of the Ad∣mirable Instances of Wisdom, Goodness and Justice in Di∣vine Transactions with the Heathen, as well as Iew and Christian; that Assuming this Freedom, I might Display

the Syntax, Harmony, Con∣nexion, Concinnity of the Notions I Employ, and on which I Bottom, with great∣er Perspicuity and Clearness, than otherwise I could have hoped to Effect it. In all, the thing I Principally Aim at, is to manifest what plain and sober Reason can do to solve Objections about them.
I call the Whole Apologie for God, because the Argu∣ments Alledged, are Crimi∣nations, Insinuating Want of Goodness, Justice, Wisdom in the great Creator, if re∣ally there be a Perpetuity in the Torments setled by Him; And no Doubt, but when the Arguments are Accusa∣tions, to Dissolve and Sa∣tisfie

Them, is to make an Apology.
Little thought had I to have Engag'd my self on This, or on resembling Subjects, when I was In∣vited to it by a Letter from One from whom I as little expected it; Who Refle∣cting on an Essay lately pub∣lished concerning Divine Goodness, imagines it Im∣perfect, for that I do not from the Infinite Divine Be∣nignity, conclude either the Non-Existence of Infernal Torments, or their Finite Duration. As if God cannot be Just, if he be Good.
Such was the Rise of these Discourses, which I Dres∣sed in the Habit of an Epi∣stle,

Not to interest therein the Person who Occasion'd it more than Others, but for Form-sake, that the Notions I conceiv'd, might enter in more easily upon the Rea∣ders Mind; who, if intan∣gled with the same thoughts, the samé Scruples it Obvi∣ates, may look on This Let∣ter as One of Resolution, written to Himself about Them.
As it is, I humbly make a Present of it to You. Not that I Presume to put the Honour of Your Name up∣on it, with design to get Pro∣tection for Defects and Weaknesses therein, that do not Deserve it; But to Pro∣claim to All the World, that

if Truth could need a Patron, I know None more Eminent∣ly Qualified to be He, than your self; and None more Worthy of the Zeal and Highest Devotions of
SIR, 
Bowdon,
Aug. 25. 1674.
