



MY LORD,
I Esteem my self happy that before my Journey to another World, (which I fore∣see, I am shortly to undertake) I have in readinesse to present to your Lordship ANTONINUS his ITINERARY through BRITAIN: Not that I conceive the Pre∣sent of that Worth that your Lordship can be much con∣cerned in it; but that I am able to leave some Testimony behinde me, of my Gratitude and Observance, which you (my Lord) may challenge by so many Names: for, not to mention the particular favours conferr'd on my self, I can never think on those you have bestowed on my neer Relations, without the highest Sentiments of a gratefull Heart. Nor ought I to forget the happinesse I enjoy by my Interest in our Nationall Rights (though a poor Pro∣letarian) under the prudent Administration of your Lord∣ship; who like another Papinian (whose Story this Work affordeth) may be justly stiled Spartian. in Caracalla. Juris Asylum & doctrinae Legalis Thesaurus. That I might testifie my Obligations after this sort, I have been encouraged from the Nature of the Subject, which is a piece of Antiquity, and that no sterile piece (such as too many are employd on) but such as may serve to illustrate the History of our Nation; which I take to be a study most proper to the Lawyer. In Praefat. Inflit. Dr. Cowel tells us, that the Common Law of England, is nothing but a mixture of the Roman Civill Law, with some feueall customes; and though this Discourse professeth not to teach ought of that Law, yet it contains the Story of the whole Roman Government here, which lasted near CCCLX. years, and a diligent Student surely may hence gather

some particulars that may give light to our present Laws; and therefore it was, without doubt, that Mr. Selden in that Janus An∣glorum. Book of his, where he sets down the Originall of our Laws, does not omit the History of the Roman Times. And if the Lawyer be the fittest student, who can be so apt a Patron as your Lordship, who is the Father of the Law? For mine own performance herein, it is a Commentary that hath cost me many years study, and I may, without breach of mo∣desty, say, it has been approv'd by him, then whom in this or any kind of Phylologie no man knew more; yet do I not recommend it as an object of your Lordships study, which I wel know is conversant about matters of a higher pitch, but onely pray that under your Patronage and Protection, it may come into the hands of the Lovers of Antiquity, and particularly of the Students of the Law; And though this stranger will not presse upon your Lordships Business and more serious Studies, in which the Good of so many persons are concerned, yet he craves leave to attend you in your Circuits and Recesses, where, perchance, he may point to some Monuments of that glorious Nation, both of Persons and things, not unworthy your observation. The pleasure of such Contemplations are so great, that Lipsius in Epist. Cent. 1. Epist. XXII. Lipsius was not able to expresse it, Quanti (saith he) & quam arcani gaudii ista visio? Cum non animo solum, sed poene oculis sese inferunt Manes illi magni & sola premimus pressa toties ipsis. My Lord; the Person that thus offers his service, is no lesse then a Roman Or is at least supposed to be the Emperour Antoninus Pius. Emperour, to that purpose I have set him forth as like himself as I could, and better (I may say without ostentation) then he has elsewhere appeared; if not suffici∣ently well, the worthinesse of his Person may plead my excuse, who, as I have endeavoured to do him due Rites, so had I by doing it in this publike manner no other ayme, then to let your Lordship and the World know, that I am
My Lord,

