



May it please your Grace,
MANY great miracles do the Romanists pretend to be frequently wrought By the Holy Sacrament of the Altar, but none so ad∣mirable as what their an∣cestors wrought Upon it: For what more wonderful than This, that a particular
 Church, by colour of a Tradition, should prevail with All other Churches throughout the whole Christian world, to reneg That Constancy, which was universally practised as indispensible for more than 400 years? That from Dispensing they should proceed to Discouraging, and therein so prevail, that those who have freed themselvs from their many other gross abuses, cannot from This; but still believ our Lord more honor∣ed by Forbearing his Table, than by Fre∣quenting it?
In opposition to this Vulgar error, I have in my narrow Sphaere used all o∣ther endeavors, but with so litle fruit, that I must either sit down in despair, or fly to the last remedy, Writeing: which beside the advantage of fastening conviction better up∣on those few that ly under My inspection,
 may extend it to as many others as shall bring my papers under Theirs.
But here also I meet great discoragements: I see that many worthy persons have of late be'n as careful to exhort to the Performance of the Duty, as to Worthiness in it: but with no better success, than those first messengers, who's kind Invitations brought nothing to the Lord of the Fest, but variety of excuses.
If therefor I would conform either to the Parable or to Reason, I must proceed to rougher means, compell by force of irrefra∣gable arguments, the unwilling and resisting world, and by all cogent proofs assert a Truth, which by Many ages was never Doubted, by More generally Denyed, by Ours somtimes Affirmed, but never (that I know) clearly proved, viz. that it is every Christi∣ans duty to be a Constant Communicant.

And this I have do'n with Such evidence, that I fear not any mans confutation; yet with litl hope to see the Table furnished with guests.
For alas! what can a poor Enchi∣ridion do, toward subduing such an error, double armed with Prejudice in the Ʋn∣derstanding and Partiality in the Affecti∣ons, fortified with long Possession, defended by the Priests, and beloved by the Peopl?
I must therefor be unfaithful both to the service I have undertaken, and to Your Grace's right, should I either expose it na∣ked and unsheltered to a Cold Advers world, or seek any other Patron than your Grace.
For as this Sacrament hath a double a∣spect, so hath your Grace a double right to it's protection: As it is the greatest exer∣cise of Love and duty to our Lord, by your
 Eminence in Piety; As it is the Principal office of Church-worship, by your eminence in Power Ecclesiastical: By the former, every good christian may claim common with your Grace in most of the following pages; but by the Later, your Grace hath a pecu∣liar jurisdiction over some, particularlyPART III. Chap. 1. Sect. 4. those wherein I have justified the Consti∣tutions of our Church, as doing what in such unhappy circumstances, is possible for retriving Primitive Constancy.
Could I say as much for the Practice! —But be it never so defective, it cannot hinder us from justifying our Church as well as St. Paul himself. For his  is no less generally mistaken for a derogation from That very obligation to constancy, which he employed it to prove indispensible; than
 is the three times in every year, which our Church defines as the Least that she can to∣lerate in the Peopl, for the most that she expecteth from the Priests; who therefor think themselvs exactly conformable, if they minister it just so often and no more; though without any care, either Before-hand, to exhort the people to Receve it, or Afterward, to reprove them if they Neglect it; which yet they cannot avoid seeing them general∣ly do, being so taught and accustomed, du∣ring our confusions, and still biased by their sloth, or worse.
What may be allowed for the untracta∣bleness of the people under our present Di∣stractions, is not for Me to determin: But that those very Distractions, which now toss us between two such parties, whereof the One first robbed the Sacrament of Constan∣cy,
 and the Other strippeth it stark na∣ked of All Performance, ly on us as a just punishment for our compliance with them, is plainly enough to be discovered, without any rude intrusion into God's secrets: For Constancy in This Office is apparently the most effectual means to unite us; as being both by it's own nature most serviceable thereto, and by its singular interest in our Lord's Person, singularly intitled to his Blessing.
I therefor conceve it no impertinent di∣sturbance of those great cares wherewith your Grace is too much molested, if as a kind of Church-warden-general, I make humble presentment, of that defect in Pa∣rochial Churches (especially) which your residence in Cathedrals hath hindered you from discovering, bicause those Officers who
 ought to be eyes to your Grace and our other Fathers in God, are themselves blinded with the vulgar error;
Whereof we saw a pernicious experi∣ment in the days of your Grace's immedi∣ate predecessor; when a General enquiry (made upon these Questions, 1. How many inhabitants in your Parish? 2. How many refuse to join in Communion with the Church?) proved abortive, bicause those who refused to communicate in This Principal office, were not noted as refusing to join in Communion with the Church; which had they ben, the necessity of com∣pulsory means would have appeared so evi∣dent, that we had not now be'n in danger, to have our nineteenth Article urged a∣gainst us, to disprove our being a True Church.

I know my self chargeable with a double great boldness; first in fronting these Pa∣pers with your Grace's name, and then in the account I make for it: But when I first engaged in the work, I resolved not to do it by halvs, and I think I might bet∣ter have omitted the better half, than This way of advantageing the whole: And since your Grace is so well known eminent for zeal in redressing whatever you shall find to need it; I have thence taken encou∣ragement to believ, you would much more easily pardon such a Presumption, than such an Omission.
I therefor humbly recommend, not so much these Papers, as their Sacred subject, Our Lord's Institution, and our Churches Constitutions, to your Grace's protection; as I do your Grace's Person and pious La∣bours
 to that of Almighty God; who, that He be pleased to make your Grace a glorious Instrument of His service in This World, and a more glorious partaker of His re∣wards in a better, is the hearty Prayer of

