



My Lord,
THough it pleases God to distinguish me from your other Chaplains by that Eminent Mark, the Sign of the Cross; Yet neither do I, nor am I, to esteem my self any thing the more thereby acquitted, or in any thing the less whit discharged of that Diligence in Ser∣vice, which in Duty I owe unto your Grace. In a great Mans House there ought to be Vessals of all sorts: God has made others much more Weighty in the Purse, and more Graceful upon the Back, as well as in the Head, and as so, the apter Ornaments in your Parlour, and Chappel, and at your great Table: But God has confined me to a private

Closet; and thereby as it were given me in special charge, to be the more instant at my private Devotions, and most serious Studies; and therein lies my Service, while they at∣tend your greater affairs.
Afflictions, especially when they come in crowds, and thronging one upon anothers Neck (as with me for some time of late they have done) do usually threaten with much of blame, as well as pain; and I am content to bear the blame, and do acknowledg a guilt upon me, equal to the Burthen that my God hath laid upon my Back; though the sin where∣with I am charged, is such, as in the Book of God is no where forbidden, in that sense, as it lies at my door; and was never proved against me by any Circumstance or light of Evidence, more then by one onely Boy, whose Education had never arrived to the understanding of an Oaths weight; and I have endured a Twelve-Months Imprisonment upon that one Boys Evidence; and yet do still find my Crime so un∣pardonable, as no submission, nor satisfaction; can expiate it. We know that where God loves best, many times he mostly chastizeth, and yet that knowledg (though we have for it a Divine warranty) is very apt to be out of mind, when we look upon a Man in Calamity. But your Grace is a Person of more Candour, whose own Experience of the good Hand of God in the day of adversity, has taught you to look upon a perplexed Sufferer, with such an equal Eye, as can distin∣guish his Sorrows from his Shame.
This Sermon (my Lord) was Preached in the Prison; such another place as was that, where St. Paul sung his Psalms. 'Tis a Prophetical Discourse, and toucheth nearly upon our own Countrey, and upon our own Times, and almost upon this very Instant. The Inspiration is none of mine, I pretend not to it in the least, what is thereof, is our Saviours, and of other Sacred Persons, from whose Writings and Say∣ings I took it up, and my Authors I have quoted. The Read∣ing, the Application, and something of Interpretation I own,

and your Grace will find them all back't with Reason and good Warranty. Our present Age (God have Mercy on us) is not without very great stain, and shame, of crying sins, sins exceeding hainous, if not unparallel'd, excepting those a∣gainst the Bloud of our Blessed Saviour, and therefore such as have for a long time cried for Vengeance. And besides old sins of above Forty Years standing; Alas! here is a loud cry of many fresh sins, which smoak with very large, thick, black, dreadful, and nausceous Vapours; Schisms, Heresies, Hypocrisies, and wicked Envy on one Hand, and Atheism, Sensuality, and unreasonable Prophaness, on the other, and ex∣cess of Pride and Covetousness on all Hands, do Reign, beside the Sacriledg, Simony, Flattery, Bribery, and Cheats, which are to be found predominant in some one sort of particular Persons, and the Rapines, Oppressions, and Extortions in some other sort. And now that the menacing Signs of Heaven do appear, day by day, and year by year, and yet the Persons mostly therein concerned do least regard them. But undoubt∣edly there are some wise Men among us, which its to be hoped will expose themselves, to stand in the Gap in this time of Eminent danger.
We have (my Lord) among others, one eminent Prophe∣sie of a most eminent Father in God, whom your Grace did well know, (who being a Person of Famous Authority, and that as well for Wisdom and Sanctity, as for Place and Dignity, has left so much the more weight upon his words) which says, That bloudy dangers do await us, but withal promises, that in the midst of that danger the truly Religious, and best sort of Christians shall be safe. And surely this is a great encouragement to all wise Men, to be diligently and se∣riously striving, who shall most excel in Piety, Truth, and Righteousness. And for this Reason, and to this end, (no doubt) it hath pleased God to load some Men, with the heavier Irons upon their Heels, in order to hold them out of that crowd, which he intends to shoot at, when the time shall

come up to serve his purpose. And Blessed are all they, who by some lighter punishments shall be rendred so safe, that when others shall be called to an account for their Pride and Wantonness, and all other defilements of over-much prosperity, They shall be excused.
Methinks (my Lord) I do contemplate in the Person of your Grace a sometimes eminent Patron of your Family, Gis∣lebert Earl of Brionij in Normandy, who was Grandfather to Robert the Cup-bearer, the first of your Line that assumed the Sirname of Le Boutellier, in the days of King William the First of this Kingdom. This Gislebert was Guardian to King VVilliam the Conquerour, when Duke Robert his Fa∣ther left him an Orphan at Eight Years of Age, and by his Wisdom and Care carried him off thorow more then an Hun∣dred dangers of his Minority,See Stow upon Will. the Con. at end of his Life. and worthily gained the Name, as he was called in those days, [Pater Patriae] He lived in an ill time; but with much Wisdom and Courage, he stood in the Gap, and withstood the insolencies of an unruly People; and attained unto old Age, and to see his Sons, and Grand∣sons of perfect Age, and lastly dyed in a Tumult, wrestling with ill humoured People, to serve his Countrey. I do not propose this example (my Lord) as if I do any way conceive your Grace, in any more then common danger to follow him in a violent Death, but rather as such, with whose Noble Acts hitherto, you have had the Reputation to compare. And as for a tumultuous Death, every wise Man among us does know, it threatens the most obscure, (as times go) and much more the more Noble and Eminent Ones. I Pray God keep your Grace, and all the Noble Patrons of our Church and Kingdom from such danger: But chiefly I pray God so keep you with his Grace, that you may be always ready for our Blessed Sa∣viour, and that with such an heart, as dreading no danger, you may be most apt and able to put forth your self so, as to go unto him with submission, according to his own way, what ever it be.
It hath pleased God to do for your Grace very great things, and to lengthen the Line of your Family from a very Ancient Remembrance, to be the Seven and Twentieth Noble Person descended in a direct Male Line, from Dukes and Earls be∣yond the Conquest: And to Preserve your whole Genealogy down unto your most Noble Self, untainted in your true Alle∣giance: And to make your Grace the Head of the greatest Tribe of one Bloud, that any Noble Person in either of these three Kingdoms can shew again; of which Famous Tree, your unworthy Remembrancer hath the Honour to be an humble Sprig with Branches, And now with Gods Blessing, it's to be hoped, this tall Tree out of your Loyns is putting forth a fresh, as if it will not cease it's growth, but be spreading on still more and more, even until Doomsday. You are (God be prai∣sed) at this day in good health; and strength, and that unto admiration, your great Age considered, I Pray God of his Mercy continue it unto you, unto your utmost time, and to strengthen your Inner Man with all heavenly Graces, equalling and exceeding those of your Outer Man. So Prays
My Lord,

