



Worthy Sir,
THis Innocent Piece comes humbly creeping under your Wings for shelter, as once Mordecai unto the most Excellent and Virtuous Queen Esther. The wrath of proud Haman like a mighty Torrent threatening that Magnanimous Heroe, and that with a Vengeance, not only to swallow the man alone, but to sweep away the whole Generation of him: But so soon as it was

known that the great Kings Wife, was his Niece, The Cloud it self recoyled, and all its drops gave back. But what shall I say? As Queen Esther among all her La∣dies of Honour, so methinks I see you sitting in the midst over the Muses! Astronomy, Geometry, Physick, Arithmetick, Musick, Limming, Engraving, yea Hus∣bandry too, and Astrology, (shall I say in the last place) are all yours. But do you hear the Newes from Alma Matre? All Astrology must be banished, and that so, as it shall not so much as find a room in the imaginations of men! Then what shall become of poor Morde∣cai? of me? And of us all Astro∣logers? And do You, Sir, think

to escape, yea though beyond the great Waters, and that in sweetest of Repose, among your Coelestial Companions? Yea, Sir, I doubt not but you will, and not only so, but so soon as it shall he known, that so great a Mecaenas as your self, is a Patriot to the Kin; Haman him∣self will be ashamed of what he has said. Truly, Sir, I am sorry to be found in this impress, in such Youthful language in many places, and the farther I read, so much the more harsh methinks it is. But I know your Candour; you will con∣sider, I write not of mine own phansy, but by a Copy; which as I am somewhat concerned to imi∣tate, so the farther I wade after it, the deeplier I am engaged in it:

Insomuch that many times, e're I am aware, it so falls in, that I fol∣low it beyond my intention. But if I have pluck't the Scarlet a lit∣tle too much, it grieves me the less, because it was upon a back of the late Times. This humble pains, Sir, is a Duty I owe, at yours, and all Astrologers service. I have therefore essayed to pay my Debt I owe unto Your great Civilities especially. And for the deficiency I humbly beg your Pardon, Sir, for him who most affectionately is,

