


I Have yielded to your Request for the Publishing of this Sermon, though I cannot but expect to undergo some un∣favourable Censures for it. The Pro∣phane and Professed Enemies of that Cause it pleads, will undoubtedly, if it come in their way, be very liberal of their silly Scoffs, and foul Reproaches: But such Dirt is not worthy of any other regard, but to be de∣spised and trampled on. I am only con∣cerned for the Censures of some better Men,
 who perhaps, through some false Represen∣tations of you and your Proceedings, may condemn that encouragement I have given to your Zeal and Ʋndertakings. I shall therefore take this opportunity to acquaint them, that, after very curious inquiries into these matters, and a deliberate consulting with my own Conscience, I thought it high∣ly became me to speak, what I have here Published. They that were Invested with the Legislative Power, did judg it very necessary to make divers Laws, for the ex∣posing some Common and Scandalous Sin∣ners, to shame and punishment. And our late Gracious Queen, of Blessed Memory, was pleased to give her particular Injunction, to those whose proper Business it was, to put these Laws in execution. Blessed be God, we have some Magistrates, who are very ready to discharge their Duty in this matter. But they cannot exercise that Power, is given them by God and the King, of making the Sword in their Hands an effectual Terror to evil doers, without evidence and conviction. And for the pro∣curing of these, it lies upon Private Persons to assist them. If therefore any Good be to
 be done, by the execution of Laws, they are in a great Measure answerable for it, if it be not effected.
There is need of a great deal of Zeal for God and Religion, to give Men the courage to ingage heartily in a work, which must Expose them to such great Expences, such severe Censures, such bitter Revilings, and such mighty Opposition, as they, who have been employed in prosecuting this affair, have had abundant Experience of. Where∣fore, having undertaken to preach upon this Occasion, I endeavoured to speak something in Vindication, and for the further incou∣ragement of your Zeal in so good a Thing. But knowing very well, that Zeal, in the best Matters, may easily transport men beyond what is fit, and really serviceable to the End it would promote, I thought it my Duty to give you some Cautions and Directions for the Management of it. And I hope this part of my discourse was not the least acceptable to you. Thus far also, I believe, I may promise for you, that, if any Good Men will be so kind, as to add their Advice for the due and effectual ordering of your endeavours, for the reforming or restrain∣ing
 the abominable Vices of the Age, you will thankfully accept and readily follow it. And, I conceive, it will not become any Men, rashly to condemn your Proceedings in so good a design, till they are well assured, that your Methods are faulty, and their better Counsels are rejected.
It is certainly a good thing you profess to be Zealously affected in, and there∣fore so far your Zeal must be good too. But your great care should be that it may be as good in all other Circumstances, as it is in respect of its End and Object: That it be not Biassed by any partial respects, or led out of its way by any rash or indiscreet Coun∣sels; that it be always attended with a holy and irreproveable Conversation, and adorn∣ed with the greatest Modesty and Humi∣lity. This would be the most Effectual course, to put to Silence the Ignorance of Foolish, and the Malice of Wicked Men; and to ingage the Affection and Assistance of all Good Men. And I hope, these are not so Inconsiderable a party, as to be easily overcome in their uni∣ted endeavours for God and Religon, whilst they have the Laws of the Land, both to
 defend themselves, and to oppose their Ene∣mies with. A Frown, or a hard Word, are generally the worst things we have to Fear. Where then is our love to God or our Country, if we have not Courage enough, in a Cause wherein they are so much concern∣ed, to bear up against such weak, contemptible Assaults? Oh! that we might but see all sorts of good Men, Magistrates, Ministers and others, all conspiring together to make one Bold and vigorous Effort, for the sup∣pressing those publick and scandalous Vices, which cry so loud to Heaven against us. We could have little cause to Despair of the Good Success of such a truly Religious Association. I am glad to understand there is such a hopeful prospect of it, from that great addition of new Bodies of Con∣stables and Housekeepers and others, who, within a few Months past, have united to∣gether for the discharge of their Oaths and Consciences in this particular; and from the great Incouragement they have from the Government of this City. And I hope it will please God, to dispose the hearts of our Magistrates, in other parts of this King∣dom, so to consider the Oaths they have
 taken, and the account they must give to God, of the exercise of that Power and Authority they are invested with; that they may not dare to suffer any private Considerations, to hold their hands from that execution of Laws, wherein the glory of God and the publick Good are so much concerned. We know the Terrour of the Lord, and therefore cannot but speak, and with the greatest Zeal and Compassion, endeavour to persuade Men, to a faithful perform∣ance of those Duties, which are of such mighty Importance to us all, both with re∣spect to our present and everlasting Hap∣piness.
You have the Honour to lead in this Noble Design, and if you resolutely and wisely Proceed in your endeavours for the accom∣plishing of it, you may Reasonably hope to provoke others by your Zeal and Success, to joyn their Heads, and Hearts, and Hands with you. However you may be sure, that God will not forget your Works of Faith, and labours of Love, and patience of Hope; but render unto you according to the Zeal, and Integrity, and Constancy of your endeavours for him. Cast not away
 therefore your confidence, which hath so great a recompence of reward. Deal courageously, and the Lord will be with the Good; If not to render your Attempts successful, yet certainly to support and comfort you in them, and to Bless and Reward you for them. That you may happily experience the presence of God with you, for all these good ends and purposes, is the hearty Prayer of,






