



Worthy Sir,
WHen the Fisher-man in his Net, took up the Golden Tripod, out of the Ionian Sea, with this Inscription thereon [To the Wisest Man of Greece.] He sent it, as his own wis∣dom directed him, to Bias of Priene, one of the Seven Fa∣mous Sages: who, though He

sent it away again to another, whom he esteemed wiser than himself; yet was this no di∣sparagement, either to Bias, or the Fisherman; The one shewing himself, by his Mo∣desty to be the Wiser man; and the Other, by his Obedi∣ence, according to the Inscrip∣tion, to the best of his Skill approving himself to be the honester man.
Good Sir, I have taken up a Tripod too, and I wish it were of Gold for your sake, that with a truly rich Pre∣sent, worthy of your Noble and Candid Virtues, I might be able to present you. True it

is, that Learning is a Jewel of a worth beyond the price of Gold, where the value of it is well understood. But alas, such is the fond humoursomness of this our Age, that Learn∣ing is too much neglected, but especially this sort of Learn∣ing wherewith I here present you; and though it be a Jewel, yet I see it may lye long enough in the Field, as it were a common Pebble stone, and ma∣ny and many an one, and that especially among the Rich and great Ones, and more especi∣ally such as are conceitedly wise, may go by, and see, and tread on it; and yet not think

it worth the Taking up.Mat. 13.45, 46. But Merchant-men (God be than∣ked) who know by Experi∣ence the Worth of Jewels, will sell Land and Houses, to buy that which Fools despise. Of the number of these Mer∣chants, Sir, my duty leads me to esteem your self in the foremost rank of mine Expe∣rienc't Acquaintance. And though I am sensible your Mo∣desty is apt enough to put by my Appellation, yet I humbly beg your Pardon, wherein my duty engages me.
But among those who per∣haps may have Esteem for Learning of another quality, 

many of them will put in ex∣ceptions to this of Astrology; as if either it were a Discourse unworthy to be called Science, or if not so, yet such at least, as they are apt to say we come not honestly by. Now true it is, Sir, that this sort of Learn∣ing, having been more unhap∣pily, than deservedly laid aside, by some Learned men, and as unworthily sullied and defiled, by many rude and ignorant ones, who have too rashly and saucily medled with what they bad not abilities either enough to understand, or to make the best Ʋse of: It is come to pass that this Excellent Pearl of

sublime Science has appeared, not without a Rust upon it, that makes it seem, as if it were not true Gold. And truly there may happen as much of hard fortune to the richest Treasure that carrieth his Majestie's Image and Super∣scription in its face, when it falls into the hands of Clowuish Ʋsurers, who out of a sordid Love of money had rather lay up their talents under ground in mire and dirt, than put them into honest Exercise. But good Sir, I have this Confidence in your great Worth, that how∣ever your excellency may lodge in other sorts of Learning in a

degree above this; yet it is not a little Rust can hide true Gold from your understanding skill, or undervalue it in your eye. And hence this little Tripod, of Astrological dis∣course humbly begs your fa∣vourable Protection.
You have here, Sir, Three Propositions, or a sacred Stool on three feet, each of them carrying their several weight, and you may sit safely thereon. The first Legg bears this Position, That there is An Astrologie certainly written in the Heavens. And this Legg stands fast. The second bears up What Skill in some

measure may be attained, in the Understanding of the same. And the third upholds the Legitimacy of the means; and shews how by true Art, and without infernal help, it may be lawfully compassed.
If Sir, I may add Light to a Lawful and honest Science, I hope I have done my God, and my Countrey good Ser∣vice, especially in an Age where true Treasure is a scarce Commodity; And as God shall bless mine Endea∣vours, my hearty Prayers and good Wishes are, That mine Honourable Patron, may have an Honour worthy of his

Name and Fame; And that, worthy Sir, the good Blessing of God may crown with Ho∣nour and Felicity, the whole Work of your Virtuous Life, is the continual Prayer and Wish of,

