



WO unto the world because of Offences, (saith our Saviour) Mat. 18. 7. But wo unto him especially by whom the offence cometh. Wo is an harsh word, and be speaks mis∣ery, and so much the worse, out of our Saviour's lips, because his words are never uttered in vain. That I am charged, and that deep and widely, with great offence, hurts me not so far as I am innocent: But wo be to him or her who is guilty, be the cla∣mour most silent. Adultery is a foul crime, and Fornication, a dangerous sin; and both these are laid at my door. And the smart of this slander is so painful and sore upon me, that I feel it wherever I go: For many very good christians, and holy peo∣ple mourn for me I find, as if I am so indeed. And two good men my Neighbours, and my brethren of the Clergy, supposing me to be so indeed; most kindly befriended me with a Brotherly reproofe; for which as I had great reason, I was very thank∣full, and returned them my thanks in an answer as I thought meet: Unto which I had no reply. But others more barbarously have hag'd lying reports, and cherishing slanderous clamours, have increa∣sed

the noise. In the mean time suspecting that there were snakes in the grass, I became pati∣ent with dum silence, and saying to my self, that days would spake, and years would teach Wisdom. Job 32. . For tho much was said, and more was thought, much noise, and little musick, loud clamours, and small truth: Yet the testimony of my Conscience, concerning the sincerity of my Conversation towards God and man, administred joy and comfort to my Soul, in the midst of my wounded reputation, even as it were at the gates of death, 2 Cor. 1. 12. And yet after more than ten years waiting for a tryal of truth, I found my self rendered a publick shame, both among Clergy and Laity; being woun∣ded at a distance by barking Curs, who keeping out of gun-shot, wounded me in the dark, so as 'twas hard to say who hurt me: While to my face all men seem'd strangers, as if nothing ill had been once thought or spoken against me. Hence was it trumpetted both in City and Countrey to the ruin of my reputation, That I am or was a man de∣prived and cast out of the ministry, and my benefice, for misdemeanors, and that I have two wives at once; am a whoremaster, a con∣tentious man, a bankrupt, and a beggarly fel∣low, an enemy to the Goverment, and a∣bundance of such like stuff, which was almost every titile false. The first man who did me the kindness to say thus to my face, was Mr. William Cuffe, my fellow prisoner in the common Goal at North∣ampton. And verily I believe this innocent man

spake as he really thought of me, being actuatedly my own most disobedient, and rebellious sons, to believe such lyes, of me. And tho he spake with too much of keenness beyond what became a man of his function; having no proofe of what he spake, but out of bare hearsay, and common fame: Yet do I freely forgive his slanders. And I do hearti∣ly thank him, that he gave me this first occasion to vindicate my self. I have reason to believe, that the ground-work of all these slanders, was laid by a more designing head, than that poor mans shoul∣diers were able to bear. No doubt but a Diaboli∣kal malice was at bottom of all, and at first con∣trived, and started those false reports, which che∣rished by my two rebellious sons, whereof one was a profess't Roman-Catholick, who by the principles of his religion was bound to seek all occasions he could imagine, with safety to his own person to destroy me, as one accursed by a papal decree, for anobstinate Haeretick; and for that reason I having disherited him of his Birth-right as my eldest son: He became somuch the more embittered against me: Insomuch as his mother thereupon deserted my bed, joyning issue with this rebellious and schismatical son of her delight, to divorce her self most obstinately, malitiously, and absolutely from our marriage bed, after we had lived together, much comfortably and happily for above thirty years as man and wife in holy wedlock. God is my witness how unapt I always was to harbour an ill opinion of this woman my somtimes, (as I verily thought) loving wife. For

tho there was just suspition of her overmuch fa∣miliarity with other men, and of her want of love to my self; because of a purloining knack she had of private selling my goods, over and above her allowance, and by keeping up a private purse; and by a coldness of affection, in case of any differ∣ence with her intimates, or kindred, being all ways apt to take party against me. But espcially for that, when by meanes of adverse fortunes in the world, I was driven to lurk at some distance in remote places, for about three years space, she ne∣ver was the woman that gave me one visit, during that kind of restrained exile; no, tho for near ten moneths of the said time I was a close prisoner in the Fleet: And for as many moneths before that, had not so much as once seen her face; and yet she knew well where I was, and wanted for no conveniency to come at me; and tho I often im∣portuned her by letters, yet she would not regard me, but seemed as if pleased with my absence, and as if at that time she had begun to desert me utter∣ly. And yet after all these things, when the storm of my troubles was over, I came home to her and abode with her as formerly, as if she had ne∣ver given me any occasion of offence. And at length when she did utterly deny any further du∣ties to me in her marriage bed; yet still I used all possible means to reclaim her, for one whole year and more, untill I found her past all hopes of re∣conciliation: And then I concluded with the Apostle, 1. Cor. 7. 9. That seeing I could no longer contein, it was beter to marry a∣gain

than to burn, And now it is more than eleven years since she has thus deserted me, and yet now at length she chargeth me with Adul∣tery, or Fornication, or Incontinency, or with all. And yet I thank God for it, who by his grace hath preserved me, that I never had carnal know∣ledge with any man's wife, before or since I knew her, And never had a child by any woman but her self until above one year after she utterly left me. And in attestation of these thing, and in vindi∣cation of my proceedings in the whole mater, I have written this ensuing treatise, in answer to her scandalous Libel. And in vindication of the Nullity of our marriage by her desertion of me, of the lawfulness of an honest Concubinage, in a case of necessity, where lawful marriage cannot conveniently, or possibly be enjoyed. Unto which discourse, I refer my readers, as to the malitious rebellions of both my sons, who were the chief incendiaries, unto all the Evil that their said mother hath acted against me. And yet I have great reason to imagin, that the green heads of these infernally inspired villains, had yet a deeper foundation then their own unripe pales to build upon. There was among my preten∣ded intimate friends, a certain Divine of the Church of England as he pretended to be: And might a man of integrity be judged by his hat and gown, and girdle he was so cap-a-pee. Or might a man be distinguished by his graceful garb, a smooth tongue, affable discourse, and a cour∣teous presence; he could not be otherwise. But

when we approach so near a man as to find an Achi∣tophel's head, Rabshakel's lips, and a Doegs hard heart, all met in the presence of a stubborn Jew: And a church-man's habit upon the body of a secretly resolved Papist; What can a man look for but a Beast out of a bottomless pit, throwing about his firebrands, arrows and death, and saying am not I in sport? What can a man expect otherwise, but infernally contrived mis∣chiefs, which without the gracious help of God above cannot reasonably be prevented. I have re∣ceived this sting at mine heart. And these hum∣ble papers are intended as an humble Antidote against the poyson thereof: And the good God grant me his blessing therein according to my in∣tegrity. Let truth and righteousness ever flou∣rish; but let lyes and slanders of the ungodly always be detected, and come to nought. And the good Lord of his mercy justify the innocent, and let me ever escape the malitious Plots and Contrivances, of the venemous lips of Cham, Ham. And let not the innocent and godly sons of the pure church, who have kept promise, tho to their hurt, be ensnared to believe the gilded lyes of a false brother.
Amen.
