



My Lord,
WEre not your goodness Equall with your Great∣ness, I durst not presume to lay this humble of∣fering before you; But as in distress, the Poorer the object, the Nobler the Charity; so in my Circumstan∣ces, the meaner the Dedicator, the more worthy and esteem'd will be the Condescending Patronage of your Lordship. Nor ought I to doubt your Generous favours, since your Predecessors were always great Encouragers of Poetry.
I must not omit the Renowned Sr. Philip Sidney (whose Father was thrice Lord Deputy of Ireland) which was not only an Admirable Writer (besides his vast Accomplishments in other things) But so Indulgent a Patron to the Sons of the Muses, that the famous Spencer Dedicated his Works to him as the only Person Capable of Espousing 'em. But this Illustrious Worthy was at last

taken from us (tho' to the Eternall honour of the Eng∣lish in that Glorious and never to be forgotten Action in the Low-Countries, the battle of Zutphen in Gelderland.
But I go too far from my purpose;
My Lord, I could not help my presumption in beg∣ging your Protection of this Play, it being a Present to me, and an English Story so fam'd for the Reign of its Monarch, and the management of those few good Men about him, who with great difficulty preserv'd this Prince from the evill Machinations of Mortimer and his Faction, from the Potent Enemies of an Interested State; and the unnatural Connivance of a Mother (who design'd as much to usurp his Right as she really did destroy his Fathers) and the delivering their Country from the Ty∣ranny and Oppression it had been long afflicted with, and which in all probability threatned the totall overthrow of the Establish'd Liberties of the Subject. I say, these weighty Motives induc'd me to Consecrate this Piece to your Lordship, as a true bred Son of the Country, and a Person who has always valued the freedom of his Na∣tive Brethren, above the Temptations of a prejudic'd and designing Court.
If Preferment could have drawn you from your esteem to the Publick, never bait was better manag'd then that which was offer'd to decoy your Lordship: But you stood it out with the Resolution of Sr. Robert Holland, went on with the sincerity and Prudence of Sr. Tho. De∣lamore, and maintain'd it with the spirit of Lord Moun∣tacute.
The World cannot be insensible of the unalterable

esteem the Family of the Sydneys have constantly shewn both in their Endeavours and Sufferings for the benefit of the Common-Weal. And sure (if we are honest to our selves) we must thrive since those who always op∣pos'd the Enemies of our Country have with much Patience and Diligence overcome their Industrious Mis∣chiefs, and have now the care of what they've so hard tugg'd for.
We have a King who thinks his Life no longer usefull then when employed for the service of his People; We have a Parliament stedfast and generous, the Publick Employments in the hands of Men of Worth, Fortunes, and Honour: (not lyable to be brib'd from abroad) The necessary part of the Nation satisfy'd and United with a Providence that has prov'd (by its care of our Monarch, both abroad and at home) how our choice is esteem'd above.
That these blessings may not be withdrawn is surely the hearty Prayer of all the Well-Affected; and that the Country may never want a Friend like your Lord∣ship is the zealous wish of him who shall always begg the Honour of subscribing himself,

