



Renowned Gent.
I Am not so short-sighted, but that I foresee to what excepti∣ons, and censures I expose my self, both by publishing such a Discourse as this, at such a time as this; as likewise, that I shou'd so far im∣bolden my self, as to prefix your honored

Names to the Dedication. As first it may be looked upon as a very unhandsome at∣tempt (to give it no worse a word) in me to be unseasonably ripping up old sores, and out of some private animosity, to be blowing up those coals which I should cover, & kindling that fire which I should quench, at such a time, when as all men should contend for unity and concord; and strive who should be the forwardest to forget and forgive injuries, from the Command and Example of both our God and our King. As 2. it may be look∣ed upon as a very great (if not an unpar∣donable) presumption in me, to present a discourse of such a Subject as this un∣to your Honored selves, whose utmost and unwearyed care hath been (and may it still continue to be so) to compose the de∣sperate divisions, and to close up the even mortal wounds of our languishing both Church and State.
Be pleased therefore to hear my Apo∣logy, as well as my charge. For the first; I conceive it to be a duty incumbent upon every man, (and necessarily so) to vindi∣cate (by wayes lawful and just) his own

reputation, when it shall be grosly de∣famed, or notoriously slandered: other∣wise all infamous reports would be taken for truths; by our silence we confessing our own guilt, and acknowledging both the truth of the charge, and the justice of that power which hath rendred us as scandalous. This being (as I humbly conceive) rationally premised, will be I believe as easily condescended unto: and then I shall take the boldness to add, that pure Necessity enforced me to this Publi∣cation. For so it was, that some of the Commissioners, Ministers, witnesses, and others, who have eaten my bread (belke thinking, that they had not yet enough undone me) have, and still do, upon all opportunities offered, or sought, report me to the world for such a one, so scandalous, so ignorant, as altogether unfit either to return to mine own living or to be admit∣ed to any other: and that (whatever there might be wanting of power in them to inflict such a sentence on me, yet) there wanted not crime enough in me to deserve it. In short, they stand it out, in assert∣ing their own justice and godliness, and

would have the world believe, that I am altogether such as they have laboured to represent me to the world. Now the de∣sign of this Narrative, is to let the world know, that these Commissioners and Mi∣nisters, whom I shall name by and by, have been as unjust towards me, as they were incompetent in Law. And (beside, that their Commission was derived from an usurping power, and Tyrannical) that their Actings by that power were far more vile and odious, then their Or∣dinance gave them license unto.
And for the 2. That I make my Ap∣plication to your honored selves: it was not only for this, because you are the worthy Representatives of that County, where these things were transacted, and so no doubt would be most ready to ap∣pear in the behalf of any one whose trust you have undertaken, so far forth as ju∣stice and equity were on his side: But also for this reason; because I have heard that some of those who have not done me the least wrong, have in a kind of menacing manner reported it, That they would acquaint your Honorable Court

with the Depositions which were taken against me: Which should they have done, I could expect no other from them but that they should act after their old fa∣shion; and if so (considering the conditi∣ons of those Commissioners, Ministers, Clerks, Witnesses, and how they had dealt with me before) they might have present∣ed me to the world, as a person notori∣ously infamous. Had the Nobles of Jez∣reel, that were his Judges, or the sons of Belial that were the witnesses against him, been the only reporters of the story of Naboth; none would have said that Na∣both had been put to death unjustly. I have therefore presum'd to publish to the world a report of their proceedings in my case, even as they were: tracing of them from day to day, from the first to the last; and all along keeping my self so close to that Copy of the Depositions, which I received from their Clerk, as that I have not willingly left out, altered or added so much as one word unto them. Beside which (if you please to read this Narrative over, or but a few lines in my precautions to the Reader) you shall find

me charging them, both Commissioners, Ministers, and Witnesses, with such crimes which are not only odious in men as Chri∣stians; but with such, which were looked, upon as vile and odious, by the more civil sort of Heathens. And yet I have not charged them with a syllable which I am not able by proofs to make good upon them. And now let them publsh their Depositions, when, or pre∣sent them to whom they please. I wish that they may present them to your Ho∣norable Court: having a confidence, that there we shall find such Judges who are both wise and just. If they present the same which I here mention, (which were all I could get from their Clerk) you have here answers unto them. If they pre∣sent other Depositions, those will be mat∣ter of charge against none, but them∣selves.
And here I cannot but wonder, that such men as, these should presume so far as to talk of acquainting this honorable Court with their proceedings; or indeed dare to think of Parliaments but with trembling, or expect any thing from them

but punishment: since these very men (as to my business) then acted by that power, and were very zealous for that power, and were very bitter against those that did not own that power, as they would have them. (One of their chiefest Articles against me, being this, That I was disaf∣fected to the present Government) when as it was by that present power (which they did then so much adore, and endeavoured so much to establish) That our late gra∣tious King was so barbarously murdered, and his Parliament ruined. And when I said, I cannot but wonder at these men, my meaning is not only the Commission∣ers, but Ministers likewise: some whereof (if I have not been misinformed) have had it in their thoughts, to Petition your Honorable Court, that they might be con∣firmed in those Livings into which they unjustly intruded themselves; and as unjustly dispossest others of. These In∣truders having been their Judges, or else having had some other hand in eject∣ing them; and their crimes published abroad for infamous, and called by the names of Insufficiency, or Scandal;

when as the greatest, if not the only scan∣dal was, that they would not be Traitors, or ingage themselves to break their Oaths, as many of them had done. What was this, but to Petition your High Court to confirm those wrongs and grievances which you came to redress? Nay more, what was it but to beseech your Honors to own and countenance that Power which had endeavoured the utter ruin of both King and People?
But your Heroick and matchless act∣ings (for which our cheerful, although yet feeble Nation, doth honor and bless you) have I think, taken from some such their hopes, and from others their fears. Go on Renowned Patriots, go on. And here let my humble lines address them∣selves to each Member of your Honorable House: and not only so, but let me be pardoned my boldness, if I presume to knock at the door of the other most Hono∣rable House likewise. My business is the same to both, it is but short, and a Petiti∣on, but not To, but For you. May all your consultations be such, as the great God may bless, and prosper. May they be for him,

for your King, and for your Countrey; the happiness of all which are so far from being inconsistent with each other, that they thrive the better for being subordi∣nate. To your everlasting Honor, you have let the world see, That the happiness of the whole, and of every member consists in this, that every one is restored unto, and injoyes his own. And doubtless our good God meant it for a signal favour to you, not only that you were the Instruments whereby he wrought his wonders, nay even his Miracles for the deliverance of this Land; but that you should so willing∣ly, so speedily, so unanimously, even run and flie upon this imployment, (and this it is which makes you the happy instru∣ments) and with such haste bind up our wounds, that we may say, That you have removed the Iniquity of the Land in one day. And whereas it is usually seen, that those who are for desolation & ruin, make most haste; a single person in an hour overthrowing that, which many cannot repair in many dayes; it must be record∣ed to your Renown, that you, by your happy faculty in reparation, have far out∣gone

the pace of ruin: you having in a day rebuilt that stately fabrick of Eng∣lands Monarchy, which many a one for a long time have been pulling down. I shall add no more, but only this; He that with his Pillar of fire, and a Cloud, conducted Moses and the Israelites through the Sea, was ever with them, and assisted them to overcome the difficulties of the Wil∣derness. May the same merciful power, which at first took you by the hand, al∣wayes lead you on your wayes; that you may happily finish that great work which you have so successfully begun, and made so fair a progress in. This shall be the dayly Prayer of

Jul. 24. 1660.
