



SIR,
THE Price that Grego∣ry Nazianzen,Orat. 1. that fa∣mous Divine, did set upon all his Athenian earning (wherein he greatly xcelled) was no other, but only his; That he had something of Worth to esteem as nothing, in omparison of Christ: Herein imi∣ating the Example of St. Paul, ho, though he profited in the ewish Religion above many o∣ers, yet when the Son of God as Revealed in him,Gal. 1.14.16. Phil. 3.8. laid it all de as Loss and dung, for the ex∣cellency
 of the knowledge of Christ Jesus his Lord. And it was the Devout Profession which St. Au∣stin once made of himself,Confess. lib. 3. c. 4. when speaking of the great delight which he took in Cicero's Hor∣tensius (as containing a most li∣beral Exhortation to the love of Wisdom, without any byass or partiality towards Sects) he af∣firmeth, that the heat of this his Delight was by this onely Rea∣son abated, because there was not in that Book to be found the Name of Christ; without which Name, nothing (though other∣wise never so polite and elabo∣rate) could wholly possess those Affections which had been train∣ed up to a nobler study. The con∣sideration of which Sacred Af∣fections in those holy men, and the like in all such, who are prin∣cipled with the like precious Faith and Grace, (so as the Loadstone upon their Affections is (as Bucer used to say that) A∣liquid Christi) is undoubtedly
 the strongest Motive and En∣couragement, emboldning ma∣ny Persons beyond their proper Inclination, and inviting them to the Publishing of those Pa∣pers, which otherwise might have been shut up and smothered in the confused rubbish of a pri∣vate Closet. So much of Encou∣ragement is contributed unto Christian Labours, from a faith∣ful and ready acceptance of them. Who amongst men, but under a due reflection upon themselves, must needs be conscious of their insufficiency, especially in matters of such Import, for which the Apostle implies None to be suffi∣ficient?2 Cor. 2.16 & 2 Cor. 3.5. The sence whereof could not but shut a man up in silence, did not the consideration of that Christian Candor, and Love to the least Glimpse of Truth, wherewith gracious Hearts are endued on the one part; and a desire to help in the building of the spiritual Temple on the other part, bear a man out beyond his
 proper temper and inclination, especially in an Age wherein Critical Censure holds an uni∣versal judgment.
1 Tim. 3.16.Great is the Mystery of Godli∣ness; great also is that Natural Blindness that is upon the hearts of men; and those who are En∣lightned,1 Cor. 13 9 they see but in part, and know but in part: and if but in part, then there is a part they do not know. In which respect, the best may truly take up the Apolo∣gy of that good Father, Si nihil aliud profecerim, saltem Socrati∣cum illud habeo, scio quod nescio.
SIR,
The many Experiences of your Abundant Favours, and of your Family, and free Expressions of Love towards me, have not only obliged, but emboldened me to Prefix your Honoured Name be∣fore these poor Pieces of my La∣bours in God's Church. Other Ar∣gument in these Papers there is none to procure either your Ho∣nours
 View or Patronage, than this One (which that good Father could not find in all the Wri∣tings of Plato and Cicero) That they have for the Subject of them, the Discovery of the emptiness and insufficiency of all Creature Com∣forts, and Worldly Enjoyments, as to the true, satisfactory, and sa∣ving Enrichment of the Soul: and this in order to the advancement of the Kingdom, and good Things of that high and holy Person, the knowledge of whom is not only our Greatest Learning, but our Eter∣nal Life.
In this Confidence I have pre∣sumed to present these Papers to your Honour, as a Publick Te∣stimony of my most Humble Du∣ty: And that I might with most Hearty Prayers Commend you and yours to the Good of God's Chosen;Psa. 106.5. d after a Plentiful Enjoyment of the Blessings of Life here, to the full Fruition of the Inheritance of the Saints in LightCol. 1.12.
 hereafter. Now that God may be the Strength of your Heart, and your Portion for ever, is the unfeigned desire of

