



Madam,
I Confess I am so transported at the Ho∣nour
You have done this poor Play,
that I know not in what Terms to pay my
Devotion to Your Highness; I am not insen∣sible
too of my own Unworthiness, and that
it is a Presumption even in the best of this
Kind, to think to gain Admittance into the Closet

of so Great a Princess; But when I consider
that no Present, of what Value soever, can
be made suitable to One of Your Illustrious
Character, It gives me Encouragement to hope
this Trifle may not be less Acceptable to Your
Royal Goodness, than a Pitcher of Water was
to the Great Monarch of the World, from the
Hands of a Mean Soldier. 'Twere Prophaneness
in me any longer to divert with my rude Pen
Your Divine Thoughts and Precious Moments,
that are still imploy'd Above, in imploring
Blessings for the Nation, and more prophane
to sully the Chrystal Mirrour of so many In∣comparable
Virtues with the coarse Breath of
Mortal Praise.
I most humbly ask Leave then to withdraw
from a Subject so much above my Capacity
and Merit; (a Task fit only for the Angels
You converse with,) and pray my Muse may
have the Happiness to conclude, who groans
to be deliver'd of her Duty, in these Homely,
but Hearty Thanks.

Accept, Great Princess, this small Offering,
This humble Mite I to your Treasure bring,
The poor mean Present of a bended Muse,
Amidst the Heaps of all the Wealthier Iews,
A banish'd Play that tedious Years had mourn'd,
Blest with your favour, by your Smiles return'd,
Writ and design'd for this Immortal Grace,
E're my then happierEarl of Essex. Favourite took place;
But tho' the Younger first the Blessing had,
This brings no less Devotion that has stay'd:
The grateful Peasant thus before he's stor'd,
Gives his first Fruits of Plenty to his Lord.
Since this had never liv'd but for your sake,
'Tis just I give you what your self did make:
For the Great Cyrus being but a Child,
And in his Cradle destin'd to be kill'd,
Your Highness his Divine Panthea now,
Has rais'd him both to Empire and to You.
The God of Love, who in the Scene departs,
Bequeaths to You his Quiver and his Darts,
And, what is more, his Title to all Hearts.
Whilst at your Feet, the mighty Monarch lays
His conquer'd Crowns, as humbly I the Bays.
Happy was He that Presence to ingage,
That chear'd the World, and brought to Life the Stage,
Where the sad Muses, since they lost their Queen,
Ne'er till that Day did tune their Songs agen.
The ravish'd Crowds ador'd You as You rode,
Like Spring in April coming first abroad.
My humble Muse, then, that did groveling lye,
Soar'd like an Eagle through the Vaulted Sky,

Forgot the Disappointments that she had,
Rav'd with fierce Joy, and ran with Pleasure mad:
Two Labours of her Brain,Queen of Scots. this Play the third,
Through Spite and Envy were the Stage debarr'd,Lady Iane Grey.
Cast and ne'er Try'd, Condemn'd and never Heard.
Thus droop'd your Poet, saw his Laurels stain'd,
Or robb'd by Others who more favour gain'd;
But time he hopes, and Pity in your Breast,
Will bring'em both to Life, as this is blest.

