



SIR,
I Here offer into your hand, what I have presumed to inscribe with your Name.
There are diverse more dexterous and more sufficient Pens, that have dealt in this Argument or Theme before me; and, who can, reasonably, be expected to say what has been left unspoken therein, by those , Hooker and Hammond, and (in some distance of merit) by Fisher?
So that, I am obliged to make my Reader; I mean, to avert his Censure, or attract his benevolence, or both;
 which I think and hope to do, by proposition, First, of the huge importunity of the Adversarie, manifesting it self but too visibly and rifely, now that Liturgie may assume and cherish hopes of a resurrection in point of estimation and use; and, then, by the consideration that inclined that holy Antient to avow, Utile est de iisdem quae∣stionibus plu∣res â pluribus fieri libros. diverso stylo; non diversâ fide, S. Aug. That it was profitable, that many should write many Books on the same De∣bates or Subjects, with diverse style, provided the faith were not diverse.
For the making it wear your Name, that, I hold a hope, will be soon assoiled, (if it should have any the least eye of unmeet or unhandsome (for I cannot force my self to say, of faulty) in it; as by saying that, if my strengths of mind or Esprit were equal to my wishes, (which can skill to flie high, and make prospect on great Eminences;) the Issues thereof should know (at this turn) no other Dedica∣tion; so by professing, that if, as Priest of the English Reformed Church, I can do any thing that speaks (or but lisps) Scholar, 'tis a Debt you may lay challenge (were it worth it) unto. For, I own my self greatly obliged to you for a thousand favours enjoyed from your hands.
The Paper I have answered, in this Tract, is of some reputation in our English World, as it should seem by the words of an eagre Presbyterian G. F's. Dr Gauden's Li∣turgical Consi∣derations con∣sidered, Sect. 4. p. 22. and Antiliturgist. Mr Powel, saith he, with whom though I agree not in all things, hath observed sixty nine offensive things in that Liturgie, you may please to consider them.
Now, as my Cause is perfectly justifiable, and I am most assured in my heart and conscience, that it cannot suffer prejudice, but in the hand or menagery of a weak Ad∣vocate or unsufficient Patrone; so, that it has been much wrong'd, or very disadvantageously treated by me, I may, (I hope, with due modesty) say (exaudiat bona hora!)
 I am not very conscious to my self, (though privy enough to manifold defects, otherwise.)
That you are a Sonne of the Churh of England, and an honourer of the Liturgie and Government thereof, I know; and can tell my self this also, that malevolent men and Schismaticks afford you the lesse of their favours (due upon the score of your great merits,) even Therefore; even because you follow the thing that good is.
But, Sir, in the right stating of accounts, it is your glory to be unfavour'd by them, on so noble a stock. Being inter∣preted, it speaks (what is truly glorious,) that you are a Reformed English-man, and seek not for new and exotick Modes of Religion, (as Gallants, for Modable Clothes,) from other Countries, whether France, or Scotland.
'Tis admirable to see, how passion, and interest blinds and perverts! a matter exemplified in the Party I oppose, who still continue and poursue their Schisme, though so oft overborn and non-plust in argument, and though they ne∣ver rise to contend, but they receive the foyle; though the admirable Paire, mentioned above, remain altogether un∣answered by them: though the Cause of Episcopacy has been clearly carried against them (not to mention, here, others) by the excellent Papers of the late King, in the Isle of Wight: and, lastly, though their Covenant was so puissantly everted by the invincible Oxford-Reasons against it. Which being the case of such as pretend to more light of head, and sincerity of heart, it disedges my won∣der quite, that the Papists (that I mention not other igno∣bler Sects of men,) maintaining so untenable a Cause,) should yet persist, resolutely, in it.
I have, here, nothing left in remainder, but to pray (the tenour of my Prayers for you duly as the day comes,) that God would requite you all your favours, his benigne
 and gracious Providence hath extended to me by you, that he would conserve you long in health, give you a crude old∣age, blesse your hopeful Family. The hearty Prayer of,
SIR,

June XXIV. MDCLXI.
