



RIght Honourable and worthy Patriots, we having enjoyed
much good and quietnesse by Gods goodnesse, through the
care valour and prudence, God having by you brought us
in some measure out of that thraldome and bondage we
were in under the late Prelates that we may not be
carried back again to more then Egyptian thraldome or
Reheboams Reformation, and that you may not be a
Moses onely, to go unto mount Nebo and there see the
good land; But as our Josuah to carry us into the good Land of a thorough Re∣formation,
the which to do that God would give you self-denying spirits, and to be
a means to the Parliament to chuse out according to Jethrows advice, and provide
out of all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousnesse,
and place such over them &c. Exod. 18. 21. Such as would make it their work
as Moses did from morning till night, vers. 13. That so poor people might not be
totally ruined in Courts of Injustice or Committees, espetially for that Popish
claim of Tythes &c. And to this end that none without a special occasion might
have plurality of places of profit, in Church or Common-wealth as too many
have, whereby the work is left undone They like Locusts going over the
bredth of the Earth Exod. 10. 14. Revel. 9. 3. Or false Teachers that
seek the fleece not the fleck, the love of money being the root of all evil; But that

he that hath an Office might weight on his Office (not Offices) one place being
sufficient to take up the whole man of the ablest self-denying honest man in the
nation, and that a sufficient known salary may be allowed to each party for their
service, and not to live upon bribes called fees, or one to have several places and
500, 600, 1000, 1500. per annum, for that which others that have been as
faithfull and are as able as themselves for that service, would perform for
100. per annum, against whom there can be no just exception, whereby it hath
been proffered to some in Authority by 100. mens service to save the nation
100000 per annum, which might be imployed towards the relief of the poor or the
payment of the Souldiers & not some that had mean estates at the begining of these
troubles, yet now glut themselves with ungodly gains and the ruins of the nation,
when others are ready to starve, as too many have done, for want of means by ho∣nest
imployment; all which is practised by reason of some time-servers that sowe
pillowe under their Arm-holes, as Isa. 38. 12. and Ezekiel 13. 18. That by
enjoying their great Benefices dare not with the Prophets say thou art the man, or
with the watchman of the Lord tell the house of Israel their sinns and transgres∣gressions,
yet they seek me dayly &c. saith the Lord, Isa. 58. 1. Have not they
discovered themselves to be as Baals Prophets, 1 Kings 18. and 20.
that seduced Ahab, or those unclean spirits like froggs that came out of the
mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the
false Prophet, being the spirits of devils, working Miracles which go forth unto
the Kings of the Earth and of the whole world, to gather them to the battel of that
great day of God Almighty, &c. Revel. 16. 13, 14. That therefore in per∣formance
of your Protestations Vows and Covenants, ye, would be instruments
of easing this bleeding nation of this Popish burthensome practice of Tythes, who
as the rakers thereof, have been the cause of 12. years war, bloudshed and ruin
already, so had rather have an utter desolation then loose their ungodly gains:
that by your doing this, the loyns of the poor may blesse God for you, and your Re∣presenter
with other free people of the nation may injoy this one thing, as a part of
the first ripe Grapes of our Canaan, which will be as acceptable as the Olive-branch
was in the mouth of Noahs Dove, and is the desire of your humble
supplicant

