



Right Worshipful,
THeology is that heavenly and sure Wisdom, revealed by the Holy Ghost in the Scrip∣ture, touching thé know∣ledg of God, and of our selves, where∣by we are taught the way to Eternal Life. The design of this Treatise, is concerning God, to shew,

1. That He is.
2. What He is.

1. That God is: First, and most ge∣nerally, God makes himself known by his Works, whereby his glory appeareth to the whole world. So the very Philoso∣phers knew the Majesty of the InvisibleRom 1 20. God, viz. by the Creation; in which
 are two things: 1. the Greatness of the work: for by what Engines could the Creatures raise so great a building? 2. The artificial sitting of things together, sheweth it was some great Artificer that made it: the Majesty of God appeareth in the ordering and disposing of the whole Universe, which in Greek is called , and in Latin, Mundus, for the orderly disposing the parts, and the harmony thereof. It is reported, that Archimedes made a Sphere, wherein all the world was fram'd, and the frame thereof described, with the orderly course of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, the bbing and flowing of the Sea, &c. Now as no man that saw this, would doubt but that it was an Artificer that made it, much less reason is there to call into question, whether the substantial world (whereof this was a shadow) was not made by a wise God of heaven and earth.
2. This may be further confirmed from Providence; , providenti, the word in Greek and Latin, betokens God's care concerning the whole world▪ and eve∣ry part of it: The word in the Hebrew com∣eth
 from Hsgiah, which signifieth, subti∣litèr videre, vel despicere, an accurate sight, or looking down upon things.
Now when we see the effects of Provi∣dence, the former and latter rain, summer and winter and all the creatures provided for, the course of things maintained, and every thing done in due order▪ this argues there is a God, whose governing hand holds all together. God is the first univer∣sal Cause, and all creatures depend upon him as the secondary causes, who cannot work without help from the first and uni∣versal cause.
3. Because in the subordination of ef∣ficient causes, there cannot be processus in infinitum.
4. The works of unreasonable creatures, being many of them done according to reason, shew that they are guided by some higher intelligence; even as the Arrow that knows not the mark, is directed to it by the Archer. Hence it is said, that O∣pus Naturae est opus intelligentiae.
5. Because the sense of the Deity is im∣printed upon every mans's heart and con∣science,
 which importeth an universal Cause by which it was imprinted. And al∣beitCicer. d. Natur. De∣r. lib. 1. Lactant. instit. Ca. 10 lb. 3 many things were feigned in the Re∣ligion of the Heathen, yet this could not; for this is the ground and root of all other: for unless it be setled in men's minds, that there is a God, in vain are men exhorted to this or that way of worshipping: for, from this perswasion, that there is a God, Emergit omnis ad religionem propen∣sio; and unless this be certainly belie∣ved, all the mysteries of our Religion and Salvation will be no better, nor more cer∣tain, than old wives fables; for hereupon they all depend.
Now as this Treatise will evidently shew you, That God is; so likewise, What God is. Indeed God cannot be defined, because of his Immensity; for, as Moses, we see his back-parts onely: but he may be described.
God is one in Essence, three in Persons, Jehovah Eohim▪ or a Spirit having be∣ing of himself, full of all perfection, un∣capable of all defects.
1. He is one God, but three Persens;
 which is said onely of him, and of no crea∣ture; therefore 'tis well to be put in, as a note to distinguish him from us.
But here it may be objected, That if the Father be God, and the Son (begotten of the Father) be God also, then there are more Gods than one? I answer, that God the Father begetteth God the Son, yet they are not two Gods, but one God; the meaning is, God the Father did not beget another God, but another Person. In the Three Persons, there is neither prius, nor posterius, being all Coeternal, by nature and time; yet in regard of order, the Father is first named, the Son in the se∣cond, and the Holy Ghost in the last place; and in this regard, sometime the first work, viz. the work of Creation, is attributed to the Father, the work of Redemption to the Sonne, the work of Sanctification to the Holy Ghost, though they be all common and communicable: Nor doth this distinction any whit hinder the simple and indivisible unity, for the Son is one with the Father, because he consisteth of the same Spirit, and the
 Spirit is not diverse from the Father andPropter u∣ tatem naturae to∣tus Pater in Flo & Spiit, to∣tus Spiritus S. in Pa∣e & F¦lio. Aug de e. Fatemur qod Pa¦ter est in Filio, & Filus in Patre, & Dus in Deo non pr dupl∣cem con∣vniet i∣m gene∣rm con∣jncto∣m▪ nc pr insiam  sed per naturae unitam simil udinem. Hlar It was a  si  of Lombard, concerning some curious questions about t Trinty, Ego nesco, non requi, sed consolabor e taen,  nscint, Angeli non udve, Propheta n  Apostols non interrog,  ipse non  csst  Lmb. . the Son, because he is the Spirit of the Father and the Son, the whole nature is in every person: John 14. 30. I am in the Father, and the Father in me, saith Christ. St. Augustine saith, that by these terms, which note a distinction, is signified a difference in relation, not in substance, wherein they are one; and there∣fore he saith elsewhere, Filius ad se Deus vocatur, ad Patrem Filius; the Son in respect of himself, is called God; in re∣spect of the Father, he is called Son; in respect of substance, they have the same beginning, in relation the Father is the beginning of the Son. I conclude this, with that saying of the forementioned Father, Non possum unum cogitare, quin trium fulgore circumfundor, nec tria possum discernere, quin subito ad unum referor. I cannot think upon the
 Unity, but I am every way confounded with the brightness of the Trinity; nei∣ther can I discern the Trinity, but I am suddenly brought back to the Unity.
Now this one God is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and truth, John 4. 24. He hath being from himself, to distinguish him from all other crea∣tures, who have a communicative being; he is full of all perfections, whereas eve∣ry creature hath some perfection in him which another hath not, he hath simply all which may be had: Moreover, the best perfections of the creatures, do fall short of his perfections, both because they are infinite, and uncapable of any defects; the creatures be they never so exact, yet are they capable of defects; as a glass in a mans hand, though it be not broken, yet it is weak, and subject to be broken.
Now God (as to his Nature) he is simple, there is no composition of parts in him, neither doth he come into compositi∣on with his creatures: He is infinite in duration, which is his Eternity; infinite in Essence, which is his Immensity; his
 presence is infinite, filling all places in heaven and earth. God who is every∣where, and in every thing, doth wholly hear, wholly see, wholly effect every thing, saith Hilary; he is infinite in knowledge, understanding all things by his own Es∣sence; he is his own knowledge, under∣standing all things together, uno ictu & actu, and not successively, as the Schools speak; he is sempèr idem, alwayes the same, his Essence and Nature is unchange∣able; other Essences or Substances, have accidents by which they are changed more or less, but no such thing can befall God, therefore he only is immutable; he is spiritual and incorporal, and therefore cannot be seen with mortal eyes; he is Al∣mighty, able to do whatsoever he pleaseth, and his power both in its own nature, and the objects on which it worketh, is infinite and unmeasurable. I shall not insist upon these things, because the ensuing Treatise will furnish you with particular apt Dis∣courses upon God and his Attributes.
Now Right Worshipful, and much Ho∣noured Sir, I humbly dedicate this first
 Part of the description of God and his Attributes, unto your Self, and worthy Lady: To you, Sir, above all others, I commend the Patronage of this Treatise, as being now Patron of that place where the Worthy and Learned Authour (pre∣sented thereunto by your Renowned Grand∣father, Sir Richard Wilbraham) exer∣cised his Ministry with good success for divers years, to whom also your Worship was (as I have been informed) a good Me∣caenas. The scope of this Treatise will lead you to the knowledge of God, the unity of the Divine Essence, and the Trinity of the Persons subsisting in the Divine Es∣sence. We cannot worship God aright, without some knowledge of this glorious and incomprehensible Truth, because the Trinity of Persons, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, are both the object of our worship, and of our faith. This is life eternal, to know thee to be the only true God, and him whom thou hast sent, Christ Jesus, Joh. 17. 3. We are baptized in the Name of the Three Persons, which layeth an indispensable ne∣cessity
 upon all Christians to know them in some measure.
There is a four-fold knowledge, or ra∣ther four Properties or Qualifications of the knowledge of God.
1. A meer notional, or speculative knowledge of God, a knowledge which is only in the brain, and reacheth not the heart; like the Moon, which giveth light, but no warrnth to inferiour bodies. A man may (as St. Paul speaks) have all this knowledge, and yet his knowledge may profit him nothing; this makes men great Scholars, but not good Christians, and some great Scholars are but Dunces in Christianity. The deepest Philosopher that ever was (saving the reverence of the Schools) is but a Sot to the simplest Chri∣stian that hath the saving knowledge of God in Christ; yet we are all to labour af∣ter this speculative knowledge, for we can∣not come to saving knowledge without a natural apprehension: Speculation is pre∣vious to practice, but meer Speculation will not serve our turn.
2. There is a practical and obdienti∣al
 knowledg which is required of us: pra∣ctice is the end of knowledg: hereby we know that we know him, if we keep his Commandments, 1 John 2. 3. And indeed knowledg without obedience may be termed ignorance of God, and Christ saith, that such knowledg will greaten a mans torments in hell; he that knoweth, and doth not his masters will, shall be beaten with many stripes, Luk. 12. 47. A practical knowing Christian is a more knowing man, than he that hath all know∣ledg without practice; some Divines give this definition of Divinity. Theologia est ars benè vivendi; Divinity is the art of holy living: he is a Divine Preacher that lives holily, he is a Divine Christian that lives obediently.
3. An affectionate knowledg of God, and the things of God is requisite to a Christian: if the star of knowledg doth not guid our affections to Christ, to love him, to desire him, this knowledg is nothing: Christian knowledg is love and delight in the person known to us, 'tis as the husband knows his wife, the father his child, and
 one friend knoweth another, loving and delighting in them. 'Tis a common rule: Verba sensus & intellectûs in scripturâ sempèr implicant affectum. Words of understanding and sense imply affection. God himself is said to know us and our ways, when he loveth and approveth of our persons and ways, and he is said not to know us, when he loves us not: in like manner we then know God, when we love him, and we cannot but love him, if we truly know him.
4. An experimental knowledg of God, a scientia gustus, as the School-men term it, a knowledg of taste, sapida scientia, a savoury knowledg of spiritual truths. O tast and see that the Lord is good. Ps. 34. 8. The more you taste of Gods goodness in your hearts, the more will you love him, and delight in him, your souls will then relish nothing but God, the sweetness of all creatures, pleasures, profits, will be unsa∣voury to your souls; of all Christians those are the most knowing, that have tasted of sins bitterness, and Christs sweetness: he that hath once tasted of hony, doth more
 perfectly know the sweetness of it, than he that hath read a thousand books of the sweetnesse of it, but never tasted it. That Christian that hath tasted how gracious God in Christ is to him, and how bitter sin is, knows both better, than that Minister that hath onely read a thousand books or that Christian that hath onely heard a thousand Sermons of both. When we preach of the sweetness of God and his or∣dinances to men that never had any expe∣rimental knowledg, we do but commend dainty meats to dead pallates, and com∣mend the Sunne to men that are blind; knowledg in the soul is both the eye, and light, if the light that is in a man be darkness, how great is that darkness? Why do the Generality of the world take phancy for faith, presumption and conceit for faith? is it not because they want this light of saving knowledg to discern the right hand of faith, from the left hand of phancy and presumption? now craving pardon for this my boldness, my prayer for you to God shall be that you may not be barren, nor unfruitful in the knowledg
 of God; and now when the World is blew with envy, green in malice, and wither∣ed in goodness, and when many great per∣sons provide delitiously for their bellies, gloriously for their backs, and poorly for their souls; you may always be doing good, laying up in store for yo selves a good foundation against the time to come, and laying hold of eternal life, that when o∣thers shall be found among the foolish vir∣gins, with their sic dicentes, so saying, you may be found among the good ser∣vants with your sic facientes, so doing. I humbly take my leave and rest.
Much honoured Sir and Madam,

May. 1. 1665.
