



Mr. Bentley,
I Know not how the Town will sure me for this Epistle of mine, tho' I have herein follow in the steps of no mean Author, who before me, made you a Present of his best Comedy, with this Encomium, that you were a very good Patron. You never were closesisted to a good Poet, and your Generosity was always suitable to the Merit of the Author and his Book, and he is freely welcome to your Table too; if so, you are a Mecaenas, and such I will stile you. But now give me leave to speak a word for my self. This Product of mine, having been foster'd, and kindly re∣ceiv'd by the Actors, almost to perfectness, was by a Capricio and hard∣heartedness of some of the Civil Powers of the Stage, like an Infe∣ctious Offspring, carry'd back to the Place of its Birth, and now, through the Incapacity of the Parent, is laid at your Door.
As to the Reflections about t, and as being prohibited the Acting, you are an authentick Witness, and can clear me as to that Point; You know it was written Ten Tears since, just as it is now, without one little of Alteration, and therefore I cou'd have no other design in making choice of this Subject, but its being recommended to me by Friends, for the best Story that ever was put into a Play. But let me tell the Person that has done me that kinkness: and that wou'd fain have it a Parallel, that it is no more such, than I am to Alexander the Great; 'tis true, Alexander went on two feet and so do I. It is suppos'd the Lady Jane wore Petticotes, and can any one be so foolish as to think her Majesty will for that Reason put them off?

But say they, it has a scurvy Title. Suppose I had call'd it the Innocent Adultress, and I hope I might so without calling any Lady's History in question.
This Play then, having been deny'd the common Iustice of a Male∣factor, I mean to speak for it self upon the Stage; in Modesty I may be allow'd to say somewhat in its behalf: It is no whit inferiour to what I have done before of this kind, nay the Characters are much more perfect, and, without vanity, or offence to my quondam Brothers of the Chime (for now I own my self not one) I make bold to say that when ever this unfortunate Lady shall have this Vail, that she is Condemn'd to, taken off, and be permitted to shew her Features, and Misfortunes in the Theatre; I doubt not but she will draw Tears from the fair Sexes Eyes.
In it I have follow'd nicely the Truth, and it cannot be judg'd, in that Age, when it was written, that I have interwoven any thing with an intent to pattern with the Times, unless I had been a Conjurer; and that I am sure those that are Enemies to this Play, will not allow me to be. I will not hold you too long, Mr. Bentley, for I know you to be a Man of Business, but will only conclude with a Character which an Author has given of the Lady Jane (hoping it will make you have the better Opinion of your Bargain) if I can repeat it rightly, if not, you will pardon me. She had, (says he) the Beauty of Youth, the Solidity of Old Age, the Learning of a Clerk, the Life of a Saint, and the Death of a Malefactor. And so, Mr. Bentley, I am,

Charles Street, Octob, 5th, 1693.
