



YOu were pleased to Order this Sermon to the Press; but I hope it hath already had one Impression upon your hearts, and I intended it for no other, and is the most noble and excellent kind of Printing; when the heart comes to be
  as a Book ingraven with the in∣gravings of God, & the Epistle of Jesus Christ, written not with ink, but the Spirit of the living God. What I before2. Cor. 3. 3. presented to your ears, I now again present to your eyes () and if by either or both it shall reach your hearts, I have my reward; You should have had it sooner, but some troubles in my spirit, and some affairs in my hand have retarded it: But now you have it, and neither in matter or form much different from what it was. And the blessing of heaven attend it, that it may either make or renew some heavenly im∣pressions upon your souls; for though it is true what the Apostle saith, Rom. 10. That Faith cometh by hearing, yet it is also as true what the Church saith, Lam. 3. 51. Mine eye affecteth my heart. Then are the senses of the body in their highest and properest operations, when they let in
 upon the soul those Idea's which will indeed raise, refresh, and nourish it.
My great plot was, in this Discourse, (pardon this plot) to make you all Cap∣tives; not to my self, but to TRƲTH and JESƲS CHRIST; and I knew not how to do it by a more probable stratagem, then to set up this Jesus in his WONDERFƲLNES before you, as conceiving, that to men truly ratio∣nal he cannot be presented under a more powerful and perswasive Notion. And so I thought it might be very sutable to men in Power and place; for the heart that is most effectually caught and captivated of Jesus Christ, is best accomplisht for the sincere and vigorous prosecution of publique affairs: Never doth the soul move aright in any service, if it be not originally drawn of him, and ultimately carried forth unto him. And O that your choisest af∣fections
 might centre in his person, and your chiefest endeavours in his glory: We read in Rev. 19. 1. of a great voyce of much people in heaven, saying, Allelujah, salvation and glory, and honour, and power to the Lord our God. What salvation, what glory, what honour, and power the Lord hath given to his people in these dayes, he expects they should give them back again to him; that as they are his by their coming from him, so they may again be made his by returning them back unto him; and then shall we approve our selves to be of those people in heaven. A∣pelles when he had drawn some curious piece, would set it in publique view, and place himself behind the curtain to hearken what would be said of it by the people pas∣sing by: Jesus Christ hath set before us in his great works among us a fair draught, a lively representation of his glorious
 power, wisdom, justice, and mercy; and doth he not now stand still, and listen what the hearts, tongues, and actings of his peo∣ple speak concerning it?
Our great transactions were lately in our VVars abroad; they are now likely to be in our Counsels at home: Much of God hath been seen in those; and O that nothing of self might be seen in these: I hope at last God will direct us to find out one Com∣mon Centre of Truth and Righteous∣ness wherein all honest hearts will meet.
The Lord give your Lordship, and all others that sit with you at the Stern of this City, wisdom to sayl between the two rocks of ANARCHY and TYRANNY, and then I hope you will arrive safe at the much longed for Haven of common righteousness, and peace. It is not for me to prescribe any thing in this nature. Only I shall pray, that the two Staves of BANDS and BEAUTY, may
 alwayes stand at the gates of this City, by our sweet enjoyment of Jesus Christ in his Ordinances, and of one another in unity and love.
Our first degree of happiness would be, not to differ; but the second is, to mannage our differences with humility and wisdom, and to take them up before they prove like a breach of the Sea.
We ought to mark those that cause di∣visions, much more those that delight in them. I shall no longer detain you from the perusal of those poor and broken meditations that follow; though they came from me in weakness, yet I hope, they will rise up in you with power, which will be a CROWN of Glory, and rejoycing to him, who desires to his utmost to be serviceable to the great Interest of your spiritual Estate,

