



My Honour'd Lord,
I Here present to your Lordship the true Effigies of Dr. Heylyn (drawn to the Life, so far as my Pen is

able, to preserve the memory of his person among the num∣ber of worthy men, for his extraordinary merits, I hope, may be truly said to this Church and Nation, wherein he labour'd while he liv'd to promote the publick Good of both; that his Name will never be forgotten, whil'st his Books are extant, if we may believe the words of St. Jerome in this particu∣lar. Vir sapiens (saithS. Jer. Com. in cap. 2. Esdr. he) diebus & noctibus la∣borat

& componit Libros ut memoriam suam poste∣ris derelinquat; so the Works which this painful Presbyter has publish'd to the World, the Catalogue of them be∣ing not ordinary with the Writers of our Age, and the matter in them upon several Subjects not vulgarly handled, I doubt not, will perpetuate his Memory to future Posterity; especially among all good men, who are sincere Lovers of Monarchy and Episcopacy.

I am sure for his Religion and Loyalty, for the Cause of the King and Church of England, no man could de∣clare himself a more faithful and zealous example, by con∣stant writing and sufferings. And for his conversation, not only as a good Christian, but as becomes a Clergy man, it was so unblameable, that his most inveterate enemies could never throw dirt in his Face for the least Immoralities.
Therefore for his sake,

whom your Lordship hath seen in his house at Abingdon, where he made you heartily welcome in those dayes, when I had the honour (though so unworthy a person) to dictate the first Principles of Acade∣mical Learning to you, which God has since well blessed, that you are one (and I wish may long continue so) of the Cheif Prelates in this Realm: I doubt not, I say for this Reverend and Lear∣ned Mans sake more than mine,

your Lordship will be pleased to take into your Patronage the Narrative of his Life, which I have faithfully com∣posed and retriv'd from the Ig∣norances and unpardonable de∣ficiencies of a late Writer. I am the more nearly concern'd for my Relation sake, because Dr. Heylyn was not an ordi∣nary common Clergy-man, though he acted in a lower Sphere than the highest Dig∣nitaries in our Church; its sufficiently known he was

singularly well acquainted a∣bove many others, with the principal motions and grand Importances in his time both of Church and State, as any man may perceive, who will take the pains to peruse his Writings. And that he had not only a speculative Science in the Civil and Ecclesiastical Polity of this Nation, but was oftentimes employed an Agent by the late King and Arch-Bishop, (the two blessed Martyrs of

this Land) in several mat∣ters committed to his parti∣cular Charge; for which he incurr'd the odium of the Mobile and especially of those Factious People, then call'd Puritans, but now Fana∣ticks; a Name though seems new and strange to them, wasInstit. lib. 1. cap. 9. of old, first given by Calvin himself to those who deser∣ting his, and the Lutheran way of Reformation, out of an aversion to Popery fell upon a contrary extreme. Their

hair-brain'd zeal without understanding, and accompa∣nied with invincible obstina∣cy in their Enthusiastical Dotages, if Power was an∣swerable to their Wills, would bring a second desola∣tion upon our Church, and confusion in the Kingdom. Both which God and his good Angels evermore protect, that we may enjoy the inestimable comforts of Peace and Go∣vernment, our true Religi∣on establish'd by Law and

Scripture, our sacred Ministry second to none for Learning and good Life generally, and the ancient Order of Episco∣pacy deriv'd from the pure Fountain of Apostolical Times, heartily prayeth
Your Lordships most faithful Servant
JOHN BARNARD.
