



MY LORD,
WHilst others, who are more immediately under Your Episcopal Government, do equally approve and commend Your Generous Disposition, and indefatigable Industry upon all Accounts, to advance the Honour of the most Excellent Church of ENGLAND; I cannot at this unhappy distance be silent, but think my self obliged to mention that great Esteem which Your Lordship entertains for the Memory of many Learned Prelates, who have presided over that Holy See, which Your Lordship at present so deservedly fills: And I am very sensible what an honourable regard Your Lordship in particu∣lar has for Bishop Barlow's Memory, which suf∣fer'd extreamly from those Sir P. P. S. W. two Relick-mon∣gers, who printed a Genuine Remains, &c. Spurious Book under his

Lordship's Commanding Name and Character: And whereas neither Religion or Gratitude were of any force to restrain their Endeavours, from blasting their Great Benefactor's Reputation af∣ter his Death, by their publishing of many small Tracts; it was thought necessary for Bi∣shop Barlow's Legatees (to whose Care his Lord∣ship had committed all his own Original MSS.) to undeceive the World, and put a stop to mer∣cenary proceedings, by exposing the Defects of those Papers which were surreptitiously print∣ed: And, I hope, those Reflections, which were drawn up, and publish'd in the Year 1694. by my Brother Chaplain (the late Ingenious Mr. Henry Brougham) and My-self, have been so far serviceable, as to do justice to our Pious Patron's Memory, and to vindicate Our selves from all Suspicion of being any way concern'd in so base an Action, as that of Selling to be Printed many private Papers, with the specious Title of the Genuine Remains of that Learned Prelate Dr. Thomas Barlow, &c.
My late Lord commanded, that particular care should be taken of all his Original MSS. And that I may with greater ease discharge my Trust, I have lately reposited all Bishop Bar∣low's Original Writings, in the Archives of

Queens College Library in Oxon, two MSS. on∣ly excepted; one treating of Bishop Grosthead's Life and Works, which I left in Your Lordship's Library at Buckden, in its way hereafter to the Library at Lincoln, where the Ashes of that Memorable Prelate are Intomb'd: The other MS. relating to the Choice of Books in the Stu∣dy of Divinity, I here humbly present to Your Lordship's Patronage; which Your Lordship has already been pleas'd in a great measure to grant, by approving of my Design, and giving me good Hopes of Your Lordship's recommending These Directions to the Clergy of Your Exten∣sive Diocese, that they may be acquainted with the smallest part of that Learned Bishop's Stu∣dy, whose Communicative Presence they were not so happy to enjoy, by his Visiting of them in such a Regular, and Episcopal manner, as Your Lordship has lately done in Your Pri∣mary Visitation of Your Diocese. That part of his Sacred Office in our Church, Bishop Bar∣low often complain'd he was not able to dis∣charge as he ought: And when he once attem∣pted to visit his Diocese in Person (which he often did by Legal Deputies) by Confirming great numbers of People, at St. Ives, Huntington, Buckden, and St. Neots. Four several

Towns in Hunting tonshire, he was necessitated to tell some that then waited on him, That his great 68 when Consecrated, and 85 at his Death. Age, and Infirmities wou'd not permit him to go through The Five Counties and in half. several Counties of his Diocese: But to express his Willingness, and Readiness to Confirm, such as wanted Confirma∣tion, his Lordship publish'd an Advertisement at the end of his Articles of Inquiry; upon which many Persons of good Quality came to Buck∣den, and receiv'd Confirmation from him in the Chapel of his Palace.
How diligent he was constantly to perform all other Duties of his Episcopal Function, none are ignorant, who at any convenient time wait∣ed on his Lordship about Matters Ecclesiastical.
And as his Lordship's repeated wishes were, that the Diocese of Lincoln, might be bless'd here∣after more duly with the Solemn Rite of Confir∣mation; so it was my Duty to attend, whilst Your Lordship perform'd the Sacred Office, for many Days together, in Your Cathedral Church at Lincoln, and elsewhere, within some Peculiars belonging to that Magnificent Church; particularly at Banbury, where near a thou∣sand Persons receiv'd Confirmation the 25th and

26th of September last, some 80 Years of Age, and scarce any under 12, for which Blessing that Ancient Corporation owns it self for ever oblig'd to Your Lordship.
May Your Lordship's Exemplary Life, and Doctrine, adorn the Faith and Practice of that Above 1300 Clergy in Lincoln Diocese. Numerous and Learned Body of Men com∣mitted to Your Pastoral Care, is the earnest of his Prayer, who is,
MY LORD,

Middleton Stony, in the Diocese of Oxon, Nov. 24. 1697.
