



THE Great Lesson that the Lord hath been teaching man in all Ages (which, alas, he hath yet but a little learned) is, That he is nothing without God. Da∣vid sought to teach his Son So∣lomon this, in that Psalm that he composed on purpose for him, Except the Lord build the House, they labour in vain that build it: Except the Lord keep the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain. Salomon he knew was to succeed him in his Throne, and to have af∣fairs of a Publique and weighty Import in his hands, and therefore would have him well digest this first and best Rule in Christian Policy, That the creature acts in all things in vain, wherein it acts without God.

 No rule is more needful for Magistrates to learn, and which when once well learned, and well practi∣sed, will of all other things (if the world could but once believe it) most avail to the prosperity and success of their Affairs.
When God called Gideon forth to a Publique Work, he first tells him he would be with him; and then adds, Go forth in This thy might.
If the Creature goes forth in any might but this, it is a poor weak thing.
It is Recorded in Sacred Story, that the Israe∣lites followed Saul trembling, when he went to Battel against the Philistims.
They thought they should be strong, and victori∣ous when they had gotten a King, and no sooner had they him, but they follow him trembling. Such will all creature strength be to us, it cannot deliver us from Fear, and Falling; or be a Rock to the heart of Man.
Your deep sense of this (Right Honourable) was that which I suppose moved you to set apart a day for a more solemn seeking Aid and Counsel from God; and wherein you was pleased to call for my poor Service in that days work, together with two others far more able. That we might do for you, (according to what Jonathan did to David when he was in streights, in the Wilderness of Ziph) strength∣en your hands in God.
You were then as in a Wilderness, and you did not clearly see your way; but have your hands been since more strengthned in God?
You was pleased to command (for so is your Desire
 to me) that I should speak somthing from the Lord to you; and what I spake, as it was calculated for your Meridian, so I intended it for no wider a Sphaere then the Walls of your own House: But seeing you are pleased to call for it to walk abroad, I have obeyed you, though not without some reluctance.
The Work you met upon was Serious, and the Day Solemn; so that I durst not but preach plainly, as those will find that read.
Only I must acquaint you, that the latter end of the Sermon I preached not, because I was prevented by the time, chusing rather to be abrupt then te∣dious.
Which indeed was a further Motive to me to yeild it to the Press; and that I might present that to your Eyes, which I could not then present to your Ear.
And here and there I have added somthing above what I spake, as being then compelled to shorten, where I could with least loss.
So that this I can say, I have presented you with a fuller expression of what was in my thoughts and papers in the Sermon as Printed, then the Sermon as Preached.
VVhat-ever it is, though it shews forth much of my weakness, yet I assure you it shews forth my hearty willingness to serve Christ, and to serve you in a sub∣ordination unto him.
One generation passeth, to make way for another; and so men serving their generations, have past away that others might come in, Moses was taken off, that Joshua might come in, and David to make way for
 Salomon; And so other Powers, and Parliaments have past away to make room for you. And now ye are upon the Stage, and therefore endeavour to Act No∣bly, to Act Gallantly, as standing in the view, not of men only, but of God, and that when you go off you may go off with the Applause, I will not say of men, but of God himself.
There is a Providence that orders in what Gene∣ration every man shall be brought forth; and there∣fore every man should be enquiring, why was I brought forth in this generation, and not another? And what is the work of this Generation wherein the Lord ex∣pects that I should come forth, and serve him? And it is Satans design and policy to amuse men about other work that concerns them not, that so he might divert them from that which is their proper work.
And shall I be bold here, (Honoured Gentlemen) to put you in mind of that, which I hear hath been some time already under your consideration; and that is to do something toward the payment of the debts that are yet behind upon the Publique faith, especially to the poorer sort: Many poor honest people live yet in hope that that Faith will not fail.
I know the wants and expences of the Nation are great, yet Mercy and Justice never to this day did any wrong to a State.
The condition also of poor Prisoners, that would pay if they could, as I was solicited to present it before you, so I humbly leave it to your Justice and Wisdom to con∣sider of it.
I know also your work is great, and God may cut out more work for you, and for his people in this Na∣tion
 ere long, then they are t aware of. Oh it is an happy thing to have Spirit fitted to what work God will engage us in.
And let us take heed that calm times do not make us secure, and settle in the world.
You know when Sampson slept in Delilah's lap, then he lost his strength, and lost God: and when he went to rouse up himself as at other times, then he felt his weakness.
So if through security, and lying in the lap of any beloved Delilah, we do fall asleep, we hazard the loss of our strength, and the departing of God, and then when we may be called forth to any work, we may arise and think to prevaile as in the days of old, when alas our strength is gone.
Oh be watchful, faithful, low in your own eyes; and the lower you are thus, the more will God de∣light to honour you, and the more honour he puts upon you; the lower be you still.
As we read of Moses, Gideon, David, Sa∣lomon, yea and Saul, when the Lord came to call them forth to publick work, and put honour upon them, then were they lowest in their own eyes.
God delights to work by such Instruments that are low in their own eyes; yea that may be low in the eyes of others; that glory may bee his a∣lone.
And to be serviceable in your Generation to Christ, his People, and the Nations whereof you are the Messengers: if you please at your leisure to peruse the following Discourse, you shall find it to
 be your greatest Interest▪ nd your Truest Wisdom, and as I have in my Son endeavoured to dis∣cover it; so, that you may eminently attain it, shall be the earnest prayer of him, who would fain approve himself to be the

