



SIR,
I Have thus long purposely forborn to give you particular thanks for your most respective incouraging Letters, with which you were pleased to grace me, whilest I was labouring in this my work, because I thought it to be my bounden duty for to do it, by offering in a more open way, the whole of it unto you, so soon as ever it should be finished. You stooped exceedingly low, when you thought any of my former labours, extremely vi∣lified by some, worth your perusal; but much lower, when you could find any thing in them worth your Commendation. It is easie to be discerned, that the altitude of your parts and place, which latter is not so much an honour to you, as it is honoured by you, have not made you supercilious, against those of a far lower form, both in gifts and station. Most modest Sir, let him with∣out your indignation say it, and be believed in it, (who yet was never so sordidly unhappy, and trusts, never shall be, as for self-ends to be a Spaniel to the gallantest of men) that I hardly know any mere individual alive upon the face of the Earth, unto whom, under God, I would more desire to approve all my Travais, or by whom I would more willingly be censured for any of my
 miscarriages about them, than by your self; and that because of those transcendent excellencies of vast Learning, of unfaigned pi∣ety, of graceful gravity, mixt with sweet moderation, which e∣very one who knowes you, will blesse God for appearing to be in you, far sooner than with any the least ostentation, you will own them to be in your self. Upon this account and score alone it is, that I make it my humble and earnest request unto you, that you would take full liberty, most freely and boldly to censure, whatsoever you shall in this, or in any former work, find enormiously peccant against either the grounds of true learning, or against the holi∣ness, or goodness of the cause defended by me, or so much as (all circumstances duly pondered & cast up) against the parts, place, or person of my Adversary. The more severe Critick you shall prove against me, in case of my demerits, the more I will promise perpetual thankfulness unto you, and, upon a clear discovery, a∣mendment of all faults, to the utmost of what my Antagonist, by way of satisfaction, can wish for from my hands. Indeed by the exuberancies of my passions against him here and there, (and, as yet I think, not without just cause) it may easily be discerned, that I am not much transported with that vulgarly taking Opinion, that now adayes English Hereticks are only to be killed with kind∣ness; but if any but from a too obvious and facile a mistake of my style, shall so far mistake the Temper of my affections to∣wards any thing that is commendable and extremely gallant (as many things are) in the parts of my Adversary, he puts a foul So∣phism upon himself, and miserably mistakes me. I should be full sorrowful, if any should value more what is prayse-worthy in him then my self or any be more solicitous of every thing he ought to set a prise upon, as upon his soul, his fame, his very outward safety▪ than my self. All my grief about him (the Lord he knowes I speak truth n it) is, that being what he is as to dvers rare excel∣lencies, he should in the imploying of them, be so little Christ's and in him Ours. Let him but once, I will not say by a number of ho∣ly alis cumsit utinam no∣ster esset. humble, learned unbiassed Orthodox Divines, but even by one such, be declared to be free from being a back-friend to true Religion, in te purity and power of it, to be no studious Ca∣lumniator of the greatest Luminaries in the Church, to be no underminer of necessary Reformation, and then I will promise
 him to make (if need be), upon my knees, an open penance, for all the wrongs, which it shall appear I have done him. Till then, I must think it no unreasonable thing, to beg of strangers, that they would allow me to know my Adversary neer hand, better then o∣thers can do at a distance, and to call to my mind, what I have long since learned, Amicus Plato, amicus Socrates, sed magis amica ve∣ritas. I am sory, that in this 2d reply by his fierce appearing against almost all sorts of Reformers, antient and modern, he hath en∣forced me more largely to appear against him in my Apologetical first part of the work, than at first I had projected. If the present age do not, I wish after ages never may feel, how necessary it was, for me so to do. Sure I am, some very Learned and good men, have thought it worth their pains elaborately to lay open the designs of such as are of his party, and whose steps he is ambitious to fol∣low, in the loading of the best Reformers, with foul Calumnies. If any be otherwise minded, by an easie Transition from the first part, Hippol. Fronto con∣tra com∣mentat. H. Grotii. Sam. Maresius contra eun∣dem multis volumini∣bus. to the second (which are therefore purposely kept distinct) they may relieve themselves from any thing, the present use whereof, they may not know.
In the second part of this my work, which is purely Doctrinal, I trust you will find some care taken in the management of the truth, in the making good of all former Charges brought in a∣gainst the Adversary, in the answering of any thing considerably material and Argumentative.
If all be not done so exactly as I could have wished it, or as the Gravity of the Cause doth require, I cannot be blamed for want of endeavours to do it, but for want of skill and power. In magnis & voluisse sat est. It may be enough for such an one as my self to have discovered, and some way to have broken the forces of my Adversary, and to leave a more perfect Conquest over him, to some greater Champions in the Church, by whose stronger Docto∣rall Arms, the Adversary, notwithstanding the heighth of his Spirit, may be willing to acknowedge himself to be beaten, which God grant. I hope, what I have done, will not be altogether unwelcome to you, because for the main of it, I am sure I present you with nothing, but what you have much more learnedly asserted your self, upon several publick occasions, and what you will own to have been the known Tenents of your most renowned Prede∣cessors,
 ever since the Reformation of our English Church. Dr. Hol∣land, D. John Reinolds, Dr. Abbots, D. Prideaux
Now that the God not only of all efficacious, omnipotent, wonder-working grace, but of all love and peace too, would be pleased at last, to make up all our woful differences; which are wide as the Sea, and who can stop them? That he would be in∣treated by the Lovers of truth and peace, to remove out of the way, all those stumbling-blocks of Advantages, which men un∣happily learned, do stumble at, and which, (as a great man once wisely observed,) make it far more easie to them, to oppose Reli∣gion, Velleroy in his Coun∣cellor. then for others to defend it. For Religion having in it some∣thing which is above the capacity of mans understanding, it is no difficult thing to contradict such a belief, by humane reason. Would to God we might once be of one heart and way, in the great matters of our God, that God's people might attain to more edification, with lesse din, and great noise of disputes. No good man knowing you, doubts, but you do strenuously labour in all your Disputations against error, for to bring matters to this. If, Sir, you will be plea∣sed to pardon this my so bold and unusual address unto you, upon this so solemn an occasion, I hope by the strength of that grace of my blessed Lord and Saviour, which in some weak measure, I have defended, to labour for after times, more in the Confutation of all Pelagianism and Arminianism, by the best, the most graci∣ous and Christian Mediums, Rarius de dogma∣ibus Chri∣stus disseru∣it; saepius, i∣mo vero u∣bique & semper de vivendi sin∣ceritate. Chrys. in Matth. 20. Hom. 65, Practice, Prayers, and Teares. The Lord his blessing be ever upon your pious pains; He long con∣tinue you to be what you are, a glory and Ornament to the Church, to the Chair, and your House. Thus prayeth he, who hopes to continue,
Brock-hole, August 24. 1657.

