



Worthy and Honored Sir,
THE laudable Character given
you by some Ministers of Christ:
and other good Souls, now (I
Charitably hope and believe) Praising
God in Glory: Especially, the experimen∣tal
tast I my self have had of your good∣ness,
(since Providence made me so
happy in your Acquaintance;) hath En∣couraged
me to prefix your worthy and de∣serving
Name to this small Tract; whose
design and chief tendency is, to encourage
poor dejected Souls (under the hidings
of God's Face,) to cast themselves on
that (never failing) goodnss of God (in
Christ,) untill God's set time for Deli∣verance

comes. And also, to stir up
experienced and grown Believers, to a be∣coming
Adoration, and Praising of
that Adorable Name, and Wonder work∣ing
Providence of the Glorious and Tre∣mendous
Jehovah; which hath so conspi∣cuously
appear'd, in the Deliverance
wrought for me, his poor nothing Crea∣ture,
(both for Soul and Body,) and
who am to this very Day) kept alive, and
upheld by that Divine Manutenency of his
own, to the great Admiration both of my
self and those godly Souls who know my
present Circumstances; and Gods dealing
with me. I have been (for several Years
past) more than ordinarily Importun'd,
both by godly Divines, and such Zealous
working Christians as your self, to Pub∣lish,
what (now) I have presumed to De∣dicate,
to so dear and well deserving a
Friend, as you are well known to be, both
to God's Truth, and such (as in any mea∣sure)
bear the Blessed Image of his Son.
The principal Motive of their importu∣ning
me to Publish this, was the strange
Influence, the Relation hereof (from my

own Mouth) had upon their own Spirits,
the effects whereof they were not able to
hide; the Tears of Joy gushing out (sur∣prizingly)
from their Eyes; with both
Eyes and Hands lifted up to Heaven,
wondering at, and Adoreing the Wonders
of God, in my Case: Professing and de∣claring,
that (in all their time) they had
neither heard, nor known, so much of
the goodness and Grace of God, vouchsased
to a poor lost and undon sinner, as was
shewn and vouchsafed to unworthy me;
Which occasioned several of the godly
Ministers, especially, Mr. Noah Bryan,
Mr. Timothy Taylor, Mr. Samuel Ma∣ther,
and the dear Mr. Nathaniel Ma∣ther,
(all now with Christ) to profess,
that they never heard of, or knew any Sin∣ner
come so near to Paul (as touching
God's method, and way; of Working upon,
and dealing with him, in, and after his Con∣version)
as I did. And therefore they
(unanimously) agreed (in Judging) that
to Publish the same, was my Duty. The
which, they doubted not; would be greatly
useful, and that both to Saints and Sin∣ners

on sundry accounts. The sincere
and upright Hearted Nathaniel Mather
(late of Pinners-Hall,) hath (several
times) chid; me for my backwardness to
so necessary and useful a Work; and a
little before his Death, he at me again a∣bout
it, examining into the Grounds of
my backwardness herein. To whom I
reply'd, Sir, There are two things which
(hitherto) have kept me back from Pub∣lishing
this my experience, and how much
of Satan there may be in it, I cannot deter∣min.
The First is, The difficulty which at∣tends
my setting down (in Writing) the
working of the Spirit of Adoption, in
doscovering and applying Christ unto me,
the Remembrance whereof, doth so swal∣low
me up, and melt me, that I am not
able to see my Paper for the Tears of Joy,
which obstruct my Visive Faculty. To
which he Reply'd, that it was pitty any
thing should hinder me in so good (and
useful) a Work. The Second is, the fear
Lodg'd within me, of Peoples not Cre∣diting
the Relation I shall give hereof,

in case it were Printed; For, (said I)
the greatest part of Professors are so great
strangers to the nature of true Regenerati∣on,
(especially when wrought in a Sinner,
in the way and method God took with me)
that they will rather suspect, and question
the truth of what I relate, than Praise
God, (or improve the same for their
own good, or Spiritual advantage) for the
same. To which, Reply was made, That
Satan was always ready to obstruct any
good Work which hath the least tendency
to God's Praise, or the good of Souls.
Since his departure, the fresh Remem∣brance
of the Importunities of the Wor∣thies
above Named, together with the
repeated Solicitations of several godly,
zealous Christians (yet living,) have pre∣vailed
with me, to beat my way through
those Difficulties which lay before me,
leaving the Issue (of my present under∣taking)
to the powerful Providence of
God, to make the same successful, in
what it is designed for. And begging
(most heartily) your Pardon, for the me∣thod
I have taken, in acknowledging the

great Kindness, and Respect shewen (by
your Religious and truly Generous self)
to the meanest and most unworthy of
Christ's (Dispised) Ambassadours; the
which (I doubt not) you will find Recor∣ded
in Heaven (by my Lord and Master,)
as an evident proof of your Faith in, and
unfeigned Love to Him, and his Cause
and Interest, here on Earth. Let not
(Dear Sir) the disadvantages under which
I lye (on account of the slanderous Re∣proaches
heaped on me, by malicious Spi∣rits,
lessen your hope of the glorious Re∣compence
(of Reward) promised (by him
that cannot lye) to all your Works and
Labours of Love exprest to me, and others
of Gods Children, for the Sake of Christ.
He that will take notice of a cup of Cold
Water given to a Disciple, in the Name of
his Disciple, will (I question not) Record
in Heaven, the refreshing Wine I have
drank at your Table, (more than once)
and the Silver and Gold sent me, and
given me by your self, whereby both I
and my distressed Family, have been kept
from sinking into the Dust.

And albeit, I should (at the great day
of Judgment) appear to be a Cast away
from Christ, of which (through Infinite
Grace) I am no more afraid, than I am
afraid that God can cease to be, what he
is.
Yet your Integrity and Uprightness (in
what you have done to me, for Christ's
sake) will be, not only made known, but
graciously and abundantly Rewarded.
(and if I mistake not the design of Pro∣vidence,
which hath put me upon fixing
my thoughts on your self, as the fittest
and most deserving Person to whom, to
Dedicate this small Extract, of the
large experience I have had of God's In∣comprehensible
goodness, and Infinite All-Sufficiency,
in saving a lost Sinner). I
look on this Dedication to be (as it were)
a , or fore-runner of Christ's
(openly) acknowledging and rewarding
those your Acts of Love, and Pitty so
secretly done to him, in the Person of me
the poorest and unworthiest of his Repre∣sentatives
here on Earth, according to
Prov. 19. 17. Mat. 6. 4. Mat. 25. 45.
Heb. 6. 10.

The Searcher of Hearts, knows I am
far from flattering you, in what I say
(of you) in this Dedication. He who
hath so (abundantly) blest you with a com∣fortable
Estate here, and hath enricht
your brave and generous Soul with such a
Stock of Heavenly Wisdom, and saving
Grace, as keeps you from swelling with
Pride and Conceit, of what he hath made
you, Perfect his own Blessed work begun in
you, to the Day of Christ. And that
the same may be the Portion of your Vir∣tuous
and Religious Consort, and your
Dear Off-spring, is the Cordial wish, and
shall be the hearty Prayer of (Dear and
Honoured Sir) your (dearly Loving, and
highly obliged) Friend and Servant, in
the best and strongest of Bonds (viz.)
Gospel Love.

