



Great SIR,
GRandure of it self is
Honourable, and
Learning in it selfe
Venerable; but when
they both con-center in one
person they are highly Admira∣ble.
Dignity single, saith the

Quantò grandior, tantò vanior. S. Aug. in Psal. 36. Father, The greater it is, the
Vainer: Learning alone, expe∣rience
proves to be obnoctious,
to every Calpestation: But in
their happy Conjunction, this
receives Protection from that,
and that derivesBeatam viā sapientia per∣fectem effecit Soa Epist. ad ium. Nstus est, cui sapientia magis conveniat, quj principi, cuāus doctrina omni∣ debet pro∣esse subjectis. Vegetius praef. l. 1. de re mili∣tari. Perfection from
this. And as the Ancients did
Honour to the one in Hercules,
so to the other inPlin. Nat. Hist. l. 7. c 37. Hypocrates;
whom the Proto-Aristocratia of
Athens worshipped as Hercules:Ego eos amo (dixit Sig. sm. mp.) quos vir∣tutibus & do∣ctina caeteros antecellre vi∣deo. Baptist. Ignat. In tota re militari nihil utilius, nihil clarius Duce e∣rudito. Guil. Sa∣lisburiensis lib. 15.
But never could we find a wor∣thier
Subject wherein to Honour
both, than your Excellency.
Tis you (Brave Sir) tis you I
say that have Moraliz'd the La∣bours
of the Poets Hercules;
strangling the Dragons of Ty∣ranny,
and Heresie, if not in
your, yet their Infancy. For
your Glory, My Lord, was re∣serv'd

the Decollating those
Hydra's, whose Heads, were
but multiplyed by the oppositi∣on
of others: Cauterizing their
Courages by severe and seaso∣nable
Proclamations. You it is,
that (in this resembling also
our other Champion of your Au∣spitious
Name) have remov'd
that Dragon of Armed Villany
which watcht our Hesperidean
Garden of Parliament, and kept
that Golden Branch under Re∣straint,
which promised us the
Elizean Joyes of Peace. Your
Heroick Arm hath un-kennel'd
thoseCacus. Sons of Vulcan, Men of
Iron, whose slie and crafty con∣veyance
rendred their Foot∣steppes
inscrutable, till your
Excellency trace't them upon
their Retrogradatious. In short,

your Lordships Valour hath
flea'd the Nemean Lyon, slain
the Erymanthean Boar, dislodg'd
the Men-devouring Diomedes,
strangled Antheus; in their Mo∣rals
of Ʋsurpation, Cruelty, Op∣pression,
and Covetousnesse, which
upon your Herculean Atchieve∣ments
have lost their strength:
to conclude, 'tis your invicible
Fortitude, hath rescued Theseus
and Alcestes, Nobility and Inno∣cence,
from Hell, in delivering
many Gallant and unjustly-im∣prisoned
Gentlemen from their
Chaines: And assisted Atlas, in
helping our Patriots to support
the Globe of Government. But
yet, most Generous Heroe, give me
leave humbly to remember you,
that, if my Mythology can count
twelve, the number of your

Labours are not compleat,
whilest theSuch for∣reigne Prote∣stants call our Churches as now abused. Dr. Bergier en Histoire Pres∣byt. Augean Stables are
uncleansed, and Hellish Cerbe∣rus
holds on his yelping. These
two taken away, Mercury the
Pindar. in 6. Olymp. Rewarder of Hero's, and Pa∣tron
of Scholars, shall Crown
your Valiant Temples with the
Panegyricks of Learned Pens,
taken from his Wing: and this
being too small a Compensation
for your Complicated Conquests,
you shall (asIn Orat. pro Muraen. Cicero affirms of
Alcides) by your Arms scale
Heaven.
And if Hyppocrates had the
Honour of an Hercules for cleer∣ing
his Country of a general
Contagion, none will deny you
the Honour of an Hyppocrates,
whilest your Prudence hath re∣triv'd
our Religion, and Learn∣ing,

Liberties and Proprieties
from the most apparent Ruin
that ever threatned them:
Therein shewing that your Vi∣ctorious
Hand is as dexterous in
Acts of Beneficence, as terrible
in Deeds of Justice.
This glorious One, of Redeem∣ing
your Country from the vilest
of Slavery, that ever a Warre
undertaken for Freedom ca∣joul'd
men into, is every way
so Stupendious, that, leaving
the Story of it to Enrich Vo∣lumes,
I shall only hint that
you Timed it, when we were on
the point of Rivetting our
Chains to perpetuity, and when
we were like those Wretches
under the Tyranny of Marganore
divinely described by Ariosto.

Ariosto l. 37. Stanza 88 del suo Orlando. Ma il popolo faca come è piùfanno,
Ch'vbediscon più a quei, che più in
odio hanno, &c.
In English thus.
The Vulgar Rout, led by example, pay
Observance blind to such as most they hate;
And let the Tyrant at his pleasure stay,
Banish, Degrade of Honour, Sequestrate▪
Cause none for fear dares to his friend im∣part
How much the common Ruin grieves his
heart.
But vengeance though it in it's pace be slow,
Payes home at last with so much heavier
blow.
And for the Manner, it's best
represented by Loyal1 Sam. 15. 32 &c. 17. 5. Hushai,
temporizing with Absalom;
whereby you have happily fru∣strated
the Councils of Achito∣phel,
who sullenly retyred, de∣serting
his Machivilianismes.
And so victorious hath your

Excellency been with a handful
of Men (animated by a Righ∣teous
Cause) against a Potent
Enemy, that, as if their power
had been given them for an Ac∣cession
to your Glory, you have
most justly merited with all so∣ber
Christians the great Title of
Orthodox Athenasius; who was
Theodoret. Malleus Haeraeticorum, and are
become Herculem Fannatico∣rum.
There rests no more, unlesse
I may crave leave humbly to in∣culcate
against that common
Salus populi suprema lex est. of which Doct. Sanderson hath lately writ at large. Maxime, which mistaken, hath
wrought us so much confusion;
That, in the great work (you
are upon) of setling our Peace,
Tolle jura Imperatornm, quis audet di∣cere, haec villa est mea, meus est iste servus, mea est haec domus? D. August. in S. Joannem. Prerogative is the best securer of
Propriety. And thatPrincipatus, quem metus ex∣torsit, & si a∣ctibus, vel mo∣ribus non offen∣dat: ipsius ta∣men itii sui est perniiosus exemplo. Leo in Deret. Pope was
herein infallible, who maintains

(as alsoGreg. Magn. in Moral. Tho. Aqvin. in lib. de Regimine Prin∣cipum. Anton. in Summ. part. 3 Canon. Ecclesi∣ast. Distinct. 8. in cap quo jure. all that speak thereof)
that Authority cannot be Just,
if Illicitly acquired. And also
humbly to beg, as your De∣fence
ofBoni Princi∣pi est ac religi∣osè ecclesias contritas atque concissas re∣staurare, no∣vasque adifica∣re, & Dei sa∣cerdotes hono∣norare atque tueri. Marcel. in Decret. Religion; so your
Countenance forReges cum Phylosophos in honore habent, & se, & illos ornant. Plu∣tarch. ad Prin∣cipem incrudit. Learning; than
which there cannot be a more
Noble and certain way to A∣grandize
you. And because
some are perswaded that the
Muses agree not with Mars; let
me only name unto you for a
confutation of them, such Ho∣nourable
Princes, and great
Captains, as Alexander, Hani∣bal,
and Caesar abroad; Albi∣nus,
Beau-Clerk, Edward 3d,
Humph. D. of Glocester, at home,
whose Literature is as famous as
their Valour; and that as great,
as can be parallel'd in any who
ever.

But herein to say more, would be to
entrench upon the Design of my Author;
whose Vindication of Learning, as I have
been able to Transcribe, it, I humbly
lay at your Lordships Feet: Promising to
my Ambition no other in so high a Dedi∣cation,
than a welcome reception,
with such whose Eyes greedily are
drawn by any thing, which is inscribed
with your Honourable Name; which
haply for any desert of it's own in this
Age (so uncharitable to Learning) it
might not otherwise find.
Now, My Lord, if I have herein been
too Free with your Modesty, or too Sawcy
with your Merits, I appeal to your Cle∣mency,
and plead that my Crime is
an Effect of your Lordships Vertues, of
which no man is a more obsequious
Admirer, than
My Lord,

