


SIR,
AS You were pleased to assign that Pro∣vince to Me, of Preaching a Sermon on the sad Occasion of Her sudden Death, who not many Weeks ago lay in your Bosom, but is now in Abraham's; so you with some others, are to bear the blame (whatso∣ever happens) of its being Printed. I must appeal to you and them as my Witnesses, that my Inclinations were contrary to your Re∣quests; and that these Papers which now see the light, should have been buried in dark∣ness (like Her, whose loss we bewail) if your Importunity had not pluckt them out of that Grave, which I intended for them, among their fellows. My time is not yet come (I Joh. 7. 4, 6. know not whether ever it may or no) to shew my self to the world in such a manner; for in like cases heretofore, there are some who can testifie, that I am not of their number,
 whose time is always ready, because they seek to be known openly.
I will not trouble my self here to publish my own Infirmities; the following Discourse will do that sufficiently; only to prevent any from thinking that I have done something extra∣ordinary upon this subject, it will be but ju∣stice to acquaint them that fewer hours were left me, wherein to prepare for this, than what I commonly have for my constant work.
It might have been thought perhaps more proper by some, for Days to speak, when such Gray hairs were dropt into the place of si∣lence; because they are less obnoxious to pub∣lick censure, and more able to encounter it. But I must now quietly take that Lot, which every Reader is dispos'd to cast upon me; not expecting the same kindness and clemency from all, which it is possible that I may obtain with a few. For it is easie to observe, that the most do pass a severe or favourable Ver∣dict upon Discourses, according as they have mens persons in contempt or admiration; and too many oftentimes are kept from recei∣ving the love of the Truth, by their rooted prejudices against him that does deliver it.

 The main thing about which I am concern'd, (next to the occasion it self) is, that so mean a Performance should follow after such a mournful Solemnity; but I hope that none will measure her real worth by the very short and imperfect representation which I have given of it; she hath a Record on high, which Job 16. 19. speaks more fully in her praise than our poor Testimonies here below. Her honoured Name did indeed deserve a more costly Embalm∣ing, than I was able to bestow; others may say only of me, as Christ did of the Affectionate Mark 14. 8. Woman, that I have done what I could; I have the will to do more, and therefore sin∣cerely add, that wheresoever I may be call'd (at any time hereafter) to preach this Go∣spel, I shall be ready to publish the same Memorial of her, as I have done in this Ser∣mon, for the glory of that Grace which was given to her.
Let not this revive your sorrow, which is de∣sign'd as an Antidote against it. Remember that the Thread was spun almost to LXIX, before it broke, and many thousands come not so near the ordinary limited age of man, as Psal. 90. 10. she did. Remember also, that there was the
 comfortable conjunction of 45 Years, before the hand of God's wise and holy Providence made this afflicting separation. You have cause to sing of mercy, as well as judgment; do not overlook the one, by poring on the other.
I shall not forget to lift up an Hearty Prayer for you, That the breach which God hath made, may be abundantly repair'd, and fill'd up by himself; and that Jesus Christ (the glorious Bridegroom, to whom your late Consort is now more intimately join'd) would not leave you Joh. 14. 18. comfortless, but come to you: That your Hoary Hairs may be yet long continued in the way of Righteousness, as an Example and Encouragement to others; and that God would not at last cast you off, nor forsake you, when Psal. 71. 9. your strength totally fails, but in a good old age translate you to a more happy Eternity.
And while I am thus praying for you, I doubt not your concurrence with me, in beg∣ing of God that this small Discourse may go and bring forth fruit, and that its fruit may remain; which will be great satisfaction to
March 20. 1687/8.

