


MY Treatise of the MENSURATION of RUN∣NING
WATERS, Right Honourable, and
most Noble Sir, hath not a greater Preroga∣tive
than its having been the production of the
command of Pope Ʋrban VIII. when His Ho∣liness
was pleased to enjoyn me to go with
Monsignore Corsini, in the Visitation that was
imposed upon him in the year 1625. of the Waters of Ferrara,
Bologna, Romagna, and Romagnola; for that, on that occasion
applying my whole Study to my service and duty, I published in
that Treatise some particulars till then not rightly understood and
considered (that I knew) by any one; although they be in them∣selves
most important, and of extraordinary consequence. Yet
I must render thanks to Your Lordship for the honour you have
done to that my Tract; but wish withal, that your Esteem of it
may not prejudice the universal Esteem that the World hath of
Your Honours most refined judgement.
As to that Point which I touch upon in the Conclusion, name∣ly,
That the consideration of the Velocity of Running Water sup∣plyeth
the consideration of theLarghezza, but misprinted. Length omitted in the common
way of measuring Running Waters; Your Lordship having com∣manded
me that in favour of Practise, and for the perfect disco∣very
of the disorder that commonly happeneth now adayes in
the distribution of the Waters of Fountains, I should demon∣strate
that the knowledge of the Velocity serveth for the finding
of the Length: I have thought fit to satisfie your Command by
relating a Fable; which, if I do not deceive my self, will make
out to us the truth thereof; insomuch that the rest of my Treatise
shall thereby also become more manifest and intelligible, even to

those who finde therein some kinde of obscurity.
In the dayes of yore, before that the admirable Art of Wea∣ving
was in use, there was found in Persia a vast and unvaluable
Treasure, which consisted in an huge multitude of pieces of Er∣mesin,
or Damask, I know not whether; which, as I take it,
amounted to near two thousand pieces; which were of such a
nature, that though their Breadth and Thickness were finite and
determinate, as they use to be at this day; yet nevertheless, their
Length was in a certain sense infinite, for that those two thousand
pieces, day and night without ceasing, issued out with their ends
at such a rate, that of each piece there issued 100. Ells a day, from
a deep and dark Cave, consecrated by the Superstition of those
people, to the fabulous Arachne. In those innocent and early
times (I take it to have been, in that so much applauded and
desired Golden age) it was left to the liberty of any one, to cut
off of those pieces what quantity they pleased without any diffi∣culty:
But that felicity decaying and degenerating, which was
altogether ignorant of Meum and Tuum; terms certainly most
pernicious, the Original of all evils, and cause of all discords;
there were by those people strong and vigilant Guards placed
upon the Cave, who resolved to make merchandize of the Stuffes;
and in this manner they began to set a price upon that inestima∣ble
Treasure, selling the propriety in those pieces to divers Mer∣chants;
to some they sold a right in one, to some in two, and to
some in more. But that which was the worst of all, There was
found out by the insatiable avarice of these men crafty inventions
to deceive the Merchants also; who came to buy the aforesaid
commodity, and to make themselves Masters, some of one
some of two, and some of more ends of those pieces of stuff;
and in particular, there were cetain ingenuous Machines placed
in the more secret places of the Cave, with which at the pleasure
of the Guards, they did retard the velocity of those Stuffs, in
their issuing out of the Cave; insomuch, that he who ought to have
had 100. Ells of Stuff in a day, had not above 50, and he who
should have had 400, enjoyed the benefit of 50. onely; and so all
the rest were defrauded of their Rights, the surplusage being sold,
appropriated, and shared at the will of the corrupt Officers: So
that the business was without all order or justice, insomuch that
the Goddess Arachne being displeased at those people, deprived
every one of their benefit, and with a dreadful Earthquake for
ever closing the mouth of the Cave, in punishment of so much
impiety and malice: Nor did it avail them to excuse themselves,
by saying that they allowed the Buyer the Breadth and Thick∣ness
bargained for; and that of the Length, which was infinite,

there could no account be kept: For the wise and prudent
Priest of the Sacred Grotto answered, That the deceit lay in the
length, which they were defrauded of, in that the velocity of the
stuffe was retarded, as it issued out of the Cave: and although
the total length of the Piece was infinite, for that it never cea∣sed
coming forth, and so was not to be computed; yet never∣theless
its length considered, part by part, as it came out of the
Cave, and was bargained for, continued still finite, and might
be one while greater, and another while lesser, according as the
Piece was constituted in greater or lesser velocity; and he added
withall, that exact Justice required, that when they sold a piece
of stuff, and the propriety or dominion therein, they ought not
only to have ascertained the breadth and thicknesse of the Piece,
but also to have determined the length, determining its ve∣locity.
The same disorder and confusion, that was represented in the
Fable, doth come to passe in the History of the Distribution of
the Waters of Conduits and Fountains, seeing that they are sold
and bought, having regard only to the two Dimensions, I mean
of Breadth and Height of the Mouth that dischargeth the Wa∣ter;
and to remedy such an inconvenience, it is necessary to de∣termine
the length in the velocity; for never shall we be able to
make a guesse at the quantity of the Body of Running VVater,
with the two Dimensions only of Breadth and Height, without
Length.
And to the end, that the whole business may be reduced
to a most easie practice, by which the waters of Aqueducts
may be bought and sold justly, and with measures alwayes ex∣act
and constant.
First, the quantity of the Water ought diligently to be exa∣mined,
which the whole principal * Pipe dischargeth in a time
certain, as for instance, in an hour, in half an hour, or in a lesse
interval of time, (for knowing which I have a most exact and
easie Rule) and finding that the whole principal pipe dischar∣geth
v. g. a thousand Tuns of Water in the space of one or
more hours, in selling of this water, it ought not to be uttered by
the ordinary and false measure, but the distribution is to be
made with agreement to give and maintain to the buyer ten or
twenty, or a greater number of Tuns, as the bargain shall be
made, in the space of an hour, or of some other set and deter∣minate
time. And here I adde, that if I were to undertake to
make such an adjustment, I would make use of a way to divide
and measure the time with such accuratenesse, that the space of
an hour should be divided into four, six, or eight thousand parts

without the least errour; which Rule was taught me by my
Master Sign. Galilaeo Galilaei, Chief Philosopher to the most Se∣rene
Grand Duke of Tuscany. And this way will serve easily and
admirably to our purpose and occasion; so that we shall
thereby be able to know how many Quarts of Water an A∣queduct
will discharge in a given time of hours, moneths, or
years. And in this manner we may constitute a Cock that shall
discharge a certain and determinate quantity of water in a time
given.
And because daily experience shews us, that the Springs of A∣queducts
do not maintain them alwayes equally high, and full
of Water, but that sometimes they increase, and sometimes de∣crease,
which accident might possibly procure some difficulty in
our distribution: Therefore, to the end that all manner of scru∣ple
may be removed, I conceive that it would be convenient to
provide a Cistern, according to the occasion, into which there
might alwayes fall one certain quantity of water, which should
not be greater than that which the principal pipe dischargeth in
times of drought, when the Springs are bare of water, that so in
this Cistern the water might alwayes keep at one constant height.
Then to the Cistern so prepared we are to fasten the Cocks of
particular persons to whom the Water is sold by the Reverend
Apostolique Chamber, according to what hath been observed
before; and that quantity of Water which remaineth over and
above, is to be discharged into another Cistern, in which the
Cocks of the Waters for publick services, and of those which
people buy upon particular occasions are to be placed. And
when the businesse shall have been brought to this passe, there
will likewise a remedy be found to the so many disorders that
continually happen; of which, for brevity sake, I will instance
in but four only, which concern both publique and private bene∣fit,
as being, in my judgment, the most enormous and intole∣rable.
The first inconvenience it, that in the common way of measu∣ring,
dispensing, and selling the Waters of Aqueducts, it is not
understood, neither by the Buyer nor Seller, what the quantity
truly is that is bought and sold; nor could I ever meet with any
either Engineer or Architect, or Artist, or other that was able to
decypher to me, what one, or two, or ten inches of water was.
But by our above declared Rule, for dispensing the Waters of
Aqueducts we may very easily know the true quantity of Water
that is bought or sold, as that it is so many Tuns an hour, so ma∣ny
a day, so many in a year, &c.
The second disorder that happeneth, at present, in the distri∣bution

of Aqueducts is, that as the businesse is now governed, it
lieth in the power of a ordid Mason to take unjustly from one,
and give undeservedly to another more or lesse Water than be∣longeth
to them of right: And I have seen it done, of my
own experience. But in our way of measuring and distri∣buting
Waters, there can no fraud be committed; and put∣ting
the case that they should be committed, its an easie mat∣ter
to know it, and amend it, by repairing to the Tribunal
appointed.
Thirdly, it happens very often, (and we have examples there∣of
both antient and modern) that in dispensing the Water after
the common and vulgar way; there is sometimes more Water dis∣pended
than there is in the Register, in which there will be regi∣stred,
as they say, two hundred inches (for example) and there
will be dispensed two hundred and fifty inches, or more. Which
passage happened in the time of Nerva the Emperour, as Giulio
Frontino writes, in his 2. Book, De Aquaductibus Ʋrbis Romae,
where he observeth that they had in Commentariis 12755. Qui∣naries
of Water; and found that they dispensed 14018. Qui∣naries.
And the like Errour hath continued, and is in use also
modernly until our times. But if our Rule shall be observed,
we shall incur no such disorder, nay there will alwayes be given
to every one his share, according to the holy end of exact justice,
which dat unicuique quod suum est. As on the contrary, it is
manifest, that His Divine Majesty hateth and abominateth Pon∣dus
& pondus, Mensura & mensura, as the Holy Ghost speak∣eth
by the mouth of Solomon in the Proverbs, Chap. 20. Pondus
& Pondus, Mensura & Mensura, utrumque abominabile est apud
Deum. And therefore who is it that seeth not that the way of
dividing and measuring of VVaters, commonly used, is expresly
against the Law of God. Since that thereby the same measure
is made sometimes greater, and sometimes lesser; A disorder so
enormous and execrable, that I shall take the boldness to say, that
for this sole respect it ought to be condemned and prohibited like∣wise
by human Law, which should Enact that in this business there
should be imployed either this our Rule, or some other that
is more exquisite and practicable, whereby the measure
might keep one constant and determinate tenor, as we make it,
and not, as it is now, to make Pondus & Pondus, Mensura &
Mensura.
And this is all that I had to offer to Your most Illustrious
Lordship, in obedience to your commands, reserving to my self
the giving of a more exact account of this my invention, when
the occasion shall offer, of reducing to practice so holy, just, and

necessary a reformation of the Measure of Running Waters and
of Aqueducts in particular: which Rule may also be of great
benefit in the division of the greater Waters to over-flow
Grounds, and for other uses: I humbly bow,

FINIS.
