


My Lords and Gentlemen:
THe Arms which Christians can use against Lawful Powers in their Severity, are only Prayers & Tears. Now since nothing can equal the infinity of those we have shed, but the Cause, viz. to see our dearest Friends for∣sake us; we hope it will not offend you, if (af∣ter

we have a little wip'd our eyes) we sigh out our Complaints to you.
We had spoken much sooner, had we not been silent through consternation to see you so enflam'd (whom with reverence we honour) and also to shew our submissive patience, which used no slights or tricks to divert the debates of Parliament. For no body can ima∣gine, where so many of the great Nobility and Gentry are concern'd, but something might have been done; whenas in all ages we see things of Publick advantage by the managers dexterity nipt in the bud, even in the very Houses themselves. Far be it from Catho∣licks to perplex Parliaments, who have been the Founders of their Priviledges, and all Ancient Lawes. Nay, Mâgna Charta it self had its rise from us; which we do the less bo∣ast of, since it was not at first obtained in so submiss and humble manner.
We sung our Nunc dimittis, when we saw our Master in his Throne, and you in your deserved Authority and Rule: nor could any thing have ever grieved us more, then to have our Loyalty called into Question by you, even at the instigation of our greatest Adver∣saries. If we must suffer, let it be by you alone:

for that's a double death to men of Honour, to have their Enemies not onely Accusers, but their insulting Judges also. These are they, that by beginning with us, murthered their Prince, and wounded you: And shall the same Method continue by your approbation? We are sure you mean well, though their de∣signe be wicked. But let it never be recorded in Story, that you forgot your often Vows to us, in joyning with them that have been the cause of so great calamity to the Nation.
Of all Calumnies against Catholicks, we have admired at none so much, as that their Principles are said to be inconsistent with Government, and they themselves thought ever prone to Rebellion.
My Lords and Gentlemen, Had this been a new Sect not known before, something perchance might have been doubted: but to lay this at their doors, that have governed the Civilized World, is the Miracle of Mira∣cles to us.
Did Richard the First, or Edward Long∣shanks, suspect his Catholicks that served in Palestine, and made our Countries Fame big in the Chronicle of all Ages? Or did they mi∣strust (in their dangerous absence) their Sub∣jects

at home, because they were of this Profes∣sion? Could Edward the Third imagine those to be Trayterous in their Doctrine, that had that care and duty for their Prince, as to make them (by Statute) guilty of death in the highest degree, that had the least thought of ill against the King? Be pleased that Henry the Fifth be remembred also, who did those Wonders of which the whole World does still resound; and certainly all History will agree in this, that 'twas Old Castle he feared, and not those that believed the Bishop of Rome to be Head of the Church. We will no longer trouble you with putting you in minde of any more of our mighty Kings, who have been feared ab∣road, and as safe at home as any since the Reformation of Religion. We shall onely adde this, that if Popery be the enslaving of Princes, France still believes it self as absolu∣te as Denmark or Sweden: nor will ever the House of Austria abjure the Pope, to se∣cure themselves of the fidelity of their Subiects. We shall always acknowledge to the whole World, that there have been as many brave English in this last Century, as in any other place whatsoever. Yet since the exclusion of the Catholick Faith, there has been that com∣mitted

by those, who would be fain called Protestants, that the wickedest Papist ne∣ver dreamt of 'Twas never heard of before, that an absolute Queen was condemned by Subjects, and those stiled her Peers; or that a King was publickly tried and executed by his own people and servants.
My Lords and Gentlemen, We know who were the Authors of this last Abomina∣tion, and how generously you strove against the raging Torrent; nor have we any other ends to remember you of it, but to shew that all Religions may have a corrupted spawn, and that God hath been pleased to permit such a Rebellion which our progenitors never saw, to convince you perchance (whom for ever may he prosper) that Popery is not the only Source of Treason.
Little did we think (when your Prayers and ours were offered up to beg a Blessing on the Kings Affairs) ever to see that day, in which Carlos, Gifford, Whitgrave, and the Pendrels should be punished by your desi∣res for that Religion, which obliged them to save their forlorn Prince; and a stigmatized man (for his offences against King and Church) a chief promoter of it. Nay, less did

we imagine, that by your Votes Hudlestone might be hanged, who again secured our So∣veraign; and others free in their fat possessions, that sat as Judges, and sealed the Execution of that great Prince of happy Memory. We confess, we are unfortunate, & you just Ju∣dges, whom with our lives we will ever main∣tain to be so; nor are we ignorant the necessity of affairs made the King and you do things, which formerly you could not so much as fan∣cy: yet give us leave to say we are still Loyal; nay, to desire you to believe so, and to remember how synonymous (under the late Rebellion) was the word Papist and Cavalier; for there was no Papist that was not deemed a Caualier, nor no Caualier that was not call'd a Papist, or at least thought to be Popishly affected.
We know, though we differ something in Religion, (the truth of which let the last day judge) yet none can agree with your inclina∣tions, or are fitter for your converse then we; for as we have as much birth among us as En∣gland can boast of, so our breeding leans your way both in Court and Camp. And therefore had not our late Sufferings united us in that firm tie, yet our like humors must needs have joyned our hearts. If we erre, pity our con∣dition,

and remember what your great An∣cestors were; and make some difference between us that have twice converted England from Paganism, and those other Sects that can chal∣lenge nothing but intrusion for their imposed Authority.
But't is generally said, That Papists cannot live without persecuting all other Religions within their reach.
We confess, where the name of Protestant is unknown, the Catholick Magistra∣tes (believing it erronious) do use all endea∣vours to keep it out: Yet in those Countreys where Liberty is given, they have far more Priviledges then we under any Reformed Government whatsoever. To be short, we will only instance France for all, where they have publick Churches, where they can ma∣ke what Proselytes they please, and where 't is not against Law to be in any Charge or Im∣ployment. Now Holland, which permits every thing gives us 'tis true our Lives and Estates, but takes away alle Trust and Rule, and leaves us also in danger of the Scout, whensoever he pleases to molest our Meetings.
Because we have named France, the Massacre will perchance be urged against us.

But the World must know that was a Cabi∣net-Plot, condemned as wicked by Catholick Writers there, and of other Countries also. Be∣sides, it cannot be thought they were murthe∣red for being Protestants, since 'twas their powerful Rebellion (let their Faith have been what it would) that drew them into that ill∣machinated destruction.
May it not as well be said in the next Ca∣tholick Kings Reign, that the Duke of Gui∣se, ande Cardinal (Heads of the League) were killed for their Religion also? Now no body is ignorant, that 't was their factious Authority, which made that jealous Prince design their deaths, though by unwarrantable means.
If it were for Doctrine that the Hugonots suffered in France, this haughty Monaroh would soon destroy them now, having neither Force nor Towns to resist his Might and Puissance. They yet live free enough, being even Members of Parliament; and may con∣vert the Kings Brother too, if he thinks fit to be so. Thus you may see how well Protes∣tants live in a Popish Country under a Popish King: Nor was Charlemaign more Ca∣tholick then this; for though he contends so∣metimes

with the Pope, 'tis not of Faith, but about Gallicane Priviledges, which perchance he may very lawfully do. Judge then, Worthy Patriots, who are the best used, and consider our hardship here in England, where 'tis not only a Fine for hearing Mass, but death to the Master for having a Priest in his house; and so far we are from preferment, that by Law we cannot come within ten mi∣les of London; all which we know your great Mercy will never permit you to exact.
It has been often urged, that our misde∣meanours in Queen Elizabeths and King Ja∣mes's time, were the cause of our punish∣ment.
We earnestly wish that the Party had had more patience under that Princess: But pray consider (though we excuse not their faults) whether it was not a Question har∣der then that of York and Lancaster (the cause of a War of such length, and death of so many Princes) who had most right, Que∣en Elizabeth or Mary Stuart. For since the whole Kingdom had crowned and sworn Al∣legeance to Queen Mary, they owned her as the legitimate daughter to Henry the Eighth; and therefore 'twas thought necessarily to

follow by many, that if Mary was the true Child, Elizabeth was the Natural, which must needs give way to the thrice noble Queen of Scots. 'Twas for the Royal House of Scot∣land that they suffered in those days, and 'tis for the same illustrious Family we are ready to hazard all on any occasion. Nor can the consequence of the former procedure be but ill, if a Henry the Eighth (whom Sir W. Rawleigh and my Lord Cherbury, two famous Protestants, have so homely charac∣terized) should after twenty years co-habita∣tion, turn away his wife, and this out of scruple of Conscience (as he said) when as History declares, that he never spared woman in his lust, nor man his fury.
Now for the fifth of Novēber, with hāds lifted up to Heaven, we abominate and detest, and from the bottō of our hearts, say, may they fall into irrecoverable perdition, who propa∣gate that faith by the blood of Kings, which is to be planted in truth and meekness only. But let it not displease (Men, Brethren, and Fathers) if we ask whether Ulysses be no better known? or who has forgot the Plots of Cromwel, framed in his Closet, not only to destroy many faithful Cavaliers; but also

to put a lustre upon his Intelligence, as if no∣thing could be done without his knowledge? Even so did the then great Minister, who drew some few ambitious, men into this con∣juration, and then discovered it by a Miracle. This will easily appear, viz. how little the Ca∣tholique Party understood the design, seeing there were not a score of guilty found, though all imaginable industry was used by the Com∣mons, Lords, and Privy Councel too. But suppose (my Lords and Gentlemen, which never can be granted) that all the Papists of that age were consenting, Will you be so seve∣re then to still punish the Children for their Fathers faults? Nay, such Children that so unanimously joyned with you in that glorious Quarrel, wherein you and we underwent such sufferings, that needs we must have all sunk, had not our mutual love assisted.
What have we done, that we should now deserve your Anger? Has the Indiscretion of some few incenst you? 'Tis true, that is the thing Objected.
Do not you know an Enemy may easily mi∣stake a Mass-Bell, for that which calls to Dinner; or a Sequestrator glad to be affronted being Constable? when 'twas the hatred to

his person, and not present Office, which per∣chance egg'd a rash man to folly. We dare with submission say, let a publick Invitation be put up against any Party whatsoever; nay, against the Reverend Bishops themselves, and some malicious Informer or other will alledge that which may be far better to conceal. Yet all mankind by a Manifesto on the House-door are encouraged to accuse us; Nor are they upon Oath, though your Enemies and ours take all for granted and true.
It cannot be imagined, where there are so many men of heat and youth (overjoy'd with the happy Restauration of their Prince, and remembring the Insolencies of the former Grandees) that they should all, at all times prudently carry themselves; for this would be more then men: And truly we esteem it as a particular blessing, that God has not suffer'd many, through vanitie or frailty to fall into greater faults, ther are yet as we understand laid to our charge.
Can we chuse but be dismay'd (when all things fail) that extravagant Crimes are fathered on us? It is we that must be the Au∣thors, some say, of firing the Citie, even we that have lost so vastly by it. Yet truly in this

our ingenuity is great, since we think it no Plot, though our Enemie, an Hugonot Pro∣testant acknowledged the fact, and was iust∣ly executed for his vain Confession. Again, if a Merchant of the Church of England buy Knives for the business of his Trade, this also presently is a Popish contriuance to destroy the well-affected.
We must a little complain, finding it by experience, that by reason you discontenance us, the people rage: and again, because they rage, we are the more forsaken by you. Assured we are that our Conversation is affable, and our Houses so many hospitable receipts to our Neighbours. Our acquaintance therefore we fear at no time, but it is the stranger we dread (that taking all on hear say) zealously wounds, and then examines the business when 'tis too late, or is perchance confirmed by another, that knows no more of us then he himself.
'Tis to you we must make our applications, beseeching you (as Subjects tender of our King) to intercede for us in the execution, and weigh the Dilemma, which doubtless he is in, ei∣ther to deny so good a Parliament their request, or else run counter to his Royal inclinations, when he punishes the weak and harmless.


Why may not we, Noble Country-men, ho∣pe for favour from you, as well as the French Protestants find from theirs? A greater duty then ours none could express, we are sure. Or why should the United Provinces, and other Magistrates (that are harsh both in mind and manners) refrain from violence against our 

Religion, and your, tender breasts seem not to harbour the least compassion or pity? These neighboring people sequestrer none for their Faith, but for transgression against the State; Nor is the whole party involved in the crime of a few, but every man suffers for his own and proper fault. Do you then the like, and he that offends let 

him die without mercy, And think always (we beseech you) of Cromwels injustice, who for the actions of some against his pretended Laws, drew thousands into Decimation (even ignorant of the thing) after they had vastlie paid for their securitie and quiet.
We have no studie but the Glory of our So∣veraign, and just libertie of the Subjects; nor was it a mean argument of our dutie, when every Catholique Lord gave his voice for the Restoration of Bishops; by which we could pretend no other advantage, but that 26. Vo∣tes

(subsisting wholly by the Crown) were ad∣ded to the defence of Kingship, and conse∣quently a check to all Anarchy and confusion.
'Tis morally impossible, but that we, who approve of Monarhy in the Church, must e∣ver be fond of it in the State also. Yet this is a misfortune we now plainly feel, that the lon∣ger the late transgressors live, the more for∣gotten are their crimes, whilst distance in time calls the faults of our Fathers to remem∣brance, and buries our own Allegeance in eternal Oblivion and forgetfulness.
My Lords and Gentlemen, Consider we beseech you, the sad condition of the Irish Souldiers now in England, the worst of which Nation could be but intentionallie so wi∣cked, as the acted villanie of many English, whom your admired Clemencie pardoned. Remember how they left the Spanish servi∣ce when they heard their King was in France; and how they forsook the emploiment of that unnatural Prince, after he had committed that never to be forgotten act of banishing his distressed Kinsman out of his Dominions. These poor men left all again to bring their Monarch to his home, and shall they then he forgotten by You? Or, shall my Lord Dou∣glas

and his brave Scots be left to their shifts; who scorn'd to receive Wages of those that have declared War against England?
How commonly is it said, That the O∣ath of renouncing their Religion is intended for these? which will needs bring this loss to the King and you, that either you will force all of our Faith to lay down their Arms (though by experience, of great integrity and worth) or else, if some few you retain, they are such whom Necessity has made to swear against Conscience, and who therefore will certainly betray you, when a greater advan∣tage shall be offered. By this test then, you can have none but whom with caution you ought to shun, and thus must you drive away those that truly would serve you; for had they the least thought of being false, they would gladly take the advantage of gain and pay, to deceive you.
We know your wisdom and generosity, and therefore cannot imagine such a thing. Nor do we doubt when you shew favour to these, but you will use mercy to us, who are both fellow-Subjects, and your owen flesh and blood also. If you forsake us, we must say, the world decays, and its final transmutation

must needs quickly follow.
Little do you think the insolencies we shall suffer by Committee-men, &c. whom chance and lot has put in to petty power. Nor will it chuse but grieve you, to see them abused (whom formerly you loved.) even by the Common Enemy of us both. When they punish, how will they triumph and say. Ta∣ke this (poor Romanists) for your love to King ship; and again, this for your long doa∣ting on the Royal Party; all which you shall receive from us, Commissioned by your dearest friends, and under this cloak we will gladly vent our private spleen and malice.
We know, My Lords and Gentlemen, that from your hearts you do deplore our condi∣tion; yet permit us to tell you, your bravery must extend thus far, as not to sit still with pity only, but each is to labour for the distres∣sed, as far as in reality his ablity will reach: some must beseech our Gracious Soveraign for us, others must again undeceive the Good, though deluded Multitude. Therefore all are to remember who are the prime raisers of the Storm, and how through our sides they would wound both the KING and You; for though their hatred to our selves is great,

yet the enmity out of all measure encreases, because we have been yours (and so shall con∣tinue) even in the fiery day of trial.
Protect us we entreat you then upon all your former Promises, or if that be not sufficient, for the sakes of those that lost their Estates with you; many of which are now fallen a sleep. But if this be still too weak, we must conjure you by the sight of this Bloody Catalogue, which contains the Names of your mur∣thered Friends and Relations, who in the heat of Battail, perchance saved many of your Lives, even with the joyful loss of their own.
The Catalogue of Names is at the end of the Book.
