


SIR,
THe world is come to that improvement of experience, as to account Dedi∣catories, more certain acknowledge∣ments of obligation than any Nove∣rint Universi, especially when there is a great distance of Quality between those by whom they are made, and those to whom they are directed. That this should be thought such, I am rather pleas'd, than troubled, since, my being oblig'd, argues my being known, to you, and consequently, that, from the one, I derive a satisfaction; from the other, an advantage.

The last Piece, which came abroad under my obscure name, was The Travels of the Embassy from the Duke of Holstein, into Muscovy, and Persia. The excellent Person who was the original Author of it, Olearius, oblig'd, with us, most of the Neighbouring Nations, who also rendred his work into their several Languages. I am told it was not unkindly receiv'd here; onely the occasion I have to speak of it now, is, that the coming forth of the English Translation, with greater lustre, than haply it had done otherwise, is, among those of some others, due to your encou∣ragement.
But I am not to date your notice of me from that; I must descend much lower, to a Time wherein you thought it dangerous to know, or be known to, many. Be not startled; when dangers are over, there remains onely a pleasing remem∣brance of them. It was, long before the Com∣mittee at Derby-House, was advanc'd into a Councel of State, an Age since, considering the subsequent reign of Tyranny and Barbarism, and the perpetual alarms and frights, whereto worry'd Loyalty was every where expos'd. These you have happily weather'd out, and seen the contrivers thereof at last overtaken by the slow pace of di∣vine Vengeance, an advertisement to All Chri∣stians

and Lay-Elders, who either gratulate or envy you the favours of a Prince, for whom you would have run yet greater hazards.
As to the Piece I now present you with, I have onely this to say. It is a Spanish Relation, writ∣ten by D. Alonso de Castillo Savorsano, a fa∣mous Author of that Nation. One of the most refin'd Wits of France thought it worth his pains, to render it into the Language of his Country, with all the graces and advantages it might derive from either. I have done it out of the latter, with a freedome of alteration and addition, as my fancy led me, to make it the most divertive I could in ours, which is the onely recommendation of all things of this nature. My Author pro∣mises his Readers a continuation of the Story, if what is already publish'd be kindly entertain'd: I do mine, the like, upon the same precaution; but with this particular inducement, That it will give me further occasion to assure the world how much I am,
Sir,

