



SIR,
THese Papers (some sheets of which, I two years since took the freedom to shew you) had, within some few Weeks after your sight of them,
waited upon you in this dress in∣to which now the Printer has put them, if the Plague had not dis∣appointed my intentions, which, coming to the Town where I liv'd, forc'd me from my House and Studies, having not (I con∣fesse) courage enough, to ex∣pose my self and Family to the mercy of so dismall a Disease, a∣gainst which, flight is the onely infallible preservative.
My occasions since have been so many and pressing, that I have had little leisure to collect my scatter'd Papers, and therefore, I must intreat your pardon, as well for the slow performance of my promise, as for whatever else you shall meet with in the Treatise, which may stand in need of it.
My design is, to shew, that though the Physiology and Patho∣logy
of Physick, ought to be mo∣delled according to the new Dis∣coveries in Anatomy, and the Democritical and Chymical Prin∣ciples, yet that many of the Rules, Methods, and Medicines, which more immediately respect the useful and practical part, are still to be retained, and that they are rather more reconcileable to the Modern, than they were to the Ancient Hypotheses.
For, the practical part of Physick being grounded upon Experience, does not so much depend upon the notional, that, this being over∣thrown, the other must necessarily fall to the ground. The fancies and reasonings of Philosophers and Physitians were built upon the practise, and signifie not much more to the Fundamentals of the Art of Physick, than pinnacles to
the body and foundation of a Build∣ing, which (though they be blown down) may stand unshaken.
Much of the Therapeutick part of Physick is like Dialls and Al∣manacks, which agree as well with that of Copernicus, as Ptole∣my's Hypothesis. For as the Anci∣ents made a true use of the light and heat of the Sun, in distinguishing and measuring Times and Seasons, and managing of their Husbandry, though probably they err'd in their Notion of his motion round the Earth; so did Physitians no lesse, happily, imploy Apollo's Art in the curing of Diseases, though they were ignorant of the true motion of the Blood, and of (the Sun of the Microcosm) the Heart.
It is (I know) objected, To what end have been all these new Discoveries in Physick; and to
what purpose is a farther Inquiry, if the practise be not altered by them? But to this Objection it may be easily answered, that though many of the Rules, Me∣thods, and Medicins of the Anci∣ents be still in force, and must be made use of in the curing of Dis∣eases; yet, when we consider, that in this Art, there must be much left to the judgment and discreti∣on of the Physitian, as to under∣standing of the Disease, the Com∣plications, and the applying of the Methods, and Remedies sea∣sonably to mens particular Con∣stitutions, it will appear, that an Artist (who proceeds from true principles) is as much to be pre∣fer'd before a bare practitioner, as a good Architect before a com∣mon Bricklayer, or Mason, who, though by his practice, he has learnt
to build a Wall, or a stack of Chimneys, will be necessarily at a losse in designing a great and re∣gular Fabrick.
It is (I confesse) an absurd temper to be so morose, so addi∣cted to authority and antiquity, as to shut our eyes, lest they should discern a new Truth, and rather disbelieve our own Senses than the Writings of Hippocrates and Galen. But, on the other hand, the humor is no lesse ridiculous, to put on the same levity in matters of Philosophy and Physick, as we do in Clothes, to like nothing which is not of a new fashion, to have a greater esteem for Error and Non∣sense in a modish Garb, than Truth and Wisdom in an old-fashioned Dress. Though we see farther than the Ancients did, we must acknowledge, that we stand upon
their Shoulders; and, if we will be ingenuous, that we are the Dwarfs and they the Giants.
We need not (I think) in our age, apprehend any danger to Phy∣sick from an over-fondness of An∣tiquity. The growing evil is the other Extream, a fancy of rejecting the wisdome of the Ancients, for the follies and whimsies of some phantastical Pseudo-chymists, which is, like the Americans, to barter Gold and Silver, for Beads and Glass.
Sir, Our Nation is of late grown as fond of Enthusiasts in Physick, as they were of those in Divinity; and Ignorance (amongst some men) is become as necessary a qualificati∣on for the practise of Physick, as it us'd to be for Preaching. I cannot believe, that the delight which the Vulgar (ray, and some Wise
men) take in being cheated by Mountebanks, proceeds from any principle in Nature, which inclines them to it. But rather think it to be caus'd from Impostours being more industrious in deluding the World, than the true Artists in un∣deceiving it.
There has of late been one of them wondrous busie in possess∣ing the rabble (to whose capacity his Discourse is suited) against the learned Physitians of the Colledge of London, and all others, who have been bred up, and taken de∣grees in Ʋniversities. He puts them into his own Bears skin, and then baits them. He would make the World believe, that they are a com∣pany of narrow streight-lac'd men, who onely confine themselves to Books, and never study Nature, and that they stifle and suppress all
occasions of improving their Art. I do not wonder, that they meet with so ill usage at his hands, whose bu∣siness and profession it has been for above twenty years, to libel al∣most all sacred and honourable persons of this Nation. I have in this Treatise, endeavored to vin∣dicate them from his false aspersi∣ons, by shewing them to have been Authors of the New Improve∣ments and Discoveries in Physick, and the great Promoters of Experi∣mental Philosophy. By the way, I have thought it not improper, to make some reflections upon the Book of this bold and impertinent invader of Physick, and plausible vender of very popular non-sense.
The truth is, both Mercurius Po∣liticus, the Author of Medela, and his Book, are so inconsiderable, that they deserve not to be treated
with any respect, especially, since himself so inhumanly tramples up∣on the ashes of the Ancients, at that wild rate flings dirt upon the learnedst Society of Physitians in the World, and libels the Ʋniver∣sities, not only in his Book, but in his pretensions to have had his E∣ducation in them.
Yet, my design is not so much to concern my self in the man, or his scurrilous expressions, as to take occasion from those material points in Physick, which he has ve∣ry idly and extravagantly stated, to treat of them more closely and pertinently, according to the best and truest grounds of Philosophy and Physick.
Sir, I have so far presum'd upon your friendship, as not only to trou∣ble you with the reading but coun∣tenancing of this Treatise. If it be
not suitable to the advantages which I might very well have re∣ceived from a long acquaintance with you (your converse being as diffusive of Knowledge, as it is of Kindness.) Pray believe that I have minded more the being just to my Promise than careful of my Credit. Sir, I am
Westmin. Martii. 10. 1666.

