


THIS little book is presented un∣to You; not be∣cause the Translator fol∣lows the epidemick cu∣stome which enforceth the complement of a De∣dication; or expects any return of temporal pro∣fit from you; or stoops you to so low a Patro∣nage,
 as to become Gos∣sipps to this adopted child; which are the vul∣gar ends of almost all presents of this nature, wherby the Receivers are rather engaged than gra∣tified:) But meerly as an humble oblation of Filial duty and respect. For he pretends not to cast in his mite, or bring a gift to your spirituall treasury, but only to pay a little parcell of his larger debt, and to give you an ac∣count of some houres of his time, which he ac∣knowledgeth
 should be all employed in your ser∣vice. Besides, he but re∣stores unto you, what was your own before, by an∣other and a nearer title of Confraternity; and only new cloath's a Spanish Monk of St. Bennet's holy Order, with your English habit, (a thing both usu∣all, and hitherto very suc∣cesfull unto you, hoping thereby to make him the better welcome; and not doubting but he will speedily, easily, and ef∣ficaciously insinuate him∣self
 into your affections, whose dayly practices have so great sympathy with his divine doctrine.
For what are (or surely should be,) the continu∣all endeavours of a true Benedictin Monk, (and in∣deed of all devout Chri∣stians) but to quell and conquer the world, the flesh, and the Devill, accord∣ing to the Principles of Truth; to subdue sense to reason; to make his very passions, (by taming them,) usefull, and his affections, (by fixing them upon the
 right object,) instru∣mentall to the attaining of perfection; and to study self-knowledg, pra∣ctice self-hatred, and persevere in self▪deniall? that God may be the sole possessor of his heart, the only mover of his affections, and the all ruler in his whole man, having now no self-will left to hinder his holy operation.
And this is the only drift of this devout Trea∣tise; which may there∣fore fully serve you
 (and all pious Pilgrims travelling to their hea∣venly home) for a clear glass, wherein you may see your own souls with∣out flattery, discover your spirituall blemishes without partiality, learn the rare secret of rooting out vices, implanting vertues, improving all accidents to your best profit, and trimming up your interiours to your highest advantage for the sweet entertainment of your beloved Spouse, without overmuch pains or prolixity.

 You are (I say▪ to look upon this small book, as upon a Compendious sum∣mary of Christian per∣fection; or as a little store-house, well fraught with the Originall seeds and simples of all spirituality, from whence other de∣vout druggists, cunning in compositions, have since furnish'd their lar∣ger shops, and extracted many ample and indeed some excellent volumes. But because Art is long, Life short; and this life is lent us to learn the Art
 of living well; what pity is it, that our lives should be more spent in reading, than profiting; that men should take more delight in writing, than instruct∣ing; and that we must be forc'd to seek a few precepts in many sheets, which may be plainly set down in a few pages? Yet such is the strange itch of writers now a days, that the number of books wch are extant upon all sub∣jects, seems to exceed that of the readers, whose arms may be as well tired in
 turning over the vast multitude of volumes, as their brains confounded in studying them: So that it were to be heartily wished, that that grave S. Tho∣mas of A∣quin. who being ask∣ed, which was the speediest and best way to be∣come learned▪ Answered, To read only one Book. Doctors advice were now revived and followed by spirituall persons; which is, That they would on∣ly (or at least chiefly) betake themselves to the serious perusall of some one good Authour, for their Guide, Governor, and Conductor in the way of the Spirit; if they mean speedily, and securely
 to arrive at their desired port of perfection. All o∣ther Books, should serve as certain solaces of their appetites, some changes of diet, or holy divertise∣ments in devotion; but this (which they have advisedly made choyce of) should be their Souls Dayly bread, and the or∣dinary, familiar, and na∣turall food and suste∣nance which it should strive to chew and digest. This (I say) should be their School of Defence, where they are to learn
 the right use of their spi∣rituall weapons; how to Train, Muster, and Or∣der the Army of their un∣ruly passions and affecti∣ons; how to stand up∣on their guard when an Alarm is given, or an assault made by their e∣nemies; how to apply fit salvs to their sores, when they are worsted and wounded in the skir∣mish; and finally how to behave themselvs in all emergent occasions of troubles and temptati∣ons, or other accidents whatsoever.

 And though I presume not to propose unto you this Brother of yours, as a more absolute master in this Art, than your fa∣mous and renowned Ab∣bots, Gersen, Cisnerius, Blosius, and many other excellent and experienc'd Champions of your Or∣der, with whom he will not enter into the least competition: Yet I may In the 40. chap. of this Book. with him safely promise, that whosoever shall faithfully and perseve∣rantly practise what he here prescribes, shall find
 this Book, though very little in bulk, yet large e∣nough in vertue and sub∣stance to conduct him to the happy end he ayms at, to his soul's unspeaka∣ble comfort and content.
Neither is he to be dis∣esteemed for the plain∣ness of his expressions; for his intent being to touch the heart, rather than to tickle the Ears, he delivers solid sense in undisguised words: And the Interpreter, being to present a true draught of his Originall,
 and not to take upon him the privilege of a Paraphrast; could not shape the quaint lan∣guage of these profane times to the divine noti∣ons of his Authour, with∣out evident danger of sa∣crilege: and therefore pur∣posely avoids all curiosity of speech, wch oftentimes in these high matters, ra∣ther puzzles, than edi∣fies; and more amuzes the devout Readers under∣standing with niceties, than moves his affectiō to true piety, or makes him
 resolute in the perfor∣mance of his duty; which ought to be the only end and aym of all spirituall writers; and he is most happily and sufficiently eloquent, who hits this mark, and workes this holy effect; as no doubt but this Religious Au∣thor will do in their zea∣lous souls, who make the right use of his doctrin, in order to their spiritu∣all advancement, and u∣niō with God; whom ho∣ly S. Denys styles, the Fa∣ther of unions, and who by thesweet bands of love,
 draws his intelligent creatures to himself, the essentiall and eternall U∣nity. To the which lead and conduct us, ô God, one in Trinity, and Trine in Unity; Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Amen.
