


SIRS,
THis Work, as it is composed for your sakes, offereth it self to your hands, without bearing any other ornament on the brow, but the reflection of Truth, any other recommendation, than the worth of the subject. It is not the abun∣dant store of sanctity in the Courts of our Age, which maketh this stiled the HOLY COURT; but this Frontis-piece onely carrieth the name, because this Book beareth the model. which verily with more ease is moulded on paper, than printed on the manners of men. Yet we may affirm, that God, who draweth the sons of Abraham, from the midst of flints and rocks, doth in all places reserve Saints for himself: and he that will consider it well, shall find that in all times the Courts of zealous Princes, have had their Martyrs, their Confessours, their Virgins and Hermits.
I have a purpose, when my leisure will permit, to divulge the lives of Kings, Prin∣ces, Lords, men of state, and likewise also of Queens, Princesses, and Ladies, who in the course of the world, have flourished in much sanctity, beginning from the Court of David, and then concluding in our Age; to the end the multitude of examples may place the Sun in full splendour before their eyes, who take the greatness of their conditi∣on, for pretext of their remisness.
For the present, because Reason should carry the torch before History, I will satisfie my self, with publishing this Christian Institution, which treateth of the MOTIVES and OBSTACLES men of Qualitie have to Perfection, with the practise of virtues, most suitable to their condition; the whole attended by two books of Histories, that ve∣ry amply contain the good and evil of Courts. I consecrate this small labour, at the feet of the Church, among so many worthy Writers, which make her wholly radiant in gold, not unlike that Bird, which, as the Kings of Asia contributed great treasure to the building of a Temple, she having no other wealth, went thither to present her Feathers.
It remaineth, SIRS, that you make the COURT holy, and you shall sanctifie the world: your examples may do much therein; when you shall advance the standard of piety, a plentifull Train will follow. Behold how all those, that have framed their for∣tune upon vice, have built on abysses; they have sowed wind (as saith the Prophet) to reap tempests; their hopes are crackt, as clouds swoln with the vapours of the earth; and their felicity like a golden statue hanged in the Air on a rotten cable, hath melted up∣on their head. Never any man hath had good fortune in impiety. He that looseth his conscience, hath nothing else to gain nor loose: Nothing to gain, for that nothing remaineth for him, but unhappiness; and nothing to loose, because he hath lost himself. So many crimes and impieties daily float on the face of this Age, that you must stretch out your arms against iniquity. If you have your hearts fixed where God planted them, you shall place the confidence of well doing, in the life of the most timorous; and shame of ill doing upon the brow of the most impudent. Your hands shall always be in a readiness to overthrow vice, and your feet shall not walk, but on Palms of victory.
The Church extendeth her hands out to you, and imploreth the aid of your authori∣tie, and good examples. You are in the house of God, as Joseph in that of the Lord
 of Egypt. The Master hath put all into your hands, defile not the honour of his bed, since with his finger he hath imprinted the lustre of his glory on your fronts. If you be among men, as Mountains over valleys, be Mountains of perfume, of which Solomon speaketh in the Canticles; and not those hills of the Prophet Osee, which have nothing but snares, and gins, to serve for stumbling-blocks to those, whom they should enlight∣en. If you be elevated in the world, as cliffs above the Sea, be watch-towers, not rocks. If you be Stars, be Suns, to be the Chariots of light and life, and not comets, to pour malignity on the four quarters of the world. Be ye assured, that how much the more you are united to God, so much the greater shall you be; the more conformable you are to the will of the Sovereign Master, so much shall you behold the earth in con∣tempt under your feet, and Heaven in Crowns over your heads.
