


SIRS,
THe benefits you have received from God, and examples the Weal-publick expecteth from you, are so essential obligations of duty, that when we speak of the piety of Great-ones, you instant∣ly are selected out to hold the first rank therein, and to be the cause that virtues, which ever are voluntary, may turn as it were into, title of necessity. For, to joyn the Clergie to No∣bilitie, is to connect two things together, which are both in Nature and the Gospel, very eminent. It is to profess ones self an honest man by birth and dignity, to stand on a pinacle, and serve as a torch, to change your word into law, and life into example.
The Bishops of all Ages have been esteemed amongst men, as the stars in the firmament, whereof the Prophet Daniel, speaketh; as the Senatours of Heaven, the Fathers of the Commonwealth, the Interpreters Daniel 12. 3. Dionys. , De Ecclesia∣sticâ Hierar∣chiâ. of God, the Mediatours of the marriage contracted between the Lamb and the Heavenly Jerusalem.
This is the cause why we ever think it is to desire a good work, to desire a Bishoprick, taking the words of the Apostle in a sense, which flattereth sensuality, informeth not the conscience; but now, that the pas∣sage to Offices and secular dignities, is closed up from many with bars of gold and silver, whom birth seemeth to invite thereunto, they hope to repair themselves on the spoils of the Church, where such as proceed by sensual and worldly ways, oftentimes find poison and death hidden under a seeming sweetness.
For Sirs, we must tell you, your dignities, how eminent soever they be, are like the roof of the Temple in Jerusalem, which had flowers among guilded prickles; in my opinion to teach Bishops, that Myters bor∣dered with Villalpandus upon Ezechiel out of Jose∣phus de bello Judaico lib. 6. c. 6. gold, and diversified with stones, have notwithstanding their points and prickings.
Had we as many eyes open towards Heaven, as Heaven openeth to behold here below the most secret actions of men, we should be strucken with horrour to see an Ecclesistical dignity fall to the lot of a depra∣ved soul, which changeth all the abilities thereof to incentives for sin, and to make of his proper honours the true snares of his soul.
But it is a common disaster, that the smoke, which in the book of Tobie driveth away the devils, doth here daily surprize men. We stick on apparences, and if we retain some Maxims of verity, we use them as letters written with the juyce of a lemon, which can hardly be read but by the help of fire.
So that when the day of Judgement shall manifest it self by fire, and that at the departure of the soul, Hermanus Hu∣go de primâ scribendi ori∣gine. flames shall be presented to enlighten it, even to the bottom of the conscience, then shall it be when all the knowledge of virtue, which we here on earth retain so poor and languishing, shall appear with enflamed characters for our condemnation.
It is an admirable thing, which the good Cardinal Hugo, who flourished about four hundred years a∣go, as he lay on his death-bed, where with much advantage the vanities of the world are discovered, and when perhaps some too indiscreetly flattered him upon the splendour of his dignity, spake in the voice of an Oracle: Take away these vanities, for I protest, if it were to do again, I had rather die in The life of Hugo. a Monastery covered with leaprousie, than with the scarlet robe of a Cardinal.
Yet notwithstanding this man had been so little idle, that besides the Concordances of the Bible which he composed, and the Commentaries he made upon the whole Corps of holy Scripture, he so couragiously employed himself in the exercise of good works, that being drawn out of the excellent Order of S. Domi∣nick, he retained all his former virtues, which found no change in him, but that they added to their na∣tive beauty the lustre of authority. I speak this, not to inform Prelates, from whom I should receive in∣struction, but to represent to so many of the young Nobility, as we now daily behold advanced to Ecclesia∣stical charges, the peril there is in Prelacies, which are not guided by the paths of a good conscience.
It is a monstrous thing (said holy S. Bernard) to hold the highest place, and have the lowest cou∣rage; Bern. de con∣sid. lib. 1. cap. 7 the first Chair, and the last life; a tongue magnificent, and a hand slothfull; much noise about you, and little fruit; the countenance grave, and actions light; great authority, and no more constan∣cy than a weather-cock. It were a better sight to behold an Ape on the house top, and smoke in a candlestick, than a man dignified without merit.
On the contrary part, when science and virtue agree with Nobility, to make up a good Church-man, it is so glorious a spectacle, that it may be said, God to produce it on earth, hath taken a pattern from himself in Heaven. I wish no more faithfull witnesses than this Prelate which I shall present unto you in this first Treatise, after I have made a brief Summary of precepts, which I have purposely comprised in very few pages, to render them the readier for the understanding; well knowing, there are store of books largely enough dilating on this subject, the length of which I have avoided to attend the matter.
I wish it may have an effect in your hearts worthy of your courage, that honouring your dignity for virtue, virtue may enoble you with titles of true glorie.

