


MY LORD,
I Finish the Holy-Court in my Books, when your age inviteth you to begin it in your manners; and for your first exercise of arms, I offer you the Com∣bats and Empire over Passions, which is greater then that of the world.
There it is where you shall know the industry of a warre, which nature wageth, and reason teacheth us; which is never too soon learned, and which is ordinarily but too late under∣stood. Princes in other battels speak with mouths of fire, and make use of a million of hands; but in this which I represent, they are alone, and therein employ but the moitie of themselves, one part of Man being revolted against the other. Besides, all the honour of the uictory rests in themselves; arms, fortresses, and Regiments not at all participating therein, and if they prove fortunate in these encountres, they stand in the esteem of wise men, for Demy-Gods.
Their quality obligeth them to this duty more then other men, since Passions are winds, which in popular life raise but lit∣tle waves, but in them stir up mountains of water. For which, I, am perswaded, that, as you so dearly have loved the labours of my Pen, and sought for your instruction out of my Books; I could not do a better service, or more suitable to your age, then by arm∣ing you against these plagues, which have so often tarnished Dia∣dems on the brow of Cesars, and turned Conquerours into Slaves.

 Sir, I promise my self much from your Greatnesse in this Conquest, seeing it already hath given testimonies to the world, worthy of your eminent Birth, which oblige you to virtue, out of a necessity, as strong, as your disposition is sweet. VVit, which is as the principall Genius of your house, hath in you cast forth glimmers, that have flown throughout Europe, when you publickly answered throughout all Philosophy, in an age where∣in other Princes begin to learn the first elements. You have pla∣ced wisedome on the highest Throne of Glory, and it by your mouth hath rendred Oracles to instruct the learned, and asto∣nish Doctours. In the first season of life, which so many other spend in delights, you have heightned the lights of your under∣standing by the labour and industry of study, living, as certain Plants, which bear the figure of Starres all invironed with Thorns.
It is time, that all your Brightnesse change into Fire, and since Sciences are but Colours, which appeare not in the night-time, if Virtue do not illuminate them, they must be gilded with the rayes of your good life, and enkindled with the ardours of your courage, as you very happily have already begun.
Sir, I do assure my self, that of all those things you know you will onely approve the good, and that of all such as you can, you will do none but the just. This is it you owe to the King, to whom you have the honour to be so near. This is it, which the education of the most prudent of Fathers, and the tender care of the best of mothers, exact. This is it, that France, which looketh on you (as a Sien of its Lillies) wisheth. This is it, which bloud, the mostnoble on Earth, breeding the most happy in the world, and that face, where Grace and Majesty make so sweet a commixion, cease not to pro∣mise us.
As there is nothing little in you, so we must not endure any thing, imperfect: and if that, which we take to be spots in the Sun, be Stars; it plainly sheweth us, that all must be splendour in your condition, and that we must not expect years, since the wit of Princes in much swifter then time.
Your great Vncle, who gained the battel of Cerisoles, said to those who upbraided him with his youth, that he did not cut with his beard, but with his sword: and I am perswaded, that you
 will imitate his valour, to take part in his glory, yea even in this your minority, wherein the Kings colours being already to fly under your name.
My Lord, remember, the throne of the Sun among the Egy∣ptians was supported by Lyons, and that you must be all heart to support that of our most Christian King▪ in imitation of the great Prince, to whom you ow your Birth; For whose sake I wish you as many blessings as Heaven promiseth you, esteem∣ing my self most happy to be able to contribute my labours and services to the glory of your education, since I have the ho∣nour to call my self by just title:
SIR,

