


SIR,
THe excellency of the subject I handle in these discourses, makes me reflect on that of your Greatness, to offer you a Work, which being conceived by your autho∣rity, must needs seek for birth under your favour. It is the third Part of a Court absolutely holy, which not unlike the Citie S. John saw in his profound com∣templations, cannot ascend from our manners to Heaven, unless it descend from Heaven into our manners. I likewise endeavour to fashion it in Books, by the model of things ce∣lestial, to imprint it on lives; and I now undertake the defence of truth, which constituting your salvation, and composing your happiness, well deserve to be the most serious employ∣ments of your mind.
It is true (Sir) all Maxims of State, that depend not on the Maxims of God, are effects of carnal prudence, which end in flesh; and all fortunes that rest not on him, who with three fingers supporteth the globe of the earth, rather pursue the way of precipices, than the path of exaltation. The wisdom of the world loves nothing so much, as that whereof it is most ignorant: it runs after honour, not knowing what honour is; ever hungry and still needy, nor having any other aim, but to make it self a Mistress over giddie spirits, to become the slave of all passions. Which maketh me say, there are none but the blind, who seek after it, the miserable who find it, the sottish who serve it, and the forlorn who tie themselves to its principles. But the wisdom of Heaven, which I in these Maxims present you, is so tran∣scendently sublime above all humane inventions, as the light of stars surpasseth the petty sparklings and slitting fires of the earth: It is that which leisurely marcheth by holy paths, to the sources of day-light, and as being present before the throne of God, beholdeth glory and felicitie unfolded in his hands. It is the element of great souls, such as yours; and when they once are throughly settled therein, they find tastfulness which turneth into nutriment, and nutriment which passeth to immortalitie. Your prudence may read in your own expe∣rience, what I express in my Treatises, nor need you go any further than your own life, to meet with the proofs of these excellent verities.
You know (Sir) how the Divine Providence in the first flower of your age, drew you from ill ways, and snatched you out of the hands of infidelity, as a Constantine from the palace of Diocletian, to serve as a Buckler for the Church, whereof impietie would have made you a persecutour. This Providence knew so well how to separate bloud from man∣ners, that it caused you to demolish what your Ancestours had raised, and preserving their dignity without touching their errours, to make of the unhappiness of their judgement, the beginning of your felicity. From thence you see with what success the hand of God hath conducted you to the height of this most eminent glory, wherein France at this present be∣holds you, as a Prince accomplished in the experience of affairs, and times, the Father of good counsels, the undertaker of great actions, endowed with a spirit which seems an eternal fire, and to be parallel'd by nothing, but the goodness of your own heart.
You live peaceable, as in the right sphere of true greatness, where you perpetually reflect on two Poles, God and the King: You seek for the one in the other, and you walk to the God of life, by the most lively of his Images. His Arms are beheld to prosper in your hands, as well as his Edicts in your mouth. You have born thunder, and Olives through∣out France under your protection, awfull at one time, and amiable at another, but ever prosperous in both. Yea, fully to crown your happiness, the Divine goodness hath afford∣ed you a house flourishing in riches and honours, which comprehendeth in its latitude, two Princes of the bloud to serve as pillars for the State. It gave you a wife, who hath made of her fruitfulness, the trophey of her virtues, and entered by love into an eclipse, to become the Mother of lights, and bring forth children to bear the hope of Flower-de-luces. The eldest Son, whom your Excellency hath committed as a sacred pledge to our Colledge at Bourges, would trouble us to tell you from whence he hath taken such, and so many splen∣dours, and sparkling flames of wit, which dazle the eyes of those who have the honour to be near him, were not you his Father. He is a Pearl, who maketh it appear by the equality of his Orient, that if Nature have equalled his birth to the greatest on earth, he will equal his virtues to his extraction.

 SIR, I speak this ingeniously, that you may both behold in your own Person, what I treat in my books, as also understand that true piety soweth the seeds of the most solid greatness. But besides, the relation this Design seems to have to the pleasure of God over you, I find much obligation to offer it you as a slender testimony of a singular gratitude in our Superiours and our whole Societie, which would willingly suffer their affections to pass through my pen, if it had as much eloquence as the main body tenders respect and zeal to your service. You have been pleased to make it known by your good purposes, to love it by election, defend it by justice, honour it with your opinion, encrease it with your libera∣lities, and if your benefits be ornaments unto it, your judgement serve for Apologies.
I received a notable portion in your favours, whilest you resided in Bourges, where your Excellency called me to deliver the Word of God, and to confess your virtues in my di∣scourses, as I must acknowledge my discourses to proceed from your virtues. It was by your conversation I perceived, that as there is nothing too high for your understanding, so there is not any thing too low for your bounty. God hath bestowed on you the gift which the Scripture attributeth to the Patriarch Joseph, to oblige hearts with sweetness; not un∣like the Engines of Archimedes, which made water mount in descending: so yours, causeth not your humility to descend, but to make it re-ascend to the source of the prime sublimity. Which done, not presuming any thing in regard of your Excellency, but daring all through your courtesie, I present these MAXIMS of the Holy Court, of which many will make their reading, others their precepts: but you will (I hope) frame your virtues of them on earth, to make them your Crowns in Heaven. So wisheth
SIR,

