



Right Honourable;
THese two plain Sermons were composed and suited to serve a great and sad Occa∣sion of your Honours, reached at your Desires, heard with your good liking, and most effectually commended by your diligent Observation and Christian Practice of their Doctrine, and therefore in these Respects were justly your own without the formality of a Dedica∣tion; and truly I designed them so intirely for the Service of your Honourable Family, that their
Preachingh had been their only Publication, and they had continued Yours still in the strictest Sence of Pro∣priety, if an intimation of your Honour's Desires (which to me carry the force of a Command) had not only allowed, but obliged me to make them more common: and seeing the Cross is not only the Badg, but the Burthen of our Christianity, and you have so many Fellow-Sufferers in the World, I have reason to hope, that others may find the same Support and Comfort by these seasonable Discourses, which through God's Blessing they have happily afforded you.
And there being so many afflicting Circumstances (as it is generally known) in your Case, your Pati∣ence and Submission will want no Advantage of Ex∣ample, but be able to speak more perswasively, and make more Converts than these weak Sermons of mine, or the Oratory of more powerful Preachers.
Indeed when Death comes so near us, and makes so deep a Wound in Nature, we need an extrordinary Assistance of Grace, the Benefit of Precept and Ex∣ample both, all the Helps which Philosophy, and Religion can furnish, lest we be wearied and faint in our Minds. St. Hierom writes of one Paulina a Lady of a steady and well-governed Tem∣per in other Trials, who yet could not bear her Chil∣drens
Death, without an immoderate and unseemly Resentment; but some allowance may be fairly made to the Tenderness of her Sex, when we see Men who have naturally a greater Constancy and Courage, wise Men, religious Men, ready to fall by the same Stroke. Synesius the Bishop of Cyrene was so af∣fected with the Death of his Children,Epist. 16. that in one of his Epistles, he complains that the Remembrance of it, like a lingring Consumption, wasted him daily, that all the Pleasure of his Life died with them; and at last, breaks out into this impati∣ent Wailing; Let me live no longer, or else for∣get that they are dead. Yea, how doth the Heart of King David, a Saint and a Souldier, melt into a more than a Womanish Softness, and bewray its Weakness and Instability, in a Torrent of Tears, and impotent, unmanly Plaints at the Death of one Absolom; Absolom a Traitor and a Rebel to his King and Father; yet because a Son, still must be lamented in the highest Strain of Passion.
My good Lord and Lady, you bewail a Son who had nothing of Absolom in him, but his Beauty, who had all the Grace and sweetness of Courtesy, of a most obliging Mind, Speech and Deportment, with∣out any of the Guilt or Blemish of Flattery, Affecta∣tion, or Design; who wanted no Accomplishment
beseeming his Noble Birth and Quality, but excelled in Piety to his God, and Reverence to his Parents, and a towardly Compliance with the other Instructors and Governours of his Youth, whereby he soon be∣came the Delight and Ornament of a learned and ver∣tuous Society,Exeter Col∣ledg Oon. dear to them as a Child, and honou∣red by them as a Patron, and therefore wept over as both, with a mixt Affection, but not so fond, as rational.
And indeed his obliging Qualifications procured him such a general Interest and Esteem, that every one who knew him seemed to mourn all along for him, as if the Loss had been only his without any Partner to share his Grief.
But I design not in this,In Mr. Lax∣ton's Sermon, preached on the day of his Interment. so much a Character of his Worth, (which hath been drawn already in better Colours, and with more graceful Strokes, than my poor Stock, or Skill can supply) as a just Commendation of your Honours singular Piety and Patience, your deep sence of the Displeasure, and yet your meek and humble Submission to the Will of the Father of Spirits, in taking from you a Son of so much Delight and Hope, and that in the Prime and the Blosom of his Years, when he seemed to be all Life and Vigor; a very severe and searching Trial.

Yet I who had the unhappy Honour to be admitted into the darkest Scene of your Sorrow, and to see your Vertue surprized with a most dreadful Assault, soon perceived it happily succoured with such forces of Reason and Religion, as assured an equal Conflict, if not a Victory.
And I know you have often blessed God, who by a wonderful Supply of his Grace hath maintained your Patience and Fortitude, and with the Temptation given a way to escape, and secure your Innocence.
And I shall earnestly pray, that the God of all Consolation, would be pleased still to suggest to you such Religious Considerations as may establish, and encrease your present Comfort, and lead you through all the obscure Passages of this Veil of Tears, into the brightest Glories of Everlasting Light and Joy, that the Belief of your dear Son's happy Transla∣tion, and the well-grounded Expectation of your own, may mortify all your earthly Affections, make you every day less concerned for what you enjoy, or suffer in this World; and that the Felicities of Eter∣nity, may render the good or evil things of Time very indifferent to you. To these my Prayers, I shall
upon all Occasions add my best Endeavours to serve your Honours, in promoting your highest, your hea∣venly Interest and Benefit, as becomes my Office and Obligations; there being no one more truly sensible of your Honour's Great Favours, than is,
My Noble Lord and Lady,

