



RIGHT HONOURABLE.
BEing at your request (which was to me little lesse then a command) prevailed with, to tender my service and paines be∣fore you at Pauls, I began first to thinke, that this unexpected Providence of God, had some intention for good to be done; And then to consider with my self, not what might be most pleasing, to scratch an itching eare,2 Tim. 4.3. but what Doctrine might be most seaso∣nable to the time and place, and most usefull and profitable for that great Panegyris, or Solemne Assembly. And I could pitch upon nothing, (in so short a warning) that might (as I conceived) be more beneficiall, then this present Discourse (now humbly presented to your Eyes, as then to your Eares) concerning the sad, and never e∣nough lamented Shipwrack of the Faith, amongst ma∣ny professours of the Gospel: my aime being, if not to re∣cover the fallen (who Adder-like refuse to hear us) yet, by Gods blessing, to prevent the fall of others. And truly, had it not been clearly foreprophesied of these last and worst Times, that many should depart from the Faith,1 Tim. 4.1. 2 Tim. 3.1. 2 Pet. 2.1.3.3, we should have wondred the more, to finde this Apostacie, after so much light of the Gospel, so long enjoyed; and after
 so serious and strict profession of it by many, even to suffering much for it; Not only the truely Religious peo∣ple of the Land, who stand fast in their old Integritie, do wonder at the monstrous and blasphemous Opinions, now lately hatched amongst us, by the power of Hell, and Prince of darkenesse (assisted by those Locusts, the Je∣suites) that craule amongst us) under the notion of New lights; But the whole Christian world do stand amazed at it: yea some reproach and deride us, as if Amsterdam, (the late sinke of all Religions) were now removed into England. The Conjectures of men, at the causes hereof, are almost as various, as themselves. Severall Heads seeke out, and have found Several Reasons of this Apostacie: We will hear what they say.
First, Some (the Prelaticall partie) charge it upon the Abandoning of Episcopall Goverment, which with a watchfull eye, and strict hand, did Suppresse, and keep them under. For that, I have these things to say. 1. They, the Bishops, did indeed suppress all sects (as they called them) that were opposite to their Hierarchicall Pompe, and Tyranie, but tolerated (yea countenanced) many Po∣pish Superstitions, and much Romish and Arminian Doctrine; which now some great ones of their own, and most of the present Sectaries, do openly Preach and pub∣lish. It is observable, that many points of Poperie, and Arminianisme, are now vented by these severall Sects; I know not, to what to impute it, but either to the Jesuites Subtletie, who professe and Act every Sect; or to the suit∣ablenesse of many of those errours, to corrupt nature; that even ignorant and unlearned men, fall into them without any Teachers; as well as some Learned Rab∣bies; I wish, they would consider it. 2. We may truly say of the Bishops, some of them, they hatcht and bred
 those Sects and Heresies, which we now labour under: They, by their rigour, in exacting Conformity, to need∣lesse Ceremonies, first drave many to Seperation, and then to fall from one errour to another; which now shew themselves, in this time of Anarchicall Liberty. 3. It is indeed want of Government setled in the Church, which is the Inlet to all these errours, and Heresies; Here was the beginning of our misery, that some were hasty to pull down one Government, but had no minde to set up another; and so left the Church, as a Vineyard without hedge or Wall, to be trampled down and eaten up by all the Beasts of the Forrest.
Secondly, others impute it to the charge of those, who first pleaded for Liberty of conscience, and prevailed with Authority for connivence at themselves; which they intending perhaps, only to be indulged to truly tender consciences, (which ought to be regarded) that doore of Liberty being but a little opened, the violence of others widened, and kept open the door, for the rest to rush in, and it could never since be shut.
Thirdly, Others lay it at the door of that Power, which repealed the Paenall Statutes, for not being present at Church, the place of publique meetings; which (say they) was an Implicit toleration for all Religions. This Key hath served ever since to open the doores of all the conventicles in the Land; where every subtle Jesuited Sect-master, hath free Liberty to vent his own poyson∣ous Opinions, and none to controll him. Nothing (it is thought) hath more gratified the Pope and his Jesuites, since these late troubles began, then that repeal. I wish, they (now at their leasure) may consider the mischiefs done; who had their hands and votes, in that repeal. These and some others, of the like nature, are the conject∣ures
 that are made, concerning the rise and original, of this grand Defection from the truth. I cannot but think, these, or some of these have done much towards our pre∣sent miseries and Church-distractions: but I beleeve, there may be found, other causes, nearer and more ime∣diate, in the men themselves, who have of late, made this Apostacie, this Shipwrack of the Faith: And they are these three, or one of them.
1. Ignorance, in many of our misled Proselytes, hath slaine ten thousands. Ignorance, I say, of the very first and Fundamentall principles of Religion: people were never well catechised, or grounded in the truth; and so carried away with every new winde of Doctrine. The common prey of Seducers, of old were silly women, and Children, not so much for age, as discretion: Look upon the followers of our new Masters, and they are for the most part younglings of eithr Sects, but most females, who from the begining were most capable of Seduction. There are many of these speake with them, about the princi∣ple of their own Sect or way, and they are ready and nim∣ble, to dispute it; as about Infant-baptism, and the Church way &c. But examine them about the points of Catechism, what Faith is, what Repentance &c. They cannot give any reasonable account. I my self have known some, that were Zealous Anabaptists, and the like, who could sufficiently finde Language to cry down a Steeple∣house, and Tythes, and raile at the Ministry, who were so farre from speaking the Language of Scripture in painest principles that they could not speake reason or sense, in their common discourse. Little do most men thinke or know, what desperate ignorance there is to be found, in most ordinary people; No marvell if Seducers, by good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the
 simple. Rom. 16.18.
2. Pride (if they have gotten any more then ordinary knowledge) pride of parts, pride of gifts, confidence of Spirit, nimblenesse of fancy, volubility of Tongue, &c. these puffe up self conceited Novices, wth scorn and arro∣gance, that they thinke themselvs abler then their Teach∣ers; and wiser then 7 men, yea 7 Ministers that are able to render a Reason for what they say or do; These young Lapwings runne away, with the shell on their head; and forget by whom they had their hatching. These turn Teachers and Preachers, and scorn and disdain those from whom they borrowed their light. Nothing so much discovers a light and a vaine head, and the Levitie and falsity of their waies, as first that pride and scorn manifested to all not of their own way; and that railing and reviling of men, far better then themselves for wisdome and pietie. Truth makes men humble, especially to those supposed to be in er∣rour and that meerly out of conscience: shewing all meek∣ness to all men for we ourselves were sometime foolish deceived &c. Tit. 3.3. But marke St Peters descrip∣tion of those false Teachers, who should bring in damnable Heresies: 2 Pet. 2.10.12. Presumptuous are they self-willed, they are not afraid, to speak evil of dignities: these speak evil of the things they understand not &c. That's a second; Pride.
3. Hyprocrisie; open, or secret corruption of mens hearts, doth often betray their heads into errours. This is the subject of the following Sermon; I must not here An∣ticipate my own discourse. Only let me tell you my owne and others observation; It is too well known, that many (I will not say, most) of them, who have left the old truths, for new, and the old waies for others, are sensibly grown far more loose and remisse, in the practicall parts of Religion,
 then they were, before they departed from us: even some of those who pretend to the purest way of Religion, and strictest way of Church Government are become more care∣lesse of themselves and Famlis, in secret and private du∣ties; Men and women that once durst not omit, reading, praying, catechizing their families, now can neglect all: Holding it, some of them, a profanation for to teach their Chidren, any Catechism, or forme of Prayer, or to speake of Scripture: But generally (which is observable) all the Sests cry down the morality of the Sabbath, make every day, (that is, no day) a Sabbath: can make it a day of recre∣ation or ease; and neglect the Assemblies: most of them (except the Quakers, who cry down pride and fashions, upon another Monkish designe) are as fashionable, in their haire and habits, as any the most vaine and garist a∣mongst us; and call it a part of their Christian Liberty: what may be the cause of these Defections, in opinion and practise? I feare some secret lust, or corruption of their hearts, which accounted the former strictness and precise∣nesse of the way of Religion, their burden; and now is dis∣covered by some Doctrines of Liberty. Hence it is, that they generally fly and forsake their old Teachers, who know their lives, and touch their lusts, and seek out such as preach novell and high speculations, with swelling words of vanity, which never stoop so low, as to touch their pride and wantonesse, Covetousnesse and worldly minded∣ness, &c. But these things are more fully prosecuted in the following Sermon; and I feare, I have held you too long from it, I commend it to your Honourable perusall, and to the Blessing of God, upon all that shall vouchsafe to reade it: In him I am
Right Honourable;  From my study; July 23. 1655.
