



THE wisest among the Heathen Writers have laboured much by their most Refined Discour∣ses, to settle a Tranquility of Mind, an E∣venness of Spirit in the inequalities, the eb∣bings and flowings of Fortune: But the Christian Philosophy only can effect what they have endea∣voured, by setting before us an immutable Eternity, Hea∣venly Joys and Glories, sufficient to abate our esteem of the most pleasing and splendid things here below; and to keep us from sinking under the heaviest troubles of this Life.
By this Philosophy our great Apostle, St. Paul,2 Cor. 4.16. Chap. 12.10. was strong; at lest, fainted not when he was weak; and tho his outward man perished, his inward man was renewed day by day; he being assured, that these light afflictions, which are but for a moment, in comparison, would work for him, and all his fellow-sufferers, a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory; whilst they, with him, look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen by
any eye but that of Faith. The same Philosophy ena∣bled the Hebrews to take joyfully the spoiling of their goods,Heb. 10.34. knowing that they had in heaven a better, and an enduring substance. And it instructs us all to lay up our treasures there, where they will be safe from corruption and stealth.Mat. 6.19, 20.
Yea, because God hath laid up for us a Crown of immor∣tal Life, and provided so well hereafter for his dutiful chil∣dren, we are obliged to be less solicitous about our earthly portions, and to bear all his fatherly chastisements, the sufferings of short time, with patience and contentment; es∣pecially considering that they are prudent exercises and me∣thods of discipline, to prepare us for heavenly Tranquility and blessedness.
For those dismal Providences which draw clouds and darkness over Religious Families, do but make them fitter to be presented to God, and to partake of the inheritance with the Saints in light.Col. 1.12.
The Rod of God is to them a Staff, and a comfort too; if like the branch of a Fig-tree, it be bitter and sharp, it is like it, fruitful too.
No Calamity comes as a Curse to a good House, whose Stock is pious, and whose Branches are holiness to the Lord. If any Leaf, or any Bough shall fall untimely, God shall gather it, and bind it up in the bundle of Life.
There is no worldly evil in which a religiously disposed mind may not find matter of some content and comfort. And truly, as disconsolate as your Case appears, it hath its lightsome mixtures, and many refreshing mitigati∣ons.
Tho God took your beloved Son when he was just ripe for the world (for he was come to Manhood at Sixteen), when you, and all that had a more remote interest in him,
promised your selves all the happy fruits of an excellent na∣tural temper, and of the accomplishment of an ingenious and religious Education: yet he took him too, in a time of great Peril and Temptation, when his age was most inclined to vi∣tious Compliances. Because he pleased God,Wisd. 4. and was belo¦ved of him, when he lived among Sinners, he was Transla∣ted; lest that wickedness should alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his Soul.
And I may here seasonably remind you, that when a lit∣tle before his last Sickness, he was treated with some loose Atheistical Discourse, too much in the mode of our times; He spoke his abhorence of it, and his utter dislike of such conversation; however the endearments of kindred or kind∣ness, did otherwise commend it to him. And I am told, that at the approach of his Death, which is usually most ter∣rible to young men, He prayed that you might be but as wil∣ling to part with him, as he was to die.
God hath taken your only Son, yet he hath left you two Vertuous and Dutiful Daughters, who I pray and hope, may be lasting and teeming blessings to you.
Scaliger and Lipsius, two incomparable Persons, were the last of their Family and Name; and I never read, that they were at all concerned for it: And surely it need not be so great a trouble to us, if it should please God to make the case our own: Seeing our Name could not have lasted much longer in a short-lived World; and seeing further, that God hath promised to the barren, and will make it good to the bereaved, That if they chuse the things that please him,Isa. 56.4, 5. he will give them a Place, and a Name, better than that of Sons and Daughters.
God grant, that by patient continuance in well-doing, and suffering, you may daily seek for Glory, and Honour, and Immortality, for that everlasting Name which shall not be cut off: And that you may be effectually instructed by the Do∣ctrine
of this plain Sermon (which was Preached, and is Printed at your desire, and wholly for your Service) how to make the best of the worst that hath, or can befal you; and to de∣fend against those two great Fountains of Temptation, Pleasure and Pain, that you may so happily govern the ruling Passions of Joy and Grief, Ar. 1. Eth. l. 2. c. 3. which have the nearest Influence upon our practices.
That after your Troubles and Trials, you may be in Hea∣ven, before your Translation, by a Christian Tranquility, an unshaken constancy of mind, and a blessed Peace of Con∣science; and that you and yours may long prosper, and be in Health ever, as your Souls prosper, is the hearty Prayer of

