



My Lord,
WHen I first designed
that these Papers
should take sanctu∣ary
at your Lord∣ships
Patronage, the Hebrew Pro∣verb
presently came into my mind,

Keep close to a great man, and
men will reverence thee. I knew
no better way (next to the innocen∣cy,Beresch. Rab. cap. 17. ap. Drus. A∣dag. Ebra∣ic. Decur. 6. Adag. 8.
and, if it may be, usefulness of
the subject I have undertaken) to
secure my self from the censures of
envy and ill nature, than by putting
my self under your protection, whose
known , the sweetness and ob∣ligingness
of whose temper is able to
render malice it self candid and fa∣vourable.
Encouraged also by this
consideration, I hardned my self into
the confidence of this Address, which
I had not otherwise attempted, but
that your Lordships kindness and
generous compassion, and the mighty
condescention wherewith you were al∣ways
pleased to treat me (while I had
the happiness of your Lordships
neighbourhood, did at once invite
and oblige me to it. I say no more,
lest I should affront that modesty
that is so innate to your temper, or

come within the least suspicion of
flattery, so repugnant to my own.
One thing only there is, which I
cannot but remark, the great honour
which your Lordship has done, not
to the Episcopal only, but to the
whole ministerial order, that a person
of your Rank and Education would
stoop to an employment, so little va∣lued
and regarded in this unthank∣ful
and degenerate Age. And herein
your Lordship has been a happy Pre∣cedent;
your example being already
followed by some, and will shortly
by more persons of Noble Descent
and Pedigree: a thing for which the
Church of England was never more
renowned, since the Reformation, than
it is at this day.
My Lord,
There was a time within the com∣pass
of our memmory, when the Bishops
amongst other things were accused

(by one of the House of Peers,Church-Hist. lib. 11. p. 183. though
one that had not the most reason to
bring in a charge of that nature) to
be in respect of their Parentage de
faece populi, of the very dregs and
refuse of the people (malice will play
at small games, rather than not at
all.) A charge as false as it was
spiteful: though had it been true, it
had been impertinent; seeing the ve∣ry
order is enough to derive honour
upon the person, even when he can∣not
as your Lordship, bring it along
with him. And indeed so honoura∣ble
an Order has Episcopacy ever
been accounted, even when there have
been no visible advantages, either of
riches or grandeur to attend it, as
there were not in the more early Ages
of Christianity, that persons of the
greatest Birth and Fortunes have not
thought it below them to exchange the
Civil Tribunal for the Bishops
Throne, and to lay down the pub∣lick

Rods and Axes, to take up the
Crosier and the Pedum Pastorale.
If we may credit that Catalogue of the
Bishops of Constantinople recorded
by Nicephorus,H. Eccles. lib. 8. c. 6. p. 541. we find Dometius,
Brother to the Emperour Probus, and
after him his two Sons, Probus and
Metrophanes, successively sitting in
that Chair: As afterwards Nectari∣us,
S. Chrysostoms Predecessor, was
of a Senator made Bishop of that
See. Thalassius became Bishop of
Caesarea, when he was a Senator,
the Praefectus Praetorio (or the Em∣perours
Lieutenant, one of the high∣est
places both of trust and honour
in the Roman Empire) of Illyricum,
and rising to greater dignities, being
designed by the Emperour for the Go∣vernment
of the East. S. Ambrose
(whose Father was an illustrious
person, the Praefect of France) was
made Governour of Liguria and
Aemilia, and sent thither with Con∣sular

power and dignity, during
which employment he was made Bi∣shop
of Milain. Petronius Bishop
of Bononia is said to have been first
a Praefectus Praetorio, and to de∣scend
of the Family of Constantine
the Great. Sidonius Apollinaris de∣scended
for many Generations of no∣ble
and illustrious Parents, his Fa∣ther
the Praefectus Praetorio of Gaul,
himself Son-in-Law to Avitus) a
person of extraordinary honour and
employment, and afterwards Consul
and Emperour) and yet in the midst
of this disdained not to become Bishop
of Clermont in France. More such
instances I could give, not to speak of
multitudes that were in the middle
and later Ages of the Church, especial∣ly
in our own Nation. But I return.
My Lord,
I beheld Religion generally laid
waste, and Christianity ready to

draw its last breath, stifled and op∣pressed
with the vices and impieties
of a debauched and profligate Age.
To contribute towards the recovery
whereof, and the reducing things (if
possible) to the ancient Standard, is
the design of the Book that is here
offered to you. The subject I assure
my self is not unsuitable either to
your Lordships Order, temper, or
course of life; if my ill managery
of it has not rendred it unworthy of
your Patronage. However such as
it is, it's humbly presented by him
who is▪

