



My Lord,
IN compliance with the good old Rule of S. Ignatius, , DoEpist. ad Philadelph. p. 30. vid. ad Trall. p. 16. nothing without leave from the Bishop, I have taken the confidence to lay these Papers at Your Lordships feet; being

well content, they should receive from You a sentence of Life or Death; either to come abroad into open light, or be condemn'd to be thrown aside, if you shall judge them useless and unprofita∣ble. For I am not so fond of my own Un∣dertakings, as to flat∣ter my self, that any thing that I can do, will work much upon the obstinate humour of a perverse and con∣tentious Age.
My Lord, The Church of England is usually as∣saulted by two sorts of Adversaries. The one declar'd Enemies to the Episcopal Government, or if at any time in a good humour they al∣low the name, they deny the thing making the Bishop of the Pri∣mitive times no more in effect than a meer Pa∣rish-Priest. The other are great pretenders to Antiquity, and strongly enough assert the Epi∣scopal Order, but with∣all would obtrude upon

us a Supreme and Uni∣versal Bishop, to whom all others are to be sub∣ject and accountable, and he we may be sure is the Bishop of Rome. As for the first of these, I have not directly enter'd the Lists with them, though what is here said concerning the Ancient Church-Government might be enough to satisfie Men modest and unpreju∣dic'd; and more I did not think fit to add. They have been so of∣ten baffled upon that

Argument, that no∣thing but a resolv'd obstinacy could make them keep a post, so utterly indefensable. But the Men of that way seem generally too over-weaning and o∣piniative, and I have no hopes of doing good upon that Man, that's wiser in his own Con∣ceit, than seven Men that can render a Reason. In∣deed the nature of my design led me more im∣mediately to encoun∣ter with the other Par∣ty, whose cause (so far

as it relates to the Sub∣ject under debate) I have examin'd, and brought to be tried by the Standard of Anti∣quity, the truest Rule to proceed by in this matter; and this mana∣ged without any need∣less Exasperations. For I never could think it a reasonable method of Conviction to rail at Popery, or to load the Bishop of Rome with ill Names, and spiteful Characters. The best way sure in such cases is to appeal to the judg∣ment

of the Ancients, and to enquire what power and authority was allow'd him in the wiser and better Ages of Christianity. Which I hope I have done with all truth and fair∣ness in the following Discourse.
My Lord, Your Lord∣ships known Zeal for the Protestant Cause, and (what next the good∣ness of the Divine Pro∣vidence is the strong∣est Bulwark and De∣fence of it) the honour and interest of the

Church of ENGLAND, might give you a just Title to this Discourse, though there were no other inducement to it. But we that are the Clergy of Your Dio∣cess, think our selves oblig'd to take all oc∣casions of letting the World know, how much we rejoyce under the happy Influences of Your Care and Con∣duct; how much we are beholden to that great Example of Pa∣storal Industry and Di∣ligence, you daily set

before us; that we have to deal with a temper so incomparably sweet and obliging, and that not only in private Converses, but in all public Cases that con∣cern the Church under your Charge, you are pleased so freely and familiarly to consult and advise with us. 'Tis this (to mention no more) that creates in us so just a regard and veneration for Your Lordship. And I veri∣ly believe, since the Primitive Times there

never was a more mu∣tual Endearment and Correspondence. Ne∣ver Bishop, that treated his Clergy with a more Paternal kindness and Condiscention; never Clergy that paid a grea∣ter Reverence, and a more chearful Obedi∣ence to their Bishop. That this Concord and Agreement may not only continue, but en∣crease, and the hap∣py effects of it visibly spread over your whole Diocess, and especial∣ly

this great CITY, is the earnest Prayer of,
MY LORD, 
