



SIR,
IT is the manner of Midwives, so soon as the childe is borne and dressed, to present it first to the owne parents, and then to the view of others. This follow∣ing Sermon, as it was first conceived by your motion and request (which is to me a virtuall command) so it is but fit and reason, that it should first be ten∣dred back unto you, that the same partie that helped to give it life and bringing forth, might also give it protection and bringing up. The successe and operation that it had (as I am made beleeve) in the hearts of them who heard it first speake, made me the more willing to expose it to the eyes of others, to see if it might somewhat prevaile to stifle, and (as Hercu∣les the serpents in his cradle) to strangle the lawlesse conten∣tions of this Lawing age. I have long and often lamented to see how all the world almost is turn'd into one common Tribu∣nall, either to sue, or censure others. The great resorts of peo∣ple in ancient times were wont to be for counsell to the houses of the Prophets: But now the Innes of Court, and Courts of Justice are more pestered with Clients, than the very houses of God. Hence it is, that for the most part, that Profession of the Law thrives best of any; and those that, perhaps some of them, envy an 100. L. per annum to a painfull Levite, with a great deale more ease, themselves get 500. L. and think it
nothing. The peevish perversenesse of men, is much guiltie of this thrift. For if men had either so much grace, or wit, to doe no wrong; or if they doe, or suffer wrong, to be willing to referre it to their wise and honest brethren, they might have both more peace in their minds, and also more mony in their purses. And I cannot but wonder at the frowardnesse and fol∣ly of men, that rather chuse to referre it to twelve men, and they strangers, by force and course of the Law; than to two men their neighbours and friends, by the perswasion of the Gospel. In which proceedings, there is this disadvantage at least (besides many more) that whereas they might have chosen Arbitrators, wise and honest, their differences fall of∣tentimes into the hands of many, whereof some are wise per∣haps, but not honest; others are honest, but no wiser than they should be: In which cases, a good cause, many times, falls to the ground. To prevent which mischiefe, was, at least, one maine intention of this Sermon. Knowing the weaknesse of it to walke alone, I have sent forth with it, two of its elder bre∣thren, (two other Sermons, preached on other occasions) to wait upon it, (and with it upon you, Sir) as poore folkes use to doe, who set the elder to tend upon the younger. Such is your noble Candor (as I well know) that you will both protect these now made your own, and also lovingly accept, what is so duly, so respectfully tendered; not only as a private pledge, but also as a publike acknowledgement to the world, of my many great ingagements for your many undeserved, undesired favours. And I shall never cease (till I cease to be my selfe) to solli∣cite the Almighty, for Grace, Mercy and Peace upon your worthy selfe, your vertuous Lady, and hopefull off-spring: taking it for none of the least favours, that I may professe my selfe to bee
 illing Magna. Novemb. 20. 1640.
