



SIR,
THE Obligations I had to your
Worthy Brother JOHN
HALL, somtime of Grey's
Inne Esquire, are no less
present to my thoughts, when I am at the
greatest distance from his Relations, then
they are during my long Residences at
London, where I frequently converse with
those, who, knowing his worth, take oc∣casion
to celebrate it, upon the least mention
of his Name.
But the Account I receiv'd from you of

Him not long since, and what you design'd
to have done thereupon, rais'd in me a ge∣neral
reflection on the Excellencies of that
Person, at least what was within the reach
of my happy knowledge of him. Of this
I gave the world what satisfaction I could,
before his Translation of Hierocles upon
the Golden Verses of the Pythagore∣ans;
that is, a short Collection of my own
Observations, without communicating my
design to any of his Friends. What Over∣tures
you have made in order to the com∣pleating
of it, I shall not here insist upon,
further then to assure you, that my prose∣cution
of it, shall, what lies in my power,
be answerable to your desires.
As to what is at present usher'd to you
by this Dedicatory, be pleas'd, Sir, to take
this short Character of it; That it is a
particular account of that Action, which
being of highest Importance in the Concerns
of Christianity, occasions the discourse of
all persons, during the process of it, as
well of these, whose Principles induce
them to a belief, as those, who stand upon
the denial of a Supream Pastorship of the
Christian Flock upon Earth. Whence

ROME derives the Priviledge of being
the Scene of this great Transaction, is not
my business to enquire: yet I think it not
amiss, to bring in here two Distichs of that
worthy Author, Sir R. Stapylton, compre∣hending,
first, the Metropolism of that Ci∣ty,
upon the Gentile account, and then its
loss of that super-intendency, and after∣wards
its retrival thereof upon the Chri∣stian
score!
Roma fuit quondam Terrae Regina Ma∣risque;
At nunc nec Terras, nec Mare Roma
regit.
Roma fuit quondam Terrae Regina Ma∣risque.
Nunc Mare, nunc Terras, amplius Illa
regit.
Thus as to the subject of the ensuing
Treatise. The further Business of this
Address, is, to acquaint you, that the Ma∣nuscript
left in my hands by one nearly re∣lated
to you, concerning your ancient Ca∣thedral,
will ere long appear in publick.
What else I have to adde, is only the usual

Complement made in the Infancy of the
year; That is, my wishes to you, of Health,
Prosperity, in Friends and Affairs; and,
the greatest transient Happinesse, all the En∣dearing
Enjoyments of a Conjugal life;
and all this, without any other design, but
that of assuring you, how much, and how
truly I am,
SIR,

Jan. 7.
1671.
