



SIR,
DEdications, like all Roman∣ces, are generally the same; and 'tis as difficult now for an Author to find a new Complement to his Patron, as to make a Knight-Errant court his Mistriss without more Rivals in his Words than in his Love. This Consideration, Sir, has engag'd me to seek some Person whose peculiar and distinguishable Vir∣tues

might afford me a Subject to say something new. I found Honor and Generosity in one Gen∣tleman; Candor, Affability, and strict Morality in another. Some were noted for their Wit; and others remarkable for their Learn∣ing and Judgment. But these and other esteemable Qualifica∣tions have separately engag d the Addresses of most Authors alrea∣dy. I was therefore oblig'd, as the newest Subject I cou'd find, to pitch on a Person who had all these Perfections together.
Here I had a great Obstacle to my Undertaking: For, whereas other Authors can recommend their Dedications to the World by sur∣prizing Discoveries, making Vir∣tue shine where the Public cou'd never find it, my poor Epistle

must want all these Advantages. Your Merit is so universally ac∣knowledg'd, that should I enlarge in its praise, I can say no more than is own'd by all those who have the happiness of knowing You. Men cannot say I flatter, lest they accuse themselves of A∣dulation; and I am secure from the Censure of World, since, tho it differs in most things, it always agrees in Your Commendation. You have frequently met Cervan∣tes in Your Travels, and con∣vers'd with him in some of those foreign Languages of which you are Master. 'Tis upon the Pre∣sumption of this Acquaintance a∣broad, Sir, that he humbly begs your Countenance at home. For You have not only Delicacy of Taste to discover and relish his

most hidden Beauties, but a gene∣rous Humanity to excuse his Faults. Those two noble Qualifications, as well as a thousand others, were in Perfection intail'd on You by Your Noble Father. He already sees You in possession of that rich In∣heritance of Virtue, which flows down in a plentiful Stream, with∣out impoverishing the inexhaustible Fountain; while, retir'd from the Hurry and Business of the World, he enjoys that Philosophical Hap∣piness which is the pleasing Result of his Noble Actions and steady Course of Life, blest in so just a Representative of his great Abili∣ties.
This Piece, Sir, has had the Fortune to be very happily patro∣niz'd in other Languages; yet Don Quixote in his present Circum∣stances

is bound in Gratitude to own the greatest Veneration to the Name of an English Nobleman. If he finds as kind and generous Entertainment here as his Transla∣tor has met with, he need not repent his changing Climates; and, if his Faults are not unpar∣donable, he doubts not of a kind Reception. The Favors of the Generous English always outstrip Merit, and 'tis the Character of the Nobility to be kind to Strangers. Those Favors I have receiv'd from You, Sir, the World will judg of by their being Yours: To say that You have confer'd them, implies they have been Great. Your own Generosity, not my Acknow∣ledgments, must be the Estimate of Your Bounty; which Cervantes pleads for his Entertainment at

Long-Leat, that delicious Seat of Your Noble Family. Be pleas'd to let him amuse You there some Moments, till You oblige the Town with Your Return, and con∣descend once more to honor me with that improving Converse, which at Your leisure has been the greatest Happiness of,
SIR

