



SIR,
SOME People may be sur∣priz'd at my Dedicating any Part of Don Quixote in English to a Person, who ha∣ving so true a Taste of his Per∣fections in his Native Language, can have little Relish for him under the Disadvantages of a Translation: But this which might appear to others a Reason∣able

Objection, was to me the most Prevalent Inducement to this Address. I must indeed con∣fess that your Capacity startl'd my Presumpt on; but then, I consider'd, that a Person, who is so truly sensible of the Beau∣ties of the Original, wou'd be most Conscious of the Great Difficulties that must attend my Undertaking, and consequently most likely to excuse the Im∣perfection in the Translating of a Book that had been thrice at∣tempted in English before; yet so, as not to discourage a fourth Essay. Expecting therefore to be Attack'd by the Criticks, and believing that the most I cou'd pretend to was a Handsome Re∣treat,

I thought it my best way to secure the Whole, by having the Rear brought up by a Lead∣er, whose very Reputation, wou'd be sufficient to keep the Enemy in Awe.
My Author, by a Successful Errantry has visited most Parts of Europe, and been taught to speak all the Polite Languages in the Christian World. But he has been a whole Century in ar∣riving at a Part of that Ac∣complishment, which you, Sir, have gain'd in so few Years, that if we compare the Perfection you have attain'd, with the short∣ness of the Time, we must con∣clude, that not only all these Languages, but a Thousand No∣ble

Endowments have been ra∣ther Born with you, than Ac∣quir'd.
Learning in Schools, Philoso∣phy in Retirement, and Experi∣ence in Gray Heirs, are but the consequence of their several Con∣stitutions; but to find the Muses at Court, the Philosopher in the Camp, and the depth of Pru∣dence in Youth, is one of those Rarities, that should be shewn to delight Mankind with Admira∣tion, and to Improve the World by Example. Could your Cha∣racter, Sir, be drawn to the Life, the Good that might be done by setting it in view, might plead an Excuse even to your self, who appear so great a Lover of your

Country, by the whole Bent of your Studies; for what you seem to have laid out for your Pri∣vate Accomplishment, proves indeed Dedicated to the Service of the Publick; and You have so Profited in Your Endeavours, that your Country seems at a Stand, whether to fix You upon Action in the Field, Council at home, or Negotiation abroad. If these several Talents, even when divided, illustrate Noble Families, where, as in Yours, Merit flows down from Father to Son, what shall we say of the Person, in whom they appear so Happily united.
One of the first Subjects we find treated in Poetry, was the
Expedition at Colchos, and the Illustrious Argonautes found an Orpheus to transmit their Fame to Futurity. Whether this were not a kind of a Laudable Knight-Errantry in the Volun∣teers, or a Fiction of the Poet; You, Sir, can best determine, who are so Great a Critick in the Greek. But had that very Orpheus liv'd in this Age, what Glorious unfeign'd Subjects had he not found in the late Adven∣turers for the Iberian Golden Fleece! These Papers, Sir, are no small Part of the Treasures of Spain, and since You had so Great a Share in the Glory of Inriching your Country with the Wealth of that Nation, You

must be content to have a Part in Impropriating Cervantes to the use of the English. You have humbled the Pride of the Spa∣niard, and he throws himself at your Feet for Protection. He, that was himself a Soldier, knows that the Gallant Man will always give Quarter; and hopes that You, whom Italy and Flanders have seen so early, and so Eminently Brave in the Defence of his Country, when it was the Interest of your own, will now Generously Protect an Honest Spaniard like Cervantes, tho' you have so lately been One of the Foremost in an Action, no less Fatal to his Nation, than Glorious to the Undertakers.
SIR, I feel a warmth with∣in me, that Prompts me to Ex∣patiate upon a Subject of which I must own my Self particularly Fond; but then a Remainder of Discretion checks my Zeal, and cautions me against any thing beyond my Strength and your Patience. I am,
SIR,

