



SIR,
'TIS a Hardship that I am destitute of other Means to acknowledge my Obligations, than by ha∣zarding the Forfeiture of my Pretences to your Favour; and that I am forced to repay your Acts of Generosity in this manner, by an Imposition on your Hu∣manity: But the Muses are of that Sex, which, if once obliged, think they have a Right still to persecute their Benefactor.
The Encouragement You are pleas'd to give my Attempt upon Don Quixote was one great Motive to my Prosecution of the Design; and, to crown my En∣deavours with a Success answerable, I must beg you to Patronize what you so generously promoted. But abating these Apologies for my Presumption, I have

one unanswerable Plea, as I am a Tran∣slator: I must do my Author Justice; and if I have learn'd any thing of the Hu∣mour of the Writer, by examining his Work, the Great Cervantes, were he now alive, would have laid the Original where I deposite the Copy: He would have chosen a Person, whose Illustrious Birth might blazon his Book with Honour, whose Knowledge in polite Learning might silence the Tongues of Criticism, and whose Personal Vertues might stop even the Mouth of Envy. He would cer∣tainly have call'd for Protection to some Influence superior to his own; and where could the Great Cervantes find it, but in the Name of BOYLE, a Name that Phi∣losophy, Poetry and Literature have dress'd with all their Charms, that the World might know it for their Darling! I need nor, Sir, particularize the Branches of your Illustrious House that are digni∣fy'd that way. Fame has them upon Record, and they may be found in all the private Studies of England, all the Pub∣lick Libraries in Europe; but most of all, Sir, in your Self.
'Tis a Reflection, Sir, upon Epistles Dedicatory, that all Writers address their

Patrons much after the same manner: But Men should consider that there is a Transmigration of Vertue from one Il∣lustrious Person to another, and that whatever has been said of Maecenas, should for the same Reason be said of You. His Capacity for arduous Affairs was high∣ly evident, from his great Share in the Management of Publick Business. Your Employments in the State, with Your Assiduity in the Senate, make you an Or∣nament to your Station, and a Benefit to your Country. He was famous for his countenancing of Parts and Learning, and you are no less eminent for your Encouragement of Arts and Ingenuity. The Subject of our Praise is the same, the Roman is every way here, but there wants a Virgil or a Horace to make the Parallel compleat. Had I the Spirit of the Poet, as you have the Qualifications of the Patron, I would with less Blushing, and more Assurance, have ventur'd to own my self,
SIR,

