



SIR,
IT was the Practice of most Authors in the last Age, to prefix their own Pictures to their Books; but our present Writers, much happier in their Politicks, have chosen to set off their Productions with nobler Frontispieces, prefixing the Ef∣figies of Persons of Quality and

Merit to recommend their Works to the World. This Practice, Sir, though very prudent, is in many Cases very presumptuous. To draw in the Wit and Perfec∣tions of a fine Gentleman to patronize the Impertinence and Folly of some insipid Piece, may bring the Patron's Merit, and the Author's Modesty, very much in Question. But here, Sir, I make bold to say, that I have suited my Book to my Patron. The great Cervantes begs the Protection of the Noble Mr. Coke. The finest Flowers, principally those of Fo∣reign Growth, require the highest Shelter and the warmest Sun. Then where should Wit fly in these tempestuous Times, but where the Nobility and Greatness

of a House may protect it from the Storm; where a generous Hospitality emboldens it to in∣trude, and the Warmth of For∣tune may cherish and enliven it? The Blessing of a plentiful Estate sets you above all Anxieties in this Life, and the Riches of your Mind secure your Happiness in the future. To double your For∣tune, you have a charming and vertuous Partner to share it: She makes your Life truly happy, for your Desires are at home. There Cervantes expects a candid Recep∣tion; he knows that where the Mind is easie, the Sentiments will be mild; he chuses to be enter∣tained where he shall find no Di∣versions but what are innocent and ingenious, like his own.
Your youthful Thoughts have been so improv'd by conversing with the best Authors, that what is the Study of others, is now your Recreation; and those Years, which among many are thrown away in superficial Vanities, were by you employ'd in admiring the authentick Worthies of History, and in modelling your Life by their great Examples. Among other Observations that you have made on this Subject, you found, that the greatest Men have still been the greatest Patrons. Hence flows your Candour and indul∣gent Favour to Wit and Lear∣ning; and from hence the decli∣ning Stage finds the Benefit of your generous Support. Your Judgment in Dramatick Poetry

can separate the Improvement and Morality of the Scene from the Viciousness of an Expos'd Character; and you can receive the true Diversion of a well-wrought Play; for where-ever Vertue is rewarded, your Merit is justly complimented.
On this Consideration D. Quix∣ote, being in a manner a drama∣tick Piece, lays a Claim to your Protection; and those who have the Honour of your Conversa∣tion, must draw this Remark from your nice Taste, and judicious Sentiments on that Subject and other polite Studies, That the Beauties of Cervantes are properly your own; Instruction without Severity, Learning without Pe∣dantry, and the Sense of Phi∣losophy

in the Words of a Gen∣tleman.
These Motives, Sir, were suf∣ficient of themselves to make me beg your Acceptance of this Work, sure of the Approbation of those ingenious Gentlemen who have done me the Favour to joyn with me in the Translation of this Volume. But I had still a further Engagement to this Ad∣dress, my own private Ambi∣tion of owning to the World how much I have been obliged to your Generosity. And I cannot forbear complimenting my self upon the Countenance of a Per∣son of your Merit, for whom I have so great a Respect. This Occasion, Sir, might engage me to make you an Author's Ac∣knowledgment,

were not your Vertues so far above the Reach of my Pen. Yet, as long as this Work shall endure, your Favours shall be found upon Record, and that I am,
SIR,

