


Honoured Sir,
A Reverend Clergy-Man of the Church of England affirms, That when the Publick Maintenance of any Tenet will bring the utmost Hazard upon a Man's Life or Fortune, and there be a ne∣cessity, that that Doctrine should be propagated; Then to be silent upon a∣ny Worldly Conceits of Honour, Profit, or present Safety, is a Breach of Christian Duty; or at least, it argues a Cowardize, unbecoming One that hath not only Listed himself under Christ's Banners, but hath undertaken the Charge of his Flock; which he must not Desert, when the Wolfe approaches.
I do not hence urge a Necessity of Printing this Ser∣mon, or that every Church-Man is obliged to de∣clare his Judgement concerning the Subject treated
of in it: But I would have it rather Received as an Excuse for the Publishing this Discourse; to which I was not only Invited, but Commanded, by some that heard it Preached; who were likewise instant in the fore-going Argument.
I cannot presume, it will do that Service, which those Friends in Kindness seemed to imagine: What∣ever their Motive was to the Publication, Obedience to their Commands, and Complyance with their Desires, were mine.
It was not designed, neither can a Sermon be thought, to be a full Treatise, and a sufficient Con∣futation to the Church of Rome, in that particular Matter: I am satisfyed, if it give but Hints to those that have time to look more into the Subject, and supply the Wants of those that have not Leisure and Opportunity to do so.
When the Church is set on Fire, and like to be consumed in the Flames, 'tis enough for me, if I can bring but one Drop of Water towards the quenching it. When the Fence is broken down, and the Vine, that God's own Right Hand hath Planted amongst us, is like to be Trodden down by the Wild Boar of the Forrest; I am not so vain, as to think I am able to Repair it: I only discover my Willingness, by putting to my Helping Hand.
Tho all Divisions are Destructive to the Church of England; yet the Popish Faction seems to tend directly to its Ruin; as being formed under one Head, and having a more United Interest than any other: Would the other Parties consider how much they assist the Papists, in Rending and Dividing our Church; would they be sensible, how much our own
Divisions Encourage the Foe, they would no longer, for a few slight Circumstances, stand at Variance with their Mother Church; but would Unite against the Common Enemy. It is a Maxime in their Poli∣ticks, Divide & Impera, which all our Separations help them to put into Practice: And 'tis to be feared, that we have more Cause to Fear, than the Jews had; That the Romans will come, and take away our Place and Nation. For, as that Party is Inconside∣rable to us, were we United; so 'tis very Dangerous by our Divisions. It is Courage not to Fear, and Prudence not to Slight, an Enemy.
'Tis to be feared, That if we thus go on, Tacitus's Observation of the Britains, will be very Applicable to us at this juncture; That their Differences at Home not suffering them to Unite, they were all O∣vercome by the Romans; Dum Singuli pugnabant Omnes vincebantur. And we know who said; A Kingdom or House divided against it self can∣not stand.
When the Enemy is before the Gates, and sets up His Batteries against our Walls; Whoever opens a Postern, or pulls down our Inward Fortifications, does more Mischief to us, than we can apprehend from the Foe Without: Were our Jerusalem a City at Unity within it self, we need not fear the Armies of the Baylonians.
Sir, While an Honest Zeal to the Church was thus prevailing with me, to publish this Sermon; I more willingly complyed there-with, as laying hold of it, as a Means of owning to the World, what high Obligations have been laid on me, by your Generous and Bountifull Hand; A Private Gratitude would
no longer content me, when I had an Opportunity of making it Publick.
If You accept of these my first Endeavours, I shall not much value the Opinion of Others, nor fear the Censures of an Envious World: The Present is indeed Mean, like all the Returns of the Poor to their Benefactours; But I hope, it will be accep∣ted, as coming from an Humble and Thankful Heart. You have a just Right and Title not only to the Author, but to whatever shall be produced by him; as being the onely Person, to whom he owes all the Advantages of his Education.
There are other Reasons, that render this Your Due, who are so constant to your Profession; and even in Clapham, are so Zealous for the Church of England. May You Live long, to see Her Flou∣rish, and Tread down all her Enemies: You saw Her once under a Cloud; and even then, she Glori∣ed in the Cross, and by Her Patience in Sufferings, triumpht over her Persecutors; May She now Exalt Her-self in the midst of her Adversaries round a∣bout Her; and become (as She is the Glory of the Protestant Religion, so) a Terror to the Church of Rome. And may You long continue a Faith∣ful Member of Her here, while She is Militant, that You may be a part of Her, when She shall be Triumphant: This is the Prayer of,
Honoured Sir, 
