



SIR,
THE design of this Application to you, is not your Praise; it were the greatest Absurdity for me to attempt it; for all that know you and me, know you to be much above my Character; your Works praise you better than my Pen can. My Inten∣tion is a sincere and grateful Acknowledgment of the kind∣ness I have received at your Hands, for which I stand much indebted to you. I would gladly bring a greater and better Thank-offering, were it in my Power; but this being the best, I hope it will be accepted; 'tis a Sermon preached for the Funeral of my Father-in-Law, whose virtuous good Life has done more to prefume his Me∣mory, than this Printed Discourse can do to perpetuate it. He was a Man eminently Religious, and very useful, a sincere vigorous pursuer of Holiness in his whole Course. I do seriously think, that if ever any man in the World made Religion his Business, he did; he was (so far as I could make Observation) Religious in every thing, allow∣ances for insuperable Frailties being made. In his Closet he was frequent, and very serious, humble, and importunate in Prayer; if ever any Man prayed in season and out of
season, he did; early and late did he wrestle with God for himself, his Family, the Nation, and the Church of God: how early in the Morning have I heard him pleading with God for this poor Sinful Nation, when questionless he thought none in the House was awake! Many an hours Sleep hath he denied himself of, for the sake of private Pray∣er; many a cold Morning before Day hath he been upon his Knees without Fire or Candle, to do what in him lay to stave off Judgments from the poor Kingdom; how would he stir up himself, rouse up his heart, and expostulate with his God! When I first saw him in his Coffin, I could not forbear saying, The Chariots of Israel, and the Horse∣men thereof! In his private Retirements he was wonder∣fully free and bold, yet not rude or irreverent in his Expres∣sions.
In his Family he was a constant zealous Worshipper of God, Morning and Evening; no Business whatever could prevail with him either to omit or curtail his set solemn Family-Duties; a thing which I fear but few Professors may pretend to. God's Word was read, his Name call'd on, his Praises sung, as often in his Family, as perhaps in the best Families in England; I think but few Families so often mourned apart and together as his. I have reason to hope, that all his Children now living will bless God in Heaven for him. He was not (as too many Professors are) chiefly careful to raise his Childrens Fortunes, but to save their Souls, and therefore was truly Watchful over them, and Faithful to them, as in the matter of Instruction, so also of Reproof and Correction. And here I may safely add, That he was one of the faithfullest Reprovers of Sin, that ever I knew. If in some Cases his Zeal outran his Discre∣tion, wise Men will easily pardon it, as being a mistake on the right hand. He was heartily concerned for the Glory of
God, and could not endure to see or hear him dishonoured; and therefore, tho he exposed himself to danger, he would speak without regarding the Person, or fearing the Issue.
In the Congregation, he was a Devout, Serious Hear∣er; he loved God's Word, and honoured the Ministry; I have good reason to believe, that he usually heard the Word Preached, in a very deep Humility and Self-denial: He took great pains to prepare his heart to re∣ceive the Word; and when he had heard it, he was di∣ligent to keep it; and to that end, he would often repeat it in his Family, to his Wife and Children. I am confi∣dent it was his earnest Desire, to be in all things subject to the Law of God; for he was never offended at Plain∣dealing, but loved to have his heart ripp'd up, and his sins pointed at: He rejoiced in opportunities of drawing nigh to God; the Sabbaths were his Delight; and I judge he was one of the most strict Observers of them. He had a great Veneration for the Ministry; I am well satisfied he hath done as much to maintain the Faithful Preaching of the Word in the Place he lived in, for many Years to∣gether, as most of his Ability in England: I could give a particuldr account here, but that the Modesty of his good Widow, my dear Mother-in-Law, forbids it. He was a Dissenter from the Church of England, and usually at∣tended the Ministry of Nonconformists; but an hearty Lover, and ready Hearer of all Sober, Orthodox, well-living Conformists; a thing, I judge, very commendable, as savouring of a Catholick Spirit, and proceeding from true Christian Charity.
In his Business he was Diligent, but not Sollicitous. I never saw a man commit his ways to God, with a great∣er Confidence and Trust. He was industriously careful to be religiously careless. He took indeed true pains to
get this World; but I think in my conscience, very much without vexatious thoughtfulness in the pursuit; raising delight in the getting, or sinking grief for the loss there∣of. In his dealings he was punctual and just; true to his word, and conscionable in his ways; he was careful rather to receive than do wrong, as many in the City and Coun∣trey can safely testifie. He lived not in Pleasure, but was ridgidly Temperate; and for the sake of Religious Duties, did very much deny himself in Eating and Drinking.
He was truly Charitable, and ready to relieve the di∣stressed; he thought it his Duty, and made it his Pra∣ctise to lay up for Charitable and Pious Ʋses, as God had blessed him; and what he laid up, he counted no more his own, than a bag of his Neighbour's Money that might be left with him; so grateful was doing good to him, that he not only did it chearfully himself, but rejoiced exceed∣ingly, to observe others like-minded. He was mightily af∣fected with those that harboured the French Protestants; and sent a Thousand Prayers to Heaven for them: The Concerns of the Church lay near his heart; and had con∣stantly a room in his Prayers.
He was constantly Serious; he seemed to carry a dread of the Majesty of God continually upon his Spirit; and would be frequently putting in something of God, where∣ever he was, or whomsoever he was conversing with; and that which crown'd all, is, he was profoundly humble, as sensible of his own Nothingness, as most men that ever I knew. In a word, as was his Name, so was he, an Israelite indeed, in whom there was no guile.
Reverend Sir,
I cannot but presume, That you will readily grant, upon a Supposition that this Account is true, (as God knoweth
it is), That he was a very good man; and consent, That his Name should be kept alive, and his good Example recorded for others Imitation. For this End, I have ad∣ventured thus to appear in Publick, by Printing this well-meaning poor Discourse; which I humbly lay at your Feet, as a Token of my unfeigned Gratitude for your undeser∣ved Love to me. The Lord recompence you; Bless this Essay to the Souls of them that shall read it; and incline your Heart to Pray for
London, May 8. 1691.
SIR,

