



THE following Discourse was delivered in your hearing
with an honest Design, and 'tis now Presented you in com∣pliance
with your Request: You some time since intimated,
That the hearing of it was very grateful to you; I pray
God it may in the review be altogether as profitable. 'Tis not Cal∣culated
for the Interest of any Party of Christians, as a Party need∣lesly
Dividing from, or Hurtfully Opposing the rest; but (if I mi∣stake
not) equally serving the real Interest of all. Let my Tongue
cleave to the roof of my mouth, and my right hand forget her cunning,
rather than by Word or Writing I should wilfully promote Faction to
the damage of Substantial Ʋncontroverted Christianity. No Man on
Earth more sincerely wisheth than my self, that all Names of Di∣stinction
amongst Protestants were for ever buried under a just and
righteous Accomodation; no Man more heartily laments the Schisms
that are amongst us, or more unfeignedly longs for a thorough Heal∣ing
of them. I doubt not but that there are multitudes of different
Denominations that can easily more Skilfully Prescribe for the Healing
of our Distempers than my self, but other Persons receiving more Ta∣lents
than my self, is no Discharge to me from a faithful managing
and improving what I have receiv'd. Nor must a Sense of the De∣ficiency
of my Performances so far dishearten me as to prevent my
just Endeavours: Wherefore I am willing that you should have
this Discourse to read, after your hearing of it, and to communicate
it as you shall judge expedient: And to this I am the more in∣clined,
for that the Discourse hath been expresly approv'd by two wor∣thy
Ministers, whose Judgment we both value. One of them is
pleased thus to express himself: —As to the Discourse it self, I
could not but be pleased with it: It does with great Piety, Solidity
and Justice, expose that which I take to be the most prevailing
and dangerous Distemper of the Age, viz. a placing our Reli∣gion
in, and laying out our Zeal upon little insignificant things (as
Words, or Phrases, Speculative Opinions, or meer Circumstances
and Opinions) in being for or against these; in which, supposing
we be in the right, we are (we can be) but very little the better; but
if it shou'd happen we are under a mistake, we must needs be
greatly the worse. To place the Kingdom of God in such things
is the common mischief of our Day; hence we are broken into

Parties, and by the same Spirit are our shameful Divisions fomen∣ted
and kept up; and 'tis the Cure of this Spirit that alone can
effectually heal the Breaches there are amongst us. Nor is this
over magnifying our self-devised Religiousness, and confining
thereupon the Kingdom of God within the Pale of our Respective
Parties, the less pernicious and fatal, for being so exceeding
common: Hence it is that there is so visible a Decay of Christian
Charity; that there is so notorious a disregard of the most impor∣tant
and distinguishing Instances of Christianity, through the
misapplying of Zeal to the little Impertinencies that neither need nor
deserve it—If this Discourse fall into the hands of such as need
it most, and the Divine Spirit please to accompany it, I cannot
doubt but its success will be such, as will greatly promote and help
on a more Peaceful and Flourishing State of Christ's Kingdom
amongst us; for which end it shall be followed with the fervent
Prayers of your affectionate Brother, &c.
Sir, When I read these Lines, and considered the worth of the
Person that wrote them, and when I remember'd that another very
valuable Minister had said of the Discourse, That he wish'd there
were Ten Thousand of such Sermons Printed, and scattered up and
down; I found my selfless unwilling to venture upon appearing thus
in publick, than I was before. I doubt not but that the most diseased
will find fault; no matter for that, let me be blamed by them, so
I may but heal them; but if that be not the Issue, I shall have the
satisfaction that occompanies an honest Design and Endeavour. May
the infinitely great and good God requite with Spiritual and Eternal
Blessings the Respect and Kindness you have shewn me. May you ex∣perience
more and more the Solid and Durable Comforts of Practical
and Peaceable Christianity; may you be the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, and your Family a little Church; may all good things be mul∣tiplied
to you, and you made better by all; may I and mine meet You
and Yours with Joy, at the right hand of Jesus in that Day; may
fiery Faction continually decrease, and Faith, Love and Holiness grow
exceedingly every where: These, Sir, are the Sincere and Fervent
Desires of

Andover, Aug.
16. 1698.
