



IF the Heathen Moralist Plutarch could
say, Meditation is as it were the re∣covery
of decaying knowledg; be∣cause
as forgetfulness seems to be the
egress of knowledg, Meditation doth
restore a new memory instead of that which
passeth away; and so preserve knowledg,
that it is in effect the same, in that, notwith∣standing
mutations, it leaves something new,
and like it self, resembling that which is Di∣vine:
How may a Christian, endow'd with
the true knowledg of God, say with the Psal∣mist
in the revival of it, Psal. 104. 34. My
meditation of him shall be sweet. When he is
alone, and hath no other companions to re∣fresh
himself with, then he may (as Bishop
Hall, who penn'd a part of his Meditations
under the solitary Hills of Ardenna) from a
renewed mind, send forth his active thoughts,
those immediate rays of that Candle of the
Lord within him, to contemplate upon his Ma∣ker,
Saviour, and Sanctifier, and reflect upon
himself, who is to survive the visible Creation,
and so raise himself into an Heaven upon earth,
relish such sweetness as the carnal mind and

sensual heart, immersed in dreggy matter, and
be-dull'd therewith, is never so happy as to
attain. The Author of this little Treatise,
whose great and pious soul was notably hea∣venliz'd
by the frequent exercise of holy Me∣ditation,
the very same who penn'd The Godly
mans Ark, which hath been often printed for
the support of drooping Christians, amongst
other excellent discourses upon various sub∣jects
in the exercise of his Ministry with great
success, did from his own experience recom∣mend
this of Meditation, whether ejaculatory
and occasional, or solemn and deliberate. I am
not ignorant, that many other eminent Di∣vines,
persons of great worth and honour,
have already notably display'd the excellency
and usefulness of this way of thinking; yet
perhaps this grave and famous Preacher in his
day, hath in a more easie method, and plain
way, by his familiar expressions and resem∣blances,
suited to vulgar capacities, here help'd
the real Christian, who would most delight in
the Duty, to put Meditation in practise, than
any who hath gone before him. No doubt,
had this excellent person himself published
this discourse here presented to your view,
you would have had it every way more accu∣rate,
by the lopping off some superfluities,
and amending of phrases, &c. more proper
for a Writer, than these of a Preacher to a po∣pular

Auditory; yet such as it is, considering
the Author in the Pulpit, you'l find when you
have read it through, it doth fully as much
resemble Mr. Calamy in his preaching at Alder∣manbury,
to your minds, as the Engraver on
the frontispiece hath represented his face to
your eyes. I dare say any of you who were
his Auditors, will be abundantly satisfied, tho
this piece be posthumous, yet it is genuine.
And seeing there is joy in heaven over one sin∣ner
that repenteth, more than over ninety nine
just persons which need no repentance, Luk. 15. 7.
If these practical Sermons, taken by the swift
pen of a ready writer, have such an influence
upon any, as to bring them to the frequent
and beneficial practise of Meditation, which
the Preacher of them held necessary: None
who prefer things before words, and esteem
real knowledg above elegancy of speech, as the
general good of mankind, beyond that of any
particular Countrey, can justly think the Au∣thor
wrong'd; but rather that with Dr. Pre∣ston,
Mr. Fenner, Mr. Hooker, &c. (some of
whose Works popularly deliver'd with plain∣ness
suited to the capacities of their hearers,
and taken but rudely from their mouths, did
more benefit Readers of meaner abilities, than
those which whiles alive, they themselves pub∣lished
with greater exactness) He is renown'd,
when he hath by this more diffusive good-work

been any way instrumental to have God and
the things of heaven (where he now resides)
more delightfully thought upon. As judicious
Calvin in his Epistle to the King of Swethe∣land
prefixed to his Commentary on the Mi∣nor
Prophets, said he would not be so morose
a Censor of manners, as to obstruct the publish∣ing
of that Commentary delivered in an ex∣temporal
kind of speaking, when design'd
only for his own private Oratory, not other∣wise
to have come abroad; only as 'twas pen'd
from his mouth by Budaeus, Crispin, and Ionvil,
because he said, he had long before learn'd not
to serve the theater of the World: else, he
doth afterwards tell the Reader, that if in his
other works which he had written deliberate∣ly
and succinctly with much more pains, he had
met with envious malignants, who did carp at
and quarrel them, he might well endeavour to
suppress that work, taken by the aforesaid wri∣ters
after him, as it was freely utter'd to his
own hearers for present use; yet when others
assured him, that it would be a loss (yea, in∣jurious)
to the Church, if not printed as it
was taken, rather than not at all; He thereup∣on
having not time nor strength to transcribe
or amend it, readily permitted it to go to the
Press. And the Reformed Church hath since re∣joyced
in the benefit of having it as it was
published; yea, and to this day Divines who

have made great use of it since in their Com∣mentaries,
as well as others, to find the true
true meaning of the Holy Writ, have heartily
blessed God for it. Yet as Bishop Wilkins hath
observ'd in his Epistle to the Real Character,
Foreigners in Short-Writing come far behind
us here in England (though it hath been now
seventy years invented) where they admire
the skill of our Writers, and whither the Di∣vines
of other Nations frequently come and
learn our Language, chiefly to understand our
Practical Sermons, many of which have been
only preserv'd in this way, You have this ('tis
to be hoped very useful) piece, taken well
from the mouth of Mr.

