



Beloved in the Lord;
I Need not spend much time
in giving you an account
how these ensuing Ser∣mons
come to bee made
publick. It is not because they are more
worthy than those which you hear
weekly; Nay, I may truly say (without
boasting) they are less worthy (though
I think none of them much worth) than
many others. It is not because I desire to
bee in print; But it is

1 To present you with the Pattern
of a Woman whom God did pick out to
make an example of great affliction, and
great patience, that when you come into
great troubles, you may bee comfort∣ed
with those comforts, with which shee
was comforted.
2 To acquaint you with the pains shee
took, and with her diligence in time of
health to make her salvation sure; That
so you may bee provoked to lay up suitable,
seasonable, and sufficient provision
against an evil day, and not have your
Evidences for Heaven to get in the hour
of adversity.
It is the grand sin of most people to
delay and prorogue their solemn pre∣paration
for affliction and sickness, till
they come to bee sick, and in affliction.
There are many in Hell, who purposed to
repent, but were prevented by death;
therefore Bernard saith,Bona pro∣osita e∣hennam intrue, bona ope∣ra coelum. good purposes
go to Hell, and only good performan∣ces
lead into Heaven.
To prevent your delaying and defer∣ring

to provide for affliction, these Ser∣mons
are printed, and to perswade you,
that whatsoever you do for Heaven,
you would do it speedily, and with all
your strength.
The Subjects handled are so plain
and easy, and the stile so rude and unpo∣lished,
that I was resolved to have bu∣ried
them in perpetual oblivion, had I
not been conquered by this following
(together with the forementioned) consi∣deration,
that they are calculated on∣ly
for people under great troubles,
at which times learned debates about
Discipline, and controverted points
of Divinity, painted Eloquence, and
curious Language, are of very little e∣steem,
and account. Afflicted conscien∣ces
are oftentimes puzled, but never
comforted with doubtful disputations.
Neat and elegant expressions may skin
over, but cannot Cure spiritual diseases.
Nothing can heal a wounded con∣science,
and keep a man from sinking
into despondency in the day of great tribu∣lation,

but a real, right, and particular
Application of the Promises, to help
a doubting Christian to performe this
great work, there are thirteen plaine
Rules and Directions laid down in the
following Treatise. My prayer is, that
they may prove useful and successeful.
Seneca indeed comforts his friend
Polybius, and perswades him to bear
his afflictions patiently, because hee was
the Emperours Favourite, and tells
him, That it was not lawful for him
to complaine,as tibi non est de fortuna conqueri salvo Cae∣sare. while Caesar was his
friend: But this was but a poor Cordi∣al:
For Caesar himself a little while af∣ter,
was so miserable, that hee had not
a friend to help him, much less was hee
able to help his friend. The Word of
God affords a better Cordial. it bids
a true Child of God not to bee over∣much
dejected under the greatest affli∣ction,as tibi non est de fortuna conqueri salvo Deo. & salvis promissio∣nibus Dei.
because hee is Gods Favourite;
It tells him, That it is not lawful for
him to complain while God is his
friend, and the Promises of God his

rich portion, and inheritance. Though
Job lost all hee had, yet hee lost nothing,
because hee lost not his God, who is All
in All, and they who have him, have
All.
My purpose at first was onely to have
printed the Sermon preached at Mris.
Moors Funeral, together with her E∣vidences
for Heaven, collected by her
in the time of her health. But the impor∣tunity
of friends hath overswayed mee,
and caused mee to adde four more,
preached immediately afterwards on the
same Text.
And now (Dearly Beloved) having
this fair opportunity to speak to you in
writing, give mee leave to propound and
lay before you some cautions and admo∣nitions;
some Rules and Directions for
the right ordering of your lives and con∣versations
in these dangerous and divi∣ded
times, that so you may bee able af∣ter
my decease, to have them in perpetual
remembrance.
1 Take heed of mistaking in the great

work of Beleeving and Repenting.
Faith and Repentance are the two great
Gospel-graces: And the reason why so
many miscarry to all eternity, is not for
want of them (such as they are) but upon
a pure mistake, in thinking they have
them, when they have but a shadow of
them. Where one goeth to Hell by despe∣ration,
hundreds go thither by presump∣tion.
O! quam multi cum hâc vanâ
fide, & vana spe ad aeternos labores de∣scendunt;
How many thousands go to
hell with a vain faith, and hope of hea∣ven!
And therefore bee much in exami∣nation,
whether your Faith be right or no.
Examine your selves,2 Cor. 13. 5 whether yee bee
in the Faith, prove your own selves.
To bee mistaken in the great work of Be∣leeving,Mark. 16. 16
is to bee necessitated to dam∣nation.
For hee that beleeves not, shall
bee damned. Ask your souls often, whe∣ther
your Repentance bee of a right
stamp or no; whether it bee a Repen∣tance
unto life, a Repentance never
to bee repented on. To bee mistaken

in purchasing of Lands, can but hurt
your outward estates; but to bee mis∣taken
in the graces of Faith and Repen∣tance,
will undo your souls to all e∣ternity.
What the Characters of a true
Faith, and true Repentance are, you
have frequently heard, I will not now
repeat them. Only remember that self-flattery,
is self-mockery; that soul-delusion,
is soul-damnation. Pray unto
God to deliver you from that great
murderer of souls, the sin of Presump∣tion.
2 Take heed (as I have said) of de∣laying,
and putting off the great work
of providing for Heaven, till sickness
or old age. The Lord Christ commands
you to seek first the Kingdome of God,
and his Righteousness, &c. First, be∣fore
other things, first, more than o∣ther
things. You must seek after Hea∣ven
in the first and chief place, and
if you seek it in the least and last place,
you will never obtain it. In matters of
weight delay is dangerous, Abigail

made haste to prevent Davids fury. Ra∣hab
made haste to hang out her Scarlet
threed. The salvation of your souls is a
matter of the greatest concernment,
and to delay providing for it, is not
onely a sin against the command of
Christ, but a sleighting of the Hea∣ven
of Christ. How justly may God
deny to you (who refuse when hee calls)
either space, or grace, to turn to him,
and say to you, as it is reported, hee said
to a man, who desired to repent in his old
age, ubi consumpsisti farinam, ibi con-sume
furfurem; Where you have spent
your flower, there go spend your branne;
Therefore let my Counsel bee acceptable
to you. Make Christ your unum neces∣sarium,
your one thing necessary, and
Heaven your primum quaerite; Seek
yee first the Kingdome of God, and
his Righteousness.Psal, 119. 60 Say with David,
I made haste, and delayed not to keep
thy Commandements.
3 Take heed of resting in the Mini∣stry
of man, You must not despise the

teachings of Orthodox Ministers lawful∣ly
called (for hee that despiseth them,
despiseth Christ; hee that is above their
teachings,Eph. 3. 17 is above the teachings of
Christ,2 Cor. 5. 20 for Christ teacheth by them.
They are his Embassadors, and they
preach not only in his Name, but in his
stead) yet you must not rest satisfied with
the teachings of men, but pray, That
while the Minister speaks to your ears,
God would speak to your hearts. That
God would fulfil that blessed Promise,
Isa. 54. 13. And all thy Children
shall bee taught of God. That hee
would give you an unction from the
Holy One to teach you all things.1 Joh. 2. 20
That you may see the goings of God in
his Sanctuary,Psal. 68. 24 you may behold the beau∣ty
of the Lord,Psal. 27. 4 and see his power and
glory in his holy Temple.Psal. 63. 2 In a word,
That God would give you, not onely the
presence of Ordinances, but his pre∣sence
in them. That you may experi∣mentally
know, what it is to injoy com∣munion
with God in Gospel-Administra∣tions.

4 Take heed of formality, custo∣mariness,
and carelesness in the per∣formance
of holy duties. Hee that
serves God carelesly, brings a curse
upon himself, instead of a blessing. For
cursed is hee that doth the work of
the Lord negligently. Hee that serves
God formally and customarily doth
not serve him, but mock him. If the
Israelites had brought the skin of a beast
for sacrifice, instead of a beast, it would
have been counted a mocking of God,
rather than a worshiping of him. So
do they who serve God negligently and
formally.
5 Bee not contented to have a name
to bee godly and religious, but la∣bour
to bee really such as you are
supposed by others to bee. Remem∣ber
what Christ saith of the Church of
Sardis.Rev. 3. 2 That shee had a name to live,
but was dead. What will it profit you
to bee thought by men to bee godly, if
God knows that you are ungodly? What
will it advantage you to seem to go to

Heaven, and yet at last to miss of it?
O labour to bee Christians, not only in
word, but in deed, and in truth, not
onely by outward profession, but by a
holy conversation. Rest not satisfied
with a less degree of grace, than that
which will bring you to Heaven. It will
bee a double Hell, to go within an inch
of Heaven, and yet at last to miscarry.
6 Remember what Christ saith of
Capernaum. The Capernaites were
not so bad as the Gadarens, who desired
Christ to depart from them: much less
as the Nazarites, who thrust Christ out
of their Coasts.Luke 4. 29 For they heard him
preach every Sabbath-day,Luke 4. 32 and were
astonished at his doctrine. And yet be∣cause
they did not sincerely practise
what was taught them, Christ pronoun∣ceth
a heavy doom against them, Matth.
11. 23, 24. And thou Capernaum
which art exalted unto Heaven, shalt
bee brought down to Hell; for if
the mighty works which have been
done in thee, had been done

in Sodome, it would have remained
unto this day. But I say unto you,
that it shall bee more tolerable for the
land of Sodome in the day of judge∣ment,
than for thee. It is not enough
to praise the Sermons you hear, to
admire, and stand astonished at the
Doctrine delivered. If you do not pra∣ctise
what is preached. If you do not
live Sermons, as well as hear them,
it shall bee easier for Sodome and Go∣morrha
at the day of judgement than
for you.
7 Take heed that the love of the
world, doth not eat out the heart of Re∣ligion,
and at last, Religion it self
out of your hearts. Remember what
the Apostle Paul saith,1 Tim. 6. 10 That the love of
money is the root of all evill, which
while some have coveted after, they
have erred from the faith, and pierced
thēselves through with many sorrows.
And what the Apostle John saith, Love
not the world,1 Joh. 2. 15 neither the things that
are in the world. If any man love

the world, the love of the Father is not
in him. There is no sin so contrary to
true Saint-ship, as worldly-mindedness:
A Saint is one who hath much of Hea∣ven
in him, and is much in Heaven.
A Saint is one whose original is from
Heaven,John 3. 3 hee is born from above, his
name is written in Heaven, his medita∣tions,
affections, and conversation is in
Heaven. Hee is one who is elected to
things above, and called to partake of
Heaven, and eternal happiness. And
for such a man to minde things earthly,
is a sin of the first magnitude.Eph. 5. 3 There∣fore
the Apostle would not have cove∣tousness
so much as named amongst
Christians. There is no sin more defiles
the soul. It will besmear you, and make
you spiritual Blackamores, and Chimny-sweepers
in Gods sight. There is no sin
doth more dead and dull the heart in
the doing of good duties.Mat. 22. 5 It hinders
a man both from, and in Ordinances.
The Farmer; and Merchant made
light of the call of Christ, and one

went to his Farm, the other to his
Merchandize. There is no sin will more
eclipse the light of Gods counte∣nance
from shining upon you. The
Moon is never in the Eclipse, but when
the earth comes between us and the Sun.
A child of God is seldome without
the light of Gods countenance, unless it
bee through the over-much love of the
world. No sin will more hinder your
flight up to Heaven.Gen. 33. 13, 14 The Ostrich can∣not
flye high, because of the shortness of
her wings. Jacob was forced in his
travelling towards Canaan to go slow∣ly
and softly, because of his multitude
of children, of flocks and herds. And
therefore let mee again beseech you to take
heed of worldly-mindedness; this
will quickly betray you into Apostacy
from Christ, and from the truths of
Christ. A man who loves the world,
will (Judas-like) betray Christ for
thirty peeces. Hee will part with his
Religion, rather than with his estate.
This sin is the root of all evil, it

exposeth a man to all temptations, to
hurtful lusts,1 Tim. 6. 9. to all errors, and all
kinde of sorrows. It will drown your
souls in perdition. Hee that seeks things
below, shall have his Heaven below.
The Apostle saith expresly, that they
who minde earthly things,Phi. 3. 19. their
end is damnation. Therefore let mee
once again repeat it; Take heed lest you
bee like the Thorny ground. Let not
the cares, riches, and pleasures of the
World choak the good seed that is weekly
sown in your hearts.
8 Let it bee your morning and even∣ing
thought what shall become of you
to all eternity,Momen∣tum unde¦pendet ae∣ternitas. and labour so to use things
temporal, as not to lose the things that
are eternal. Remember that this life is
a moment upon which eternity de∣pends,Momen∣taneum quod de∣lectat, ae∣ternum quod .
and according as you spend this
moment, so you shall bee for ever happy,
or for ever miserable. Remember that
the pleasures of sin are but for a mo∣ment,
but the punishments of sin are
everlasting.

9 Look upon Sin as the greatest 
evils, greater than poverty, imprison∣ment,
banishment, or death it selfe
chuse the greatest Affliction, rathe
than commit the least sin.Anselme If Hel
were on the one side, and Sin on the other
chuse rather to go into Hell, than to
sin against God. For Sin is a greater
evill than Hell, because it is the cause o
Hell, and more opposite to God
(who is the chiefest good) than Hell
is. For God is the Author of Hell
(which hee hath provided for all unbelee∣vers,
and impenitent persons.) But it is
blasphemy in the highest degree, to
say, That he is the Author of Sin. Look
upon Christ as the greatest good, grea∣ter
than health, wealth, liberty, or life.
Love Christ more than you love your
estates, or lives; Hee that loves Christ
more than the world, will not forsake
Christ to imbrace the world. Hee that
fears sin more than affliction, will not sin
to avoid affliction.
10 Rest not contented with that mea∣sure

of grace you have attained unto;
but labour to grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of the Lord Jesus Christ.
Remember that the Scripture doth not
only perswade you to get into Christ, but
to grow up into Christ; not only to bee
Righteous, but to bee filled with the
fruits of Righteousness,Eph . 15. &c. Remem∣ber
that saying of Christ, To whom
much is given,Luke 12. 48. of them much is re∣quired.
God hath given you much, you
have plentiful means of salvation, and
you have had them for many yeares, hee
expects from you, not onely good fruit,
but much good fruit; not only thirty-fold,
and sixty fold, but an hundred-fold.
Where the Husbandman bestows
most cost, hee expects most fruit. The
more a Merchant adventures by Sea, the
greater return hee looks for. God hath
done more for you, than for many others;
and therefore hee expect that you
should do some singular thing for him.
Hee looks you should be more hum∣ble,
more heavenly, more knowing than

others. If the Sun should give no more
light than a little Candle, to what pur∣pose
hath God given it so much light:
If you that have Sun-like abilities do
no more good, than those who have but
half your abilities, to what purpose have
you them? It is a true saying, As our
gifts increase, so must our account
increase.Crescen∣tious onis cresunt rationes donorum. You shall answer at the great
day, not only for your gifts, but for the
measure of them. Remember that
God doth not only require service from
you, but service proportionable to the
means, and mercies you injoy.
Hee that hath but one Talent, shall
answer but for one; but you that have five,
or ten Talents, must bee answerable, ac∣cording
to the quantity, as well as the qua∣lity
of them.
11 Labour to diffuse those graces
which God hath given you, and to
communicate them to those with
whom you converse. True grace is
of a spreading nature, and therefore
compared to leaven, which diffuseth it

self into the whole lump, and to Salt,
that seasoneth all those things with which
it is mingled.Ioh. 4. 29. 30. Assoon as the woman of
Samaria had found out the Messias, shee
leaves her water-pet, and goeth into the
City, to tell others what God had done
for her. Assoon as Cornelius had re∣ceived
the Message from the Angel, to
send for Peter; hee calls together his
kinsmen and neer friends, that they,
together with him, might bee made
partakers of Gospel-grace.Act. 10. 4 A true
Christian is like a Needle touched
with the Loadstone. A Needle (truly
touched) draweth another, and that will
draw another, and that, another: Whoso∣ever
hath his heart truly touched by
effectual grace, will labour to convert
others, and they, others. Philip
will draw Nathaniel, Andrew will draw
Peter. And Peter being converted,
will labour to strengthen his Brethren:
There is a natural instinct in all crea∣tures
to make others like themselves
(as fire will turn all things that come

neer it, into fire) and there is a spiritual
instinct in all converted Christians, to
convert others. It is as natural to a
true Christian to make others true
Christians,, as it is for a man to beget
a man. True grace is not only of a com∣municative,
but of an assimilating na∣ture.
See then that you labour by seasonable
and religious admonitions, and exhor∣tations;
by communicating of experi∣ences,
and especially by the shining pat∣tern
of a holy life and conversation,
to bring all those with whom you con∣verse
unto Iesus Christ. That man
hath not grace in truth, who puts it
in a dark Lanthorne.
12 Labour to bee good in your Rela∣tions,
good Husbands, and good Wives,
good Parents, and good Children, good
Masters, and good Servants. Remem∣ber
that that man cannot bee a good
man, who is not good in his Relation.
Hee cannot bee a good Christian, who is
not a good Husband, or a good Child,

or a good Father, &c. Shee cannot bee
a good Christian, who is not a good
Wife; and so of the rest; and the rea∣son
is: Because the same God who
commands the Husband to love God,
commands him to love his Wife; the
same God who commands the Wo∣man
to obey God, commands her to
obey her Husband. There is the same
stamp of Authority upon our duties to∣wards
our Relations, as upon our duties
towards God; therefore bee sure to make
conscience of relative duties.
13 Ioyn works of mercy and cha∣rity
together with your profession of
piety and holiness. For God hates a
penurious, niggardly, and covetous
professor of Religion. Let that saying
of David abide upon your hearts, God
forbid I should serve the Lord with
that which cost mee nothing.2 Sam  God
hates your obedience to the first Table,
if it bee not joyned with obedience to 
second. Works of mercy and charity ar
made in Seripture the touchstones 

the truth of our piety and holiness. This is
pure Religion (saith the Apostle) and
undefiled before God,James . 27. and the Father,
to visit the Fatherless, and Widows
in their affliction, and to keep himself
unspotted from the world. If any
man say (saith St. John) I love God, Ioh. 4. 20
and hateth his Brother, hee is a liar,
for hee that loveth not his Brother
whom hee hath seen, how can hee love
God whom hee hath not seen? An
unmerciful, and an uncharitable man,
is a wicked and an ungodly man. Let
it bee the care of all those amongst
you, who are rich in estate, to be rich in
good works. Let every man lay up
for the poor, according as God hath
prospered him, Cor. 16. 2 remembering that saying
of Christ. Come yee blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdome prepa∣red
for you, from the foundation of
the world; For I was an hungred, and
yee gave mee meat, I was thirsty, and
yee gave mee drink, I was a stranger,
and yee took mee in, naked, and

yee cloathed mee, I was sick, and yee
visited mee, I was in prison, and yee
came unto mee.
14 Take heed of separating from the
publick Assemblies of the Saints. I
have found by experience, that all our
Church-calamities have sprung from
this root. Hee that separates from the
publick worship, is like a man tumbling
down a hill, and never leaving till
hee comes to the bottome of it. I
could relate many sad stories of persons
professing godliness, who out of dislike to
our Church-meetings, began at first to se∣parate
from them, and after many chan∣ges
and alterations, are turned some of
them Anabaptists, some Quakers, some
Ranters, some direct Atheists. But I
forbear; you must hold communion with
all those Churches, with which Christ
holds communion; you must separate
from the sins of Christians, but not
from the Ordinances of Christ. Take
heed of unchurching the Churches of
Christ, lest you prove Schismaticks in∣stead

of being true Christians.
15 Though you never live to see the
times setled, yet labour to get your con∣sciences
setled: Pray for the Spirit of
Truth, to guide you into all Truth in
these erring dayes. Remember that say∣ing
of Christ,Mat. 6. 23. If thine eye bee evil, thy
whole body shall bee full of dark∣nesse;
if therefore the light that is in
you bee darkness, how great is that
darkness. God hath given you your un∣derstandings,
to be the guide of the whole
man. As the Eye is the guide of the
body, and the Sun of the world, so is the
understanding of the man; therefore you
must in praying, pray that God would
give you a right understanding in all
things. Pray not onely for the grace of
Sanctification, but of Illumination.
Avoid as soul-poyson all Doctrines,
1 Which tend to liberty, open a door
to prophaneness, and are contrary to god∣liness.
2 Which hold forth a superstitious
strictness above what is required in the
Wod.

3 Which are Antimagistratical, and
Antiministerial.
4 Which lift up corrupt nature, and
exalt unsanctified reason.
5 Which preach free-grace, to the ut∣ter
ruine of good works.
6 Which lessen the priviledges of
Infants, and makes their condition worse
under the New Testament, than under
the Old.
7 Which are contrary to the Analogy
of Faith, the ten Commandements,
and the Lords Prayer.
16 Take heed lest being led away
with the errour of the wicked, you
fall from your own sted fastness.2 Pet. 3. 17 Take
heed of a threefold Apostacy, of which
this Nation is deeply guilty.
Of Apostacy
1 In your Judgements, from the
Truths of Christ, and from the Faith once
delivered to the Saints
2 In your Affections, from that
ancient love, desire, and delight, which
the Saints of God have had heretofore,

and you your selves once had, in, and to∣wards
the Ordinances of Christ, and the
godly and learned Ministers of Christ.
3 In your conversations, from that
humble and exact walking with God in
all good duties, both towards God, and
man, which was the credit, and honour of
the good old Puritan in former daies.
Let mee speak to you in the words of the
Apostles Paul and Peter. Cor. 15. . Wherefore
my beloved Brethren, bee yee sted∣fast
and unmoveable, &c. The God
of grace, who hath called you into
his eternal glory by Jesus Christ,
make you perfect, stablish, strength∣en,
and settle you.
17 Remember that it is the will of
Jesus Christ, that you who partake of the
same word of life, and of the same Sa∣cramental
Bread and Wine, should
admonish one another, exhort one
another, watch over one another, bear
the burdens of one another, provoke
one another to love and good works;
seek the good of one another, and not

your own good only. That you should
warn the unruly, comfort the feeble∣minded,
and support the weak. That
this is your duty appears, from Col. 3.
16. Phil. 2. 4. Heb. 1. 24. Gal. 6. 1.
Rom. 15. 2. Rom. 14. 7. 2. Cor. 5. 15.
1 Thes. 5. 11, 13, 14. The 12th. vers.
speaks of Ministerial and authoritative
admonition, but the 13, and 14. verses
of fraternal and charitative. These Texts
will rise up in Iudgement against thou∣sands
of Christians at the last day. I do not
say that you are to admonish none but
those of your own Society. Admoni∣tion
is an act of mercy; It is spiritualis
Eleemosyna, spiritual Almes, and you
are bound by the royal law of charity,
by the communion of Saints, the com∣munion
of Churches, and communion
of natures, to distribute these spiritual
almes to all that need them, as God shall
give occasion. But this I say, you ought
especially to admonish them, and watch o∣ver
them. This is novum, though not
solum vinculum. Some Divines think

that one chief reason why the Israelites
were punished for Achans sin, was be∣cause
they did not admonish him, and
watch-over him: For the Israelites
were commanded in the plural number,
Josh. 6. 18. Keep your selves from the
accursed thing, &c. Hee was one of the
body, and because they did not watch
over him, they communicated in his sin,
and in his punishment. There is an ex∣cellent
Law in this Nation, That every
Parish shall provide for its own poor.
And by parity of reason, it is as just and
equal, That every Congregation
should chiefly and especially look to
the souls of their own members, to
warn them, admonish them, exhort
them, and watch over them.
That you may the better discharge
this duty, you must labour to bee ac∣quainted
one with another, as far as
your Callings and Relations will give
you leave. It is a great and common sin,
and much to bee lamented, That there is
so little knowledge and acquain∣tance,

between those that are of the same
Congregation. They sit in the same Pew
together, partake of the same Sacra∣ment,
and yet converse no more toge∣ther,
than if one lived at York, and the
other at London. And when they do con∣verse
together, it is a meer civill and
outward converse, as amongst sober
heathens: But there is very little Re∣ligious
society between them, for the
spiritual edification one of another.
Now this must needs bee a great sin; For
how can you watch over one another, edifie
and admonish one another? How can you
support the weak, comfort the feeble-minded,
if not spiritually acquainted one
with another.
And yet it is not my opinion, that
every member of a Congregation is
bound to know every fellow-member.
I beleeve it was not so in the Church of
Jerusalem, or of Samaria. It is in∣credible,
to think that they all knew one
another. I should bee loath to lay such a
clog upon you consciences, as to say,

That every maid-servant, and man-servant
is bound to know, and to bee
acquainted with all those with whom
they communicate in the Lords Sup∣per.
Indeed the Church-officers are the
eyes of the people, and are to know all,
and to bee acquainted with all: But yet
notwithstanding this, I say, It is the duty
of every member, to endeavour ac∣cording
to his place and calling, to grow
up in spiritual acquaintance one with
another, as God shall offer occasion, and
not to be so strange and unacquainted, but
to walk in love one towards another,
to bear one anothers burden, and so
fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal. 6. 2.
And this you ought the rather to do,
that so you may contribute to the keep∣ing
of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper pure in the Congregation to
which you belong. There is much com∣plaint
amongst many (and not without
just cause) of mixt communions, and
of  universal liberty which some take
in giving the Sacrament promiscuously

to all that come, though grosly ignorant,
and notoriously scandalous, and in mak∣ing
(If I may so speak) the Chancel-door,
as wide as the Church-door.
This in my judgement is a great ini∣quity.
1 It is to give holy things to Dogs,
and to cast Pearls to Swine. It is a
prophanation of the Ordinance, in giv∣ing
it to those who are visibly unworthy
to receive it, and to whom wee know
Christ would not have us to give it.
2 It is an act of great uncharitable∣ness,
to those who are grosly ignorant,
and scandalous. For it is to give them
that which wee know will further their
damnation.
3 It makes the Church-Officers
(who have power to hinder them, and do
not use it) partakers of other mens
sins.
4 It is an Act of cruelty to the Na∣tion:
For because wee have been Pro∣digal
of Christs blood, therefore hee
hath been Prodigal of ours.

5 It is a great scandal to the truly
godly, and a stumbling-block to weak
Christians, causing them (though unad∣visedly)
to separate from our Congrega∣tions.
6 It is to walk contrary to the practise
of most (if not all) of the Churches of
Christ in the Christian world.
To prevent this Sacrament-propha∣nation;
there are some Ministers, wh
wholly surcease from administring it. This
I allow not, unless in case of absolute ne∣cessity.
For this is (as it were) to suspend
the whole Congregation, and to deny
Children their bread, for fear of gi∣ving
it to Dogs. The best way is to follow
the advice which our Lord Jesus Christ
gives, Matth. 18. 15, 16, 17. where hee
propounds Rules and Directions for the
removing of scandals out of the Church.
If thy Brother shall trespass against
thee (saith Christ) go and tell him his
fault between thee and him alone.
Hee doth not say, Go, and separate pre∣sently
(For this is to rend the Church,

not to heal it; This is to hinder thy
Brother from Christ, rather than to
gain him to Christ. Hee doth not say,
Go and tell others (for this is to back∣bite
thy Brother. This is to reproach
him, rather than to reprove him) But hee
saith, Go and tell him his fault be∣tween
thee and him alone; if hee
shall hear thee, thou hast gained thy
Brother: But if hee will not heare
thee, then take with thee one or two
more, &c. And if hee shall neglect to
hear them, tell it to the Church (that
is, to such who are impowred by Christ
to redress offences) but if hee neglect to
hear the Church, let him, &c. Hence
learn,
That all Church-reformation, and
Sacrament-purity must begin from
Church-members, and proceed from
them in Christs way unto Church-of∣ficers;
That if any man who is called a
Brother, bee a Fornicator, or a Railer;
or a Drunkard, or guilty of any other
scandalous sin, It is your duty, who are

members of the same body with him,
and know his guiltiness, to labour by
private admonition to gain him to God,
not to shame him by telling others, but
to gain him, by telling him alone. But
if hee will not hear you, then you are in an
orderly way, to bring it to the Church,
which if you neglect to do, the sin of
Church-pollution is your sin, and not
the sin of your Church-officers. If there
bee three doors to get into an house, hee
that keeps mee out of the first, keeps mee
out of the other two. All Sacrament-reformation
begins with you, you are
the first door at which it enters: if
you faile of your duty, the sin lyeth at your
door, not at ours. It is the custome of all
people (though otherwise godly) if a scan∣dalous
sinner bee admitted to the Lords
Supper, to charge the sin of it upon the
Minister, and in the mean time to forget
that the sin is theirs, not his, because
they have not done what Christ would
have them, for the gaining of him, and
for the inabling of the Church, to pro∣ceed

against him by censures, if hee
prove obstinate. The Lord give you hearts
to thinke of this, and give you grace
(instead of murmuring against, and com∣plaining
of mixt communions, and of
separating from us because of them) to
contribute your utmost towards the pur∣ging
of our Congregations, and to pra∣ctise
all those duties which Christ re∣quires
of you in order thereunto.
I have much more to say of this parti∣cular,
but I perceive that the Epistle swells
to too great a bigness, and therefore I shall
defer what I have further to say, till
God shall offer mee another such oppor∣tunity.
18 Labour to maintain peace and uni∣ty
amongst your selves. It is a good and
pleasant thing for brethren to dwell
together in unity.Psal. 133. Have Salt in your
selves,Mark 9. 50 and peace one with another.
Labour to get your souls seasoned with
the grace of humility. self-denial, and
mortification; and this will keep you in
peace. Remember the saying of Christ,

Blessed are the Peace-makers. Now
I beseech you Brethren, by the Name
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that yee
all speak the same thing, and that there
bee no divisions among you; but that
yee bee perfectly joyned together in
the same minde,1 Cor. 1. 10. and in the same judge∣ment.
19 Study often and often the quatuor
novissima, the four last things, Death,
Judgement, Hell, and Heaven. The
meditation of Death, will prepare you
for Death: The meditation of Hea∣ven,
will make you heavenly-minded:
The meditation of Hell, will keep you
from Hell:Descenda∣mus vi∣ventes, ut non de∣scenda∣mus mo∣ientes. Therefore Bernard perswades
us to go often down to Hell by medi∣tation
while wee live, and wee shall
not go down to it when wee dye. The
meditation of the day of Judgement,
will bee both fraenum, & calcar, a bridle
to curb you from sin, and a spur to incite
you to all godliness, that so you may give
up your account with joy at that terrible
day.

20 Study the exceeding great and
precious Promises of the Gospel, make a
Catalogue of them, meditate on them,
and labour to apply them to your own
souls, for your everlasting comfort. And
for this purpose, read over these Sermons,
and study them in time of health, that you
may injoy the benefit of them in the time
of sickness.
Lastly, Let mee intreat you to praise
God in my behalfe; that hee hath been
pleased out of his free love to uphold mee
amongst you in my Ministerial imploy∣ment
for these Eighteen years; And to
continue your earnest prayers unto him,
that hee would make my labours more use∣full,
and successful, that hee would guide
mee, that I may guide you, that hee
would not onely make, but keep mee
faithful in these back sliding times, and
teach mee so to preach, and so to live,
that I may save my self, and those that
hear mee.

