



IF all Noble-men were as good and
religious as they are presented to the
World in the Epistles prefixed to the
Books that are dedicated to them, we
should not have so much cause to com∣plaine
of great mens Iniquities, or of
poore mens flatteries. S. Augustine in his Booke of Re∣tractations,
Retracts it as a great fault, that when he de∣dicated
a Booke to Mallius Theodorus, he praised him
more then he deserved, though he confesseth that he was
doctus vir & Christianus, a Learned and Christian man:
It is none of the least miseries of great men, that they

want faithfull friends to tell them their vices as well as
their vertues. King Ahab had 400. flattering Pro∣phets
who were the cause of his ruine. Hence is that
old Proverbe, that there are onely two things that never
flatter great men, Death and Horses. For Death sei∣zeth
upon great as well as small. And a Horse will cast
downe a great man as well as any other, if he rides not
well. This Sermon speakes plaine language, and this
is the only Reason (for ought I know) that it received
such kind acceptance, for otherwise it wants that
neatnesse of phrase, and eloquence of speech which such
Noble Auditors are accustomed unto, I have often
heard of Great men, that complained upon their Death
beds, that none would tell them of their faults, but ne∣ver
of any that complained hee was told too much. The∣odosius
the great Emperour confesseth of S. Ambrose,
notwithstanding his severe carriage towards him,Theod. So∣lum
novi Ambrosium dignum Episcopi nomine;
That he knew none worthy of a Bishoprick but Ambrose.
It is a custome to send Sermons out unto publike view
under the Patronage of some Noble-man or other.
This Sermon hath this preheminence, That it comes
forth under the Patronage, and by the commands not
only of one Lord, but of a House of Lords. The Lord
make it to obtaine that end for which it was preached!
That you (my Lords) may make Joshua's choise

your choise. The subject matter of the Sermon is
very common and ordinary. But herein I follow the
example of Chrysostome, who when he was made
Patriarch of Constantinople, the first Sermon that
he preached before the Emperour Arcadius and the
great Courtiers, was a Sermon of Repentance. This
is the message that I have received (saith Chry∣sostome)
from my Master Christ to deliver unto you.
Repent for the Kingdome of God is at hand. 
Haec autem non dubitabo vobis assiduè revocare
in memoriam. Haec neminem reverentes ne∣que
potentes aut divites timentes ad vos loquemur.
The Lord bestow this great grace of Repentance upon
you, and inable you to serve God with all the ingre∣dients
mentioned in the following Sermon! Two things
I would desire your Lordships alwayes to remember.
1. That the best way of thankfulnesse for mer∣cies
received, is to serve the God of those mercies,
and to serve him with the mercies we receive from
him.
2. That the best way for the House of Lords to
prosper, is to indeavour earnestly and faithfully to
reforme the Lords House, your own houses, and first
your selves.
Some things I have added which were not preached,
which relate to all men in generall as well as great men,

which I then omitted for brevity sake, but have here
interserted I hope without offence, that so this Sermon
which is printed for a generall good, might have some∣things
in it tending to the good of all men as well as great
men.
The Great God make the House of Lords as the
House of the Lord wherein service may be done to
God, and for Gods cause. So prayeth

