




Hoxton, May 24. 1697.
My Dear Friends,
WHAT I here put into your Hands, is your Own already. To you was the Substance of the ensuing Discourse Deliver'd from the Pulpit; and 'twas your Request that put me upon Preparing it for the Press. I am glad to understand that I did not wholly lose my Labour, while I so many Sacra∣ment Days successively entertain'd you on this Subject: And am not without hope that what you have found Beneficial, may be Profitable to some others also. I expect to pass under a variety of Censures, but so the great End of my Ministry be but furthered, I can easily over-look them.


IT hath been my Earnest Endeavour ever since I have been with you, to pro∣mote Serious, Practical, Christianity, among you, without attempting to draw you to, or fix you in, any Particular Sect, Party, or Interest whatever. I heartily rejoyce to find a Catholick Spirit prevail so much among you, the general want whereof, all who are truly concern'd for the Honour of Religion, find so much cause to lament.
I HIGHLY Esteem and Honour you, on the Account of your Inviolable Re∣spect, and firm Adherence to your Reve∣rend Pastor, in the midst of all those Storms the great Enemy of Souls hath rais'd against him, in order to the dimi∣nishing his Usefulness: Your Steadiness in so violent a Tempest as he not long since past through, which plainly had its Rise from beneath, was God's great Mercy, the Devil's Disappointment, your Pastors Support, and your Glory.
I HEARTILY thank you for all the Testimonies of Respect and Kindness, I have receiv'd from you, since I have been spending my pains amongst you. I bless the Lord that he hath made any use of me, to promote your Knowledge, Faith, of Holiness: And I desire he may have all the Glory of any Good wherein I may have been Instrumental.


I BESEECH you, my Dear Friends, to go on more and more to adorn your Christian Profession: Let your Tempers and Lives shew to whom you belong: This will be the way to honour God, to strengthen the Hands, and chear the Hearts of your Ministers, and you'll reap the Fruit in due time. Go on to shun Extreams, and you'll avoid the Dangers that attend them. Place as little of your Religion as is possible in Separation. Be always ready to receive Light in Divine Things; and never think your selves past Improvements. Love all that love God and Goodness, how much soever they differ from you. As far as you are able, speak Well of those who speak Ill of you; and return not Railing for Railing: But do what in you lies to live Peaceably with all Men. Beware of more Serpentine Subtilty than a Dove-like Innocence can temper. Be strictly Just in all your Deal∣ings; Circumspect in your Walk, Tem∣perate in all things; and let your Mode∣ration be known unto all Men; For the Lord is at hand. Let it be your Endea∣vour to get well surnish'd Minds, warm Hearts, Governable Spirits, tender Con∣sciences, and heavenly Affections, and your Stability and Fruitfulness will be signal.


OFTEN Reflect on the Strength and Sacredness of the Divine VOWS you are under, which the Ensuing Treatise is design'd to help you rightly to Under∣stand and Improve: And take care to live Faithfully up to them, if you have any Regard to the Favour of God, the Honour of Christ, your own Present Peace, or Future Happiness.
AND now, Brethren, I commend you to God, and the Word of his Grace: I leave the Success of my Endeavours to Him who led me into these Meditations; And make it my Request to you, That when you are most Serious and Fervent at the Throne of Grace, you would not be Unmindful of

