




AMong all the Mercies which God hath vouchsafed to bestow upō this Kingdome by your helpe, the pro∣curing of a Monethly Fast, from his Royall Majesty (during the warres of Ireland, and the unsetled condition of England) is not the least. For by this meanes the Churches of England are set in a monethly posture of warre to fight with Prayers and Teares (which are the Churches weapons) against all the ene∣mies of our peace and prosperity: And may very fitly resemble the Tree of Life, mentioned Revel. 22. 2. which yeelded her fruite every Moneth, and the leaves of the tree were for the healing of the Nations. I doubt not but through Gods blessing, this Monethly Fast will prove an England-and-Ireland-healing Fast, if it be celebra∣ted as it ought to be, with weeping, mourning, and brokennesse of heart for sin, and from sin. Great is the efficacy, and omnipotency of prayer and fasting: So great, Vincit in∣vincibilem ligat omni∣potentem. as that it would require rather a large volume than a

short Epistle to expresse it. And therefore I purposely wave it, as a theame in which a child cannot want elo∣quence, & in which I should sooner know where to be∣gin, than where to make an end. As the Jewes had their Monethly Feast, which they called their New Moones, in 2 King. 4. 23. Amos 8. 9 Numb. 29  Hb An∣tiquty. which the Word was preached, their shops shut up, & special sacrifices offered up to God: And as they had their Feast of Trumpets, in which they blowed their trumpets all day long (especially in their first New Moone) from Sun∣rising, till night: So, Blessed be God, we now enjoy our Christian New Moones, and Evangelical Feast of Trum∣pets. We have not oely our Monethly Sacrament Feast to refresh our soules withall, in most of our congrega∣tions, (which would be as the hidden Manna, Revel. 2. 17. an unspeakeable consolation to the Religious par∣ty, if you would be pleased (most, noble Senators) to appoint by your authority some spirituall railes (as you have taken away other kind of railes) to keepe away all dogs and swine from polluting that holy Ordinance) but we have also our New Moone Fst, in which the Word is preached, trading ceaseth, and Sacrifices of prayer, praises, and almes, are tendred up to God, in the name of Jesus Christ. We have our Feast of Trumpets, in which our godly Ministers throughout the whole Kingdome lift up their voices as a Trumpet, and all the whole day▪ are either the mouth of the people to God, or Gods mouth to Esay 58. 1. the people, shewing unto England their sinnes, and to the people of this Land their transgressions, and calling them to humiliation, and reformation. From hence it comes to passe, That (if Englands just feares, and Ire∣lands miseries should so long continue by reason of our sinnes) we are likely to be blessed by the providence of God, bringing good out of evill, with twelve Nationall,

solemne, publike Fasts every yeare, which (if rightly kept) will be as the twelve Gates of the New Jerusalem, spoken of, Revel. 21. Every fast will be as a Gate to let us in, into a part of the New Jerusalem of Mercy, and happi∣nesse promised to the people of God, here upon earth. And there is one thing more, which addes much to this new monethly mercy, and that is, That notwithstand∣ing your most weighty and important affaires, you are pleased to keepe this Fast, your selves in your own Per∣sons, after a most solemne and religious manner every Moneth. Which pious example no doubt will be a no∣table incouragement to all the Kingdome to follow so good a President, and a mighty provocation to the re∣ligious and solemne observance of it. It is said expres∣ly of the King of Niniveh (though a Heathen) that he came from his Throne, laid his robes from him, and that his Nobles and people from the greatest of them to the least put on sackcloth. And, as Chrysostome well observeth, Their sackcloth prevailed more with God, then all their purple robes: Quod non poterat Diadema, id saccus obtinu∣it. Such a famous example doe you hold forth, who are the chiefest of our Tribes; to which I doubt not but the lowest of our people (unlesse they will bee worse than Heathens) will cheerefully conforme.
This insuing Sermon was preached at your last Month∣ly Fast, and it is now by your command exposed to pub∣lique view. There is nothing in it, that makes it worthy the Printing, but onely your kinde acceptance of it; which is as a Royall stampe upon some inferiour metall to make it currant. It is the property as of God in Heaven, so also of all earthly gods who are truly noble, not onely to give great gifts worthy of the givers, but also to accept of poore and small gifts, though un∣worthy

to be given, when given with a thankfull heart, as of a  Ar∣txes. handfull of water, a cup of cold water, a poore wi∣dowes mite, a little goates haire, and semblably of this following discourse, which now becomes publike under your Patronage. The Lord grant it may accomplish that for which it was Preached! That Englands mercies may be a motive, and a meanes of Englands humiliation and Reformation. And that by confessing our sinnes with a happy confusion of face (as the Text requires) wee may prevent that unhappy confusion, which is otherwise likely to come upon us. The same Almighty God mul∣tiply all his gifts and graces upon you, be a Sunne and a shield unto you, appearing alwaies in the Mount of straits, causing all Mountaines to become a Plaine before you, & in∣abling you to consummate all those good things which you have begun to doe for this Church and State.
So prayeth 
