



Right Honourable:
IT hath pleased God to take unto himself
a Reverend, Learned and Pious Mi∣nister
Dr BOLTON, one who feared
God above many, who was (not with∣out
just cause) highly esteemed by your
Lordship, whose memory is very pre∣tious
to you, and who was very dear to
a Religious Daughter of yours now
with God (whom I mention for Ho∣nour
sake) the Lady Lucy Roberts.
The ensuing Sermon preached at his sad Funerals, I crave
leave to dedicate to your Lordship, as a publike acknowledge∣ment
of the many and great favours I have received from you.

The design of it is, to wean Christians from the overmuch love
of their bodies. All men by nature are prone curare cutem ma∣gis
quàm animam, to take more care and spend more time for
their bodies, then for their souls: Hence it is that they think no
cost too much that is laid out for the feeding and cloathing of
their bodies, no gift too great that is given to the Physitian to
heal them when diseased, but any thing too much which is gi∣ven
to a godly Minister for the good of their souls: Hence it is,
that the working dayes are too few, and too short for their bodily
profits and pastimes, but the Lords day which is the Queen of
dayes, because it is the Souls Market-day for Heaven, is bur∣densome
to them, and very tedious. Hence it is also that they
are willing to lay out Nine parts of their Estate for their bodies,
but unwilling to part with the Tenth for soul-advantages. The
scope of this Sermon▪ is to shew the vanity and sinfulness of these
and such like practises.
It tells your Lordship
That the Body is the worst half of man, the boxe the shell,
the carcasse: That the Soul is the Jewel, the life, the man of
man.
That the Body is a Vile body made of vile materials, subject
to vile diseases and to vile abominations, and that he that pro∣vides
for his body and not for his soul, is like unto a husband∣man
that in harvest time gathers in his stubble, and leaves his
Corn to be devoured by his Hoggs; or like unto a Goldsmith,
that weighs exactly his dross, but disregards his gold. And
also
He that provides for his Body with the neglect of his Soul, is
like unto a Merchant that overloads his Ship so as to drown
himself; or to a man that makes so great a fire to warm him∣self
by, as to burn his house and himself in it.
It sheweth your Lordship also
That this vile body will never be changed into a glorious
body till the great day of the resurrection, and that then the
Lord JESUS will come from Heaven on purpose to fashion our
vile bodies like unto his glorious body.
That this life is not the time appointed for the good of

our bodies only or chiefly, but of our souls principally and espe∣cially.
That the only way to make our bodies glorious, is by getting
our souls to be made gracious.
That the happiness of the body depends upon the happiness of
the soul: If the soul be adorned here with Christs righteousness,
the body will be cloathed with glory unexpressible hereafter. If
the soul when separated from the body be polluted and belepred
with sinne, the body and soul will both of them be eternally mise∣rable
at the resurrection.
These Lessons are very suitable and seasonable for all sorts and
degrees, but especially for you (Right Honourable) whose body
now begins to wax old, and will shortly go down to the house of
rottenness and be crumbled into dust.
I doubt not but God hath sufficiently taught you the vanity
and emptiness of all earthly greatness. That greatness with∣out
goodness, is like the greatness of a man with a Drop∣sie,
which is his disease not his happiness: That Riches
without Righteousness are but heaps of dung: And that
nothing but Grace will make you truly and eternally honou∣rable.
God hath taken you off (out of love to your pretious soul)
from all publike employments, and thereby hath lent you much
time to provide for eternity. He hath given you a Noble Coun∣tess,
a pretious Consort, a beloved Companion, a dear
Yoak-fellow (united to you not only by marriage relation, but
by true love and most entire affection) who will be glad to go hand
in hand with you in heavens way.
To both of you my obligations are very many and very great,
the characters of your Love are visible and legible by all: All
that know me know my relation to you: My prayers to God for
you both shall be, That God would give you more of himself, and
of those mercies which cannot stand with damnation: That
he would keep you good in bad times, and constant to your prin∣ciples
in Apostatizing times: That he would lengthen out your
dayes for his glory; and that this Sermon may be instrumentall
to make you minde your bodies lesse, and your souls more; that

when the great day of judgement shall come, your vile bodies
may be changed into the likeness of the glorious body of JESUS
CHRIST.
So prayeth,
My Lord

