


WHatsoever Sacrifices Men have at any time offer'd up to God, they had first receiv'd from His Bounty: nor were they there∣fore the less Acceptable to Him, if offer'd with humility, gratitude, and sincere devotion. I have rea∣son then to hope (Noble Sir) that this Book, which I now bring as an Oblation of Honor to your Name; and bring with grateful senti∣ments

of your exemplary Munificence so hap∣pily exercis'd upon our Illustrious Colledge of Physicians; will not be the less acceptable to You, because it is already Yours, by unque∣stionable right.
I call it Yours; because, though it be an abortive Child of my weak brain, 'twas be∣gotten by a Conjunction of my Obedience to the Command of our Most Worthy President, with my honest Ambition to contribute my Mite toward the advancement of the Noble Art of Dissection, to which You have given so ample Encouragement: because 'twas born in Your Magnific Theatre, at the Inaugu∣ration thereof: and because it now comes abroad into the World with no other aim, but publickly to acknowledge Your Heroic Beneficence.
Nor do I indeed know any other way of making that Acknowledgement, so agreeable either to the Generosity of Your Mind, or to the Nobility of Your Design, in erecting the Anatomic Theatre; as this I have taken, is.
For, to Your Great Spirit, 'tis much more delightful to accumulate Benefits, than to re∣ceive Thanks and Eulogies from Your Bene∣ficiaries: and You are alwayes best pleas'd with those acts of Your Charity, which are

done in secret, and which are not otherwise to be known, than by the light of their own Merit. Whence it is, that Your Liberality walks in paths new and remote from the Common rode, yet direct, and leading at length into most spatiose fields of public Uti∣lity, where industrious Men may reap a more plentiful harvest of rewards, than they can at first expect: and that the streams of Your Goodness resemble those Rivers, which, though running under ground, diffuse fertility to whole Countreys and Provinces through which they pass. Of this, the Mechanic Lecture You have founded in Gresham Colledge, for the promotion of Manual Trades; and Your Ana∣tomic Theatre, are illustrious Examples, worthy the imitation of Good Kings, and the envy of Bad: being Both so deeply founded upon Wisdom, that the Advantages they promise, are of Universal concernment to the present Age, and (if Men be not wanting to themselves) cannot but extend to all in Ages to come; rendering their Usefulness more and more Con∣spicuous, the lower they descend to Posterity.
And as for the Nobility of Your Design in the later; that can not be deny'd to be full of Piety toward God, and of Benevolence to∣ward Men.

Of Piety toward God; in that it aims at the incitement of even Philosophers, to make farther researches and discoveries of the infi∣nite Goodness, Wisdom, and Power of God, discernable in all his Creatures, but more eminently in the admirable fabric of Man's Body: and by consequence, to encrease their Love and Veneration of the Divine Majesty. For most certain it is, that profound Contempla∣tion of the Works of Nature, is of it self pow∣erful enough even to compell Human Rea∣son to admire, love, praise, and adore the Transcendent Perfections of the Author of Na∣ture; that we are all naturally disposed to form in our Minds such Notions of the Deity, as are proportionate to the discoveries we make of the Excellencies thereof, in the Ob∣jects we contemplate; and in fine, that our Devotion toward the same Deity, is alwayes proportionate to those Notions. Hence doubtless it was, that the most inquisitive Naturalists amongst the Antients, were also the greatest Celebrators of the Supreme Being: and that the Indian Gymnosophists, the Persian Magi, the Egyptian Sacrificers, the Gallic Druids, and the Athenian Hierophantae, were to their several Nations both Philosophers and Priests; teaching at once the mysteries of Nature, the

duties of Religion, and the rites of Divine Wor∣ship. Evident it is then, that Your Theatre may be properly enough call'd, a Temple of Natural Theology, where the Perfections of God are studied in the Works of His hands, and His Praises celebrated with Understanding. Deum enim colit, qui novit.
Of Good-will toward Men; in that it hath pro∣vided the fittest Means to bring the most An∣tient, the most universally Useful, and there∣fore the Noblest of all Arts, the Art of Heal∣ing, to Perfection. For, Anatomy being the Grand fundament of Medicine, and yet (with sorrow I write it) incomplete; it cannot be, but every new discovery thence arising to the Learned and Judicious Professors, must conduct them, not only to more certain Sci∣ence, first of the true Oeconomy of Mans bo∣dy, in the state of Nature; and then of the disorders and perversions of that Oecono∣my, by Diseases, with their respective Seats and Causes: but also to the most rational and propre Indications, for the preservation of that, and the cure of these. Nor can You think me to speak rather from affection or partiality, than from right judgement; if I affirm, that no Men are more likely to make such Discoveries by accurate Dissections, than

some of the now flourishing Fellows of our Colledge are: so great are the Testimonies they have already given to the World of their unwearied Diligence, solid Erudition, and admi∣rable Sagacity of Spirit. So that 'tis not easie for me to determine, whether these Gentle∣men be more Worthy of Your Theatre, or Your Theatre more Worthy of them. But of this I am sure, that such a Theatre hath been most fitly conjoyn'd to such a Colledge: and I dare prophesie, they will mutually add more and more Honor each to the other.
Now (Honor'd Sir) if You please to reflect upon what I have said, of the Generose Tem∣per of Your Mind, and of the Wisdom of Your Design in this Magnificent Structure; You will (I presume) be soon induced to believe, what I before affirm'd, that I could give no testimony of the great Respect and Gratitude I owe You, more decent and congruous to Both, than the Dedication of these my late Anatomic Praelections to You is, in which (how imperfect soever) I have shewn my self wil∣ling at least, and Zealous to be serviceable to Your End, without offending Your Modesty.
The Reasons I have brought, seem suffici∣ent, both to evidence the Right this Book hath to Your Favor, and to justifie my Election of it,

as the least indecent Sacrifice I could offer to Your Glory: and the same may serve also to incline You to receive it benignly, as a speci∣men of my Devotion to so Eminent a Benefa∣ctor; and to permit me to expose the same to the Censorious World, under Your Auspici∣ous Patronage; which will certainly afford it defense from Contempt, and might also give it long Life, were it not of an infirm constitu∣tion, as having been form'd in haste, and in the declining age of its Author, and,
March the 27th A. D. 1679.
Noble Sir, 
