



My Lord,
IT is now near Two Years, since I was desired to employ some of my lei∣sure Hours in considering this Book, and putting it into a Condition of becoming somewhat more useful and acceptable, than (it may without any suspicion of Vanity be said) the former. Translation could pretend to be. A little Time spent in the Perusal satisfy'd me, that there was Matter in it not unworthy my Pains, and such as it was great Pity Men should want the Knowledge of, who understand not the Original. And as
unreasonable did it seem, that others should be discouraged from enquiring into this Author, by the Misfortunes which naturally attend even the best Un∣dertakings of this Nature, when Time, and Improvements of Language have given another Turn to Writing, and crea∣ted a Disrelish for every thing, which is not suitable to the Genius of the present Age.
The greatest Difficulty which lay up∣on me, was that of finding Opportuni∣ties, in the midst of those more impor∣tant Cares of my Profession, which nei∣ther This, nor any other Attempt or Consideration, however commendable or beneficial in it self, must prevail with me to neglect. But here I found even my Duty assisting; for That requiring part of my Attendance in a Place of somewhat more Retirement and Ease than where Your Lordship's Father was pleased to fix me, I made use of those Advantages to this purpose, and finished much the greatest part of the following
Book, in a way of Diversion, as it were, and unbending from severer Studies, and a more Laborious Station.
The particular Liberty taken by this Author, is a Qualification, which the pre∣sent Generation, at least in our Parts of the World, will certainly be fond of. But it happened to have the same Effect upon Him sometimes, which we are not much to wonder if we find very frequent in those of less Judgment; and that is, over-straining Points of Dispute, by af∣fecting to say all, which either the Case will bear, or which any other Person hath said before. This gave Occasion for my interposing sometimes with an Advertisement; and that I hope in such a manner, as may not have injur'd the Author, while it designs the Benefit and Security of my Reader. One thing on∣ly I cannot forbear adding upon this Occasion, that in the midst of all his Free-Thinking, he constantly expresses a due and absolute Deference for Revela∣tion and Divine Truths. And This
indeed was by no means the Effect of his Profession, but of his Judgment; for Your Lordship is too discerning, not to know, that, as a little and superficial Knowledge in Physick makes Men Quacks, so it is not the Abundance, but the Defect of Reason and good Sense, which makes them Infidels and Scepticks in Religion.
How little the Sieur de Charron suffer'd his Thoughts to be under the Bondage of any private Respects, will be suffici∣ently evident to any considering Reader, from sundry Instances. Particularly from what he hath deliver'd upon the Subject of Government, in his Third Book: In which, tho' some Moot Points may seem a little uncouth to Us of this Nation, yet if we reflect upon the Constitution, under which he liv'd, we shall rather have occasion to wonder at his admitting so few reserv'd Cases, than mentioning so many. Besides, that even those men∣tion'd would be of no mighty ill Con∣sequence, if always confin'd to those
Conditions, and Occasions, which He hath temper'd and restrain'd them with. But, passing from the Mysteries of State, and pressing unusual Emergencies, to the Ordinary Measures of a Publick Admi∣nistration, there is somewhat of an Air so full of Ingenuity, and such regard had to the Great Ends for which Government was instituted, as a very gentle Appli∣cation would think an Encomium upon the English Constitution, and a sort of Prophetick Satyr upon the late Oppres∣sions of a People to whom he stood nearly related.
Upon the whole Matter (My Lord) I have Reason to hope, This may prove not only a Book of Good Entertainment, but Great Benefit, to Persons who have the Capacity, and will give themselves the Pains, to consider it. Were it not so, I should not have thought it worth my Trouble; and should yet much less have presumed to make an Offer of it to Your Lordship. I can with good Confidence say, that no Man is better qualified to be a Ma∣ster
of the Subject it treats of. The particular and intimate Knowledge of Your Abilities, which my being Ho∣nour'd with the Care of Your Lord∣ship at the University gave me, would bear me out in delivering more upon this Occasion, than Your Modesty will permit. And indeed the General Opi∣nion of all that have the Honour of Your Lordships Acquaintance, saves You that Decency, and hath prevented me in this Point. The Manly Sense, and Wonderful Penetration, which ap∣pear'd very early in You, have given me many pleasing Reflections; and I am sure are Foundation sufficient for making Your Lordship a Greater Or∣nament and Honour to Your Family, than even that Nobility which You have by Descent.
But I must beg leave (My Lord) to put you in mind, that besides Your Own, Your Lordship hath a mighty Stock of Honour and Esteem to set out upon, deriv'd from the Memory of a Father, than
whom Few, if Any, of his Condition, are more universally loved and admir'd. I say, loved, my Lord, for This, as a more rare, so is it a more valuable Tri∣bute, than that of Honour, to Persons of Quality, and in Great Offices. For where so much is paid to the Station, we can make very little Judgment, what is sin∣cere, and what is the Effect of Forma∣lity, or Fear, or Interest. But in His Lordship's Case there was something so Distinguishing, in all the Respects paid to Him, as plainly shew'd a particu∣lar Regard to his Person, and that the outward Testimonies were not Things of Course, but that he had engag'd the very Hearts of Those who paid them.
I will not so far seem to distrust Your Lordship's Acceptance of this Ad∣dress, as to make the least Apology for it. You will interpret it, I doubt not, as a Testimony of the Honour I have for You, and a Desire to pub∣lish my having it, to the World: And Your Lordship will do me the
Justice too to believe, that were it in my Power to give any other Evidence of This, than such an open Declara∣tion; nothing should be wanting on my Part, which might prove the Sincerity of those Professions I am Proud to make, of being,
My LORD, 
Lewisham, May. 6. 1697.
