



BEing the admirable frame of Heaven and Earth, and the perpetual vicissitude of Night and Day, do continually set forth the Praises of God All-mighty and All-merciful; nor is there any Nation of the World, that doth not hear the Speech and Doctrine of them; it followeth, that the God, who is Maker and Governor of this Ʋni∣verse, ought to be Worshipped and Praised by all Men every where. And, had not men degenerated from
 that goodness of Nature, wherein they were created, they might have learned Piety and Religion, from this making of the World, and from so great and perpetual benefits of God towards them; but because, being corrupted by the transgression of the first man, they run headlong into all Sin, and so unto Death, it pleased God, (in opposition to this license and mischief) to deliver a Law of Holy living, which whoso∣ever would obey, they might avoid the evil of Sin and punishment, and attain unto a happy life.
Now, because that Law, nei∣ther was extant among all Na∣tions, nor was able (through their obstinacy) to retain the Israe∣lites, to whom was given, with∣in the compass of their duty; God at last sent his Son into the World, who might take away the Partiti∣on Wall, and spred his Gospel a∣mongst
 all Mankind, and Redeem us by his Blood, and by the in∣stinct of his Divine Spirit sweet∣ly draw us into the right and the good way, and so conduct us to bless∣edness eternal.
Wherefore, being obliged by so great beneficence of God, 'tis not only commendable, but (if we would be Saved) neccssary for us to bear grateful Minds, and to our power answer his benefits by doing our duty to him. And our duty is (as Christ our Master and Saviour hath taught us in Brief) to love God with all our Heart, with all our Mind, and with all our Strength, and to love men as well as we love our selves. And, whereas it is the part of humane love, to do good to all as you are able, and to hurt none; Divine love, because we can do no good to God, exacteth at our hands,
 that every day we be employed in celebrating his goodness, and Sing∣ing Praises to his Name. Whoso∣ever is endued with this Love, is carried unto God with such a strong inclination and desire, that he e∣steemeth Riches, Honors, Glory, (for which others do and suffer all things) nothing worth; and is so much de∣lighted in God's Law, that he Me∣ditates upon it Day and Night, thinking all time lost, which is not bestowed upon him, from whom all good things descend.
If this were deeply fixed in our minds, surely we should not lay out so great a Portion of so short a life upon those Arts and Matters, which do so little conduce either to the Glory of God, or the profit of Mankind; but not do it our selves wholly to this heavenly Philosophy, or Sophy rather, that is, to Wis∣dom. For indeed, this Discipline
 is not (as some imagine) such as cannot be well learned without the aid of profane Letters. It were ab∣surd, if not impious, being pro∣fane Wits (whose Authors were not only ignorant of God but most of them evil men) can be without this Heavenly Doctrine, to say, the Christian Doctrine cannot consist without them, whose Masters pro∣nounceth St. Paul foolish and un∣learned. For, as God would have nothing in the Sacred Books which is not pertinent to his Worship; so is there nothing wanting, which is pertinent. We must not believe a Master infinitely perfect to have fur∣nished us with maimed and imperfect instructions.
Yet I say not this, as if I thought the use of profane Letters were to be laid aside; for if one learn in them the Nature of things,
 and the actions of men, to this end that he may adore and Honor God, the Author and Governor of them, he does well, in my judgment, and seemeth to be con∣versant, not in a profane, but a Sacred work: because he so fol∣lows that Study, that it may not hinder, but serve and advance Religion. But to have good man∣ners, and the right way of life may be learned either from the trifles of Poets, or from Sentences of Phi∣losophers, being uncertain, and most part false and contrary each to other: this were all one, as if men since the Invention of Guns, would Fight Battails with their Fists. I conclude therefore, my hon∣our'd Amerbachius, that the sa∣cred Scriptures are to be turned and studied Night and Day; so studied, that both we our selves
 may frame our lives according to their prescripts, and teach others committed to our trust to do like∣wise.
Basil. Aug. 10. An. 1547.
THE END.
