



THE Apostle Paul doth declaim against nothing more than Ano∣ther Gospel, which is not another Gospel, (as he saith) because no Gospel: Quod nusquam est cum unum fit Evan∣gelium non plura, saith Beza on the Gal. 1. It is no where, seeing there is but one Gospel, and not more. This pretended other Gospel was a Do∣ctrine that taught the Conjunction of the Works of a Law with the Grace of God, and the Righteousness of Christ in the Juctification of a Sinner before God, which some False Teachers did zealously press upon the Ga∣latians, in opposition to the Apostles Doctrine: These he calls, Troublers of the Churches, and Perverters or Subverters of the Gospel of Christ, viz. The Doctrine of Justification by Free Grace. Such as teach Ju∣stification by a Law, of Merits, not of Christ, but our own, [See Be∣za on the pl.] "Altho' we say they were wrought in us by Christ, as if Christ could be said to Justifie, by giving us a way or means to justifie our selves; you may as well reconcile Light and Darkness as these two.
As to the Introducers and Teachers of such Doctrine, the Apostle de∣nounceth a bitter Curse against them, whatever they were, (pretending to never so much Holiness) Apostles, or Angels: Yea, he puts himself under this Anathema, if at any time he should be guilty in this kind: And to
 shew that he speaks not rashly or passionately, but by the Spirit of God, and to awe Men's Minds the more, and deterr them from such Attempts, he re∣doubles the Imprecation. But you'll say, May we not a little make bold with the Gospel of Christ? How far may we venture to go, and not fall un∣der this Anathema? The Apostle answers, v. 9. If any Man preach any other Gospel unto you than that you have received, let him be accursed. And the Doctrines which they had received was Justification by Faith without the Works of a Law: And that a Law is not of Faith in the Point of Justification, ch. 3.12. Mr. Beza justifies our Translation in rendring  besides, rather than against. For (saith he) the Apostle said not, If they preach contrary things, and subvert the whole Gospel, (as Chrysostom hath it.) But, If they pervert it a little, if they preach any thing besides that Gospel which they had re∣ceived, &c. If they, as the Apostle saith many did, 2 Cor. 2.17.. Caupanariam Exer∣centes.
, Caupones, Infames semper & sordidi sunt babiti, quod merces corrumpunt & a∣dulterant. Jun. Beza. Corrupt the Word of God, as fraudulent Vintners, (who dash their Wines with Water, or any base Li∣quors.) But, saith the Apostle, We are of those who Preach the Word of God, , in Sincerity, in the Truth of our Hearts, as we will answer unto God, without any thing of Craft or Double Dealing, or mixing our omn Schemes or Phantasies therewith, that speak the very Truth, as we have dealt plainly and truly, not shunning to declare unto you all the Counsel of God, Acts 20.27. not shuffling and hiding some great Truths, that we think are not fit for the People to know; and therefore, saith he, we have abdi∣cated. Abrenunciavimus pudendis latebris, non callidi∣taté ambutantes, ne{que} falsantes sermonem Dei. 2 Cor. 4.2. this shameful hiding the Word of God, not demeaning our selves craftily, nor handling it deceitfully.
And to such as receive this other Gospel, who have professed to the re∣ceiving the True Gospel, he saith, I marvel you should be so soon re∣moved from him that called you into the Grace of Christ unto ano∣ther Gospel: Calls them Fools, Gal. 3.1. saith, they were fascinated, bewitched, the Devil had got a great hand over them; tells them they were Apostates, had began in a Spiritual Gospel, but ended in a Carnal: Nay, he testifies, that whoever is Justified by a Law, [it's ] are fallen from Grace; and that all their former Sufferings, how great so∣ever they have been, would prove in vain. Oh! that Professors of our Days would seriously consider these things, who are so ready to run after this other Gospel!

Lastly, It is also needful to observe how the Apostle Paul complements Peter that Great Apostle, and one of the Pillars in the Churches, for his double dealing in these matters, in so much as countenancing this False Gospel, or the Imposing Teachers of it: He withstood him to the Face, and publickly; he rebuked him sharply, because he was exceedingly culpable; and in that he not only committed a great Sin himself, but carry'd away Barnabas, and many professing Jews with his Dissimulation; insomuch that they all plaid the Hypocrites. with him, to please the Neonomians. He aggravates their Fault, in telling them they countenanced a Doctrine, which they were convinced was false, ch. 2.16. That they made Christ a Minister of Sin, that they condemned themselves in their Practice, by building the things which they had destroyed. He takes off also all Apologies that they might make from the seeming Smallness of the Fault, as to refuse to eat with the Gentiles. Come, come, saith he, the mischief lies in it's Ten∣dency, viz. To encourage the Preachers and Receivers of the Doctrine of Justification by the Works of the Law, : For, saith he, we have believed on Christ, that we might be justified by the Faith of Christ, and not by the Works of a Law; for by the Works of a Law no Flesh living shall be justified. I hope they whom these things do nearly concern at this time, will duly weigh and consider them: Tho' I doubt not but they know them, yet it may not be amiss to stir up knowing Men, by putting them in remembrance, 2 Pet. 1.12, 13. Verbum sat sapientibus.
As to the present Grand Assertor of a New Law, and of the Doctrine of Justification by the Works of the said Law, I thought it due to the Grandeur of his Appearance in the Head of a New Sect, to treat him by the Name thereof, viz. A NeonomianOne that Asserts the Old Law is abolished, and there∣in is a superlative Antinomi∣an, but pleads for a New Law, and Justification by the Works of it, and there∣in is a Neonomian., and the rather, because by that Rectoral Rule of Government which he hath usurp'd to himself, and the Rule of Sin, he hath judicially Sen∣tenced all his Opposers to the Name of Antino∣mians, or Abetters of them: Insomuch that all our first Protestant Reformers, and any known by the Name of Calvinists, fall under his se∣vere Censure, as Ignorant Setters up of the Name of Christ and his Grace against his Government. I thought it meet to call in the long-ago deceased Doctor also, under what Name or Title soever he is pleased to call him, (whom he carries about to scare Children with, and as a Trophy of his pretended Triumph) that he might be made speak, and the World may hear what he hath to say for himself, and be acquainted how he is abu∣sed, and that he may be hereafter permitted to rest quietly in his Grave,
 and not used as Wickliff was, i. e. Burnt for an Heretick so many Years after be hath been dead.
In a Word, Shall we stand still with our Fingers in our Months in such a Day of Peace and Liberty, while we are Brow-beaten, or wheadled out of the great Fundamental Points of Eternal Life and Salvation, which in all Ages of Antichristian Tyranny have triumph'd over the smartest Persecutions, through the Blood of the Lamb, and the Word of his Testi∣mony, in the Faith and Patience of the Saints, who have not loved their Lives unto Death in the Heroick Defence of them, against the very same sort of Opposition? And who, I pray, will harm us now, if we as strenu∣ously defend the Truth as it is audaciously attack'd? Have any of us suf∣fered to the spoiling of our Goods in the Defence of Truth, of a subordinate and subservient Nature to these? and shall we suffer all this in vain, and cast our selves tamely at the Feet of such a confident Invader of our most choice and precious things in the World? yea, our very Life in Christ? What is it that affrightens us? Doth the Scripture, Law or Learning terrify us? If so little a Foot-man can run us out of Breath, how do we think to contend with Horses, Dragooners I mean, if they should come? And if in the Land of Peace we are wearied, what shall we do in the Swelling of Jordan? If Popery should ever over-run us again (which God forbid) and we should be called to bear Testimony to these Truths at Fire and Paggot, as the Famous Martyrs have done? It's to be feared now, that many Protestants would provide for their Safety, by flying to the Neonomian Asylum. But to conclude, however we shrink from the despised Truths of Christ, shuffle and cut with him, and sometimes huff and bounce at him, or some Truth of his, I am fully assured the God of Glory and all Grace, who hath hitherto preserved the pure Doctrine of his Gospel, not only from the impure Mixtures of Pretenders to Holiness, the crafty Methodists of Satan as an Angel of Light, but also from his open Rage as a roaring Lion, will continue yet to maintain it against all the bting Winds of False Doctrine: That Christ hath his Fan in his Hand, and will thoroughly purge his Floor; and that if any Man lay any other Foundation than what is laid, which is Jesus Christ, and continues so to do, his Root shall be Rottenness, and his Blossom go up as Dust.

