



SIR,
WERE it merely for the Pomp, or the Protection of an Ho∣nourable Name, that I take the Liberty of prefixing Yours before this Work, those pur∣poses of doing it had been abundantly answered. But I confess an Ambition higher than either of These, and design this Address, as a means to know a Person more intimately, whose Cha∣racter creates Honour and Respect in all that are acquainted with it. An Ambition excuse∣able
at least, in One whose Happiness it is, to have some sort of Pretension to be gratified in a Desire, which he cannot but entertain and indulge.
Where Providence confers the External Ad∣vantages of Life only, the Greater and most va∣luable part is still behind. Very few are more than half-blest; and of Them who are, or call themselves unhappy, the Generality are misera∣ble, not from real Want of what they need, but from an Incapacity of enjoying what they have. Hence it is still accounted a Moot-point in Philosophy, whether Prosperity or Adversity, Plenty or Penury, require greater management and address.Crates. One of some Name, we know, among those Sages durst not so much as trust himself with the Temptation of Riches. You, Sir, very justly reproach his behaviour with Rashness and Folly, by shewing, that not the Sea, but a Soul large and diffusive as the Sea rather, is necessary to deliver a man from the danger of a plentiful Fortune. This does not only secure, but render Him and It a publick Blessing, by Acts of Goodness, Munificence, Hospitality; By cultivating those Social Virtues whereby Mankind are sustained, cemented, en∣deared to one another, and all those important and beneficial Ends accomplished, to which the Giver of these Good Gifts designs they should be serviceable.

 The Difficulties, under which most Men miscarry, are not avoided by abandoning the World, but by using it in so masterly a manner, as always to keep above it. Ambition and Avarice sometimes inhabit the most retired Cloisters; and are (no doubt) sometimes too absolute Strangers to Quality, and Business, and Fortune. Every one is valuable in proportion as he is Useful; but Useful They can be but very little, who industriously decline the occasions of being so. The Man of Conversation and Civil Society is therefore that Pattern of Wisdom, de∣signed and drawn by this Author. And to the same purpose, all perfect Systems of Morality enlarge upon the different Capacities of Men; because the Offices resulting from thence make the chief part of Christian, as well as Human Prudence. These are the Talents peculiar to each person, and his proper Business distinct from the rest of the World.
Now, Sir, when Charron accordingly treats of The true and genuine Use of Riches, of a Mind capable of Stemming a full tide of Plen∣ty; of the Integrity of Magistrates in Distribu∣tion of Justice, of the Fidelity and Vigilance of Wise and Worthy Patriots in the Service of their Country, and Defence of its just Rights; of the Tenderness and Prudence of Parents, and the affectionate Deference and Duty of Chil∣dren; when, I say, These and other Descrip∣tions passed through my hands, there needed
but little reflection, to bring to a Relation's re∣membrance, a very eminent Instance of these several Civil and Domestick Virtues.
Be pleased therefore, Sir, to assert your own Excellencies: And what Your Example al∣ready recommends to the World, proceed yet more to enforce, by accepting a Treatise in∣tended to draw Men to these Resemblances of Your self, as an Argument of that respect, with which I am,
SIR, 
