



Dearly Beloved,
I Am not Insensible that there are many who Sympathize with you; and have been ready to pour in Balm into Bleeding Wounds, to comfort you in the midst of your sorrows; and blessed be the Lord, the God of all Consolation, who hath stirred up any to this Work. But it hath been matter of wonder to me, that amongst the many Tracts that have been written to the Afflicted, so little hath been done to Obviate that sin, which most in that condition fall into, and few lament. It being taken for granted with most, that Streights and Troubles, will, if not justi∣fie,
 yet greatly extenuate the evil of Di∣strust.
Having made a serious and narrow in∣quiry into the Scripture, I find that this Sin is otherwise spoken of, then the most (yea, and I fear the best) think of it.
We deem it such a failing, as God will easily wink at and pass over, but after due search, I perceive there is nothing that God sticks more at then this. We reckon it among the common infirmities of the Saints, but the Lord sets it in the highest ranck of Provocations.
Considering how prone we are to run in this evil, and how greatly provoking it is, and what dangerous consequences of it are; I judged a word of Caution, might be as seasonable, as needful, and a few things suggested, might through Grace, prove an Antidote against this Contagi∣on.
And until some other person be awakned to speak more fully to so useful a Sub∣ject, I hope a plain Proposal and serious Consideration of what is here offered, may prevent much sin and sorrow.
I judge it a more noble task to indea∣vour the preventing of trouble that it come not, then to remove it when it hath taken hold of us.

The onely sure and safe way to keep off sorrow, is to lay a Bar in the way of sin.
As sin is the Womb out of which all troubles do proceed, so Ʋnbelief is especi∣ally both Mother and Nurse, of all the sorrows of the Godly, not onely as it pro∣cures, but improves them.
The sins of Gods people have been very great in former times, which have pro∣voked the Lord to inflict many sore evils upon us: But if to all our other sins, we should add a sin of our afflicted condition more provoking, than all those of former times; what can we expect, but that God should swear that we should not enter into his rest, and that the Lord should bury (at least) all this Generation in the Wilder∣ness.
I know many are the fears, if not the settled thoughts of some wise and good men, that this present Generation will not see the good which hath been earnestly pray'd for, and is affectionately expected.
I do not pretend to know the reasons that many have for this conjecture, but I think I may without presumption conclude, that if the Lord cause us to fall in our wilder∣ness, as he aid that Generation whch come out of Egypt, it is because we have been too like them in that which was their Provocation,





I must confess, I am not satisfied how this kind of Ʋnbelief (which denies or strongly disputes against the Providence of God over his people, in time of distress) came to be so favourably thought of, as to be reckoned amongst the infirmities and weakness of Saints; since it was of old counted, The Provocation. I cannot ap∣prehend that the accession of more Light, and the addition of new Experience can lessen that which was so great before.
Let those who will not tke pains to read this little Tract purposely written, to dis∣cover the provoking nature of unbelief; yet be intreated to behold it as in a Glass, in the History of the Children of Israel, whom the Lord slew in the Wilderness for this sin; can you think for a small thing, for which God cut off above six hundred thousand men?
But especially consider and wonder at the Lords proceedings against Moses, and that but for one offence of this kind. He was not admitted to go into Canaan, though he did affectionately desire it, and pleaded earnestly with God.
Num. 20.12. And the Lord spke unto Moses, Because you believed me not to sanctifie me in the Eyes of the Chil∣dren of Israel, ye shall not bring this
 Congregation into the Land which I have given them.
Though Moses is taxt but this once of unbelief, and doubtless his unbelief did not shew it self as theirs did in murmur∣ing; all that seems in the Story to be charged upon him was his not expressing his faith and confidence in God, and in∣deavouring to vindicate his Providence, and stay the murmurings of the people. His omitting to sanctifie God before the people, and to profess his dependence upon him, is here condemned as a not believing him. And for this kind of unbelief once charged upon him, Is there such a  r laid in his way to Canaan, that all his Interest could not remove? He that could obtain any thing of God in other ases, could pre∣vail for a whole Nation at once, Exod. 33. could not be heard speak for himself in this case, Deut. 3.26. The Lord was wroth with me for your sakes, and would not hear me; and the Lord said unto m, let it suffice thee, speak no more unto me of this matter.
And can we hope that we shall fare better than these? Surely no. Our un∣belief cannot but be much more provo∣ing, in as much as it is much more in∣xcusable.

It is indeed a day of many fears, and they are not groundless, if we consider the subtile and unwearied attempts of Ene∣mies, or the incorrigibleness of this Na∣tion, under unusual judgments. But though we may fear sore evils both from God and men, yet let us banish sinful fears, and remove far from us all distrustful thoughts of Gods Providential care over his people, in all the evils that may come upon them.
Let us never fear that God will leave his Children in the Wilderness, into which he hath led them, and out of which they might find a way if they could leave him; But rather conclude that God hh brought us under a sentence of Death, th t we might not trust in our selves, but in him that raised Jesus Christ from the dead.
He that raised him will raise his Wit∣nesses, whose dead bodies have layn in the open Street, and if the Spirit of the Lord enter into them, and they stand upon their feet, Deliverance will hasten.
If any thing suggested prove an Anti∣dote against unbelieving fear, and do any way contribute to the begetting f a Sp rit of Courage and Fai h, to keep cls to God, to depend upon him, and wait for 
 in all the streights that we may be brought into, I shall rejoyce as having attained my end.
We do not know what days we may yet be cast upon, or what troubles may abide the people of God, if we meet with none but what have been in former Ages, we have reason to believe from Experience, but if we should fall under such tryals as never any Age of the Church did pro∣duce, yet we have reason to believe from the promise, so that Distrust would then have no excuse.
The Apostles way of Reasoning is ob∣servable, and oh that we could learn of him in this particular, 2 Cor. 1.10. Who delivered us from so great a death, and doth deliver. We are able to go thus far with him, who sees not that God hath done great things for his people, and for this Nation, to deliver it from Popish designs, and Plots against it; the Lord hath disappointed Enemies of all sorts, and we must acknowledg that he doth still deliver. Our fears (through mercy) are not come upon us, nay, our Peace and Liberties are continued beyond our expecta∣tions; Let us learn to go a little farther with the same Apostle, and say as he did, In whom we trust, he will yet deliver us.

If our Fears do but awaken our Faith, and we can say with David, Psal. 56.3. What time I am afraid, I will trust in thee. Having learnt to depend upon God in dif∣ficulties, we shall in a little time be able to rejoyce in Tribulation; and say as he did, ver. 4. In God I will praise his word, in God have I put my trust, (and remar∣kable is what follows) I will not fear what Flesh can do un o me.
Fear calls in Faith to succour him, and Faith soon casts out those fears which did affl ct him. Oh that we could imitate him, and in the day of our fears, call in our Faith, and our ancient Experiences, and incourage our selves in the Lord our God, and wait quietly for his Salvation.
How sweet such a frame of Spirit would be to our selves, how much it would con∣tribute to the making the Name of God glorious; what convictions it will leave upon the Spirits of men concerning the Power of Godliness, a little Time and your Experience will evince.
