



It may please your Lordship,
THe Calling I have entred into, and the capacity wherein I have the honor to serve your Lordship, wil (I fear) offend the weak ten∣dernesse of some, who think these deep searches into reason, mis-be∣coming a Preacher of Faith, and the contemplation of the works of Na∣ture very impedimentall (if not de∣structive) to the work of Grace; And give them occasion to censure me for dealing so far with Philoso∣phy.

Yet somewhat I have to plead in excuse of my self; supposing what I do, to be a crime: And more I have to plead in defence of my self, that what I do is no crime at all. The smallness of the work, together with its being written, before I put my hand to the plough, is enough to ex∣cuse me, and extenuare the crime; were it indeed, what it is onely sup∣posed to be. But seeing the fortress is defensible, it can be held for no less then cowardice to capitulate. It would not a little disparage a good cause to seek to excuse that, which may be justified; especially since it hath so learned and solid a Lawyer, as the Lord Chancellor Ba∣con to plead in its behalfe. Philoso∣phia Naturalis (saith that eloquent Wit) Post Uerbum Dei Nov. Organ. 1, I Aph. 89., certissima Superstitionis Me∣dicina est; eadem{que} probatissimum fidei

alimentum. Itaque merito Religioni do∣natur tanquam fidissimd ancilla: cum ulter a Voluntatem Dei, altera Potesta∣tem manifestet. Neque enim erravit ille qui dixit, Erratis, nescients Mat. 22. 29, Scripturas, & Potestatem Dei: informationem de Voluntate, & meditation m de Potestate, nexu indiui∣dho commiscens & copulans. Natu∣rall Philosophy, next to Gods Word is the most Soueraign Antidote to expell the poison of Superstition; and not only so, but also the most approved food to nourish Faith. And therefore well may she be given to Religion as her most faithful handmaid: seeing the one shews us the Wil of God, and the other his Po∣wer Nor was he out that said, Ye do err, not knowing the Scriptures, nor the Power of God: joyning these two to∣gether, Instruction touching the Will, and Meditation on the Pow er, as inse∣parable, and equally necessary. Want

of Philosophy is indeed the Nurse of Superstition: whence the igno∣rant age, or Childhood of the World in which the Natural causes of Eclip∣ses, Comets, Thunder, Earthquakes, and the like were not known, was the most Superstitious: As are also at this day the simple and most vul∣gar sort of men. Who (likethose others, that the same Noble Author mentions in the same Aphorisme) conjiciunt singula ad Manum, Ibidem & Virgulam Divinam (quod Religi∣onis, ut putant, maximè intersit) faci∣lius posse referri: quod nihil aliud est quàm Deo per mendacium gratificari velle. They conceive (saith he) that without enquiring into the middle and inferiour causes, all effects may more easily be referred to the immediate act and finger of God, the supream cause, as conducing most of all to the interest of Religion; Which is as much, as to

go about to flatter the God of Truth with a lye, and to make him, what hee is not, or would not be thought. All the treasure of the Earth is Gods, (who doubts it?) for Domini est Psalm 24. 1. terra, & plenitudo ejus: Yet when our Saviour in the Gospel saw the Emperors stamp upon the penny brought to him, he thought it no robbery, nor injury to his Father, to say: Reddite quae Caesaris sunt, Cae∣sari; & quae Dei, Deo. Give unto Cesar the things that are Cesars, and unto God, the things that are Gods; That is, that are Gods immediate own. Even so I confess all effects and things, from the very foundation of the world to this present day, are the works of God. Yet because I find Natures su∣perseription on many (if not most) of them, (though in some it be not so legible as in others) I hold it no impiety, or robbing God of his Glory,

to say: Reddite naturae, &c. Give unto Nature, the works that are Na∣tures: And unto God, those that are Gods. There being a great difference between the dividing of the Red Sea, and Jordan, by Moses and Jo∣shua: and the dividing of the Ri∣ver ouse in Bedfordshire. related in this Book: And between the small Vermine that infested the Egypti∣ans, and the Phthiriasis in the Philo∣sophers finger Which difference ne∣verthelesse without Philosophy we are not capable of knowing, but are apt to think all strange thingsSuper∣naturall; and (like those mistaken Philosophers, who think the Magnet hath its Vis directrix, from the Pole∣star) to seek for that cause above, which we may find here below.
Besides, it is apparent by severall passages in the Book of God, that many of the Secretaries of the Holy

Ghost (as Moses, David, Isaiah, A∣mos, &c.) had either from their own parts & industry, the acquired: of from their inspirer the infused knowledge of naturall things: which they were not ashamed to make use of, even when they were about Gods great work. Nor could the extremi∣ty of Jobs miseries make him forget orlay by thoseMathematicks, 10.33.31.32 which he had learnt in the time of his prosperity. But the example of Solomon puts the matter out of all scruple, whose divine Pen (so often serviceable to the Spirit of God) did more then divert it self with Philo∣sophy, writing whole Volumes of the History of Nature. For we are told, that he spake (with the tongue of his Pen) of 3 kin.4. 33. Trees, from the Cedar tree, that is in Lebanon, even unto the Hysop that springeth out of the Wall. As also of

beasts, and of fowle, and of creeping things, and of fishes. And we are told it by him, who surely would not have commended it, had he disli∣ked it.
Yet not but that (as want of Phi∣losophy nourisheth Superstition, so) a care should be taken on the other side, least the abuse of Philosophy cause Prophaneness and Col. 2. 8. Atheisme, which lyes as much a∣gainst God, as Superstition doth for him.
My Lord, though all this be truth, and nothing but reason, yet so pe∣tulant is prejudice, that it will not passe for such, unless besides its dead Advocate to defend it, it also have a living Patron to afford it the influ∣ence of his countenance & protecti∣on. Which favour I most humbly beg of your Lordship, both for my self and my book; but withal your

Pardon for my being so bold to beg it: and for daring to prefixe your Noble name to the contemptible en∣deavours of
My very good Lord

