



MAY it please your Ho∣nours to pardon the presumption on∣ly of this Address, and I shall not of∣fer at any Apology, either for the publishing or the dedica∣tion

of the ensuing Treatise; remem∣bring the just and smart reprehension, which M. Cato gave upon occasion to A. Albinus, for chusing rather to de∣precate a fault than to be without it: For who,. Gellius Noct. Att. l. 11. c. 8. saith he, compell'd you to commit that, which you should ask forgiveness of before the doing it? — There is not any thing of surprizal force, or necessity, in a matter of so de∣liberate and premeditated a choice: and therefore no excuse sufficient to pal∣liate the transgresion.
The Subject here insisted on is nei∣ther trite in our Language, nor un∣profitable; and but too suitable to that Atheistical and degenerate Age we live in, wherein the general disbelief of Spirits (Divine and Humane, An∣gelical and Diabolical) may well be thought the , and , the ground and introduction of all that irreligion and profaneness, which naturally enough follows upon it. 'Tis

a design, evidently comporting with the subtilty and malice of our grand Adversary, to promote and counte∣nance this Infidelity in all the parts and branches of it, that he may pass hiself unsuspected, whilst he thus at once destroys the Object of our Worship and Adoration, roots up the very Ca∣pacity of Vertue and Piety within us, quashes all the hopes and fears of a World to come, and takes away the Ministers, which Providence hath or∣der'd and commissioned for our pre∣sent discipline, security, and comort. Nor is the success of these his most per∣nicious endeavours small and incon∣siderable. Men immers'd in Body, and depraved with vicious Customes and the debaucheries of sensual appe∣tite and lust, are easily tempted; first to undervalue themselves, and that excellent Being, the breath of God, which lodgeth in them; and tence begin to doubt of or deny a Deity, and

laugh at the Tales of Immaterial Sub∣stances, as the Romantic and vain sup∣porters of a fond and groundless awe and superstition in the World. So they will do, 'tis like enough, at what is said in the following Pages of An∣gels in particular. But then it may be worth the while to observe, (for the caution and safety of all, at least, whose vitals are not yet tainted with the infection) not only, how bold∣ly they contradict the many plain and repeated declarations of sacred Scrip∣ture, which Christians certainly should reverence; but how unreasonably cross they appear to the strongest current of Traditionary Belief among the best of Men.
Next, for the Method and way of handling what I have undertaken: It is not, I confess, curious and affe∣cted, and yet not altogether careless, but such, as the Text prefixed most fair∣ly

suggests; and may competently serve, I hope, both to the satisfaction and ease, the edification and delight of unprju∣diced Readers; and that the rather; because I have endeavoured to represent every thing according to its proper evi∣dence, of certainty or probability only, neither vainly dogmatizing in matters unrevealed, nor sceptically slighting of any intimations giv'n us by divine Re∣velation.
And now, for the Dedication: I cannot say the Book it self needs any other Guardians than the Angels con∣tained in it, however the Author may; and, as there are none better qualified for his Protection than your Lordships, so there is none to whom he could more chearfully apply for shelter: But in this his design, I am sure, is honest and dis-interested, being only to testifie his bounden Gratitude to your Honours, (under whose Patronage and good en∣couragement

this Treatise was concei∣ved and finished, and he hath lived for fifteen years) and then to satisfie an innocent Ambition of publickly subscri∣bing himself.

