


SIR,
IT was the sad complaint of Hi∣lary
in his time, That there
were as many Creeds as Wills,Periculo∣sum nobis est tot nunc Fides existere, quot vo∣luntates, dum aut ita Fides scribuntur ut volu∣mus, aut ut volu∣mus intelli∣guntur. Hilarius.
and every one presumed to al∣ter
the wholesome Forme of
sound Words, or else wrest it to a corrupt sense.
And you know the sense of a Creed is the
Creed. In these dayes of Libertinisme, men ac∣count
it a kinde of bondage to confine them∣selves
to a wholesome Forme of sound words,
though they areVerbis consecratis utendum Quintil. Consecrated words, and
therefore such as cannot be condemned.
The Devil hath set good men at variance
about saeculal affaires, Private interests and
publique rights, and in the mean time robs or
cheates us of what is spirituall and glorious,
the purity of truth, the power and beauty of ho∣linesse.
We live in sad times, in which Athe∣isme
pleads for protection and intolerable er∣rours
contend for a toleration. They who

blaspheme Christ and his Gospel in jeast,The judg∣ment of God upon scoffing A∣theists.
are Atheists in good earnest (as Lucian and
Rablais were) but God will plead his own
cause, if we will not. Lucian (as Suidas re∣lates)
was torne to pieces with dogs, and
Rablais died drunk with Wine and Athe∣isme:
We have good cause to suppresse and be∣waile
the very first risings of naturall Atheisme;
we must not suffer any black suggestions or
hovering thoughts which rellish of Athe∣isme
to roost and nestle in our hearts;In animâ dicuntur esse, quae sunt in eâ per mo∣dum quie∣tis; reliqua potius di∣cuntur esse ab animâ, quàm in animâ, Vi∣de Bona∣vent. lib. 2. dist. 38. These
extemporary thoughts, are sins which do pro∣ceed
from us; but O let them not be familiars,
and inmates which lodge, and dwell within us.
I fear that Atheisme may soon become a Na∣tionall
sin in England, if there be an indulgence
(worse then any at Rome) vouchsafed to ir∣regular
phantasies, and appetites under pious
pretences. They who deny the God head of
Iesus Christ, and the Holy Ghost, hope to e∣scape
censure in England, if they can have the
favour to be called devout Familists, although
their blasphemy and wantonnesse doth declare
them to be sensuall Socinians, and beastly A∣theists.
The Socinians and Familists have e∣ven
already shamed the more modest Mahu∣metans.D. Pococ∣kii speci∣men Hist. Arab. pag. 21. Annot. pag. 218. & 219.
Mr. Pocock (the learned and
ingenuous Professour of Hebrew and Ara∣bick
in this Vniversity, in his notes upon Gre∣gory
the Arabian Phaenix) assures me that
the Al Hayetians acknowlege the incarnation
of the Eternall Word, and that we shall all be

judged by this Incarnate Word at the last day.
The more moderate Turks would stop their
ears at the hearing of such blasphemies agaist
Christ, as hath poysoned this English air. Some
Mahumetans hold that Christus est Deus de
novo ortus, as the Socinians say, he is Deus fa∣ctus,
Subordinatus, &c. And the Mahumetan-Sectaries
talk just like our Familists,D. Pocock Annot. pag. 219. Anti∣nomians:
&c. as will be evident to any one that
will persue M. Pococks choise and learned An∣notations.
Licitum pronuntiant vino & scor∣tationi
indulgere, & reliqua quae lege vetita
sunt perpetrare; omittenda esse censent, quae
lege mandata sunt,pag. 261. & orationē. I am ashamed
to English that with my pen, which some Pro∣fessours
have translated in broad and foule
English by their grosse neglect of duties, con∣tempt
of ordinances, and bold practice of a∣bominable
leudnesse; I will not mention their
dreams of a Phantasticall Hell, and Heaven.
But sure I am our Familists,Sunt ex Alshiisqui hominum  statuerūt. vide D. Pocockii Annot. p. 264. and their Alshii
speak the same Dialect, when they discourse
of their being Godded with God, and salute
one whom they reverence with this Atheistall
complement, Tu est Tu, id est, Tu es Deus.
Sir, you are what you are, you are God!
Henry Nicholas, the Father of the Family
of Love, said of himself, I am God. A man
would think that our Familists had met with
some Mahumetans at Poland, or Constanti∣nople,
and some of the worst of them also.
For Al Gazalius a precise and learned Mahu∣metan

would teach them better langnage and
behaviour also; He saith that cleanlynesse
is a part of Faith, and the Key of Prayer,
that we must have pure mindes, clean hearts
and hands. But enough of that.
Sir, Being encouraged by the Committee,
for regulating this Vniversity, to undertake a
service which I even tremble to repeat, and
you being Chaireman of that Committee, I
conceived my self obliged to present you with
this Treatise. When the Vniversity was plea∣sed
to elect me the L. Margarets Professour
of Divinity, the revenue due to that Profes∣sour
by a grant made under the great Seale of
England 3io. Caroli,Apr. 20. 1649. This Act shall not extend to the reve∣nues of any publik pro∣fessor or reader in either of the Vni∣versities. Ad lau∣dem & ho∣norem san∣ctae & in∣dividuae Trinitatis, ac Fidei & Christia∣norum augmen∣tum. was setled by speciall
Act. And the Vniversity did purchase the
lease of the House and Meadowes in Wor∣cester,
which belong to the said Professour,
and would (if they might have had the com∣mon
priviledge of leaseholders) have bought
the inheritance of the premises outright for e∣ver;
but the Vniversity is denyed the benefit of
the lease and the common priviledge aforesaid.
The House and Meadowes are sold to others,
and no revenue payed to the Professour. I de∣sire
that the Vniversity may be righted, and
that my successour may not suffer as I have
done. Sir, notwithstanding these discourage∣ments,
I conceived it my duty either to read or
write for the propagation of the Christian
Faith, and honour of the blessed Trinity ac∣cording
to the first Grant. I consulted the V∣niversity

and your self, and you both concur∣red
that rebus sic stantibus, it was better to
write then read, and that it did most conduce
to the propagation of the Christian Faith; Fi∣nally,
that it was most requisite that I should
write in English, because since the beginning
of the year 1645.1645 there have been many blas∣phemous
bookes to the great dishonour of the
blessed Trinity printed in England. But I
have found the task far more difficult, because
there are many Socinian subtiltyes which
will hardly bear English, and I could not
but take some notice of them, either by a For∣mall
answer, or else by a confirmation of that
deep truth which they do with no lesse blasphe∣my,
then subtilty reject, deny. I have been
forced sometimes to expresse my minde in La∣tine
in the margine, merely upon that accompt;
but the plainest reader may if he please to read
the 4. 5. 8. and 9. Chapters, understand as
much of this mystery as is necessary to bee
known; and I am confident that the happy
union between the Mystery of Faith, and the
practicall Mystery of godlinesse is as plainly
represented in this little Treatise, as in any of
the ancient or moderne Divines; for I have
faithfully endeavoured to give you the strength
and Quintessence of both in a familiar way
with many experimentall observations of
mine own, which I shall now reveiw and pra∣ctise
in my most retired condition. But before
I retire, give me leave to speak a word for my

Brethren who are eminent for all manner of
learning, sound in the Faith, holy in their life,
and peaceable in their conversation; if men
of such qualifications know not how to rest in
the present unsetlednesse of publike affaires, and
yet are ready to performe all lawfull things re∣quired
of them for the defence and preservati∣on
of the true Religion and publique Liber∣ties;
why may not such be still employed for the
promoting of such a just Accommodation & Re∣formation
as may effectually advance the grand
publike interest, the power, purity and growth
of Religion in this land? you cannot look upon
these men as enemies, and dare not deale with
them as the worst of Infidels (whom Christian
See Weemse vo. 3. Ex∣pos. of the judiciall Law, cap. 15. Faithfull Presbyte∣rians de∣scribed and commen∣ded.Princes have sometimes banished from their
dominions) if you desire to have the same com∣mon
friends and enemies with Iesus Christ.
Now which is the more tolerable penalty, to be
out-lawed or banished, is not hard to determine.
If you look upon them as Presbyterians, it is
no dishonour to them to be true to their Prin∣ciples
in the midst of changes; it is a signe that
they were never friends to the Fortune of
the Cause, but to the Cause it selfe; forgive
them if they know not how to pursue a new
interest without new light or direction from
the word of God. Besides they are such Pres∣byterians
as all godly and prudent Indepen∣dents
will close with in the highest and sweetest
acts of Church-communion. For I am confi∣dent
that no wise and godly men will Practi∣cally

separate from us in those very things in
which they do Doctrinally agree with us,Grounds of an happy union be∣tween god∣ly men of both per∣swasions. be∣cause
that Text which they do so often cite,
Philip 3. 15, 16. is Demonstratively clear in
this very point, and doth manifestly condemne
all causelesse Separation from lawfull Com∣munion
with the godly members of Reforming
Churches.Si vultis vi∣vere de Spiritu Sancto, te∣nete chari∣tatem, a∣mate veri∣tatem, desi∣derate uni∣tatem, ut perveniatis ad aeterni∣tatem. Godly Presbyterians and Inde∣pendents
do. 1. Receive the same Offi∣cers,
Pastours, Teachers, Ruling Elders, and
of the same qualification required in the Rule
set forth by the Parliament. 2. Admit
Members of the same qualification held forth
by the Assembly, namely visible Saints, who
being of age, do professe Faith in, and obe∣dience
to the Lord Jesus Christ according to
the Rules of Faith and Life delivered in the
Word.Aug. 3. Desire that the above mentio∣ned
Officers should be incorporated in one El∣dership,
and joyn in all acts of Government of 
the Church. 4. Hold the same censures 
of Admonition and Excommunication, and do 
likewise receive such as have been censured
into communion again, as soon as they give
testimony of their repentance to them.Godly In∣dependents do acknow∣ledge Paro∣chiall Chur∣ches to be true Chur∣ches of Christ.
Godly Independents doe acknowledg
that Parochial Churches (wherein Ministers
and others endeavor to remove all things just∣ly
offensive, that so all ordinances may be ad∣ministred
in purity) are true Churches of
Christ. 2. They retaine Communion with
these Parochicall Churches by baptizing their 

Children, and receiving the Lords Supper
there, as occasion serves. And if occasionall
Communion with us be lawfull, constant
Communion with us would not be sinfull.
 3. They receive the members of such parishes
as aforesaid unto Communion with themselves
in their own Congregations also occasionally.
 4. They professe that they are ready to give
an account to such Parochiall Congregations,
as to Sister-Churches, whensoever they are
offended at any irregular administrations in
 Independent Churches. 5. They esteem a
sentence of Non-Communion passed by such
Parochicall Congregations, is Churches a∣gainst
them, upon any scandall wherein they
are unsatisfied, as a means to humble them,
and as an ordinance of God to reduce them.
Much more might be added: But it is clear
from these premises, that prudent and godly
Independents cannot conceive themselves ob∣liged
 1. To set up other Churches with dif∣fering
rules of Constitution or Worship; For
Presbyterians and Independents did both agree
in the same Confession of Faith and Directo∣ry
for Worship, and resolved to practice most
of the same things, and those the most
substantiall in respect of Government al∣so,
as doth appeare by those few tran∣sactions
in the Assembly, and Commit∣tee
for Accommodation, which have been
Printed.

2. Nor can they say, that they are enfor∣ced
to gather new Churches out of true Re∣formed
Churches; for a circumstantiall dif∣ference
cannot be a sufficient ground for lea∣ving
of all ordinary Communion with true
reforming Churches. The prudent and god∣ly
Presbyterians have set no bounds to
themselves in their Reformation but the
Word of God; and therefore if the Indepen∣dents
will set forth a compleat Modell of their
whole Church-way, and Church-order, ful∣ly,
freely, and clearely, and prove it by
plaine Texts out of the holy Scriptures, we
shall thankfully receive whatsoever they shall
convincingly impart. And I shall be bold to
say,Statesmen and Sword-men have kept godly Presbyteri∣ans and In∣dependents at too great a distance upon rea∣sons of State. that there had been a judicious, affec∣tionate
and practicall Accommodation be∣tween
us (notwithstanding some speculative
differences in notionall Ideas) if there had
been no interposition of Statesmen, or
Sword-men, when the Committee of Ac∣commodation
had sadly considered and re∣viewed
all materiall Arguments on this side,
and on that; And if you set aside all rea∣sons
of State and saecular considerations, I do
not see why men who agree in the substance of
the Service and Worship of God, in the Direc∣tory
according to the Preface, in the Confes∣sion
of Faith set forth by the Assembly, and
in the Doctrine contained in the Confessions
and Writings of the reformed Churches,
should not mind the same thing, and walk by

the same Rule, that there might be a Prac∣ticall
Communion between us in all points
wherein there is a Doctrinal Agreement,
and we might go hand in hand to heaven to∣gether,
with meeknesse of wisdome, and sin∣cerity
of love.Caveats for men of both perswasions Let men of both perswasi∣ons
beware of such a superstitious tender∣nesse
as doth usually arise from some un∣conscionable
errour, and unmortified lust,
because it is no priviledge, but a judgement
to be given up to errour or lust; and from such
ensnaring liberty, which is indeed perfect bon∣dage,
good Lord deliver us. No man is ob∣liged
to follow the Positive Praescript of
an erroneous conscience in any point or
case whatsoever: Differences of Iudgment
did not extinguish the relation of member∣ship
amongst the Romans and Corinthians.
And it is certaine that the Substantials of
Church-Government must not be changed in
every age acording to the graduall differences
of light in severall persons and Congregations.An expe∣dient desi∣red for an happy uni∣on between Presbyteri∣ans and In∣dependents Dum pro∣pter haec alter alteri Anathema esse caepit, nemo penè Christi est. Hilarius.
We humbly desire that there may be a strict
and mutuall obligation condescended to in
some expedient by all godly men of both per∣swasions
for mutuall edification, and for the
preservation of all the Churches in these Do∣minions
in truth, godlinesse, and peace, that
we may not passe unchristian censures upon
our Christian Brethren.
Let all private quarrels then fall to the
ground, and let us mind the common interest

of the Lord Iesus,Caveats for Statesmen and seriously promote it
in our respective places in faith and love. And
let all Statesmen beware 
1. That they do not fall into the same spi∣rituall
or civill evils which they themselves
have condemned in the King and Prelates.Remonstr. Decem. 15. 1641.
2. Beware of ERASTIANISME
which doth overthrow all Church-government,
both Presbyterian and Independent.
3. Take heed of CIVILL SCEPTI∣CISME
which doth overthrow the Fun∣damentals
of publike Faith, and publike
rights, and plucks up all Civill Government,
by the roots.
4. Beware of Familisticall Polytheisme; 
for the Familists affirme that there are as
many Christs, as many Gods manifested in
the flesh, as there are Saints on earth. But
to us there is but one God,Jer. 2. 11, 12, 28. and one Lord Ie∣sus
Christ; it is enough for blind Pagans to
talk of many Gods, and many Mediatours.
5. Beware of Atheisme, the great Mon∣ster 
of this Age, compounded of Socinianisme,
Familisme, Libertinisme, and Antinomi∣anisme.
The Ephesians complaine of none
but robbers of Churches, and blasphemers,
Acts 19. 37. But we have cause to complaine
of them, and Apostates, Idolaters, Atheists,
and what not?
 6. Beware of a Toleration of intolerable
errours. Reverend Mr Cotton is afraid
that the Antichristian Whore will steale in at

the Back-doore of a Toleration. The Magi∣strates
of England are engaged by the Oath
of God to root out whatsoever is contrary to
sound Doctrine, and the Power of Godlinesse.
That man is seduced by a private Spirit (as
you observe well in your Orthodox Book)
who lusteth after envy, after Sects and Di∣visions;Catholike Charity, C. 1. p. 11, 12.
but the holy Spirit is a Catholike
Spirit, a Spirit of Catholike Faith, and
Catholike love, an unreserved and univer∣sall
Love to all that beleeve and love the
Lord Jesus Christ.
Let us then all hold fast the wholesome
forme of sound words in faith and love. For
they who waver against the credit of their
own testimony,L. in Test. Dig. de Testibus. are not (as the Civilians
say) to be heard or regarded, because they
have lost their credit. We are reserved for
some service in this declining Age; and there∣fore
it doth become us to be Orthodox Saints,
steady Christians, that our Posterity may
imitate us, and see those glorious daies,
which some conceive are come already, be∣cause
they have attained a little vainglory in
this Age of vanity. The Writers of this pre∣sent
time, who seeme to contradict one ano∣ther
concerning the light and glory of these
unhappy daies, may as easily be reconciled as
Sophocles and Euripides were concerning the
goodnesse of women. Sophocles being asked
the reason why he did alwaies represent wo∣men
in his Tragedies as very good, whereas

Euripides did ever represent them as very
bad? answered, that be and Euripides did not
at all contradict one another; for saith he, I
do ever represent women just as they
should be, and Euripides just as they are.
In like manner some Writers represent
these times just as they should be, and
others represent them just as they are. But
I must needs condemn those, who draw a croo∣ked
conclusion from the corrupt doctrine and
manners of this untoward and crooked gene∣ration,
and infer that there is no Church of
God in England, because Antichristian and
blasphemous Seducers are multiplyed without
number, and favoured in the Land, though
all the Magistrates and godly of the Nation
are by one confederate Body, obliged by solemn
Oath to root out Idolatry, Blasphemy, He∣resie,
Schisme, Profanenesse, and whatsoe∣ver
else is contrary to sound doctrine, and the
power of Godlinesse.
1. It is not denyed that there is a fry of 
Achans in the Land. 2. The sins condemned 
are inexcusable, and so are all the Foster-fa∣thers
of them. 3. We pray that they who have 
given their power to the Beast, may give it to
the Lamb. 4. All faithfull Ministers do open 
heaven to the faithfull, and shut it against un∣beleevers,
as our Master enjoynes us, Mark.
16. 15. Luk. 24. 47. and therefore we are true
and faithful to the King of Saints, and Com∣monwealth
of Israel. 5. There are thou∣sands 

in England whose hearts bleed at their
eyes for the abominations of the Land; men
that do seriously endeavour to save them∣selves
& others from this untoward gene∣ration,
according to Peters direction, Act.
 2. 40. 6. The house of Jacob was the Church
of God, and yet there were foule faults, Incest,
and murder found amongst his Sons. The
Lord perswade and encourage the Fathers of
this Nation to be as zealous against the sins of
the Nation, as Jacob was against the sins of
Reuben, Simeon and Levi. I must go back∣wards
here,Gen. 9. 23. as Shem and Japhet did. I have
not time to mention other things, but let all
such as have the power and bowels of Fa∣thers,
take heed that they do not persecute
or offend one of those little ones who be∣leeve
in Christ,Mat. 18. 6. much less undo one of those
great ones, who have much of Christ, and
his Spirit reigning in them. Beleeve it Sir,
there are a company (I put my self out of the
number) of Select men in Oxford; I know not
whether there be, all things considered, the
like in the World againe, men able and wil∣ling
to promote the Common-wealth of true
Religion, publike Liberty, and ingenuous
learning for the Common-weale and good of
mankind in all Nations; for they are acquain∣ted
with all necessary Arts, Sciences, and Lan∣guages,
and dare throw the Gauntlet to the
proudest Champions in the Antichristian
World. Some few of these may perhaps be

complained of by some Weathercockes, who can
rather turn then crow, some froward children
who bite their mothers breasts, or vipers who
would eate a way to their own preferment
thorow their mothers Bowels. It is not for
want of pride or ignorance that these afflict
your doores and eares with unnecessary com∣plaints,
which they prove just as Erucius did his
against Roscius, who when he was asked who
told him so, he answered, No body; and when
it was demanded how the accusation would
be proved, answered, In truth I know not.
What is this (saith Tully pro Sexto Roscio)
but to abuse the Laws and Judges, to object
what you cannot prove, nay, do not so
much as endeavour to prove? It may be you
will reply as Hazael did, Am I a dog
that I should be accessary to any grievous
or unrighteous Decree? You know what
Hazael did; and you know that Asa was a
good man, and yet a Persecutor. But I hope
that as you have been zealous for the Refor∣mation,
so you will be zealous for the preser∣vation
of the Vniversity, which is the earnest
desire and prayer of

