


Honored Sir,
YOur favourable Ex∣pressions of tender Charity to me, have neither been few nor small; the Commemoration whereof might well command your un∣worthy Servant into a better and larger Testimony of your noble Generosity, & my hum∣ble Acknowledgement. But I
 must act now not according to your meritorious Worth, but my slender Ability.
'Tis pitty that Good-Will should loose any thing, but what is not worth a Keeping: much lesse then should well-do∣ passe thanklesse on Earth, which goes not rewardlesse in Heaven.
Sir, I cannot crowd your Be∣neficence into an Epistle, nor Gods miraculous Memorials into the most voluminous Fo∣lio.
'Tis not unknown what a
 anguishing Distemper per∣secuted me from Country to City; banished me from shore, and almost from my Self; gave me many Months Chase at Sea, emptied me of comfort, & fill'd me with Complaints: In so much as a Pining Body and a repining Soule (the Lord forgive me) were mine inseparable Companions for a long time. But I will be discontented at nothing but my own Discontent.
Ever since I was your Ho∣nours Weak and Worthlesse
 Chaplain in the Lyon, Cen∣turion, Fairfax, Triumph, and the James, I wanted no∣thing but Thankefulness; nor could I complain of any thing but my own Ʋnbeliefe. I was among you in fear, & weak∣ness, and much trembling, that I may borrow Pauls words 1 Cor. 2.3. though I cannot utter them in that more spiri∣tuall sense, that He doth.
But I may well sing to God, Psal. 103.1,2,3,4,5. verses, and I pray God make my Life (which he hath graciously
 lengthned) a Comment upon the whole Psalm.
When I think of my Resto∣ratives for Soul and Bodie, that Counsell, Encouragement and Comfort, which your pru∣dent Head, your tender Eye, your honest heart, your libe∣rall Hand, your faithfull Tongue administred unto me, I say (from the soul of a Na∣thanael) For my Life I can∣not thanke you too much, nor GOD enough And indeed, while I am telling you stories of your own Kind-heartednesse,
 me-thinks I heare you reply on this poor crooked Stoper, look up higher to the LIVING GOD, & say to that the same CELESTIAL EXCEL∣LENTISSIMO, What shall I do unto thee, O thou preser∣ver of men! Job 7.20. What shal I render to the Lord for All his benefits towards me? Ps. 116.. I have tryed ma∣ny helps for my Recovery, but all to no purpose. Now I feel, and find that the Lords way is in the Sea, and his Path in the mighty waters, and his
 foote-steps are not knowne, Psal. 77.. To this good and great God (from whose Ocean you borrow your streams of Bounty) I recommend your Honour, and all yours, both by Sea and Land, humbly de∣siring him to bind up your Soul in the Bundle of Life, to let the Blessing of Him that was ready to perish come upon you (as Job 9.3.) The LORD Register you into the Number of those whose Bowels yearn to the distressed, wh se Hands open to the Afflicted,
 and whom None is able to re∣ward, but He, who hath Most and deserves All, yet is con∣tented with a little in sinceri∣ty; in whom I rest,

