



LAst year being come in a Mission to this Isle,Campions Epistle Dedicato∣ry. 1581. accord∣ing
to my imployment (Renowned Champions) I found
waves more Tempestuous a great deal on the English
Shore than I left in the Britannick Ocean. By and by, when
I had pressed farther into England, I saw nothing more
common than unaccustomed Tortures, nothing more certain
than unexpected Dangers: I recollected my self as well
as I could, mindful of the Justice of my cause, and not
forgetful of the times; and lest I should by chance be
taken up before I was heard, I reduced the intentions of
my mind into writing; I thought fit to declare to the World
what I came for, what I zealously endeavour'd for, what
kind of War I wag'd, and against whom I Proclaimed it;
I had the Original Copy with me, which I was resolv'd
should be taken with me if I was taken: I intrusted a
friend with a Copy of it, who, contrary to my knowledge,
communicated it to a great many more; my Adversaries
Rudely seized the Book as soon as it was Published,
passing their most malicious Censures upon it: That one
man should Challenge them all in matters of Religion,
although I should not stand alone in the Field in case I

was ingaged for the Publick Faith. Hanmer and Charke
answered my Challenges, and what then? disingenously
all; for they made no material answer, but one which
will never be approved of: We embrace your Proposals,
the Queen Espouses them, make your application to her.
In the interim they cry our your Society, your Seditions,
your Arrogance, a Traytor, without doubt a Traytor. O
Ridiculous! Why do Wise Men thus lose their labour
and credit? But of these two, one for his fancies sake
made Incursions into my Book, the last did more malici∣ously
weigh the whole cause: The Book was published
lately, being very plain, treating of our Society, of the in∣juries
we sustained, and of the Province we now undertake;
what remains therefore (since our Adversaries prepare
Torments for me and not the Schools) but to prove the
matter of Fact to you which Created so much Confidence
in me, as to demonstratively show the sources of things.
I would also exhort you, whom it concerns above all men,
to take that care which Christ, the Church, your Country
and Salvation requires of you; had I trusted in my Parts,
Learning, Subtilty, Reading, Memory, and Challeng'd
such a croud of Adversaries, I had been Vain and Arro∣gant,
but I never regarded my self nor them, but consi∣dering
the cause, I deem'd my self sufficient to uncloud the
Sun at Noon Day; therefore pardon those heats of Zeal,
which the honour of Christ, my King, and the invincible
Truth have occasioned. Ye know M. Tullius, when
Roscius did promise him a Victory, in case he would de∣fend

by dint of Argument, that Seven Hundred Miles could
not be run in two days, did not only not fear the force
and efficacy of Hortensius his Arguments, but even of
those that were his betters, the Philippi, the Cottae,
Antonii, and Crassi, who gain'd to themselves great ho∣nour
in Rhetorick. Indeed there is some Truth so Tran∣sparent,
that no Sophistry in words, nor Jugling
in things can Eclipse: Moreover, that is more manifest
which we undertake, than that supposition of Roscius,
for if I can prove that there is a Heaven, that there are
Saints, that there is one true Faith, that there is a
Christ, the Victory is mine. May I not be then Couragi∣ous
here? They may Martyr me, but they can never
Baffle me, for I insist on those Doctrines which the Spirit
hath Taught, which is never deceived nor overthrown. I
beseech you that you would use the means whereby you
might obtain Salvation, as for the rest I am not at all in
suspence, but that I shall receive from those I Petition it
of; if they will apply themselves to study, call upon
Christ and be diligent, they will certainly find out the
Truth, to the Confusion of its Adversaries: in the mean
while it behoves us, who are so firmly grounded, to take
the Field with a magnanimous Courage. I draw the
Curtain here, because the rest which I have to say is
Dedicated to you.
Farewel.
