



DEarly beloved in our Lord Je∣sus Christ, and right precious Christian friends, to that end I may be instrumental to vin∣dicate the truth of Iesus, as al∣so to build up the Saints in their most holy faith; and con∣sidering with my self that the publishing of that precious truth, viz. The visible Reign of Christ on earth with his Saints, might be one means by which I might be instrumental in so good a work; I was therefore so much the bol∣der for to present this ensuing discourse unto your most serious considerations, I being assu∣red that through Gods blessing, it wil be pro∣fitable unto you, when wel considered by you. Truly my friends, was it not so that I was ful∣ly perswaded that this is a truth which I here maintain, I should not be so bold as to give it forth unto publike view, and should hardly now have published this Treatise, but that I finde such little entertainment of this truth a∣mong
the sons of men; and therefore the ra∣ther it is exposed unto opposition; but I que∣stion not but that it wil ere long appear to be a truth of such great Antiquity as from the A∣postolical times, and how that it is an unrepea∣led truth which hath been obscure these many yeers, yet its now coming forth so gloriously, like the Sun at noon day, so as that it wil bee individual. Brethren, I know not how you wil resent that which I have wrote; I hope you wil not have any occasion to take it ill of mee, for as much as I desire nothing more, than the promoting of the truth in this ensuing Dis∣course. I desire that this my writing may no further finde acceptance by you, than you finde it mannaged according unto Scripture-record, for be you assured, that whosoever speaks not according unto that truth, it is because they have no light in them, Esai. 8.20. for you are to search the Scriptures, for they testifie of Je∣sus Christ; As also of his truth, Ioh. 5.39. for my part, I should bee loath that any of you should have any cause to say of me, that I should misguide you, I had rather shut my self up in silence, than that I should be found by you such an evil instrument, but I hope you are perswa∣ded better things of me than so, for this I can assure you, I have a clear conscience both to∣wards God & Men, wishing and earnestly long∣ing to see your further growth in Christianity, and your perfection in the Doctrine of Jesus, that so you may be compleat in all the wil of God, then shal you shine gloriously, and appear
beautiful in the eys of our heavenly father, even then when you are compleatly built upon the foundation of the Apostles, and Prophets. Je∣sus Christ being the chief Cornerstone of that Building, as is apparent, Eph. 2.20 21. then you will grow to a holy temple in the Lord, & to a compleat City, and then when Zion is built up, the Lord wil appear in glory, Psal. 102.16. which Scripture I desire to leave upon your spirits; desiring the Lord Jesus to apply it home to you by his Spirit. I shal now commit this en∣suing Discourse unto you, desiring that the Spi∣rit of Moderation and of Christ may guide you, as in Phi. 4.5. Because the Lord is at hand, wishing you to trie al things, & to try this thing and to hold fast that which is good; and if you recive any benefit by what is here declared, give God the glorie of it. And so I commit you to God, and to the word of his grace, which can perfect you in every good word and work, which shall be the continual prayer and ear∣nest endeavour of me,

