



MADAM,
HAving by a strange fortune lighted on this Book, which to me appear∣ed so pleasing, and fit for your en∣tertainment, in that your retired solitary life; I think it cannot be displeasing to any, being raised with the glory of your Name: that is, this History of Elise. In which, Madam, you shall find Vertue suffer∣ing under the weight of afflictions, that end it; and an innocence made guilty more by the in∣advertencie of the Parties, then the malice of the Judges.
Yet it may be esteemed a Tragick history not so fit for your persent disposition, to whom no∣thing

ought to be presented but of pleasure and content. But to judg so, is to be ignorant of your worth, which like the Dolphin is most pleased in the roughest waters. And as nothing gives more content to those that have passed dangers, then to speak of the perils they have been in both by sea and land; who can better judge then you, that have found by experience the truth of this saying of a grave Writer, That it is very hard amongst so much malignity as hath infected the world, to live under the support of innocence. But when posterity shal read your history, which deserves the writing of the most able and curious pen, they will then hold for a vanity that of the Romans, which is a truth in your history, that hath shewed us a vertue without second, in the first and most glorious from of our dayes; One may see a patience without example, a mildness unbelievable, a fidelity inviolable, a chastity in∣vincible, and lastly a constancie founded on emi∣nent piety, that can know nothing greater then it self.
All this, Madam, is exempt from flattery; since as many places as the Sun shines on, are as many Eccho's of your praises. But what eccho's or what voice can worthily shew your merits, being raised to that height, that they can no way be presented but imperfectly; none can under∣take without express boldness, were they never so eloquent in language, to praise them but im∣perfectly. But as our eys have a natural sympa∣thie with the elements of fire and water, which proceeds from their composition, and make us

willingly contemplate the bright liveliness of the one, and the chrystal running of the other: Even so I hope, be it that your eys descend to the reading of this Peece, or that your ears may but hear it recited, your thoughts may meet with consolation; seeing in the misfortunes of others a feeble Idea of these disasters, whose blackness will raise the height of your glories, as the ob∣scurity of the Night sets off the brightness of the Moon, whose roundness is accomplished. It is for weak spirits to faint at sight of one let blood; Generous hearts laugh at the attaints of fortune; and how can they look pale at the read∣ing of calamities, that have so far surmounted the greatest? And then, Madam, the honour you have gained in bringing to the world so many Males for the maintaining of the Hono∣rable and Noble house of the Sakviles, will in∣spire you with a new strength to pass over with∣out apprehension the sad and tragick events of this Deduction. Which hath no other end but to bring you some divertisement and consola∣tion, and to let you see the lively affection I have ever had to honour and esteem, according to my power, so many Vertues as crown you, and tie me, Madam, to be ever

