



My Lord,
I Address unto your Pie∣ty the ensuing Example of the hand of God up∣on the Impious, as I re∣ceived it from the mouth of a Sage, Learned and Devout Fa∣ther, who had had acquain∣tance with the good Simplicius, one of the principal Persons in the following History, and there∣fore the best acquainted with all
the particulars of it.
If mischiefs are cured by their opposite remedies; if we save our selves by the contrary of that which destroys us, and if things are best set off by Comparison with their contraries, I questi∣on not but the Splendor of your Name, and the Glory of your Virtue, will here shine with the greatest lustre amongst the thick darknesses represented in the en∣suing Narrative. But God who draweth light from the midst of obscurity, does give us good instructions, by the horrour so naturally stamped on the front of Vice. Some Criticks who
shall run it over (as it often happens) without stopping at this Epistle, will presently judge that these are matters as unsit∣ing for my hand, as for your eyes, your Soul being as far remote from such Idea's, as the East from the West: But my senti∣ments are different, as I suppose yours will be, unless you be an Enemy to your own advantage; for who are fitter to beat down the most enormous vices, than those who are elevated to the highest pitch of Vertue? The opposing a Giant to David, was it not the means to aggrandize his Glory? What other rodbut
that of Moses could devour Ser∣pents? and what other strength then that of Sampson could tear a Lyon, subdue the Philistines, and unhinge and bear away the Gates of a City? 'tis for St. Peter to kill and eat unclean Beasts. The generous Julus in the great Roman Poet disdained to hunt the fearful Game, or to imploy himself in chasing or killing the timerous Deer; wild Boars and Bears are onely subjects worthy his pursuit. 'Tis the valour of an Enemy that raiseth the Glo∣ry of the Victor. Your deport∣ments so full of Honour and of Virtue, make you so terrible to
Vice, to suffer her to approach you otherwise then as subdued below your feet, and acknow∣ledging you Victorious against her strongest efforts. It is in this equipage that this relation does approach you; For as the Serpent Pithon was one of the most famous Trophies of Apol∣lo, who had pierced it with his Arrows, a fabulous inven∣tion whereby the Poets would denote that the rayes of the Sun do purifie all ordures; And as this Glorious planet does with∣out infection cast his rays upon a dunghil; so those of your con∣dition can glance upon the crimes
against which I declaim in the ensuing pages, without offence; and your Vertue shall serve me for a Lance and Buckler in my combat, and (I hope) my con∣quest, of these Monsters. The Ark which saved from the de∣luge the seed of the Ʋniverse, did receive the unclean beast without contracting any impu∣rity; so a firm and well tem∣per'd Soul looks down upon the insolence of Vice with a disdain∣ful Eye, and is so elevated as it were in the Highest regions of the Air, that their black vapours can never reach it: Judith offered to the Lord the
Equipage of Holofernes, Jo∣shuah accursed things of Acan, and Moses sacrificed to him the abominations of the Egyp∣tians; These reasons My Lord, have invited me to address this Tragical Narrative to Your Lordship, as to a Hercules, the chaser of mischief; nor is this without Example, the ancient Ethnicks dedicated Wolves to Mars, Eagles to Jupiter, Ly∣ons to Sol, Owls to Minerva, and Foxes to Mercury. And the Hebrews themselves sacri∣ficed Oxen and Goats to the great God of Israel, and Lord of Hosts: And to say truly, at
the feet of what more signal Virtue can such horrid impiety be thrown, and where can a more Heroick valour be found to purge Europe of those vi∣ces which render her more fer∣tile of Monsters then Africa. France, which hath seen you manage with so much care, fi∣delity and prudence her
He was Trea∣surer of the Ar∣my, and Mr. of the Ordnance. powders of gold and salt peter which compose the Thunders and Lightnings, as well as Sinews of War, that Lewis the Just might reduce the rebellious Spi∣rits of his Subjects to some ap∣pearance of the Duty and Obe∣dience,
will witness to the World this verity: But since truth is as displeasing to you, when she tells you of your me∣rits, as she is to others when she reproacheth them with their unworthiness, I shall onely beg leave to hew from this fair Quarrey one stone to adore the Frontispiece of this Work, and bear this inscription, That you perhaps amongst all men living are onely he to whose sole cour∣tesie I may declare my self truly obliged, which renders me from the bottom of my Soul.
My Lord,

