



SIR,
THO' I can't without Ingratitude,
Conceal the Exceeding Favours,
which the Town have shown this
Piece; yet they must give me leave to own,
that even my Vanity lay Husht, quite stifled
in my Fears, till I had securely fixt its Good
Fortune, by Publishing your Approbation of
it: An Advantage, which as it will Confirm
my Friends in their favourable Opinion, so it
must in some Measure, Qualifie the Seve∣rity
of the Malicious. After this Declara∣tion;
let the World Imagine, how Difficult it
is for me, not to Launch into your Character:
But since the smoothness of your Temper, and
Depth of Iudgment, are my chief Protection,
I am loath to Discompose you, by an Vngrate∣ful.
Repetition of those Virtues, which only please

you in the Practice: The World as little
wants the Knowledge of 'em, as you desire the
Recital.
'Tis your Happiness, Sir, that your For∣tune
has fixed you above the need of Praise,
or Friends, yet both are equally Vnavoidable:
For even to your Solitude, Praise will follow
you, and grows Fonder of you for your Cold∣ness;
She Loves you for your Choice of Plea∣sures,
those Noble Pleasures of a sweet Re∣tirement,
from which nothing but the Conside∣nation
of your Countrey's Weal cou'd draw you.
But as no Man can properly be made a Pa∣tron,
whose Virtues have not in some sort Qua∣lified
him for such a Care: So, Sir, it is suffi∣cient
for me, that your Life and Conversati∣on
are the best Herald's of Your Power, and
My Safety.
Here, Sir, I must beg leave to clear my
self from what the Ill Wishes of some wou'd
have the World believe, that what I now Offer
you is Spurious, and not the Product of my
own Labour: And thô I am pleas'd, that this
Report seems to allow it some Beauties, yet

I am sorry, it has made a Discovery of some
Person's, who think me Worth their Malice.
This Dedication were little better than an
Affront, unless I cou'd with all Sincerity assure
you, Sir, that the Fable is intirely my own;
nor is there a Line or Thought, through∣out
the Whole, for which I am Wittingly
oblig'd either to the Dead, or Living;
For I cou'd no more be pleas'd with a
Stol'n Reputation, than with a Mistress,
who yielded only upon the Intercession of my
Friend: It satisfies me, Sir, that you believe
it mine, and I hope what others say to the
Contrary, is rather owing to an Vnreasonable
Disgust, than their Real Opinion. I am not
Ignorant of those Oversights I have Committed,
nor have the Dissecting Criticks much Discou∣rag'd
me: For 'tis Their Diversion to find
Fault; and to have none, is to them an Vn∣pardonable
Disappointment; no Man can ex∣pect
to go Free, while they don't spare one ano∣ther:
But as I write not in Defiance of their
Censure; so, after having Diverted you, Sir,
I shall not trouble my self for a Defensive

Preface. Had it not succeeded, I shou'd have
had Modesty Enough to impute it to my own
want of Merit: For certainly the Town can
take no Pleasure in Decrying any Man's La∣bours,
when 'tis their Interest to Encourage
'em; every Guest is the best Iudge of his own
Pallat, and a Poet ought no more to Impose
good Sense upon the Galleries, than Dull
Farce upon the Vndisputed Iudges. I first
Consider'd who my Guests were, before I pre∣pared
my Entertainment, and therefore I
shall only add this as a General Answer to all
Objections, That it has every way Exceeded
mine, and hitherto has not wrong'd the House's
Expectation; That Mr. Southern's Good
Nature (whose own Works best Recommend
his Iudgment,) Engag'd his Reputation for
the Success, which its Reception, and your
Approbation, Sir, has since redeem'd to the
Intire Satisfaction of
SIR,

Febr. 7. 169.
