



PRECIOUS WITNESSES for your God and Country:
THe neerer I am still the Throne of Grace, the more is your present con∣dition upon my heart; and truly, this I can say, it hath been very seldome since I began this WORK, but poor Zion,Jer. 30.17. (Whom no man seeketh after) hath been all along in my eye: It isIsa. 62.1. for Zions sake, I cannot hold my peace;Isa. 60.1. untill the glory of the Lord be risen upon her. Now is the time, thatMal. 3.16. they who fear the Lord, should speak often one to ano∣ther, and strengthen the hands which hang down, and feeble knees. I shall not say any thing of the THING it self, (what is of God shall stand) only a few
 words, what hath mov'd me to send THIS (as a LOVE-TOKEN) to all the Friends of the Bridegroom.
First, I have observ'd of late, that the Interest of Christ and his People, the GOOD OLD CAUSE, is not (methinks) so lively and HEARTY, upon some mens spirits, as formerly it was; but either some disappointment of time,Mat. 25.5. or the Bridegroom's tarrying long, hath occasioned a little deadness and faintness in some Choyce Ones. Now that I may speak to the heart of these; Wherefore should there be any CASTING DOWN?Isa. 40.2. Is not your warfare accomplished, and the day of the Lamb come? Therefore (O ye wor∣thies,Psal. 27.14. Wait on the Lord, be of good courage, and he shall strengthen your hearts; wait (I say) on the Lord. If a traveller by reason of a long journey be almost tyr'd, yet when he coms neer the place where he would be, and sees it hard by, this will put new strength into him again. I have in this Treatise not only exprest my opinion, that the Lord is REVIVING HIS WORK; but have given some reasons for it: what incouragement and refreshing the Lords
 people shall have by it, a little time will shew: For I am very confident, as the Lord will suddenly check and blast all ways of falshood, and deceitful preten∣ders to his Holy Secrets; so he will shew a TOKEN OF GOOD to what is his own, and is given forth by his Spirit, con∣cerning the Kingdom and Time.
Secondly, As I knowProu. 14.34. Righte∣ousness exalteth a Nation, andProv. 29.2. When the Righteous are in Authority, the People rejoyce: so my desire and pray∣er to God is, that every yoke may be broken, the oppressed go free, and vio∣lence be heard no more in our Land. Indeed we did expect before now, to have seen better days, and were in a hopeful way to have had EnglandIsa. 1.26. call'd the City of Righteousness, the faithful Ci∣ty, by having Judges as at the first, and Counsellors as at the beginning. Now I do not doubt, but we shall have our Civil Rights, Liberties and Priviledges, more full, and free, and better then ever any men had, since England was a Nation. Is any thing too hard for God to do? can∣not he raise up a Generation of faithful men, andPro. 31.8. open their mouths for the dumb, and in the cause of all such
 as are appointed to destruction: that is, for him that hath not ability to speak for himself by reason of his simplicity, un∣fitness or impediment in his speech, or dare not speak for fear of his Potent Adver∣sary.
I finde in our Chronicles, how a Car∣dinal told the Pope,Speed, Hen. 3. p. 624. That England was to the Pope as BALAAMS ASS, which being so often wrong'd and cudgel'd, it was no marvel if at length she open'd her mouth to complain. What thoughHere Gods judgment is a great deep, that England should be the Beast or Asse on which must ride the Ba∣laams, or Heads of both Apo∣stasies. England have been an ASS, and dumb a long while; yet who can tell, but after so often wrong'd and cudg∣eld, she may speak and complain at last. But more seriously, that England hath been a while dumb, I do not take the cause to be (at least principally) of any pow∣er or policy in men, or fearfulness which hath surpriz'd the Nation; but in order to the fulfilling of some Decree and Coun∣sel of God, and Scripture-Prophesies, which were to be accomplished at this time; the which time being expired, such multitudes will stand up for their freedom and Civil-Rights, that were the Enemies ten times more and stronger then they are, they would signifie nothing.
 Hence take notice of the blindness and folly of some men: for if the time of En∣glands deliverance be not come, there needs not such gathering of horse and foot together: For I am confident, the Lovers of ENGLANDS-LIBER∣TIE, will be no secret plotters, they scorn it, neither will they move till the Lord by some signal Providence plain∣ly shews that the time is come: and when that is, vain will be the help of man to frustrate the good purpose and work of God. That Doctrine then, which the Army us'd to preach to the Long Parli∣ament, will be often repeated by the peo∣ple: To punish only instruments,St. Albans Declarat. No. 16. 1648. p. 50. and let the head (by whose power, and in whose interest all hath been done) not only go free, but stand in perpetual priviledge and impunity, to head such instruments again, as oft as he can find opportunity, and get any to serve him; is a way so far far from security, as it leads indeed to endless trouble and ha∣zard, or to perfect loss of all. Again, in point of Justice, with what Consci∣ence inferior ministers can be punish∣ed, and the principal set free, FOR OUR PARTS, VVE UNDER∣STAND
 NOT, NEITHER DOE VVE KNOVV ANY GROUND OR REASON TO EXEMPT KINGS FROM HUMANE JU∣STICE. It is a maxime in the Civil Law,Si quis ff. quod quis∣que Juris, &c. That of right every man should be judg'd by such Laws as him∣self hath practised against others.
Thirdly, What I have spoken about Professors, I have plain enough exprest my meaning. I only intend Backsliders▪ who by their Covenant-breaking, Hy∣pocrisie, and Falshood, have made the Profession of Religion to stink among the Nations. It pleased the Lord (through his Grace) to inable me to hold forth a publick Testimony against the Prelats, but never was the great Name of God, his Gospel and Kingdom, so much con∣cern'd in that Controversie, I mean, between the Non-conformists and Con∣formists, as it is at this day between the Lords VVitnesses and the Second Apo∣stacy. The higher a thing is lifted up, and then hurled down, the more it is wrong'd and hurt thereby. The Bishops never lifted p the work of REFOR∣MATION in Church or State; they were Professors that did it: and to shew their
 spight to it, and that they might wound it, and wrong it the more, when they had rai∣sed up the Good Cause of God, and the interest of the Nation, as high as they thought would serve their OWN TƲRN, down they threw it with both hands, hoping it should never rise again. It is but a little which I have said, to that (I beleeve) will be said: for indeed the bottome of the Apostacy will not be touch'd, till things be put more home, (as Nathan did to David) THOU ART THE MAN; that is, particularly to name them, and to set down their falshood and treachery, and what wages and hire some have had for serving the lusts of men.
It was a crime laid to Silicius, Victoria per avaritiam faedata, he discredited his victory by his Covetousness: this needs little application. Alas! what credit have they now by opposing the Prelates! doe not the people generally say (and not without cause) it was to have the Bi∣shops power in their own hands; and ha∣ving gotten it, are as insolent and proud, and for covetousness a thousand times worse then they? The sordid covetous∣ness of these men, caused one to deride them
 thus:Whitlock, Observ. p. 358, 359. Our Protestant Jesuites care not for converting the Indians that have no gold; they know how to inter∣weave the pretence of Gods interest with their own, and therewith to ad∣vance all their designes. Indeed these Jesuites carry not the Gospel into any beggerly Region; spring a mine, and then if you will set up a pulpit, and shew them gold there, they will barter salvation: otherwise, no penny, no pa∣ter-noster. Again, Our Fishers an∣gle for no fish, but such as have money in their mouths; they will only fish for such as contribute to their superflui∣ties. Bad times (saith he) when he that will not be a knave, must be a fool.
Fourthly, When I consider what fa∣mous testimonies the LORDS-WOR∣THIES have left behind them of their faithfulness and great zeal unto the glo∣rious cause of Christ, not only speaking against the corruptions and abuses of their times: (For had they done no more, what had we known now of the Hypocrisie and Apostacy of Professors then?) but have left behinde them (in white and black, as we say.) Living Mo∣numents of their Love to God and his
 people. Truly this takes very much with me, and exceedingly condemns the neglect and backwardness of this age. I am thinking many times when, an AF∣TER-GENERATION shall hear of this Second Apostacy, and how far it ex∣ceeds the former, in breaking Oaths, Vows, and Ingagements, and the name of God and Religion more dishonored by Church-members, and Church-Officers, and other Professors, then ever before in any age; how strange it would be to them, and admir'd, if nothing should come to their hands from us, as there doth to our hands from the Witnesses before us.
Besides, I am now an old man, and expect every day to lay down this earthly Tabernable; it will be therefore some comfort to me, whensoever my change∣ing coms, that I have left a PUBLICK TESTIMONY against this present A∣postacy, as formerly I did against the other: and howsoever I bless the Lord that hath kept my feet out of the SNARE of both, yet this I shall leave behind me under my hand, i. e. The Free Grace, and Goodness of God, hath more abun∣dantly appeared towards me, in preser∣ving me a poor worm, from this Last
 Apostacy, then from the former: not onely because of the two, I take the Last to be the worst; but because the later hath in it much more of the depths of Satan then the former had. As for their jeerings and reproachful speeches, I pass them by: such things are not new with me; the Bishops and their Creatures used them: yet thus much I must say for the Bishops, which I cannot say for them, so far they shewed us FAIR PLAY, not to imprison us, nor banish us, till they had told us the cause, and heard what we could say for our selves; yea, and would seem to be very pious and chari∣table in taking great paines with some of us, to bring us out of our errours, (as they cal'd it:) but I have found no such piety or charity with these men, for I have been banished now almost two years, but never to this day knew the cause of it, neither hath there been any thing laid to my charge. I shall not speak of the sad calamity which they have brought since upon my Family, by the death of my dear wife and daughter. Again, for the Bishops, this I may say further, for many of them (I think the
 most part (when they banished any of us, or cast us into prison for Non-confor∣mity) they thought they did well, and did God good service in it. Thus they were like Saul before his conversion, they did things ignorantly in unbelief: But for men to persecute the people of God for no other cause, but because they reprove them for their hypocrisie and falshood, (and they know in their own consciences what is spoken is very true) of such men we cannot have the charity which we had of the Bishops. Indeed they are like Saul too, but it is another Saul, i. e. that Saul which persecuted David, ONE who knew he did not well in it, but acted against his light and conscience.
Fiftly, But one word more to you Mour∣ners in Zion: I am very sensible that ma∣ny of the Lords people have other thoughts of the TIME then I have, and do think I am mistaken concerning the period of the one thousand two hundred and sixty years. Indeed to know what I do (in respect of so many good men dissen∣ting from me) would very much discou∣rage me from ingaging again in the same thing; but that I have more encourage∣ment TO HOLD FAST then I think
 meet to express: I know whom I have believed, in him I trust, and will trust; and do know I shall not be ashamed of my hope. What David prayed for, is a great strengthning to me; Be surety for thy Servant for good: let not the proud oppress me. Humbly be it spoken, I do believe he will answer for me, and defend me.Psa. 91.14. Because he hath set his love up∣on, therefore will I deliver him.
Lastly, I desire in the Spirit of meek∣ness to commend these few things to all the faithful of the Land.
1. Howsoever I shall discourage none (but rather encourage them) to keep close to all Christs Appointments; yet to be watchful that their affections run not out after any form or particular judg∣ment; but that the great cause of Christ and Zion may still (if possible) have most weight upon their hearts.
2. You that know what it is to watch, now double your watch,Hab. 2.1. stand (with the prophet) upon the Tower, and go not off day nor night: If there be any noise or stir in the night, who first hath knowledge of it? not such as are gone to bed, or fallen asleep, but are up, and wa∣king, and watching to hear what is do∣ing.
 Methinks I hear the sound of a going in the tops of the Mulberry-trees:2 Sam. 5.24. There is something already stir∣ring, A sound of abundance of rain.1 King. 18.41. Now the Lord keep us watching one hour: the vision is speaking, and the wise shall understand.
3. Where you se most of God, most plainness, truth, faithfulness, and endear∣ed love to the interest of Christ and his people, rather close there, then upon the account of one-ness in some opinion or judgment. You will see shortly, that some will be lay'd aside, notwithstanding their opinions, when others will be chosen and taken, for the abundance of their integri∣ty and singleness of heart.
4. Labour to experience the power and leading of the Spirit: it is very dan∣gerous to rest in any thing that comes from the Creature, till you have the wit∣ness of the Spirit, which is not fleshly, hea∣dy, or empty, but powerful, inward, and abides, and settles the soul:Psal. 36.9. In thy light shall we see light, and no where else, let them pretend never so high Attain∣ments.
5. There is a path which no fowl knoweth,Job 28.7, 8. and which the vultures eye
 hath not seen. The Lyons whelps have not troden it, nor the fierce Lyon passed by it. Why may not this be the way of which the Lord speaks,Isa. 42.16. I will bring the blind by a way that they knew not: I will lead them in pathes that they have not known? Surely Gods leading his friends into his COƲN∣CEL-CAHMBER, where he shews them great and mighty things which they knew not,Jer. 33.3, is an untrodden path. A Soul may be in the Chamber of pre∣sence, yet not be in the COƲNCEL-CHAMBER. We may experience much divine love, and taste sweetly and largely of Free-Grace, and yet not be brought where his great secrets are bro∣ken open. But I shall not speak of this, for it is too wonderful. But who think ye are the persons whom Jehovah leads into his COƲNCEL-CHAMBER? verily, the poor and the maimed, and the halt and the blind; such as he ga∣thers up in the high-ways and hedges; a people lying at his foot stark naked: have no parts, no abilities, no understan∣ding or judgment; altogether and e∣very way helpless, so that if they have any light, it is from the Lord: for
 in themselves they are sure is nothing but darkness. That which I aym at is, to perswade Christ's Little Flock in all pla∣ces to renounce their own reason, judg∣ment and understanding, and to be poor, blinde and naked worms, in the high ways and hedges: for such now will be taught of God, in things appertaining to the Times and Kingdom.Mat. 16.17 Blessed art thou Simon Bar-jona, for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in Heaven.
I shall say no more: But PRAY, PRAY for this poor worm, that I may finish my course with joy: Indeed this I earnestly beg of all the Saints every where, who am through grace preserv'd, to be

