





Precious Ones,
THe Lord saith by his Prophet,Psal. 50.5 Gather ye to me my gracious Saints, that have stricken my co∣venant with sacrifice. Who are meant here, I shall not say: but this I say, The time draws nigh, in which the sanctified and mighty ones of Je∣hovah shall be gathered together to him; even the hundred fourty and four thousand standing with the Lamb on Mount Zion.
It is possible, this Work of mine at first sight may seem strange to you, being contrary to what hath been generally received; and withal, may occasion some discouragement, as if the day of the Lords vengeance, and the year of recompenses for the controversie of Zion, were further off then you thought before. For the first, I shall refer you to the Discourse it self: but for the later, that is, taking None of the Vials yet begun, it will be for your encouragement and advantage many ways.
1. Here you may see, what choice and singular Priviledges the Lord hath reserved for YOU the Saints of the last times as, to be particularly THESE, Rev. 14.1, 2, 3, &c. and the called, chosen, and faithful, Chap. 17.14. The Angels to come out of the Temple, with seven golden Vials, full of the wrath of God:Psal. 149.7.8. To do vengeance on the heathens, reproofs in the nations: To binde their Kings in chains, and their No∣bles in fetters of iron: To do on them the judgement writ∣ten;
 this comely honour is to all his gracious Saints. Hal∣lelu-jah. It never grieves a childe, to know more then he did of the Portion which his father left him. I have in this Treatise acquainted you with something more, then what (probably) you knew before concerning your lot (how eminent it is) being fallen in the last days.
2. If the Lord will thus honour you the Saints of the last times with high and glorious employment, What manner of persons ought ye to be, in all holy conversation and godliness? How should ye studie2 Tim. 2.21. to be meet for the Masters use; workmen that need not to be ashamed? SurelyLevit. 16.21. he will send by the hand of fit men. Were a man chosen to any great Office in the Commonwealth, he would take pains to have insight in it, and to have all meet qualifications for the discharge thereof. In for∣mer times, as Saints saw that their work then was to suffer for the testimony of Jesus Christ; so they went to God, by instant and earnest prayer, for faith, patience, courage, constancie, &c. that they might not love their lives unto the death. We are come, without doubt, neer the time of the end, viz. the period of the Beast's reign, and the Vials to begin. Hence we should minde what our Work is NOW, and for THIS be calling upon God day and night, for spirits sutable to the Work.
3. I know nothing (if duly weighed) of more weight then this, to heal all present Breaches amongst the faithful of the Land, and to gather them in (as one) with and for the Lamb. Never was there a time more unseasonable then now, for brethren to be at oddes, whether about Forms, or the like; but rather (bearing each with other in their Opinions) to joyn together in Fasting and Prayer, that they may all know the Lord, as to the proper work of the day; and therein (as all alike concerned) stand fast together in the defence thereof. I have observed it a long while, that nothing more draws out the hearts of Christians to peace and oneness, then the understanding of the Times. Men walking in a dark room, are apt to stumble and fall one upon ano∣ther. It is want of Generation-light, that Ephraim envies Judah, and Judah vexeth Ephraim. Could Saints but see, that the day breaks, and the shadows are flying away; those Forms and other things which men now are earnest for, God is shaking,
 and making all things new: they would lay their hands upon their mouthes, and say, Once have I spoken, yea twice: but I will proceed no further. If a Master should come and finde his servants quarrelling about some small matter, and in the mean time nothing done concerning things of more weight and impor∣tance; though some might be less in fault then others, and so less blamed; yet they would be all reproved, as having neglected the greater and more weighty business. It is true, in these Contro∣versies, as some have more Truth on their side then others; so their fault is the less: nevertheless, not having served their Gene∣ration, but contended onely about things of lesser importance; for this they may ALL stand ashamed before the Son of man at his coming.
4. If no Vial yet be poured out, and the Vial-Angels are to come out of the Temple; this considered, should stir up the Churches of the Saints to hear what the Spirit saith unto the Churches. They have seen thy goings, O God;Rev. 2.7. Psal. 68.24 even the goings of my God, my King, in the Sanctuary. My opinion is, near the time of the Vials, the Spirit of God will move among the Saints at their holy Meetings, in some strong and extraordi∣nary way; as to the shaking of the house, as Act. 4.31. or as in Acts 13.2. And the Temple was filled with smoke from the glory of God, and from his power. And therefore,Rev. 15.8. as emi∣nent and infallible confirmations and assurances are to be ask'd; so God's Answers and Returns are to be heeded: for now Belie∣vers are to expect the great promise of the Father, to be endued with power from on high; and to have the Spirit of truth,Joh. 16.13. to guide them into all truth, and to shew them things to come. Again, as wonderful and extraordinary things are to be attempted, things new, and in former ages unheard-of: so the wonderful appearances of God, as moving and leading men there∣to, are to be observ'd; which are no other then Gods call to the Angels of the Vials in the Temple: Go your ways, and pour out the Vials of the wrath of God upon the earth.Rev. 16.1. Who is wise, and he shall understand these things; prudent,Hos. 14.9. and he shall know them? For the ways of the Lord are right, and the just shall walk in them; but the transgressors shall fall therein.
5. To hold that some of the Vials are begun, it draws such a cloud and darkness over mens eyes, as it cannot but disadvantage Saints many ways. For, 1. Those who now suffer upon the account of the Fifth Kingdom, and run not after the errour of Balaam for reward; what improvement can they make of their Testimony? I say, how little (comparatively) doth it tend to? If the Sackcloth-Witnesses have poured out Vials upon the Earth, Sea, and Fountains of waters; truly the house of Austria is a business far off, and the following Vials yet further; and in my understanding, all yeelds very little comfort to those whose present expectation is raised up after great and high things nearer home.
Again, granting some Vials poured out; but how many, and when, where, and how; here all uncertain: This must needs wrap a soul into a world of doubts; as, what to pray for, and where we are, and what work to prepare for. Paul saith well, It is good to be zealously affected always,Gal. 4.18. in a good thing. For my part, I sincerely speak it, taking the Vials begun, the more I consider where we are, and what to pray for, and prepare for, (as to present Generation-work) the less I am satisfied, as to have things bottom'd and well grounded.
But on the contrary, taking the Vials not begun, here methinks things are easie and plain to him that hath understanding, as to the knowledge both of our Time and Work. Besides, for the Prisoners of hope, here is that will stay them with flag∣gons,Eccl. 4.14. and comfort them with apples. For out of pri∣son he cometh to reign. The risen Witnesses are to begin the work upon the Earth-state Apostacie. After three years and half, (which I take to be the whole time of the last State-Apostacie, and the Witnesses lying so long slain) that in Job will be made good:Job 17.8. The innocent shall stir up himself against the hypocrite.
6. Were this Doctrine concerning the Vials rightly under∣stood, it would awaken many carnal and corrupt Professors; as Formalists, Neuters, Time-servers, &c. It is no marvel that this sort of men are so little affected or affrighted with the seven last plagues: For if three of the Vials (as it is com∣monly held) are poured out, and yet all things continue as they
 were from the beginning; Why may not the later do as little as the former did? Whereas, did the Hypocrites and Apostates of this Age know, that none of them are yet poured out; and withal, were they informed who will be the subjects of each Vi∣al, and what the effects: this would be like thunder in their ears: Alas, who shall live when God doth this?Num. 24.23. Now we should see the sinners in Sion afraid; fearfulness would surprise the hypocrites.
Specially when they shall hear, that the first Vial, whose sub∣ject is the Earth, is shortly to be poured forth upon an earthly and carnal Interest, to wit, the Grand Apostates of the last times, described in 2 Tim. 3.2, 3, 4. For the time is come,1 Pet. 4.17 that judgement must begin at the house of God; accord∣ing to his way of old; and begin at my Sanctuary:Ezek. 9.6. And in taking this course, all mouthes will be stopp'd: Be silent,Zech. 2.13 O all flesh, before the Lord: for he is raised up out of his holy habitation. What will Rome, Spain, France, Germany, &c. have to say, when it comes to be their Turn to feel the weight and wrath of the Vials, when they shall hear how the Lord began first at his Sanctuary; namely, with those had a Form of god∣liness, but denyed the power thereof?
7. Neither is the knowledge of this, altogether without some use to the present Powers of the world, especially such, who say they believe that Christ shall have a visible and glorious Kingdom; onely they differ from their Brethren in point of time. It was much, that Saul should tell David, I know well (saith he) that thou shalt surely be king,1 Sam. 24.20. and that the kingdom of Israel shall be established in thine hand. One would think he spake not as he thought; or at least, not as he would have it; when no sooner were the words out of his mouth, but he sought by all the subtil ways he could devise, how to take away Davids life, that he might not be king.
But now, to remove jealousie from men in Authority, in re∣lation to those who already cry Hosanna to the Son of David, GOD SAVE KING JESUS, blessed be he that cometh in the Name of the Lord; and do assert him the onely Potentate, and that he shall break all other Potentates and Powers of the world, and alone be exalted: This
 Apologie I dare give forth to the whole world, in their behalf, I speak of those who bear witness to the fifth Kingdom, That they do abhor all secret Designes and Plots; neither is it in their hearts to act as men, nor for men; no, nor to appear in the work of the Lord, till they shall see one of the days of the Son of man, that is, the Lord eminently risen, in lifting up the Stan∣dard for his People. So that as they cease from man, and from trusting in Chariots and Horse-men; so it is belowe their Princi∣ples, to provide Pikes and Muskets, or any such Ammunition: for they know, when their time and work comes, if they shall need then any such Weapons, their Enemies will spare them enough, as casting away all they have, that they may flie the faster to Rocks and Mountains, whereby to be hid from the fierce wrath of the Lamb.
But whereas there is a great Rumour thorow the Nations, of wonderful Actions and Changes at hand;Mat. 2.3. (When Herod heard these things, he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him:) hence it is suggested, as if the Assertors of Christ's glorious and visible Kingdom, had fix'd a certain, definite & determinate Time when the Stone cut out without hands, should begin to smite the Image upon his feet that were of Iron & Clay, and break them in pieces. But this is not true. Yet this we confess, (for we desire, as our hearts are known to God, so to have them naked and opened unto the eyes of all men) we are of opinion, That the Lord will arise,Psal. 102.13. and have mercy upon Zion: for the time to favour her, yea the set-time is come. The vision which was for an appointed time,Hab. 2.3. is at an end, and will speak. The fourty and two months, and one thousand two hundred and sixty days, are neer their periods; and there shall be time no longer, either for the Beast, or other Ty∣rants, to bear rule over the Saints of the most High. But what of this? Here is no ground for action: for until the Lord himself make it clear and certain, by his own infallible appear∣ance, that the time is come; mens Conjectures are nothing, as to move any to such undertakings.
And therefore I say further, Had these men who believe that Christ will shortly destroy all worldly powers, as great advan∣tages against any of them, as David had against Saul when he
 fell into his hands, they would not (I speak as I believe) stir, or act any thing, meerly as having such an Advantage or Oportuni∣ty: for they eye more then what men call Providence, (which Thieves of all sorts may pretend to:Num. 23.21.) The Lord God must be with them, and the shout of a King among them. And until the Lord of hosts muster the host of the battel,Isa. 13.4. those that rejoyce in his HIGHNESS will remain in their Chambers, having their doors shut about them.
I speak not this, as if there were the least unwillingness in the Assertors of the Fifth Kingdom to suffer in the behalf there∣of. For I am confident, they are as willing as ever were Saints in any Generation, to hold forth (with their lives in their hands) this Testimony of Jesus Christ, namely,1 Tim. 6.15. THAT CHRIST AS MAN SHALL BE THE ONELY POTENTATE, INSOMUCH AS ALL WORLDLY DOMINION,Dan. 2.35. RULE, GOVERNMENT, &c. SHALL BE BRO∣KEN TO PIECES, AND BECOME AS THE CHAFF OF THE SUMMER-THRESHING-FLOOR, AND NO PLACE FOUND MORE FOR IT:Dan. 7.14, 2.7. BUT CHRIST WITH HIS SAINTS SHALL HAVE THE DOMI∣NION, GLORY, AND GREATNESS, UNDER THE WHOLE HEAVEN.
But what I write, is to wipe off the Scandal and Reproach which some seek to fasten upon them, by matching them with Cavaliers and Malignants; and as if great Plots (I know not what) were under Consultation amongst them: A thing detest∣ed, as most unsutable to the glorious Cause and Interest which they profess. Besides, they know well enough, as Christ will take the Kingdoms of the world into his own hands: so, when that time shall come, (as we hope it is not far off) he will come with power enough: we need not to take any thought about it: For the zeal of the Lord of hosts will perform this.Isa. 9..
Having thus far endeavoured to remove needless Fears, it were well (notwithstanding) if the Great Ones of the world would take notice of what was hinted before, That Jesus Christ is designing against them, (though we are not) to root them out, and to pull them down, and to destroy and overthrow
 them.Isai. 28.22. Now therefore be not mockers, lest your bands be made strong. For I have heard from the Lord God of hosts, a consumption even determined upon the whole earth.Isai. 23.9. He hath purposed to stain the pride of all glory, and to bring to contempt all the honourable of the earth. What greater folly in men, then to take care to have the walls of their houses high and strong, but no covering to it, whereby to keep off hurt and danger from above, and over head? That BLOW which the Powers of the world may expect next, it's from above, even The finger of God: and therefore if they have not made it well and strong over-head, (strong enough to keep off the hand of God) what will their Souldiers and Guards about them, stead them? Your Covenant with death shall be disannulled,Isai. 28.18. and your agreement with hell shall not stand: when the overflowing scourge shall pass thorow, then ye shall be trodden down by it.Isa. 8.9, 10. Also, associate your selves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces; take counsel together, and it shall come to nought. When fire takes hold of sticks bundled together, the one rather furthers then hinders the others burning. When the day of the Lord of hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty,Isai. 2.12. the more they combine together by Power and Policie, the faster they will run, and destroy one the other. No man (I think) could have done more (whether Machiavilian or Atheist) then Herod did, to prevent the great Designe of God, when Jesus Christ came first into the world!Pro. 21.30. But it would not do. For there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel, against the Lord. So a while after, to hinder Christs Resurrection, what could the devil have suggested, (as a Plot more probably to take effect) then to make the sepulchre sure,Mat. 27.66 sealing the stone, and setting a watch? But this would not do neither: for Christ arose in the appointed time, notwithstanding all the depths of Satan in the chief Priests and Pharisees; notable Types of the Rulers and Priests of the last days. Whilst some, like the Wise-men, are asking, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? and mourning with the Disciples, to see him crucified in his Cause and Witnesses: others, with Herod and the Pharisees, are taking crafty counsel how to hinder his Kingdom, Power, and
 Greatness: But this will not do:Psal. 2.6. Yet have I set my Son up∣on my holy hill of Sion.
Neither will Christ stand to that Division and Share which these men have set out to him, viz. Spiritualties: for so they have divided the Government of Nations between Him and Themselves. As for all outward things, Crowns, Kingdom,Compare Luke 4.6. Power, Greatness, Glory, Riches, Laws, &c. this is their Share. Now there is another thing, which they call Spiritual, or inward and invisible; this they allow to Christ; and no mar∣vel: for they know not how to get it out of his hands. But the Prophet speaks of another Decree, which is,Psal. 2.7. That Jesus Christ shall have all; and their flesh (that is, their Revenues, Riches,Rev. 19.17, 18. Greatness, Power, Places, &c.) shall be given to the fowls that flie in the midst of heaven.
But I shall say no more, as having little hope that such sayings as these, will take with them. For the old subtil Serpent, who loves to be with them in the Garden, tells them, (when such things come to their ear) YE SHALL NOT SURELY DIE.Gen. 3.4.
8. And here I may not forget, what help and advantage Saints have, by the knowledge of these things: as, to be kept and preserved from the Errours of the last times. For, what is it that doth occasion many poor souls so easily to be led aside into that NOTHING of the Quakers, but their ignorance of the Visions and Prophecies of the Scriptures not yet fulfilled? Hence (knowing little of the visible and glorious Kingdom of Christ, as the Son of man) they turn all things either into Alle∣gories, or a Christ within them; and so make all the great coun∣sels and purposes of God of no effect. As for this sort of people, truly I love them, and pity them: I love them, for many good things which I see in them; as, their honest walking, and civil righteousness; and for that Publike Testimony which they hold forth against the scandalous practices of corrupt men. And I pity them much, to see how, pretending to Perfection, and to have the highest Light and Discoveries of Truth, there is no∣thing to be found in their Writings, Speeches, Lives, but what is very lowe, and signifies NOTHING, as to be a People raised up for the work of the last days. They tell us of Christ and Antichrist, of Babylon and the New Jerusalem; of the
 Seals, Trumpets, Vials; the Beast, false Prophet, and the Great Whore, &c. But alas, poor hearts, nothing do they make of it, either as to the truth of the matter in it self, or in their own way, as they apply it, and would be understood. And therefore well may their Way be call'd NOTHING: for nothing is held forth by them concerning the great things of Christ which Saints now wait for, according to the promise of the Father.
But to return to you, who are hastening the day of the coming of Christ: Give me leave in the Close to speak one word more. As the expectation of Saints everywhere is exceeding high, af∣ter strange and wonderful things: so the Prophecies of the Scriptures (such I mean as respect the last days) are the more diligently to be search'd, as the Grounds of our Faith and Hope. And howsoever all of them are of excellent use, whereby to know what must shortly come to pass, and how to be in readi∣ness: Nevertheless, the matter of the Vials (in my opinion) is a thing wherein Christians should labour to have special light and knowledge, as containing the whole Work of God, till the sin∣ners be consumed out of the earth, and the wicked be no more.
Neither will there lie such Darkness on the Vials, if we once (through Christ) have found the beginning. For as in read∣ing Books, the last word of the Page gives direction to what follows, and how to finde it: so (I conceive) in every Vial, there is a light of some direction, whereby to carry us over to the knowledge of the next, and from it to what follows▪ and so of the rest: which will occasion the humble searcher to say, O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and know∣ledge of God! But here no common or ordinary frame is sufficient: but we must labour for high and choice spirits, to be strengthened with might by the Spirit in the inner man, and filled with all the fulness of God.
Now that such a measure of the Spirit may be poured out
 upon all the Lords Servants and Handmaids waiting everywhere for the same, is the daily prayer of him who is
 From Hull, the be∣ginning of this HOPEFUL YEAR 1656.
