



Worthy Sirs,
FIrst in your Cathedral Church to have recommended, and af∣terwards, in a more solemn manner, to have dedicated a Persuasive to a chearful Obedience to those lawful Governors, whom God alone has thought fit to place over you of that so Ancient and tru∣ly Loyal City; may seem, upon a transient View, to argue the Preacher and Publisher of such a Discourse, to have been so far transported, by a too fervent Zeal for the defence of his
 most just Cause; as to have over∣looked his LORD and MASTER'S Observation: namely, that, They Mar. 2. 17. that are whole have no need of the Physitian, but they that are sick. And therefore a brief Treatise on such a Point as this, had been much more properly delivered in the Pulpit, much more seasonably presented from the Press, to some other Corporation; which has, peradventure, of late been afraid to do that which is Evil against their Supreme Magistrate; only be∣cause they have happily found him not to have borne the Sword of Justice in vain.
But since that Remark of our Blessed Saviour does in no wise de∣hort from following the Son of Si∣rach's wholsome Advice; viz. to use Ecclus. 18. 19. Physick or ever we be sick: to meet
 even the remotest Symptomes of those more slowly approaching Diseases, which tend to the dissolution of those earthly Houses, our Souls at present inhabit. Let therefore what hath been said upon this Subject, be inter∣preted according to the true meaning thereof: i. e. Not so much for a Confirmation, as a happy Continu∣ation; but chiefly for a deserved Commendation of your firm, unsha∣ken Allegiance to the Crown; and of your Exemplary Obedience to the Church, as now by Law establish∣ed. And that too at such a time, when so many of your Sister-Societies did but too plainly demonstrate; That the true Faith, they ought then to have born to their Soveraign, his lawful Heirs and Successors, was on∣ly supported by the easily yielding
 Ground; and built upon that most deceitful Sandy Foundation of a mistaken Interest.
Wherefore, may the design of this Essay be understood to be (what real∣ly it is) a sincere, hearty, though weak Endeavour; That You, who now stand so secure, may take heed lest hereafter you fall. That You, who are now planted a noble Vine, Jer. 2. 21. wholly a right Seed, may not in time to come be turned into the degene∣rate Plant of a strange Vine. So prayeth,

