



Reverend Sir,
THIS Discourse of Extreme Unction had gone into the World without any Preface to the Reader, had not your Vindication obliged me to direct one to you, who, it may be, will find your self concerned to peruse the follow∣ing Papers. I could not by any means suffer my self to be diverted from reading your Book that was published last Week, and that not meerly for gratifying a more than usual Curiosity to see what you had to say; but rather for the informing of my Judgment; since I could not easily believe that in saying so much as you have done, you should yet say nothing to the purpose. And therefore you may be sure, I did not fall asleep, when I came to the Article of Extreme Unction, but gave you full attention there, because I had so lately dwelt upon that Argument, and was just then publishing my Thoughts about it. Shall I speak my Mind freely? It was to me indifferent
whether I should find my self obliged to retract any thing that I had written, or to tell you, as I do, that you have given me no Reason at all to do so. I am as unwilling to anticipate the De∣fence of that Worthy Person against whom you are engaged, as to neglect all notice of your Vindi∣cation in a point wherein I am this moment parti∣cularly concerned: And therefore I shall tell you generally and briefly how the matter stands, be∣cause there seems to be a fitness in it, but without pretending to deserve any Thanks from him, or to expect any from you.
As for what you say upon the Text of St. James, the main Question is, whether from those In∣definite Words, Is any sick among you, taken in Connexion with those that follow, there be more reason to believe that it was a standing part of the Presbyters Office to anoint any Christian whatso∣ever in his Sickness, for the Forgiveness of his Sins; or from those Words, The Prayer of Faith shall save the Sick, and the Lord shall raise him up? To conclude that the Apostle having directed all the Sick to send for the Elders of the Church, did im∣mediately take notice of a Case that happened but sometimes, viz. that of a miraculous Cure upon the Prayer of Faith, in which case the Sick were to be anointed with Oil in the Name of the Lord.

Now, Sir, I beg leave to tell you that tho there are many Inducements to the latter Opinion offer∣ed in the First part of this Work, which you seem not to have been aware of, yet I cannot find any one Exception against that, or any Reason for the former Opinion in all your performance, which I have not prevented in mine. Which will be so evident to those who care to take the pains of com∣paring you and me together: that I need not fear to be suspected of Insincerity,
Reply, p. 190. in desiring you whose Zeal will not suffer you to mitigate the earnest desire you have for the Salvation of your Brethren; in desiring you, I say, to animadvert upon these Papers; and that for the Author's sake, who is, I dare say, no less concerned to be saved, than you are that he should be so. You know the Council of Trent has damn'd us (as far as Anathematizing goes) for denying your Sacrament of Extreme Unction. If you do in good earnest believe there was Cause for it, let us see that you do so, by sparing a little of your Charity to save us, if it may be, from this damning Error.
Certainly I could not desire to meet with a Man more fit for this Undertaking than you would seem to be. For you it seems can prove that Extreme Unction is a Practice that came down from the Apostles,
Reply, p. 70, 71. and was from Age to Age visibly continued in all Chri∣stian
Churches both of the East and West for 800 Years: How, say you, did the Greek and Latin Churches for the first 800 Years practise this Unction; and do Prote∣stants, who pretend to reform according to the Primitive Purity, reject it? I perceive you are very sure of it; pray therefore will you try to make me so too, for if you do, I promise you to examin all those Rea∣sons from the place over again, which led me to an Interpretation of St. James different from yours, and that with a double Severity; tho you should not think it needful to pass the least Reflection up∣on them. For I assure you it is the practice of the Church for more than 800 Years, and especially the practice of the First six Ages, as I understand it, that induces me not a little to believe our Inter∣pretation of St. James to be the true one; which you must not blame me for,
Reply p. 65. who say, that the best way of proving things from Scripture is to shew Antiquity understood it so.
But if you thought that your Word ought to be taken in so great a Point, you should by no means have lessened the Authority of it, by telling two (excuse me Reverend Father! for so it is) I say, two Tales, in the very same Breath wherein you delivered your Oracle about the Antiquity and U∣niversality of Extreme Unction.

One Tale is, and 'tis a notable one, that the De∣fender himself confessed this Extreme Unction to be so Ancient and Universal a Practice as you would have it thought to be. Surely if you do not make better Proof out of the Fathers than you have done by the Confession of the Defender, we must look out for a new Man to prove to us Extreme Unction by the Universal Practice and Tradition of the Church, as you speak.
Def. p. 42, 45. I find indeed the Defender confessing that that Interpretation of the Words of St. James which he followed, was for 80 Years esteem∣ed the undoubted meaning of them, and that the ancient Liturgies of the Church, and the publick practice of it, do for above 800 Years shew that they esteemed this Unction, i. e. St. James's Unction, to belong primarily to bodily Cures, and but secondarily only to the Sickness of the Soul. Now that he should therefore confess Extreme Unction to have been of so ancient standing, is to make him say the quite contrary to what he does say. For the Unction of which he spake, was not Extreme, but brought to shew that Ex∣treme Unction did not in all that time obtain in the Church. I pass by your Insinuation that he sup∣posed the Unction mentioned by St. James was practised by the Primitive Church for the first 800 Years. He said no such thing, nor supposed any such thing, but only that for 800 Years they e∣steemed
St. James's Unction to belong primarily to Bodily Cures; which they might do, and yet in less time than 800 Years they might bring in an Unction different from that of St. James, though both of them were primarily designed for Bodily Cures. In the following Discourse I have shewn that they not only might do so, but that they did do so. But I pass by this, till you give further occasion to display the Artifice of these Insinua∣tions, which for the present I shall leave to your Reader's Diligence to gather, if he will take the pains to compare you with the Defender in this Article.
The other Tale is, and 'tis Brother to the for∣mer, That Cardinal Cajetan did not positively say, as the Defender affirmed he did; who affirmed that Cardinal Cajetan freely confessed the Words of St. James could belong to no other than Bodily Cures. This, Sir, quite disheartned me, for I took the Cardinal's Confession to be so positive, that I tran∣slated it out of the Cardinal himself, and inserted it into a convenient Place of the following Book
Disc. p. 13., where any one may find it, and so may judg be∣twixt you and us in this Matter. For I intend not to produce the Place here too, and to argue the Point precisely, because 'tis so clear that there is no need of words to make an honest Man under∣stand
it; and all the Words in the World will sig∣nify nothing if a Man be not so honest as he should be. The only Pretence you have that the Cardinal did not positively say, what the Defen∣der affirmed him to have said, is, that the Defender did not give the Cardinal's own Words, but what he conceived to be his Sence. For he did not translate him as I have done. But, Reverend Fa∣ther, it must be such another Man as you seem to be, who reads the Cardinal's Words, and will not allow him to be as positive for us, as the Defender said he was. But the worst of all is this, that you do upon this very occasion accuse the Defen∣der of Falsification, that is, of Falsifying Cajetan, as you tell us in the Margin. I told him, said you, First, that Cardinal Cajetan did not positively say as he affirmed he did. So that by your own Confes∣sion you told him so in your former Book, and therefore this seems to be a very deliberate Busi∣ness, and you stand in it still. But, then you say, what if he had? Why truly then the Defender did not falsify Cajetan, as you it seems are resolved to say that he does. And thus, where you accuse the Defender of one Falsification, you are your self guilty of two Falsifications in the compass of five Lines; one of which is so much the more inexcusable, because it consists in accusing ano∣ther
falsly of the same Crime. For these Reasons, Sir, we desire to be excused, as to believing that all Antiquity goes this way and that way, because you say so.
But because I would not be thought unreasona∣ble, I shall be content if instead of proving Anti∣quity to be for ye, you will answer the Arguments of the Second Part to the contrary. Only I desire you not to repeat any thing you have said here, which you will find satisfied there. For instance, that the ancient Prayers made mention of Remis∣sion of Sins, as well as of Bodily Cures; for you will find that
Disc. p. 99, 100, 106. this has been considered to your Hand.
And that your Work may still be less; I think it were good advice if you would spare the De∣fender's pains too a little; that is to say, whereas you have solemnly ranged by Pages and Articles, his Calumnies, Falsifications, false Translations, Unsin∣cerities, uncharitable Accusations, wilful Mistakes of your Doctrine, affected Misapplications, &c. False Impositions, Authors misapplied, and plain Contradicti∣ons; you would do well to put out an Advertise∣ment, signifying and confessing, that there is not one Tittle of all this true, nor any Colour for any part of this spiteful Charge, excepting in the Translation, of the 32 Can. of Sess. vi. of C. Tr.
which you note p. 48 of your Reply: In which the Defender trusting to one to translate that Ca∣non for him, who did not sufficiently remark the pointing of it, was led into that Mistake which you there observe, and which your self in the same place in good measure acquit him of, by confes∣sing that he understood that same Canon aright but in the very next Page: And had you only added that he made no use of that Mistake in the management of his Argument from that Canon, as in Justice you should have done, you would then have exposed only your own Disposition to Cavil, but have done as little prejudice by this, as you have by all the rest to the Defenders Honesty or Understanding. And 'tis so very small a mat∣ter which here you tax him for, and he, I assure you, has such an untoward business against you in this very place, that I cannot afford to abate any thing of the foresaid Advice; to confess once for all. I know not but he may be perswaded to tarry a Month or thereabouts, to see whether you will be thus ingenuous, and discreet.
You may expect to have employment enough besides, in vindicating the Doctrine of your Arti∣cles, for I am told that, God willing, you will have another Defence in a little time; and we are apt to think that it will give you and Monsieur
de Meaux another Years work, to put Words toge∣ther.
I have but one Word more.
Reply, p. 188. p. 173. The Bishop begs of Almighty God in the anguish of his Soul, &c. you conjure the Defender by all that is Sacred, &c. by the Eternal God, and his Son Christ Jesus, &c. Reve∣rend Sir! Men that are not in earnest may use the most amazing Expressions to make the World be∣lieve they are: But be not deceived, God is not mock∣ed; as you will find. And in the mean time those that are honest and wise will not so much consider who they are that break forth into the most vehe∣ment Exclamations, as who they are that bring the clearest Proofs. Sir, I am

