



THE Design of this Address is neither to pro∣claim your Merits, nor to beg your Patro∣nage, (the, too, common Theme of Epistles) but to give you a naked Account of the Origin of this Birth; which was a Question propounded to me by one of you, under the Roof of the other, Whether I knew of any one that had contracted the History of the Bible into a narrow compass? I answer'd in the Negative. But the Question made some impression upon me, and gave me the first hint of this de∣sign, which thereupon I applied my self unto, and pursued till I brought it to this issue which you see. This occasion, in conjunction with my great Obli∣gations to the Person and Family of one of you, will more than justifie this present Dedication.
I am sensible that if this Task had been under∣taken by some Hands, it would have been dress'd up after a more genteel and fashionable manner, and appeared in a far more gay and splendid Equi∣page: But for my part, I am not wont to trade in Silks, Sattins, and such costly, Court-like Attire: I leave them to such as frequent King's Palaces. A plain Country Garb agrees better with my Mind and Purse: Such therefore I have provided for it, and bestow'd upon it.
For the Work it self, the Usefulness hereof is ap∣parent, both as an Abridgment, and as such an Abridgment. As an Abridgment, it's helpful, not only to the Memory, but also to the Judgment and
 Understanding: for, by laying passages closer to∣gether, and bringing 'em into a narrower Compass, one may take the fuller prospect of 'em, and more easily apprehend the Frame of the whole.
Then as its an Abridgment of the Holy Histo∣ry, so its useful in many respects. For, in general, All these things were written for our learning, (Rom. 15.4—) and admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come, 1 Cor. 10.11. To teach us, particularly, in reference to Kingdoms and Nations, that Piety is the best Policy: That Righteousness exalts a Nation, but sin is a re∣proach to (and the ruin of) any People, Prov. 14.34. and, That the Lord is with us while we keep close to him;— but if we forsake him he'll forsake us, 2 Chron. 15.2. And then, in re∣ference to particular persons, they serve to teach us how to govern our selves in all cases and con∣ditions, and in all capacities and relations. The Examples of Judgments on Transgressors are Warnings to us to avoid the like sins for which they smarted, 1 Cor. 10.6-11. The Examples of Blessings on the Obedient, are Encouragements to us to practise the like Duties, and Exercise the same Graces for which they were rewarded, Rom. 4.23, 24.
If what is here done may be of any use to you, (Gentlemen) or to any others, to promote your Acquaintance with, and delight in the Holy Scrip∣tures, and dispose you to a greater diligence in the study thereof, I shall rejoyce in this fruit of my Labours; and likewise in this opportunity of giv∣ing this slender Testemony to the world, that I am,

