


May it please Your Majesty,
IT is one of the false and
evil Doctrines which Mr.
Hobbes hath publish'd in
his Leviathan, (p. 114.)
That a banished Subject,
during the Banishment, is
not a Subject. And (pag.
165.) that a banish'd man is
a lawful Enemy of the Common-wealth that banish'd
him, as being no more a member of the same. I
thank God, from the time that I found my self
under the insupportable burden of Your Maje∣sties

displeasure, and under the in famous brand
of Banishment, I have not thought my self one
minute absolv'd in the least degree from the obli∣gation
of the strictest duty to your Person, and of
the highest gratitude that the most oblig'd Ser∣vant
can stand bound in, or from the affection
that a true and faithful Englishman still ow's and
must still pay to his Country. And as I have
every day since praied for the safety of your Per∣son,
and he prosperity of your Affairs, with
the same devotion and integrity as for the salva∣tion
of my own Soul; so I have exercis'd my
thoughts in nothing so much, as how to spend
my time in doing somwhat that may prove for
Your Majesties Service and Honor. And therefore
assoon as I had finished (as far as I am able, with∣out
the supply of those Memorials and Records
which are fit to be enquired into) a work at least
recommended, if not enjoin'd, to me by your
Blessed Father, and approv'd, and in some de∣gree
perus'd by Your Majesty, (which I hope
will be to the Honor of His Majesties memory,
and your own magnanimous Sufferings) I could
not think of any thing in my power to perform of

more importance to your Majesties service, then
to answer Mr. Hobbes's Leviathan, and confute the
doctrine therein contain'd, so pernicious to the
Soveraign Power of Kings, and destructive to the
affection and allegiance of Subjects; notwith∣standing
which, by the protection the Author hath
from the Act of Indemnity, and I know not what
other connivance, it is manifest enough, that many
odious Opinions, the seed whereof was first sow∣ed
in that Book, have bin since propagated, to the
extreme scandal of the Government in Church
and State. I have often heretofore, when I had
liberty for that presumtion, advertis'd Your
Majesty, of the wickedness of very many of the
Principles upon which that whole Book is sup∣ported,
and was not without some hope of pre∣vailing
with Your Majesty to give your Self the
leisure, and the trouble, to peruse and examine
some parts of it, in confidence that they would
no sooner be read, then detested by you; where∣as
the frequent reciting of loose and disjointed
Sentences, and bold Inferences, for the novelty
and pleasantness of the Expressions, the reputa∣tion
of the Gentleman for parts and Learning,

with his confidence in Conversation, and especial∣ly
the humor and inclination of the Time to all
kind of Paradoxes, have too much prevail'd with
many of great Wit and Faculties, without read∣ing
the context, or observation of the consequen∣ces,
to believe his Propositions to be more inno∣cent,
or less mischievous, then upon a more deli∣berate
perusal they will find them to be; and the
love of his person and company, have rendred
the iniquity of his Principles less discernible.
Mr. Hobbes consulted too few Authors, and made
use of too few Books; the benefit of which my
present condition has also depriv'd me of; altho
the want which I complain most of, is of Friends
to examine and controul, upon the reading any
impropriety or indecency in my Expressions, or
defect of vigor in my Ratiocination; towards
the weighing whereof I have had little contribu∣tion.
However, I presume to think, that the an∣tidote,
how weak spirited soever, is seasonable
to be administred, to expel or allay the poison that
is still working very furiously. And if I know any
thing of the constitution of the Government of
England, and of the nature and temper of that

faithful Nation, the publishing of his poor Dis∣course
may be of some use and service to your
Majesty; that all the World may know, how much
you abhor all those extravagant and absurd Privi∣leges,
which no Christian Prince ever enjoied or
affected. The consideration of this only, hath
dispos'd me to expose my self to the licence of
the Tongues and Pens of all those, who will never
be without inclinations rather to insult upon my
Fortune, and to reproch my Person, then to
pity my Weakness, or rectifie my Understand∣ing.
If the prefixing your Majesties Name be∣fore
it, as if you would countenance so dis∣graced
and degraded a Person, or give any Pro∣tection
to a Work of which he is the Author,
doth not find your Majesties approbation; I have
appointed that presumtion to be declin'd, being
stedfastly resolv'd, by Gods Blessing, never to
displease You whil'st I live, or after I am dead;
and retaining still a hope, with some confidence
(which sustains my weak decaied Spirits) that
your Majesty will at some time call to your re∣membrance,
my long and incorrupted Fidelity
to your Person, and your Service: and that tho

I am for the present depriv'd of that most va∣lued
and precious Relation, your Majesty will
not be offended, that I assume the title of be∣ing

Moulins,
May 10. 1673.
