



Beloved in our Lord Jesus Christ,
BEing desired by some Worthy Bre∣thren in London, to signifie unto you, That whereas there hath been a Mode of Singing set up and practiced (of late) by some of our Brethren, by such limi∣ted and prestinted Forms and Tunes invent∣ed by Men; wherein all the People joyn toge∣ther, both Saints and Sinners, young and old, holy and prophane, under the specious pre∣ence of a Church-Ordinance and Gospel-Duty, without any foundation from the Word of Christ for their so doing. Divers of us have endeavoured to stem that current of In∣novation, and repair that Breach made in the Church of Christ, lest it should deluge
 all those of our Profession by the Impetuosity of its Innundation; and we hope our Labours herein have been of use to many, for their Satisfaction, altho' others have turned the Deaf Ear upon us, and persisted in their way of Common Popular Singing.
This is therefore to acquaint you, that where∣as Mr. Richard Claridge, (one whom I highly esteem and honour for his Parts and Learning) was pleased above twelve Months since (of his own Accord) to write a Treatise in Answer to Mr. Richard Allen's Essay, Vindication and Appendix; he did communicate the same, either in part or in whole, to Mr. William Kiffin, Mr. Robert Steed, and Mr. Isaac Marlow, and my self; and we were of Opinion the printing of it would be of use; upon which  Specimen being printed, Notice was given to Divers Friends both in City and Country▪ some of which did willingly contribute toward its furtherance, and we hoped it might have bee compleated before now.
But after Eight Sheets had been printed off it was discerned that the Author had mad some Alteration in the Copy, which we coul not consent unto, because it appeared to u to be different from those common principles o Christianity we profess, by which we should hav been rendred incapable to have recommended  to your Perusal. And because he would n be prevailed upon to obliterate the same, an suffer it to be printed according to that Cop
 which he read to those Brethren above-mentioned; which would have amounted unto about twenty Sheets, you must now be contented with these Eight Sheets only. It cannot be imagined that I (above all Men) should have the least thought of Prejudice against the Author, be∣cause he hath (without any request of mine) been pleased to Vindicate me from those Re∣flections R. A. hath cast upon me: For which I do hereby return him thanks. And by what you may see in these few sheets, where any Oc∣casion hath occurred, you may be able to make a true Judgment of the rest. Had I there∣fore preferr'd my private Interest to the Ho∣nour of Truth, I should for that Reason have desired the publication of the whole. But through the Grace of God I am made willing to sacrifice all my own private Interest to the Honour of Christ, whensoever his Service shall call for it.
As to what you are here presented with, I have carefully perused it, and so far as I can discern, it is (in the general) Sound and Or∣thodox, and fit to be consider'd by all such who desire Information about this Controversie. For,
1. He hath sufficiently discovered his An∣tagonists pretence, that Singing of Psalms (as they practice it) is a Christian Duty, from the pretended Morality of it; and added five Arguments to prove, that according to R. A's. own reasoning, it's no Christian Duty.
2dly. He proves, that singing of Psalm (as aforesaid) is not the Duty of every Chri∣stian, from the Example of Christ, as R. A▪ pretends; because it is not certain that Christ and his Disciples did then sing vocally toge∣ther.
3dly. He proves, that the Greek Word , doth not in it's primary Signification denote Singing; but it's first and simple Sig∣nification is to Praise, and that without Sing∣ing: And that it is not restrained to God (a R. A. pretends) but is spoken of Men, and other things also.
The Primary Signification of this Wor , he proves from several Authorities.
1. From Heathen Writers, of very grea Antiquity.
2. From the Septuagint and Apocrypha
3. From the best Greek Lexicographers.
4. From many Learned Translators of, an Commentators upon Mat. 26.30. and Act 16.25. together with a most Learned an Elaborate Account of the Signification of th Greek Word, , and shews R. A. his Mi∣stakes about it.
By all which it will evidently appear to an Unbyass'd Person, that all their pretences from the Etimology, and principal Signification o those Words, Hymneo and Hymnos, [tha Ptaising God without Singing doth fully an¦swer all that they can pretend to from thos Words, according to the prime Signification
 known, approved, and constant use thereof, and hath been so understood by the Learned, and was so rendred in their Old Translations of the Bible, until another mode of praising God, viz. Singing in Rhime, came to be in use in the last Century: After which they were pleased, for the Credit of their own in∣vented Form, to add the Word Sing, in di∣vers places of Holy Scripture: By which an Advantage hath been taken to impose upon, and deceive the Ignorant and Unwary Reader.
Our Brethren have invented different ways to support their Tottering Cause. As,
First, By telling us it's a Christian Duty, because it's a Moral Duty, and so the Duty of all Men, being taught them by the Dictates of the Light of Nature: Altho' it is to be remembered, that at the same time they went to a Singing-Master to be taught it, which (in my Opinion) confuted all those pretences without any further Trouble. But I would de∣ire our Brethren to consider, whether such a osition may not induce some to turn Deists, when they are told, that they may attain such nowledge of their Duties as they speak of, in a reat measure without Revelation; in case they hould believe what they say to be true. For esides what our Author hath said upon it, he late Reverend Doctor Manton, in his Xth. Sermon upon Heb. 11. v. 3. saith thus, That Reason is not the Judge of Controver∣sies in Religion, and the Doubts that do arise
 about the Matters of God are not to be determined by the Dictates of Nature. If then we leave the Written Word, and fol∣low the Guidance of our own Reason, we shall but puzzle our selves with imperti∣nent Scruples, and leave our selves under a Dissatisfaction. This is the Inlet of all Atheism and Prophaneness, when Men set up Reason as the highest Tribunal.
Secondly, When this will not do, Then they say, we must Sing as they did under the Law, and that there is no other way prescribed how we should sing: But when we have shew∣ed them, that there was no such Singing pra∣ctised under the Law, as they now use: And that the Psalms of David, &c. were not ori∣ginally written in Rhime, nor sung in their manner: Then,
Thirdly, They tell us they have Apostoli∣cal Injunction for it, and the Example of Christ and his Apostles. And when they have been forced to confess they cannot prove their Mode of singing from thence: Then,
Fourthly, As their Ultimum Refugium, They tell us, that Christian Churches have Liberty to order such accidental Modes and Circumstances of Divine Worship as are not particularly prescribed in the Word, as they shall judge most for Edification. And these External Modes and Circumstances of Wor∣ship, they take to be in the power of the Ma∣jor Part of a Church, so far, as to warrant
 their own practice therein. Now if we should be no wiser than to follow such Direction, it might lead us to Rome, as well as to Geneva; where their practice of Singing was at first Erected.
But this hath been sufficiently answered by Mr. Isaac Marlow, in his Clear Confutation of R. A. and his five Commendators, even from their own Confessions, &c. to which I refer you.
I shall only add a few Passages out of Mr. Mather's late Book, called a Discussion, &c. where he saith, in page 132, 133. &c. No Difficulty or Severity of the Times can alter the Rule given by Christ unto his Church. And speaking of what some suppose may be done in point of Prudence, besides that Rule, He saith, Prudence hath its Scope only in such things in Church-worship, as are no part of the Worship, but only Circumstances thereof related to Worship, not as it is Worship, but as an Action perform'd by Men, all whose Actions must have Time and Place for them: But when Place and Time come under an Insti∣tution, there Prudence may not alter them; nor may we swerve from the Rule, for they (then) become Parts of Worship.
Now if our Brethrens practice as to their man∣ner of Singing, is not a part of Divine Institu∣ted Worship, but only an External, Accidental Mode and Circumstance thereof, as they them∣selves
 are pleased to tell us, then why do they impose it upon their Churches, as if it were the highest part of Divine VVorship; surely they have No New Commission from Christ to exercise a Legislative Power, by the Ma∣jor part of the Members of their Churches, who can never (by their Vote) make an Ex∣ternal and Accidental Mode of performing an Outward Action, a part of Divine VVorship, if God hath not appointed it; for none can alter the Nature of things but God alone. But I have no leisure at this time to enlarge upon this Subject, but shall beg of God to give you Understanding in this and all other parts of his Revealed Will; and Subscribe my self,

From my House in Barbican, De∣cember 22. 1697.
