



MY LORD,
MY first thoughts after I had read the Books of the Prejudices, were, not to write any Answer to it: For besides that I saw in that Book nothing else but the same Accusations from which our Fathers and we have already been frequently justified; and that moreover they were wrote there in so extreamly passionate and invenom∣ed a stile, for my own particular I did not think my self bound to follow every where those persons who seem to make it their design to load me with the number of their Volumes, affecting to take me for a Party in all the Works that they daily publish, and even in those that are most remote from the chief Subject of our Controversy. Yet when I perceived the loud Out-cries that these Gentlemen and their followers made about their Pre∣judices, to draw the applause of the World to themselves, as

if they had silenced us, and our Reformation remained over thrown under the weight of their Victory, I judged it necessa∣ry to enter upon this new labour, and the deference that I had for those who exhorted me to undertake it, has brought forth this Treatise that I now give to the publick. Those who shall take the pains to read it, will find that I have not meerly tied my self to the Book that I confute, but that to save my self the labour of doing it at twice, I have considered the matter in its first Principles, and examinëd it in its just extent, that I might be the better able to judge of it. I acknowledg the Subject Treated on required more Learning, readiness, and lea∣sure then I was master of, but it may be also they will find in the plain and natural way wherein I have handled it, something more easy, then if I had employed more Art and Meditation in it. It is this makes me hope, that when I shall not fully have answered the expectations of those who have engaged me in this work, yet they will not read this Defence without some satisfaction, However it be, My Lord, I take the boldness to present it to you, and to entreat the favour of you to receive it as a token of the acknowledgment that I have for so much goodness as you have testified towards me. I am perswaded that those of our Communion in this Kingdom will very heartily consent, that my weak pen should also express the sentiments that they all have of your person, and of the cares that you take to uphold their common interests. I will also affirm, that your Merit is so generally acknowledged, that when nothing shall be disputed, but the just praises that are due to your prudence, to the wisdom that appears through∣out your whole Conduct, to the inviolable Principles of Honour and Justice that are the perpetual Rules of your Actions, and in a word to the great and solid Vertues that you practise with such exactness, they can assure themselves that there will be no difference about that, between those of the one and the other Communion. But all those Qualities that they take notice of in You, how Rich and Resplendent soever they are, even in the eyes of those who are destitute of them, would be nothing else but

false dazling light, if they were not accompanied with real Piety, which only gives a value to all the Moral Virtues. You are not ignorant, My Lord, you, in whom we saw it but a few Months ago, how your Soul ready to take its flight, tremb∣led and remained confounded in the view of all that humane. Righteousness, and that you could find no rest in your Spirit, any where else, then in the bosom of Religion and Piety. This alone was that which gave you the Tranquillity of Soul, which taught all those who had the honour to come near your Bed, after what manner a good man who could rest assured of Gods Mercy, and the Grace of Jesus Christ, might look Death in the Face. It is this that has yet prolonged your days, or to speak better, that has restored Life to you by an extra∣ordinary blessing of heaven, little different from that which Hezechias heretofore received as the fruit of his humiliation and prayer.
Continue, MY LORD, to lay out that life which has been given you again, in the service of God, and in the employments to which your calling engages you, and of which you have so great an account to render. Those employments are certain∣ly difficult, and if I may take the boldness to say it, they are oppressing, through their quality, through their numbers, and through the accidents that either accompany or follow them. But he who has called you to them, will give you ability to dis∣charge them, and will shed abroad his blessing upon your cares, as far as shall be necessary for his own glory and the good of the people, in whose favour you labour, and he himself will one day give you a reward for all those toilsome Labours.
Although you do not need to be excited to do good, yet I take the confidence to hope, that you will be some way encouraged in the Duties of your place, by the reading of this Work, which will more and more discover to you the Justice of it. You will see therein the Conduct of our Fathers justified, in regard of their Reformation and Separation from the Church of Rome; and by consequence you will therein see not only the Right that we have, but the Obligation and indispensable

Necessity also wherein we are, to live apart and divided from that Church, and united among our selves, in a Religious and Christian Society, till it shall please God to make the Causes of that Division cease, and joyn again that which men, I would say what the Court of Rome and her Council of Trent, have put asunder. That Re-Ʋnion is a Happiness that wee will alwayes beg of God with the most ardent Prayers, and which we will receive as one of his highest Favours, if his hand should bestow it. But it is also a thing which it is im∣possible for us to promise our selves: while we shall not see the same desire of a good and holy Reformation (which was almost general in our West in the daies of our Fathers) to be again revived in the Church of Rome; which yet they knew how to stifle with incredible skill. An Authour of those Times, who himself contributed as much as any other to clude the good effects of that desire, has not failed to own it, and which is more, to own it to be just. I do not deny, saies he, Cassander Consult. art. de Eccles. that many at the beginning were not urged by a motion of Piety, earnestly to cry out against some manifest Abuses, and I confess, that we must attribute the chief cause of that Division that at present rends the Church, to those who being puff'd up with a vain pride, under a pretence of Ecclesiastical power, contemned and haugh∣tily and disdainfully rejected those who admonish'd them with reason and modesty. And imediately after that same Author reasoning about the means to re-establish a holy peace between the two parties; I do not believe, adds he, that we ought ever to hope for a firm peace in the Church, if those who have been the cause of that dis-union do not begin by themselves; that is to say, unlesse those who have the Ecclesiastical Government in their hands, relaxe a little of that great rigour, and contribute something to the peace of the Church, and unlesse in hearkning to the ardent prayers and exhortations of the greatest part of good men, they apply themselves to reform those ma∣nifest abuses, by the Rule of the holy Scriptures and of

the Antient Church, from which they have wandred. After this manner a man engaged in the Communion and Interests of the Church of Rome, spake, even in the Time of the Coun∣cill of Trent. He would indeed after that, have us also, whom he accuses to have gone too far in the other extream, yield something on our side, and that we should return, as he speaks, to our selves; but it ought not to be thought strange that he being such a one as he was, would lenify by that corrective the confession that he made before, and it is enough for us that he has owned the force of the evil, and taken notice of the true and only remedy. God who holds the hearts of all in his hand, kindle in them the love of the true Religion, and give us all the grace to look to the Blood that has ransomed the Church, and that first Spirit who con∣secrated it to one onely Jesus Christ her Lord and Husband. For it is he only who can re-unite us; without me sates he, ye can do nothing; and he that gathereth not with me, scattereth abroad. I pray that the same God who has given you the knowledge of his Gospell, would make you persevere in it to the end; that he would confirm his love and fear in the souls of my Lords your children, who already so well an∣swer the honour of their birth, and the cares you have taken for their Education; and lastly, that he would more and more shed abroad his blessings over your person, and over all your house. This is that which I desire from the bottom of my heart, and that you would do me the favour to believe that

