



Christian Reader,
LEt the remembrance of so sig∣nal
a mercy and deliverance
vouchsafed by God both to
Church and State should be buried in
Oblivion, I have (at the request of the
Book seller) presented thee here with a
true and faithful Narrative of that
grand work of darkness, forged in
Hell, and by Satan suggested to some
Popish Instruments, who envying the
peace and prosperity of our Church, and
progress of the Gospel, had designed at
one blow to overthrow both: and that
nothing might be wanting to complete
that horried wickedness, their purpose
was to have charged it upon the Puri∣tans,
thereby hoping to free themselves
and their Religion from the imputation
of so hainous a Crime. Now that the

memorial of a mercy of such publick
and general concernment should not be
forgotten, we have the word of the eter∣nal
God to be our guide therein. When
the Lord had by his Angel destroyed
the first-born of Egypt, and spared
Israel, he instituted the feast of the
Passover to continue the memorial
thereof through their Generations, Ex.
12. 11, 12, 14. and ver. 26, 27.
saith Moses to them, when your
Children shall say unto you, What
mean you by this service? ye shall
say, It is the Sacrifice of the Lords
Passover, who passed over the Hou∣ses
of the Children of Israel when
he smote the Egyptians, and deli∣vered
our Houses. And how careful
good Mordecai was to continue the re∣membrance
of that great deliverance
of the people of God from destruction
plotted and contrived by that wicked
Haman, appears Esth. 9. 20, &c.
where they did not only celebrate those
present dayes of their deliverance with
feasting, and gladness: but he, toge∣ther

with the rest of the Jewes, or
dained, and took upon them, and
their seed, and upon all such as join∣ed
themselves unto them, so as it
should not fail, that they would keep
those daies in their appointed time
every year, and that those daies
should be remembred, and kept
through their Generations, every
Family, every Province, and every
City, and that those daies of Purim
should not fail from amongst the
Jews, nor the memorial of them
perish from their seed, &c. And
truly the remembrance of this great
mercy hath the more need to be revi∣ved
at this time, when some noted per∣sons
amongst us begin to decry it, and
wholly to lay aside the observation of
that day, though enjoined by Act of
Parliament, and made conscience of
by most of the godly people of the Na∣tion.
I have also been induced the ra∣ther
to make this brief Collection of
the Story, because, though it be pub∣lished
by others, yet it is in larger Vo∣lumes,

which are not every ones mo∣ney;
whereas, for a small matter eve∣ry
family may get and keep this by
them for the benefit, and satisfaction
both of themselves and Children, that
so the Lord may not lose of his glory,
nor they (for want of information)
fail of their duty. I shall conclude with
that of the Psalmist, Psal. 107. 8.
O that men would praise the Lord
for his goodness: and for his won∣derful
works to the Children of men!
which is the hearty desire of

