



CHRISTIAN READER,
THe nature of man is more apt to be guided by
Examples then by Precepts; especially by the
the examples of men eminently learned, and of
great repute for Pietie and Godliness. Such men
are as Looking-glasses to the places where they
live, by which most people dress themselves,
and when they fall into sin, they fall like men in
a croud, many falling with them. The bodies of men are not so
subject to be infected by the illness of the ayr, as the souls of
men by the ill examples of godly learned Ministers. When Peter
at Antioch dissembled, many of the Jews dissembled likewise
with him, and Barnibas was brought into their dissimulation also.
It is very remarkable that this example of Peter is said to be a con∣straining
of the Gentiles to Judaize; Why constrainest thou the
Gentiles to do as the Jews? Gal. 2 14.
There is a compulsive power in the ill examples of godly
men to constrain others to do the evil that they do; and there∣fore
let godly Ministers (especially in these days) take heed least
by any wicked compliance they build men up in sin, and bring
destruction upon themselves, as the two sons of old Ely did, who
by their wicked examples made the people of Israel to transgress,
and thereby brought ruine upon their old Father and them∣selves.
1 Sam. 2. 24.
And so on the contrary, there is a heavenly power and efficacy,
in the good examples of men eminent in place and godliness, to
draw others to Pietie and Holiness. As long as Joshua lived,
and the Elders that had seen all the great works of the Lord that he
did for Israel, the children of Israel served the Lord. The religious

cariage of Theodosius the Emperour in his family, made, not only
his family, but his whole Court to be a nourcery of Religion. Pezel.
Mel Hist. in vita Theodo. 2.
But this is most especially seen in the godly Lives of godly and
learned Ministers. Herod the King reverenced John Baptist,
observed him, and when he heard him, did many things, and heard
him gladly; not so much for the love of his doctrine, as because he was
a just and holy man, and (as Jesus Christ saith of him) a burning
and shining light; burning in holy zeal for God, as well as
shining in Orthodox Doctrine. He is called by the Prophet,
The voyce of him that cryeth in the wilderness. And as Nazianzen
saith of him, he cryed louder by the holiness of his life, then the
sincerity of his doctrine; He was Tota vox, All voyce; his ap∣parel,
his diet, and his conversation, did Preach holiness, as well
as his doctrine. Mar. 6▪ 20. John 5. 35. Isay 40. 3.
And therefore is cannot but be a work very profitable to the
Church of Christ, for any man to write a History of the Lives of
the eminently learned, and godly Ministers of former times, as a
fair Copy for Posterity to write after, and a Patten for them to
imitate. This Reverend, religious, and learned Author hath un∣dertaken
this work in this ensuing Treatise, and effected it so
well, as that I thought it not sufficient to give a naked Impri∣matur
unto it, without this additional commendation both of
the Author and of his work. The Apostle having in the eleventh
Chapter to the Hebrews given us a littleBook of Martyrs, in the
beginning of the twelfth Chapter, he calls them A cloud of
witnesses. Such a cloud of witnesses is contained in this Book.
And as the childreu of Israel were directed in their journeys by
the Pillar of a Cloud, that went before them, as long as they
were in the Wilderness, so let us make this cloud of Witnesses
(so far as it followeth Christ) a Pillar of Cloud to guide us,
while we are in the Wilderness of this World, till we come to
enjoy that unexpressible happiness of which they are now made
partakers.
So prayeth 
