



Gentlemen, and my most Honored Brethren,
THE design of the Book which I here offer you, being chiefly to invalidate those pretended proofs of Perpe∣tuity, wherewith men would set up such new Opinions as alter the purity of the Christian Faith touching the Holy Eucha∣rist, I have therefore reason to believe that this present Treatise will not prove unacceptable to you; for altho the Religion we profess, needs not the hands of men to support it, no more than heretofore the Ark of the Israelites; yet have we cause to praise God, when we see that Reproach, of departing from the Ancient Faith, may be justly retorted upon them, who charge us with it. Ye will find here in this Discourse a faithful and plain represen∣tation of things, such as they are in truth, in opposition to every thing which the Wit of Man, and the fruitfulness of Human In∣vention have been able to bring forth to dazle mens Eyes and corrupt their Judgments: As soon as ever I had read the Wri∣tings of these Gentlemen whom I answer, the first thought that came into my mind was that of Solomon, That God made man Eccles. 7. 29. upright, but he had sought out many inventions. And indeed, what is plainer than the Supper of our Lord, as he himself has instituted it, and his Apostles have delivered it to us; and what can be more preposterous than to search for what we ought to believe touching this Sacrament, amongst the various Opinions of these later Ages and different Inclinations of men; and espe∣cially amongst them, who are at farthest distance from us: These remote ways do of themselves fill us with doubts and suspicions, and the bare proposal of them must needs disgust us, and make us draw consequences, little advantageous to the Doctrins which these Gentlemen would Authorize. Yet I have not refused to joyn issue with them on their own Principles, as far as the truth will permit me; and if they would read this Answer with a free unprejudiced mind, I am certain that they themselves will acknowledg the contrary to what they have endeavoured to persuade others.
I here offer you then Gentlemen, and my most Honored Bre∣thren, this last fruit of my Labor: first, for your own Edificati∣on, and secondly, for a publick testimony of my Respect and
 acknowledgments. All that I do, or have done, is justly due to you, not only upon the account of the Right which ye have over me and my Labors, but likewise because it is partly from your good Examples that I have taken, and do still every day draw the motives which strengthen me in the ways of God and in the love of his Truth. It is in your Holy Society that I learn the Art of serving the common Master of both Angels and Men, accord∣ing to the purity of that Worship, which he hath prescribed us, and at the same time, how to work out my own Salvation as well as that of others. And indeed what is it, that a man cannot learn in an Assembly, wherein all hearts and minds do unani∣mously concur in the practice of Piety and Charity, which con∣sists of persons who have no other aim, but so to order their Con∣versations, as to draw down thereby the Blessings of Heaven up∣on themselves and the people whom God hath committed to their Charge, and render themselves worthy of the protection of our great and Invincible Monarch. This Work would have been published sooner, had it not been for three great Losses we have suffered by the Death of Mr. Drelincourt, Mr. Daillé, and Morus; three names worthy to be had in everlasting Remembrance. These persons have left us so suddenly one after another, that we have scarcely had time to bewail each of 'em as much as we de∣sired: The loss of the first of these extremely afflicted us; the loss of the second overwhelmed us with Sorrow; and the Death of the last stupified us with Heaviness. God having taken to him∣self these three famous Divines, it was impossible but this work should be retarded. But being now at length able to Publish it, I therefore entreat you Gentlemen, to suffer me to Dedicate it to you, that it may appear in the World honored with your Names. May the Father of Lights, from whom descendeth every good and perfect Gift, enrich you more with his Graces, and preserve your Holy Assembly, and the Flock committed to your care: These are the ardent Prayers of your most Humble and Obe∣dient Servant and Brother in Christ Jesus,

