



Sir, Madam,
I Have longed for an opportu∣nity whereby I might testifie my gratitude unto you for your Noble favour in so freely con∣ferring the Rectory of Grendon upon my eldest Sonne: as also for those many encouragements which he hath since received from you: and this (I conceived) I could not better do then by presenting this Book unto you wherein you have the substance of many worthy mens labours upon several Heads in Divi∣nity contracted into a narrow roome. Solomon, the

wisest of men, tells us, that of making (which is true also of reading) many Books there is no end, and much study is a weariness of the flesh:Eccl. 12.12. yet to have the choice∣est flowers transplanted out of several gardens into a little parcel of ground, cannot but minister both pleasure and profit. Concerning this Subject, a Learned, famous, and Reverend Divine hath left us his thoughts in these words: Of all Divinity (saith he) that part is most usefull which determines Cases of Conscience,B. Hlls Epist. to his Cases of Conscience and of all Cases of Conscience the practical are most necessary; as action is of more concern∣ment then speculation. Such you shall finde here, whereby you may be guided both in private and publick; and whereby, as in an impartial Glass, you may view the face, and know the true state of your souls, and be directed to be the more exemplary in your lives▪ you know that Magnates sunt Magnetes, great ones, like Load-stones, draw many by their examples, and inferiours look upon them as their Looking-glasses, by which they usually dress them∣selves: Its very observable, that when Crispus the chief Ruler of the Synagogue beleeved, many of the Corinthians beleeved also;Act. 18.8. and I doubt not but your constant and diligent attending upon the pub∣lick Ministry (though at a great distance from you) doth attract and quicken many of your Te∣nants and neighbours to do the like. It makes you also precious in the eyes of God and his people,Summum apud Deum est nobi∣litas▪ clrum esse virtutibus▪ Hierom. the best Nobility is to excel in grace, and vertue; and

this cannot be better discovered then by love to Gods Ministers, and a careful Sanctification of the Lords day: and what Influence such examples have upon the vulgar is obvious to every eye. I have read that Queen Elizabeth once riding progresse into Suffolk, said, that now she saw the reason why that Countrey was so well governed; for she observed that all the Justices, and Gentlemen coming to meet her, had every one his Minister next to his person. And truly they that honour God, shall be honour∣ed by him, he will be a Sun and a shield unto them;Psal. 48.11. he will give them grace here, and glory hereafter; and no good thing will he with-hold from them which walk up∣rightly. Godliness is the high-way to happiness, the good old way that hath ever beene beaten by all those Saints that now finde rest unto their souls. What Aeneas Silvius said of learning, may much more be said of Religion, and righteousness: Vul∣gar men should esteeme it as silver, Noble men as gold, and Princes should prize it above their chiefest pearls. Semen sanctum statumenterrae, the holy seed is the substance of the earth;Isa. 6.13. the Saints are the people of Gods purchase, that comprehend all his gettings, and are much more dear to him then Naboths Vine∣yard was to him. He sets them before his face for e∣ver, Psal. 41.12. as loving to look upon them, yea, upon the very walls of the houses where they dwell, Isa. 49.16. they are his portion, Deut. 32.9. his inhe∣ritance, Esay 49.16. the dearly beloved of his

soule, Jerem. 12.7. and his glory, Esay 46.13. And thus they are though accompanied with ma∣ny weaknesses: For as David saw nothing in lame Mephibosheth, but what was lovely, be∣cause he saw in him the features of his friend Jonathan: So God beholding his offending Saints in the face of his Sonne, takes no no∣tice of any thing amisse in them. And truely the knowledge and remembrance of these things is that which doth wonderfully support the god∣ly under their greatest pressures, and draw forth their affections Heaven-ward: The Saints (saith a Reverend Divine) are lowly in their spee∣ches, but lofty in their actions; but especially in their affections, which are carried above all Earthly Objects, and not content till they are got home to Heaven.Col. 3.1, 2. These starres, though they are seene sometimes in a puddle, though they reflect there, yet they have their si∣tuation in Heaven. These Birdes of Paradise, though they may happilie sometimes touch up∣on the Earth, yet they are mostly upon the Wing, and these outward comforts, and Crea∣tures are to them, but scalae & alae, wings, and winde in their wings to carry them upwards. I write not these things (Right Worshipful) as suspecting your ignorance, or doubting your pra∣ctice of them; but only to stirre up your pure minds by putting you in remembrance, that wherein you

have begun, you may be encouraged to persevere till you come to the full fruition, and enjoyment of that Crowne of Glory, and eternal happiness which Christ hath purchased, and will certain∣ly conferre upon all those that love him, and long for his appearing. For the furtherance whereof, I hope the Reading of this Book may contribute something, which is the heartie pray∣er, and earnest desire of him, who will not cease,
Sir, Madam,
March 22. 1658/9.

