



SIRS,
WHen your Stewards made choice of me to this ser∣vice, I laboured to find out, and pitch upon such a subject, as might through Gods blessing, bring most glory to him, edifica∣tion to your souls, and advantage to our Native Country and whereby you might be minded of the Principall ends of your meeting: And as the Lord was pleased to direct me to this ensuing subject, so did he of his infinite mercy appear so far in his own Ordinance, that there generally appeared in you a readinesse to con∣cur in advancing those good works which were proposed to your Christian considerations: It was intended that after dinner a generall subscription should have been promoted amongst you: but by reason of the shortnesse of time, and multiplicity of other businesses wherewith your Stewards were taken up, it was not carried on amongst a fifth part then present: Yet was there more done by those few, then hath been done by any one County of England in their late meetings: and amongst the rest of you, Mr. John Howkins (whose name I cannot but mention with honour, though he is unknown by face to me) subscribed four score pounds, towards the placing of poor boies born in Rugbie, Apprentices in London.
It's pitty so good a foundation should want its superstructure, and there∣fore at the request of your Stewards (though I never thought any sermon of mine worthy the Presse) I have adventured to publish this, hoping that the same goood word of God that so warmed your hearts in hearing, may by the same blessing, revive, and quicken your affections in reading, so as to perfect what was then so well begun amongst you.
The names of the Stewards (who are to have the oversight in dispo∣sing of your monies) I thought fit to, set down at the end of this Epistle: Men, I hope without exceptions, whose Prudence, and Fidelity you need not to suspect in the ordering of it. Amongst them Col. Thomas Clark at the Kings head within Algate, is chosen Treasurer, to whom if you please to send in what it shall please God to move your hearts to contribute to so good a work, I doubt not but as many shall have the benefit, so your own soules will find the comfort of it hereafter.
Let not any one say that this Sermon might have been preached in Rome, or Spain where good works are in such request whilst they hope to merit Heaven by them. No, it will rather vindicate our Doctrine from their fowl, and false aspertions whilst they call us Solifidians, and charge us as if we preached onely Faith, without good works: whereas on the contrary we still call upon our hearers to shew their Faith by their fruits, and tell them that Faith without works is dead, and can minister no true comfort, and therefore exhort them to grow up to fruitfulnesse which will sweetly seal up their calling to glory, and virtue, as the budding of Aarons RodEph. 2. 10. did his calling to the Priesthood, yea, we tell them, that if they be new creatures, they are created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that they should walk in them; and that if Christ be their Redeemer, he hath redeemed them from all iniquity, and purifieth them to himselfe a peculiar people, Zealous of GoodTit. 2. 14. works: But I fear to exceed my limits, and therefore my prayer for you all is, that the God of hope wil fil you with all joy, and peace in believing:Rom. 15. 13, and make all Grace abound towards you, that ye alwaies having all sufficiencie in all things, may abound to every good work.
Amen.
From my study in Thridneedle street. Dec. 19. 1654.



Col. Tho. Clark Treasurer
Mr. Nicholas Enos.
Mr. William Hickocks.
Mr. Tho. Barnhurst.
Mr. Tho. Ashby.
Mr. Iohn Norris.
Mr. Edw. Iohnson:
M. Tho. Underhil.



Col. Iames Drax.
Mr. Tho. Hopkins.
Mr. Laurence Warkman.
L. Col. Tho. Randall.
Mr. Rich. Chandler:
Maior Raph Tasker.
Mr. Rich. Smith.
Mr. William Bridges.


