



SIR,
THough we live in an age wherein Religion is more talkt of, than practi∣sed; and profaneness more in fashion than Piety: Yet (bles∣sed be God) there are still

some among us (and those not a few) who dare not make their lust their law. What a deluge of errours, in opinion as well as practice, hath of late years, overflowed this Nation, every corner there∣of hath more cause to bewail, than skill to cure. Amongst the which, the Solifidian or Antinomian makes not the least bustle, nor by their spe∣cious pretences do the least mischief, who, whilst they seem to cry up the noble Grace of Faith, beat down the power of Godliness. As if pleading

for duty, (though but in its proper place) were to derogate from the freeness of Gods Grace, or allsufficiency of Christs merits. But, that these not only may, but must go together (though some there be that seem to deny the latter) the Authour of this ensuing discourse hath learn∣edly avouched. The work; as (at first) it was, at my re∣quest by the Authour un∣dertaken, (though then without the least intention, in either of us, of publishing it) so being at his death

wholly left to my dispose; I held it a duty incumbent up∣on me, to do what I could to make the same more publick, since it was so hopefully brought to the birth, especially being pressed thereunto by di∣vers knowing Christians (Di∣vines and others, who had got a sight of it.) Many friends the Authour I know had, (Persons of Honour, and o∣thers) for whom (whilst li∣ving) he had a great respect, and who had the like for him. Some of whom may (perhaps) expect to have

been here remembred. But since Providence hath so or∣dered it, as to leave the pub∣lishing thereof to my dispose, I must crave their leave, to let the World know that a∣mongst my many Friends, there is none for whom I have so great and deserved a respect as for your self, and therefore since it must abroad, I am bold to send it forth un∣der your favour. And that upon a double account: first, that being brought up at your feet (as my Gamaliel) and having the happiness in

the morning of my age, to have the greatest part of my Education under your person∣al direction: so I am willing (before my Sun go down, it being now far in the after∣noon with me) to leave some acknowledgment behind me of what respect I owe, not only to your whole family, but principally to your own Per∣son. And next, for that you are a Person (without flat∣tery be it spoken) so eminent∣ly taken notice of in your Country, as able to judge of what is herein written, and

one that hath always been of the same Judgment and Practice with the Authour, of which whoever is not, I pity his condition, and shall pray for his Conversion, and shall ever remain,


