




Gentlemen,
THat we interrupt your more serious Studies with the offer of this Peice, the injury that hath been and is done to the deceased Au∣thor's Ashes not only pleddeth our Excuse, but engageth you (whose once he was, and within whose Walls this Standard of

Wit was first set up) in the same Quarrel with us.
Whilst Randolph and Cowley lie em∣balmed in their own native Wax, how is the Name and Memory of Cleveland equally prophaned by those that usurp, and those that blaspheme it? By those that are am∣bitious to lay their Cuckows Eggs in his Nest, and those that think to raise up Phe∣nixes of Wit by firing his spicy Bed about him?
We know you have not without passionate Resentments beheld the Prostitution of his Name in some late Editions vended under it, wherein his Orations are murthered over and over in barbarous Latine, and a more barbarous Translation: and wherein is scarce one or other Poem of his own to com∣mute for all the rest. At least every Curiasier of his hath a fulsom Dragooner behind him, and Venus is again unequally yoaked with a sooty Anvile-beater. Cleve∣land thus revived, dieth another Death.

You cannot but have beheld with like zea∣lous Indignation, how enviously our late Mushrom-wits look up at him, because he o∣verdroppeth them, and snarl at his Bright∣ness as Dogs at the Moon.
Some of these grand Sophys will not allow him the Reputation of Wit at all: yet how many such Authors must be creamed and spirited to make up his Fuscara? and how many of their slight Productions may be gig∣ged out of one of his pregnant Words? There perhaps you may find some Leaf-gold, here massie Wedges; there some scattered Ray, here a Galaxy; there some loose Fancy frisking in the Air, here Wits Zo∣diack.
The Quarrel in all this is upbraiding Merit, and Eminence his Crime. His touring Fancy soareth so high a pitch, that they fly like Shades below him. The Tor∣rent thereof (which riseth far above their high Water-Mark) drowneth their Levels. Usurping upon the State Poetick of the

time he hath ht  such It Mea∣sures of VVit and Language, and that despai∣ring to initate, they must statly to under∣stand. That above is VVit with them to which they are conmmensurate, and what ex∣ceedeth their Sling is monstrous.
That they  his VVit and Fancy as the (to win the plamp Oyster when he could not crack it. And now instead of that strs masculine Stile which breath∣eth in this Athor, we have only an ener∣ effeminate oth offered, as if they had taken the sivating Pil before they set Pai to Paper. You must hold your Breath in the perusal, lest the Iest vanish by blowing on.
Another Blemish in this Monster of Perfection is the Exuberance of his Fancy. His Manna lieth so thick upon the Ground they loath it. VVhen he should only fan, he with Hricanos of VVit stormeth the Sense, and doth not so much delight his Rea∣der, as ppress and overwhelm him.

To cure this Excess, their frugal VVit hath reduced the VVorld to a Lessian Diet. If perhaps they entertain their Reader with one good Thought (as these new Dictators affect to speak) he may sit down and say Grace over it: the rest is VVords, and no∣thing else.
VVe will leave them therefore to the most proper Vengeance, to humour themselves with the perusal of their own Poems: And leave the Barber to rub their thick Skulls with Bran until they are fit for Musk. On∣ly we will leave this friendly Advice with them; that they have an Eye upon John Tredeskant's Executor, lest among his other Minims of Art and Nature he expose their slight Conceits: And another upon the Roy∣al Society, lest they make their Poems the Counter-ballance when they intend to weigh Air.
From these unequal Censures we appeal to such competent Iudges as your selves, in whose just value of him, Cleveland shall live the

VVonder of his own, and the pattern of suc∣ceeding Ages. And although we might (up∣on several Accompts) bespeak your Affe∣ctions, yet (abstracting from these) we submit him to your severer Iudgments, and doubt not but he will find that Patro∣nage from you which is desired and expected by

