



Gentlemen,
THat we interrupt your more serious Studies with the offer of this Piece, the injury that hath been and is done to the deceased Author's ashes not on∣ly pleadeth our excuse, but engageth you (whose once he was, and within whose walls this standard of wit was

first set up) in the same quarrel with us.
Whilst Randolph and Cowley lie embalmed in their own native wax, how is the name and memory of Clieveland equally prophaned by those that usurp, and those that blaspheme it? By those that are ambitious to lay their Cuckows eggs in his nest, and those that think to raise up Phenixes of wit by firing his spicy bed about him?
We know you have not without pas∣sionate resentments beheld the prosti∣tution of his name in some late Editi∣ons vended under it, wherein his Ora∣tions are murthered over and over in barbarous Latine, and a more barba∣rous Translation: and wherein is scarce one or other Poem of his own to com∣mute for all the rest. At least every Cu∣riasier of his hath a fulsom Dragooner behind him, and Venus is again une∣equally yoaked with a sooty Anvile∣beater.

Clieveland thus revived dieth another death.
You cannot but have beheld with like zealous indignation how enviously our late Mushrom-wits look up at him because he overdroppeth them, and snarl at his brightness as Dogs at the Moon.
Some of these grand Sophys will not allow him the reputation of wit at all: yet how many such Au∣thors must be creamed and spirited to make up his Fuscara? And how many of their slight productions may be gig∣ged out of one of his pregnant Words? There perhaps you may find some leaf∣gold, here massie wedges; there some scattered rayes, here a Galaxy; there some loose fancy frisking in the Ayr, here Wit's Zodiack.
The quarrel in all this is upbraid∣ing merit, and eminence his crime. His touring Fancy soareth so high a pitch

that they fly like shades below him. The Torrent thereof (which riseth far above their high water mark) drown∣eth their Levels. Vsurping upon the State Poetick of the time he hath brought in such insolent measures of Wit and Language that despairing to imitate, they must study to understand. That alone is Wit with them to which they are commensurate, and what ex∣ceedeth their scantling is monstrous.
Thus they deifie his Wit and Fancy as the Clown the plump Oyster when he could not crack it. And now instead of that strenuous masculine stile which breatheth in this Author, we have on∣ly an enervous effeminate froth offer∣ed, as if they had taken the saliva∣ting Pill before they set pen to paper. You must hold your breath in the per∣usal lest the Iest vanish by blowing on.
Another blemish in this monster of perfection is the exuberance of his

Fancy. His Manna lieth so thick up∣on the ground they loath it. When he should only fan, he with Hurricanos of wit stonnieth the sense and doth not so much delight his Reader, as oppress and overwhelm him.
To cure this excess, their frugal wit hath reduced the World to a Lessian Diet. If perhaps they entertain their Reader with one good Thought (as these new Dictators affect to speak) he may sit down and say Grace over it: the rest is words and nothing else.
We will leave them therefore to the most proper vengeance, to humour themselves with the perusal of their own Poems: and leave the Barber to rub their thick skulls with bran until they are fit for Musk. Only we will leave this friendly advice with them; that they have one eye upon John Tre∣deskant's Executor, lest among his o∣ther Minims of Art and Nature he ex∣pose

their slight Conceits: and ano∣ther upon the Royal Society, lest they make their Poems the counter-ballance when they intend to weigh Air.
From these unequal censures we ap∣peal to such competent Iudges as your selves, in whose just value of him Clieveland shall live the wonder of his own, and the pattern of succeeding Ages. And although we might (upon several accompts) bespeak your affe∣ctions, yet (abstracting from these) we submit him to your severer Iudg∣ments, and doubt not but he will find that Patronage from you which is de∣sired and expected by

