



My Lords,
THE following Discourse presents you, with the Original Copy, of a compleat and well Accomplished Magistracy, dra∣wen first by Moses, somwhat more imperfect∣ly, and afterwards corrected by Jethro, unto that Exactness, wherein it now lies before us, in those most Antient and Authentick Records, The Holy Scriptures of God: A Subject which had it been set out, according to merit of it, would have fallen before you, and entitled it self to you deservedly, who have both had the Honor to sit at the Stern, in the Govern∣ment of this great City, and that have both 

It is not surely, without a special hand both of Power and Providence, that your feet (my Lords) are still standing upon those slippery places, where so many have caught fals: How∣ever, That's excellent Counsel which the A∣postle gives (and I mention it, not by way of Charge, or Accusation, but meerly by way of humble Admonition)
Ro. 11.20. Be not high-minded, but fear; for, Blessed is the man that fea∣reth alway: But he that hardeneth his heart, shall fall into mischief, Prov. 28.14. The Fear of God lies in the middle of Jethroes qualifications, as the Diamond in the Ring, or the Heart in a mans Body, or as a dram of Musk, to perfume the whole Box of Oint∣ment. And indeed, who among all the People, have more cause to fear God then Magistrates? since if they fear not him, they have Nothing else to fear, or so much as to restrain them from any thing that is evil: The Psalmist having let fall that high expression, concerning Rulers, (I said ye are Gods) he presently adds by way of corrective, for fear of the worst,
Ps. 82.6, 7. Vita in sum∣mo, mors in imo. Lactant. But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the Princes: And if there were no other mo∣tive
but this (my Lords) The consideration of your own Mortality, that should strongly induce and perswade you to fear the Lord your God. The Fear of God being the only Antidote against the Fear of death: He needs fear no danger, no difficulty, no enemy, no death, that does but truly fear God.
But besides this, Consider I beseech you,
Opus Dei, in die suo. what God is now about to do: and for that, consult but your own Experiences: Seems he not to be in a way of
Isa. 23.9. staining the Pride of all outward glory? Hath he not lately an∣swered us by
64.3. terrible things in Righte∣ousness, and such as we looked not for?
Job 12.21. Powring contempt upon Princes, and upon great ones,
Psal. 2.5. Speaking to them in his wrath, and vexing them in his sore dis∣pleasure; And the
Isa. 2.17. loftiness of man shal be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men made low, That the Lord alone may be exalted in this day; And therefore, now saies the Psalmist, You that are
Ps. 2.10, 11 12. Rulers, and Judges of the Earth, Be wise, Be in∣structed, Serve the Lord with Fear, Re∣joyce with Trembling, Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, &c.

Doubtless Christ is now upon his March, to∣wards the taking in of all
Rev. 11.15 Nations, or at least, some of all Nations, and All that he meets with in his way, They must (who e∣ver they be) either bow before him, or else be Broken, and
Psal. 2.9. dashed in pieces by him, like a Potters vessel: And at
Esth. 4.14 such a time as this, That God would give out abundance of Wisdom and Courage, Abundance of the Fear of his Name, Abundance of Love to Truth and Peace, Abundance of Hatred and Indignation against Covetousness, (
1 Tim. 6.10 the root of all our evil) to all in Authori∣ty) That the
Jam. 2.1. Lord of Glory would in a spe∣cial manner thus cloth the Governors of this great City, with his own Spirit, unto a full compliance with Christ, in all the great things that he is now about to bring forth and Accomplish; This is the Prayer, my Lords, of

