



THe Service that I was lately called to, by your Honorable Appointment, was a Spi∣ritual Service, and the Theam or Argu∣ment that my Meditations were ingaged and carried out upon, was of a Spiritual nature, far above the reach of those that live meerly by Sense and Carnal Reason,
 Hom animalis, cui anima prosale. non alia quam naturali animi luce pritus, Bez Non Reg∣nitue per spiri tum sanctum. Pisc. and that savor not the things of God: The natural man, says the Apostle, receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14.
My desire was, to suggest something from the Word of Truth, in so great a Presence, that might advance the Work of Reformation, which is so
much spoken and talked of amongst us, and where∣unto we are, above all other People in the World, so many ways ingaged.
But surely our misery even in this respect (aswel as in some other) is many times great upon us,
Viv . That whilest we onely pretend to a right end, we wofully miscarry about the means, that should bring us to that end: My endeavor therefore was, To rectifie this great Error, and to lay something at the bottom, which might sustain the Building of a Scripture-Reformation, viZ. Jesus Christ by his Word and Spirit: This is doubtless so re a Foundation, that a better cannot, and an∣other ought not to be laid or thought upon; Other foundation can no man lay, then that is laid, which i Jesus Christ, says the Apostle: The Prophet calls him,
. nn. A precious corner-stone, A sure foundation, Isa. 28.16. And whilest men go about to erect Buildings of Reformation, or Buildings of Salva∣tion, or of any thing that tends thereto, upon other Foundations, they do but as the Disciples, when they fished all night, and caught nothing, they do but busie,
 and weary themselves to no purpose, and in conclusion utterly lose their labour; yea, they many times both sow the wind,
. and reap the whirlwind, as the Prophet speaks.
Now to establish us upon this sure Foundation, in point of Reformation, was the scope and drift of the ensuing Sermon, That we might not meerly hearken unto, or carnally rest upon that, which men hold forth unto us, about that great Work, but consult the minde of Christ therein, from his Word
faithfully interpreted and opened unto us by that Spirit, which at the first gave us the Word,
, 2 Tim. 3.16. Scripture cúm sint à Spiritu Dei, non possunt intelligi sine Spiritu Dei. Zanch. de sacr. Script. and that must still give us the true sense and meaning of it.
Not that I would altogether exclude men neither, from having any hand in this business, any farther then God himself excludes them: I knew that in all Times and Ages, God hath been pleased to select and chuse out men (Magistrates and others) and to qualifie them accordingly, for the helping on of this great Work; not that he stands in any absolute need of Men, or Means, or Instruments, onely to testifie his love and honorable respects unto some, he hath been always pleased to take them in, and to put that glorious Title upon them,
 2 Cor. 6.1. of being co-workers with him in this weighty business, though they can do no more then what in his strength, and in the power of his might,
Ephes. 6.10. they are continually inabled to perform.
And among other Engines or Instruments of great worth, The Preaching of the Gospel (by men right∣ly qualified for, and duly called unto, that great Work) must and will certainly have a very great stroke in this business, which, accompanied with the Spirit, is The Rod of Christs strength,
Psal. 110.2. or The Scepter of his Kingdom; that whereby he teaches, and governs his People, Casting down imagina∣tions, and pulling down strong holds,
2 Cor. 104, 5. and capti∣vating every thought to the Obedience of himself, by these weapons that are not carnal. And therefore certainly the Civil Magistrate cannot honor Christ more, or do Him better service, who is King of kings,
1 Tim. 6.15. and Lord of lords, then by supporting such a Mi∣nistery,
which is Experimentally found, and known to be vehiculum Spiritus, the Chariot, as it were, of that Spirit, which hath always made a world of Be∣lievers to come flocking to Christ, and flying apace unto him,
. like so many Doves to their windows.
Now as to this, the Honorable Houses of Par∣liament have lately Declared themselves very fully, to the Satisfaction, I am perswaded, of all unbyassed and well-affected People throughout the Kingdom; and that in these words, among the rest to that purpose, Mens consciences (say they) must be mol∣lified and prepared by the powerful Prea∣ching of the Word,
eaation of the Lords and Commons as∣sembled in Parliament, concerning the apers of the Scor Com∣mistioners,  before they will be capable Subjects of Ecclesiastical Disci∣pline; and till then, there is no other means to restrain them from vice and im∣piety, but by the Power of the Magistrate armed with wholesom Laws to that pur∣pose, and by the powerful Preaching of the Word, which is our hearty desire and endeavor to advance throughout the Kingdom.
Which Noble Resolution of theirs, seconded and pursued by the Power and Authority of this great City, what a world of good might it do in a short time? How mightily, in all likelihood, would the Sun of Righteousness cast forth his beams even all the Kingdom over, if LONDON were but quietly and thankfully possessed of this most savory mercy? And truly I oyce very much, That in taking up∣on
me the boldness to be herein your humble and faithful Movitor,
Qui monei ut∣facias, quod jam facis, ipse mo∣nendo laudat, & hortatu fortius ire juvat. that I do but onely intreat the pur∣suance of that which ye are already doing: For where hath the powerful Preaching of the Gospel always hitherto had more incouragement, then from this Famous City?
I will not here be too busie, or too bold, in pre∣scribing or giving Information to you about that Ministery which ye ought to favor, support and coun∣tenance by your Civil Power; As that
D. Stoughton B. Light. pag. 23. rare man said in a Sermon of his to Ministers, I am not of mettal good enough for that, The snuffers of the Temple should be of pure Gold.
Onely thus much give me leave to say in the gene∣ral, That certainly such as deal with the Under∣standings of men, had need to be men of Under∣standing; They that take upon them to teach and inform others, had need to be well taught and in∣formed themselves; They that make it their work, and their imployment to season others, had need to be well seasoned themselves: otherwise, If the salt have lost his savor,
Matth. 5.13. compared with Luke 14.34. wherewith shall it be sea∣soned? it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be trodden under foot of men.
But I must remember to whom I speak,
Verbum sapicu∣tibus. 1 Cor. 10.15. Ioh. 10.3, 4, 5. even to wise men, that are able to judge of what I say, and to discern the voyce of Christ, from the voyce of a Stranger: And blessed be God for it, that of late you have known no man, laboring amongst us in the Word and Doctrine, By this Name, or By that Name, but on both sides, such as by long expe∣rience you have found Able, and Orthodox, and Pious, and Peaceable, they have been equally im∣ployed
and incouraged by you; which hath some∣what revived our languishing hopes, that there may yet be a sodering and a combining amongst those that are really well affected (and not in appearance onely) through your exemplary Care and Wisdom herein; And that in due time Breaches shall be so far heal∣ed,
. 2.4. that Swords may be beat into Plow-shares, and Spears into Pruning-hooks; and that we shall have no occasion to learn War any more, if God hath not a purpose (for the Iniquities thereof) utterly to ruine the Nation;
 militem  terribilis roucit ad bel∣m, . oves ad pa ulccdo  i∣ Bellanai . remium,  hrvsol. in , Serm. That as the terrible Trumpet of War hath lately called forth the Soldier into the Field, so that now at the length (after a few other Storms blown over) the sweet Jubile-Trumpet of the Gospel shall gather the Sheep of Christ toge∣ther, and make them lye down in green pastures, and lead them forth beside the still waters.
That God would herein bless your Endeavors, (Right Honorable and Right Worshipful) and bring the Blessing of Peacemakers upon you, and make you famous all the Kingdom over, and singu∣larly instrumental in this great Work, is the hearty Desire, and earnest Prayer of

