



THe Common Law of England (most eminent Prince) makes great difference between the Inheritance of the Crown of England and the E∣states of Subjects: for the next Heir, though of half Bloud, shall inherit the Crown. Thus did Queen Mary inherit the Crown from Edward, though but of half Bloud to him: So did Queen Eliza∣beth from Queen Mary, yet was but of half Bloud to her. But no Subject of half Bloud shall inherit any Estate; but for want of an Heir of the whole Bloud, it shall Escheat to the King, or the Lord upon whom the Estate was held.
And as the Common Law makes this difference in Bloud, so does it in the Inheritance of the Crown, and men born out of the Allegeance of the King. For no person born out of the Allegeance of the King, shall Inherit any Estate from any English Subject: but the Heir of the Crown shall Inherit

wheresoever he be born. Thus did King James (your Highness Grandfather, and the happy Ʋniter of the British Monarchy) Inherit the Crown of Eng∣land, yet was not born in the Allegeance of it.
The King of England, though born a Forreigner, may purchase and hold an Estate in England; but no other Forreigner; though born of Subjects to the Crown of England, shall take an Estate by Purchase, but the King shall have it. The Reason of these differences I do not understand: For as the Law secures the Inheritance of the Crown, so doth it make a bar between this Nation and all others who desire to become Subject to it. But if there were anciently any reason for this Law, it is now ceased; since the peopling the American Plantations, the repeopling Ireland, the Wars, and late Great Plague, have lost and consumed so many people out of Eng∣land.
As the Common Law debars the Nation of any future supply for all these Losses, so some Acts of Parliament have put the Nation into a Hostile con∣dition with the World. There was a Law made in the 5 of Rich. 2. c. 3. which forbid the English to carry forth, or bring in Merchandize, but in Ships of the King's Allegeance, and the Marriners, or more part, Subjects: but this Law was so intolerable, that the next year, viz. 6 Rich. 2. c. 8. the English had liberty to Trade in Forrein Vessels, where others could not be had. But this Law thus qualified by the Authority of the 1 Eliz. cap. 13. caused great displeasure between Forrein Princes and the Kings of this Realm, and the Merchants were sore grieved and damaged thereby. Therefore for the encrease

and Continuation of Amity, both the Laws made by Rich. 2. were Repealed, and the English had liberty given them to carry out and bring in Merchandize in any Vessels, paying Strangers Duties; but if there were War, or any restraint of English Ships, then to pay but ordinary Duties. But the English had liberty given them at all times to import Masts, Raff, Pitch and Tar, in any Vessels, paying ordinary Duties; the former being for the preservation of the Timber of England, the latter for the benefit of the Navy.
But the Rump-Parliament designing a War against the Dutch, without any consideration of this Law, or of the Statute of 14 Rich. 2. c. 6. whereby the Merchants of England in any Realm might freight forrein Ships to that Realm, if the Ships of that Realm would not take reasonable Gains; or of the 35 Eliz. 11. for the preservation of the Timber of England; or of the 17 Car. 1. for Importation of Gunpowder, which themselves had made; (all which yet stand in force, and are unrepealed.) made a Thing, Intituled, An Act for encouragement and en∣crease of Shipping and Navigation, commonly called The Act of Navigation, whereby the English are forbid to import any forrein Goods unless in English-built Ships, whether they can get them or not, and Sailed by ¾ English, upon penalty of confis∣cation of Goods, Guns, Tackle, Apparel, and Am∣munition. A War they designed, and a War they had with the Dutch, which lasted longer than their Government; and so they left the Nation engaged in a War abroad, and the Laws at War at home.
But though the Nation be freed from the Tyranny

of the Rump, yet it still labours under the miserable effects of this Law; for with some few alterations it twice received the Royal Stamp, viz. 12 Car. 2. 18. and 13 Car. 2. 14. As the terrour of this Law has put this Nation into a Hostile condition with the World, so hath it suspended all those good Laws made by Queen Elizabeth and King Charles the first, for preservation of the Timber of England, and the maintenance and support of the Navy Roy∣al, whereby the Nation may be best secured from the danger of a forrein War. Your Highness at your leisure may read how many other ways the Trade and Navigation of England have suffered under this Law, as well in the former Treatises, as these which now implore your Highness Protection.
In this condition then was the Nation involved in a War with the Dutch, under the Glory and Conduct of your Highness (who though descended from the Royal Extraction of the first Monarch of Great Bri∣tain, yet is your Highness a Forreigner born, and so not regarded by these Laws, and therefore had lit∣tle reason to expose your self to such imminent dan∣ger in defence of them, if your innate affection for the Honour and Happiness of the English Nation did not otherways transcend all obstacles against it.) The Nation, as well as his Majesty, by a universal suf∣frage, was satisfied with the necessity of your Conduct for the preservation of it. I wish it were as well understood, that these Laws, and some other Grants and Ʋsages, have made the Dutch so powerful to oppose it, and the Nation in no better condition to prescribe Laws to them.
But Sir, the vertue of your Noble minde, is not

circumscribed within the Pale of Military Disci∣pline, but extends to an Integrity and Judgement in Counsel, equal to your Valour and Conduct in War. And the Nation stands not in less need of your Counsel at home, than it did of your Conduct abroad: for as the Case stands, though God should have Crowned your Conduct with such desired success, as to have obtained an entire Victory against the Dutch; yet could not this Nation, (the Trade and Navigation of it being restrained to Companies, and English-built Ships and Marriners) but o∣thers, reap the benefit from it. Your Highness is doubly qualified; so as the Nation may be happy in your Counsel, as your Highness is a Privy-Councellor to the King, and a Member of the House of Peers. And if the Nation by your Counsel shall partake of those benefits which the Enemies of it enjoy, this will be so much more an Eternal Monument of your never-dying Fame, by how much the difficulty of overcoming these Laws, and the prejudice of the times is more.
To the vertues of your Noble Minde, is added your being born free from Subjection to these Laws; and so with more indifference your Highness may better judge between them and the Interest of the Nation, than another born in Subjection, and who by a long habit hath wonted to them.
Ʋnder all these Attributes of your Highness Ex∣cellencies, do these Humble Treatises implore your Protection, of all which they stand in need: For though one end designed by them is to procure Peace abroad, yet will they have a War at home with three sorts of people: the Ignorant, Prejudiced, and Par∣tial.

I do not (God knows) sully your High Name with Flattery, or private designe of mine own: nor could a less excitation than the Honour and Happiness of the Nation have invited me to make this Humble Address to your Highness. With a sincere Heart then (so well as I am able) from cau∣ses before known, from which all the Consequences are inferred, I submit these Treatises to your Cen∣sure. If I fail in my end, yet I do not understand how otherways I could have so well attain'd it; and therefore hope it will in some measure plead a Pardon for this Presumption in
(Most Eminent Prince) 
