



SIR,
IF I could describe Trade in all its excellencies, so well as Ben. Johnson does the mind, and were to present it to him who I thought did know best how to value it, I would prefer Sir Charles Harbord: For in him besides a well weighed understanding, it will meet with an open and free access (which are the principles from whence Trade is best generated, pre∣served, and increased) conjoyned with so even a tem∣per, that he is never moved to judge, or act, but from causes before understood by him.
This, Sir, is one reason why this Treatise implores your Patronage; and I wish that the same method of reasoning were observed in Geometry, Numbers, Divinity, Physick, and Natural Philosophy, as in this Discourse, viz. first to establish the principles, and by a certain rule to reason under them. The princi∣ples from which all Learning and Reasoning are gene∣rated Anal. post. l 8. c. 32. lib. 12. are three (though Aristotle is pleased to restrain them to two) viz. Definitions, or sensible things or actions before known, which cannot be defined; Pe∣titions, and Axioms or Common Notions. Here you may be pleased to take notice how by not right under∣standing the nature of these Principles, and confoun∣ding them, all Learning and Reasoning in these studies is rendred perplexed, difficult, and uncertain, and without any Order or Method; which that I may



avoid, I think fit here to declare the nature of them, and how they differ from one another.
A Definition is the explaining the name of some in∣telligible thing or act, which may be understood, but cannot be the object of sence, nor can be taken for a Proposition. Sensible things and actions may be alike known to sensitive Creatures, who have like sences: but definitions are only understood by intelligent Creatures, never to sensitive. For example, a Man, a Tree, a Horse, or any sensible thing may be alike perceived by all sensitive Creatures, who have like sences. But Father, Merchant, Lawyer, Point-line, &c. may be defined and understood by intelligent Creatures, but can never be perceived by sensitive. By no power of the understanding can any man, ne∣gatively void of any sence, be made to perceive any thing which is subject to that sence. A man negative∣ly blind, cannot be made to perceive things which are only visible, nor deaf to perceive sounds which are only audible; and so it is of the other sences. And as in Things, so in Actions; carnal copulation, killing an∣other, and taking from another, are sensible Actions, and cannot be defined: but Murder, Justice, Adulte∣ry, Theft, &c. may be defined and understood by in∣telligent creatures, but can never be perceived by the sences, or sensitive Creatures. How much time is lost, and confusion caused in defining sensible things by Aristotle, Plato, and our Schools, which every igno∣rant man knows as much as the most learned; and a thousand times better than all these Sophisters by their contention in them, I leave to you Sir to judge.
To this loss of time in defining sensible things, Ari∣stotle and our Schools from him, do not only confound

definitions with propositions; sometimes giving a de∣finition the power of a particular proposition, other times of an universal; but he makes a man to be an universal proposition, and the man Callias to be a particular: Nor is Euclid wholly free from mistaking herein; for he oftentimes confounds definitions with propositions, as hereafter shall be shewed. So as Clavius following the Authority of Aristotle and Eu∣clid, and attempting to Analyse the Propositions of Euclid in a rational method, not only makes the Com∣ment more perplexed and tedious, but not otherways to be done; which is the reason he says in his Scholi∣um upon the first Proposition of the first Book of Eu∣clid, that you must take the way he is forced to do, as well as others before him.
2. Petitions are immediate Propositions, wherein is propounded some certain knowledge, which is either understood to be necessary in one or more of the de∣finitions, or some sensible thing or act before known; or 2dly. you require that one or more of the definiti∣ons, or acts may be expressed, or done by every learner; or lastly fact or defect may be propounded in one or more of them, which must be unquestionably true, as it is propounded: These are frequently con∣founded by Commentators upon Euclid, with Axioms and common Notions. So, Sir, as it is no wonder that no method or rule of reasoning is observed in Geome∣try, where the principles of it are so perplexed and confounded; whereby Urania, so far and lovely in it, is so clouded, and all ways of approaching her so ob∣structed; that of ingenious men, who desire to pay their Oblations at her Altars, not one of twenty can find the passage to her.

3. But these principles are so sterile, that without the conjunction of a superiour and nobler cause they are never impregnated with any new generation of know∣ledge. Nor can this knowledge be begotten from any less power than that which is eternal and necessary in all things or actions, as they are propounded. These principles from their excellency are stiled Axioms, Dignities, Universals, and Common Notions; and though every acquired proposition hath the authority of a Petition, yet by no learning or reason can any Proposition have the authority of an Axiom.
The principles thus established, men begin to learn and reason, whereby knowledge may be infinitely im∣proved by reason, but never the principles; for as Ari∣stotle in very many places affirms, they are indemon∣strable, and the intellect without reason, is of them, and reason is of conclusions deduced from them. Here, Sir, I cannot pass over the first stumble which is laid before every learner in our vulgar Logick, which in the first page affirms Logick to prove (not the conse∣quences but) the Principles in its own Science and others too: which is all one, as if one says the conse∣quences (which must ever be proved by the premisses) go before the principles, and the principles and pre∣misses come after the consequences and conclusions. So as not only all rules of reasoning are hereby inver∣ted and destroyed, but the authority of Aristotle con∣temned, who as I remember, in 16 places of his Ana∣lyticks, and frequently in his Physicks, Metaphysicks, Topicks, and Ethicks, affirms the principles of Science to be indemonstrable; and that reason is of Science, and demonstrable: And sure it is great pity none of the Rabbines correct it: though from no learning or

authority of Aristotle or our vulgar Logick was ever any progress of knowledge in any one proposition ac∣quired or heard of, I am sure not by me.
These principles thus established, this method or rule must be observed in the generation of knowledge. One or more of the definitions, or things, or actions before known (which are termed the subjects of the proposition) must be assumed in every scientifical pro∣position, either simply or conditionally, wherein ei∣ther some thing or act is propounded to be done (which is termed a Problem) which was not before known in any of the petitions or demonstrated propositions, or some new knowledge in the Subjects propounded (which is termed a Theorem) which was not before known: & in the demonstration of this thing to be done or knowledge to be understood (which are termed the Questions of the Proposition.) The major propositi∣on must be an Axiom, the minor proposition so made up of the Petitions, and before demonstrated propo∣sitions, and the Hypothesis, if the Subjects be con∣ditionally assumed, conformable in all parts to the major proposition, that the affirmation or question of the proposition, or the contradiction, if the demon∣stration be negative, may flow into the conclusion.
Here, Sir, be pleased to stay a little, and behold ra∣tional knowledge thus begotten, how fair and lovely she is in her pure and simple nakedness! how pleasant and easie are her ways? and how excellent and noble is her extraction? descended from eternal causes: begotten by a mind so pure, as partakes not any af∣fection of any sensual appetite or passion: Her ways all plain and before known, and may be apprehended as well by youth of both Sexes as men of riper years.

Nor does knowledge thus begotten by the mind die with the body; but though she be the daughter of time, remains an eternal monument of the minds ex∣cellency, being subject to no alteration, wrimple, or decay by any power of time or fate. Oh Divine know∣ledge! how is thy excellency imposed upon by Price, Affectation, Vain glory, and hard Words? How are thy ways obstructed by Faction, Prejudice, and Self∣interest? Whilst thy glorious beauty is never conspi∣cuous, but by denying these, and frequenting the hum∣blest paths.
If, Sir, I have more than becomes me insisted upon your patience, I am so far from excusing my self herein, that I acknowledge I have ofter before done it, with this advantage to my self, that as well in this as many other things I have had the honour to be con∣firmed by your more discerning Judgment. This Treatise therefore presumes to inscribe your Name, whereby it well hopes to be enlivened when its own little worth shall find no other Monument: so, Sir, I desire you to entertain a belief of me, that no man more truly honours you, or wishes you more happi∣ness than,
SIR,

