


IT may be much wondred at, that I should in the least pre∣sume to meddle with this Sub∣ject, that hath already been handled by so many very Great men. But when it shall be well considered, in ow much different a manner I have eated upon it, from what hath een hitherto done, I question not ut by the generality of Mankind,  shall be very easily excused. And
 though there may be many imperfecti∣ons met with: Yet when the design of the thing (it being to undeceive peo∣ple in a Matter, upon which depends the Health and Welfare of all) shall be well lookt into; I doubt not, but by the candidly ingenious, my Under∣taking will be well approved off: Though I expect to meet with a great number of Carpers, especially a∣mongst those, who by long custom, and for want of due consideration, have embraced a contrary opinion to that of mine.
It is scarce possible for a man to converse with a Person that is ill, let the Distemper be what it will, e∣specially those, who have any smat∣tering in Physick, which most peo∣ple now a days have, but they pre∣sently
 tell you, that their blood is so very acid, that unless that acidity can be corrected, it is impossible for them to be well: And accordingly they pre∣sently flye to the use of Alkalious Me∣dicines, as Powder of Pearle, Cor∣ral, Crabs eyes, or something of the same nature, and if they send for a Physician, which few people do, till they have first used a vast Farrago of Alkalious Medicines; and if the Physician chances to take the same method, that they themselves had before done, they presently cry out, we have already taken such vast quantities of the beforementioned Me∣dicines, that unless you can think of some more generous and efficacious Alkalies, the Acids complained off, are not to be mortified: Which has
 put men to great shifts either to find out new, or to disguise the old ones: yet after all, the Patients expectation has been frustrated, their Distempers not being to be cured, by Medicines of that Nature, but on the contrary either to be exasperated, or so con∣firmed, that they will scarce ever ad∣mit of a cure at all, especially if the Distemper be a Chronick one.
I must confess, that I my self have formerly been a stickler for Alkalies, (being carried away by the common vogue of Mankind) and seeing the insufficiency of common Alkalies, have put my self to great expence, besides a vast deal of trouble, to Volatilize Salt of Tartar, &c. till at last I was fully satisfied, by daily obser∣vation, that Alkalies, though never
 so exalted, would do me very little, if any service at all in the cure of most Distempers.
There are some particular prepa∣rations of Steel and Antimony, some of which I have given an account off, the which giving as Alkalies, and as they are generally believed to be, did me very great service. But since I have well examined them, instead of Alkalies, I find them to be most noble Acids, and the Distempers cured by them, did not (as I formerly sup∣posed) proceed, from any abundance of acid Particles in the Blood or Juices. But on the contrary from Alkalious ones, as I suppose, most Distempers do, and as I have endeavoured to make appear by many Observations.
I expect a great many will cry out
 as some have already done, that this Man was bred an Apothecary, and shall he pretend to be a reformer in Physick and Surgery.
To which I answer, that their Charge I own, confessing my self to have been an Apothecary, and was bred up under a man (though other∣wise a very honest and just Person) that was not the greatest Master in his business. I taking notice of my Masters imperfections, applied my self, for four years of the time I lived with him, to diligent Study, in order to become Master of those things, I was sensible my Master could not teach me, And after I had well considered, and in some measure, be∣come a Master in Pharmarcy, which is the Foundation, upon which the
 Practice of Physick is built: I was at last induced to look into the Body of Physick it self, and though I don't pretend to absolute mastership, yet I shall endeavour, and think my self oblidged in Duty, both to God and Man, to improve my small Talent to the best advantage I can, let Carpers say what they will.
The greatest part of my time, I lived in Worcester, and although I kept an Apothecaries-Shop, yet my Dependance was wholly upon my own Practice, the success I had in which, is sufficiently known in that Country. And for a Character, I desire no other or better, then the generality of those People will give me, of whom I know not one, that can or will speak amiss of me, for any thing, but my
 coming away from them, and leaving such flourishing, thriving business, that scarce any man of my Age ever had before me. For which many of them have blamed me. But the rea∣sons of my leaving that place, are best known to my self.
And since I have been speaking concerning my own being bred an A∣pothecary, I shall enlarge a little upon that subject, giving a short account of the necessary qualifications of one of that Profession, and then shall leave every body to judge, whether a man so qualified has not made a large step, towards being a good Physician.
First, An Apothecary must be very well acquainted with the Vegitable Kingdom, not only to know the faces of Plants, but their Natures and
 manner of Operation upon Humane Bodies, otherwise, how can he tell how to handle them, so as to make his Compositions as they ought to be. And indeed every Physician supposes the Apothecary so qualified when he Pre∣scribes to his Shop; for in his Bill, he seldom directs the method of making his Medicines, but only orders such and such Medicines, knowing or at last supposing them (for every Phy∣sician ought to be well satisfied in the Abilities of an Apothecary, before he prescribes to him) to be before hand skilfully prepared. For let a Phy∣sician Prescribe like an Angel, if the Apothecary through his ignorance in his business, be destitute of good and well prepared Medicines, both Phy∣sician and Patient are frustrated in
 their expectations, the which I am affraid to frequently happens.
Secondly, He must well under∣stand the Nature and Operation of Minerals and Mettals, which is not to be learnt in the Dispensitary, nor any other way to be attained, but by much reading and hard labour in the fire.
Thirdly, He must understand the Nature of Animal Bodies also, amongst which is comprehended that of Man, there being scarce a part of whole Body, but what is sometime or other to be used as Medicine: But before it is used, the Apothecaries skill is for the most part required for its preparation, in order to which, he ought first of all, very well to under∣stand its Nature.

All the forementioned qualificati∣ons, and a great many more, are mul∣titudes of Apothecaries in England endowed with: And to the Honour of the Apothecaries of London, be it spoken, I have generally found the meanest Shops in that Eminent City, better fraited with good Medicines, then any of the most Eminent in all Holland, or the rest of the Low-Countries.
I might add a great deal more on the behalf of that noble Profession, which although, I my self have left it off, yet still have a high value and esteem for it, and think an honest and skilfull Apothecary, is as serviceable in the Common-wealth, and deserves as much incouragement, and is as highly to be valued, as any man what∣soever.

The Famous Ettmuler, was not ashamed to own, that he served eight years to an Apothecary. Yet for all that, he afterwards became one of the eminentest Physicians of Europe. And for ought I know, the loss of him at the Age he died, from whom so much might rationally have been expected, deserves as much to be lamented, espe∣cially by Physicians, as the loss of any one private man.
I have not given a full account of those Distempers I have treated on, but given some short hints concerning them, so far as was necessary to clear my way as I went.
I have in the following Essay, made reflections upon the Practice of some particular men only, my design not being in the least, to reflect upon
 that Noble Society, or Body of Men, or any Member of them, I mean the Colledge of Physicians, whom I own to be the Glory of our Nation, and of the whole World, and for whom I have the greatest reverence and re∣spect imaginable.
I don't pretend to be the sole Au∣ther, or first broacher of this Doctrine of Acids, in the cure of Distempers, it having long since been the opinion, of some of the most happy Practiti∣oners in the World, and is at this time embraced, by several of the greatest men, that perhaps our age affords.
I wrote this Essay at a place, (during the first three Weeks of the Siege of the Castle of Namur, in which time, we had not many wounded men, brought to our Field-Hospital) where I had
 not the oppertunity of consulting Books, nor had I the benefit of coming at my one Papers, wherein I had from time to time set down my Observations upon this Subject: For want of which I have only made use of those that oc∣curred to my memory, which is a very treacherous one, and so they are not so numerous nor exact as I designed them: But however for some reasons I am willing to venture them abroad as they are, they not being in the least designed to entertain the Learned, but to undeceive the Multitude.
I don't pretend to be so great a man, nor to deserve so well of Man∣kind as Helmont, Paracelsus, &c. have done, yet they treading out of the common Paths, and acting upon dif∣ferent Principles, from the rest of
 Mankind: They did not want those, who maligned and hated them, and used all the opprobrious Language in the World against them. Therefore why should I, who don't in the least pretend to have arrived to those great Perfections, that they had attained to, take it amiss to be abused and evil spoken of.
Authority has in great measure, blinded some mens understandings, and sealed up their eyes. There being still a sort of men, that pay too sub∣missive a deference to ancient Opini∣ons, tho' never so contrary to reason, that they will not open their eyes to see or understand the truth. There are still men who write against most known Truths, as against the gravity and Elastick force of the Air, and
 other things of the same Nature. This Doctrine of Acids, and that I former∣ly wrote concerning the Cure of Wounds, are likewise of the number of those that are unfortunate, meerly for want of being born old and with a venerable Beard.
When a Book (says the Famous Malbranch) is first to appear in the World, one knows not whom to con∣sult to know its destiny. The Stars preside not over its Nativity: Their influences have no operation on it; and the most confident Astrologers dare not foretel, the divers risques of fortune it must run. Truth not be∣ing of this World, Caelestial Bodies have no power over her; and whereas she is of a most spiritual Na∣ture, the several positions or combina∣tions
 of Matter, can contribute no∣thing, either to her establishment or ruin. Besides the judgments of men are so different in respect of the same things, that we can never more hazardously and imprudently play the Prophet, then in presaging the happy or unfortunate success of a Book. So that every man who ventures to be an Author, at the same time throws himself, at the Readers mercy, to make him, or esteem him, what he pleases. But of all Authors, those who encounter with prejudices, ought most infallibly to reckon upon their condemnation. Their Works sit too uneasie upon most mens minds, and if they escape the passions of their ene∣mies (which I have not done) they are obliged to the Almighty
 force of Truth for their pro∣tection.
However time will do every man Justice, and Truth, which at first ap∣peared a Chymerical and ridiculous Phantasm, by degrees, grows sensible and manifest. Men open their eyes and contemplate her, they discover her charms and fall in love with her.
The Books that encounter with prejudices, leading to Truths through unbeaten Paths, require much longer time than others, to obtain the reputa∣tion their Authors expect them. And I find it but too true in my self, that all those Writers who combate with prejudices, are much mistaken if they think by that means, to recommend themselves to the favour and esteem of others. Possibly some few, will speak
 honourably of them when they are dead. But whilst they live, they must expect to be neglected (I speak experimentally) by most people, and to be despised, reviled, and persecuted, even by those, who go for the wisest and most moderate sort of men.
There is nothing but Truth con∣tained in my Novum Lumen Chyrurgicum, and I did think that I should have been put into a condition this Summer, to have made it evi∣dently appear. But instead of that, I have been abused and delivered up into the hands of my enemies, to do with me as they pleased.
My Novum Lumen is built upon a pair of Medicines, the which as yet I think not fit to make publick, but here lyes my misfortune, common
 to all those, who make new Discove∣ries. A great many believe the Truth of what I have said, and that my Medicines are capable of perfor∣ming what I have promised for them. But amongst the number of those, who are so ingenuous as to believe matter of fact, a great many say, this man was not the Author, others that they have the same Medicines, and some that they imparted them to me. As for these Gentlemen, I can very easily excuse them, I very well know∣ing that it is the Nature of most Men, not to allow any Person the honour of his own Discoveries, they thinking that thereby, their own Glory is eclipsed. But there are another sort of Men, whose Interest, will not give them leave to embrace
 the Truth, and for the same reason they do what in them lies, to keep others from so doing. And the greatest part of Mankind not being judges in my cause, any further then their eyes direct them, and it being altogether impossible, that there should be any great number of Specta∣tors, by which means I am evil spoken off by many, upon no other grounds, then because an interested party have told them, that I have pretended to what I can't perform.
I expect the mouths of my ene∣mies will be opened very wide against me, but I have already born so much, that I can with a great deal of con∣tentedness bear with the greatest in∣dignities that can be offered me: My great satisfaction being, that I have
 peace in my own breast, having pro∣posed nothing but what tended to the good of Mankind: And very well knowing, that if my Medicines are faithfully and skilfully used, they are capable of performing much more then I have promised for them; but the best Medicines unskilfully used, or with a design that they should not suc∣ceed by prejudiced Persons, may be brought into disgrace.
The following Essay I humbly offer to the candid Readers serious consideration, nothing doubting but that it will meet with a favourable reception from some few. And I must needs say, that I more value the good Opinion and good Word of one candidly ingenuous, then all that can be said against me, by ten thousand
 clamarous ill-natured Persons. I have endeavoured to act and behave my self so, as to deserve no mans ill Word; but if I am abused and my Un∣dertakings misrepresented without any just cause, I shall never break my heart about it, I very well know∣ing that the justice and integrity of my Undertakings, will one time or other be made appear.
From my House in St. Anns Court, in Dean-Street, near Soho-Square, October the 12th. 1695.
