



Worthy and much Honoured Friends,
THE design of the following sheets will be so obvious to every Eye upon the reading of them, that ma∣ny words to expound it to you will be perfectly superflous; it will easi∣ly be its own interpreter both to you & others besides: what is need∣ful upon that Subject I shall more fully discourse in my Epistle unto the Reader. My business to you is, but to give you an account of my Entituling you unto it. For which it were enough to say. That God hath so blessed you both in that occu∣pation which I make the Theme of
 the following discourses, as that it hath brought you in not only a Livelihood, but such an Overplus as hath capacitated you not only to serve your Generation, in the Offices relating to and the principal Conduct of that Trade, but in other great Employments: The one of you hath not only served the City, wherein you are, in the Offices of Sheriff and Alderman (that you both have done) but also in the Office of Mayor (and that the other too hath not don the same is only from his own Reluctancy) and also represent∣ed this famous City in the Highest Court of parliament. But also, be∣cause you are great Examples of that Piety, Sobriety, and Goodness of Temper, to which (as you will find I have in the following sheets obser∣ved)
 this course of Life in mens youth doth much tutour, and dis∣pose them, and in being, or having been the heads and conductors of all that are busied in that Oc∣cupation, you have Entitutled your selves to all those Discourses which may tend to the Moral or Spiri∣ual Improvements of it. You will by the following discourses see, you have no reason to reflect with any blushing, upon the way in which you were in your youth trained up; you have eminently served your Generation before you fall asleep. The employment of your Lives hath not been a making Silver∣shrines for Diana; it hath not been a service to the Luxury, Pride and Wantoness of the Generation in which you lived; it hath not been
 an Apocryphal' Employment, it hath been the Employment of a good Dorcas, only you made the Stuffe which possibly other pious and de∣vout Souls made up. It hath been an Employment that hath had a good end and design, upon which in the morning you could warantably go, and pray to God for a Blessing and in the evening say, Prosper thou the work of our hand upon us, Lord Prosper thou our han∣dy-work. An Employment which hath kept you at home watching over your Families, and which hath brought you in a Livelihood, and given you a Station in the world, if beneath Envy, yet above Pity. What hath enabled you to Em∣ploy the poor, to give portions to six and also to seven? you may look
 back without a regret and rejoyce in the fruit of your Labours; seeing many a sober Tradesman that you have bred, many a poor person that you have clothed. Your days (my worthy and honoured Friends) are in a great measure past, and when you look back u∣pon them you will say they are past Swifter than your Shuttles; your week is almost at an end, & and you who have had many a piece of Stuff at the end of the week brought home to you, must in a few weeks, or months, or years; be gathered to your Fa∣thers & be no more. Your works will follow you and your selves must carry home to the great Lord of Heaven & earth the Web which you have Weaved. May it please
 the Lord to bless these Discourses to you both, that they may but any way conduce either to aug∣ment your comfort in a reflection upon the work which you have already done: or help you to throw your Shuttles well as to the rem∣nant which you have yet to do; that when you cary all home you may hear that blessed voice, Well done good and faithful servant, thou hast been faithful in a little, I will make thee a ruler over much; enter thou into thy masters joy: which is and shall be the prayer of him, who is,

