



Brethren,
MY heart's desire, and prayer to God for you all, is that you might be saved: For, I bear you record, that you have a zeal of God; only if I make a doubt whether it be according to knowledge or no: yea, if I tell you, I verily believe it is not according to knowledge, I am sure (your inge∣unity is such) that you will pardon it to me, considering that my own per∣swasion and practice is differing from you, and Charity (which al∣wayes
 begins at home) will not allow me to judge my self to practise upon ignorance; though I am also one o them who but know in part, yet  hope I desire to practise according to my knowledge: Which if you will b so charitable as to suppose, I must judg your zeal not to be according to know¦ledge. And let me tell you, as there is no more sacred fire than that of zea when it hath its due fuel, and is ex∣ercised in a just and good cause; s there is no more dangerous fire when i hath a mistaken object. The zealou soul runneth, and as the man who run¦neth, if he be in a right way come quicker than another to his journey end; but if he be out of his way,  is sooner than another at a further di¦stance from home: So it is with th zealous spirit. I must profess, let  person be of what perswasion he will I must have a reverence for him, if perceive that he differeth from me ou of Conscience, because he dareth not t
 sin against God. It is a noble temper to be afraid of sin. If a person pretends conscience for a particular opinion and practice, and in the mean time be a common drunkard, swearer, liar, blasphemer, unclean person, one that lives as it were without God in the World, making no conscience of reading the Scripture, praying, bringing up and governing his Fa∣mily in the nurture and fear of the Lord, only pretends conscience as to baptizing of Children, keeping the Seventh day Sabbath; this man is an hypocrite, and dissembles with God and men for there is an uniformity in con∣science, and it would certainly oblige him to avoid known and confessed sins, as much as what he doth fancy is a sin, and as much oblige him to all, as to any known duty. But where I see a Christian walking close with God in the gene∣ral of his conversation, and differing from me in this or that point, because he thinks he cannot without sin believe
 and practise what I do; I cannot but love and honour him, and be very far from their Religion who think it the best and most Gospel way to cudgel him into my Perswasion: A Gaol, or a Fire and Faggots never yet cured an erring Conscience. Such Brethren though overtaken with a fault are certainly (according to the Apostles counsell) to be restored in the spirit of meekness, and to be dealt with, (like rational Creatures) argued, and treated, and perswaded out of their mistakes, not cudgelled out of them. This (Brethren) hath caused me to send this little Book amongst you; so penned, as I think you will not judge it to have any thing of bitterness in it, and in so small a volume, as I can∣not despair but that you will bestow the reading of it, nor will it ask you long time: You will find in it, the most of what hath been said by Di∣vines in this case: I have contracted their larger Discourses that I might
 not tire your patience, and made what they have said (in Latine or in more Scholastick terms) plain to you by a free and familiar style. The singula∣rity of your dissent doth certainly call to you for the use of all possible means to finde out what indeed is the Truth of God in this point; and there can∣not be a greater witness against you, of your want of sincerity, than an un∣willingness to read or hear what hath been, or is or shall be said against you. For though indeed there be some Ar∣ticles of Faith, some Principles of Re∣ligion, about which it is a Christians wisdom not to admit disputes, yet this is not such; 'tis no Fundamental in Religion that the seventh Day from the Creation is the Sabbath: It is none of those points in which you can∣not erre without breaking your union with the Head Christ, yet is it no light point, for it breaks communion with all Churches, and that is no light mat∣ter: And the Scripture sayes we are
 members of Christ, and members one of another. Although an erring Conscience obligeth him that is troubled with it, to do nothing against it, yet certainly he that hath it, or hath rea∣son but to suspect he hath it, stands highly obliged to use all means to re∣form it; and although the differing complexion of a Christians Conscience may oblige him for a time, to walk divided from his Brethren, yet he ought not to do it without many thoughts of heart, because of his division; and while he walks alone in obedience to his Conscience, he ought also to sit alone, and to keep silence. To sit alone pondering with himself, what is said on both sides, and with∣out prejudice, weighing arguments in the ballance of the Sanctuary, compa∣ring spiritual things with spiritual. And to keep silence, both as to the publishing his singular and novel ns, (keeping to that excellent  of the Apostle, Rom. 14.22.
 Hast thou faith? have it to thy self, before God.) (It is a mad fan∣cy of some, who think that every opi∣nion in Religion is worth breaking the Churches peace for) and also keeping silence as to inveighing against and reviling others, otherwise perswaded and practising: For, which way went the Spirit of God from the multi∣tudes of their Brethren unto them? And besides, who knowes not that there is the same distance betwixt their brethren and them? and none can usurp such authority, but those who will arrogate to themselves infallibi∣lity, and take away the judgement of discerning, which is the very root and basis of the Protestant Religion. You know Brethren, what Fetters I have upon me as to my publick Mi∣nistry. If I were free, I question whe∣ther I by it should have any capacity to serve your souls, while you are un∣der this mistake: If I may do it with these Printed Papers, it will be no
 small satisfaction to me; if not, y my work is with the Lord, an my judgement is with my God I think scarce any of you think I have any prejudice against you, many of you may believe, I have a great kind∣ness for you. The good Lord bring us all in this point, to think and speak the same thing, and to walk in the same Way.

