



Sir,
WHen I had once re∣solved to joyn these Sheets (long since drawn up, and in the hands of some of your noble friends) in one Book with those, relating to your Noble Aunt; I had no great dispute with my self, to whom (according to the usual cu∣stom) I should inscribe them. You are the only Male Branch of this ex∣cellent Root; the Heir of her Re∣ligion, Vertue and Honour; you were (while she lived) next to your dear Father, the great object of her Love, Care, and Pious Solli∣tude:
 For you it was that she so often, so passionately (even in her greatest Agonies) begg'd our prayers; she had you only, and your sister to pour out sighs and tears to God for, that you might be found constant, and walk∣ing in the truth. You alone can lay a just claim to her picture, and these other Papers devoted to a memorial of her. You are fittest to undertake the Patronage of her Honourable and Precious Name, against such, as (to justifie others) would fasten a De∣bauchery in Religion upon her Urn, after fifteen or sixteen years rest, in which, since her death, it might pre∣scribe; for the Faith in which she not only truly died, but in so eminent a Profession, and such particular Decla∣rations of it, as are not ordinary. (Alas! (Dear Sir) for the sad occa∣sion of this so late an impudent a slan∣der, but the judgements of God are a great deep) You Sir, since her death, have been visiting the seat of iniqui∣ty, the Country of the great Whore, which hath made so many drunk, and is yet by parcels intoxicating souls with her superstitious and idolatrous
 abominations; you went not out of cu∣riosity, but upon a just call, and to pay a duty to your Fathers Sepulchre. Had your rare Mother lived till you took that Journey, she would have cryed out with another kind of De∣votion than Horace for his friend Virgil.

Sic te cunctipotens Dues
Sic pelagi Dominus—
Ventorumque regat Pater
Obstrictis aliis praeter—
Naves quae tibi creditum
Debes—finibus Italis
Reddas incolumem, precor
Et serves animae dimidium meae.

But it pleased God (by death seven years before) to deliver her from those fears, in which your two years ab∣sence would have kept her: and though she lived not so long as to attend you with her fervent prayers; yet Sir, I can tell you, she had treasured up a large stock of prayers for you; and she had begg'd a moving stock, which was working for you, when she ceased to be; and by the infinite goodness of God
 hearing those prayers, you were pre∣served, both in your going and coming, in the perils you ran by Land, and by Sea: Yea and preserved also free from those sensual and superstitious tinctures, which too too many bring home with them. You have (dear Sir) made it appear in your practice, that the foppe∣ries of the Romish Religion, are baits fit for no noble and ingenuous souls, nor any that have once seen them in their proper element: You have had an ocular demonstration of the folly that attends it, and the licentious leudness tolerated and patronized by it: and while others in a Land of Righteous∣ness have learned wickedness; and from the very Tents of Protestants have proved Renegadoes to the Faith, make∣ing shipwrack both of it and a good conscience: You have defied the Ba∣bilonish Whore in her very bed of fil∣thiness; and been faithful where Satan hath his Throne, treading upon the Lion and the Adder, and (without harm) trampling the young Lion un∣der your feet. 'Tis (Sir) I hope, be∣cause the Lord hath set his love upon you, that he hath delivered you;
 and he will set you on high; because you have known his Name. Go on (dear and honoured Sir) to make the tear of your Parents to be your fear; to love that dear Saviour, whom above all the world, your dying Mother begged for your portion. (You must, Sir, give me leave chiefly to insist upon the mention of your Mother (you know she alone was known to me so much as by face.) Go on Sir, to justifie her interest in Heaven, by making it appear that her prayers were for you heard and accept∣ed. Let all her Vertues and Graces be read in your holy conversation. When she came to die (though it was in the prime of her years) it was no grief of heart unto her, that she had consecrated her life to God, and early drawn off her self from the perishing vanities of the world. I can assure you Sir, she never repented her of one of those very many hours which she had spent in prayers and tears on the behalf of her, and your im∣mortal soul; or which she had spent in reading the Word of God, or in hearing of it preached in season, and out of season. I speak this, not Sir, as in the least suspecting your forgetfulness of the
 Law, or the life of your Mother; but you can never enough remember her; and (as the Apostle speaketh) I only desire to stir up your mind by way of remembrance. I hope (dear Sir) you will please to pardon my offers of these Papers to you: I have told you your interest in them; and though they be but an inconsiderable Present, yet your ingenuity will inforce your acceptance of them from him, who (under his pre∣sent circumstances) knows not better how to improve himself:
Sir,

