



FOr the Divisions of Reuben are great thoughts [great searchings] of heart (saith the victorious Prophetess, Jud. 5. 15, 16.) Reuben was one of the most Potent Tribes of Israel, you will find, Numb. 1. that upon their first Numbring, there belonged to it Forty six thousand five hundred fighting Men: Ʋpon the se∣cond Numbring, Num. 26. Forty three thousand seven hundred, and thirty. They had their Portion on the other side of Jordan, and were by that River divided lo∣cally from their Brethren; but that is not the Division here lamented. In a cause where the whole was concerned against a Potent Enemy, they could not unite, but abode amongst the Sheepfolds to hear the bleatings of the Flocks. The cause of this Neutrality is not told us, but what ever it was, it could not be justified, and caused a∣mongst the more considerate amongst their Brethren, great thoughts, great searchings of heart, and not without rea∣son: It is a just amazement to any, that any Men for a little Secular Profit and Advantage to themselves, should disunite from their Brethren in Councels, and Actions tending to the common preservation of the whole Body of which they are Members. This hath been our case in England for more than an Hundred years, Men to keep up their particular Dominations, grandeur, and Secular
 Gain and Interest have kept up Division to the apparent hazard of the whole, at least twice, or thrice, and this deserveth great thoughts, great searchings of heart. Be∣ing called to perform my part in the late Publick Thanks∣giving, I knew not what better Subject to pitch upon, than the Commendation of Unity, with a Persuasive to it; be∣cause I thought this alone was a Real Thanksgiving, as well as most of any thing subservient to the good of the Nation. Every one calls for Unity, and reflects upon those who are (in their fancies) the hinderers of it, but they seem not to understand the way of Peace. Would they have an Unity in the Doctrines of Religion? No∣thing less, they grant this unpracticable; nor will they themselves own the Articles of our Religion, further than as an Instrument of Peace, and with a Latitude for their own sense of them. Would they have an Ʋnion in De∣signs and Councils for the Publick Good, and in the performance of mutual Offices of love one towards ano∣ther? To this all good Men will say Amen. Only, say we, this is inconsistent with any Persecution; for how do they shew their readiness to do all Offices of love one to ano∣ther, who make it their business to ruine others, by Fines, Imprisonments, &c. Or how can they joyn in Actions for Publick Good, of whom you require (as the terms of such Conjunction) things that their Consciences tell them they cannot do without Sin? and others Consciences tell them are no way necessary for that end; but wholly fo∣reign as to the thing for which they would have them unite? Would you have an Ʋnion to uphold the Protestant Religion? All honest Men are agreed for this. But, say they, (and truly too) you pluck up Protestant Religion by the root that day, that you deny to every Protestant, the Judgment of Discretion, which allows to every Man a liberty to Judge of his own Acts, whether they be such
 as he may lawfully do, or may not do. For if a Man may act contrary to the practical Judgment of his own Conscience; in compliance with the Commands, or Opi∣nions of others, calling themselves The Church: The Papists have got a great Point of us, and seeing they have greater Numbers, and that of Learned men, than are of and amongst Protestants, they grant it safer to be Papists than Protestants. Well, but say some, We would have such an Ʋnion that all may joyn together in Hearing, Receiving the Sacrament, &c. All good Men will say, Amen to this too; Provided, that they will al∣low all those who are true Ministers of Jesus Christ (if there be any in the World except amongst those of their Persuasions) to Preach and Administer the Sacraments: And Provided, There be nothing added to Preachings be∣yond what God hath revealed in his Word, nor to Prayers and Administrations of Sacraments beyond what God hath directed in his Word, which is a sufficient Rule for Worship as well as Doctrine, except as to the common Circumstances of all humane acts. We hear Men say, Will you allow nothing then to Humane Laws and Legislators? Yes, very much; 1. A Power to judge what is necessa∣ry and expedient in all Civil things for the upholding and managing the Civil Government. 2. A Power to inforce the Laws of God in Religious things. 3. A Power there also to determine the necessary Circum∣stances of those actions, so far as they are Humane Acts. But by the granting of these things, so much of some mens craft is in danger to be set at nought; So much Magni∣ficence (as some count it) in danger to be destroyed, that I despair ever to see such an Unity. Nor do I understand how it is necessary in order to Brethrens dwelling toge∣ther in Unity, more than it is necessary to the Civil Ʋnion of a Corporation, that all Men in it should ma∣nage
 the same Trade by the same Method, and in the same Circumstances. If Men be united in their common Coun∣sels, Designs, and Readiness to serve the publick, for their common Good and Advantage, and a readiness to serve one another in love, it is enough for our Civil, and Secular Happiness: and if they be united in a common belief of all things necessary to be believed, and all things necessary to be done, in order to Salvation, it is Ʋnion enough in order to our Spiritual, and Eternal Happiness. The necessity of any other Ʋnion is a Chimaera fit only for such who cry out for Unity upon terms, upon which it is almost impossible it should be had, that is, they cry out for continued Discord, under the Notion of Unity, This, Reader, is that Union which the following Discourse pleadeth for, and directeth what seemeth to me the best means to attain. Now the God of Peace, which brought again from the dead, our Lord Jesus, that great Shep∣herd of the Sheep, through the Blood of the Everlast∣ing Covenant, make us perfect in every good work to do his Will, working in us, that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ. To whom be Glory for ever and ever, Amen.
