



Dearest Sister,
WHen I composed the following Discourses, it was in the same streights of time which usually are allowed for Meditations of that na∣ture, nor did I ever think of a further Publication, then to those that heard me, nor do I see any thing in them wor∣thy of a more publick remark, unless the great President of Divine Grace, which it pleased God to shew you in the Man of your Bosom, by the Power of which Grace, he was saved in a Bat∣tle, wherein few escape. I know not
 what particular fancy it is that some Per∣sons have to Sermons made upon Funeral Occasions, that hath obtained of me the Copy of these Notes. I hope it is their desires of many remembrances of their latter end, which we have all sufficient need of. Our Prophets are gone, Our Fathers, where are they? When once I had agreed the Publication of them, I needed no deliberation to whom I should inscribe them. You Dear Sister! had the greatest share in him, to whose memory they were designed, you had the nearest view of his Conversation, for more then twenty years, you were the greatest sharer in his long trial of affliction. These things considered, with my Relation to you, made me quickly determine that thing. I shall think my labour not lost in transcribing these Papers, if any thing in them, as well as the Example of your late dear Husband may incourage you, or be any ways helpful to you, in fighting
 the good fight, and finishing your course. The decays we find in our selves, the deaths of our Friends, the day∣ly Bells we hear telling us that such or such Persons (our Neighbours) are re∣moved to their long homes, mind us of our mortality. Our Bones are not of Brass, nor our Sinews of Iron, which yet if they were, both the one and the other we see are daily diminishing, by the influence of the ill air, in which we breath. Our very breath is no such in∣heritance as doth not corrupt, and fade away. Our dearest Friends that are dissolved, have only got the start of us, we are in the same race, and must stop at the same post. Death is the End of all. It is more then forty years that he who was the common Father both to you and me, left this world. Some of whose last words to me were, Dear Child! Learn to die, Fear God, and keep his Commandments, so
 shalt thou learn to die. We have been since that more then forty years at School in the world, to learn (amongst others) this one great thing to Die. We have had many Friends, many dear Relations since that time, who have by their dying Examples, been speaking over the same thing to us: Learn to die. This discourse is of that tenden∣cy to learn us this great Lesson; That the Lord would bless it to my self, to you, to all that shall read it, is the Prayer of

