



1. BEfore you (most Renowned Patri∣ots) we most humbly spread our Cause (to whom should the Commons of England make their Applications, but to those whom they have chosen, to repre∣sent them in their Circumstances of Distress and Grief? Especially when their most Gracious Soveraign, hath so often de∣clared, the Benignity of his Royal Nature to them, and readiness to joyn in any Act or Acts declarative or confirmative of it; and when the most Noble Lords in the years 1672 and 1673; together with the Commons, (then assembled) had gone so far as to our Relief in the Cause, as ey did, notwithstanding which the mu∣tability
 of your Honourable House seems to require a new Application to your Ho∣nours. How far we have applied our selves to the Reverend Bishops, will ap∣pear to your Honours by the Account of the Proceedings of the Commissioners of both Perswasions, appointed by his Sa∣cred Majesty, &c. Printed 1661; and several other overtures. That the case was the same then that is by us now plead∣ed for, will appear to your Honours by that Printed Account, p. 5. in their 7 Proposal expressed in these words:
That the Gift of Prayer, being one special Qualification for the work of the Ministry bestowed by Christ, in order to the Edification of his Church, to be exercised for the profit and and benefit thereof, according to its various and Emergent necessities; It is desired that there may be no such Im∣position of the Liturgy as that the exercise of that Gift be thereby totally excluded, in any part of Publick Worship. And that the Commissio∣ners on the other side so apprehended, ap∣pears by their Answer then to this Proposal p. 35. where they replyed, This makes the Liturgy void, which is very true as to
 Universal use, and Imposition, but not otherwise.
2. Nor is this Opinion, a Novel Opi∣nion, or the liberty desired, a Novel Request: It appears by the Book called, The Troubles of Frankford, that it is older than our Reformation by Q. Eliza∣beth, and coaevous in England with the first hours of Reformation; much older, in the Churches of Suitzerland (the oldest Reformed Protestant Churches.) The O∣pinion and Practice of the Waldenses and Bohemians (whose Churches I do not call Reformed, but look upon them as continu∣ing in their Integrity and succeeding in the Primitive Doctrine and Practice of the Church in a great measure, whilst other parts of the World were in their Apostacy for more than a thousand years together) None ever shewed us any Liturgy of Pray∣ers they had, nor do they mention any in their accounts which by their Deputies they in gave both of their Faith and Practice to Luther an Oecolampadius, which are extant in Sclttus's Annales Evang. That the practice we desire is the same with that in Scotland, New England, Holland is not to be denyed.
3. The persons (most Renowned Pa∣triots,
 on whose behalf we desire it, are neither few nr inconsiderable. Two thousand Ministers were turned out 1662. Some are dead, but possibly, not a much lesser number are sprang up either in the Ministry, or Candidates for it: Of those let men say what they please, there will not be found a tenth part, that can think it lawful to perform their Ministerial Acts in Publick Solemn Prayer by the Pre∣scribed Forms of other Men. And Dr. Falkner in his Epistle tells the World, That the Genius of that party is much set a∣gainst them, and in their Practice, they reject them almost generally with some eagerness; which is very true, and so ap∣peareth, in that the far greater part of them can neither (upon eighteen years Tri∣al) be perswaded that it is lawful for them to hear them, nor yet by any sort of Cudgells be Cudgelled into such a Belief or Practice, tho I must profess my self of ano∣ther mind, and in that am my self a Dis∣senter from I believe 9 parts of ten of our Dissenters, whom yet I love and honour (I take in both Ministers and Peo∣ple unto my Account.) Nor are they Incon∣siderable, considered, as to their Intellectu∣als or Morals, or Quality in the World, or
 usefulness to our English world; which must be owned, and will readily be (I am sure) by your Honours, who are the Eyes of the Nation, seeing in every corner of it, and ng able better to judge of Numbers and Qualities of Persons, than we, that sit in our Studies, or any that take an Account from Registers, &c.
4. Nor are they invaluable, or the worst sort of men for Morality, and which is much higher True Piety and Godliness. Of late years your Honours have had many of them brought before you in your publick Sessions, and Assizes. Might not you say to those that brought them, as the Town Clerk of Ephe∣sus once said, Acts 19.37. You have brought hither these men, that are no Robbers of Churches, nor Blasphemers of God. I may add further, no Murtherers, no Adulterers, no Drunkards, no Profane, or false Swearers, no Perjured Persons, no Robbers by the High way, onely accused of Questions about a Law, not profitable to men, nor necessary for the glory of God. A Law which is but the Will of King and Parliament, whose Will hath been since sufficiently declared (tho not yet in that for∣mality) that it should not be so rigorously pursued, nor ever was, that it should be exd¦ecuted




 in that manner and with those cir∣cumstances that it hath been. For their Religion, let it be judged from what your Honours have observed, in their behaviour both in Religious Duties, and as to tr Civil converse with men. For their Re∣ligious▪ Conversation, let it be observed, Whether the generality of them, when they are in Gods Publick Worship, are they, who when they should be joyning with the Mi∣nister in putting up Prayers (whether he be praying by Forms or no) have their Eyes up and down, here and there; are whis∣pering and talking to those that are next them, it may be sleeping; or rather be not those who (natural infirmities allowing it) do stand up or kneel, keep their Eyes shut, or fixed upon God, and (so far as man can judge) mind what they are about, with all Indication of Reverence and Godly fear? Whether they be the Persons that talk, or sleep out Sermons, or that hear the word of God (so far as men can judge) with trem∣bling? Not that none but they do so, my concern is not to discourse of others, but for them. Whether they generally be not a Peo∣ple against all Idols and Idolatry, that dread to use the name of God idly, or to swear by it or by any Creatures Prophane∣ly?
 Whether they be those that prophane the Sabbath, by unnecessary Journyings, or Labours, or Recreation, and do not or∣dinarily spend it in the publick and private Duties of Gods Worship? For their beha∣viour towards men, Are they generally the Sons and Daughters of this age, that dare curse their Fathers and Mothers, and reproach the Womb that bare them? Are they Murtherers, Thieves, Adulterers, Fornicators, Perjured Persons? Do they not generally make Conscience to Owe no∣thing to any, but to love one another, to deal justly with men? I will not speak for every Individual (Christ had a Judas in his Flock.) Nor do I reflect on any others; I know there are many that are no Dissent∣ers, who are Pious towards God, Righte∣ous towards Men. I would only have these on both sides made one. What have their worst Enemies to Object, but disobedience to an Humane Law in matter of Divine Worship, wherein they do in all sinceri∣ty profess they cannot do, or omit the thing commanded or, forbidden without sinning against God. In the mean time your Ho∣nours see their bitterest Enemies can diso∣bey Laws against Pluralities and Non-resi∣dents. Others of them can disobey Laws
 against Drunkenness, Swearing, Cursing Adulteries, &c. and not see the beams in their own eyes, tho they cannot but say these Laws, are against things plainly, and syllabically forbidden in the Word of God. And indeed none lives on either side but violates some Humane Laws. Ne∣mo sine crimine vivit. Optimus ille qui minimis urgetur, said an Heathen Poet, and truly without doubt.
5. Nor (most Honoured Patriots!) are the Arguments of those who are charged as disobedient (as to this very point of Prayer) invaluable, nor can any mans confidences make them appear so to your Reasonable and Generous Souls. It is not so evident as some Infallibles of our age would make it, That the Holy Spirit of God, hath not or may not have a special and immediate influence upon Pious Mi∣nisters Souls, as to their words in Prayer, as well as upon Gods Peoples words in Confession, or Ministers words in Preach∣ing (both which the Scripture asserts) which ought not to be excluded in that Prayer where words are to be used. Nor is it certain that words are not an Essential Part of all Ministerial Prayer, and these or these words an Essential part of this
 or that Prayer: Nor that any Superior can direct an Essential Part of Gods Wor∣ship: nor that in an Act of Worship, where God hath left any thing to Mini∣sters or Peoples Liberty, that they may do this or that, any Superiors can deter∣mine them to one part against the other: Nor many things more in the following sheets, which are inlarged upon. Some parts of some of these Questions may appear clear to some, the other part to others. But this will conclude the things in themselves not to be plainly and clearly lawful: Your Honours abhor an Infallible Judge boast∣ed of by the Papists, let it not be pretend∣ed to in the Tents of Protestants. Nor one Infallible person suffered to triumph over others, in the near concerns of Divine Worship. In things necessary for all by a Divine Law, we humbly allow it the Kings and your Honours duty to command us: But if they appear not such upon plain evidence to our Superiors, we beseech their Pardon, if we say, They cannot with any security to themselves from the Divine Law, enjoyn them to, or inforce them from those who judge them sinful in Divine Worship.
6. And as it is not possible, that any Divine Rule should be produced to make
 such a thing as this necessary to be brought into, or continued in Publick Worship: So these two last years have given abun∣dant Evidence that it is not Expedient to tye all men to the use of them. We are sure your Honours will grant, from the Instances of the Songs of Thanksgiving Recorded in Scripture, both those of Mo∣ses and Miriam and Deborah, and David, and from the Prayers in Scripture, of So∣lomon, David, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, Ezra, &c. That when Persons are under Signal Providences, whether of Delive∣rances or Distress, or in respect of some general Sin, the Servants of God, have not thought it sufficient in Publick Prayer, To give thanks in general words for all Mercies and Preservations, but to tell him of his particular wondrous works; to re∣cognize him, the Author of this, or that Salvation: To confess and bewail those particular Sins, if they be the Sins of the generality of the People: To put up Petiti∣ons suited to those particular distresses the Church or State is in. This is plain in all Scripture: And where it is not done, God is eminently restrained in his Glory; our duty is eminently neglected: We are sure God within these two years hath made
 England as remarkable a Stage of Provi∣vidence as ever any Nation in the World was made. We have been in most eminent distresses, and have had most eminent de∣liverances: Both of them concerning the whole Nation, and all that in the Nation can be dear to every good man. The life of our Soveraign, the life of our Reli∣gion, The life of our Ancient Government, The lives of several of our Noblemen, multitudes of our Gentry, and many thousands of our Commonalty. Plots upon Plots have been discovered, — Uno Suc∣ciso Pullulat alter. We have had to deal with an Hydra. Now we humbly refer it to your Honours to judge, what particular Homage, either of Prayer or Praise, God hath had, relating to these distresses in all our particular Congregations: And whe∣ther the limiting all Ministers to Old Forms of Prayer, hath not been the cause of this High Omission? The Practice of our Ministers satisfied as to Confirmity is two-fold. Some take themselves obliged, not only (as all are) in the Desk to add no∣thing to the Forms. But in their Pulpits to keep to the Bidding of Prayer in the Canon; or at least to Preface their Ser∣mons with half a dozen lines taken out of
 some Collect, and conclude them with either Gloria patri, &c. or that excellent Collect our Vindicator tells us of, Grant we beseech Almighty God, &c. those (and these are not a few) could never put up one Prayer (except upon 11 April 1679, for which were indeed good and parti∣cular Forms made) for any deliverance, nor yet offer up one Publick Thanksgiving. Others there are, who conceive that though the Statute gives them in the letter of it, no further liberty, yet the continual Pra∣ctice of our Church, not control'd by any Law, hath otherwise expounded the Statute. I doubt not but in many of their Congre∣gations, Prayer and Praise, as to these Providences, hath not been restrained from the Almighty. But your Honours know what is truth in the Affair, more than any private Person can; and who knows not, that the particular Emergencies, respect∣ing several Congregations, and the Mem∣bers of them, are such, as had need of Forms to be made every week, to have them comprehensive of all just matter, of Prayer and Praise for that Congregation.
7. Nor finally, are the Sufferings of Multitudes, both of Ministers and People things invaluable, not to look back fur∣ther,
 than the manifestation of His Maje∣sties and the Parliaments good will, for Dissenters liberty, Anno 1672, and 1673. (though it was not formally perfected by an Act.) It would fill a Volume to tell your Honours, how many and how great the Sufferings of good men have been since that time; all have been bottomed in this, (or at least most of them) that the most of the Sufferers have not thought it lawful, either to perform their Ministe∣rial Acts in Prayer, by the prescribed Forms of others, or to hear such a Ministration; and therefore Ministers, who thought themselves obliged to Preach, have been constrained to do it in private, and People, who could not satisfie themselves without hearing somewhere, have been inforced to hear in Private Meetings. Hence both Ministers and People, have been most wo∣fully pursued in Ecclesiastical Courts, at Assizes, and Sessions; some, to the loss of two Thirds of their Estates; some, to Im∣prisonment for six Years together; some one way, and to one degree; others in another way, to another degree. Some more legally in Courts, where some have been found to defend a righteous Cause: Others more illegally, they have had doors
 broken open, their Goods taken away to great Values, when some (Ministers) have been 20 Miles off at that time, when they were sworn to preach at Meetings. O∣thers (private Persons) at great distances from home, or sick in their Beds, yet have not been able to remedy themselves. But it were infinite to run into Particulars, we doubt not but your Honours have seen and heard enough, as if some men had designed to leave none to whom the King and Parliament should shew any mercy. All this while the Papists (scarce one of whose Names we heard of in any Courts) were hatching their most Hellish Designs against the Life of the King, our Religion and Government; since which time their Designs have broken out, and been made manifest to our English World: and cer∣tainly the madness of some Protestants (to speak no worse) and their apparent incli∣nations to more charity for Papists, than Protestants (whose very Name some of these men do not like; Catholicks, they say, pleaseth them better: it is easie to be judged they do but keep the Epithet within their teeth for a while) layeth an high obligation on all true Englishmen to unite all Protestants, that we be not made a common Prey.
8. Yet did we ask of your Honours to take away all Liturgies, our desire might be more liable to Exception, (why should we prescribe to others Consciences?) Nor did they in 1641. it was the Act of a Parliament, in which not the Tenth part were either Presbyterians or Independents. They only desire the leaving it at liberty, as in most, if not in all other Refor∣med Churches. Nor are they ambiti∣ous of Bishopricks, Deanaries, Preben∣daries; they can truly say, Nolumus Episcopari, let the King give these things to whom he pleaseth. Let us but have Bread, and a liberty to Preach the Gospel without the wounding of our Consciences.
9. Now may the Great God of Peace, grant an happy understanding betwixt His most Excellent Majesty and Your Honours. May the King live, and live for ever, and the Parliament be as a sheaf of Arrows in His Hand, to strike through the loins of all those who have ill-will to Him, to the Reformed Religion, or Ancient Government of
 this Nation. And may Your Honours have the glory of causing your Banished to return, and being called, The Re∣pairers of our Breaches, The Restorers of our waste places to be inhabited. So shall all Posterity call you blessed,
And your Petitioners ever humbly pray, &c.
