



Madam,
THat noble person (to whose memory these sheets are de∣voted) and my relation to her, were so well known to your Ladiship, that I am sure you will find no difficulty to con∣clude that something of this nature is but a debt to her memory, and especially from my self, upon whom she laid so many obligations, that if I should hold my peace, the very stones would speak: Nor Madam, can I think dis∣courses of this nature useless, being, though of no significancy, in subsidia mortuorum, to advantage the dead; yet not insignificant both in solatium, and ad exemplum vivorum, for the
 comfort and example of those who are alive, that others may learn the steps of holiness, by which she ascended that bles∣sed Mansion into which we believe her en∣tred, and by which she mounted to that pinacle of honour in the Church of God, upon which we lately saw her, and which her memory yet possesseth. This (Madam) being determined, I had no difficulty to find out to whom I should in∣scribe them. Both the subject matter of the discourses, and your Ladiship's near relation to her Ladiship challenged that at my hands. The design of the sheets (Madam) introductive to the sequent Narrative of her Ladiship's life, is to evince a great truth to the world, concerning which the practical errours, which we daily see in it, give us reason to believe it not sufficiently perswaded, viz. That the person fearing the Lord is the most excellent person. Were the world better convinced of this most de∣monstrable Proposition, those persons would not find it so difficult to reconcile the world unto them, and to gain a quiet room, in the latitude of it, wherein to pass the time of their so journing here with fear; only leading such a conver∣sation,
 as might comport with the fear of God, according to the degrees of light they have received. Those Madam, who know the value of persons fearing Je∣hovah, must from principles of reason have a kindness for every one whom they see afraid to sin against that great and glorious Name, though that timoration makes them recede from them in some practices, wherein they could desire them to be like themselves. But Madam, how unreasonable soever the more peevish world sheweth it self in their judgement of, and behaviour to such persons. Your Ladiship hath for many years declared your self to have a juster apprehension, and testified it both by your own choice of the right waies of the Lord, and your exemplary kindness to those whom you have found walking therein. These Papers, Madam, will justifie your Lady∣ship's judgement, and may possibly help to confirm what your Honour hath so long believed.
To the latter part of these sheets your Ladiship is entituled by your near re∣lation to that Honourable person whom they concern, and the intireness of affection, which you mutually bare
 each to other. She seldom mentioned your Ladiship in your absence; but the form of her mention was, My dear Sister of Exeter. With your Ladiship it was that she consulted in her difficul∣ties, refreshed her self in her dark and sad hours; to whom therefore doth her Picture more of right belong, than unto your self? It might indeed have deserved a better hand, but as it is, I dare say your Ladiship will see many a line in her countenance, which you will re∣member and say, Sic vultus, sic illa manus, sic ora ferebat, that it is ex∣ceeding like your Ladiships noble Sister. If your Ladiship asketh why it cometh so late after her Funerals, I must an∣swer, Madam, that your Honour is not altogether ignorant what hath hap∣pened to me since that time; notwith∣standing which, the Copy of these sheets were in the Stationers hands more than two years since, and unhappily (through his slowness) perished in your dreadful Burning: since which I have indeed had time enough to have revived them, but have been distracted with so much bu∣siness of other natures, as before this time I have not been able to finish what
 long since I intended, and had begun. They now come forth not in so good a dress as I could wish, but as imperfectly as works use to do, finished in so many parts as I have been inforced to finish them in, and by.
Such as they are, I most humbly offer them to your Honour, as a small obla∣tion to the memory of her to whom your Ladiship knows I owed much more; and as a poor acknowledgement of the many obligations which it hath pleased your Ladiship to lay upon me, who have no way, but such as this; and my fervent prayers to approve my self

