



I Have in this small Treatise been (at least) endea∣vouring to prepare and present unto you a subject of highest Concernment at this day, (i. e.) rightly to sver and distinguish between the interest of Christ and the Magistrates, or Powers of this world, in matters relating to Government, it having been the unhappy part of most of the Powers of this world to intermix and mingl their Power with that which the Lord hath reserved to himself, (i. e.) Rule and Dominion in Divine Things, in and over the con∣sciences of men, which is (alone) the Lords Prerogative in that little Kingdom he hath reserved to himself: I had prepared it be∣fore, but now present it unto you, whom (after so long empting from vessel to vessel) I may suppose are made willing to be acquainted with the Lords mind, and your duty or work in this matter, which is to let the oppressed go free.
I have no ground to question but that many (if not most) among you in this day of light, are principled in this tuth already; yet (I suppose) this po abour of him that truly loves Truth and Peace, with the true Gospel-liberty, may be both accepted and of use, if not to inform, yt to confirm in a truth of such importance. I have in this Trease endeavoured truly to state the agistrates Part, (as to Govemrnent) and the Lords, and cleared this, Tha ule in Divine things belongs only to the Lord, and in civil things nto the Magistrate; I have given the grounds, with the dangers
 of the Magistrates intermedling with that which is none of his, I am not ignorant of the often urging of that word of Christ, Luke 14. 23. Compel them to come in; although it is as often abused from the real intention of our Lord therein, which is a Ministerial compulsion by the Gospel-invitation, to us poor perish∣ing Gentiles; the high act of Gods grace that such a compulsion is come forth to us.
I have endeavoured plainness (as becomes the Ministry of the New-Testament) and brevity, that so a little time might give you the reading thereof. Oh that the God of Grace (who hath begun his wonders amongst us) would be pleased to engage the Powers of this Common-wealth wholly to diavow the claim of any interest in Dominion, (that so clearly and undoubtedy is our Lords Prero∣gative) that you might become a Pattern to the Nations round you, and by your practice preach this to all the world, That Rule in Divine things belongs to the Lord; doubtless if it convince them not, it shall be a witness against them; for on this account shall the Nations be broken, and thi breach will be grievous and in∣curable. You being once more come to sit at stern in this Common∣wealth; Who knows but tat God hath been proving and refining you, that so you by whom he began the work in these Nations, might be honoured by him above all others in the further perfect∣ing of it? Oh be not high-minded, but fear, humble your selves, to walk with God; know who it is that hath entrusted you, and fear bfore him; be wise as Serpents, and harmless as Dves. so may you expect a blessing from Heaven, & your endeavours crown∣ed both here and hereafter: So prayeth he who for Zions sake cannot hold his peace:

