


Learned SIRS,
IT's the saying of the Wise man. Prov. 4. 5. Get wisdom, get understanding, forget it not. v. 7. Wisdom is the principle thing, therefore get wisdom, with all thy get∣tings get understanding. v. 8. Exalt her and she shall promote thee; she shall bring thee to honor, when thou dost embrace her, and chap. 16. 16. How much better is it to get wisdom, than gold? And to understanding, rather to be chosen than silver? Then surely it is not wisdom to get gold and silver, but that which is far above it. Which will give to thine head
 (not a Crown of gold and silver, but) an Or∣nament of grace, a Crown of glory shall she de∣liver to thee.
They are the great things of Divine wisdom (as revealed in the Scriptures of truth) that I have been exercised about, and of which it's said 2 Tim. 3. 15. They are able to make us wise unto salvation through faith in Christ Jesus. And therefore I have no reason to suppose you'le count it strange, or presumption, that I present the Dedication of the ensuing discourse to your learned and serious consideration. 'Tis true, it's a plain English Christian Discourse, yet the things discoursed on are the great and high things of God, and the Gospel, and therefore am not willing to doubt but you will readily grant; are such things as concern your most scrious Studies.
Though with some their Studies may be much (if not too much) about things of a lower and terrene concern (as indeed all things are, beneath the glorious Gospel of the blessed God) yet I doubt not the lawfulness of endeavours for at∣tainments in human learning, and that both as to the Languages  Philosophy, both in the ra∣tional, natural and moral parts thereof; though my self have little or none of either in its artifi∣cial parts: Yet, it's radically in all rational men, though it has been (and is) too much debauched
 and defaced, in most, by sensual lusts.
Your learned and Philosophical studies may tend to make you men of parts, and of use among men, in things of torrene concern, if not abused, and if kept subject in its place, may prove no hin∣drance to you (but a help) in your Divine stu∣dies, though I acknowledge not Philosophy to be the Mother of Theology, as some say. Gal. 4. 26. yet this I dare say, that without rational Philo∣sophy (in its root) we could not be rational men, and then we could not be Christian men without a miracle indeed (as some say) it being to the rational understanding part in man that the Gos∣pel comes, and by which it's understood and believed.

Learned Sirs,
Whatever ends you design in your studies, it concerns you all, to take in Theology and the glo∣ry of God, as the chief and glory of all things of Gospel concern, being of highest, of best, and eter∣nal concern, and this I am sure your learning (simply considered in it self) will not hinder (but help) you in, while you keep humble and improve your acquired Talents for God.
The blessed Gospel of his grace by Jesus, be∣ing very much suted to the rational capacities of men, or else it were in vain to publish it unto them.

Though the Gospel in it self, being the Mi∣nistration of Peace by Jesus, properly relating to the general restitution, new world, new state and life, with all its Ordinances of divine wor∣ship, faith and holy life in order to preparing us for (and obtaining of) the glory, and as so, is above the reach of reason, and all the human Phi∣losophy in the world, without the Divine reve∣lation thereof, Rom. 10. 14. 1 Cor. 1. 21. & 2. 7, 8. but being by the Gospel revealed, and brought down and opened  Rom. 10. 6, 7, 8, 9. to those who believe the Scripture to be the Di∣vine Revelation, it's rational (as well as divine) to believe God in his word, and love and cleave to him therein (which is the great and saving Faith of the Gospel) though over and above our rational capacities. He has of his own grace or∣dered the Gospel (which is the Divine Revela∣tion thereof) to be the Ministration of the Spi∣rit; 2 Cor. 3. 8. and to minister the Spirit for our help therein; Gal. 3. 2. Rom. 8. 26. yet, its so far from the Gospel to destroy our rational and moral capacities, that it tends to help and lighten us therein, though in a more Spiritual and sublime way.
Some talk of losing (or laying aside) our rea∣son, as if Christianity were an irrational thing; if we lay aside our reason, we must lay aside our
 humanity, and our Christianity too. Others talk of reasons being sanctified, and that I like well, it stands with the truth of the Gospel, rea∣son sanctified by the word and spirit of the Gospel. Joh. 17. 17. Sanctifie them through the truth, thy word is truth. chap. 15. 3. Ps. 119. 9. and I understand reason then to be sanctified, when it understands, believes, loves and obeys the truth of the Gospel, which I take to be regeneration be∣gun here, which being persevered in, will issue in the perfect Regeneration in the world to come.
But I am afraid that under the notion of sancti∣fied reason, two evils are come in upon Christi∣anity like a torrent, even to the spoiling thereof.
1. Some under the notion of the Spirit and sanctified reason, do out and end the greatest part of the glorious Gospel of the blessed God, in the great matters of Faith, narrowing and denying thereof in the largeness of its extent, contrary to the very letter and scope of Scripture, alone from their supposed sanctified reason, as will appear in the following discourse.
2. And others make additions, and change the Ordinances according to their own devices, and all, by supposed sanctified reason, corrupted Phi∣losophy and vain deceit, after the will of men and not after Christ.
The Christian religion in it self, as it's the most
 divine, so its he mostrational Religion in the world, or that ever was in the world, being opened to us by the Divine Revelation, though there are some things in it above the reach of reason to comprehend, even with the Divine Revelation and Teachings of God therein, yet we may understand the truth there∣of, and it's rational for us to believe it, because God has said it; to instance in some particulars.
1. That God should so love the world, as to give his only begotten Son for its redemption, and Christ so love the world, as to give his Flesh for the life thereof, are incomprehensible mysteries of grace. Joh. 3. 16. & 6. 51. Eph. 3. 17, 18, 19.
2. The Incarnation of our blessed Lord and Sa∣viour Jesus Christ is in it self an incomprehensible mystery. 1 Tim. 3. 16.
3. The Resurrection, Judgment, the greatness, terribleness, righteousness and justice thereof, the restitution, new world, with the diversities of the glories and punishments thereof, are all incom∣prehensible mysteries till the times come of effecting thereof, 1 Cor. 13. 9. 10. 1 Joh. 3. 2. Ps. 9. 11. yet by the Divine Revelation we may understand the truth of these unsearchable mysteries, and it's very rational as well as divine, that we believe the truth thereof.
So that I say, the Christian Faith and Religion is the most rational, and to render it unreasonable
 in any of the parts thereof, does open wrong to God, Christ, the Gospel, and to men: When in truth, in its own simplicity and purity, there is nothing irrational in it; in this matter, we may and must say (if we say right) as Prov. 8. 8, 9. All the words of wisdoms mouth are righteous, there is nothing froward or perverse in them, they are all plain to him that understandeth, and right to them that find knowledge & ch. 14. 16. a scorner seeketh wisdom and findeth it not, but knowledge is easie to him that hath under∣standing.
God having given to men large Capacities, that if rightly exercised about the works of God and word of life, they might attain to the excellent knowledge of the most holy, and to the precious faith and life of the Gospel, through the Divine teachings therein, which shall not be wanting to those that really desire and seek it; Prov. 2. 1. to 6. Luk. 11. 13. Jam. 1. 5. God having in his wisdom and grace stated the things of the Gospel both in matters of Faith and Wor∣ship, plain to the rational Capacities of men, to the end that they might (through a right in∣dustry) obtain the saving knowledge of his will therein.
And its only the irrational devices, additions, and contrary interpretations of men (both in mat∣ters
 of Faith and practice) that hath filled the world with irrational errours, divisions, and confusions, which the Scripture (if cleaved to, in its own light and language, which is but rea∣son it should be so, as well as divine) would be the alone blessed way for us to arrive to unity in the great things of Gospel concern, reason misled by Tradition, Blind-zeal, or captivated by sen∣sual lusts, has and doth make bad work in the world. See from Scripture how reason and Christi∣an Religion unites.
1. It's both rational as well as Religious that we believe God in the word of his grace. 2 Thess. 3. 2. where unbelievers are rendred to be unrea∣sonable men, as well as irreligious, and 1 Pet. 3. 15. we are to give a reason of our hope, to every one that shall ask. Which can never be, if our reason be useless, nor can meerly rational men understand it when it is given them.
2. It's rational, as well as Religious, that we should serve and worship God according to his own revealed will in the Gospel, and not after our own wills, or the inventions and Traditions of men. Rom. 12. 1. 2. the contrary is irratio∣nal, as well as irreligious.
3. The increase of divine grace (received by faith in the Gospel) is by the rational exercise of our selves therein. Mat. 25. 29. with Heb. 5. 14.
4. The holy and honourable terms of the Gospel, on which the life and glory thereof is promised, and without which we may not expect it, renders it to be very rational and credible to men, no man in his right reason can conclude that God should seek to save a people in so wonderful away, but in the way of holiness, the contrary would render the Gospel incredible to all rational men.
5. It's rational, as well as Religious that we abhor all moral evils, sensual and brutish lusts, and to love all moral vertues and duties, and the contrary is irrational and immoral, as well as irreligious. The Moral law, or Ten Com∣mands given by Moses, is commonly understood to be the same for substance as is written in na∣ture, or rational and moral Philosophy in men. Rom. 2. 14, 15. Which the Gospel destroys not, but tends to perfect it in us, as it's administred to us by Christ. Rom. 3. 31. and 8. 4. 1 Cor. 9. 21. not as from mount Sinai, but as from mount Sion. Heb. 2. 18. 22. the sum and substance of the Law and Prophets is to teach men to love God above all, and their neighbours as them∣selves, to do to others, as they would they should do to them, and the Gospel teaches the same Mat. 22. 37. to 40. and 7. 12. and this is written in all men by nature, and is true rational and moral Philosophy, and true Gospel Divinity, and
 where it's not effected, it's by the souls captiva∣tion, by irrational, immoral, and sensual lusts; and how would the Divine Law of Christ, and in the Gospel united to our understandings and reason, effect it, if taken heed unto: A sin and shame it is, (and dreadful will be the issue there∣of) that many Learned men who account them∣selves above others, both in Philosophy and Di∣vinity, and yet are more immoral than many moral Heathens. And as both moral Philo∣sophy and Gospel Divinity unites in teaching the abhorrency of all ungodliness, with the practice of all the contrary vertues and duties, so would it teach us to abhor all persecution for Conscience sake, if attended to, it would teach us in this matter, to do to others, as we would they should do to us; the contrary being not only unchristian, but irrational. No man in his right reason would be content to be forced to believe and worship God as others do, contrary to his own light and con∣science, such in Justice, reason it self, and light of nature abhors; and it's likewise contrary to the Protestant Doctrine and Faith, which is, to make the Scriptures our rule in all matters of Faith and practice, and not to be compelled to believe as the Church believeth, which is con∣demned by Protestants to be the Popish Faith, and not the Faith of Christ.

And strange it seems to be, that Learned men who profess themselves to have most, both of Philosophy and Divinity, should be so great mis∣carriers herein: I think it may be said (without all just occasion of offence) that throughout all ages of Christianity, Learned men has lien at the bot∣tom of most of the persecutions for Conscience sake, surely it came not from their Philosophy or Divi∣nity, but from their enmity, pride, and pro∣phaneness, Ps. 10. 2. or from some carnal and corrupt ends, within themselves must be irratio∣nal and irreligious, or at best from blind and ig∣norant zeal, Joh. 16. 2. Phi. 3. 6.
It's true the Scripture warns us to take heed of being spoiled by Philosophy and vain deceit after the traditions of men, and the rudiments of the World, and not after Christ, Col. 2. 8, i. e. When our reason turns us aside from the Gospel either in matters of Faith or practice, being corruptly exercised, and so becomes vain and deceitful, and is not pure reason, that submits it self to the Divine Law of Christ in all things so far as it understands it.
And although Rational and Moral Philosophy was (and yet is) excellent in its time and place, and in itself (in its degree) spiritual, being of (and from) God (yet the Gospel is more spiritual) and by it, men formerly arrived to much of the
 knowledge of God and themselves, and so to a good life in moral virtues, (and yet might arrive to the same) and doubtless were then accepted of God, and may yet be so, where the Gospel is not known, yet where the Gospel comes it will not serve or avail us without the true faith and life of the Gospel, but if it (being captivated by sensual lusts) reject or neglect the Grace of life; it renders such the more liable to the Judgment and damnation threatned therein.


Learned Sirs,
The Reasons of my dedicating the ensuing Chri∣stian discourse unto you, are,
1. Because the things, discoursed on, are mat∣ters of great (if not of greatest) concern, to the name of God and Christ, the glorious Gospel of the blessed God, and the spiritual and eternal good of men, and therefore of weighttest concern to have the precedency in your meditations.
2. Because most of the things discoursed on are not Novel, but the controverted things of the past and present times, the Doctrine of the Sovereignty of God, as exercised towards men, the Doctrine of Election and reprobation, the general and special grace of God, &c. being the substance of the discourse, and that on which all depends. The eighth chapter may at first (probably) with some, seem most difficult, yet I doubt not, but is
 founded in, and fully comports with the universal design of God, and undertaking of Christ in the general grace to the World, in the restitution and world to come, in times to be effected, and seems to be of very great weight to be understood, and to have room in our Christian Faith as the top∣stone and glory thereof, and without which, we shall lose the understanding of (and Faith in) the greatest (if not the most glorious) part of Scrip∣ture and Gospel truth.
In the discourse I sometimes mention what some others have said about some of the things discour∣sed on, and especially two Books, viz. The Practical Discourse of the Sovereignty of God, and, The Death of Death by the Death of Christ: Not designing a particular answer to them, (nor had I at all mentioned them, had they not been sent in by some designedly to lead us aside from that which we believe to be the truth of the Gospel) but have stated the truth about these matters, to the best of mine understanding from Scripture light, which if true, the substance of both are answered and must fall to the ground. And let none count it strange, or tautologies, that I so often go over the same things in the dis∣course, it is to shew the incongruity of those in∣vented principles and practices with Scripture light and right reason, in all the ways mentioned,
 it likewise being the method of God in Scripture, frequently to mention the same things over and o∣ver again, designedly thereby to inculcate it on the memory and heart, that it might not be for∣gotten.
3. Because, I think we have ground enough (at least) to suppose, that the Apostasie from the Primitive faith, as it was then delivered to the Saints, has been too much ushered in by learned en, I suppose that it will easily appear, that in all the parts thereof, whether the Papabor others, some learned man (or men) lieth at the bottom thereof: And likewise has been chief actors in its propagation, and therefore it greatly concerns you now at last to be at work for God, Christ, the Gospel and good of men in good earnest, for disco∣very thereof and reformation therein: O that you might have your share in this matter! how might you honour God, and season the Nation with the truth of the Gospel both in faith and life, having the greatest opportunities and ad∣vantages in order thereunto, in the sincere endea∣vours of which you may expect Divine dire∣ction, assistance, and blessing; and O that this little Essay may tend to encourage herein, it being the common advantage and good of all, I really design; I hope I have not, I am sure I would not follow cunning devised Fables for the world,
 and if I am in any thing mistaken, I would glad∣ly be informed therein from Scripture light and right reason, Isa. 8. 20. the things being of great, if not of greatest concern, and (if I mistake not) are all of them the revealed things of Divine wisdom, and therefore it belongs to us to be en∣quiring thereinto; and on these grounds, I am not willing to doubt your ready and inoffensive reception of my poor endeavours in these great matters, with this my Dedication.
Considering first that you know, though all men are not skilled in the Langudges, nor in arti∣ficial Philosophy, yet it is radically in all rational men, without which they could not be capable ei∣ther of artificial attainments, or of Divine tea∣chings.
2, That you know, God is at liberty in his teaching, (and always has been so) and therefore may (as formerly he has done) led the unlearned in∣to truth asson as the learned, and sometimes be∣fore them, Luke 10. 21. 1 Cor. 1. 26. to 29. Therefore let not the Learned despise the unlear∣ned, nor the unlearned judge the learned, but prize and own the teachings of God in each other, let us be humble and self denying, let us own truth, and reject error where ere we find it, and thus it will be where Christ and Grace rules. O that none of us all may give the Lord cause to say of
 us as of his people of old, Hos. 8. 12. I have written to him the great things of my law, and they were counted as a strange thing. I desire that none of the great things God has written to us in his Gospel law of grace, may be accounted strange by us.
And thus (not to detain you any longer in this Dedication) I commit the ensuing Discourse to your most serious considerations (and the like un∣to all into whose hands it may come) if any thing therein carry not Scripture authority in it, let it not be credited, but if it do, take heed and be∣ware how you contradict it; this and no other is expected by him who longeth for the manifesta∣tion of the Gospel in its truth, purity, and power, the glory of God, and the good of all men.

Fare ye well.

