



Madam,
AFter that I was perswaded to let the
world see these Receits, I thought it
policy to give them as much allowance of
advantage, as they were capable of, and to this
end, I have presumed to offer them to your Ho∣nour,
for your probatum est. The Sermons
never yet were made more publike, then the pri∣vate
Chappel belonging to this Family, where
they have been offered to the ears of those that
have importuned me to venture them upon a
publike censure. My designe from the first be∣ginning
of that private Lecture, was to satis∣fie
diverse doubting Christians, in severall ca∣ses

of conscience, if God might but honour me
so far as to remove strawes out of the way of their
faith. The most of those cases, herein contained,
were such as in my little time I had gathered
from the experiences of divers; and possibly it
was but my duty, to endeavour to satisfie them
in my Pulpit, who had almost set me in my
closet. And had not I had their Imprimatur,
(so much nothing is there of mine in them) they
had never been offered as a Sacrifice at another
Altar. If God hath sanctified them but to one
soul, I dare not call them common or unclean.
If what hath satisfied my own, and possibly
some others spirits, may be honoured with further
successe, let the Physician of souls have the glo∣ry,
and I onely more of his work (which is a
wages to it self.) I am confident as your Ho∣nours
eye passeth the several pages, your Ladi∣ship
will espie some stone turned out of the way,
upon which your Honours own soul stumbled.
Let it minde your Ladiship to say with David,
Psal. 116. Ah, Lord! Truly I am thy servant,
I am thy servant; and the childe of thine
hand maid, for thou hast loosed my bonds.
I shall be honoured if any thing in these Papers,

occasion but one meditation of praise. Madam,
I am confident your Honour is past this rough
stumbling way. It will be yet sweetnesse, for your
Honour to remember, the dayes of old, though
you have led captivity captive. I have here,
but begun my work, answering some few cases,
according to the ability God hath measured to me.
The greate part is yet behinde, vi Such as a∣rise
from the mijudging the effects of faith.
If this be acceptable, I may possibly hereafter,
venture a second part upon the publike Chari∣ty.
My single aim in this work, hath been to
prepare the way of the Lord, and it is (Ma∣dam!)
an Honourable employment to be a Pio∣neer
to the Lord of Hosts. I have neither
sought to enter line these plain Sermons with rea∣ding,
nor yet glaze them with Rhetorick; I
knew, leaves of antiquity, would make no plai∣sters
for wounded consciences; nor would it be
the smell or look, but the inward vertue of the
salve, which must heal the sores of a troubled
spirit. I have often wished that some man, whose
years had taught him more divine wisdom and
experience in these secret cures, might have pre∣vented
me in this work▪ Alas, Madam! your

Honour knows, I am but an infant of dayes, let
not your Honour expect much▪ but remember
that he who writes, hath not yet exceeded the
twenty sixth yeer of his age; and that as his days
have been few, so they have most of them
been very evil too. But my bowels yearned, to
see so many poor souls lye wounded, and panting
for life in the way of our Ministery, and every
one in the midst of this Pamphlet age, passing by,
and but looking on, if not possibly another way.
Many have handled notions, and disputed nice∣ties
in Divinity▪ Others more profitably, have
laboured in practicall paints, (in which God hath
honoured this age, in which we live, to excell for∣mer
Centuries of Time:) But few have made
it their work (except collaterally) to remove the
souls obstructions, which soon put the whole
frame of their spirits in a sad distemperature, and
upon the removth of which, depends so much
for the Christians thriving and growth, though
he be fed at the daintiest tables: This hath made
me (though the meanest of those that labour for
the Lord) to do the  in casting
a directr eye upon their wound▪ where I have
failed, my eyes are nto the great Physician to

supply the deficiences of his poor creature, who
in this hath indeavoured to do nothing but for his
sake, and those on earth, who are his Mysticall
pieces. How sweet (Madam!) shall be the
countenances of the glorified ones, when the beau∣ty
of the Lord Jesus Christ (the highest flower in
glory) shall be fully transparent in their cheeks,
clarified from the duskish shadow that corrupti∣on
casts upon them? Me thinks it will be glori∣ous
to see, and it is sweet but to think, how
beautifully David appears before the throne of
the Lamb, without the visible track of a tear
upon his cheeks, who here quartered so many
nights amongst floods and billows of sorrow,
and was so often startled at so poor a querie as,
Where is thy God become? Let your Honour
lift up your head; The day of your redemp∣tion
draweth nigh. The Lord Jesus is pulling
out his handkerchief laced with love, to wipe all
tears from your eyes, and hastning to bow the
heavens and come down, to Gather his Saints
together, even those that have made a cove∣nant
with him vvith their lips, and trans∣late
them from this valley of tears, to that place,
where they shall hunger and thirst no more,

but be satisfied with his likenesse, who is the
brightnesse of his Fathers glory. I humbly beg
your Honours pardon for my presumption. Your
Honours former honouring me, with the acce∣ptation
of some former labours, hath emboldned
me, and I know your Ladiships spirit is so low,
that it can rejoyce in stooping to take a message
from the Prince of glory (though from the mouth
of his meanest Embassador:) In which confi∣dence,
I humbly offer these worthlesse indeavours
to your Ladiships hands; and with my humble sup∣plications
at the throne of Grace, for your Ho∣nours
progresse in Grace here, and happinesse in
Glory here after, I rest,

From my study
in Chappel-field-house
in Norwich. Aug.
17. 1648.
