



APologies serve onely to multiply
Discourses, and the itch of dis∣pute
becomes the Scab of the
Church: Controversies being ei∣ther
the Ebullitions of indigested Idleness,
symptomes of distemper'd zeale, or inebri∣ations
of Passion, while men in distractions
ly idle, seriously foolish, or drunke with
dispute, forget the Holy Ghost to talke of
an holy Church; and by relinquishing their
Charity lose the Communion of Saints:
most Polemick Divines being no more to be
beleev'd then Lawyers, who have least right
to that they pleade for, and doe it onely for
the fees of promotion, while the people are
wrung by the eares, they easily remitt their
ear-rings, to reare a golden Calfe to wor∣ship,
or forge one out of silver, each Coun∣try
being as able as Ephesus from a silver
forge to produce a Diana. Who phancy pro∣fit
raise Idols of their Phancy: gaine pro∣fits
by maintaining, & Prophets to maintain
them. And no coyne can be so adulterate

as not to passe currant, if it bee but stamp'd
with the face of Religion. I would not act
high treason against heav'n by adultera∣ting
my Kings Coyne, or by an uncharita∣ble
clipping of it take away the Crowne,
and obscure the Image of my Redeemer;
or by a pruriginous affectation of scribling
increase the Scab of Church or State; or
that the Luxury of my phancy should like
the ranknes of other's wanton out into weeds
in the garden of the Spouse. If errour
would not triumph over tacit truth; silence
argues no assent, and introduces no supposi∣tion
of guilt; though all may accuse the
sallies of a prodigious curiosity, none should
the excursions of a rasher pen; the spitle
cast on me from inane and jejune noddles
should only mortifie my quick silver, and it
heale the itch of my curiosity, the inke
which I have tooke from the pens of all a∣ges
be appli'd to cure the tetters of my own
dilating vanity and not profus'd on others.
Male de te loquuntur sed mali, men speake
evill of thee, but evill men, was the comfort
of a wise man, which I must not be intituled
to whom you can discommend; you for
whom ever silenc'd enmity studies commen∣dations,
they who cannot approve your
judgement, admire your knowledge; say
you have a greater Library in you, then you

have lost, yet have you lost a greater Li∣brary
then the County which you inrich
with your selfe a Panoply of knowledge
can glory in. I could not bewale but ra∣ther
congratulate such a losse: For should
the hot zeale of some Iack Straw of Refor∣mation
raise a combustion might fire halfe
of our Anglican Libraries, (nay was ev'n
your Roman Vatican in a flame with halfe
of the worlds Libraries, which by kindling
the flames of contention by disordering the
Vniverse seem to antidate its combustion)
if a teare could quench the fire, I should
number it among my sinnes at the expense
of so much water to redeeme them.
Error is of a teeming Constitution, this
Hydra's heads multiply by amputation,
there is no end of writing of Bookes the
wisest of men dead said, and the wisest of
men living lament. Study is a wearinesss
to the flesh, I wish most mens studies were
not onely a wearines to their own but all
flesh the effect of few mens wit & most mens
idlenesse, while there is nothing new under
the Sun, not onely bookes but men are tran∣scribed,
men are liv'd ore againe: the Pytha∣gorean
Metempsychy is verified: the re∣volution
of planets reduce the same consti∣tutions,
same errors: hence Learning is in
the circle and not in the Progresse: error

hath alter'd her modes and garbs with
times, someties more gaudy, better painted,
trim'd and drest to become more tempting,
but still hath carried her old rotten body
through all her veils and disguises ds∣coverable
to a curious inquirie. That
which sends occasion to opinion to proclaim
most men knowing, administers to me no
infrequent suspition of their ignorance,
multitude of bookes, variety of notions like
to Cadmus Souldiers by mutuall quarrells
destroy each other. Light and darkenesse
both met in the Chaos, but it was a worke of
omnipotency to separate them. I cannot bee
induc'd to beleeve either the greatest reader
or writer, the best Clerk-men write much
of little, because they know not how to com∣prehend
much in little: a fly buzzes more
about nothing, then a Bee with all her ho∣ney;
most write much to instruct the world,
they know little, the Iliads of their labours
may be compris'd within a nutshell, and
that nutshell crackt found without a kernel.
Uoluminous Tostati dilude the mountains
of our hopes with a ridiculous mouse, who
plac'd in competition with a single sheeted
Mercury may be orevalued, while in floods
of words scarce occurs a drop of reason, and
these by malice onely impostum'd Authors
betray their owne corruption, or their tu∣mid

bodies of controversies are onely sym∣ptoms
of a drscracy, and show an Hydrop∣sick
constitution in Religion.
But while these scrap-gatherers pick
reversions from common places, and poore
truth imprisoned for her plaine dealing,
fed at the Almes basket of vncharitable
times is scarce kept from famishing, for
you a reputed treasurie of knowldge to cast
no mite into her treasury; while these
standing pools retaine corruption, you who
are an ambulatory Library, not to stream
with excellence, & like the Philosophers E∣lixir
have as some say the price of al things
in Epitome; yet you your selfe know no va∣lue,
this is a miracle which may refute
yours and their adversaries who can be∣leeve
miracles have a cessation: But lest
you Sir should be lost in your Laborynth of
your own praises as the world in admirati∣on
of your intricate excellence, be pleas'd
to know Sir, that the opinion of what you
know cannot make you speake wisely of
what you know not, and the Prerogative of
greatnesse is no priviledge for unworthi∣nesse;
he may be evill himselfe who speaks
good of another upon knowledge, but he can
never be good himselfe who speakes evill
upon suspition of any one: though you are
pleas'd to say I make a jest of Religion, yet

produce one jest which did not give an ear∣nest
of truth. I must confess I have not lov'd
a solemnity in folly, or serious Ildenesse,
like children to contend with a passions
vehemency for cock pins and hobbyhorses;
if I have admitted that noi bonum ludere
cum sanctis, it was onely when they were
dress'd like unto Bartholmew Faire babies
in a garbe onely to be made sport with;
(honour their ashes which have been tem∣ples
of the Holy Ghost, treasuries of know∣ledge,
& Cundit pipes of salvation, and nei∣ther
my pen nor tongue shal bedrible their
ashes, which to speake Philosophically may
retaine some perfume of their sanctities. I
am not ignorant of the stories of Gervase
Montanus, Babylas, nor all the names which
sanctifie your year, or with their owne
bloods are writ in the Rubrick of the
Church: But yet I must beleeve, Honoran∣di
sunt Charitate non servitute, and that
best honour we can do them is to imitate
their vertues and not bely their ashes, and
make banquets for the serpent the father
of lies, which thus may be said to have food
out of the dust, which not to administer
cannot intitle me to your livery, viz.
A Heretick in Divinity, a Heretick in
Philosophy, and in Physick, but not to a
Physitians religion which you can please

your selfe by calling Atheism, but if you
were acquainted with much felicity as to be
intituled to the knowledge of Dr Brownes
Religio Medici, you might bee induced
to beleeve a Physitian still may prove an
Evangelist, and I hope I shall not prove
besse by bringing you the good tydings of
the Religion you have lost; and though it be
true as you say, I am none of the young men
who see visions, yet I am content to give you
the honour of an old man who dreameth
dreams; not that you have truth reveal'd
to you sleeping, but are content to snore in
your errours; and please your self with th
imaginations of truth, Chymera's of your
owne distracted phancy, or the dreame of
melancholy Monks: if I recede from any,
it shall be by their receding from them∣selves,
and as Apostacy is but a recession,
and Heresie which you inculcate an electi∣on,
I am content with S. Paul after the way
you call here sie to worship God by, election
of truth without supposing it taken 
in Thyestiles expugnatio civitatis,
but more especially the holy city of God, his
holy Catholique and Apostolik Church
militant on earth and triumphant in Hea∣ven,
yet I may that which is patient in
the purgatory of your errors.
And though you are suppos'd a Goliah

able to defy a whole host of Israels, ye
a poore contemptible boy whose best com∣pany
hath been sheepe, silly creatures
in a wildernesse of errour, if when a Lyon
roar'd on him, one of yours E. S. I. who like
a Lyon goeth about seeking whom he may
devoure, he tooke him and rent with his
owne arguments, shall he not dare to en∣counter
you out of the slender scrip of his
owne reason; and with pebbles drawn from
a brooke of clearer testimonies aime at your
forehead that  or  pontificiall
infallibility in the head of your Church,
and then amputate it by the two edg'd
sword of verity, and the whole host of delu∣sion
your Catholique body of error, cui fu∣mus
pro fundamento shall evaporate, yet
by wrinkling and shrinking truth, I shall
not bring the Church in that narrow com∣passe
to give private spirits leave to ruf∣fle
her, or make her lesse Catholick or not
infallible, which could she be, she might
cease to be holy; nor could I be perswaded
that the pontificiall robes carried holiness to
the Lord, that Vrim and Thuminim per∣fection
and light were relative to the Mi∣ter,
and the lips of that high Priest onely
carried knowledge, I could fly the bosom of
the common mother, but since from di∣stemper'd
parents we exuge poyson, not nu∣triment,
you must give leave to decline

those breasts which flow not with the sin∣cere
milk of the word, and believe the body
distemper'd, and of a richetty constituti∣on:
whose head so exceeds the proportion;
had infallibilitie a tie above the, intention
of a Priest in Collation of orders; to the
proof of which, though I cannot expresse
the exactnesse of pedantism in quotation,
yet I shall not be warp'd from that may ex∣presse
ingenuity, and satisfie a pretender
to it in a rural retirement, having no book
but one of an imperfect edition, forc'd to
read my self, ubi multa desiderantur & à
desunt nonnulla, but nothing that may
inform of truth, though I can make use
onely of some confus'd notes for the engra∣phical
part of memory, yet in the agra∣phical
part I shall not show so great a de∣ficiency
in the Mnenoncal Art as may
render truth suspected; truth shal be my aim,
I may fly high, rove, yet never farre from
the mark, and perhaps escape the falts
of most Polemicks, who resemble a piece of
Arras, where there is much in representa∣tion,
and nothing in reality: or Plutarchs
heartlesse fish with a sword assimilating
body, want both vigor and acutenesse: the
discourses of umbraticall Doctors on all
sides like bodies bred in the shade, cannot

endure the Sun, or a shower: in their more
serious retirements affecting nothing be∣yond
Domitians humour of catching of
flies: which I shall without torture inforce
them to confesse: Could you but dispossesse
your self of prejudicacy; truth is a garment
that time can wear; who pretend to grey∣headed
error, rather dscredit it then pa∣tronize
it. Lay aside those great names of
Seraphick and Angelick Doctors; look not
on any Religion through the opticks of
blear-ey'd prejudice, as I am confident you
make not yours squint to self-interest.
I have neither giv'n up my name to re∣gall
or papall supremacy, neither protested,
covenanted, or ingag'd to any faction; hee
who aims at truth by the Roman, or any
other bias, wil never come nere the mark:
the fire of self-love, as it is kindled by the
breath of the Father of lies so it partaketh of
the quality of his flames, to be without light:
since it keepeth us in darknesse to our selves,
& an imperception of the true dimensions of
others. This liking or disliking of others,
is but the spurious issue of philautie
which undervalues al, meets not in a compli∣ance
with the humour: some natures as Seneca
observes, are so shady, as they think every
thing turbulent and stormy, that is even, in

a meridian lght. Some like to old rusticks
are content to meet in the Church porch of
tradition to talk of mundan a affairs, which
care not to enter into the Church to serve
God in his Ordinances: others resemble
young Novices which creep into the
Church by holes to angle and ring the
bells backward, neglecting the key of tra∣dtion:
others by curious inquiries are put
into a whee, and are circled so long be∣twixt
proving the Scripture by tradition
and tradition by Scripture, till the Devill
find a means to dispute them into infideli∣ty;
and make them believe neither. Most
mens lips and pens open wide like to a mo∣nilesse
purse; nothing comes out of this▪
and what is worth nothing out of them: yet
this nothing must be plac'd in competition
with nothing lesse then salvation: the
tradition of the Church must be a satis∣factory
proof to believe by Divine faith,
(if we may believe a Papist) Scripture,
Gods word. If wee ask why we must be∣lieve?
it is replied: because the Church
is infallibly govern'd by the holy Ghost: if
we inquire how? they run to revelation
guilty of enthusiasm which they object to
others: or if they offer to prove it by Scrip∣ture,
as most do, it is an acknowledgement

that the Scripture is of higher proof then
the Churches tradition: thus these imper∣tinents
touch nether Heaven nor Earth,
in their discourses they open an entry into a
room, but shut it presently. Some elate tradi∣tion
above Divinity: the principles of any
conclusion must be of more cred then the
conclusion it self: the Articles of Faith,
the Trinity, Resurrection and Communion,
if the conclusions by which they are prove∣able
is Ecclesiastical tradtion; it must fol∣low
that the Churches tradition is of more
credit, when the Faith of the Articles must
be finally resolv'd into the veracity of the
Churches testimony. Others depresse tra∣dition
even below humanity; are so far from
equalizing it with rational dscourses, as
they prefer the dreams of phanaticks before
the Churches tradition: without which a
rayling Song thrust upon an evil air,
is not worse musick then the confused notes
which some intitle the harmony of Scrip∣tures;
and if they know Gods Law by heart,
they have no heart to his Law, and after all
these pretences of Knowledge and illumi∣nation,
like to the Egyptian sages can pro∣duce
nothing but frogs and blood: Nor doe
the Exotique Seminaries furnish us better
then the weeds which the ranknesse of our

own soil hath cast up: Apostolicall pru∣ging-hookes
are exchang'd for San∣guinary
instruments, involving the world
in blood, and staining their own lives▪
at ther deaths leaving nothing behind
but a memorial of some hideous impietie:
while with styles solemnly religious, and
even Seraphical devotions we find more
principl'd in Caesar Borgia, and Nicholas
the Florentine then Elemented in Religion,
not erecting a Spiritual Kingdome for
Christ, but a temporal for the Pope; which
he honest good man, solemnly vows and
protests against; for all the Bishops of Rome
at their Creation, make a solemn vow and
confess to observe inviolably all Ordinances
made in the first eight generall Coun∣cells,
in which is provided that all Causes
be determined by the Bishop of the same Pro∣vince
where they are begun.
This might check the exorbitancy of the
Roman See, and confine Tibur within her
own limits, if sober men having neither
the inebriations of passion or self-interest
might be judges: Neither might that
impertinent question of triflers trouble
the world: Where was your Religion before
Luther? (retorted ingeniously by S. H.
Wotton to a pragmatical Monk) where

yours is not to be found now, in the word of
God: But I may modestly and charitably
averre, where yours was if you have any,
and where much of what you call funda∣mentall
in yours, now is not to be found in
the word of God.S. Hie in Psal. 133. Ecclesia non in parieti∣tibus
Consistit sed in dogmatum veritate:
Ecclesia est ibi ubi fides vera: one imperti∣nent
question is not ill required with ano∣ther,
when a Romanist is ask'd where the
Churches visibility and their judges infal∣libility
was,S. Hier. ad Lucif. post med. tom. 2. Cum ingemuit totus orbis &
Arrianum se esse miratus est; and even the
infallible Guide, Liberius even a Pope de∣coy'd
into Arransm: or while he was in∣tainted,
if a Pope was what you would have
him, an infallble Iudge, is he not to be be∣lieved,
when he answers the Emperor with an
esto quod solus sum,Thod. l. 2. Hist. Eccl. dialog. inter Con∣stant Im∣per. & Lib. pap. 16. non tamen fidei cau∣sa
periclitatur: olim tres soli sunt reperti qui
regis mandata resisterent. If a particular
Nation doe what the whole world did, sigh,
and wonder at her self so soon turn'd Le∣per,
it need not be the wonder of a wise man?
they who sacrifice their Religion to suc∣cesses
must set up Fortune for a deity;
which I believe is the World Idol, who
Persian-like adore the rising Sun;
and not like Israelites; they will not believe

God as much in the Cloud as in the Pillar,
though the one is the more glorious object.
Can an intelligent man suppose religion
dead in the Primitive persecutions, because
buried alive in the Caves? or ours lost be∣cause
some of ours are necessitated to imi∣tate
them, and you, if you have any Religi∣on
in this Kingdom? yet this meeting with
weak judgements, and strong passions a∣gainst
the time, hath gain'd not a few
Proselytes to Rome, and some seemingly
learn'd,Vin. Lir. Cont. Haer. c. 23. & 24. whose error like that of Origen,
& Tertullian magna suit in ecclesiâ dei
tentatios
While the Priest which should bee the
lungs of the Church to receive in the in∣fluences
of Heaven, and temper the heart
of Religion, sucking in the contagious air
of popular phancies are tainted; and have
brought an hectick fever in the body Ec∣clesiastick,
subjecting it to continuall
heats by the exasperation of malignant
humours, through the obstructions of self-interest,
ignorance and the grosse matter
of ambition: but I shall endeavour to
trie these lungs, and let out the puru∣lent
matter which occasions the heat of
disputes and cold fits of Charitie, infal∣lible
Symptoms of a Consumptin in

the body of Religion: and though
there may be Physitians more experienc'd;
yet the Domestick Doctor is alwaies
call'd into Consultation, as best acquaint∣ed
with the Constitution: there may be per∣fumes
which may deceive those who con∣verse
with putrid lungs at usuall distan∣ces;
yet I, who have been intimately Con∣versant
with Priest and Parson, and even
protostickler of Schisms, which have at∣triv'd
florent an Age with Civil Warrs,
dissected men living as well as dead, ha∣ving
read both men and books, may pre∣scribe
opposite remedies, having those
 mollifying praeparations
which Hippocrates requires his Phisitian to
have upon all occasions: And though I
have arriv'd at Knowledge by prodigious
curiosities; yet if we believe Alchymists,
he who can fix quick-silver may make
gold: and I doubt not God of his mercy
will fix me volatile as Mercury, and pro∣duce
that Elixir, which by its fluxion
may convert the most obdurate metall in∣to
Gold; and having wandred long out of
the Ark, not knowing where' to rest my
foot for the deluge of errors, I may from
the tops of the Mountains, the holy Fa∣hers,
return with the Olive branch of

peace to the Ark, Gods holy, Catholicke,
and Apostolick Church; from which onely
Ravens fly, those birds of prey, whose de∣light
is in ruine, and  devour mankind;
which is far from him, who is a friend to
all, and yours by an inviscerate dilection,

