


THe troubled state of Affairs, which is every where to be seen at this day, is in it self sad; but yet (to them which do but heedfully mark the way of Gds works all along of old) it seem∣eth to speak the hope of some excellent change.
2. To wit, even as in the beginning of all things, God brought light out of darkness, & a most beautiful order out of the confused Chas: So in the course of his governing, what∣ever he suffers to come to pass, to the disturbance of the Sons of men, all that he always turneth to good unto them if they be god∣ly at least, to exercise them; if they be wicked also, frequently to bring them out of the darkness of ignorance, into the fellowship of the light. So that the Church evermore even by her very ruines may grow either bigger or better.
3. Even in the many vicissitudes of that one people of Israel, if they be observed, it is apparent that all their chastisements, cap∣tivities, removals here and there, were always onely fresh occa∣sions of declaring the works of God.
4. Who is it which seeth not that even Abraham the Father of the Faithful, with travels, dangers and promises, in appearance a long time but vain, was therefore so tired out, that his faith be∣ing thus trained up, he might learn to bear up in hpe against hope? and that the Church might have a very glorious patern of
 that Heroick faith, which utterly vanquisheth all the difficulties in the World.
5. That therefore his seed was in such an horrible manner op∣pressed by the Egyptian bondage, that in Pharaoh there might be taken an occasion to shew forth the power of God, and thereby the name of God in all the Earth: God himself is his own witness, Exod. 9.16.
6. What could be more sad to see, then that the People of God being overcome by their Enemies the Philistines, should lose even the symbol of the Presence of God, and the hope of help from Heaven; viz. the most sacred Ark of the Covenant? that this very Ark being taken by the enemies, carried by them in triumphs, and brought into the Temple of Dagon, should be made such a laughing stock before that Devillish Idol and Idolators? and yet even this very terrible disaster and dispensation, to what excellent purpose did it serve, to set forth the glory of God, and detect the vanity of Idols?
7. 'Twas sad, that the people of Judah, and in them the seed of David (to which so great promises were made, even to all generations) and also many holy men were led into the Babylo∣nish Captivity; yet even there Ezekiel being raised up to be a Prophet, with what notable Revelations did he illuminate the Church? and Daniel by wonderful works and sufferings in the same place, how great and many Kings and people did he bring to the knowledge of the true God? as it is to be seen in his Book, Chap. 2. ver. 46, 47. & 4.1, 2, 3. & 6.26, &c.
8. The Plots of Haman against the dispersed people of God, the Jews, how far did they proceed? they were doomed to perish all in one day, and yet this very dismal exploit, how great sal∣vation, joy, honour, did it bring to that people, for a monument unto all Posterity of the Providence of God, as always watchful for the good of his people? as is plain in the book of Esther.
9. How great was the rage of Antiochus against this people? but did it not produce so many glorious Martyrs, Maccabean men of valour, with so many excellent cordials to the Church, for the experience of Omnipotent Divine Providence, directing all things according to its own pleasure?
10. The dispersion of the Apostolical Church at Jerusalem
 was very sad, and yet it was nothing but the dissemination of the Gospel amongst other Nations (Acts 4.8. &c.) The banish∣ment of John into the Isle of Patmos, with how vast a treasure of Prophesie did it enrich the Church?
11. Also, how many soever any time afterwards, either assaults, or persecutions without, or bickerings and contentions, heresies or schisms within, brak forth in the Church; so many occasions evermore were found, either of setting out the most glorious Army of Martys, or of compiling the most famous Writings, and there∣by confounding the wicked by the constancy of the Saints, and the further irradiating the godly with the clearer light of the Truth.
12. Finally, touching the last times of the World, which now are, although the great Prophet our Lord hath foretold terri∣ble things; viz. That it shall come to pass that we shall hear of wars, and rumours of wars, Mat. 24.6. That Nation shall rise up against Nation, and that there shall be Famine and Earthquakes. ver. 7. yet he hath added, See that ye be not troubled, for all these things must come to pass, but the end is not yet, (ib.) For the Gospel of the Kingdom shall be preached in all the world, for a witness unto all Nations, and then shall the end come, ver. 14.
13. Then let there be even now before our faces (through the violence of second causes (howbeit to the very great grief of the godly) Nation dashing against Nation, Kingdoms and Empires falling upon one another: Let the earth tremble with horrour, and let Cities, Churches, Schools, yea, and all places private and publique, be piled up in their own ruines; yet for all this, that same God which formed the most beautiful Structure of the World, out of the most rude Vast; which also he powerfully pre∣serveth, and wisely governeth hitherto for the sake of his Church, knowing how to produce even out of these concussions, that which is better then we all can think; to wit (as he hath promised) that the Gospel may at last pass away from sharply chastised Christen∣dome, to the other Nations of the World: That so (as it was long ago) our stumbling may be the enriching of the World, and our diminishing, the riches of the Gentiles, Rom. 11.12,
14. The consideration of this so much to be admired Eternal
 Providence, doth gently allay the grief which I have taken by reason of the ruine of the Church of my native Countrey; of the Government of which (so long as she kept he station) the laws are here described, and set forth in view: Even my self alas, be∣ing the very last Supeintendent of all, am fain before your eyes, O Chu ches! to shut the dor afte me: And that I may shut it faithuly, I determined by this sh meditation, to justifie the Divine judicial proceedings against us; as also to furnish my self, together with them which are yet left of mine, and whosoever will take heed of miscarrying by our example, with some comfort, and some advice.
15. For the deluge of most raging Pesecutions for these forty years, hath s defaced us, that in all Bohemia and Moravia, we have not verily so much as one Church remaining, onely some few reliques of the flock dispersed through the neighbouring Kingdoms. Moreover, by reason of the continuance of our Ba∣nishment, we are come to that pass, that near all the Pastors of the Churches, all indeed withut exception of the Presidents, Bishops, Superintendents, Deacons and Archdeacons, are perished from among the living: Saving onely my self alone, who for the hope of a Restauration, being in the year, 1632. chosen (according to the will and votes of the Church assembled in a Synod) by the Presidents then, yet alive even now but one onely (with a few Ministers my Brethren, and one onely Colleague out of Polonia) do survive alone, during the good pleasure of the Author of life. For howbeit, upon our lat dispersion in Polonia, not full four years since, I endeavoured by all means my utmost, to prevent my being left alone the last of all; yet it pleased not God to give success to the counsels hereunto given, for since that time, those of the chief, which might have succeeded, are perished from among the living.
16. But yet I would not have these things to be so taken, as if in my solitude, and by my departure hence, I feared or foretold the final end of the Church in my Countrey. I know, that the Church being founded upon the Rock of Eternity can∣not fail, viz. the Catholick: And yet examples testifie, that par∣ticular Churches are sometimes overthrown by the hand of an an∣gry God, that according to his good pleasure others may be planted, or
 else the same otherwise: Yea, God himself attesteth, The end is come upon my people Israel, I will not again pass by or spare them any more, Amos 8.2. and again, when the destruction threatned was now come to Baruch, Thou saidst, wo is me now, for the Lord hath added grief to my sorrow: Thus saith the Lord, that which I have built I will pull down; and that which I have planted, I will pluck up, &c. Jer. 45.3, 4. Finally, the Church her self being overthrown, speaking concerning her self thus, Our end draweth near, our days are fulfilled, our end is come, Lam. 4.18.
17. Nor yet is it to be thought, that Elias offended when complaining that he was left alone, he was afraid as concerning the Church: for in this his solitude and carefulness, he was raised up with Divine Consolation, and also instructed with counsel, for the appointing of his Successor, 1 Kings 19.14, &c. which I also with full trust expecting from the same everlasting goodness, (if notwithstanding God should call me to depart out of this life, without present comfort, yet) will say with the last of those seven Maccabean Brethran Martyrs, Let the anger of the Omnipo∣tent which is come upon our generation for ou sins, rest upon me and my Brethren, 2 Mac. 7.38. but if neither by this prayer, I may obtain, that the anger of God should conclude in me, but at last our Mother must also dye as there, (ver. 41.) What shall I do?
18. It is a cutom in use among the Heathen, that they which dye without an Heir, transfer their fortunes to strangers, even whom they please; insomuch, as some of their Kings, being the last of their line, have made the people of Rome heir of their Kingdoms (so Attalus King of Pergame, Ptolomie of Cyrene, Egypt, and others.) Why may not I also so provide for the making good of my trust, if it should be the will of God, that I should be taken away without (any one such as should succeed me) a Successor.
19. But then, to whom shall I transfer our goods, or what are those goods? for all are lost. Nay, but by the Grace of God, there is yet something left to be beueathed; neither are they all wanting to whom it may be disposed, both friends and foes. Now then to foes we leave those things which are, or else may yet
 be taken away; viz. outward good things, as Churches, Lands, Schools, &c. yea, the lives also of thse few of us which are yet escaped, if it so please the World-disposing God: even as he was pleased t deal with Christ, who being crucified, had not one∣ly his garments, but his very life given to the Souldiers for a prey.
20. But to you friends (after the example of our eternal Ma∣ster) we commend better treasures, even our well-belved Mo∣ther, the Church, take you now the care hereof in our rooms, what∣ever it shall please God to do unto her, whether to restre her a∣mongst us, or when she is deceased at home, to se her to life elsewhere. You have just cause indeed to love he, even when dead, who whilet yet living, went before you in her god exam∣ples of Faith and Patience, even now unto the third Genera∣tion.
21. But how shall I commend to you that which now is nt to be found? what charge can be given or taken of that which is not: I answer, it is no unusual thing to erect Grave-stones for deceased friends, that their memory may not easily wear away: Yea, and if in their lives they shined in acts of vertue, we pourtray the countenance of those very vertues for a mirrour to posterity. Moreover also, God himself when he took away and laid waste his peoples Land, City, Temple, because of their unthankefulness for his blessings, he would still have the Basis of the Altar to be left in its place, upon which after ages (when they should be returned to themselves, and to God) might build again, Ezra 3. ver. 3. If then by the grace of God, there hath been found in us (as wise men and godly have sometimes thought, as will after in its proper place be made to appear) any thing true, any thing honourable, any thing just, any thing pure, any thing to be loved, and of good report, and if any vertue, and any praise, care must be taken that it may not dye with us when we dye; and at least that the very foundations be not buried in the rubbish of present ruines, so that the generation to come should not be able to tell where to finde them; and indeed, this care is taken, and provision is made on this behalf, by this our trust entrusted in your hands.

22. Indeed I reckoned this as already done, having some while since presented you with the History of Johannes Lasitius, a noble man of Polonia, lately printed at Amsterdam, containing (as his words are) memorable passages of the Ecclesiastical Discipline, Customs, Decrees of the Brethren of Bohemia. Which present, though they t whom it was commended, did testifie by their loving aspect and friendly speech, that it was not unacceptable to them, yet they did acquaint me, that they in England judged it expe∣dient that there should be another peice written about the same matters, having a plainer title, viz. The way of the Discipline and Ecclesiastical Order, in the Accord of the Brethren of Bohemia. I answered, that that was published by our Fathers; which use not to commend their own; and that this would ra∣ther be performed more fully and exactly by some person of ano∣ther Countrey, who upon that account might be an Admirer of our Order; and which would give more ample satisfaction in these things: But my friends were instant with me, and unani∣mously urged the putting out of the formerly mentioned work; so that I made them a promise, I would satisfie their desire in this matter.
23. I therefore save my credit, and behold here I send that which I was requested, with manifold Copies! in the substance of the matter I have changed nothing; it being not mine, but the Churches publique piece: Onely where it was judged pertinent, and to good purpose, to set down some things of special reference, that the close bands of that Order might be the better per∣ceived, and the practice more easily observed, I have there added some notes, more fully explaining that which was briefly spoken.
24. And because the Preface seemed something dry and insuf∣ficient for the information of Foreigners, I have premised a short Historical Narration; viz. How that the Churches of Slavo∣nia being planted by the Apostles themselves, propagated by Hierom, Cyril, Methudius, took root especially in the Coun∣trey of Bohemia, and run up to a head and ripened in the Ʋnity of the Brethren of Bohemia: So that this may be useful for the better understanding of the sequel.

25. Farewel, Holy Brethren, and best w but the use of a double hour upon me, while I acuaint you with the conflicts and sorrows of my Church, and especially the ways of our Ecclesiastical ac∣cord. I commend you to the Spirit of Grace, may he by that of the Apostle (Let a l things be done decenty, and in oder) being written on your heart, compose, cncorporate, consolidate you all (even the whole body, with his most glorious Head, and all the members of his Political and Mystical bdy, with one anther, with the band of faith, love, and eternal concord, even indisslu∣ble; that as Brittain hath been behold of late, the sad tragical stage of Contentions, so now it may be a lively pattern of Concord, to the perfecting of the power and glory of Gd, and the happy treading down of the Enemies, under your Great Constantine, (not called out of, but recalled into ritain, in site of the Max∣entians and Licinianus.) Finally, to make your Chrch by the assistance of God, after so many shakings, fair as the Moon, clear as the Sun, and terrible as an Amy in Battel-Array, even the mirrour of all the Churches in the World, Amen Jesus Christ, Amen. So prayeth from his whole heart,

