



Right Honoble & Right Worfull:.
YOU were pleased to send a Letter
of Recommendation, dated the
13th of Septemb. 1675. under your
Citie-seal, to the Magistrates of
Middleburgh, in my favour, de∣siring
their Lordships, to admi∣nister
Justice with all Expedition, according as the
merits of the cause required, promising the like
assistance, and dispatch to any of their Inhabi∣tants,
who should have occasion to prosecute any
suits at Law in your Courts of Justice. What
slender effects all your forcible Arguments (con∣cerning
the maintenance of a good correspon∣dence
and commerce) produced, the abstract of
the proceedings thereupon will shew. Notwith∣standing
it was made known to the Burgermasters,
that there is not a parish in London, nor a Coun∣ty
or Citie in England, where there are not sever∣all
Orphans, Widows and others (Creditors of
Sr. William Courten and Sr. Paul Pyndar) whose Com∣plaints
and Cries call aloud for satisfaction and
reparation from the Hollanders and Zealanders, that
have taken the bread out of their Mouths. I shall
not make any long repetitions of the cases, the se∣verall
actions and pleadings being printed at large
in French and Dutch by Mr. Iames Boevé and my
self, & published to the whole World (being
necessitated thereunto) for our Vindication in

answer to a most scandalous Book set forth by the
Sons & Heirs of Mr. Peter Boudaen reflecting not
onely upon our persons, but upon the Judicature
of England, which the Lords of Middleburgh &
the Supream Councill at the Hague have wronged
by their erronious Judgements, contrary to Law
and Equity, & the practise of all other Nations.
I submit the whole Matter to Your favourable
construction & interpretation: Craving nothing
more then Your good opinion, and just resent∣ment
of the Case in a further recomendation to
the Parliament. It being of most pernicious con∣sequence
to all English men in their properties
who dayly trafficque into Holland and Zealand to be
rendred tenants at will (by such Presidents) to the
Magistrates of Middleburgh and Amsterdam. As
to the Advertisments concerning Navigation &
Trade, I presume they will naturally fall under
Your most serious considerations, having now the
fairest prospects under Heaven from London, to
all forraign Parts.
And that all prosperity and happiness may at∣tend
you and Your affairs in the Honoble Go∣vernment
of the Citie under the most Ancient
& Royall Charter successively confirmed by the
Crown of England, (amongst the rest of your Vo∣taries)
shall be the dayly prayers of him that is
Right Honoble & Right Worfull
Amsterdam, August 10th.
1676.

