



SI fuerint Moecenates, non de∣fuerint Marones: Poetry re∣vives quickned by the beams of such a Sun, whom all the Muses acknowledge their Apollo; and Sun-like you may gild ev'n the lowest and most humble Valleys, yet neither impair your height or lustre; glance a more auspicious beam on this birth, which Eaglet-like approa∣ches the Sun for legitimation, the most pier∣cing ray of your judgement. I shall not after the mode of Dedications, cry cut of Iejune∣nes and Sterility, and intreat a Patronage to my weakness; as not content to commit er∣rour

without a Patron, or recommitting it in an Apologie: To gild a dunghill would but exhale a stench; though the odours of Virtues charioted in Sun-beams, may communicate their influences, and perfume the world. Nor wants Poetry her Virtues; Stones, Trees, and wilde Beasts, accompany an Orpheus, while he mollifies the most obdurate, and stone-assi∣milating tempers; teaches the most irregular pieces by his measures, to be squared by the rule of proportion, and serve to the edifice of Virtue; produces harmony out of Natures discords, while the most savage natures by his harmony, are reduc'd to consort: Civility dead, Poesie revives: and though some object as the Lyrick to Maro, Quid si Threicio blandius Orpheo, auditam moderere arboribus fidem, non vanae redeat san∣guis Imagini; Virtue now being onely a vain and bloodless Image. Yet the love of this Euridice stung by the old Serpent, tea∣ches me a descent into this home-bred hell we carry within us; where foul tormenting pas∣sions reside like furies; Lust is tied unto a wheel, Care and Envy, Vultur-like, feed on the Heart and Liver, while Incontinence

pours water into Sieves; Ambition rowls stones up Mountains, and the dropsie of A∣varice, Tantalus- like, is thirsty in full Ri∣vers. And though with Orpheus I cannot hope to unlearn Furies their cruelty, and teach their eyes in teares to wear the Livery of Re∣pentance; or reduce the belov'd Euridice: yet if I can ease any of their pains, by the delivery, my Charity-will be brought to bed of her children, which I shall desire your Ho∣nour a Witness to. Nor is Poesie unworthy of your Patronage, which a Sir Philip Sidney hath prais'd, our Seraphick Donne us'd, the learned Scaliger, and he who makes all prai∣ses modest, the excellent Hugo Grotius la∣bour'd in. Nay, ev'n the Prophets were Poets, and Pagan Poets are cited by the Apostles. And though Poesie be vinum daemonum, as the Father calls it, when it inebriates mens mindes with folly; yet it is flagellum daemonum when it lases them out of their vanity, tormenting them in their members. The inriching of the people of God with the ornaments of Egypt, S. Austin applies to Arts and Sciences invented by Hea∣then, but taken from them as the spoil of

Egypt, and converted to Gods service. It may be said of Poesie, as of S. Cyprian, La∣ctantius, Victorinus, Hilarius, Quanto auro & argento, & veste exiit ex Aegy∣pto? Converted from Paganism to Christia∣nity. Let an Atheist, like Porphyrius, scoff at it, as borrowed from Gentilism; and an Apostate, resembling Julian, prohibite hu∣mane literature in Christians, which none have disrespected, beside those whose ignorance render'd incapable of it, or blacker impieties court Oblivion. This could make an Octa∣vius descend to the Lyricks friendship; and a Lord Brook, as the most permanent Epitaph, desire to be writ Sir Philip Sidneys friend. Friends to Poesie cannot want a memory, while Time can keep a Register. Dignum laude virum musa vetat mori; & ego te meis chartis carpere lividam opinionem tot∣que tuos patiar labores? Whether your ana∣tomicall inspections to know your self both within and without, which intitle you to that some have call'd the Physician, a wise man; or unridling Aenigmaticall Law quirks? not onely by using your fortunes with reason injoy them, but know the reason how you injoy; or

whether you unravel Nature to her first Prin∣ciples, and become of the Cabinet Councell to the Worlds Monarch, which styles you what others are miscall'd, The most Honourable, who in the worst of times dare be good; and when Ignorance is an Epidemicall disease, pass un∣tainted; make to use of your Eminency to become a State Weather-cock, and turn round with every wind; or resemble those Magnifico's, who Comet-like sprung from fat and slime of earth, blaze and become portentous to Kingdoms; while Ignorance is blazon'd with Power, and Ambition and Avarice dress'd out with formalities of State: like Anticks in great houses carv'd with Honours, and gilded with Titles, may attract admiration from vul∣gar heads: Yet wiser men can make no grea∣ter use of then the Cynick of his statues, onely to exercise patience. But to you, (who have pass'd through the Temple of Virtue to that of Honour, whose Honour is a Temple to en∣shrine Virtue, monopolizing more then these want, whose glorious outsides, like Egyptian Temples, by introspection afford nothing above an Ape.) As a tribute due to honour, I present these besprinklings of a retirement, while De∣mocritus-like

I laugh at the shittlecock world, and exquire the causes of the spleen in the beast, the Rabble; which will invite some who Abderitanae pectora plebis habent, the mad Rabble, and those Plebeian heads, who are a degree above them in their Clothes, not in their intelligences, to accuse me of phrensie: Yet an Hippocrates (the more refin'd spirit) will pass intainted with the aire of popular displicencies, since the Temples of Virtue and honour want not their sacrifices.

