


IT can incur no just Censure that we address our selves to the Churches of Christ here in the following Sheets, inasmuch as they are but a Reply to a Book lately dedicated unto them. Nor does our zeal, (we hope) for Truth, the Honour of God, & the Safety, Peace & Flour∣ishing of these Churches come short of what our Reverend Author may be inspired with in his performance We make the same glorious Pretence with him to maintain & defend the Order of the Gospel, altho' we cannot allow what is suggested in the Title page, That every Principle so strenu∣ously contended for in that Treatise, is either professed or practised by the Churches of Christ in New-England. One part, at least, therefore of his Book the Reverend Author ought to have published in his own Name, and not have obtruded it on the Churches here, whose Practise never gave grounds to suspect them leavened with so gross thoughts, as particularly his Doctrine of the Ordination of Ministers is.
We will not guess at the Authors secret aim, or whom in particular he raises his Batteries against We'd cha∣ritably hope he has no private Interest to bribe him in this Affair; and we hope for a like favourable and candid Con∣struction of this Reply. Indeed the Name prefix't to that faulty Treatise, may be presumed, with a multitude of prejudiced People, to weigh down all the Reasons and
Arguments which can possibly be brought for their Con∣viction. And we have no such advantage to boast of; yet are happy in this, that we are not over-awed by any Name, and the Truth we know is greater, and more venerable than all things.
Its well known how liberal some men are of the odious brand of Apostates, for every one who cannot digest the late published Orders: but, without arrogance, sume, as more due, the Title of Proficients, and doubt not to make it out, that our dissent from many of them is so far from a going back from any Gospel Truth or Order, that it is rather a making progress, and advancing in the Evan∣gelical Discipline.
It is a groundless Calumny which is suggested, That a latitude beyond what our Author contends for, is but a betraying the liberties and priviledges which our Lord Jesus Christ has given to his Church, or the Brethren of the Church. These we profess to prize and stand for, and would by no means lose. But wherein do they consist? not in the Brethrens challenging any part of the Ministerial Work! Not in imposing upon others any thing which Christ has not imposed! which is but a debarring Christians of the Pri∣viledges they have a right to. But they consist (as we conceive) in such things as these, That our Consciences be not imposed on by Men or their Traditions, Christ being the alone Lord of the Conscience, 1 Cor. 7. 23. That Believers are through Christ, freed from the guilt and do∣minion of Sin, from the curse of the Law, and from the sting and terror of Death. That we have the liberties of Gods House and Ordinances, & therein communion with God. That we may have the benefit of the gifts of his Ministers for edification, and such like, according to the Apostles Doctrine, 1 Cor. 3. 22.
Nor is that Objection less frivolous, when if we appear less Rigid than others of the Reverend Authors severity, we are reflected on as casting dishonour on our Parents, & their pious design in the first settlement of this Land No, we reverence our Ancestors, and the Memory of their di∣vine Zeal and Constancy, and would derive it as a Truth sacred to our Posterity, that it was a religious Interest which carried them through all the amazing Difficulties & Discouragements in that Undertaking. But yet, the par∣ticular design or end has been some-what differently con∣veyed unto us.
Some have carried it as if the great end were the Con∣version of the Heathen; and there have been great Com∣plaints by some of late, how this has been neglected and contradicted, and another course taken up, whereby in∣stead of bringing the Heathen into the Church of God, many whose Fathers and themselves were once of the visible Church, are now strangely left out, scarce any face of Religion remaining among them.
As for this, we bewail it, and look upon it as a Reproach to the Land, and would therefore countenance no such Principles or Practices as have any tendency to such Apostacy.
Again, some have made this the great Design, to be freed from the Impositions of Men in the Worship of God, wherewith they were sometimes burthened; and as they sought freedom for themselves, we cannot suppose they design'd to impose upon others In this we are risen up to make good their grounds.
The Reverend Mr. Willard in his Sermon of the sinful∣ness of Worshipping God with Mens Institutions, p. 27. gives this as the errand of our fore-Fathers into this Wil∣derness,

namely, to sequester themselves into a quiet corner of the World, where they might enjoy Christs un∣mixt Institutions, and leave them uncorrupted to Posterity; and the gain-saying or counter working this, is, as he in∣timates, to cast dishonour upon them, or call them fools.
This Charge falls heavy on those who are for imposing their will on others. We crave no more but to enjoy the Institutions of Christ unmix't. And it appears very strange that those who fld from an Act of Uniformity, should presently impose on themselves, on their Neighbours, and entail the Mischief on their Posterity.
Some indeed would make the design of our first Plan∣ters to consist in some little Rites, Modes or Circumstances of Church Discipline, and those such as the Word of God no where requires These are the men who dishonour their Country, and their Fathers Memory, by making their great design to lie in so small matters. And it is notorious there has been no agreement in these points from the be∣ginning. Its known there was Anti-Synodatia printed, and who had a hand in it, and how modest his Dissent was, and in what terms they contradicted what the Synod had established, tho' the like is criminal and insufferable in any other.
These Principles in Church Discipline are also wrote against in English by the Assembly of Divines, by Mr. Cdry, Mr. Ratherford, Mr. Baly, &c. In a word, if it be the Truth, according to Gods Word, we stand for, it would not be grievous to any of our pious Ancestors, were they now on Earth; neither will it be grievous to them now in Heaven: nor should it be grievous to any good Man to receive Conviction. We refer all therefore to the Word of God, to the Law and to the Testimony.
In the Preface or Epistle to said Book, we find several things that might be justly excepted against, but designing neither to be contentious nor volumnious, we shall speak but to one or two.
In pag. 8. the Reverend Author is pleased to number up seven or eight erronious Doctrines, as he apprehends them to be; & the consequence from all is this, that if we espouse these Principles, we give away the whole Congregational Cause at once. Whence we perceive now the professed cause which the Author engages in; tho' we hope it is not the Name or the Party, but the Truths they delend. We shall have occasion to examine these Principles hereafter; it may sutie here to say, they are craftily & unfairly worded, & in the Dress they are here clad, we do not espouse them; yet according to their most fair & genuine construction there is a great deal of Truth in most of them. And this is but a block the Author politickly casts in the way, which at last we fear may but discourage some from em∣bracing the Congregational way, seeing it must needs fight for its life against some Truths. Its hard kicking against the pricks, Acts 9. 5.
Another thing Remarkable in the Preface is the Authors heat and , pag 9. Shall we then by Silence betray the Truth? shall we reort, therefore we are bold to speak too. Who is on the Lord side? Who? shall we answer, we are, we trust (through Gods Grace) together with you; and all other siding  would have in contempt Is there no one that will stand up for the Churches of Christ▪ God or∣bid but we should, had others declined it! The good People in them then may well think their Watch-men are all either dead or a sleep: or if they talk light and heady, they may conclude them in a trance, or not quite awaked. 

which cause it is that I dedicate this ensuing Dissertation. And for the same cause we address you in the following answer. It is not my cause, but yours. Nor is it ours, but the Churches. and every good Christians in common. Did I say yours? nay, it is Christ cause. We list under the same Banners, and would to God we were all as really, as we would seem to be divested wholly of carnal self........ for truly our present Defence is become the peculiar concern of these Churches.
But why all this heat? we would not interpret too hard; but these Expressions seem plainly to carry this sense, That every one who obeys not the late published Orders, is an opposer of Truth, not on the Lord side, Enemies to the cause of Christ, and the Churches of New-England. Where∣upon the Reverend Author roules himself, and sounds an Alarm to the Churches, To put down all such If this be not involv'd in it, we would beg his Pardon, and be in∣formed better. But truly, Sir, it is a mistaken Zeal, dly lavish'd away, and not kindled from above; or we know no such conspiracy against the Truths of our Lord Jesus Christ, or against the good of the Churches in New-England, altho' we are not proselyted to some of your particular Opinions. It appears to us, that the Reverend Authors infirmity in this matter, is the same with the Apostle Johns, Mark 9. 38. Master, we saw one casting out Devils in thy Name, and he followeth not us; and we forbad him, because he followed not us. Which too forward zeal ou Lord checks, and reconciles the matter, Vers. 39, 40. And esus answered, forbid him not; he that is not against  is on our part. But in this case, as in many others we ould instance in if need were, the Reverend Author, tho' very zealous for a time, yet is not very steady & constant;

for before he ends his Book, he comes about again, in pag, 139. where he proposeth his Brothers Essay for Union wherein he shows how inconsiderable the Differences are between those of the Presbyterian and Congregational judg∣ment, that they need not set Truth to purchase Peace. And yet by the cry just now, you would have thought all the Truths of Christ trampeled under foot, the Cause of Religion deserted. and and a formidable War commenced by the Presbyterians against the order of the Gospel.
It is observable, that the Reverend Author in the Disser∣tation of the following Questions, makes use of abundance of Quotations from several famous Persons in their Gene∣rations; but in some the sence is perverted to a wrong end, beside the obvious intention of the Writers; in some he brings them in contradicting at one time what they said at another, and sets some in opposition to others. And where he endeavours to confirm his Tenets by the Testimony of some he might, if he had pleased, have brought many others to contradict the same thing. But this is a good way to amuse the Reader, and to cloud his mind, and to terrifie him, by mustering a legion of ar∣tifica Arguments. We shall be sparing in Quotations, and pass by many cited by the Author, tho' we approve them not. Only we crave leave to present one Quotation, which may be of use to us all along, being we are unwil∣ling to be imposed on to believe what God never spoke, or to do what God never requir'd. It is that of the Reverend Mr. Willaa, in his fore-quoted Sermon, pag. 23. 24. Hence it follows, that there s nothing to be received by us on this account, but what has Gods Seal affixed to it. Its therefore enough to set us down resolved against any such thing, if we can say there is a silence about it in the

Scripture, that God has no where commanded it in his word, either expresly, or by just and necessary conse∣quence, its no Order of his devising. Scripture silence about any Tradition gives a full condemnation, what ever leas men may bring for it, as, That it is profitable, many have been edified by it, it is a prudent way to secure the Interest of Religion; many wise, holy learned Men have pleaded for it and practised it; that there is much of decency in it and the thing it self is no waye: harmu. Al this is fully answered with that one word, God has spoke no∣thing about it, Heb. 7. 4. It never entered into his hart to enjoyn it. Jer. 7. 31. Thus he.
This being publickly practised and printed so long a go by so eminent a Minister, and never since contradicted, we take it for granted, that none have any thing to say against it. And we are thankful to him for furnishing us with a Doctrine so fully laid down, to bear off the Institutions, Traditions and Impositions that men would lay upon us.
But it is high time now to consider the Questions which the Reverend Author propounds, and the Answer he gives to each of them. In which attempt we shall offer no other Apology for our brevity, save that our Author him∣self ight have been as brief, and yet full as clear and iv.
