



May it please your Grace,
BY the divine Mercy and assi∣stance I have now finished my illustration of our Publick Offices (which end with these Forms of Ordination,) By shewing how
 agreeable these (as well as the rest) are to Scripture, to pure Antiquity, and to the design of this important Duty; I have also compared this with the Or∣dinals of other Churches, Ancient and Modern, and hope all impartial Judges will own, that ours receives great ad∣vantage by the comparison: But my principal care hath been to help the Candidates for Holy Orders, not only to understand, but consider the whole compass of their Duty, and to persuade them to perform it strictly and exactly: Being well assured that nothing will more effectually conduce to the Glory of God, the Honour and Establishment of this Church, to the growth of saving Knowledge and Piety, and the suppres∣sion of Heresie, Schism and Vice, than a learned and devout, an exem∣plary and industrious Clergy: And cer∣tainly 'tis great pity we should not have the best of Men to officiate, since we are
 blest with the most excellent Forms for all Divine Administrations.
'Tis not possible more care should be taken of this, than is here, as far as Rules and Offices can go: But 'tis your Grace, and the College of Bishops must give life to the Churches Orders, and to my Endeavours: Your Grace hath a Right to these Papers, because you are the chief Governor in Ordinati∣ons, under whose Hands most of the Right Reverend the Bishops receive their Cha∣racter, with power to admit others to the inferior Orders. Wherefore from your Graces known zeal, and exemplary care, we cannot but expect such mea∣sures shall every where be taken in this Affair; that none shall be received into this Holy Function, but such as are like to be a lasting Honour to it; Our Adversaries on both Hands seem now to despair of their baffled objections against our Forms, but fail not to enlarge on
 the popular Theme, of personal refle∣ctions upon some defaulters, so that if those that are already Ordained and yet offend, were reformed, and the unqua∣lified kept out for the future, our E∣nemies ill will would want matter to work on, and our Sion would be the Joy of the whole Christian World. If both Clergy and People could be brought up to an adequate conformity to our incomparable Rules, it would immedi∣ately be apparent (what all these Dis∣courses are intended to prove) that there is nothing material to be reformed in our Constitution, Aristot. Polit. Cavendum ne si graviora inferremus vulnera dum minori∣bus mederi desidera∣mus, Ambr. de offic. l. 2. c. 2.. And therefore the one thing necessary in our Church (whatever some would suggest to the contrary) is to live up to our En∣gagements, and to let care be had, that
 our Lives be answerable to our most Holy Profession, and our Practices agreeable to our Vows; Which I am confident will be sincerely endeavoured by your Grace; and that Heaven may prosper you, and all our Governors in so just, so pious, and so laudable a design, shall ever be the subject of his Prayers, who desires on this, and all occasions, to approve himself,
My Lord,

Durham Octob. 8th, 1699.
