



May it please your Grace,
THat the Christian Faith (as it was
taught by Christ and his Apostles,
and confirmed by the four first
General Councils) is established
by His Majesties authority; all have reason to
be thankful both to God, and to His Majesty.

While we are contending for things of
lesser moment at home, Religion is dange∣rously
assaulted from abroad; their artifices
are subtile, their success is lamented.
By what perswasions they endeavour to
gain Proselyts; and how they are refuted?
Your Grace will find affirmed in the Preface,
and proved in the Disput following. The first
part whereof I present to your Grace, it be∣ing
difficult for me to publish it all at once.
My Lord, some perhaps, as their motive
of such an address as this, would fall a
painting out the praises of your Grace, and
your Ancestors in your Face; as, that one or
other of your Race, could be no more spa∣red
from the State in every age, then one of
the Aeacides from the warrs of Greece: which
although most true, yet I forbear, lest I
should offer violence, vim facere, to your
Graces Modesty, by unseasonable mention∣ing
things which all know to be undenyable.

Nevertheless, I hope your Grace will par∣don
me if I affirm, that it is a main encou∣ragement
of my troubling you, that
your Grace is a Gentle-man of Spirit, versed in
Antiquity, and able to discern if I perform
any thing to the purpose, in this great sub∣ject,
or process of greatest importance, that
ever depended before the Tribunal of Hea∣ven.
My Lord, I have likewise privat obliga∣tions
to your Grace. I had the honour to
be your Condisciple, at which time it
did not obscurely appear, what your Grace
would prove afterwards? Also having pre∣sented
several Trifles to your Grace, at your
two times being in Scotland, you
seemed to accept of them, with a favou∣rable
countenance: which encouraged me
to trouble your Grace afresh. A Spaniel, the
more he is taken notice of, the more he troubles
his Benefactors, with importunat kindness.

Taking all for good coyn, whether they be in
jest or in earnest.
If I perform any thing in this great subject
worthy of your Graces perusal, I would be
infinitly proud of it: otherwise, the greatest
censure I expect from your Grace, is, that
either your Grace would smile at my folly, or
else put me back with a gentle frown; hop∣ing
your Grace, will pardon presumption,
proceeding from simplicity and good-will.
I will trouble your Grace no more, but be∣ing
sorry, that I can give no greater evi∣dence
of my propension, to your Graces ser∣vice,
I rest as I am able, most addicted to it.

