



May it please your Grace,
I Have often with much pleasure and admiration, observed how rarely every part of Divine Ser∣vice
 is suited to its proper Subject: whereof there needs no better in∣stance than that which is under our present Consideration: The Com∣munion is the most sublime Duty of Christianity, the Compendium of Religion, the best opportunity for Repentance, the highest exercise of Faith, and the strongest engagement to our Charity; and accordingly it is fitted with an Office agreeable to its usefulness and grandeur, wherein the Directions are full and perspi∣cuous, the Exhortations vigorous and importunate, the Devotions fer∣vent and expressive of more than ordinary affections; an Office, wherein equal regard is had to the Majesty of the Ordinance, and the
 advantage of the Receivers, to the Custom of the Antient and the be∣nefit of the present times: So that the illustration of this one Part of Liturgy, will contain Arguments to convince the Negligent, Instructi∣ons to teach the Ignorant, and be the properest method to prepare us for this Sacrament, to assist us in Re∣ceiving, and to confirm us in all Ho∣liness and Vertue afterwards: yea I dare affirm, that he who will con∣scientiously practise by these mea∣sures, can neither be an Ill Man, an Ʋnworthy Receiver, or an Enemy to that Church which affords him such excellent means of Salvation.
Wherefore that these endeavours may be made publick with more Ad∣vantage,
 I have been bold to recom∣mend them to your Graces Patro∣nage, and that with great reason. For their subject being of the highest Mystery, and their design to adorn the most eminent Office of the Church, could no where be more justly presen∣ted than to your Grace, who beside the Dignity of your Primacy, and the honour of so High a Station in this Church, are so known a Lover and Patron of all its Primitive Ad∣ministrations: Besides, your Grace hath a peculiar title to the Author, as well as a Right in the subject of this Discourse; for he first received the Holy Order of Priesthood, and the Power of Dispensing this Sacra∣ment Ignat. ep. ad Smyr. Apost. Can. 39. Concil. Lao∣dic. Can. 57.
 from your Gra∣ces Hands, to whom therefore he will ever pay the Reverence and Observance due to a Spiritual FatherEsto subjectus Pontifici tuo, & qua∣si animae parentem suscipe: Hieron. ad Nepot. Ep. 2.. In fine, I am obliged to make this Tender, by my Condition and my Duty, by Gratitude and Affection: And your Graces fair Approbation of my first Essay, encourageth this to hope for a Candid acceptance, both as it is a Testimony of my Respect, and as it may minister to the Devotion of those who approach to Gods Altar.
My Lord,
There is nothing more useful to the friends of this Church, nor more
 convincing to the dissenters from it, than to present her pure and Primi∣tive Order of Worship in its natu∣ral and lovely splendor, whereof by the Divine mercy, I have seen some Experiments from my former at∣tempt, and if this may prevail also to undeceive the seduced, to amend the prophane, and to elevate the de∣votion of Pious Men, I shall have all I aimed at in this Work, only I most gladly comply with this Oppor∣tunity to testifie my self

