

Honoured SIR,
LOVE being the great instru∣ment of paying our Duty to God, in obedience to his Holy Laws and Sanctions; and of our Loyalty to the King in the obser∣vance of his Sacred Commands, and of Charity to our Neigh∣bour; in doing him all the good Offices of Friendship, Bene∣volence, and Beneficence, of which you have given many great instances to our Society.
Man in his Primitive Estate and Perfection, did love the First Infinite and Omnipotent Being, as the Supream Good, and all other Beings, as so many Emanations (deri∣ved from Him) which are more or less to be beloved, as they participate greater or less degrees of that Essential Goodness.

The King resembling God, as being a Particle of the Di∣vine Nature, and as being his Vicegerent in the Sacred Of∣fice of Government, is to be treated with most reverential Esteems, and most sincere Affection and Obedience.
We ought to entertain our Neighbour with kind Respects, in reference to his Humane Nature, as created by God, after his Image; and with greater love as a Christian, redeemed with the Merits of our Blessed Saviour, and with our most affectionate Esteems, as a Person sanctified by the Holy Spi∣rit, and adorned with Heavenly Graces.
In these several capacities of a Man and a good Chri∣stian, we are bound to caress you with all degrees of Love, and most affectionate Kindness, as you are highly our entire Friend, Benefactor, and Preserver, and have loved our Na∣tion, and built us a Synagogue.
And having read many Lectures upon the Body of Man, and other Animals, Dissected in a stately Theater (built at your great charges) I Dedicate this part of Anatomy (as the Fruits of your Munificence) to YOƲ the worthy Patron and supporter of our Society.
Your elegant Structure may be styled the Seat of Pallas, as it is a kind of Academy of Arts and Sciences, wherein our Anatomical Lectures are celebrated; by which, experimen∣tal Phylosophy, and the Faculty of Physick and Chyrurgery is advanced, by prying into the secrets of Nature, manifested by laying open the several apartiments of Bodies, relating to various kinds of Animals, and more particularly to that of Man, whose parts are understood by diligent inspection, and illustrated by the parts of other Animals, designed and engra∣ven in large Copper-Plates, as curious Monuments of the Bo∣dy of Man (and other Creatures) and as so many Hierogly∣phicks of Nature, explained by Notes and Letters, which are very conducive to the knowledge of the parts affected, and Cures of Diseases, tending to the preservation of Health and Life.

In your Magnificent Fabrick, our anniversary Orations are celebrated, in which the grateful Commemoration of your Mu∣nificent Favours, and the great Benefactions of other Royal and Noble Persons is solemnized, by speaking in a more pecu∣liar manner, our most Humble Duty and Thanks for the high Obligations laid upon us by You our generous Patron and Bene∣factor.
Farthermore, in your most elegant Edifice, you have gi∣ven us the opportunity of frequent Dissections, which may be highly imporved in the discovery of unknown parts, Vessels, Li∣quors, (and their motion) of the Body of Man and other Ani∣mals.
Vesalius and Fallopius discover'd the carnous Fibres of the Stomach and Guts, as their proper Organs of motion, Dr. Harvey the Circulation of the Blood from the Center to the circumfe∣rence by the Arteries, and from the ambient parts of the Bo∣dy to the Heart by the Veins; Dr. Jollife the Lymphaeducts, and the motion of the Lympha to the common Receptacle; Dr. Glysson and Dr. Wharton found out the motion of the Chyle through two kinds of mesenterick Glands, into the com∣mon Cystern; and Dr. Wharton the true use of the Glands; and Malpighius the Glands and fibrous Compage of the Brain; as also the Glands of the Liver, Spleen, and Kidneys, and the Lobules, and Vesicles of Air in the Lungs; and Bartho∣lomeus Eustachius the Ʋrinary Ducts of the Kidneys; and De Graaf the seminal Vessels of the Testicles; And Dr. Glysson, Dr. Wharton, and Dr. Willis have discovered the Succus Nervosus; and the last of them, its production into the corti∣cal Glands of the Brain; Dr. Grew and Malpighius the Ves∣sels of Air, Sap, Milk, Resine, Turpentine, &c. in Plants, Dr. Croone discovered the Muscles, called Pterigostaphylini to belong to the Palate and not the Uvula, and hath very well ex∣plained the nature and use of the parts of the Ear; Sir George Ent hath Dissected many Animals, and made new discoveries of parts (not mentioned by other Anatomists) and more particularly in the Rana Piscatrix; Dr. Lower, and Steno found out the spiral Fibres, and many other ranks, disposed in great order in
the Heart; Dr. Charlton, Sir Thomas Millington, Dr. Lawson, Dr. Tyson, and all the Fellows of our Colledge, are very skilful in Anatomical Dissections of Animals, where∣in they have laid open many Secrets of Nature.
Ʋpon this account I have given you the trouble of a History of New Discoveries, made by most Learned Anatomists in the Body of Man, and other Animals, in curious Dissecti∣ons; that you may see the great Ʋse and Dignity of Anatomy, and of your Glorious Theater (consigned to it) wherein all our Learned Exercises are celebrated, to the advancement of Natural Philosophy, and the Republick of Learning, to which I have contributed my Mite.
Thus making my most Humble Addresses to the Almighty Creator, Redeemer, and Preserver; That out of his infinite Goodness he would be Graciously pleased to return all your ample Favours to Me, and our Society, sevenfold into your own Bosome, and to Grant you all Felicity in this World, and Eternal Glory in the World to come; which is the earnest Prayer of
SIR,

