



JAcobus Acontius, a most excel∣lent man, offended at the e∣vill disposition of our scrib∣ling age wished that it might be provided, that none should write and publish any thing, unless it were some new thing; which should both be of his own observation, and might make for the glory of God, and the aedification of the Church, and from whence so much fruit might be hoped, that what time is be∣stowed on the reading of it, the readers could not bestow it better elswhere: that so nothing might be done which was al∣ready done, but what was yet to be done. For few Writers (says hee) bring any 
 
thing of their own: but onely steal, things and words, of which they make Books, &c. Which they know to be most tru∣ly spoken, who are to peruse that far∣rago of Books, wherewith we are year∣ly little less then overwhelmed. For if you look on the titles, you shall have them always new and very specious: if on the thing, it is always the same boi∣led over and over above a thousand times, and Coleworts crammed in, e∣ven to nauseating. And though some∣thing of new observation be offered, yet to what purpose is it, that whole Books should therefore be written, and those new things found out so buried in things ordinary, that either a man hath no mind to enquire, what of new observation is in them, or cannot do it without tediousness of spirit and loss of time. But it is not my business to inveigh against this disorder in many words. I come now to declare why I my self come out in publick. And I wil 
 lay it open in a word I bring something new, and different from the common way of Philosophie: And I bring it so, as that I hope, it will be without any ones hinderance or molestation, as conteining in a very few leaves, matters of very great moment. And I bring it to satisfie the desires of others this way. For where∣as I had the year last past, given a proof of my Philologicall endeavours, Ja∣nua Linguarum reserata, (or a seminary of Arts and Languages) which was courteously received, and that with applause, and approved almost by all mens verdict, (as severall letters, dated either to my self or my friends, touch∣ing that matter do testifie,) some (of the number of those, who at this time bend their desires, thoughts and de∣devours, to rectifie the method of stu∣dies) began to solicit mee, to put out my philosophicall Works, or at least to desire a communication of my con∣ceptions, especially in Physicks. Ha∣ving 
 no other minde therefore, but to bring something for mine owne part that may be profitable, if it may be: or else that others may have occasion by me, to bring better matters; I pur∣posed with my self to expose to the light, this same Synopsis of Physicks, lately dictated in this Schoole, that publick censure might be made of this also, as well as of my former Work. Which that it might be, it seemed meet to give some further intimation of the occasion and scope of our un∣dertaking, to those that wil offer them∣selves to be our censors.
After that the calamitous lot of exile had thrust mee, who was by calling a Divine, back to the services of the School, wherein I was desirous to beare my self, not slightly, but so as that I might discharg the trust committed to me; it chanced that I hapned, among other things, upon Ludovicus Vives his Books, detradendis disciplinis. In 
 these when I had found most whole∣some counsels, for the repairing of Philosophie, and the whole course of studies, I began extreamly to grieve, that a man of so piercing a wit, after he noted so many most evident errours, had not put to his hand to make those rough things smooth, but the judg∣ment of one touching this excellent Writer, that Vives saw better what was not then what was, made mee to consi∣der, that it is usuall with the wisdome of God to communicate things by de∣grees. Yet I thought with my self that others should take this as an occasion to labour to designe one certain and in∣fallible way among so many deviations discovered unto them: which I won∣dred that men were so backward to es∣say for full a hundred years. (For I knew not whether any one had gone about it.) But it hapned, that a certain learned man, to whom I communica∣ted these complaints of mine in a more 
 familiar manner, shew'd mee a Book call'd, Prodromus philosophiae instau∣randae by Thomas Campanella an Itali∣an: which I read over with incredible joy, and being inflamed with an ex∣ceeding great hope of new Light, I greedily turn'd through his Realis phi∣losophia epilogistica (for so hee calls it) set forth in foure Books, as also the Books de rerum sensu, where ever I could get them. Whereby I found my desires in some sort satisfied, but not throughout. For his very foundation, that all things were made up of two contrary principles onely, offended me (For I was already most fully perswa∣ded of the number of three principles out of the divine Book of Genesis: and and I remember out of Hugo Grotius, disputing against the Manichees, That of two things fighting one with the o∣ther, destruction might follow, but an or∣dinate construction could never follow.) And besides I observed that Campa∣nella
 himself was not very certaine of his own hypotheses: as one that began to waver in his assertions towards the positions of Galilaeus touching the earths mobility, and yet to call them in doubt himself: as it is evident e∣nough in his Apologie for Galilaeus.
But when I chanced afterwards up∣on a piece of Sir Francis Bacon Baron of Verulam, Chancellour of England, entituled inst aur atio magna (an admi∣rable work, and which I look upon no otherwise, then as a most bright beam of a new age of Philosophers now a∣rising) I understood that in some par∣ticulars also of Campanella, such solid Demonstrations, as the truth of things requires, were wanting. Yet it grieved me again, that I saw most noble Veru∣lam present us indeed with a true key of Nature, but not open the secrets of Nature, onely shewing us by a few examples, how they were to be ope∣ned; and leave the rest to depend on 
 observations and inductions continued for severall ages. Yet I saw neverthe∣less, that my hopes were not quite left in suspense: in as much as I perceived my minde so enlightned by the light which it received from those severall sparks, now grown welnigh to a torch, that some great secrets of Nature, and very obscure places of Scripture, (the reason of which I knew not before) were now plain, as it were of their own accord, to the exceeding great content of my mind. For now with those, that have lighted upon a more sound way of Philosophie in this age, I saw and rested in it;
I That the onely true, genuine and plain way of Philosophie is to fetch all things from sense, reason and Scripture.
II That the Peripatetick philosophie is not onely defective in many parts, and many ways intricate, full of turnings and windings, and partly also erroneous, so that it is not onely unprofitable for Chri∣stians, 
 but also (without correction and perfection hurtfull.
III That philosophie may be refor∣med and perfected, by an harmonicall re∣duction of all things that are and are made, to sense reason and Scripture, with so much evidence and certainty (in all such things as are of most concernment, and have any necessity) that any mortall man seeing may see, and feeling may feel, the truth scattered every where.
Of all and every of which observa∣tions, least we should seem to have dreamed somewhat, there will be some thing to be said more at large.
And for the first we make three principles of Philosophy, with Cam∣panella, and his happy Interpreter To∣bie Adams, Sense, Reason and Scripture: But so joyntly, that whosoever would not be left in ignorāce or doubt, should rest on no one of these without the o∣thers, otherwise it wil be a most ready precipice into errors. For Sense, though 
 it make an immediate impression upon us of the truth imprinted upon things: yet because it is very often confoun∣ded, either by reason of the multitude of things in a manner infinite, and the strange complications of formes: or else wearied and tired, sometimes with the distance of the objects, and so con∣sequently dazeled and deceived. Rea∣son must of necessity be imployed, which may conclude alike of like things, and contrarily of contrary things, by observing their proportion, and so supply the defect of sense, and correct its errours.
But then because many things are re∣mote both from sense and reason (which we cannot in any sort attein unto by sense, nor yet by reason firm∣ly enough) we are indepted to the grace of God, that he hath by his Word revea∣led unto us even some secrets which concern us to know. Therefore if any one desire the true knowledg of things, 
 these three principls of knowing must of force be conjoyned. Otherwise, he that will follow the guidance of sense onely, will never be wiser then the common sort; nor be able to imagine the Moon lesse then a starre; the Sun greater then the earth; and that again sphaericall, and every way habitable. On the contrary if a man contemplate on abstract things and consult onely with reason without the testimony of sense, he will be rapt away with meer phantasines, and create himself a new world: like the Platonicall and Aristo∣telicall, &c. Lastly, they that heed the Scripture onely, and hearken nei∣ther to sense nor reason are either car∣ried away beyond the world (by the sublimity of their conceptions;) or else involve things they understand not with the Colliers faith; or following the letter, propound unto them∣selves things, though never so absurd and superstitious, to be believed; as 
 Papists do in that most absurd tran∣substantion of theirs, &c. So then the principles of knowing, must be con∣joyned, that divine Revelation may af∣ford us belief; Reason, Understanding, Sense, Certainty. And they must be used in this order (in naturall things I say) as that we begin with sense, and end in revelation (as it were the setting to the seal of God:) for by this order every subsequent degree will receive receive from the antecedent, both E∣vidence and also Certainty, and Emen∣dation. For as there is nothing in the understanding which was not first in the sense: so there is nothing in the be∣lief, which not first in the understan∣ding. For he that believes, must know what is fit to be believed. Hence the Scripture frequently invites us to hear, see, tast, consider; And affirmes that faith too comes by hearing. I said Cer∣tainty too. For by how much the nee∣rer Reason is to sense (that is by how 
 many the more experiments of the senses it may be demonstrated) it is so much the more reall: and on the contrary again, the further it recedes from sense, by so much the more vain speculation and naked imagination it hath. But by how much the neerer divine Revelation may be reduced to understanding, and the testimonies of experience, so much the more strength it findes.
I said further, that the precedent degrees were corrected by the subse∣quent: and so it is. For where sense fails or mistakes, it is supplied and cor∣rected by reason: And Reason by Re∣velation. For example, when the sense judgeth the Moon to be bigger then Saturn, or an Oare to be broken under the water, &c. Reason rectifies it by certain documents of experience. So when Reason hath gathered any thing falsely of things invisible, it is amended by divine Revelation. Yet that emen∣dation 
 is not violent, and with the destruction of the precedent princi∣ple: but gentle, so that that very thing which is corrected, acknowledg∣eth, and admits it of its own accord, and with joy, and soon brings some∣thing of its own, whereby the same cor∣rected truth may become more appa∣rent. For example, Reason brings nothing to correct sense, whereof it is not soon ascertained by sundry experi∣ments, and affirmes it self, that so it is, (as that an Oare is not broken un∣der water, the Touch teacheth: as also the sight it self, looking on it after it is drawn out.) Faith holds out no∣thing, which is contrary and repug∣nant to Reason, (though it bring that which is beyond and above Reason:) But all things such as Reason not one∣ly yields being overcome by authori∣ty, but also finds of a truth to be in things, and so seeks and finds out some thing of its own, which may serve to 
 confirme and illustrate the same truth. Therefore let it be taken for true, That Sense is not onely the fountain of know∣ledge, but also of certainty, in naturall things: But that the understanding is the Organ not onely of knowledge, but also of certainty in revealed things.
Let us come then to the purpose. Some deny, that holy Scripture is to be drawn to Philosophie, because it teacheth not the speculation of outward things, but the way of eternall life, I confess, that the Scripture was given by inspiration of God, to teach, reprove, correct, and in∣struct in righteousness: That the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works. (2 Tim. 3.) I con∣fess, I say, that this is the ultimate end of the Scripture. Yet who knows not, that there are for the most part more ends of one thing? even in humane things, much more in divine, where the wisdom of our adored God hath whol∣ly wound up it self, with an artifice 
 scarce to be found out of us. Tru∣ly, if wee finde that artifice all o∣ver nature, (and so it is) that every creature, and part of a creature, and part of a part, serves for severall uses: I see no reason why we should deprive the Book of God of this character of the highest Wisdome. But I see reason why we ought to determine, that most sufficient complements of all things, whereunto Sense and Reason were in∣sufficient (and yet wee were concerned to know them) are extant in that most holy Book. For did not God bring man into the School of the World, to contemplate his manifold Wisdome? Did not hee command him to behold his invisible things by these things that are seen? (Rom. 1. v. 20.) Surely this must be acknowledged to be the end both of making the World and place∣ing man therein. Now it is cleere through all Nature, that, to whatsoe∣ver end God hath ordained any thing, 
 he hath conferred means upon it to be tein it. Hee hath therefore conferred means upon man to contemplate his wondrous things: Which as wee must acknowledge that they are sense and reason, so we must needs acknowledge that they are not every where suffici∣cient. For our senses leave us in the knowledge of eternall things, and those things which are placed quite out of sight, and done when we are not present. But where Sense fails, Reason fails also: Being that this is nothing but an universall knowledge of things, gathered from particulars acts of sense; that this or that is, or is done, either so or so. When as therefore both Sense and Reason doe very ordinarily fail us, shall we believe, that the most graci∣ous Father of Lights, would not sup∣ply this defect some other way? His most liberall and in every respect ap∣proved bounty towards us, will not permit us to suspect that. But if God 
 have some way or other provided for us, let it be shewen what it is, or where it is to be sought for, if not in that sa∣cred volume of Oracles? And I pray, was it in vain, or onely in respect of our eternall salvation, that God said of his Law. This is your wisdome and under∣standing in the sight of the Nations, which shall heare all these statutes and say. Surely this is a wise and understand∣ing people. (Deut. 4. 6.) Or did David boast in vain? I have more under standing then all my teachers; because thy testi∣monies are my meditations (Psal. 119. 99.) Or the sonne of Sirach say in vain: The Word of God most High is the fountain of wisdom? (Eccles. 1. 5. Or was it in vain that Salomon call'd God, the guide unto wisdome, and the corrector of the wise? Wisd. 7. 15.) see here a correctour! But how doth he correct, but by dashing over our vain cogitati∣on with his word? And to what pur∣pose, I pray is all that is frequently mē∣tion'd 
 concerning the beginning of the World and the order of the Creation, and properties of the creatures, If the parent of nature, who is also the Di∣ctatour of the Scriptures, meant to teach us nothing of nature? They say it is to this end, that we may learn to know and admire, love and fear the Maker of all things. Right: But how the Ma∣ker without his work? Does not any one so much the more admire and praise the ingenuity of the Painter, if he be excellent, by how much the better he understands the art of pain∣ting? Surely yes. A superficiall know∣ledge will never raise either love or ad∣miration. And then I demand, those things, which wee meet with in the Scriptures concerning the crea∣tures (by similitudes also drawn thence) are they true or false? If true (for who can determine otherwise with∣out blasphemie) why may we not con∣ferre them with those things that are 
 manifest by sense & reason? that so we may finde out that harmony of truth, which is in things, and in the mouth of the Author of things? Truly, if the words of the wise are as goades and nails fastened: (as Salomon testifies, Eccles. 12. 11.) What shall we think of the words of the all-wise God? But this, that though they raise us up with ano∣ther end, and by the by, yet they con∣tein nothing but most solid truth and all manner of-wisedome. In vain there∣fore may some one say: I finde no men∣tion in the Scriptures, much less pre∣cepts of Grammar, Logicke, Mathema∣ticks, Physicks, &c. For there is as much distance betwixt divine writings and humane, as betwixt God himself and man. Man that is limited with time, place and objects, at one time and in one place can do but one thing: but God that is aeternall, omnipresent, and omniscient, at once sees, rules and go∣verns all things, always and every 
 where. And the same Character do their writings retein on either part. Hu∣mane writings do some one thing with expresse endeavour, handling one ob∣ject in one place, and that in such a way as is most pleasing to mans under∣standing: but divine writings like an universal treasury of wisdome stay not upon one particular matter, (unlesse it be in things pertaining to Theologie) but contein variety of matter under severall sayings. Whence a Divine, a Moralist, a Politician, a Houshol∣der, a Philosopher, a Philologer, &c. may take out every of them, what each hath use of. And this breadth & depth of the Scripture is its prerogative before humane writings, that so it may be in truth an inexhausti∣ble fountain of all wisdome. For what∣soever matter is to be handled, the Scripture affords always, either a rule, or some sayings or examples: as John Henrie Alsted (sometimes my honou∣red 
 Master) shews in his Triumphus Bib∣licus, and much more might be disco∣vered by a very accurate diligence: which that so it is, for a good part of it, shall appear also in these our Physicall meditations. Rightly therefore said Cassiodorus: the Scripture is an heaven∣ly school, wherein we learn whatsoever we are either to learn or to be ignorant of. And piously T. Lydiat: It is most absurd, that heathen Philosophers should seek for the principles of all arts in one Homers posie, and that we Christians should not do the same in the Oracles of God, which are a most plentifull and most clear foun∣tain of wisdome. (About the end of his Physiological disquisition.) Those most Christian Philosophers are there∣fore deservedly to be praised, who have endeavoured to render unto God the Parent of things that praise that is due unto him, Franc. Valesius, Lambert Danaeus, Levinus Lemnius, Thomas Lydiat, Conradus Asacus, Otto Casman∣nus;
 who have not doubted to asseve∣rate, that the seeds of true Philosophy are conteined in the holy Book of the Bible, and to derive their maximes of Philosophy from thence (though with different successe.)
Let it stand therefore, that Philoso∣sophy is lame without divine Revelati∣on. Whence wee have this conse∣quence, that Aristotle is not to be tolerated in Christian schools, as the onely Master of Philosophie: But that we should be free Philosophers, to follow that which our senses, Reason, and Scripture dictate. For what? Are not we placed as wel as they in Natures garden? Why then do we not cast about our eyes, nosthrils and ears as well as they? Why should we learn the works of nature of any other Master, rather then of these? Why do we not, I say, turn over the living book of the world instead of dead pa∣pers? wherein we may contemplate more things, and with greater delight 
 and profit then any one can tell us. If we have any where need of an Inter∣pretour the maker of nature, as we have said, is the best Interpretour of himself. If a Monitour or Suggestour, we have more and better then Aristotle, experi∣ence (of the various and occult Maean∣ders of nature) being multiplyed in the processe of so many ages. For as all hu∣mane things get up to perfection from rude beginnings, so Philosophy hath had its grouths too. In Aristotles age it was scarce out of its infancy: In the ages that followed after, (especially in ours) it was so increased stil with new observations, that the Aristotelick tenets savour of obscurity & uncertainty in cōparison of these, nay, they hold out open falsities. Be it then (writes Rod. Goclenius to Nic. Taurellus) that nature hath shewed all the acutenesse of humane ingenuity in A∣ristotle; let Aristotle be a man that hath deserved well of all humane wisdome be∣yond and above all other mortall men be∣sides; 
 let him be the Father and Captain of our wisdome; let him be the supream Dictatour of wisdome, the Generalissimo of Philosophers, the eagle of the Philoso∣phicall Kingdome, wisdome and praise of literature; let him be the Hercules, the Prince, the Tribunall of truth; let him be the deity of Philosophers; let him be lastly a man greater then all praise, and above all calumny; which titles Julius Scaliger sets him out with: yet this miracle of Nature is not the RULE OF TRUTH, seeing that hee hath not every where traced Truths footsteps. Thus Goclenius. Now hee that will may see Campanella and Verulamius, (for it may suffice, to have shewed these Hercules, who have happily put to their hands to the subduing of Mon∣sters, and cleansing Augias stables; and to have opposed them to those, whom the authority of Aristotles vainly swel∣ling Philosophy holds bewitched:) and feel how farre Aristotles assertions are 
 often from the truth, and this is the cause why it seems convenient, that Aristotle with all his heathenish train should be excluded from the sacred Philosophy of Christians; least they should any more entangle the truth in errours, and involve and obscure those things with intricate disputations, which are of themselves plain by the lamp of the Word of God, and of sound reason. For is it not very absurd, that Christians, who are trained up in the true knowledge of the true God, and taught by his holy voice, concerning the originall causes, end, and manne of subsistence of all things visible and invisible; to whom also the very my∣steries of aeternity are revealed; whom the anointing of God teacheth al things; to whom Christ hath impar∣ted his mind (1 John 2. v. 27. 1 Cor 2. 16.) that they, I say, should see for the truth of things amongst th heathen, that are destitute of all thee 
 and have no other helps, but those of reason, and of the senses, which are common to us with them? Is it so in∣deed that there is not a God in Israel, that we go to enquire of the gods of Ekron? Is the light of Hierusalem so put out, that we must needs borrow lamps at Athens? It is well known that Origen was the man that first of all joyned heathen Philosophy with Christian Religion: with no ill intent perhaps, but sure it is with very bad e∣vent. The good mans purpose without doubt was to put some externall splen∣dour upon Christian Religion, as then contemned by reason of its simplici∣ty, that so Christians might be well ap∣pointed to buckle with the Gentile Philosophers at their own weapons. But whither or no came this perswasion from him, that hath called us out of darknesse into his marvellous light, and commanded us to beware of vain Philoso∣phy after the tradition of men, after the 
 rudiments of the World, and not after Christ. (Gal. 5. 8. 1 Pet, 2. 9. Colos. 2. 8.) And indeed the most sad estate of the Church a little after shews what fruit we had in coupling Aristotle what Christ; when all was ful of the noise of disputations, (for slippery quaestions, and an itching desire of controversie is the very soul of Peripateticisme) and haeresie sprung out of haeresie, till at length the fumes of humane opinions had so quite darkned the brightnesse of the divine wisdom, that all things dege∣nerated into Antichristianisme. Where in forging articles of faith, and ordai∣ning rules of life, Aristotle had an ae∣quall share with Christ, that I may not say he had the sole dictatourship: of which thing our School divinity will give us a very cleer sight. If Origen then a man of so sublime a wit, in vain attempted to piece out Christian reli∣gion with that same heathen Philoso∣phy; 
 and Thomas Scotus nor no man else had any better successe, why then do we tolerate it? Why do we not slip our wits out of those snares? why do we not throw away those spectacles which present us with fancies instead of things?
Some are afraid, least, if they should let go Peripatetick Philosophy, they should have none at all. As if when Ha∣gar were cast out, there would have been none to bless Abraham with issue! Or that the Israelites would have been sterved with hunger, when they. had left the Aegyptian flesh pots; or that Moses must needs have grown block∣ish, when he was out of the company of the wise men of Memphis! Nay rather, that promised Grace will come at length, at length that heavenly Man∣na will rain down, at length we shall be truly  taught of God, when turning away our ears from humane O∣pinions, we shall hearken to God alone 
 speaking by Nature, and by his Word. And then how solid, easie, and delight∣full will all things be! when as the whole course of Philosophy will not consist in opinions but in truth.
But greater care was to be had of me∣thod: that all things should be delive∣red to the learners in such a way, that they may finde knowledge to flow into them, not to be stuft in; always begin∣ning with those things that are best known, and ending in things no lesse known then they. For why should we think that impossible in Physicks, which is so excellently atchieved in Mathematicks? whereall Demonstrati∣ons (N. W.) are brought to the very sight: and all is so contrived together of things that go before and are better known (always beginning with such common things that it is taedious to the unskilfull to heare them) in such an order, as that which is in the mid∣dest is never skipt over, nor place, given to that which is more unknown, 
 whence it comes to passe, that you must of necessity assent as well to that which is last, as to that which is first. And truly there is reason to wonder why the like hath not been yet assayed in Metaphysicks, Physicks, and Theo∣logie, (for Ethicks and Politicks con∣cern more contingent things.) I am not ignorant that there is more evidence in Numbers, Measures and Weights, then in Qualities, by which Nature puts forth its strength after a hidden manner: yet I will not say that there is greater cer∣tainty in them, seeing that all things are done alike not without highest rea∣son, in a continued order, and as it were by an aeternall law. And yet in Mathe∣maticks all things are not alike plain, yet they are assayed sundry wayes till they can be reduced to , or very sight, as I said before, and delivered scientifically. For he sayes nothing in Philosophicall matters that proves no∣thing: and he proves nothing that doth 
 not so demonstrate it, that you cannot con∣tradict it. And now I beseech you let this be our businesse, that the schools may cease to perswade, and begin to demon∣strate: cease to dispute and begin to spe∣culate: cease lastly, to believe, and begin to know. For that Aristotellicall ma∣xim, Discentem oportet credere, A learner must believe is as tyrannicall as dange∣rous; and that same Pythagorean  ipse dixit. Let no man be compell'd to swear to his Masters words, but let the things themselves constrain the in∣tellect: Nor let a Master have any more credit given him, then hee can demon∣strate in very deed, that hee is to have. For in a free Common-wealth there ought to be no Kings, but Dukes or Ge∣neralls; no Dictators, but Consuls. And those that profess the art of instructing men, are the Fathers of men, not the carvers of Statues. O when shall we see that day! that all things which ought to be known shall offer themselves so to 
 a mans understanding, that there wil be nothing but what may be understood for the very cleerness of it, nothing call'd in doubt for certainty: the truth of things making such an impression upon the senses with its light. For hee doth not see truly, who must yet be perswaded by arguments to make him believe that hee sees: as wee have been hither to dealt with for the best part.
I could not choose, because I seemed to see light in the light of God, but assay calling God to my aid, to reduce these new hypotheses of naturall things into a new method, and dictate them to the schollers of this school. And thence sprang this, which I now offer, repre∣senting a draught of the lineaments of some new, (and as I hope truly Chri∣stian) Philosophie. Not that I would crosse the design of great Verulam (who thought it the best way to abstein from Axiomes and method, till full inducti∣ons could be made, of all and every 
 thing throughout all nature:) but to make an experiment in the mean time, whether more light might be let into our minds by this means to observe the secrets of nature the more easily, that so praise might be perfected to God out of the very mouth of infants, and confusion prepared for the gain saying enemie; as David having comprised the summe of Physicks in a short hymne for the use of the unlearned) speaks. (Psal. 8.) I have entituled it a Synopsis of Physicks reformed by divine light: because Phi∣losophy is here guided by the lamp of divine Scripture, and all our assertions are brought to the attestation of the senses and reason, with as much evi∣dence as could be possible. Now both those come under the name of divine light. For as David said, THY WORD is ALANTHORNE unto my feet: so said Salomon THE SPIRIT or mind OF A MAN is THE CAN∣DLE of the Lord searching all things. 
 (Psalm 119. 105. and Proverbs 20. 27.
If any one object: That these things here delivered, are not yet of that cer∣tainty or evidence, as to be preferred before Aristotles so long received do∣ctrine; I will answer, that is not my drift at present: but onely I propound this as an example, that a truer way of Philosophie may be set out, by the Gui∣dance of God, the Light of Reason, and the Testimonie of Sense, if Philosophers would labour more after God and the Truth, then after Aristotle and Opini∣on. In the mean time, these should be the more acceptable, and had in more reverent esteem of us, if it were for no∣thing but this, that they are taken from the Oracles of God, and aime at a more abundant knowledg of God. For my part truly I had rather (in that mind I now am: and that it may so conti∣nue, strengthen me, ô God) I had rather I say erre, having God for my guide, then having Aristotle: that is, I had 
 rather follow the voice of God, though not throughly understood yet, so I fol∣low it, then be carried away from the sacred testimonies of my God, to the devices of the brain of man.
I confesse my self, that something more were to be desired here yet, to that rule of certainty and evidence which I spake of before: yet because I trust that these things may be brought to a fuller  [exactnesse] by reiterated meditations, (of mine own or some o∣thers,) I doubted not to follow the counsell of great Acontius: If thou hast made any rare observation, sayes he, which never any one before made (whither the thing be a new invention, or some new way of former inventions) although much be wanting as yet, which is above thy strength, neverthelesse if thou shouldest not make it publick, it would argue either too much cowardize, or too much haughti∣nesse of thy mind, and however that thou art no lover of the Common Wealth. And 
 why should not these things be ac∣counted as new inventions; That ter∣narie of principles so clearly demonstrated from Scripture, Reason, and Sense? Why not that admirable scale of sub∣stances, by a septenarie gradation? Why not the doctrine of spirits (as well separate as incorporate:) of mo∣tions also and qualities, laid down more accurately and plainly then ever before, & letting in a quite new light into the know∣ledge of natur all things? To say nothing of smaller matters scattered all over the book. Every of which in particular though I dare not defend tooth and nail, for some things perhaps are still the reliques of common tradition: and others it may be, not yet sufficiently e∣stablished upon the foundations wch we have laid down) yet I am perswaded that they are the groundworks of unmoved truth, and avail much to the more exact observation of particular things. And that I may speak in a word, I hope there 
 is so much light in this method of Phy∣sicks here delivered, that very little place is left to doubts and disputations: so that it makes something towards the taking away the controversies of Au∣thours, the opinions of all (whatsoever of truth either Aristotle hath; or Galen, the Chymicks, Campanella and Verula∣mius do reasonably alledge against him) being reduced to an harmony; which may be made plain by the example of the principles of which they make bo∣dies to consist, (which Aristotle would have to be the four Elements; the Syagy∣ricks Salt, Sulfur and ☿. Nay more, that by this means a gate is opened in a new kinde of way, not onely to the under∣standing of Arts and humane inventi∣ons, but also to multiply them: which could never be, unless the foundati∣ons of truth were found. Perhaps I speak more, then the Reader will think he finds in my Writings. But if he saw but the streams (the delineation of 
 that Pansophia Christiana, which wee have in hand) that are derived, from this fountain, as also from that of our Didacticks and Metaphysicks, hee would not hold it vainly spoken. But because those are not yet brought to light, I set down this as a law for these that are: If any thing be not sufficiently deduced from Sense, Reason, and Scri∣pture; If any thing cohere not harmoni∣ously enough with the rest; If any thing be not evident enough with its own per∣spicuity, let it be taken as not said at all. Which law standing in force it may be lawful for my self & all others, both to doubt always, and every where whether every thing be so as it is delivered to be: and also to enquire why it is, as it is found to be; by which two courses, that the lowest foundations of truth, will in time be discovered no body needs to doubt.
Therefore let none of vs seeke after any thing else, but how the truth 
 may best be maintained on all hands which if it happen not to be on our side, and that we are deceived with ap∣pearances of truth, (as it is very usuall in humane affaires,) I beseech all those that are more sharp-sighted, for the love of truth courteously to shew us our way, which we have lost, and where our demonstrations come not together. But if these savour of truth something neer, that then they would not disdain to joyn their endevours with ours for the illustration thereof: that all of us being the children of truth may com∣pose and sing Hymnes of prayse toge∣ther to God the Father of Truth. Thou therefore
O Christ the Fathers glory bright,
Of this great World the onely light;
On us some beams of light bestow,
That are thy servants, thee to know.
Amen, Lord make me to see! here in∣deed 
 thy externall light shining upon, and internall informing thy creatures, but there in [in heaven] aeternall and uncreated! Amen, Amen. And so Chri∣stian Readers farewel.

