



Fellow CITIZENS,
I Am no Orator, I own it, nor ever made a Speech in my Life, but once in the Vestry, about choosing a Lecturer, and new Lettering the Church-Buckets: but this I'll be bold to say, That no Man is a hear∣tier Well-wisher to the Prosperity of this Protestant City than my self. Now I must tell you, Gentlemen, that you don't take so much Notice of a certain Author, who does you the Honour to reside among you, as his great Qualities deserve. You only consult him as a Physician; and indeed I must needs say he is a pretty Physician; He has eas'd many of you of those heavy Burdens, call'd Wives and Children; and, out of his Zeal to the Publick, has helpt to thin the overstock of Traders: But still you must give me leave to tell you, that you overlook his principal Talent, for Physick is what he va∣lues himself least upon. He is a Poet, pray be not scandalized at the Word, he is a Poet, I say, but of sober solid Principles, and as hearty an Enemy to Wit as the best of you all: he has writ twenty thousand Verses and upwards without one Grain of Wit in them; nay, he has declar'd open War against it, and, despising it in himself, is resolved not to endure it in any one else. When he is in his Coach, instead of pretending to read where he can't see, as some Doctors do; or thinking of his Patient's Case, which none of them do, he is still listning to the Chimes, to put his Ear in tune, and stumbles upon a Di∣stich every Kennel he is jolted over. Nay, even in Coffee-houses, when other People are cleansing Chester-Harbour, banishing Popish Priests, disposing the Crown of Spain, repairing Dover-Peer, pitying the poor Scots at Darien, or settling the Affairs of Poland, he is enditing Heroics on the back of a News-Paper with his Pencil, and wou'd give more for a Rhime to Radziouski than a Specific for the Gout. Those flashy Fellows, your Covent-garden Poets, are good for nothing, but to run into our Debts, lye with our Wives, and break unman∣nerly Iests upon us Citizens; then, like a parcel of Sots, they write for Fame and Immortality; but this Gentleman is above such Trifles, and, as he prescribes, so he writes for the Good of Trade. He's a particular Benefactor to the Manu∣facture of the Nation; and, at this present Minute, to my certain knowledge, keeps Ten Paper-mill a going with his Job and Habakkuk, and his other Hebrew Heroes. There's scarce a Cook, Grocer, or Tobacconist within the City-Walls but is the better for his Works; nay, one that is well acquainted with his Se∣cret History, has assured me, that his main design in writing the two Arthurs, whatever he pretended in his Preface, was only to help the poor Trunk-makers at a Pinch, when Quarles and Ogilby were all spent, and they wanted other Materials. Above all, you can't imagine what a singular Deference he pays to a golden Chain; 'tis impossible for a rich Man with him, either to be a Knave or a Blockhead: he never sees the Cap of Maintenance, but is ready to worship

it; and, in compliment to the Sword-bearer, wou'd, I dare engage for him, sooner write a Panegyric upon Custard, than any of the Cardinal Virtues, tho' he pretends to be their Champion.
This may serve, Fellow-Citizens, to give you some Idea of the Man; but what we most want his Assistance in, is to reform several enormous Abuses that have crept in among us. The Poetry of our Bell-men, which in its first In∣stitution contain'd many excellent Lessons of Piety, is grown very loose and immoral, and gives our Wives and Daughters wicked Ideas, when it awakes them at Midnight. The Tobacco-boxes too seem engag'd in a general Confederacy to bring Vice into esteem; their lewd Inscriptions charge Religion with desperate Resolution, and have given it many deep and ghastly Wounds. Our Posies for Rings are either immodest, or irreligious; and we see few Ver∣ses on our Ale-house Signs, but have some spiteful and envious Strokes at Sobriety and Good-manners, whence the Apprentices of this Populous City have apparently received very bad Impressions. 'Tis great Pity that our Magistrates, in whose Power it is, have not yet restrained the Licentious∣ness of these Rhimes, and obliged the Writers of them to observe more Decorum. But, since they are so remiss in their Duty, retain this Gentleman on the side of Religion, and you'll soon see these Enormities Vanish. Be∣sides, being of a goodly Person, if you desired him now and then, upon a So∣lemn Occasion, to walk before a Pageant, or march at the Head of the Blew-coat Infantry, at the Burial of one of his own Patients, with how much more Decency and Gravity wou'd those Public Ceremonies be perform'd? And then who so proper to inflame the Courages of our City-Militia, as our Parson tells me, one Tyrtaeus did of old, by the Repetition of his own Lines? Well, cou'd I but be so happy as to see him once appear in the Front of our Finsbury-Squadrons, or animate with his noble Compositions the Wrestlers in Moor-fields, I shou'd not doubt to see our ancient Military Genius come in Play, and every London 'Prentice able to worst his Brace of Lions. Therefore, Fellow-Citizens, for mine, for your own, and your Families sakes, hug and cherish this worthy Gentleman, make him free of all your Companies, for he's as well qualified for any of them as his own; carry him to all your Entertainments, nay even to your private Deli∣berations over Brawn and Quest-ale, and when any foreign Ambassador is treat∣ed by the City, get him to pay the Compliment in Verse, and the R-c-rd-r may second him in Prose; put the entire Management of Smithfield into his Hands, and make him absolute Monarch of all the Booths and Poppet-shews. Above all, let him endeavour by the Melody of his Rhimes (and what can withstand 'em?) to call back our fugitive Mercers from Covent-garden to Ludgate-hill and Pater-noster-row. Since we are for new Painting our City-gates, why should we not Furbish up our old Heroes in new Metre? Why should poor King Lud and his two trusty Sons, Temancus and Androgeus, be forgotten? Or what harm have the Giants at Guild-hall and Whittington's Cat done to be buried in ob∣livion? There are a thousand other Subjects to employ his Muse, wherein he may discreetly intersperse some notable Precepts against Trusting, some pretty Touches in defence of Vsury, and some handsom Consolations for Cuckoldom, all which might be of admirable use to season and confirm our City-Youth in the true Prin∣ciples of their Ancestors: And what if you cou'd perswade him to write a few pacifying Strains to calm the distemper'd Spirits of our Car-men and the Oy∣ster-women at Bilingsgate? In short, these are some of the Topics you may re∣commend to him. Let him make Verses for us Citizens, and prescribe Physic to the Fools without Temple-bar. I am,

