



Sir,
IT was given for a Maxime (a∣mongst
other Policies of Go∣vernment)
to the States of the
United Provinces, by Prince
William of Nassaw, your great
Grandfather, that they should
doe Justice unto all Strangers;
It being the greatest support of a
Nation, and the want of it, the
chiefest cause of their fall. I am grieved that such occasions
are given me, to write upon this Subject, or to say that
these Netherlands, have long mourned for the transgres∣sions
of evill doers.
Before the Law of Property, there was noe theft, all
things remained in common to every man; but after the
Laws of Nations were established, all mens rights, be∣came
distinguished and preserved, by certaine Rules and
order of good Governement.
May it please your Highness, I am obleiged as an
Englishman, a Gentle-man, and a Subject, of the King of

Great BRITTAIGNE, publiquely to vindicate my self,
my Country, and the Judicature of England, since severall
Advocates and their Clyants in Middelburgh, have taken
the boldnes, and liberty, publiquely to scandalize and re∣proach
all three, by belching out their calumnies and asper∣sions,
against us, in the ordinary Courts of Justice there.
And since your Highnes by a wonderfull Providence, is
not only restored, to the ancient Offices, and Dignities, of
your most Noble and Princely Ancestors, but that the chiefe
Office of Statholder, in Holland and Zeeland is intailed upon your
Highnes and your Heires for ever, as a remarkable testimo∣ny
of your personall merits, and the common gratitude
of the people, for the many and great Services, that your
Ancestors had done for these Provinces. I shall therefore
implore your Highnes to recommend my Causes, that I
may at last find common Justice, in these Netherlands,
without respect of Persons: And that in the meane time,
your Highnes would give your selfe the trouble of reading
this short Narative of them; wherein I have not offered
any thing, impertinent to the busines in hand. So leaving
the scope of the whole matter, unto your Highnes most
serious considerations; submitting the same to your great
wisdome and judgment, as the chief President of all
Judicature, in these Provinces.
Great Sr.

Middelburgh in Zeeland, September 2. 1675.
