


IT is not unknown to all that know me in England, that for these many years I have had my health very ill: And therfore having from time to time used all the meanes and medicines that England could afford; last of all by the advice of my Physi∣tians, I have made it my humble suit unto your Majesty, that I might travell unto the Spa for the use of those waters; purposing with my self, that if I could be well, I would go from thence to Heydel∣berg, and spend this winter there. But when I was gone from the Spa to Aquisgrane, and so to Colein, I found my self rather worse, then better then I was before: And therefore I resolved with my self, that it was high time for me to settle my thoughts upon another world. And seeing I was out of hope to enjoy the health of my body, at the last to look to the health of my soule, from whence both Art and experience teach me, that all my bodi∣ly infirmities have their beginning: For if I could by any study have proved Catholike Religion to be false, or by any means have professed it to be true in England, I doubt not but the contentment of my soule would have much helped the health of my body. But the more I studied the Scriptures and most ancient Fathers to confute it, the more I was compelled to see the truth thereof. And the more I laboured to reconcile the Religion of England there∣unto, the more I was disliked, suspected and con∣demned as a common enemy. And if I would have been either ignorant or silent, I might perhaps with the pleasures and commodities of my preferments,
 have in time cast off the care of Religion. But see∣ing my study forced me to know, and my place com∣pelled me to preach, I had no way to avoid my grief, nor any means to indure it. I have therefore appre∣hended the opportunity of my Licence to travell, that I may withdraw my self for a while from the sight and offence of those in England, who hate Catholike Religion, and freely and fully enioy the presence of our B. Saviour, in the Unity of his Catholike Church; wherein I will never forget at the daily Oblation of his most B. Body and Blood, to lift up my heart unto him, and to pray for the admission of your Majesty thereunto. And in the meane time, I have thought it my duty to write this short Treatise with my own hand; wherein, before I publish my self to the world, I desire to shew to your Majesty these two things. 1. The means of my conversion unto Catholike Religion. 2. The hopes I have to do your Majesty no ill service therein. I humbly crave your Majesties pardon, and will rest ever,

Liege
Decemb. 12. 1613.
