



MADAM,
THE follovving Work being a just and faithful Rela∣tion of the most remarkable occur∣rences in the Life of my Lady VVarner; I hope for an easie
Pardon of my Presumption, in offering it to Your Majesty.
The Memoires of Heroical Persons, vvhose efforts have been to make the Science of Saints their chiefest study, and their heighest ambition to ex∣cel in Vertue, cannot but find a gracious acceptance under the Protection of Your Royal Name; since Your Majesty not only by vvords, but by an unparallel'd examples, has so openly declar'd in favor of Vertuous Actions before all other Titles, even to Crovvns and Scepters.
Amongst these Great Souls, this Lady, vvhose Life I Write, must be Registre'd, vvhose Ver∣tues
so long conceal'd, by a signal Providence have taken air, and are come to light.
The Monastry of Graveling, in vvhich she liv'd, and Crovvn'd her Merits by a happy Death, vvas alvvays look'd upon as a Nursery of eminent Sanctity; but Humi∣lity seems to be their darling Ver∣tue: For these Humble Virgins being hid from the Eyes of Men, that they might be more con∣spicuous to those of God and his Angels, vvere never vvilling to transmit to Posterity, vvhat othervvays might justly deserve the highest esteem and venera∣tion; and consequently the O∣rignals I have made use of in
compiling the Actions of this holy persons Life, have by the importunity and Authority of the Honorable Lady Anne Nevil of happy Memory, late Abbess of Pontoise, been rather extorted from the Monastry of Grave∣ling than freely offer'd; so that I am beholden to my Ladies Zeal for the greatest part of the Memoires vvhich she had indu∣striously got together, vvith de∣sign to have put them into such a Method as might fit them for the Press; yet all that either my Lady Abbess, vvhilst she liv'd, or I since her Death have been able to procure, are so fevv, in comparison of those
many Vertues my Lady VVar∣ner practis'd, that I can give my Reader but a faint Idea, and small Scantling of them.
After all my endeavours, I knovv these small Essays vvill not escape hard Censures, and no Precaution can secure me from severe Challenges upon this Subject. The refin'd Policy of Worldlings vvill never be able to brook this Hidden Trea∣sure, nor look this Lady in the Face, vvho in the flovver of her Youth, so generously slighted the Charms of a plentiful Fortune, of a loving Husband, and of her dearest Children, to make her self an intire Sacrifice to God.
These proceedings, I say, e∣specially in a Pretended Reforma∣tion, vvill be traduc'd as the highest Folly and greatest piece of Bigotry; vvhen indeed the follovving Evangelical Counsels has alvvays been one of the Discriminating Tests, and Di∣stinctive Signs of the true Re∣ligion.
For this reason, Madam, I make again my humble Addres∣ses to beseech Your Majesty to vouchsafe to receive this small Treatise under Your Royal Pro∣tection. 'Tis true, Vertue is very povverful, but Obloquies are like to be so great on the one side, and my endeavours
to dravv her true Lineaments to the Life, so vveak on the other, that Your supporting hand vvill be vvanting to encounter the first and sustain the second.
The Picture of my Lady, in the Frontispiece of this Book, is vvithout Flattery very Lovely: But vvhoever Reads her Life, must confess the Fea∣tures of her Soul vvere incom∣parably more Amiable. For my part, I vvonder not that Vertue vvas Hereditary to her; because if a good Tree must needs bear good Fruit, 'tis not to be admir'd that a good Child should be Born of a good Mo∣ther? My Ladies Mother had
so svveet an Air, and so vvin∣ning a Comportment, that she gain'd the Hearts of all, vvith vvhom she converst. Nay, our late Queen of happy Memory, Henrietta Maria Mother to Our Gracious Soverain, vvas so far taken vvith her, that she chose her to be one of her Maids of Honor.
Hovv far more advantagious is the Fortune or the Daughter, since Your Majesty has been Graciously pleas'd to allovv the best Actions of her Life to be Addrest to Your Self? They must needs Live for ever by this Immortal Favor, being re∣flected on by those Rays of
Majesty vvhich suffer no Eclipse, and which by the opposition of a Malign Darkness give ra∣ther a greater Light: For a Queen to be truly Great, is al∣vvays to be the same, vvhether Fortune smiles, or frovvns up∣on Her; neither Elevated in Prosperity, nor Dejected in Ad∣versity, but shevving the Great∣ness of Her Soul in despising all things beneath it. This Golden Mean, this equal Temper, the Christian World has alvvays admir'd in Your Majesty; but never more, than in this present Conjuncture. Hence, Madam, I humbly conceive Your Majesties Name the most Proper un∣der
Heaven to Countenance such a Work, as designs (by dravving the Picture of a Ver∣tuous Lady) to publish, and praise the Contempt of an unconstant World. For vvhat can speak so efficaciously as Your Example, the instability of all Human Felicity? For as Your present State offers forcible Motives tovvards the disparaging of all Worldly Greatness, so the consideration of Your Royal Patience and unshaken Constancy, cannot but comfort the most af∣flicted, and heal the vvounds even of the most desperate.

These Vertues, Madam, grounded on Christian Humi∣lity must necessarily at length be Crovvn'd : 'Tvvas Prudence, in not vvrestling vvith the merci∣less Waves, and furious Tumults of an ungrateful People, vvhich has sav'd us the best of Kings, the best of Queens, and the most hopeful of Princes: The humoring of a Storm is of∣ten the best vvay to Steer a Vessel securely into the Haven. 'Tis not for me to search into the Mysteries and Decrees of the Highest; I knovv as they are inscrutable in their Secret Courses, so they are to be A∣dor'd and Reverenc'd in their
surprizing Effects: But vvhen I reflect on such a Series and uninterrupted Succession of Mi∣raculous Deliverances, vvhich both before, and after the Sub∣version of the Government, have attended the Royal Family; I cannot be per∣svvaded, but that the spee∣dy return of Your Majesty into Your Kingdoms, is nigh at hand. I dont re∣ly upon the Flight or Sing∣ing of Birds, as the Heathen Augurs did, but take my Measures from better Omens: The Iustice of Your Cause, the Over-ruling Providence vvhich never leaves the Iust, the
Povver of a Most Christian King, backt by the greater force of Heaven, vvhich his Zeal in supporting Religion and Iustice cannot but obtain, foretel the certain and speedy ruin of Ʋsurpation and Re∣bellion. Methinks I hear the Angel Guardian of our Iland Whispering in Our Soverains Far, as heretofore the Angel Guardian of Israel did in the Ear of St. Ioseph, these joyful vvords; Rise, and take the Child, and his Mother, and re∣turn into your Country, for they are Dead, vvho sought the Life of the Child.

Pardon me, Madam, for en∣larging the Preface by this Di∣gression. The Zeal I have for Your Majesties happy Restau∣ration vvill Apologize for the length. I have no more to add, but to beg that Your Majesty vvould vouchsafe to Honor these Memoires vvith Your Royal Approbation, and accept this Tribute of my poor endeavours, vvhich vvith all imaginable submission I lay dovvn at Your Sacred Feet. That the Great God of Iustice may speedily restore Your Ma∣jesty, and Our Gracious Sove∣rain to Your Thrones; and that after a long and happy Raign
upon Earth, You may receive an everlasting Crovvn in Hea∣ven, are the earnest vvishes and dayly Prayers of MADAM

