



SIR,
I Heartily wish this Play were as perfect as I intended it, that it might be more worthy your acceptance; and that my Dedication of it to you, might be more becoming that Ho∣nour and Esteem which I, with every Body, who are so fortunate as to know you, have for you. It had your Countenance when yet un∣known; and now it is made publick, it wants your Protection.
And give me leave, without any Flattery to you,  Vnity in my self, to  my Illiterate Criticks, as an answer to their  Objections, that they have found fault with that, which has been pleasing to you. This Play in relation to my concern for its Reputation, succeeded before it was Acted, for thro' your early Patronage it had an audience of several Persons of the first Rank

both in Wit and Quality; and their allowance of it, was a Consequence of your approbation. Therefore if I really wish it might have had a more popular reception; it is not at all in con∣sideration of my self; but because I wish well, and would gladly contribute to the benefit of the Stage, and diversion of the Town. They were (not long since) so kind to a very imper∣fect Comedy of mine, that I thought my self justly indebted to them all my endeavours for an entertainment that might merit some little of that Applause, which they were so lavish of, when I thought I had no Title to it. But I find they are to be treated cheaply, and I have been at an unnecessary expence.
I would not have any Body imagine, that I think this Play without its Faults, for I am Con∣scious of several, and ready to own 'em; but it shall be to those who are able to find 'em out. I confess I design'd (whatever Vanity or Ambition occasion'd that design) to have written a true and regular Comedy, but I found it an undertaking which put me in mind of—Sude , ∣straque laboret . And  to make a∣mends for the  a design, I do con∣fess both the attempt, and the imperfect perfor∣mance. Yet I must take the boldness to say, I have not miscarried in the whole; for the Me∣chanical part of it is perfect. That, I may say with as little vanity, as a Builder may say he has built

a House according to the Model laid down be∣fore him; or a Gardiner that he has set his Flow∣ers in a knot of such or such a Figure. I design'd the Moral first, and to that Moral I invented the Fable, and do not know that I have borrow'd one hint of it any where. I made the Plot as strong as I could, because it was single, and I made it single, because I would avoid confusion, and was resolved to preserve the three Unities of the Drama, which I have visibly done to the ut∣most severity. This is what I ought not to ob∣serve upon my self; but the Ignorance and Ma∣lice of the greater part of the Audience is such, that they would make a Man turn Herauld to his own Play, and Blazon every Character. However, Sir, this Discourse is very impertinent to you; whose Judgment, much better can discern the Faults, than I can excuse them; and whose good Nature, like that of a Lover, will find out those hidden Beauties (if there are any such) which it would be great immodesty in me to . I think I don't speak improperly when I  a  of Poetry; for it is very well known  to you; she has not deny'd ; you have injoy'd her, and she has been ruitful in a most Beautiful Issue—If I break off abruptly here, I hope every Body will understand that it is to a∣void a Commendation, which, as it is your due, would be most easie for me to pay, and too trou∣blesome for you to receive.
I have since the Acting of this Play hearkned after the Objections which have been made to it; for I was Conscious where a true Critick might have put me upon my defence. I was prepared for their Attack; and am pretty confident I could have vindicated some parts, and excused others; and where there were any plain Miscarriages, I would most ingenuously have confess'd 'em. But I have not heard any thing said sufficient to pro∣voke an Answer. Some little snarling and bark∣ing there has been, but I don't know one well∣mouth'd Curr that has opened at all. That, which looks most like an Objection, does not relate in particular to this Play, but to all or most that ever have been written; and that is Soliloquy. Therefore I will answer it, not only for my own sake, but to save others the trouble, to whom it may hereafter be Objected.
I grant, that for a Man to Talk to himself, appears absurd and unnatural; and indeed it is so in most Cases; but the circumstances which may attend the occasion, make great alteration. It oftentimes happens to a Man  which require  their Nature, cannot admit . Such, for cer∣tain, is all  nd other less mischievous intentions may be very improper to be Commu∣nicated to a second Person. In such a case there∣fore the Audience must observe, whether the Person upon the Stage takes any notice of them

at all, or no. For if he supposes any one to be by, when he talks to himself, it is monstrous and ridiculous to the last degree. Nay, not only in this case, but in any part of a Play, if there is expressed any knowledge of an Audience, it is in∣sufferable. But otherwise when a Man in Soli∣loquy reasons with himself, and Pro's and Con's, and weighs all his Designs: We ought not to imagine that this Man either talks to us, or to himself; he is only thinking, and thinking such Matter, as were inexcusable Folly in him to speak. But because we are conceal'd Spectators of the Plot in agitation, and the Poet finds it necessary to let us know the whole Mystery of his Contri∣vance; he is willing to inform us of this Persons Thoughts, and to that end is forced to make use of the expedient of Speech, no other better way being yet invented for the Communication of Thought.
Another very wrong Objection has been made by some who have not taken leisure to distinguish the Characters. The Hero of the Play as they, are  him▪ (meaning Mellefont) is a Gull, and  a  and . Is every Man a Gul and ? At that rate I'm afraid the two Classes o , will be reduc'd to one, and the Knaves themselves be at a loss to justifie their Title: But if an Open∣hearted Honest Man, who has an entire Confi∣dence in one whom he takes to be his Friend, and

whom he has obliged to be so; and who (to confirm him in his Opinion) in all appearance, and upon several tryals has been so: If this Man be de∣ceived by the Treachery of the other; must he of necessity commence Fool immediately, only be∣cause the other has proved a Villain? Ay, but there was Caution given to Mellefont in the first Act by his Friend Careless. Of what Nature was that Caution? Only to give the Audience some light into the Character of Maskwell, before his appearance; and not to convince Mellefont of his Treachery; for that was more than Careless was then able to do: He never knew Maskwell guilty of any Villany; he was only a sort of Man which he did not like. As for his suspecting his Fami∣liarity with my Lady Touchwood: Let 'em exa∣mine the Answer that Mellefont makes him, and compare it with the Conduct of Maskwell's Cha∣racter through the Play.
I would have 'em again look into the Chara∣cter of Maskwell, before they accuse any Body of weakness for being deceiv'd by him. For  on summing up the enquiry into  find they have only  Charactr, .
But  which I am more concerne  all the false Criticisms that are made upon me; and that is, some of the Ladies are offended: I am heartily sorry for it, for I declare I would rather disoblige all the Criticks

in the World, than one of the Fair Sex. They are concerned that I have represented some Wo∣men Vicious and Affected: How can I help it? It is the Business of a Comick Poet to paint the Vices and Follies of Humane kind; and there are but two Sexes that I know, viz. Men, and Women, which have a Title to Humanity: And if I leave one half of them out, the Work will be imper∣fect. I should be very glad of an opportunity to make my Complement to those Ladies who are offended: But they can no more expect it in a Comedy, than to be Tickled by a Surgeon, when he's letting 'em Blood. They who are Virtuous or Discreet, I'm sure cannot be offended, for such Characters as these distinguish them, and make their Beauties more shining and observ'd: And they who are of the other kind, may ne∣vertheless pass for such, by seeming not to be displeased, or touched with the Satyr of this Comedy. Thus have they also wrongfully accu∣sed me of doing them a prejudice, when I have in reality done them a Service.
I have heard some whispering, as if they in∣tended to accuse this Play of Smuttiness and Bawdy: But I declare I took a particular care to avoid it, and if they find any in it, it is of their own making, for I did not design it to be so un∣derstood. But to avoid my saying any thing upon a Subject, which has been so admirably handled before, and for their better instruction,

I earnestly recommend to their perusal, the Epi∣stle Dedicatory before the Plain-Dealer.
You will pardon me, Sir, for the freedom I take of making Answers to other People, in an Epistle which ought wholly to be sacred to you: But since I intend the Play to be so too, I hope I may take the more liberty of Justifying it, where it is in the right. I hear a great many of the Fools are angry at me, and I am glad of it; for I Writ at them, not to 'em. This is a bold con∣fession, and yet I don't think I shall disoblige one Person by it; for no Body can take it to himself, without owning the Character.
I must now, Sir, declare to the World, how kind you have been to my Endeavours; for in regard of what was well meant, you have excu∣sed what was ill perform'd, I beg you would con∣tinue the same Method in your acceptance of this Dedication. I know no other way of ma∣king a return to that Charity you shew'd, in pro∣tecting an Infant, but by Enrolling it in your Service, now that it is of Age and come into the World. Therefore be pleased to accept of this as an Acknowledgement of the Favour you have shewn me, and an earnest of the real Service and Gratitude of,
SIR,

