



MY LORD,
A Young Poet, is liable to the same Vanity and Indiscretion with a Young Lover; and the Great Man that smiles upon one, and the Fine Woman that looks kindly upon t' other, are each of 'em in Danger of having the Favour publish'd with the first Opportunity.
But there may be a different Motive, which will a little distinguish the Offenders. For tho' one should have a Vanity in ruining another's Reputation, yet the other may only have an Ambition to advance his own.

And I beg leave, my Lord, that I may plead the latter, both as the Cause and Excuse of this Dedication.
Whoever is King, is also the Father of his Country; and as no body can dispute Your Lordship's Monarchy in Poetry; so all that are concern'd, ought to acknow∣ledge Your Universal Patronage: And it is only pre∣suming on the Priviledge of a Loyal Subject, that I have ventur'd to make this my Address of Thanks, to Your Lordship; which at the same time, includes a Prayer for Your Protection.
I am not Ignorant of the Common Form of Poetical Dedications, which are generally made up of Panegyricks, where the Authors endeavour to distinguish their Pa∣trons, by the shining Characters they give them, above other Men. But that, my Lord, is not my business at this time, nor is Your Lordship now to be distin∣guish'd. I am contented with the Honour I do my self in this Epistle; without the Vanity of attempting to add to, or explain Your Lordship's Character.
I confess it is not without some strugling, that I behave my self in this Case, as I ought: For it is very hard to be pleased with a Subject, and yet forbear it. But I chuse rather to follow Pliny's Precept, than his Ex∣ample, when in his Panegyrick to the Emperour Tra∣jan, he says,
Nec minus considerabo quid aures ejus pati
possint, Quam quid virtutibus debeatur.
I hope I may be excus'd the Pedantry of a Quota∣tion, when it is so justly apply'd. Here are some Lines

in the Print, (and which your Lordship read before this Play was Acted) that were omitted on the Stage; and particularly one whole Scene in the Third Act, which not only helps the Design forward with less Precipitation, but also heightens the ridiculous Character of Foresight, which indeed seems to be maim'd without it. But I found my self in great dan∣ger of a long Play, and was glad to help it where I could. Tho' notwithstanding my Care, and the kind Reception it had from the Town; I could heartily wish it yet shorter: But the Number of Different Characters represented in it, would have been too much crowded in less room.
This Reflection on Prolixity, (a Fault, for which scarce any one Beauty will attone) warns me not to be tedious now, and detain Your Lordship any longer with the Trifles of,
MY LORD,

