



TIs said; and none who are Gen∣tile, as the Readers of Plays most undoubtedly are, but will yeild it as Orthodox and Authentique, as any other of our Pro∣verbial sayings; Better be out of the World, than out of the Fashion. Since, then this Pastoral takes the Confidence to come abroad; it is requisite, it should follow the Mode; and like other Plays of this Age, have a Preface: Though, Scene and Persons being Rurall, this Punctilio, perhaps, may be unexpected, and would have been dispens'd with.
But having, (and who so Cautious to avoid a Rock, as the once Ship-wrackt?) suffer'd so much through the defects of setting off, when it came on the Stage, it dares not now reject any Accomoda∣tion
the Press can give it. For (with the Theaters good leave to speak Truth,) it cannot receive greater Disadvantage in the Reading, than it met in the Presenting, The chief Parts Acted by Women; and, for their Ease, and somewhat of deco∣rum, as was pretended, whole scenes left out, and scarcely any one Speech un∣mangled and entire. As for Adornments, in Habit, Musick, and Scene-Work, it was Vacation-time, and the Company would not venture the Charge: Though they could not be ignorant, that without such Embellishments, they might, with as much hope to have it take, have pre∣sented a Masque as a Pastoral. For, as well the one as the other receives it's Grace, more from Show then Plot; from Novel, and Sprightly Aires and Dan∣ces, then curious and busy Intrigues, bor∣rowing more indeed of the Opera then Comedy. Wherefore, in regard of the great Cost in the Presentations of them, they are both of them made almost the peculiar divertisement of Courts, at the Ce∣lebration of Marriages, and the like Splen∣did
Entertainments. But why all this? What avails it, if the Gallant likes not his Suite, to excuse the Stuff, and blame the Trimming? Let the Fault then, as to the late case of this Pastoral, be layd where it will; in the Meat, or the Seasoning. It was happy in haveing such Generous Guests, as could so civilly suppress their disgusts. Wherefore, to those most No∣ble Persons, as extreamly oblig'd, it is gratefully Dedicated. And now, whe∣ther it be lik'd or dislik'd, they are sure of this, to be pleas'd with: 'Twill cost less to read, than it did, (when acted) to see it,
