



MADAM,
THAT high Station, which, by
Your Birth You hold above the
People, exacts from every one,
as a Duty, whatever Honours
they are capable of paying to Your Royal
Highness: But that more exalted Place, to
which, Your Vertues have rais'd You, a∣bove

the rest of Princes, makes the Tribute
of our Admiration and Praise, rather a choice
more immediately preventing that Duty.
The Publick Gratitude, is ever founded on
a Publick Benefit; and what is universally
bless'd, is always an universal Blessing. Thus
from Your self, we derive the Offerings which
we bring; and that Incense which arises to
Your Name, only returns to its Original,
and but naturally requires the Parent of its
Being.
From hence it is that this Poem constitu∣ted
on a Moral, whose End is to recommend
and to encourage Vertue, of consequence has
recourse to Your Royal Highness's Patron∣age;
aspiring to cast it self beneath Your
Feet, and declining Approbation, till You
shall condescend to own it, and vouchsafe to
shine upon it as on a Creature of Your
Influence.
'Tis from the Example of Princes, that
Vertue becomes a Fashion in the People,
For even they who are averse to Instruction,
will yet be fond of Imitation.

But there are Multitudes, who never can
have Means, nor Opportunities of so near
an Access, as to partake of the Benefit of
such Examples. And to these, Tragedy,
which distinguishes it self from the Vulgar
Poetry, by the Dignity of its Characters,
may be of Use and Information. For they
who are at that distance from Original Great∣ness,
as to be depriv'd of the Happiness of
Contemplating the Perfections and real Ex∣cellencies
of Your Royal Highness's Person,
in Your Court; may yet behold some small
Sketches and Imagings of the Vertues of Your
Mind, abstracted, and represented in the
Theatre.
Thus Poets are instructed, and instruct;
not alone by Precepts which persuade, but
also by Examples which illustrate. Thus is
Delight interwoven with Instruction; when
not only Vertue is prescrib'd, but also re∣presented.
But if we are delighted with the Livelyness
of a feign'd Representation of Great and
Good Persons and their Actions; how must

we be charm'd with beholding the Persons
themselves? If one or two excelling Quali∣ties,
barely touch'd in the single Action, and
small Compass of a Play, can warm an Au∣dience,
with a Concern and Regard even
for the seeming Success and Prosperity of the
Actor: With what Zeal must the Hearts of
all be fill'd, for the continued and encreasing
Happiness of those, who are the true and li∣ving
Instances of Elevated and Persisting Ver∣tue?
Even the Vicious themselves must have
a secret Veneration for those peculiar Graces
and Endowments, which are daily so emi∣nently
conspicuous in Your Royal Highness;
and though repining, feel a Pleasure which
in spite of Envy they per-force approve.
If in this Piece, humbly offer'd to Your
Royal Highness, there shall appear the Re∣semblance
of any one of those many Excel∣lencies
which You so promiscuously possess,
to be drawn so as to merit Your least Ap∣probation,
it has the End and Accomplish∣ment
of its Design. And however imperfect

it may be in the Whole, through the Inex∣perience
or Incapacity of the Author, yet,
if there is so much as to convince. Your
Royal Highness, that a Play may be with
Industry so dispos'd (in spight of the licenti∣ous
Practice of the Modern Theatre) as to
become sometimes an innocent, and not un∣profitable
Entertainment; it will abundantly
gratifie the Ambition and Recompence the
Endeavours of,

