



MADAM,
ALthough Ambition may not only be allowed, but applauded, when in pursuit of such designs as are re∣ally worthy; and attempted by actions altogether Generous; Yet will as certainly be condemned, when by different ways it runs too far unreined, with∣out so much as an endeavour to check it. How criminal then must that presumption appear, which is altogether unexcusable? And under no less a guilt he must certainly lye, dares make

an approach to so Sacred a Shrine, with an of∣fering so mean an unworthy.
But when I am most certain all that can be termed vertue is centred in your Ladyships Breast, I cannot despair of having that par∣ticular one of mercy extended to a conscious Offender; Assured of which, I must not doubt a charitable construction from the world, con∣fident none will wholly condemn what appears in it, sheltred under your Ladyships protecti∣on.
However I must expect a just imputation on my ignorance, in describing no better the character of One endowed with all accomplish∣ments, in the person of Frederick, and that of a Lady possest with equal perfections, in Diana; when I had so extraordinary Origi∣nals to Coppy by, in your most Noble Lord, and Excellent Self. But were my capacity much beyond what I could presume to wish, it would be a vain attempt to pretend a descri∣ption of what is so much beyond expression. For should I make the least offer at a Pane∣gerick, how large a field must I wander in? since it would compose an entire History, to

write the Greatness and Nobility of your own Descent, and the Family you are allied to by a happy Marriage; and how much more then would there be to add, in making the short∣est Repetition of those for ever to be Recorded Actions, both of Your Own, and Your Lords truly Noble Ancestors; That it seems as if Heaven designed an Union of whatever may be called Worthy, in that joyful Affinity. For as on the one side your Ladyship is not only Heiress to the Fortunes, but Vertues of those from whom you are descended; so I dare pre∣sume you think your self really happy, in that most indulgent Possessor of your Affection, who gives already sufficient Proof of inheriting that Great and True worth is Inherent to his Blood.
Nor could less be expected where he had such an Example in his Noblest Father to imitate, whose signal Loyalty to his Prince, Zeal to the true Protestant Religion, and intire Love to his Country, have ever been the Guides and Directors of all his Thoughts and Actions.
But unawares, (delighted with the Subject) I seem running into what my want of Ability for the performance, must make me avoid; since the only design of this humble Address, is to implore your Ladyships favourable acceptance of this small Trifle; which obtained, will make it as fortunate, as the Writer happy, if allowed the permission of owning himself.
MADAM,

