



My Lord,
IT is with a great deal of Pleasure, that I lay hold on this first Occasion, which, the Accidents of my Life have given me of writing to your Lordship: For since at the same time I write to all the World, it will be a means of publishing, (what I would have every Body know) the Respect and Duty which I owe and pay to you. I have so much Inclination to be yours, that I need no other Engagement: But the particular Ties, by which I am bound to your Lordship and Family, have put it out of my power to make you any Complement; since all Offers of my self, will amount to no more than an honest Acknowledg∣ment, and only shew a willingness in me to be grateful.
I am very near wishing, That it were not so much my Interest to be your Lordships Servant, that it might be more my Merit; not that I would avoid being obliged to you, but I would have my own Choice to run me into the Debt; that I might have it to boast, I had distinguished a Man, to whom I would be glad to be obliged, even without the hopes of having it in my Power, ever to make him a return.
It is impossible for me to come near your Lordship, in any kind, and not to receive some Favour; and while in appearance I am on∣ly making an Acknowledgment (with the usual underhand deal∣ing of the World) I am at the same time, insinuating my own Interest. I cannot give your Lordship your due, without tacking a Bill of my own Priviledges. 'Tis true, if a Man never commit∣ted a Folly, he would never stand in need of a Protection: But then Power would have nothing to do, and good Nature no occa∣sion to shew it self; and where those Vertues are, 'tis pity they should want Objects to shine upon. I must confess this is no rea∣son, why a Man should do an idle thing, nor indeed any good Ex∣cuse for it, when done; yet it reconciles the uses of such Autho∣rity and Goodness, to the necessities of our Follies; and is a sort of Poetical Logick, which, at this time I would make use of, to argue your Lordship into a Protection of this Play. It is the first

Offence I have committed in this kind, or indeed, in any kind of Poetry, tho' not the first made publick; and, therefore, I hope will the more easily be pardoned: But had it been Acted, when it was first written, more might have been said in its behalf; Ig∣norance of the Town and Stage, would then, have been Excuses in a young Writer, which now, almost four Years experience, will scarce allow of. Yet I must declare my self sensible of the good Nature of the Town, in receiving this Play so kindly, with all its Faults, which I must own were, for the most part, very industriously covered by the care of the Players; for, I think, scarce a Cha∣racter but receiv'd all the Advantage it would admit of, from the justness of Action.
As for the Criticks, my Lord, I have nothing to say, to, or against any of them of any kind; from those who make just Ex∣ceptions, to those who find fault in the wrong place. I will only make this general Answer in behalf of my Play (an Answer, which Epictetus advises every Man to make for himself, to his Censurers) viz. That if they who find some Faults in it were as intimate with it as I am, they would find a great many more. This is a Confession, which I need not to have made; but however, I can draw this use from it, to my own Advantage, that I think there are no Faults in it, but what I do know; which, as I take it, is the first step to an amendment.
Thus I may live in hopes (sometime or other) of making the Town amends; but you, my Lord, I never can, tho' I am ever

