


Dear Father,
HOW much I am Obliged to you both for my Being and Well-being, I desire now to testifie unto the world; for though to requite your Love, and Bounty be not within the Sphere of my Quicquid est quod dat patri filius, utique minus est, quia hanc ip∣sam dandi facultatem pa∣tri debet. Seneca, lib. 3.Ability, yet since the 1 Tim. 5. 4. (a) The Stork.Apostle commandeth Children to learn to requite their Parents, and Nature it self hath taught unreasonable (a) Crea∣tures this Lesson, I shall Endea∣vour (by Gods help) to pay that threefold debt of Obe∣dience, Reverence, and Gratitude, which all Children owe to their Parents. And therefore I shall ever de∣vote my self unto your Service, to whom (next under God and my King) I owe my self, and those Abili∣ties I have, both Natural, and which through Gods Blessing upon your Liberal Education, by a double Ap∣prentiship, in two St. Leonards Col∣ledge in St. Andrews in Scotland, and Graies Inne in Lon∣don.famous and flour∣ishing Societies, I have acquired. To express therefore my due Observance, and gratefull Recognition of your for∣mer

Care, and Cost; I here present you with (the first=born of all my Labours) a brief Collection of the Divine Right of Monarchy, evidently deduced (e Sa∣cris paginis) to be the onely Species of Politique Go∣vernment, and that the people have no Right in the Collation of their King, or any Colour to presume to the same. The undeniable Right of this Subject absolutely lessens my Endeavours; because to prove a Principle is to deny it the force of a Principle: But, because some in the world are not ashamed to make this Case disputable, therefore, (pregnant with zeal, though weak in the Delivery) I brought this into the world, pre∣suming that the alwaies assented to Truth hereof would strengthen me in my Travel. And thus brought forth I beg for it (as a true born Son) your Baptism. Hoping that for the Fathers sake, qualis qualis est, aequo animo consules: And so to the world, under your Protection, it is committed, by
Reverend Sir,

