



SIR,
THough I have good reason to acknowledge with all thankfulness, the constancy of that affection and favour you have ever had for me; yet I must assure you, and all the world, the arguments which prevailed with me for this Dedication, were fetch'd from a Topick of a far different nature. The discourse is of Publick concerment, and therefore no Patron could be more suitable then one of so publick a spirit, as all that know you must bear witness unto; Moses and Aaron will not go out under any other Patronage, save of so Loyal a subject, and hearty a well-wisher to the Doctrine and Dis∣cipline of our Church: I mean, that good old way establish∣ed by Law, practised by our Ancestors ever since the Refor∣mation, and sealed with the blood of Martyrs, which is too evident to be denied or eluded; unless it can be made ap∣pear that Ridley and Cranmer were no Episcopal men. Nor do I doubt of your candid acceptance, having been privy to that cheerful resolution and undaunted courage, with which you undertook, though with the hazard of all that was dear
 unto you, to endevour to make way for the Celebration of such a day, and a Sermon of such a subject upon it; in a time of the greatest difficulty, when the enemies both of Church and State, God and their King, were most preva∣lent, and many people began to be content they should be so.
Their brawny necks being now accustomed to the Yoke, with Issachar they couched down between their burdens; the reason whereof is also rendred in the same plce, Gen. 49.15. He saw that rest was good, and the land that it was pleasant, and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute. But God was pleased to defeat those resolutions, and to strangle as Loyal Designs, and No∣ble Intendments, as ever were in the world; making them to become abortive in their very birth; yet with a far greater design of mercy, then if your intentions had come into Acti∣on, and every action ben crowned with its desired success; for your way must have been through that Red-sea, on the brinks whereof your feet then stood, and perhaps when you had passed through that, you might have seen a Wil∣derness before you. But God has brought us to Canaan a nearer, and much a safer way, giving us the Land of Promise, without acquainting us at all, either with the Red-sea or Wilderness: And all this, that his own Counsels might take place, and that such a Deliverance might be the more wonderful in our eyes, when we were thus convinced that it was his doing.
But though you were prevented from laying the foun∣dation,
 as you intended, yet you resolved to contribute your utmost, for the finishing that in the West, which was so happily began in the North; witness the indefatigable pains you took, and the great charges you were at, that things might not roul back again, when they were once tum∣bling, though as yet very hazardous. What acceptance your labour and travail found with all persons of Honour and Loyalty in these parts, is not unknown to any that then knew the West.
Nor did those Buds and Blossomes of Loyalty and Affe∣ction to His Most Sacred Majesty, onely put forth when it was now the spring, and the summer of our deliverance drew nigh; but bore fruit even in the midst of that sad winter, when the blackest storm was over us. How you were afflicted all along with all them that suffered upon the account of the King, or the Church, or both? How their iron even entred into your soul, those seasonable Contribu∣tions, which passed through my hands, for refreshing the bowels of such afflicted ones, can testifie; these are I sup∣pose good grounds for publishing it under your name. There was great reason for that, sure, if I might with modesty publish any thing at all, after so many Exquisite Sermons, and Treatises already Extant upon this subject; for this I shall wave the ordinary excuses, though I could with much evidence of truth have alledged them all, and only say for my self, that when of old the Arke was to be adorned, though men of the greatest abilities brought Gold, Silver, and Purple; yet were not those of meaner quality to
 be rejected, who appeared with an offering, though but of Badgers-skins, or Goats-hair. Printing is not my itch as they can bear me witness, who are privy to the temptations I have often had unto it, and hitherto ever resisted, though the authority of some very excellent persons, together with other weighty reasons have now prevailed upon me.
I hope, no man will like it the worse, for coming a little otherwise from the Press, then it was uttered from the Pul∣pit; the Eye and the Ear, the Phancy and the Judgment, be∣ing very different, what the one is affected with, the other without some corrective may nauseat. Besides, I have here laid down the substance of the matter all a long, as it was then delivered, though in some places (as it fell out) some∣where contracted, in others a little more enlarged, where the subject might better have been streched out to the length of a voluminous Chronicle, then confined within the narrow bounds of a Sermon. A Paragraph or two I have trans∣cribed, De novo, Word for word out of Mr. Dud. Diggs, for satisfaction of such who still persist in very great er∣rors, only upon the pretence of those convictions they lye under, from the no grounds of a falsly fancied Co-ordi∣nation, whereby every unprejudiced Reader may in some sort be satisfied, others will never.
I shall hold you no longer in the porch, then only to let you know, that as I long have, so shall daily bow my Knees to the Father of Spirits, that he would bless and guide you in all your undertakings, that your ancient Family which has fr so many years been in honour in these parts, never
 suffer any Eclipse or Diminution, but that you may ever be followed with fresh accruements of temporal Honour here, and so walk as to obtain an Eternal weight of Glory hereafter; which shall ever be the prayer of

