



AT the Desire of the Authors Rela∣tions, I prefix your Ladyships Name to a Treatise by himself prepared for the Press, and committed to my pur∣usal at the motion of Dr. Bates, who a∣mong the brightest Luminaries now shines in his expected and desired Firmament.
The ensuing Picture drawn by his im∣partial Intimate, will revive your remem∣brance of the Blessed Mr. Cooper, who was so highly esteemed by your Honourable Mo∣ther, and (among many other ejected Mi∣nisters) no small sharer in the effects of her Beneficence, which she exerted there not as a Boon to oblige the Needy, but for a Te∣stimony to that cause for which he suffered, and a just return to his occasional Labours, whence greater Blessings were designed to
 herself and Family. But seeing the Subject treated of, viz. The Glory of the Saints Re∣ward is that under the Power whereof you determine your Choice, bear your Affli∣ctions, and direct your Actings, it would be vain to labour at a further Apology for this Dedication.
The Design pursued by the high displays of Glory in this Book respect both Sinners and Saints.
Sinners are concernedly perswaded to enter into the way of Heaven, from a Con∣viction that the good there received infi∣nitely exceeds in Pleasure, Honour, and Ad∣vantage; whatever can be found in a sinful course. This part is so warmly and wisely managed, that the obstinate Reader must ascribe his ruin to his own perverseness; for this motive from eternal Rewards is en∣forced with that account of the vanity and vileness of a temporal Bliss, as must put any considering Person to the blush, who sets up Earth as a Rival with Heaven, or takes up with a Portion in it, yea, though end∣less Misery were not the Wages of that Mad∣ness: Yet assured this last will be found true, and that God governeth us, by fear as well as hope, the prudent Author describes
 Hell in a manner fit to terrifie the most se∣cure from persisting in ungodliness, to their neglect of Christ and forfeiture of this great Salvation.
The mind impressed with the prospect of these two extremely different States he leaves neither under despair of recovery, nor yet under darkness what means he should apply himself to: And therefore, he prescribes the method to be used by the un∣converted, yet still in a dependance on the Grace of Christ from the demonstrated im∣potency of meer nature, and total want of human merit; and encourageth a compli∣ance with the said method by full assurances that a disappointment cannot arise from our fallen State as irrecoverable. But least the mistaken Presumption of the Hypocrite should fix his danger by a claim to Saintship, he faithfully states the infallible sign of the Heirs of this heavenly Kingdom, and warns against a conceit of safety before these be evident. The other part of his design is to fix the Eyes of Saints so upon this cer∣tain and glorious Crown of Life, as thence to derive relief and strength against those endangering Snares, worldly Allurements, afflictive Sufferings, and tiresome Labours
 which will attend them in their Pilgri∣mage; this he treats of as a Man first forced on this Subject for a divine composedness under his own exercise; and then from the experimented fixing & transporting power thereof commends the same to Zion's Mour∣ners, as effectual to make them happier even under Sufferings, than without them.
It may be less proper in an Epistle to your Ladyship to mention the doctrinal points wherein this divinely heated Soul discovers much Light and Judgment. How accu∣rately and strongly doth he prove against the Antimonians the lawfulness of a Saints respect to the recompence of reward, the rectoral connexion between Gospel Duties and Benefits; the necessity of Repentance in order to forgiveness, &c. which I hope will be the more regarded from him, be∣cause his opinion about Predetermination and the object of Reprobation is more plea∣sing to them, than that of others of us be.
Madam! a Book of which these are the Contents, must be acceptable to one, in whom such Truths had an early regenera∣ting Power, and can entail on Posterity a great stock of Prayers sent up by the Au∣thor, and his Brethren, at the request of
 the Lady Wimbleton, whose Death invites you to an imitation of her exemplary Life.
Her Ladyship with the Reverend Author are now beholding and enjoying that Glo∣ry in its fullness, the darker glimpses where∣of sufficed to raise them above this World, and reconcile them to Death; yet were their present Station capable of a blush, reflecti∣ons on their low Apprehensions, remiss La∣bours, scanty layings out, and faint long∣ings for that Glory, would compel it.
Its but a few moments, and our State is decided for Eternity, and the unseen World shall be felt in its greatness (as well as reali∣ty) beyond our comprehension. Oh, what a change will the very Borders of it make in our Thoughts, advancing, cleansing, and improving such as are most sublime and best, whilst all others perish which are car∣nal false or foolish!
That you may dayly proceed in a meet∣ness for Heaven, by further evidence of title, and agreeableness of temper; that none of your Off-spring may come short thereof by degenerating from their emi∣nently pious Ancestors; And that these uncontroverted Truths (which deserved an
 earlier Publication as well as larger Audi∣tories than the time of Preaching them would admit) may be of saving use to them, and many others, shall be the fervent Prayer of,
Madam,

