



Most Dread Soveraign,
AMONGST the numerous Train of Mercies, that attend∣ed Your Majesties Thrice hap∣py Restauration, Reviving the Hearts of a drooping Clergy may deservedly be reputed none of the meanest. For if a true, impartial Estimate were taken of all mens Suf∣ferings, it would be found no Calling whatever drank so deeply of the bitter Cup in our unnatural Warres as that, all the Rich Rewards
of Learning being withdrawn, Priviledges reverst, their Lands exposed to Sale, and Houses to Dilapida∣tions. But tis an Observation of some, that after the most bloisterous Stormes, when the Ark of the Church has been long floating, and ready to sink, God usual∣ly sends the fairest Calmes. Near 20 yeares together has the Dignity, and of late the Office of the Ministry lain bleeding, and twas drawing to its last Gasp, if a Mi∣racle of Providence had not sent a
Soveraign Balm. And however for the present the wounds are a little bound up, yet has it contracted so much weakness through ill Vsage, that twill ask no small time to reco∣ver its strength, though it meets with never so much tendernes & Indulgence from its Nursing Father. Tis re∣corded to the Eternal Renown of the great Constantine, that amongst all his Imperial Titles he gloried in none more, then being styled, the Advocate of Gods Church. Pardon then, Great Sir, an holy Presumption, if so incon∣siderable a thing as I address my self to one of the Po∣tentest Monarchs upon Earth, in behalf of the long op∣pressed Embassadours of Christ. The Bounty and
Mu∣nificence of your Godly Progenitours, conferred large
Revenues, and Immunities upon them, which the Sacri∣legious hands of some late Innovatours seased up∣on. Now is there any thing more becoming the Royall Majesty of Great Britain, the Eldest Son of the Church, Defender of the Faith, and Heire of such a
Father, then to restore God his own. Tertul. relates that the Heathens upbraided the Christians with their penurious basenes in matters of Religion, and how much the Papists were scandalized at our first Reformers for diverting the Churches Patrimony to private Uses, all the world is too well acquainted. Let this Reproach be rowled
away from the Gospel, and let not Babylon be more liberal to uphold Idolatry, then Zion is to maintain true Religion. The Eyes of all the Reformed, and Po∣pish world are upon you, tis the
Hope of the former, and Fear of the latter, that under your Protection our British Church may recover its pristine Glory. But if your Majesty expects to have the Church furnish'd with able accomplished persons, proportionable encouraegmēts must not be denyed, least the most pregnant Wits, and raised Parts turn aside to the more gainfull Pro∣fessions of Law, and Physick, which Promise both am∣pler Rewards, and higher Preferments, and are not ac∣companied with so vast a charge as the Study of a Di∣vine does necessarily require I know the winning of Soules is in it self a sufficient Motive, but all that are bred up in the Schools of the Prophets, do not presently shake hands with the world in the heat of their Youth, but must have some other Allurements suitable to flesh and Blood. Wisdome it self approves this course and uses the same Attractives, Riches, and Honour are with me Prov. 8. Now since your Sacred Majesty had no hand in first retrenching their Priviledges, and alienating their
Revenues, tis hoped you will not con∣tract the least Guilt by Tolerating what may be redrest. So will you engage the Prayers of the Church, a strong∣er Guard then all your Victorious Armies. So will your Kingdomes prosper; which otherwise must never look to be happy, whilest the Church is miserable And how powerfull will the United Intercessions of so many Thousands be, dayly imploring the Throne of Grace, that the yeares most Barbarously cut off from the Royall
Father may be added to the Son, that as the Glory of the second Temple went beyond that of the
first, so may the Holyness, and Splendour of our Re∣stored Hierarchy exceed that of former Ages, which is the Soules Desire of

