



MY LORD,
I Humbly offer This to Your Lordship, not only as an acknowledgment of Your Lord∣ship's many Favours, and my hearty Grati∣tude for them; but also with a design of craving Your Lordship's farther goodness in protecting

This against the clamorous opposition of unrea∣sonable men: For by what I have already ex∣perienc'd, I may easily guess at the unwelcome entertainment it is like to meet with from some, for whom yet it bears the most Christian and Charitable design. And though (of late espe∣cially) I have met with unkind usage, and very severe reflections for doing my duty in speaking seasonable Truths, yet I declare, I think I could not be more Kind and Charitable even to our Enemies, than in Preaching against what they are most guilty of. And now the ensuing Discourse is so far from railing, as they have term'd it, (their usual Character of what dis∣likes them) that I hope it will appear to Your Lordship to have in it, a good natur'd and Cha∣ritable intention. For having before spoken to the subject of Praise, for our late Deliverance (for which I was disturb'd, and bely'd in the very Church) I thought I could make no better improvement of the late Solemn Thanksgiving, than in the design of the ensuing Discourse; which I lookt upon as peculiarly proper for the Afternoon, being so sutable to that most pious Prayer (for our Enemies) therein appointed.

My Lord,
I shall forbear reflections on those, who make severe ones on this, and the like, when they heard it from the Pulpit. Considering it would be no very decent entertainment for Your Lord∣ship: and a means, I hope, to make them more candid Interpreters in the Reading, than they were in the Hearing of it.
Though in the midst of all, it has been, I must confess, no small support and satisfaction to me; That I have had the particular signal Respect and Incouragement of that Reverend Canon (for whom, Your Lordship has so great and just esteem) for some of those Discourses that have suffered under the untoward reproach of others. Now Your Lordship knows with what Authority I might term Him one of the most Learned men, and best Preachers of this Age. And when I consider This, together with the cool reception even He found among some, when he urg'd them lately and so well,
To give unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's: 'Tis well the case is no worse with me.

But I must consider, that minutes, now espe∣cially, are precious with Your Lordship. And that high Place, to which a most gracious and discerning Prince has exalted Your Lordship, suffers too much by this tedious interruption.
And yet I have not performed what is the usual entertainment in these Applications: Having given no account of Your Lordship's great Vertues and Accomplishments. Nor should I need to do it if I could; all mens mouths be∣ing sill'd with the Praises of Your Lordship and most noble Son (who would almost convince us of the Natural, Parental Production even of humane souls) so exactly resembling Your Lordship in untainted Loyalty and Goodness. And here I enter on a large field; Your Lordship being the happiest of Parents, having a truly Noble and most dutiful Off-spring: And a Family, that for a strict Conformity to the Church, and stanch Loyalty to the King, can scarcely be match'd or surpass'd by any. I speak not these things out of design or flattery, but can assert them from some experience, and dare challenge any that know Ailesbury house to contradict me in the least particular.
Though I the less wonder at that strain of Goodness and Loyalty, which runs through the

whole Family, when I consider that it has Two such eminent Examples, which shine so illu∣striously before it. And we all know that the best way to obtain my Lord's and Lady's Fa∣vour, is to Fear God and Honour the King. Which (by the Grace of God) shall evermore be the most hearty and constant endeavours of,
My Lord, 

