



FRiends and Brethren, in the friendship and brother-hood of the Lord Jesus, with whom, and for whom we all in the spiritual union of Christ, and him cru∣cified, have suffered together for the witness of Jesus, and the truth of the Gospel which hath been taught us by him, that our joy might be together in him: Wherefore know ye,1 Cor. 8.6 that there is in you, and ruleth over you, one true and living God, the Fa∣ther of whom are all things, and you in him; and one Lord Je∣sus Christ, by whom are all things, and you by him,Rom. .5. Ephes 4.6.7. and who is over all, through all, and in you all, God blessed for ever, and that hath given to every one of you that believeth Grace,C. 2 9. ac∣cording to the measure of the gift of Christ, in whom dwells
 all the fulness of the God-head bodylie, and of whose fulness all that believe and trust in the living God, the Saviour of all men, have received grace for grace;1 Tim. 4.9, 10. the glory of whom with the eye of divine beauty you may behold, as the glory of the onely be∣gotten Son of the Father ful of grace and truth for you; for the Law came by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ, whose coming is to reveal in you,Ioh. 1.14. Joh. 16.25. and shew unto you the Father plainly, even the mysterie of the History which lieth hid in the Letter, til Christ shall unfold it unto you in the spirit; and there∣fore God hath given unto Christ all power in Heaven and on Earth,Matth. 28.18. Col. 2.15 Col. 1.18, 19. that he might overcome all Principalities and Powers for you, that hindered the revelation of Christ to you, and he in all things to have the preheminence with you, for it pleased the Fa∣ther that in him should ll fulness dwell, that of his fulness he might fill all things both in heaven and earth, of things high and low, of what sort or degree soever they be; and all being ful of him, there is then no room in any thing to contain any thing but him, nor to be contained besides him, where himself containeth all things, for he is all & in all; and this is he that wil in due time free me, you, and all men, from all that doth oppress us, and oppose us in the truth.
And when the Lord Jesus shall become your all, in all places, persons, and things, to fil all in your apprehensions, then is hel as wel as heaven with you ful of him, and he rules in them both; so saith David, who saw it, and knew it, If I ascend up into Hea∣ven, thou art there:Psal. 39.8. If I go down into Hell, behold, thou art there: And if I dwell in the uttermost parts of the Earth, thou art there also: Heaven and Earth is ful of his glory,Psal. 103.19. and his Kngdom rueth o∣ver all; and the presence of God in deah and hel with is peo∣ple, in which any thing of God hath been shut up or hid, is that which makes death,Rev. 20.13. Isa. 26. and hel, and the sea of sin and misey to give up the dead that is in them, and no more to cover their slain; and a new death and hel, or eternal fire, as wel as a new life, and a new heaven and earth, will God prepare to swallow up ye old, where the old Name and Nature of Hel and Death and Hea∣ven,. 7.32.  21.4, 5. and Earth, even Tophet shall be changed, and their place no more found; after which there shall be no more death; nei∣ther sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain,
 for the former things are passed away,Isa. 6. and all things will God make new, in the new Heaven and in the new Earth, where all things that are is contained, and in which change all the things of the first Creation as all old things are ended, and made new in the second Creation; yea, even death and hel, else how is it said, Behold, I make all things new, if that be not:Isa. 62.22. And as the new Heaven wh ch the Lord shall make shall remain before him, and have in it a new life and felicity, which should end the old, so the new Earth which he shall make shall also remain, and have in it a new death and hel which changeth the old, and into which hel or Lake of fire all things of the old, which belongeth to the old man in us, even that death and hel which swallowed us up,Rev. 20.14. Isa. 28 18. and tormented us, shall be cast into it, to be ended by it, and the covenant & agreement of men with death & hel disannulled, & all the enemies of mankinde to be destroyed with it, when Christ himself who makes all things new, shall appear in hel to change the property of it,Isa 63.1, 2.3, Rev. 14.19, 20. and thereby tread the Wine-press of the Wrath of od, even Satan under foot, for the redemption of his people; and then shall all the Enemies of God and of them which all sin and transgression, and all that is not found written in the Book of Life, he cast into that Wine-press, or Lake of Fire, to be there killed and ended: This is the second death,Rv. 20.14, 15. and our se∣cond life and resurrection from the dead.
And that you may see this death taking place upon all that which is enmitie with God, Christ, your selves, and the truth, and you thereby come to a resurrection of life in him let me en∣courage you to trust in God, who only can save you and raise you to a newness of life,Isa. 26.4. for in the Lord Jehovah is everlasting stregth who wil bring down under foot,Col. 2.14.15. and nayle to his cross all that which is against you, and contrary to you; therefore you that would see the one to enjoy the other, wait upon him in the way which he doth it, which is by the obedience of Christ to the cross; for he is said to drink of the Brook in the way,Hb. 2.9. Psal. 110.6, 7. tasting death for every man by which he is in us, and for us, woundeth the head of the Dragon, and thereby lifteth up his own head, as you shall find more of hereafter in what I have written to you, that the way of Gods justice, judgement, and mercy, in which he destroyes all his & our Enemies, is that by which you shal receive
 comfort and consolation from the Lord, as the way of God in which his Prophets, Apostles, and Saints, all waited for him, to be taught by him,Isa. 26 . as hath been also manifest to be the way of God with me since I knew the Lord and was taught by him, and by him made to bear witness of the truth which I received in judgement with him, who my self hath been comforted, refresh∣ed, and restored therewith in all my sufferings and undertakings for him unto this day, and who wil also comfort you with the same consolation, and restore you with the same restoration into safety with himself for he that hath kept you, wil keep you stil, and wil cast off none that wait upon him, but saith the Prophet, Thou wilt keep him in perfect peace and safety whose minde is stayed on thee,Isa 26.3. because he trusteth in thee.
And as far as any of you shal with any, in the sufferings of any that suffer for the truth, be a sufferer with them, who toge∣ther suffer with Christ, so know, that as you are partakers with them in the same sufferings of Christ, so you are partakers with them in the same glory of Christ, though you may not all suffer the outward Bonds and afflictions of the body as others do, and as Christ did for us all, yet to be sensible of their sufferings, as when one member suffers,1 Cor. 12.26. all suffer with it; and if one rejoice, all rejoice with it; and so if we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign with him, in which the God of all grace, who hath called us in∣to his eternal glo y by Christ Jesus after that ye have suffered a while,1 Pet 5.6 7, 8, 9, 11. make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, settle you, to whom (and to none else) be glory and dominion for ever and ever.
And now you my Brethren and partakers in the same So-ship and spiritual union of Christ, that which I desire, and alwaies de∣sired to know among you since I knew you, and that I would you should also know among your selves to bear witness to the truth, is,1 Cor. 2.. Jesus Christ, and him crucified, by which the world is crucifi∣ed unto you, and you unto the world; and that whether we are present one with another, or absent one from another, yet that the truth as it is in Jesus, and which maketh you free, may abide with you,Gal. 6.14. Joh. 8 32, 36. chap. 14.16. Phil. 2 5. Rom. 12.16. & be perfected in you, & you thereby to know it, & by it may be united into one mind and one spirit with the Lord Je∣sus and one another, walking together in one fellowship of the spirit, and spiritual union, in all humility, meekness, gentleness,
 and long-suffering,Eph. 4.1, 2, 3. forbearing and forgiving one another in love, according to the example of Christ the first and true pat∣tern of all our walkings, sufferings, undertakings, and rejoicings in the Lord, even then do you witness the true Christ and light of the World in whom is light, and no darkness; truth, and no error; good, and no evil; and that if you wal in the light as he is in the light, then you have fellowship one with another, & with those that have fellowship with Christ;1 Joh. 1.5, 6. and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son (which is his Life shed abroad in your hearts) cleanseth you from all sin; which fellowship those that are ignorant of God, and of the pardon of their sins by Christ, knoweth not, but are in darkness, and under the bondage of corruption until now, and have not known Christ, nor him crucified, and so long can∣not bear witness unto him.
Then that you may be tryed and proved to farther learn this Lesson of Christ, and be made able and wiling to bear his cross, and witness to it, you are to mind God in his judgements, the way in which you are called before him to learn all the obedi∣ence of Christ to the cross, who after you have entered into spi∣ritual judgement with the Lord, do cause you to enter into tem∣poral judgement with men, as companions with his spiritual, as he did Christ, his Prophets, Apostles, and Saints, who learned obedience by the things which they suffered, and through suffer∣ings they were made perfect;Heb. 2.10. therefore are the prisons and suf∣ferings of the Prophets and Apostles of the Lord Jesus, into which they were cast by men for the truth, said to be their Schools, where they both learned and witnessed Christ, and him crucified; and which by experience I have found to be mine, where I have learned and witnessed with them unto the same truth; that against me false witnesses have risen up, and laid to my charge things which I knew not, as they did against them,Psal. 35. and all that witness the truth to this day in the time of their witnes∣sing; & in which sufferings of the Prophets & Apostles, the truth was the more manifest both to them and the world, as it was with Jeremiah, vvho vvas taught in the Dungeon of the Prison,Jer. 32.1, 2. chap. 29 so and from thence sent forth Wrtings of his Visions and Revela∣tions of vvhat God had made knovvn unto him, as also did the rest of the Prophets in their sufferings, and as did the Apostles,
 and John the Divine,Rev. 1.9. Col. 4.18. Phil. 1.12, 13: who wrote the Evangelist and the Epistles, and when he was persecuted into the Ile of Patmos for the testi∣mony of Jesus, then was the revelations of Jesus Christ reveal∣ed to him, and written by him; and Paul writ his Epistles in his times of suffering, and saith he, My Bonds proves all to the further∣ance of the Gospel; and times of persecution are the times of Gods farther teaching his people; and did men that persecute o∣thers for their judgement, and endeavours to destroy their knowledge, know that it vvould be thereby the more encreased, they would not do it; for when they send them to Prison, they do but send them as to a School vvhere they shal learn more of God, and be the more confirmed in the truth they before knew, for Christ wil never leave them that he hath once taught, but wil be alwaies with them more to teach them, that they may more knovv him, and be setled and grounded in him.
And in all my sufferings and imprisonment for the truth to this day, I have had with me the company of that one School-Master, the Lord Jesus, who at first taught me the knowledge of himself in the spiritual School of divine learning, the Spirit of himself set up in my heart, by vvhich I vvas made a Schollar fit to take my Degrees, to bear the burden and undergo the reproaches by men laid upon me in the school of my imprisonment & sufferings for the truths sake, that I might not fear nor be discouraged by them, as I have not bin hitherto, praised be God, but in six trou∣bles the Lord delivered, me and in the seventh which is this I am now under) no evil is yet come unto me,Job 5:17, 18, 19: which hath been seven trials and persecutions that I have had for the vvitness of Jesus, and by vvhich the Lord hath also tryed and proved me, vvhether the Lesson he at first taught me, To trust in him, and deny my self for him, vvere stil ovvned, and not forgotten nor denyed by me, in which through him I have been hitherto faithful, & shall so continue unto death if the Lord wil, and am not vvithout my revvard, vvhich is a Crovvn of Life.
The fruit of which Life of God manifest in flesh (as fast as it vvas ripened in me) vvas by the Lord and keeper of the Vin∣yard in which it grew, gathered, and sent by me to be distributed among you,Acts 20.20. of vvhich with Paul, I kept nothing back from you that vvas profitable to you, during the time I vvas vvith, you nor
 from the rest of my Brethren in the flesh vvhere I have at any time been, but vvith Paul I have taught publikely, and from house to house, vvhat the Lord hath taught me, vvhich I did not do for price nor revvard of men, as some Parish-Ministers do, that as so many Merchant-men, through covetousness make mer∣chandise of the people; and seek not the Lord Jesus Christ, but themselves; but what I do, and have done, as my conscience bears me vvitness, hath been really with heart and soul, accor∣ding to my power, for the glory of God; and the comfort of his people in the Lord Jesus, that as freely I have received, so freely have I given; for the Vinyard was the Lords, and he himself as the Husbandman of the Vinyard, did by his spirit in me plow it, sow it, plant, and dress it, and caused it to grow by the sweet and powerful dew of himself falling from heaven upon it, as the former and later rain upon the earth, and being ripe in me, he gathered it, and made it ready for me, and through the power of his spirit working in me, sent it abroad among you to be by me declared unto you for your souls comfort, & did himself (whose Messenger I was) reward me for it, not onely with spiritual comforts to my soul, and with food and raiment to my body, but also vvith the reproaches of Christ, vvhich I count greater riches then the pleasures of Aegypt or the riches and glory of this World, in vvhich I also rejoyced as my portion vvith the Lord, seeing the Lord in it, and vvith Paul, learned to be content in all things, and vvith him returns you all thanks, that have in any measure, (and freely) participated vvith me, and ministred to me in my sufferings
And novv the same Lord vvhich caused to grovv in me that Gospel-fruit vvhich I declared to you, must also cause it to grovv in you, before it can bring forth fruit to you, that you all vvith me, and I vvith you, and vve both vvith Ephraim may be like a green Firre-tree in vvhom fruit is found, for you had it from me but in vvords, vvho only can plant or speak to the ear, but it is the Lord that must speak to the heart, to teach, plant, and cause to grovv in you the great Mysterie of godliness; for Paul may plant, and Apollo may vvater, but God must give the en∣crease, vvhich as I have said unto you, is, That you should knovv God manifest in flesh, Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and to¦day,
 and for ever; born, crucified, dead, buryed, risen and as∣cended, and coming to you the second time in spirit and truth, without sin unto salvation, bringing all things of him unto your remembrance; and by which spirit of him in me, manifest∣ing the same to me, I have published it to you, beseeching you all in Christ Jesus to be reconciled to God, for that God in Christ from all eternity was himself reconciled to you and all mankind, and that vvhile you and all men vvere yet sinners, sent his Son to dye for us, according to the Scriptures, to reconcile you to him∣self, and in mercy to you he pardoned you, and by his spirit with∣in you frees you, and which Message of him for the reconcilia∣tion of all men to God so far as to me was made known by him; I have been, am, and shall be through him ever faithful, who through his mercy hath preserved me in it.
And now the increase of the Fruit of this Vinyard of Christ for the increase of his body, taught me by him in the School of my imprisonment and sufferings for the truth, and ripened and gathered by him in the Harvest thereof, I shall present you with from the Lord, and not as from my self without him, who first vvrit in my heart, and after by my hand in several Treatises of several subjects while I have been a prisoner among you, to be in order presented to you shortly, agreeable to what I have be∣fore in vvords declared amongst you, and which if you have an ear to hear vvhat the spirit saith, may be more opened in you by the Lord of that spirit in the reading thereof; and in vvhich rea∣ding I desire you all to vvait upon the Lord to be taught by him vvho only can give you an appetite to it and make you detest it; that can make you vvilling and able to receive it, vvhich is the mysterie of Christ crucified; and you that cannot receive all for the present, vvhy rest your selves satisfied vvith what you can, and judge nothing before the time until the Lord shall come and open it to you vvith an injoyment of it in you,1 Co 4.5. as he hath done to me; in the mean time take this herevvith sent you as a prepa∣rative to that vvhich is coming; and he that can receive it, let him receive it; and judge not that you know not; and despise not that you enjoy not, lest you should speak evil of the truth una∣wares; but vvait the Lords time vvith patience and confidence, until he that shall come vvill come, and make truth appear truth
 to you, and then you vvil not judge at all;Heb. 10.35, 36 37. the vvhich I doubt not but vvith you that knovv the Lord, truth as truth will be re∣ceived by you as from the Lord, who himself vvith all his own Messages cometh vvith the Messengers to open the understand∣ings of them vvhich he hath appointed receivers; and the rest must tarry till he come, vvho vvas not only the Author of it in me for you, but vvill also be the Finisher of it to you at his com∣ing; wherefore receive you it, the Lord and me together in one Spirit, else you vvill not receive it as truth, nor to your souls comfort; but as Paul saith, It will be unto them that do not be∣lieve, but are reprobated, as the savour of death unto death;2 Cor. 2 15, 16. and to them vvhich do believe, and are saved, as the savour of life unto life; for some in love to the Message of Christ vvill rejoice in it; and others in hatred to it will be terrified by it; however the Will of God be done in it.
And as I have sometime said unto you (vvhen I was at first forced to leave you to go to prison for the truth and your sakes) that when I was absent from you, my spirit should be present with you; so in the absence of now my person, you may in this my Writing read my spirit, vvhich is alvvayes vvith you in the Lord; and as you have said you vvere comforted with my pre∣sence, be ye also comforted still in my absence, of which I doubt not but through the Lord you are comforted; yea, and in the absence of any man that may have been as a Messenger of the Lord to you, let your comfort be in the Lord, who onely is able to make you stand: And the God of all comfort and patience fill you with all joy and peace in believing; and the God of peace be with you;2 Cor. 1.3. and the peace of God which passeth all understand∣ing, keep you and rule in you, and thereby make you able and willing to follow peace with all men;Phil. 4 7. in which rest ye all toge∣ther with me, where I also rest with you; and seeing first our peace with God in Jesus Christ our Lord, we are therefore at peace with men, and do forgive them as God in Christ hath for∣given us, and is at peace with us: And as I have not been for∣gotten by you that know my spirit in the Lord, so I forget not you in him, but ever remain the Lords faithful steward, and your faithful friend & servant in the brotherly Message of the truth of the Gospel of the Lord Jesus, for the glory of God, and comfort of all those that shal love his appearing.

And lastly; My friends and brethren, who all know of the pro¦ceedings against me, you have also known how my life and Do∣ctrine hath been among you, and how by false accusations I have suffered for the truth and a good conscience; but I rejoyce in it, and still say, The Lords Will be done, and his Kingdom come e∣ven to my Enemies, and reconcile them, and those present dif∣ferences with men that having peace in themselves, they may live in love and peace one with another, and no longer seek the de∣struction one of another: In the mean time with the Prophets and Apostles of the Lord Jesus I shall rest, and say as David and Christ did,Psal. 35.11. That though false Witnesses have rose up, and laid to my charge things which I knew not, yet they could not pre∣vail against me to hurt me, nor prevent the truth revealed in me; but the things that have happend to me have prov'd rather to the further encrease of it with me; wherefore better is it if the Will of God be that we suffer for well doing rather then for evil;Phil. 1.12, 13. and wrongfully rather then justlie, Pet. 2.19. for this is thank-worthy (saith Pe∣ter) if a man for conscience towards God endure grief wrongfully, as my conscience bears me witness in the Holy Ghost I do, and have done to this day, endured cheerfully that which I have been wrongfully accused, for owning the Name of Jesus; yet they can∣not pull me out of his hand, nor blot my Name out of the Book of his Remembrance; but though men interested in the World, that are lifted up with worldly pride and honor,Luke 6.22, . may hate me, and blot my name out of their Books, and cast it out as evil for the Son of Mans sake, yet the Lord who saith, I am blessed there∣in, owns me, and doth still love me, and never will nor can for∣sake me, because in Christ the Book of Life I am alwayes in re∣membrance before him, in whom my new Name is written, and no man can take it from me;sa. 19.14, 15. for can a Woman forget her sucking-child, (saith the Lord) that she should not have compassion on the son of her Womb? yea, she may forget, but I will never forget thee, saith the Lord: Such is my faith and confidence in the Lord, who having loved his own, will love them to the end, and is ten∣der of them as the Apple of his eye.
And that as he hath freed my soul from the snares of death, sin, and devils, so he will in his time free my body from the snares of men that with hatred to the life of God in me, lye in wait
 daylie to devour me; and that when my liberty hath been seve∣ral times like to come, have suggested false things against me to prevent it, and hinder the truth from appearing, as the Princes,Dan. 6. Jr. 38 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 9, 10, 11, 37.7, 8 9, 10. 39. 11, 12. Gen. 41.14. Dan 6.23. Priests, and false Prophets of old did against the true Prophets to keep them in prison; but the Lord hath his time for me as he had for them, to free me, and I shall with patience wait for it, who works, and none can let; and who made Zedekiah free Jer∣miah from the Dungeon of the Prison upon the request of Ebed∣meleck, one of the Kings House; and who also made Pharoah King of Aegypt free Joseph from Prison upon the motion of Pharoahs chief Butler; and did also make King Darius to com∣mand Daniel from the lyons Den without an, hurt to him; & who no doubt in his due time will (by what means he pleaseth) free me, and none shall hinder, till when I shall rest in him with my prayers in the spirit for you all, that God vvill keep you and me; and also for my enemies, that he vvill not lay to their charge the things they have acted against me, vvhich he hath hitherto made me able to bear, & to rest contented vvith in the Lord, that I still am (dear Friends and Brethren) a very loving Friend and Brother in Christ to all men, friends and enemies so called, vvhile I am, and the truth is in me,

