



Honoured and Beloved Inhabitants of Stafford,
AS your Wisdom, Resolution, Faithfulnesse and Activity to appear for the Truth, and contend for the Faith (shining forth in those whom God hath set in Civil Authori∣ty among you) in that great push of tempta∣tion; hath given occasion to many to glori∣fie God in your behalf, rejoice in your sted∣fastnesse, and pray for you, and (I doubt not) yielded comfort to your own consciences: so they have inga∣ged me to acknowledge my self your servant in Christ, and for the Truth, in this cause which doth so much concern the glory of Christ and comfort of Christians. I therefore, though conscious of mine own weaknesse, when I heard of those many lowd and proud chal∣lenges, that had been made by the contrary Party to dispute about this Subject, was willing, upon the advice and perswasion of some
of my Brethren, to undertake the Challenge, relying on the help of Christ and the goodnesse of the Cause. And having received the Papers of the Challengers, in as short a space as I could, prepared this Answer (except some additions and explanations, which since its return to my hand, I thought meet to insert, for the help of the ignorant, for whose sake it is principally written) upon the giving in of a Copy, whereof a Reply was promised shortly by the Challen∣gers. I waited long and heard nothing of my Papers, nor any Re∣ply, untill a Letter came to my hands from some of principall note among you, dated Novemb. 11. expressing the contrary Parties boasting of a Reply ready long ago, which was to be Printed with their Propositions, and mine answered. Whereupon I was then in that Letter, and since by word of mouth, desired to Print mine An∣swer; lest I should be abused by others misrepresenting of the same. My answer was, that I would consult with my Brethren, and if they should think it meet, I would be willing to yield to you herein.
Ever since that time I have been cast on a wandring and unsetled condition (as is well known,) far from my Study and Books. Yet when I could gain a little time with the help of the Bible, I added something by way of explanation, for the help of meaner capacities that are not able to see the strength of an Argument, or answer when it is barely propounded. Two Arguments more I have also added to the former number from one Scripture, whence I had only propounded one Argument at the first.
It may be some will demand, What is the reason that their Chal∣lenge is not accepted in a way of publique Dispute, seeing they have urged it frequently, and confidently upbraided your Town and all Ministers, that none would publiquely Dispute with them? To this I Answer.
1. What hope of a publique Dispute on good terms, to be underta∣ken by a Minister of Christ, when your own faithfull and peaceable Pastour might not be suffered to preach the Gospel to you, a people com∣mitted to his charge?
2. What incouragement can any rationall man have to Dispute with such as abhorre Syllogismes, which are the rationall way of dis∣puting?
3. What hope of finding out, or clearing the Truth by Dispute, where there is no likelihood that the laws and rules of disputing will
be observed with freedom, safety, peace and love, with the help of a Learned, Judicious and Impartiall Moderator.
4. What likelihood of good by a Dispute, wherein impudencie, au∣daciousnesse and verbosity, passion, bitternesse and violence are like to bear sway?
5. What can a publique Dispute in such a case (which case there is too great cause to fear) be, but a sinfull abuse of pretious time, of peoples patience, and even of Scripture and reason it self?
6. Who sees not that the drift of these men is to turn Religion into a matter of contention, and to draw people together to vain-jang∣lings and concertations, as heretofore they met together at Stage∣plaies, Bear-baits and Cock-fights, which abuse What pious heart doth not abhorre?
7. It was judged that most or all these evils might farre better be prevented by calm considerate writing, wherein the passions of fear, anger, &c. and all tumults might be avoided; and reason might speak and be heard.
8. Yet if this way of discussing the truth shall not be satisfactory, and good grounds of hopes shall be given, that the afore-named evils may be prevented. I doubt not, but the Challenge will be accepted. Otherwise no faithfull Minister of Christ may, to satisfie the irra∣tionall desires of some, and answer the insolencie of others, adven∣ture on that, which will be by the judgement of the prudent, no bet∣ter then a taking of Gods Name in vain, and exposing of himself to certain danger. Paul himself, though full of zeal for the Truth, was willing to yield to the Disciples and his Friends,
Act. 19.30, 31. per∣swading him not to adventure himself into the tumultuous The∣ater.
It were much to be wished, that those men which have but weak reason, neither knowing how to manage an Argument, nor capable of conviction thereby; but are taken with plausible expressions and big words, or drawn by hopes of honour, pleasure, gain, ease or liberty, into new waies, like children Carried about with every winde of doctrine, would make more use of their sense (by which only it seems they live, making no use of faith or reason in this case) to observe the end and issue of these waies, into which they are so ea∣sily drawn.
We need not go to Munster or other parts beyound the seas to see the judgement of God on these men: Our own Countrey gives too
many sad experiences thereof. I will only give one instance, of one whose name deserves to be written in the dust, and doth already stink throughout the Land, and therefore I will not stain my paper with it: Yet he is so notorious and infamous, that a short description of him will sufficiently put men in minde whom I mean. In War∣wickshire he appeared first, crying down in his Preaching the Mi∣nistry of England, and Infant-Baptisme: After that he proceed∣ed to be a great Dipper; after that he became a Master of the Qua∣kers, and would cast people into Trances and Revelations, as is credibly reported: Lastly he became Head of the Ranters, that abo∣minable, rotten, blasphemous and hellish Rout. Warwickshire and the Counties adjacent know whom I speak of, and the truth at large of what I briefly touch. Yea this wretched man is notoriously known in the chief City of the Land; so true is that of the Apostle, speaking of hypocriticall flagitious Deceivers,
2 Tim. 3.5, 6, 7, That have a form of godlinesse, but deny the power thereof: Which creep into houses, leading captive silly women laden with lusts, ever learn∣ing and never coming to the knowledge of the truth. But, saith he,
9, 13. their folly shall be made manifest to all men. And again, Wicked men and seducers wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived.
It might seem strange that they who so much depend on the answers of providence in outward successe, as irrefragable arguments to de∣monstrate the goodnesse or badnesse of causes and persons, should not acknowledge and tremble at Divine providence, by this and many thousand such like spirituall plagues, warning all men that have any care of their souls, to beware those waies that lead thereto. But it is not strange that they thus preposterously judge; for those whom God hath given up to a sensual judgement, a reprobate minde, and hard heart, do alike cry down those waies that are attended with outward disgrace and misery, in a course of strictnesse and conscientiousnesse, though accompanied with riches of spirituall graces, which usually is the lot of the godly; and admire and greedily embrace the waies of sin and licentiousnesse, which for a time visibly prosper in the world, though accursed from heaven with invisible and spirituall plagues, which is the common condition of the wicked.
It is a sad and shamefull thing that evil men should be more indu∣strious, active and bold, to study, plead for, and promote errour and falshood, then Gods servants are for the maintaining of the truth;
and particularly that these men should do more to cast themselves and their children, others and their posterity out of Covenant; then the godly will do to clear to themselves and others, theirs and their chil∣drens interest in the Covenant; but it is so. The best see, know, be∣leeve and love, but in part: Whereas corruption, lust and errour, wholly reign in every unsanctified man, and have too strong a party in the most sanctified. Divine truths and Evangelicall mysteries, are strangers to our corrupt mindes, and receive but cold entertainment there. Errours and lies are connaturall to mankinde, and soon clo∣sed with; when men speak lies they speak of their own. Honours, pleasures, and filthy lucre, fleshly liberty and ease, have a mighty influence upon carnall hearts, to carry them on in promoting and re∣ceiving falshood, and resisting and rejecting truth. Nothing out pure zeal for God, love of Christ and his truth, care of our own and brethrens souls, can stir up earnestly and sincerely to contend for the truth, especially when it lies under outward discouragements, dis∣graces and frowns from the world, and alas, how rare are those gra∣ces amongst men, and how weak in the strongest Christians!
Yet surely in other respects, Holinesse and truth (though as a spark of fire in the midst of a sea of corruption, or as a Pearl in the bottom of a dunghill, or as a little glimpse of light under a dark chaos of naturall and acquired sinne and ignorance) have the advantage, for being of a divine originall, they are of prevailing invincible power, and therefore beleevers that have this unconquerable truth in them, and on their side, cannot be excused if they do not stirre up the grace of God in them, and take care and pains that they may be able to contend for, and maintain the truth that was once delivered to the Saints; especially in these times of so great light, wherein (besides the Scriptures in a known Language, and plentifull publike Preach∣ing,) in Catachisms and larger Treatises the Truth is so fully cleared. It may be that God hath as for other causes, so for the cor∣rection of our sloth and carelesnesse, suffered these Controversies to break out, that he may quicken us to the more diligent use of all holy means to grow in grace and knowledge. If for this use dear brethren, this my poor labour may be serviceable to you, or others to whom at your desire (upon the consent and approbation of my brethren in the Ministry) it may be made common, I have my desire. But before I leave you, let me intreat you and others that may make use of it, that you will not content your selves with a slightly looking on it, but
be serious as the matter handled (concerning yours and your childrens interest in the Covenant of Grace requireth,) deserves: howsoever in the manner you may finde sundry imperfections in the instrument, yet let not that be any prejudice to the truth whereof God is the au∣thor. Because I was forced at the first to quote Scriptures briefly for speed, which their importunity called for, and since I have not writ them out at large to prevent bulkinesse, which might deter many from looking on it; let me intreat you to turn over to every proof in your Bibles, and read and observe the same carefully; and if you would write them out in the margin or some paper, it might be time well spent; without pains and diligence no profiting can be expected; he that deals with a slack hand, will come to poverty, but the hand of the diligent maketh rich. Thus committing this service and your use thereof to the blessing of God, desiring that he may have the praise if you shall receive hereby any increase in the knowledge of the truth and stability therein, and that I may have the help of your prayers, who remain

