



SIR,
DAvid describeth the godly
man, by his pleasure, and by
his paines: First, the plea∣sure
of the godly man, in these
words:Psal. 1. 2. He delighteth in the
Law of the Lord. Secondly, the paines of
the godly man: And in that Law he me∣ditateth
day and night; not only in the day
appointed for man to labour in, but in the
night also appointed for man to rest: the
reason is, because it is his meat and drinke,
to doe the will of his God. (Honoured
Sir) The Word of Christ being the Rule

of Englands Reformation; the good
Lord (that writeth his Lawes in his peo∣ples
hearts, according to his new Cove∣nant
of Grace: Heb. 8. 10.) put it into
my minde, seriously to consider, What
Schisme was, that I had covenanted a∣gainst.
And searching the Scriptures, I
found it thus written, 1. Tim. 6. 3. If any
man teach otherwise, and consent not to
the wholesome words, even the words of our
Lord Jesus Christ; and to the Doctrine
which is according to godlinesse. Vers. 4.
He is proud, knowing nothing; but doting
about Questions, and strife of words;
whereof commeth envy, strife, raylings,
evill surmisings. Vers. 5. Perverse dis∣putings
of men of corrupt mindes, and de∣stitute
of the truth; supposing that gaine
is godlinesse; from such withdraw thy self.
Yea, and after a further enquiry, to under∣stand
aright the things that are controver∣ted
amongst us; by the good providence
of the Almighty, I found two Texts of ho∣ly
Scripture, setting forth two sorts of
men, Diametrally opposing one another,
as light doth darkenesse, truth doth false∣hood;
the one ths written: 1 John 5. 1.
Whosoever beleeveth that Jesus is the
Christ, is borne of God. And the other,
thus; 1 John 2. 22. Who is a lyar, but he

that denyeth that Jesus is not the Christ,
He is Antichrist, that denyeth the Father
and the Sonne. And when I thought to
understand the difference, it was to hard
for me, untill I went into the Sanctuary
of God; where the Father of glory, of his
good pleasure, revealed to me (the most
unworthyest of all his servants) the truth
of that; which (I conceive) is the root
of all our Controversies, and gave me to
understand the meaning of the Scriptures,
1 John 5. 1. Whosoever beleeveth that Je∣sus
is the Christ, viz. the eternall King,
Prophet, Priest of the Church of the new
Testament, ratified with his bloud, whom
the Father of glory hath exalted to bee
Lord and Christ, Acts 2. 36. and head,
Ephes. 2. 20, 21, 22, 23. Is borne of God.
Seeing no man can say, (that is confest)
that Jesus is the Lord but by the holy Spi∣rit,
1 Cor. 12. 3.
Hence I find it written, Joh. 1. 11. Jesus
came to his owne, but his owne received
him not, that is, for the Christ, that Mes∣siah
which was to come: but onely for
the Carpenters sonne; Matth. 13. 58. The
reason was, because none could understand
that Mystery: but they onely to whom the
Father of heaven revealed it, Matth. 11.
14. Hence, when Jesus demanded of his

Disciples? Whom doe men say that I the
Sonne of Man am? Peter answereth,
thou art the Christ, the Sonne of the li∣ving
God: Jesus answereth, Blessed art
thou Simon Bar-Jona; for flesh and blood
hatb not revealed this unto thee; but my
Father in heaven. And thou art Peter,
and upon this Rock (Jesus the Christ,
whom thou hast confessed) I will build my
Church, and the gates of hell shall not pre∣vail
against it, Mat. 16. 16, 17, 18. Many for
fear durst not in those dayes confesse Jesus
to be the Christ: Instance the Parents of
the blind man: Because the Jewes had a∣greed,
that if any did confesse, that hee
was the Christ; He should be put out of
the Synagogue, John 9. 22. But so many
as recived him (viz. to be the Christ) to
them he gave power to be called the sons
of God; even to them that beleeve in his
name; which were borne not of bloud
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of th
will of man, But of God, John 1. 12, 13▪
And as for that other Text of the holy
Scripture that doth universally oppose it
the heavenly Father gave me thus to inter∣pret
it: 1 John 2. 22. Who is a lyar (viz
orne of the evill one, who is a lyar, and
the father of lyes, and abode not in the
truth, John 8. 14. But hee that denieth

that JESUS (whom hee confesseth
dyed for his sinnes; and rose againe
the third day, according to the Scrip∣tures)
Is not the Christ, viz. the an∣nointed
King and Prophet of his Church,
in all his outward administrations and in∣stitutions,
in admitting of Members into
his spirituall Kingdome, according to his
royall Commission, Matth. 28. 18, 19.
Mark. 15. 15, 16. (though he acknow∣ledge
him to be his eternall Priest that e∣ver
liveth, to make intercession to God
for him, Heb. 7. 25. He is that Antichrist
(viz. an enemy and adversary to Jesus
the Christ) that denieth the Father and
the Sonne, He that denieth the Sonnes
Authority, to bee the eternall King,
and his Commission to bee in force,
Matth. 28. 18, 19, 20. Mark. 15. 15,
16. and to be the eternall Prophet; and
his word to be the eternall rule for Do∣ctrine
and Gouernement; aswall as his
eternall Priest to reconcile him to God
Denieth the Father, that sanctified the
Sonne, and sent him into the World, John
10. 36. and raised him from the dead,
and exalted him to bee Lord and Christ,
Acts 2. 36. Hence it is (my Honoured
friend) First, that in all my writings, I
have studied to exalt Jesus the Christ, it

being the Primitive. Faith once given to
the Saints, Math. 16. 16. Secondly, to
distinguish Jesus the Christ from all o∣thers
named with the name of Jesus in
Scripture Record: as Joshua is called Je∣sus,
Hebr. 4. 8. &c. others. Thirdly, be∣cause
I find the Scriptures giving that Ti∣tle
to him in divers places.
John confesseth, I am not the Christ,
John 1. 20. The Woman of Samaria
said, I know the Messiah commeth which
is called the Christ, John 4. 25. Apollos
mightily convinced the Jewes, shewing
by the Scriptures, that Jesus was the
Christ, Acts 18. 28. Now that I received
from the Lord, I could not but make
knowne to you, You being one of the
tender hearted Loyall Covenanters, a
Member of that High and Honourable
Court, under whose shade Conscientious
Covenantours (that contend for the faith
of Jesus the Christ, once given to the
Saints) find rest.
Know (worthy Sir) that the depar∣ture
from the faith of Jesus the Christ,
is a cause of so many Schismes, and Here∣sies
maintained in the earth. Disdaine
not therefore to read a little Treatise,
called the Difference betweene the Chri∣stian,
and Antichristian Church, Deli∣niated

according to the Scripture Record,
though the truth therein contained (like
the Two witnesses, Revel. 11. 3.) have
long mourned in Sackcloth: Yet if God
give you an heart to receive it, It will be a
Jewell surpassing all earthly Treasure.
For if Iesus the Christ bee your Prophet
to teach you, his heavenly Father will,
Matth. 17. 5. Acts 3. 22. 23. He will then
be your King to protect you, Matth 28.
20. Your Priest to intercede for you, Joh.
27. 20. Your Judge to acquit you, Joh. 12.
48. and if the love of Christ draw you to
keepe all his Commandements (though in
the world you meet with afliction for
his sake; yet in Christ you shall find peace)
for the Father, Son, and Spirit will dwell
in your heart, and take it for the Sanctum
Sanctorum, where they will abide to cheer
and refresh you, Joh. 14. 23. And if you
confesse, him in this world before men: He
will confesse you before his Father, and pro∣claime
it to your eternall peace and com∣fort,
(Euge bone serve) Well done thou
good and faithfull servant, enter into your
Masters joy. Matth. 25. 21.
Orpington in Kent▪
the tenth Moneth,
the first day, 1645.

