


BEloved in CHRIST,
Disdaine not to Read this
Learned Treatise of Ma∣ster
John Cotton, of Bo∣ston
in New-England,
out of any prejudice thou mayest take a∣gainst
the person, or publisher of it.
What if some judge him a Schisma∣ticke?
yet he regardeth not mans rash
censure: Seeing he can with holy Paul,
that before his Conversion persecuted the
Church of God, safely Apologise for
himselfe; Acts 24. 14. That after
the way that you call Heresie, so

worship I the God of my Fathers;
beleeving all things that are written
in the Law, and in the Prophets.
Verse 15. And have an hope toward
God, which you your selves also
allow, that there shall bee a re∣surrection
of the dead, both of
the just, and unjust. Verse 16. And
herein doe I exercise my selfe, to
have alwaies a Conscience void of
offence toward God & towardman.
But yet this I confesse unto you, that I am
lesse then the least of all the Messengers
of Christ; for I am not worthy to bee
called a Messenger, or Minister; for I
persecuted the Church of God, that pro∣fessed
the Faith of Jesus the Christ;
that held foorth all his Royall Offices,
King, Prophet, Priest, according to
his outward administration, in admit∣ting
of Members into his Spiritual
Kingdome: And sided with the An∣tichristian
Prelates, and Bishops, that
denyed, that Jesus is the Christ, whom
the Spirit of God calleth Lyars, and
Antichristians, That denyeth the Fa∣ther

and the Sonne, 1 John 2. 22.
For though I, with the Antichristian
Bishops, and Priests, did acknowledge
Jesus the Christ, our high Priest that
ever liveth to reconcile us unto God;
yet wee have persecuted them that hold
his Kingly and Propheticall Office to
be eternall, aswell as his Priesthood, and
the gathering of his Church according
to his Royall Commission, Matth. 28.
18, 19, 20. Hence it is, that Christ
divided, becometh no Christ to the di∣vider;
this according to the Vulgar
Latine, Solvere Jesum, to dissolue Je∣sus,
that is, to receive him onely in
part, and not in the whole, which is the
spirit of Antichrist. Now when the
Lord opened the eyes of my understan∣ding,
and convicted me of all the abo∣minations
I had done in my spirituall
Captivity under Antichrist, especially,
that I had crucified Jesus the Christ
in his Members, being pricked in my
heart, I trembling cryed, what shall I
doe? The Spirit and the Bride, the
Lambes wife, said; Repent, and be

Baptized in the name of Jesus, &c.
Then I gladly received the Word, was
Baptized, and was added to the Church,
Acts 2. 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. Yet, by the
grace of God, now I am, what I am;
And having from some Friends, re∣ceived
this Learned Conference, kept
it by mee as a precious Diamond of
great worth, from which my soule,
through the great goodnesse of God, did
reape much spirituall comfort. And
did wait, hoping that some learned and
faithfull friends of his, would long a∣goe
have Printed a larger, and an ex∣acter
Copy of it: But finding none, (I
that am lesse then the least of all Saints)
could not any longer conceale it, but
thought with my selfe, I was bound in
Conscience to publish it, in this lear∣ned
Age, wherein there is so much
enquiry after truth, for the benefit of
poore, hungry, empty, selfe-denying
Spirits; rather then such a Learned
Tract of heavenly light, should alwaies
lye in the dust, as unseene, and forgot∣ten.
For this cause alone, I have at∣tempted

(Courteous Reader) to present
o thy view this Learned Treatise; Not
hat I have any relation to that Lear∣ed
man; nor any command from him
o doe it: But onely in love, that this
his Learned Disputation might not bee
uried in silence. Read it therefore (Be∣loved
in Christ) not for his sake that
publisheth it; but for his sake that was
he Author of it; or rather for the God
f Truths sake. For whose cause the
Learned Author contendeth for the
Faith in these daies, wherein the Gos∣ell
of Truth hath suffered so great Ec∣lipses,
through the rage and tyranny of
the Popish Antichristian Prelates and
Priests.

