



CƲrteous Reader, be not too cen∣sorious
concerning him that is
the Publisher of this little
Treatise, stiled, The difference
between the Christian and Antichristian
Church, as if hee condemned the Ages
and Generations that are past, as in a lost
condition; because he saith they have built
their house upon wood, and hay, and stub∣ble,
and not upon the sure rock Jesus the
Christ: Farre be it from him to judge so
ashly of the Ages and Generations past, or
present, concerning their finall estate; for
ee is commanded to judge no man before
he time, knowing that they stand and fall
to their owne Master: And, wee shall all
stand before the judgement seat of Christ;

And then and there every one shall give
an account for himselfe to God, Rom. 14.
4, 10, 12. Knowing, as it is recorded in the
inspired Scriptures, that If any man build
upon this foundation (Jesus the Christ)
gold, silver, precious stones, wood, hay
stubble; Every mans work shall be made
manifest: for the day shall declare it; be∣cause
it shall be revealed by fire: and th
fire shall try every mans worke. If any
mans worke abide, which hee hath buil
thereon,
hee shall receive a reward: If a∣ny
mans work shall be burnt, hee shall
suffer losse; but himselfe shall be saved
yet so as by fire, 1 Cor. 3. 12, 13, 14, 15.
Secondly, Know that the discovery of
this truth was (as the vision that is his
for an appointed time) and is become un∣to
us, as the words of a book that is sea∣led,
which men deliver to one that is lear∣ned,
saying, Read this I pray thee: And h
saith, I cannot; for it is sealed. And th
book is delivered to him that is not lear∣ned,
saying, Read this I pray thee: An
hee saith, I am not learned, Esay 29. 11, 12▪
So that it is not in him that is learned, no
in him that is unlearned, to discover the
mystery of iniquity, by which Antichris
hath filled the Temple so full of smoak, that
no man can see how to enter into it, unti

God enlighten him; which caused the Lord
Jesus in the dayes of his flesh, to break out
into an Eucharistia of praise, looking on
his Disciples, I thank thee, O Father, Lord
of heaven and earth, that thou hast hid these
things from the wise and learned, and hast
revealed them unto babes. Even so, O Fa∣ther,
because it seemed good in thy sight,
Mat. 11. 25, 26. That the whole glory in
discovering of truth to any, might be given
unto God.
Thirdly, Know (gentle Reader, who
art a searcher after truth in these inqui∣ring
times) that the Publisher wrote this
Treatise, to discover that the difference
lieth not so much amongst us in point of
Baptisme; as it is about the Doctrine of
the Faith of Jesus the Christ, the Sonne
of God; which whosoever beleeveth and
confesseth, that Jesus the Christ is the Son
of God, it is lawfull to baptize him, Act. 8.
36, 37, 38. And, to which Faith of Jesus
the Christ, and Baptisme, the promise of
receiving the gifts of the holy Spirit is
given, Act. 2. 38, 39. And though for pub∣lishing
this mystery of Faith, which hath
been hidden for some Ages and Generati∣ons
that are past, hee suffer reproach and
contempt from the hands and tongues of
some; yet, if the will of God be so, it is bet∣ter

hee suffer for well-doing, then for evill.
Yet the love that hee beareth to the loyall
Covenanters in the Nation, constraineth
him to doe it, rather then his Country-men
should ever remaine in blindnesse, under
the power of Antichrist.

