


MAY it please you who are legally placed in this high Orb of Honour, and have most happily driven away and scattered  according to Aquila, agreea∣bly to the Septuagint  compliably with Philo the Jew, the Fly-swarms of Sects and Heresies, whichExod. 8. 21 offended, diverted, and exasperated all sincerely and modestly walking in straight-pahs, to give leave, because even in natural Things, the higher the Sun mounts, the lesse shadows it casts; and in Artificials, the Pyramid ascending higher and higher, is lesser still and lesser, that I poor man amidst the Acclamations of allLips. lib. 2. manuductionis ad Philosophi∣am Stoicam. Psalm 133. 1 (though Lipsius is pleased to teach, Vir perfectè bonus non est nisi in Descriptione, There is no man perfectly good, otherwise than in Description) good Protestnts, may give God praise for your most happy successe, and joyfully sing with the Royal Pro∣phet; Behold, how good and how pleasant it is, for Brethren to dwell together in Unity! For pleasant, St. Hierom allow decorum, comely, and the Hebrew word is nahhim, fair; Unity and order being fair and comely. The Sept. for in Unity, place , into one and the same Thing, signifying such as attend to the same divine Worship; these being one Body and one Soul, than which there cannot be a greater and more near conjunction. This Compliance with his Majestie's and your Com∣mands will make of every pious occurrence, in Synesis his Lan∣guage,Syes. lib. de providentiá. , matter of Vertue. In Arabi the Happy, all plants and Herbs are endwed with a sweet odour, expred from the felicity of the Soyl; and all regulated Woks are fur∣ther blanch't and candied by our obedience to our Superious, wherein we give again, and resemble the passive Obediential power in creatues with respect unto God. To say a good Chri∣stian; and the same disobedien, is , a most incon∣gruous and false manner of speaking. It is my part and Of∣fice to proclaim aloud, (and Seneca wisely sayes of Fools,Sec. in ep. ad D. Paulum. Deus quandoque exore fatuorum effatur, The most wise God
 speaks sometimes by the mouthes of Fools.) that this your Ecclesiastical Uniformity will indeed render you formidable yea terrible to the Church of Rome. And therefore our sul∣phureous and jealous-headed people here, have not the least glimpse of cause to fear Popery, Things running upon this by as: David paints them, There were they in great fear,Psalm 53. 5 where no fear was; no cause of fear: The Vulgar Latin as∣serts, Illic trepidaverunt timore, There they moved mou Trepidationis, with the motion of trembling: In the plain∣ing of which Verse, Hesychius calls such  persons fearing vain noyses and Spectres: Aristotle isHesych. in Sept. an offerer here, averring, some to be so fearfully fearfull, that they fear , the poor slies that fly buzzingArisot. in Po∣lit. lib 7. cap. 1. Soph. in Elec∣tra. about them: And Sophocles applies himself, , All things make a great noise in the ears of a timotous man. Go then, most noble Souls, and aeternitati pingite, bind the old Protestan to you with an eternity of obligation. For the Pa∣pist, nobly and couragiously persist to set him more and more aside with the rest or rather, as he is most dangerous, more than all the rest. Where the Pope obtains the least freedom, he is always crowd∣ing for all: And I am sure and secure, that generally Monks, Jesuits, and Priests were his Majesties perverse Enemies, until they saw the Day down towards him: I most heartily forgive those Iliads of evils (Wrongs and Lyes) wherewith they most horribly afflicted me, even when they were most gently treated here! Sunt Homicidae interfect res fatrum, & sunt Homicidae de ra∣tractoresClemens Ro∣man. ep. 1. ad S. Jacob. eoum, There are Homicides who murther their Bre∣thren, and there are homicides who detract from them: But I shall defend my Country, from their secret encroachings, and Insolencies; which I best know. The Jesuts have thundred in their Sermns against you, yea, brought you upon the Stage after a most disgraceful and ridiculous manner, in St. Omers, France, Spain, Italy. Indulge to us, we most humbly beseech you, free∣dom in as great a latitude for the surpessing of Popish Hypocrisy, as their Pope▪ according to his Politicks, gives it to them for the debasing of Christian Honesty. Heroick Hearts, In God's Name proceed, and prosper.

