


MAy it please you, who are called by the Su∣periour Powers, both in Heaven and Earth, to bring into the light, abscondita te∣nebrarum, the hidden things of darknesse; to cast your eys down upon the ground, where you
 shall finde, lying in a corner, a poore man tossed by the course of the World, from Darknesse to Obscurity. There is nothing more eminent, and more admi∣rable in God, than his Provi∣dence: And therefore, no instru∣ments are more glorious than the instruments which hee employ∣eth in the setting forth, and illu∣stration of it. I had great reason to feare, because through all the chances and changes of my life, some kinds of darknesse did still haunt me, that I should never have appeared in the perfect light, till I should have come to the light of Heaven: But anima∣ted with the reflexion of your countenance, I shall have better
 hopes. O yee good, and great Protestors against the pride and prophanenesse of the Church of Rome, Ponder, I most humbly beseech you, the mayn things that I have learned from the mouthes of Popish Priests, be∣yond the Seas, where every man speaks freely; which in part, are these.
First, that their number in Eng∣land is so great, and the Houses of all Papists, who are able to goe under the burden, so ful, they can∣not, but with much hardnes, live by one another. And it must needs be so: For, the man is of little account amongst them, that will not mayntaine a Priest; and many receive many.

Secondly, That they convey many thousands of pounds eve∣ry yeare, to their Houses. For, the Bodies resident in their Houses are such, that the parts are either all homogeneous, and of the same kinde; as, all Ie∣suits, all Monks, all Friars; and these have great Reliefe sent them from England: or heteroge∣neous, and of a different kind; as Iesuits, and Scholers; and these are sustained by Lands, or by Pensi∣ons; where the Scholers are set apart for Priesthood, as in Rome, Sevill, Valladolid: to other places, as to their Colledges, of Saint O∣mers and Doway, a very great part of their meanes, and mainte∣nance, comes out of England.
 And that, for this purpose, and the safe passage of their Goers and Cemmers, young and old, the Iesuits are Masters of a Ship, furnished with many kinds of Colours, and many sorts of Countrimen, in which Ship, I my selfe should have passed.
Thirdly, that banished out of England, going from one Port, they must presently return to an∣other: because their Priestly Fun∣ction hath not leave from the Pope, to apply it selfe to action, and exercise, but in the Domi∣nions of England, Scotland, and Ireland; (and so their Faculties run:) And their places of Resi∣dence in other Countries are loa∣ded.

Fourthly, that they win souls to them, every day in England, and almost, in all parts of it: ho∣ping greatly, to undermine us by little and little; and grow up (wee not minding them) to the greater number. Wherefore, they are strangely cunning in their carriages; taking the shapes of Physicians, that in a more covert manner, they may visit the sick: (which as the generall voice goes, was acted in my poore parish, a little before I came to it; and the effect was, that the wo∣man died a papist, who had li∣ved a protestant; and her hus∣band soon after, made a papist, and rewarded by a great person, with a service:) And the habits
 of Beggars, Souldiers, Captains; and of Countrymen, bearing long staves upon their necks: And they will be Servingmen too, if occasion give way. And there is scarce a House, that looks like a House, which they have not fitted with private doores and conveyances.
Fiftly, that the Iesuits have two Houses in England; one in London, known to them, by the name of Saint Ignatius: another in the Country, called, Saint Xaverius his House. And that both the Ie∣suits, Monks, and Friers have re∣ceived Novices, which have wore their Habits, and perfor∣med their Novice-ships, even in England. And that the Bishop of
 Chalcedon, in the time of his abode heere, ordained Priests. And that they are, or have bin furni∣shed with secret presses under ground, for the printing of Books.
Thus farre, in the first en∣counter, I doe charge the Po∣pish Priests of England; ha∣ving truly, faithfully, and re∣ligiously brought them, as wit∣nesses against themselves. And if men may be judged out of their Serve ne∣quam, ex tuo ipsius ore judica∣beris. own mouthes (as one was jud∣ged by the Iudge himselfe,) they may be likewise accused out of their owne mouthes: because right judgement proceedeth ac∣cording to just accusation. And when men of these darke ways,
 men of pragmaticall, and work∣ing heads are also bold, what will they not dare to endevour? What will they leave unattemp∣ted? And are they not very bold, when Franciscus à sancta Clara, a man of a holy name, because hee named himself, but a subtil one, and of my old acquaintance, durst vent the relikes of his old Dictates in a forme, bending us, and the profession of our Faith, by which we are entitled to Hea∣ven, to a Reconciliation with them? And this being done, fol∣low mee, almost to my owne doores, in the Country; and ha∣ving took his standing in a great House, neer me, give matter, and heart to his evill Instruments, to
 dishonour me, and make a sport and scorne of mee, in my own Parish, and within my owne small fold? Are they not unsuf∣ferably bold, when a Priest came to my Lodging, and there, in his fury, attempted to draw a sword upon me? If you graciously assist me not, I have bin saved abroad, to perish at home, with all my friends about me: or at least, to lie buried in secrecie, and con∣tempt. Pardon me, if I am hot. I have bin hitherto chill: and lukewarmnesse is highly blame∣able. I have bin wrought upon, through all my life; and bowed to serve other mens ends: And have ignorantly suffered my selfe to be moved, and fashioned in
 order to them. But now the vi∣zard is off, I will throw them off, one here, and one there; and only serve God, who is my true end. It is remarkable, that the Papists turn our lenity, and gentlenesse towards them, into an argument against us: inferring that wee have no zeale, no religion. O con∣sider the flocks and multitudes of ignorant people, that came to me, when I lodged in London, crying for satisfaction in matters of beliefe: Every one of them, being divided betwixt a Prote∣stant and a Papist; & not know∣ing where to finde rest for their souls. And some came under my hands, whom the papists, by their continual perswasions, had
 wrought into a distraction; some into madnes. This others know, with mee. God will require an account of these souls. O that it were granted to mee, but first to the glory of God, that while I have leave to behold this good light, both of the Sun, and of the Gospell, I might speake in the light, (as our Saviour commands us) what I have heard in dark∣nesse! and that I might be al∣ways at hand, to binde up the gaping wounds of afflicted spi∣rits; even where they are most wounded, because there are most Enemies. Neither do men, saith Mat. 5. 15. our Saviour, light a candle, and put it under a bushell: but on a can∣dlestick, and it giveth light to all
 that are in the House. The Can∣dlestick is the place of the can∣dle; be it small or great. Shall the zeale of the true Church, be o∣vercome in religious forward∣nesse, by a false one? It is not all my purpose, to labour in the pre∣vention of Popery. Part of it is, to teach plainly and truly, the Faith professed in England; and the piety of a Christian life, even to the perfection of it; as will appeare to the Reader. It is our Saviours Rule, commended to Saint Peter, When thou art conver∣ted, Luk. 22. 32. strengthen thy Brethren. God hath abundantly performed his part towards mee: the perfor∣mance of my part remaineth, to∣wards him, and my Brethren.
 And no zeale is like to zelus ani∣marum, the zeal of souls. It some∣what suits, which the Bride∣groom said to the Spouse: My Cant. 2. 10, 11, 12, 13. beloved spake, and said unto mee, Rise up, my love, my faire one, and come away: For loe, the winter is past, the rain is over, and gone. The flowers appeare on the earth, the time of the singing of birds is come, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our land. The fig-tree putteth forth her green figs, and the vines with the tender grape, give a good smell. Arise my love, my faire one, and come away. When God calls, who loves be∣cause he will love, and therefore says, first, My Love, and then my faire one; (and he first loves, be∣cause we are not faire, but by his
 love. And he seems to love with∣out reason, and to do what hee does as women doe, because he will doe it: but it is the greatest of all reasons, that his will should be done. And this, is confessed by the Schoolmen in the resolu∣tion of other great difficulties.) and when hee cals so movingly, and so prettily, it is high time to goe. But, before I go, I beg of all the zealous and noble spirits, in∣cluded in my Dedication; that they will so farre listen after me, and remember Gods worke in me; as to take notice, and ob∣serve what becomes of me. And so, God that in his good time hath remembred you, and us, re∣member both you and us all in
 the end; and world without end. Which humbly prays

