



Sir,
1 Cor. 14 27 THe Churches of the Saints
and the World, may not
bee unfitly compared to
the Pearle and the Peb∣ble:
though both of one naturall
substance, earth; yet the one of
rare price, whose beauty is the sun∣beames
inclosed; the other wanting

it, is cast away as refuse. What
maketh the Saint more excellent
then his neighbour, seeing both are
borne of flesh, both subject to the
same corruptions, sicknesse, death,
but this?Ephes. 4. 24 The Saints excellency is
nothing else but the Image of Jesus
Christ the Sunne of righteousnesse
shining in him: For as the moone
and starres derive their light from
the sunne;1 Cor. 1. 30 so all the wisdome, righ∣teousnesse,
holinesse a Saint hath,
hee deriveth from Christ. Hence
David the King doth so prize their
fellowship, All my delight is in thy
Saints,Psal. 16. 3. thine excellent ones that are in
the earth, and them that excell in ver∣tue.
Yea, it is a sure note of a Ci∣tizen
of Sion, that hee honours them
that feare the Lord:Psal 15. Whereas world∣ly
men without grace, are rendred
in his eyes as vile. Hence the Spouse
acknowledgeth that all her excel∣lency
cometh from plantation; Let
my Beloved come into his garden,Cant 4 16. and
eat his pleasant fruit. Yea, Christ

declareth to Nicodemus that a be∣leevers
holinesse cometh from re∣generation;Joh. 3. 5.
that in Christ hee may
onely glory. How doth the Lord
discover this his excellency to a
beleever, by his calling, till that
time hee lieth amongst the refuse
of the world,Tit. 3. 3. as foolish, disobedient,
deceived, serving divers lusts and plea∣sures,
living in malice and envie, hate∣full,
and hating one another. But then
the kindnesse and love of God to
man appeared,Col. 1. 13. by delivering him out
of the kingdome of darknesse, and tran∣slating
him into the kingdome of his
deare Sonne. By which it is manifest,
that hee is one of the Chosen genera∣tion,
the royal priesthood,1 Pet. 2. 9. the holy na∣tion,
the peculiar people, whom hee
hath called out of darknesse into his mar∣vellous
light. But when doth the
Lord discover the truth of his cal∣ling
to his conscience? Then when
hee giveth him precious faith; for
that onely distinguisheth him form
the world that lieth in sinne. Gal. 3.

22. The Scripture concludeth (father,
mother, sonne, daughter, nay the
infant that is borne of the most
holiest parents) all under sinne, that
the promise by the faith of Jesus Christ
might bee given to them that beleeve.
So that in that same houre the Lord
giveth him faith, hee giveth him
an evidence in himselfe,Heb 15. 1. that hee
loved him in Christ before he was
borne,Rom 9 11. before hee had done good
or evill,Act. 13. 39. that hee hath justified him
from all those things hee could not
be justified by the Law,Heb. . 14. that hee
hath purged his conscience from all
dead works, that his person is ac∣cepted,
his sinne discharged,Act 26. 1. and he
hath a right to the purchased in∣heritance
amongst them which are
sanctified. Thus the love of Christ
revealed to dye for him, to take
away his iniquity, and reconcile
him to God; the Spirit given to
take away his heart of stone,Eccl. 36. 25. 26. giveth
him an heart of flesh, to cause to
walke in his flatutes; yea, and draw∣eth

his heart to yeeld obedience to
every commandement of Jesus the
Christ. The truth of this grace
given, Right Worshipfull, you can
give a true testimoniall; for you
were once in your naturall condi∣tion
as well as others, till it plea∣sed
God who separated you from
the womb,Gal. . 15, 1. to call you by his grace,
to reveale his Sonne in you; you
consulted not with flesh and bloud,
but left your native soyle, (in the
persecuting times of the Prelates)
chusing rather to suffer affliction with
the people of God (according to
the light they had received) then
to remaine in England and enjoy the
pleasures of sin for a season. Yet there
the Lord exalted your Worship to
bee the Governour: And in that
dawning light, coming forth out
of mysticall Babylon, the Lord dis∣covered
much spirituall knowledge,
of the riches of his free-grace in
Jesus Christ, amongst you; you be∣ing
freed from the yoke of the Task∣Masters

heere, the Bishops, that
kept you in bondage: you had li∣berty
there to debate those Questi∣ons;
which the naming onely of
them heere, would have rendred
a man odious. But Satan that en∣vieth
the peace of the Saints; stir∣red
up a spirit of contention a∣mongst
you; especially when these
Queries came to be debated.

1 Whether there are any gracious
conditions, or qualifications
wrought in the soule before faith?
2 Whether any man can gather his
evidence of the assurance of his
Justification from his Sanctifi∣cation?
3 Whether there bee an active power
of Faith, and other gifts of grace
in a Christian conversation?

The one side would not beleeve
themselves justified, no farther then
they could see themselves worke;
making their Markes, Signes, and

Qualifications, the causes of their
Justification.
The other side, laid the Evidence
of their Justification, onely by Faith
in the free Promise: for there are
foure things that makes remission of
sinnes perpetuall to a beleever.
First, The cause of Remission, the
sacrificed Body of Christ on the
Crosse, or accursed Tree; Heb. 10.
4. By one offering, hee hath perfected
for ever them that are sanctified.
Secondly, The ground is a free
promise tendred to us from God; as
to Adam, The Seed of the Woman
shall breke the Serpents head, Gen. 3.
15. John. 3. 16. 1 John 4. 10.
Thirdly, The meane is, Faith ap∣prehending
it, Phil. 3. 9.
Fourthly, The Spirit of Christ sea∣ling
of it, Ephes. 1. 13.
This truth revealed for the com∣fort
of poore drooping Saints found
great opposition; But the good
Lord, stirred up your gracious
spirit, to countenance, and defend

them in the midst of strong opposi∣tion;
and though you were sleigh∣ted,
and set light by at the ende of
your Government, as not worthy
to be an assistant, with many other
Instruments more; yet the good
Lord stood by you, and strength∣ned
you, and delivered you from
the hands of your opposers, per∣served
you from the dangers of the
Sea; and though at your returne to
your Native Soyle, you lived like
Joseph, a while, in a despised con∣dition,
yet the Lord raised you up
to sit amongst Princes. So that
though you were willing to lose
life, friends, preferment, for Christ;
found you not then, life, peace, joy,
in the Lord Jesus, which was bet∣ter
to you, then all worldly amity;
according to his owne promise,
In the World you found affliction,
but in him you found peace: And
when you were called to be a Mem∣ber
of the high Court of Parlia∣ment,
in our distressed and distra∣cted

times; the Lord made you an
nstrument to defect the Trecherous
plot of those two brethren in evill;
Thomas Lord Strafford; and Willi∣am
Lord Archbishop of Canterbu∣y,
that contrived the destruction of
our fundamentall Lawes, ratified
by the Statute of Magna Charta, by
abouring to set up an Arbitrary Go∣vernment,
and keeping on foot a Po∣ish
Army, consisting of Irish Re∣els,
and others, to compell the faith∣ull,
and true-hearted Nobility,
and loyall Commons of England,
o subject themselves to their illegal
Taxations: hazarding the losse of
he favours of the King, Nobi∣ty,
Parents, Friends, and Allyes,
together with those places of Ho∣our
and Maintenance, the King of
lemency had freely bestowed; ra∣er
then his Country should be ru∣ed,
and enthralled, by such accor∣


a branch of that goodly Caedar,
under whose shade, the Innocent
and oppressed, tender Consciences
that stand for a through Reforma∣tion,
agreeable to the Word o
God, find rest) ever be forgotten, and
left unrewarded; God forbid: I
is worthy to be written on a Pilla
of Marble; and recorded in the
Chronicle: that after-ages may ne∣ver
forget to shew kindenesse, and
mercy to your Noble Posterity
that did not thinke your life (toge∣ther
with your neerest relations
deare unto you, so as to part with
them, that you might purchase you
Countries Liberty; I cannot judge
him Englands Friend, that enviet
your honour, and promotion; Se∣ing
you are (for the love you hau
shewed to Christ his Truth, and
poore Members, together with you
Native Countrey) worthy of double
honour. Now (worthy Sir) seeing all
your excellency is nothing else, bu

the Image of Jesus Christ, the Son
of righteousnes shining in you. Dis∣ain
not to receive from the hand of
a poore despised Instrument that pre∣sents
this Treatise, The Learned Con∣ference
of Master John Cotton, that
he had with the Elders, at the Bay of
Boston in New England. Though I
am the least of all Saints, not wor∣thy
to be called a Saint; because
n the time of the Prelats raigne; I
ided with them, in persecuting the
Faith of Jesus Christ, and impriso∣ning
of his Members; But did it
gnorantly, through unbeliefe, and
when the Lord pierced my heart
for it; I trembling, cryed, What shall
I doe? The holy Spirit and the
Bride said, Repent, and bee baptized
in the name of Jesus, for the remission
of sinnes, and I should receive the gifts
of the Spirit, &c. Then Noble Sir,
though I procrastinated it for a sea∣son,
at last, I was not disobedient to
the heavenly voice, but arose, and

was Baptized; For this cause,
have beene much opposed by my
old Friends, and Countrey-men▪
But yet remaine a Loyall Covenanter,
that standeth for a Refor∣mation
in England, and Ireland, agreeable
to the Word of God, and
the best Reformed Churches: See∣ing
it is not the voice of the Chur∣ches,
but Christ in the Churches
we Convenented to hearken unto
as Master Case his Sermon yet te∣stifieth.
First, To extirpate Popery; (which
I apprehended at the taking of the
Nationall Covenant) was that
Doctrine of Antichrist, which doth
universally oppose the doctrine of
Jesus the Christ. Affirming what
Christ denieth; and denying what
Christ affirmeth.
Secondly, Prelacy, viz. The Go∣vernment
of Arch-bishops, and Bi∣shops,
and all Ecclesiasticall Offi∣cers
depending on that Hierarchy,

Roote and Branch: as a Plant the
heavenly Father hath not planted.
Thirdly, Superstition: viz. What∣soever
is supra Statutum, that hath
not the word of God to warrant
it.
Fourthly, Schisme: Namely,
from all those that teach, and cosent
not to the wholesome words,even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and to the doctrine which is according
to godlinesse; from such I must with∣draw,
1 Tim. 6. 3, 5.
Fifthly, Heresie: Even from all
them that deny that Jesus is the
Christ; They are Antichrist that deny
the Father and the Sonne. Whosoever
denyeth the Sonne, the same hath not
the Father, 1 Joh. 2. 22, 23.
Sixthly, That the Lord may be one:
viz. Even the Lord Jesus the Christ,
whom God raised from the dead, and
et him at his owne right hand in the
eavenly places; Farre above all prin∣cipality,
and power, and might, and

dominion, and every name that is na∣med,
not onely in this world, but that
which is to come: And hath put all
things under his feet, and gave him to
be head over all things to the Church,
Which is his body, the fulnesse of him
that filleth all in all, Ephes. 1. 20, 21
22, 23.
Seventhly, And his Name to 
one in the three Kingdomes: (that is,
as I conceive it) his power, autho∣rity,
and royall Commission must
be exalted in all his Offices, to be
the eternall King, eternall Prophet,
and eternall Priest, in all things
appertaining to the conscience: see∣ing
the loyall Spouse of Christ hath
no Head, no Husband, no Lord,
no Law-giver, but royall King Je∣sus.
That wee, and our posterity after
us, may live in faith, and love;
and the Lord may delight to dwell
amongst us.

For the keeping of which Co∣venant,
I had rather chuse to dye,
then to deny the faith of Jesus the
Christ: Knowing, that he which
confesseth him before men, him he
will confesse before his Father.
But hee which is ashamed of Christ,
nd his words, in this sinfull and a∣dulterous
generation, of him also shall
the Sonne of man bee ashamed, when
hee cometh in the glory of his Father,
with the holy Angels, Mar. 8. 38.
Thus I desire, in the first place,Mat 22. 21 to
give to God the things that are Gods;
and, in the next place, render to
the high and honourable Court of
Parliament, whereof your Honour
is a Member, and to your King,
when the Lord shall put it into his
heart to returne unto his Parlia∣ment,
and to joyne with you, all
your dues,Rome. 13. 7. tributes, customes, feare,
honour; and subject my selfe to
obey all your just, legall, and civill
commandements: Knowing, that

you set not up the Sword for
nought; Pet. 2. 14 but to be a terrour to them
that doe evill, and a praise, a guard
and defense, for them that doe well.

Orpington, in Kent,
the ninth Month,
1645.
