



SIR,
THis Discourse is the sequel of some o∣thers, that have al∣ready appear'd in publick, under the August Name of Your MAIE∣STY. I thought I was obliged to offer unto You the First part of this Work, forasmuch as having propos'd to my self at the begin∣ing, to give each man to consider,
 what He is, me thought, that Your MAJESTIE should find in this consideration more pleasure than all other Men. I have the same reasons to present this also to You, where I treat no more of the Knowledge of our selves, but of the Means to know oths, and to be known by them. I shew, that this Means is SPEECH; I explain all the Effects thereof, and the better to discover the Causes, I carefully inquire into all, it borrows from the Body or the Soul. These Causes, SIR, are so excellent in Your MAJESTIE, that You will doubtless have an incredible satisfaction to examine them: A∣bove all things I am perswaded, You will find more of it than any Man, when you shall consider its Effects. You will see, it is Speech,
 which produceth what Your MA∣JESTY loveth most, I mean, Glory, and you'll acknowledge, that to it you owe that Lustre, which maketh Your MAJESTY out-shine all the Powers of the Earth. 'Tis by it, SIR, that You express those Generous Thoughts, which all tend to our Felicity; and 'tis by the same, that you have atchieved those great things, which make all Na∣tions say, that You are the Greatest Prince that ever was.
I know, SIR, that men admire no less in Your MAJESTY the Faculty you have to be silent, than the Facility to speak: I know, I say, that the Prudence you have to be silent, is one of the reasons, which make others speak so much of You. But I remember very
 well, that Secrecy, how favorable soever it is to great Desseins, can∣not alone make them succeed, and that, how-ever Your MAJESTY hath advantagiously used it in all the Contrivances you have made for our Happiness, you would ne∣ver have obtain'd the Execution thereof, if you had not employ'd Speech; it was necessary, Orders should be given for that. Indeed, SIR, you know how to give them as becoms a Prince, who needs none but himself to contrive and to resolve. You alone know, why you give them, and those that re∣ceive them, often not know the excellent End, Your MAJESTY proposeth to your Self, but at the moment, which makes them suc∣cesfull.
How amiable is Glory, when a
 Man thus owes it entirely to him∣self! And how pure & sincere doth that of Your MAJESTY appear to me? Others, who have only Power for their Portion, heer themselves praised for a thousand Events, wherein their Conduct had no part: Words are alwayes found for them. But all the Acti∣ons of Your MAJESTY, are so much above what can be said of them, that those to whom Praise costs least, complain they can find none to expresse them. Such an one hath demanded Ten years to write, what we have seen You do in Ten dayes: And another that knows, it requires less pains to compare Hero's with one another, than to write their Praise, hath en∣deavour'd to find like ones to Your MAJESTY, but could meet with
 none among all those, whom An∣tiquity hath left recorded. Indeed, SIR, none of them are known, whose Passions have not guided all their Enterprises: the world hath seen him, whom past Ages have most boasted of, to follow nothing but the motions of his Ambition, and, without at all considering the tranquillity of his Subjects, to car∣ry the trouble into whole Asia; whereas, SIR, all Europe hath seen You, young and victorious, shewing favour to your Enemies, that you might give Peace to your people: And it seeth at this very time, that Your Majesty co∣vets not a great Country exposed to your Conquests, but desires only what of right you can pretend to. This moderation, SIR, is the greatest Virtue of Kings, and espe∣cially
 is it admirable in a Prince vi∣gilant enough to surprise the Ene∣my in a season, when the most ar∣dent Spirits for war, do quit that painful exercise; and brave enough to execute himself, what the bold∣est durst not advise. What Mor∣tals, SIR, could have stopt Your Majesty, accomplisht with these Excellencies, if the Right of Bien∣seance could have tempted you? But your Neighbours were to as∣sure themselves afresh, 'tis not Am∣bition that hath armed you; 'tis from the hands of Justice, you hold that sword, which subjects the Provinces in less time, than needs to march through them, Brabant and Henaut may give te∣stimony hereof to the rest of the World. Your Majesty hath made them know your Right, because
 you let them feel the force of your Armes; and 'tis known, that their Revolt is the only cause of those great Exploits, which History will never be able sufficiently to cele∣brate, and for which Poesie it self, which boasts to speak like the Gods, confesses to want expressi∣ons. But Sir, though Poesy can∣not express the surprising effects of your Courage, take it in good part, that Philosophy does rebuke the Excess of it, and that with her usual liberty she reproaches you for having expos'd your Sacred Person like that of a Common Souldier. This reproach would make up the Glory of every other Prince; but Sir, how could any man have ex∣cus'd You to posterity, if that Great Heart, which is not given you but to sustain the Destiny of
 France, had made you be cast away in this occasion? One cannot praise enough this ardor, which maketh you quit pleasures in the midst of Winter; but how noble soever it be, it is to be blamed, when it makes you seek dangers, and when it exposeth, against re∣bellious Subjects, a life so precious to so many other faithful ones. Be pleased, Sir, to hearken to that zeal, which speaks to you; It hath alwayes lov'd Kings, it hath never flatter'd them, and as it knows none greater than Your Self, it cannot at that time, when it intends to discourse of SPEECH, make better use of it for the good of the Universe, than to tell what you owe to your own Preserva∣tion.
I shall add, Sir, that the same
 being to declare it self upon this Subject by the mouth of a Man, it could not choose any one, whose Zeal were equal to mine. I am
SIR,

