



Dearly Beloved,
THe large interest which I have long en∣joyed in your favour, and which you must ever have in my heart, hath imbol∣dened me to prefix your names to this Peece; and with the more confidence of your acceptance, because in it an addresse is made to you at once by two, who sometimes were toge∣ther your Ministers in the Gospel of Christ: by the ever to be honoured Mr. Cotton in the Book, and by my unworthy selfe, in the review and Dedication of it: Both now removed from you. The one, first to a remote part of the world, there to plant Churches; and thence (after that happy work done) to heaven: The other, to some more publique service neerer hand: in which I humbly crave the best help of your prayers, as you are constantly remembred in mine; and that with more strength of affe∣ction, whilst I oft call to mind those most com∣fortable daies, in which I enjoyed the happiness of joynt Ministry with so able and faithfull a Guide; and both of us so much satisfaction and encouragement from a people so united in the love both of the truth, and of one another.
The first Chapters of both his Epistles to them. I cannot read what Paul writeth of his Thessalo∣nians,
but I think I read over what we then found in Boston. They were then very happy daies with you, when your faith did grow excee∣dingly, and your love to Christs Ordinances, Mi∣nisters, servants, and to one another abounded. Although your Town be situate in a low Countrey, yet God then raised your esteem very high, and your eminency in Piety over-topped the heighth of your steeple; your name was as an oyntment poured out,
Cant. 1.3. and your renown went forth for that beauty and comelinesse which God had put upon you.
Ezek. 16.14. How it is now with you, at this distance, I cannot so wel judge; only I desire you would please seriously to consider whether the new wine or the old he better, & ever think that best which doth not intoxicate us into staggering frō the Truth, and falling off from one another: but so cheareth the heart, as yet maketh us humble and meek, and keepeth us close to God, his truth, ordinances, the power of his grace, and all those duties, in which the faithfull among you formerly walked with God, met with peace, and at last reached heaven. Such a frame of spi∣rit, and way, I can remember, was sometime a∣mong you; and as oft as I remember it, I desire not to forget to praise God for it. What was then your blessednesse?
Gal. 4.15. And what then was, I humbly beseech God may so revive and continue, that you may prove a little model, and fore-taste of that blessed Church, which God wil make an eternall excellency,
Isai. 60.15. and a joy of many generations. This you and I have the more cause to desire and endeavour, because
1. Miserum est fuisse, it is a great misery to have it said of us, that we have been happy. Fuimus Troec,
fuit Ilium, was but a sad word, and it is a sadder thing for the Sun of righteousness which had sometime shone gloriously upon any particular Church or people, at last to set in a cloud; if such a light come to be darkned, how great is that darknesse? after the light is put out, the room proveth darker then if it had never been set up; and the remembrance of those former pleasant things once enjoyed, but afterwards lost,
Lam. 1.7. added to, and aggravated the Churches lamentation.
2. And yet such a lamentable condition hath been and may be the lot of such places & people which God sometimes hath highly honoured, when they have grown fat and wanton toge∣ther. Bethel hath proved Bethaven;
Hos. 10.5. 2 Kings 2. Judg. 8.8. Jer. 7.12. in after times we finde young prophane mockers in Bethel, and scornfull neuters in Penuel. Goe to Shiloh; think of the sometimes glorious Churches of Asia. As Empires and Kingdoms, so particular Churches have had their periods. I have sometimes on purpose visited some places where God had be∣fore planted his Church and a faithfull Ministry, to see if I could discern any footsteps and re∣membrances of such a mercy;
Prov. 24.31. and loe they were all grown over with thorns, & nettles had covered the face therof, & the stone-wall therof was broken down.
3. And which is more sad, in some of them never, in others very hardly built up again: God proving severe, when we grow wanton, and so as he removeth the Candlestick when we play or fight by the light of the candle set up in it;
Rev. 2.5. so he is very hardly induced to light it againe in that place where it hath once been wantonly or fro∣wardly put out: there are more hopes of reco∣vering a particular person fallen, by vertue of
an everlasting covenant made with him (al∣though he may goe halting to his grave, and never here again rise up to his former comforts and enlargements) but a particular Church or people (unless it be that of the Jewes, who in the great Jubile after their rejection shal again re∣turn to their former possessions) cannot claim the like priviledge of such a Covenant.
Jer. 3.1, 12, 13, 14, 8, 4. The Arke never returned to the same place from whence it was in a way of judgement removed; and the glory of the Lord, when after its gradual removes, was at last quite gone from the first Temple, was not fully restored in the second till Christs first comming; nor wil it be in this their rejection, til his second. I think there wil be found very few instances of Gods presence and ordinances long enjoyed by a people, and after abused and re∣jected, if thereupon lost, easily (if at all) resto∣red:
Jud. v. 3. the faith once delivered to the Saints, is not wont to be received or lost the second time. The reason is, because a jealous God can least endure upon trial made of him, to be sleighted in that wherein he would most commend to us his spe∣ciall love, and ever account's the rejecting of such special tokens of it as a renouncing of himselfe.
2 Sam. 8.7 They have not rejected thee but me. And as the husband in the law pleaded some unclean∣ness in his wife,
Deut. 24.1. when he put her away: so God makes account that we tell the world, that we have found iniquity in him,
Jer. 2.5. when we goe far from him, and walk after vanity, and that he hath been a wildernese and land of darkness, when we prove Lords, and wil come no more at him. Dear Friends, he hath not been so to you,
v. 31. even your enemies being judges, and your own experience wil beare
witness for him, that his Gospel, even in point of ontward advantage, hath paid for its entertain∣ment. These thick cords of love therefore (I hope) wil binde you close to him, and strongly draw you off from whatever may be a means of draw∣ing you away from him, and so by your con∣tinuing to be planted in the house of the Lord, and by you still flourishing in the Courts of our God, you will proclame to all, that he is upright,
Psal. 92.13, 14, 15. and that there is no unrighteousness in him. These (Dearly beloved) are my affectionate desires, & hopes of you; and yet in regard of the unsetledness of these times, and the wildnesse of many mens spirits in them, you wil pardon me if I be be jealous over you with a godly jealousie, and that having this fit oppor∣tunity, I take the boldness, by putting you in re∣membrance of what sometimes you were,
2 Pet. 1.13. Rev. 2.4, 5 Rev. 3.2. 2 Tim. 1.13 Rom. 6.17 to stir you up to keep warm your first love, and to do your first works: to be watchfull, & to strengthen the things that remain, especially if any be ready to die. To hold fast the form of sound words, whereto you have been formerly delivered, and to hold up the power of godliness;
In your selves, by the constant exercise of Faith, Repentance, self-examination and humiliation, self-denial and mortification, &c.
In your publique government, by reviving your ancient care and zeal for the sanctifying of Gods Sabbaths, countenancing his Ministers and Or∣dinances, and discountenancing whatever Do∣ctrines or practises are contrary to the truth as it is in Iesus, and the power of godliness.
In your Families, by private prayer, singing of Psalms, catechizing your children and servants, training them up in Gods feare, and restrai∣ning
them from that pride, wantonness, and stub∣bornness, which your faithful Pastor (now with God) was wont much to complaine of, and which in these looser times, I wish, you had not cause much more now to bewaile.
Now the good Lord help you to stand up for God in your severall places, and so to serve your generations,
Act. 13.36 2 Kings 20.19. that peace and truth may be in your daies: that in them your Sun may not go down, but when ye are gathered to your fathers, in your hopefull and happy posterity it may rise with greater strength and glory, as drawing neerer to a more glorious day now approaching; that then another generation may not arise after you, which shal not know the God of their fathers,
Judg. 2.10. and so the ages to come may be to seek for Samnium in Samnio, old Boston in New. But on the contrary▪
That your seed may be so known among the Gen∣tiles,
Isai. 63.9. and your off-spring among the people, that all that see them, may acknowledge them to be the seed which the Lord hath blessed.
That this may be the everlasting covenant which God shall make with you and them,
Isai, 59.21. that his Spirit and word shal not depart out of your mouth, nor out of the mouth of your seed, nor out of the mouth of your seeds seed, from hence forth and for ever:
But that your Congregation may be a Zion, which God hath chosen, and desired for his habitation, of which he may say,
Psal. 132.13, 14. This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell, for I have desired it: Is, and (God ena∣bling me) shall be the most hearty desire and prayer of him

From St. Johns Colledge in Cambridge, July 7. 1654.
