



My Lord,
BY Encouraging the Translating of useful Books, the French Na∣tion have made an Universal Con∣quest

upon Learning. They have by this Method possest themselves of the Wit, Wisdom, and Experience of all Ages and Climates.
'Tis no Scandal to take Example by an Enemy, in what is Commen∣dable; and our imitating them in this Practise is one way of making Reprizals. I confess, that Transla∣tions from French Originals, are on∣ly for the Advantage of common English Readers; but they being the Generality, the Benefit is Pub∣lick: For which Reason it is not below the Dignity of our Court and Nobility to Countenance such Endeavours.
'Twas upon this Account that I presum'd to Offer the following Translation to Your Lordship's Pro∣tection, in order to its Publick Re∣ception.

You are the English Va∣rus.
Nec gratior ulla est
Quam sibi quae Vari praescripsit Pagina Nomen.
This Piece may be thus Recom∣mended to our Countreymen, and find that welcome Entertainment which a Vseful History deserves. It likewise gave me an Opportunity (as Zeal is always Officious) of expres∣sing (in some measure) the Re∣spect I am oblig'd to Entertain for Your Lordship, as an Eminent Pa∣tron of the Muses. But if I were an utter Stranger to them, I have at least an Englishman's Right of Of∣fering my small Tribute of Ac∣knowledgments among the Crowd of Your Admirers. 'Tis impossible for Sublimest Wits to say what they

ought upon this Theme, and for the Meanest not to say something; since the ablest Panegyrist in At∣tempting Your Character can only speak the Sense of Nations. Even Foreign Courts are sufficiently Ac∣quainted with Your Worth; and if any are so little Civiliz'd as to be Strangers to Your Name, they may inform themselves where-ever Good Sense or Gallantry are in any Esteem. 'Tis both Your Happiness and Merit to be Admir'd Abroad, and Belov'd at Home.
Your Lordship appears so much a Favourite of Heaven and Nature, that I can never think of You with∣out calling to Mind that Horatian Character of the Roman Tibullus; I know not how the Description squar'd with Him; but if it were then a Complimen, 'tis now prov'd a Prophecy.

Dii tibi Formam
Dii tibi Divitias dederant Artemque fruendi.
Quid vovest dulci Nutricula ajus Alumno
Quam fapre & fari possit quid Senti∣at; & Cui
Gratia, Fama, Valetudo, contingat abunde.
Your Advantages of Fortune and Person might create Envy in some, if Your greater Accomplishments of Mind, and most obliging Nature, did not irresistably command the Affections of All. Your Noble Ance∣stry bequeathed You those Endow∣ments that were capable of being be∣queathed; and You have furnish'd Your self with such as are not to be transmitted by Descent, but ob∣tain'd by the particular Vertue of

the Successor. Courage, Con∣stancy, Magnificence, Justice and Liberality, are deriv'd to You with Your Blood, and, with relation to the Publick, true English Principles are Yours by Inheritance. You are happy in Examples of Your Ance∣stors, and more happy in Personally maintaining the Honour and Repu∣tation of so Illustrious a Family. You preserve with their Greatness, their Condescention and Affability.
Generous Actions are Your de∣light; and when You dispense Your Favours, Your Judgment as well as Generosity is exerted. Want and Merit are ever the Objects of Your Compassion. You have the Art of supporting Grandeur without For∣mality; even Business it self by a peculiar Felicity, sits easie upon You. You manage the Hurry of Affairs with that Tranquility, that is scarce

to be found in the Cell or Cloyster. Your Method resembles that of Na∣ture, whose greatest Progresses are carry'd on with Serenity: The shal∣lowest Streams are always the most noisy; the deeper the Current, the greater the Silence. Your Retire∣ment again is never unactive; and he that follows You to your Retreat, shall find you,
Tacitum Sylvas inter reptare Salubres
Curantem Quid sit dignum Sapiente Bonoque.
Your Lordship has shown the world that a States-man can be a Friend, and a Courtier an English-man; that Complaisance and Gallantry can con∣sist with Sincerity and good Sense. I will not pretend to enumerate all those Qualifications that endear You to Your Countrey, being sensible how

imperfectly I have touch'd what is obvious to every man's Eye; my comfort is, That the Readers Private Sentiments will do You Justice: I will only presume to join with them in hearty Wishes, That Your Lordship may long continue in your flourish∣ing Prosperity, an Ornament to the Court of Great Britain, an Assistant to Their Majesties, and the Nation's Affairs, belov'd by Your Country as much as You are a Lover of it. This is every true Englishman's Prayer, and particularly of
My Lord,

