


May it please you Lordship!
THAT zeal and unwearied diligence which your Honour has on all occasions demonstrated to pre∣serve the Protestant Religion, and prevent the still advancing Plots of bloody Papists, has most justly rendred all English Protestants your Debtors, and fill'd them with veneration for your name and person. Were all No∣ble-men endued with a like prudence, and integrity, the po∣pish plot had long since lost its Head, and England been se∣cured (as with a Brazen Wall) against all the malicious effects of Rome.
The Trojans of old had not been destroyed, had they not trusted to Sinon's flatteries, and admitted the fatal Horse, cramb'd with treacherous Greeks, within their Walls. Nor can England and Ireland become enslaved to the Pope, or any other Forrein power, unless some of our own (intrusted sub∣ordinately with the Administration of affairs) clandestinely joyn with our open enemies. But where Thieves keep the keys, well may the house be rifled; and if Wolves, though in Sheeps∣cloathing, be once made Shepherds, 'tis not difficult to imagine what will become of the flock. Nor can that Nation but be e∣steem'd in a condition deplorable, and on the very precipice to wilful ruin, where 'tis a matter of greater hazard to discover Treasons, than to contrive them.
The following Narrative will partly shew the figure which potent Papists have made for some years past in the Kingdom of Ireland, and what influence they have had (like malevo∣lent Planets) to blast and crush all that durst go about to de∣tect their disloyal Hellish designs. It will here appear, that

there hath been for many years a Treasonable Conspiracy car∣rying on in that Kingdom, and that the Popish Irish were in an expecting readiness to give the blow, and act over their Butcheries of 41, but with greater barbarity: Only one thing there was that hindred, viz. the Dutch (a powerful Prote∣stant State, very powerful till some late Jesuitical designs weakned them) must first be ruined.
So that it seems the project was general to root out and de∣stroy all the Protestants throughout Europe; for this declaration to me was made in the year 1672, a time when England and France were so hopefully united, and vigorously engaged in a War with Holland, and the same juncture when the never to∣be forgotten Camp at Blackheath was on foot.
What Intervening accidents might make the Conspirators defer their rising in Arms, or whether my making this discovery might not cause them to be more wary, though through some peoples kind connivance, it rendred them never the more dis∣abled to have gone on, I determine not: 'tis enough that as I knew it my duty to divulge it: so, although meerly for the same I have now past through a Nine-years. Purgatory, and am thereby reduced to poverty, debt, and great extremity; yet were it still to do, I would discharge my conscience, though a Thou∣sand Popish Lords were concern'd to be angry, and I were sure not only to lose my Livelyhood, but my Life likewise on that account.
At your Lordships feet I humbly lay these papers, and pre∣sume to shelter them into the world under the patronage of your truly Honourable Name; as well because your Lordship is so excellently qualified to judg of the truth of them by your great insight into the complexion of affairs and persons in Ireland (which had the honour of having your Lordship for some (too short) time her Lord Lieutenant) as in regard of my parti∣cular obligation, that the same might remain as a publick testimony of my gratitude.

