



MADAM!
YOur Honor knows I have ever been afraid of
the Press hitherto I have stood out against all
importunity, and I was peremptorily resolved
never to have published any thing in Print:
but now I am inforced, whether I wil or no,
to send abroad these two smal pieces. And
since they must out, I humbly present them to
your Ladyship: Not for any worth that is in them: Not for your
Honors protection of them; let them go forth at their own peril:
nor yet for the subjects sake; the matter of them in the general
not so directly, and properly complying with your Ladyships condi∣tion:
they are rather for the instruction of Magistrates: But
I dedicate them to your Honor: because they are your due.
Whatever I can perform in the service of God, and more by
far then ever I am able to do, low to the gracious Lady Frances. To
say truth, your Honor called for them, and here they are: take them
with favorable acceptation. Something your Ladyship wil meet
withal in both Sermons appliable and useful in regard of your self.
The NAIL (I mean the good Nail) wil give your Honor a fresh
sight of that Noble Gentleman, worthy Sir JOHN
HOBARTE, your Honors lately deceased husband. He was
a gallant Nail: by the grace of God wel filed from all rust and
ruggedness: He was a bright Nail, as burnished gold, shining more
and more every day he lived (that I can testifie to the comfort of
my soul) by a godly conversation. He was a great and a strong

Nail: His abilities were beyond the common pitch: He had a
good head for wisdom and understanding: He had a good heart;
Faithful and zealous he was for God, for Religion, for his Coun∣try,
for our Solemn Covenant: He was a fixed Nail not only in
the Capitol, but also in the Sanctuary: his care and painful en∣deavors
were layd out not only for the Common-wealth, but for
the Church also: yea he himself was a little suncturary to the
faithful Manisters of Jesus Christ. He was a stout Nail, steeled
with Christian resolution and courage; not counting his life dear
if he might have sacrificed it (as partly he did) for the Kingdoms
peace, his Countries safety and the Churches settlement. He was
a Nail on which the Welfare and prosperity of our Sion did
much depend. And for our sins God hath plucked out this
useful Nail. We see this great Nail turned into a little Wheel:
and he is now rolled into the House appointed for all the living.
I wil not tel the world of your Ladiships immoderate sorrow, and
how you sit disconsolate, sighing, sobbing, and mourning like a
faithful Turtle bereaved of her mate: I wil rather guide my
speech to your Honor, and direct your eye to the Wheel. Worthy
Sir John Hobarte, he was a stately Wheel, he moved bravely in his
time, and did much of Gods work with all alacrity; yea he coun∣ted
that life worse then death, when his motion was any whit stop∣ped
by infirmity of body, so as he could not be active in the Publick
service as he desired. This Voluble, and swift Wheel, is now bro∣ken
at the Cistern: and your heart Madam, was almost broken
too. Oh! I beseech your Honor, look up to the throne of glory;
it is the voice of the Lord hath turned the Wheel: He hath spokn,
and hath done it. Submit, Submit with humility, patience, cheer∣fulness.
Rejoyce rather: what a world of comforts may your La∣diship
have in your loss? He did worthily in his life, he dyed reli∣giously:
I saw him draw his last breath: but so much Majesty,
and peace in a dying countenance I never saw. A stranger would
have thought he had been only in some sweet-contenting sleep, or
tasting the heavenly joys. What an Honorable name hath he left
behind him! Is it not as an oyntment powred forth, even as the
fragrant spikenard? The Nail is pulled out of this lower wall, but
it is not lost: it's only advanced, and set up higher. He is fa∣stned
in the wall of the New Jerusalem, he shines, and ever shal shine

bright in glory. And we all ere long shal roul after him; and
then shal your Ladyship enjoy a better Communion with your hus∣band
then ever. Be content to waite, is it not a little while?
I intended a very short Epistle, but my pen begins to be free,
and eager of its way. I can hardly hold it in: it would fain be
dropping out something of your honors goodness. I wel know how
little your Honor affects the praise of men (your praise is in the
Gospel) and your Ladiship wel knows how much I abhorr base
flattery. And God he knows, my design is not to make you proud
by speaking your vertues to your face, but only this; I would
most gladly take occasion to publish something to the world of those
eminent Graces, which the Lord hath wrought in your Honor by his
holy spirit: that your Ladiships example may be propounded as a pat∣tern
to all Chrstian women, which they may ever look upon, and fol∣low.
Elect Lady! I could tel them, how I have ever found you
walking in the truth, even in the most perilous and seducing times:
with what obedience you have always heard the word, resigning
up your wil to Gods Command: How your deportment was to your
Noble yoke-fellow: the heart of your husband did safely trust in
you: All that were but lookers on, did see te entireness of your
heart, the intention of your love, your loyalty, and faithfulness,
joyned with all diligence, and care. You made in your study and
work, to do him good in regard of his body, in regard of his estate;
but especially, and above all in regard of his soul. I could take oc∣casion
by this my dedication to tel the world: That even whilest
you are on earth, your conversation is in heaven. I can truly te∣stify
that your Ladiship is a widow indeed, continuing in fasting,
and prayer, and reading, and meditation; and that this is your
work night and day in the temple, in your closet, in your family:
That's remarkable; in your family you observe Davids houres.
Every morning, every noon, and every night you have prayer,
Scripture read and expounded (and that by an able, and a called
Minister of the Gospel) besides repetitions of Sermons, singing of
Psalms, and constant Catechising (a most necessary work) the
Noble Olive-plant, your precious daughter answering with the
first, with all readyness, and cheerfulness, to her immortal honor.
I confess hearing the answers of young Mrs. Philip Hobarte, and
the rest, I could not but think thus with my self: This day is that

Prophesy fulfilled in mine eares. I wil powre out of my spirit up∣pon
all flesh, and your sons, and your daughters shal Prophesy,
and your young men shal see Visions; and on my servants, and on
my hand-maids wil I pour out of my spirit, and they shal Pro∣phesy.
Madam! Wil not your honor be offended if I show my folly, and
boast a little to the world? You are my glory, my Crown, and
my rejoycing: the comfortable Harvest, and precious Seal of my
Ministry. And this is discerned by others, as wel as by my self.
Your paralel is not to be found: or at the least, scarcely was ever
any Christian seen, who did thrive, and grow so fast in Grace as
your Honor hath done, especially of late years. Now, if either your
Honor or any others that shal cast their eye on these my free ex∣pressions,
and think me indiscreet in writing thus to your Honor:
I Apologize for my self in the words of Christ when he prayed vo∣cally,
and loud at Lazarus his grave; Not for your sake Madam!
but because of the people which stand by, I said it. I propound
a pattern to other Christians, and other families: and my sole
aim is, the glory of God, and the provoking of many to a holy e∣mulation.
The God of heaven and earth; the God of my father bless your
Honor, and your noble and hopeful daughter. I beg for you the
upper and the nether springs. The God of all Grace perfect all
Grace in you: be filled with the Spirit, with inward peace and
joy of the Holy Ghost. Be the Lords darling. Beleeve me Gracious
Lady! The tongue shal cleave to the roof of my mouth, and my
right hand shal forgets its skil: before I shal cease to bear your
Honors name at my heart: and to present it unto the Lord as of∣ten
as I appear at the throne of Grace.July 23. 1647.
Be sure Madam! I am
Your Honors most humbly Devoted servant for ever. Thankful
for your Superlative favour, bounty, and care. And
As under God your Honor raised me from the grave. So (if I
can beleeve mine own heart) I am your Honors faithful
Pastor: who if God should call him to it, would willingly lay
down his life to establish your Ladiship in the truth and
grace of Jesus Christ, and to further your eternal Salvation.

