


Courteous Brethren:
WE read of Renowned Dr. Harvey our Countryman, who tells us he opened an Imposthume in a Gentleman's left side, where he beheld the Dyastole and Sy∣stole of the heart, and he touched it, and found it insensible, though it gives life unto every part.
'Tis an Argument he is of eminent and publick conducement, useful to derive good to others, who it least sen∣sible of private Injuries offered himself. As for Injuries I have had a double share, and I have not only forgiven them, but forgotten them; I should gladly do them good that did me hurt.
There is a saving in Germany, poor Luther made many a Rich man; I

could be contented to be poor, so I might be instrumental to enrich Artists in the Knowledge of Healing, whereby it might tend to the peoples greater good, and God's greater Glory.
The Laws of Charity oblige a man that hath gone in a dangerous way to preadmonish him that intends the same.
Satis Eloquentiae: Sa∣pientiae parum: abunde fabularum audivintus.So that I stand bound to advise you that you consult not so much with that learned Theory of the Schools; which is good for nothing but to dispute and contend.
Learned Dr. Charlton in the end of his Epistle to his Translation of Hel∣mont upon the Magnetick Cure of Wounds. I remember hath a saying to this effect: There are many things (faith be) that have been disputed in the Schools and Colledges, that have been received for truths among them; and they have seemed to have Reason for their Foundation, and Learning for

their Defence or Walls: but when they have come to be experienced, they have fallen to the ground, and nothing of truth hath appeared in them &c. They can inform you nothing of truth, nei∣ther in the knowledge of a Disease; nor a good method in curing, nor a lau∣dable Medicine to effect a Cure.
Practice is the best part of Physick, Observation the surest, and the Theory of the Ancients, the uncertainest and emptiest. This we are taught by the example of many Eminent Physicians both Chymical and Gal∣lenical;Paracelsus, Hel∣mont, Crollius. who could with their Arcanum's cure those Diseases that were termed opprobria Medicorum: And we see likewise thoseRiverius, Fo∣restus, Johnstonus, and many more Modern Physici∣ans. Renown∣ed Physicians that were trained up in the Do∣ctrine of the Schooles; yet when they were to encounter any stubborn Disease, they would not trust to their Weapons, (ha∣ving

often been foiled with them) but ran to their Arcanum's, as their Ob∣servations witness.
Not that I think all their Secrets were Chymical Preparations; for I have abundance of reason to believe that there are singular specifical virtues in Sensitive and Vegitive Simples, and of a far greater power than some of our large Compositions.
I am not so credulous, as to believe all to be true that the Chymists boast of, neither am I so diffident, as to think all the Schools have treated of to be false.Comede da∣ctylos & pro∣jice foras du∣ritiem. Read them as our Mo∣dern Divines read the Schoolmen.
Let not any one think (qui forsan Latinè, aut Graecè intelli∣gere potest) that because he is a good Scholar, he can presently be a good Phy∣sician: if he doth,Non quaerit aeger Medicum elo∣quentem, sed Sa∣nitatem, Seneca. be sure he will be mistaken; for he will find the Art of healing to consist in

another kind of Learning. Novi nuper quendam, saith Dr. Primrose, qui cum se Medicum profiteretur; quamvis levissimè eâ disciplinâ tinctus foret; talis tamen habitus est ob quandam Latinae Linguae cognitionem: but there is a great difference betwixt such men and sound Physici∣ans;Garrulosum Me∣dicum alterum morbum aegro esse. 'tis one thing to give a Patient a long and learned discourse of his Disease; but it's another thing to give him a present remedy.
I have but only hinted at Diseases, (because I intended this but for an Enchyridion) yet you may perceive by it, that we have been blinded in the true knowledge of the Causes, Places, and Cures of Diseases; I must confess I owe much of it untoVir magno judi∣cio, & praestante doctrina, clarissi∣mus. Helmont, the Stan∣dard-bearer of Physick; yet I speak not his Judgment, but mine own, having enfor∣ced a belief from experience; I have

not written any thing in this Tract, but what I am perswaded of the truth of, though it may in most places seem (to some) at the first view to be Paradoxes▪ yet upon a more accurate inspection i may become received Truths. And if this crude labour of mine finds accep¦tance with young Practitioners; I shal spend some time to enlarge upon it to their satisfaction.
As for my Arcanums you'l all conclude, it is not fit to put them to publick view: if any of you should desire the knowledge of them, malè docuit. And to cast them at the feet of all Pretenders to Physick, they may be abused by their ignorance i the preparing, dose, time or manner, &c. for one may have as good Medicine for a Disease as can be by the Art of ma invented,Morborum reme∣dia, si ab indo∣ctis usurpentur venena, si vero à doctis & exerci∣tatis deorum auxilia sunt. yet if he know not the time when, no the form in what man∣ner, nor the dose how much; he may instead of curing kill the Pati∣ent:

Besides, there are some idle and careless Artists, who may not deserve it, that never inquire into Diseases, nor yet Medicine; but expect every thing to be popt into their mouths:Dii laboribus, omnia vendunt. the Gods sold all by sweats; night unto night sheweth knowledge, &c. the gift of healing is a great gift, which comes from above, from which you are to fetch the knowledge of Medicine: And I doubt whether it be safe to divulge Se∣crets: we have no such precedent from any Author: we see Riverius in all the four Centuries of his observations; there was hardly a Disease but he cured with his Febrifugium and Calomanenas, and who knows what they were; (I have a very strong faith, that my Powder which I call my Arcanum Universale, was his Febrifugium, for the dose and operation is alike; and if mine were not the same I am confident it is not inferiour to it, nor any extant) they bid us seek and we may find; for they have

told us nothing, but a Story, how Actae∣on was Metamorphos'd for presenting Diana naked to the People, &c. All their Secrets died with them; or at least communicated to such Friends as kept them from a publick view; then let us do as they did, and we may attain unto that they had; we must not content our selves in the knowledge of a little Mithridate or Diascordium; or to give a Purge or a Clyster; but let e∣very day repent us of yesterdays Igno∣rance.
Let us drive to per∣fection,Ars longa, vita brevis, experien∣tia difficilis, &c. though the Age of a man is too short to obtain it: It is much against my temper, to conceal any thing from any Ingenious and ho∣nest Artist; but I have been much mi∣staken, and I am sorry to speak it; that if I had told less, it would have been more for my credit and profit: I can say with the Poet Ovid:
Hos ego versiculos feci tulit alter ho∣nores.

Nevertheless, the unworthiness of some, shall not detract from the worth of any Civil and Ingenious Brother: I shall always be civil to all, but especially to those that I find are so:Ars praeclarissima Artifex sordissi∣mus. I am sorry to see so ma∣ny shabby and course spirited Fellows, that practise in so high and honourable a Calling: There is such a vast disproportion between the Art and the Artist; that well may the Art be ashamed to own them: There are not only ignorant Jack-daws that are intru∣ders upon this worthy Art, which square out all things by their crooked and indirect Rules; but likewise there are Pompeys and Caesars too, who scorn to admit of Equals, and be Caesars or no bodies, &c. who think it much be∣low their Greatness to advise with any. If they are at any time petitioned unto it, they grant it with this reservation to themselves, to deny every thing o∣thers say, though it be never so undeni∣able and clear a truth; they would ra∣ther

twenty should die under their hands, than part with one to be cured by another, that's a great affront to their Ambition whereunto they sacrifice ma∣ny a mans life, and dissemble their Pride under the cloak of Humility, and so blind the poor Country-man; that they think such a one to be Aesculapius him∣self, and that his Medicines were extra∣cted from the balm of Gilead; when he may be but some Imposter; and his Me∣dicines, it may be, no better than a little Cow-dung, or some thing worse; and as the Papists are kept in blindness, by pray∣ing in a Language they understand not, to the hazard of their souls; so are many amongst us led away (by such de∣ceivers) in harkning unto the false Doctrine of the Heathens, to the ha∣zard of our bodies: for they thunder out Art in Quarto, and Conscience in Folio, and shower down such Heavenly Apologies for their deceit and ignorance, with such clashes of Lightning, that frights the simple into such a belief, as

to mistrust, were a crime unpardonable; whereby they are canoniz'd on Earth, and written in the Rubrick, in the Ca∣lendar of the World. I believe there have been many such Saints on Earth, that never found any room in Heaven.
Brethren; have a care none of you be ever found akin to any such Homi∣cide; though you may with such jug∣gles and indirect means deceive the people, you cannot deceive the all-seeing God; he will make you smart for it in the end, when the popular applause of the World shall but torment you the more. The life of man is more worth than all the Creation: And as it is pretious to the Creature; so it is to the Creator; and he will not suffer it to be trampled upon (by the pride of any) without revenge; and yet those sad fellows may be much cried up and in great esteem amongst the vulgar, when a far more knowing and worthy Practi∣tioner may not be regarded. Let not this be any discouragement to any young

Practitioner; for if there be anything of worth in him, and he acts like an Artist, let him expect to be undervalu∣ed by the ignorant, and let him not ad∣mire why it is so; for we find that it hath been the unhappiness of all Ages, that Falshood hath been preferred before Truth, and persons of no worth or value, have had the precedency of persons of true worth and esteem:Scientia non ha∣bet inimicum praeter ignoran∣tem. as for the vulgar, whom Nature huddl'd up in hast; that Act meerly by the prerogative of depraved Nature, speak against every thing but what is naught; whatsoever is of Worth and Art, be sure they will dislike; and ex∣claim against all Persons, but such as comply with their ignorance, whose Ma∣lice and Fury is like the Waves of the Sea, driven by the fury of enraged Boreas.
I have read of Cato that he was for∣ty four times brought (by the vulgar sort of people) to the Judgment-Seat,

and every time came off acquitted; what a great happiness it is, when a man hath many malicious Enemies, to find impartial and upright Judges.
Every Country hath its Diana, as well as Ephesus: And he that will not sacrifice with the people, shall be crucified by them; but he that doth keep a pure and undefiled Conscience towards God, and acts like an honest and ingenious Artist towards his Neighbour may ex∣tract a Cordial from the World's poy∣son, and live above the reach of Envy.
The most splendent Creature is some∣time clouded, and the most vertuous Lady suffers an Eclipse in her innocen∣cy by some malevolent Neighbour when a Strumpet goes unsuspected.
It is not every Artist's fortune to arrive at Corinth; but I could wish every ingenious Artist could practice what he knows, and that he knew more, to practise better: so I desire to be un∣derstood, when I say that Practise is the best part of Physick; that there

must be first a knowledge of the Disease, and likewise of the Remedy, and so to proportion the Remedy to the Disease; and not to try practices on mens bodies;Care at successi∣bus opto, Quis∣quis ab eventu facta notanda pu∣tat. that the Poet cursed; but first you must know, be∣fore you practise, and so your practice will confirm your know∣ledge: So I conclude with this advice; first, let God go before you, to counsel and direct you unto the direct means; let him go with you to crown it with a good Success, and let him follow you, to take all the glory unto whom all glory is due.
Caepta faveat Deus, ac vota nostra secundet.

