


Friends and Countreymen:
SInce Death and Diseases (which are Diametrically opposite un∣to life) are entailed unto us through the Transgression of our first Parents, the Creator and sole Authour of life, foreseeing the weak∣ness of our Natures, to withstand the strength of such mortal Enemies, created Medicine from the beginning out of the Earth, to correct the fury and tyranny of Diseases (whereof Death is the Daughter) whereby each should be at his good pleasure; and so governs it at his will, that he

permits and suffers this man to die, and that to be sick by secondary Cau∣ses, which happen as well directly as irregularly,
And whereas the Nature of Di∣seases are various; so he hath endu∣ed the Earth with various and sundry Medicinal Vertues; and he hath likewise called and ordained some to administer and apply such suitable and fit means, as the nature of Di∣seases do require. But the great dif∣ficulties by reason of the invisibility of the Disease, and the great obscu∣rity in the knowledge of Medicine have frustrated many in their expe∣ctation. All Arts and Sciences (ex∣cept Physick) have grown to some pitch; but that hath rather gone backward, till within some late years, famous Helmont (to whom the Art it self stands much obliged) and some Renowned Physicians of our Native Countrey, have begun to cast off that black vail of deceit with

which it was cloathed by the Theo∣rems of the Heathens.
Indeed the gate of healing hath remained shut from the Cradle of the World; and the Schooles of the Greeks, instead of opening it shut it closer, and made it more mysterious than ever was intended by the first Creator.
The natures, causes and places of Diseases were not rightly understood by them, whereby they failed in their Remedies; they had so much re∣gard unto the effects, that they neg∣lected the causes, which pernicious and destructive course is practised still, by such who are wholly led by their Rules.
Wherefore the whole intent of this small Tract is to undeceive you, that you be not deceived of your lives by such erroneous preservers, and that you give not your money for what's not bread, nor buy a Snake instead of an Eele. I know it is not

Artist-like to build so great a Porch to so small a Fabrick: but if it tend to the Owners more conveniency, it is to be dispensed withall. Indulge me therefore Reader, to give thee some cautions; (it may be for thy Good) First, touching the Disease: Secondly, touching the Physician. Inasmuch as we were poysoned from the Tree of Knowledge; so no other Tree could we fetch an Antidote from; but the Tree of Life, which was for healing of the Nations: So Diseases are only cured by fit and suitable means; for thou mayst be kill'd by a bad means as well as re∣stored by a good. Wherefore be an earnest Suiter to Heaven, that thou mayst have the right means from Earth, and a benediction with it, which will make it operate the bet∣ter.
And as it must be a true and pro∣per means that must cure thy Disease, so have a special care the Remedy

come not too late. How many have been robbed of their lives upon that score? Opportunity is the soul and perfection of Physick, you may lose that opportunity to day,Post est occasio calva. that the price of the World cannot procure thee to morrow: take time by the fore top lest it be bald be∣hind.
There are two great Obstacles which commonly make many dis∣advantages; the first is, from the perswasion of Friends; the second, from the flattery of Diseases.
First, when any one is taken sick, one Friend adviseth him to such a thing, another perswades another, and a third another; telling him if it does him no good it will do him no hurt: But there is no such Medi∣um will stand; for if it do not exas∣perate the Disease; yet it doth re∣tard the Cure; and so by trying un∣certain means, you loose the advan∣tage

of a sure Remedy.
Secondly, The Deceit and Flattery of the Disease; when Diseases assault you very strongly in theQuanmvis non nunquam morbi in eorum princi∣piis absque peri∣culo tibi videntur: vires & in mores tamen sensim de∣jicientur & cor∣rampentur ut po∣stea nulla salutis spes super fit, at morbus qui pri∣mo curabiis fue∣rat, malignitam neglecta incurabi∣li . beginning, they may have such Inter∣vals and Respites, that you apprehend your selves better to day than you was yester∣day, and that while the Disease doth in∣sensibly: undermine your lives, and then assaults with greater fury than he did at first.
Others are very mild and gentle in the beginning, yet they may be very malign: parvae febres quando qui valde malignae; whereby you do not so much mistrust them, much less un∣derstand their danger.
And sometimes those that labour under sharp Diseases, the Symptoms

have been so remiss and dark, that it hath been a very difficult thing for an able Physician to presage either life or death, and when he hath passed his Judgment, within few hours there hath been such a change, that he hath been fool'd in his Prognostick.
In others again, Diseases have layen so hid and obscure, that they have died before they were percei∣ved to be sick, of which we have had many sad Examples, of some that have died suddenly, who have carried those Diseases undiscovered about them, that wanted nothing but the word, immediately to run them to the heart.
Now I have shewed you the De∣ceit and Flattery of Diseases, which have couzened thousands of their lives; of whom you will do well to learn to beware, and act prudently, to prevent by mistrust, what you would not have come suddenly and unexpected.
And as I have told you the deceit of Diseases, so I shall tell you the deceit of Physicians; I mean such who have built more upon the sandy Foundation of theAs if it were for their sake God created Medicine, and Christians should be beholden to them for it. Pagans and Heathens then upon a sure and rocky Foundation, who have studie more to get money than to cure their Diseases.
It hath pitied me many a time,  see that Old Saying too often verifi∣ed; viz.Saepe plus mali à Medico quam à Morbo. That many times there is more danger from the Phy¦sician, than from the Disease, such a Physician as practi¦seth by Old Authors. And that yo may the better know them, and un∣derstand some of their juggles, I shal recite some of their Practises.
First, when such a Deceiver is call∣ed unto a Patient, if his Diseas should be grown to a great height

which hath made him dangerously ill: (which was the end God or∣dained Physick and Physicians for, to relieve such distressed Natures) he stands at a distance, fearing to come near (like a low spirited fellow) lest he receive such a kick from the Di∣sease in his rotten reputation, as he may not easily recover: but he re∣solves rather to hazard the loss of a poor Patient, then venture the loss of his small credit; wherefore he is re∣solved to look on, and see which will get the Victory: in the mean while he excuses his juggle, telling, the Di∣sease is not yet come to an height; and by such a time he hopes to find a Crisis, and then he may safely take something, in the interim adviseth an Ale-brew, or Herb-Candle, many more such juggles they have to send people to their Graves: Just as if your house were on fire, And one comes and counsels you to let it a∣lone till it burn to the top of the

House, and then is the surest quenching it, you take his counsel. Now 'tis possible that the Heavens may pour down such a shower of rain as may extinguish it; but whether they do or not, doth not this man well advise you, think you; or as if an Enemy hath entered a Garrison, it is not safe to resist him, till he come to the heart of the Town: But good Souldiers will tell you otherwise, that what their Ene∣my gets they shall get it by Inches, &c.
And this Crisis they so much talk of, is nothing but an effect of Na∣ture:As Helmont hath well obser∣ved. Nature hath opposite Virtues and Faculties, which hold a great harmony with the Moon's Motion, whereby there is, it may be, some small change a little while through her Motions; but they are not caused by the Moon, but by Nature harmoning

with her Motion: But what of this? what is it to the taking away thy Disease? indeed it may help a little a bad Medicine, but a good Medi∣cine will make a Laudable Crisis, let the Moon be where she will; in staying thus for the Moon, many have lost the Sun.
Now this Deceiver finding Na∣ture to have cast the Disease, runs in and congratulates her Victory with a dram of his Bottle; and instead of helping her up, many times keeps her the longer down: But if the Disease hath cast Nature, then he gives his Relation this Cordial: That all the men in the World could do no more, and that he did consult with forty Learned Authors, &c. But if this will not operate then he gives them thisA Medicine to cause Rest or Sleep. O∣piate in a dram of Aqua Coelestis, viz. It was the will of God it should be so, and that his time was come, &c. and

so his decets are buried with his poor Patient: But how doth he make you believe it was the will of God, and that his time was come? we all know, God doth permit that which he doth not will: God may permit this Impostor to give a de∣structive means, or not to use the right; for it is almost all one: If thou hast not something to take off the poyson of the Disease, the poy∣son of the Disease will take off thee.
In vain had the Creatour created Medicines out of the Earth from the beginning, unless the natural terms and bounds of things might be pro∣longed by healing and Medicines: And likewise the Tree of Life had been in vain in Paradise; if he that hath bounded the life of man had not together by the same endeavour appointed all means requisite for the bounds of life: then, if I use no means, or not the right means, my

bound is set, which I shall not pass over, according to that saying; woe is me that my Pilgrimage is prolong∣ed; thy Youth shall be renewed like the Eagle, &c.
There's a second sort of such Jug∣lers, and they are altogether igno∣rant of any Knowledge, either from Ancients or Moderns; only know how to let blood, give a Purge or Clyster; when any such is called to a Patient, he never stands to enquire into the Disease, but presently de∣termines this to be done, and that to be taken upon pain of life, and if it succeed well, then he is a very skilful man; but if ill, then there was no other course to save his life; and plead the former excuses. These I do as much pity for their ignorance, as blame for their too rash confi∣dence; 'tis probable if they knew better they would act wiser.
There's another sort, much akin with the former, but carry things

more modestly, and bring this fetch to excuse their ignorance; they tell the sick, they saw the same Disease cured (in some remarkable place, and by some eminent persons, 'tis like they tell them) and they have the means wherewithal it was ef∣fected, and several times since have tried it, &c. I shall say by these and the former, as Diogenes did when he saw some Rodians gorgeously ap∣parel'd: Tush, said he, that's no∣thing but pride, and seeing some poor Spartans stand by in their thread bare Caps; said, that's but another sort of pride. There are many other such Jugglers that thou∣sands have been decoy'd by, which are palliated with heavenly excuses to blind your eyes; I shall speak but of one more, which is the greatest and most dangerous of all; and that is, in procrastinating and retarding Cures. They will undertake any thing, though they know nothing

(as to a Cure) yet in keeping them in hand so long by their delusions, in promising this time, and that time, and tell them of Spring and Fall so long, till the Patient is fallen: if any such Hocus be asked either by the Patient or some other Friend, what he thinks of his Disease, or Ulcer; he tells them, there is no danger, and that by such a time he may be well, and when that fails, then puts it to another time, &c. Now if any ingenious Patient be∣gins to smell this Juggler, and apply himself to some able and honest Ar∣tist, to mend what he marr'd; but whether it may be accomplished by Art, or not; This Quack-salver hath this fetch to excuse his deceitful ig∣norance, if the Patient be recovered, then saith this Impostor, why I knew and told him so, that there was no danger at all, and that he would be well, &c. but if it cannot be resto∣red by Art, then saith this deceiver,

if he had continu'd with me, I could have cured him (I should not questi∣on it) long before this time and there was no danger in it, when he went from me, &c. This is the Devil's Hocust Pocust, that he teaches such Artists to perswade people, the nearest way to Heaven, is by way of Hell; that gross Impiety and grand Hypocrisie, that such Juglers are guilty of, they commonly lay on the shoulders of the Innocent.
I am sorry to speak it, that I have seen too many such deluding souls in this Country; I shall forbear to speak any more lest some should think I speak in prejudice: I protest the contrary, but wish them really such, as they would have the World understand them to be: I expect such as I have touched the guilty conscience of, to snarle against me; who will endeavour to corrupt your Judgment, and perswade you into an ill opinion of this small Piece (for

whose good it was designed by the Author) raising, it may be, curious and malitious Questions amongst you, as the Rabbies and Doctors did amongst the Jews, viz. Can there any good thing come out of Naza∣reth? and that he eats and drinks with the Publicans; &c. But I tell such, 'tis better be a Publican amongst the Pharisees, than a Judas amongst the Apostles.
My last advice unto you is this, whatsoever good this, or any other may bring unto you, return all your praises unto that God from whom you receive all your Mercies.
— Foelix quicunque dolore
Alterius discet, posse carere suo.

From my House at the Sign of the Globe and Chymical Fur∣naces in the Postern near Moorgate. Febr. 4 1679/80.

