


Madam,
ATYS, the Sonne of Croesus the Rich King, was dumbe in his Child-hood, & so continued many years: he was never

heard to speake a word, till Cyrus enter'd Sardis, and then, the Child seeing a common Souldier running upon his Father with a drawn sword to kill him, brake forth into violent and articulate speech, O man, kill not Croesus! So that he, who till that time lived mute to himselfe, then became a cleare speaker for the saving of his Father.
This, Madam! in a sence, is my very case. I had thought to have been mute in this kind for ever, and never to have spoken againe by my Pen in Print. Though many, and a∣mongst the rest, even your Honour have endeavoured often to perswade me to make some poor pieces of mine publike: But bring sensible of mine

owne weakness, I stood out, and was resolved forever to forbeare. For Iam a Child, and cannot speak; at least, not with that skill, and energy that the Printing-presse calleth for: Yet now at last seeing my precious Fa∣ther his name in hazard (not of being stained, its not capable of that; Nor of being utterly forgotten, for his name is written in the Booke of Life, with Golden letters, and his praise shal be for ever in the Gospel; but that his remembrance amongst men (after this Generation) might have beene cut off by devouring time; to save the memory of my Father alive, I break silence.
I annex to his life, a piece of mine own. The reason why I do so, and

why I put forth this Sermon rather then any other, it is not for any worth that I apprehend in it, but be∣cause I had a special calling to it: So soon as it was preached, the Major with the Aldermen, and some Mi∣nisters came to me, and with great earnestnesse, desired me to print the Sermon, that so they might againe see what they had already heard. I did not yeild to them at that time. But now seeing that God hath with∣in these fow daies stirred up my Spi∣rit, to do something whereby I might honour my Father, before I go hence to meet him in another, and a better Country, I remembred my Friends request, and did resolve to answer their desires, according to my poore

ability, though some few yeares after.
Why I presume to tender this homely peece to your Honour, I shal humbly give a short account; Partly for my Fathers sake. Ioseph, to ho∣nour his good old Father Iacob, brought him, and set him before the King. Give me leave also, Elect Lady! to bring my Reverend Fa∣ther into your Honours presence: It will be some grace to him on Earth; and had your Ladyship known him, you would have honoured him.
Also, because the Subiect is soe suitable to your Honour all the way. Your Ladyship loves the sweet per∣fume of the dead Saints. And as

for the Lyon, it is the Ensign of No∣bility, and Magnanimity; and your Honour bears the Lyon in your own Coat of Armes. But as for the Ly∣on of the Tribe of Judah, you bear him in your heart, and embrace him with the Arms of your precious faith. My Naile, and Wheele, I presented to your Ladyship out of du∣ty and gratitude onely. The Subiect of those worthlesse papers, did not so aptly close with your Honours con∣dition; they did more immediately concern the Magistracy. But in this work of mine, my whole designe is to exalt the Lord Jesus Christ; I set him up before you as an Ensigne; which I know your Honour wil with all cheerfulnesse follow.

Yet further, your Honour cannot be ignorant of the frame of my spi∣rit that as the blessed Apostle Paul said concerning his Corinthians, so I of your Ladyship. Madam! you are in my heart; Christ lives in your Ho∣nour, and where so much of Christ appears, who can but give Ho∣nour?
Finally, As Saint Paul writ to Philemon, Thou owest to mee even thine owne selfe; In a like phrase I may speake to your Lady∣ship; Iowe even mine ownself to your Honour, which I would have acknowledged to the whole world, & made it out in some particulars; but that I feare (such is your humi∣lity and goodnesse) your Ladyship

would not have resented it well. Accept, I beseech your Honour! this poor Present, with the same Candor it is offered. And be assured, Madam! that I am,

