




Friends and Neighbours,
IT was the good will and pleasure of God to grant me this mercy to be born in a time of great Light, and in a Land of Visions, when, and where the Gospel was preach'd in great Power and Glory; and to encline my heart in the morning of mine age, to an attendance upon the preaching of the Gospel, by those whom he had eminently gifted and spirited for that Work; yea, to take hold of my heart by his Word, and so to engage me in the
 study of his will revealed in his word, that I could not settle my self upon any secular employment, save onely, that while I did live at home, my dear Mother being a Widow, I was (as became me) serviceable unto her in that Calling God had set her in. In which time I had the happiness of enjoying Communion with many of the Lords people, by which Communion I was furthered in the knowledge and understanding of Scripture.
After this the Lord brought me into acquaintance and favour with several godly and able Ministers, who (after some know∣ledge of me) did tell me, that they did verily believe God had some work for me to do in the Ministry, and that God would find me out, and give me a clear call thereunto; which perswasion of theirs, answering the inclination that God had wrought in my heart almost from my Cradle, did the more unsettle me as to any worldly employment. And so it was, that about the 21. year of mine age I had several proffers as to publike Work, but still there was something or other did impede and hinder. In fine, being in the Countrey near Windsor, for my health's sake, about May, 1654. I was desired to preach amongst you at Upton, which ac∣cordingly I did on the 27. of that instant.
And after I had preach'd with you (you being destitute of a Minister) I was desired to take hold of that opportunity for the doing of God service; which desire I did freely close withall, and in order thereunto, after that I had obtained power from the then Supream Magistrate, I took possession of the Pulpit to preach in, and the House to dwell in.
In this my undertaking I had but little external encourage∣ment, there being not much either of Maintenance or Counte∣nance, to be expected from you: As for Maintenance, its known to be very short; and as for Love and Countenance, I could look for little, being at the first desired but by a very few in the Pa∣rish; and besides, for that you did seem generally to expect those things from him who should be your Minister, which (unless I should have sinn'd against my Light and Conscience) I could not do. I hope I am able to say in some good measure of sincerity and truth, That my great ends were the glory of God, and the salva∣tion
 of your precious souls. For I considering how you had been supplyed for sixty years, or more (according to your own confessi∣on) to wit, with a prophane Ministry; and also, that the means was so short, that few good men (they being bound by the Law of God and Nature to provide for their Families) could accept of it; I did judge I might be of more service among you then elsewhere. My Lord Christ had told me by his blessed Word, that in this Work I must not looke to meet with the great things of this world, as Riches, Honours, Friends, &c. but on the contrary, to meet with Disgrace, Contempt, Scorn, and Persecution. And indeed, there was no reason for me to have expected other among you, but the setting of you in a flame a∣bout me; so that I might have walked by your doors in fear, have lai'n down, and rose up in fear; have preacht in fear; My great Work in the Ministry being to pull down your strong holds, to plunder you of that which is more dear to you than your Gold and Silver▪ namely, your sins, to take your Beloveds out of your bosome, to pull out your right eyes, and cut off your right hands; to take away your Gods from you, your Carnality, Hypocrisie, Superstition, &c. But it was otherwise ordered by the holy and wise God; for in the room of this I had your attendance upon my Mi∣nistry, and approbation of it, many of you confessing that the Word came in power upon you, convincing you of many things. I also received great respects and love from many. Nay more, after that I had been near two years among you, and you fully knew what I refused to do, (I being alwayes open-hearted among you as to the matters of my God) you did notwithstanding (hearing of some Overtures made to me about a remove) desire my continuance with you, and did manifest this desire by subscribing your Names to what you were freely willing to give me Quar∣terly for the supplies of my Family: Which Subscription of yours, though it did not much augment my Mainte∣nance, yet it was to me so high an expression of your love, and so clear a discovery of some Work that my Mi∣nistry
 had wrought among you, that I resolved thereupon to continue a longer time with you; and manifested this my resolution to be real, by laying out a considerable sum of money upon the Vicaridge-House for my own  ommo lati∣on: And so through the good hand of God did contnue with you until December, 1660. for which opportunity of Ser∣vice I do think my self obliged for ever to bless the Lord that he should call out such a poor worm, and give him six years time to bear a publike Testimony for Christ in his generation.
Now as for my departure from you, though the cause thereof be known to many of you, yet for the honour of the Gospel, and clearing of mine own innocency, I shall give you a brief account thereof in this place.
The greatest Contest I had all along with many of you, was about the administration of the Lords Supper, and Bap∣tism, and Burial of the Dead, you requiring of me that I would bury the Dead according to former custome, and administer the Seals in a promiscuous manner to all in the Parish: The great Argument you prest upon me was this, That these were Church-Duties, and so incumbent upon me as your Minister. Unto the which my general Answer was, That I could not understand that the Lord Christ (our great Arch-Bishop) had laid any injunction upon his Ministers about the Burial of the Dead, and therefore I re∣fused the Observation of any Ceremony at Burials, save on∣ly to accompany the Corps to the Grave, and after a decent interment, to preach the Gospel to the Living when it was de∣sired, or I thought my Labours would be accepted. But then for Baptism and the Lords Supper, I did readily grant them to be Church-Ordinances, and being such (as I have often told you) did pre-suppose a Church-state, a submis∣sion to Gospel-Discipline: Now this Gospel-Discipline I found you not onely ignorant of, but very averse unto, not be∣ing willing to put the Neck into Christs Yoke: And these being Christs matters, and I but a steward, I durst not do any
 thing therein without my Lords Commission; and (according to my light) did not see how you could be in a capacity to receive, or I to administer, without a submission to the Rules of the Gospel. Now though the violence of some in these matters was abated, (I judge through the power of the Word) yet there did remain much prejudice in the hearts of others against me, upon the account of my faithfulness un∣to my Lord and Master; which I did in a good measure dscern, and have sometimes told you, that that enmity and prejudice against Christ and his faithful Servants, that lay hid under the Garb of Courtesie and Civiliy, when ever opportunity did afford it self (if such hearts were not sub∣dued) would break forth, and discover its self according to its utmost ability. But notwithstanding the prejudice of several, I did nevertheless abide with you till there was not above seven or eight dayes left by that Act of Parlia∣ment, entituled, An Act for confirming and restoring Ministers; Dated September 13. 1660.) to the Justices, to hear and determine such Cases: For that Act did expire on the 25th. of December next ensuing, and it was the 18th. of that instant before I received any Warrant to ap∣pear before them upon that account, and then in the eve∣ning of that day was a Warrant brought to me, signed with the hands of two Commissioners. In the which Warrant there was nothing mentioned of complaint against me, but onely that as I expected any benefit by the Act for Confirmation of Ministers, I should appear before them and other Justices of the Peace, the next morning about ten of the Clock, at the Crown in Beconsfield. And in obedience to this War∣rant, I appeared; and when I came there, I found four of my Parishioners ready to appear against me; whom when there was five Justices come, (which made a Quorum) were called in unto them, & the door shut. These four persons were sworn, and upon their Oaths did say (among other things) that I had refused to bap∣tize my Parishioners Children (which was a truth upon the fore∣mentioned account) and not onely so, but that I had declared my
 judgement against Infant-Baptism. This they swore, notwith∣standing I had often declared for Infant-Baptism publikely; and besides, the chief of those that swore against me, his Wife was present at my House when one of my own Children was baptized. And 2dly, They swore that I had refused to administer the Lords Supper to the Parishioners (which was a truth ut supra) and not onely so, but that I had publikely preacht against the same.
This they swore, notwithstanding I had the Summer before, upon 1 Cor. 11. preacht divers Sermons touching the Author, Nature, Excellency &c. of that Ordinance.
When these my Parishioners had done swearing, I was called in, and the Depositions sworn against me, read. And when I heard what was sworn against me, and withall did perceive their Reso∣lutions, I told them▪ That as to my preaching against these Or∣dinances, it was known to be notoriously false, for that I did both in judgement and practice own them; but in that they said I had not administred them to the Parishioners, they spake truth; for I had not, nor could not administer these Ordinances to a people that would not submit to Gospel-Discipline. After I had thus spo∣ken, they required me to withdraw; and after a little space of time, called me in again, and read an Order unto me for my lea∣ving the possession of the Vicaridge House at Upton, at, or be∣fore the 25. of the said December. To the which I answered, that since it was the good pleasure of my God that so it should be, I was even glad I had a quietus est to my Conscience, and a free∣dom from further trouble in that place. As touching this Order, I cannot but declare my judgement to be this, That doubtless it had been a most righteous Sentence against me, had that which my Neighbours swore been truth; for I do verily judge, that those Ministers that shall either corrupt the Ordinances of Christ with their own inventions, or else deny them, and preach against them, do both a like deserve to be deprived of publike opportunities for preaching, and to have the Church-doors shut against them. I had now left me but one Lords day wherein I could preach Authori∣tatively among you, at which time I preacht the substance of what follows in this small Treatise. This Lords Day in the afternoon
 Providence so ordered it, that the four persons that swore against me, were al present, which I judge they hardly ever were at one time all the six years I was amongst you. At which time I took my farwel of you, and gave you a publike account of what was sworn against me, in their hearing; and when these persons came out of the place (as I was informed by several) they denied that they had so sworn against me, notwithstanding their Names, and what they swore, was exest in the Order drawn up for my ejectment. Which Order r after this manner, (as I am able to testifie, having a true Copy of the Order still by me) Forasmuch as it appeareth to the said Commissioners (the Names of the Commissioners being asserted above the Order) upon the infor∣mation of——that R. C. who pretends himself to be Vicar of Upton, in the County of Bucks, for many yearsI mention no more of the Order, becuse these were the most material things in it. last past, refused, and still doth refuse to baptize Children, and hath declared himself against Infant-Baptism; and that he hath for many years last past refused to administer the Sacrament of the Lord's Supper to his said Parishioners, and hath publikely preach't against the same, &c. There∣fore we order so and so. The reason why I give this account, is not out of any prejudice I have to those Neighbours that did so prosecute, and therefore I have purposely omitted the naming of them, though they did as evil against me, and my Wife & Chil∣dren, as they could; for though we had a hole to put our heads in, provided by the Father of Mercies, yet it clearly appeared that it had been all one to them whether we had or not. But yet I can appeal to God in this, that all the hurt I wish them is, that God would give them repentance unto life. But the great end of this account is, that the Gospel may not suffer reproach for my sake.
After that I was thus ordered to depart and the Church-doors shut against me by the Wardens, I did with what convenient speed I could, remove my Family, and leave the place, And now since my departure from you, looking back upon my conversation among you, I find matter both of Humiliation, and also of Peace and Consolation: That which doth afford me matter of Humiliation, is the consideration of the deadness of mine own heart, and the straitness of mine own spirit while with you, that I wa no more
 abundant in labours, no more in praying, in preaching publikely, and from house to house; that I did no more earnestly and affectio∣nately endeavour your conversion to Christ; though I have as much to plead as some others, viz. a weak and frail body, and other oc∣casions which the wants of my Family did administer to me; yet I must acknowledge, that these things do afford me matter of hu∣miliation, to consider that God should give me so large an oppor∣tunity, and that my heart should not (as it ought) be enlarged in the work of my God. But then on the other hand, there are some things do afford me matter of peace and comfort, as, 1. In that I was (by the power of God) kept faithful to my light, with reference unto Gospel-Administrations; I would not for all the world that I had come over to you in the administration of the Lord's Supper, and Baptism, in a promiscuous way. 2. In that I did design and endeavour (as I could) the obtaining of your af∣fections, and went as far as I did judge the shooes of the Gospel would carry me, to accomplish this my design. 3. In that I did continue with you so long as I could; had I come away sooner, I might have broken my peace; and had I continued longer, I might have undone my Family, and done you no good, being deprived of opportunity to preach the Gospel, amongst you. 4. In that I am not without hopes that God did by my Ministry work upon some of your souls; I am sure as to conviction there was work done. Now that work may be done, where there's none, and carryed on where there are any beginnings thereof, is the design of this Book, which I do heartily present unto you of the Parish, and also unto those of adjacent parts, that did use to attend upon my Ministry, as a to∣ken of that dear love and affection I bear to your souls, desiring your acceptance in the Lord. Now to him that is able to subdue most rebellious ones, and to preserve subdued and enlightened ones from falling, and to present them faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy; to him do I commend you all, desiring that to this onely wise God our Saviour, you may be enabled to give (as is most due) all Glory and Majesty, Dominion and Power, now and ever.
Amen.

