


WHen Saint Paul called to remembrance the

unfeigned faith that dwelt in the Grand-Mother Lois first: Hee was easily perswaded that the same dwelt in Timothy the Grand-Child also. So true∣ly, when I consider the unfeign∣ed faith and holinesse, that dwelt first in your good aged Grand-Father, and Grand-Mother; I cannot but conceive some hope, that there is some measure of the same faith, and sanctity e∣ven in you.
Now to the end that any of you, who (being of the elder sort) have received any Godly Principles, immediately from your Grand-Father and Grand-Mother, when they were a∣mongst

the living, That you, I say, may the better retain those godly Instructions to the end; And that you may teach them to your Children, and Child∣rens. Children, I do here send you your Reverend, and Pious Grand-Father, in some measure revived.
It is, I confes, but an imperfect and blind delineation of so de∣serving, and perfect a man. Con∣suming time hath worne off much of his orient lustre: yet there is so much remaining, as hath a great deale of beauty in it, enough to refresh your me∣mories. Here, take him for your patterne; Bee yee followers of

God, of Christ, & of your good Grand-Father also as dear Chil∣dren, and tread in his steps.
It was the saying of a learned and godly Divine unto his chil∣dren, when he was at the point of death. How will you looke me in the face, before the dreadfull Tri∣bunall of Jesus Christ, if any of you appeare before me then, in an unre∣generate condition? How will a∣ny of you look your Venerable Grand-Father in the face at that terrible day; If you be found in any Error, Heresie, Schisme, or inordinate walking, as becomes not the Gospell of Iesus Christ? It is our great honour that we had such a holy root, such a Fa∣ther

of our Family: It will bee our greatest shame, a blot never to be wiped out, if any of us shal degenerate. This was the Brand and Ignominy of multitudes of the Iewes; they boasted, and said, We have Abraham to our Fa∣ther: but Christ said to them a∣gain, Yee are of your Father the De∣vill, for the lust of your Father ye wil do. These things I write, not that I suspect you, much les condemn you, (Of many of you I am con∣fident) but in tenderness of love to warn you, and excite you to walke accurately. The blessing of my Fathers God be upon you al.
Accept in good part this poor remembrance, from

