



EVen Nature teacheth us Nescio qua natale so∣lum dulce∣dinecunctos ducit, & immemo∣res no si∣nit esse sui. to love dearely the Land of our Nativity. I cannot but wish well to that place, and people where I drew my first breath; viz. Bramford: as al∣so to that place, and people where my good Father finished his course, and breathed his last: viz. Belsted. To both those

places, and peoples I send Salu∣tations. But that is not my main designe.
Brethren! My hearts desire, and prayer to God for you, is, that you may bee saved. The meanes of Salvation you enjoy∣ed a long time, under the Mi∣nistry of yout Ancient Pastor, my deare Father, Mr. John Car∣ter. He appeared to you all that while, as that bright Star, Matth. 2. By his light, and motion, by his Doctrine, and Conversation, he guided you to Christ. He so long as hee was in his Taberna∣cle of Clay, was not negligent to put you alwaies in remem∣brance of those things which

concern your everlasting peace. That which I drive at, is, Now that hee hath put off his Taber∣nacle, now in his stead to ad∣monish you. Remember there∣fore Revel. 3. 3. how you have received, and heard, and hold fast, and repent. Remember how hee was an example 1 Tim. 4. 12. of Beleivers, in word, in conversa∣tion, in Charity, in Spirit, in faith, in purity. Consider, how shall you escape, if you neglect so great Salvation: Will it not be more tolerable for the Land of Sodom, in the day of Iudgment then for you? Now for the e∣ternal good of your Souls, here I send nou your old Pastor a∣gain. I confesse his livelie voice, that cannot be recalled, but his

life and example I endeavour to revive again. The rich man in Luk. 16. 30. Hel spake thus; Father Abraham! If one were sent to my Fathers house, from the dead, they would repent. I commend un∣to you your ancient spirituall Father, in some sort raised from the dead. Now look to your faith, look to your repentance, look to your holy walking; else his Ministrie will rise up in iudgment against you. For hee being dead, yet speaks. O that you would now so conform to his Doctrine, and practise, that when hee, and you shall stand together at the last day, before the great Shepheard of the Sheep: Hee that had the

rule over you, might bee able to say with ioy; Lord here I am, and the Children which thou hast given me.
This is, and shal be the pray∣er of him that is

