


Worthy SIR,
THAT which Naomi spake to Ruth concerning Boaz; Hee hath not left off his kind∣nesse to the living, and to the dead: It is fully verified of your selfe; you cease

not to shew kindnesse to the living, and to the dead. To the living; by your preach∣ing and Ministry, you make Saints dai∣ly. To the dead Saints you shew kind∣nesse, by perpetuating their Names, to their honours, and the good of many. And herein you are a great gainer; you shine your selfe, by making others shine. Amongst the rest of those that honour you, I am one, though I never saw your face, otherwise then in the Frontispice of your learned Bookes.
In your first part of the marrow of Ecclesiasticall History, We had in∣formation, that you did resolve to add a second part; and to put in the Lives of such godly Divines, and others, as were eminent in these latter times, if you were furnished with faithfull infor∣mation. Hereupon, divers did set upon me with very great importunity, to write the life of my deare Father, and to send it up to you. Truely, Worthy Sir! I was desirous of the thing, but durst not undertake the work: I was sensible of mine own weaknesse; and also that his

sayings, and doings had so far slipped the memories of this Generation, that I should have brought to light such an im∣perfect thing, as rather would have been a blemish to so eminent a Saint, then an honour. Hereupon, I laid all thoughts aside of medling, or attempting such a thing. I knew that he is glorious in hea∣ven, and on the Earth too, so far as his name is spread.
Now, good Sir! let me be bold to give you a short account of my selfe. Some few daies since, I went about to make a new Diary for my selfe. I was desirous in the first place, to set down some passages of my Father, for mine own satisfaction, and use. I began so; and before I was aware, it amounted to so much, as I thought better that published, then no∣thing at all: and at the last my Spirit grew restlesse; I could not satisfie my selfe, till I had digested it into some or∣der, and made it publike. And now, Sir, here it is; I present it to your judi∣cious view: accept it in good part from a meer stranger. Because it was so short,

therefore I joyned it to a weak and un∣worthy piece of mine own, to make it a Book.
My humble request to you, worthy Sir, is this, that (though I slipped the last opportunity, yet) if you shall set forth any more lives; or if you shall have a new Impression of any of the former: that you would extract so much of my precious Fathers life, as you shal judge fit, and place it where you please, in your Ec∣clesiasticall History. Your Monuments will bee lasting in after ages, when my poore Pamphlet will bee worne out with time. Pardon my boldnesse: The Lord strengthen out your daies, for the good of his Church, and the honour of his Saints.

