



My Loving Friends,
SOme years since, when I stood in the Relation of a Pastor to you, I wrote my Book of Knowledge and Practice, aiming therein more especially at your benefit. Which Treatise, I hope (through the Lords blessing) hath been of some use to you. I have since thought that it would not be a service unacceptable to you, to add by way of Supplement, a more full explication of the Main Principles of the Christian Faith, and some Further Di∣rections for regulating of your Practice, and to send them unto you to supply my Personal absence. God only knows whether I shall ever see your Faces again in this World, Providence having fixed my Habitation at so great a distance from you. However my hearts desire and prayer to God for you is, that you may be saved; and if this poor Book may in any measure contribute thereunto, I shall heartily rejoyce. The holy Apostles, no doubt, in writing their Epistles, aimed at the Spiritual good of the Church in general; yet we may well suppose that those particular Chur∣ches to whom their Epistles were directed, read them with more especial regard, and possibly reaped more signal benefits by them than others did. So, though I design these instructions for your Spiri∣tual good, and benefit of all those into whose hands they shall come; Yet I hope they shall be more especially minded and regarded by you to whom they are particularly directed, and in contem∣plation of whose necessities, and with an aim at whose benefit they were particularly framed. I know many of you are such of whom the Apostle speaks, Heb. 5.12. Who have need that one teach you the first Principles of the Oracles of God, and have need of milk and not of strong meat. I should be glad to have you all rightly instructed in the main fundamentals of Christianity, and that not for
 your sakes only, but for my own, that I may give up my account with joy and not with grief. Heb. 13.17. But yet I must tell you that it is not enough to save any of you, that you are of the true Religion, except you be true to it, and live agreeably thereunto. God hath indeed made sufficient provision by the obedience and death of his Son to save Mankind. But you must earnestly leg of God to inable you to do your part, which is, unfeignedly to repent of all your sins, savingly to believe in Christ and to accept him for your Lord and Saviour, and to deliver up your souls to him, that you may be pardoned through the infinite merit of his active and passive obedience, and sanctified by his Spirit, and inabled by his grace to lead a holy and good life. And as I earnestly desire you all to have an especial care of your own Souls, so do I with some importu∣nity intreat all, that are Parents or Masters of Families among you, that they would take great care to instruct their children and servants in the main Principles of the Christian Religion. I have often thought, that if ever real Piety and Christianity flourish in England, more must he done by Parents and Masters in instructing those under their care than is now ordinarily done. I hope this short Treatise (may with the blessing of God) something assist and help you in performing that part of your duty. May the God of all grace lead you and guide you in ways of truth and holiness and inable you to live in love and peace one with another. And though I should never see you again in this life, yet may the Father of Mercies (through his infinite goodness) grant that I may meet your Souls in Heaven. This is the earnest desire and prayer of him who was once your unworthy Pastor, and is still your very lo∣ving and affectionate friend,
Wickham brook, Novemb. 6. 1678.

