



Much honour'd Worthies,
GIve me leave to prefix your names to this Manuell, and con∣joyne you in this De∣dication, whom Pro∣vidence hath linked in that sacred Tye, which so mysteriously emblems Christ and his Church; and that, with that lustre in your Family, as Rubies and Diamonds, Carbuncles and Saphires, are matched in Emperiall Crownes; with that happy successe in your Issue (those Olive branches about your Table) as Rachel and Leah, which builded up the house of Israel; with that harmonious Diapason in Re∣ligion, as Jachim and Boaz in the Tem∣ple; with that beautifull and sweet as∣spect
 to your Neighbourhood, as the Rose and Flowre-deluce in Garlands; with that Halcyon calmnesse in the trouble∣some Sea of this World, as Castor and Pollux to the Mariners. When Duty told me, in something I was bound, in much I was not able, to expresse my gratefull affections towards you; I resol∣ved (with that poor Persian, who had nothing to entertain Artaxerxes with, but water fetcht out of the next spring) to present you with these Waters, drawn out of the Wells of Salvation, with this unpolished Cabinet, not like that of A∣lexander's, embroidered with gold and pearls, wherein he kept Homer's Ili∣ads; but rather resembling that preti∣ous stone in Dioscorides, black on the outside, checkered with golden spangles within; or the Tree in Plinie, withered in the outward rinde, fruitfull in the inner core: For indeed, the frame and structure of it (as mine) is homely, but the truth enshrined in it (as Gods) is pretious: for it comprises an Elixir of that glorious Gospell, for which the Bri∣tish Nation hath been so renowned, and outshined all others in these Western parts, velut inter ignes Luna mino∣res.
 Transcendently renowned in a three∣fold respect: First, in regard of their nursing Fathers of the Church. Second∣ly, of their primitive receiving of the Gospell, as soon as any o∣thers. Thirdly, of retaining the purity of it after others. For,
The first Christian Emperour was Constantine, inaugurated to the Dia∣dem at York, by acclamation of the Souldiers, Son of Helena, King Coile's Daughter, a British Lady. The first Christian King the Sun beheld, was Lu∣cius, Monarch of Brittain. The first King that appeared for reformation of Religion, (which for many Centuries, with the River Alpheus, had coursed through the saltish brine of corruption) was in part Henry the Eighth, more compleatly his Son Edward the Sixth. The first Prince, that by his learned Pen laid Siege to the Hierarchie of Rome, was King James; all of them of the British Race. What can be added more, unlesse a proto-Matyr, to seal it with his blood?
Secondly, Brittain, for primitive receiving of the Gospell, may challenge equiqage, if not precedency, with other
 Nations, which Gildas, the wise, embla∣zons; for, relating the tempestuous storms, and billowes of calamity, his Country-men were tossed withall, under Claudius his bloody War, with the same breath he mentions a sudden miraculous calm. In the mean time (saies he) Interea gla∣ciali frigore rigente Insu∣lâ, &c. Gild. de excidio Bri∣tan. cap. 6. Niceph. lb. 3. hist. cap. 1. Theod. lib. 9. de curand Graec affect. while Bellona vvas raging, there ap∣peared and imparted it selfe to this cold Iland, (removed off from the visible Sun further than other Coun∣tries) that true and invisible Sun, vvhich in the time of Tiberius Caesar had shevved himselfe to the vvhole World. Bitannorum lca Roanis inaclla Christo sub ta sunt. Tertul. advers. Judae∣os, cap. 7. 8. Tertullian, who lived lesse then two hundred years after Christ, tells us, that the Brittish Territories, (not only the Southern, but) those unaccessa∣ble to the Romans, were subject unto Christ. Britāniam in Christianam consentire re∣ligionem. Orig. Homil. 4. in Ezek. Origen, who lived in the year of Christ, 260. saies, that the Britaines had consented to the Christian Religion. And St. Gallia, Bri∣tannia, Africa, Persis, oriens India, & omnes barbarae Nationes unum Christum adorant, unam observant regulam veritatis. Jerom. ad Evagrium Jerom proclaimes, that Gaul, Brittain, Africk, Persia, East India, and all barbarous Nations, adore one
 Christ, and observe one rule of truth. And this Evangelicall light was brought hither both by Apostles, and Apostolicke men: Apostles, first St. Peter, if credit may be given to Simeon Me∣taph. apud Surium, die 23 Jun. pag. 862. Simeon Metaphra∣stes and Surius, which seemes to be con∣firmed by Innocent 1. in Epist. ad Decent. Innocentius, almost one thou∣sand three hundred years ago, saying, The first Churches of Italy, France, Spain, and the Ilands that lie betwixt them, (whereof, Eusengrenius saith, Britain was one) were founded by St. Peter; which may rationally be con∣jectured to be the cause, why Gild. pag. 2. Epist. de ex∣cid. Brit. Gildas amongst other things, objecteth to the British Priests, Quod sedem Petri Apostoli inverecundis pedibus usur∣pâssent, That they had usurped the A∣postle Peter's seat with unreverent feet. Secondly, St. Paul, whom Theodoret, Sophronius, and Arnoldus Mirmannus in Theatro, quarto Neronis An. Dom. 59. Arnoldus Mir∣mannus, affirme, to have passed to Brittain the fourth year of Nero, and there having sowen the seed of life, to return to Italy. This Venantius For∣tunatus, eleven hundred years ago, witnesses of Paul's Peregrination.


Transiit Oceanum, vel quà facit In∣sula portum,
Quas{que} Britannus habet terras, at{que} ultima Thule.


He pass'd the Oceans curled wave,
As far as Ilands harbours have:
As far as Brittan yields a Bay.
Or Iselands frozen shore a stay.

Thirdly, Symon the Canaanite, surnamed Zelotes, of his zeal, in the second year of Claudius, eleven years after our Saviour's passion, arrived at Britain, and preached the Gospell, as witnesseth Dorotheus: Simon Zelotes peragratâ Mauritaniâ & Afrorum re∣gione, Christū praedicavit tā∣dem in Britan∣niâ, ubi cruci∣fixus, occisus, & sepultus est. Doroth. in Sy∣nopsi. Simon Zelotes having passed through Mauritania, and the Regions of Africk, at last preached Christ in Brittain, where he was crucified, slain, and buried. Nicephorus Evangelii doctrinam ad occidenta∣lem Oceanum, insulas{que} Bri∣tannicas per∣sert. Niceph. lib: 2. cap. 40. Baron. ad di∣em 28 Octob. Magdeb. cent. 1. l. 2. cap. 2. avouches, that he having preached to many Countries, conveyed at the last the Doctrine of the Gospel to the Western Ocean, and British Ilands. With these, Baronius, and the Magde∣burgenses agree.
To these three Apostles, Antiquaries joyne some Apostolick men, or Evange∣lists,
 as Aristobulus, whom St. Paul nameth in his Epistle to the Romans, recorded by Mirmannus i theatro de con∣versione gen∣tium. pag. 43. Mirmannus, Dorotheus in Synop. Dorothe∣us, and Baron. out of the Greek Martyrol. ad diem. 25. Martii. Johannes Capgravius in Britanniae ca∣talago. Poly∣dor Virgil. hist. Anglic. lib. 1. Camde in descript. Prov. Belg. Brit. Harps∣field in histor. Ecclesiast. fol. 3. Baleus, Fl∣mingus, Scro∣pus. Baronius, to have propagated the Gospell in Brittain; as also, Joseph of Arimathea, a Noble-man of Jury, who buried our Saviour, is said to have travelled through Gaul, and from thence to be sent by St. Philip, (as some say) or by St. Peter himselfe, as he passed that way too and from Brittain, (as others) into this our Nation, wherein he obtai∣ned a place to exercise an Eremeticall life for him and his ten Companions, in the Iland called Avallonia, where Glastenbury after was builded. For this, there is a cloud of modern * Witnes∣ses.
Thirdly, Brittain was renowned for retaining the Gospell in the primitive purity, longer then other Churches, yea, then that of Rome, commended so much by the Apostle, and afterwards by Cy∣prian, as will appear by two circumstan∣ces, whereof the former is this: When there was a Schism in the Eastern and Western Churches, about the celebration of Easter, Polycrates, with the Orien∣tall Bishops, alledged the authority of
 John, Philip, Polycarp; yea, the prescript of the Gospell for their war∣rant. Victor Bishop of Rome alledged for their warrants St. Peter and St. Paul. Such as were more moderate, (which principally were the Britains) Ostendit nec Victorem, nec Polycratem justam habu∣isse causam de festo Paschatis tam odiose digladiandi, nam nec Sal∣vator inquit, nec Apostoli, . Socrat. misliked to see a schism in the Church for so small a matter, judging with Ire∣naeus, Observationes illas esse libe∣ras, That those rites were things adia∣phorous or indifferent; concluding (as Socrates hath it) that neither Victor nor Polycrate had any just cause so bitterly to contest about such trivialls, seeing neither Christ nor his Apostles, , by any Law had commanded the observa∣tion of it.
Secondly, when Augustine the Monk Galfrid. Mo∣numothensis histor. Britan∣nica. l. 8. c. 4. imposed upon the British Church the Ro∣mish superstitions, they renounced them; the occasion was this. Gregory, after∣wards Pope, surnamed the Great, seeing-beautifull children sold in Rome, en∣quired Cujates, of what Country they were? It was answered, Angli, English. Potius Angeli, (saies he) Rather An∣gells. He further enquired, Of what Pro∣vince? They replyed, of Dira. Nay,
 (saies he, knowing they were Pagans) Dei ira, the wrath of God. He thirdly demanded, Under what King? It was an∣swered, Alla. Efficiam (saies he) ut canant Halelujah, I will make, that they shall sing Hallelujah. Whereupon he shortly after sent his Legat Augustine, Cent. 2. cap. 2. to convert the Saxons; which being ef∣fected, he endeavoured to perswade the British Church to accept the Popes Su∣premacy, and the Romish Ceremonies, which to that day they had not knowne, as Altars, Images, Vestments, Crosses; but were strongly opposed by Dinotus, Daganus, and Columbanus, Qui nullam in ritibus mutationem ad∣mittere volebant, which would admit of no change in Religion.
But by degrees this Serpent insinua∣ted, Centur. 6. lib. 5. cap. 17. and got focting, in that King Osu∣vius inclined thereto; and the matter was debated with so hot contention, that from words it came to weapons, and twelve hundred Churchmen were slain, that refused subjection to the Sea of Rome: Yet, the red Dragon wholly pre∣vailed not, till almost two hundred years after this, the whole Iland was seduced by the blandishments of one Ecbertus,
 to submit their necks to the Roman sla∣very.
Sed quorsum haec? Whither tends all this? To encourage us to stand fast to our tacklings, and vindicate that Truth, thus famously in the daies of yore, glori∣fied in this Nation, but now like Hip∣polytus his body torn piece-meales, that scarce a wise Aesculapius knowes how to joyne it; wherein I will adventure, first a word of the disease, then of the cure.
The disease arises from the hedge of Discipline pulled down, when proud slime will acknowledge no Superintendency over it. This Inclosure lay common; Sa∣tan first perswades to deny Infant Bap∣tism, then all Baptisme, then all Or∣dinances; whence, one turnes Leveller, another a Ranter, a third a Quaker, a fourth a spirituall Monarchist. One im∣pugnes Christs Divinity, and becomes an Arrian; another his Satisfaction, and proves a Socinian; a third his Incarna∣tion, and turnes Jew; a fourth a Scep∣tick, of all Religions, till truly of none, The cure consists of two ingredients, first, soundnesse of judgment in profession; secondly, sincerity of heart in practice. Soundnesse of judgment in profession, respects either Doctrine or Discipline:
 Doctrine, which must be regulated by those Oracles, delivered by our Saviour and his Apostles, as interpreted by the current of primitive Fathers, while (as Egisippus said) the Church was a pure Virgin, , keeping Clemens A∣lexandria. the good old way, as is expressed in the joynt harmony of Confessions of all re∣formed Churches. Discipline, that those grand Ecclesiasticall Canons, [Let all things be done decently and in or∣der, in peace, without schism, with∣out scandall] may be precisely obser∣ved, and put in execution, by some Scrip∣ture-grounded authority.
Besides these, the last, and not the least, is sincerity of heart in practise; for, howsoever the World, doting upon guil∣ded miseries, stinking vanities, golden fetters, judges purity of the Spirit but Ecquid divi∣tiae pereuntes, & transitoriae facultates, nis stercora aeter∣na diligenti∣bus sunt. Greg. in 2 Reg. c. 2. Non debet pro magno haberi honor huma∣nus, quia nul∣lius est ponde∣ris fumus. Au∣gust de Civit. dei. lib. 5. c. 17. folly, I can assure you, in the word of life and truth, the richest and rarest con∣fluence of all human happinesses, the most exquisite excellency and variety of the greatest worldly pompe and splen∣dour that ever the Sun saw, since the first moment of its creation, is but dust in the ballance; it is but dung, to a humble mind, savingly enlightned with the fore∣taste but of the least glimpse of that in∣comprehensible
 endlesse glory, which shall shortly be revealed to the upright in heart.
To this end, the thirsty longing of my soul, and heartiest prayer shall ever be, that ye may shine every day more and more gloriously, in all personall sanctity, plantation of godlinesse in your own fa∣mily, a holy zeal in advancing the af∣fairs of God, where you have any power or calling; that when the last period of your mortall abode in this vale of tears, which drawes on apace, shall present it selfe, you may look Death in the face without dread, the Grave without fear, the Lord Jesus with comfort. Thus let all the saving blessings of Trinity in Unity, and Unity in Trinity, be gloriously shi∣ning upon your selves, your children, and posterity, which is the daily vote of him, who is,

Octob. 10. 1656.
