



Right Worthy and much honoured,
IF the Dedication of this poor Work unto you, may carry with it any intimation of the great Respect and Honour I have for you, I desire the world should understand the ground of it; which is not so much the emi∣nency of your Quality and outward Condi∣tion (though that also deserves its due value and regard) as your eminent Piety and Vertue, which renders you truly honourable, and at∣tracts the esteem of all good men. And truly I cannot but look upon it as a great testimony of the Divine favour to that Noble Family to which you are all so nearly related, and a great honour to it, That in an Age so corrupt and depraved as this is, there should be found in it
 so many Persons more ennobled by their Virtue than their High Birth; and more great in Good∣ness and real Worth, than in Estate. May the Blessing of God Almighty ever rest on You and your Families, and make you still great Examples of all that is good and praise-worthy, in the places where you live; that when you shall have finished your course, and served your Ge∣neration here according to the will of God, and are entred into your everlasting Rest, your Names may be to the succeeding Age as a Per∣fume poured forth.
As for what concerns this Work, you may please to understand, That it is the fruit of some of my hours of leisure and retirement, of which I have had more of late years than ever I desired or expected. And surely tam otii quam negotii reddenda est ratio, as he said: We must give account to God of our times of leisure, as well as of those of publick and visible em∣ployment. For those several years last past, wherein I have been confined to privacy, I have addicted my self to the serious study of the Holy Scriptures, not finding any way wherein I could better employ my time. For where can we find that profit, that delight, that comfort in afflictions, which may be reaped from a diligent perusal and serious meditation on those Sacred and Divinely-inspir'd Writings? I have often thought with my self, that a short and plain Analytical Paraphrase and Exposi∣tion of them, might be of great use to those
 who have not leisure to read larger Comments. And accordingly I have bent my pains to serve them therein, as I was able. If my poor endea∣vours may be any ways serviceable to the Church of God, I shall rejoyce. However, as our blessed Saviour said in excuse of Mary when she was blamed for pouring her Box of precious Ointment on his Head (Mar. 14.4, &c.), Let her alone, she hath done what she could; intimating, that if she had known how to ex∣press her high veneration and affection to Him in a better manner, she would have willingly done it: So I hope I may in some measure of sincerity and uprightness say, that I have done what I could. If I had known how to do any thing better for the service of God and His Church, in the Circumstances wherein I have of late years been cast, I hope I should have readily done it. But seeing I did not, I have (humbly imploring the Divine Assistance) ad∣ventured on this.
'Tis well known, that there is nothing in this world more pleasing and cheering to the eyes, than Light; insomuch that one elegantly calls it The smile of Nature. And in like manner, to the Mind and Understanding of man, there is nothing more pleasing and delightful than a clear discovery of Truth. But of all Truths, there are none can be so acceptable, so delight∣ful and ravishing, as those glorious Truths revealed by God in his holy Word, which tend so much to the bettering of man here, and to the bring∣ing
 of him to eternal happiness hereafter. And truly I am very confident, would Persons of Quality and Education more diligently read and study the Holy Scriptures, they would find such incomparable delight, sweetness, and comfort in them, that Play-books and Romances, and such corrupting and effeminating Trash (which consume the precious hours of too many of our Gentry) would seem vile and contemptible in their eyes. But I need not say these things to you, who know how better to employ your time, and have learned to prefer Manna before Onions and Garlick.
All that I shall further trouble you with, is only to acquaint you, That se  ventu∣ring this poor thing of mine into a World so full of Censure and Prejudice, I find my self inclin'd to put up some such Petition unto God for it, as that excellent person, Mr. Herbert put up for his Divine Poems:
Turn their eyes hither who will make again:
Theirs, who will hurt themselves or me, refrain.
And thus (honoured Friends) wishing very heartily unto You, and all yours, all manner of prosperity, I remain,

Gesings in Wickam-brook Suffolk, Octob. 1. 1672.
