



Worthy Patriots,
WHom heroick Excellencies have advanced into the Consistory of Gods, and lifted in that Sanhe∣drim of Angels Tutelar of three Nations,) I present with all humilitie to your vigilant care, a defence of that cause which is, and ought to be infinitly dearer to you, than any private interests; as whereupon infal∣libly depends the Peace of Church, and State, which (me thinks) should seem a Paradox to none, who seriously weighs the former sad disasters of Germany compared with our present distractions, both taking their spring, and growth in a great measure from Anabaptism; which reason with experience dictates; for by their principles whole
 Nations are unchurched, and none received into Communion but by re▪ baptizing, all former mem∣bers esteemed as Publicans, and Heathens; hence Magistracie, and Ministry that dissents, are by them wholly disgusted, if not discarded. Though doubtless a respect ought to be had of tender con∣sciences, in patronage whereof (its known) I have suffered as much as the most of my condition, yet I never judged promiscuous toleration without di∣stinction to be Gospel-proof. The pious watchmen of the Church have been alwaies cautious, least under that notion Schism, and Heresie should creep in; The starved Snake, when she begins to warm, infects the whole house, and puts out the sting to the disturbance of her fosterer. The Church Christs spouse is but one, a Dove without Gall, harmoniou∣sly agreeing in fundamentals, not quarrelling se∣ditiously in superstructures, but submitting with meekness to authority, that the unity of the spirit may be kept in the bond of Peace. The rule by which the keys, and sword are steared, ought to be certain, which is the Scripture, not private mens pretended consciences, which too often are defiled, like Lesbi∣an rles, bendable any way, differing one from a∣nother like Clocks, and all from the Sun Diall of the Word, and Spirit. Magistrates are custodes utriusque tabulae, Guardians as well of the first, as second table, Rom. 13. 4. executing wrath on them that do evill, false teachers are called evill
 workers, Phil. 3. 3. Errour is a sin, especially held with pertinacie, and a high transgression of the Law. Libertie in Religion is like free conversing without restraint, or watch in time of Pestilence, one house easily infects a whole City, and destroys the main end of Magistracie, and Ministry, whose essentiall work is to preserve peace, and piety: It is destructive to Peace, for the Apostle saith, that when men do not consent to the Doctrine which is according to godliness, but dote about questions, and strifes of words, thence ariseth envy, railings, and evill surmisings, 1 Timoth. 6. 3, 4. Diffe∣rence in opinion causeth difference in affection, and both these abett difference in practice, hence the Apostle so often exhorts Christians to be of one mind, and judgement. Phil. 2. 2. Heresie is called a fruit of the flesh, Galat. 5. 20. that de∣prives of the Kingdom of God. The spirit of God commends the Church of Ephesus for not bearing with them that are evill, that is false teachers, Revel. 2. 2. condemns the Church of Thyatira for suffering the woman Jezebel to teach, and se∣duce Christs servants, Revel. 2. 20, Reproves the Church of Pergamos for suffering them that taught the doctrine of Balaam, for entertaining them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, Revel. 2. 14, 15. The Apostle prayes that such may be cut off, as trouble the Galatians with false doctrines, Gal. 5. 12. we are commanded to buy
 the truth, not sell it, Prov. 23. 23. to d nothing against the truth, but for the truth, 2 Cor. 13. 8. to rebuke our brother plainly, and not suffer sin up∣on him, Levit. 19. 17. Hence unsound doctrine is compared to a canker that corrodes the sound flesh, 2 Timoth. 2. 17. The Abetters, and fomenters thereof are resembled to thieves that spoyl, to ra∣venous Wolves that devoure, to deceitfull wor∣kers that undermine the truth, 2 Cor. 11. 13. A∣sa, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, Nehemiah, were commended for punishing abuses in the wor∣ship of God, and setting things aright in matters of Religion. The Canons of antient Councels had an eye to this; Those that are termed the Apostles Can. 11. and 45. Clements constitutionis lib. 6. Cap. 13. The four first generall Councels, next in Gregories judgement, to the four Evangelists, bended their stiles against those grand Hereticks Arius, Eunomius, Nestorius, and Eutyches; with them concur the Primitive Fathers: Ter∣tullian says, Hereticks must be compelled, not prayed to do their duty, for heresie is not to be perswaded, but to be overcome by rigour, Tert. advers. Gnost. Cap. 2. Athanasius sayes Arius, Eudoxius, and Patrophilus, when they write such things (unsound doctrines) how I pray you, are they not worthy of all punishments? Augustine hath golden sayings to that purpose, thinkest thou; saith he to Vincen∣tius, no man ought to be forced to righteousness:
 When as thou readest, that the Master said to his servant, compell all that you find to come in? and also that Paul was forced to receive and embrace the truth by the violent compulsion of Christ, ex∣cept thou judge goods, and lands dearer unto men then their eyes? Epist. 48. Hezekiah served God by destroying the Groves, and temples of Idols, the King of Nineveh inforcing the whole City to please God, Darius by delivering the Idol into the pow∣er of Daniel, Nabuchadnezar in restraining all his subjects from blaspheming God, August. E∣pist. 50. Jerom observes that Arius in Alexan∣dria, was but one little spark, but because he was not presently suppressed, the flame thereof consumed the whole world▪ Cap. 5. ad Galat. Gregory Nazianzene saith, cut off the Arian impiety, cut off the pernicious errour of Sabellius, this I say unto the Laymen, this I say unto the Cler∣gie, and this I say unto the Magistrates, my words fighting for the holy Trinity shall not have as much efficacie, as the Edict shall, if thou wilt suppress such as are infected with pernicious opinions: Na∣zian. Homil. in dict. Evang. for this cause John the Evangelist left the bath wherein was Terin∣thus, Iren. advers. haeres. lib. 3. cap. 3. Poly∣carpus called Marcion Primogenitum diaboli The devils first begotten son, Origen refused to come to prayers with Paulus Samosatenus, Euseb. lib. 6. cap. 3. Placilla the Empress would not suf∣fer Theodosius to confer with Eunomius, Zozom.
 lib. 7. cap. 7. Constantine prohibited the exer∣cise of all unsound Religions, either in publick or private places, commanding their books to be bur∣ned, their goods to be sold, their houses to be pul∣led down, and proscribed them as traytors to his Person, and enemies to the Truth, Euseb. de vit. Constant. lib. 3. cap. 63. whereupon ensued the conversion of many Hereticks, and Schismaticks, as Eusebius, Zozomenus and Nicephorous testifie. Constantine, Constantius, & Constans the sons of Constantine the great, decreed that no Sect should have libertie to exercise, or profess their Heresie, as Aug. recordeth, Epist. 166. Gratian, Valenti∣nian, & Theodosius enacted that all people within their Dominions should embrace one Religion, even the same which the Apostles taught, that Damasus maintained at Rome, & Peter at Alexandria, bran∣ding the contrary professours with the odious name of Hereticks, Theod. lib. 5. Arcadius, Honorius, and Constantius sons of Theodosius perswaded themselves that their Father got all his victories bccause of his care for the Church, and severitie against Hereticks, decreeing that all former pains, punishments, and mulcts of their noble Progeni∣tors should be executed against the pertinacious, and obstinat spirit of Hereticks, Niceph. lib. 13. cap. 1. Iustinian amongst other constitutions of the Empire composed matters touching religion, and banished all Sectaries, rejected the suit of
 Theodoricus King of the Gothes solliciting for the Arians, Justinian, Novell. 42. When Theodo∣sius was somewhat indulgent to Arianism, the Au∣thors whereof denyes the deity of Christ, Amphi∣lochius Bishop of Iconium having suffered a for∣mer repulse, assaulted him with this Stratagem; entering his presence, saluted him with due reve∣rence, but slighted his son Arcadius compeer in the Empire with him, at which the Father was en∣raged, till the grave man replyed, Art thou of∣fended O Emperour, that I attribute not to thy son equall honour with thy self? and dost thou not think that God is angry at those, that ascribe not equall glory to his son Christ with himself? where∣upon he was convinced to act new Laws against the Arians, Zozom. lib. 7. cap. 6.
Mixture of religion hath been adjudged dange∣rous for many reasons, first, it dissolves the bond of obedience, unrivets the sacred tye of love a∣mongst subjects, breeds exacerbation of mind, and exulceration of affections, lays secret trains, and privie mines, for tumults, uproars, seditions, mas∣sacres, and civill wars, as in Germany, where the Anabaptist grew so populous, that (as Sleiden records) they could not be vanquished, till almost a hundred thousand of them were slain by the uni∣ted forces of the Empire, Sleid. lib. 7. Secondly collusion in religion, and immunity of profession hath been the Prodrome, and Harbinger of the con∣fusion,
 and ruin of the greatest States, and most flourishing Churches: The Sects of the Pharisees, Sadduces, Essenes, and Herodians were a Progno∣stick Crisis of the Jewish dissolution; The diver∣sitie of opinions without restraint in the Emperour Heraclius his time, gave fuell, and fomentation to the Embrio of Mahometan superstition, and the Apostacie of the Eastern Churches. Thirdly it hath been the cause of defection, and ruin of the most famous Churches; for the Pagan, and Apo∣state Emperours, because they would supplant the true Christian profession, granted liberty, and im∣munity unto all Sects of Hereticks; So Iulian at the request of Rogatianus, and Ponticus, granted liberty of perdition (so Optatus Milevitanus calles it) unto the Sect of Donatus, thinking by that means to root out the Christian name from off the earth, and envying the unity of the Church, from which he fell, freely permitted all sacrilegious dis∣sention, Optat. cont. Parm. lib. 2. Fourthly, it brings a judgement upon those Princes, who for sinister ends tolerate Hereticks, and Idolaters; up∣on those Kingdoms, or Common-wealths, where Heresie, and Idolatrie is exercised: Gregory Na∣zianzene relates that Constantius falling into an Apoplexie, before his death repented of three things too late. 1. That he had elected Julian to be Caesar. 2. That he had banished Athanasius. 3. That he had granted toleration of religions;
 Iulian was wounded to death with an arrow in Persia, as he was advancing his army, throwing out handfulls of blood into the skie, and crying , Thou hast overcome O Galilean, Theodor. lib. 3. cap. 20. Valens being put to flight by the Barbarians, was burned in a Village with his Souldiers, Theodor. lib. 4. cap. 28. Constantius calling a Synod at Nicomedia in favour of the Arians, a suddain earthquake over∣threw the whole City, Niceph. lib. 9. cap. 39. During the reign of Iulian the Apostate it was not safe to tarry within dores by reason of earthquakes, nor to walk abroad by reason of great tempests of thunders, lightnings, hail; and the City of A∣lexandria was overflown, and drowned in the Sea.
But why do I press these things? holding out my gloe-worme amongst so many shining tapers? knowing we live under authority that is sufficient∣ly wise to distinguish betwixt truth, and errour, conscientiously carefull to put a difference between tenderness, and obstinacie; He that searches the heart, bears me record, that I urge them with no further approbation, than may suit with the glory of God, advancement of truth, and Peace of the Nation; Nor would I wish any further influ∣ence upon the Anabaptists, than on my self, were I in their condition, which is first, that they may be enlightned, and convinced, or if not so, that they
 would peaceably keep their Tenets to themselves, & not corrode further, like Gangrenes infecting the sound parts; which is the end of this my writing; Not that I can adde any thing to what hath been formerly discussed; or that my weak endeavours may be compared to the learned labours that are gone before; But that divine providence hath so dis∣posed, I was called suddainly to a conflict with the greatest Beauclerk of the faction, and God giving success to the honestness of the intention beyond the means, The relation of the dispute, and Ser∣mon were put in Print, which he in his Plea for Anti Paedobaptists hath endeavoured to over∣throw; Hence divers godly persons (some out of scruple of conscience, others for other motives) have importuned me to reply; which I humbly present unto your view desiring that it may be protected under the shadow of your wings; And if I may contribute any thing to the discovery▪ and making plain the truth▪ I have the fruit of my labour, and my wish, who desire to live to no other end, than to do service to Gods Church, my Coun∣try, and your Honours in the quality of
Lantilio Pertholy Ian. 1. 1654.

