



SIR,
Having heard from those Persons who have of∣ten the Happiness of waiting on You, how easie an Access You give to All, I have presum'd to ask the Honor of being admitted into Your Presence.

If this Address may be thought too forward, it will be some Excuse, to have it known, that I was justly afraid of being prevented by those Numbers of Men, Eminent in all Faculties and Professions, who are preparing to make the same Attempt upon You. The Peace, which His Most Sacred MAJESTY has with the greatest Glory brought Home to us, as much as it owes to the Influence of Your particular Counsels, will be very far from allowing You any Share of that Rest, which it affords to all Europe besides: Believe me, SIR, the Men of Letters knowing now, that Your Thoughts are no longer taken up by the War, are all ready to break in upon You with their Offerings; they look on You as their declar'd Patron and Protector; they have upon this Prospect recover'd their Spirits, and en∣larg'd their Hopes; and some of them have gone so far, as to think they find You Born for their Advancement, under that very Star, which was never before observ'd to shine out in all its Lustre, but only at the Birth of the Roman Mecaenas, and the French Rich∣lieu and Colbert.
Every Art and Science pretends a Right to approach You, because every one of 'em is Familiarly known to you: ANATOMY has this also in particular to Alledge for it self, that, having receiv'd its Chief Improvements and Advantages from our own Country-men, it may be accounted of English Growth; which the World will agree, is the most effectual Thing that can be said of it, to Recommend

it to Your Protection, who lay the Honor and Interest of England so near Your Heart, and whose Love for Your Country, is not to be out∣done, but by the Love Your Country returns You.
The Favor of Great Ministers to the Learn∣ed, is a Subject that takes up but little Room in our British Annals. It has been thought to be the Defect of some Former Reigns, Fa∣mous in all other respects; and was reserv'd, we believe, to Compleat the Glories of This. My Lord Treasurer Burleigh was a better Servant to Queen Elizabeth, than Patron to the Muses: But were Spenser, who had the Misfortune of being born a Hundred Years too soon, Alive at this Time, we have Instances sufficient to Convince us, that his Applica∣tions would meet with no Repulse. Mr. Stepny, Mr. Prior, Mr. Congreve, and many more, are as much Distinguish'd by Your Favor, as by their own Merits; the World at last being satisfied, that Polite Learning in good Hands, is so far from excluding Business, that it gives a Grace to it; and that a Genius truly Great, will, which way soever it is Directed, Exert its Force and Maintain its Rank.
You will please to bear this Freedom, SIR, in a Person who as little Capable as he is himself of making a right Iudgment of Men, yet living in a Place, where he is ever sur∣rounded on all sides with Your Praises, may have leave to Remember what he so often hears from the Knowing and Iudicious, and

to repeat a Character, that comes Warranted to him, by the most allow'd Authorities.
The truest Mark of Worth, SIR, is to be Valued there, where One is most Known. The People of Westminster, who were acquainted with the First Parts of Your Life, and have had the longest Experience of Your Virtues, own Openly their just Esteem of You, by Pla∣cing in You the Trust of Representing them in Parliament. 'Tis there, in the Midst of Those that Choose You, that Your Excellent Con∣duct of Publick Affairs is still Supplying Them, and all the World, with Fresh Matter of Ap∣plause and Admiration: But they had never more Reason to be Satisfied with their Choice, than on that Glorious Day, when Right was done to Your Merit, by the Testimony of the Nation in a Vote of the House of Commons; where it was Resolv'd, That it is the Opi∣nion of this House, That the Honorable CHARLES MOUNTAGUE ESQUIRE, CHANCELLOR OF THE EXCHEQUER, for his Good Services to this Government, do's Deserve His Majesty's Favor. A Vote, that carries more Honor in it, than all the Titles and Patents of Modern Heraldry, than all the Inscriptions of Ancient Greece or Rome. What has ever happen'd like this to any of our Ancestors, in all the Course of our Re∣cords and Histories? Who besides, has Re∣ceiv'd so Solemn, so Noble, and so Publick a Panegyrick from the Vocie of his Country; Pronounc'd within those Walls, where the

Tongue is left to its Liberty, and no Man Oblig'd to Speak otherwise than he Thinks? 'Tis, without doubt, the First Wish an En∣glish-man would make, thus to Deserve, and Possess the United Favor of Prince and Peo∣ple; and this Degree of Happiness has been Granted to You alone: The Next is, to have a Place in the Good Opinion of Him that is so Universally Valued; and this is the Utmost Ambition of
SIR, 
