



MADAME,
YOVR MAIESTY, Will, I hope, graciously be pleased to permitt wee to make my present Addresse with the sincere Confession of a fault, and most humbly beggin pardon for it.
It was not from mine own presumptuous ambition, but because I thought it necessary to the good of many Readers of the fol∣lowing History, that, with leave, YOVR MAIESTIES name should be seen at the first opening of it: But till now I durst not declare why I thought so, being apprehensive least, not so much YOVR GREATNESSE, as scrupulous HV∣MILITY should forbid it.
The Design which I had in compiling and publishing this

Work was to represent, as on a Theater, to the view of our Nation the more then Heroicall Gests (especially) of our Ancient Kings and Princes, now by your, to us happy, Mariage, become YOVR MAIESTIES ANCESTOVRS; Such Gests I meane of theirs as regarded Heaven and Religion: How humbly and ioyfully they entertained it, how by their Sanctity they adorned it, and with what industry and magnificence they advanced it, being the very same Religion, which, though in this last age defamed and persecuted, wee still with ioy professe.
The same Theater will likewise represent this Religion with at least equall advantage and splendour in the Lives and actions of very many glorious Queens and Princesses, to the eyes of whose minds Almighty God having discovered the more then celestiall Beauty and Glory with which it adorns pure and humble soules sincerely embracing it, they suddenly found themselves deprived of all Tast of perishing Delights, and all esteem of wordly Emi∣nence, insomuch as their own Greatnes and the Affluence of all Temporall contentments became a Burden to them: Yea many of them conceived such a loathing aversenes against them, that not being able to endure even their presence and sight, they made hast to hide themselves from them in Desarts, or perpetuall Pri∣sons of Monasteries: And others not so nice, or perhaps wanting opportunity, lived in the sight of them on purpose to shew their contempt of them. And their State obliging them to abundance and delicacies of Meats, to costly Magnificence in Apparell, and to a necessity of admitting ceremonious honours and Veneration from others, they would for these things be revenged on their in∣nocent selves by many stoll'n Fastings, by secret tormenting Chains and Cilices, by humbling themselves in spirit under the meanest of their Subiects, and by prolonged retreats in Prayer and con∣versation with God alone. By these and many other such Arti∣fices the Divine Spirit taught them to use this world as if they used it not, to crucify the Flesh and all the appetites of it, and to live to and with God alone, whilest the world thought they belonged to it.
Now such a Life as this being altogether unfashionable and even hydeous in the eyes of the late Reforming age, wherein Poverty, want of sensuall contentments, solitude and continuall attendance in Spirit to God are esteemed extremest Miseries,

and a willing embracing and seeking such Mortifications to Nature, Madnes: Hence it comes to passe that the frequent Stories of the like, which will be afforded in the following Book, will no doubt by many be resolved to have been fabulous inven∣tions, such Practises impossible, and whensoever pretended, Hy∣pocriticall.
Fore-seeing this, I iudged it necessary, by the best means I could, to prevent such like prejudices or incredulity of my Readers. And no expedient could I imagine more proper and efficacious for this purpose, then a restoring, as it were, to life again those glorious Examples of Piety, whose seemingly inimitable Vertues my desire was they might see are visibly quickned among us in YOVR MAIESTY, a Daughter of those glorious Princes, a far greater QVEEN, yet no lesse ambitiously aspiring to their Humility, contempt of worldly Glory, affection to Mortifications, and unwearied attendance to God, both in the same Publick Ordinances delivered by Him to his Caholick Church, and the same private Recollections, and amorous Whisperings to his Divine Heart.
MADAME, for fear of obstructing YOVR MAIESTIES hoped for pardon I dare not enlarge my self upon this Argument, which contains my Fault. Neither indeed is it needfull: For it will be a sufficient advantage not only to my present Design, but also to recommend our Catho∣lick Faith it self, if the Maligners of it can be perswaded, onely to reflect on the blessed Fruits of it in YOVR MAIESTIES mind and conversation: Fruits which they dayly see and acknow∣ledge. If they would doe this seriously, they would, no doubt, wonder by what fatall Constellation that Religion should be so persecuted, the Effects of which even the Persecutours them∣selves doe love and admire.
As touching this Work it self, the which (first humbly again begging leave) I lay at YOVR MAIESTIES feet, if onely the Names of Persons and Places were changed, it re∣lates in effect the same Story which all Catholicks read in the Records of their own respective countreyes. It is the very same Faith which is reported to have been preached both here and there: and the same successe attends the preaching of it. At first it is derided, hated and persecuted: the Professours of it in

the mean time patiently suffring whatsoever its Enemies will think good to inflict: But in time it begins to be hearkned to: and then it never fayles to ingratiate it self with its most bitter Adversaries, and without the terrour of Secular armes, without any seditious conspiracies, being armed only with its own beauty and gracefullnes, and recommended from Heaven by healthfull Miracles, it subdues and captivates the hearts of Nations, the most Savage and barbarous.
Such has been the constant Method by which CATHO∣LICK RELIGION, and it alone, has triumphed over Idolatry and Atheisme. As on the contrary by a Method di∣rectly opposed to this, but yet constant likewise and Vniform, other Vncatholick Sects, wheresoever intruding themselves, have prevayled. For surely it was not by Miracles, it was not by patient suffring, it was not by the zeale of unarmed Preachers that the Professours of Calvinism in France, Scot∣land and Holland, and of Lutheranism in Germany and the Northern Regions became possessours of Churches not built by their own Ancestours, for they had no Ancestours at all. Truly if for the space of above a thousand years, which the following History comprehends, I could have discovered any Province or Citty by such unchristian arts made Christian and Catholick, or but one Catholick Writer pretending to such a Method of pro∣pagating his Religion, I should not have passed it over with a desingenuous silence.
For the generall substance therefore of this History, YOVR MAIESTY already knowes it before you cast your eyes on the Book. Yet I may take leave to say, That one Advantage this History may boast of, beyond that of any other Catholick Nation: For which therefore it may invite even YOVR MA∣IESTIES curiosity. As it embraces a greater variety of Revo∣lutions hapning in our Island (the Scene of it) then any other countrey: So in all those Revolutions it affords many great and extraordinary Rarities. Never any Nation was so plentifull and over-flowing in Benedictions to other Countreyes, by sending forth an incredible number of Apostolick Bishops and Preists which converted to the FAITH almost all our confining Nations. Never any Nation was blessed with so many glorious Saints adorned with Crownes and Purple. Yea it may be affirmed

that the Annalls of the whole CATHOLICK CHVRCH doe scarce record in all other Countreyes so many Kings and Princes, who have relinquished their Thrones to change their Scepters for Crosses, their Treasures for Poverty, their ma∣gnificent numerous Courts for bare, solitary Cells, and their awefull Power for Subjection. This was a change which none could work, but onely the right hand of THE MOST HIGH.
And yet the like Change wrought by the same ALMIGHTY HAND in the soules of a far greater number of our Queens and Princesses was more admirable, in as much as their imbecil∣lity, delicacy of education and naturall timidity were greater. For the space of severall Ages the Daughters of our Monarks seemed as if they thought themselves born in a countrey none of their own, a Countrey of Strangers, or rather Enemies: the destru∣ction of whose race they sought to procure, by refusing their concurrence to continue it. And therefore as if they had been ashamed to acknowledge their Native countrey, and afraid to con∣verse with the inhabitants of it, they made hast to hide them∣selves from them, that they might freely entertain their far more Noble and aspiring thoughts and desires of A BRIDEGROOM worthy of their Love, and a Crown answerable to their holy ambition. Or if such Retreats were denyed them, they were taught by A HEAVENLY INSTRVCTOVR to erect so∣litary Monasteries, or Bride-chambers for their CELESTIALL SPOVSE in their own hearts: Where they could live undi∣sturbed even among Crowds of Visitants or Flatterers: they could macerate themselves with Fastings at the most luxurious Feasts, and with painfull Hayrcloathes under their softest and most gor∣geous Vestments. They knew no use of worldly Riches but to supply the necessities of the poore, or to adorn the Altars of their CELE∣STIALL SPOVSE: from a continuall entertainment of whom nothing could distract them, even in sleep their hearts waked to him.
A great well-orderd Army of such glorious Saints of your own Sexe will the following History discover to YOVR MA∣IESTY, and this of all states, Wives, Widdowes and Vir∣gins, and which was wonderfull, some of them all these, both Wives, Widows and yet Virgins. So that here YOV may sett before your eyes a numerous Variety of Heavenly Patterns of YOVR own rank, by conversing with whom YOV may

yet more richly adorne YOVR, soule. Each of them will present YOVR MAIESTY with a Gemme sparkling with a peculiar different luster, all of them both like and unlike in beauty and glory. Now may a Heavenly Crown besett with such more then Starlike Iewells attend YOVR MAIESTY, whensoever Death shall ease YOV of that YOV now wear. This is the argument of the dayly Prayers of

