




MADAM,
THE goodness of Your La∣diships disposition hath procured you no little Love from those you live amongst, and I never could observe any, that I thought re∣ally
 Loved you but they Honoured you, and were very ambitious upon all occasions to serve you. I must write my self one of those (though the mean∣est of many) from whom you may justly expect Love, Honour and Ser∣vice, and that for more reasons than (as I judge) you would be willing I should publish to the World; however permit me to say, Thankful∣ness makes my best service your debt; That singular worth that all (even your greatest Enemies) will acknow∣ledge to be in you, makes me to Honour you; and your no few inward en∣dowments of Grace, (I have some reason to say) I am not ignorant of, enforce me to Love; All which I can∣not forbear to express, unless I will brand my self with Ingratitude, the which I have ever held to be a Monster in nature and a solecisme in manners, a crime so odious that the more In∣genuous
 of the Heathens much decryed it, saying, The unthankful man is a compendium of all Evils. Now that I might give a publick testimony of all the said particulars; I most humbly crave leave that the following dis∣courses (which are not notional but pra∣ctical and containing nothing of Fana∣ticisme but Orthodox Truths) may to the view of the world go forth un∣der your name, and be transmitted un∣to the hands and use of your Neigh∣bours of Acton, for whose Instruction they were primarily prepared, and in whose hands I desire to leave them (ha∣ving your Ladiships name prefixed in the Front) as a testimony of that re∣spect I have for more then twenty years had to that place. Possibly they may in some degree, serve the Interest of their souls, when I am in my Grave. It is true they may meet with many profitable treatises of the like argu∣ment,




 yet I was desirous they should have somewhat thereof from my self. Besides your Ladiship was pleased to hear almost all, these discourses from the Pulpit, and I would crave leave to promise my self, that you will re∣ceive them from the Press, & as you retrained not the Church when they were Preached, that you will not re∣fuse them into your Closet, now they may be read; as you did not I be∣lieve▪ grudge them your time in the Con∣gregation, that you will not deny them portion of your retirement; but as they have already had your religious Eare, so they shall also have your judicious Eye. Let not I pray, the homeliness of these impolit lines cause you to reject them; they were, I confess, a tumultuary work, for all the time they were modelling, I had two works ly∣ing upon my hands, Pulpit work and School work, to labour for Elder per∣sons
 against the Lord's day, and to labour amongst and for Younger per∣sons every day, and but slender means of assistance.
That which makes me ventrous to beg your Ladiships acceptance is your unexpected Candour, being confident you will receive them, as I present them, with the right hand. More great and excellent things, I know, are ex∣pected to be presented to great and ex∣cellent ones, but as under the Law, he that was not able to bring a Lamb, the sacrifice of the richer sort, was com∣manded to bring two Turtle Doves, Levit. 5. 7. v. yea a little Goats hair, from those who had no better, was re∣quired to be brought towards the buil∣ding of the Tabernacle, Exod. 35. And our blessed Saviour commends the poor Widdowes two mites, then when the richer sort cast mch into the Treasury, Mark 12. 42. v. Esteem
 my present little, and so it is, yet well it may become the Greatest up∣on earth to imitate a great God, who weigheth the heart of the giver, not the value of the gift, and so doing your Ladiship will please to eye, not the Present but the Presenter; who ho∣peth the following lines will help you to mind that here upon earth upon which you must live for ever in Hea∣ven; as also provoke you to labour for▪ those Eternal good things in them mentioned; and the rather because your time is hastning towards an end, and it may come to an end suddenly, for none know how soon they may meet with the death of the body, that are every day encompassed with the body of death; but happy they, who, the nearer their bodies draw to the pit of corruption, do find their Souls draw nearer to the place of perfection, and the nearer they are to leave Temporal good
 things, the nearer also they are to the en∣joyment of Eternal good things. On Earth it is your business to labour for Eternal good things, in Heaven it will be your blessedness to enjoy Eternal good things. Now that God would conti∣nue unto your Ladiship such a large portion of Temporal good things as you already enjoy here upon Earth, and Crown you with all happiness in the full fruition of Eternal good things in Heaven, as you are dayly (I hope) la∣bouring for, shall ever be the Prayer of him who promiseth to continue at the Throne of Grace,
Madam, 
