


REjoyce thou Heaven (the Church of Christ) and ye holy Apostles and Prophets (Rev. 18.) (The Evangelical Preachers) that blessed be God, there are many Seven thousands that have not bowed to the Bayal of Man's Holiness, joyning with Christ to Justification: But Mr. Williams having (in the judgment of many) in his Gospel Truth stated, warped that way; witnss his interpreting the Righteousness of Christ, in Phil. 3.9. to be a Believers Gospel Holiness. I hereby appeal to your Consciences, if such a Star of the first Magnitude in the Firmament of the Scriptures, ought with the si∣lence of the By-standers to be so obfuscated.
Though in many respects, I look on my self one of the unworthiest of those that name the Name of our blessed Lord Jesus in sincerity, yet I cannot but bear my Testimony against the Preface of the said Book as unsound, according to my sence of the Truth, after above 50 Years investigating it, and tasting a sweet Relish in Divine Things; and I humbly apprehend, I have in the ensuing Collection, made it so appear; which I leave to the Spirit of the Prophets in the Prophets, to judge and hope you will all agree, to declare, he hath much wronged the said Text.

As for his stigmatizing my dear Father, as a dethroner of Christ, because he exalted him alone without Works, in the business of our Salvation, I be∣seech the Lord, Mr. Williams may see his Mistake, and that God would forgive him, as I, (and I hope all mine) freely do. This I pass by; But when the Mother of us all, the Truth as it is in Jesus, is wounded by him, when not of Works, lest any Man should boast, Eph. 2.9. is turned by him into, God promiseth Lie to imperfect Man by Forgiveness, yet insists on some degree of Obedience.
And hence, the use of Faith, Holiness, &c. To these Benefis is not from their Conformity to the Precept, but their Conformity to the Rule of the Promise. Then on such an invasion, all from 16 to 0. should be alarum'd; then all hearts and heads that love the Lord Jesus, should be engaged i vindi∣cating his Royalties; that he is Alpha and Omega, Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, all and in all in our Salvation. that no Flesh should glory.
In particular, I find my self (though the meanest) obliged to bear witness against this piece, being censured by many for my silence, in regard my Pre∣face to my Fathers reprinted Sermons, (they say) occasioned this Pudder: What I did therein, was in the simplicity of my heart, to exalt the Lord Jesus, and refresh Souls thereby, which I still desire by taking off Mr. William's Evidence against the said Sermons, by shewing his disagreeing from Scripture, and Orthodox Authority, as well as from my Father.
I hope you will all candidly accept this Service, and upon this occasion, give me leave to beg, that as the Lord Jesus hath sent you to preach the everlast∣ing Gospel, glad Tidings to sinners through Christ, in which many of you have been renowned, so that ye abound more and more, That you will deter∣mine to know nothing among your people, but Christ and him Crucified, that he may be magnified in your Bodies by life and by death, that you may shew in every Sermon, that to you to live is Christ, and not to labour with a Scheme of some degree of Obedience in the business of our Salva∣tion; and this supposes the death of Christ, as if his death were only a Sub-intelligitur, business in his Rectorship.
O that we could be more warm for our Lord Jesus, who poured out his Soul and warm Blood for us! and, if when warm, you please to remember me, a poor worm, at the Throne of Grace, as I do ye, I doubt not but I should be highly recompensed for this labour of love, and should find refreshment under many rufflings from the Lord, on my Person and Family. Thus beseeching the Lord to pour out abundance of his Spirit on you all, and the unhappily engaged Mr. Williams, (whom I truly love and respest,) That the people may be prepared for the Lords glorious appearance now hastning, To him I recommend you, and subscribe,

Clapham, January 21st. 1692/3.
