


SIR,
I Cannot but be troubled that in your declining days you should inflame the Reckoning, as you have done in your Rebuke, to the Grief of your best Friends, among whom my self am particularly concerned, that you should so vio∣lently let fly against those Truths of the Gospel, which have solaced the Souls of Thousands, as held forth by the Doctor, whom you have very ungravely treated, as an Heterodox wild Monster, to the Eternal Infamy of his Name and Family. what in you lay. I hope, e're this, God hath caused you often to mourn over your intemperate Management of your Re∣buke; and lest you should come short therein, that I may provoke you seriously thereto, I think it necessary to lay before you the Character, I had lately from a Worthy Minister of the Gospel, and Friend of yours, concerning him you have so unmercifully traduced, which was given by one that, some∣times in the height of his Zeal, was as bitter as any against Dr. Crisp, except your self; that is, by Mr. Richard Baxter upon his Death-Bed but two days before he dyed, as this Friend of yours assured me, once and again, that Mr. Baxter told him, and he related it to you very lately, as thus, that Mr. Baxter said to your Friend, There has been a great deal of Talk about Dr. Crisp, but I look upon him to have been a Godly, Holy Man, and that he was Sound and Orthodox, and that he brought in more Souls to Christ than any of us; but this was his Fault (said Mr. Baxter) that being a Po∣pular Man, and mightily flock'd after, he would preach Extempore Sermons, which exposed him to deliver Things undigested, which needed to be corrected, but for the
 main he was Sound and Orthodox. For which Testimony I thanking the Relater, desired him to give me it in Writing in ipsissimis Verbis; but being prudent, he desired Excuse, and repeated the same again to me, and afterwards to others. I told him, as to the Extempore Sermons, that was a great Mistake to my knowledge; and I was glad God had convinced so great an Enemy to the Doctor. Now if this be true, as there is not the least grain of ground to doubt, it coming from a Faithful, Holy Minister, then surely Dr. Crisp was not such an one as my Kratiste hath blackned him to be, God ha∣ving provided for the embalming his Memory with sweet Odours, even from his gain-sayers when launching into Eter∣nity, to give an account of their hard Speeches unrepented of. I hope it may please the Lord, by his Holy Spirit striking in with this and other Occurrences, to lower the top-sails of my good Friend, before he brings you to the brink of Eternity, when your Natural Parts will signifie nothing; and that you may have more Time, than Mr. B — had, to testifie to the World your high prizing the Free Grace of God in Christ, as held out by many besides Dr. Crisp, as in the ensuing Treatise; and that you may testifie to the World also, that your Father in Law, Mr. King, mistook in his Prophesie, saying, (as I am told) That his Son in Law (your self) had good Parts, but his Pride would undo him. But I hope, and pray, the contrary, viz. That God would undo him only of Natural self, and do him up again by the renewing of the Spirit. To his Grace I commend you, and am,

28 July, 1698.
