



THese Animadversions on the Bishop's Book, are Dedicated to your Service, the Author and his Labours being yours by Right; Tho' this piece of Service be extorted, having no apprehension of appearing in this manner, had it not been the vindication of Truth, the undeceiving of strangers, and your uneasiness to find our manner of Worship exposed, vilified, and represented to the World as pure humane Invention, and therefore nothing but Will-worship; and yet worse, being made as black as Heathens, denying due Adoration to God, and casting his Word out of our Assemblies: a rare notion that all the polite Masters of most exuberant Invention, had never the brow to brand our perswasion with, before this Author appeared, who will be singular.
And since we are now set out to the world as worse than the most degenerated and barbarous people that ever called themselves Christians, and thereby a Clothing of wild Beasts forced on us, as on many primitive Christians to inrage their Devourers; its pre∣sumed none can offend, if by a just Vindication we strip our selves of this covering, that the World may see we are no Savages.

However this may appear impar congressus, as not standing on even ground with the Bishop; yet Truth being on our side, and he the first Aggressor, there's no fear but the God of Truth will throughly plead his own Cause: Therefore lest by the Author's bare naming of many Scriptures, whether pertinent to this pur∣pose or not, any should be seduced, or vainly think his Book can∣not be answered by any of us, who are arraigned and provocked, or that we are haters of Light, and unwilling our deeds should be made manifest, whether wrought in God or not, or that we are ashamed of our manner of Worship, or that we have not the con∣fidence to convince gainsayers, and so suffer Truth to be betrayed by unreasonable silence, and lest that strangers, or our succeeding Posterity should be impressed with Calumnies for Truths; tho▪ I be the very weakest of my Brethren, yet being in some special manner concerned in this place, and a Book sent me by the Au∣thor, am willing to try the strength of his Arguments, trusting that God will appear to make the issue and result of this Debate con∣ducive to the further strengthning and establishment of many fear∣ers of God, who desire to live and die in the Old Good Paths, and therein to find rest to their Souls.
Yet I do freely declare to you my Worthy and Beloved Friends, that the constraint of putting such a Book into your hands, on so mean a subject, ministreth to me some melancholy reflections; for if ever any of my poor Labours had been worth your notice, after I had finished my course, it would been more comfortable to me, if the subject had engaged a Discourse, of things more profitable & spiritual than meer Jejune forms: knowing the people of London▪ derry, being as a Firebrand pluckt out of the fire, stand in need of more suitable entertainment, how to make due returns of grati∣tude for so signal deliverance, than to be treated with a Dispute of Forms, so remote from the power of Godliness, and the present due sense of Works of Wonder, done for this people, which we are apt sinfully to forget, tho peremptorly required to take heed, lest we forget the things which our eyes have seen, lest they depart from our heart, all the days of our life, but to teach them to our sons, and sons sons.

God hath much to require of Derry, more than other places in point of Gratitude; August. epist. ad Marcell▪ speaking of gratitude, piously saith, what better thing can we bear in our mind? express with our lips? record with our Pen? hear more joyfully? consider with greater plea∣sure? or what better fruit can we bear than gratitude?
It cannot therefore be unseasonable, to put you in mind of these things, tho' ye know them; or to improve this occasion for the help of others hereafter, to retain a due impression and regard to the great Works of God, there being no people in these Kingdoms, whoever had more special and immediat appearing of Soveraign Dominion, Wisdom, and Mercy, than this City, if it be considered
That after vast numbers of people were frighted into it as a place of refuge, not knowing of one another, nor what they should do when within these Walls, having no Ruler but God alone, as of different perswasions, so of different sentiments, many consulting a Surrender on Terms as most rational, some few resolved against it (of which I was an Eye Witness) many secret enemies with∣in, corresponding with those without; a potent Army under good Conduct, closs about the City; Streets, Lanes and Walls, often as in Fire, with multitude of Bombs, and many killed in Houses▪ pro∣visions failing, and Soldiers almost starved, yet sallying out, wax∣ed valiant in Fight; when their Enemies strong and full, found not their hands, but fainted in the day of Battel; when not only mens bodies were faint and sick with Famine, but hope of relief being deferred, made their hearts sick also; yet when weakest, were ani∣mated to that heroick resolve, to put a period to their own mise∣ries, and perpetuat their loyalty by fighting to death, when they could stay no longer within these Walls, rather than yield: I know of one fainting man, who said, within these three days we must either surrender or be dead men by famine; but was smartly taken up by others, replying, he was not worthy to live who spoke it, and while there was Dog or Cat in Derry, yet remaining, there should be no surrender; and further told him, you shall eat that Hat on your Head ere we yield. At this time the City was all over Deaths and Corps, and rare to see a Mourner for the nearest Relation, when buried, many faint∣ing
 on the Streets for want of the Fruits of the Earth; the City then appearing for no other use but to be a common Sepulchre to them all: nothing remain'd, but hope against hope, only by the good Providence of God, there were many Godly praying persons in the place, both Citizens and Strangers, who were ac∣quainted with calling on God, long before they came into this distress, these prayed without ceasing; and the hearer of Prayer, did graciously so far condescend unto some of them, that during the whole Siege, and in greatest extremities, were comforted by the hope of deliverance in Gods due time, and some of them being Mi∣nisters, of what perswasion, I shall not so much as name, that all may joyn together in due praises, not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give glory, for thy mercy and for thy truths sake: for when humane strength was gone, then did the God of mercy appear, and his own Arm brought Salvation, sending food to the fainting remnant, thorow the Fire of their Enemies on every side, they gnashing their Teeth and melting away: and thus by Divine Power and Mercy, the place of Deaths, was made a beginning of Reviving, and Life to the whole Nation.
Who, at this day out of their graves have it to say, they came out of their graves as the remnant of Derry; when this people were as if their bones had been scattered at the graves mouth; who could have answered that question but God? can these dry bones live? who but he alone could put flesh, sinews and skin upon them, and breath Life into the dead, making them to stand up as an Army so terrible, that their besiegers were frighted from their Walls, hastning far away, when nothing pursued them but the Terrour of God?
Shall he remember us in our low estate, and we forget him? shall he to whom it's a humbling of himself to behold the things that are in Heaven and earth, look down and send from above, drawing us out of these depths, and we not so much as look up to the hand doing it?
Hath God appointed Salvation for Walls and Bulwarks, when there was no strength to defend our walls of Stone and Clay? shall
 it be said of this City thou hast forgotten the God of thy Salva∣tion, and hast not been mindful of the Rock of thy strength?
Hath God frustrated and rejected the confident expectations of our enemies? hath he given them wine of astonishment to drink, and taken the cup of trembling out of our hand? hath he amuzed and confounded them with his works of wonder for Derry? inso∣much that some of the besiegers being surprized that the gates were not opened unto them, and afterward finding that the flower of their Army fell before these walls: said, God doth fight for Derry, but blasphemously added, God was not just in so doing, this I can instruct by some of deserved reputation, to whom it was spoken, and yet alive.
Oh! that men would Praise the Lord for his Goodness, and for his Wonderfull Works; and not be as these who Sung his Praise, but soon forgot his Works: For Preventing of this For∣geting, Chrysost. on Math▪ Homil. 25. Saith, that great Mercies and Deliverances should not only be Carefully committed to the Memory, but actual Praises Rendered to God for them every day; and the same Author on Tit. Hom. 1. If Saith he, we receive a Benefit from a Friend, or if we but know he hath spoken a Seasonable Word for us, with what Warmth of Love do we Remember him. How much greater love should we have to God, who hath delivered us from the greatest dangers.
It is great Mercy to be helped of God to understand the Depth of our Mercies, for some are Preserved who were not ready to Die, & if by the Furnace we have been in, our Dross be not Purged away, and we become not a Refined People meet for the Master's Use, we have reason yet to fear a Furnace more hot, where God in his Justice may Melt and leave us. Let us therefore fear him and his Goodness, let us Live to him, who made us Live in the Jaws of Death; let us take Pleasure to speak of his Mighty Acts, and testifie our Gratitude by an Holy, Just and Exemplary Con∣versation, provocking one another unto Love and good Works, walking by the same Rule, minding the same Thing, as men of one heart and one way.
Our Gracious God hath not only Delivered, but put severals of
 you in Places of greatest Trust, and Honour in this City; and as by the Grace of God ye have happily begun, so go on in the strength of the Lord God, by your Authority and Example, to promove the Power of Godliness, and the publick Good of the City, Ministring Justice to all of all Perswasions Impartially (which I know to be your Principle) and to maintain by all Lau∣dable Means, Peace, Love and Concord in the Place; that so all the Inhabitants may find you a Blessing from God, and that the whole City now raised from it's Ruines and Desolations, may Flourish in all Godliness, Righteousness and Felicity; is the Prayer of
Much Honoured, 
London. derry. April 18 1694.
