



My Lords and Gentlemen,
THat I presume to affix your Names to this Sermon, is to let the World know, that as by your Favour in not forsaking our Ca∣thedrall, I had the Opportunity to Preach it, so by your desire, and at the Instance of divers Honourable and Worshipfull Persons, Justices of the Peace, and others it was committed to the Press.
The truth is, my Lords, you and those worthy Gentle∣men did more then desire it. You assured me (as a Mo∣tive
 for you to ask, and me to grant) that it would be ve∣ry useful for the Publick. And this had with me the Na∣ture of a Command; because I count it my duty, as a Minister of Christ, to promote by all lawfull wayes, the true interest of Christianity, exemplary Piety, Repent∣ance, Purity and Peace.
And as these blessed Ends (wherein the Happiness; and Wellfare of a Church and Nation consist) have been by Gods Grace (though with much Frailty and Weak∣ness) the constant Objects of my Endeavours in the work of the Ministery, so now more especially, since God has been pleased so miraculously to be seen in our Delive∣rance, and happy Restauration. For though Gods Judge∣ments allwayes signally call for Repentance, yet me thinks his Mercies much more; because he has promised that Christs People shall be willing in the day of his po∣wer,Psalm. 110. in the Beauty of holiness from the womb of the Morning, when the lively fruitfull Dews of Grace fall, that renew the face of the Earth, and make it fresh and youthful.
And as these times are Times of Mercy, so I thought, that healing Discourses were the fittest. But then that the Cure might be sound and reall, not Palliative and false, I thought it proper at this Season (the Embleme of the great Assize) to search the wound unto the bottome. And therefore I made choice of a Scripture, not so much to teach you your Duties, (which I had good Reason to hope you better understood, than to need my Admonition) as to make my Auditory sensible of those sins, that had drawn down our heavy Judgements, that so laying them to heart, they might leave the Magistrate less work by a Cordial Re∣pentance, and more prise Gods Mercies, so miraculously bestowed on us, when we had least Reason to expect them,
 because by his Corrections, we had so little been prepared for them.
Yet because I saw God had drawn a wonderfull Veil of Mercy between our Sins, and his Judgements, and that the King and his great Council, were so sollicitous and care∣full in Preparing and Passing so unparallell'd an Act of Grace and perpetuall Oblivion, I resolved not to meddle with any Persons, or Parties, concerned in that Act, but with the crimes of the Text, and the Vices of the Nation, and stil to fix on such Motives, as the Text naturally sug∣gested, to make us bury our Animosities, and with all Humility to adore the Hand in the Clouds, and not re∣gard the rods, and the Scourges, wherewith we were bea∣ten. And where in the Application I was forced to speak of the sins, that had made us like Jerusalem, in the Pu∣nishment, I industriously confined my self to those, that had been in the Melting Pot. And I have reason to bless God, that the great Sufferers, and prime Objects of my Discourse, were so sensible of my reproofs, that they gave me hearty thanks.
As for the rest of the Audience, they were so uncon∣cerned in my Thoughts, that I could not be so unchari∣table to imagine, they would so much own and counte∣nance the sins of the Text, as to conceive themselves aim∣ed at in the Description of those sins. And it must be their own unchristian Imprudence, if by any sinister Construction, they turned that into a Satyre, which I de∣livered a Sermon. And I wish them timely to consider, whether such unjust Apprehensions may not deprive them of a right to our Mercies, by entitling themselves as yet to those sins, that have drawn down such Judgements.
Yet if any Sanballats and Tobiahs still maligning the happy restauration and Building our Jerusalem and
 Temple, will think themselves concerned, when the sins so sorely threatned, and sharply punished in Gods People, are but named and described, this wil onely argue their guilt, that still stares them in the Face, and will not suffer them to forget, what their Brethren have resolved to bury in perpetual oblivion; and they are too much like the Ro∣man Dame, whose trembling at the noyse of the Lictors whip (that was the Ensign of her Sisters Honour) did palpably betray the meanness of her present condition. But as I thought not of any such Self-libellers, as these, be∣fore the Sermon was Preached, so I shall less think of them now, when it comes from the Press.
I have better work at present; to praise God for his Mercies in the removal of his judgements, and humbly beseech him, that by the power of his Grace, he would put an end to our sins, lest they make us unworthy of the conti∣nuance of his mercies. And as he has restored us our Judges as at the first, and our Counsellors as at the beginning, so he would make you, my Lords, and Gentle∣men, very eminent among those, whom he has designed to dress and polish us by Justice and Judgement, that so being now delivered from the hands of our ene∣mies, we may all serve God without fear, in holiness, and righteousness before him all the dayes of our life, and becom a faithfull City, a City of Righte∣ousness. And this shall be the Prayer of,
My Lords, and Gentlemen,

