


Gentlemen and Right Honourable Patriots,
MANY Daughters have done Vertuously, and thou excellest them all, was a Motto on the Me∣morial of Q. Elizabeth, hung up in most Churches, for the good Laws she made against Popery. What high En∣comiums of Praise, and great Retributions of Thanks, then are due to you, right Christian Senators, for your warm Ad∣dressing His Majesty to suppress the Blasphemy and Debau∣chery which the Nation abounds with? And upon His wise referring back so great a Work to your selves, to effect it by an Act of Parliament, for your thereupon forming the late good Act, wherein it is, to your great Honour, Enacted, That if any Person........ shall by Writing, Printing, Teaching, or advised Speaking, deny any One of the Per∣sons, in the Holy Trinity, to be God, or shall assert or maintain there are more Gods than One, or shall deny the Christian Religion to be True, or the Holy Scriptures, of the Old and New Testament, to be of Divine Autho∣rity, shall suffer so and so. Although there be no Reward to the Prosecutor, it is hoped you have thereby, in a good mea∣sure, put a stop to the carriere of the Prophane Tongues and
 Pens of a debauched Crew of this Age, that Impiously deny the Trinity of Persons in the Godhead, that mock at all Re∣vealed Religion, as contained in the Scriptures, that call the Scriptures an Inken Divinity, and the Blood of our Lord Jesus, as the Blood of another good Man, and make his dreadful Agony and Sufferings, but Facile Representations of what Christ doth in us, and that could Print, That when God hath glutted himself, &c. (as in the Book): For your Zeal to God's Glory in which, may you have an Eternal Reward above, and many good days of God's Blessing here, is my Supplication to the Throne of Grace. But besides these Dragons against the Christian Religion, which you have been quelling, we have the Foxes running about that spoil the Vines; those that under the fair Species of Man's Holiness, would undermine God's Righteousness in our Justification: For going about to establish their own Righteousness, they have not submitted to the Righteousness of God, Rom. 10.3. That is, they are against being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus, against having his Righteousness imputed to them, to be unto, and upon, all that believe, though the Scripture is clear herein. But besides the pure Word of God, which is the Sheet-Anchor of our Religion, it is a great Mercy that in Disputes, with Men of corrupt Minds, that we have the Fundamentals of Christianity contained in the Doctrines established by Law, in the Book of the Homilies, wherewith to incounter such Foxes as would spoil our tender Grapes, by denying our very Sins to be born by Christ, and bringing in some degrees of our Obe∣dience, though imperfect, to joyn, as it were, with Christ's Righteousness for our Justification, and to make such our Obedience pass currant, by bringing in God making a Law that in effect allows of Sin, which are excepted against in the ensuing Treatise; which I put forth to vindicate, according to my poor Talent, not so much Dr. Crisp, but the Doctrine
 of God our Saviour, delivered by the Doctor consonantly to the Sacred Scriptures, and to the said Homilies, as you may perceive, upon perusal of these my Collections, from Scripture and sound Authors: Which I humbly recommend to your leisurely serious Considerations, hoping you will think it ne∣cessary, in this degenerate Age, to contend for the Faith deli∣vered to the Saints; and that your selves, so many of you as shall be chosen for the next Parliament, (which I suppose will not be a few), that you will think it worthy your Pains and Labour to indeavour to suppress all Socinian and Arminian Tenets, that, to uphold Man's Free Will to do good, strike at our being saved freely by God's Grace, contrary to God's Word; We are saved by Grace through Faith; and that not of our selves, it is the Gift of God: Not of Works, lest any boast. Our Holy Fore-Fathers, in the Nations shaking off the Popish Yoke, spake plainly, We in Christ paid the Debt: We in him are fulfillers of the Law: He on his Cross made a perfect cleansing of thy Sins. But this will not go down with Arminianizers of this day, that bring in our Gospel-Holiness to concur with Christ's Righteousness in our Justification. This I address to your Pious Thoughts; and, I suppose, not improperly to you, as expected Members of the House of Commons, hoping the next Parliament may begin where the last left off, in taking Care of the True Christian Religion: And that you may be the better fortified, I quote a Vote of a former House of Com∣mons, March 2. 1628. Whosoever shall bring in Inno∣vation of Religion, or by Favour, or Countenance, seem to extend Popery or Arminianism, or other Opinion, dis∣agreeing from the Truth and Orthodox Church, shall be reputed a Capital Enemy to the Kingdom and Common-Wealth. VVhich Spirit, against Popery and Arminianism, through the great Mercy of God to this Nation, hath been kept alive and warm in all Parliaments since 1628, even in
 the Reign of King James the Second; and there is no doubt of losing it in this Reign, wherein His Majesty hath given good Proof that he is neither Papist nor Arminian, nor in∣clining thereto. Now whether the Quotations, in this Trea∣tise, do not shew, that some mentioned therein go against the Orthodox Church, judge ye, and the Lord give you VVis∣dom to withstand. Thus hoping for a favourable Constru∣ction of my Endeavour, pro modulo si non pro voto, to vindicate the Truths of the Gospel, I beg the Lord's Blessing on you, and am,

28 July, 1698.
