



Honoured Sirs,
AN inbred affection to my Native Countrie, a civil respect to your Ʋnanimous consent, may suffice to justifie the readiness of my com∣plyance in undertaking this late service.
 Which having found the favour of your courteous acceptance, (attested by those after-intreaties in order to a publication) inclines me to hope that the Doctrine then delivered will be drawn into some Ʋse by Your care to practice it. I confesse my private genius stands little affected to the mode of appearing in print: Nor do I value my pains at so high a rate as to judge them worthy of the publick view. Howbeit, to compleat my respects to those who imploy'd me, I have so far pre∣vail'd against all reluctancies, as to gratifie Your desires, though to my own dissatisfacti∣on. Beseeching the Almighty to blesse the ex∣pence of that hour with successe of eternity; That it may prove in the issue as profitable to Your souls, as it was judged suitable to the season.
And now (dear Countrie-men) having met with so fair an opportunity, give me leave to remember You that this Your earthly Countrie can contribute nothing of it self to the illustration of Your persons, Nisi per te fulseris quid tibi lux pa∣triae praeter tenebras al∣latura est? Petrarch. but waits to receive some rayes of splendour from
 the reflections of your own worth. Be it therefore Your holy ambition so to excell in vertue and goodnesse, that as it was anciently foretold what should be said of Rahab and Babylon, Psal. 87. 4. &c. [This man was born there,] so it may reflect with honour upon the places of Your first breathing, that this and that faithfull Christian was born there.
Nor will it a little advantage You to re∣count in Your meditations, how in the Land of Your first Nativity Ye did but begin Your Pilgrimage: Yea, the World it self is but the place of Your exile Quid aliud terra quàm Exilium? Calv.. Heaven onely deserves to be esteemed Your Countrie Patriam nostram Pa∣radisum computa∣mus. Cypr.. Let Your conversation therefore be in Hea∣ven. And that You may speed in Your moti∣ons thither, save Your selves from this un∣toward generation Acts 2. 40.; Buy the truth, and sell it not Pro. 23. 23; Maintain good works for necessary uses Tit. 3. 14.; Follow after the things which make for peace, and wherewith Ye may edifie one another Rom. 14. 19..
To forbear any larger prefacing, and to
 give You a summarie abridgement of all that I would say, [Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest,Phil. 4. 8. whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good re∣port, if there be any vertue, and if there be any praise, think of these things.] And accept the poor endeavours of

