



MADAM,
IT cannot be doubted but your Majesty has
of late been a great Sufferer, in being forced
to hear frequent and loud Triumphs for a
supposed Victory, which, by a Court-Ser∣mon,
scarce an hour long, the English Pro∣testant

Church at one blow, and without any
resistance, pretends to have a gained over the
Catholick.
But your sufferings were much more en∣creased,
when you saw the immediatly follow∣ing
effects of that and several other Sermons
of the like stile, which, by concert, at the same
time proclaimed distruction to that very
Christianity, which first expelled Paganism
out of our Nation.
Your Majesty has oftentimes heretofore
been wakened and affrighted with such A∣larmes:
But then the Trumpets were blown
by men whose Profession and Religion obli∣ged
them to renounce all humanity towards us,
and all respect to Monarchy. Whereas this
last unexpected blast proceeded from those,
who, even but yesterday, promised us, as a re∣ward
for our common sufferings, a security
from those our common Enemies, whose ma∣lice
and rage we only apprehended.
God forbid we should be astonish'd, as if
some strange thing hapned to us, to see our
Religion persecuted: It is impossible it should
be otherwise, because the great Enemy of Truth
and Charity wil never be reconciled to live
at peace with either. Yet when we see so

wonderful and so sudden a change in formerly
professed Friends, when not only the hands,
but the voice of Jacob, are become the voice
and hands of Eau: And when we, examin∣ing
our selves, can neither find nor suspect any
demerit to provoke our Protestant Friends a∣gainst
us; nor so much as imagin, what ad∣vantage
they can gain by our ruine, but rather
an apparent harm to themselves: This being
a Case of suffering, for the entertaining
which we have no Pattern to prepare us, and
for mitigating which, all rational means are
uneffectual, we cannot forbid our selves a lit∣tle
to wonder at it: Yet this great Blessing we
may reap from it, that thereby we are even
forced to our own happiness, by having recourse
for comfort and deliverance to God onely,
who, when the World goes farthest from us,
Himself approaches nearest to us, and looking
fixedly on him, we shall discover, by his Divine
Light, how our unexampled ingratitudes
have extorted from him unexampled pu∣nishments.
So many years of oppressions, and such vicis∣situdes
in them, have not diminished, much less
changed the constancy of our affections to
Creatures; we have passionately loved the

World, even when it was bitter to us; When
God called us to mourning and penitential
humiliations, we dissembled the taking notice
of it: In the midst of persecutions we conten∣ded
in pride and vain jollities with our Op∣pressors:
Yet now we see how mercifully God
deals with us, lest our former miseries should
prove beginnings of eternal ones, he has
brought upon us these new and unfore-seen af∣flictions,
for a last Tryal whether his mighty
hand can humble us, or no. He has seen
that the fideliy we perform'd to our Temporal
Governors, and the charitable assistance we
afforded to our fellow suffring Brethren we
perhaps expected should be recompensed by
them in this life. Therefore he will have
us continue the same Duties more cordially,
now that we know and see that himself on∣ly
must be our reward. Our complaints and
prayers (which are so far from mitigating,
that they rather incense some spirits against
us) he will force us to addresse to himself one∣ly;
which if we do as we ought, and mend
our lives under his correction, we shal certain∣ly
pacify him, and, when he sees it for our
good, conciliate men to us also; since for this
last, which onely can be doubed, we have no

lesse engagement than that of his own Word:
When the waies of a man please our Lord,Prov. 16. 7.
he will convert even his Enemies to him.
Madam, these reflections I can with much
more assurance represent to your Majesties
consideration, because, though hitherto the too
common in sensibility of Catholicks to God's
Visitations, has been much aggravated by our
neglect to follow so Christian an example of
humiliation, penitential austerities, contempt
of worldly vanities, and delight in solitary
retraits to converse with God, as your Ma∣jesty
has afforded; yet it is now at last to be
hoped, that in the present dispersion of Ca∣tholic
Pastors, if your Majesty could joyn
your Authority with your Example, they both
together would prove forcible means to invite
all Catholics to a serious compunction for
their former miscarriages, to an acknowledg∣ment,
not only of the justice, but even merci∣fulness
of our Lord's Visitations, to a willing∣ness
in suffring for him, and an expectation of
deliverance onely from him.
Never certainly did our Nation, nor per∣haps
any other afford two Catholic Courts
such perfect Schools of Piety, in which there
are two such Mistresses, of most peculiarly

Christian, though seldom found to be court∣ly,
vertues; such are Humility, Mortifica∣tion,
Penance, zeal for true Religion, e∣quanimity
in Suffrings, assiduous and un∣wearied
Devotions, &c. But in a Genera∣tion
so perverse as this, it must be somwhat
more then Example, that can render these
vertues fashionable abroad also. Insensible,
vain, tepid, and negligent Catholics must
see themselvs reprehended by the severity of
your Majesties looks, and if need be, condem∣ned
by your charitable reproofs. Bravery and
curiosity of Attires, precious time mispent in
vain Conversations and Visits, magnificence
in entertainments, dissolution in dancing, &c.
are justly to be esteem'd crimes unpardonable
in those upon whom the hand of our Lord
lies so heavy.
There is no joy now seasonable, nor indeed
excusable among Catholics, but a Joy in
suffring for truth and fidelity; For we never
had, till now, so comfortable a refreshment to
our afflictions. It is now made evident that
ur only fault is that which is our greatest
glory. We are threatned more severely then
ever, whilst we are declared most innocent.
In former Edicts for execution of Laws the

principal motives were a care for safety of
his Majesties Person, and the security of
the State and Government; Withdrawing
of Subjects from their natural Allegiance;
contriving of Seditious and Treasonable
practises; maintaining of rebellious princi∣ples,
&c. were formerly our pretended
crimes. Such was the stile in which the late
desolating Parliament represented to our
most Excellent King of glorious memory, a
necessity of persecuting and destroying his
most faithful Catholic Subjects, when, God
knowes, both His safety and security of the
Government was at the same time in design,
and shortly after in effect, destroy'd only by
the Representers themselves.
But now Treason is left out of our charge:
Nor is there any apprehension of the least dan∣ger
from us to his Majesties Person or the
State: Nay, so publickly and constantly have
we asserted the innocence of our Religion in
the Point of fidelity to Princes, and such un∣questioned
proofs thereof have we given by
our actions, that the Honorable Peers of this
very Parliament were in an immediate pre∣paration
of mind to antiquate all the Sangui∣nary
Laws against us: God Almighty

give repentance and pardon to the unhappy
obstructors of that grace.
Yet for all our innocence, Preachers must
be satisfied: They cry aloud their fears of the
increase of Popery; when as, for one new-professed
Catholic, who forsakes their
Churches, hundreds of all other Sects relin∣quish
both their Churches and Allegiance
too. They impute as a Crime to us, what all
other Sects impute to them, and themselves
glory in, that we receive our Ordinations
from Rome, that is, that we are not a separa∣ted
Sect, but members of the true Catholic
Church. For if there be indeed a Catholic
Church, Ordinations must be derived into
particular Countries from a Common Prin∣ciple
and Fountain, otherwise the Cement of
Union and Subordination is dissolved.
But what esteem our former Princes had
of this pretended Crime, will appear by a late
example given by his Majesty of happy
memory;Sanderson's Hist. pag. 349. out of the Re∣cords of the House of Commons, 1640. He had graciously reprieved a Priest
condemned at the Old Bayly. Hereupon the
Commons in the late unhappy Parliament
A. D. 1640. by Mr. Glyn, request the Lords
to joyn in a Petition to his Majesty, to be in∣formed
who should dare to be instrumen∣tal

in retarding Justice in the face of the
Parliament: To which the King by the Lord
Privy Seal (28 January) tels them the cause
of the reprieve was, because the man was
found guilty, as being a Priest only; up∣on
which account neither King Iames,
nor Queen Elizabeth ever exercised the
penal Lawes. Notwithstanding, his Maje∣sty
left the Prisoner to their wills, to live or
dye, according to their Votes; and thereby he
escaped; for even they had not the courage to
say, Let this mans blood be upon us and
our Children.
This, MADAM, is our condition:
A condition, though, according to the World's
estimation, to be bewailed, yet if we look up
to Heaven, it is a condition to be triumphed
in. Now we are sure a reward in Heaven
expects us, since we are thus recompenced upon
Earth. It becomes us all therefore, bending
the Knees of our Hearts, to give infinite
thanks to our gracious God, since it is now e∣vidently
and confessedly for him onely, and
the Catholic verities revealed by him,
for the unity of his Mystical Body and the
religious fear we have of being guilty of
Schim, that we do, and shall hereafter
suffer.

This, Madam, is now our onely crime, and
this I am now actually committing, and am
so far from being asham'd [except only of the
imperfect manner of executing it] that I
have assumed the boldness to desire and hope
your Majesties approbation and defence both
of the crime and criminal Person: it is our
whole common Faith, delivered by God
to the Church, that both at Court, and
all over the Nation, has been publickly
traduced; some Doctrins have been char∣ged
to be contrary to the honour and safety
of the State; others to be Doctrins of De∣vils;
all of them to be Novelties and usur∣pations;
our whole Catholic Church is
made to pass for a Sect, a separated Schis∣matical
congregation; But from what other
Church, neither can our Accuser tell, nor
any one imagin.
Perhaps the present temper of the Times,
and delay of an Adversary appearing, had en∣couraged
the Preacher to think his Sermon
un-answerable, not for any weight in his
proofs, but, because it may be in his power
to reply with an Instrument sharper than his
Pen. Notwithstanding, as Prudence did
justly restrain that impetuosity, which zeal to

Gods truth might move in the hearts of Ca∣tholics
to retort this Cartel of Defiance,
which he has published against His Church:
so to remain utterly silent after so many re∣impressions
of that Sermon in several
forms and after such diligent Translations of
it into forraign Languages, after that in∣credible
avidity with which so many thousand
Copies of it have been snatched out of the
hands of the Readers, and from the Stalls of
the Sellers, this would be a confession of our
own guilt, and a distrust in our Cause, as pub∣lick
as his challenge and provocation has been,
this would be indeed to be ashamed of Christ
and his truth before men.
For this reason, shutting my eyes to all ex∣ternal
frights or discouragements, I presumed
to undertake an Answer to his Allegations,
hoping that some others of my Brethren would
do it with greater efficacy and fruit, than I
dare promise to this imperfect work: And ha∣ving
this resolution, I took the boldness to in∣scribe
your Majesties Name in the Front,
being assured that nothing could be more ac∣ceptable,
nor a greater refreshment to your
most tenderly Christian heart, (which bears
an equal share in this our common oppression)

then to see that Faith, which you valew above
Crowns, at least not betray'd, and, truly I
confidently hope, demonstrated to remain un∣prejudiced
by any thing alledged in that Ser∣mon.
With this perswasion, I most humbly
beg leave to cast at your Majesties feet both
my self and Work, which, as it was under∣taken,
not upon my own single judgment, so
that it may not appear in public, without your
Majesties approbation and protection, is
the most humble Suit and only Petition of,
14 May, 1663.
MADAM,

