



Perswading her to Resolution in Religion, and to render her self without further delay ino the Communion of the Ca∣tholick Church.


WHat Heaven-intreated Heart is this?
Stands trembling at the Gate of Bliss;
Holds fast the door, yet dares not venture
Fairly to open it and enter,
Whose Definition is a doubt
'Twixt Life and Death, 'twixt in and out.

Say, lingring fair! why comes the birth
Of your brave Soul so slowly forth?
Plead your pretences (O you strong
In weakness) why you choose so long
In labor of your self to lie,
Nor daring quite to live nor die:
Ah linger not, lov'd Soul! a slow
And late consent was a long no,
Who grants at last, long time try'd
And did his best to have deny'd,
What Magick bolts, what Mystick Barrs
Maintain the Will in these strange Warrs!
What fatal, what fantastick Bands,
Keep the free Heart from its own Hands!
So when the year takes cold, we see
Poor Waters their own Prisoners be,
Fetter'd, and lock d up fast they ly
In a sad self-captiity▪
Th' astonisht Nymphs their floods strange fate deplore
To see themselves their own severer shore.
Thou that alone canst thaw this cold,
And fetch the Heart from its strong Hold;
Almighty Love! end this long War,
And of a Meteor make a Star.
O fix this fair Indefinite
And mongst thy shafts of Soveraign light
Choose out that sure decisive Dart
Which has the Key of this close Heart,
Knows all the corners of't, and can controul
The self-shut Cabinet of an unsearcht soul.
O let it be at last, Love s hour;
Raise this tall Trophee of thy Pow'r;
Come once the conquering way; not to confute
But kill this Rebel-word, Irresolute,

That so, in spight of all this peevish strength
Of weakness, she may write Resolv'd at Length.
Unfold at length, unfold fair Flow'r
And use the season of Love's show'r,
Meet his well-meaning wounds, wise Heart▪
And haste to drink the wholsome Dart;
That Healing shaft, which Heav'n till now
Has in Loves Quiver hid for you,
O Dart of Love! Arrow of Light!
O happy you, if it hit right,
It must not fall in vain, it must
Not mark the dry regardless dust.
Fair one, it is your Fate▪ and brings
Eternal Words upon its Wings.
Meet it with wide-spread Arms; and see
It's seat your soul's just center be.
Disband dull fears; give faith the day,
To save your life, kill your delay;
It is Loves Siege, and sure to be
Your triumph, though his Victory.
'Tis cowardise that keeps this Field,
And want of Courage not to yield.
Yield then, O yield, that Love may win
The Fort at last, and let Life in.
Yield quickly, lest perhaps you prove
Death's prey, before the prize of Love.
This Fort of your fair self, if't be not won,
He is repulst indeed, but you'r undone.

