



May it Please Your Honours,
IT is not the King's Party, but His Cause, that lies now at your Feet: and the Que∣stion is Briefly but This: Whether or no, from this time forward, Loyalty in an Eng∣lishman shall be Reputed a Crime or a Virtue? Our Comfort is, that we have the Authori∣ty of the Nation, for our Protection; the Justice of it, for our Judges; the Wisdom, Vote, and Interest of it, for our Advocates:

and This Address is but an Appeal from the Inquity of our Oppressors, to the Piety of our Governours. We shall not trouble your Ho∣nours with Compleynts against a General Corruption; (how-True, and Dangerous-soever) but content our selves with a Particular Case, wherein the Parties to this Paper are Pe∣culiarly Concern'd, and only Relievable by Your Honourable Aid, and Authority Which Case, in short, is This
There appear so many Pretenders to the Sixty Thousand Pounds, &c. lately Granted by His Majesty, at Your Honours Request, for the Relief of the Truly-Loyal, and Indi∣gent Officers, that without a strict Examinati∣on of the Certificates, the King, the Kingdome, and the Party, will be Deceiv'd of Half the Mony. This Inconvenience was Prudently foreseen by the Honourable, the Commis∣sioners Appointed for the Distribution of it; who thereupon Directed the Regimenting, and Printing of the Certificates in Order to a Review: which Vote was no sooner Past, but Presently Hands were Gather'd to call for a Present Dividend; (Although as yet there were not above Five Thousand Pounds

in the Treasury) Some Honest Gentlemen were Drawn into This Petition, who now see Their Errour; and that the Scope of it was, by a Confusion of all Qualities, and Interests, to Hinder a Discovery.
Those Interruptions being at length Re∣mov'd, and the Book Perfected, and Printed; by the Express Approbation of His Sacred Majesty; The License of a Principal Secretary of State; and the Unanimous Allowance of the Commissioners aforesaid; We do most Humbly Crave leave to Acquaint Your Ho∣nours, that there is Great Industry still Em∣ploy'd, to frustrate the Effects of it by Disgra∣cing the Thing it self, and by Hastning a Di∣stribution, before we can Reap the Fruit of the Intended Inspection: When yet The Abuse is so Gross, and Palpable, that not Any Man that has ever born Office in the King's Ar∣my, but can Point to the very Particulars, and say [This Officer has been dead This Se∣ven-year. [That never had any Commission. [A Third never had any Men. [This left the Party and Serv'd the Enemy, &c.] So that, finally, only. Those will be Gainers by a Sudden Distribution, that would be Losers

by an Inspection. Nay, so Unfortunate we are, that it has been several times Refus'd us to Enter an Advertisement of This List into the News-Book, which is the only Publique, and Common way of Notice.
All These Crosse Circumstances put to∣gether, have driven us upon a Necessity of Saying Something to do our selves Right; and That's the only Scope of our Plea, Case, and Proposals, which, with all Dutiful Reve∣rence, are the Subject of This Dedication. The First Part Conteyning our Answers to several Objections, touching the Reason of our Proceedings. The Second Part is Chiefly a Report of Fact, to Vindicate us in Point of Modesty. The Third Consists of Certain Pro∣posals, which we rather commit to the Mo∣tions of Providence upon Your Hearts, then Presume in any Degree to Presse upon Your Inclinations. If we have Offended in Point of Forme, we are Ready, with all Dutyful Submissions, to Acknowledge our Offence: For Although the Indignation, to see our Selves bought and sold like Slaves, and Practis'd upon by every Knight of the Post, may Pos∣sibly Divert us from the Regular Method

of Good Manners; Yet, where the Question is either Duty to Your Authority, or Gratitude to Your most Generous Obligations; we shall much rather Lose the Remnant of our Mise∣rable Lives, then Fayle of any Proofe which may Demonstrate the Truly-Loyal and Suffe∣ring Officers, to be of All Others

In the Name of the Rest.
