



SIR,
NExt to his Innocence there ought nothing to be dearer to a Mini∣ster than his Reputation, who as long as he lies under an ill character, will rather teach the People to find fault with him than mend any in themselves; and therefore he is con∣cern'd in duty to God, the Church, and him∣self, to clear his words from all mis-prisions, and his actions from all aspersions which are at any time cast upon them; in which respect it is, that I am now concern'd to submit to the publick censure this following discourse, which I lately deliver'd in a Sermon at St.
 Paul's; in which, as I did not desire to dis∣please any, so neither did I hope to please all, whilst in the prosecution and discharge of my duty, I was to concern my self in the faults of the present, to counter-argue a profitable vice, and so could expect no less than their displea∣sure, to whom the over-ruling sentence of a guilty conscience should apply that hard say∣ing of my Text. The Treasure which I covet∣ed was not their favour, but amendment, and therefore if I lanc'd them to the quick, it was no more than I intended, and I am glad to be assur'd of it, though by their displeasure; which whilst I have gain'd from some of more note in the City than to be affronted by a careless contempt of their censures, (by whom I have been traduc'd for libelling Citi∣zens, for such vices of which they were ne∣ver suspected but by me) I must either by a passive silence bear false witness against my self, and wilfully betray my own innocence, which were a sin against my duty; or else to right my self, and benefit them, appeal to o∣thers of more impartial judgments, who may best discern whether the guilt and weakness
 which hath been betrayed were theirs or mine.
If I had no relation to the City but by the Honour which I have had to relate to your self, I ought for your sake to have a better o∣pinion of it, than to lye under the least tempta∣tion of defaming it; which that I have not done at any time, much less at this, will ap∣pear to them, who after the perusal of this Sermon shall consider, whether there be not men in the City who came as ill by their e∣states, and make as bad use of their riches; as any I here describe? and whether they ought in charity to conceive, I mean any o∣ther than those when I censure them? and be∣ing such as they are, whether they can deserve less? and if they who undertake to judge me, be none of them themselves, why they should partake of others sins, by disallowing of their deserved reproof? whether I had better strive to please or profit? to gain mens affections by doing my duty, or by omitting it? and whe∣ther I could have evidenc'd a greater respect to their persons than by reprehending their vi∣ces, which wheresoever I find I am bound to hate, but most in my best friends, to whom I
 chiefly owe that degree of charity? I am apt to flatter my self into a belief, that such considerations as these may save me the trou∣ble of an Apology, and prevail with such sincere lovers of plain dealing as your Ho∣nour, to judge charitably of what I now hum∣bly recommend to your Patronage of which as I have formerly found the benefit, so I have still reason to be the more ambitious, because there is a power in your judgment to oblige others to have a better opinion of

Barking Octob. the 7th. 1662.
