



My LORD,
HOmilies are by our Rubrick (and the Sta∣tute) to give place to Sermons, where they may be had; and therefore the Minister who Officiates on the King's-Day, is obliged rather to Preach a Sermon of his own Composing upon the same Argument, than to Read the Homily concerning Obedience to Rulers
 and Magistrates. This, I doubt not, was chearfully done by Persons and in Places of the greatest Eminen∣cy; and we in the Country thought our selves bound to be as Dutiful as those in higher places; as Affecti∣onate to his Majesty's Service, tho' not so Eloquent: And tho' many of Richer Parts, have of their Abun∣dance cast much more into this Treasury; yet Men of Meanest need not despair of His Majesty's Gracious Acceptance; Mar. xij. 42. whilst, like the poor Widow in the Gospel, they come to Express their Pious Officiousness to Support his Crown, by their Oblations; tho' they be∣tray their Poverty by the Meanness of them, and shew how much greater their Zeal is than their Abilities to serve Him.
This I did (as well as I could) in His Majesty's Collegiate Church of Ripon; nor is it Ostentation, that makes me Preach it over again from the Press, but pure Charity towards the Cure of the Leprosie of those Rebellious Principles, which every Priest must needs see tokens enough to discern to be that Plague in the Head, which renders too many among our People so utterly unclean, as that they are only fit to dwell alone, and without the Camp of Israel. Lev. xiij. 44. ves. 46. And as the Priest under the Law, who attempted the Cure of any other Leper, was by God's Direction to begin at the Right Ear, xiv. 14. and from thence to proceed to his Right Hand; so, I thought my self obliged to Print what I had Preach'd, that they might Handle what they had heard, and be the more perfectly Con∣vinc'd,
 how much it concerns us to Endeavour their Cure, and them to join with us in our Prayers to God for the Perfecting it.
The Subject Convinces me, how ready some will be to take Offence at the Author and Argument of this Sermon; and tho' I neither fear the Censure, nor court the Favour of Men so disaffected to the Government; yet I thought my self obliged to make Choice of such a Patron, as had been a Pattern of Loyalty to others, and was Himself Able and Willing to Protect both; and to Maintain that Truth, which hath been the Rule of Your Life: Your Lordships Devotion to Your Prince, and Zeal for His Service being as well known as Your Person. And tho' there be little in this Dis∣course Worthy of Your Judicious Eye, or Owning; Yet the Cause which it Pleads, being That for which Your Honour hath always Expressed so Great a Con∣cern, as to venture Your Life and Estate in it, makes me not Despair of its Acceptance: And Your Eminent and Ʋndeserved Goodness, of which I have had so long Experience, secures my Pardon for Prefixing Your Name to it.
If my Abilities had born Proportion to my Will, it should have been as far beyond, as it now will fall short of Your Lordships Expectations: But my Com∣fort is, That as it gives me an Happy Opportunity to Testifie my Gratitude for Your former Favours, so there will be a Power in Your Acceptance to make Plainness an Ornament, and to Oblige others to think
 well of the mean but sincere Performances of him, who accounts himself obliged to be, as well as to subscribe himself,
My Lord,

