



My L.
AS there was never any Book and Pa∣tron
more suited to one another, than
this Book is to your Lp; so there
were never any Reasons more satisfy∣ing
than those that have iniduced me to this De∣dication:
For, first, if in this Incredulous Age,
some men should charge the following Relati∣tions
of any falshoods; it were an injustice done
to your Lp, to pretend, that any man is so capa∣able
to vindicate them as your Lp; who amidst
the throng of so much Ecclesiastick and Civil Bu∣siess
at Court (from which you are now fain to
retire for case and refreshment to your wonted
Solitude in the Country) have been very con∣stant
and close in the study of those extraordina∣ry
Books cited in this Pamphlet; and so unwea∣ried
a hearer of those wonderful Preachers of
whom I now treat, that you have every day
heard them with joy for many hours together;
and never fail'd, with your own hand, to write
those learned and Elaborate Discourses I have
here published; and many more of the like na∣ture;
in which Zeal (to your glory and to the
shame of other Professors be it spoken) you had
no equal, but one Reverend Ruling Elder, a Bon∣net-maker
in Leithweind.
So that, My L▪ this Dedication is but only the
offering to you some few of the rare Sayings,
and comprehensive Sentences which grace and
adorn those Papers that your Lp. has been at
such pains to collect, and are still so careful to
preserve; and which you justly value more than
all the Rights and Charters of your very oppulent
and flourishing Fortune. My L. the easie access
which these high and mighty Preachers have e∣ver
allow'd your Lp. to their company, joyn'd
to that vast Experience which you have now ac∣quired
in the Stile of the Curaes, by your al∣lowing
them so fairly and fully to make their de∣fences
at the Council-board, gives you such a
title to judge of the Works of these Contending
Parties, as oe but your self can pretend to:
Your Lp. knows well, that it's in possible for the
ablest Curate or Prelate amongst them all, to
imitate the precious, powerful, Soul-ravishing,
Heart-serarching Elequence of those Sons of Thun∣der,
Kirkrone, Rule, Schilds, Areskine, Chrightone,
Dickson, &c. and that there is such a real diffe∣rence
betwixt their Sermons and that of the
Prelatical Party, that if the first be Gospel, as
your Lp. is fully perswaded; then it must be
received by all men, for an unquestionable truth,
that the Gospel was never preached in Scotland
when Prelacy prevail'd in it, as your Lp. and
the Godly party you Patronize, have often af∣firm'd:
And tho' this were not evident to all
that compare the Works of the present Profes∣sors
with those of their Opposits, yet your Lps.
simple word would pass in the World for a suffi∣cient
proof of it, Lying, Slandering, or the least
known falshood being infinitely below such a
true Gentleman: Nay, there is no Heroick Vir∣tue
more conspicuous in your Lp, than your Ve∣racity,
which hath so fill'd the Minds and
Mouths of all who intimately know you, that it
must needs one day make a considerable figure
in the account of your Lps. Life, which cannot
miss to see the light in a short time, being, that
for those three years last past, you have so suc∣cessfully
laboured to furnish plenty of Memoirs
and Authors for such a work.
But, 2dly. Some of the Malignants, who have
no tast for such Spiritual Sayings, as daily drop
from the Pens and Tongues of the Covenanted
Brethren, may accuse the Books and Sermons
here cited of Nonsense; but for as ill natured as
the World is grown, they must own, that your
Lp. has been very long, and very intimately ac∣quainted
with the truest and best Nonsense; so
that being a complete Master of it your self, it
must be allowed that you are also a very
good Judge. Besides, My L. the Curates them∣selves
cannot deny, but that your Lp. is fully
qualified to judge of the Works of such
learned men as are spoke of in this Treatise; if
they consider your wonderful knowledge of,
and great concern for the Mother University at
St. Andrews, which had the happiness to be
nearest to your Lp, and to be your particular
charge; and the Kingdom is not unsensible how
you Reformed and Purged it throughly, with
such unspeakable Justice and Impartially, that
even aged Gentlemen, Drs. of Divinity, and
Heads of Colledges, some who had been your
Lordships own Masters, and one your Kinsman,
had not he least regard nor respect from you,
because of their wanting Covenant Grace, without
which no man is valuable in your Lps. Eyes: Let
men but consider with what deliberation & fore∣fight

you did proceed, and what Prudent and
Learned Advice you did follow in providing for
the Education of the rising Generation in that
Society; and then they can never doubt of your
being wonderfully qualified both to be a Pa∣tron
and a Judge of this Book.
These Considerations, joyned to that of your
Lps. unexpressible Merit (for which I want
a Comparison) naturally led me to beg you
would take the following Flowers of Presbyteri∣an
Eloquence into your Protection, as cordially
as you do the Anthors of them: If your Lps.
unknown Modesty would allow it, I could tell
the World in a few words, some of your natu∣ral
and acquired Endowments: To your Cou∣rage
and Conduct which are equal, you have
added such a success, as to raise the Church and
State of Scotland to be the wonder and amaze∣ment
of the World: Such burning and un∣quenchable
Zeal; such strange and unaccoun∣table
Prudence, and unparallel'd Piety hath ap∣pear'd
in all your publick Actions, that if o∣thers
had but wrought together with your Lp.
in any measure, then I dare say (as your Lp.
excellently words it, in your pious printed
Speech to the Parliament) A greater dispatch
had been made of the Prelatists, and many ho∣nest
suffering Ministers e're now had been delive∣red
of their pinches; and the Enemies of the
Kirk and Covenant had evanished, as they did
lately from Court, when your Lp. condescend∣ed
to appear in person at it: It is to you that
the Nation owes her miraculous deliverance
from the Idolatries of the Creed, Lords-Prayer,
and Gloria Patri: It's your Lp. that hath re∣scued
us from the Superstitions of observing
Christmass, Easter, and Whitsunday, and from
all the Popish fopperies of Cassocks, close
sleev'd Gowns and Girdles: It's your Lp. that
enriched Their Majesties Treasure with the Re∣venues
of fourteen fat Bishops, and with admi∣rable
expedition have voided more than half
of the Churches of the Kingdom; and ad∣vanced
such a set of Preachers as it is cer∣tain,
never flourished in any period of the
Church of Scotland under any of their Ma∣jesties
Predecessors; and now that some malig∣nant
Lords have been brought into the Council
again; your Lp. hath retir'd from it, bravely
scorning to sit at the same Board with the Op∣posers
of the Cause.
My L. tho' the times have been reeling and
dangerous, yet your Lp. has, by extraordinary
management, put your self beyond the great∣est
reach and Malice of Fortune, for you have,
indeed, deserved well of all Parties; K. James
is obliged to thank you for the real Service
you have done him; and K. William for your
good Will to serve His Majesty: The Presbyte∣rian
Clergy own their good Livings to you;
and the Episcopal Divines are bound to you,
for advancing them to the Honour of being
Confessors: The stubborn Highlanders owe all
their Composition-money to your Lp; and the
West Country Rabble were highly enriched by
your Lp's Countenauce and Protection: You
scorn that malignant way of making your Pa∣lace
a Cooks Shop for Strangers; but tho' your
Commons be short, yet, it's well known, that
your Graces are long; at least after Dinner, the
full length of a Curates Sermon, and that is
three quarters of an hour: There is one thing
more that your Lordship is most remarkable
for, and that is, your daily practice of Family
Duty; it's well known, that there have been
more new Creatures begotten in your Lp's Fa∣mily,
than in any other we have yet heard of;
and in this matter, such is your great Goodness
and Humility, that you condescend often to al∣low
to some of your Servants, the Paternal Ho∣nour
that's known to be due to your Lp. But
all these, and many more such like extraordi∣nary
Qualifications which the World admire in
your Lordship, are nothing to those Supernatu∣ral
Gifts and Graces which are so evident in all
your Actions, that you often take God to wit∣ness,
that you never make one step without the
special Assistance and Direction of the Holy
Ghost.
My L. these and other Reasons (that I now
omit, since I hope this shall not be the last Ad∣dress
of this nature) makes me bold to give your
Lp. this trouble, and humbly to beg your Pro∣tection
to what you so much value, and that
you would but once at least, grant the Petiti∣on
of,
My L.

