



Dearly Beloved in the Lord,
TIS now a year and half since in my Cathedral I told you my sad apprehensions of Popish designs, to de∣stroy both us and our Re∣ligion: for though no particular disco∣very could then be made, yet the dis∣course and actings of several Papists in these parts did plainly shew they were then preparing that which is now disco∣vered: for they were then providing Horse and Arms, they posted about day and night, they threatned many that they must ere long turn or burn, and some told their friends that if it came to cutting of throats they should be saved; which

made it evident that not only they had some bloody design, but thought them∣selves also sure to effect it. Whereupon I besought you to arm your selves for the day of Tryal, and preached a Sermon to that effect: and afterwards the better to strengthen you against the incursion of Popish Superstitious Doctrines, I preach∣ed several Sermons how you were to stick close to the Scriptures, Gods Holy Word, which was our only Rule of Faith, and not knowing what kind of Pastor you might have after my death, whether a Protestant Pastor not well verst in such matters, or a Popish Pastor wholly devoted to them; I resolved at my decease to leave you these Sermons as a Legacy: for my great age of seventy five years past assuring me, according to 2. Pet. 1. 14, 15. That shortly I must put off this my Tabernacle, I will endeavour that

you may be able after my decease to have these things alwaies in remembrance. But now I have a new and farther reason to hasten this my Legacy to you, because I hear my bloody Enemies the Jesuitical Priests are resolved as soon as they can find opportunity, to hasten my death. This hath made me speed these Sermons to the Press, lest I and they fall into their hands who will give the same speedy end to both. And the truth of what I now deliver to you I trust by Gods assisting grace to seal with my blood, if he call me to it; for then I know he will enable me for it. And though I am a weak carnal worm, of my self not able to do any thing, yet by Gods powerful grace I may, and I hope I shall be enabled to do all things: for he hath said, I will never leave thee nor forsake thee. And therefore I most hum∣bly and most readily commit the keeping

of my Soul to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator: His will be done.
Amen.
