



Right Worshipful,
DEdications of Books being a custome no lesse com∣mendable then common, did engage my prefixing of your worthy name to this small Treatise, and simple (I dare not so call it, for the mat∣ter declared in it, but the management of it by the Author) Sermon: preached (in obedience to the commands of Church-Officers) some moneths since, and now
 published to the provoking of more ge∣neral zeale against sinful Altars then our times afford. Worthy Sir, the aimes propounded to my self in this present Dedication, are such as are common to all Dedications: First, to expresse my thankful acceptance and acknowledge∣ment of your undeserved respect to me, a meere stranger in your frequent at∣tendance on my Ministery; and fervent expostulations with some in my behalf, in matters wherein I have been con∣cerned, and many other wayes expressed. Secondly, and chiefly to excite your zeal for, and engage your attendance on Gods one only Altar distinct from, nay, in op∣position to all false Altars of human ere∣ction. Sir, I do not in the least tax you of lukewarmnesse, or suspect your recession from Gods Altar: no, my self, and ma∣ny others that minister to the Lord, ha∣ving observed your constant attendance on the Ordinances of the Gospel, your countenance to the Ministers of the Go∣spel, your complaints against the Errors, Heresies, and Schismes of the times, with your careful turning away from such as innovate new and false principles, and practices of Divine worship, must needs bear witnesse that you are very fit to be
 one of the ten Princes of our English Is∣rael, to be delegated to expostulate with separate brethren concerning their seem∣ing (at least) building of an Altar against the Altar of the Lord. Sir, though I speak this without flattery, yet I cannot but observe you obnoxious unto danger, and a fit object of the Apostles Caution, Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall:or. 10.12. and that not only as you are a man subject to infirmity, as are your brethren: but also as you are eminent by your place, a Ruler in our Israel, ca∣pable of being more serviceable to God whilest you stand, and to Satan if you fall. We see Corahs rebellion and form∣all Altar-building-sin drew in two hun∣dred and fifty Rulers famous in the Con∣gregation, and men of renowne. Satan well knowes he is a meane man that drawes not after him some Clients: and that the multitude (like Bees) follow their master. Hence his policie is to make the Leaders of the people, leaders of them into sin. May I therefore be bold to commend to your reading this small Treatise, as an antidote to tempta∣tion, and guard against all the assaults of Satan, by which he may labour to batter
 in pieces your present zeale to the Lords Altar. And now, Sir, I cannot passe over the third common aime of Dedications, wherein you may be serviceable to the Author; nay, to God and the soules of men: that is, that your eminent Name may commend this poore Sermon to publick acceptance, and your report of the words of the Lord therein spoke, may provoke a desire in others the Ru∣lers of this sinful Citie to read and hear it: Sir, it is worth observation that Ba∣ruchs roll written against Altar-building Jerusalem,Jer. 36.13, 114, 15, 16. from the mouth of the Pro∣phet Jeremiah; by the favour of Micha∣iah the son of Gemariah the son of Sha∣phan, obtained an audience from all the Princes; nay, an accesse into the pre∣sence of the King of Israel. If in this re∣spect this small Tract may become a Ba∣ruchs roll; It may be they will present their supplications before the Lord, and returne every one from his evil way: for great is the anger and the furie that the Lord hath pronounced against this people. Sir, I will no longer trouble you, but leave it under the shadow of your Worships favour, not doubting your readinesse to cover the infirmities of
 it, and its Author with your scarlet robe; and beg of God that it may be useful to your counsel and comfort in constant attendance on, and contentions for Gods one only Altar. This, Sir, shall be the daily prayer of him who is,
SIR,

