



Honoured Sir,
THIS payment is Scholar's Coin; such as we have, we give; tho it seldom deserves a Receipt in full, yet it is fair Reckoning, and that savours of Ho∣nesty when insolvent. My Accompt is Seven years long without a Days intermission. I have no room for par∣ticular Items, and therefore must insert my acknowledgment
 for summa totalis. The value of Letters sink in time of War usually, yet they are always currant with the Ingeni∣ous, and in a special manner with Sir John Thomson. I send this as naturally to your Study, as Rivers return to the Ocean; and to your Patronage, expecting the same quiet to it that I enjoyed under it for a considerable period of my life, when the Weather abroad was very stormy. But I crave no Patronage, without Approbation to the Truth in it, not the Treatment of it; its Garb is very Course, but its Heart is Honest, for which I appeal to your Judgment, for I know not where to find a more Competent Judge of the Doctrine of our first Reformers, from whence we Glory in the Name of Pro∣testant: Nor where to find a more Impartial Judge in any Affair: Catonism is your greatest Crime, your Adversaries being Judges. I wish your prosperity in Piety and Learning, might encourage many an English Gentleman that needs it, to follow your Example, and convince them that the last may be first; and I have a constant Monitory of Sympathy to wish, that you may prosper, and be in health, as your Soul prospers.


Madam,
SƲch has been your kindness, that I ought not in this Monument of Gratitude, nor can I in any, part your Honour from Sir John, nothing but Death can be so cruel, as to break a Bond of Love cemented with so many amiable Pldges, thn which the Nobility of your Birth, and the Happiness of your Engrafture, are not greater Blessings. Rachel and Leah, with both their Handmaids, have not laid more living Stones in the building Jacob's House; and yet Number is the smallest Blessing, it is not one of a Tribe, or two of a Family, rich Blessings! but some are already crown'd with Glory, some nigh ripe in Grace, all hopeful. But Children, hopeful Children, gracious Children,
 glorious Children, are not the only good things you have been fertile in; I have been a witness, a sharer, a dispen∣ser to some of a more moral nature; but it is yet too ear∣ly, and long may it be before the fit Season for publishing your Vertues.


Captain,
YOur particular Desire midwiv'd this Birth into the World, it is just you stand Godfather for it also; that Desire was but a small Spark of the Zeal you have exerted for publishing the Truth of the Gospel in City and Country. By Sea and Land, in England and the Indies, you have promoted preaching of the Gospel. It is not one Synagogue only you have help'd to build, nor one Pilgrim Prophet your House has been Hospital to. You have not only been a kind Patron to the Levites in your Family, but a Father to their Children, and a Husband to the Widow; and as your help has been meet in your Domesticks, so chearfully encouraging in your Piety and Charity.


Gentlemen,
THere is no Name better known to me than yours; some in Scotland very ancient Families, if the An∣tiquaries Rule be true, your Name is older than the use of Sirname. Some in the North of England very numerous; in Germany some Soldiers of great Valour. Some Divines of great Learning both in Scotland and England; four noted Writers at one time. Some Merchants of great Ri∣ches, as the four famous Brothers, Mr. Maurice, the Colo∣nel, Sir William, and the Major, who found the Stone their Father in vain sought long for. But though neither Divinity nor Morality consist in Nams, I never observ'd any Name that Ʋprightness and Integrity did accompany with fewer Exceptions, and generally a love to Religion,
 than the Name of Thomson: But as there is a Name bet∣ter than the name of Sons and Daughters, so than this of yours, to be the Sons of God, called by his Name, and Cal∣lers on it. That this may be more generally your Privi∣ledge, and that this small Treatise of the fewe of Heaven, the fee of Felicity, the hold of Happiness, and tenure of Eternity, may contribute to entitle you to this Inheritance, and give you comfortable Evidence of it, is and shall be the Prayer of


