



SIR,
NExt to that Devote Society, whose I am, and whose Desire was my Call to publish this Discourse, it became me to pitch on you for a Theophilus, to whom and your Second Self I might Dedicate it; it being the First Fruits of a small Recovery of Health from a dangerous and tedious Sickness, and you being so constant a Friend and comfortable a Visitant under it; Amicus certus in re incertâ cernitur. I hope you will not be offended that I have thus published your Name, you being a publick Person for so many Years, and it being the Desire of all good Men that know you, that your Vertues were still in a more publick and visible Station. There are but few who have serv'd Three such Kings without real or reputed Blame by one Party or other, in Wisdom, Diligence or Fidelity, as you have done; and long may you live to do so.
Madam! All things under your Care are in print; and for that Cardinal Vertue of your Sex, Cleanliness and Neatness, you are a Pattern both at London and Epsom. I wish all Gentlewomen would copy out the rest of your Vertues in their Lives also. 1. In making the Pleasures and Diversions of Civil Converse wear the Livery of Religion, recommending their Profession as that which is not only consistent with Chear∣fulness and Sociableness, but as that which refines it, and pre∣serves
it from Extravagancy and Troublesomness. 2. In adorning themselves in such a modest and acceptable Dress, that neither runs to the Extreme of the Vanity or Costliness of some, who think their Habit is never fashionable enough, ex∣cept they become the Pity of Persons wise and grave, and the Scoff and Ridicule of the Vain and Foolish like them∣selves, and think their Apparel and Furniture never rich enough, except they endanger the Estates and Credits of their Parents or Husbands, and bring them under the Curse of Wo∣mans ruling over them, and Childrens oppressing them; nor the singular Affectedness of others, who think the most of Re∣ligion is wrapt up in Garments, or that a Profession is invisible, if it have not a Badge in their Cloaths; and that to be the Duty of a Sect, that themselves think the Sin of an Office. 3. In that Abhorrence of Idleness, not only overseeing your House∣hold Affairs with your own Eye, but giving an Example with your own Hand, and sometimes bearing the heaviest part of the Burden. 4. In the charitable Improvement of a plentiful Allowance, by which they may lay up so sure a Foundation, that no Earthquake can shake, but may establish. 5. In a true and constant Sympathy with the meanest and lovest of Acquain∣tance and Friends, not forgetting them in Adversity, or slight∣ing them whilst unserviceable.
The more of Perfection you have both obtained, the more easie the Duty of Progress and Growth will be, and the greater Obligation lies on you for it from him who made the difference. The Foundations of Religion are Living Roots, and they have a Sun to shine upon them that knows neither Night nor Winter.
That you both may in this, and all other things, prosper, and that this small Offering, and every other Providence may promote it, is, and shall be the Prayers of

