



SIR,
POOR Darius is decreed ro be unfortunate e∣very
where. His Stars pursue him two thousand
years after his death, tear his Image, and em∣ploy
his Friends against him▪ for I am one of 'em. I find
him in Curtius, a Prince of Valour, Clemency, Justice,
and great moral Virtues, suffering under the heaviest ca∣lamities,
that ever befel Man. And I have much pity
for him; and more abhorrence for the Villains that Mur∣der'd
him, than those that cut off Aexander. Darius has
no success, the greater still the pity. If Alexander moves
my pity, 'tis when he has success, because 'tis the ru∣ine
of his great Virtues. Darius never parted with his;
nor good nor ill Fortune vanquish'd his Virtue, that
Darius, of the two, seems the greater Conqueror, and in
a common Waggon gor'd in his Blood, appears a more
Glorious Prince▪ than Alexander in his Chariot trium∣phing
over the Indians. For Darius in all misery tri∣umphs
over Fortune. Fortune most insolently triumphs

over Alexander. The description Curtius gives of him and
his Army, when they came from the Conquest of the
Indies, is a perfect picture of one of our lewd debauchees
of quality, coming in the head of drunken Ruffians
from beating a Watch. Curtius say, a thousand sober
Men might have taken 'em all prisoners. And no doubt,
cou'd a lusty whiggish London Watch have met with
'em, Alexander the Great had been carried to the Coun∣ter,
notwithstanding his Royal Dignity, or perhaps the
sooner for it. Therefore, if Darius moves no pity, I
am afraid it is not his fault, but mine; and he is once
more fallen into ill hands. I am apt to think I com∣mitted
a fault, in not taking the whole Story; but lea∣ving
out Queen Statira, and her two Daughters, High∣born
Princesses, well known to the World, whose mis∣fortunes
wou'd have probably mov'd more compassion,
than those of a strange Lady, obscurely descended from
my Fancy, which I have introduc'd in their stead. But
when I first contriv'd and writ this Play, my Judgment
was overborn by some I much regard; who told me,
those Princesses had been already seen very often, their
Beauties wou'd now seem stale, and a new Face be more
agreeable. My judgment at that time might be easily
born down, for it was weak, as I my Self was, by a
redious sickness, else I had not medled with Tragedy;
for there is nothing more plain, than that the humor
of the present Age runs quite to another extreme,
too far. Nor do the present Company of Actors a∣bound
with Tragedians enow, to master that Hu∣mor.
And they have no reason to contend with it,
since they can please at a much cheaper rate, by

Farce and Comedy; and truly so can I, they cost me less
pains than Tragedy does. But when I first medled with
this Play, and long after, I was not in Humor for Co∣medy.
A Poet, like a Fiddle, will never sound mer∣rily
in wet weather. The Trebles, which are the strings
for Jigs, will nor endure stretching. So I was forc'd on
grumbling Tragedy; and having done somthing in it,
was loth to lose my labour. Thus much I am willing to
say against myself, because it is Truth. But as I will not be
arrogant, so not over-fawning, because there is Foppery
and Affectation in both. A misfortune fell upon this
Play, that might very well dizzy the Judgments of my
Audience. Just before the Play began, Mrs. Barry was
struck with a very violent Fever, that took all Spirit from
her, by consequence from the Play; the Scenes She acted
fell dead from her; and in the 4th Act her distemper grew
so much upon her, She cou'd go on no farther, but all
her part in that Act was wholly cut out, and neither
Spoke nor Read; that the People went away without
knowing the contexture of the Play, yet thought they
knew all. Now we know, how hard it is to recover the Re∣putation
of one that's executed; it is almost as hard as
it is to recover his Life. The circulation of Blood is
stopt in the Strangled; and the circulation of Reason in
the Living, by violent prepossessions. And when the mul∣titude
are possest of any thing, it is not easy to get it from
'em. They have great Strength and Authority too. And
not alone in these trifles, but in things of the highest con∣sequence,
even in matters of Religion. As in these toyes,
People dare not be pleas'd, but as they find others are; so

in Religion, they dare not be sav'd, but in the way they
find others go. Now though in matters of Religion, where
Truth is of great concernment, and to suffer for it, Ho∣nourable
and Advantageous, a Man may boldly contend
with the whole World; but in so foolish a Cause, as whe∣ther
the fall of Darius be a good Story of a Play, and
whether I have manag'd it well, or no, to hector the
World, if it dares differ from me, wou'd be notorious
Arrogance and Folly; nay, Injustice too: for let Men
have what Opinions they will, of this Play, they
have paid me for 'em, and paid me handsomly, why
shou'd I seek to take it from 'em? I will then say no
more concerning the Play; if that be faulty, I must
take care to have the fewer faults in my self. But
certainly I shall not be endur'd by any good Man,
nay, even by my self, if I shou'd not here take oc∣casion,
to render, with all possible Humility and Du∣tifulness,
my Thanks to His Majesty, for the Ho∣nor
of his Presence, on the Day which was to be
for my advantage; which He was pleased to Grant
me, out of a most Gracious and Royal regard to
what had formerly appear'd well in me, both as a
Poet and a Subject. I know not how the Minds of
others are wrought upon; but such a piece of Roy∣al
Justice and Favour is to me more strong than a
Law to bind me for ever to my good Behaviour. I
cannot also forbear to mention the many special Fa∣vours,
I have receiv'd from the present Lord Cham∣berlain.
Obligations are Chains, but when they come
from Princes, and Men of worth, they are badges

of Honour, and a Man is tempted to shew 'em,
when he goes abroad, I confess, not only my
Gratitude, but my Vanity, makes me name him,
Past dispute his excellent Understanding, and ma∣ny
other great Qualities, are an Ornament to his
High Office; then well may His Favours be a
Grace to me.
Now, SIR, I shall come to you, I have re∣ceiv'd
several kindnesses from you, have found
in you at all times, an inclination and readiness to
do me any friendly Office; all which have ex∣tremely
won upon me; and I am very uneasy
under Obligations, till I have made some return.
But I can make no other, than of this kind, which
I therefore beg you to accept. It is true, com∣mn
Dedicators have brought this sort of Ad∣dresses
into as much contempt, as common Evi∣dences
have done Swearing. The true and first
intent of 'em was Sacred. A Dedication ought
to be a little Chappel, Consecrated to the Me∣mory
of some Friend of Worth; and a Reposi∣tory
of Holy Reliques. Now 'tis become like the
Temple Church, a place where Knights of the Post
ply; that are ready to say any thing for any one.
But I have kept a better Reputation in the World,
you will come amongst good company. There
are few Names fixt before my Writings, but may
serve like the Phenix's, on the Front of our new
Buildings, for marks of Insurance; and might

insure 'em, were it possible. But I come to you
with no such foolish design. For how ridiculous,
and unreasonable is it, to desire another to defend
my impertinence? An office no wise Man will un∣dertake,
and the greatest Man that is cannot per∣form.
My Writings, when they are out of my
hand, are no longer mine; the World pays for
'em, and will manage 'em as they please. All
care of 'em is vain, therefore I take none. My
Honesty no Man shall dispose of but myself. 'Tis
to preserve that, and not my Writings, I beg your
leave for this Address; and I wou'd not accept
your leave, if it wou'd cost me any flattery. You
have liv'd in the last Court, and this, with great
Reputation. Have approv'd yourself, to be a Man
of Honour, Loyalty, Courage, Generosity, good
Sense, good Nature, and good Morals; which
ought to be celebrated for the publick Good, which
too much wants such examples. I know how ill
the sick and corrupt World, digests the least praise
of any but themselves. How tyr'd even good
Men are, if you lead 'em far into the commen∣dation
of any Man; and the bad will not go along
with you, but on some ill design. Therefore I
shall keep where I am safe, where every Man will
be o' my side. No Man that knows you, but
confesses you to be one of the worthiest Gentle∣men
they know. I shou'd therefore shew very lit∣tle

worth of myself, if I shou'd slight both your Fa∣vour
and Desert. And, SIR, I hope you, who
have forgiven Writings of mine, that shew my Fol∣lies;
will not be displeas'd with this Dedication,
where I shew the few Virtues I have, my Justice,
and Integrity, which are the best claims I have to
the Title of
SIR,
Your most Humble
and Obliged Servant,

