



BEauty (Madam) has received from Nature a Domi∣nion so pleasing, that Men contend not with more am∣bition for Empire over their own Sex, than subjecti∣on to Yours. Kings have worn Your Sexes Chains with as much pleasure as their Crowns, and Conquerours have fol∣lowed Your Triumphs with as much delight as they have seen their own attended by Kings: A Dominion so absolute, that all Your Commands are Laws. Indeed Princes who are be∣loved, shall be absolute, their Subjects will force Arbitrary Power upon 'em: Nothing enslaves like Love, Force binds our Hands, but Love captivates our Hearts. How absolute then must Beauty be? No man yet ever had the will much less the power to rebell against it. They who should seek to depose it, would begin a Civil War in their own bosoms, and lay

waste and ruinate the most delightful Possessions of their minds. And (lastly) so large, that it finds Subjects where it finds men: Its Empire extends as far as Humane Nature, and its Spoils are all that's excellent in the whole Creation. But men claim to be subjects of its Empire as the birth-right of Reason, and esteem that (too) as one of Reason's great ad∣vantages. Beasts are excluded that Claim; cannot be natu∣ralized into that Dominion, for want of the ennoblements of Reason. Men are exalted to love Beauty by the same faculty which lifts 'em to adore Heaven; and there is a kind of Divi∣nity in Beauty, which makes Love to be a kind of Religion: Beauty is certainly the fairest visible Image of Divinity in the world. The Ancients, therefore, built Temples and Altars to it, and ranked it amongst Celestial Powers. We Christians have much ado to abstain from that Idolatry; however we pay it as high Honours, though under other Names. That these, Madam, are the Rights and Possessions of Beauty, you cannot but know; that they are therefore yours all the World knows, but you. But, Madam, wrong your Beauty in your own opinion as much as you please, you cannot injure it in others; the Sun will shine though you wink, and you will be fair, whether you regard it or no. And, that Beauty will have Empire, how great, may appear by the many and mighty Con∣quests it makes; and in a Nation too where you have such numerous and considerable Rivals for that Dominion, some perhaps as powerful as any in the World, You, like the God∣dess of Beauty, gain the Golden Ball, not from humble Mor∣tals,

but your fellow Goddesses. How clear a Title you have to it, I shall not say, for I shall not please you by it, and I shall displease them: Nothing is so hateful to the conquered as to be upbraided with their misfortune: But certainly how mean an opinion soever you have, Heaven has none, of that Workmanship which he takes care to plant such Lights of Glory round about to shew: And though Nature might have disco∣vered you to more advantage in a greater Empire, and by brighter Lights of Fortune, yet it proves how fond she was of that fair Idea which she was not able to conceal. They then who admire you, shew but their good Manners to Nature and Providence, in commending Nature's workmanship, and Providence's choice of a Favourite. But I fear the many Fair Ones, over whom you tryumph, will think themselves treated by this Discourse with too much insolence; however I am sure they will not grutch you the few Flowers that a poor Poet brings to strew in your way, especially when they come from Gardens warm'd by the lustre of your favour; and watered by Royal Bounty, which you caus'd to be shower'd upon it: moved to it by no Friends of mine, for I had few; by no Merits, for I had fewer; but only by your own excellent mind. How many attractives then have the following Poems to excuse their pressing into your presence? They attend you not only as born in general Vassalage to your Beauty, but as Creatures that received life from the concurrence of your Fa∣vour. I am now engaging in another Theme more safe than the former, I shall anger neither Sex by expatiating on an

Excellence which will contract You no envy, Your Patro∣nage of Wit, that Province You may enjoy without any trou∣ble from multitudes of Pretenders, You need not fear lest the ambitious Great Ones of either Sex invade you in it. No (Heaven be thanked) we live in an Age wherein men are content to want it, and to let others possess as much of it as they please: We need no Laws to secure us in the possession of that propriety. Witty men indeed do often quarrel with one ano∣ther about it, because they know the value of it; others think it not worth contending for: Against it indeed they often strive, and they have reason, it treats 'emrudely, will have no friend∣ship no acquaintance with them, will make no court to 'em, will scarcely lend 'em a little sense for common Conversation: This carriage I must confess is very provoking, especi∣ally when to men of Quality. They have cause to be angry with it, and to revenge themselves of it, as they often seek to do, by thrusting it out of their own, or any favour which might advantage it, setting up Fashions, Dresses, or any thing in the room of it. Your Grace then must both know and value the Jewel well, which you will take up and wear, when it is not only flung into the dirt by others, but trod upon. And wear it safely you may. Wit may dress you in all the lustre it has, and never endanger you a blasting from the fascinati∣ons of envious and malignant eyes. But though by ascribing this praise to You I displease not others, I fear I shall Your Grace, for by protecting a despised Quality You could not aim at praise: Besides praise being one of the vainest pleasures

of mankind, so excellent a mind cannot nor need not delight in it: You may find satisfaction enough at home, You need not go abroad for happiness. And we who place Your Statues in our Gardens, add no glory to You, only make our own Walks delighted in by our selves, and frequented by others, which else would lye neglected by both. I fix then Your Grace's Image at this Jewish Temple Gate, to render the Building sacred, nor can the Jews be angry with so beautiful a Pro∣fanation; and in guiding them to You, they are conducted like their Ancestors to repose and happiness, in the most fair and delightful part of the World. There I shall leave 'em, and retire to the contemplation of it, no moderate degree of happiness to one who is with so much devotion,
MADAM,

