



My Lord,
AN address of this kind, from a Man so idle and unusefull as I am, is at all times unseasonable; to a Person, whom the Wisdom o' the King, and the good Fortune o' the King∣dom, employ in so many great Affairs, as take up your Lordships hours. But it can never be more out of time, than now; when your Lordship is in sorrow, for the loss of your Brother, the late great Earl of Leicester, who mourns not, that knew him? All that knew him, lov'd him, if they lov'd mankind; for, a greater Example of humanity, the World, I believe, has seldom found. All honour'd him, that knew him, if they valued Truth and Wisdom: so much good sence sell from him, in his common Conversation, that none convers'd with him, but were both Entertain'd and Improv'd, if they were capable of it. And, no doubt, many great Men were the greater for his Acquaintance; and thus, tho' in a private Life, he influenc'd the publick: and the whole Kingdom was the better for him. Some survive themselves, and their Understandings die before 'em. His mind retain'd its wonderfull vigor to the last: He was pleasant to all, when years and pains ad taken all pleasures from him, but what he found in doing good of his bounty, I have of∣ten shar'd, and so have many more. And, I was always extreamly proud of any marks of favour from such an impartial and discerni

Judge. I cou'd dwell on so pleasing a subject, as the extraordi∣nary Qualities of this great Nobleman: but since, Providence has ta∣ken him from the World, to number up his deserts and vertues were but to set before your Lordship your losses, and the misfortunes of the Kingdom. Now I am entring on another copious subject; what does this Kingdom owe your Lordship? you have been in several Reigns, one of the greatest Ornaments of England: but you have of late been one of its fortunate preservers: your Lordship was an eminent Instrument in this Revolution, which has been so happy to England, and the greatest part of Europe. Had not this change been, almost all Europe had been overrun by France; England, for certain, had lost its Rights, Liberties, and Religion, and perhaps, been no more a Kingdom, but a Province to France, a Vassal to Vas∣sals, and for all its Wealth had nothing but a Wafer. What cou'd have stop'd that inundation of power, which was rolling on, and swelling as it roll'd, delug'd many parts of Europe, and threatned all? What cou'd a formidable Fleet and Army, almost innumerable, have ask'd of a few divided Counsellors, at White-hall, which they durst have deny'd? And what a glorious figure does England now make, in comparison of what it did some years ago? It lay one Reign be∣calm'd in Luxury: In another Fetter'd: In this Reign it has not on∣ly freed it self, but humbled France, and protected Germany, Spain, and Holland, and appears one of the greatest Powers in Christendom. How much then is owing to your Lordship, by whose Wisdom, and Courage, this Revolution was contriv'd and carry'd on; in a Reign, when the least opposition to unlimited power, was judg'd an unpardonable Crime? But, I may quit this subject, since what your Lordship has done, will make a noble part of English History. In this Play, I set Tyranny before the Eyes of the World, and the dreadfull Consequences of lawless and boundless power. But some wou'd not have the World frightned with such a Figure nor an I∣mage of a Government profan'd, which they adore: 'Tis well for 'em, that they worship an unknown God. If their Dwellings and E∣states, (if they have any) lay in the reach of a mighty Prince, whose Will is Law, I believe, they wou'd be glad if they were secur'd from For∣reign Invasions, by the English Seas; and from boundless power at home, by English Laws. I have suffer'd severely, and therefore may be allow'd to speak. The Favour, or rather Authority, which a mighty Neighbouring Kingdom, had in our Court some years ago, got my Inheritance, which, tho' it lay in the Desarts of America, would

have enabled me (if I cou'd have kept it) to have liv'd at my ease in these beautifull parts o' the World; the loss of it has made Eng∣land a Desart to me. No wonder then if I am pleased with the Suc∣cesses of our Wise and Valiant King, who was born to free and do justice to opprest mankind: and, I hope, to my self. And now, I doubt not, but your Lordship, who has been so instrumental in pre∣serving and establishing the Liberties of all Englishmen, will also per∣mit a Poet to enjoy Poetick Liberties. I mean, that leave which has been long granted, of addressing to such great Men as your Lord∣ship, for your Favour and Protection▪ I need Encouragement from others, because I have none from my self. No Man can have a meaner opinion of me, than I have of my self. I am opprest by my self, I will not say by my modesty, for modesty is a vertue; and modesty and boasting are inconsistent; my fortune has long languish∣ed under an unmanly spiritless temper of mind, which makes me rather choose to suffer than give trouble to any: nay, than to seek the favour of those, who take a pleasure in obliging. A Poet may very well hope for Patronage from a Nobleman, who is of the blood of Sir Philip Sidney. And I have found your Lordship ready to as∣sist me: your Lordship addrest to the late Queen of ever-blessed Me∣mory, in my behalf. And, by your intercession, I had a large share of her Princely Bounty: and, no doubt, I shou'd have had more, if England had longer enjoy'd her. And now, my Lord, I humbly beg your Lordships favour, not for this Play, but my self: at least, that I may have leave thus publickly to honour my self, with the Title of,
My Lord,

