


May it please your Grace,
THis Comedy was Written by the Sacred Command of our late most Excellent King, of ever blessed and beloved Memory. I had the great good Fortune to please Him often at His Court in my Masque, on the Stage of Tragedies and Comedies, and so to advance my self in His good opinion; an Honour may render a wiser Man than I vain; for I believe he had more equals in extent of Dominions than of Understanding. The greatest pleasure he had from the Stage was in Comedy, and he often Commanded me to Write it, and lately gave me a Spanish Play called No Puedeser: Or, It cannot Be. out of which I took part o' the Name, and design o' this. I received the Employment as a great Honour, because it was difficult; requiring no ordinary skill and pains to build a little Shallop, sit only for the Spanish South Seas, into an English Ship Royal; but I believe my self able for the Work, because he thought so, who understood me and all Men, better than I only knew my self, en∣courag'd by Royal judgment that never was mistaken, I have attained a success I never should have met with, had I only followed my own feeble Genius, which often deceives me. That I may enjoy the little fortune I have got with the better reputation, and not ramble the World like a blind Author, observing none but my self, I make this humble Application to your Grace. I am sure all the World will approve my choice. I cannot be guilty of Flattery if I would; nor slander Wit (if I had any) by ful∣some and wanton Paintings. Here will be no Tryal of skill how I can praise, Nature has done it to my Hands, and devis'd and expos'd finer Ideas, than I am able to Translate. A gracefulness of Person, excellence of Un∣derstanding, largeness of Heart, a Loyalty, Gallantry, Integrity, Humi∣lity, and many Qualities above my description. Fortune also has been more wise than usual, She frequently honours and enriches others to her own disgrace—but here She shares in the Praise, and Commends her own Wisdome, in what She bestows on your Grace. She has advanc'd Honour in Advancing you, Titles, Greatness and Command may be proved, they have attained you. Wealth has a value in your Hands, 'Tis no vile par∣don, poor flatterer, servile Lacquey, wretched Prisoner; but excellent Mi∣nister of a just wise and liberal Prince. Shou'd I mention all the Qualities, that have long gained you the highest Honours from Prince and People, I should rather seem to describe a Province than a Man; for what single Pro∣vince can afford what are at once in your Grace, a General, a Statesman, Courtier, and all in perfection; and which is rare in such company, a Martyr. What has your Grace both done and suffered, for our Religion, Laws, Liberties and Honour? And not only in the former times of Rebel∣lion, but the latter of Confusion? When the pretended Protestants of the times, out of their Zeal against all Popish Doctrines, abhorring you for ad∣hering to good Works.

As an English-man, I am bound in justice, to pay you all the Honours I can. You have been an Ornament, and support to the Crown and Church of England, both in your Person and Posterity. Many great Men no doubt have sprung from your example, but none equalling those descended from your self. The late brave Earl of Ossery, advanced the Honour of our Na∣tion, both by Sea and Land. 'Tis hard to say in which Element he made us most renown'd, and for which vertue. He was no more to be vanquished by falshood than fear; Loyalty, Fidelity, and Gallantry, are Vertues insepara∣ble from the House of Ormond; we find e'm in every branch of it, and at all seasons. The Earl of Arran, Attacked in the late days of Confusion, a Bloody, Popular, and Formidable Error in its Camp, Fortified and De∣fended by all the strength of England; and for ever secur'd his own, and so much of the Publick reputation as was entrusted to him; managing that charge with the same Wisdom, Justice, and Fidelity he has done the King∣dom of Ireland, and many other great Commands, for the Honour and Ser∣vice of the King. In the Young Earl of Ossery we have great assurances, the Grandfather and Father shall live in him, and receive the last rewards of Vertue Men are capable of in this World, to have their Honour and Happiness extend beyond their own beings. And herein the History of your Grace seems a Comment on the Fifth Commandment, you have always Honoured the Father of your Country, and your Days of Honour conti∣nue long in the Land, in your own Person, and your Illustrious Race. A useful President to England.
That I may approve my self an honest and grateful English-man, is one reason of my Address: I have also other obligations on me. Your Grace has been a Princely patron and encourager of Poetry; a Pleasant but Bar∣ren Country where my Genius and inclination has cast me. I am entan∣gled among the inclinations of it, though it affords nothing but a good Ayre, a little vain reputation, and we must climb for it, and shall miss it too, if envy or ill nature can hinder us. There were no living, if some great Men elevated not only in Quality but Understanding above the rest of the World, did not Protect us from these Barbarians, because they know us. I beseech your Grace then give me leave to pay my Duty to you. Many and great are your Revenues in Honour, in the Camp, the Court, the Church, and the whole Common-wealth of Learning. The Poet may be employed as well as the Historian. I have made but a small Collection, but I have put it in hands that I hope will not soon embezle it. This Come∣dy has rais'd it self such a fortune in the World, I believe it will not soon run away. Give it leave to Honour it self with your great Name, and me with the Title of,
May it please your Grace,

