



My Lord,
IT is a bold Expedition which a Writer under∣takes, when he sends his Forces abroad in∣to the World; he is to encounter Enemies of all kinds; not only, vast populous Pro∣vinces of effeminate understanding, who of∣ten defeat with their numbers; but Bold, Bar∣barous, Hardy, and invincible Fools who will dye upon the Turfe, rather than yield: nay, and his friends too often break their League, and send secret supplies to his Enemies. All Reputations look on themselves as invaded, and every one pre∣tends to Reputation. Fame is a great Common, where every Cot∣tager thinks he has a right, and will rather suffer it all to lye waste, than any part to be inclosed. Every man thinks himself by Birth, a Wit, as every Spaniard thinks himself a Gentleman; he has as good Bloud in his veins, as Persons of the greatest Dig∣nities, onely wants their Titles; that is to say, every Man wou'd be a Wit, if he had it. Yet as much value, as they have for it in themselves, they hate no man more, than he who about s in that, for which they wou'd have themselves esteemed. But the enmity of poor vulgar Heads were nothing, if Men of the first rank of Wit, had not Feudes among themselves; 'Tis a strange Lunacy that possesses 'em: a man that has the largest Habitation in Fame, will yet think all his Windows darkened, if another soars over him.

Men have not the same Phrensies in other things. The greatest lo∣ver of Musique in the World, does not think he shares one Note less of it, for a croud of Listners; what ever quarrels there have been among Trading Nations, about ingrossing Commerce, none ever fought to ingross the Winds, because no Ship had the less for an∣other having his Sails full: and yet Wit-Adventurers, perpetually contend for the breath of the multitude, and think themselves becalm'd, if any one has a gale. In short, a Writer is lookt up∣on as an Invader of the World; and all Mankind are in Arms against him. In such a desperate condition, he must implore, of some potent Person, either his Conduct, or at least leave to awe the World with his name; and I know no greater Name, nor more able to afford me protection than your Lordships. It is but pretend∣ing your Lordship favors this Play, and that shall give it safe Conduct through understandings of every Degree and Climate; it can pass through no Region, where your Lordship has not an absolute Command. The Traders to the hot Southern Climes of Wit, find in your Lordship the Golden Coast, vast heaps of that Wit, which passes currant in the World, and bears the Images of others, are known to be coyned out of your Lordships Oar; but nothing can be richer, than that of your own Refining. More temperate Heads which ake under the oppression of that Heat, delight themselves in your Lordships Courtesy, Generosity, Integrity, Honour, and all the more familiar Vertues: no part of Mankind, but may find some particular Excellence or other in your Lordship, to please them. The Vertues of this age, methinks converse with one ano∣ther, like the Wits of it, in parties and factions; seldom uni∣ting together; every Vertue takes a House by it self, and there de∣bauches with a thousand Vices. How often do we see Wit, insepa∣rably associating with that Rascal, Ill Nature; and those Fopps, Conceits, and Selfishness, and not one vertue in his company? as often do we find courage blustring by it self, and Wit, not da∣ring to come near him. Integrity, Friendship, and Honesty, are so miserably under the hatches, one knows not where to find those poor Creatures; they never in any age, lived in much heighth, they are not born to great fortune, and seldom acquire one; Kna∣very has the only Dutch Genius, to get an Estate, but yet they never were so down as now, they now scarce at all appear, or if

they do, we find Wit not often in their company. And thus I might discourse, shou'd I go round to all the Moral Vertues; But they are not all so unsociable, as never to meet, they can come to∣gether when they like the place, and they are so fond of your Lord∣ships Soul, not one of 'em fails of resorting thither. And as peo∣ple use to dress themselves well, when they are to appear in great Assemblies; so those excellent qualities, which we often find slo∣venly Habited in private Lodgings, by themselves, do now in so much good company, shine in your Lordships Breast, in their richest Equipage: That repairing to your Lordships Protection, I march not so much under the Conduct of one, as of many Great Men, uni∣ted in one. But far be it from me, to sacrifice such a Hecatomb, to the multitude; no, rather let me offer this, and all their ap∣plause to your Lordship; for after all, that is my real design. It is true, my Lord, I have not much of it to lay at your Feet. The Play I present you, cannot boast of extraordinary Merit; it is not of the first kind of Plays, a thing may be good in its kind, and yet an ill thing, because the kind is ill; those who do not like low Co∣medy, will not be pleased with this, because a great part of it con∣sists of Comedy, almost sunk into Farce; yet, if they will allow it well in its kind, I shall desire no more favour from 'em; any may perceive, I never intended to build high, by the poor foundation I laid, and yet, as it happened, the Building stood firmer than I ex∣pected, and withstood the battery of a whole party, who did me the Honor to profess themselves my enemies, and made me appear more considerable than ever I thought my self, by shewing, that no less than a confederacy was necessary to ruine my Reputation; had they overturn'd this, they cou'd not have hurt me, since I had long before parted from it, as a trifle, where I never intended to repose; but as it happened, I had the diversion to see the Play stand, and them choakt with the dust they made about it: if they wou'd have done me the favour to have taken me into their society, I wou'd have joyn'd with them in damning a great part of it; for I design'd it for Damnation; but if they had done so, I fear we shou'd not have agreed in what part: for as if we were design'd for enmity, with all that I loath'd, they seem'd extreamly diverted. All this, I say, my Lord, onely to offer your Lordship my Present, as clean as I can make it, which I take the more pains about, because I offer it

not as a Bribe, but purely a Present. The common declared design of Dedication, like the concealed one of Devotion, is in other terms Bribery; Men do not pray to serve Heaven, but pray that Hea∣ven may serve them; so Dedicators, who trouble great Men, only to gain their Protection, sacrifice not to their Patrons, but sacrifice their Patrons to themselves. I declare, I beg not your Lordships Protection, but Acceptance of this Play, and then let it perish if it will—Victims ought to dye, nor does it come to your Altars, with∣out a Crown, and one received from a Royal Hand; a Fortune more Glorious than I could expect I designed it, (as any one may see by the low Characters) onely to serve an Apprentiship to the City, but being honor'd with the Kings favour, I thought I ought to treat it with Re∣spect, and I cou'd not do it greater Honor, than to put it in your Lord∣ships service; and so I discharged my self of a double Debt, and paid all under one, the duty I owed, to what the King favour'd, and the much greater Duty and Honor I owe to a person, whom Hea∣ven has favour'd with Qualities admir'd by all the World, but by none more than
My Lord,
Your Lordships most Humble, And Obedient Servant,

