



AS the Apostle found the Men of Athens too su∣perstitious, so did I the Island
of Jamaica too much addicted to Judicial Astrology: And several so fond of that fool∣ish Art, as seldom to set out to Sea without consulting their Oracle of a Star-gazing Astro∣loger for lucky Dayes, and happy Stars. And being well assured that there was no∣thing of what was pretend∣ed in that Art, so called, I was willing to undertake something while I was with you for undeceiving the de∣luded, and repressing of that vain, prevailing Humour, of predicting by the Stars: For which end I searched the best Authors I could meet
with in your illiterate World, and summ'd up in these few Papers the most con∣vincing Arguments I could either find or think of, to make appear its Vanity and Iniquity.
I had thought first to Preach a Sermon or two upon the Subject; but judg∣ing it not so fit for the Pulpit, I left at my coming away a Written Copy of it, for any de∣sirous to see it, and now I send it you in Print: Not that your Society is any way chargeable with a good Opini∣on of this Imposture, but to
enable the more Judicious to refute its Propugnators, as they meet with them.
Neither may I be so inju∣rious to you, as to let this publick Occasion pass without the Testimony of my Thank∣fulness for all the Kindness and Respect you shewed me, together with your generous Bounty in bestowing upon me. And if you had not been more wanting to your selves (I mean your Souls) than to me, we might have yet been happy together. But I will not make the Causes of our Parting more publick
than I made them in my Va∣ledictory Discourse in the Congregation. I must needs acknowledge, the costly Kind∣ness of many of you left me nothing to ask, but what was of higher con∣cern than any thing you had of your selves to give. And if I should conceal this Goodness, I might be found to Offend on the same score with him that took the Mans one Ewe-lamb from him. And for the Blessing of Health I must needs commend your benign Climate, in which I enjoyed a greater measure thereof than ever I am like
to do in the European Regi∣ons. Sed multa majora deside∣rantur. Now being perswa∣ded that even in your Sardis Christ hath a few Names, and that thô they dwell where Satans seat is, (perhaps as eminently as in any Place where Christ is Named) yet have not defiled their Gar∣ments with the Pollutions of the Place; to such I say, Watch and Pray, hold fast and Re∣pent, abide in Christ, and Christ in you; and when you have secured well your own Souls, spare not to Sigh and Cry for Abominations done in the midst of you, and
Weep over a perishing World about you, lamenting daily what you cannot amend, and so shall you be kept from other Mens sins.
And before I take leave, I begg one thing for you all, that the Lord of the Vineyard that sent me to labour among you, may grant that the many Sermons I have Preached with you may never rise up in Judg∣ment against you at the great Day, but that the savour of the Knowledge of Christ you have had spread among you, may still in its gracious effects a∣bide upon you, encreasing and
blessing the Word yet with you, for bringing forth Fruit unto Eternal Life: So Pray∣eth

