



IF we may judge of the Excellency of things by their usefulness, we must confess, that Para∣bles are very excellent, since they are of such use. Although the things mentioned in the Parables that were delivered by our Saviour and others in Scripture, were never acted accor∣ding to the Letter, yet something like those very things was acted by those very persons to whom the Parables were spoken, which had it been spoken in plain down-right language, would not have in∣structed them half so well: for Parables are such clear Glasses, as (being held up to men) do repre∣sent both them and their actions in a most lively manner, and that so fully, as that they ae forced to pass sentence upon themselves by their own judg∣ment
and conscience, which otherwise could never be so convincingly done. I say, to pass judgment against themselves, even as David did upon Na∣than's Parable against him; and the Jews did upon our Saviour's Parable against them, Mat. 21.41.
It is lawful to use Para∣bles, when a man is able so to frme them,Per terresh is intelli∣git Christus doctri∣nam lactis; sive simi∣litudines illus rusti∣eas & terrestes qui∣bus uti solebat. Mar∣lorat. that the true scope my both appear and instruct; and the words be so chosen and placed, as an understanding ear may dis∣cern them to be a Parable, not a story.
A Parable (saith Peter Martyr) is nothing else but a similiude, or example to illustrate the matter in hand. Parables do familiarly explain divine truths, representing heavenly mat∣ters under earthly resemblances. If I have told you earthly things saith our Saviour, John 3.12. that is earthly resemblances, or similitudes, representing those heavenly truths, which all be∣lievers ought to know and practice while they are upon the earth. Parables in Scripture do hold forth the same truth under divers similitudes. In one Chapter, viz. Matth. 13. We see how many Parables Christ makes use of to set out the king∣dom
of heaven by. It is said ver. 3. he spake ma∣ny things to them in Parables, saying, A sower went forth to sow. And ver. 24. Another Parable put he forth unto them, saying, the kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field. And ver. 33. Another Parable spake he unto them, saying, The kingdom of heaven is like unto a grain of Mustard-seed, which a man took, and sowed in his field: divers other Pa∣rables: of like nature ye have in the same Chapter. So that as some speak of the Jews Manna, it was turned into all manner of savoury tests, according to the several palats of them that eat it, so there is that in heavenly Doctrine, which suiteth with all true desires of happiness.
Moreover in Parables, similitudes are fetcht from the several and usual employments of all sorts, to illustrate that Doctrine of the Gospel, which belongeth to all sorts. This every one should heedfully mind; how Christ speaks to them in the language of their own Trades and Callings: here each person in his own Trade and Occupation may learn something for his Salvation. Here the plough-man may meditate on the Parable of the sower, when he is ploughing up his ground, and turning up the furrows of the earth, which may put him in mind of plowing up the fllow-ground
of his heart: and when he is breaking up the clods of the earth, he may remember, that Gods calls for a broken and contrite heart: and when he put his hand to the plough, this shew him the constancy of an holy profession. No man having put his hand to the plough, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God, Luke 9.61. here∣by a man may learn what pains to take with his own heart, so preparing it for the true seed, the word of life: and when he casteth in the seed in the season, he may understand his own season: and as that which a man soweth, is not quickned, unless it die, so he may learn that the body of man after it dieth, and rotteth in the earth, shall rise a∣gain: and he that seeth not so much in the sow∣ing and reaping his grain, is a fool in the Apo∣stles sense, 1 Cor. 15.36. his plowing up the ground may also shew him the grievousness of afflictions, how the wicked plow upon the backs of the Righteous, and make long their furrows. He that thus meditates at the plough, shall alwayes have a Sermon before him, every furrow being a line or sentence; and every grain of Corn that he soweth, a Lesson whence he may learn something of God.
Here the Gardiner may receive the Gospel as brought to him in his own language, and may con∣sider the Parable of a certain man that bad a fig-tree
planted in his Vineyard, &c. Luke 13.7, 8. That is, God, who for our capacity is compa∣red to a man, signifying, that he used them not as beasts and slaves, but lovingly and kindly as men do, or should do one to another, drawing them with the cords of a man, and the bands of love, Hos. 11.4. Had a fig-tree planted in his Vine∣yard,] that is, had a people whom he had chosen to himself, and both planted, pruned, and watered, by his word and Sacraments: by the Vineyard he may understand the Church of the Jews, or the Land of Jury, and by the fig-tree the Inhabi∣tants thereof. Of God's particular planting this Vine, we read, Psal. 80.8, 9. God brought a Vine out of Egypt, cast out the Heathen, and planted it, prepared room for it, and caused it to take deep root, so that it filled the Land, the hills were covered with the shadow of it, and the boughes thereof were like the goodly Cedaers. And whenso∣ever the Gardiner (like Adam) walketh amng the trees of the Garden, and beholdeth the Vine, he may think of that Mystical Union between Christ and his Church; that he is the Vine, his people the branches, that whosoever abideth in him, and he in him, the same bringeth forth much fruit. That the Church of God also is a Vineyard of red wine, that the Lord doth keep it, and water it every moment, and lest any hurt is, he will keep it night
and day, Isa. 27.2, 3. That men also are compa∣red to Trees, as in Jotham's Parable, who compa∣reth Aimilech to the Bramble, a base Plant, u∣surping Authority, when the more noble Trees, the Olive, the Fig-tree, and the Vine refuse it. In a word! that the good man is compared to the green-tree, and the wicked unto the dry.
The Scripture is very copious in borrowed ex∣pressions, and partly for our weakness condescend∣ing to us, to make us to understand the deep Myste∣ries of God by earthly things. It sets forth Christ (as one noteth.) 1. From inanimate things, from the Sun, the Str, a Rock. 2. By vegetative, the Root, the Branch, 3. From sensitives, the Lion called the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. 4. From Rationals: the Son of man, to shew, that Christ is all in all.
Parables are either. 1. , when the nature of the thing doth make the comparison, as in that of the seed; the variety of increase by the word preached is expressed by the greater or lesser increase of the grain, according to the ground whereon it falleth. Or 2. , when the disposition or affection makes it, as when Christ compareth himself to Children piping and dancing, to express the mild means he used for the saving mens souls. Or 3. , when a passion, or perturbation makes it, as when Christ's coming is
resembled to a Thieves Burghlary, or to a woman's travel for the suddenness and affrightment. Or 4. , when the action is only brought for comparison, as in the Parable of the unjust Stew∣ard, Luke 16.6. that as he made friends of his Masters money against an hard time, so should we of the goods lent us by the Lord, by giving alms to the poor, whose prayers may help us in the day of tryal.
Our Saviour was frequent in the use of Para∣bles in his discourse and doctrine, and therein he acommodated his speech to his Auditors. The Jewish Nation was much used to Parables, as ap∣pears by the doctrine of the Prophets of old. So the corruption of the Church is set forth by the simili∣tude of a degenerate Vine, Isa. 5. and of a most unclean harlot; Ezek. 16.30, 31. &c. we read Ezek. 21.2.—6. Of a Parable of a Wood to be burnt with fire: then the Prophet is commanded to turn his speech to the men of Jerusalem, and to denounce destruction to them from ver. 7. ad. 10. at length he is commanded to sigh, and groan, and lament bitterly, even to the pain of his loins: And if they enquire into the cause of these things, to an∣swer, because evils are coming, at which every heart shall melt away. Now by this kind of lan∣guage Christ took a course to enflame their minds after Gospel mysteries. And albeit divine myste∣ries
were veiled in the Parables, as barely propound∣ed to the reprobate world, making them the more inexcusable, through the just judgment of God; yet these mysteries were revealed by Parables as clearly expounded to the elect, through the goodness of God in Jesus Christ.
But although Parables do familiarly explain and illustrate divine truths, yet they darken di∣vine truths to some, to whom it is not given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven: and our Sa∣viour saith, that therefore he spake in Parables to them, because they seeing saw not, and hearing heard not, nor did they understand. A singular judgment of God on them for their contumacy and contempt of the Gospel. It is an observation of Oleaster, that the holy Prophets (especially to great men) spake most in Parables, that since the people were so shy of naked truth, it might be pre∣sented in some Guise.
Doubtless, the design of our Saviour in laying things under parabolical expressions, and as it were out of sight, was, that his hearers might seek out the things hereby intended with more diligence, and find them with more pleasure; for this way of Illustration makes things very delightful and pleasant, and it is not only a way, whereby the ig∣norant may be made to understand, but the scope of them being once found, it will then appear, that no
falshoods, but real truths are contained in them; because truths, not falshoods, were not only intend∣ed, but signifyed by them, and so Parables are not only lawful, but commendable, and very grateful to the ingenious Reader or Hearer.
How then should every one desire to know the meaning of Scripture-parables? as Christ's Dis∣ciples came unto him, saying, Declare unto us the Parable of the Tares of the field, Matth. 13.36. that so they may come to the clear and sound knowledge of divine truth. Parables are pleasant, like a Picture drawn with lively colours. And profitable also. Galeacius Caracciolus, that noble Marquess of Vico, was converted by a similitude used by Peter Martyr in a Sermon, seconded with private discourse.
Much honoured in the Lord!
Here you have in this ensuing Treatise (which I humbly Dedicate to you) a judicious Ex∣planation, and faithful Application of one of our Saviours Parables: The Parable of the Great Supper, to which many Guests were invited. The Author was better known to you than to my self, yet not altogether a stranger to me. He was not on∣ly a word-man, but a work-man; a work-man that needed not to be ashamed: a pattern of wholsome
words in sound teaching, a pattern of good works in well doing, so that a man might read his Sermons written as it were in the lines of his life. He was a light of direction in teaching, and a pattern of perfection (as it were) in his life. His Preaching and his Practice; his Words and his Works a∣greed together. The Law of God is a Lanthorn, good example bears it; it is safe following him that carrys the light. That Minister only know how to speak well, that hath learned to do well. Then doth the seed of the word bring forth fruit, when the godliness of the Preacher doth water it in the breast of the Hearer. Thus eraving pardon for this my boldness, that the Lord may add to those gifts and blessings he hath bestowed upon you, is the prayer of

