



I Am fully perswaded there is a certain
Sympathy betwixt Travellors. As for
my part, I am very free to make this in∣genious
Confession, that as the first motive
of my courting your acquaintance, was the
extraordinary Character you had acquired
n your Travels abroad; so the History of
Italy, wherewith you have obliged the
World some Years ago, did raise in me a
ertain Ambition of being received among
he number of your Friends. The con∣ruity
there is betwixt all Histories, tho'
f different Nations, and far distant Coun∣ries,
will be, I hope, a sufficient Plea for
his Address to you; 'tis true, this Rela∣on
will not afford the same variety of
eautiful Structures, Gardens, Statues and
ther Niceties as that of Italy; neverthe∣ess
the more remote the Manners, Reli∣ion
and Policy of the Muscovits are from
ther Nations of Europe, the more abstruse
heir History and surprising in the event,
mong a Nation guided for the most part
eerly by instinct, and consequently hur∣ed
on to one extreme or another, the

more, I say, they may deserve our particu∣lar
observation at this juncture of time.
But besides this motive peculiar to my self▪
there are also several other Obligations, for
which, by the general acknowledgment o
all true English Men, your Native Coun∣try
stands indebted to you, and never
ought to be Buried in Oblivion. The early
Proofs you gave at your younger Years▪
both of your Capacity and Readiness to
serve your Country, in the Treaty of the
Isle of Wight, in the Year 1647. and 1648
were the fore runners of a long Concatena∣tion
of Services, you and your Family have
since heaped upon the Kingdom of England▪
There are as yet many living Testimonies o
your successful endeavours in the Restau∣ration
of K. Charles II. of Blessed Memo∣ry;
and, as the University of Oxford, shew'd
their readiness in acknowledging your Ser∣vices
to the Publick, by investing you in
the Year 1670. with the Dignity of a Do∣ctor
of the Civil Laws, in honorem Princi∣pis
Auriaci, now our present King; so, i
was questionless, both upon the score o
your Merits and Ability, that by the par∣ticular
Commands of his then Majesty
and Privy Council, and the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal in Parliament Assembled
you were appointed for the searching into
and prosecuting the Discovery of that mos
horrid Popish Plot, carried on against th

Life of K. Charles II. and the Government.
I will not enlarge my self here upon the
singular Benefit the Government received
at that time by your Care and Vigilancy,
to your no small charge and hazard; the
publick Testimonies, and reiterated Recom∣mendations
to his then Majesty, from the
House of Peers, are sufficient Evidences of
these Eminent Services, you did to the
Government, during the prosecution of that
Conspiracy: But there is one thing more,
which, in my Opinion, ought before all
others, not to be pass'd by in silence; I
mean your continuance in Westminster, du∣ring
the greatest Plague England ever felt.
What could be a more evident proof of
your undaunted Courage and entire Devo∣tion
to the service of your Native Country,
than to tarry at a time of so eminent a Dan∣ger,
in the midst of a great many Thou∣sands
expiring round about you; where in
Conjunction with Sir Edmund Bury Godfrey,
you were appointed by His then Majesty's
Commission, to take care in Quality of Justi∣ces
of Peace, of the Out-Parishes, to the great
Satisfaction of the Publick. Your two Sons
Col. Lenthall Warcup, and Capt. Edm. War∣cup,
at the Unfortunate, but Glorious Day
of Battle at Steenkirke in Flanders, in the
Year 1693. gave such illustrious Demon∣strations▪
of being true Inheritors of your
Courage and Love to their Native Coun∣try,

that their fall was generally lamented,
and their Names have ever since been pla∣ced
in the most Honourable Remembrances
of all those who esteem it a Glory, to Sacri∣fice
their Lives for the Defence of their
Country. Being confined to the compass of a
Letter, I am forced to deprive my self of the
satisfaction, of giving the due praises to their
Memory, but in lieu of them, I will offer to
ther Names as a perpetual remembrance of
their Bravery the following Words of the
Honourable Sir James Vernon; There was ne∣ver
(said he, speaking to you, of your Sons)
a Battalion behaved themselves better, than
that which your Son commanded; nor any Offi∣cer
so universally regretted as he was: And I do
not doubt, but your younger Son would have trod
his Brother's Foot-steps, had he not soon after
met with the same Fate. They have given (con∣tinues
he) the best Account of the Life they re∣ceived
from you: And I, who have a more nu∣merous
Stock of Sons than yours was, know not
what better to wish for them, than that they
may run the same Hazards, in the same Cause;
and may be so loved, and so missed. Thus, re∣commending
my self to the Continuation of
your Friendship, I rest,
SIR,

