



SIR,
YOU cannot blame the inscribing of these Papers to your self, as their just and proper Patron, because through your own so∣licitation, the matter contain'd in them was first delivered, and is now after this more publick man∣ner recorded, principally for your own use. If any others receiv'd any benefit by the Hearing, or if any should hereafter by the Reading of it, as they ought to return the chief praise to God, (whose Spirit, I hope, assisted in the Composure, and from whom his servants have all their furniture for every good word and work) they do in the next place owe their Thanks to you. For you have
(especially) by putting me upon such a second ser∣vice, manifested your unwillingness to reap the Fruit of this labour alone, aswel as your charita∣ble hopes, that it may produce some through the blessing of heaven; in which I heartily wish, that you be not disappointed. All the I can say to en∣courage you, is only this, that I have not here stept out of the road of the common Faith,Tit. 1.4. but writ∣ten the plainest Truths in the plainest method, and therefore 'tis so far fitted (though defective in many other respects) to answer the end of com∣mon Edification; nor is your Case so peculiar, but that Others may frequently be in the same, and stand in need of the like instructions.
But I do not flatter you, when I tell you, that I am perswaded better things of you, than I can expect from this discourse upon every ordinary superficial Reader; men do seldom consider, that the word which sounds in their Ear, or is presented to their Eye,John 12.48. shall help to Judge them at the last day; and so, a trifling cursory perusal of the most serious and important things, aggravates their ac∣count hereafter, though it does not influence their practice here. Multitudes, when they are at that
Age, which you have arrived to, lay the foundation of a late and ineffual Repentance, and of remedi∣less everlasting misery:Psal. 58.3. They are estranged from the Womb, and in that state they continue, till they are falling into the Grave, under the heavy load of the sins of their Youth; if they do take care to thrive and prosper in this World by heap∣ing up Riches, they will be sure to make their condition most wretched in the next by Treasuring up Wrath; the neglect of their Souls, is as no∣torious, as the (perhaps) unnecessary Provisi∣on which is made for their Bodies; when they lanch into the business of their several Professions, the getting of an Estate is their only Aim, and in the pursuit of this, they lose that which is more worth than the whole World. The Wisdom recommended in the following Sermon, will be but foolishness to all such, unless God is pleased to give them other Spirits.
You on the other hand, have begun so well with God, that I therefore chearfully expect your happy progress: I doubt not but that you have fixt your eye, and set your heart, aright, by proposing the best End, and chusing the best Part; never∣theless
seeing your lot is cast into such a time of Temptation, and every circumstance of humane Life is so full of Snares, and there is a special vanity in youth,Eccl. 11.10. there is need of constant watch∣fulness and care, and frequent renewing your Holy Resolutions, as well as Invocation of God for help, that your Bow which yet abides in strength, may never Break or Slacken, through the entice∣ments of evil Company, the Deceitfulness of Riches, or power of Indwelling Sin. You may meet with some who think it strange,Pet. 4.4. that you run not with them to the same Excess of Riot, and other debauchery; and the Flesh is still Lusting against the Spirit in the most im∣proved and mortified Christians; and there is scarce∣ly any lawful Employment, but what by an un∣due behaviour in it, may become sin. I must therefore, while I take Comfort in your Pious beginnings, give you this Councel and Caution against a dangerous Revolt.
I lift up an hearty prayer for you, that the bles∣sing of God out of Sion may rest upon you, and all your concerns; that he may not be to you as the Moth,Hos. 5.12. or as Rottenness, but as the cherishing
Sun and fructifying Dew; that neither your Root, nor Leaf may wither; that the Fear of God may be always before your face, and his secret upon your Tabernacle;Job 29.4. that your Soul may be like a watered Garden, and an Hedge of Providence Planted about all which you have on every side; and that after you are car∣ried through the several Changes and Periods of time, the God whom you serve, may be your Inheritance and Portion to Eternity. So pray∣ing, and by all other possible means, which my Sta∣tion or Capacity will afford for your Assistance, in any Spiritual matters, I shall very readily approve my self,

May 22. 1689.
