



Dear Souls,
TO you all, and to you especially that heard these Lectures do I de∣dicate them, and present them to you, not to look upon onely (for then I had as good have sent you a picture, and as much it would have pleased your eye). Man was made not only for Speculation, but also for Practice; Speculation brings onely pleasure to a mans selfe; its Practice which benefits others; And I hope I need not tell you that Man was not born for himself alone. These Rules

will serve (if heedfully observed by the eye of Reason) to ballance your judgment in sayling through the Pro∣gnosticall part of Physick, that so you may steer your course by the Card of Truth, and not float unsetledly upon the waves of Errour, Ignorance or O∣pinion. To you (rather then to any that I know) belongs the practice of Physick; and that Practice may be per∣fect, Judgement ought to be sound; and to make judgement sound is requi∣red an exquisite knowledge. Judge∣ment is perfected by knowledge, know∣ledge by experience: whence it ap∣peares, that the more communicative knowledge is, so much the more ex∣cellent it is. Of all the men in the world I hate a drone most, that sucks the sweetnesse of other mens labours, but doth no good himselfe; and will as soon teach Physick or Astrology to an Oake, as to a creature the center of whose actions is terminated in him∣selfe, Surely, surely, If God had not

made the nature of man communica∣tive, he would not have made one man to stand in continuall need of another: but we see the contrary, and the sons of wisedome know how to pick out the meaning of God from it.
I have given you here all my Prog∣nostications from the Decumbiture of the sick party: And although I inge∣nuously confesse the greatest part of them will hold true, in a Horarie Que∣stion erected upon the sight of the U∣rine; yet this is my judgement at pre∣sent, That next the Nativity, the De∣cumbiture is the safest & surest ground for you to build your judgement up∣on; and you shall always find it by ex∣perience.
Together with this I have given you the presages of Hippocrates, all which never decline from the Zodiack of the sick person: And thus much I can say of them by experience, I never found one of them false. Make use of them both together; God hath given you

two eyes; why may you not look up∣on the Macrocosme with the one, and upon the Microcosme with the other? In both I desired to be as plaine as I could, because all Artists are not Schol∣lers.
Thus have you what I have done, and you know for whose sakes I did it. What now remains, but that you la∣bour with might and main for your owne goods, and the increase of your owne knowledge to make experience of them? For as the diligent hand ma∣keth rich, so the diligent mind increa∣seth knowledg; and for my owne par∣ticular, never feare, but during the time I am amongst the living, I shall never cease to do you good in what I may or can.
Spittle-fields, next door to the Red-Lion.

