



SIR,
BEcause the Im∣provement of Na∣tural Knowledg, for which the Royal Society was founded, may be attained in some de∣gree, by recovering some parts thereof, which the An∣cients had, but are now un∣known;

I thought it not im∣proper to present to you, who deservedly preside in that Il∣lustrious Society, this Attempt, to restore those eldest Stan∣dards of Measures and Weights, which are mention∣ed in the most ancient Re∣cords, the Sacred Scriptures, as commonly known when they were written. But such hath been the ignorance and carelesness in these Matters, of many intervenient Ages, by whose care these things should have been transmitted to us their Posterity, that most of our late diligent Enqui∣rers have declared their Opi∣nion

to be, that tho the retrie∣ving of them be highly desira∣ble, yet that success in such an endeavor is scarce to be hoped.
Nevertheless, being desi∣red by some Learned Di∣vines of our Church, in sub∣serviency to some brief An∣notations on the Bible by them intended, to do the best I could in this Affair, I have by this Treatise attempted to rescue this most ancient and useful Piece of Learning, from the Grave of Oblivion and Neglect, into which ma∣ny despairing Men were cast∣ing it, before it was quite dead, or past recovery.
Learning I call this Know∣ledg of Weights & Measures, because the first Constitution of them, and the Reason, and Proportions contained in their mutual Correspondencies, do import, not only prudent Ob∣servation, which is Learn∣ing's Foundation, but also some Elements of Geometry, Arithmetick, and Staticks, (which are essential Parts of its Superstructure) thence pe∣culiarly called , or the Learning. And for this cause I have been forced, in the prosecution of this En∣quiry, to call in to my assi∣stance some of the easiest

Mathematical Notions, which are as old almost as Mankind, associating thereunto some Observations of Nature, whose constancy from the be∣ginning gives reason to be∣lieve that they were known early by Men, together with the eldest Works of Art re∣maining in the Pyramids, Shekels, and other remains of Eastern and Western An∣tiquity, that from the con∣current Evidence of these Aged Witnesses, I might be enabled to give this my Ver∣dict, which is now brought in before you.
Ancient I may well assert

this kind of Learning to be, since it appears by Moses's Description of the Ark by its Measures, that the Cu∣bit was in use before the Flood. And amongst the Kingdoms founded after the Deluge, Egypt will claim very great Antiquity, being by Scripture called the Land of Ham, whose Son Miz∣raim is found in the eldest Monuments of Time, in the Head of its Kings. But here, Proclus assures us, the Art of Measuring was cul∣tivated in the eldest Times; whence we justly conclude this to have been part of

that Wisdom of the Egypti∣ans, in which St. Stephen affirms Moses to have been universally skilled.
The great Difficulty of find∣ing out the exact Truth in this Case, that is perplext between the despair of many; and the contrariety of Opinions of o∣ther Authors, will plead suffi∣ciently for the Pardon of such Defects, as after my utmost Endeavour, to clear this matter by decisive Evidence, both a Priore, and a Poste∣riore, may yet be discovered in this Discourse by your piercing Eyes, or by the cu∣rious Examination of the

Members of the Royal So∣ciety, to whose Censure I willingly submit it.
Nevertheless I cannot but hope, that this Essay of mine will be kindly received by you, even on account of your con∣stant love to its Author. For that good Affection being be∣gun in your Youth, thirty Years ago, in Magdalen-Colledg in Cambridg, you have continued to this day, while you have gradually risen higher in the Favour of our two Great Mo∣narchs successively. And I may justly reckon, that no∣thing can break that Friend∣ship,

which so great Ad∣vantages of Preferment, on your side, doth not abate.
Besides, I believe this Book will be the more welcome in∣to your choice Library, be∣cause the Subject of it, is not any quarrelsome Interest, or distinguishing Tenet of a Party of Men, but the peace∣able Doctrine of Measures and Weights, which in their General Nature, are the Common Concern of all Mankind; as being the ne∣cessary Instruments of just Dealing, and fair Commerce between all Nations; which the Admiralty of England

(wherein you are so highly trusted) doth promote in Times of Peace, as it se∣cures our Safety in Times of War. For I may without any arrogancy affirm, that not only the Principles and Method of this Discourse, do give Light to that Gene∣ral Doctrine, but also that the particular Measures and Weights therein stated, have an universal influence there∣upon. Because these being the most Ancient and Sacred Examples of that kind, and the Rules of that Righteous∣ness, whereof Noah, the Father of all Men now

living, was a Preacher, it's highly probable that all Na∣tions did derive as their Pe∣digree from him; so their Measures and Weights from the imitation of his, (al∣though length of Time, ne∣glect and corrupt Customs, have made great Alterati∣ons) which I have briefly proved by the Examples of those used by the most Lear∣ned Nations, the Greeks and Romans.
But whatever the Success of my Labours may be as to the Subject or Matter of this Tract, I am secure, that the calm manner of my wri∣ting

it will be very agree∣able to the known Candour and Serenity of your Tem∣per: For I have industriou∣sly avoided all appearance of Contention against any Man that may herein differ from me, so far as not to name the known Diversities of Opini∣ons of Men about this Mat∣ter, and have employed all my Diligence to prove mine own Assertions, either by Ar∣guments peculiar to them, or by shewing the Approach of Others of the best Reputa∣tion to agreement with me.
By this means, and by re∣fusing to make special applica∣tion

of the Generals here stated, to the many Texts of Scripture whereunto in the Annotations they must be applied, I have contracted my Thoughts into so small a Book, that it may seem in∣congruous to present it to a Man of such great Worth as you are: For which I shall add no other Apology than this, That if in this little Room mine Vndertaking be not well performed, the shor∣ter Follies are the better; if it be, I know you will not think the worse of a Book, because in a few Sheets it determines many and great

Difficulties. However, if it were never so great, and never so well written, I should think it insufficient to answer those great Obliga∣tions under which I am to be,
Honoured Sir,

Octob. 28. 1685.
