



Sir;
ALthough this Treatise may seem impertinent to a Personage of your Endowments and Worth; yet I could not but Dedicate to the preserver of my life the first Essay of my recovery; and let you see that however I may be unfortunate, necessitous, or weak, yet I can∣not cease to be acknowledging. When I was in Iamaica, I had the honour, of your favour; and I participated together with others th happynesse of that Government, which needed not the caprichios or follyes of any insolent and unworthy successour, to endeare it to the Inhabitants. When I was sick,

you made me a part of your care: and when my own resolutions, added to the violence of my disease, had inclined me to Dye, you com∣manded me to live: and that I yet retaine so much breath as to make this profession, it is out of obedience to your Authority, as well as an effect of your Tendernesse. But I am not onely to render you thanks for that being I derive from your Goodnesse: Morall Phi∣losophy teacheth me, and that more solemn∣ly, to acknowledge the Authour of my well-being: and it is with all the hast, as well as Submission imaginable, that I testify my ob∣ligations to you for fixing me in the Family of the Right Honourable the Lord Viscount Mordant, and establishing my repose by the same Loyall, Noble, and generous hands, which have contributed so much to the universall tranquillity of this Kingdom. I have, at length, removed all the umbrages I ever lay under: I have joyned my self to the Church of Eng∣land; not only upon the account of it's being Publiquely imposed, (which in things indifferent, is no small consideration: as I learned from the Scottish-transactions at Perth) but because it is the least defining, and consequently the most comprehensive, and

fitting to be Nationall: wherein any unpre∣judiced person (not resolved to mistake par∣ticular mens actions or opinions, for Church-Principles and errours) may observe all those circumstances to continue in order to the promotion of Sober Piety, which the An∣gels proclaimed at the Birth of the World's Saviour; viz. GLORY TO GOD IN THE HIGHEST, PEACE ON EARTH; AND GOOD VVILL TOVVARDS MEN. In fine, it beares the impress of what is Ancient, and Apostolique, as well as True. I alwayes had a reverence for those Primitive Christians; and it is with a sinceri∣ty not unbecoming them, that I thus declare my self: and I believe you will admit this deportment to be the best retribution I could make you; since it justifies your esteem for me, and those pretensions wherewith I am perfectly
Sir, 
Parsons-green
Apr. 25. 1665.
