


Noble Sir,
IT is no small priviledge to be born of god∣ly parents; The blessings of the Covenant run most kindly in the channell of the Covenant;
there is more to be pre∣sumed of such children then others; not only as they are under the bles∣sing of their parents prayers, (Bathsheba called Solomon the sonne of her Vowes; and Monica St. Augustine the childe of her prayers and tears;) but also as they themselves have a greater holdfast upon God, by vertue of his holy Covenant; Lord, I am thy servant,Ps. 116.16. and the sonne of thy handmaid, was Davids plea.
What a right you may claime to Gods family by your mother, the just
character here delivered of her, will sufficiently evidence. Her example, Counsels, prayers, are a bet∣ter portion then your Fa∣thers inheritance: She tra∣velled the second time with your spiritual birth, and was in paine till she could see Christ formed in you, and the rest of the fruit of her loynes; and that all her children by nature might be the a∣dopted sons and daugh∣ters of God by grace; that you might be good rather then great, ser∣viceable rather then ho∣nourable, that she might
go out of the world with that joy of our Lord, My seed shall serve him,Ps. 22.30. it shall be counted to the Lord for a generation, this was the travel of her soul. Solomon recount∣eth the Prophecy,Prov. 31.1 which his Mother taught him; and surely as by the ex∣ample of your pious mo∣ther, so by the gracious counsels and instructions which from the very cradle, she was perpe∣tually instilling into your minde, she being dead, yet speaketh; the module whereof is indelibly en∣graven upon your heart.

The greatnesse of your losse is not easie to be told; and it is not yours onely but the whole Chur∣ches: she was a Christi∣an indeed in all the ca∣pacities which she su∣steined, and filled them all with singular wisdom and fidelity. The pro∣vidence of God in taking her away in the fulnesse of her strength and acti∣vity for Jesus Christ; is to me very stupendious, and compared with the premature death of di∣vers others of the Lords choice ones, seemeth to intimate some approach∣ing
judgement; The righ∣teous perisheth and man layeth it to heart,Isa. 57.1. and mer∣ciful men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from THE EVIL TO COME. When the corn is reaped and gathered into the barne, the bruit Cattel are turned into the field: Such a gene∣ral, sudden, and (to us) untimely death of the godly, calleth upon sur∣vivours to sit down, and consider, how they may either prevent, or prepare for approaching evils; at least how they may fill
up the vacant roomes of those worthies that are gone to rest, with a grea∣ter activity of grace, and a more diffusive service.
As for your selfe (Honoured Sir) the re∣maining hopes and ho∣nour of your Fathers house; go on to doe worthily for God; and let the world know that your Mothers Blessing is not yet worne out of your familie; and that power of Religion which she fought to stablish there, did not expire with
her. Which as it is the hope, so it shall be the prayer of him, who is,
Sir,

