




SIR,
NOt to revive your sorrow for the loss of your precious Yoke-Fellow, but to mo∣derate and regulate it, do these Meditati∣ons offer themselves to your view: Phy∣sicians say, that if rheum be sweetned, it cannot hurt the lungs; sure I am, if grief be sweetned and sanctified, it cannot hurt the heart;2 Cor. 7.10 Worldly sorrow indeed may cause death, but godly sorrow tendeth to salvation; that your sorrow may be such, let me com∣mend the reading of these Papers to you, and do you, (by holy prayer) commend them to God. Neither grief nor mirth, (simply in themselves) are sinful and hurtful, but as the Object or degree determines them.
Your Wife (I know) while she lived,Ezek. 24.16. was the desire of your eyes; so pleasant an Object, that I cannot but presume her very Picture now she is dead, will be a most acceptable Present; which though not drawn by a curi∣ous Pensil, yet (I dare be bold to say) it
is so like her that whosoever knew her, will know whose Picture it is, at the first-sight; I am sure the Painter hath not flattered Her. It is a life-Picture (as Artists call them) taken from her face, and not by Copy. A life-Picture indeed; describing not the outward Effigies of her face but the inward Pourtraiture of her mind, all fair and beautiful: I commend it to your self, and your Friends; not to hang on your Walls, but to wear in your bosom. If the fight of it should occasion your tears, I shall not repent, because by the sadness of the Countenance the heart is made better, and sorrow will flow in the right Channel, not the absence of her person, so much as the want of her graces. Give me leave, by that interest she gave me in you, to enjoyn you, both the serious, and the frequent review of this piece; and if you joyn prayer with your contempla∣tion, it will make you insensibly to pass into her likeness; for which end you will find this In∣scription engraven round about her Effigies, Whose faith follow.
This do, sincerely, vigorously, and perseve∣ringly, and I dare assure you, your loss will be your gain; which is and shall be the pray∣er of

