



May it please your Grace,
Philostratus in vitâ lib. 7. cap. 12.APollonius Tya∣naeus being askt what CITIES were; answer'd, That they were common prisons
 wherein were shut up four sorts of men, Merchants, Lawyers, Idle spectators, and Gallants. 'Tis for the sake of the last of these (and especially of the choicest part, the Courtier) that I have run the hazard of lo∣sing my little Credit, and expos'd my self to the cen∣sures of an over-critical and severe Age by this publica∣tion, I could pretend seve∣ral things in my defence,
 but 'tis sufficient that I was excited to the undertaking by a person as capable to judge what is expedient in this kind as most men living, and that the matter of the Book seems hugely usefull, if not necessary. Other Countries abound with Treatises of Good Man∣ners; and ours, perhaps, has as much need as any. I have heard that when the late Duke of Buc∣kingham
 came to Gonda∣mor the Spanish Ambas∣sador to excuse the vile in∣dignities which the rabble of the City had offer'd him as he pass'd along the streets, the Count told him, there wanted no Apologie, for he well knew, That though the Flour of England was very fine, yet the Bran was exceeding course. I have attempted to seirce the Flour from some trash and
 refuse which Time and evil Customes have ming∣led with it; and that my innocent enterprise might prove succesfull (in imita∣tion of the famous ArtistVide Aelian. Var. Histor. lib. 14. & Plin. lib. 34, cap. 8. item Galen. lib. 5. . Polycletus, who erected a most exquisite statue, which he call'd his Canon, by viewing the lineaments and proportions whereof,
 men might more readily learn the precepts of his Book) I have humbly as∣sum'd the confidence to set up your Grace as a Lively Pattern to actuate and re∣commend my Rules, from whose civility and sweet deportment others may transcribe whatsoever is amiable and gracefull. 'Tis said of William of Nassau Prince of Au∣range, That every time he
 put off his Hat, he won a Subject from the King of Spain. A courteous and comely behaviour sets off virtue, and obliges much, and gains upon the affections of men; but then if the Soul be not adorn'd with Modesty and solid good∣ness, all external accom∣plishments look like mere Pageantrie. And this prompts me to solicit Your Grace (and, I hope, 'tis no
 rudeness, but anQui monet ut facias, quod jam faci, ipse monendo
Ludat, & hortatu comprobat acta, suo. Ovid. En∣comium to excite one to that which he does alrea∣dy) that you will please to imploy your most serious caution and endeavours in preserving your self un∣tainted from the brutish corruptions and debau∣cheries too much in fashion
 (which are. Aristot. destructive of all true nobleness and bravery of Spirit) and per∣mit the worthy rational principles of sobriety and virtue to take an early pos∣session of your mind. It was the commendation ofSejanus incipiente adhuc potentia bo∣nis consiliis notescere volebat. Tacitus An∣nal. lib. 4. Sejanus, that whilest he was a Young Courtier he studied nothing more than
 to grow eminent for inte∣grity; That Your Grace pursues the same course at present, there's reason suffi∣cient to believe, & that you will never degenerate (as he did) or give the least en∣tertainment to those follies which intitle men to shame and misery, is at once the earnest request and firm perswasion of

