


Dear Son and Daughter,
IT is not (certainly) without some special design of Provi∣dence, that these Meditati∣ons which were conceived up∣on the death of your hopeful Nephew, the only Son of your Elder Brother,
Sir Robert Booth, now in Ireland; should not, by reason of those distempers which have ever since pursued me unces∣santly, as you (to your trouble) know; be able to come to the Birth until this time, when our sorrows are doubled in the death of your precious Child Martin Hawes, your First-born: Possibly, (as we may rationally conjecture) that we should not too soon forget the Affliction and the Misery, the Wormwood and the Gall; but that our Souls having them continually in remembrance, might be humbled in us, Lam. 3.19, 20.
Possibly; that the Children being e∣very way alike, both in Person and in Disposition, one and the same Plaister might give ease and cure to the wound; and one and the same Monument per∣petuate
their Memorial unto Poste∣rity.
Truly they were a pair of lovely Babes; Babes in Age, though men in knowledg and understanding; of whom we may (in their Capacity) sing as David once in his Funeral Elegies of Saul and Jona∣than,
They were pleasant in their lives, in their death they were not divi∣ded.
Their lives indeed were short; so it seemed good to the Divine Wisdome, after He had shewed two such excellent pieces in the Light for a while; timely to lay them up amongst his Jewels, lest they should receive hurt or stain from a pre∣sent evil world. But although their lives were short, yet verily they were precious, such, as allowing them this A∣batement,
that they were Children; nei∣ther Parents nor Standers-by could rati∣onally have wished they had been other∣wise then they were. And though there were some distance of years, yet there was the greatest parity of Persons observ∣ed between them, that though they were but the Brother's and Sister's Sons, you could not (had they been together) have distinguished them from natural Bre∣thren, or Tynnes (rather) of the same Birth.
For Elegancy of Person, Loveliness of Countenance, Solidness of Judgment, Acuteness of Wit, Tenaciousness of Memory, Sweetness of Disposition, Ʋ∣niversal Innocence, and Modesty in be∣haviour; Obedience to Parents (Next or Remote) Submission to Governours, Observance to Superiours, Love to E∣quals,
Condescention to Inferiours, and candor to all.
And (that which deservedly is of higher value with God) Reverend At∣tention to his Word Read or Preached, together with some suitable ability to give a methodical repetition of both; Studious in learning Catechisms, of which they were able to give such a rational ac∣count, as if they had been Candidates for the Ʋniversity; as many, both of the Nobility and others in the Parish of Giles's in the Fields can (at this day) witness: Love to the best things, and a due respect to the best men; with a more then a Childish dislike of, and advers∣ness to what they understood to be e∣vil, &c.
These Desirablenesses according to, yea and above the rate of Children, ren∣dered
them so like one another, as if one Soul had animated two bodies; or one and the same Conception had been formed up into two Patterns, though re∣served to be seen successively; to the end (as it were) that the Elder might out-live himself in the Younger; Aut Utrum{que} putabis esse verum, aut Utrum{que} putabis esse pictum: You would have deemed them to be either the same Person, or two Pictures; one the Original, the other a Copy.
Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora fe∣rebat: He that had seen one, might have known them both.
And as they were alike in their Lives, so in their Death they were not divided; or if a little, in time, not at all in the manner and Circumstances.
They both Lived with us, but died
with you; they lived with the Divine, but died with the Physitian, to shew that neither Religion doth kill, nor Physick can keep alive.
Nevertheless, though they died with you, they came not to dye, any further than the hidden Decree of the Divine will had before determined.
They died alive as it were, Death gave them so little warning. Neither Parents or Children understood where∣fore they came; until within a very few days, Death shewed his Commission, and as soon Executed it.
They died both of them in the absence of their Trustees, who though one step higher in the Parental line, were not (I am sure) half a step lower in Parental affection, which the Divine eye Saw, and pittied; and therefore out of Com∣passion,
hiding from us what he was about to do; As he snatched us from the Elder, by sending us abroad: So He snatched the Younger from us by sending him Home to his Fathers House: So pittying our Infirmity, who otherwise (possibly) might not have parted with them so willingly, nor have born their loss so patiently. The loss of two such choyce Patterns of Divine workmanship, could not but have been an heart-breaking object to us, as it was to you, but that their constant absence from you, was a pre∣parative, whereby the terrour of death was somthing abated: their very absence, so long before was a little death.
That which sweetneth it to us all, is, (that God hath not left us to mourn as men without hope) that in the Con∣text
before us, The Children are not dead, but sleep, they sleep in Jesus.
If any Stander-by shall judg (possibly) that my affection hath transported my Charity into their excess; my Apology is this, that I had rather be guilty of an Excess in Charity, than a Defect in thankfulness. I know we cannot ex∣pect such rational accounts of Grace in Children, as may be found in Adult Saints, but that that doxologie, out of the mouths of Babes and Sucklings, thou hast ordeined strength, Psal. 8.2. doth not exclude Children, though not confine the meaning of the words so nar∣row; is the judgment of the old St. Ig∣natius, who from those Scripture in∣stances of Samuel, Josiah, and others, denieth not but that the Spirit of God working in young ones, doth many times
give out early discoveries of the Grace of the Covenant, when Elder Persons  (Ignat. Epist. ad Magn.) do only carry their Gray-haires as a badg of their Ingratitude to God.
As for your dear Children, God hath not left himself without futher witness in their death, of an interest in them; Those heavenly whispers which the ten∣der Aunt, laying her ear to the pale lips of her dying Nephew, as he lay upon his back, with eyes fixed Heaven-ward, when he wanted strength to make his heart audible, God—Christ—Grace, &c.
And her own dear Childs delight in that little Book, A Guide to Hea∣ven, a book little in bulk, but great in Excellency; which as it caused him to make it his Vade Mecum while he liv∣ed;
his Golden Cup, out of which he drank his Mornings draught every morning in his Bed: So it caused him to take it with him as his Viaticum to Heaven, when he came to dye. For it was found with him when dead: These I say are overplusses of Divine Grace, and witnesses of Divine Love, to those dying Babes from their Heavenly Fa∣ther.
Wherefore Dear Children, let not the Consolations of God seem small un∣to you, but improve them for your own Comfort, and quickning, in the holy Education of the surviving Trea∣sures of your Blood; that if they live, you may have comfort in their Lives; or if they dye, you may have hope in their Deaths.

Be steadfast and immoveable, and always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as you know, your labour is not in vain in the Lord.
And accept of this imperfect Monu∣ment, set up for your continual Inspecti∣on, and the blessed Childrens Memo∣rial: By

