



Madam,
I Shall not need to fear the reviving of your sorrowes by this late ad∣dress; I finde them still
fresh upon your spirit; and I dare not accuse you for it: I had almost said, you cannot be guilty of an ex∣cesse in your mourning o∣ver the losse of such a childe; A child not only of the severest obedience, but of the sweetest and ten∣derest respect to your spiri∣tual and eternal good, that most Mothers ever had the happinesse to bring forth.
Surely it was her pious care to pay in grace, the debt which he owed you by nature: and to compensate her natural being received from you, with your spiritu∣all.

Your Ladiship hath of∣ten acknowledged to myself, and others what a soul-help she was to you, ever since God was pleased to call her by his grace, and to reveale his sonne in her. Surely as seldome have children lost a bet∣ter mother; so seldome did mother lose a better childe. And as such a losse can hardly be over∣wept, so I am afraid our times are little guilty of such a sin. Our sin is ra∣ther that we bury our sor∣rows together in the same grave with our godly, pray∣ing, soul-friends, as if
we were no losers by their death; truly would Chri∣stians put on their mourning affections, but as long as they wear their mourning garments, for their godly dead, there were lesse cause of mourning.
It is true, their voice to us is that of our Lord, Weep not for me; there is no cause (as to themselves) to sorrow even as others that have no hope; Yea, but weep for your selves, and for your children; not for their gaines, but for your loss, losse of Counsel, loss of their quickning edi∣fying Converse; their
prayers, comforts, losse of their holy jealousie and watchfulnesse over us, their tender compassions to our souls. Alas, a great part of Christians understand not their loss, and the most do not lay it to heart; and so though they quit the sence, yet they aggravate their misery; while they adde sin to their affliction; even the sin of insensiblenesse:Isa. 26.11. Lord when thine hand is lifted up they will not see.Jer. 5.3. Thou hast smitten them, but they have not grieved.
I am glad therefore Ma∣dam on your behalf to finde that these tears are not yet
dried up; blessed are those mourners that prevent not the Consolations of the holy Ghost; but do patiently wait till God himselfe come to wipe off the teares from their eyes; of which this will be a comfortable pledge, if by the sadnesse of the countenance the heart be made better.Eccl. 7.3. Which that it may be your Ladiships portion, as mine own, shall be the earnest prayer of
Madam,

