



Dear Sir,
THese Meditations presented to you, were first intended for a diversion to your and my sorrrow, Conceived by the death of that Excellent Child your First-born, your Benjamin; but his
Precious Mother's Ben-oni, for she brought him forth, not with the ha∣zard only, but with the loss of her own Life; his Birth was her Death: from which very moment of time, You were pleased to concredit his Educati∣on to his tender Grand-Mother, your Pious Mother, and my Self; a Deposi∣tum, than which there could nothing have been more Sacred to us in the world: I am sure we were as tender of it, as of our own Lives; yea verily our Lives were bound up in the Child's Life.
er. 31.20. He was indeed Natus delicia∣rum, a Delectable Child, in whom Na∣ture and Grace seemed to be at a strife, which should excel in her workman∣ship: and as he grew in age, so he grew in sweetness of disposition, and in all Natural and Moral Endowments, of
which his Age was capable: yea he out-grew his Age, and was alwayes be∣fore-hand with his Education; Im∣bibing instruction faster then we durst (rationally) infuse it, for fear of hurting the tender Vessel: So that he seemed to be a Man before his Childhood was expired: As many Loved him as knew him; and were in dispute with them∣selves, whether such Maturity did Pro∣phesie an Eximious Life, or an Immature Death: I must confess (whether my infirmity or no, I know not) I was of∣ten offended at the mention of the lat∣ter, as too boldly intrenching upon God's Prerogative: But such (it seems) was the Divine Decree, so it proved; His work was done betimes, and ours a∣bout him afore we thought of it; and while we said of him in our hearts, as
once Lamech said of his Son Noah,
Gen. 5.29. This Child shall Comfort us; he shall live with us; God said Nay, he shall leave you, and shall live with me; for before he was Eleaven years old, God snatch't him out of our Tuition, and removed him into an Higher Form; where he should learn no more by the sight of the eye, and hearing of the ear, which are subject to mistake; but by clear and perfect Vision; where he knows more than we could teach him; yea able to teach us what we are not capable to un∣derstand; while we see but in a glass darkly, he is seeing Face to Face. Oh could I but write what he is able to dictate concerning the Facial Vision which I am now (with fear and trem∣bling) but peeping into; what a rare Exposition should I publish to the
world, upon the present Context before us? such as Eye never Read, nor Ear ever Heard, nor can ever enter into the heart of man, until we enter into that Light where he is; where his intellectu∣al Eye is married to the Sun of Righte∣ousness, and his naked will is swimming and bathing it self in Rivers of pleasures for ever. This may be indeed (what these papers wished to be, and that is all) a perfumed Handkerchief to wipe off tears from your eyes, and fill your Soul with joy; Your loss is his infinite gain.
It was a satisfaction good enough for an Ethnic, who, when one brought him the tidings of his Eldest Son's death, was able to reply, Scio me ge∣nuisse mortalem: Your Comfort may express it self in a higher straine, Scio
me genuisse Immortalem; for though Nature did not make him Immor∣tal by his Generation, Grace hath made him Immortal by his Regeneration: So that all that you and I have to do, is but to breathe after that Perfection, of which (through Grace) I am humbly confident he is already possest: Let us so run that we may obtain. As for my self, so many deaths have been rushing in upon me (deep calling unto deep) as have not only retarded the birth of these Conceptions, but threatned their burial in the same Womb which Con∣ceived them, which is the just cause they have stuck so long in the Birth. But since it hath pleased the Living God to let me live to see the travail of my Soul, though miserably mangled in the Birth by unskilful hands: Such
as they are, Dear Son, I dedicate them to your Name, to be as an Absolom's-Pillar, until God may raise up a Living-Mo∣nument in the room of that which he hath removed: And because this may be too weak and obscure, let me provoke you (Sir) to erect to your self a Mo∣nument that may be worthy of you; Let your own Life be a Name to you when you are dead; a Name better than of Sons and Daughters; by filling that Honourable Station, wherein God hath fixed you, and all your other Relations, with such Fruitfulness, Wis∣dome, and Fidelity, that all that know you, may rise up and call you blessed; yea, that your Name may be as a sweet Perfume to Posterity: Live your own Life and your Son's too.
As for me, I cannot long Survive, having so often received in my selfe the
Sentence of Death;
2 Cor. 1.9. Psal. 90.10. I have lived alrea∣dy one full Age of man, and am now∣in the third year of my LABOƲR AND SORROW, and it is little I can do for God; I must Decrease, but may you Increase; yet pray for me, that I may live much in a little time; and that my self and your Aged Mother may like those Trees of God, Psal. 92.14, 15. bring forth more fruit in old age, then in the beginning, to shew that the Lord is upright, &c.
Farewell Honoured Son, and God All-Mighty make you amends for the loane which you have lent to God, if not in the Stream, yet in the Foun∣tain. He Bless you, and make you a Blessing: So prayeth

