



Dearly Beloved,
IT is once, yea twice declared in the Book of Job, That when the Sons of God came to present themselves before the Lord, Satan came also a∣mongst them; surely, not only to espy what miscarriage might give him advan∣tage against them, but also to endeavour their subversion by the crafty insinuati∣ons of himself, and ministers, stirred up to that end; and no marvel, for if he durst presume to practise the same against our blessed Saviour, we may more assuredly expect his subtilty and puissance to be

bent against us: wherefore Diligence and Sobriety is required, (1 Pet. 5.8.) that by the one you may avoid giving him occasion against you; and by the other discover his crafty devices, although car∣ried on by fair pretences, like a Wolf in Sheeps-cloathing, making use therefore of some of your own selves, according to the words of the Apostle Paul, (Acts 20.29.) which (as heretofore) is this day ap∣parently verified; and that (amongst o∣thers) particularly in that Book presented to the World by J. Bunyan, entituled, A Confession of his Faith, and the reason of his practice touching Church-fellowship: where∣in, (amongst other things) he endeavours the vilifying (the ready way for the ex∣tirpation) of the Ordinance of Water-Baptism, and that under the specious pre∣tences of Charity, Church-edification, &c. that his Design might be so masked, as to be received by many conscientious Christians, who cannot (through his craf∣ty vail) discover his intentions in refe∣rence to the aforesaid Ordinance, which

he would not have us at all respect in the matter of Church-Communion. Which I no sooner saw, but I was filled with displeasure, apprehending my self obliged, as once Phineas was (in a mat∣ter whereunto this is not inferiour, if the spiritual concern be respected) to mani∣fest an holy indignation against the same, and (according to my ability) to vindi∣cate the Truth therein degraded; where∣upon I resolved to send abroad the ensu∣ing Treatise, which I now commend to you; (what is well done, expects your Approbation; and what is amiss, your gentle Correction): withal entreating you to look to your selves that you may not be ensnared; hold fast the form of sound words, lest that otherwise you be unawares beguiled; retain alwayes a re∣verent esteem of God's Ordinances. Which if you do not, you will sudden∣ly be surprized by that Adversary, who goeth about like a roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour; keep close to the Holy Scriptures, continue instant in

Prayer, and that for me also, that Wis∣dom, Boldness, and Patience may be gi∣ven me, that I may not cease to speak the things I have believed. Brethren, farewel, the God of Peace fill you with all Joy and Peace in believing. Amen.

