


SIR,

IF Verse but vocal Painting be,
As Painting is dumb Poetry;
A Dedication in Burles{que}
In vocal Painting is grotes{que}
For was there ever Dedication
Without some fulsome Commendation?
And has not all Burles{que} its Birth,
And afterwards its Name from Mirth?
Now to Commend at once and rally,
Are things which either will not Tally;
Or Mirth with Praise will look as odly,
As Rakels when by chance they'r Godly:
Though, Shepherd, it requires Address,
Thy Praise in Laughing to express,
I'll boldly venture ne're the less.


May the Propitious Comick Muse,
Burles{que} Conceits, and Terms infuse;
And thou, O jolly God of Laughter
Attend, and usher down Jove's Daughter;
And both inspire and grace the Verse,
Which for your Shepherd I rehearse.
Can you do less for him, when he
Has been your constant Votary?
He ner'e lies down, and never rises,
But still to you he Sacrifices,
He Sacrifices Man and Beast,
The Lay-man and the very Priest:
For still his Victims by sixt Rules
Each Morn are Knaves, each Evening Fools,
By him with pointed Wit dissected,
To all laid open and detected,
For animals of rotten insides,
Or who have strange prodigious blindsides:
And though the Sacrifice is found
Still thus defective and unsound,
The Victims wanting Noble parts,
Their Brains sometimes, sometimes their Hearts,
'Tis therefore, Shepherd, does them chuse,
For such he knows you least refuse.
He ner'e gave Gods or Men offence,
By off'ring to you Truth and Sense,
For those he uses to defend
A Wit, a Courtier, yet a Friend.
But now stop short in thy Career,
That this may be rejected Fear;
For er'e since Praise hath been a Traffick
A Panegyrick's not worth a Fig,
It may be had with a full Pocket
By ev'ry pert and noisie Blockhead,
Whose Cloaths and Talk are render'd Tawdry
By nasty Colours and by bawdry.
Then Shepherd, farewel Commendation
Now by the Law of Dedication,
(The Author's just Retaliation)
Since I have spoke so much of thee
Thou must hear something too of me.
'Twas I who Sung our brave Tarpawlin,
Engaging like a Devil bawling,
And Monsieurs Navy sorely mawling,
Names of French Men of War. His Formidable, his Victorious,
His Proud, his Thunderer, his Glorious,
His Strong, his Terrible, his Fierce,
(Strange names for Butlers jolly Verse!)
Till ev'ry Ship with its great Name,
By being Clapperclaw'd became
An Irony and Jest of Fame.


Ah,Apostrophe to the Offi∣cers of the Fleet. Bully Tar! could that be Civil
To use poor Monsieur like a Devil?
Poor Monsieur! who with Pains exceeding
Had try'd so long to teach thee breeding
To beat his Brains out! ah! to crop him
Shorter by' th' Head, or else to lop him,
And not to leave him Limbs enow,
Ah Gods! to make one jaunty Bow?
And then to set his First Rateson Fire
To serve thee for a Roguish Bonfire!
To Mawl the rest, their Rigging tear,
And leave them destitute and bare!
Que Diable des gens Barbares!
Or was this bustle and this fight-all
Design'd and acted in requital
Of Monsieurs pains, that as at Land
He made thee Breeding understand,
Thou mights't at Sea take him in hand?
And bring him by a lusty Swindging
To low Saluting and to Cringing,
If so; how great's th' extent and Latitude
O Bully Tar, of thy Sea-Gratitude!


This Fight,Return to Mr. Shep∣herd. as 'tis to thee well known
I've Sung in quite another Tone:
Now dwindling I resume the Battle
Wag'd once betwixt Suburbian Cattle.
Thus does a Falcon soaring rise,
And at some noble Quarry flies,
But stoops, when it can fly no more,
At Carrion, which it left before.
This Battle Read too, and the while
If thou approv'st it, Shepherd, Smile.
But though thou lik'st it, Laugh not out,
For all the Versifying Rout,
A bold and a presuming Nation,
If once they know thy Approbation,
Will mawl thee with perpetual Billets,
And pelt thee with Poetick Pellets,
Send thee more Scrawls, more various Pothooks,
Than are i' th' Letter-Case of M—
Thou wilt on ev'ry hand be pepper'd,
For all who Write would fain please Shepherd:
Nay, to take his, and Dorset's Heart
The Nine their utmost Charms exert,
Their Charms of Nature and of Art.
Whilst by their Looks, their Air, their Dress,
They to the wond'ring World no less
Than Virgin-Goddesses confess;
What they aspire to by their Charms
Is to be bless'd in Dorset's Arms:
Pleas'd, ravish'd with his Approbation,
Tho Damn'd by all the Fools i' th' Nation.
Now for one Compliment in Rhime.
And so t' have done, for 'tis high time.

There's, no Man more Your Humble, than is, SIR, 
