



My Lord,
I Presume to Dedicate the fol∣lowing Trifles to you; which, if you were one, who judg'd by the Volume, would yet have more the appearance of Trifles. Let them be what they will, they are the most valuable things that I have to offer: and the Obligations which I have to your Lordship are so extraordinary, that to endeavour to make no return, would be down right Ingratitude. Your Lordship will be inclin'd to think me bold to excess, when you hear me

boasting of Favours receiv'd from you, tho perhaps you have never so much as heard of me. Yet, I desire leave to repeat it, the Obligations which I have to you are altogether Extraordinary. For it is owing to your Lordship that I have pass'd some moments of a melancholy Life with inexpressible pleasure. For as read∣ing has always been my chief di∣version, your Lordship's admirable Writings have been able to give me joy in spight of ill Fate. Your happy and commanding Genius never fail'd to controule my evil weaker one, and seem'd still to cry out to it, Whilst I am by, he must not be unhappy.
Nor have I only the obligation to your Lordship of your own incomparable Wri∣tings, but of most of the productions of the best Writers of our Age. 'Tis from your Generous Approbation, that

they have deriv'd that spirit which renders their Works Immortal. For when ever a Man who is so true∣ly great as your Lordship, shall vouch∣safe to look with a favourable aspect on Poetry, it will not fail to flou∣rish, tho all the Stars look malignant∣ly. Ev'n I, My Lord, who am no Poet, have notwithstanding found that the desire of pleasing so accomplish'd a Iudge, has more than once inspir'd me with that noble warmth, which Hea∣ven and Nature deny'd me. When Heaven sent Mecoenas into the World to be first Minister to the Common∣wealth of Rome and of Learning, then arose Virgil and Horace, and the rest of those extraordinary Men, whose very single Names are grown to be entire and glorious Panegyricks. When several Ages after him, Cardinal Richlieu was establish'd in France in his double Capacity, the Muses were in∣vited

to pass the Mountains, and breath the sweetness of the Gallick Air. Af∣ter Mecoenas and Cardinal Richlieu, your Lordship will stand eternally re∣corded by Fame, as the last in succes∣sion of that Illustrious Triumvirate, and it will always stand recorded to∣gether by the same everlasting Regi∣ster, That in your Lordship's time England had more good Poets, than it could boast from the Conquest to You before. By animating and exci∣ting the very best of which, you will for ever oblige all those who are to receive Delight and Instruction, from them. Thus is your goodness grown so diffusive, that its influence extends to thousands whom you never heard of. Ti∣tus was the Delight and Ioy of man∣kind, but your Lordship is, and for ever will be so. You have found out a better way than either Mecoenas or Richlieu, to oblige not only the present Age, but

ev'n remotest Posterity. For if we cherish Mecoenas his Memory, tho we know that he endeavour'd at the same time to polish and enslave the World; if the Memory of Richlieu be dear to us, tho at the same time that he treated the Muses magnificently, he laid the cursed design of Europe's Cap∣tivity: with what blessings must not we mention your Lordship, when we con∣sider that we owe at once our Delight and our Safety to you? For at the very time that you are the De∣light and Ioy of your Age, and Or∣nament of your Country, at the ve∣ry time that you exalt the Honour of England by your own admirable Writings, and the Labours of those Excellent Men, whom your authentick applause inspires; at the same time by giving wholesome Counsels to our Au∣gust Monarch, you become instrumen∣tal in the defence of our Liberties,

and the general security of the Christian World. Mecoenas and Richlieu pro∣tected the Muses, but their Protecti∣on was partly at least political, and necessary for the gaining or softning some unruly Spirits, who would have been else too turbulent for the New Yoak. But your Lordship's Patronage proceeds from no sinister end, no un∣just design on our Liberties; but pure∣ly from the greatness of your noble Mind, and a Godlike principle of inbred Beneficence.
Thus, My Lord, have I been guil∣ty of a fault which is common to all the most supportable Dedications. For I have hitherto told the Publick no∣thing concerning you, but what I learnt from the Publick before. There is no Man but knows that of all the Nobility your Lordship has been always the most true and most can∣did

Friend to the Muses. Whilst o∣thers are imploy'd in finding their faults, it is your prerogative to par∣don them, and approve their Beauties. This is what is known to every one. But every one does not know that to find faults requires but com∣mon Sense; but to discern rare Beau∣ties, requires a rare Genius. Thus if your Lordship will pardon so poeti∣cal a Similitude, when one of the glo∣ries of the fairer Sex, one who was fram'd and design'd by Providence to bless some Man who is greatly good, and give an earnest of Heaven below to him; when such a one is at any time seen amongst us, the vulgar Spe∣ctators, those Criticks in Beauty, are busie in censuring some Mole or some Blemish, or some inconsiderable Irre∣gularity, which Nature industriously perhaps contriv'd with intention to set off her great Masterpiece. But when

a Man who has a Soul that in crea∣ting was form'd to be mov'd by Beau∣ty, that is, a beautiful Soul, when he contemplates her, he gazes, admires, and loves in a Moment; then follow transporting impatient wishes to return that happiness he receives from the lovely Object. Your Lord∣ship could never be the Muses best Friend, if you were not the Man who understood them best. If you had not heighth of Genius, and largeness of Soul to comprehend all their Excellencies: If you did not sensibly feel their ele∣vation of thought with all its warmth, its force and its delicacy; which you could never fully discern, if you did not throughly understand their Tongues, if you had not skill to judge of its finest Grace, its Vigour, its Purity, its judicious Boldness, its comprehensive Energy, and all its glorious attractive ornaments. Your Lordship could ne∣ver

be compleatly skill'd in those or∣naments, if you had not a piercing and a delicate Eye; an Eye that can readi∣ly judge betwixt tawdry Trimming and proper, that can discern betwixt gay and curious Colours, and can distinguish vain gawdy Pageantry, from pompous richness and true Magnificence. You could never converse with the Muses so freely as to understand them fully, if you did not perfectly speak that language of the Gods, in all its Sweetness, all its A∣bundance, in all the power of its various Numbers, and in all its harmonious Maje∣sty. No, My Lord, you could never be pleas'd to a height with the Writings of others, if in writing, your self you had not felt those happy Enthusiasms, those violent Emotions, those supernatural transports which exalt a mortal above mortality, give delight and admiration to all the World, but shake and ravish a Poet's Soul with insupportable pleasure.

But it is high time to take leave of a Subject which throws me into a heat, which is very inconsistent with the respect that is due to your Lord∣ship's Character.
Otherwise it would be no hard mat∣ter to prove from the same affection which you bear to the Muses, that your Lordship's Virtue shines as bright as your Genius.
Carmen amat quisquis Carmine digna gerit.
But there is small need of proving that Virtue which all men discover by its own light. Your Lordship's Genius shines but to a few, to none but those happy few, who have some parti∣cles in their breasts of the same eter∣nal Fire. For inspiation alone can capacitate a Mortal to behold Celestial

Beauties. The Vulgar discern it as they do a fix'd Star, they see that it is, they see that it shines: but the Rays that it casts at that infinite distance, can but just reach their benighted Souls thro the horrid gloom that surrounds them; and it is with pleasing wonder that they hear the Sons of Art pro∣claiming its prodigious Grandeur, its amazing Glory. But all men have a clear Idea of Virtue, tho few have a just notion of Genius. Your Virtue, My Lord, like the Sun, is nearer to them, tho that too is at a mighty di∣stance, yet not so remote but that at the time that it cherishes them, it casts more light upon them, than their Souls can directly bear.
Who does not admire your Goodness, your Charity, your generous Condescen∣sion, your greatness of Mind, your no∣blest Friendship; and to crown all, your

Passionate Concern for your Countries welfare? These are the qualities which have caus'd your Lordship to be belov'd universally, nay, and be∣lov'd too with as much warmth as if you were neither much esteem'd nor respected, yet at the same time so profoundly esteem'd, and in that aw∣full manner respected, as if you were not belov'd. The news of your late Promotion was receiv'd with the universal acknowledgement, That your Lordship was an honour to that most noble Order, which is an honour to Kings; and we all cryed out una∣nimously with your own Horace,
Mecoenas equitum decus!
But I must be forc'd to stop short in this full career, lest proceeding I should please all Readers but you, whom of all Readers I would least dis∣please.

Before I conclude, I think fit to acquaint your Lordship, that I omitted the prefixing your name to this bold Epistle for several reasons: the chief of which is that. I might not be liable to the accusation which one of our greatest Wits has some time since brought against dedicating Authors; which is, that they paint so grosly, that it were impossible to know for whom the Dawbers design'd their Pictures, if they did not; to inform us, set their names on the Top. I appeal to all those who shall happen to read this, if before they found you nam'd, they did not conclude that what has been said all along could be addrest to no man, and justly applyed to no man; but my Lord Dorset alone. I am,
My Lord,

