



MY LORD.
THe Poem upon which I have made the following Re∣marks has met with very different success in the World. Some have admir'd it as a Master-piece of Art and Nature. Others have explo∣ded it with extream Contempt. And a third sort, amongst whom are some extraordinary Men, have been willing to encourage something that is Generous in the Design, and

something that is Happy at least in fome parts of the Execution. I need not acquaint Your Lordship that for my own part, I believe Prince Arthur to be neither Admirable nor Con∣temptible. Forif I had the one or the other Opinion, I should certainly ne∣ver have Written against him. I have given my Reasons in the following Treatise why I cannot admire him, which I hope will have the Apro∣bation of Your Lordship's Judgment.
It would be an intolerable pre∣sumption in me, if I should endea∣vour to give Your Lordship any long diversion from that sublime Em∣ployment, which the King to show the Judgment of his first Choice, has a second time conferr'd on You. While England with Joy beholds You Exalted to Rule the State, which from the first moment of Your Ri∣sing in it, You have always En∣lightened,

Adorn'd and Animated.
Your Lordship with a certain Pre∣sage of Soul has all along taken care by improving and encouraging Arts to soften and humanize that stubborn People, whom You were one day design'd to Govern. Yet You have always, with a Just tho' an Absolute Sway, Rul'd the most Capricious part of that People, and by much the most difficult part to be Govern'd. I speak, MY LORD of the Men of Wit, a Turbulent and a Tumultuous Nation, ex∣ceeding sufficient in their own con∣ceits, impatient of reproof, and gree∣dy of glory. And he who has the Skill to command these, with a great deal of ease can Govern the rest. Your Lordship has always di∣stributed Justice to them with un∣disputed Authority, but always with an inclination to Mercy, when Mer∣cy

was not Cruelty: and by Your admirable goodness of Nature join'd with Your rare Qualities, have gain'd to that degree upon them that the vainest of Men have been publickly seen to subject their very Sense to You; and have been found to make it their vanity, (for vanity will be sure to gain in one place what it has lost in another) to sub∣mit their own to Your Lordship's Judgment. To imitate them in this I presume to lay the following Re∣marks at Your Feet; and to assure Your Lordship that I am with all respect imaginable,
MY LORD.

