



My LORD,
THE World has not been displeas'd to see in Rinaldo a Character Resembling Your Grace's, a Character of a Heroe who neither Rants nor Whines, but is great with a solid and real Greatness, very Valiant without Extravagance, and very Human with∣out Weakness, and deserting Pleasure for Glory. And that Character naturally claims your Protection, which resembling yours has pleas'd all sorts of People: For your Grace

at the same time that you have been the Darling of the Fair, has been the Passion of the Brave, and the Esteem of the Wife. The University of Oxford is proud of such a Chancellour, and the Armies of the King of such a Lieutenant General. All who are engag'd in the Cause of Truth, whether they defend her by Force or Argument, are animated and excited by having your Grace at the Head of them. But at the same time that you have been the Darling of the Fair, and the Esteem of the Wise, the Largeness of your Soul, and the Height of your Cou∣rage, the Love of your Country and the Love of Glory, have made you almost the Adoration of the Armies. Whenever you were Encamp'd, the old Officers beheld with Wonder in you a double Portion of the greatness of Soul of the Noble Duke of Or∣mond, your Grandfather. And whenever you were engag'd in the Field, the old Ani∣mated Soldiers Review'd with Ravishment the Heroick Courage of your Father, the Brave Earl of Ossory. I must confess, My

Lord, the commendation of any Man's Ancestors, is for the most part a Superfi∣cial and a Foreign Praise; But to shew the High Esteem that we have of yours, is to shew the Value that we have for your Grace. I admire indeed the old Noble Duke of Ormond, and the Brave Earl of Ossory, but I admire them most in your Grace. For the Blood of your Illustrious Family, like the Flood of a noble River, becomes more great and more august the farther it descends from its Source.
The Earl of Ossory did as much as Man could do at Mons, and Success attended his Actions. Your Grace deserv'd to be Victo∣rious at Landen, but Fortune would not have it so. But 'tis easie, my Lord, to look great in Prosperity; To be great in Adversity that is the Work. Your Grace in yours appear'd so exalted to your Enemies, that they al∣most condemn'd that Fortune which had de∣clar'd for them, and blush'd in their Captive to behold their Superior. I am afraid that I have gone too far, while I have ende∣vour'd

to please; For to shew that I am sen∣sible of your extraordinary Merit, cannot but be pleasing to all the World but your Grace. But to shew that I had rather have your Approbation than that of the World, I here restrain the Passion which I have to proceed, and subscribe my self,
My LORD,  
