



HOly, and beloved: This little Treatise, seeketh not the patronage of the worldly wise, mighty, or hono∣rable; it craves not the favour of vertuous Lady, or Christian Gentlewoman: It shrewds not it self, under the roof of any great Lord, or Patron, But it lieth pro∣strate, at your feet; it submitteth it self, with all humility, un∣to your censure; whatsoever is well done presumeth of your approbation; whatsoever is faulty, expects your meek and gen∣tle correction. Vnto your view I am bold to present it. My fa∣ther, my mother, my brethren, and my sisters. To cast down the man of sin is now the profession of many, and every hand thinks it a happinesse, to lop off a bough, from this over-spreading tree. Now every purpose is established by counsell, and with good advice make warre. Prov. 20.18. In this spi∣rituall warfare, I have endeavoured, to contribute my mite of consultation: He that striveth, to take away the spreading boughs of Antichrist may seeme to do a good work. But will not his labour be almost lost, they will sprout again, so long as the root remaineth in the earth; Therefore is it that your unworthy brother, and companion in tribulation, hath adventured to lay the mattock, unto the root of the tree, therefore have I under∣mined Babels foundations, that the pillar being plucked away, whereon the whole house leaneth, the fabrick may fall upon their heads at once: that the roots being discovered, and cut insun∣der, the next blast may throw the tree down to the ground, and then shall the armes thereof be shattered in the fall. These words
were sometimes since preached unto an Auditory: And upon request of some of the hearers, I have condescended to give you a copy: wherein is something more, but to my knowledge nothing lesse then what was spoken: The Lord hath set me as a man of contention: This Sermon being at I am perswaded, the very inward cause, of all my troubles, and imprisonment; Although I confesse nothing herein, was laid to my charge: That was the subtilty of the Serpent, who knew well that he was not able to mannage, any thing against me that was here de∣livered; and therefore waving this altogether, He hath sought occasion against me (and found it also) in the doctrine of Bap∣tisme. This was the thing, that first of all did inflame the hearts of my opposers, and cause them to swell with envy, and to break forth, into a rude opposition; which flame could not be quench∣ed, but was more increased, untill, through their suggestions, and informations, I was cast into prison: That it might not fare better with me then with others. The Lord lay not this sin to their charge: now I do present this unto you, that your wisdome may take it into consideration, whether there were any Just cause of exception, in that which was delivered, or whe∣ther those floods of water, cast out of the mouth, I meane oppro∣brious, and reviling speeches, were not the fruits of him, that is, and will be alwayes opposite unto the truth. Brethren, I de∣sire you to pray for me; that knowledge, and utterance, courage and patience, may be given unto me, that I may not cease to speak the things I have beleeved: that the Lord would give me that honour, that whether in bonds, or at liberty, whether by life or by death, I may glorifie his Name, in the edification of his Church, in the most holy faith. Brethren farewell. The God of peace fill you, with all joy, and peace, in beleeving. Amen.

