



SIR,
THese Sermons will not be new to You; there ha∣ving past so little time, since you heard them at Charenton, no doubt but you will know them at first sight. The support they then found in our holy Assembly, emboldens them now to present themselves in publick. Per∣haps it had been better, to rest contented with that favour, which our people shew'd them, and not publish them once more in this other form. For beside, that the eye is much more delicate than the ear, and the defects of a discourse are far more easily observ'd on paper, where they abide, than in the air, where they do but pass; there is further a great difference between an Auditor, whom devotion doth oblige to hear you, and a Reader, who does owe you nothing. The one would think, he should sin against Piety, if he deny'd you his at∣tention. The other doth you a favour, in heeding you, and may examine you, without a crime. The one's judgment is half made for you; whereas the other's is at its full liberty. These reasons would have with-held me, from hazarding the editi∣on of these small Books, if the matter had wholly depended upon my opinion. But the desires of my friends, and the in∣treaties of the Book-seller interposing in it, their violence hath forc'd my modesty. Yet I should have had vigour, and firmness enough, to defend my self against it, if the question
had been simply of my self, and my reputation. For the pre∣sent age being so polite, and so illuminated, as the most elo∣quent tongues, and the best fashioned penns can hardly con∣tent it; I well know, that to please it, there is need of graces, and perfections, which I do not possess. But neither is that, the thing I seek: since of my weakness, and the Calling where∣with GOD hath honoured me, having competently secured me from such a passion. That which made me yield, to the too favourable will of my Friends, is the interest of Christian souls, which they laid before me, and the service, they believ'd, this Book might do them. The success will inform us, whether they had reason to promise themselves so much from it. For my part, the thing being as yet uncertain, I held my self ob∣liged, to give place unto their judgment, and to prefer the profit, which they imagine the faithful may receive from my poor labours, before any other consideration. And if it be temerity, to hope the same; at least it is not a crime, but a laudable affection to desire it. Of one thing, Sir, I am well∣nigh assured; that you will not dislike the gift, I make you, of this third, and last part of my work. For to say nothing of that sweetness of spirit, and that obliging nature, which every one observes in you; and not to consider divers testi∣monies, which I have received, of your good will towards me in particular, I am confirm'd in this opinion, by your piety, well known in our Church, both by the excellent fruits of your charity, in the ordinary course of your life, and by the services, you have sometime done our whole flock, in the Of∣fice of an Elder, while you executed it among us, with much edification, and praise. Perswading my self therefore, Sir, may it please you, that you will receive this small present, with your usual goodness, and facility; there remains not else, but that I pray GOD to conserve you, with your worthy, and well-born Family in health, and prosperity, daily augmenting on you His most precious blessings, both spiritual, and temporal. I beseech you, to continue me the honour of your good graces, and to do me the favour to believe, that I passionately am,
SIR, 
From Paris. Apr. the 1. 1648.
