


SIR,
I Present You these Sermons; believing, I owe this acknow∣ledgement, not only to the Friendship, wherewith you honour me: but much more to the edification, and good offices, the Church where I preached them, receiveth now a long time from your piety. For besides the fair ex∣ample, which your life giveth us, a life full of vertue, and honour; always constant, and equal in the profession, and holy Exercises of the truth of the Gospel: there hath been presented no occasion of doing ser∣vice to the people of GOD, either in the one, or in the other of their times, but you have embraced with zeal, and managed with prudence.
So likewise we see, that the Good and Merciful LORD, you serve, hath crowned your obedience with the benedictions of His Grace. For in the inequality of seasons, and the diversity of affairs, He hath still rendred You acceptable, both to those within, and even to them without. And, which is the principal, He hath preserved His Covenant in your house, that neither the vanity of the world, nor the scandal of the time, hath been able to make any of the breaches there, which we see with grief in other families. To establish this pretious heritage of piety in your
blood, His Providence hath added to it, by alliance, persons excellent in knowledge, and in merit, in whose linage you daily see your own life re∣new, and flowrish afresh. It is true, Sir, you have also had your tri∣als; as no true believers are exempted from them. But those which GOD hath dispensed to you, have been so tempered with his goodness, as I believe you may truly say, that in this more, than in any other passage of Your life, He hath made shine forth the marveils of His grace to∣wards You. Such was, some years ago, the bitter, but blessed and hap∣py death, of the late Sir Your eldest Son, taken away untimely, and in the prime flower, and vigor of His age. This was without doubt a very dolorous stroke, which cut down in a moment the sweetest of your hopes, plucking from your embraces, a Son as love-worthy, as he was loved; and whose deserving, to say all in a few words, was no less, than the dignity of a Senator, to which he was already arrived, in the chief of the Parliaments of this Kingdom. But how sensible soever His death was unto you, it was notwithstanding accompanied with grace of GOD so visible and ravishing, as I fear not to refresh Your memory of it; well knowing, it is no less dear, and pretious to You for the piety, and the high, and truly Christian constancy, He shewed, in those last, and happy moments of His life; than troublesom, and bitter, for the mourn∣ing, and sadness, which it left on Your whole House. As soon as His malady appeared to be, what indeed it was, He looked on Death without disturbance; He prepared Himself for it, with great courage; and His air, his eyes, and all His discourses, were full of resolution, and con∣tentment. He comforted us all; and amid the tenderness, and resent∣ments of such a separation, never expressed ought of feebleness. And though He left on earth, of the dearest and sweetest, one may here pos∣sess or desire; yet He quitted it, not only without regret, but even with joy; so firm was the hope, or to say better, so clear and assured the sight, which the LORD JESUS then gave Him, of the blisses, and de∣lights, to which He called him. He remained in this graceful, and holy disposition, even to His last breath, with a spirit clear, and a soul calm, speaking to us of His approaching happiness; and of the present grace of His LORD; with so much efficacy, as it stopped Your tears, and in such manner forced the resentments of your grief, that how just so∣ever they were, You had nevertheless a secret shame, to make them ap∣pear in the presence, and on the occasion of so vertuous a person; as if Laments, and Plaints should have in some sort offended His piety, and dishonored the victory of his faith. The same GOD, that loosed Him so miraculously from earth, to raise him up to heaven, granted You to support the affection of His departure, with a patience worthy Your
vocation. After so rude a blow, He hath yet sustained You; and con∣ducted You to an honourable old age, that few persons do attain. And now I doubt not, but Your principal consolation, and the agitations of the present world, and the infirmities of this age, is the assured hope you have, of arriving also one day at the port of that blessed immortality, where, contrary to the ordinary course of nature, You have seen this dear Son enter before You.
If in the holy exercises of Piety, by which You daily prepare You for it, the reading of these Sermons may find place, and be of any use for Your consolation; I shall therein have extream satisfaction: at least I can well assure You, it is one of my most ardent desires; who pray GOD, to preserve you, with all your Family, in perfect prosperity, and remain inviolably,
From Paris April. 1. 1648.
SIR, 
