



MAy it please your Honour. In that which is so serious as Religion I dare not be a trifler: nor can I love a man that is so. Divinity is ever Grave, neither toying nor yet sullen. Piety and Gravity are twin sisters, both descended from above, owning their high birth from the supreme Sanctity and soveraigne Maje∣sty of Heaven. As they come from high, so they descend lowe, even to the center of a Man; and take possession of his heart: there they dwell, and from thence they send forth, (like Rivers from their Spring-head) many notable assurances of their residence there. While that some vent Le∣vity and Wickednesses because they have recei∣ved Religion no deeper then into their braine. Many men are Christians according to a certaine

common since they have of Religion. Now in the Braine of man, The common Sence and the Phantasie are neere neighbors, hard is the conditi∣on (and yet the condition) of some, with whom Phansy leades the way.
These Brain-Christians, are so much in skill, that they forget Practice. With the head a man may know, even unto others wonder, and his owne pride: But with the heart a man beleeveth Rom. 10. 10. unto righteousnesse: If this store-house be well filled, The mouth will shew the aboundance Matth 12. 34. of the heart within, and then with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. If coldnes or emptinesse be there, you may finde it in the dull Rom. 10. 10. and barren language of the Speaker. The most cer∣tain and most absolute symptome of a good heart, well filled, is Truth of what the Tongue delivers. A good man out of the good treasure of the Matth. 12 35. heart bringeh good things. Now nothing is good but Truth.
Truth, it is one of the glorious titles and attri∣butes, which our Saviur (in whom was found 1 Pet. 2. 22 no guile) hath taken to himselfe I am the Way (saith he) and the Truth, &c. All Fraud, False∣hood and Lying are from Hell. When the Devill speaketh a lie, he speaketh of his owne: for he Ioh. 14. 6.

is alyar and the father of it. He began with a Ioh. 8 44. Gen. 3. 4. lye at first, and it hath been his owne ever since. Verum Evangelium veritatem amat, verita∣tem colit, veritate alitur & Augeli (saith your Andradius) The true Gospel loveth the Defens. Trid. l. 2. Truth, honoreth the Truth, hath nourishment and growth by Truth. Maxentius Johannes affirmeth very well, Nullum vitium est, quod non sumat à mendacio initium, neque virus cujus non sit origo veritas. There is no vice, which hath not beginning from a Lye: nor any Vertue, whose originall is not Truth.
If after this, you finde me wittingly false in a∣ny assertion, or in any authority which I shall pro∣duce, your Lordship hath here (I have sent it) wherewith to stop shame into my mouth. But if by these following papers your Honour finde your old Anonymus false and fowly false, on whose side must he be, and they that follow him? Christ and Truth go together; wo to the adverse party: they are enemies and must be one day under foot.
When this old Souldier had often pretended much valor to encounter any man that I should bring; and had almost perswaded me into an opi∣nion of his Ability: At last, in neere two yeeres time being pressed by me, he concluded, plainely, o

discourse with none. Some were married. I un∣dertook for ene unmarried! Others were skilled in the Easterne languages! I undertooke that no word should be instanced, but English and Latine. Then it was dangerous! I undertooke that also upon my owne head. Lastly, it was to no pur∣pose! And indeed I found it to no purpose to presse him farther. Quo fronte! quâ fide! with what forehead he made these darings, with what faith he hath performed them, I well remember, and can justifie: Herein he is guilty of much un∣truth.
Yet lest he might seeme to have a guilty cause, as well as a pretensed valour, his pen was ready a∣gainst all men, and he offered me the choice to de∣signe unto him, upon what particular subject hee should write. I answered him, that I was so con∣fident and so assured of the Truth and goodnesse of our Religion, that I gave him liberty in all the latitude of Controversies betwixt us, to make his owne choice; even there where he thought himself ablest, and the best provided: onely desiring that he would be curious to pick out his best arguments, and that he would be briefe. He promised a speedy discharge, and made his present election to prove Saint Peters supremacy: I said I was glad he had

pitched on a point so materiall, but (said I) you have taken one as difficult for you to prove as I could wish. It is now a twelve-moneth since, yet hath this man herein been as mute as death. Is he not guilty of another untruth?
I am little at leisure, and the least of any in skill for these Eristicke discourses: but I serve Truth, and that will prevaile. I do therefore againe and againe exact and challenge him to performe his undertaking in that subject, and with that brevity as was promised.
In the meane time having perused foure severall Treatises of his writing, two in print, and two un∣der the pen, I have good cause to aske, How well he can justifie what I finde in them; not in the whole Treatises (they are not of such weight and worth) but in foure passages taken severally, one out of each Treatise. Nor will I pick out that which is sleight and easie: Nor will I take lesse then what I finde concerning one entire passage and the par∣ticular subject there handled.
The Reasons why I am bold to present the trouble hereof unto your Lordships hand are few, yet enough to exact this of mee. Foure they are, and very powerfull with me. Duty, Gratitude, Good manners, and Piety.

First in way of Duty I do owe the First fruits of my pen, in matters of Religion, unto the person (if hee were living) but now unto the happy me∣mory of * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * Here were som lines that would by circum∣stances have ex∣pressed the name of that Ho∣norable person, whom I chuse ra∣ther to o∣mit.
This first motive leades me fairely on unto my second, which is Gratitude to your Lordship in whose Noble Person, and deare love, his Lordship now lives, more then in all the world beside. Your Favours, great and many, all free and noble, like your selfe, have obliged me to this Gratitude. And among many other, the many earnest and af∣fectionate wishes, zealously and prayer-like ex∣pressed, for my embracing that Religion, which your Lordship hath with strong beliefe for true, lodged in your owne soule, though in truth, to the great hazard of that excellent soule. An high ob∣ligement as it is: and able from a duller spirit then mine, to extort this Gratitude.
In the next place Good-manners have impel∣led me hereunto. Some conferences this old Gen∣tleman hath held with me in your honors presence to whom he is well knowne. Wherefore (and for other reasons also). I hold it a degree of Good∣manners, not to run this into his hand, without sa∣luting your Lordship and as it were first asking leave.

Lastly Piety to God, and to the Church my mother, and piety due unto your Lordships soule, whose great abilities and rich endowments of minde, may herein examine these, and hereby, take occasion to examine other Truths, and then cleare away the misty clouds of Popery: which are farre more dangerous and deadly to your soule, then unto millions beyond Sea, who either have not the like abilities within, or so faire day-light abroad, by the free Gospel revealed, as is unto your Lordship in this blessed Iland.
God eternall grant that you may see, and know his Truth: and not like those whom the Apostle expresseth to be Ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of Truth. And this for one onely Advocate and Redeemer Jesus Christ his sake, shall be prayed in your Honours behalfe, by
Your Lordsh. ever obliged and most humble servant to his power,

Surenden-Dering, 28. Jan. 16.39./40.

