



SIR,
THE Divine Epistle of S. Paul to the Colossians was not to rest in their hands; but by his ex∣press order, to be communicated unto the neighbouring Laodiceans; as we read, in the Epistle it self towards the end. It would therefore seem a little congruous, that these Sermons, which expound it, do undergoe a like disposal; and not confined to the French, to whom they were originally Preached, be imparted to the neighbouring English.
The Author of them was He whom, his Auditors at Charenton did frequently call, for the beauty, and richness of his Discourses, the Silver-tongue Daille; Readers here have applauded, and do esteem highly, for his Apologie, and that exquisite Treatise of the use of the Fathers; both which have for some years, spoke our Language; The learned all abroad do know him, and value him for divers other excel∣lent labours. He signalized himself, both at the Press, and in the Pulpit: and GOD was pleased, to crown him, in His service, with the glory of a vigorous, and venerable old age.
I confess, I was none of the meetest to represent this Work of his, and communicate it, as I do: nor did I design it at the entrance. But a private exercise receiving some encou∣ragement,
grew up, and comes at length into a publication. Neither am I without hope; but that the known English civility for strangers, will be shewed Mr. Daille; though his Interpreter be no more, then he is.
Yea, while that Reverend man interpreteth here a great Apostle; and presseth as he doth, solid religiousness towards GOD, Loyal Subjection to Princes, and Superiours; Peace, and Love, and every Vertue among men; I would promise him Christian attention, and consideration; a calm and ge∣nerous enduring of little discrepancies, if any occurr; and all the respect, that befits a Minister of CHRIST.
Now, Sir, I deem it not improper, to put into Your hand, a piece, which had its Original in France; when I reflect upon the illustriousness of Your Ancestry sometime there. I cannot but mind in particular, how the Family was en∣graffed into the Royal House it self; Peter a Son of Louis le Gros, espousing the Inheretrix, a Name, and Arms of Cour∣tenay; so becoming the stock, whence those Noble after∣branches issued, which did spread forth on this, and on that side of the Sea.
But the Dominion, and Empire of GOD is equally over all the Kinreds, and Kingdoms of the World; and unto Him, every one's greatest, and nearest relation. I tender there∣fore the present Volume, chiefly, as spent upon the illustra∣ting, and enforcement of His holy mind and will: and do beseech You, to accept the gratitude, which it is tendred withall.
That every Divine blessing may descend, and rest upon Your Person, and Affairs, Your Vertuous Honourable Lady, and all those sweet Branches about Your Table, is the ear∣nest, and incessant Prayer of
SIR, 
