



SIR,
AMONG the advantages, which the Reformation of the Church, embraced by our Fathers, in these latter ages, hath afforded us, we must, without doubt, ascribe the preheminence, to the free use we have of the word of CHRIST; which He, of His abundant Grace, hath recovered for us. This Divine Taper, lighted up from Heaven, in the house of GOD, to shine unto His people, did re∣main hid a long time, under a Bushel, (that I may express it,
Mat. 5.15. in the terms of the Gospel) the negligence, and fraud of men with∣holding it in this shameful-state. It is now set anew, on its Candlestick, whence it diffu∣seth every way, its enlivening, and saving light among us; and that in such abundance, as we may truly say in this respect, the word of CHRIST dwelleth richly in us.
Col. 3.6. It reigneth alone, in our assemblies, where its voice, and not any other, is continualy heard to resound; the Fables, and Legends of men being altogether banished thence. It is read there in a familiar language, which every one understands; whereas if it be read else∣where, it's in a tongue, dead, and barbarous, and unknown to the people. It is explain∣ed among us, with all fidelity, sincerity, and diligence, whereas amid the darkness of for∣mer ages, it was so unworthily treated by Preachers, that to consider their Sermons, one would think, they had designed to make it openly ridiculous. I confess, those persons, that abide in the erroneous opinions of their Ancestors, yet are somewhat ashamed of this gross, and prophane licentious practice of theirs; and they have reformed it after a sort: Yet there remain, but too many defects among them still, and this one in particular, that they explain, in publick, only some pieces, and (if it may be said) shreads of Scri∣pture, sometimes taken from one book, sometimes from another, never shewing their hearers any complete body. For it cannot be denied, but that this manner of handling the word of GOD, doth deprive the faithful of much edification; it being evident, that
the view, and the considering, of an entire book, giveth us a great deal more of know∣ledge in it, and admiration at it, than the view of any part of it, alone, and taken off from the whole, can do. This fault is so much the less pardonable, in our adver∣saries; for that, besides reason, it crosseth also the custom, and authority of those anti∣ent Doctors of the first ages of Christianity, whose true sons, and legitimate successors, these Gentlemen, boast, they are. For it was frequent at that time, for Pastors to ex∣pound in the Church, whole books of Scripture throughout, by Sermons continued on, upon the chain of the holy Text, from the beginning of a volume to the very end: that remainder, which we have, of the writings of those days, doth clearly evince so much. There are extant still, the Sermons of S. John Chrysostom, upon Genesis, upon the Gospels of S. Mathew, and S. John, upon the Acts of the Apostles, and upon all the fourteen Epistles of S. Paul; which were delivered by this great man, part of them in the Church of Antioch, and part, in the Church of Constantinople the greatest, and most populous Churches of all the East. And among the Latines, we have the Tractates of S. Augustin, upon the whole Book of Psalms, and upon the Gospel of S. John, and upon His first Epistle, which were in like manner, made and delivered in the Assem∣blies of his people. An evident sign, that about the beginning of the fifth Century, when these two excellent, and famous personages did flourish, this custom was in re∣pute among Christians. Whether then, the thing be considered in its self, or the suffra∣ges of the Ancients be taken, it is manifest that our Fathers, and our selves, had all the reasons in the world, to re-establish this sacred, and just usage, in the Church.
Now Sir, this Book, which I address unto you, is a fruit of it. For having under∣taken, in conformity to this order, to expound, in our holy assemblies, the Divine Epistle of the Apostle S. Paul to the Colossians, and being come to the end of it, by the grace of our LORD, because the whole work, could not be commodiously contracted into one volume only, I have divided it, into three parts; of which this here, is the second. The Piety, which hath long flourished in your House, Sir, and the exquisite know∣ledge, that GOD hath given you, of His truth, do induce me to believe, that this Books which wholy treats of His Divine mysteries, and nothing else, will not be un∣pleasing to you. It's this hath given me the liberty, to put your name upon it: a Name, which diverse excellent graces, wherewith GOD hath adorned, both your Fa∣mily, and your Person, do render very dear, and very honourable, in our Church. I am sorry, that this Present is no more worthy of it. But such as it is, I do not despair, but it may obtain, from the dignity of its subject, and from the favour of your goodness, that acceptance, which it cannot pretend to upon any merit of its own. Please you then, to receive it, as a sincere testimony of the respect, I bear your vertue, and of the grate∣ful sense I have of the friendship, wherewith you honour me: withal, as an inviolable pledge of the prayers, which I present unto GOD for your prosperity, and of the fer∣vent affection, I have, to be, as long as I live.
Paris. Apri 1. 1648.
SIR, 
