



MADAM,
IT is now almost four Years since that your
Son, the late Baron of St. Hermine, ac∣quainting
me with what manner of Di∣scourse
He was ordinarily entertained at
Court, by those who laboured to advance
the Roman Religion, the rather to make him
disgust the Reformed, told me, That the Chief∣est
Argument which they urged against him,
was, Antiquity, and the General Consent of all
the Fathers of the First Ages of Christianity.
And although of himself He understood well
enough the Vanity of this Argument of theirs;
yet notwithstanding, for his own fuller satisfa∣ction,
He desired me that I would discover unto
Him the very Bottom and Depth of this Business.
This therefore I did, as Exactly as possibly I
could, and gave Him my Judgment at Large in
this Particular: Which Discourse of mine He
was pleased to like so well, that conceiving
some hopes from thence, that it might happily be
of use to others also, I shortly after put Pen to
Paper, and digested it into this Treatise You

now see. It having therefore been Composed at
first for His Service, I had resolved also with
my self to have Dedicated it to His Name; pur∣posing,
by this small Piece of Service, to testifie
to the World the Continuation of the Affection
I bare to His Progress in Piety. But that deadly
Blow which snatched Him from us in the Flow∣er
of His Age, about two Years since, at the Fa∣mous
Siege of Bosledue, having left us nothing
of Him now, save onely the Spoils of His Mor∣tality,
and the Memory of His Vertue, together
with our Great Sorrow for having enjoyed Him
here so short a time; I am constrained, Madam,
to change my former Resolution. For, to Dedi∣cate
my Book to Him, in the State wherein He
now is, in Heaven; following the Example of
many, both Ancients, and Modern Writers, who
have not stuck to direct their Discourses from
hence below, to those whom God hath taken up
into Heaven; I cannot perswade my self, that
the Practise is either Lawful, or Fit. For, be∣sides
the Vanity of the Thing, should we hold
Discourse with one, who, being at so great, and
almost infinite a Distance from us, cannot pos∣sibly
hear what we say; I should account it al∣so,
if so be He could hear us, a Point of extreme
Inhumanity, I had almost said, Impiety, to di∣sturb
that Perfect Rest His Blessed Soul now en∣joyeth;
which hath now no more to do with our
Debates or Discourses here below, but sees the
Truth now in a most pure Light, and enjoys
that Everlasting Bliss wherewith our Saviour

hath out of his Mercy crowned His Faith, and
Perseverance in the Fear of His Name. I shall
therefore content my self with cherishing, and
preserving, whilst I live, the precious Memory of
His Worth, the Excellency of His Wit, the Sound∣ness
of His Judgment, the Sweetness of His Na∣ture,
the Fairness of His Carriage, and those
other Choice Parts, wherewith He was accom∣plished;
but above all His singular Piety, which
clearly shone forth in His Words, and Actions,
till the hour of His Death.
And Madam, as for this small Treatise, which
was at first conceived and composed for Him, I
thought I could not, without being guilty of a
piece of Injustice, present it to any other, but
Your Self: seeing it hath pleased God, notwith∣standing
the Common Order of Nature, to make
You Heir to Him, to whom it belonged. This Con∣sideration
only hath emboldned me to present it
to Your Hands; knowing that the Nature of this
Discourse is not so suitable to that Sorrow which
hath of late cast a Cloud over Your House; it ha∣ving
pleased God, after the death of the Son, to
deprive You of the Father; and to the Loss of
Your Children, to add that also of Your Noble
Husband. But, my desire of avoiding the be∣ing
Ʋnjust, hath forced Me to be thus Ʋncivilly
Troublesome: seeing I accounted it a kind of
Theft, should I have any longer withheld from
You that which was Your Right, by this Sad
Title of Inheritance. Be pleased therefore,
Madam, to receive this Book, as a part of the

Goods of your Deceased Son; which I now ho∣nestly
restore, in the view of the whole World,
after some times Concealment of it in my Study.
This Name, I know, will oblige You to afford it
some place in Your Closet, which is all that I
can at present desire. For, as for the reading
of it, besides that Your Exquisite Piety (which
is built upon Infinitely much Firmer Grounds,
than these Disputes,) hath no need at all of it;
I know also, that Your present Condition is such,
as that it would be very Troublesome unto You.
And if You shall chance to desire to spend some
hours in the Perusal of it; it must be hereafter,
when the Lord, by the Efficacy of His Spirit,
shall have comforted Yours, and shall have al∣layed
the Violence of Your Grief: to whom I
pour out my most earnest Prayers, that He would
vouchsafe Powerfully to effect the same, and to
shed forth His most holy Grace upon You, and
Yours; and that He would by His great Mercy
preserve, Long, and Happily, that which re∣maineth
of that Goodly, and Blessed Family,
which He hath bestowed upon You. This,
Madam, is one of the most Hearty Prayers of

