


Most Honoured Lords, and Dearly Beloved Brethren in Christ,
IN like manner as the Jews of old, when they past their little Children through the Fire in Honour of Moloch, that they might not be mov'd with their pitiful Outcries and Lamentations, endeavour'd

to deafen and silence those doleful and ruthful Moans and Shrieks of the distres∣sed Infants with variety of Sounds and Noises loud and shrill; such are the labours of the Followers of the Church of Rome, to leave no Stone unturn'd, to stop the Mouths of the Detectors of their False Doctrins: And in regard they are not able to compass their Ends by the way of Truth, they not only rage with Fire and Sword against the Orthodox, but per∣secute them with Clamour and Judicial Sentences; and which is more, fill every corner of the World with their Thundring Writings, to prevent the Voice of Truth from being heard; nay, which is more then all this, like Ahab himself, they make it their business to throw the guilt of the Troubles which themselves have rais'd, upon the Faithful Preachers of the Truth; and which is most horrible to hear, make it their glory to condemn them all to the Punishment of Infernal Fires.
The same ill Fate has befall'n me. For when it was my late hap to officiate in the Function of Ecclesiastial Overseer, in the County of Weeden, upon the Rhine, one of the Popish Prelates, a certain Neigh∣bour

of mine, was not asham'd, instead of a NEW-YEARS-GIFT, to send me word, That not only my Self, but also all the Protestants in general were eternally Damn'd, and to be infallibly Burn'd in the everlasting Fire of Hell. But in regard that by the Testimony of the Apostle, We can do nothing against the Truth, 2 Cor. 13. 8. but for the Truth; and that it is the chief Duty of a Preacher of the Gospel, To hold fast the faithful Word which is according to Tit. 1. 9. Doctrin, that he may be able both to Exhort in wholsom Doctrin, and to Convince them that say against it; I thought it my Duty, not only to Translate into the German Lan∣guage the Catechism of Controversies, written by Monsieur Moulin, and by that means to arm my Auditors against the daily Attacques of the Monks; but also to refel such an inconsiderate and unchri∣stianlike Letter, and by this my ANSWER to vindicate the Salvation of the Protestants against so horrible a Condemnation. Where∣in I have chiefly made it my business to encounter my Antagonist with the Sword of his own Brethren, as having brought in Aid of our Cause, the Testimonies of the most Famous Popish Doctors against him.

Not that I would have it so to be under∣stood however, as if the Suffrages of Men that wander in the Paths of Error, were necessary for the support of our Doctrin, but only that as vanquish'd Enemies, fol∣lowing the Triumphal Chariot of Truth, their Necks laden with Chains, and com∣pell'd to submit to the Victress, they might give all the World an unquestionable Te∣stimony of her Conquest; or else, that if after the first Rout, they should adven∣ture to make a second Attempt upon her, being by this Stratagem set together by the Ears one among another, and distract∣ed in their Minds, or at least in their Sentences, they might by mutually wound∣ing each other, destroy themselves; there∣by affording us this pleasing Spectacle, as if the Lord had set every Man's Sword upon his Neighbor throughout the Host; and had so brought it to pass, that they should kill one another with the Weapons which they had made themselves; and that the Heads of these new Goliah's should be cut off with the Swords which they had girt upon their own Loyns. For thus we see that the Papists in many things are like Samson's Foxes, having their Tails

in such a manner ty'd together to set on Fire, that with their Heads they draw two contrary Ways; or else like certain Monsters, whose Bodies are not united together till about the Navil or the Belly.
But as Fawning creates Friends, and Truth begets Hatred; so neither could I avoid the Hatred and Persecution of the Papists. For their Revenge transported them to that degree, that they sent se∣veral Soldiers to apprehend me, and to have punish'd me with eternal Captivity; who because they could not overtake me flying away on Horseback, discharg'd two Pistols at me, to have kill'd me outright; but in vain, while God in his Mercy pro∣tected me.
Constrain'd therefore by these and other Persecutions, and continual way-layings of my life, some Weeks ago I threw my self into the Bosom of your Church, that under your Protection I might live in more safety; and so soon as opportunity should permit, that I might be ready to employ the utmost of my Abilities and Sedulity in your Service.

But in regard, that according to the Proverb, There is no Desire of that which is to Men Unknown, I thought it might be worth my while most devoutly and humbly to offer and dedicate this my Answer to all and singular both Shepherds and Sheep, High and Mean, Ecclesiastics and Laity, Magistrates and Subjects, as having no other means to excite and kindle in your Hearts, when once made known to your Christian Pity, so much of gene∣rous Goodness, as to receive me into the Arms of your Charity, and make me Par∣taker of your Labors.
Accept, I beseech ye therefore, most Honourable Patrons, with courteous Mind and Hand, this little Treatise of mine; and open to me the doors of your Bene∣volence; and what you would should be done to your selves in the same case, that do to me. Be not weary in well doing, for in due season ye shall reap, if ye faint not. While we have Gal. 6. 9, 10. therefore time, let us do good unto all Men, especially unto them that be of the houshold of Faith.
In the mean time, our Merciful God, who has begun a good work in you, will perform it until the day of Jesus Christ; that being Phil. 1. 6, 11,

fill'd with the fruits of righteousness, ye may speak the Word of God without fear, and con∣tinue in one Spirit, and one Soul, holding toge∣ther 14, 27, in the defence of the Faith of the Gospel; and in nothing fearing your Adversaries, which is to them a Token of Perdition, but to you of 28, 29. Salvation, and that of God. For to you it is given for Christ, not only this, that ye believe in him, but also this, that ye suffer for his sake. Having the same sight which ye saw in me, and now hear in me. My Brethren, count it all joy, James 1. 2, when ye fall in diverse temptations. For bles∣sed is the Man who endureth temptation, because 12. that when he is try'd, he shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promis'd to those that love him.
May it please the same Almighty God, That fighting a good fight, ye may hold Faith and a good Conscience, which some having put away, as concerning Faith, have made Shipwrack. So shall ye remain faithful unto death, and a Crown Apoc. 2. 10. of Life shall be given unto you. So that when the time of your dissolution is at hand, you may gladly and truly say, We have fought a good 2 Tim. 4. 6, 7, 8 Fight, We have fulfilled our Course, We have kept the Faith. Henceforth there is laid up for us a Crown of Righteousness, whicb the Lord, the Righteous Judge, shall give at that

day; and not only to us, but to them that have lov'd his appearing.
Now unto the King Everlasting, Incorruptible, Invisible; To God only Wise, be Honour and 1 Tim. 1. 17. Glory for ever and ever, Amen.
So farewel, most Honoured Patrons, and benignly favour,

