



My right Noble Lord,
THE reason of my sending forth of this piece, under your Lordships name, is, that by this means I may pay home before I die, the old debt which I owe to your Lordship, and to the whole noble family, for countenan∣cing and encouraging me openly in my Ministery, all the while I was in Irwin near your Lordship, full twenty yeares.
And the reason why I do confesse my debt now, and go about to discharge some part of it, at this time of your Lordships restraint in England, is, be∣cause when I call to minde the time of my restraint about some thirty yeares ago, (when the High Com∣mission Court of Prelates procured my confinement within a little village in the North beyond Aberdein, in regard I could not give them satisfaction by recei∣ving the yoak of some Popish ceremonies, imposed

then upon the Ministery,) I cannot forget how comfortable your Lordship was to me then, and what paines and travel you endured summer and winter without wearying, untill they who at that time had power to loose me from my confinement, being made sensible, some of them of the iniquity, and all of them of the inexpediencie of keeping me in bonds, I was restored to the free and full use of my Ministery. Wherefore I do esteem it a part of due gratitude, to do what in me lieth, to be com∣fortable to your Lordship in this your present con∣dition; and do heartily pray to God that your ex∣ercise and trouble, may prove a meanes of your happinesse. It is true indeed, that happinesse with∣out this meanes were to be wished, if so it were Gods pleasure; but unto God onely (in whose hands alone it is to make men blessed, and in whose friendship and favour through Christ on∣ly men are really blessed) it doth belong, as to choose the man to whom, so also to choose the meanes whereby, and the manner how he will communicate the right and possession of true bles∣sednesse. If happinesse were at mens wish and carving, no man would choose God for his chief good, nor Gods way to bring his felicity about; for the multitude of men do say, Psal. 4. 6. Who will shew us any good?
The good which God doth shew unto them, and the way how by reconciliation with himself, and walking humbly and uprightly before him, they may have God to be their rich reward, is not the thing they love to have; but corn and wine and oile, and whatsoever may best please their fleshly fancie, is their desire. And of this the

Lord doth complain, Psal. 81. 11. My people, saith he, would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me. And what was it which they did preferre unto God? they loved to have their own will in this world, whatsoever should befall them after death; they loved rather to have their own earthly desires satisfied, then to have the friendship of God: and their choice was given unto them to their owne destruction. So (saith the Lord) I gave them over to their owne hearts lust, and they walked in the counsell of their owne heart. Few, when they look upon the course which the world doth runne after, yea very few do preferre the fellowship of God reconciled to them in Christ, before riches, honour, and sen∣sual pleasure: For, Who will shew us any good? is that which many do say, Psala 4. 6. bu Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon us, is the petition of the few opposed to the multi∣tude; and even those few godly would wish to go to heaven with ease, and to be free from trouble in their journey, if it were the Lords will, as we may see in the prayer of Iabez, 1 Chron. 4. 10. Who called on the God of Israel saying, Oh that thou wouldest blesse me indeed, and enlarge my coast, and that thine hand might be with me, and that thou wouldest keep me from evill, that it may not grieve me. But our loving and wise God, who knoweth perfectly what is fittest for every man, doth crosse and correct those natural de∣sires of his children. And howsoever he will now and then possibly grant the prayer of Iabez, to some of his people, yet he hath appointed this to be the ordinary road-way to heaven, which

the Apostle pointeth forth to us, Acts 14. 22. We must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God,
And this course of carrying of Gods children through many afflictions, doth no wayes hinder their happinesse; for how many soever their cros∣ses be, yet this holdeth alwayes fast, Psal. 65. 4. Blessed is the man whom thou choosest, and causest to approach unto thee. If therefore by plurality of chastisements, the Lord shall draw, and drive them to seek remission of sinnes and reconcilia∣tion with himself, and the renewed sense thereof through Christ, and shall by the rod hedge them within the way of walking with him in a friendly communion: they lose nothing except their lusts, and do gain eternal blessednesse. And certainy there is so much reliques of natural cor∣ruption, so strong inclinations unto sinne, so many actuall outbreakings, and grosse transgres∣sions to be found in the most precious Saints, that there is no wonder the Lord should visit their trespasses with the rod, and their iniqui∣ty with stripes; but all the wonder is, that he will not take his loving kindnes utterly from them. There is also so great need of loosing their affe∣ctions from what seemeth love-worthy in this world; so great need of raising the hearts of the heires of Salvation unto the seeking of a King∣dom, which cannot be shaken, and of a crown uncorruptible; as all reason doth call for the mix∣ture of troubles with earthly comforts, lest the sweetnesse of temporary vanities should prove un∣to them poysonable. Moreover, the experience of the Saints set down in Scripture, and especi∣ally

in the Psalmes, doth make it manifest, that by the variety of outward and inward troubles the faith of Gods children hath been tried, and trained to farther strength. Their love, hope, and patience, and all other spiritual graces in them have been so fostered and augmented, as they have been made joyfully and thankfully to subscribe this truth, Psal. 94. 12. Blessed it the man whom thou chastenest, O Lord, and teachest him out of thy Law. This is the language of the Lords present dispensation toward his people, and the lesson which his Providence doth recommend to us all, that we may learn it to our good: where∣unto if this piece shall contribute any thing for the edifying of those who shall be pleased to read it; and in speciall, if it shall be acceptable to your Lordship, this shall do much more then re∣compence the labour of

