



David Dickson wisheth all happiness.
THe name of Wisdome and Happiness (most Illustrious Marquess) hath alwaies and every where been very eminent, and all men have justly commended him that hath been studious of both; But few they are who well understand the things themselves: For they that place their Happiness in any thing besides the en∣joyment of God, in the matter of true Wisdome, are much mista∣ken: That indeed is the true Wisdome, by which wee are di∣rectly and infallibly led to solid and eternal Happiness. It is a most sad spectacle, and to wise observers not unprofitable, to behold the misery of mankind, joyned with madness. Man is banished from Heaven, and as a Vagabond wanders up∣on Earth, tossed up and down with the stings of misery, and a certain blinde de∣sire of Happiness, inquires after his Remedy. But the Felicity hee should seek after above, hee looks for among terrene trash, and so misseth of it every where. For the chiefest Good hee embraceth the meanest things, and the deceitful sha∣dows of Vanity: By the frequent frustration of his conceived hopes, hee is mind∣ed of his errour, and urged with the perpetual agitation of a restless spirit, to seek after the heavenly Country, and his Fathers house. But hee goes astray from the womb, and his errour is endless, encreasing and multiplying the miseries that hee flies from.
The contemplation of Divine Goodness, conflicting with mans obstinacy and stubbornness, heightens the sadness of this spectacle; The fountain of happiness descends from Heaven (cloathed with Majesty and Light, as with a garment) ma∣nifesting to those that are in the dark, his invisibility, to wit, his eternal power and God-head, shining forth in the works of Creation, that hee might invite rebels in∣to favour with him. But they either look not towards God, or looking to him, they acknowledge him not, or knowing him in some measure, they glorifie him not as God, but become vain in their imaginations, and bowed downward, they cry out, Who will shew us any good? None seriously pray, Lift up the light of thy Countenance upon us.
God comes neerer in the works of his providence, and leaves himself not without witness, but communicates his good things to men unworthy; gives Rain from Heaven, and fruitful seasons, filling the hearts of his most ingrateful enemies, with food and gladness, that they might feel after the Lord, and finde him, whom they had lost; so by the riches of his goodness and forbearance, they might be re∣duced to repentance; But they receive these benefits, and sacrifice them to glut∣tony

and intemperance. And even with these things which Divine bounty vouch∣safed (arming themselves with the weapons of iniquity) they rebel against God.
But here the Man-kindness of God doth not end, but hee comes close to us, reacheth forth his hand, knocks at every mans breast, produceth the Law written legibly upon every mans heart, shakes their consciences, stirs up their thoughts to summon those fugitive enemies to the Tribunal of Justice, to accuse the guil∣ty, and convince them of their odious ingratitude, takes away all excuse from those that are convicted, and all this, that men might repent, and sue out for par∣don. But they convinced of their iniquity, contumaciously lift up themselves against God, fall out with conscience, and lay violent hands upon it, to bee silent; they invade that truth of God, written upon their hearts, which once suppressed they imprison, and with-hold in unrighteousness. Its no wonder if God suffer such desperately stubborn, and self-condemned creatures, to walk in their own waies, and leaves them to Satan, giving them up to their own corrupt affections. Alas! Alas! millions are lost, and will bee so.
By how much the more this spectacle is lamentable, by so much the goodness of God is more lovely, which will not endure that Divine Grace should suffer a re∣pulse, by those which the good pleasure of God will have to be his own, to come to themselves, and be saved. You will easily affirm that to be a joyful sight, which for ever will bless the beholders, and make them happy. The Eternal Wisdome, the Beloved of the Father, the Delight of Angels, the Light of the World, the Life of Men, the Son of Righteousness, under whose wings is healing, and salvation, Our Lord Jesus Christ came down from the bosome of his Father: Who having discharged the price of our Redemption, conquered our enemies, gets up into his triumphant Chariot; passes through all places where his redeemed ones abide; for their sakes hee sets up the banner of his love; hee sends forth the voice of saving wis∣dome in the Gospel of Peace: By the Ministery whereof, hee opens the fountain of mans misery wider, reproves of sin, creates in them a sorrow after God, holds forth wrath to come, and terrifies; demonstrates to them their folly, unworthi∣ness and impotency to deliver themselves from those evils, and humbles them to an abnegation of their own wisdome and strength. Hee offers himself a Media∣tour, for the restoring of amity betwixt God and man, provokes in us a thirst after Life and Righteousness, holds forth to us freedome from the Law of works, as also the ratification of the New and Free Covenant of Grace, to which hee causeth them to consent; perswades them to embrace Christ, that great gift of God, and wholly resign themselves up to him: Hee exhibits also to them Remission of sins, and causes them to lay hold upon it to Justification: Hee wills those that are justified, to mortifie the old man, and enkindles in them no less de∣sire after holiness, than after Heaven and Happiness it self: Hee requires the fruits of Faith, in obedience to the Divine Law, and causes them to suck vital juice from the vine, which they send forth in fruits worthy of the Gospel. Hee com∣mands that every one take up his own Cross, which lies in his way to Heaven, causing them to observe his commands, and after the Lord of Glory, bearing reproach for him, through prosperity and adversity to pass on unto eternal life.
This is that saving Wisdome which deceives no man, but justifies and blesseth all her Children, and in like manner is justified, asserted and defended by all her Chil∣dren. This is that Wisdome from above, which every where is diffused through the Holy Scriptures, in the thrice seven Apostolick Epistles, more than twenty times drawn into a Compendium, and is fitted to the present use of the Children of Light.
I have sent abroad an Explication of these Epistles, Noble Hero, that I with my fellow-Ministers (who have dedicated their labours to your honour) might perform some portion of that gratitude, which long since the Reformed Church of Scotland is indebted to your most Illustrious family; And yet it is more obliged to your self, who have not onely revived the glory of your famous Progenitors by your stu∣dious indevours in the reforming Religion, but also the seven ast years (even with the manifold hazzards of your life and fortunes) you have much advanced it, hav∣ing undergone tose difficulties, which would have altogether exhausted the strength and courage of meaner persons.
The University of Glasco is indebted to you this honour, to which you have committed the education of your noble Sons, inlarging it in the number of its pro∣fessors of Divinity; most chiefly with the Delegates of the National Synod, by your Presence, Counsel, and Authority, once and again you have been helpful to them.
And here because it concerns my self, it's fitting I should own it, which you may record, as a debt that may bee required of mee, by whose Authority, amongst the chief Delegates of the Synod, I was advanced to the Chair of Divinity Professor, the task injoyned, was to open the scope of difficult places of Scripture to younger students. Wherefore after an Autumn or two equal it is that you should receive some fruit for that your seeds-time in the University; both from it, and namely from my self.
But this our smaller Offering bears no proportion with your Merits, whose admi∣rable Prwess▪ both in peace and war, constancy and fidelity in all conditions (which by no temptations on the right hand or on the left to this very day, could bee taken off from promoting the Civil and Ecclesiastick Republick) hath in all Delega∣tions, as well Ecclesiastick as Politick, rendred the name of the Marquess of Argile, both to the States of the Kingdome, as also to the Synods of the Nation, most ac∣ceptable and renowned, Neither could the envy, or obloquy of open enemies, or of friends less faithful to the Church and Commonwealth (who with their adhae∣rents, unskilful Judges of matters, are wont to inveigh against none but those that deserve best of the Commonwealth) either take away, or cast a cloud before equal Arbitrators, upon that honour which virtue merited, the Council of the Kingdome, and the National Synods have conferred.
I have also mentioned your name, Illustrious Hero, born of most Noble Pa∣rentage, promising the fairest hopes, because it is equal, that you should partici∣pate of your Fathers honour, as you are heir to his inheritance. Your Name pre∣fixed to this Apostolical Doctrine, may it bee an Argument and an incitation to you more firmly to imbrace the Wisdome and the Virtue of Christ. Imitating your Father, follow that way, wherein this doctrine is compendiously con∣tained, to the prosecution of solid felicity, that One thing necessary▪ Finally, that this conjunction of your names may make you zealous after your Fathers, and Grand-Fathers virtue, according to that hope, which the ripeness of your ingenuity hath begotten in us all, who observe that virtuous disposition in you, ascending to great things (which wee earnestly desire) that the antient renown of your family may bee continued and greatned in your self.

