




May it please your Lordship, And the Honourable Senate▪
MY first Application is for Pardon, that I should adventure to prefix your names to the Frontispice of this small Fabrick, between which and your singular Merits, there is no Proportion, save what flows from the Uniformity and Deli∣cacy of the Contrivance, and sincerity of his Respects who presents it. I have sometimes appeared in publick, though not with the Gold of Ophir, and Tyrian Purpure, wherewith the Persians were accustomed to present their Princes, and Benefactors, in testimony of their Obeysance and Gratitude; yet with Oblations sutable to my Ability as now,

though unsutable to your Honour and Dig∣nity.
Your unstained Reputation, Candour, and Ingenuity, by which you are guided in the Management of the weighty Affairs of the City. Your encouraging by your Au∣thority and good example the holy Mini∣stry, Vertue and Learning in Schooles and Universities, within the Verge of your Iuris∣diction. The commemoration of Favours, which I have received from the Council, these many years bygone, have had no small In∣fluence upon me, to make this publick, yet humble Address. And though I have done but little by way of Remuneration, yet Somewhat, to be a Remembrance of my hearty affection to the Good Town.
I have made some small attempts, during the twelve years I taught Peripatetick, and Experimental Philosophy, and since, for the Ad∣vancement of Learning among others, which have not wanted success, whereby the Au∣thor hath been encouraged; especially by the kind acceptance, his Writings have met with from the greatest Philosophers and Ma∣thematicians in this Age, in England, Holland, Germany and France. It is yet recent in the minds of many Noble and worthy Persons,

what esteem His Royal Highness had of my Observations, of the great Blazing Star, which appeared in December 1680, which since have been published. I do not mention this for applause, or out of vanity, but for some peculiar reasons hinted at below. But these studies being only Hand-maids, and Subser∣vient to Divine Knowledge, and not so gene∣rally useful, I have now given them a Ma∣numission, unless I be animated by the be∣nign, and favourable aspect of those, who may and can. I move in a distinct Sphere from Masters of Universities. They teach in Philosophy, the Causes and Reasons of Things. What I write is but Practical and Mechanical, for the promoting of natural Knowledge and Learn∣ing, as do the Virtuosi. But in stead of such I present your Honours with a small bundle of Orthodox Truths confirmed by plain Scrip∣ture Testimonies, wherewith the true Chri∣stian Church hath in all Ages scattered the swarms of dark Errors, and damnable He∣resies, Locusts from the bottomless pit.
But least I seem too tedious upon one Subject, I shall beg your Lordships liberty, to interpose for your Divertisement, this pleasant Interlude, the contemplation where∣of may recreate the mind, and have its own

usefulness. That brave Athenian Orator De∣mosthenes writes, that there was a standing Ordinance among the Locrians a people in Greece, that whosoever desired a new Law to be made he should make an overture there∣of to the whole Assembly with a rope about his neck. If it was Judged profitable for the Publick-Good, the Author was assoild, and got the thanks of the house. If not, he was instantly strangled. By this means for the space of 200 years and more, no new Law was made, save this only that follows. It was a received custome there, that if any man should strick out his neighbours eye; his on the other part was to be stricken out likewise, in imitation of Lex Talionis. Nei∣ther was this crime to be expiated by any sacrifice, nor redeemed by any summ of Money or Gold, how great soever. A certain man who had but one eye, was threatned by his Adversary with the loss of it. This man taking it grievously, and judging the want of his sight more bitter than death, adven∣tur'd with a halter about his neck to offer this new Law to the Senate, viz. that who∣soever should strick out his neighbours eye, who had but one, he should be requited with the lose of both his, as a just recom∣pence; that the one might share equally

with the other in the same calamity. The Law was approven and Ratified by the whole meeting. Demosthenes relates this, teaching that in a well ordered City; Magi∣strates should take special care that new Laws be not rashly made or changed. But I return thither whence the famous Orator hath led me aside by this digression.
I cannot but now after these wieghty per∣swasives, make my next application for Ac∣ceptance, and seriously entreat, that this little Book, if not for the value of the thing offered, yet for its design, which is that Truth may have victory over Error, and for the ingenuity and affection it flows fromIn mag∣nis volu∣isse satest., may be received into the tuition of your favour, and get a full protection against the Champi∣ons of the uncircumcised Philistimes, and be∣ing enlightned with the splendor of your Lordships name, and receiving the impression of the Councils Authority upon it, may by the Lords blessing, be useful to young Stu∣dents in Religion, and others too. For which singular Favour, I shall fervently pray the Almighty God to bless you in your Persons, and Government, sub auspiciis Augustissimi regis Caroli a Carolo, the Ancient City may flourish with Religion and Righteousness,

Peace and Truth, that the Lord may be in it, in the darkest night, a pillar of fire to enlighten and direct, in the hotest affliction a pillar of cloud to overshadow and pro∣tect, and to us all both a Sun and a Shield. And shall think my self very happy, while I live to be under the Character of
 Edin. January 2. 1684.
