



SIR,
THO the Sacred Majesty of Kings (I am sen∣sible)
ought not in common Cases to be ap∣proach'd
by every little Busy-body, or frivolous
Remonstrance-maker; yet when our Prince's
Palace is on Fire, and his Sacred Person in the midst of
Flames, the meanest of his Subjects hath the Privilege then
to give him warning of his Danger, and to assist to quench
the Fire: And this I am afraid, Sir, is at present too near
our Case, or I would not have assum'd the Boldness to
disturb your Repose, or have plac'd my self so disadvanta∣giously
before your Majesty, as I must expect to appear,
under the Character of a Publick Censor of the Manners
of your Ministers, and a petty State-Reformer. But it is
not I alone that am thus concern'd and busy for the Publick;
the whole World are at this time mournfully reflecting
upon the miserable Estate we are fallen into from that hap∣py
and glorious Prospect of things which we had in 1688
and 1689: This hath put all Men upon Enquiry into the
Causes of the unhappy Change of our Affairs; and I find
it agreed on all Hands, That the principal occasion of our
Misfortunes (or rather Mismanagements) is from the
intrusting those with the Government of all, who were the
Creatures and Tools of the two last Reigns, and are irre∣concileable
Enemies to your Majesty's Government; those

who opposed your coming to the Crown; those who de∣clar'd
to your Face King Iames the only Rightful King;
Those who sold their Country and betray'd it to the two
last Kings, and will be always ready to sell it even to the
French King, if he prove the fairest Chapman.
I have heard that Thurloe, who was Secretary of State to
Cromwel, being ask'd by King Charles II. how they did
support their Government so long, when all the Nobility,
Gentry and Clergy were against it? he replied, By in∣trusting
those only in the Management of all Affairs, who were
as heartily against that Nobility, Gentry and Clergy. I do not
apply this literally; for, God be prais'd, your Majesty hath
a great part of all these several degrees of Men, who are
most heartily and zealously in your Interests: But I mean
by this, that you are to oppose your Enemies with their
Enemies, not with their Friends. And that the Design of
keeping out King Iames with Jacobites, seems to be as
impracticable, as his Project prov'd of setting up Popery
with a Protestant Army.
Yet there are some about your Majesty (who for base
and private Ends) endeavour to possess you with the de∣structive
Politicks of courting and buying your Enemies
into your Service, and would perswade you, that King
Iames's Tories are the only Party truly principled for Mo∣narchy,
and are fittest for Employment, as being long
practis'd in Business: And that (on the contrary) your
Majesty's best Friends, whom they call Whigs, are not only
ignorant, and unacquainted with Publick Business, but are
Haters of Monarchy, of Common wealth-Principles; and
at best, for making their Kings no more than Dukes of
Venice, and Kings of Clouts. Now this is a Notion so
false, so fatal to the Prosperity of your Affairs, and so dan∣gerous
to the very Being of your Government, that I can∣not
but think it highly necessary, that this Matter should
be fairly stated and laid before your Majesty: I am sensible

how unfit I am for the Task, and how open I lie to a Charge
of Presumption in attempting it. But as the Son of Cyrus,
who was from his Birth dumb, broke Silence when he saw
his Father in the Hands of his Murderers; so (since I saw
no other Champion appear in this Cause) I resolv'd to
break through all Impediments, even those of Nature, and
to endeavour the Rescue of my King out of the Hands of
those who have already been the Ruin of two Kings, your
Majesty's Predecessors, and who will undoubtedly bring
you and your Affairs into great Difficulties, if you be not
delivered from their Counsels.
In order to this, I have impartially made a Collection
(in the following Dialogue) of all the Arguments which
Whigs employ against the Tories, or Tories against the
Whigs, and submit it to your Majesty's discerning Judg∣ment,
and most piercing and distinguishing Wisdom, (upon
the whole) which of them are most proper for your Ma∣jesty
to employ; those who were in the Interests of Popery
and of France, or those who oppos'd both to the Death. I
appeal to you, Sir, whether a Tory's being for the Divine
Right of Succession, and consequently for King Iames's
Monarchy, makes him the fitter in Principle to be employ'd
by King William? Or, whether his boasted Skill in Business
will be of any use to your Majesty, if he be in Principle and
Inclination for K. Iames, and believes K. William a King de
facto only, without a Rightful Title, and in plain English,
an Usurper? If these Gentlemen (as their Principles will
naturally lead them to do) use all their Skill in their several
Stations, to obstruct and make difficult your Affairs, to be∣tray
your Designs to your Enemies, to countenance and
protect K. Iames's Friends in all their Plots and Contri∣vances,
furnish them with Intelligence, help them to Passes,
Escapes, &c. all which things (it cannot be denied) have
been and are daily done by some Persons employ'd in this
Government: Of what Use, Sir, or Service then is this

boasted Skill in Business to your Majesty's Interests? Cer∣tainly
Men less conversant in Publick Affairs, who have a
Zeal for your Government, would be of more Use and Ser∣vice
to you; Men who were persecuted by K. C. and K. I.
either in their own Persons, or in the Persons of their Friends,
who were fin'd, imprison'd, and some of their Relations
hang'd in those Reigns, are more likely to act in earnest
against K. I. and in the supporting your Majesty and
your Government, than those who had their Fortunes
and their Families rais'd by K. I. and his Brother K. C.
and who hope to be rais'd yet more by his Return, or at
least, to secure in his Government what they have got in
this, by obliging him and his Friends, at the Price of sa∣crificing
you and yours.
For Example: Is it reasonable to believe the E. of N.
whose Father and Family was rais'd by K. C. and K. I. for
prostituting the Law (and his nauseous Rhetorick) to the
Designs of those two Brothers, who himself was a Privy-Counsellor
with Father Peters, and chosen by K. I. at the
time of the Revolution to treat with your Majesty at Hun∣gerford,
in order to delay your Progress to London; and last∣ly,
who so violently oppos'd your Majesty's being crown'd
King, as to lay an eternal Obligation on K. I. by it: I say,
Sir, is it reasonable to believe this Gentleman so proper a
Secretary of State to your Majesty, as the E. of S. who hath
so mortally disobliged K. I. by being so early, and so zealous
in your Interests, who went at the Head of that Message to
K. I. wherein he was required to retire from Whitehall;
who hath since that been so instrumental to place and pre∣serve
the Crown upon your Head; and hath, in a word,
broken all Measures so with K. I. as to leave no Possi∣bility
of a Reconciliation to him, and consequently hath
no Retreat from this Government, but is oblig'd in com∣mon
Sense, to serve Your Majesty faithfully and zea∣lously?

Or can your Majesty think Mr. K. who (it is generally
said) believes himself the Son of K. I. and it is known
by all the World, owes his Fortune to him; who (if we
may believe Report) at the time of the Revolution, agreed
with Captain Tosyer, to carry the Ships he then com∣manded
in the Straits to K. Iames in France, (had not
the common Sailers very rudely oppos'd the Project;)
who after this acquitted himself so ill at Cadiz, in letting
the Thoulon Squadron pass by him in his sight, without
fighting them; and to conclude, hath made so unaccounta∣ble
a Campagne of it this Summer; can your Majesty
(give me leave to say, Sir) think this Gentleman (after
all this) fitter to command the Fleet of England, than
Mr. R. whose Provocations to K. I. are never to be for∣given
by him; who was one of the most instrumental
Men in England in placing You upon the Throne; who last
Year gave you the greatest and most glorious Victory that
ever was obtain'd by us at Sea; and whose Courage, Con∣duct
and Fidelity the Parliament of England hath unani∣mously
attested?
And now, Sir, (If I may presume so far) will Your
Majesty be pleas'd to examine what Honour, what Profit
hath accrued to You, or the Nation, by your employing
these Gentlemen who have of late been at the Head of the
Ministry. For God's sake, Sir, cast up the Account of
the last four Years Management, and see what You have
gain'd by changing VVhigs for Tories; Have not Your
Affairs gone backward both at Home and Abroad? Have
not Mismanagements been multiply'd? Have You not
cool'd Your Friends, and yet not gain'd your Enemies?
Do not almost all the Tories You employ drink K. Iames's
Health in Your Wine, and serve Him in Your Offices? Do
They not obstruct all Business which ought to be dispatch'd,
and dispatch all Business which ought to be obstructed?
browbeat Your Friends, and delay them in their most

just Pretences, but comply with your Enemies in their most
unreasonable Demands; nay, connive at their Cabals and
Conspiracies, and snatch them out of the Hands of Justice,
when the Law hath pass'd Sentence of Death upon them
for their Treasons? Would not such Ministers and Friends
as these be less dangerous to You, when profess'd Enemies,
nay in Arms against You in the Field, than in your Coun∣cil,
Cabinet and Offices? Undoubtedly they would.
But I know the common Answer to all these kind of
Complaints is, That it is more easy to find Faults than
Remedies. If You please therefore, Sir, we will consider
of Remedies, and I think there may be some found out
both easy and certain, and they are these: First, Sir, be
pleased to remove from your Person, Council and Offices
of Trust, Men bred up and confirm'd in Principles de∣structive
to our English Government, and hateful to Your
People; and to discountenance all State-Projectors, and
Mountebank-Ministers, who make Wounds in the State
to recommend their Balsam: Throw out, Sir, these Achans
to be ston'd by the People, who will otherwise (I fear)
prevent God's Favour to You; who blast Your Success
Abroad, and rob You of the Affections of Your Subjects
at Home, with their Accursed Thing, I mean that Tinsel
Power with which these Miscreants dazle the Eyes of
Princes, and lead them out of the right way; God is dis∣pleased
with it: For uncontroulable and unaccountable
Power is the Right and Attribute of God alone; and (as
the Scripture tells us) He will not give his Glory unto ano∣ther;
nor suffer those to act as Gods, who are to die like
Men. Your People also will be displeased with a Despo∣tick
Power; for the Kings of England are bound by
Laws, by Mutual Compacts, &c. (as You your Self,
Sir, have set forth most unanswerably in your Declaration
when You came over;) and if these are broken, English-Men,
who believe themselves Subjects to the Crown of

England, (as by Law establish'd) and not
Slaves to any particular PersonOtherwise K. I. would have a fairer Pretence, than I hope we shall ever allow him.; they
become impatient, angry, and at length
perhaps unreasonable. And whenever
they see their King beset with Ministers
of Lawless Principles, (those wholesale Merchants of Ar∣bitrary
Power) they grow mistrustful and uneasy, and are
apt in such Cases to shut their Purses, and open their
Mouths. And give me leave to say, Sir, had not the Peo∣ple
been made apprehensive and jealous, by seeing these
Men in the Ministry, whose mischievous Methods they
were so well acquainted with, and did so much abhor;
no general Excise, no Loans, no Powers would have been
thought by the People of England, too much to have in∣trusted
You with; so highly they esteem'd your Generous
Relief of them, your unequal Courage, and the many
other admirable Vertues they saw shine in You. An English
King is the greatest Monarch upon Earth, when he reigns
in the Hearts of his Subjects; and all other Methods to
Power and Greatness have been found ineffectual in England.
I remember I once saw written over a Mercer's Shop,
Keep thy Shop, and thy Shop will keep Thee: and tho it
be a homely Allusion, it is very applicable to the present
Point; Keep your Laws, Sir, and your Laws will keep You;
support your People in their Rights and Liberties, and
Queen Elizabth shall pass her Royal Word for them, they
will support Your just Prerogative at Home, and Your
Honour Abroad. And, Sir, by the way, do not let Your
Flatterers give You a cheap Opinion of a Power deriv'd
from the People; for it is undoubtedly from their Consent,
that all Power must come: Nor let them make You uneasy
that Your Title to the Crown is from the universal free
Choice of the Commons of England: Believe me, Your
Ministers, nor the two Learned Bishops who have scribled
upon this Subject, will never be able to find You a better.

In the next place, Discharge all Iacobites and Trimmers
from Offices of Trust: For such as either desire K. Iames,
or from their Fear, or Wisdom, endeavour to deserve from
him (so much as their Pardon) I humbly conceive are
unfit for Your Service at this Juncture; tho when the Go∣vernment
is more settled, I am for entertaining all who give
Proofs of their Penitence for their past Actions and Opi∣nions.
But, Sir, Purgatives will not alone perfect the Cure of
your Government, and restore it to perfect Health; You
must make use of Alteratives too, there must be a Change
of Measures, as well as a Discharge of Men: And the
Method I would humbly offer is this.
First; To make the Interest of England your chief De∣sign
and Aim; and since You are an English King, to be∣come
entirely an English Man. England is a Nation jea∣lous
of Rivals in her Prince's Favour, and thinks her self
deserving of all his Care, and all his Caresses: If the
People of England think You have a favourable Opinion of
them, they will endeavour to deserve it; if not, they may
perhaps deserve your worst Opinion too. This Humour
of the Nation Queen Elizabeth found early, and apply'd
her self so happily to it, as by this single Point to master
all her Difficulties, (the greatest it may be that ever Prince
had to struggle with); whereas her Successors, by contrary
Measures, brought themselves into very unfortunate Cir∣cumstances.
In the next place, Sir, let me desire You to avoid con∣cerning
your Self in Elections of Members in Parliament,
or influencing them when chosen: the Parliament is a sa∣cred
part of the English Constitution, and, like the Israe∣lites
Ark of old, is not to be touch'd profanely, but with
great Danger to those who touch it so. And therefore, Sir,
it will be your true Interest to leave the People free to their
Choice and to leave the Members free to their Opinions

when they are chosen. It is still-fresh in our Memories,
how much the Practices of the late Reigns in corrupting
Elections, and Closeting the Members of Parliament, en∣rag'd
the Nation, and they had reason to resent it; for if
(for the sake of a Vote) a Member of Parliament shall be
placed in an Office of Trust he is not fit for, this is destroy∣ing
the Government two ways at once: For, to speak in
the Phrase of the Ministry, it is making a Parliament of
Clouts, and an Officer of Clouts at the same stroke. Re∣jecting
Bills offer'd by Parliament of publick Benefit, and
for the securing of our Antient Government, and the Fun∣damental
Rights of the Subject, was highly displeasing to
the Nation also in the late Reigns, and will be so in all
Reigns: As was likewise the denying the People their un∣doubted
Right of frequent Parliaments. They had also in
the late Governments an Invention to make a Pump of the
Parliament, and by pouring in a Pint of Water, to fetch out
a Tun: This was justly most provoking to the Nation, and
treasur'd up Wrath against the Day of Wrath.
The refusing of Bills, and the Contempt of Addresses
from the Parliament against Ministers, or in any other
cases, hath likewise given great Offence in former Reigns.
For tho the House of Commons, seconded by the House of
Lords, cannot reach the Life of Estate of any Person, but
by a full Proof in form of Law; yet because it is so difficult
a matter to come at such a Proof, a Vote of the House of
Commons against any Minister, hath always been esteem'd
by all Kings (who were well with the People) a sufficient
Reason for the removing them from Court; and I have
heard that our King Henry the Fourth (a Warlike and a
Wise Prince) upon an Address from the Parliament against
some of his Ministers, reply'd. I know no Evil by these Men,
but if they are thought unfit by my Parliament for my Service,
I shall not think fit to continue them in it.
All these things, Sir, therefore are most carefully to be

avoided by your Majesty: They will appear with a worse
Grace in You, who have declar'd and made War against
these Practices, than in your Predecessors: For as St. Paul
says, Thou who hast said, Ye shall not commit Adultery, dost
thou commit Adultery? Thou who hast said, Ye shall not steal,
dost thou steal? You must by no means, Sir, give this oc∣casion
of Clamour and Recrimination to your Enemies.
But be pleas'd to follow this General Rule, always to be∣ware
of the Ministers, and to avoid the Schemes and
Counsels of K. Charles and K. Iames's Government, and
then You can scarce err: For whatever is opposite to their
Principles and Practices, is the direct Road to your Secu∣rity
and Success.
In the next place, Sir, let Rewards and Punishments be
duly and impartially distributed; this is a Rule to which
all Ages and Governments have paid the greatest Respect
and Observance; and to which the present Monarch of
France does chiefly owe the Prosperity of his Affairs: and
without this Principle no Government can subsist. Your
Ministers who serve You well and faithfully, must be di∣stinguish'd
from those who betray You, or serve You care∣lesly
and idely; and not smil'd or frown'd upon as they are
supported or persecuted by this or that Party or Faction.
(And by the way, Sir, a Prince in England that rules ac∣cording
to the Laws and Interests of his People, will never
have occasion to make his Court to any Party or Faction;
nor can any Minister or any Party serve You against the
Interest of the Nation.) Let your Souldiers be encourag'd,
and preferr'd according to their Bravery and Abilities, with∣out
Favour or Affection: The Bravest otherwise will fol∣low
the Example of Cowards, if they find they have no
Advantage over them by their Courage: For all Men would
be Cowards if they durst. To an English Souldier a Smile or
a kind Word, is as acceptable at some times as a Month's
Pay; and if you will condescend to a Commendation of

what they do well, they will endeavour in the next occa∣sion
to exceed what they did before: For if You are once
Master of their Love, Your are sure to have the Disposal
of their Lives. Nor need You fear to punish them severe∣ly,
provided You reward them bountifully. Let the Inso∣lence
of your Enemies be rebuk'd, and Rebels and Trai∣tors
to your Government be severely punish'd, and not
courted and caress'd; for in the present State of Affairs all
Mercy to your Enemies is Cruelty to your Self and Friends:
and it encourages your Enemies, and disheartens your
Loyal Subjects, to see these Insolents brave the Government
unpunish'd, and to see your treacherous Ministers sollici∣ting
the Pardon of every condemn'd Traitor; and making
their Court to K. I. at the Price of your Safety, is most
provoking to every good Man. Besides, it looks like your
having a Doubt of your own Right and Title to the Govern∣ment,
to be thus backward in asserting it; and is so inter∣preted
by the Iacobites.
Intelligence is another Point of mighty Consequence, and
can scarce be purchas'd too dear: For it is the Soul of Go∣vernment,
and directs all its Actions properly, and without
it You consult in the dark, and execute blindfold; You
know not what to act, what to fear, where to attack, or
where to defend: I do not mean by this that we are to pene∣trate
into the French King's Counsels, or rifle his Cabinet,
that I am afraid is out of the reach of our Power, and of
our Purse; But I cannot but think we may be able to know
the Marches of their Armies, and the Motions of their
Fleets, without selling our Souls to the Devil for Intelli∣gence,
or breaking our Exchequer.
Thus, Sir, I have set before Your Majesty, what, in my
poor Judgment, is for your Interest to pursue, and what is
for your Service to avoid; what will make your Majesty and
this Nation happy, what will make both unhappy: and I
heartily pray the Great, Good and Wise God, to direct, bless

and prosper your Majesty in all your Glorious Designs for
the Defence of these Kingdoms, and of Christendom against
the common Enemy. If I have us'd too great a Freedom,
or have offended in what I design'd for your Service, I am
sorry for it: I call God to witness, my Plainness proceeded
from my Zeal and Affection to your Interests, and the Pro∣sperity
of your Affairs, and not from any factious, saucy,
or unmannerly Principle. I wish some abler Pen had taken
upon them this Part. But I must own, it provok'd me to
see my Country and my King so forsaken; the one of Ad∣vocates,
the other of honest Counsel; and this urg'd me to
take upon me those two Characters, of Advocate and Ad∣viser,
both which I confess my self very unfit for: Not, but
that as I said in the beginning, I take it to be the Privilege,
nay and the Duty too of every English Subject, (provided
it be perform'd with a decent and due Respect) to lay be∣fore
the King such Matters as may be dangerous to his
Person or Government, to be conceal'd from his Knowledg:
(for we are not ty'd up in England to Spanish Forms, where
the King must be wet to the Skin, if he whose proper Office
it is be not in the way to put on his Cloak.) And I beg
your Majesty to believe what I have said is from a Faith∣fulness
and Sincerity, which will in all Accidents and Diffi∣culties
preserve me unalterably,

