



SON,
THe calamity of this time being such, as hath bereft me of the ordinary means of expressing my affection to you; I have been casting about to find some other way of doing that, in such sort as you may receive most profit by it. Therin I soon pitched on this considera∣tion, That Parents owe their Children, not not onely Material Subsistence for their Body, but, much more, Spiritual Contri∣butions to their better part, their Mind. I am much bound to God, that he hath endued you with one, very capable of the best instructi∣ons: and withal, I therfore esteem my self oblig'd to do my utmost, for moulding

it to its most advantage. If my aim therin prove successful, you will with more ease di∣gest those inconveniences and distresses, which already you have begun to be acquainted with, and that threaten daily worse to you; For, how can a man suffer his heart to be dejected at the privation of any tempo∣ral blessings; while he considers the in∣anity of them, and that nothing is worthy his serious thought, but what may accomapnie him to his Eternal habitation? What needs he fear the desolations of War, and the worst they can do against him, who have his Estate in their power; when he may be rich with a much more nobler treasure, that none but himself can rob him of? without doubt, he that shall seriously reflect on the excellency of his own nature, and upon the admirable perfect and happy state he shall most certainlie arrive to, if he but wean himself from those worldlie impediments that here clog his souls flight; cannot choose but look, with a dis∣dainful eye, upon the glittering trifles, that weak spirits delight themselvs with. If e deem it not requisite (as of old, the fa∣hous Wise man did) to throw away those

encumbrances, to the end he may the more freely attend to divine contemplation, (for worldy goods, duly, used, may be very ad∣vantagious both to ones self and to others); yet, at least, he will not repine at Fortunes recalling what she formerly had but lent him, and permitted him the use of.
That, then, you may be arm'd against the worst may arrive to you, in this un∣happy state of affairs, in our distressed Country; I send you those considerations of the Nature and Immortality of Humane Souls, which, of late, have been my chief entertainment. The progress you have al∣ready made in the study of Philosophy hath (I am perswaded) enabled you ro bene∣fit your self, with what I have written on this subject: on the serious examining of which, if you will employ but half the time, that I have done in spining out my thoughts, and weaving them into the piece you see; I doubt not but you will therby receive so much contentment, as well as profit, that you will not repent you of your pains. Besides that, Intellectual entertainments are the pu∣rest, and the noblest, and the most proporti∣onate

to Mans Nature, and prove the most de∣lightful to him, when they are duly relished. You will presently agree, that the matter I handle is the most important and weighty, within the whole Extent of humane nature, for a worthy person to employ himself about. The advantage that Man hath over unreasonable creatures is, that what he doth is by election: and he is himself master of all his actions; wheras they are impelled by outward causes, to all they do. It is pro∣perly said of them, that aguntur magis quàm agunt: He only is free; and in all varieties of circumstances, hath the power to choose one and reject another. Now, to have this ele∣ction wisely made, and becoming a Man, requires that it be steer'd by knowledg. To do any thing well, a man must first know throughly all that concerns the action he is about; and chiefly the end of it. And certain∣ly, of all his actions, the government of him∣self is the most important, and nearliest con∣cerning him. The end of that government, and of all a Man's aims is by all men agreed to be Beatitude; that is, his being complete∣ly well, and in a condition of enjoying the

most happienss that this nature is capable of. For arrival wherto, 'tis impossible to pitch up∣on the direct and sure means, unless it be first determin'd, whether the Beatitude we speak of belong to this life, or be not to be at∣taind'd til we come to the next: or rather, whether or no there be another life, besides this, to be happy in. For, if there remains an Eternitie to us, after the short revolution of time we so swiftly run over here on Earth; 'tis clear, that all the happiness which can be imagin'd in this fleeting state is not valuable, in respect of the future; nor any thing we do here is considerable, otherwise than as it conduces to the making our condition, then better or worse. Now, the way to be sure of this is either Infallible Authority, or Evident Science. They that rely on the first depend of others: and they only know, are abso∣lutely complete of themselvs; and have within themselvs the Principles wherby to govern their Actions, in what is of high∣est consequence to them. 'Tis true, eve∣ry body is not of a strain of Wit and Judg∣ment to be of this Rank: and who are not, must be contented to believe others, and be

satisfied with what is taught them. But he, that will be of a superiour Orbe must make this his study. This is the adequate entertain∣ment of a worthy person.
To conceive how high and excellent this Science of governing a Man in order to Beati∣tude in the next world is, we may consider how, among all arts that concern this life, the art of a States-man, to whom belongs to see a Common-wealth well govern'd, is by much the noblest: All other arts are but mi∣nisterial to him. He makes use of the Soul∣dier, of the Lawyer, of the Orator, of the An∣tiquary, of the Physician, as best conduces to the end he aims at, of making the Com∣mon wealth he governs happy and flou∣rishing. All other meaner Trades serve him in a yet lower degree. Yet after all, he must take his measures from the Metaphysician or Divine. For, since the government of a Soci∣ety of men aims at giving them the best being they are capable of; and, since Man's well-being here in this life is but instrumen∣tally good, as being the means for him to be well in the next life; 'tis evident, the States-man's art is but instrumental to That,

which shews how every particular man must govern his life, to be partaker of a hap∣py Eternity: And consequently, if a States∣man has not this Science, he must be subject to a braver man, than himself, whose pro∣vince is to direct all his actions to This end. We are told, how reverently great Caesar list∣ned to the discourses of learned Achoreus, how observant Alexander was of his Master Aristo∣tle, how secure Nero trode whiles Seneca gui∣ded his steps, how humble Constantine was to St. Sylvester's precepts, how Charlemain go∣vern'd himself in his most important actions by Alcuine's advice: In a word, all the Great∣men of Antiquity, as well among the Romans as among the Grecians, had their Philosophers and Divines, in their kind, belonging to them; from whom they might derive rules of living and doing as they ought upon all occasions, if themselvs were not Masters in that superiour and all-directing Science. He that sees not by his own light, must, in this dangerous Ocean, steer by the Lantern which another hangs out to him. If the person he relies on, ei∣ther withholds the light from him, or shews him a false one, he is presently in the

dark, and cannot fail of losing his way. How great an authority had the Augurs and Priests among the rude Romans, to forbid any Pub∣lick act or break any Assembly, upon pre∣tence of Religious duties; when they liked not the business in agitation? The like may interessed Divines among Christians do, if the Ministers of State have not some insight into Divinity. He leads a vexatious life, who, in his noblest actions, is so gored with scruples that he dares not make a step, without the authority of another to warrant him.
Yet, I do not conclude that he, whom I design by the character of a Brave Man, should be a professed or complete Metaphysici∣an or Divine, and consummate in every curi∣ous circumstance that belongs to this Science; it suffices him to know it in bulk, and have so much Divinity, as, in common occurrents, to be able to govern himself, and, in special ones, to understand what and why his Di∣vine perswades him to any thing; so that e∣ven then, though not without help, yet he governs himself, and is not blindly govern'd by another. He that aims at being a perfect

Hors-man, is bound to know in general (be∣sides the art of Riding) the nature and temper of Horses; and to understand the different qualities of Bits, Saddles, and other utensils of a Hors-man: But, the utmost exactness in these particulars belongs to Farriers, Sad∣lers, Smiths, and other Tradesmen; of all which the judicious Rider knows how to make due use, when he has occasion, for his principal end, which is, orderly governing his Horse. In like manner, he, whom we de∣sign by a complete Brave Man, must know solidity, the main End he is in the World for: and withall, how to serve himself, when he pleases and needs, of the Divine's high Contemplations, of the Metaphysician's subtile Speculations, of the Natural-Phi∣losopher's minute Observations, of the Mathematician's nice Demonstrations, and whatever else of particular Professions may conduce to his End; though with∣out making any of them his profess'd bu∣siness.
To lay grounds for such knowledg as this is the scope of my ensuing Discourse. My first aim was to beget it in my self: to

which end the digesting my thoughts into Or∣der, and the setting them down in Writing, was necessary; for, without such strict exa∣mination, as the pening them affords one means to make, they would hardly have a∣voided being disjointed and roving ones. Now, that I have done that, my next aim is, that You, to whom I wish as much good as to my self, may reap as much benefit by the Studying it, as I have done by the Com∣posing it.
My end then being a private one, (as look∣ing no further, than You, my Son, and my Self) I have not endeavour'd to express my Conceptions, either in the Phrase or Lan∣guage of the Schools. It will serve our turn to comprehend the Substance, without confining our selvs to any scrupulous exact∣ness in what concerns only form And, the same consideration has made me pass slightly over many particulars, in my First Treatise, of the Nature of Bodies; on which learned and witty men might spin out large Volumns. For, in that part I aim no fur∣ther, than to shew what may be effected by Corporeal Agents. There, Possibility servs

my turn, as well as the determinate indivisible point of Truth. I am obliged to that, only in my main great Theme, the Soul, in regard of which, the numerous crooked narrow cranies, and the restrained flexuous rivolets of Corpo∣real things, are all contemptible; further than the knowledge of them serves to the knowledge of the Soul: And a Gallant man, whose thoughts flie at the highest Game, re∣quires no further insight into them, than to satisfie himself by whatway they may be per∣formed; deeming it far too mean for him, to dwell upon the subtilest of their mysteries for Science sake,
Besides this libertie that the scope I aim at allows me, of passing very cursorily o∣ver sundry particulars; I find now, at my read∣ing all over together what I have written (to deliver it to the Printer) that, even in that which I ought to have done to comply with my own design and expectation, I am fal∣len very short: so that, if I had not unwa∣rily too far engaged my self for the present publishing it, truly, I should have kept it by me, till I had once again gone over it. I find the whole piece very confusedly done;

the stile unequal and unpolished; many parti∣culars (when they are not absolutely necessary to my main drift) too slightly touch'd, and far from being driven home: and, in a word, all of it seems to be rather but a loose model and roughcast of what I design to do, than a complete Work throughly finished.
But, since, by my overforward promising of this piece to several Friends that have been ve∣ry earnest for it, I have now brought my self to that pass, that it would ill become me to delay any longer the publishing of somthing on this Subject; and that, obligations, of ano∣ther nature, permit me not at present to dwell any longer upon This, (besides that so lazy a brain, as mine is, grows soon weary when it has so intangled a skean, as this to unwind): I now send it you as it is; but, with a promise that, at my first leisure, I will take a strict survey of it, and then, in another Editi∣on, will polish, correct and add what shall appear needful to me. If any man shall take the Book out of my hand, invited by the Ti∣tle and Subject to look into it; I pray you in my behalf represent to him, how distant my profession is, and how contrary my Education

has been to writing of Books. In every Art, the plainest that is, there is an Apprentiship necessary, before it can be expected one should work it in a fashionable piece. The first attempts are always very imperfect aimings; and scarce discernable what they are meant for, unless the Master guide his Scholars hand. Much more will the same happen in so diffi∣cult and spiny an affair, as the writing on such a nice and copious Subject as this is, to one who is so wholly ignorant of the Laws of Method as I am.
This free and ingenuous acknowledgment on my side will, I hope, prevail with all in∣genuous person, who shall read what I have written, to advertise me fairly (if they judg it worth their while) of what they dislike in it: to the end that, in another more accurate Edition, I may give them better satisfaction. For, besides what failings may be in the Mat∣ter, I cannot doubt, but even in the Expres∣sions of it, there must often be great obscuri∣ty and shortness; which I, who have my thoughts filled with the things themselvs, am not aware of: So that, what peradventure may seem very full to me, because every imperfect

touch brings into my mind the entire noti∣on and whole chain of circumstances belong∣ing to that thing I have so often beaten upon; may appear very crude and maimed to a Stranger, that cannot guess what I should be at otherwise, than as my direct words lead him.
One thing more I shall wish you to desire of them who happily may peruse these two Treatises; as well for their own sakes, as for mine: And that is, that they will not pass their censure upon any particular piece, or bro∣ken parcel of either of them, taken by itself. Let them draw the entire Thrid through their fin∣gers, and examine the consequentness of the Whole Body of the doctrine I deliver; and let them compare it, by a like survey, with what is ordinarily taught in the Schools: and, if they find in theirs, many bracks and short ends, which cannot be spun into an even piece, and in mine, a fair coherence througout; I shall promise my self a favourable doom from them, and that they will have an acquiescence in themselvs to what I have here presented them. Whereas, if they but ravel it over loos∣lie, and pitch upon dispuiting against particu∣lar

Conclusions, that, at the first encounter of them single, may seem harsh to them; which is the ordinary course of Flashy Wits, who cannot fadome the whole extent of a large discourse: 'tis impossible, but that they should be very much unsatisfied of me; and go away with a perswasion, that some such Truths, as, upon the whole matter, are most evident (one stone in the Arch supporting another, and the whole), are meer Chymeras and wild Para∣doxes.
But (Son) 'tis time my Book should speak it self, rather than I speak any longer of it here. Read it carefully over, and let me see, by the effects of your Governing your self, that you make such right use of it, as I may be com∣forted in having chosen you to bequeath it to. God in Heaven bless you. Paris the last of August, 1644.

