



Madam,
To You these Verses I Address;
Addresses are the Mode, if they express
Abhorrence of a late Association:
How should I then exceed that part o'th' Nation,
Ʋnless I do abhor their curst designe;
Who the Great Thynn to Murder did combine?
I may the same Addressors Copy own,
The Reason why I trouble you unknown:

If they, to shew their Loyalty and Love,
By late Addressing to the Pow'rs above,
Did not themselves too too officious prove:
Why should I think your goodness would refuse,
At least, to pardon this my humble Muse
For her Attempt, the Great Thynn's Memory
To Consecrate unto Eternity?
To whom could She with greater Right apply
Her self, then unto You; who may be thought
The Accidental Cause, that Fam'd Thynn brought
To his untimely Death? Whom for your Friend,
She hopes you'l own; were it but for his end?
How Ill! Enjoyment thus to be deny'd;
To have the shadow only of a Bride!
Hard Fate of Man! That being a Slave to's Word,
And scorning to be false to his accord,
Occasion thence should rise, that to his Life,
The period puts. The Angry Sisters Knife

Could nought withhold, from cutting of the thread?
Hard-hearted (Destinys!) to Write Thynn dead!
Yet so it is. Such the event may prove,
When they, whose Age hath quasht all thoughts of Love,
Attempt by needless promises to bind
Lovers from that, to which they're most enclind.
As if Engagements alter could the mind,
And Youthful Heats be by such Bonds confin'd.
We know that Love doth to it's Center tend:
Fruition is the longing Lovers end.
Would Old Age then this, as Youth's Error mend?
Tho' you refus'd the Great Thynn in his Life,
For your Espous'd to own, your self his Wife;
Yet now he's dead, you need no scruple make,
Were it but for the promis'd Joyntures sake.
Your Pardon, Madam, I again Implore,
To you I have one small Petition more:

Petitions to a Lady, I do hope,
Will not by Tory be abhorr'd, nor Pope.
When some great Hero shall you next time Wed,
Let joyful Hymen lead you both to Bed.
I doubt not but you'l take this in good part,
Well follow'd it may please you to the heart.
Wives pleas'd by Night are likely so by Day;
And then no fear that they will run away.
Besides, that danger is bred by delay,
Youth's Blooming hopes with Patience cannot stay.
Your hopes therefore too long do not defer;
So humbly Prays your poor Petitioner.
