



SIR,
AFter a Poet has made his appearance upon the
Stage, the next thing he generally does, is to
take his station in some great man's Anti-chamber;
there to screw himself into a protection for his Play,
with a Paper stufft full of Bombast-encomiums of
his new Patrons high Merits and wonderful Qualifi∣cations:
Which perhaps, till that time, were as little
heard of in the world, as the Poet was known to his
thus applauded Maecenas.
The business of this Dedication to you, Sir, is
quite otherwise; for as I have the honour to be ve∣ry
well known to You, so I take this opportunity,
as well to express the sentiments of my esteem for
You, as to publish my thanks for past Obligations.
A poor Tribute indeed! But as 'tis my present All,
so it's wholly at your service.

And now, while I am paying my Addresses to a
Barnardiston, methinks I have as copious a subject to
enlarge upon as I cou'd wish. But lest▪ I shou'd seem
to incur the reflection I have thought fit to make
on others, I shall only hint at what I cou'd not pos∣sibly
omit. I shou'd exasperate the Country You
live in, shou'd I not take notice with what a due
regard they have all sixt their Eyes upon You. Nor
is there any question to be made, but that in this
their well-grounded hopes, You will even out-do
their Expectations. And tho Lincolnshire as well as
Suffolk claims an Interest in You, yet the latter has
that to say of your Family, which can scarce be pa∣rallell'd
in any other.
That Ketton shou'd have been the continued Man∣sion-house
of seven and twenty Sir Thomas Barnar∣distons,
successively from Father to Son, with but the
interruption of one Sir Nathaniel, Your great Grand∣father,
is a thing highly remarkable. And since the
Honour of Baronet is but of late date in the world,
no doubt but that badge of Knighthood was still con∣ferr'd
upon these brave Ancestors of Yours for their
fidelity to the Crown▪ and as a reward for the ser∣vices
they severally afforded their respective Princes.
This noble train of Sir Thomas's is at present clos'd with
the now Sir Thomas Barnardiston, your truly honour∣able
Father, a person every way so conspicuous, that
he has no occasion for the least touch of a Poet's
varnish, to gloss over his true and real worth. All
that I shall say upon this account is, that being so

well acquainted with that tender Union and Corres∣pondence
that is betwixt you, I may safely answer
for your joyning with me in an
O Ʋtinam sero in Coelum Redeat!
After this may your Lineage run the length of
time; and may Ketton never want a Barnardiston for
its Proprietor, till the world wants a Mortal for its
Inhabitant.
Thus, Sir, as I began my Epistle in a method some∣thing
uncustomary for one of my profession; and ha∣ving
all along forborn to harangue you with fulsome
Flattery, so I shall beg leave to conclude without so
much as side glancing a single Compliment upon
my self, and let me tell you, that's a great piece of self-denyal
in a Poet of this Age. I am confident, that
as you wou'd be apt to scorn me for the one, so
you'd laugh at me for the other. If I can find out
any value to put upon my self, 'tis not in respect of
my performances, but for the good fortune I
have to be,
SIR,
Your most Obedient,
and most obliged Servant,

