


Honoured Sir;
WHat you were pleased to desire might be pub∣lished; I desire you would be pleased to ac∣cept this dedication of; both as an acknow∣ledgement of the power you have to com∣mand me, and as a testimony of my thank∣fulnesse to you for your many favours to my self, and your transcendent beneficence unto the Colledge whereunto I stand related: The particulars where∣of I should have displayed, but that I know that this were the ready way to unbespeak your acceptance; nor indeed can I hope that this poore paper will ever be able to out-wing that Fame which is already gone forth; or to come into the hands of any, whose ears have not been already filled with the report of so noble, so pious, and so seasonable a gift. For, the perfume of this box of costly ointment, which you have expended to further the preaching and propagation of the Gospel, hath already filled the whole house of the present age, and shall make your name be∣come as an ointment poured forth, embalming it to all succeed∣ing generations: For, this which you have done shall here∣after be told for a memoriall of you; yea, wheresoever the Gospel shall be preached by those who shall have been bred up here by your bounty, even there shall the souls of many have cause to blesse and glorifie God on your behalf. But I may go no farther, lest I should transgresse and break truce with your humi∣lity.
As for the subject of this discourse, it is none other than what hath been often insisted upon at large by many of our learned and judicious Divines, whose books I am not worthy, and whose works I am not able to carry after them. But I do not at all fear that it will be any whit the lesse acceptable unto your self, who love the good old way of sober truth, however many now a dayes do thirst after novelty; a good account (I think) may be given of both from that of our Saviour, Luke 5. 39. No man having drunk old wine straightway desireth new; for, he saith the old is better; nor yet will it, I hope, be altogether uselesse unto others, seeing S. Peter thought good in both his Epistles, to stirre up the pure minds of believers by way of remembrance, 2 Pet.3. 1. and we therefore indeavour to understand truths, that we may be able to call them to mind in the time of our need: So that what wants novelty to recommend it to our fansies and under∣standings, may yet prove welcome unto our consciences, and may be both profitable and acceptable, because seasonable.
And indeed, Sir, that which first made me pitch my thoughts upon this subject, was the sad consideration of that giddinesse and drunkennesse of spirit in matters of Religion, which so ma∣ny in these our dayes are distempered withall, running to and fro, and staggering like a drunken man, out of one opinion into another; and yet after all their seekings, they are still to seek for the truth, the way whereof they have not known. Many causes hereof might be assigned; two I shall desire your leave here to remember and make mention of.
And First, I do impute and charge this Vertigo and Me∣grime in religion, this unfaithfulnesse to truth, upon the account of newfanglednesse, that pica of our nature, the unreasonable de∣sire and love of novelty, which is so very much predominant in these our times, as if S. Paul's prophesie were now fulfilled in the eares of many, (2 Tim. 4. 3, 4.) For, the time will come when they will not indure sound doctrine, but after their

own lusts shall they heap to themselves teachers, having itching eares, And they shall turn away their eares from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables. Let a man that is a setter-forth of new opinions but open his shop, and how doth the multitude throng about him! like those Athenians that took S. Paul to be such a one, Acts 17.19. Saying, may we know what this new doctrine, which thou speakest, is? for, thou bringest certain strange things to our eares; we would know therefore what these things mean. For, (we must know that) all the Athenians and strangers, which were there, spent their time in nothing else, but either to tell or heare some new thing). But such as desire news onely because it is news, will not much care whether it be true or false; and those that judge of truth by the newnesse of it, may fall into ten errours e're they light upon one truth; Antiquiry is no sufficient mark of truth, (witnesse the Gibeonites, who had old shoes on their feet, and mouldy bread in their hands, and yet at the same time brought a lie in their mouths) much lesse is novelty; for, Truth is of the elder house; and as for those that entertain truth onely because it is new, though it be truth which they entertain, yet are they not like to keep it long; for, it will not be long new. It is much if a news-book be reade over twice: The Athenian news-mongers made account they favoured S. Paul highly, when they promised to heare him tell his story over again a second time, Acts 17. 32. A second-hand truth? away with it to the brokers. Thus children and fools were ever admirers of new clothes; and that which was alwayes the praise of an Almanack, is now become with these men the onely taking qualification of doctrine and opi∣nions. That luxury went high that had every day a new suite, and these can scarce think themselves right drest, unlesse they have dayly new changes of opinions. But since the Devil knows their humour so well, they shall want for no news, so long as his invention can afford it; and when that fails, the old serpent

knows how to slip his skin, and that which is old in it self will be new to them; blanch but an old Arrian, and out comes a So∣cinian spick and span new. And indeed, what are most of our new-lights, but old-heresies, the Devils old cards plaid over again, and the pieces of the old Serpent crawling to find one another from under the Anathema's of foregoing ages?
But a second cause to which I think the unsettlednesse of many men may be justly imputed, is their not being well-grounded in the first principles of Religion. Some never were catechised at all, but have been nursed up in grosse and palpable ignorance; no wonder if such as have no ballast at all in them, be made the sport and pastime of every wind of doctrine; no wonder if such as have been bred all their lives time in a dungeon, do become dizzie, and count all light new when they come first into it. My self have known some, that much cryed up for new discoveries some crude and raw apprehensions of those very truths, which others, who had the happinesse of better education, had been very well acquainted with, and grounded in from their child-hood. But others there are, who have learned the truth more by rode than by heart, and received it from other men upon their bare word, without seeing any evidence for it. These men when they come once to see an appearance of reason for the contrary opinion, (which is more than ever themselves had for the taking up of truth) it is not much to be wondred at, if such are easily drawn aside to errour; and then it is but very natural for them to call errour light, and to condemn truth for darknesse, because they never understood it: And then if a little pride get but in once (as it is never farre of) to mix with their ignorance, how easy a thing is it for them to grow conceited of their new attainments (which yet wiser men cannot but pitty them for) to despise the truth (which before they did but ravish), and to inveigh against those who formerly taught it them; calling them blind guides, whereas the fault was, themselves had been blind followers,

and supposing them to have no ground for the truth, because in∣deed themselves never had any: yea and to loath the very ordi∣nances in which the truth had been dispensed to them. Thus the best food, if it lie on the stomach undigested, is oftimes vomited up again with the greatest abhorrency and detestation. What a sad condition have those men brought themselves into! A spi∣rit of errour hath not onely taken possession of them, but hath also bolted himself in, and made them hate the very means of their recovery: By this time the Devil hath got such a com∣manding power over them, that he drives them about in herds and droves, as he doth the Quakers at this day. Who, that it might be apparent unto all men that they are seduced, are become mere Vagrants. Whereas had they at first entertained truth upon good grounds, they would never have proved so false un∣to it; had it taken due possession of them, or they of it; they would never thus have quitted house and home, to be carried about like empty clouds, and wandring starres, which, though they may pretend unto new light, yet are they fast bound in chains of darknesse, and unlesse they do timely repent, S. Jude tells us what their doom shall be, verse 13. To whom is re∣served the blacknesse of darknesse for ever.
Now then, Sir, Since the danger is so great, what need have we all, as to beg of God that he by his Spirit would keep us sted∣fast in the truth, so also our selves to neglect no means that may be available thereunto; among which I conceive this one to be none of the least, that we endeavour to understand our selves well in our religion, to see truth in clear Scripture-evidence, to be intelligent and knowing, not merely-believing Christi∣ans, to be rooted and well-grounded in the Faith, so shall we be steàfast and unmoveable. For which end if it shall please God to make this discourse in any measure profitable (as I hope it is not altogether unseasonable) unto his people; neither shall I

have any cause to repent myself that I ran this adventure, nor you to be sorry that you have undergone the trouble of this dedi∣cation. And thus, Sir, I take my leave, recommending you to the gracious protection of the Almighty, and to the riches of his love in our Lord Christ Jesus.
Sir, Your Assured friend, much obliged to serve and honour you,

Cambridge: March 18. 1656.
