



SIR,
GOD is the great Maker and bestower of all Rights: The persons capable to receive them, and to whom he doth convey them, are Angels and Men. To mankind he gives the best of Rights, and invests them with the best Inheritance, by the best Mediator Jesus Christ, the Principal Heir of all Things, through the means of Faith, which justifies the Sons of Men by Nature, to be the best Title, and the strongest Assurance that can be had to Eter∣nal Life.

I have therefore purposely fixed upon these noble Principles of Faith, Justifica∣tion, and Assurance, That I might be a true Mercury to point out the stately way that leads to Coelestial Glory. Directing wise Souls to come off from the wandring Pur∣suits of earthly Pomps, empty Speculations, and uncertain Riches, which discompose and tyre the best Wits in the Labyrinth of this World: That they may find true con∣tent in the Choice of that one Thing which is truly necessary, That better part which shall never be taken from them; That solid comfort which will stand by them, and bring them Peace to the end, and in the end, and unto all Eternity.
This pain Treatise of these most high and most Christian Truths, I held my self obliged to dedicate unto you, as being the first Fruits of my Labours in this kind, and therefore most due to you of all men, who was my first Benefactor and most liberal Pa∣tron of my Studies, together with your most excellent Lady, now with God.

Her transcendent Estate I cannot reach, but Yours, and both your Sons I may, and do Address my self unto. And for the joynt-favours which I have received from you and your Lady during your conjugal Union, and for your continued and for her sake increased kindness since the sad separation, I humbly offer this token of my Gratitude to remain by you, from me, to look into upon occasions for your Satisfaction and comfort, in the midst of the Dis-satis∣factions and Discomforts of this Miserable World.
The same also I desire you would com∣mend to your Sons, the Stems of that Noble Lady, whose memory I shall ever honour, and you and them for her sake.
In this I aime meerly to strike the sprightly veine of Pure Love to You and to your hopeful Family, and a deer Remem∣brance and kindness to you all, as to the best of my Friends.
Upon which generous Terms if you please to accept of this small Present it may pro∣mote
the acceptation thereof to others, and encourage him farther, who ever desires to shew himself,
SIR, 
Rochester. March. 26. 1668.
