



MOST HONOURABLE,
Some time ago, being by the Pro∣vidence of GOD, Reduced to a low condition, like a Man that had fallen from a precipice. I began to look about, and to think by what means to Reascend; for that end strearch∣ed my Invention to the utmost extent, I took a vew of every thing upon which I could fix mine eye. I examined the con∣duct of all sorts of persons, both as to publick and private concerns, in order to find some footsteps by which to climb up.
 in my my survey of things, found sever∣als that I thought might be Improven. And amongst many others, this project of making Nots to pass for currant money occured; as did likewise several others of no less moment, which I could have expanded on this occasion, were it not that too many projects at once, may ra∣ther obstruct than advance the proce∣cution of any; And also that this one may be sufficient at the time, if it take effect, which if it do not I shall hencforth be dis∣couraged to attempt any thing of the like Nature.
After I had made several discoveryes, as is said, New difficulties occured, as to the manner of giving them vent. The concealing matters of so great Importance I thought a Crime: On the other hand, fearing it was in vain for me to propose any thing of this kind having had so bad success in my own Concerns none would re∣lay on any Overture I could make concern∣ing the prosperity of others; I strugled long between these difficulties; However at last I resolved to put in form one of my
 projects, and shew it to some who could advise me how to proceed therein; And accordingly made a short draught of this Note-Project, as that which was most like∣ly to take effect, I shew'd it to some of the Honourable Members of Parliament. But the draught being short, and not so distinct, as what is here deduced, nor the Foundation on which it was proposed to be setled, so solid as what is now pro∣posed, it was thought there might be se∣veral difficulties in it, wherefore I laid it aside at that time.
The next Effort I made, was an Essey upon the manner of Husbandry, in which I thought most People of this Kingdom Commited Condsiderable mis∣takes, tho this was not received with that Approbation, which I humbly con∣ceive it deserveth, yet it found acceptace beyond my expectation, for it is not to be Imagioned that upon an overly Glance, one can have the same Sentiments as an o∣ther that has made it his business to consider it throughly.
Now (I hope in a good time,) I Resume
 my Project concerning the Notes. The Kingdom at present being drained of Money, by reason of the great quantities of it that has been given for Corn from Forraign parts these several years past, and likewise People seem now Inclined to Cultivat Trade and Manufactures more than formerly, which certainly makes a project of this nature more Necessar then at other tims; Wherfore in all Humility I present the following Sheets to Your Grace, Lordships and Honours; The first part of which Respects the Circulating of Notes may perhaps be some what dark at first veiw, yet after perusal and the se∣rious thoughts of any person of Tolerable Capacity, I think it will be plain to a Demonstration. I have considered it over and over many tims, and according to what sence GOD has given me. I think nothing can be plainer, and doubt not in the least to Solve all manner of objecti∣ons that can be made against it. As to what followes in the other two Chapters is plain at first view, and will not be dif∣ficult to determine what is fit to be done therein.

Some years ago I Remember, there was an overture made to the Parliament, for the Streicking a vast number of Notes or Talies, but the manner of Circulating them was keep'd a secret, till the Author should have the promise of a Consider∣able Reward; tho it is but reasonable that a Man should be Rewarded for his good service, not only with Respect to the pains be is at. But likewise with Re∣spect to the benefit others receive by his Good Offices: Yet I have made no such Preliminary overture, leaving that In∣teirly to Your Wisdoms Discration.
As when an Artificer has finished an Instrument of Musick, with all imaginabl exactness, it may suffer the bending or unbending of several Strings, before it can be fited to a particular Tune or Air. In like maner the following project, may perhaps receive some inconsiderable A∣mendiments when it comes to be put in practice, which till then cannot be ob∣served. Yet I humbly Conceive there is no material part wanting to make it Compleat; However it be, my thoughts
 of it to be so, has induced me to lay it be∣fore Your Wisdoms, who after Considering of it throughly, can eosily give your Judg∣ment therein. That GOD may give you Wisdom, and grant a happie Isue to this Session of Parliament shall be the earnest Prayer of

