



Madam,
AN Unfortunate Prince begs Au∣dience of Your Ladiship, in hopes of re∣presenting His Unhappy
Circumstances to be such, as that he may with Ju∣stice lay claim to Your Ladiships Protection.
He is sensible that nei∣ther His Ambition, or rather His Destiny, could make Him amends for the Mis∣fortunes they have plung'd Him in, than by suffering Him to reappear in the World under Your Ladi∣ships Commission. If He succeeds in this Request, He questions not to Reign again with as much Glory and Lustre, as He was
before oppress'd with the Malignity and Perverse∣ness of His Fate.
To You, Madam, He flies for Refuge, knowing the Whole Universe must pay Veneration to such an Asyle, and that the Sactu∣ary cannot but be inviola∣ble, that is supported by so much Beauty, so much Wit and Vertue.
He is assur'd His greatest Enemies will be forc'd to court His Re∣conciliation and Friend∣ship, when under Your Co∣lours;
and that they will freely make Restitution of all the Stars unjustly gave them to His disadvantage, rather than incur the Blame and Censure of the present Age, and all Po∣sterity. For it is Declaring War to All, to continue at variance with a Prince, under the Guarranty of a Lady, whose many Charm∣ing Qualities would have obtain'd her even the Ado∣ration of the Ancients.
But he is most capable of telling His own Story:
And as for doing You Ju∣stice, Madam, in so nice a Character as that of Your Ladiships, a Chara∣cter that entitles You to the Love of Heaven, and demands the Esteem and Admiration of all Man∣kind, is what surpasses the Art and Skill both of Pen and Pencil. Every Action of Yours is a Panegyrique of it self. You stand in no need of the Daubing either of the Writer or the Painter: Daubing, I said, Pardon the Word, Ma∣dam;
but every thing must prove Course, that vainly attempts to Copy so perfect an Original. So much Merit needs no Hi∣storian. As it has alrea∣dy rendred You the Favou∣rite of the present Age, so Tradition will transmit you to Posterity, as an Ex∣traordinary Instance of all the Advantages of Birth and of Fortune, of Body and of Mind, without any of the Vanities that almost con∣stantly attend these Blessings and Accomplishments in o∣thers.

But this is a Subject so bewitching, that it had almost transported me be∣yond the Bounds of the most profound Respect and Submission wherewith I am,
Madam, 
