



My dearest and most honoured Lord,
I Am not a Person who ever
had any design on Patrons, and
am therefore little used to this
Ceremony of Dedications, being
withall sensible how insignificant
it is in many other regards. But I
cannot satisfie my self if I should
omit this occasion of a Publick Ac∣knowledgment
of those many Fa∣vours
I have received from your
Lordship, ever since I had the hap∣piness
to be personally known unto
you. I will not trouble you with
an Enumeration of the Particulars,
I know you had rather do them

than hear of them. But I have se∣veral
peculiar Reasons for this Ad∣dress:
The Possibility of Discipline in
a Diocesan Jurisdiction is a Subject
nearly concerning your Lordship up∣on
your new Promotion, and I
hope your Lordship will let Mr. Bax∣ter
see from your own experience,
that it is as practicable in a Diocese,
as in his Worcestershire Association.
He allows no preeminence of one
Minister above others, in order to
the forming such Associations for great
and generous designs, but what re∣sults
from the difference of Talents.
But certainly where, besides this
preeminence in Talents, there is also a
preeminence in Office too; where be∣sides
these gifts and qualifications of a
Person to persuade his Brethren,
there is also an antecedent obligation
incumbent on them to hearken to
his persuasions, it cannot choose but
add considerably to the efficacy of

such his persuasions, both to engage
them at first, and to hold them toge∣ther
when they are once engaged.
This assistance therefore I hope for
from your Lordship, that you will
help me to convince him from his
own Topick of Experience, and that you
will give him an experiment of his
own Age and Country, that he
may not still complain of being re∣mitted
to Ancient and Forein Pre∣cedents.
Besides, you have given me
hopes of an assistance in the Dispute
it self, by Publishing a Discourse
concerning the Ancient Church-Go∣vernment
in these Islands. You will
there let him see his great mistakes
in our ancient Irish, and Scotish, and
British History, concerning the Pal∣ladian
and Anti-Palladian Bishops, as
he is pleased to distinguish them;
and not onely his mistakes, but Sel∣dens
and Blondells, and the most ac∣curate

Antiquaries of the contrary
Party. I am glad that I have gi∣ven
the occasion of it, by which I
hope I shall do the World service,
though I cannot by any thing of
my own. I have no more to say,
but to return my heartiest thanks
for it, and remain,
My dearest Lord,

