


Dear Sisters,
THAT Infinitely Wise God, who does what he will, and gives not account of any of his Matters, Job. 33. 13. has made a breach upon us. That God who gave at first, and for many years continued, has now removed from us a dear and tender Mother. This Arrow that killed one, wounded all; that Stroke that took away Life from her, took away an ex∣cellent Wife from our honoured Father, and a dear Mother from you and me. At once
 (fatal hour!) she was left a breathless Corps; he a solitary Widdower; and we Motherless Children. What a sad and sudden change is made in Persons, and Families, when Death knocks at the door and enters in! The Root now is dead, and dry; tho' the many Branches are yet spar'd. For ma∣ny years, God continued us an entire Fa∣mily: The Destroying Angel that knockt at many doors, visited many houses, pass'd by ours: When the Ax has been laid at the Root of many Families, when many Branches have been lopt off, and many Trees hewn and cut down; we stood in the Vine∣yard untoucht: But Death will come, and a parting time will come. Will come! alas! it is come. The sweetness of her Temper, the greatness of her Love, the tenderness of her Affection, the Grace of God in her; whatever might endear a Mother, rendered her company delightful, and her presence a great part of our earthly happiness: But God would have her home, and would not that the Mansion designed for her should stand any longer empty. That Body which had many Infirmities, and which a-while-a-go with grief and tears we beheld pined and wasted; consum'd and worn with lan∣guishing sickness, is now at rest: And the
 more noble Soul is now among the Spirits of Just men made perfect: Thus hath Heb. 12. 23. her heavenly Father disposed of her; and is it not time to think what is our work and duty? is it to weep and mourn? While she lived she was worthy to be loved; and now she is dead she is worthy to be lamented; and silent Tears will, and may speak what words must not. Hath Death remov'd, and the Grave buried her out of our sight? did she take leave of us with her cold, and dying Lips; and is she gone, and must we see her no more? Sad thought! may we not weep and mourn? we may, we ought; but yet there is something of greater importance that such Providences call for, and should be the employment of surviving Relations.
The Red has been speaking, and yet speaks; Lord! grant we may hear the Voice, and un∣derstand the Language, know the meaning, and obey the Call of it. Death hath been speaking, the Grave with open mouth hath been speaking, her last Sickness, Decease, and Funeral have been speaking: O that I, and you may have an Ear to hear what this Providence saith! While she was with us she spent that little time, and the less breath she had in speaking for God's Glory, and the good of others. Oh! never forget
 that Affectionate Exclamation, Oh love the Lord, all ye my Children! And being dead she yet speaketh; and with Heb. 11. 4. a louder Voice too. She had no greater Joy than to see her Children walking in the Truth. No doubt you are Children of many Prayers and Tears; she travailed with you again, and long'd to see Christ formed in you; and I doubt not but it was a comfort to see such probable grounds to hope you were born again: That you were not only born of her, but born of Water and the Holy Spirit; and I will venture to say she loved none so much for bearing John. 3. 5. her Likeness, as for having the Image of God. Her highest ambition was to see you good, holy, and living in the Fear of God; and when you were to change your condition, and enter into a Married state, her earnest desire was, you might Marry in the Lord, and be disposed of to such as might further, not hinder you in the way 1 Cor. 7. 39. to Heaven; it did delight her, to my know∣ledge, in her last Sickness, that some of you have such.
Her early Instructions, serious Counsels, seasonable Reproofs, holy Example, fervent Prayers, and many Tears spoke Love to your precious and Immortal Souls: What but
 this was the Language of all? Lord! save me, and mine too; let me go to Heaven, and let my dear Children fol∣low after: Be thou a God, Friend, and Father to me and them; bind up my 1 Sam. 25. 29. Soul, and the Souls of mine in the bundle of Life. And now blessed be God all of this kind has not been in vain. She lived to see the fruit of her labour, and her Prayers in part answered; and what is gi∣ven, I hope, and I pray God it may be but the first-fruits, earnest, and pledge of what is yet behind. Have you begun well, and are you set out in your Journey to Heaven? Go on, and hold out. Has the Spirit en∣lightened, renewed, and changed you? Have you the Likeness of God, and the Image of Christ? Have you given up your selves in a serious and solemn manner to the Blessed Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit? Is sin your grief and burden; the object of your sorrow and hatred? do you oppose, resist, and fight against it? persevere to the end, and the Crown is yours. Let nothing discourage you; if the way be rugged, and your Journey tedious; if you are threatned with Storms and Tempests; if you find it hard to watch, and pray, to wrestle, and conflict, to deny your selves, live by Faith, and perform many duties, which are contrary to corrupt Nature, don't faint, tire, and give
 out; Heaven is at the end of your Journey, and Heaven (oh believe and think oft on it!) will make amends for all: When once you are there, with an over-flowing Joy will you think of these Afflictions, Crosses, and Disap∣pointments; for then you shall see, know, and be fully convinc'd that Infinite Wisdom made them all serviceable to your Eternal Welfare. Tho' the flesh is pain'd and smarts, yet a time will come, when you shall praise your heavenly Father for seasonable Chastisements, and the Discipline of his Rod. Tho' the flesh may be uneasie, and the burden may pinch you; tho' the Rod may make you groan, and weep; tho' Satan may tempt, and your own hearts may be ready to question your Relation to, and Covenant-Interest in God; his Love to you, or yours to him, because it is so, and so with you; yet don't say, nay, don't so much as think there are any more bitter Ingredients in your Cup than are necessary; than both the Wisdom, and Bowels of a Father advise.
Is Satan busie to fill you with doubts and fears; needless suspicions, and groundless jealousies? does he draw a Curtain before, or cast a Veil upon your faces? does he labour to magnifie your Sins, blot your Evidences, and extinguish your Hope; and are you cast down, and go mourning all the day long because of
 this? why should you? is it not an Argument Satan has lost his game, and you are none of his Slaves, because he thus disquiets you? Do you mourn after God, and pant, and breathe for him? is it nothing but the light of his Countenance, the smiles of his Face, and a sense of his Love can content you? Are you looking to see the Image of God upon your hearts; and is it your grief, and trouble you cannot see it so plain, and legible as you should, and would, and desire? and hereupon do you conclude you have no Grace? What! when even these tears and groans tell you you have. Tho' you may walk in darkness, as many Children of Light have, and do; yet stay your selves on God, and wait for him. Oh how easily, and quickly can the breath of God scat∣ter all these Clouds which darken your Souls, and the Light of his Countenance make a bright and a joyful day!
Having this opportunity to testifie my Love to you, especially to your Souls; I shall beg, and presume on my Readers patience, while upon this occasion I give you some counsels, which I pray God may be useful to you, and many more in the like circumstances.
I. Bless God it was your Lot and Happiness, to be born of such holy Pa∣rents; whereof one is taken, and the
 other is yet left. To be the Off-spring of them who are the Children of God; to be the Postcrity of those who themselves are born from, and have an Alliance to Hea∣ven; to descend from them who are the Dear and Antient Friends of God; to be born of them who have a Convenant-Interest in God, and can lay claim to the Covenant both for themselves, and theirs; how great a mercy! what an invaluable Priviledge is it! I am far from saying, that Grace runs in a Blood, that Children are Heirs to the Graces, as they are to the Riches of their Parents; but yet it is a Priviledge to be born of such. I do, and I would have you heartily bless God for it! How sad a thought is it! I am born of them who are Enemies to God, Slaves to these Lusts, and Servants to the Devil. What a sad Example do such set before their poor Children in case they live; and what a dreadful Legacy, how many Woes, and Curses do they bequeath to 'em in case they die before 'em! I know sometimes sove∣reign Grace (that even of Stones can Matth. 3. 9. raise up Children to Abraham) cuts off the Entail: But more frequently they tread in their Fathers steps, and bear their Iniquities.

 But how comfortable is it to sit down and think! God a long time before my Birth, order'd I should be born of such, and such, who were his familiar Friends, and dear Servants. I have a Father, a Mother in whom I can see the Image of God; who are united to Christ; and san∣ctified by the Holy Spirit. Is it not a mercy to be the Children of such? Are not they more likely in a serious, conscientious, and sober manner to devote, and dedicate their new-born Infants in Baptism to God? when others only complement with God, and bring them to the Laver of Regeneration out of Custom, Ceremony, and for Fashion sake; they will do it with a deep sense of God's Goodness and Mercy: And great may be the benefit of this solemn Transaction, and early Dedication. Will not such Parents when they look upon their own act and deed, and remem∣ber what they promised in the Name and stead of their Children, be put upon performing consequent Duties; as earnest and servent Prayer to God for them, a timely instructing them in the Christian Religion, setting before 'em an holy Example, and watching over their first, early, and ungovern'd years? and how beneficial may all this be! are not such Children like to have the benefit of an holy,
 Religious Education which very oft God blesses to Conversion? however may they not be kept from many open, scandalous, and conscience-wounding sins which in Youth They are in∣clined to, and Others commit? may not, and has not God blessed such for their Father's sake? These are (does the great God as it were say) the Children of my Covenant-ser∣vants; they were born in my Family, enter'd into my Service, and I will be their God as I was the God of their Father, and Mother; their Holy Parents devoted them to me, and I accepted, set my mark upon them; they are mine, and they shall be mine, and know what it is to be born of those who were my Friends and Favourites. What is the peculiar privi∣ledge of such!
Truly the Children of such Parents owe more thanks to God, upon this account than usually they are aware of. How few on their Knees, heartily acknowledge God's Goodness, and mercy to 'em in this respect! while others pride themselves, in the greatness of their Fa∣mily, the nobleness of their descent, and that they have more pure and refined blood running in their Veins than others; Bless the Lord, O my Soul! that I had a Father who was a Son; and a Mother who was a Daughter of God. This Children should do, not only
 while Parents are alive; but when dead: a deep sense, and a thankful acknowledgement of God's goodness should survive their Funeral; render their memory very very pretious, and force lively praises from us, when they are faln asleep. Let me add, that this duty is most reasonable, and the neglect of it most cul∣pable if God hath blessed all, or any of their endeavours to our Conversion. Were they under God, the means of our first, and second birth? the instruments of conveying Natural, and Spiritual Life? Is it owing to them that we are Men, and Women; and to their Prayers and Tears; instructions and counsels that we are Christians? Did God bless our Education, and was it the means of an early and lasting Piety? Our Debt is increas'd, and a double Tribute of Praise is owing to God.
II. Learn how to make use of, urge, and plead this priviledge with your selves; and with God. With your selves, that you may live and act as Children of such Pa∣rents: with God, that you may have the Blessings and Mercies which belong to such. Ʋrge it upon and plead it with your own Souls that you may suppress Sin, resist Temptation, and live in the constant and lively performance of Holy Duties. Israel makes use of this
 Argument: He is my God, and I will pre∣pare Exod. 15. 2. him an Habitation: he is my Father's God, and I will exalt him. Lord! (may such an one say) thou art my God, I have been devoted and dedicated to thee; and therefore I will love, and fear; serve, and honour; trust in, and depend on thee: more▪over, thou art my Fathers God, and my Mothers God, and as this strengthens my obligation to, so the remembrance of it shall keep me from departing from thee: my own God, and my Fathers God I will never forsake.
Do I (should such an one often say) live, walk and act; deport, and carry my self as one descended from Godly Parents; and be∣coming my Hereditary Relation to God? Do I frame my Life, and Conversation as becomes the Child, the Son, the Daughter of such a Father, and such a Mother! oh, how may such a reflection confound, shame, and put us to the blush! fill us with grief, sorrow, and repentance for what is past; and be in slead of many arguments to persuade to more holy strictness, circumspection, and accuracy for the time to come!
Further, urge and plead this with God; when you come to beg Blessings, Spiritual, or Tem∣poral.
 I know you are not strangers to secret, and closet Prayer: you do not, dare not, cannot live without it: when you go take this argument along with you. The Argument is strong, when I can say, My God, it is strong∣er, when I can go on, and say my Father's God. David was mov'd to do kindness for Mephibosheth, for his Father Jonathan's sake; and can we think the Heart and Hand of God will not be open'd, to give Mercy to the Posterity of his old Friends? How frequently did the Saints of old put God in mind of their holy Ancestors? saying, remember Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. Jehosaphat goes to Prayer with this Title in his Mouth; O God, the God of our Fathers. David pleads this, O Lord 2 Chr. 20. 6. I am thy Servant, truly I am thy Servant, Psal. 116. 16. and the Son of thine handmaid. Oh, how comfortable, argumentative, and enforcing is it to mind God who we are; when we come to his Door for an Alms! to say, with hum∣ble and holy reverence, Lord! dost thou ask who I am? I am thy Servant, and a Child too of a dear friend of thine: my Father and Mother were thine antient acquaintance; Lord, don't deny me, don't send me away empty for their sake; but shew mercy to me: My holy Parents were thine, thy domestick servants, they were brought up and lived in thy family; Lord! remember I am the Child
 of such, and give me an alms. Oh, pity and pardon; sanctifie, and save me! oh, let not one descended of holy and believing Parents be a cast-away! let not me, Lord, let not me have my portion with hypocrites; when Mat. 24. 51. my Holy Father and Godly Mother shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob in Mat. 8. 11. the Kingdom of God! I am thine Lord. Save me! and to enforce my plea for mercy, I humbly remember thee, my Father was thine, and my Mother was thine, Lord, let me find the benefit of being the off spring of such.
III. Earnestly sue for the full answer, and return of those Prayers they sent up to God for you. 'Tis one great, and unspeakable advantage the Children of holy Parents have, that they often recommend them and their case to God. Such Prayers may do them good after their decease; and that they may, their Children should beg a return. This now should be your work, and mine: Many of these Prayers are filed up in the Court above, as appears by that saying of my dear Mother to me, Oh, pray for me! for when my Children were young, and could not pray for themselves, I pray'd for them. Thanks be to God, for a praying Mother. Now send New Prayers after the Old; Yours after Hers▪ Oh! suffer not so many warm, and earnest Prayers; so many
 speaking tears, and pleading groans to be lost for want of suing to Heaven, for a rich, and speedy return. May not each go to a Throne of Grace and say? Lord, my holy Mother, who is now fallen asleep, was given to Prayer; she was a Friend of thine, and had an interest in thee, and improv'd it not only for her self, but for me: How oft I was in her mind, and upon her heart, in her secret addresses to thee, Lord, thou knowest. Did she not again, and again, recommend me to thy mercy, through the merit of thy dear Son, and her Saviour, and I hope mine too; the Lord Je∣sus? are these Prayers all answered? have I all the Grace, and Holiness, Joy, Peace, and Comfort she prayed for? are not many of these Prayers yet to be answered? Are not many of her requests for me yet with God? oh, now for a quick, speedy, and full return! tho' she be dead, let none of her Prayers for me be lost! Lord, that I could hear thee saying, I remember thy Mother, a good friend of mine; I remember whose Child thou art, and I am resolv'd to be kind to thee: lo! here is the Grace, Pardon, Peace, and Com∣fort thy Mother prayed for: she wrestled, pleaded with me, and would not let me alone, be it unto thee according to her Faith, and Prayers.

 Lord, (may such an one say,) my Holy Parents spoke to thee on my behalf, before I was able to speak for my self; how many Prayers did my Holy Father, and Godly Mother make for me, in my Infancy, Child∣hood, and Youth? Lord, read over, and grant those Petitions which are of an antient Date. Tho' Death hath tied their Tongues, the Grave stopt their Mouths, and they can pray no more; yet, nay the rather let those Prayers be answered that are upon the File, and are committed to the Hands, and Care of the Blessed Jesus, the great Master of Requests! Lord Jesus! do thou see that none of these be lost; but answered in the best time.
IV. Exercise a serious, solemn, and hearty Repentance for all sin. When I consider our dear, and excellent Mother was not taken away by a sudden, and surprizing stroke; but a long, and pining sickness pre∣pared the way: that she was not taken off in the midst of her days; but lent to us for a considerable number of years: that she lived, till she saw many of her Children's Children, and did not fall asleep, nor go to Bed till to∣wards the Evening; I would hope, there was no particular sin of ours provoked God to re∣move
 her at this time. But alas! we all have many sins, and should not such a Providence awaken our Repentance? It should; it tends that way; and I pray God it may. Let us search our ways, examine our hearts, consider what sin, or sins have been too much allowed, and winked at. Sin is the cause of Death to our selves, and to those whom we dearly love: these, these are the murderers of our friends, and relations; let us send an hue and cry after them; and when we have found them out, let us Crucifie them. Oh, that no sin, tho' never so dear, pleasant, or secret may survive this funeral! our departed Rela∣tions have no need of our groans and tears: oh! let us labour to consecrate our sorrow, by turn∣ing the flowing streams into the Channel of Re∣pentance, that that, which was natural, may commence Divine.
How proper is the Death of Relations to ex∣cite, and quicken Repentance! how much may the remembrance of their sick-bed Discourses; their dying speeches; their farewel counsels; and the great change one moment made con∣tribute, to soften, break, and humble our hearts! to make us serious, and solevin in re∣newing our Repentance! at such a time, how easily is the passion of sorrow moved! do you weep for her? methinks I hear her (having
 no need of pity and tears! saying, weep not Luk. 23. 28. for me. Do you weep for sin? pretious tears! comfortable sorrow! oh! weep on; and weep more. Every Corps, Funeral, and Grave tells us what an evil sin is; and should provoke us to Repent: but when Death comes into the very House where we live, takes away one of our own number, strikes, and kills a dear Re∣lation; when it is a Father, a Mother, a Husband, a Wife, a Child that is carried to the House appointed for all the living; Job 30. 23. the call to Repentance is more solemn, loud, plain, and particular; and ought to be more awakening.
After the Death and Funeral of such, Re∣pentance is a very seasonable duty. Now is the proper time, to offer to God the Sacri∣fice Psa. 51. 17. of a broken Heart, and contrite Spi∣rit. Can I see Death closing the Eyes of such near Relations, parting them and me; nay, one part of themselves from the other? Can I behold their pale, wan, and ghastly Counte∣nances; the Soul being gone? Can I see them wrapped up in a Shrowd, and nailed up in a Cossin? Can I attend their Funeral, look into the dark, and deep Grave where I must leave a—to Worms and Rottenness and not think hardly of sin; and not resolve by the Grace of God to kill, and mortifie it? at such
 a time who does not cry out? ah cruel death! ah cruel death! but hath not every one much more cause to cry out? ah cursed sin! ah cursed sin! the death of this friend, of this Relation, this Funeral, and all others O cursed sin, is owing to thee; and henceforward I will endeavour thy destruction and ruin.
V. Be very careful to keep God among you. Do, what in you lieth that God may be the God of your Posterity after you: that they under you may lay claim to the Covenant, and the Blessings of it. Endeavour that Re∣ligion in the Life, and Power of it may flou∣rish, not only in your own Hearts; but in your families. Let not FAMILY PRAYER be thrust out; nor adjourned to those hours in which you are least of all fit for this awful, and important duty. May we all strive to keep up the friendship begun between God and our Family! Since God hath made all of you (except one) Mothers: reckon it is your du∣ty to bring up your Children for God: teach them to know your God, and your Fathers God, and that God, to whom in Baptism you have devoted them; that when you shall be dead, cold, and rotting in the Grave; they may be serving and honouring God in your place and stead. That Religion, and the fear of God may not die out of your Fa∣milies,
 when you shall. 'Tis true you cannot give them Grace; but you can instruct, teach counsel, advise, exhort, and persuade, &c. you can set a good example, you can pray to God for them, and plead that Covenant, you entered them into almost as soon as God gave them to you: and all this you ought; and I hope you will be careful to do.
Tho' the presence, awe, and fear of living Parents may restrain Children from some sins and vices; tho' their examples, and counsels may influence them so far, as to persuade them to take up a form of Godliness; yet (oh, 2 Tim. 3. 5. what Tears are sufficient to bewail this fatal degeneracy!) what a dead, spiritless, and lifeless thing is the Religion of many such, as soon as their godly Parents are Dead, and cold in their Graves! how oft doth that ground that was manured, and cultivated, plow'd and sown; ay, and watered with many showers of Tears, bring forth a sad crop of Briars and Thorns! Some Children are a grief and heart breaking to their Parents while they live; and many more, are a reproach, and disgrace to them when dead and gone: how many Children of such Parents, notwithstanding the benefit of a good education, seasonable instructions, wise reproofs, and timely coun∣sels, live at that rate, that they are a blot
 to their family, and a disgrace to their name! If any such shall chance to read these lines I charge them in the name of God, to consider what a sad case they are in; and I pray God to convince them of their sin and folly; and how near they are to a sudden, and final ruin. Would to God, such would consider how greatly they will be ashamed; and how little they will have to say for themselves when the Prayers and Tears of their Living; and the Dust of their Dead Parents shall rise up in Judgment against, and condemn them. But I hope better Heb. 6. 9. things of you and things that accompany Salvation tho' I thus speak. Oh, let it still be your study and care; and let it be more and more so every day to promote piety, and holiness in your own Souls, and to propagate it to others who are descended from you! that so long as any branch of this Family remains, the fear of God, and a care of Religion might slourish. To conclude, there is one thing very amiable, and which your Relation pecu∣liarly calls for; and that is LOVE: this I think I should hardly have mentioned, be∣cause I hope you are taught of God to 1 Thes. 4. 9. love one another, if I had not received it among the last Commands of a Mother, who had so much of this Grace her self, to be your Monitor in this particular. Now the Lord sit you, and me to follow; that at
 the Resurrection of the Just we may meet our Dear Mother, who now sleeps in Jesus; and our Honoured Father, who is yet with us, and whom God long preserve, for ours and his Churches sake; with Joy and Tri∣umph. That they may say, lo, here are we, and all the Children thou didst graciously give us. Amen.
Reading, Feb. 28. 1692/3.

