



Honoured Sir,
A Late Providence equally surprizing and sad; a Pro∣vidence,
which they must be great Strangers in this
our Jerusalem, who have not heard of it; gave
birth to this following Discourse. To perpetuate the Memory,
and assist my Neighbours in making an improvement of it, was
the design of its being first preacht, and now publisht. I know
that a Critical Eye may observe some blemishes; and I per∣swade
my self an envious one will find more: But I am the
less solicitous, because I hope, I rather designed to do good to
others, than gain applause to my self. I would rather that
Men would praise God,Rom. 1. 9. (whose I am, and whom I desire
to serve with my Spirit, in the Gospel of his Son) than blow
the Trumpet at my door.
Though this Discourse hath the ill fate, to come forth in an
Age when the Love of many is waxed cold: Yet I hope some
will have that charity for it and the Author too, which hi∣deth
a multitude of faults. If some shall find fault with the
stile as not being acurate, and polisht; let them know, it was
preacht to a Congregation in the Countrey, who mind more
that the form of Words delivered to them be wholesom
and sound, than gay and eloquent: And that so sad and
awful a Providence called for something more, than flourishes
of wit. Perhaps some that are got into the chair of the scorn∣ful,
will deride it;Heb 5. 14 but I hope that they, who have their sences
exercised,Gen. 27. 4 to discern both good and evil; will find I have
prepared savoury meat for them,ver. 20. and that God brought it
to me. To justifie the making so plain a discourse, thus publick;

I neither can, nor care, to use that Stale Complement;
of its being extorted from me, by the irresistible importunity of
them that heard it: Neither will I stuff this Epistle with
those trifling Apologies, which are as easily answered as they
are commonly used.Matth. 25 5. It is a time, when not only the foolish
Virgins; but the wise too slumber and sleep. Oh what a Spi∣rit
of slumber is faln upon most of the Protestant Churches, at
this day! And must none of the Watchmen of Israel sound
the Trumpet, and give them an Alarum!
If the abounding of Iniquity, and the frequent repetition of
the same sins; and those too, that are of a crimson colour, and
scarlet dye: If the general declension of Faith, Love, Zeal, and
other Christian Graces, which is too notoriously visible among all
Parties; that profess the Protestant Religion; or which is all
one,Jude ver. 3. the faith which was once delivered to the Saints: If
the ill symptoms which are upon us at home; and our Brethren
abroad: If former, and later warnings of Providence, be not
sufficient to excuse, nay, to justifie my calling men to repentance
and reformation; I must, ay, and I am willing for once, to
bear the blame, of having done an unnecessary work.
These my first fruits, Sir, I offer to you; to whom I owe all
I can do of this kind. If they are not so fully ripe; yet because
they bear that Character let them find acceptance with you. I
hope the discourse, together with the occasion of it, may do good:
And if it may contribute to the repentance and reformation of
the nation; or any particular Number of Sinners in it, my
great end is attained: That it may be accompany'd with that
divine, with that all-mighty power, which can shake, and open
the heart of the most obdurate sinner; as well as that of the
earth, let your prayers meet mine at the throne of grace.
I am,
Honoured Sir,
Reading
Sept. 29. 92.
Your most dutiful, and most
obedient Son,

