



May it please Your Grace,
IT affords the greatest Satisfaction and Con∣tentment of any thing a Man can do to serve
 the Glory of God, and the Interest of his True Religion Establish'd a∣mong us. And I must reckon my self pecu∣liarly oblig'd to endea∣vour this by the great Favour of the Divine Providence, in leading me by his Grace, out of an Unhappy Separation, in which I had been E∣ducated, to unite my self to the Church of Eng∣land. It has also pleas'd the Divine Goodness to make some Use of my mean Endeavours, ac∣cording to a Method u∣sual with his Infinite
 Wisdom, which is, Out of the Mouth of Babes and Suck∣lings to ordain Strength; and to chuse the weak things of the World, to perform by them some of his most Glorious Effects.
These things have car∣ried me on in this En∣deavour; these things have supported me un∣der the Difficulties and Disadvantages I have sometimes encountred. And by Vertue of them, as I entred the Church of God upon a deliberate Consideration, and with a full Conviction of Con∣science, that it was my in∣dispensible
 Duty; as I did it in Defiance of that ter∣rible Storm of Persecuti∣on which threatned it, and was begun, at that time, from a Combination of all the Sorts of its Ene∣mies against it, so I thank God, I have been so sup∣ported, that no Hardships have ever been able to make me repent the do∣ing so. And I think my self infinitely more oblig'd to the Divine Goodness for having been, in any measure, able to exercise the Faith and Patience I had occasion for, than if I had in any of the Ways
 of Schism, grown Rich and Prosperous in the World. And I have Rea∣son at length to say, I waited patiently for the Lord, and he enclined unto me, and heard my Calling. This Ac∣knowledgment I think my self bound to make as publick as I can, for the Edification of others, and for the Glory of God, to whom be all Glory for ever and ever.

My Lord,
I know what is said in due Thankfulness and Ac∣knowledgment to Al∣mighty God, whom you Love and Honour, will
 be very acceptable to Your Grace: But I must go on, and say that which will not be so acceptable, and yet I think my self indispensably oblig'd to say it. I must own, with all thankfulness, that Your Grace has been, by Your Condescending Good∣ness, the Instrument of the Divine Providence in my Support and Encou∣ragement: And I am ob∣lig'd entirely to Your Grace's Favour for a Com∣petent and Comfortable Subsistence. Your Grace has shown herein the Ex∣cellent Spirit of a true
 Church-of-England-Man, that is, of a very good Christian: The Disposi∣tion which is a Glorious Imitation of the Goodness of God, in being Merci∣ful, as our heavenly Father is Merciful, and ready, like him, to pardon and fa∣vour a returning Peni∣tent. May it please the Divine Goodness, in Fa∣vour to his Church, to continue long in Your Important Station a Per∣son who knows so well how to Honour and Re∣commend his Church to those that are in Error and Disobedience, and
 what is the best Course and Method to cure our Unhappy Divisions. May Your Grace live to see us well and generally Uni∣ted among our selves, and in a strong League and Union with all Foreign Protestants for our mutual Defence against the com∣mon Enemy.


My Lord,
I humbly beg leave to present the following Me∣morials to Your Grace, hoping they may obtain the Favour of Your Pa∣tronage, as demonstrating a Concern for the Glory of God, and for the Ho∣nour
 of Christian Religi∣on; and as containing Matters of Fact, which many among us will be able to make use of in Defence of the Refor∣mation, and Conviction of the Roman Church, of the heaviest Imputations which ours has ever charg'd up∣on her, to much further and better Purpose than I have done, or can do it. I could not so justly pre∣sent them to any Person as to Your Grace, because of my greater Obligations to Your Grace, than to any other Person in the World: And because it
 was by Your Grace's Fa∣vour and Recommenda∣tion that I obtain'd the Means and Opportunity to make up these Observa∣tions.
I must now humbly beg Your Grace's Pardon for this Presumption, and the Interruption I have given to Your more Important Thoughts: And engage my self for ever to be,

My Lord,

Wittresham, Decemb. 8. 1698.

