



MADAM,
WHen the best Things of the World are presented to the Great, this is a piece of Justice done, both to those Honourable Per∣sons, and to the things that are presented; for thus much is un∣doubtedly due to the deserts of
 both. And when such exalted persons are pleased to receive those things, and approve by using them, this becomes an advantage to both: They have the service of what is most use∣ful in its kind; and their using it recommends it to others: For the inferiour ranks of Mankind commonly derive their Esti∣mates of things from the Opi∣nions and Practices of those that are above them. It is because I account this Book very Ex∣cellent in its kind, and worthy to be recommended as such to the World, which makes me presume, Madam, to dedicate it to so high a Person as your Honour. I hope, if you please
 to acquaint your self with it, that I shall have the honour to be approv'd in my Judgment of it, and It may have the great advantage to be recommended by you. I know that your ac∣complisht Mind is disposed to approve of what is ingenious and devout. Here presents it self to your Honour, Divine Truth in a decent and fashion∣able Attire; it were not fit for any one to make you a Visit in a careless Undresse. The Beauty here is not conceal'd and disguised by too much ex∣ternal Ornament, nor expos'd to Contempt by too little. This Book, you may be pleas'd to observe, is fitted to possess mens
 Minds with that pure and peaceable Wisdom which is from above; to excite Devo∣tion in the coldest and most careless Hearts; and to possess with a love of Devotion our too nice and witty Age, since here it appears so rational and ingenious even in its highest flights.
Madam,
I must readily acknowledge, the Hand that makes you this Present is too mean and un∣worthy; but since you have not thought me too mean, to receive Obligations from you, I must not believe my self thereby excus'd from bringing
 all such Testimonies of Re∣spect and Gratitude as I am able. Yet I most humbly crave your Pardon for this Presum∣ption, as what it were still greater presumption to expect without seeking it: And, doing thus, it were a very guilty de∣spair on the other hand, if I should not hope to obtain it from a goodness such as yours. Your Honour cannot want any Noble Quality in an answer∣able degree, who derive your high Birth from two Illustri∣ous Families; and are furnisht in them with so many excel∣lent Presidents. While I pre∣sent this Book to you, I pre∣sent also my Prayers to Al∣mighty
 God; to the giver of every good and perfect Gift, that by his Blessing it may be∣come to your Honour, a very profitable Entertainment: That it may nourish in you those good Advances of Piety and Vertue, which adorn your Youth: That it may help to maintain still that prudent con∣stancy, which has shown it self able to conquer the violent current of present Wickedness, while such a number of un∣thinking Sinners are carryed a∣long with the fatal stream. I pray, that the God who has blest you with Beauty, and Wealth, and Honour, the three greatest Gifts of this World,
 may still continue favourable ou in the Dispensations of  Providence; and after a g and happy Life, may re∣ve you to Heaven. Thus  Prayers shew, what I am dy in any other possible way express, that I am,
MADAM, 
