



My Lord,
THose whom the indulgent Providence
of God has favour'd with great Riches
and Honours, as it has your Lordship,
are under a great necessity to have
their minds well accomplisht with Vertue, Wis∣dom
and Piety. No man can use an high Fortune
well, to his comfort and honour in this life, or his
happiness in the next (which in some measure de∣pends
upon this too), but he that is a wise and
good man. The more of these outward things
any person has in possession, the greater degrees
of inward endowments are necessary to direct him
in the use of them; for greater service to God,
and more good to men, is expected by the Donor
from him: and he is exposed to the more and
the stronger temptations to evil. Great Fortunes
are like mighty Engines, which if they are wisely
and carefully managed, will perform great and
useful effects: But if not, instead of serving their
end, they may dash out the brains of him that
uses them. They usually serve to make men the
best, or the worst of Mankind; either the most
glorious instances of Vertue and Religion, or the
most enormous sinners.

To some unhappy men that want these inward
Endowments, their great Possessions are only the
Instruments of wickedness: They serve to gratifie
and cherish foolish and hurtful Lusts. So the Pos∣sessors
of them become the slaves of sin, and mise∣rable
Captives to the Devil. The mistaken men,
grosly imposed upon by his subtil and malicious
arts, are brought into a sordid and pernicious bon∣dage,
whilst they fancied themselves enjoying an
uncontrolled liberty.
Thus also these men unfit themselves for all
good and heroick enterprizes and performances:
They blast their own glory, and interrupt and pre∣vent
the praise and renown which they might ob∣tain.
It is often their fate to see themselves negle∣cted
as useless, whilst meaner persons, better accom∣plisht,
and more fit for great trusts, are preferred
to them.
Such men spend a few years in a wild extrava∣gant
jollity, having the most of their pleasures forced,
and so the less pleasant: And the rest of their days
they commonly wast, perhaps in shame and poverty;
sometimes in pain and sickness too; and with these,
under the lashes of an angry Conscience. And if that
becomes so stupid and hard, as to scruple nothing
that is wild and wicked, they make the more haste
to a miserable death, and hurry to an endless per∣dition.

Thus Riches become the hurt of the owner for
whom they are kept, which was one of the Vani∣ties
that Solomon long ago observed in the World.
And surely a great one it is, that a man should
make himself miserable by those things that
might yeild him comfort in this life, and subserve
his eternal happiness: That he should thus defeat
all the wise care, and tender kindness of those
friends that gather'd, or preserved his Riches for
him. 'Tis a sad and deplorable thing, to see men
throw away the happiness which they might en∣joy,
and wilfully run into those miseries that might
be avoided. But I hope, and heartily wish for a
better fate to your Lordship, to whom I account
my self much obliged, and to whom therefore I
am very desirous to be in some way serviceable.
My Lord,
It was to assist your Lordship, as well as my
weak abilities could, upon your lanching into a
dangerous World, your own Pilot, that you might
not thus make shipwrack of a good Conscience, a
good Reputation, a large Estate, and a noble Soul,
that I first composed this Discourse, and deliver∣ed
it in your hearing. And for the same purpose
I do now, upon the desire of some of your Lord∣ships
very Honourable Relations, humbly present
it thus again. If it is in it self such as may be
serviceable towards Piety and Vertue, it may now

be the more serviceable to your Lordship, having
this advantage, that it may be deliberately consi∣der'd,
and the reason and importance of the Rules
it contains, may be better discern'd, than from a
transient delivery. I presume it will be accepta∣ble
to your Lordship's Prudence in this publick
way, if it be useful to so honest and good a de∣sign,
both for your own, and other mens sakes,
who, with your Lordship, may receive some advan∣tage
thereby. And I humbly conceive it will be
acceptable also to your Lordship's great and con∣descending
Goodness, as a Testimony of my un∣feigned
desire of your Lordship's Honour and In∣terest;
and my thankfulness for the great Obliga∣tions
which your Lordship has been pleased to lay
upon,
My LORD,

