



Right Worshipful,
AS after sickness, health; after re∣straint, liberty; after sorrows, solace; after pain, pleasure; after showres, sunshine; after wars, peace; and after melancholly, mirth is the more musical, sweet, acceptable, delightful, and pleasant to the full

possessour and free enjoyer thereof; so in regard of the many and mani∣fold pressures, oppressions, plun∣derings, exilements, imprisonments, and inutterable injuries and wrongs many millions have for these many years of late undoubtedly endured, if they were right Royalists; and wherein your Right Worshipfull Father Sir Thomas Edwards late de∣ceased (I am confident) did not escape scotfree: I have presumed to present to your favourable Cen∣sure, A Cabinet of merry Conceits, which I penn'd at some interims of leasure for mine own private recre∣ation then, but for yours now; wish∣ing that you may be as pleasant in the perusing of them, as I was in the

composing of them. Wherein I have pretermitted divine matters, for, non ludendum cum sanctis; remembring that the Fly playing with the candle had his wings clipt for his over bold∣ness: nor have I intermeddled with State Affairs, for, quae supra nos, ni∣hil ad nos; not forgetting Aesops Wolf, who prying into the Lions den, had his skin pull'd o're his ears for his presumption. Nor have I pointed at any particular persons by (Critick-like) traducing his good name; or (Cinick-like) carping at his carriage and conditions; for I never lik'd of such an one as Horace hints at,
—duminodo risum
Excuciat sibi non hic cuiquam parcit amico.

So he may shake with laughter where he goes,
He does not spare the dearest friend he knows.
Since this late, though long desir'd thrice happy Alteration, far beyond the expectation of humane wit, (for therein was digitus Dei, the visible power of the invisible Divine Pro∣vidence perspicuously manifested to all the world) very many, and those great ones too, who though they had the cream of the former times, have clean turn'd Cat in pan, and would have all, (if it might be) they finde such sweetness in it. Indeed it was long since a remarkable Machiavili∣an Maxime, that qui nescit dissimu∣lare, nescit vivere, (i. e.) who can∣not

dissemble cannot live; which though it were a Heathenish speech, yet was never put more in practice then in these Phanatick times; for he that cannot metamorphose his shape like Proteus, vary his hiew like the Polypus, change his colour like the Cameleon, bear two faces under a hood like Janus, comply with eve∣ry Planet like Mercury, vary and change like the Moon constantly, turn with the Weathercock, adu∣late with Aristippus, equivocate with Synon, dissemble with Gnatho, hunt with the Hound, and hold with the Hare, carry fire in the one hand, and water in the other; and in a word, who cannot temporize at all times, with all persons, and in all

places, that man knows not how to look or live in this hypocritical, perverse, and crooked Generation. I remember a Jeast, as I heard fa∣ther'd upon Dr. Pearn a Cantabri∣gian, in the time of Hen. 8. in whose Reign there was much chopping and changing in matters of Religi∣on, and still this Dr. temporiz'd and turn'd with them at a hairs breadth; who being a notable bone Compa∣nion, and invited to a great Feast, after dinner was ended, he very pleasantly cull'd out a Gentlewo∣man there to dance with him, whom after a little tracing he high∣ly applauded for her exquisite dan∣cing; (as indeed she merited no less) she thanking him for her un∣deserved

commendations, retorts this jear upon him; Truly Mr. Dr. I must ingeniously confess I can dance indifferent well, but I cannot turn so well as you: whereat the whole company then present laugh∣ed very heartily. Another Gentle∣man in an eminent Office at Court in the same K. Henry's Reign, kept ever a correspondency with the times, let them turn how they would he weigh'd not, when as others that had a more tender con∣science were displac'd and lost all; which some well observing, ask'd him how he could hold in such diffi∣cult times as those were: Pish, (quoth he) ye are all fools, ego ex sa∣lice fio, non ex quercu; I am made of

the tractable and pliable Willow, and not of the inflexible and stub∣born Oak. Wherein the loyal Roy∣allists rightly resembles the Oak; for as the well-rooted Oak will not be easily overturn'd by any violent storm, or furious tempest whatso∣ever; so the well gounded Royal∣list will not be moved, much less be carried away with every whisling winde of any vain, erroneous, and false doctrine, but like Aristotles Quadratus, in utrumque paratus, come weal or woe, prosperity or povery, he continues still the same. The Oak was formerly by the Hea∣thens dedicated to Jupiter, and so termed Jovis arbor; but we may now more properly call it, not Jo∣vis,

but Jehovae arbor, not Joves, but Jehovahs tree; for the Royall Oake, by the special Divine Provi∣dence proved a most happy Asylum, and sure succour and refuge to his most Sacred Majesty, when his in∣nocent integrity was most eagerly pursued after by those raging and ravening, blood-seeking and blood-sucking Wolves, (palliated in fair and specious sheeps cloathing) to be utterly devoured by them. Now right Worshipful, in that I well know, that I shall have some mock∣ing Momus, carping Zoilus, and snarling Cynick (whereof no age is free) censoriously to traduce, and despitefully to writhe and wrest the sense and meaning os some of these

my harmless Lines; I tender these my pleasing pains to your Worship as my Mecaenas, to secure and shrewd them under the tutelary Pa∣tronage of your Worships protecti∣on, as under Achilles seven-fold Buckler, from the inevitable darts of calumniating tongues. In an assured Confidence whereof, I am

