



My Lord,
THE Roman Generalls humbly begg, that They may walk abroad under Your Honourable Protection; It being as dangerous for a Poem to appear in Publick without a good Patron, as it would be for a Ship richly fraught, to sail among Pirats without a Convoy. The Criticks of Our Times pouring in, whole Broad-sides of Censure, before They Know, whether the thing may prove Prize or not. They are Ingenious in Other Mens Books, but seldom in Their Own, and think every Imprimatur, gives them Licence to become Ridiculous: Like the Bear they think their own Issue most beautiful; and there∣fore, whatsoever the Product of their Brains be, they think may pass, without any Elaborations of Art to lick it into fashion. For My Part, I can scarce without a
Blush, Christen this Infant of My Fancy, with the Name of a POEM, since I am conscious of its want of Merit. But if Your Lordship vouchsafe to find to it, Your Accep∣tance may raise it to that Title: For as Lead, or some such inferiour Mettals, though They have but little worth in Themselves, yet from Their Stamp, They re∣ceive Value and Estimation. The Story is Heroick, and in that, as far above a Common Patronage, as it is un∣worthy of Yours. I have neither altogether followed, nor yet declin'd History, lest by the One, My Play might be took for a Piece translated out of Livie or Lucan, or by the Other, for an Idle Romance; but like the Tra∣vellor, for Delight, sometimes I follow, and sometimes I quit My Road. Your Lordship may blame Me, that I spent My time in Writing of a Play, when I might have improv'd My Self in the Study of the Law; truly, I made it My Diversion, not my Study; for after I had read a Sect or two in Littleton, I then to divert My Self, took Caesar's Commentaries, or read the Lives of My Roman Generalls, out of Plutarch. I Know the Common Fate of a Play, it seldom Lives more dayes then the Word has Letters in't, unless some more then Common Influence preserve it longer. So that 'tis alone Your Lordships fa∣vourable Acceptance, which can preserve Mine to a lon∣ger Date, which is already confident of Your Protection, since Your Early Services for Your Countrey, have allied You to the Glory of the Roman Generalls.
My Lord,
I am

