



SIR,
THO' all my Services and Respects necessarily devolve on you, as on the Inheriter of your Brothers In∣terests, yet you may lay a more im∣mediate Claim to my Esteem and Observance, from your own repeated Favours and Obliga∣tions: In so much that I am bound by a dou∣ble Tye of Gratitude, on all Occasions, to ma∣nifest my Resentments of them, and think my self unworthy privately to enjoy the Hap∣piness, unless I declare to the World how much I am Oblig'd to you. You must needs,
Sir, think me sincere in my Intentions, when, upon making so small and insignisi∣cant a Payment, I am willing to call the Publick to witness, I am infinitely still your Debtor. I confess the opportunity I have had of improving my Talent by the Advan∣tage of your Brothers Tuition and Instru∣ctions, might (you may justly think) have inabled me to offer you an Original in∣stead of a Translation, and the Transcrib∣ing his Character and Sense, might ra∣ther have been expected than my Authors. But for my Apology, I must plead my Ʋn∣happiness in the loss of him, which yet is no more peculiar to me than to the whole Society of Magdalen-College, where∣of he was a Member. He is there re∣membred as a Person in whom the Scholar and Gentleman were so well met, that nei∣ther of them spoil'd the other: He was Learn'd without Arrogance; Genteel with∣out Vanity; Witty without Affectation; Well bred, Airy, Gay and Easy, yet never relax'd his Mind so far as to abate in any part of its real Improvement. And, though to instance the Graces and extraor∣dinary Endowments of his Body, would be thought perhaps to derogate from those of his Mind, and to make the Lustre of his Vertues stand indebted to his Person, yet I can not but think so curious an Habita∣tion
was design'd to answer the Merit of the Inhabitant, whose outward Structure should represent the Quality of the Owner. But I do not mean to inlarge on his Cha∣racter, for that is Work that must be wrought extreamly Fine, or methinks 'tis Nauseous, even on the Dead; and, whatever I may pretend to the contrary, will look more like a Complement to your self, than Justice to his Memory. The little I have said will suffice, I hope, to shew that what I here of∣fer you is not altogether unsuitable to his or your Genius, wherein Philosophy is divested of the Stiffness and Morosness of the Schools, and has assum'd the Garb and Air of a more Ingenuous Education than ordinary. Here is something, Sir, that will entertain your Philosophical Minutes, and something that will quicken those design'd for your Di∣version; and all so mixt and temper'd, that the Author seems still to have kept his Eye on those two main ends, Pleasing and In∣structing. Philosophy by this Method is become a la mode amongst the Women of greatest Quality in France, who pride them∣selves more in being accounted Partisans of a Sect, than Leaders in Dress and Fa∣shion. And we may presume that the Power and Force of Imitation will reach the Minds of our English Ladies, when Learn∣ing shall be set off with the Allurements
and Delight they meet with in reading a Romance. To provoke them therefore I have adventur'd upon this Translation, not∣withstanding the Prohibition of French Commodities: But it is not from their Judgments I expect the Approbation of my Endeavours: My chief Design was to please you; And if I shall in the least succeed in that Attempt, it will be abundant Honour and Satisfaction to
Sir, 
Magd. Coll. Oxon. May, 7. 1692.
