



Worthy Reader,
BE pleased to know, that I once intended an Epistle Reprehensory to the Ro∣mish Church, the Who∣rish Mother of THE MY∣STERIE of INIQƲITY (for there it was Born though her Phari∣saical Emissaries would compass Sea and Land, that it might be else-where Nursed)
 but upon more mature thoughts, I conclu∣ded to be at the expence of no more then this Epistle Premonitory; whose Scope and Errand is to acquaint the World with the Occasion of this (my first) appearance in Print.
I am now by Personal Experience schooled in the Truth of that, Veritas odium parit. Never was there an Age, wherein TRƲTH had more Daughters, and fewer Sisters; But the misery is, the Brood is ILLEGITIMATE, and HETEROGENEAL.
I was about two moneths ago brought to Pulpit of some honest Truths (suita∣ble to the Text, as that was to the Occasi∣on) which were CONCEIVED (I hope) by a DIVINE (though now ne∣cessitated to a (Printed) Sheet by a MA∣LIGNANT) Influence. And though (the Lord knows) my Discourse was all along levelled and commensurated (as neer as I could) by the Necessary Lawes of 1. Piety, in respect of my God. 2. Loy∣alty in respect of my King; and 3. Cha∣rity,
 in respect of my Neighbour; Yet have (innocent) I, been since, in such aO how sad is it, when what is said for Antidoting of Superstition is presently construed to be (at least) Sedition! horrid manner, by some (whom God for∣give) censured, condemned, calumniated, and mis-represented (what their ground was, let the Impartial judge) as that (fear∣ing lest Silence might be Interpreted Guilt, a pleasing Gloss, in such a case, to Malice) I concluded, it was needful to Publish to the world, what I delivered, (with divers other things) Innocency and Ingenuity, those Bosome-Solicitors, prompting me on; for VINDICATION.
Hic murus Aheneus esto, &c.
Thus,
What the Reason and End of the Pub∣lication is, I have shewed; That the work is performed no better, let it be imputed to Mine, and not to the Weakness of my Cause, for that is not Guilty; neither let Men make use of Mine as Premisses to In∣fer other Mens Weaknesses. Alas! I am less then the least of ten thousand. No mar∣vel the Birth be condemned as Abortive, since the Parent is one born out of due
 time. I confess the Subject had better be∣come both Age and Ability; but though the want of both, (especially of the latter) did encline me to stand for a Mute, yet the Case was so urgent, that it pressed hard for a Consonant. What Censures soever I shall undergo, even while I endeavour to suppress or prevent Censures, I am resol∣ved (through Grace) to be Passive under them; Only my Suit is to thee (Worthy Reader) that thou wouldest 1. Forbear to Tax me (further) till thou hast read me through; (and then I hope, thou wilt not Tax thy Forbearance:) And 2. Pray for him, who is


