


IF true Piety, if high esteeme of Learning and true Reli∣gion, if love to the forme of sound words holding ou saving trueths, if due respect to the faithfull Ministers of CHRIST, if well purchased Honour, if close walking with GOD, if ingenuous and honest actings for the good OLD CAUSE, may be strong inducements to make vse of such a Patron then for all these jointly, let mee be bold humbly to desire, to present the following thoughts to publick view, under the Patrocinie of your L. honou∣rable Name. When these graces in your L. have in∣deared you, to all the Lovers of precious trueths in these parts, then why not mee also? IT was the earnest desire of some Reverend and godly Ministers both by word and writte, that my thoughts upon these verses 14 15 of I. Tim. Chap. 3. should bee published; wherein, though through much weaknes I confesse. I have endeavoured to vindicat & cleare diverse precious saving trueths, which to make out, it behoved me to inlarge some points more fully, then were in Sermon delivered, wherein my chiefe aime hath been, the just opposing of Popery and other Novations, the Assertors and Fomenters whereof with a mouth full and foule, have poured out all manner of Ob∣loquie and Contempt upon Gospel-trueths, and the holy Ministery, so to render both odious, vselesse & ineffectuall: which with our own present Coldnesse and Indifferencie in the things of GOD, and the not sisting of needlesse debates, together with our barrennesse, and walking un∣sutable, and behaviour unanswerable to the GOSPEL of
 CHRIST, speak no lesse then the removing of the Candle∣stick, or some great eclipse of Religion among us. I have shunned all just offence in owning these trueths; if any charge asperitie, let these know, that were it not, That love covereth many blemishes, much more might have been spoken. If any professe unsatisfaction in some things here, let me tell them, That I speak the truth in CHRIST, that I am for peace, but doth not seek to please men. I shall spare to adde more, onely this, That recommending this Treatise both to your L. favourable acceptance, and judicious Cen∣sure: and hoping that your L. will regard the substāce of matter, & accept the minde of the Offerer. I recōmend your L. to the rich Grace of GOD. who hath called you to the unfained love of the trueth, and is able to preserve you unblameable therein to the end; I do subscribe my self

At old Aberdene March 30. 1660.
