



My Lord;
AFter so many Favors, and those so great, Conferr'd on me by Your Lordship these many yeares; which, I may call more properly one Conti∣nued Act of Your Generosity and Good∣ness; I know not whether I should ap∣pear either more Ungrateful in my Silence, or more Extravagantly Vaine in my endeavours to acknow∣ledge

them. For, since all Acknowledgments bear a Face of Payment, it may be thought, That I have flatter'd my self into an Opinion of being able to return some part of my Obligements to You; the just despair of which Attempt, and the due Veneration I have for his Person, to whom I must Address, have almost driven me, to Receive only with a profound Submission the ef∣fects of that Vertue, which is never to be Com∣prehended but by Admiration: And the greatest note of Admiration is Silence. 'Tis that noble Passion, to which Poets raise their Audience in highest Subjects, and they have then gain'd over them the greatest Victory, when they are Ravish'd into a Pleasure, which is not to be ex∣press'd by Words. To this Pitch, My Lord, the sence of my Gratitude had almost rais'd me: to receive your Favors as the Iewes of old re∣ceiv'd their Law, with a mute Wonder, to think, that the Loudness of Acclamation, was onely the Praise of Men to Men, and that the secret homage of the Soul was a greater Mark of Reverence, than an outward ceremonious joy, which might be counterfeit, and must be irreverent in its Tumult. Neither, My Lord, have I a particular right to pay you my Acknowledgments: You have been a Good so Universal, that almost every Man in three Nations may think me Injurious to his Propriety, that I invade your Praises, in un∣dertaking

to celebrate them alone. And, that have assum'd to my self a Patron, who was no more to be circumscrib'd than the Sun and Ele∣ments, which are of Publick benefit to humane kind.
As it was in much your power to oblige all who could pretend to Merit from the Publick, so it was more in your Nature and Inclination. If any went ill-satisfy'd from the Treasury, while, it was in your Lordships Management, it proclaim'd the want of Desert, and not of Friends: You Distributed your Masters Favour with so equal hands, that Iustice her self could not have held the Scales more even: but, with that Natural Propensity to do good, that had that Treasure been your own, your In∣clination to Bounty must have ruin'd you: No Man attended to be deny'd: no Man brib'd for Expedition: want, and desert were pleas sufficient. By your own Integrity and your Prudent Choice of those whom you employ'd, the King gave all that He intended, and Gratuities to His Officers made not vain His Bounty. This, My Lord, you were in your Publick capacity of High-Treasu∣rer, to which you ascended by such degrees, that your Royal Master saw your Vertues still growing to His Favours faster than they could rise to you. Both at home, and abroad, with your Sword and with your Counsel, you have serv'd Him with un∣byass'd Honor, and with unshaken resolution:

making His Greatness, and the true Interest of your Country, the standard and measure of your actions Fortune may desert the wise and brave; but, true Vertue never will forsake it self. 'Tis the Interest of the World that Vertuous Men should attain to Great∣ness, because it gives them the power of doing good. But, when by the Iniquity of the Times they are brought to that extremity, that they must either quit their Vertue or their Fortune, they owe themselves so much, as to retire to the private exer∣cise of their Honour; to be great within, and by the constancy of their Resolutions, to teach the in∣ferior World, how they ought to judge of such Principles, which are asserted with so generous and so unconstrain'd a Tryal.
But, this voluntary neglect of Honours, has been of rare Example in the World: few Men have frown'd first upon Fortune, and precipitated them∣selves from the top of her Wheele, before they felt at least the Declination of it. We read not of many Emperors like Dioclesian, and Charles the Fifth, who have preferr'd a Garden, and a Cloyster, before a Crowd of Followers, and the troublesome Glory of an Active Life, which robs the Possessor of his rest and quiet, to secure the safety and happiness of others. Seneca, with the help of his Philosophy, could never attain to that pitch of Vertue. He onely endea∣vour'd to prevent his fall by descending first; and, offer'd to resign that Wealth which he knew he

could no longer hold. He would onely have made a Present to his Master of what he foresaw would be∣come his Prey: He strove to avoid the Jealousie of a Tyrant; You dismiss'd your self from the Atten∣dance and Privacy of a Gracious King. Our Age has afforded us many Examples of a contrary nature: but your Lordship is the onely one of this. 'Tis easie to discover in all Governments those who waite so close on Fortune, that they are never to be shaken off at any turne: Such who seem to have taken up a resolution of being Great, to continue their Stati∣ons on the Theater of Business: to change with the Scene, and shift the Vizard for another part. These Men condemn in their Discourses that Vertue which they dare not practice. But the sober part of this pre∣sent Age, and impartial Posterity will do right, both to your Lordship and to them. And when they read on what Accounts, and with how much Magna∣nimity you quitted those Honours, to which the highest Ambition of an English Subject could aspire, will apply to you with much more reason, what the Historian said of a Roman Emperour; Multi diutis Imperium tenuerunt; Nemo fortius reliquit.
To this Retirement of your Lordship, I wish I could bring a better Entertainment, than this Play; which, though it succeeded on the Stage, will scarcely bear a serious perusal, it being contriv'd and writ∣ten in a Moneth, the Subject barren, the Persons low, and the Writing not heightned with many laboured

Scenes. The consideration of these defects ought to have prescrib'd more modesty to the Author, than to have presented it to that person in the World, for whom he has the greatest Honor, and of whose Patronage, the best of his Endeavours had been unworthy. But, I had not satisfied my self in stay∣ing longer, and could never have paid the Debt with a much better Play. As it is, the meaness of it will shew at least, that I pretend not by it to make any manner of return for your Favours; and, that I on∣ly give you a new Occasion of Exercising your Goodness to me, in pardoning the Failings and Imper∣fections of, My Lord,

