



MADAM;
THe best Guard being Innocency; and, this Sermon wanting Pro∣tection, Where shall it find more of Safety (because where more of Purity) then in Your Breast?
Whil'st I am Pleading my Gracious Soveraigns Just Power, I fear not but your loyal Hus∣band will Espouse my Quarrel, and Patronize my Ser∣mon: And, I hope, your pitty will not see this Perish, Treating of those Vertues and Graces that have such an Assimilation to Your Self.
I here present You, Madam, with a small Glass, but broken from the Chrystalline Heaven; wherein, you may see the Body of Divinity, the Glory of the Lord; and, what Glory he would put upon you: Therein God pre∣sents to you as rich a Triple-Offering as the Wise Men of
 the East did to his only Son, Gold, Frankincense and Myrthe.
A Bevy of Rich Jewels, which the Indies are igno∣rant of; nor is Arabia so happy as to Parallel. The Ruby of Justice, the Pearl of Mercy, and the Emerald of Humility; Thus the true Christian is blazon'd.
May these Vertues then by the Sanctification of the Spirit, be as a Collar of SS to Adorn your Neck. May these unpolisht Lines, intended as an enlargement thereon, be subservient to your Devotions, and Closetted in your Pious and Discerning Breast; so shall you be all Glorious within, and the King of Heaven shall take pleasure in your Spiritual Beauty.
In my Prayers I may not forget your Two vertuous Daughters; may Madam Margaret, and Madam Ca∣tharine deserve the stile of Jemima and Kesia (two of Holy Jobs Daughters) for the Light of Divine Truth in them, and the Perfume of Godliness.
Residing at London, you have the Glory of Art and Nature in your Eye; but, the Ornament of a Meek and quiet spirit in Gods sight is of greater Price.
Some New City-Modes may differ much from this, and one from another; but, I assure you, after this Manner in the Old Time Holy Women, who trusted in God, adorned themselves.
And, if you will be but so just to your own self, as to Peruse, and still Practise Gods Holy Precepts; so Merciful to Me, as to Pardon this Presumption, you Crown the Hopes and Desires of
MADAM,

