



SIR,
SINCE it was Your Pleasure that this Sermon shou'd be made publick, and expos'd to the Censures of a Critical Age, the humble Author (tho' pretty safe in his own Obscurity) is desirous to take shelter under Your Illustrious Name, and thinks it but reasonable that the just Authority You have over him, shou'd be responsible for all the hazardous Consequents of such an Ʋnder∣taking.
There are Others, indeed, whose Importu∣nity help'd to push me forward to this Ad∣venture, looking upon the Argument as (but too) seasonable, and therefore likely to do Good at this Juncture.

I wish it may answer the Design of it, which every Good Man will allow to be Just and Honest: But if the Management (which is only to be fear'd) proves lame and defective, then Your Friendship, SIR, and Theirs, must be blam'd, for setting an over-value upon this Composure.
It will probably be thought one Defect in this Discourse, That having insisted too much upon the Historical part of my Subject, I have not drawn out the Applications to a due length, but have spent more time in raising and exposing old Jewish Ghosts, than in lay∣ing those Evil Spirits which the Magick of Money has rais'd in our own Land. But tho' Jerusalem be the Scene, and Israel the Actors in this Wicked Conspiracy, yet the like corrupt Practices being every Day detected, and so publickly known among us, I presently concluded that my Animadversions upon the Text, being an unparall'd Instance of Bribe∣ry, wou'd with ease be extended to reach all Corruptions of like Complexion, and there∣by supersede many Particulars in the point of Application.
I'm sorry that Discourses of this Nature shou'd be Licens'd and made necessary by pub∣lick Scandals, and crying Abuses: But when
 it is obvious to what Shrine some Men sacri∣fice their Consciences; when we hear of Pri∣vate Purses unjustly fill'd, and the Publick Exchequer much exhausted and drein'd by a se∣cret Diabetic Passion. In a Word; When we see what servile and inglorious Practices this Nati∣on must soon have groan'd under, if they had not been happily discover'd, every considering honest Man will so far claim Privilege to be his own Representative, as to put in his Vote, That those felonious Gluttons who have fed upon the Publick Treasury, or eaten the Children's Bread, be made to disgorge all a∣gain, till they have paid back the very last Mite.
But we have reason to bless God that there was Virtue enough left in the Fountain to purge it self; and it is to be hoped that Men hereafter will be afraid of that Rock on which so many have split of late, while both Hou∣ses in a commendable Zeal took up Arms a∣gainst Solomon's Men of Oblations, as well the Givers as the Receivers of Bribes, by whose Baseness the poor Country might otherwise have been soon Bought and Sold into extream Pe∣nury and Slavery.
And, indeed, it is to be wish'd, that all other Magistrates, as they love their Coun∣try,
 wou'd strike while the Iron is hot, left Iniquity at last prevail by Custom, and plead Prescription.
But I forbear,—not that I think that these treacherous Under-hand-Dealers can be too much expos'd to popular Scorn and Deri∣sion. But left this provoking Subject transport me unto any Indecent Warmths, which yet I think more pardonable in this Case than a fatal Tenderness and Forbearance. I will add no more, but that I glory in hereby pub∣lishing my self,
SIR,

