



THere is one kind of Vertue, which is inborn in the No∣bility, and indeed in most of the Ancient Families of this Nation; they are not apt to insult on the Misfor∣tunes of their Countrymen. But you, Sir, I may tell it you without Flattery, have grafted on this natural Commis∣seration, and rais'd it to a Nobler Vertue: As you have been pleas'd to honour me, for a long time, with some part of your Esteem and your good Will; so in particular, since the late Revolution, you have increas'd the Proofs of your kindness to me; and not suffer'd the difference of Opini∣ons, which produce such Hatred and Enmity in the brutal Part of Human kind, to remove you from the settled Basis of your good Nature and good Sence. This Nobleness of yours, had it been exercis'd on an Enemy, had certainly been a Point of Honour, and as such I might have justly re∣commended it to the World: But that of constancy to your former Choice, and the pursuance of your first Favours, are Vertues not overcommon amongst English Men. All things of Honour have, at best, somewhat of Ostentation in them, and Self-love; there is a Pride of doing more than is expect∣ed from us, and more than others would have done. But to proceed in the same Tract of Goodness, Favour, and Protection, is to shew that a Man is acted by a thorough Principle: It carries somewhat of Tenderness in it, which is Humanity in a Heroical Degree; 'tis a kind of unmoveable good Nature; a word which is commonly Despis'd, because it is so seldom Practis'd. But after all, 'tis the most gene∣rous Vertue, oppos'd to the most degenerate Vice, which is

that of Ruggedness and Harshness to our Fellow Crea∣tures.
'Tis upon this knowledge of you, Sir, that I have chosen you, with your permission, to be the Patron of this Poem. And, as since this wonderful Revolution, I have begun with the best Pattern of Humanity, the Earl of Leicester; I shall continue to follow the same Method, in all, to whom I shall Address; and endeavour to pitch on such only, as have been pleas'd to own me in this Ruin of my small Fortune; who, though they are of a contrary Opinion themselves, yet blame not me for adhe∣ring to a lost Cause; and judging for my self, what I cannot chuse but judge; so long as I am a patient Sufferer, and no di∣sturber of the Government. Which, if it be a severe Penance, as a great Wit has told the World, 'tis at least enjoyn'd me by my self: And Sancho Panca, as much a Fool as I, was ob∣serv'd to discipline his Body, no farther than he found he could endure the smart.
You see, Sir, I am not entertaining you, like Ovid, with a La∣mentable Epistle from Pontus; I suffer no more, than I can ea∣sily undergo; and so long as I enjoy my Liberty, which is the Birth-right of an English Man, the rest shall never go near my Heart. The Merry Philosopher, is more to my Humour than the Melancholick; and I find no disposition in my self to Cry, while the mad World is daily supplying me with such Occasi∣ons of Laughter. The more reasonable sort of my Country∣men, have shewn so much favour to this Piece, that they give me no doubt of their Protection for the future.
As you, Sir, have been pleas'd to follow the Example of their Goodness, in favouring me: So give me leave to say, that I follow yours in this Dedication, to a Person of a different Perswasion. Though I must confess withal, that I have had a former Encouragement from you for this Address▪ and the warm Remembrance of your noble Hospitality to me at

Trentham, when some years a go I visited my Friends and Re∣lations in your Country, has ever since given me a violent Temptation to this boldness.
'Tis true, were this Comedy wholly mine, I should call it a Trifle, and perhaps not think it worth your Patronage; but when the Names of Plautus and Moliere are joyn'd in it; that is, the two greatest Names of Ancient and Modern Co∣medy, I must not presume so far on their Reputation, to think their best and most unquestion'd Productions can be term'd Little. I will not give you the trouble, of acquainting you what I have added, or alter'd in either of them, so much it may be for the worse; but only that the difference of our Stage from the Roman and the French did so require it. But I am affraid, for my own Interest, the World will too easily disco∣ver, that more than half of it is mine; and that the rest is rather a lame Imitation of their Excellencies, than a just Translation. 'Tis enough, that the Reader know by you, that I neither deserve nor desire any Applause from it: If I have perform'd any thing, 'tis the Genius of my Authors that in∣spir'd me; and if it has pleas'd in Representation, let the Actors share the Praise amongst themselves. As for Plautus and Moliere, they are dangerous People; and I am too weak a Gamester to put my self into their Form of Play. But what has been wanting on my Part, has been abundantly supplyed by the Excellent Composition of Mr. Purcell; in whose Per∣son we have at length found an English-man, equal with the best abroad. At least my Opinion of him has been such, since his happy and judicious Performances in the late Opera; and the Experience I have had of him, in the setting my Three Songs for this Amphitryon: To all which, and particularly to the Composition of the Pastoral Dialogue, the numerous Quire of Fair Ladies gave so just an Applause on the Third Day. I am only sorry, for my own sake, that there was one

Star wanting, as Beautiful as any in our Hemisphere; that young Berenice, who is misimploying all her Charms on stu∣pid Country Souls, that can never know the Value of them; and losing the Triumphs, which are ready prepar'd for her in the Court and Town. And yet I know not whether I am so much a loser by her absence; for I have Reason to apprehend the sharpness of her Judgment, if it were not al∣lay'd with the sweetness of her Nature; and after all, I fear she may come time enough, to discover a Thousand Im∣perfections in my Play, which might have pass'd on Vulgar Understandings. Be pleas'd to use the Authority of a Fa∣ther over her, on my behalf; enjoyn her to keep her own Thoughts of Amphitryon to her self; or at least not to com∣pare him too strictly with Moliere's. 'Tis true, I have an In∣terest in this Partiality of hers; but withal, I plead some sort of Merit for it, in being so Particularly as I am,
SIR,

October 24. 1690.
