



My LORD,
THE Gratitude of Poets is so troublesome a Virtue to Great Men, that you are often in dan∣ger of your own Benefits: For you are threaten'd with some Epistle, and not suffer'd to do Good in quiet, or to compound for their Silence whom you have Oblig'd. Yet, I Confess, I neither am, nor ought to be surpriz'd at this Indulgence; For your Lordship has the same Right to Favour Poetry which the Great and Noble have ever had.
Carmen amat, quisquis carmine digna gerit.
There is somewhat of a tye in Nature betwixt those who are Born for Worthy Actions, and those who can transmit them to Posterity: And though ours be much the inferiour part, it comes at least within the Verge of Alliance; nor are we unprofitable Members of the Common∣wealth, when we animate others to those Virtues, which we Copy and Describe from you.
'Tis indeed their Interest, who endeavour the Subversion of Govern∣ments, to discourage Poets and Historians; for the best which can happen to them is to be forgotten: But such, who, under KINGS,

are the Fathers of their Country, and by a Just and Prudent ordering of Affairs preserve it, have the same Reason to Cherish the Chroniclers of their Actions, as they have to lay up in safety the Deeds and Evi∣ of their Estates: For such Records are their undoubted Titles to the Love and Reverence of After-Ages. Your Lordships Admi∣nistration has already taken up a considerable part of the English Annals; and many of its most happy Years are owing to it. His MAJESTY, the most knowing Judge of Men, and the best Master, has acknowledg'd the Ease and Benefit he Receives in the Incomes of His Treasury, which you found not only Disorder'd, but Exhausted. All Things were in the Confusion of a Chaos, without Form or Me∣thod, if not reduc'd beyond it, even to Annihilation: So that you had not only to separate the Jarring Elements, but (if that boldness of Expression might be allow'd me) to Create them. Your Enemies had so Embroil'd the Management of your Office, that they look'd on your Advancement as the Instrument of your Ruine. And as if the clog∣ging of the Revenue, and the Confusion of Accounts, which you found in your Entrance, were not sufficient, they added their own weight of Malice to the Publick Calamity, by forestalling the Credit which shou'd Cure it: Your Friends on the other side were only capable of Pitying, but not of Aiding you: No farther Help or Counsel was remaining to you, but what was founded on your Self; And that indeed was your Security: For your Diligence, your Constancy, and your Prudence, wrought more surely within, when they were not disturb'd by any out∣ward Motion. The highest Virtue is best to be trusted with its Self, for Asistance only can be given by a Genius Superiour to that which it Assists. And 'tis the Noblest kind of Debt, when we are only oblig'd to God and Nature. This then, My Lord, is your just Commenda∣tion, That you have wrought out your Self a way to Glory, by those very Means that were design'd for your Destruction: You have not only restor'd, but advanc'd the Revenues of your Master without Grie∣vance to the Subject: And as if that were little yet, the Debts of the Exchequer, which lay heaviest both on the Crown, and on private Persons, have by your Conduct been Establish'd in a certainty of Sa∣tisfaction. An Action so much the more Great and Honourable, be∣cause the Case was without the ordinary Relief of Laws; above the Hopes of the Afflicted, and beyond the Narrowness of the Treasury to Redrss, had it been manag'd by a less able Hand. 'Tis certainly the Happiest, and most Unenvy'd part of all your Fortune, to do Good to many, while you do Injury to none: To receive at once the Prayers of the Subject, and the Praises of the Prince: And by the care of

your Conduct; to give Him Means of Exerting the chiefest, (if any be the chiefest) of His Royal Virtues: His distributive Justice to the Deserving, and His Bounty and Compassion to the Wanting. The Disposition of Princes towards their People, cannot better be discover'd than in the choice of their Ministers; who, like the Animal Spirits be∣twixt the Soul and Body, participate somewhat of both Natures, and make the Communication which is betwixt them. A King, who is Just and Moderate in his Nature, who Rules according to the Laws, whom God made Happy by Forming the Temper of His Soul to the Constitution of His Government, and who makes us Happy, by as∣suming over us no other Sovereignty than that wherein our Welfare and Liberty consists; A Prince, I say, of so excellent a Character, and so suitable to the Wishes of all Good Men, could not better have convey'd Himself into His Peoples Apprehensions, than in your Lord∣ships Person; who so lively express the same Virtues, that you seem not so much a Copy, as an Emanation of Him. Modration is doubtless an Establishment of Greatness; but there is a steadiness of Temper which is likewise requisite in a Minister of State: So equal a mixture of both Virtues, that he may stand like an Isthmus betwixt the two Encrooching Seas of Arbitrary Power, and Lawless Anarchy. The Undertaking would be difficult to any but an Extraordinary Genius, to stand at the Line, and to divide the Limits; to pay what is due to the Great Representative of the Nation, and neither to inhance, nor to yield up the undoubted Prerogatives of the Crown. These, My Lord, are the proper Virtues of a Noble Englishman, as indeed they are properly English Virtues: No People in the World being capable of using them, but we who have the Happiness to be Born under so e∣qual, and so well-pois'd a Government. A Government which has all the Advantages of Liberty beyond a Commonwealth, and all the Marks of Kingly Sovereignty without the danger of a Tyranny. Both my Nature, as I am an Englishman, and my Reason, as I am a Man, have bred in me a Loathing to that specious Name of a Repuck; That mock-appearance of a Liberty, where all who have not part in the Government, are Slaves; And Slaves they are of a viler Note than such as are Subjects to an absolute Dominion. For no Christian Mo∣narchy is so Absolute, but 'tis Circumscrib'd with Laws: But when the Executive Power is in the Law-Makers, there is no farther check upon them; and the People must suffer without a Remedy, because they are Oppress'd by their Representatives. If I must srve, the number of my Masters, who were Born my Equals, would but add to  Igno∣miny of my Bondage. The Nature of our Government above all others,

is exactly Suited both to the Situation of our Country, and the Temper of the Natives: An Island being more proper for Commerce and for Defence, than for extending its Dominions on the Continent: For what the Valour of its Inhabitants might gain, by Reason of its Re∣moteness, and the Casualties of the Seas, it cou'd not so easily preserve: And therefore, neither the Arbitrary Power of one in a Monarchy, nr of many in a Commonwealth, could make us greater than we are. 'Tis true, that vaster and more frequent Taxes might be gather'd, when the Consnt of the People was not Ask'd or Needed; but this were only by Conquering abroad to be Poor at home: And the Examples of our Neighbours teach us, that they are not always the Happiest Subjects whose Kings extend their Dominions farthest. Since therefore we can∣not win by an Offensive War, at least a Land-War, the Model of our Government seems Naturally contriv'd for the Defensive part: And the Consnt of a People is easily obtain'd to contribute to that Power which must protect it. Felices nimium bona si sua nôrint, Ang∣ligenae! And yet there are not wanting Malecontents amongst us, who Surfiting themselves on too much Happiness, wou'd perswàde the Peo∣ple that they might be Happier by a Change. 'Twas indeed the Policy of their old For father, when himself was fallen from the Station of Glory, to seduce Mankind into the same Rebellion with him, by telling him he might yet be freer than he was: That is, more free than his Nature wou'd allow, or (if I may so say) than God cou'd make him. We have already all the Liberty which Free-Born Subjects can enjoy; and all beyond it is but License. But if it be Liberty of Conscience which they pretend, the Moderation of our Church is such, that its Practice extends not to the severity of Persecution, and its Discipline is withal so easie, that it allows more freedom to Dissenters than any of the Sects wou'd allow to it. In the mean time, what Right can be pretended by these Men to attempt Innovations in Church or State? Who made them the Trustees, or (to Speak a little nearer their own Language) the Keepers of the Liberty of England? If their Call be extraordinary, let them Convince us by working Miracles; for ordina∣ry Vocation they can have none to disturb the Government under which they were Born, and which protects them. He who has often chang'd his Party, and always has made his Interest the Rule of it, gives little E∣vidence of his Sincerity for the Publick Good: 'Tis manifst he changes but for himself, and takes the People for Tools to work his Fortune. Yet the Experience of all Ages might t him know, that they who trouble the Waters first, have sldom the benefit of the Fishing: As they who began the late Rebellion, enjoy'd not the Fruit of their Un∣dertaking,

but were crush'd themselves by the Usurpation of their own Instrument. Neither is it enough for them to Answer, that they only intend a Reformation of the Government, but not the Subversion of it: On such pretences all Insurrections have been founded; 'Tis striking at the Root of Power, which is Obedience. Every Remon∣strance of private Men, has the seed of Treason in it; and Discour∣ses which are couch'd in ambiguous Terms, are therefore the more dangerous, because they do all the Mischief of open Sedition, yet are safe from the Punishment of the Laws. These, My Lord, are Con∣siderations which I should not pass so lightly over, had I room to manage them as they deserve: for no Man can be so inconsiderable in a Nation, as not to have a share in the welfare of it; and if he be a true Englishmen, he must at the same time be fir'd with Indigna∣tion, and revenge himself as he can on the Disturbers of his Coun∣try. And to whom could I more fitly apply my self, than to your Lordship, who have not only an inborn, but an Hereditary Loyalty? The memorable constancy and sufferings of your Father, almost to the uine of his Estate for the Royal Cause, were an earnest of that, which such a Parent and such an Institution wou'd produce in the Person of a Son. But so unhappy an occasion of manifesting your own Zeal in suffering for his present Majesty, the Providence of God, and the Prudence of your Administration, will, I hope, prevent. That as your Fathers Fortune waited on the unhappiness of his Sove∣reign, so your own may participate of the better Fate which attends his Son. The Relation which you have by Alliance to the Noble Fa∣mily of your Lady, serves to confirm to you both this happy Angury. For what can deserve a greater place in the English Chronicle, than the Loyalty and Courege, the Actions and Death of the General of an Army Fighting for His Prince and Country? The Honour and Gallantry of the Earl of Lindsey, is so illustrious a Subject, that 'tis fit to adorn an Heroick Poem; for He was the Proto-Martyr of the Cause, and the Type of his unfortunate Royal Master.
Yet, after all, My Lord, if I may speak my thoughts, you are happy rather to us than to your self: for the Multiplicity, the Cares, and the Vexations of your Imployment, have betray'd you from your self, and given you up into the Possession of the Publick. You are Robb'd of your Privacy and Friends, and scarce any hour of your Life you can call your own. Those who envy your Fortnne, if they wanted not good Nature, might more justly pity it; and when they see you watch'd by a Croud of Suitors, whose importunity 'tis impossible to avoid, would conclude with Reason, that you have lost much more in

true Content, than you have gain'd by Dignity; and that a private Gentleman is better attended by a single Servant, than your Lordship with so clamorous a Train. Pardon me, My Lord, If I speak like a Philosopher on this Subject; the Fortune which makes a Man un∣easie, cannot make him Happy: and a Wise Man must think himself uneasie, when few of his Actions are in his Choice.
This last Consideration has brought me to another, and a very sea∣sonable one for your Relief; which is, That while I pity your want of leisure, I have impertinently Detain'd you so long a time. I have put off my own Business, which was my Dedication, till 'tis so late, that I am now asham'd to begin it: And therefore I will say no∣thing of the Poem, which I Present to you, because I know not if you are like to have an Hour, which, with a good Conscience, you may throw away in perusing it: And for the Author, I have only to beg the continuance of your Protection to him, who is,

