

MADAM,
WHen, for our akes, your Heroe you resign'd
To swelling Seas, and every faithless wind;
When you releas'd his courage, and set free
A valour fatal to the Enemy,
You lodg'd your Countries carès within your breast;
(The mansion where soft Love should onely rest:)
And ere our foes abroad were overcome,
The noblest conquest you had gain'd at home.
Ah, what concerns did both your Souls divide!
Your Honour gave us what your Love deni'd:
And 'twas for him much easier to subdue
Those foes he fought with, then to part from you.
That glorious day, which two such Navies saw,
As each, unmatch'd, might to the world give Law.
Neptune, yet doubtful whom he should obey,
Held to them both the Trident of the Sea:
The winds were hush'd, the waves in ranks were cast,
As awfully as when God's people past:
Those, yet uncertain on whose sails to blow,
These, where the wealth of Nations ought to flow.
Then with the Duke your Highness rul'd the day:
While all the brave did his command obey.
The fair and pious under you did pray.
How pow'rful are chast vows! the wind and tyde
You brib'd to combat on the English side.
Thus to your much lov'd Lord you did convey
An unknown succour, sent the nearest way.
New vigour to his wearied arms you brought;
(So Moses was upheld while Israel fought.)
While, from afar, we heard the Canon play,
Like distant Thunder on a shiny day,
For absent friends we were asham'd to fear,
When we consider'd what you ventur'd there.
Ships, Men and Arms our Country might restore,
But such a Leader could supply no more.
With generous thoughts of conquest he did burn,
Yet fought not more to vanquish then return.
Fortune and victory he did pursue,
To bring them, as his Slaves, to wait on you.
Thus Beauty ravish'd the rewards of Fame,
And the Fair triumph'd when the Brave o'rcame.
Then, as you meant to spread another way
By Land your Conquests far as his by Sea,
Leaving our Southern Clime, you march'd along
The stubborn North, ten thousand Cupid's strong.
Like Commons the Nobility resort
In crowding heaps, to fill your moving Court:
To welcome your approach the Vulgar run,
Like some new Envoy from the distant Sun.
And Country Beauties by their Lovers go,
Blessing themselves, and wondring at the show.
So when the new-born Phoenix first is seen,
Her feather'd Subjects all adore their Queen.
And, while she makes her progress through the East,
From every grove her numerous train's increast:
Each Poet of the air her glory sings,
And round him the pleas'd Audience clap their wings.
