



My LORD,
IT is the common Practise of pre∣tenders to Learning, to seek the Favour of Persons, of your Lordships Eminency, Nobili∣ty, and Piety, and to judge their Labors imperfect, if they inscribe not in the Fron∣tispice some Great NAME, to secure them against the attempts of Prejudice and Mistake. I conceive that I should wrong too much, our Religious and In∣genious Nation, and this Treatise, if I did entertain any such Feat, and alledge
it as the Cause of this Dedication to your Lordship; for I am perswaded, that none will be so great an Enemy to him∣self, and so singular in his Judgement, to be offended at that which intends to protect him against our most dreadful Adversary, Death; at that which hath met with such an Ʋniversal Welcome, amongst all our neighboring Nations, that it hath appeared in many Languages, and been generally embraced in those Countreys, by all Men that are named Christians.
But here I must freely acknowledge the Cause of this ambitious Address. Your Honour is worthily esteemed One of the most Glorious Examples of Religion, and Justice amongst us: In imitation therefore of the Reverend Author; I do Humbly intreat your Lordship, to give me the Liberty to shew your Honour in the beginning of this Defence against the fears of Death; That my Christian Reader may look upon an Original and
a Copy together, and see the Practise, as well as the Discovery of the solid Comforts against Death. I shall not at∣tempt to set forth this noble Original, my weak abilities cannot so well discover, and expose it to our view, as our daily Ex∣perience and Observation. Your Ho∣nors Vertues, Liberality, and Devotion, are visible to us all; and the whole Nation, takes notice of your Lordships Family, to have been always very fruitful of the most experienced Men in the Law, the most re∣nowned for Justice, and the most remark∣able for Piety and Religion. And at pre∣sent, we see (by God's Goodness) seve∣ral Illustrious Branches, proceeding from your Honor; Branches that flourish alrea∣dy, to our great Admiration and Joy.
By them the Honor and Reputation of your Noble Family, will be for ever sup∣ported and defended against Death and Unconstancy, as your Lordships Person and Name, are, and shall be by your Piety and Care of Religion. God Grant unto
your Honor and Family, a Continuance and Increase of his Earthly Blessings, ac∣cording to his 1 Tim. 4.8. Promise and after this mortal Life, God Grant to you, and your Posterity, the fruition of his Eter∣nal Bliss in Heaven. This shall ever be the Prayer of
My Lord, 

