



Honored Sir,
I Perceive your Chaplain can∣not have his Quietus est, when you have yours: but after he hath passed his Au∣dit in the Pulpit, must be called to a new reckoning in the Press. When my Accompts will now be
 stated, I know not: or whether I shall find as merciful Judges of my Sermons in the Country, as I did in the City. The candid Hearers were then pleased to pardon my infirmities; but I may justly fear that the Critical Readers will not: when many eyes are upon a Sermon, some will alwayes be gloating asquint.
But it seems there is no remedy; Trahendus nisi it; and nothing is now left to me but the glory of Obeying: and indeed the great and ma∣nifold favours of your Family, even from your Grandfather, (sometime High-Sheriff of this County also) have been so entailed upon me, that they have devoted me, and all my nothing, yours for ever.
Accept then these Sermons as your own crea∣tures, the mere product of your command; and if they reproach your Judgment blame your affections, and that loyal zeal which made you approve what ever was unison to it.
The same loyal zeal hath somewhat influenced me towards this Publication: and in such a state of times and things it is not easie to restrain it. I know both King and Church have many more learned Champions, all press'd and ready in
 their defence: but in Majestatis reos quilibet homo miles. And, when I observ'd the Church rent into Mille Familiarum nomina; and those such as do Aedificare ad delictum, Ani∣mate each other to Schism and Division. When these still steal the Press, that they may steal away the hearts of the People from their Sove∣raign: and, (which is an Impudence not to be out-vy'd) crave, by their still Clamorous Pamphlets a Toleration to do it; and, the ful∣lest Convictions cannot stop the Mouth of them. When this Fawning Generation, by the most In∣dustrious Arts, seek to undermine the Truth; why may not I put forth my Hand to stay the tottering Ark, and become a Remembrancer of the Religiously Loyal, and (if possible) a Re∣claimer of some yet Son of Belial?
Against their empty Notions then I oppose the solid and substantial Duties of Justice, Mercy and Humility in one Sermon. Whil'st Fana∣ticks are gaping after New Nothings, I shew you (Sir) The Good Old Way; walk in it, and there is no fear of a Precipice.
Whil'st they despise Civil Dominions, and Blaspheme Ecclesiastical Glories, I (in the
 other Sermon) Writing after St.Paul's Copy,Tit. 3. 1.Put them in mind to be Subject to Principalities and Powers, and to Obey Ma∣gistrates: And, because they do not tremble at their Blasphemies, but Triumph in them, Knowing the Terror of the Lord, I perswade Men, That he who resisteth receiveth to himself Damnation.
If perhaps (Sir,) you enquire why this strange , why this Sermon sup∣planteth his Elder Brother, which cryed in the Pulpit before him; my Answer is, That this Sermon hath the Scarlet-Thred of Sove∣raignty upon it, treating of Gods Vice-Roy: and the other is willing to step behind, practi∣sing what it Teacheth, Humility.
And now (Sir,) I have told you my in∣nocent Design, if I may (in the least) be therein Serviceable to the Church, and Grate∣ful to You, it is the only Ambition of

