



My Lord,
THE Authors of this Poem, present it bumbly to your Lordships Patronage, if you shall think it worthy of that honour. It has already been a Confessor, and was almost made a Martyr for the Royal Cause. But having stood two Tryals from its Enemies, one before it was Acted, an∣other in the Representation, and having been in both acquitted, 'tis now to stand the Publick Censure in the reading: Where since, of necessity, it must have the same Enemies, we hope it may also find the same Friends; and therein we are secure not only of the greater-Number, but of the more Honest and Loyal Party. We only expected bare Justice in the Permission to have it Acted; and that we had, after a severe and long Examina∣tion, from an Upright and knowing Judge, who having heard both sides, and examin'd the Merits of the Cause in a strict perusal of the Play, gave Sentence for us, that it was neither a Libel, nor a Parallel of particular Persons. In the Represen∣tation it self, it was persecuted with so notorious Malice by one side, that it procur'd us the Partiality of the other; so that the Favour more than recompenc'd the Prejudice: And 'tis happier to have been sav'd (if so we were) by the Indulgence of our good and faithful Fellow-Subjects, than by our own Deserts; because thereby the weakness of the Faction is discover'd, which in us, at that time, attack'd the Government; and stood combin'd, like the Members of the Rebellious League, against the Lawful Soveraign Authority. To what Topique will they have recourse, when they are manifestly beaten from their chief Post, which has

always been Popularity, and Majority of Voices? They will tell us, That the Voices of a People are not to be gather'd in a Play-House; and yet even there, the Enemies as well as Friends have free Admission; but while our Argument was ferviceable to their Interests, they cou'd boast that the Theaters were True Protestant, and came insulting to the Plays, where their own Triumphs were represented. But let them now assure themselves, that they can make the major part of no Assembly, except it be a Meeting-House. Their Tyde of Popularity is spent, and the natural Current of Obedience is in spight of them, at last prevalent. In which, my Lord, after the merciful Providence of God, the unshaken Resolution, and prudent Carriage of the King, and the inviolable Duty, and manifest Innocence of his Royal High∣ness, the prudent Management of the Ministers is also most conspicuous. I am not particular in this Commendation, because I am unwilling to raise Envy to your Lordship, who are too just not to defire that Praise shou'd be communicated to others, which was the common Endeavor and Co-operation of all. 'Tis enough, my Lord, that your own Part was neither obscure in it, nor un∣hazardous. And if ever this excellent Government so well establish'd by the Wisdom of our Forefathers, and so much sha∣ken by the Folly of this Age, shall recover its ancient Splendor, Posterity cannot be so ungrateful, as to forget those, who in the worst of Times, have stood undaunted by their King and Countrey, and for the Safeguard of both, have expos'd themselves to the malice of false Patriots, and the madness of an headstrong Rabble. But since this glorious Work is yet unfinish'd, and though we have reason to hope well of the success, yet the Event depends on the unsearchable Providence of Almighty God, 'tis no time to raise Trophees, while the Victory is in dispute: but every man by your examplē, to contribute what is in his power, to main∣tain so just a Cause, on which depends the future Settlement and

Prosperity of Three Nations. The Pilot's Prayer to Neptune was not amiss, in the middle of the Storm: Thou may'st do with me, O Neptune, what thou pleasest, but I will be sure to hold fast the Rudder. We are to trust firmly in the Deity, but so as not to forget, that be commonly works by second Causes, and admits of our Endeavors with his concurrence. For our own parts, we are sensible as we ought, how little we can con∣tribute with our weak assistance. The most we can boast of, is, that we are not so inconsiderable as to want Enemies, whom we have rais'd to our selves on no other account, than that we are not of their number: and since that's their Quarrel, they shall have daily occasion to hate us more. 'Tis not, my Lord, that any man delights to see himself pasquin'd and affronted by their inveterate Scriblers, but on the other side it ought to be our glo∣ry, that themselves believe not of us what they write. Reasonable men are well satisfi'd for whose sakes the venom of their Party is shed on us, because they see that at the same time, our Adver∣saries spare not those to whom they owe Allegiance and Veneration. Their Despair has push'd them to break those Bonds; and 'tis observable, that the lower they are driven, the more violently they write: As Lucifer and his Companions were only proud when An∣gels, but grew malicious when Devils. Let them rail, since 'tis the only solace of their miseries, and the only revenge, which we hope they now can take. The greatest and the best of men are above their reach, and for our meanness, though they assault us like Foot-padders in the dark, their Blows have done us little barm; we yet live, to justifie our selves in open day, to vindicate our Loyalty to the Government, and to assure your Lordship, with all Submission and Sincerity, that we are

