



My Lord,
'TIs a severe Reflection which Montaign has made on Princes, That we ought not, in reason, to have any expectations of Fa∣vour from them; and that 'tis kindness enough, if they leave us in possession of our own. The boldness of the Censure shows the free Spirit of the Author: And the Subjects of England may justly con∣gratulate to themselues, that both the Nature of our Government, and the Clemency of our King, secure us from any such Complaint. I, in particular, who subsist wholely by his Bounty, am oblig'd to give po∣stcrity a far other account of my Royal Master, than what Mon∣taign has left of his. Those Accusations had been more reasonable, if they had been plac'd on inferiour Persons. For in all Courts, there are too many, who make it their business to ruine Wit: And Montaign, in other places, tells us, what effects he found of their good Natures. He describes them such, whose Ambition, Lust, or pri∣vate Interest, seem to be the onely end of their Creation. If good ac∣crue to any from them, 'tis onely in order to their own designs: con∣ferr'd most commonly on the base and infamous; and never given, but onely hapning sometimes on well deservers. Dulness has brought them to what they are; and Malice secures them in their Fortunes. But somewhat of Specious they must have, to recommend themselves to Princes, (for Folly will not easily go down in its own natural form with discerning Iudges.) And diligence in waiting, is their gilding of the Pill; for that looks like Love, though 'tis onely Inte∣rest. 'Tis that which gains 'em their advantage over witty Men; whose love of Liberty and Ease, makes them willing too often to dis∣charge their burden of Attendance on these officious Gentlemen. 'Tis true, that the nauseousness of such Company is enough to disgust a reasonable Man; when he sees, he can hardly approach Greatness, but as a Moated Castle; he must first pass through the Mud and Filth

with which it is encompass'd. These are they, who wanting Wit, af∣fect Gravity, and go by the name of Solid men: and a solid man is, in plain English, a solid, solemn Fool. Another disguise they have, (for Fools, as well as Knaves, take other names, and pass by an Alias) and that is the Title of honest Fellows. But this honesty of theirs ought to have many Grains for its Allowance; for certainly they are no farther honest, than they are silly: They are naturally mis∣chievous to their power; and if they speak not maliciously, or sharply, of witty men, 'tis onely because God has not bestow'd on them the gift of utterance. They fawn and crouch to men of parts, whom they cannot ruine: quote their Wit when they are present, and when they are absent, steal their Iests: But to those who are under 'em, and whom they can crush with ease, they show themselves in their natural Antipathy; there they treat Wit like the common Enemy, and give it no more quarter, than a Dutch-man would to an English Vessel in the Indies; they strike Sail where they know they shall be master'd, and murder where they can with safety.
This, my Lord, is the Character of a Courtier without Wit; and therefore that which is a Satyre to other men, must be a Panegyrick to your Lordship, who are a Master of it. If the least of these Reflecti∣ons could have reach'd your Person, no necessity of mine could have made me to have sought so earnestly, and so long to have cultivated your kindness. As a Poet, I cannot but have made some observations on Mankind: The lowness of my Fortune has not yet brought me to flatter Vice; and 'tis my duty to give testimony to Virtue. 'Tis true, your Lordship is not of that nature, which either seeks a Com∣mendation, or want it. Your mind has always been above the wretch∣ed affectation of Popularity. A popular man is, in truth, no better than a Prostitute to common Fame, and to the People. He lies down to every one he meets for the hire of praise; and his Humility is onely a disguis'd Ambition. Even Cicero himself, whose Eloquence de∣serv'd the admiration of Mankind; yet by his insatiable thirst of Fame, he has lessen'd his Character with succeeding Ages: His Action against Catiline may be said to have ruin'd the Consul, when it sav'd the City: for it so swell'd his Soul, which was not truly great, that ever afterwards it was apt to be over-set with vanity. And this made his Virtue so suspected by his Friends, that Brutus, whom of all men he ador'd, refus'd him a place in his Conspiracy. A Modern

Wit has made this Observation on him, That coveting to recommend himself to Posterity, he begg'd it as an Alms of all his Friends, the Historians, to remember his Consulship: And observe, if you please, the odness of the event; all their Histories are lost, and the vanity of his request stands yet recorded in his own Writings. How much more great and manly in your Lordship, is your contempt of popular applause, and your retir'd Virtue, which shines onely to a few; with whom you live so easily and freely, that you make it evident, you have a Soul which is capable of all the tenderness of Friendship; and that you onely retire your self from those, who are not capable of returning it. Your kindness, where you have once plac'd it, is inviolable: And 'tis to that onely I attribute my happiness in your love. This makes me more easily forsake an Argument, on which I could otherwise delight to dwell: I mean, your Iudgment in your choice of Friends; be∣cause I have the honour to be one. After which, I am sure you will more easily permit me to be silent, in the care you have taken of my Fortune; which you have rescu'd, not onely from the power of others, but from my worst of Enemies, my own modesty and Laziness. Which favour, had it been employ'd on a more deserving Subject, had been an effect of Iustice in your Nature; but, as plac'd on me, is onely Charity. Yet, withal, 'tis conferr'd on such a man, as prefers your kindness it self, before any of its Consequences; and who values, as the greatest of your Favours, those of your Love, and of your Conversation. From this constancy to your Friends, I might reasonably assume, that your Resentments would be as strong and lasting, if they were not re∣strain'd by a nobler Principle of good Nature and Generosity. For certainly, 'tis the same composition of Mind, the same Resolution and Courage, which makes the greatest Frienships, and the greatest Enmi∣ties. And he who is too lightly reconcil'd, after high Provocations, may recommend himself to the World for a Christian, but I should hardly trust him for a Friend. The Italians have a Proverb to that purpose, To forgive the first time shows me a good Catholic, the se∣cond time a Fool. To this firmness in all your Actions (though you are wanting in no other Ornaments of Mind and Body, yet to this) I principally ascribe the Interest your Merits have acquir'd you in the Royal Family. A Prince, who is constant to himself, and steady in all his undertakings; one with whom that Character of Horace will agree,

Si fractus illabatur orbis
Impavidum ferient ruinae,
Such an one cannot but place an esteem, and repose a confidence on him, whom no Adversity, no change of Courts, no Bribery of Interests, or Cabals of Factions, or Advantages of Fortune, can remove from the solid foundations of Honour and Fidelity.
Ille meos, primus qui me sibi junxit, amores
Abstulit; ille habeat secum, servetque sepulcro.
How well your Lordship will deserve that praise, I need no inspira∣tion to foretel. You have already left no room for Prophecy: your early undertakings have been such, in the service of your King and Countrey, when you offer'd your self to the most dangerous employ∣ment, that of the Sea; when you chose to abandon those delights, to which your Youth and Fortune did invite you, to undergo the ha∣zards, and, which was worse, the company of common Sea-men, that you have made it evident, you will refuse no opportunity of rendring your self useful to the Nation, when either your Courage or Conduct shall be requir'd. The same zeal and faithfulness continues in your Bloud, which animated one of your Noble Ancestors to sacrifice his life in the Quarrel of his Sovereign: though, I hope, both for your sake, and for the publick Tranquillity, the same occasion will never be of∣fer'd to your Lordship, and that a better Destiny will attend you. But I make haste to consider you as abstracted from a Court, which (if you will give me leave to use a term of Logick) is onely an Ad∣junct, not a Propriety of Happiness. The Academicks, I confess, were willing to admit the Goods of Fortune into their Notion of Felicity; but I do not remember, that any of the Sects of old Philosophers did ever leave a room for Greatness. Neither am I form'd to praise a Court, who admire and covet nothing, but the easiness and quiet of retirement. I naturally withdraw my sight from a Precipice; and ad∣mit the Prospect be never so large and goodly, can take no pleasure even in looking on the downfull, though I am secure from the danger. Methinks there's something of a malignant joy in that excellent de∣scription of Lucretius,
Suave mari magno turbantibus aequora ventis
E terâ magnum alterius spectare laborem;
Non quia vexari quenquam est jucunda voluptas
Sed quibus ipse malis caicas, quiâ cernere suave est.

I am sure his Master Epicurus, and my better Master Cowley, pre∣fer'd the solitude of a Garden, and the conversation of a friend to any consideration, so much as a regard, of those unhappy People, whom in our own wrong, we call the great. True greatness, if it be any where on Earth, is in a private Virtue; remov'd from the notion of Pomp and Vanity, confin'd to a contemplation of it self, and centring on it self:
Omnis enim per se Divum natura, necesse est
Immortali aevo summâ cum pace fruatur;
— Curâ semota, metuque
Ipsa suis pollens opibus—
If this be not the life of a Deity, because it cannot consist with Providence; 'tis at least a godlike life: I can be contented, (and I am sure I have your Lordship of my opinion) with an humbler station in the Temple of Virtue, than to be set on the Pinacle of it.
Despicere unde queas alios, passimque videre
Errare, atque viam palantis quaerere vitae.
The truth is, the consideration of so vain a Creature as man, is not worth our pains. I have fool enough at home without looking for it abroad: and am a sufficient Theater to my self of ridiculous actions, without expecting company, either in a Court, a Town, or Play-house. 'Tis on this account that I am weary with drawing the deformities of Life, and Lazars of the People, where every figure of imperfection more resembles me than it can do others. If I must be condemn'd to Rhyme, I should find some ease in my change of punishment. I desire to be no longer the Sisyphus of the Stage; to rowl up a Stone with endless labour (which to follow the proverb, gathers no Mosse) and which is perpetually falling down again. I never thought my self very fit for an Employment, where many of my Predecessors have excell'd me in all kinds; and some of my Con∣temporaries, even in my own partial Iudgment, have out-done me in Comedy. Some little hopes I have yet remaining, and those too, considering my abilities, may be vain, that I may make the world some part of amends, for many ill Playes, by an Heroique Poem. Your Lordship has been long acquainted with my design; the sub∣ject of which you know is great, the story English, and neither too far distant from the present Age, nor too near approaching it. Such

it is in my opinion that I could not have wish'd a nobler occasion to do honour by it to my King, my Country, and my friends; most of our antient Nobility being concern'd in the Action. And your Lord∣ship has one particular reason to promote this undertaking, because you were the first who gave me the opportunity of discoursing it to his Ma∣jesty, and his Royal Highness: They were then pleas'd, both to commend the Design, and to encourage it by their Commands. But the vnsettl'dness of my condition has hitherto put a stop to my thoughts concerning it. As I am no successor to Homer in his Wit, so neither do I desire to be in his Poverty. I can make no Rhapsodies, nor go a begging at the Graecian doors, while I sing the praises of their Ance∣stors. The times of Virgil please me better, because he had an Augu∣stus for his Patron. And to draw the Allegory nearer you, I am sure I shall not want a Mecenas with him. 'Tis for your Lordship to stir up that remembrance in his Majesty, which his many avocations of business have caus'd him, I fear, to lay aside. And, (as himself and his Royal Brother are the Heroes of the Poem) to represent to them the Images of their Warlike Predecessors; as Achilles is said to be rous'd to Glory, with the sight of the Combat before the Ships. For my own part, I am satisfi'd to have offer'd the Design; and it may be to the advantage of my Reputation to have it refus'd me.
In the mean time, my Lord, I take the confidence to present you with a Tragedy; the Characters of which are the nearest to those of an Heroick Poem. 'Twas dedicated to you in my heart, before 'twas presented on the Stage. Some things in it have pass'd your approba∣tion, and many your amendment. You were likewise pleas'd to re∣commend it to the King's perusal, before the last hand was added to it, when I receiv'd the favour from him, to have the most con∣siderable event of it modell'd by his Royal Pleasure. It may be some vanity in me to add his Testimony then, and which he graciously con∣firm'd afterwards, that it was the best of all my Tragedies; in which he has made Authentick my private opinion of it; at least, he has given it a value by his Commendation, which it had not by my Writing.
That which was not pleasing to some of the fair Ladies in the last Act of it, as I dare not vindicate, so neither can I wholly condemn, till I find more reason for their Censures. The procedure of Inda∣mora and Melesinda, seems yet, in my judgment, natural, and not

unbecoming of their Characters. If they who arraign them fail not more, the World will never blame their conduct: And I shall be glad, for the honour of my Countrey, to find better Images of Virtue drawn to the life in their behaviour, than any I could feign to adorn the Theatre. I confess, I have onely represented a practicable Virtue, mix'd with the frailties and imperfections of humane life. I have made my Heroine fearful of death, which neither Cassandra nor Cleopatra would have been; and they themselves, I doubt it not, would have outdone Romance in that particular. Yet their Mandana (and the Cyrus was written by a Lady) was not altogether so hard-hearted: for she sat down on the cold ground by the King of Assyria, and not onely piti'd him, who dy'd in her defence; but allow'd him some fa∣vours, such, perhaps, as they would think, should onely be permitted to her Cyrus. I have made my Melesinda, in opposition to Nour∣mahal, a Woman passionately loving of her Husband, patient of in∣juries and contempt, and constant in her kindness, to the last: and in that, perhaps, I may have err'd, because it is not a Virtue much in use. Those Indian Wives are loving Fools, and may do well to keep themselves in their own Countrey, or, at least, to keep company with the Arria's and Portia's of old Rome: some of our Ladies know better things. But, it may be, I am partial to my own Writings: yet I have labour'd as much as any man, to divest my self of the self-opinion of an Author; and am too well satisfi'd of my own weak∣ness, to be pleas'd with any thing I have written. But on the other side, my reason tells me, that, in probability, what I have seriously and long consider'd, may be as likely to be just and natural, as what an ordinary Iudge (if there be any such amongst those Ladies) will think fit, in a transient Presentation, to be plac'd in the room of that which they condemn. The most judicious Writer is sometimes mistaken, after all his care: but the hasty Critick, who judges on a view, is full as liable to be deceiv'd. Let him first consider all the Arguments, which the Author had, to write this, or to design the other, before he arraigns him of a fault: and then, perhaps, on second thoughts, he will find his Reason oblige him to revoke his Censure. Yet, after all, I will not be too positive. Homo sum, humani à me nihil alienum puto. As I am a Man, I must be changeable: and sometimes the gravest of us all are so, even upon ridiculous accidents. Our minds are perpetually wrought on by the temperament of our Bodies: which makes me sus∣pect,

they are nearer alli'd, than either our Philosophers or School-Divines will allow them to be. I have observ'd, says Montaign, that when the Body is out of Order, its Companion is seldom at his ease. An ill Dream, or a Cloudy day, has power to change this wretched Creature, who is so proud of a reasonable Soul, and make him think what he thought not yesterday. And Homer was of this opinion, as Cicero is pleas'd to translate him for us:
Tales sunt hominum mentes quali pater ipse
Jupiter, auctiferâ lustravit lampade terras.
Or as the same Anthor, in his Thusculane Questions, speaks with more modesty than usual of himself: Nos in diem vivimus; quodcun∣que animos nostros probabilitate percussit, id dicimus. 'Tis not therefore impossible, but that I may alter the conclusion of my Play, to restore my self into the good Graces of my fair Criticks. And your Lordship, who is so well with them, may do me the Office of a Friend and Patron, to intercede with them on my promise of amendment. The Impotent Lover in Petronius, though his was a very unpardo∣nable crime, yet was receiv'd to mercy on the terms I offer. Summa excusationis meae haec est: placebo tibi, si culpam emendare per∣miseris.
But I am conscious to my self of offering at a greater boldness, in presenting to your view what my meanness can produce, than in any other error of my Play. And therefore make haste to break off this te∣dious Address, which has, I know not how, already run it self into so much of Pedantry, with an excuse of Tully's, which he sent with his Books De Finibus, to his Friend Brutus, De ipsis rebus autem, sae∣penumerò Brute vereor ne reprehendar, cum haec ad te scribam, qui tum in Poesi, (I change it from Philosophiâ) tum in optimo ge∣nere Poeseos tantum processeris. Quod si facerem quasi te erudi∣ens, jure reprehenderer. Sed ab eo plurimùm absum: nec, ut ea cognoscas quae tibi notissima sunt ad te mitto: sed quià facillimè in nomine tuo acquiesco, & quia te habeo aequissimum eorum stu∣diorum, quae mihi communia tecum sunt, aestimatorem & judi∣cem. Which you may please, my Lord, to apply to your self, from him, who is

