



MY LORD,
WHEN I first design'd this Play I found or thought
I found somewhat so moving in the serious part
of it, and so pleasant in the Comick, as might
deserve a more than ordinary Care in both: Ac∣cordingly
I us'd the best of my endeavour,
in the management of two Plots, so very different from each other,
that it was not perhaps the Tallent of every Writer, to have made
them of a piece. Neither have I attempted other Playes of the
same nature, in my opinion, with the same Iudgment; though with
like success. And though many Poets may suspect themselves for
the fondness and partiality of Parents to their youngest Children, yet
I hope I may stand exempted from this Rule, because I know my self
too well to be ever satisfied with my own Conceptions, which have
seldom reach'd to those Idea's that I had within me: and conse∣quently,
I presume I may have liberty to judge when I write more
or less pardonably, as an ordinary Markes-man may know certainly
when he shoots less wide at what he aymes. Besides, the Care and
Pains I have bestowed on this beyond my other Tragi-comedies may
reasonably make the World conclude, that either I can doe no∣thing
tolerably, or that this Poem is not much amiss. Few good
Pictures have been finish'd at one sitting; neither can a true just
Play, which is to bear the Test of Ages, be produc'd at a heat, or
by the force of fancie, without the maturity of judgment. For
my own part, I have both so just a Diffidence of my self, and
so great a Reverence for my Audience, that I dare venture no∣thing

without a strict Examination; and am as much asham'd to
put a loose indigested Play upon the Publick, as I should be to of∣fer
brass money in a Payment: For though it shou'd be taken, (as
it is too often on the Stage,) yet it will be found in the second tel∣ling:
And a judicious Reader will discover in his Closset that trashy
stuffe, whose glittering deceiv'd him in the action. I have often
heard the Stationer sighing in his shop, and wishing for those hands
to take off his melancholy bargain which clapp'd its Performance
on the Stage. In a Play-house every thing contributes to impose
upon the Iudgment; the Lights, the Scenes, the Habits, and,
above all, the Grace of Action, which is commonly the best where
there is the most need of it, surprize the Audience, and cast a
mist upon their Vnderstandings; not unlike the cunning of a Iug∣gler,
who is always staring us in the face, and overwhelming us
with gibberish, onely that he may gain the opportunity of making
the cleaner conveyance of his Trick. But these false Beauties of
the Stage are no more lasting than a Rainbow; when the Actor
ceases to shine upon them, when he guilds them no longer with his
reflection, they vanish in a twinkling. I have sometimes wonder'd,
in the reading, what was become of those glaring Colours which a∣maz'd
me in Bussy Damboys upon the Theatre: but when I had
taken up what I suppos'd, a fallen Star, I found I had been co∣zen'd
with a Ielly: nothing but a cold dull mass, which glitter'd
no longer than it was shooting: A dwarfish thought dress'd up in
gigantick words, repetition in aboundance, looseness of expression,
and gross Hyperboles; the Sense of one line expanded prodigiously
into ten: and, to sum up all, uncorrect English, and a hideous mingle
of false Poetry and true Nonsense; or, at best, a scantling of wit
which lay gasping for life, and groaning beneath a Heap of Rubbish.
A famous modern Poet us'd to sacrifice every year a Statius to Vir∣gil's
Manes: and I have Indignation enough to burn a D'amboys
annually to the memory of Johnson. But now, My Lord, I am
sensible, perhaps too late, that I have gone too far: for I remem∣ber
some Verses of my own Maximin and Almanzor which cry, Ven∣geance
upon me for their Extravagance, and which I wish heartily
in the same fire with Statius and Chapman: All I can say for
those passages, which are I hope not many, is, that I knew they were
bad enough to please, even when I writ them: But I repent of them
amongst my Sins: and if any of their fellows intrude by chance into
my present Writings, I draw a stroke over all those Dalilahs of

the Theatre; and am resolv'd I will settle my self no reputation by
the applause of fools. 'Tis not that I am mortified to all ambition,
but I scorn as much to take it from half-witted Iudges, as I shou'd
to raise an Estate by cheating of Bubbles. Neither do I discom∣mend
the lofty style in Tragedy which is naturally pompous and mag∣nificent:
but nothing is truly sublime that is not just and proper.
If the Ancients had judg'd by the same measures which a common
Reader takes, they had concluded Statius to have written higher
than Virgil: for,
Quae superimposito moles geminata Colosso,
carries a more thundring kind of sound than,
Tityre tu patulae recubans sub tegmine fagi:
Yet Virgil had all the Majesty of a lawfull Prince; and Statius one∣ly
the blustring of a Tyrant. But when men affect a Vertue which
they cannot reach, they fall into a Vice, which bears the nearest
resemblance to it. Thus an injudicious Poet who aims at Loftiness
runs easily into the swelling puffie style, because it looks like Great∣ness.
I remember, when I was a Boy, I thought inimitable Spencer
a mean Poet in comparison of Sylvester's Dubartas: and was rapt
into an ecstasie when I read these lines:
Now, when the Winter's keener breath began
To Chrystallize the Baltick Ocean;
To glaze the Lakes, to bridle up the Floods,
And periwig with Snow the bald pate Woods:
I am much deceiv'd if this be not abominable fustian, that is,
thoughts and words ill sorted, and without the least relation to
each other: yet I dare not answer for an Audience, that they wou'd
not clap it on the Stage: so little value there is to be given to the
common cry, that nothing but Madness can please Mad-men, and a
Poet must be of a piece with the Spectators, to gain a reputation
with them. But, as in a room, contriv'd for State, the height
of the roof shou'd bear a proportion to the Area; so, in the Height∣nings
of Poetry, the strength and vehemence of Figures shou'd be
suited to the Occasion, the Subject, and the Persons. All beyond
this is monstrous; 'tis out of nature, 'tis an excrescence, and not a
living part of Poetry. I had not said thus much, if some young
Gallants, who pretend to Criticism, had not told me that this Tra∣gi-comedy
wanted the dignity of style: but as a man who is charg'd▪
with a Crime of which he thinks himself innocent, is apt to be too
eager in his own defence, so perhaps I have vindicated my Play

with more partiality than I ought, or than such a trifle can deserve.
Yet, whatever beauties it may want, 'tis free at least from the
grosness of those faults I mention'd: What Credit it has gain'd
upon the Stage, I value no farther than in reference to my Profit,
and the satisfaction I had in seeing it represented with all the justness
and gracefulness of Action. But as 'tis my Interest to please my Au∣dience,
so 'tis my Ambition to be read; that I am sure is the more
lasting and the nobler Design: for the propriety of thoughts and
words, which are the hidden beauties of a Play, are but confus'dly
judg'd in the vehemence of Action: All things are there beheld, as
in a hasty motion, where the objects onely glide before the Eye and
disappear. The most discerning Critick can judge no more of these
silent graces in the Action, than he who rides Post through an un∣known
Countrey can distinguish the scituation of places, and the na∣ture
of the soyle. The purity of phrase, the clearness of concepti∣on
and expression, the boldness maintain'd to Majesty, the significan∣cie
and sound of words, not strain'd into bombast, but justly eleva∣ted,
in short, those very words and thoughts which cannot be
chang'd but for the worse, must of necessity escape our transient view
upon the Theatre: and yet without all these a Play may take. For
if either the Story move us, or the Actor help the lameness of it
with his performance, or now and then a glittering beam of wit or
passion strike through the obscurity of the Poem, any of these are suf∣ficient
to effect a present liking, but not to fix a lasting admiration;
for nothing but Truth can long continue; and Time is the surest
Iudge of Truth. I am not vain enough to think I have left no faults
in this, which that touchstone will not discover; neither indeed is it
possible to avoid them in a Play of this nature. There are evident∣ly
two Actions in it: But it will be clear to any judicious man, that
with half the pains I could have rais'd a Play from either of them:
for this time I satisfied my own humour, which was to tack two
Plays together; and to break a rule for the pleasure of variety. The
truth is, the Audience are grown weary of continu'd melancholy Scenes:
and I dare venture to prophesie, that few Tragedies except those in
Verse shall succeed in this Age, if they are not lighten'd with a course of
mirth. For the Feast is too dull and solemn without the Fiddles. But
how difficult a task this is, will soon be try'd: for a several Genius is
requir'd to either way; and without both of 'em, a man, in my opinion,
is but half a Poet for the Stage. Neither is it so trivial an underta∣king,
to make a Tragedy end happily; for 'tis more difficult to save

than 'tis to kill. The Dagger and the Cup of Poison are alwaies in
a readiness; but to bring the Action to the last extremity, and then
by probable means to recover all, will require the Art and Iudg∣ment
of a Writer; and cost him many a pang in the performance.
And now, My Lord, I must confess that what I have written
looks more like a Preface than a Dedication; and truly it was thus
far my design, that I might entertain you with somewhat in my own
Art which might be more worthy of a noble mind, than the stale
exploded Trick of fulsome Panegyricks. 'Tis difficult to write justly
on any thing, but almost impossible in Praise. I shall therefore
wave so nice a subject; and onely tell you, that in recommending a
Protestant Play to a Protestant Patron, as I doe my self an Honour,
so I do your Noble Family a right, who have been alwaies eminent in
the support and favour of our Religion and Liberties. And if the
promises of your Youth, your Education at home, and your Experience
abroad, deceive me not, the Principles you have embrac'd are such as
will no way degenerate from your Ancestors, but refresh their memory
in the minds of all true English-men, and renew their lustre in your
Person; which, My Lord, is not more the wish than it is the constant
expectation of

