



My Lord,
THIS Poem being the last which I intend for the Theatre, ought to have the same Provision made for it, which Old Men make for their youngest Child, which is commonly a Favourite: They who were born before it carry away the Patrimony by Right of Elder∣ship. This is to make its Fortune in the World; and since I can do lit∣tle for it, Natural Affection calls upon me to put it out, at least, into the best service which I can procure for it. And as it is the usual practice of our decay'd Gentry, to look about them for some Illustrious Family, and there endeavour to fix their young Dar∣ling, where he may be both well Educated, and Supported: I have herein also follow'd the Custom of the World, and am satisfi'd in my Judgment, that I cou'd not have made a more Worthy Choice. 'Tis true, I am not vain enough to think that any thing of mine can in any measure be worthy of Your Lordship's Patronage: and yet I shou'd be asham'd to leave the Stage, without some acknow∣ledgement of your former Favours, which I have more than once experienc'd. Besides the Honour of my Wife's Relation to Your Noble House, to which my Sons may plead some Title, though I cannot; You have been pleas'd to take a particular notice of me, even in this lowness of my Fortunes, to which I have voluntarily reduc'd my self: and of which I have no reason to be asham'd.

This Condescension, my Lord, is not only becoming of Your An∣cient Family, but of Your Personal Character in the World. And if I value my self the more for your Indulgence to me, and your Opinion of me; 'tis because any thing which you like, ought to be consider'd as something in it self. And therefore I must not undervalue my present Labours, because I have presum'd to make you my Patron. A Man may be just to himself, tho he ought not to be partial. And I dare affirm, that the several Man∣ners which I have given to the Persons of this Drama, are truly drawn from Nature; all perfectly distinguish'd from each other. That the Fable is not injudiciously contriv'd; that the turns of Fortune are not manag'd unartfully; and that the last Revolution is happily enough invented. Aristotle, I acknowledge, has de∣clar'd, that the Catastrophe which is made from the change of Will is not of the first Order for Beauty: but it may reasonably be al∣ledg'd, in defence of this Play, as well as of the Cinna (which I take to be the very best of Corneille's) that the Philosopher who made the Rule, copy'd all the Laws, which he gave for the Theatre, from the Authorities and Examples of the Greek Poets, which he had read: And from their Poverty of Invention he cou'd get nothing but mean Conclusions of wretched Tales: where the mind of the chief Actor was for the most part chang'd without Art or Preparation; only because the Poet could not otherwise end his Play. Had it been possible for Aristotle to have seen the Cinna, I am confident he would have alter'd his Opinion; and concluded, that a simple change of Will might be manag'd with so much Judgment, as to render it the most agreeable, as well as the most surprising part of the whole Fable: Let D'acier, and all the rest of the Modern Criticks, who are too much Bigotted to the Ancients, contend never so much to the con∣trary. I was afraid that I had been the Inventor of a new sort of designing, when in my Third Act, I make a discovery of my Alphonso's true Parentage. If it were so, what wonder had it been, that Dramatick Poetry, tho a limited Art, yet might be capable of receiving some Innovations for the better. But afterwards I casually found, that Menander and Terence, in the Heauton∣timoroumenos, had been before me; and made the same kind of discovery in the same Act. As for the Mechanick Vnities, that of Time is much within the compass of an Astrological Day, which begins

at Twelve, and ends at the same hour the Day following. That of Place is not observ'd so justly by me, as by the Ancients; for their Scene was always one, and almost constantly some Publick Place. Some of the late French Poets, and amongst the Eng∣lish, my most Ingenious Friend, Mr. Congreve, have observ'd this Rule strictly; though the Place was not altogether so publick as a Street. I have follow'd the Example of Corneille, and stretch'd the Latitude to a Street and Palace, not far distant from each other in the same City. They who will not allow this Liberty to a Poet, make it a very ridiculous thing, for an Audience to suppose themselves, sometimes to be in a Field, sometimes in a Garden, and at other times in a Chamber. There are not indeed so many Absurdities in their Supposition, as in ours; but 'tis an Original Absurdity, for the Audience to suppose themselves to be in any other place, than in the very Theatre, in which they sit; which is neither Chamber, nor Garden, nor yet a Publick Place of any Business, but that of the Representation. For my Action, 'tis evidently dou∣ble; and in that I have most of the Ancients for my Examples. Yet I dare not defend th way by Reason, much less by their Autho∣rity: for their Actions, though double, were of the same Species; that is to say, in their Comedies two Amours: And their Persons were better link'd in Interests than mine. Yet even this is a fault which I shou'd often practise, if I were to write again; because 'tis agreeable to the English Genius. We love variety more than any other Nation; and so long as the Audience will not be pleas'd without it, the Poet is oblig'd to humour them. On condition they were cur'd of this publick Vice, I cou'd be content to change my Me∣thod, and gladly give them a more reasonable Pleasure. This Di∣gression, my Lord, is not altogether to the purpose of an Epistle Dedicatory: Yet 'tis expected that somewhat shou'd be said even here, in relation to Criticisme; at least in Vindication of my Ad∣dress, that you may not be desir'd to Partronize a Poem which is wholly unworthy of your Protection. Tho, after all, I doubt not but some will liken me to the Lover in a Modern Comedy, who was combing his Peruke, and setting his Cravat before his Mistress; and being ask'd by her, when he intended to begin his Court? reply'd, he had been doing it all this while. Yet thus it happens, my Lord, that Self will come into all Addresses of this Nature, tho 'tis the

most unmannerly word of the World in civil Conversation, and the most ungrateful to all Hearers. For which reason, I, who have nothing to boast of, but my Misfortunes, ought to be the first to banish it. Especially since I have so large a Field before me, as Your Inborn Goodness, Your Evenness of Temper, Your Humility in so ample a share of Fortune as you possess; Your Hu∣manity to all Men, and Your Kindness to your Friends: Besides Your Natural and Acquir'd Endowments, and Your Brotherly Love to Your Relations. Notus in Fratres animo Paterno, was the great Commendation which Horace gave to one of his Patrons: And 'tis that Praise which particularly Crowns your other Vertues. But here, my Lord, I am oblig'd in common Prudence to stop short; and to cast under a Veil some other of your Praises, as the Chymists use to shadow the Secret of their great Elixir; lest if it were made publick, the World shou'd make a bad use of it. To enjoy our own Quiet, without disturbing that of others, is the practice of every Moral Man: And for the rest, to live chearfully and splendidly, as it is becoming of Your Illustrious Birth, so 'tis like∣wise to thank God for his Benefits in the best manner. 'Tis un∣necessary to wish you more Worldly Happiness, or Content of Mind, than you enjoy: But the continuance of both, to Your Self, and Your Posterity, is earnestly desir'd by all who have the Honour to be known to You, and more particularly by,
MY LORD,

