



My Lord,
I Humbly Dedicate to Your Lord∣ship that Poem, of which you were pleas'd to appear an early Patron, before it was Acted on the Stage. I may yet go farther, with your permission, and say, That it receiv'd amendment from your noble hands, e're it was fit to be presented. You may please likewise to remember, with how much favour to the Authour, and indulgence to the Play, you commended it to the view of His Majesty,

then at Windsor, and by His Approbation of it in Writing, made way for its kind reception on the Theatre. In this Dedication therefore, I may seem to imitate a Custom of the Ancients, who offer'd to their Gods the Firstlings of the Flock, which I think they call'd Ver Sacrum, because they help'd 'em to increase. I am sure, if there be any thing in this Play, wherein I have rais'd my self beyond the ordinary lowness of my Comedies, I ought wholly to acknowledge it to the favour, of being admitted into your Lordship's Conversation. And not onely I, who pretend not to this way, but the best Comick Writers of our Age, will joyn with me to acknowledge, that they have copy'd the Gallantries of Courts, the Delicacy of Ex∣pression, and the Decencies of Behaviour, from your Lordship, with more success, then if they had taken their Models from the Court of France. But this, my Lord, will be no wonder to the world, which knows the excellencie of your Natural parts, and those you have acquir'd in a Noble Education. That which with more reason I admire, is, that be∣ing so absolute a Courtier, you have not forgot, either the ties of Friendship, or the practise of Gene∣rosity. In my little Experience of a Court (which I confess I desire not to improve) I have found in it much of Interest, and more of Detraction: Few men there have that assurance of a Friend, as not to be made ridiculous by him, when they are absent. There are a midling sort of Courtiers, who become

happy by their want of wit; but they supply that want, by an excess of malice to those who have it. And there is no such persecution as that of fools: they can never be considerable enough to be talk'd of themselves; so that they are safe onely in their obscurity, and grow mischievous to witty men, by the great diligence of their envy, and by being al∣ways present to represent and aggravate their faults. In the mean time they are forc'd, when they endea∣vour to be pleasant, to live on the Offalls of their Wit, whom they decry; and either to quote it, (which they do unwillingly) or to pass it upon others for their own. These are the men who make it their business to chase Wit from the Knowledge of Princes, lest it should disgrace their ignorance. And this kind of malice your Lordship has not so much avoided, as surmounted. But if by the excellent temper of a Royal Master, always more ready to hear good than ill, if by his inclination to love you, if by your own merit and address, if by the charmes of your Con∣versation, the Grace of your Behaviour, your know∣ledge of Greatness and Habitude in Courts, you having been able to preserve your self with Honour in the midst of so dangerous a Course; yet at least the remembrance of those Hazards has inspir'd you with pity for other men, who being of an inferiour Wit and Quality to you, are yet Persecuted, for be∣ing that in Little, which your Lordship is in Great. For the quarrel of those people extends it self to any

thing of sense; and if I may be so vain to own it amongst the rest of the Poets, has sometimes reach'd to the very borders of it, even to me. So that, if our general good fortune had not rais'd up your Lord∣ship to defend us, I know not whether any thing had been more ridiculous in Court, than Writers. 'Tis to your Lordship's favour we generally owe our Pro∣tection and Patronage: And to the Nobleness of your Nature, which will not suffer the least shadow of your Wit to be contemn'd in other men. You have been often pleas'd not onely to excuse my im∣perfections, but to vindicate what was tolerable in my Writings from their censures And what I never can forget, you have not onely been careful of my Repu∣tation, but of my Fortune. You have been Sollicitous to supply my neglect of my self; and to overcome the fatal Modesty of Poets, which submits them to perpetual wants, rather then to become importunate with those people, who have the liberality of Kings in their disposing; and who dishonouring the Bounty of their Master, suffer such to be in necessity, who endeavour at least to please him: and for whose en∣tertainment He has generously provided, if the Fruits of His Royal favour were not often stopp'd in other hands. But your Lordship has given me occasion, not to complain of Courts, whil'st you are there. I have found the effects of your Mediation in all my Concernments; and they were so much the more noble in you, because they were wholly voluntary.

I became your Lordship's (if I may venture on the Similitude) as the world was made, without knowing him who made it; and brought onely a passive obe∣dience to be your Creature. This Nobleness of yours I think my self the rather oblig'd to own, because otherwise it must have been lost to all remembrance▪ for you are endued with that excellent quality of a frank Nature, to forget the good which you have done.
But, my Lord, I ought to have consider'd, that you are as great a Judge, as you are a Patron; and that in praising you ill, I shall incurre a higher note of ingratitude, then that I thought to have avoided. I stand in need of all your accustom'd goodness for the Dedication of this Play: which though, perhaps▪ it be the best of my Comedies, is yet so faulty, that I should have fear'd you, for my Critick, if I had not with some policy given you the trouble of being my Protector. Wit seems to have lodg'd it self more Nobly in this Age, than in any of the former: and people of my mean condition, are onely Writers, because some of the Nobility, and your Lordship in the first place, are above the narrow praises which Poesie could give you. But let those who love to see themselves exceeded, encourage your Lordship in so dangerous a quality: for my own part, I must confess, that I have so much of self-interest, as to be content with reading some Papers of your Verses, without desiring you should proceed to a Scene or Play: with

the common prudence of those, who are worsted in a Duel, and declare they are satisfied when they are first wounded. Your Lordship has but ano∣ther step to make, and from the Patron of Wit, you may become its Tyrant: and Oppress our little Reputations with more ease then you now protect them. But these, my Lord, are designs, which I am sure you harbour not; any more then the French King is contriving the Conquest of the Swissers. 'Tis a barren Triumph, which is not worth your pains, and wou'd onely rank him amongst your Slaves, who is already,
My Lord, 
