



My Lord,
AS I was lately reviewing my loose Papers,
amongst the rest I found this Essay, the
writing of which in this rude and indi∣gested
manner wherein your Lordship
now sees it, serv'd as an amusement to me
in the Country, when the violence of the
last Plague had driven me from the
Town. Seeing then our Theaters shut up, I was engag'd in these kind of
thoughts with the same delight with which men think upon their ab∣sent
Mistresses: I confess I find many things in this discourse which I
do not now approve; my judgment being a little alter'd since the writing
of it, but whither for the better or the worse I know not: Neither indeed
is it much material in an Essay, where all I have said is problema∣tical.
For the way of writing Playes in verse, which I have seem'd
to favour, I have since that time laid the Practice of it aside, till I
have more leisure, because I find it troublesome and slow. But I am
no way alter'd from my opinion of it, at least with any reasons which

have oppos'd it. For your Lordship may easily observe that none are
very violent against it▪ but those who either have not attempted it,
or who have succeeded ill in their attempt. 'Tis enough for me to
have your Lordships example for my excuse in that little which I have
done in it; and I am sure my Adversaries can bring no such Argu∣ments
against Verse, as the fourth Act of Pompey will furnish me
with, in its defence. Yet, my Lord, you must suffer me a little to
complain of you, that you too soon withdraw from us a contentment,
of which we expected the continuance, because you gave it us so early.
'Tis a revolt without occasion from your Party, where your merits had
already rais'd you to the highest commands, and where you have not
the excuse of other men that you have been ill us'd, and therefore laid
down Armes. I know no other quarrel you can have to Verse, then
that which Spurina had to his beauty, when he tore and mangled the
features of his Face, onely because they pleas'd too well the lookers
on. It was an honour which seem'd to wait for you, to lead out a
new Colony of Writers from the Mother Nation: and upon the first
spreading of your Ensignes there had been many in a readiness to have
follow'd so fortunate a Leader; if not all, yet the better part of Wri∣ters.
Pars, indocili melior grege; mollis & expes
Inominata perprimat cubilia.
I am almost of opinion, that we should force you to accept of the

command, as sometimes the Praetorian Bands have compell'd their
Captains to receive the Empire. The Court, which is the best and
surest judge of writing, has generally allow'd of Verse; and in the
Town it has found favourers of Wit and Quality. As for your own
particular, My Lord, you have yet youth, and ime enough to give part
of it to the divertisement of the Publick, before you enter into the se∣rious
and more unpleasant business of the world. That which the French
Poet said of the Temple of Love, may be as well apply'd to the Temple
of the Muses. The words, as near as I can remember them, were these:
La jeunesse a mauvaise grace.
N' ayant pas adorè dans le temple d' Amour:
Il faut qu'il entre, & pour le sage
Si ce nest son vray sejour
Ce'st un giste sur son passage.
I leave the words to work their effect upon your Lordship in their
own Language, because no other can so well express the nobleness of
the thought; And wish you may be soon call'd to bear a part in the affairs
of the Nation, where I know the world expects you, and wonders
why you have been so long forgotten; there being no person amongst
our young Nobility, on whom the eyes of all men are so much bent.
But in the mean time your Lordship may imitate the course of Nature,
who gives us the flower before the fruit: that I may speak to you
in the language of the Muses, which I have taken from an excellent
Poem to the King.

As Nature, when she fruit designes, thinks it
By beauteous blossoms to proceed to it;
And while she does accomplish all the Spring,
Birds to her secret operations sing.
I confess I have no greater reason, in addressing this Essay to your
Lordship, then that it might awaken in you the desire of writing
something, in whatever kind it be, which might be an honour to our
Age and Country. And me thinks it might have the same effect upon
you, which Homer tells us the fight of the Greeks and Trojans be∣fore
the Fleet, had on the spirit of Achilles, who though he
had resolved not to ingage, yet found a martial warmth to steal
upon him, at the sight of Blows, the sound of Trumpets, and the
cries of fighting Men▪ For my own part, if in treating of this sub∣ject
I sometimes dissent from the opinion of better Wits, I declare it
is not so much to combat their opinions, as to defend my own, which
were first made publick. Sometimes, like a Schollar in a Fencing∣School
I put forth my self, and show my own ill play, on purpose to be
better taught. Sometimes I stand desperately to my Armes, like the
Foot when deserted by their Horse, not in hope to overcome, but onely
to yield on more honourable termes. And yet, my Lord, this war of
opinions, you well know, has fallen out among the Writers of all Ages,
and sometims betwixt Friends. Onely it has been prosecuted by some,
lke Pedants, with violence of words, and manag'd by others like

Gentlemen, with andour and ciuility. Even Tully had a Controversie
with his dear Atticus; and in one of his Dialogues makes him sustain
the part of an Enemy in Philosophy, who in his Letters is his confi∣dent
of State, and made privy to the most weighty affairs of the Ro∣man
Senate. And the same respect which was paid by Tully to At∣ticus,
we find return'd to him afterwards by Caesar on a like occa∣sion,
who answering his Book in praise of Cato, made it not so
much his business to condemn Cato, as to praise Cicero. But that
I may decline some part of the encounter with my Adversaries, whom
I am neither willing to combate, nor well able to resist; I will give
your Lordship the Relation of a Dispute betwixt some of our Wits
upon this subject, in which they did not onely speak of Playes in Verse,
but mingled, in the freedom of Discourse, some things of the An∣cient,
many of the Modern wayes of writing, comparing those with
these, and the Wits of our Nation with those of others: 'tis true they
differ'd in their opinions, as tis probable they would: neither do I
take upon me to reconcile, but to relate them: and that as Tacitus
professes of himself, Sine studio partium aut ira: without Passion
or Interest; leaving your Lordship to decide it in favour of which part
you shall judge most reasonable, and withall, to pardon the many er∣rours
of,

