



May it please your Grace,
THE favour which Heroick Plays have lately
found upon our Theaters has been wholly
deriv'd to them, from the countenance and
approbation they have receiv'd at Court. The
most eminent persons for Wit and Honour in the Royal Circle
having so far own'd them, that they have judg'd no way so
fit as Verse to entertain a Noble Audience, or to express a no∣ble
passion. And amongst the rest which have been written
in this kind, they have been so indulgent to this Poem, as to
allow it no inconsiderable place. Since, therefore, to the Court
I owe its fortune on the Stage, so, being now more publickly
expos'd in Print, I humbly recommend it to your Graces Pro∣tection,
who by all knowing persons are esteem'd a Principal
Ornament of the Court. But though the rank which you
hold in the Royal Family, might direct the Eyes of a Poet
to you, yet your beauty and goodness detain and fix them:
High Objects, 'tis true, attract the sight; but it looks up
with pain on Craggy Rocks and Barren Mountains, and con∣tinues
not intent on any object, which is wanting in shades
and greens to entertain it. Beauty, in Courts, is so necessary
to the young, that those who are without it, seem to be there
no other purpose then to wait upon the triumphs of the fair;
to attend their motions in obscurity, as the Moon and Sars
do the Sun by day, or at best to be the refuge of those hearts

which others have despis'd; and, by the unworthiness of
both, to give and take a miserable comfort. But as needful
as beauty is, Virtue, and Honour are yet more: the reign of
it without their support is unsafe and short like that of Ty∣rants.
Every Sun which looks on Beauty wasts it; and,
when once it is decaying, the repairs of Art are of as short
continuance, as the after Spring, when the Sun is going
farther off. This, Madam, is its ordinary Fate; but
yours which is accompanied by Virtue, is not subject to that
common destiny. Your Grace has not only a long time of
Youth to flourish in, but you have likewise found the
way by an untainted preservation of your Honour, to make
that perishable good more lasting. And if Beauty like
Wines could be preserv'd, by being mix'd and embodied with
others of their own natures, then your Graces would be im∣mortal,
since no part of Europe can afford a parallel to your
Noble Lord, in masculine Beauty, and in goodliness of
shape. To receive the blessings and prayers of mankind, you
need only be seen together; we are ready to conclude that
you are a pair of Angels sent below to make Virtue amiable
in your persons, or to sit to Poets when they would pleasantly
instruct the Age, by drawing goodness in the most perfect
and alluring shape of Nature. But though Beauty be the
Theme, on which Poets love to dwell, I must be forc'd to
quit it as a private praise, since you have deserv'd those
which are more publick. For Goodness and Humanity,
which shine in you, are Virtues which concern Mankind,
and by a certain kind of interest all people agree in their com∣mendation,
because the profit of them may extend to many.

'Tis so much your inclination to do good that you stay not to
be ask'd; which is an approach so nigh the Deity, that Hu∣mane
Nature is not capable of a nearer. 'Tis my Happi∣ness
that I can testifie this Virtue of your Graces by my own
experience; since I have so great an aversion from sollici∣ting
Court Favours, that I am raady to look on those as very
bold, who dare grow rich there without desert. But I beg
your Graces pardon for assuming this Virtue of Modesty to
my self, which the sequel of this discourse will no way justi∣fie.
For in this address I have already quitted the cha∣racter
of a modest Man, by presenting you this Poem as an
acknowledgment, which stands in need of your protection;
and which ought no more to be esteem'd a Present, then it is
accounted bounty in the Poor, when they bestow a Child on
some wealthy Friend, who will better breed it up. Off-springs
of this Nature are like to be so numerous with me,
that I must be forc'd to send some of them abroad; only this
is like to be more fortunate then his Brothers, because I
have landed him on a Hospitable shore. Vnder your Patro∣nage
Montezuma hopes he is more safe than in his Native
Indies: and therefore comes to throw himself at your Graces
feet; paying that homage to your Beauty, which he refus'd
to the violence of his Conquerours. He begs only that
when he shall relate his sufferings, you will consider him as
an Indian Prince, and not expect any other Eloquence from
his simplicity, then what his griefs have furnished him
withal. His story is, perhaps the greatest, which was ever
represented in a Poem of this nature; (the action of it in∣cluding
the Discovery and Conquest of a New World.) In

it I have neither wholly follow'd the truth of the History, nor
altogether left it: but have taken all the liberty of a Poet, to
adde, alter, or diminish, as I thought might best conduce to
the beautifying of my work. It being not the business of a
Poet to represent truth, but probability. But I am not to
make the justification of this Poem, which I wholly leave to
your Graces mercy. 'Tis an irregular piece if compar'd with
many of Corneilles, and, if I may make a judgement of it,
written with more Flame then Art; in which it represents the
mind and intentions of the Author, who is with much more
Zeal and Integrity, then Design and Artifice,
MADAM,

October the 12▪ 1667.
