



FOR to whom can I dedicate this Poem, with so much justice as to you? 'Tis the representation of your own Heroe: 'tis the Picture drawen at length, which you admire and prize so much in little. None of your Ornaments are wanting; neither the Landscap of the Tower, nor the Rising Sun; nor the Anno Domini of your New Soveraign's Goronation. This must needs be a gratefull undertaking to your whole Party: especially to those who have not been so happy as to purchase the Original. I hear the Graver has made a good Market of it: all his Kings are bought up already; or the value of the remainder so inhanc'd, that many a poor Polander who would be glad to worship the Image, is not able to go to the cost of him: But must be content to see him here. I must confess I am no great Artist; but Sign-post painting will serve the turn to remember a Friend by; especially when better is not to be had. Yet for your comfort the lineaments are true: and though he sate not five times to me, as he did to B. yet I have consulted History; as Italian Painters do, when they wou'd draw a Nero or a Caligula; though they have not seen the Man; they can help their Imagination by a Statue of him, and find out the Colour∣ing from Sonius and Tacitus. Truth is, you might have spar'd one side of your Medall: the Head wou'd be seen to more advantage, if it were plac'd on a Spike of the Tower; a little nearer to the Sun.

Which wou'd then break out to better purpose. You tell us in your Preface to the No-protestant Plot, that you shall be forc'd hereaf∣ter to leave off your Modestie: I suppose you mean that little which is left you: for it was morn to rags when you put out this Medall. Never was there practis'd such a piece of notorious Impudence in the face of an Establish'd Government. I believe, when he is dead, you will wear him in Thumb-Rings, as the Turks did Scanderbeg; as if there were vertue in his Bones to preserve you against Monarchie. Yet all this while you pretend not only zeal for the Publick good; but a due veneration for the person of the King. But all men who can see an inch before them, may easily detect those gross fallacies. That it is necessarie for men in your circumstances to pretend both, is granted you: for without them there could be no ground to raise a Faction. But I would ask you one civil question, what right has any man among you, or any Association of men, (to come nearer to you) who out of Parliament, cannot be consider'd in a publick Capacity, to meet, as you daily doe, in Factious Clubs, to vilify the Government in your Discourses, and to libel it in all your Writings? who made you Judges in Israel? or how is it consistent with your Zeal of the publick welfare, to promote Sedition? Does your definition of loyal, which is to serve the King according to the Laws, allow you the licence of traducing the Executive Power, with which you own he is invested? You complain that his Majestie has lost the love and confidence of his People: and by your very urging it, you endeavour what, in you lies, to make him lose them. All good Subjects abhor the thought of Arbi∣trary Power, whether it be in one or many: if you were the Patriots you would seem, you would not at this rate incense the Multitude to assume it: for no sober man can fear it, either from the King's Dis∣position, or his Practice: or even, where you would odiously lay it, from his Ministers. Give us leave to enjoy the Government and the benefit of Laws under which we were born, and which we desire to transmit to our Posterity. You are not the Trustees of the publick Li∣berty: and if you have not right to petition in a Crowd, much less have you to intermeddle in the management of Affairs:

or to arraign what you do not like: which in effect is every thing that is done by the King and Council. Can you imagine that any reasonable man will believe you respect the person of his Majesty, when 'tis apparent that your Seditious Pamphlets are stuff'd with particular Reflexions on him? If you have the confidence to deny this, 'tis easy to be evinc'd from a thousand Passages, which I only forbear to quote, because I desire they should die and be forgotten. I bave perus'd many of your Papers: and to show you that I have, the third part of your No-ptotestant Plot is much of it stolen, from your dead Author's Pamphlet call'd, the Growth of Popery: as manifestly as Milton's defence of the English People, is from Bu∣chanan, de jure regni apud Scotos: or your first Covenant, and new Association, from the holy League of the French Guisards. Any one who reads Davila, may trace your Practices all along. There were the same pretences for Reformation, and Loyalty, the same Asper∣sions of the King, and the same grounds of a Rebellion. I know not whether you will take the Historian's word, who says it was reported, that Poltrot a Hugonot, murther'd Francis Duke of Guise by the in∣stigations of Theodore Beza: or that it was a Hugonot Minister, otherwise call'd a Presbyterian▪ (for our Church abhors so devilish a Tenent) who first writ a Treatise of the lawfulness of deposing and murthering Kings, of a different Perswasion in Religion: But I am able to prove from the Doctrine of Calvin, and Principles of Bu∣chanan, that they set the People above the Magistrate: which if I mistake not, is your own Fundamental: and which carries your Loy∣alty no further than your likeing. When a Vote of the House of Com∣mons goes on your side, you are as ready to observe it, as if it were pass'd into a Law: But when you are pinch'd with any former, and yet unrepealed Act of Paliament, you declare that in some cases, you will not be oblig'd by it. The Passage is in the same third part of the No-protestant Plot: & is too plain to be denied. The late Copy of your intended Association, you neither wholly justify nor condemn; But, as the Papists, when they are unoppos'd, fly out into all the Pageantry's of Worship; but in times of War, when they are hard press'd by Argu∣ments,

lie closs intrinch'd behind the Council of Trent: So, now, when your Affairs are in a low condition, you dare not pretend that to be a legal Combination, but whensoever you are afloat, I doubt not but it will be maintain'd and justify'd to purpose. For indeed there is nothing to defend it but the Sword: 'tis the proper time to say any thing, when men have all things in their power.
In the mean time you wou'd fain be nibbling at a parallel betwixt this Association, and that in the time of Queen Elizabeth. But there is this small difference betwixt them, that the ends of the one are directly opposite to the other: one with the Queens approbation, and conjunction, as head of it: the other without either the consent, or knowledge of the King, against whose Authority it is manifestly de∣signed. Therefore you do well to have recourse to your last Evasion, that it was contriv'd by your Enemies, and shuffled into the Papers that were seiz'd: which yet you see the Nation is not so easy to believe as your own Jury; But the matter is not difficult, to find twelve men in New-gate, who wou'd acquit a Malefactour.
I have one onely favour to desire of you at parting, that when you think of answering this Poem, you wou'd employ the same Pens a∣gainst it, who have combated with so much success against Absalom and Achitophel: for then you may assure your selves of a clear Vi∣ctory, without the least reply. Raile at me abundantly; and, not to break a Custome, doe it without wit: By this method you will gain a considerable point, which is wholly to wave the answer of my Ar∣guments. Never own the botome of your Principles, for fear they shou'd be Treason. Fall severly on the miscarriages of Government for if scandal be not allow'd, you are no freeborn subjects. If God has not bless'd you with the Talent of Rhiming, make use of my poor Stock and welcom: let your Verses run upon my feet: and for the ut∣most refuge of notorious Block-heads, reduc'd to the last extremity of sense, turn my own lines upon me, and in utter despaire of your own Satyre, make me Satyrize my self. Some of you have been driven to this Bay alreadie; But above all the rest commend me to the Non∣conformist Parson, who writ the VVhip and Key. I am afraid it is

not read so much as the Piece deserves because the Bookseller is every week crying help at the end of his Gazette, to get it off. You see I am charitable enough to doe him a kindness, that it may be publish'd as well as printed; and that so much skill in Hebrew Derivations, ma not lie for wast-paper in the Shop. Yet I half suspect he went no far¦ther for his learning, than the Index of Hebrew Names and Etymo¦logies, which is printed at the end of some English Bibles. If A∣chitophel signify the Brother of a Fool, the Author of that Poem will pass with his Readers for the next of kin; perhaps' tis the Relation that makes the kindness. Whatever the Verses are; buy 'em up I be∣seech you out of pity; for I hear the Conventicle is shut up, and the Brother of Achitophel out of service.
Now Footmen, you know, have the generositie to make a Purse, for a member of their Society, who has had his Livery pull'd over his Ears: and even Protestant Socks are bought up among you, out of veneration to the name. A Dissenter in Poetry from Sense and Eng∣lish, will make as good a Protestant Rhymer, as a Dissenter from the Church of England a Protestant Parson. Besides if you encourage ayoung Beginner, who knows but he may elevate his stilea little, above the vulgar Epithets of prophane, and sawcy Jack, and Atheistick Scribler, with which he treats me, when the fit of Enthusiam is strong upon him: by which well-mannerd and charitable Expressions, I was certain of his Sect, before I knew his name. What wou'd you have more of a man? he has damn'd me in your Cause from Genesis to the Revelations: And has half the Texts of both the Testaments against me, if you will be so civil to your selves as to take him for your interpreter; and not to take them for Irish Witnesses. After all, perhaps you will tell me, that you retain'd him only for the opening of your Cause, and that your main Lawyer is yet behind. Now if it so happen he meet with no more reply than his Predecessours, you may either conclude, that I trust to the goodness of my Cause, or fear my Adversary or disdain him, or what you please, for the short on't is, 'tis indifferent to your humble servant, whatever your Party says or thinks of him.
