



MADAM,
AMBITION is so far from being a Vice in Poets, that tis almost impossible for them to succeed without it. Imagination must be rais'd, by a desire of Fame, to a desire of Pleasing: And they whom in all Ages Poets have endeavour'd most to please, have been the Beautiful and the Great. Beauty is their Deity to which they Sacrifice, and Greatness is their Guardian-Angel which protects them. Both these are so eminently join'd in the Person of Your Royal Highness, that it were not easie for any, but a Poet, to deter∣mine

which of them out-shines the other. But I confess, MADAM, I am already byass'd in my choice: I can easily resign to others the Praise of Your Illustrious Family, and that Glory which You derive from a long-continu'd Race of Princes, famous for their Actions both in Peace and War: I can give up to the Historians of Your Country, the Names of so many Generals and Heroes which croud their Annals; and to our own, the hopes of those which You are to produce for the British Chronicle. I can yield, without envy, to the Na∣tion of Poets, the Family of Este to which Ariosto and Tasso have ow'd their Patronage; and to which the World has ow'd their Poems: But I could not without extream reluctance re∣sign the Theme of Your Beauty to another Hand. Give me leave, MADAM, to acquaint the World that I am Jea∣lous of this Subject; and let it be no dishonour to You, that after having rais'd the Admiration of Mankind, You have inspir'd one Man to give it voice. But with whatsoever Va∣nity this new Honour of being Your Poet has fill'd my mind, I confess my self too weak for the Inspiration; the Priest was always unequal to the Oracle: The God within him was too mighty for his Breast: He labour'd with the Sacred Revela∣tion, and there was more of the Mystery left behind than Di∣vinity it self could inable him to express. I can but discover a part of Your Excellencies to the World; and that too ac∣cording to the measure of my own weakness. Like those who have survey'd the Moon by Glasses, I can only tell of a new and shining World above us, but not relate the Riches and Glories of the Place. 'Tis therefore that I have already wav'd the Subject of Your Greatness, to resign my self to the Contemplation of what is more peculiarly Yours. Greatness is indeed communicated to some few of both Sexes; but Beauty is confin'd to a more narrow compass: 'Tis only in Your Sex, 'tis not shar'd by many, and its Supreme Perfection is in You alone. And here, MADAM, I am proud that I cannot flatter: You have reconcil'd the differing Judgments of Mankind: for all Men are equal in their Judgment of what is eminently best. The Prize of Beauty was disputed

only till You were seen; but now all Pretenders have with∣drawn their Claims: There is no Competition but for the se∣cond place. Even the fairest of our Island (which is fam'd for Beauties) not daring to commit their Cause against You, to the Suffrage of those who most partially adore them. Fortune has, indeed, but render'd Justice to so much Excellence, in setting it so high to publick view: or rather Providence has done Justice to it self, in placing the most perfect Workman∣ship of Heaven, where it may be admir'd by all Beholders. Had the Sun and Stars been seated lower, their Glory had not been communicated to all at once; and the Creator had want∣ed so much of His Praise, as He had made Your condition more obscure. But He has plac'd You so near a Crown, that You add a Lustre to it by Your Beauty. You are join'd to a Prince who only could deserve You: whose Conduct, Courage, and Success in War, whose Fidelity to His Royal Brother, whose Love for His Country, whose Constancy to His Friends, whose Bounty to His Servants, whose Justice to Merit, whose Invio∣lable Truth, and whose Magnanimity in all His Actions, seem to have been rewarded by Heaven by the gift of You. You are never seen but You are blest: and I am sure You bless all those who see You. We think not the Day is long enough when we behold You: And You are so much the business of our Souls, that while You are in sight, we can neither look nor think on any else. There are no Eyes for other Beauties: You only are present, and the rest of Your Sex are but the unregarded parts that fill Your Triumph. Our sight is so intent on the Object of its Admiration, that our Tongues have not leisure even to praise you: for Language seems too low a thing to express your Excellence; and our Souls are speaking so much within, that they despise all for∣reign conversation. Every man, even the dullest, is think∣ing more than the most Eloquent can teach him how to ut∣ter. Thus MADAM, in the midst of Crouds you Reign in Solitude; and are ador'd with the deepest Veneration, that of Silence. 'Tis true, you are above all mortal wishes: no man desires impossibilities, because they are beyond the reach of

Nature: To hope to be a God, is folly exalted into mad∣ness: but by the Laws of our Creation we are oblig'd to Adore him; and are permitted to love him too, at Hu∣mane distance. 'Tis the nature of Perfection to be attractive; but the Excellency of the object refines the nature of the love. It strikes an impression of awful reverence; 'tis indeed that Love which is more properly a Zeal than Passion. 'Tis the rapture which Anchorites find in Prayer, when a Beam of the Divinity shines upon them: that which makes them despise all worldly objects, and yet 'tis all but contemplation. They are seldom visited from above; but a single vision so trans∣ports them, that it makes up the happiness of their lives. Mor∣tality cannot bear it often: it finds them in the eagerness and height of their Devotion, they are speechless for the time that it continues, and prostrate and dead when it departs. That extasie had need be strong, which without any end, but that of Admiration, has power enough to destroy all other Passi∣ons. You render Mankind insensible to other Beauties: and have destroy'd the Empire of Love in a Court which was the seat of his Dominion. You have subverted (may I dare to accuse you of it) even our Fundamental Laws; and Reign absolute over the hearts of a stubborn and Free-born people tenacious almost to madness of their Liberty. The brightest and most victorious of our Ladies make daily complaints of revolted Subjects: if they may be said to be revolted, whose servitude is not accepted: for your Royal Highness is too Great, and too Just a Monarch, either to want or to receive the Homage of Rebellious Fugitives. Yet if some few among the multitude, continue stedfast to their first preten∣sions, 'tis an Obedience so luke-warm and languishing, that it merits not the name of Passion: their addresses are so faint, and their vows so hollow to their Sovereigns, that they seem only to maintain their Faith; out of a sence of Honor: they are asham'd to defist, and yet grow careless to obtain. Like despairing Combatants they strive against you as if they had beheld unveil'd, the Magical Shield of your Ariosto, which dazled the Beholders with too much bright∣ness:

they can no longer hold up their Arms, they have read their destiny in your Eyes.
Splende lo Scudo a guisa di Piropo;
E Luce altra non é tanto lucente:
Cader in terra a lo splendor fu d'vopo,
Con gli occhi abbacinati, esenza mente.
And yet, Madam, if I could find in my self the power to leave this argument of your incomparable Beauty, I might turn to one which would equally oppress me with its great∣ness. For your Conjugal Virtues have deserv'd to be set as an example, to a less-degenerate, less-tainted Age. They ap∣proach so near to Singularity in Ours,, that I can scarcely make a Panegyric to your Royal Highness, without a Satyr on many others: but your Person is a Paradice, and your Soul a Cherubin within to guard it. If the excellence of the out∣side invite the Beholders, the Majesty of your Mind deters them from too bold approaches; and turns their Admiration into Religion. Moral perfections are rais'd higher by you in the softer Sex: as if Men were of too course a mould for Heaven to work on, and that the Image of Divinity could not be cast to likeness in so harsh a Metall. Your Person is so admirable, that it can scarce receive addition, when it shall be glorify'd: and your Soul, which shines thorough it, finds it of a substance so near her own, that she will be pleas'd to pass an Age within it, and to be confin'd to such a Palace.
I know not how I am hurried back to my former Theme: I ought, and purpos'd to have celebrated those indowments and qualities of your Mind, which were sufficient, even with∣out the Graces of your Person, to render you, as you are, the Ornament of the Court, and the object of Wonder to three Kingdoms: but all my praises are but as a Bull-rush cast upon a stream, if they sink not, 'tis because they are born up by the strength of the Current, which supports their light∣ness; but they are carry'd round again, and return on the Eddy where they first began. I can proceed no farther than your

Beauty: and even on that too; I have said so little confider∣ing the greatness of the Subject; that, like him, who would lodge a Bowl upon a Precipice, either my praise falls back, by the weakness of the delivery, or staies not on the top, but rowls over, and is lost on the other side. I intended this a Dedication, but how can I consider what belongs to my self, when I have been so long contemplating on you! Be pleas'd then, Madam, to receive this Poem, without Intituling so much Excellency as yours, to the faults and imperfections of so mean a Writer: And instead of being favourable to the Piece, which merits nothing, forgive the presumption of the Author; who is, with all possible veneration,

