



'TIS enough for your Lordship to be consci∣ous to your self of having perform'd a just and honourable Action, in Redeeming this Play from the Persecution of my Enemies; but it wou'd be ingratitude in me, not to publish it to the World. That it has appear'd on the Stage is principal∣ly owing to you: That it has succeeded, is the Appro∣bation of your Judgment, by that of the Publick. 'Tis just the Inversion of an Act of Parliament: Your Lord∣ship first sign'd it, and then it was pass'd amongst the Lords and Commons. The Children of old Men are generally observ'd to be short liv'd, and of a weakly Constitution: How this may prove I know not; but hitherto it has promis'd well: And if it survive to Po∣sterity, it will carry the Noble Name of its Patron a∣long with it; or, rather, it will be carried by yours to after Ages. Ariosto, in his Voyage of Astolpho to the Moon, has given us a fine Allegory of two Swans; who, when Time had thrown the Writings of many Poets into the River of Oblivion, were ever in a readiness to secure the best, and bear them aloft, into the Temple of Im∣mortality. Whether this Poem be of that Number, is left to the Judgment of the Swan who has preserv'd it: And though I can claim little from his Justice, I may presume to value my self upon his Charity. It will be told me, That I have mistaken the Italian Poet, who

means only that some excellent Writers, almost as few in Number as the Swans, have rescued the Memory of their Patrons, from Forgetfulness and Time; when a vast Multitude of Crows and Vultures, that is, bad Scrib∣blers, Parasites, and Flatterers, oppress'd by the weight of the Names which they endeavour'd to redeem, were forc'd to let them fall again into Lethe, where they were lost for ever. If it be thus, my Lord, the Table wou'd be turn'd upon me: But I shou'd only fail in my vain Attempt: For either some other Immortal Swan, will be more capable of sustaining such a weight, or you who have so long been Conversant in the management of great Affairs, are able with your own Pen, to do Justice to your self; and, at the same time, to give the Nation a clearer and more faithful insight into those Transacti∣ons, wherein you have Worthily sustain'd so great a part. For to your Experience in State Affairs, you have also joyn'd no vulgar Erudition: Which all your Modesty is not able to conceal; for to understand critically the de∣licacies of Horace, is a height to which few of our Noble Men have arriv'd: And that this is your deserv'd Com∣mendation, I am a living Evidence; as far, at least, as I can be allow'd a Competent Judge on that subject. Your Affection to that admirable Ode, which Horace writes to his Mecaenas, and which I had the Honour to inscribe to you, is not the only Proof of this Assertion. You may please to remember, that in the late happy Conversati∣on, which I had with your Lordship at a Noble Relati∣ons of yours, you took me aside, and pleas'd your Self with repeating to me, one of the most Beautiful Pieces in that Author. It was the Ode to Barine, wherein you were so particularly affected with that Elegant Expres∣sion,

Iuvenumque prodis publica cura. There is indeed the Vertue of a whole Poem, in those words; that curiosa fe∣licitas, which Petronius so justly ascribes to our Author. The Barbarity of our Language is not able to reach it: Yet, when I have leisure, I mean to try, how near I can raise my English to his Latin: Though in the mean time, I cannot but imagine to my self, with what Scorn his Sacred Manes wou'd look on so lame a Translation as I cou'd make. His Recalcitrat undique tutus might more reasonably be apply'd to me, than he himself ap∣ply'd it to Augustus Caesar. I ought to reckon that Day, as very Fortunate to me, and distinguish it, as the An∣cients did, with a whiter Stone; because it furnish'd me with an Occasion of reading my Cleomenes to a Beauti∣ful Assembly of Ladies, where your Lordship's Three Fair Daughters, were pleas'd to Grace it with their Pre∣sence: And, if I may have leave to single out any one in particular, there was your admirable Daughter-in-law; shining, not like a Star, but a Constellation of her Self; a more true and brighter Berenice. Then it was, that whether out of your own Partiality, and Indul∣gence to my Writings, or out of Complaisance to the Fair Company, (who gave the first good Omen to my Success, by their Approbation,) your Lordship was pleas'd to add your own: And afterwards to Represent it to the Queen, as wholly Innocent of those Crimes, which were laid unjustly to its Charge. Neither am I to forget my Charming Patroness; though she will not allow my Publick Address to her, in a Dedication; but Protects me unseen, like my Guardian-Angel; and shuns my Gratitude, like a Fairy, who is Bountiful by stealth; and conceals the Giver, when she bestows the

Gift. But my Lady Sylvius has been juster to me, and pointed out the Goddess, at whose Altar I was to pay my Sacrifice and Thanks Offering. And had she been silent, yet my Lord Chamberlain himself, in restoring my Play, without any Alteration, avow'd to me, that I had the most Earnest Sollicitress, as well as the Fairest; and that nothing cou'd be refus'd to my Lady Hyde.
These Favours, my Lord, receiv'd from your Self, and your Noble Family, have encourag'd me to this Dedi∣cation; wherein I not only give you back a Play, which had you not redeem'd it, had not been mine; but also at the same time, Dedicate to you, the unworthy Author, with my inviolable Faith, and (how mean soever) my utmost Service: And I shall be proud to hold my De∣pendance on you in Chief, as I do part of my small For∣tune in Wiltshire. Your Goodness has not been wanting to me, during the Reign of my two Masters. And e∣ven from a bare Treasury, my Success has been contrary to that of Mr. Cowley; and Gideon's Fleece has then been moisten'd, when all the Ground has been dry about it. Such and so many Provocations of this nature, have concurr'd to my Invading of your Modesty, with this Address. I am sensible that it is in a manner forc'd up∣on you. But your Lordship has been the Aggressor in this Quarrel, by so many Favours, which you are not weary of conferring on me. Though at the same time, I own the Ambition on my side, to be ever esteem'd

