



SIR,
HEroique Poesie has alwayes been sacred to Princes and to Heroes. Thus Virgil inscrib'd his Aeneids to Augustus Caesar; and, of latter Ages, Tasso and Ariosto dedica∣ted their Poems to the house of Est. 'Tis, indeed, but justice, that the most ex∣cellent and most profitable kind of writing, should be addressed by Poets to such persons whose Cha∣racters have, for the most part, been the guides and patterns of their imitation. And Poets, while they imitate, instruct. The feign'd Heroe inflames the

true: and the dead vertue animates the living. Since, therefore, the World is govern'd by precept and Example; and both these can onely have in∣fluence from those persons who are above us, that kind of Poesy which excites to vertue the greatest men, is of greatest use to humane kind.
'Tis from this consideration, that I have pre∣sum'd to dedicate to your Royal Highness these faint representations of your own worth and va∣lour in Heroique Poetry: or, to speak more pro∣perly, not to dedicate, but to restore to you those Ideas, which, in the more perfect part of my characters, I have taken from you. Heroes may law∣fully be delighted with their own praises, both as they are farther incitements to their vertue, and as they are the highest returns which mankind can make them for it.
And certainly, if ever Nation were oblig'd ei∣ther by the conduct, the personal valour, or the good fortune of a Leader, the English are ac∣knowledging, in all of them, to your Royal High∣ness. Your whole life has been a continu'd Series of Heroique Actions: which you began so early that you were no sooner nam'd in the world, but it was with praise and Admiration. Even the first blossomes of your youth paid us all that could be expected from a ripening manhood. While you practis'd but the rudiments of War you out-went all other Captains: and have since found none to surpass, but your self alone. the opening of your

glory was like that of light: you shone to us from afar; and disclos'd your first beams on distant Nations. yet so, that the lustre of them was spred abroad, and reflected brightly on your native Country. You were then an honour to it, when it was a reproach to it self: and, when the fortu∣nate Usurper sent his arms to Flanders, many of the adverse party were vanquish'd by your fame, e're they try'd your valour. the report of it drew over to your Ensigns whole Troops and Compa∣nies of converted Rebels: and made them forsake successfull wickedness to follow an oppress'd and exil'd vertue. your reputation wag'd war with the Enemies of your royal family, even within their trenches; and the more obstinate, or more guilty of them, were forc'd to be spyes over those whom they commanded: lest the name of YORK should disband that Army in whose fate it was to defeat the Spaniards, and force Dunkirk to surrender. Yet, those victorious forces of the Re∣bells were not able to sustain your arms: where you charg'd in person you were a Conqueror: 'tis true they afterwards recover'd Courage; and wrested that Victory from others which they had lost to you. And it was a greater action for them to rally than it was to overcome. Thus, by the presence of your Royal Highness, the En∣glish on both sides remain'd victorious: and that Army, which was broken by your valour, be∣came a terror to those for whom they conquer'd.

Then it was that at the cost of other Nations you inform'd and cultivated that Valour which was to defend your native Country, and to vindicate its honour from the insolence of our incroaching Neighbours. When the Hollanders, not conten∣ted to withdraw themselves from the obedience which they ow'd their lawful Sovereign, affronted those by whose Charity they were first protected: and, (being swell'd up to a preheminence of Trade, by a supine negligence on our side, and a sordid parsimony on their own,) dar'd to dispute the So∣veraignty of the Seas; the eyes of three Na∣tions were then cast on you: and, by the joynt suffrage of King and People, you were chosen to revenge their common injuries▪ to which, though you had an undoubted title by your birth, you had yet a greater by your courage. Neither did the success deceive our hopes and expectati∣ons. the most glorious victory which was gain'd by our Navy in that war, was in that first engage∣ment: wherein, even by the confession of our enemies, who ever palliate their own losses, and diminish our advantages, your absolute triumph was acknowledg'd. you conquer'd at the Hague as intirely as at London. and the return of a shat∣ter'd Fleet, without an Admiral, left not the most impudent among them the least pretence for a false bon-fire, or a dissembled day of publick Thanks-giving. All our atchievements against them afterwards, though we sometimes con∣quer'd

and were never overcome, were but a copy of that victory: and they still fell short of their original. somewhat of fortune was ever wanting, to fill up the title of so absolute a defeat. or, perhaps, the Guardian Angel of our Nation was not enough concern'd when you were absent: and would not employ his utmost vigour for a less important stake than the life and honor of a Roy∣al Admiral.
And, if since that memorable day, you have had leisure to enjoy in peace the fruits of so glo∣rious a reputation, 'twas occasion onely has been wanting to your courage; for, that can never be wanting to occasion. the same ardor still incites you to Heroique actions: and the same concern∣ment for all the interests of your King and Bro∣ther, continue to give you restless nights, and a generous emulation for your own glory. you are still meditating on new labours for your self, and new triumphs for the Nation. and when our for∣mer enemies again provoke us, you will again so∣licite fate to provide you another Navy to over∣come, and another Admiral to be slain. You will, then, lead forth a Nation eager to revenge their past injuries: and, like the Romans, inexorable to Peace, till they have fully vanquish'd. Let our Enemies make their boast of a surprise; as the Samnites did of a successful stratagem: but the Furcae Caudinae will never be forgiv'n till they are reveng'd. I have alwaies observ'd in your Royal

Highness an extream concernment for the honour of your Country 'tis a passion common to you with a Brother, the most excellent of Kings: aud in your two persons, are eminent the Characters which Homer has given us of Heroique vertue: the commanding part in Agamemnon, and the executive in Achilles. And I doubt not, from both your actions, but to have abundant matter to fill the Annals of a glorious Reign: and to perform the part of a just Historian to my Royal Master, without intermixing with it any thing of the Poet.
In the mean time, while your Royal Highness is preparing fresh employments for our pens▪ I have been examining my own forces, and making tryal of my self how I shall be able to transmit you to Posterity. I have form'd a Heroe, I confess, not absolutely perfect: but of an ex∣cessive and overboyling courage. but Homer and Tasso are my precedents. both the Greek and the Italian Poet had well consider'd that a tame Heroe who never transgresses the bounds of mo∣ral vertue, would shine but dimly in an Epick poem. the strictness of those Rules might well give precepts to the Reader, but would ad∣minister little of occasion to the writer. But a character of an excentrique vertue is the more exact Image of humane life, be∣cause he not wholy exempted from its frail∣ties. such a person is Almanzor: whom I present,

with all humility, to the Patronage of your Royal Highness. I design'd in him a roughness of Chara∣cter, impatient of injuries; and a confidence of himself, almost approaching to an arrogance. but these errors are incident only to great spirits. they are moles and dimples which hinder not a face from being beautifull; though that beauty be not regular. they are of the number of those amia∣ble imperfections which we see in Mistrisses▪ and which we pass over, without a strict examination, when they are accompanied with greater graces. And such, in Almanzor, are a frank and noble openness of Nature▪ an easiness to forgive his con∣quer'd enemies; and to protect them in distress; and above all, an inviolable faith in this affection. This, Sir, I have briefly shaddow'd to your Royal Highness, that you may not be asham'd of that Heroe whose protection you undertake. Neither would I dedicate him to so illustrious a name, if I were conscious to my self that he did or said any thing, which was wholy unworthy of it. How∣ever, since it is not just that your Royal Highness shou'd defend or own, what, possibly, may be my errour, I bring before you this accus'd Almanzor, in the nature of a suspected Criminal. By the suf∣frage of the most and best he already is acquitted; and by the sentence of some, condemn'd. But, as I have no reason to stand to the award of my Ene∣mies, so neither dare I trust the partiality of my friends. I make my last appeal to your Royal

Highness, as to a Soveraign Tribunal. Heroes shou'd onely be judg'd by Heroes; because they onely are capable of measuring great and Heroick actions by the rule and standard of their own. If Almanzor has fail'd in any point of Honor, I must therein acknowledge that he deviates from your Royal Highness, who are the patern of it. But, if at any time he fulfils the parts of personal Vallour and of conduct, of a Souldier, and of a General; or, if I could yet give him a Character more advantagi∣ous than what he has; of the most unshaken friend, the greatest of Subjects, and the best of Masters, I shou'd then draw to all the world, a true resem∣blance of your worth and vertues; at least as farr as they are capable of being copied, by the mean abilities of
Sir,

