



Sir,
THe Design of Dedicating Playes, is as common and unjust, as that of desiring Seconds in a Duel. 'Tis engaging our Friends (it may be) in a senceless quarrel, where they have much to venture, without any concernment of their own. I have declar'd thus much before-hand, to prevent you from suspicion, that I intend to interest either your judgment or your kindness, in defending the Errours of this Comedy. It succeeded ill in the representation, against the opinion of many the best Judges of our Age, to whom you know I read it e're it was presented pub∣lickly. Whether the fault was in the Play it self, or in the lameness of the Action, or in the number of its Ene∣mies, who came resolv'd to damn it for the Title, I

will not now dispute: that wou'd be too like the little satisfaction which an unlucky Gamester finds in the re∣lation of every cast by which he came to lose his Mo∣ney. I have had formerly so much success, that the miscarriage of this Play was onely my giving fortune her revenge: I ow'd it her; and she was indulgent that she exacted not the paiment long before. I will therefore deal more reasonably with you, than any Poet has ever done with any Patron: I do not so much as oblige you for my sake to pass two ill houres in reading of my Play. Think, if you please, that this Dedication is onely an occasion I have taken to do my self the greatest honour imaginable with Poste∣rity; that is, to be recorded in the number of those Men whom you have favour'd with your Friendship and esteem. For, I am well assur'd, that besides the present satisfaction I have, it will gain me the great∣est part of my reputation with after-Ages, when they shall find me valuing my self on your kindness to me: I may have reason to suspect my own credit with them, but I have none to doubt of yours. And they who perhaps wou'd forget me in my Poems, wou'd remem∣ber me in this Epistle.
This was the course which has formerly been practis'd by the Poets of that Nation who were Masters of the Universe. Horace and Ovid, who had little reason to distrust their Immortality; yet took occasion to speak with honour of Virgil, Varius, Tibullus, and Pro∣pertius their Contemporaries: as if they sought in the

testimony of their Friendship a farther evidence of their fame. For my own part, I, who am the least a∣mongst the Poets, have yet the fortune to be honour'd with the best Patron, and the best Friend. For, (to omit some Great Persons of our Court, to whom I am many wayes oblig'd, and who have taken care of me, even amidst the Exigencies of a War,) I can make my boast to have found a better Mae∣cenas in the person of my Lord Treasurer Clifford, and a more Elegant Tibullus in that of Sir Charles Sedley. I have chosen that Poet to whom I would resemble you, not onely because I think him at least equal, if not superiour to Ovid in his Elegies: nor because of his quality for he was (you know) a Roman Knight as well as Ovid: but for his Candour, his Wealth, his way of Living, and particularly because of this te∣stimony which is given him by Horace, which I have a thousand times in my mind apply'd to you.
Non tu Corpus eras sine pectore; Dii tibi formam,
Dii tibi divitias dederant, artem{que} fruendi.
Quid voveat dulci Nutricula majus Alumno
Quam sapere, & fari possit quae sentiat, & cui
Gratia, forma, valetudo contingat abunde;
Et mundus victus, non deficiente crumena?
Certainly the Poets of that Age enjoy'd much hap∣piness in the Conversation and Friendship of one ano∣ther. They imitated the best way of Living, which was to pursue an innocent and inoffensive Pleasure; that which one of the Ancients called Eruditam volup∣tatem.

We have, like them, our Genial Nights; where our discourse is neither too serious, nor too light; but alwayes pleasant, and for the most part instructive: the raillery neither too sharp upon the present, nor too censorious on the absent; and the Cups onely such as will raise the Conversation of the Night, without disturbing the business of the Morrow. And thus far not only the Philosophers, but the Fathers of the Church have gone, without lessening their Repu∣tation of good Manners, or of Piety. For this reason I have often Laugh'd at the ignorant and ridi∣culous Descriptions which some Pedants have given of the Wits (as they are pleas'd to call them:) which are a Generation of Men as unknown to them, as the People of Tartary or the terra Australis are to us. And therefore as we draw Giants and Anthropophagi in those vacances of our Maps, where we have not Travell'd to discover better; so those wretches Paint leudness, Atheism, Folly, ill-Reasoning, and all man∣ner of Extravagances amongst us for want of under∣standing what we are. Oftentimes it so falls out, that they have a particular picque to some one amongst us; and then they immediately interest Heaven in their quarrel: As 'tis an usual trick in Courts; when one designs the ruine of his Enemy, to disguise his malice with some concernment of the Kings: and to revenge his own cause, with pretence of vindicating the Honour of his Master. Such Wits as they describe, I have never been so unfortunate to meet in your Com∣pany:

but have often heard much better Reasoning at your Table, than I have encounter'd in their Books. The Wits they describe, are the Fops we banish: for Blasphemy and Atheism, if they were neither Sin nor Ill Manners, are Subjects so very common, and worn so Thredbare, that people who have sence avoid them, for fear of being suspected to have none. It calls the good Name of their Wit in question, as it does the Credit of a Citizen when his Shop is fill'd with Trum∣peries, and Painted Titles in stead of Wares: we con∣clude them Bancrupt to all manner of understanding: and, that to use Blasphemy, is a kind of applying Pige∣ons to the Soles of the Feet: it proclaims their Fancy as well as judgment, to be in a desperate condition. I am sure for your own particular, if any of these Judges had once the happiness to converse with you, to hear the Candour of your Opinions; how freely you commend that wit in others, of which you have so large a Portion your self; how unapt you are to be censorious; with how much easiness you speak so many things, and those so Pointed, that no other Man is able to excell, or perhaps to reach by Study; they wou'd, in stead of your Ac∣cusers, become your Proselites. They wou'd reve∣rence so much good Sence, and so much good Nature in the same person: and come, like the Satyre, to warm themselves at that Fire, of which they were ig∣norantly afraid, when they stood at distance. But, you have too great a Reputation to be wholly free from Censure: 'tis a fine which Fortune sets upon all extra∣ordinary

persons, and from which you should not wish to be deliver'd till you are dead. I have been, us'd by my Critiques much more severely, and have more rea∣son to complain, because I am deeper tax'd for a less Estate. I am ridiculously enough accus'd to be a contemner of Universities, that is in other words, an Enemy of Learning: without the Foundation of which I am sure no Man can pretend to be a Poet. And if this be not enough, I am made a Detractor from my Predecessors, whom I confess to have been my Masters in the Art. But this latter was the accusation of the best Judge, and almost the best Poet in the Latine Tongue. You find Horace complaining, that for taxing some Ver∣ses in Lucilius, he himself was blam'd by others, though his Design was no other than mine now, to improve the Knowledge of Poetry: and it was no defence to him, amongst his Enemies, any more than it is for me, that he Prais'd Lucilius where he deserv'd it; Pa∣ginâ laudatur eâdem. 'Tis for this reason I will be no more mistaken for my good meaning: I know I ho∣nour Ben Iohnson more than my little Critiques, be∣cause without vanity I may own, I understand him bet∣ter. As for the Errors they pretend to find in me, I could easily show them that the greatest part of them are Beau∣ties: and for the rest, I could recriminate upon the best Poets of our Nation, if I could resolve to accuse another of little faults, whom at the same time I admire for great∣er Excellencies. But I have neither concernment enough upon me to write any thing in my own Defence, nei∣ther

will I gratifie the ambition of two wretched Scrib∣lers, who desire nothing more than to be Answer'd. I have not wanted Friends, even amongst Strangers, who have defended me more strongly, than my con∣temptible Pedant cou'd attacque me. For the other: he is onely like Fungoso in the Play, who follows the Fashion at a distance, and adores the Fastidius Brisk of Oxford. You can bear me witness, that I have not consideration enough for either of them to be angry: Let Maevius and Bavius admire each other, I wish to be hated by them and their Fellows, by the same reason for which I desire to be lov'd by you. And I leave it to the world, whether their judgment of my Poetry ought to be preferr'd to yours; though they are as much prejudic'd by their Malice, as I desire you should be led by your Kindness, to be partial to, Sir,

