



MY LORD,
THE Commands, with which You honour'd me some Months ago, are now perform'd: They had been sooner; but betwixt ill health, some business, and many troubles, I was forc'd to deferr them till this time. Ovid, going to his Banishment, and Wri∣ting from on Shipbord to his Friends, excus'd the Faults of his Poetry by his Misfortunes; and told them, that good Verses ne∣ver flow, but from a serene and compos'd Spirit. Wit, which is a kind of Mercury, with Wings fasten'd to his Head and Heels, can slye but slowly, in a damp air. I therefore chose rather to Obey You late, than ill: if at least I am capable of writing any thing, at any time, which is worthy Your Perusal and Your Patro∣nage. I cannot say that I have escap'd from a Shipwreck; but have only gain'd a Rock by hard swimming; where I may pant a while and gather breath: For the Doctors give me a sad assurance, that my Disease never took its leave of any man, but with a pur∣pose to return. However, my Lord, I have laid hold on the In∣terval,

and menag'd the small Stock which Age has left me, to the best advantage, in performing this inconsiderable service to my La∣dies Memory. We, who are Priests of Apollo, have not the In∣spiration when we please; but must wait till the God comes rushing on us, and invades us with a fury, which we are not able to resist: which gives us double strength while the Fit continues, and leaves us languishing and spent, at its departure. Let me not seem to boast, my Lord; for I have really felt it on this Occasion; and pro∣phecy'd beyond my natural power. Let me add, and hope to be believ'd, that the Excellency of the Subject contributed much to the Happiness of the Execution: And that the weight of thirty Years was taken off me, while I was writing. I swom with the Tyde, and the Water under me was buoyant. The Reader will ea∣sily observe, that I was transported, by the multitude and variety of my Similitudes; which are generally the product of a luxuriant Fancy; and the wantonness of Wit. Had I call'd in my Judg∣ment to my assistance, I had certainly retrench'd many of them. But I defend them not; let them pass for beautiful faults amongst the better sort of Critiques: For the whole Poem, though written in that which they call Heroique Verse, is of the Pindarique na∣ture, as well in the Thought as the Expression; and as such, re∣quires the same grains of allowance for it. It was intended, as Your Lordship sees in the Title, not for an Elegie; but a Panegy∣rique. A kind of Apotheosis, indeed; if a Heathen Word may be applyed to a Christian use. And on all Occasions of Praise, if we take the Ancients for our Patterns, we are bound by Prescription to employ the magnificence of Words, and the force of Figures, to a∣dorn the sublimity of Thoughts. Isocrates amongst the Grecian

Orators; and Cicero, and the younger Pliny, amongst the Ro∣mans, have left us their Precedents for our security: For I think I need not mention the inimitable Pindar, who stretches on these Pinnions out of sight, and is carried upward, as it were, into ano∣ther World.
This at least, my Lord, I may justly plead, that if I have not perform'd so well as I think I have, yet I have us'd my best en∣deavours to excel my self. One Disadvantage I have had, which is, never to have known, or seen my Lady: And to draw the Linea∣ments of her Mind, from the Description which I have receiv'd from others, is for a Painter to set himself at work without the living Original before him. Which the more beautiful it is, will be so much the more difficult for him to conceive; when he has only a relation given him, of such and such Features by an Acquaintance or a Friend; without the Nice Touches which give the best Resemblance, and make the Graces of the Picture. Every Artist is apt enough to flatter himself, (and I amongst the rest) that their own ocular Observations, would have discover'd more perfections, at least o∣thers, than have been deliver'd to them: Though I have receiv'd mine from the best hands, that is, from Persons who neither want a just Vnderstanding of my Lady's Worth, nor a due Veneration for her Memory.
Doctor Donn the greatest Wit, though not the best Poet of our Nation, acknowledges, that he had never seen Mrs. Drury, whom he has made immortal in his admirable Anniversaries; I have had the same fortune; though I have not succeeded to the same Genius. However, I have follow'd his footsteps in the Design of his Panegyrick, which was to raise an Emulation in the living, to

Copy out the Example of the dead. And therefore it was, that I once intended to have call'd this Poem, the Pattern: And though on a second consideration, I chang'd the Title into the Name of that Illustrious Person, yet the Design continues, and Eleonora is still the Pattern of Charity, Devotion, and Humility; of the best Wife, the best Mother, and the best of Friends.
And now, my Lord, though I have endeavour'd to answer Your Commands, yet I cou'd not answer it to the World, nor to my Conscience, if I gave not Your Lordship my Testimony of being the best Husband now living: I say my Testimony only: For the praise of it, is given You by Your self. They who despise the Rules of Virtue both in their Practice and their Morals, will think this a very trivial Commendation. But I think it the peculiar happiness of the Countess of Abingdon, to have been so truly lov'd by you, while she was living, and so greatefully honour'd, after she was dead. Few there are who have either had, or cou'd have such a loss; and yet fewer who carried their Love and Constancy be∣yond the Grave. The exteriours of Mourning, a decent Funeral, and black Habits, are the usual stints of Common Husbands: and perhaps their Wives deserve no better than to be mourn'd with Hypocrisie, and forgot with ease. But You have distinguish'd Your self from ordinary Lovers, by a real, and lasting grief for the Deceas'd. And by endeavouring to raise for her, the most durable Monument, which is that of Verse. And so it wou'd have prov'd if the Workman had been equal to the Work; and Your Choice of the Artificer, as happy as Your Design. Yet, as Phidias when he had made the Statue of Minerva, cou'd not forbear to ingrave his own Name, as Author of the Piece; so give me leave to hope,

that by Subscrving mine to this Poem, I may live by the Goddess, and transmit my Name to Posterity by the memory of Hers. 'Tis no flatery, to assure Your Lordship, that she is remember'd in the preent Age, by all who have had the Honour of her Conversation and Acquaintance. And that I have never been in any Company since the news of her death was first brought me, where they have not extoll'd her Virtues; and even spoken the same things of her in Prose, which I have done in Verse.
I therefore think my self oblig'd to thank Your Lordship for the Commission which You have given me: How I have acquitted my self of it, must be left to the Opinion of the World, in spight of any Protestation, which I can enter against the present Age, as Incompetent, or Corrupt Judges. For my Comfort they are but Englishmen, and as such, if they Think Ill of me to Day, they are inconstant enough, to Think Well of me to Morrow. And, af∣ter all, I have not much to thank my Fortune that I was born amongst them. The Good of both Sexes are so few, in England, that they stand like Exceptions against General Rules: And though one of them has deserv'd a greater Commendation, than I cou'd give her, they have taken care, that I shou'd not tire my Pen, with frequent exercise on the like Subjects; that Praises, like Taxes, shou'd be appropriated; and left almost as Individual as the Person. They say my Talent is Satyre; if it be so, 'tis a Fruitful Age; and there is an extraordinary Crop to gather. But a single hand is insufficient for such a Harvest: They have sown the Dragons Teeth themselves; and 'tis but just they shou'd reap each other in Lampoons. You, my Lord, who have the Character of Honour, though 'tis not my Happiness to know

You, may stand aside, with the small Remainders of the English Nobility, truly such, and unhurt your selves, your Selves mad Combat. If I have pleas'd You, and some few others, I have obtain'd my end. You see, I have disabled my self, like an E∣lected Speaker of the House; yet like him I have undertaken the Charge; and find the Burden sufficiently recompenc'd by the Ho∣nour. Be pleas'd to accept of these my Vnworthy Labours; this Paper Monument; and let her Pious Memory, which I am sure is Sacred to You, not only plead the Pardon of my many Faults, but gain me Your Protection, which is ambitiously sought by,
MY LORD, 
