



FOR to whom can I dedicate this Poem, with
so much justice, as to you? 'Tis the representa∣tion
of your own Heroe: 'tis the Picture drawn
at length, which you admire and prize so much in
little. None of your Ornaments are wanting; neither
the Landscap of the Tower, nor the Rising Sun; nor
the Anno Domini of your New Sovereign's Coronation.
This must needs be a gratefull undertaking to your
whole Party: especially to those who have not been so
happy as to purchase the Original. I hear the Graver
has made a good Market of it: all his Kings are
bought up already; or the value of the remainder so
inhanc'd, that many a poor Polander, who would be
glad to worship the Image, is not able to go to the
cost of him: But must be content to see him here. I
must confess I am no great Artist; but Sign-post pain∣ting
will serve the turn to remember a Friend by;
especially when better is not to be had. Yet for your
comfort the lineaments are true: and though he sate

not five times to me, as he did to B. yet I have con∣sulted
History; as the Italian Painters do, when they
wou'd draw a Nero or a Caligula; though they have
not seen the Man, they can help their Imagination
by a Statue of him, and find out the Colouring from
Suetonius and Tacitus. Truth is, you might have
spar'd one side of your Medall: the Head wou'd be
seen to more advantage, if it were plac'd on a Spike
of the Tower; a little nearer to the Sun. Which
wou'd then break out to better purpose. You tell us
in your Preface to the No-protestant Plot, that you
shall be forc'd hereafter to leave off your Modesty: I
suppose you mean that little which is left you: for it
was worn to wrags when you put out this Medall.
Never was there practis'd such a piece of notorious Im∣pudence
in the face of an Establish'd Government.
I believe, when he is dead, you will wear him in Thumb-Rings,
as the Turks did Scanderbeg; as if there
were virtue in his Bones to preserve you against Mon∣archy.
Yet all this while you pretend not onely zeal
for the Publick good, but a due veneration for the
person of the King. But all men, who can see an inch
before them, may easily detect those gross fallacies.
That it is necessary for men in your circumstances to
pretend both, is granted you; for without them there
could be no ground to raise a Faction. But I would
ask you one civil question, what right has any man a∣mong
you, or any Association of men, (to come nearer
to you,) who out of Parliament, cannot be consider'd
in a publick Capacity, to meet, as you daily do, in
Factious Clubs, to vilify the Government, in your

Discourses, and to libel it in all your Writings? who
made you Iudges in Israel? or how is it consistent with
your Zeal of the publick Welfare, to promote Sedition?
Does your definition of loyal, which is to serve the
King according to the Laws, allow you the licence
of traducing the Executive Power, with which you own
he is invested? You complain that his Majesty has lost
the love and confidence of his People; and by your very
urging it, you endeavour what in you lies, to make
him lose them. All good Subjects abhor the thought
of Arbitrary Power, whether it be in one or many:
if you were the Patriots you would seem, you would
not at this rate incense the Multitudè to assume it;
for no sober man can fear it, either from the King's
Disposition, or his Practice; or even, where you would
odiously lay it, from his Ministers. Give us leave
to enjoy the Government and the benefit of Laws
under which we were born, and which we desire to
transmit to our Posterity. You are not the Trustees
of the publick Liberty: and if you have not right
to petition in a Crdoud, much less have you to intermed∣dle
in the management of Affairs; or to arraign what
you do not like: which in effect is every thing that is
done by the King and Council. Can you imagine that
any reasonable man will believe you respect the person
of his Majesty, when 'tis apparent that you Seditious
Pamphlets are stuff'd with particular Reflexions on
him? If you have the confidence to deny this, 'tis easy
to be evinc'd from a thousand Passages, which I onely
forbear to quote, because I desire they should die and
be forgotten. I have perus'd many of your Papers;

and to shew you that I have, the third part of
your No-protestant Plot is much of it stoln from
your dead Authour's Pamphlet call'd, the Growth of
Popery; as manifestly as Milton's defence of the
English People, is from Buchanan, de jure regni apud
Scotos: or your first Covenant, and new Association,
from the holy League of the French Guisards. Any one
who reads Davila, may trace your Practices all along.
There were the same pretences for Reformation, and
Loyalty, the same Aspersions of the King, and the
same grounds of a Rebellion. I know not whether you
will take the Historian's word, who says it was re∣ported,
that Poltrot a Hugonot, murther'd Francis
Duke of Guise by the instigations of Theodore Beza:
or that it was a Hugonot Minister, otherwise call'd
a Presbyterian, (for our Church abhors so devilish a
Tenet) who first writ a Treatise of the lawfullness of
deposing and murthering Kings, of a different Perswa∣sion
in Religion: But I am able to prove from the
Doctrine of Calvin, and Principles of Buchanan, that
they set the People above the Magistrate; which if I
mistake not, is your own Fundamental; and which
carries your Loyalty no farther than your likeing.
When a Vote of the House of Commons goes on your
side, you are as ready to observe it, as if it were
pass'd into a Law: But when you are pinch'd with
any former, and yet unrepealed Act of Parliament,
you declare that in same cases, you will not be oblig'd
by it. The Passage is in the same third part of the
No-protestant Plot; and is too plain to be denied.
The late Copy of your intended Association▪ you neither

wholly justify nor condemn; But, as the Papists, when
they are unoppos'd, fly out into all the Pageantries of
Worship; but in times of War, when they are hard
press'd by Arguments, lie close intrench'd behind the
Council of Trent: So, now, when your Affairs are
in a low condition, you dare not pretend that to be a
legal Combination, but whensoever you are afloat, I
doubt not but it will be maintain'd and justify'd to
purpose. For indeed there is nothing to defend it but
the Sword: 'tis the proper time to say any thing,
when men have all things in their power.
In the mean time you wou'd fain be nibbling at a
parallel betwixt this Association, and that in the time
of Queen Elizabeth. But there is this small difference
betwixt them, that the ends of one are directly opposite
to the other: one with the Queen's approbation, and
conjunction, as head of it; the other without either
the consent, or knowledge of the King, against whose
Authority it is manifestly design'd. Therefore you doe
well to have recourse to your last Evasion, that it was
contriv'd by your Enemies, and shuffled into the Pa∣pers
that were seiz'd: which yet you see the Nation
is not so easy to believe as your own Iury; But the
matter is not difficult, to find twelve men in New-gate,
who wou'd acquit a Malefactour.
I have one onely favour to desire of you at parting,
that when you think of answering this Poem, you
wou'd employ the same Pens against it, who have com∣bated
with so much success against Absalom and
Achitophel: for then you may assure your selves of a
clear Victory, without the least reply. Raile at me

abundantly; and, not to break a Custome, doe it with∣out
wit: By this method you will gain a considerable
point, which is wholly to wave the answer of my Ar∣guments.
Never own the botome of your Principles,
for fear they shou'd be Treason. Fall severely on
the miscarriages of Government; for if scandal be not
allow'd, you are no freeborn subjects. If God has not
bless'd you with the Talent of Rhiming, make use of
my poor Stock and wellcome: let your Verses run upon
my feet: and for the utmost refuge of notorious Block∣heads,
reduc'd to the last extremity of sense, turn my
own lines upon me, and in utter despair of your own Sa∣tyre,
make me Satyrize my self. Some of you have
been driven to this Bay already; But above all the
rest commend me to the Non-conformist Parson, who
writ the Whip and Key. I am affraid it is not read
so much as the Piece deserves, because the Bookseller is
every week crying help at the end of his Gazette, to
get it off. You see I am charitable enough to doe him
a kindness, that it may be publish'd as well as printed;
and that so much skill in Hebrew Derivations, may
not lie for Wast-paper in the Shop. Yet I half suspect
he went no farther for his learning, than the Index of
Hebrew Names and Etymologies, which are printed
at the end of some English Bibles. If Achitophel
signify the Brother of a Fool, the Authour of that
Poem will pass with his Readers for the next of kin.
And perhaps 'tis the Relation that makes the kindness.
Whatever the Verses are; buy 'em up I beseech you
out of pity; for I hear the Conventicle is shut up, and
the Brother of Achitophel out of service.

Now Footmen, you know, have the generosity to
make a Purse, for a Member of their Society, who has
had his Livery pull'd over his Ears: and even Pro∣testant
Socks are bought up among you, out of venera∣tion
to the name. A Dissenter in Poetry from Sense
and English, will make as good a Protestant Rhymer, as
a Dissenter from the Church of England a Protestant
Parson. Besides, if you encourage a young Beginner,
who knows but he may elevate his style a little, above
the vulgar Epithets of prophane, and sawcy Iack, and
Atheistick Scribler, with which he treats me, when
the fit of Enthusiasm is strong upon him: by which well-manner'd
and charitable Expressions, I was certain of
his Sect, before I knew his name. What wou'd you
have more of a man? he has damn'd me in your Cause
from Genesis to the Revelations: And has half the
Texts of both the Testaments against me, if you will
be so civil to your selves as to take him for your In∣terpreter;
and not to take them for Irish Witnesses.
After all, perhaps you will tell me, that you retain'd
him onely for the opening of your Cause, and that your
main Lawyer is yet behind. Now if it so happen he
meet with no more reply than his Predecessours, you
may either conclude, that I trust to the goodness of my
Cause, or fear my Adversary, or disdain him, or what
you please, for the short on't is, 'tis indifferent to your
humble servant, whatever your Party says or thinks
of him.
