



SIR,
THAT which I here present you is Originally the Pro∣duct
of yovr own Country, since the Great Artist from
whose elaborate and curious hand I Coppy this Peice
in little, owed his Birth and Habitation to Warwickshire. I
know not therefore to whom (in the number of my Friends)
more properly to dedicate these Collections than to your self:
for thus it is an act of Justice to restore to the proper County
(in your Person who represent it) what came from thence at
first.
Nothing deterr'd my Presumption in this more than to think
I should expose the Imperfections of my Pen to so accurate
and excellent a Judgment. A Judgment that has taught you
the true use of Foreign Travails, by which you have brought
home from the politest Nations of Europe, all their Virtues and
Accomplishments, and left behind their Fopperies and Vice.
It is this Judgment that has so signalized your Merit in the
Eye of your Country, that she has justly fixt her choice on
you for one of her Representatives in our Great Senate; and
it is the same Judgment that you have since most worthily em∣ploy'd
in that High and Honourable Assembly, by assisting,
and complying with the best Methods and Endeavours for the
Publick Good: Or, to use the words of Horace,
—Quid expediat, communiter, aut melior pars,
Malis carere quaeritis laboribus.
Yours are the Publick Cares; that's your noble Province.
While I, and those in my inferiour and unactive Station, can
only wish Success to the Proceedings of such Good Patriots as
your self; Our thoughts are best imploy'd with our own pri∣vate
Business, and inoffensive Studies.

Concerning this Book, Sir, it is a Subject that gives Posterity
such a View of the decays of Time, and the Inconstancy of
Fortune, as the like cannot, perhaps, be produced in the Histo∣ry
of any other Nation Since of all that stupendious number
of Monastick Foundations in England and Wales, the
continued Work of many Ages, by which the greatest Kings,
Princes, and Noblemen of this Island were once thought to
have eternized their names, and in those magnificent and costly
Structures to have built themselves so many Monuments as lasting
as the Earth they stood on, not one remains at this day; nay
the very Ruines of many are become invisible. To this pur∣pose
(tho' on a different occasion) a modern French Poet hath
well exprest himself in these Lines,
Aussi le temps a fait sur ces Masses hautaines
D'ilustres chastimens des Vanitez humaines.
Ces Tombaux sont tombez, and ces superbes Rois
Sous leur chute sont morts une seconde fois.
And yet their Memory still lives in our History and Records;
so much more durable and lasting is Paper than Brass and
Marble. For this we are heholding to the Labours of your
Sir William Dugdale, a Person so highly meritorious in the study,
and discovery, of our English Antiquities, that his Reputation
can never die among the learned.
Warwickshire has certainly produced two of the most famous
and deserving Writers, in their several ways, that England can
boast of; a Dugdale, and a Shakespear, both Williams; a name
that has been of eminent Grace to this County in many Instan∣ces:
nor will it ever cease to be so while you are living.
I might here enlarge in your just Encomium, but I fear to
displease you even with truth, when it must be so very much to
your Commendation. I know your Modesty as well as Merits,
and I have ever observed that Praise is most uneasie to those who
best deserve it. I will therefore only add that I am,
SIR,

