



SIR,
THE Relation, which I stand unto you in, ha∣ving been made Signal, at the first, by your very great Uprightness and Generosity, and ever since, foster'd by your
 no less Love and Bounty, I have often wish'd I could add one more Ornament to it, by ma∣king it remarkable in its Grati∣tude. Could I thus do, that Fidelity, at least, and Incorrupt∣ness in Patronage, which is the more your Own, by being so little the Virtue of the Age, might, in hopes of like Success, be by Others in like manner Pra∣ctised. But I am very sensible how far, in this respect, my Pow∣er is short of my Desires: And yet I need not be over-much concern'd that so it is; since a Conscionable Endeavour to dis∣charge mine Office is by You esteemed the best Requital: And, in this, I trust, I shall
 never, to my Ability, be wan∣ting. However, Sir, at the Persuasions of some, whose Judg∣ment I much esteem, (if their Kindness to me hath not som∣thing biass'd it,) I have presu∣med to offer these Discourses, (such as they be,) as a publick Acknowledgment of your many Favours. I can say little for them, but that I meant them Pi∣ously; and for their Subjects sake, I do not altogether Despair of their being accepted: Which, it may be, they the rather will be, because they are, in part, the effect of that Sacred Functi∣on, in which your free and un∣sought Munificence gave me the first Encouragements. Neither,
 by being your Peculiar, would I have them Unserviceable to the good of Others more at large; of which, yourself both have been, are, and yet further will be, so Worthy an Instrument. It is too manifest, Sir, that the most do look upon the Divine Laws as a Task, and have a se∣cret Grudging while they Obey them; such as a Slave perceives under a Burden, which he bears with Discontent, and would fain throw off. I am therefore not unwilling to contribute that little which I can, to the Curing of this Malady; by making out unto Men, that our Saviours Commands have in them what may strongly allure our Love;
 as being the highest Accom∣plishment and Happiness of our Nature; and thereupon should be desired and delighted in: And that the Violation of these Com∣mands is a thing Foul and Odi∣ous, as casting the greatest Stain and Deformity upon Men; and should therefore be shunn'd and abhorr'd. I must confess, there may seem but little need of such Treatises as This; because our Nation abounds with so many, and so very good ones; and, I fear, their Number, with some, taketh away from their Value. But, considering that there is a Sphere, in which some Discour∣ses will be more Active than others, though of greater Worth;
 and that Acquaintance, Good Will and Curiosity, will som∣times bid Take up and Read, when otherwise the Book would have lain clos'd and untouch'd; I could not tell, but it might be so with This. And I would hope, that the Favour which I have found in these parts, and Your Name prefixed, will, through Gods Blessing, make way for, and give a more kindly Ope∣ration unto, the ensuing Dialogue. And while the Age is, at the present, so hotly engaged in the Disputing and Controversial Way, possibly, Sir, a quiet and peaceable Discourse, of things that highly concern all, may be thought not Unseasonable; whe∣ther,
 as an Admonition to some, who, intent upon what they should righty Think, are less mindful of what they should religiously Do; Or, as a Re∣freshment to others, who, wea∣ry of Contention, and Fear∣ful of the Event, find their chief Rest in God, and his Righteous Laws. The Names which carry on this Dialogue have their Honours in Sacred VVrit; and do import by their Signification very VVorthy Persons. And such I was willing they should be; THIS a Lover of God; THAT a Pious and Good Instru∣cter; that their Words might sway the more with myself, when I should think it was not I, but
 They, that Spake; and that, with Others also, who should please to Read them, they might bear a greater Authority than from Me they could have had. And though, I doubt, they are much short of what they should be, yet the less Knowing, if Attentive, will find what they may be informed by; and the more Understanding, if Religi∣ous, what they will not utterly dislike. But, Sir, whatever the following Sheets will be to O∣thers, to yourself they are no more than a bare Signification of Respect; seeing they can add little to your Knowledge, which is large and extensive; and are not wanted by your Practice,
 which few have the Heart to reach unto. It is, I know, more easie to You to Do worthy Acti∣ons, than pleasing to Hear of them, when done: But I cannot, in Gratitude, as I serve at the Altar, but, amongst many Others, take notice of One, viz. The Honorary Respect you have shew'd to the Church, in freely giving up your Impropriate Tithes, as an Addition to her Maintenance. I hope it will be returned into your Bosom with large Advantage; since, by those Few that have prevail'd with themselves to do the like, it hath been found a sure way for the be∣ing Blest. And if more, who have the Power, durst make the
 Experiment, I question not, but They also would find it so to be.
That you may long Live, and have an Increase of Happi∣ness with the Increase of your Years, is the Prayer of,
Honoured SIR,

