



THAT all things perish by Age and time, or some unhappy accidents, is a thing not to be denied; the consi∣deration whereof, hath not a little incited me to the undertaking of this present work; which, after no small cost and pains, being thus finished, I offer unto you my Noble Coun∣triemen, as the most proper Persons, to whom it can be presented; wherein you will see very much of your worthy Ancestors, to whose memory I have erected it, as a Monumentall Pillar, and to shew in what Honour they lived in those flourishing Ages past.
In this kind, or not much different, have divers persons in Forrein parts, very learnedly written; some whereof I have noted in my Preface: And I could wish that there were more that would adventure in the like manner for the rest of the Counties of this Nation, considering how acceptable those are, which others have already performed, though but brief∣ly; viz. the Perambulation of Kent, by Mr. Lambard: The Survey of Cornwall, by Mr. Carey of Anthonie: The Descri∣ption of Leicestershie, by Mr. Burton; and the Antiquities of Canterbury, by my speciall friend Mr VVilliam Somner: To which I may adde A short view of Staffordshire, by Mr. Samp∣son Erdswike (late of Sandon in that Countie) not yet publisht; a Gentleman whose memorie is very precious in those parts for his great knowledge in Antiquities.
What I have said of our VVarwick-shire Families, is whil'st

they have been seated in the Countie; and, where I could, pointing briefly at their extractions: for to have gone farther would have been both improper, as out of my bounds, and impossible for me to effect, as may well be deemed by those that understand what a taske it is to find out authorities for the asserting of no more than one Descent. Great is the commen∣dation that is justly due to most of you, for promoting this publique work, by so noble a freedom to me in the sight of your antient Charters and Evidences, which have afforded al∣so many notable discoveries in relation to others aswell as your selves: Nor is it a little honour you deserve for that pious, though due respect, shewed to your dead Ancestors, by repre∣senting to the world a view of their Tombes, and in some sort preserving those Monuments from that fate, which Time, if not contingent mischief, might expose them to.
But principally must I acknowledge the signall furthe∣rance, which this Work hath received by my much honou∣red Friend Sir Simon Archer Knight, a person indeed natural∣ly qualified with a great affection to Antiquities, and with no small pains and charge, a diligent Gatherer and preserver of very many choice Manuscripts, and other rarities, whereof I have made speciall use, as almost every page in the Book will manifest.
That this my endeavour will have a candid acceptance, I no whit doubt; my principall ayme having been, by setting before you the noble and eminent Actions of your worthy Ancestors, to incite the present and future ages to a vertuous imitation of them; the continued welfare, and lasting honour of your selves and hopefull posterity, being the unfeigned wishes, of

