



SIR,
ATrifle of this kind is so little worthy your attention, that I know not how to make a fair way for its appearance, and beg you to give it audience. The Muses are become so prostitute, that every Enthusiast begets a work on'em; Plays are grown meer Found∣lings, and generated so fast, that we find one or more laid at the door of every Noble-Man; and these impudent Begetters are not satisfy'd that you give their unlawful Issue a maintenance and reering, but have the Conscience also to expect a Reward for easing themselves on you of their ungodly burthen. Sir, I must confess I am little better than a lewd Sinner of this Order, but have so much Grace and Modefy at least to re∣quire no Recompense where I ought to be begging Pardon for committing a slip of this nature. I am confident I cou'd not chuse a more indulgent Foster-Father; and tho' my very Name bears an accusation against me, yet I have the honour also to be related to the Muses by the Mothers side; for you your self have been guilty of Poetry, and a Family Vice is there∣fore the more excusable in me, who am unluckily a Poet by descent. Poee is a Noble Exercise, and like a reserv'd Game seems intended wholly for the recreation of Learned Gentlemen, or such at least as have had libe∣ral Education, and these have still succeeded best in it: But we see the illiterate breaking in daily on the Quarry, and even those assuming, to themselves the name of Poets, who never had any other call to that Art

beside the hope of a third day. If one half of us who set up for making Plays, understood what Horace says in these Lines, it may be we should not vainly presume to think our selves what indeed we are not.
Descriptas servare Vices, operumque Colores, Cur Ego, si nequeo, ignoroque Poeta salutor.
Shakespear among all the Writers of our Nation may stand by him∣self as a Phoenix, the first and last of his Order; in whom bounteous Nature wonderfully supply'd all the parts of a great Poet, and Excellent Oratour; and of whom alone one may venture boldly to say, that had he had more Learning, perhaps he might have been less a Poet. 'Tis cer∣tain the good nature of the Town suffers any thing for the sake of Novelty and Entertainment, however meagre, and the encouraging some miserable Writers, is to be allow'd more an act of Charity than Judgment; for tho' Poverty be generally the end of a Poet, I think it is but a very la∣mentable beginning. There is a large difference between those, who fol∣lowing the itch of gaining empty applause, mispend their time in writing themselves into necessity, and such who spend their time in writing them∣selves out of it; and where the Muse begins with the want of a Meals∣meat. The former might be any thing else better than what they chuse to be; the latter, because they can be nothing else, wou'd fain be Poets. 'Tis dangerous making a Pastime of any one thing so long, that at last we are glad to embrace it as a Profession; like those, who after they have melted all their Substance in search of the Philosopher's-Stone, are forc'd in the end to turn Chymists. But of this enough; for I am al∣ready conscious to my self of deviating something from my Theme, and can only form this application out of what I have said, that you, Sir, have prudently known how to make the best use of your Excellent Talent in this kind, by applying it to your diversion, and the unbending your Mind. By these means, you have happily given our Country a great Poet in your Writings; and at the same time have not omitted the more necessary part of giving her a Great States-Man, and Heroe; to which Emincy your Birth, Courage, and Capacity have equally rais'd you. And shou'd I enlarge on these Heads, I am confident the World wou'd not tax me of the least flattery, and I shou'd only be guilty of not gi∣ving you your due; but you are reserv'd for a better Pen, and silence

therefore is a good fault in me. I have only now to beg pardon for sending so mean a Trifle so long a Voyage; 'tis so full of faults I know not how to give it the name of a Play. The Italians when they know not what to make of a thing, call it Un Pasticcio Inglese, what kind Complement they intend our Country in the Expression I know not, but I believe they mean no better than a Hotch-podge. 'Tis my first Poetical Cookery of this sort, and whatever it be, I humbly submit it to your Censure, but more to your Patronage; and with it,
Sir, 
Rome, August the 20th, 1695. New-Style.
