



My Lord,
SInce I cannot promise you much of Poetry in my Play, 'tis but
reasonable that I shou'd secure you from any part of it in my
Dedication. And indeed I cannot better distinguish the exactness
of your taste from that of other men, than by the plainness and
sincerity of my Address. I must keep my Hyperboles in reserve for men
of other understandings: An hungry Appetite after praise: and a
strong digestion of it, will bear the grossnesse of that diet: But one
of so criticall a judgement as your Lordship, who can set the bounds of
just and proper in every subject, would give me small encouragement
for so bold an undertaking. I more than suspect, my Lord, that you
wou'd not do common Justice to your self: and therefore, were I to
give that Character of you, which I think you truly merit, I wou'd
make my appeal from your Lordship to the Reader, and wou'd justify
my self from flattery by the publique voice, whatever protestation you
might enter to the contrary. But  find I am to take other measures with
your Lordship; I am to stand upon my guard with you, and to ap∣proach
you as warily as Horace did Augustus.

Cui male si palpere, recalcitrat undique tutus.
An ill tim'd, or an extravagant commendation, wou'd not pass upon
you: but you wou'd keep off such a Dedicator at arms end; and send
him back with his Encomiums, to this Lord, or that Lady, who stood
in need of such triffling merchandise. You see, my Lord, what an awe
you have upon me, when I dare not offer you that incense, which wou'd
be acceptable to other Patrons: but am forc'd to curb my self, from a∣scribing
to you those honours, which even an Enemy cou'd not deny
you. Yet I must confess I never practis'd that virtue of moderation
(which is properly your Character) with so much reluctancy as
now. For it hinders me from being true to my own knowledge, in not
witnessing your worth; and deprives me of the only means which I had
left to shew the world that true honour and uninteressed respect which
I have always payed you. I would say somewhat, if it were possible,
which might distinguish that veneration have for you, from the
flatteries of those who adore your fortune. But the eminence of
your condition, in this particular, is my unhappiness: for it renders
whatever I would say suspected. Professions of Service, submissions,
and attendance, are the practise of all men to the great: and com∣monly
they who have the least sincerity, perform them best; as
they who are least ingag'd in love, have their tongues the freest to
counterfeit a passion: for my own part, I never cou'd shake off the
rustique bashfulness which hangs upon my nature; but valluing my
self, at as little as I am worth, have been affraid to render even
the common duties of respect to those who are in power. The Ce∣remonious
visits which are generally payed on such occasions, are
not my tallent. They may be real even in Courtiers; but they ap∣pear
with such a face of interest, that a modest man wou'd think
himself in danger of having his sincerity mistaken for his design.
My congratulations keep their distance, and pass no farther than
my heart. There it is, that I have all the joy imaginable when I see
true worth rewarded; and virtue uppermost in the world.
If therefore there were one to whom I had the honour to be
known; and to know him so perfectly, that I could say without
flattery, he had all the depth of understanding that was requisite
in any able Statesman, and all that honesty which commonly is
wanting; that he was brave without vanity, and knowing with∣out
positiveness: that he was loyall to his Prince, and a lover of
his Country; that his principles were full of moderation, and all
his Councils such as tended to heal and not to widen the breaches
of the Nation: that in all his conversation there appear'd a na∣tive
candour, and a desire of doing good in all his actions; if such

an one whom I have describ'd; were at the helm, if he had risen
by his merits, and were chosen out in the necessity and pressure of
affairs, to remedy our confusions by the seasonableness of his ad∣vice,
and to put a stop to our ruine, when we were just rowl∣ing
downward to the precipice, I shou'd then congratulate the Age
in which I liv'd, for the common safety; I should not despair
of the Republique though Hannibal were at the gates; I should
send up my vows for the success of such an action as Virgil did on
the like occasion for his Patron, when he was raising up his country
from the desolations of a civill war.
Hunc saltem everso juvenem succurrere seclo,
Ne superi prohibete.
I know not whether I am running, in this extasy which is now
upon me: I am almost ready to reassume the ancient rights of Po∣etry;
to point out, and Prophecy the man, who was born for
no lesse an undertaking▪ and whom posterity shall bless for its
accomplishment. Methinks I am already taking fire from such a
Character, and making room for him, under a borrow'd name
amongst the Heroes of an Epique Poem. Neither could mine, or
some more happy Genius, want encouragement under such a
Patron.
Pollio amat nostram, quamvis sit rustica Musam.
But these are considerations afar off my Lord: the former part
of the Prophecy must be first accomplish'd: the quiet of the ation
must be secur'd; and a mutuall trust, betwixt Prince and people be
renew'd: and then this great and good man will have leisure for the or∣naments
of peace: and make our language as much indebted to his care,
as the French is to the memorie of their famous Richelieu. You know
My Lord, how low he lay'd the foundations of so great a work:
That he began it with a Grammar and a Dictionary; without
which all those Remarques and Observations, which have since
been made, had been perform'd to as little purpose as it wou'd
be to consider the furniture of the Rooms before the contrivance
of the House. Propriety must first be stated, ere any measures of
elegance can be taken. Neither is one Vaugelas sufficient for
such a work. 'Twas the employment of the whole Academy
for many years, for the perfect knowledge of a Tongue, was
never attain'd by any single person. The Court, the Colledge,
and the Town, must be joyn'd in it. And as our English is a
composition of the dead and living Tongues, there is requir'd a

perfect knowledge, not onely of the Greek and Latine, but of
the Old German, the French and the Italian: and to help all
these, a conversation with those Authours of our own, who have
written with the fewest faults in prose and verse. But how bar∣barously
we yet write and speak, your Lordship knows, and I
am sufficiently sensible in my own English. For I am often put
to a stand, in considering whether what I write be the Idiom of
the Tongue, or false Grammar, and nonsence couch'd beneath that
specious Name of Anglieisme. And have no other way to clear
my doubts, but by translating my English into Latine, and there∣by
trying what sence the words will bear in a more stable lan∣guage.
I am desirous if it were possible, that we might all write
with the same certainty of words and purity of phrase, to which
the Italians first arriv'd, and after them the French: At least
that we might advance so far, as our Tongue is capable of such
a standard. It wou'd mortify an English man to consider, that
from the time of Boccace and of Petrarche, the Italian has varied
very little: And that the English of Chaucer their contemporary
is not to be understood without the help of an Old Dictionary.
But their Goth and Vandall had the fortune to be graffed on a
Roman stock: Ours has the disadvantage, to be founded on the
Dutch. We are full of Monosyllables, and those clog'd with con∣sonants,
and our pronunciation is effeminate. All which are ene∣mies
to a sonnding language: 'Tis true that to supply our po∣verty,
we have trafficqued with our Neighbour Nations; by
which means we abound as much in words, as Amsterdam does in
Religions; but to order them, and make them usefull after their
admission is the difficulty. A greater progress has been made in
this, since his Majesties return, then perhaps since the conquest to
his time. But the better part of the work remains unfinish'd:
And that which has been done already, since it has only been in
the practise of some few writers, must be digested into Rules
and Method; before it can be profitable to the General.
Will your Lordship give me leave to speak out at last? and to
acquaint the world, that from your encouragement and patro∣nage,
we may one day expect to speak and write a language,
worthy of the English wit, and which foreigners may not dis∣dain
to learn. Your birth, your Education, your naturall en∣dowments,
the former Employments which you have had abroad,
and that which to the joy of good men you now exercise at
home, seem all to conspire to this design: the Genius of the Na∣tion
seems to call you out as it were by name, to polish and a∣dorn
your native language, and to take from it the reproach of
its barbarity. 'Tis upon this encouragement that I have adven∣tur'd

on the following Critique, which I humbly present you to∣gether
with the Play: In which, though I have not had the lei∣sure,
nor indeed the encouragement to proceed to the Principal
Subject of it, which is the words and thoughts that are sutable
to Tragedie; yet the whole discourse has a tendency that
way, and is preliminary to it. In what I have already done, I
doubt not but I have contradicted some of my former opinions,
in my loose Essays of the like nature: but of this, I dare af∣firm,
that it is the fruit of my riper age and experience, and
that self-love, or envy have no part in it. The application to
English Authours is my own, and therein perhaps I may have
err'd unknowingly: But the foundation of the rules is reason, and
the authority of those living Critiques who have had the honour
to be known to you abroad, as well as of the Ancients, who are
not lesse of your acquaintance. Whatsoever it be, I submit it to
your Lordships Judgment, from which I never will appeal, un∣lesse
it be to your good nature, and your candour. If you can
allow an hour of leisure to the perusal of it, I shall be fortunate
that I cou'd so long entertain you; if not, I shall at least have
the satisfaction to know, that your time was more usefully employ'd
upon the publique. I am,
My Lord,

