



My Lord,
A Person of the highest Rank and Honour, to whom I cannot deny any thing, having obliged me to publish the Discourse I delivered the day of my Abjuration. I thought my self bound in duty to address it to a Bishop; these being the fittest Judges of such things, whom God has placed in his Church, instead of the Apostles, to hinder Her departing from the conduct of His Rules and Spirit.
I had no need of long considering, my Lord,
to make choice of you, among so many Bishops, full of Zeal and Learning God has blessed England with. He has indued you with all the parts of an excellent Bishop, and your Honour is no less to be commended for the holiness of your Life, than for the vastness of your Knowledge.
I shall not speak, my Lord, of the greatness of your Birth: It is known by all the World, and is the least of the Blessings God has favoured you with.
The Glory of a Father kill'd in the Ser∣vice of a King, who can never be remembred by his Subjects without admiration and grief; and the deserts of a Brother highly placed in the World, are not the things you put the greatest value upon. You are more concerned for the interests of the Church, and you do for Her what they have done for the State. You repair the Church, for whose defence they fought: and you are no less distinguished by the virtues that make men Saints, than they have been by those that make Hero's.
'Tis a Right, my Lord, by the consent of all done you, and we wonder as much, at
the modesty you keep in a dignity so eminent as the Episcopal Function, and that uniform and irreprehensible conduct the Apostle requires in a Bishop, that appears in all your actions.
'Tis also the judgment of the best enligh∣tened Monarch in the World, and His Maje∣sty having made you Dean of His Royal Chap∣pel, and keeping you always by His Sacred Person, shews the high esteem he has for you. He was willing that the Court you had in∣structed by your Learned Sermons, should be edified also by your example, and that, that elevation which so many times discovers the faults of others, might cause your great parts to shine the better.
'Tis for this same reason, my Lord, I take the freedom to present your Honour with this Discourse, I dare hope you will receive it, with that goodness you have shewn me, and which ingages me my whole Life to be with a profound respect,
My Lord,

