



Right Worshipful, and much honored!
HAd this Filius doloris mei Gen. 35.48. Ben-oni died in the ar, and been interred with the Honorable Ladie, it had made no addition to My Sorrow. Might I have had my Option, either the Funeral had found mee a silent Mourner, or these Funeral Notes had not needed a gentle Reader. But I was in a manner—Scripta di∣volgata sunt, Amicûm sum f su, non me âpte audaciâ. Lips. Epist. st p. 20. necessitated, as before to the Pulpit, so now to the Pres my former relation to your Noble Familie, (where I had the honor to bee Preacher three years)
 not excusing mee from the one, nor yourPietas non so∣lùm erga De∣um, sed etiam parentes & op∣timè meritos usurpatur. Hinc pius Ae∣neas. Et illud Ciceronis, Ego omni officio ac potiùs pietate, &c. sic ep. 9. l. 1. & 6. l. 2. Pietie to∣ward your dearest Parent from the other. Howbeit my slow motion toward the Press may bee sufficient evidence, that, although I have an hand in this Pub∣lication, I had no heart to it. Not that there is in mee the least unwillingness to serv you, and to do all the honor I can to the memorie of Her, to whom both my self and mine were so much obliged: But that I am sensible of the imperfections of my Funeral-service; (alas! what could bee performed by a man of so imperfect health, and withal so full of various necessarie emploiments, as I then was?) and am not ignorant that the endevours of my best health, and greatest vacancie, would have subsided much below her excellent Worth. Add hereunto the Distemper of the Times, casting great dis-respect, as uponNon solùm tempora iniqua literis sunt, sed etiam judicia hominum. Uti∣nam fallar! sed ut haeres fluút, Domitiani e∣dicto opus non erit; bonae ar∣tes brevi in exsilium ibunt suâ sponte. Lip. Ep. Qu. p. 201.
Dixeris haec inter varicosos Centuriones,
Continuò crassum ridet Vulfenius in∣geris,
Et centum Graecos curto centurse lice∣tur, Pers. St. 5. secu∣lar Learning, the necessarie and neat Handmaid; so upon Sacred Divinitie, the never enough honored & admired Mistress. Divinitie finde's but little huma∣nitie among manie men. Even they that heretofore have said, How beautiful are the Feet of them that preach the Gospel of Peace, and bring glad tidings of good things? and if it had been possible would have plucked out their own eies, and giv'n them to their pious and painful Ministers, are now readie to pluck out their Mini∣ster's eies, and to pluck meat from their mouths, and to pluck them from their Pulpits, and to trample them under their feet. They cannot see so much beau∣tie in their Faces now, as they did in their Feet here∣tofore; when they saw their Faces (as the Council did Stephen's) as if they had been the faces of
 Angels. They saie unto them, as Korah and his Complices said to Moses and Aaron, Yee take too much upon you, seeing all the Congrega∣tion are holie, everie one of them, and the Lord is among them: Wherefore then lift you up your selvs above the Congregation of the Lord? Numb. 16.3. or at least as Miriam and Aaron said against Moses, Hath the Lord in∣deed spoken onely by Moses? hath hee not spoken also by us? Numb. 12.2. and, conceiting them as useless and dangerous as the brazen Serpent at last was, they would as gladly (and think they might as righteously) break them in pieces as Heze∣kiah did it, 2 Kings 18.4. And how fare's it with orthodox, searching, settling Discourses, delivered to the Ear, and thence commended to Publick View? Never was there greater need of such, and never a greater neglect of them. Of Hundreds, each where∣of may challenge an Hic meret aera liber Sosiis &c. it may now bee said, Quis leget haec? vel duo, vel nemo. Divinitie hath had of late but few Readers; and manie Learned, Godlie, Reverend Divines but few Hearers. Everie Ignis Fatuus hath been followed as if it were the Star that led to Christ: and everie blazing Comet more looked upon and delighted in then the fountain of Light. Rush∣candles have been lighted at Mid-daie, and a crie made, O what blessed Lights are here! and the Sun, though shining in his strength, made nothing of in comparison. Now what. Evils do these Co∣mets portend? May his Prophesie prove the falsest that ever was, that shall fore-tell the extirpation of
 a learned and faithful Ministrie, the extinction of the liberal Sciences, the putting out of the two eies of the Land; our relaps into Barbarism and Atheism, and God's heaviest Judgments breaking us into pieces. O may wee never hear Lo-ruhamah, Lo-ammi; nor saie Icabod; nor see Magor missabib. Our provocations have been high; were our invoca∣tions strong, and our return to our offended God spee∣die, peradventure our Land might yet bee called Beulah, and Hephzibah; wee might beeIsai. 62.3, 4. a crown of glorie in the hand of the Lord, and a royal diademe in the hand of our God. What will be∣com of us, whether wee shall bee a People anie longer or not, God onelie know's. If hee shall not forthwith proceed to Judgment, and cut us off, our iniquities beeing full, and crying for vengeance, wee must needs acknowledg that his Mercies are admirable, and that hee deal's not with us after the manner of men. If hee shall,Felices ambo tempestivéque sepulti. how gratiously hath hee deal't with your Mo∣ther in taking her awaie from the evil to com! Your Father hee took awaie before the late War, and so secured from it: Your Mother hee left behinde, and secured in it. Scarce was there anie Hous in the Kingdom that enjoied such a Sabbath from Sorrow as Her's did. For whereas most great Houses were deserted by the Inhabitants, not daring to continue in them, or to leav behinde them almost anie of their Goods: Manie rifled by rude Harpyes, and made as emptie as when they were newly erected; other's filled with bitter lamentation for abuses offered to the weaker sex, and carrying awaie the Master, or som of his Children: and som, either burn't down to the
 ground, so that their places know them no more, or made utterly unfit for habitation: It pleased God to free Her's, almost to a miracle, from all these mise∣ries. Shee had Peace within her wals,Psal. 122.7. and plen∣tie and prosperitie with it. Though men of War came frequently thither in great multitudes, they de∣ported themselvs there, and departed thence, like Sons of Peace. Their Quarters they alwaies left free, except from Free-quarter. Shee made the most High her habitation,Psal. 91.9. and Hee blessed her Dwel∣ling place. Shee delighted in Him, and Hee in Her. Shee sincerely served Him, and Hee gratiously saved Her. Should new Storms arise, (and wee have no caus of confidence that God hath left of Storming England) you know whither, and by whose Exam∣ple, to repair for Shelter and Succour. The Glorie of Children, (Solomon tell's us) are their Parents.Prov. 17.6. Your's, having been so ennobled with all Virtues, that it might bee said of them, Deus est in utroque Parente, have exceedingly honored you. You will as much honor. Them, and much more your selvs, by a livelie representation of all their Virtues. It is far moreNè tibi ad∣scripseris vetu∣sta stemmata, aut à majori∣bus partam laudem: pul∣crius crit de∣cus, cujus autor ipse, quàm cu∣jus haeres fue∣ris. Joach. Fort. Ring. de ratione Stud. p. 166. honorable thus to reflect and return ho∣nor, then to receiv it. And this as it is alreadie don by som, so it is exspected from all. You are all looked upon as lucida sidera, shining Stars; whose motion must bee regular, and influence singular. The Irish use to require of their Children whatsoever Excellencies were in all their Ancestors. That you may do what is required of them, you need not go further then to your immediate Parents; in whom there was a collection of all the several Excellencies
 of your most antient and honorable Familie; and whom if you shall resemble, as Constantine's Sons did him, to the. Euseb. life, you shall greatly honor, as Them and your selvs, so Almightie God also. Who require's to bee honored by all, but specially by them whom hee hath specially honored. Such as have the greatest outward Privileges, are apt to conceit themselvs privileged persons; and to live to Themselvs, doing nothing for God, that hath don so much for them. As the poorer sort of people in Swethland were wont to saie, It belonged not to them to sanctifie the Sabbath, but to the Rich: So som Rich, almost everie where seem to saie, It be∣long's not to them to serv, and do for God, but to the Poor, who have more— meae Stultitiam pa∣tiuntur opes, tibi parvula res est. Hor. need of him. These must know, that the more liberally God sow's his Fa∣vors, the larger crop of Honor hee look's to reap. Do you, I beseech you, what you can for God; laie out your selvs to the utmost; improve your Talents, your Los∣ses, the Times. Your Talents must not bee napkin'd up; nor your Candle lighted and put under a bushel. Your losses are exceeding great. Parents are pretious. Theog. Mercies; such as Your's, invaluable. When God made you Fatherless, hee intended you should the more look up to Heaven, and seek a Father there. Now hee hath made you Orphans, hee purpose's wholly to wean you from transitorie Comforts, and to make you more hunger after himself, depend on his Providence, cast anchor where you cannot miscarrie. Schola crucis schola lucis. Affliction is God's School, where hee teacheth his dearest Children the knowledg of his waies: the faster they learn, the soo∣ner
 they leav. If they profit not under one Rod, ano∣ther must bee exspected; if two prove ineffectual, a third will follow. You have been twice under the cor∣rrecting hand of God; deprived, by the first stroke, of your Father; by the second, of your Mother. Som of you have most dear Yoke-fellows. If the departure of Parents drive you not neerer heaven, the loss of an Husband or Wife shortly may. The Times call upon us to call upon God, and to make our Peace with Hea∣ven, since there is so small probabilitie of Peace upon Earth. If this slender Discours shall afford anie fur∣therance to a right Improvement of your Talents, and Losses, and these threat'ning Times, I shall have the less caus to wish it un-published. You would needs have it; I here humbly present it; and shall ever bee

