



SIR,
THE favourable Reception which your Ex∣cellent Lady afforded to one of my former Plays, has encourag'd me to double my presumption, in addressing this to your Graces Patronage. So dangerous a thing it is to admit a Poet into your Family, that you can never afterwards be free from the chiming of ill Verses, perpetually sound∣ing in your ears, and more troublesom than the neigh∣bourhood of Steeples. I have been favourable to my self in this expression; a zealous Fanatick would have gone farther; and have called me the Serpent, who first presented the fruit of my Poetry to the Wife, and so gain'd the opportunity to seduce the Husband. Yet I am ready to avow a Crime so advantagious to me; but the World, which will condemn my boldness, I am sure will justifie and applaude my choice. All men will joyn with me in the adoration which I pay you, they would will only I had brought you a more noble Sacrifice. In∣stead of an Heroick Play, you might justly expect an He∣roick Poem, filled with the past Glories of your Ancestors, & the future certainties of your own. Heaven has already

taken care to form you for an Heroe. You have all the advantages of Mind and Body, and an Illustrious Birth, conspiring to render you an extraordinary Per∣son. The Achilles and the Kinaldo are present in you, even above their Originals; you only want a Homer or a Tasso to make you equal to them. Youth, Beauty, and Courage (all which you possess in the height of their perfection) are the most desirable gifts of Heaven: and Heaven is never prodigal of such Treasures, but to some uncommon purpose. So goodly a Fabrick was never framed by an Almighty Architect for a vulgar Guest. He shewed the value which he set upon your Mind, when he took care to have it so nobly and so beautifully lodg'd. To a graceful fashion and deportment of Body, you have joyned a winning Conversation, and an easie Great∣ness, derived to you from the best, and best belov'd of Princes. And with a great power of obliging, the world has observed in you, a desire to oblige; even beyond your power. This and all that I can say on so excellent and large a Subject, is only History, in which Fiction has no part; I can employ nothing of Poetry in it, any more than I do in that humble protestation which I make, to continue ever

