


My Lord,
A Treatise against Irreligion, cannot be better directed then to your Lordship; whose life is one of the best proofs we have for Religion; whence we may not only conclude the truth of Christia∣nity, but also that its severest rules are easy and practicable. Irreligious men may elude the clearest demon∣strations, and laugh them to scorn; but they cannot but wonder at, and yeild up themselves to those great examples which appear in your Lordships conduct. They strike at their hearts with an irresistible force, and do not only convince them of, but also perswade them to a better belief.

My Lord, your Lordship's both publick and private, Episcopal and Domestick vertues, make Irreli∣gion asham'd of its own principles, and do abundantly evince, that the Church of England, in these lat¦ter ages, wherein vices seem to have over-run the whole world, has still the means and vertues of the primitive time.
Your Lordship refus'd the high∣est dignities in the Church, with as much earnestness as others court and follow them. Episcopacy, which usually lays open those defects, a private life had before happily conceal'd, did reveal in you all the qualities the Apostles and the ancient Canons require in a Bishop: you have taken upon you all the burden, and left all the Splendor of so great a charge; and your Lordship rather suffers then enjoys the honours that are inseparable from it.
You give the Clergy of your Dio∣cess, the example of a penitent and laborious life, of a constant self
denial of an indefatigable chartiy, of an even and unblamable conver∣sation, of unspeakable love to the ancient spirit of the Church, and of an uninterrupted residency and care of their Flocks; they verify in your Lordship, that famous saying of one of the greatest Bi∣shops that ever was. Verus Amor recti habet in se Apostolorum Consilia, & Apostolicas Sanctio∣nes.
My Lord, I had the happiness to be for two years together wit∣ness of your Lordships holy life; when I was under your govern∣ment in Christs Church, that mag∣nificent Colledg. Which the gran∣deur of its buildings, and ampli∣tude of its revenues commend less then the gravity of its Canons, and the number, learning, vertue, and civility of its Students. The Ʋniversity of Oxford, who know no equal out of this Kingdom, and is now, and has been for many hun∣dred years together a seminary of great men both in Church and State;
owes to your Lorship the greatest part of her splendor, you improve her buildings, increase her reve∣nues; enlarge her libraries; en∣courage all arts and science to flock to her as to their center, keep up the strictness of her discipline, and the reverence due to her de∣grees.
I receiv'd there so many favours of your Lordship's, both in publick and private for the comfort of my soul, and the improvement of my studies, that I should be guilty of a most notorious ingratitude; if I did not let the World know how good and generous your Lord∣ship has been to me. This is the end, my Lord of this Dedication; and I will think my weak endea∣vours abundantly rewarded, if I can perswade the World that you have engag'd me to be as long as I live,
My Lord,

