


My Lord,
I Could not deny my self the Pleasure of Dedicating this little Book to your Lordship, having the Honour of seeing you

twice or three times a Week, but never without being Charm'd with you Behaviour, and your many▪ Excellent Qualities.
The ill Practices of this Age, have so far infected the Noblemen, and made them so solicitous of their private Interests, that it is to be feared, we may live to see those times return again upon us, when Mens worth was measured by their Riches, and Persons of Quality were proud of their ignorance.
Ingenium quondam fuerat pretiosius auro,
At nunc barbaria est grandis, habere nihil.
One cannot without grief see so many Young Noblemen, the Hopes of the Church; and Flower of the State, spend the best of their Years in Pleasures and Idleness.
And tho' they have no Noble Qualities which can Entitle them to the Worlds respect, yet they still hope to recommend themselves to their esteem by their Noble Birth, their Splen∣did Living, and the flattery of Sycophants.
But you, my Lord, are far from think∣ing that the advantages of Nature and For∣tune can make amends for all other Defects, or

ought to incline you to despise the Study of Curious Arts and Polite Learning.
The constant Application, by which you im∣prove those rare Talents you brought into the World with you, the great attention you give to the Instructions of your Masters, the plea∣sure you take in having your Judgment infor∣med, and the Impression which right Notions make upon you, do clearly discover the just Opinion you have of what things are truly worthy of Honour.
Val. Flac▪ Arg. L. 1. Phasidos.—Tu sola animos mentemque peruris Gloria, te viridem videt, immunem{que} Senectae
Thamisis in ripa stantem, juvenes{que} Vo∣cantem.
As the Roman Noblemen used to return from Athens and Marseilles, laden with the Spoils of Greece, and perfected in the choicest Studies, that they might be qualified for sit∣ting and speaking in the Senate; doubtless, My Lord, you are moved by the same Spring, when you consider, that the Parliament (to which your Birth will one Day call you) is the most August Assembly in the World, whose greatness was never perhaps so well under∣stood

as since this present War, when we see all Europe waiting upon their Consultations, and that their Winter Resolutions Govern the Actions of the Summer.
How happy are you, My Lord, in a Wise and a kind Father, who has added to so solid a Judgment, so great Experience of the World, who not thinking it sufficient to give you the ablest Masters in all Sciences, reserves the in∣spection of your Studies and Education to to his own fondness and care.
And how Happy is your Father in such a Son, who makes so good use of his Admoniti∣ons and Example; and by the Blossoms of your Spring, promise him so fruitful an Autumn.
But that which strikes me most in you, My Lord, is, the observing, as often as I have the Honour of waiting on you, that the pleasure you take in sound Literature and gentile Studies, which would otherwise be your chief delight, do yield to your stronger Love of Virtue and Honesty.
What may we not expect from that re∣gard you have for your Preceptors, that Com∣plaisance to your Equals, and Courtesie to your Inferiours, the acknowledgments you pay unawares to those whose Duty is to serve

you, your generous Inclinations, your sweet Nature, your Modesty and Affability, which Charm every Body that comes near you, the perfect Obedience and profound Respect, which you pay to your Father on all occasions, and above all your Religion and Piety, which added to all your other rare Qualities, shew you to be the Care of Heaven, which sel∣dom or never bestows so many Excellencies on the same Person.
Cladian.—sparguntur in Omnes. In te mixta fluunt, & quae divisa beatos Efficiunt, collecta tenes;
I think, My Lord, I may very well be al∣lowed to quote Latin Authors to you, since you already understand their Language; and its needless to speak of the Progress you have made in the French, after having seen an Answer which Mr. de St. Euremont wrote to a Letter you sent him, whereby it appears how full of admiration he was at your Wit, the Correctness of your Style, and justness of your Thoughts, and when Mr. de St Euremont has decided so much in your Favour, it's better than if your

Lordship had the Approbation of the whole French Academy. I beseech God, to confirm you more and more in his Love and Fear, and fill you with the Blessings of his Holy Spirit. I am,
My LORD, 
