



NOt only in former times, but also in this old Age of the World, nothing hath been deeper buried, nor hitherto more desired by all, especially the lovers of Art, than the knowledg of that great Mystery of the Philosophers, which by a known word is called the Philosophers-Stone; We therefore preserving the Inscription of the Monument, do raise this knowledge, buried and obscured under the pretext of the Tomb of the most wise Semiramis, formerly Queen of Babylon, out of its Grave, and

present it to the View of the Learned, which if (not an ambitious covetous Cyrus, but) a wise man open, he will to his satisfaction find Royal and in∣exhaustible Treasures: I may also add constant Health: which two, you will say, are the principal supporters of an happy life.
But some haply of no small ingenu∣ity will imagin that this Tomb may be opened by Womens work, or Childrens sport: but let them know that this Knowledg is a most deep River, where∣in the Lamb wades, that is, the up∣right profiteth; and the Elephant swims, that is, the most Learned do fluctuate, yea are drowned in their opinions, errors and doubts; whilst one is yet doubtful concerning the true sub∣ject of the great Work, yea generally a stranger to it; another very solicitous

in acquiring the sophical Mercury, wearyeth himself with unsuccessful la∣bours, not knowing what it is, or of what form; Another tortures himself with vain perplexity to know what the Philosophers Fire is, what the magical Elements, the Key, or dissolving Men∣struum, whence it is to be drawn, whether sweet, or corrosive? cold or fiery? it hath troubled me often to see such men so concerned, and in vain laborious in those things, wherein they at length could find nothing but vanity and affliction of mind; wherfore com∣miserating them by the impulse of Cha∣rity, I do freely impart (though many will accuse me as guilty of violated si∣lence) the Light mercifully communi∣cated to me, that they may use the same as a Key to the Sanctuary of that sa∣cred Knowledg.
But the curious Industry, and indefa∣tigable Curiosity of you, being most ex∣cellent in the exact Arcana's and Work of Polydaedalus nature, having invited all the Learned men of the World by your most sweet incitements, to communicate the most secret things, enjoyneth and ob∣ligeth me to make you (the genuine Sons of all sorts of Knowledg) Heirs of this, which in my judgment is the most exact and curious Work of all Nature. But who I am, enquire not. I am a man that makes it my study to profit others, your Friend, and an admirer of your Vertues, known to many, at least by name.
Farewell therefore, ye Students of Nature, and High-Priests of Art, the lofty Stars of Germany, God be with you, and with his Power strengthen your Works and Thoughts, that they may be highly advantagious to the whole Com∣monwealth of Learning, for the encrease of the Publick-good, and the immortal Glory of your own Names.
From my Study, Jan. 1. 1674.
