



SIR,
I Have taken the Liberty to offer
you a Present which perhaps
will surprize you; for we are ge∣nerally
possess'd with an Opinion
that 'tis impossible for the same Per∣son
to manage both a Sword and a
Pen. If I had the least Inclination
to pretend to the Quality of an Au∣thor,
I wou'd endeavour to demonstrate
the Ʋnreasonableness of that Preju∣dice;
nor do I believe that I shou'd
find it a very difficult Task to perform.

I cou'd easily transcribe the Stories of
so many famous Captains who were e∣qually
remarkable for their Wit and
for their Valour; and display'd the
former in their Writings with as much
Honour and Success as they signaliz'd
the latter in the most dangerous Bat∣tles:
And from these Instances I wou'd
conclude that the nearest and most di∣rect
Way to Glory is to follow the bright
Tracts of those Illustrious Heroes.
But since the Prosecution of so noble
an Attempt wou'd require a larger
Stock of Merit and Abilities than ever
I cou'd boast of, I will not be guilty of
so much Vanity as to alledge those Ex∣amples
in my own Vindication. Nor
will I trouble You with any study'd or
formal Apology, since I'm confident
You will be easily persuaded to forgive
my Boldness in presenting You with
the Observations I made during
my Travels, which I thought I might
communicate to the Publick without in∣vading
the Province, or provoking the
Jealousie of Men of Letters. I made

it my Recreation for some Weeks to pre∣pare
'em for the Press, and shall be sa∣tisfy'd
if they can furnish You with any
tolerable Entertainment for some Hours.
Your Approbation is all the Glory,
and the highest Recompence I desire.
'Tis true, I cannot ask so noble a Re∣ward
without discovering the Boldness
of my Ambition; for you have so nice
a Taste, and so exact a Judgment,
that you never bestow that Favour but
on such as merit Applause from all the
World. But I encourage my self with
reflecting on that Goodness which is
so natural and peculiar to You, and
even presume to hope that the Sweet∣ness
of Your Temper will put a fa∣vourable
Bias upon Your Judgment,
and incline You to excuse, or at least
to over-look my Errors. This, SIR,
is the only Favour I beg leave to de∣sire;
for I never entertain'd a Thought
of courting Your Protection on the
Score of so mean a Present. I know
that must be obtain'd by a very diffe∣rent
Method; nor do I hope to procure

it by any other Way than that by
which all Good Men who have the
Happiness to be known to you, may
pretend to it. 'Tis from Your Genero∣sity
alone that I expect so glorious an
Advantage, and from that compassionate
and bountiful Inclination, which has
render'd You the Support of so many
Illustrious Exiles, whom the Tempest
of the Age has cast upon the Shores
of Holland, where, by Your Favour,
they have found not only a Safe but a
Peaceful and Convenient Retreat, and
are enabl'd to out-live the Loss of all
their Hopes and Fortunes. Since then
a Man of Honour may assure himself
of Your Protection without being ob∣lig'd
to bribe Your Favour, I might
be justly accus'd both of Folly and In∣justice
if I shou'd endeavour to obtain
it by indirect Methods. No, Sir, I
never harbour'd so criminal a Thought;
and the only reason why I make bold to
consecrate the Fruit of my Travels to
You, is because this Dedication will
furnish me with an Opportunity to ac∣knowledge

the vast Debt I owe You.
The Iniquity of Fortune made me in∣capable
of expressing the Sense I have
of Your Goodness; and I can assure
You, that Consideration alone sate hea∣vier
upon me than all the rest of my
Disasters. And is it not natural for a
Man in such a Condition to embrace
the first Occasion he can meet with of
satisfying in some Measure the extreme
Desire he has to express his Gratitude?
Permit me then to acknowledge that I
have receiv'd very considerable Favours
from You, that You bestow'd 'em in
the most obliging Manner imaginable,
that I never merited 'em, that You
cou'd not have the least Reason to
believe that ever I cou'd requite 'em,
and consequently that You were only
acted by a Principle of doing Good,
without the least hope of a Return.
This, Sir, is what I desire to publish
to all the World; this is the only Mo∣tive
that incited me to prefix this Let∣ter
to those which You will find in the
Body of the Treatise; and to convince

You that I had no other Design in my View,
I shall pnrposely avoid the usual Strain of De∣dications,
and save You the trouble of read∣ing
those Praises which Your Merit chal∣lenges
from all the World, and Your Mode∣sty
will not receive even from Your best
Friends. 'Tis not without extreme Reluctan∣cy
that I decline so inviting a Subject; and
I had almost made bold to tell You, that You
were oblig'd to me for my Silence. You
know what a vast Field lies before me, and
with how much Pleasure and Satisfaction I
wou'd have made Use of this Opportunity to
acquaint the World with Your unalterable Love
to Your Country, Your inviolable Fidelity to the
State, Your Zeal and Affection to His Ma∣jesty's
Service, Your extraordinary Abilities and
Capacity for the Management of those impor∣tant
Affairs that are intrusted to Your Care;
the Clearness and Quickness of Your Apprehen∣sion,
the Solidity of Your Judgment, Your
uncommon Generosity, the charming Sweetness
of Your Temper, Your incorruptible Probity,
and all the other eminent Vertues and Endow∣ments,
which hath gain'd You the Esteem and
Admiration of all the World. 'Twou'd be an

endless Task to mention all those rare aud no∣ble
Qualities which have so justly intitl'd You
to the Favour of the greatest King in the
World. But I must not forget my Promise,
and therefore shall content my self with ad∣miring
you in Silence, after I have begg'd
Leave to assure You that I am, and shall ever
remain, with a profound Respect,
SIR,

