


My LORD,
AN Adversary of the Truth, and therefore Yours, hath lately offer∣ed to your Grace the same abuse as the Roman Souldiers did to the Lord Je∣sus. For as they arrayed him in Royal Scarlet, bowed the Knee before him, and said to him, Hail King of the Jews; but at the same time spit upon him, and smote him on the head: This enemy, who is also a Roman Souldier, clotheth your Grace with high praises, and makes a profound obeysance to your Place and Merits in an Epistle Dedicatory; But by the same Epistle he puts under your Graces Prote∣ction

a charge of Rebellion against our Catholick Orthodox Church, and an Apologie for the Doctrine of the Jesuites. This is stroaking and striking together. No blame is so disgraceful as such praises. So did the Devil call Christ the Son of the living God, to disgrace him by his Te∣stimony, and make him to be taken for one of his Confederates. The man never appearing to own his work, seems to ac∣knowledge, that neither his person nor his work deserveth the notice of the world. Yet I thought it necessary to let the world know what a cheat is put upon the Rea∣ders by this childe of darkness, who being altogether unknown to your Grace (as your self were pleased to express unto me) beareth himself for your ancient Acquain∣tance, and claims your Patronage, while he disgraceth your Person, and revileth your Doctrine. Neither doth the Libel,

being but an ignorant scolding, deserve an answer; but that the man recompenceth his shallow learning with his superlative malice, making use of this conjuncture, when the minds of loyal subjects are exul∣cerated by their late and long sufferings by rebellious Zelots under pretence of Reli∣gion, to make the sufferers to fall out with Religion it self.
These are the depths of Satan, who knows perfectly how to steer the spirits by the Rudder of their most sensible Interes∣ses, and at this time labours to drown the too remiss sense of holy Belief, in the quick resentments of personal oppression. Blessed be God that he is come short of his aim in this attempt; and that this Libeller by his Imposture hath only stirred the just indignation of good Christians, in whom the interess of Gods truth and glory takes place before all personal concernments.

Himself might have bin an example of that just severity which he commends in your Grace, if he had been as bold to Pre∣sent the Book, as audacious to Dedicate it to so great a Patron. I cannot but have re∣course unto the same Patron which he hath chosen for his untruths, to protect the confutation of them: Knowing, that the Vindication of the Truth, is in its right place, being put under your Graces prote∣ction; in whose shadow the Church re∣joyceth, as of the gracious Patron of Piety and Vertue, the Incourager of Goodness, the Maintainer of the Orthodox Faith; and in that respect, the right Arm of the great Defender of the same. That your Government may be blessed unto the Church, and Prosperous and Honoura∣ble unto your Self, is the fervent prayer
My LORD, 
