



MADAM,
ALL Wisdom (but the revealed) is the Child of Ex∣perience: And all Precepts of the same owe their Birth to particu∣lar Occasions. The Wisdom of the Counsels of this Discourse, is
justified by the Experience of many Ages: And the particu∣lar occasion of it was on the birth of the Prince of Orange, by a Judicious Person of Quality li∣ving then in the Court of the Hague. The longing wishes and earnest prayers of the Eng∣lish, that they may have the like occasion, will warrant these Counsels from appearing unsea∣sonably. Yea, they are more sea∣sonable new, and less subject to oblquy, than if they came out when there is a Royal occasion for them. For they might then meet with the opposition of pri∣vate Interesses, and resolved Courses. Whereas they may now be weighed impartially, and without any concernment but that of Wisdom, Reason, and Publick and Private Good.

 Besides, these Counsels are not every way so adequate to the condition of a Prince, but that others may reap benefit by them; Those especially, Madam, of the Condition of Your Noble Family, who being called by their Birth to be Pillars of the State, and Up∣holders of the Crown, have more Interest to see their Off∣spring entred into those Gene∣rous Ways of Piety and Vir∣tue, in which consisteth their Honour and Nobility, and by which they are fitted for the Service of their King and Countrey. Of that high inte∣rest none is more sensible than Your Ladyship, of whose No∣ble Breeding my Lord Your Father, who was Nobility it
self, made His Chief Study and Grand Employment, with a Success admired by all that are honoured with Your Lady∣ship's Acquaintance. And might His Heavenly Happi∣ness be sensible of any thing that is done under the Sun, he would be much delighted to see your Ladiships Successful Care in the Education of His Illustrious Posterity, now in the Th rd Generation. It was that Hereditary Nobleness of Your Soul, Madam, and Your Vigilant Care to propagate it to your Descent, which made a Copy of this Discourse so precious in Your Ladiships Esteem, and the Loss of It so grievous. Wherefore the re∣covering and preserving of It by the help of the Press, will
(I hope) be acceptable to Your Ladiship. And Your singular Approbation cannot but make it highly valued by all that know the height of Your Worth, and the depth of Your Judgment. All wise Mothers will learn by Your Ladiships Example, deeply to consider how GOD and Na∣ture having assigned unto the Mother the Government of the first Seven Years of their Chil∣drens Age, in which they are either made or marred, have thereby obliged all Mothers humbly to crave the assistance of Gods Wisdom; and with such serious Application to stu∣dy the Nature, and learn the Husbandry of their Infant-Reason, as to become able to sow in their fresh Soyl lasting
Seeds of Goodness and Virtue, lesing none of the Natural Advantages which they pre∣sent for that great Work; spy∣ing all their Natural Disad∣vantages against it, to mend them with Speed and Dexte∣rity; and keeping off care∣fully the outward ordinary hin∣derances of Virtuous Breeding from their Tender Souls, which easily admit, and tenaciously retain the first impressions. Such Observations will sit all Pious and Rational Souls. And the Noble Breeding pre∣scribed here (if we lay by Points of Grandeur) regards all Conditions, since Noble∣ness lieth in Virtue. Ge∣neral Good was the aim of the Author, and is that of the Publisher; besides his
Zeal, by presenting It to Your Honourable Hands, to approve himself,
Madam,

