


AS Justice is the common preserver of Humane Society; of Order, Peace, and Commerce, consisting of those two general parts, Preventing and Punishing; so the first is the chief and more noble part thereof: That not only nips Vice in its Bud and Blossom, but so refines its Natural Soil, that its very Source becomes to be obstructed, and its Progress prevented; neither are the mischiefs few or inconsiderable, where this first branch hath not its due and wished effects. Those who are not employed in duly discharging what properly belongs to their Places and Callings, soon becoming dissolute, following the wild mazes of their Wills and Passions; hence arise such swarms of Mutineers and Levellers, the loud noise for Liberty and
Property, tho the invading that of others is only aimed at.
The Prefaces of several Laws observe it as too common, That they who lay aside their Lawful Trades and Employments, do thereupon betake themselves to the taking, killing, and stealing of Game, appropriated to Noblemen, Gentlemen, &c. And common Experience shews that such takers seldom confine them∣selves to the breach of Laws for preserving Game, but having
gone over those bounds and limits, beyond which they may not innocently pass, are in a short time dextrous in other Pilfrings. And did not the diligence of Magistrates, and their often punish∣ing such loose Persons, prevent them from acting bare-faced, they would soon in no less measure than the Goths and Van∣dals of Old, and the
Wastcoteers of late, be a terror to all People.
It has been an aspersion unjustly cast on the Statutes of the 43 Eliz. for Relief of Poor, That that Law hath made multitudes idle and careless: And that allowing them a Refuge for Relief from their Parishes, hath caused them the less to provide for themselves. Indeed, by that Law the Parish is (as they commonly say) bound to find them, but that in a far other and larger sense than they mean, viz. Work for those that WILL Labour, Punishment for those that WILL NOT, and Bread for those that
cannot. And if the two first parts of that Law were duly observed, the Poor would not only be reduced to a small number, comparatively to what they now are, but there would be no such Poor as idle and wandring Rogues and Vagabonds, as the Statute of the
29th. of the same Queen shews there were before that time: And the Punishment appointed for such loose Persons being, that they be Whipt, and sent to the place of their Birth, as an Admonition to the Inhabitants of that place, to bring up their Chil∣dren better.
Those who have observed the Method that the Ancient Laws direct for Pursuing and Apprehending Felons and other Capi∣tal Offenders, by Hue and Cries, have lookt on it as almost
impossible (were such ways duly pursued) for such to escape the reach of Justice. But they that have deliberately consi∣dered of the Laws of a later date, especially the 4th. 39th. 43th. of the late Queen, and the 4th. and 7th. of King
James; and of the Methods they direct for the early placing out the Children of the Poor,
Apprentices; and those of riper Years in Service; That none be entertained in Service without due Testimonials whence they came; nor then by the pound, piece, or pair, in which Masterless Method many serve more
Masters in a Week than they spend sober Nights, but for no less time than a Year: That Persons of all Ages and Sexes be duly employed, and of all Qualities, be neither Idle nor disorderly: The Annual choice of Officers in every Pa∣rish to see those things, and others of the like Nature, duly observed; and withall, the Penalties on them that remain re∣miss or negligent. To which may be added the late Laws of Excise, which as they are Advantageous in producing a vast Revenue to the Crown, so are more Advantageous to the Coun∣try in affording a constant and Genteel livelihood to multitudes of decayed Tradesmen, Gentlemen,
&c. (to which every one contributes as little as he pleaseth, no one being Obliged to keep or frequent Ale-houses) may well admire that there is any lon∣ger a Felon in the Gaol, or an Idler in the Streets. And that there may not be such, there can scarce be better ways contri∣ved than the Laws direct, nor any in a greater measure enablea. to effect it than the Justices of the Peace are. To you through His Majesties favour belongs the choice of nominating, pla∣cing, displacing, directing, and encouraging almost all sub∣ordinate
and inferiour Officers; and of Examining, Inspe∣cting, and Punishing their omissions and neglects, and now, if ever, it's time to restrain the increase of the Poor, by re∣straining the Idleness and Insolence of the meaner sort. That the Method hereby proposed is both practicable and easie, is manifest, and the Legality of it is fully attested, by being Examined and Approved of by a considerable number of emi∣nent Justices of the Peace of this County; being no new thing, but a more literal and direct observance of the Law than the common practice is.
And tho it cannot be certainly asserted what Annual Advan∣tage such Method in a whole County may produce, yet as far as can well be computed, and as may upon good grounds be pre∣sumed, the Yearly Profit to the Publick would far exceed what this Paper mentions.
If the Children in the City of Norwich between the Ages of Six and Ten Years, gain
12000 l. per Annum beyond their Maintenance, as an * Author of good Credit affirmsAuthor of the State of England, Dr. Chamberlain. to have appeared upon a late Computation there made, how much greater Sum might be advanced in so many Popu∣lous Towns, and in so large a County as this is, by the La∣bours of such and others of riper Years, who now spend most of their time idly, or worse? Besides many other Advantages would thence arise, some whereof are obvious to the meanest Capacity: And when ever an Act of this Nature shall be thought worth the vigorous prosecution, a sufficiency of fit subservient Agents will never be wanting.
