


SIR,
HAving undertaken this work by the com∣mand of your Royal Father of glorious memory, I thought my self bound in duty to dedicate it to no other then his Son, the true heir both of his Crown and vertue. That great Monarch having honoured my pen so much in his life time, as to employ it for his de∣fence, I should be unthankful to his memory if I forsook his Cause after his death; seeing especially his Cause to be that of God, and the heavenly truth assaulted in his person: Seeing also that the Cardinal against whom I write, who hath found out many new shifts, and laid fresh colours over the idol, is the great Teacher of those Seminaries whose restless labour is to subvert the consciences of your Subjects. By assisting them in that danger, I thought I should do an acceptable service to your Majesty, who be∣ing filled with the true knowledge of God, burns also with the Zeal of his house. For a King whom God hath en∣dowed with his knowledge and fear, must be firmly per∣swaded that God hath raised him to an eminent place, that he may discover afar off the plots and workings of that grand enemy of our salvation, who hath a particular ma∣lice
 against Kings that are no servants to his Empire. As Ravens will build their nests on the tops of high trees, Sa∣tan likewise endeavours to nestle himself in the top of Em∣pires, and in the houses of great Kings, and there to hatch his brood, which are errours and vices, that they may be conspicuous and borrow authority from the place they stand in. Whence if he be thrown down and defeated of his hopes, no doubt but he hates such a King more then any man on earth, and will spare no strength and no devices to disturb his rest and shake his constancy.This came forth, An. 1626. In this short time that your Majesty hath been sitting upon the throne, you have found already that the frame of great Kingdoms here∣in differs from that of the great building of Nature, that in the supream part of the Universe there is a perpetual rest and tranquillity, but the lowest part is the region of trouble and confusion: whereas Kingdoms and Empires are like trees, whose top is the most shaken. And it is without question that many Kings would have quitted their place, if as there are stairs to get up to an Empire, there were some to come down from it. If this be true in all Kingdoms, much more in those where the Ruler hath subjected his Scepter to the Cross of Christ, and by an holy magnanimi∣ty hath set himself to wage war with the Devil. Wherein, Sir, we acknowledge the work of God, admiring his pro∣vidence and exalting his goodness, that while he called your Majesty to these tryals, he endowed you also with strength to overcome them: Having filled you with the Spirit of his fear, and set you forth in the eyes of the world as a rare example of vertue and holiness in your conversation, of prudence above your age, and of meekness below your greatness. In all which your praise is the greater, because you apply your self to do the will of God, while your dig∣nity gives you more power then to the rest of men to do your own. This fills us with hope that God will make use of your Majesty to do great things, and that the ruines of the Church, happened in the time of the King your Father, will be repaired under your happy reign. We know Sir, how sensible you are of the wound of the Church. We know that your Majesty hath the lively zeal of Gods glory;
 As indeed of all the men of the world none hath more rea∣son for it, since of all men in the world you are the most evidently favoured of God. For hath God poured his bles∣sings upon any Countrey of the world so bountifully as up∣on your England? A Countrey which in a profound peace of many years, in a great plenty, and in a safe posture from all fears round about, enjoyes the saving light of the Gospel, whilest a black smoak from the bottomless pit over-spreads well nigh the whole face of the earth. Certainly for one to raign where Christ raigneth, and to have the Church of God under the shadow of his Empire, it is twice raigning. A Monarch that employeth his power to establish the Kingdom of God, is a Ruler of men, not only as they are men, but as they are Gods children. One flower of such a Crown, is a thousand times better then the three Crowns of the Prelate of Rome. For which heavenly favours, it is not only convenient but necessary for your Majesty to raise your heart with a holy glory, whereby God may be glorifi∣ed. He will pour down with a liberal hand his graces from above upon your Royal Head, whence they may flow about upon your whole Kingdom: He will direct your counsels: He will prosper your armes: He will make you the love of your Subjects, and the terrour of your enemies, and will prolong your dayes in his blessing; employing your au∣thority, that in your Kingdoms his pure service be main∣tained; and that the Pastors of the Church by their resi∣dence with their flocks, their vigilance in their work, and their simplicity and modesty in their habit, may edifie Gods Church. Our part will be, after the example of Moses, to help with the lifting up of our hands the sword of Ioshua. And the Lord will take compassion of his people, hearing the prayers for your Majesties prosperity and preservation, which are poured by him who is and must be all his dayes,
Sir,

