




My most endeared Relations and Acquaintance,
THose Two well known and useful Books bearing my Father Dunton's Name, (Entituled, The House of Weeping, &c. and Dying Pastors last Legacy, &c.) sel∣ling wonderfully beyond all expectation, have encouraged me now a Third time to reoblige the World (but in a more especial manner my beloved Country-men, and you my Relati∣ons and intimate Friends,) by publishing another Treatise of his which you here see is entituled,
The Sighs and Groans of a Dying man, &c. which said Treatise was fairly writ∣ten out for the Press (as many of you very well know) with my Fathers own hands just before his Death; and if this pleases as well as the two former pieces (as doubtless it will, for it doth together with some of the other Fifty Treatises accompanying of it, compre∣hend the Whole Duty of a Sincere Christian) I intend out of hand to expose some more of his Works to publick View: But many of them being written in Short-hand (and no body being able to read his Characters but my self) they'l take me up some little time to Transcribe them fair for the Press.
Now if any wonder that this present Treatise comes into this wide World with∣out some Great or Noble Man for its Pa∣tron,
 let such know that such Dedications begin now adaies to grow out of Fashion, his Policy was commended by many (and proved profitable to himself) who instead of Select Grandees for his Godfathers made all the Congregation Witnesses to his Child: so would I, if I could, invite you all together that are my Friends (and the whole English Nation besides) to this useful Book request∣ing you, and all therein to Patronize such parts and passages thereof as please you best, so hoping that by several Persons of all Ranks and Degrees the whole will be protected.
But the Truth of it is to all you mentioned on the first Page chiefly, and of right belongs the Dedication of this Book; for surely those many and great Favours and daily continued Courtesies, which I have received from you may well challenge and command a double Expression of thanks and acknowledgement from me. And I knew not wherein I might more publickly, and better testifie my grati∣tude to you than by presenting you with some∣thing that might abide by you (and be your daily Companion both abroad and at home) as a Specimen of that solemn respect and service which I owe to you all.
I have read of Pylades and Orestes, and many others, but the Past, Present or Fu∣ture
 Age have not, nor never will produce such a Stupendious Example of Friendship and entire respect as yours hath been to me, which tho I cannot fully requite (should I live to the years of Methusalem) yet I will ne∣ver cease (whilst I have breath to fetch) kindly to acknowledge.
Moreover, I very well knew any thing that had my Dear deceased Fathers name stampt upon it, would be very gratefully re∣ceied (and kindly entertained) by you all.
And therefore now it being very seasona∣ble, I shall crave ave to put you in mind of your Deceased Fiend and Father; he is a true Friend (sath the Smyrnean Poet of old) who continueth the memory of his de∣ceased Friend: When a Friend of St. Au∣stins dyed, he professed he was put into a great strait whether he himself should be willing to live or willing to dye; he was unwilling to live because one-half of himself was dead, yet he was not willing to dye because his Friend did partly live in him tho he was dead: Let us all now make the Application as we see cause. And further consider, that tho for the present our loss may seem great, yet if any Memory on earth goes with us to Heaven, he now being nearer the Fountain of Love, loves us more than ever, and now is better able to express it in higher and dearer ser∣vices;
 but if all remembrance of Friends and Kindred dye with us, yet still he loves us more then he could ever possibly upon Earth, tho in another relation the thoughts of which should stop the current of those Tears wherewith our hearts and eyes are so big and full.
But to avoid Prolixity, I must proceed and further acquaint you that to this Treatise of my Fathers entituled, Sighs and Groans, &c. is added for your great pleasure and Satisfaction.

First, The Pilgrims Guide from the Cra∣dle to his Death-bed, with his gloriou and triumphant passage from thence to the New-Jerusalem, &c.
Which said Treatise was written on pur∣pose to encourage those Holy and Devout Pilgrims who have set forth, and are Jour∣neying towards a Heavenly Country that so they may make a resolved and chearful pro∣gress therein, notwithstanding all the dif∣ficulties, oppositions and conflicts that they may meet withal in the way thither.
Herein is given brief hints of the usual Tryals, Troubles and Temptations that are like to sally out upon those that travel this narrow way that leads to Paradice, with an exact account in what places (whilst they are upon their Journey) they must look for
 and expect comfort, succour and support, with a representation also of the happy success of those Christian Pilgrims that hold on in their heavenly race, and hold out therein, even a participation of future glory, and that all the Temptations they overcome in the Road to happiness, shallbe as so many shining Jewels in their Crown of Victory which will abun∣dantly make amends for all their pains, suf∣ferings and difficult travels.
Here further you may see (throughout the whole Allegory) how that this present transitory Life is called a Pilgrimage, a Travel and a way, because it continually plieth to an end; For as they which are car∣ryed in Coaches, or sail in Ships, do finish their Voyage, tho they sit still and sleep, even so every one of us, albeit we be still busied about other matters, and perceive not how the course of our Life passeth away, being some∣times at Rest, sometimes at work, sometimes Idle, and sometimes in sports and recreati∣ons, yet our life alwaies wasteth, and we in posting speed with winged hast towards our last end.
And loe! as our way-faring Pilgrim (describ'd in this Book) travelleth apace and leaveth many things behind him; even so it fares with us: For the poor re∣solved Pilgrim in his way sometimes seeth
 stately Towers and sumptuous Buildings, he beholdeth them a while, he admires them, and so passeth from them; afterwards he seeth Green Fields, fine Meadows, flou∣rishing Pastures, and goodly Vine-yards, upon these also (with pleasing delight) he looketh a while, he wondreth at the sight, and so passeth by, then he meeteth with fruitful Orchards, green Forests, long Chaces, delightful Plains, lovely Com∣mons, pleasant Fields, huge Thickets and spreading Trees full of all manner of flying Fowls and singing Birds, sweet Rivers with silver Streams, and beha∣veth himself as before. At the length, be∣fore he cometh at his Journeys end, he meeteth with lonesome Desarts, hard Waies, rough, and unpleasant, foul, and over-grown with Bryars and Thornes, here also he is enforced for a time to stay: He laboureth, sweateth, and is grieved; but when he hath gone awhile, he over∣cometh these difficulties and getting at last a clear and distinct Prospect of the end of his Journey he remembreth no more his former Griefs and Danger.
Just thus it is with us who like Pilgrims and Strangers are travelling and posting apace towards our long homes, one while we meet with pleasant and delightful things,
 another while we meet with affrighting, sor∣rowful, and grievous crosses, but they all in a moment pass away and are gone and va∣nish even like Mist before the early Sun. And look as a pleasant Landskip which at a di∣stance seemeth to the eye rough, and uneven, (by reason that here is shadow'd a Hill, or Dale, there a Plain, and green row of Trees, yonder a Church, a Town, a City, a Village with Rivers (full of Swans) running by it; Then here again a poor Cottage, a shady Grove, a delightful Meadow, Birds flying, a sturdy Castle, and behind that some demo∣lisht Fabrick) yet if you come close to it all appears both smooth and even.
Just thus it is with every Christian Pilgrim, who when he first sets out for Heaven, or whilst he is on his Travels thither, all things seem to appear to him rough, harsh and unpleasant, but when he comes close and near to his Journeys end, and just within prospect of Happiness, all things appear to him smooth, plain and delightful.
This weary Pilgrim oft did ask to know
How bad the way, how far he had to go To the new Je∣rusalem..
His way was tedious, and withal opprest,
Yet his chief Travels were unto his rest.
Our Life's a Journe To the Grave.; yet fond man delays
To enquire out the number of his daies.
He cares not [He] how slow his hours spend;
His Journey's better than his Journeys end.

But this true Dal Called the Pil∣grims Guide. most friendly doth display
To each sad Pilgrim the hour of the day.
And tells him of the shady Oak Divine Provi∣dence., and Her
That doth refresh; (the Sun-burnt Traveller)
And cover him from Mrs. Charity. Storms and Showres too,
And Called World, Flesh and Devil. Highway Thieves that would his soul undo.
Yet if the Guide spoke of be not his Friend
Hee'l miss that Road which doth in glory end.
But then again this Heavenly Guide shews plainly to every Christian Pilgrim what strange discouragements he must expect to meet with on the road to the Celesti∣al Paradice, and how that his way thither is not all along strew'd with fragrant Flowers, with pleasant Fountains, and green and shady Walks (as many weak Pilgrims foolishly imagine when they first set out on their Journey for Heaven) for turmoiling fears and perplexities will attend every resolved Pilgrim, almost in every state and place he passes through.
Further in this Allegory is shown how no Pilgrim whatso∣ever must expect whilst on his Travels to Heaven to meet with that glorious Jewel called CONTENTMENT  which many Pilgrims heretofore have eagerly sought for but could never find it) till they arrive at the de∣sired Country: which said disappointment often made our Pilgrim in this Book wofully to cry out—Con∣tentment, Oh! Contentment, where art thou, where art thou, what art thou gone such a long Journey that thou canst never return?

—Oh! Contentment, Contentment*,
Spark of pure Celestial fire,
Port of all the Worlds desire;

Paradice of Earthly bliss,
Heaven of the other World and this;
* TELL me where thy Court abides,
Where thy glorious Chariot rides.


Eden knew thee for a day,
But thou wouldst no longer stay;
Outed for poor Adams sin,
In a flaming Cherubim.
Yet thou lov'st that happy shade,
Where thy beauteous form was made;
And thy kindness yet remains,
To the Woods and flowry Plains.


Happy David found thee there,
Sporting in the open Air,
As he led his Flocks along,
Feeding on his rural Song;
But when Courts and Honours had
Snatcht away the lovely Lad,
Thou that there no room couldst find,
Let him go, and staid behind.


His wise Son with care and pain,
Searcht all Natures frame in vain;
For a while content to be,
Searcht it round, but found not thee;
Beauty own'd she knew thee not,
Plenty had thy Name forgot;
Musick only did aver,
Once you came and Danc'd with her.


All the World still Hunt about,
Happy he that finds thee out.
Some have dreamt thou stll dost sit
Circled round with Mirth and Wit,

In a Cloyster, or a Pew,
Others alwaies seek for you:
But there search, alike is vain,
These Morose, and these Prophane.


Mothers with indulgent care,
Hug their Child, and find thee there;
Kiss it while a Sleep it lies,
And upon it feast their Eyes;
When the little Bantling came
Just to Lisp its Mothers Name,
All her airy hopes are fled,
There it dies and leaves her Dead.
—Oh then Contentment, Contentment!


Since thy Throne thou dost not place
In a Palace, or a Face,
Since thou coyly passest by
Pleasures, Riches, Harmony.
Since we cannot find thee out
With the Witty, or Devout.
Since I here of thee Despair,
I'le walk to Heaven and find thee there.

And therefore now I heartily wish that those rouzing and awakening Truths, that are contained under this pleasant Allegory, entituled, The Pilgrims Guide, &c. may be of dayly and universal use to all those Chri∣stian Travellers that are upon the srious enquiry after the right and nearest way to the New-Jerusalem: (where true Contentment only Dwells) And who knows but they may! for sometimes Truth apparel'd in a delightful Allegory, hath a freer access to some Tempers than in another Mode or Dress: But this I am sure
Pro captu Lectoris habent sua libelii.
 According to the candour or humour of the Reader, it will be accepted or censured: And therefore I shall not be concern'd if it please not every Liquorish Palate.
That there may be faults in its Conduct I am not alto∣gether Ignorant, but these lapses lookt on with a sorrow∣ful Remembrance that the Author's Dead; or with an amicable view, will but appear as Moles in a fair Face however.
Dear Hearts,
Do you but give it your blessing and chearing Pro∣tection, and it shall venture the idle and impertinent censures of others.
But Secondly, for your further pleasant Entertain∣ment, you have in this Book a distinct Treatise, Enti∣tuled,



Wherein you have in most winning and affectionate Language; First, The whole Art of Living and Dy∣ing well, impartially represented to your view. Secondly, The Reasons wherefore Death is a serious thing; and how can this be rationally doubted? (tho it is by the A∣theistical Spirits of this Age) for when a man dies, he takes his solemn leave of one World and goes into ano∣ther (where he never was yet) to receive his last and final Doom, either to be Saved or Damned to all Eter∣nity. Thirdly, It is shown in this Passing-Bell how a dying hour is the last opportunity we have for com∣mending the Goodness of God, and His holy and righte∣ous waies to others, and how we ought therefore whilst the flourishing Plumes of Age are upon us, and we con∣tinue in perfect Health and Strength, daily to beg of God that our last Breath, in a more especial manner, may be drawn Heaven-wards, that so we may enter praying into the House of Blessing and Praise. Fourth∣ly, Herein is shown how we ought to live in a continual
 preparation for Death all our life long, with an account of the infinite hazard of a Death-bed Repentance, or ventring Eternity upon our last breath. Fifthly, It is plainly shown in this Passing-Bell what Death is, where∣in you have his Character drawn to the Life. Sixthly, Here you have a most excellent Prayer that ought to be said in case of a sudden surprize by Death, as by a mor∣tal Wound, or any other evil Accident, when the me∣thods and Solemnities of preparations cannot be used. To which is added, The Sick-mans last and loving Exhortations to his Wife, Children and Servants an hour, or thereabouts, before his doleful Passing-Bell had Rung. Seventhly, You have an Act of Resignation to be said by a dying Person in all the bad accidents of his Sickness. Eighthly, You have an Act of holy Re∣solution of amendment of life in case of Recovery. Ninthly, You have in this Passing-Bell, the Reasons why the English People shut the eyes and mouth of their dead Friends as soon as ever they are departed. Tenth∣ly, You have the reasons why dead bodies are often kissed. Eleventhly, The reason why dead Bodies are often wash∣ed. Twelfthly, You have the reasons why the dead are often perfumed and Embalmed, &c. Thirteenthly, The Reasons why the dead are usually cloathed with white Linnen (or other sutable dresses) before they are put into their Coffins. Fourteenthly, You have the Reasons of the pomp and Ceremony wherewith the English carry thier Dead to the Grave. In the Fifteenth place, you have in this Treatise called, The Passing-Bell, a preparation con∣cerning the Contingencies and treatings of our deceased Friends in order to their Burial. Sixteenthly, The manner how the English Bury their Dead. Seven∣teenthly, The exact Method that ought to be observed in Funeral Processions for most Ranks and Degrees of men. In the Eighteenth place, in this Passing-Bell, you will see how Death is borne with us, goes along with us hand in hand through all the Stages of our Life;
 how Infancy dyes into Child-hood, Childhood into Youth, Youth into Manhood, and so on till Old Age comes where we part fairly at our Journeys end, unless some acci∣dent, a Sword, a Bullet, or a Disease meet us and makes us break company at Half way, as it very often doth, for Death throws at all with an Impartial hand, and even scorns to spare any; he doth not crouch to Em∣perours, and humbly beg their leave to kill them; he Kills not Kings upon his bended knee, nor doth his darts use any more Ceremony to a Prince upon the Throne, than to the poorest Beggar on the Dunghill, or lowest Vassal that crawls on the ground, both die and turn to dust alike. Further is shown how the Noble∣mans costly and embroidered Sear-cloth stinks, as well as the rags and half sheet of the Beggar.
Nay how, even Kings themselves corrupt under their grandy Tombs and glorious Arches as well as poor Laza∣rus, who goes to bed in silence, naked, and without a covering. Then in the Nineteenth place, you have an account how that 'tis neither Riches, Stately Friends, worldly Pomp, nor Honours too can Shield us from the stroke of Death: For take Man, extend him as big as you please, let your fancy stretch him till she crack her self; Cloath him with purple, then beset that pur∣ple with Jewels as thick and large until he look not like a Man but a Firmament: Let Crowns and Miters shoot down like Stars that fall; set him in the midst of perpetual Victories; let vanquish'd Towns, Cities, Kingdoms, Empires, Lordships and Mannors be his Footstool, and let Conquer'd Princes and Governours be the Cushions to it. And let one stand and proclaim before him all what ever proud Titles or Honours (which are but a blaze blown by the breath of a mortal Man) or Ambition hath aspir'd to, or Fancy can dictate, call him King of Kings, the Husband to Fortune and Cousin to the Gods, yet afer all this Noise and Pomp, when we have done all, it is but a Man, Death
 with his Pale-horse will trample upon him and kick out his breath, and so draw a black Curtain over him, and then this mighty Pageant is at an end.
Methinks,
I hear the whistling Plow-man all day long,
Sweetning his labour with a chearful song:
His Bed's a pad of Straw: his diet, coarse;
In both, he fares not better than his Horse:
He seldom slacks his thirst, but from the Pump;
And yet his heart is blithe, his visage, plump;
His thoughts are ne're acquainted with such things,
As Griefs or Fears: he only sweats and sings:
When as the landed Lord, that cannot dine
Without a qualm, if not refresht with Wine;
That cannot judge that controverted case,
'Twixt meat and mouth, without the Bribe of Sauce;
That claims the service of the purest linnen,
To pamper and to shrowd his dainty skin in;
Groans out his daies, in lab'ring to appease
The rage of either Business or Disease:
Alas, his silken Robes, his costly Diet,
Can lend a little pleasure, but no Quiet:
The untold sums of his descended wealth
Can give his body plenty, but no Health:
The one, in pains, and want, possesses all;
T'other, in great splendour, finds no peace at all.
How often have I seen (saith a late learned Au∣thor) a Valiant General when he is to reap the har∣vest of his Crowns and Triumphs, fight unprospe∣rously, or fall into a Feavour with Joy and Wine, and so change his Lawrel into Cypress, his Trium∣phal Chariot to an Hearse, dying the night before he as appointed to perish in the Drunkenness of his Festi∣val Joyes. And therefore here under this Head, may ery properly be inserted the following Verses, Viz.

Go to the dull Church-yard and see
Those Hillocks of Mortality,
Where proudest Man is only found
By a small swelling of the Ground,
Where crouds of Rich Bodies are made
Slaves to the Pick-ax and the Spade.
Dig but a Foot or two to make
A cold Bed for thy dead Friends sake;
'Tis odds but in that scantling room,
Thou rob'st some Great Man of his Tomb;
And in thy delving smit'st upon
His Shin-bone, or his Cranion.
Yet further (in the Twentieth place) it is shown in this Passing-Bell, that tho Death (like a terrible Sergeant) will most certainly one time or other overtae and Arrest all (with his cold and clamy hands) and lay them prostrate in the Dust; yet how notwithstand∣ing all that we ought not continually to amaze our selves with the thoughts of it, or too much to aggravate to our fancies the pains of Dying, the loss of Earthly So∣ciety, and dearest Friends; the solitude, darkness, and sluttishness of Graves, the dismal Knells, the Blacks, &c. the Hearses, and the whole pomp of sorrow and dolefulness, that attends Funerals, because too many of these sad and Melancholy thoughts are ready to soften and betray our minds and Christian courage, and will make Death the more tremendous and terrible to us when ever with its grim eyes it stares us in the Face; But some there are 'tis certain, tho their number is but few that care not tho Drums and Trumpets should Ring their Knell, or tho they saw a Grave every step they fetcht.
And the truth of it is, I am ready to think, that could we from one of the highest Battlements of Hea∣ven stand and take an unlimitted Prospect of all things
 in this world & by this advantgeous view espy how many men and women lye fainting and dying at this very time for want of Bread, how many Young men and valiant Heroes, in foreign Countries, are hewen down by the Sword of War? How many poor Orphans are weeping over the Graves of their deceased Fathers, by whose life they were enabled to eat? How many Marriners and Ps∣sengers are at this present time in a storm, and shreik out becase their Keel dashes against a Rock or bulges un∣der them? How many people there are that at this time weep by reason of Soul and Bodily troubles both, and are ecome even desperate by too quick a sense of infelicity? In all reasonable conjectures we should be almost glad to be out of the noise and participations of so many evils, and even long to be in a better world, though we were to pass through a thousand deaths unto it.
But to proceed (in the 21st place) here is further shown that the road of Death is as common as 'tis in∣grateful, Infants as well as men daily can direct us in it, witness every Church-yard, where are to be seen Graves of all sizes: but the business is not so much to dye, as to dye well, which this Passing-bell shews you is only obtained by living well.
It is indeed often uncomfortable to nature (especially when a man stands upon the brink of an endless Eter∣nity) to behold the sad stages of Corruption and Oblivi∣on of Dust and Darkness, and of a lasting silence. But the only way to overcome death is to be resolved to meet it, and to be ready with a kind and a hearty welcome to entertain it, or rather to bid it as it were defiance in the open field by a truly vertuous and godly life. And fur∣ther under this Head is shown, that when we come to dye we shall see (whatever we may now think) that Mines of Gold, Rocks of Diamonds, Lordships and Man∣nors, Crowns and Scepters, Kingdoms and Empires are not worth one Drachm of Grace, one Smile from Heaven, one Embrace of a Saviour, and how they are
 not able to purchase it; nay if they cold, cursed said no∣ble Galeatius be that man who counteth all the world worth one hours communion with Jesus Christ, and if one hour of Communion be so sweet, Oh! what will a Life of Communion be, saith a late Learned and Re∣verend Divine: Therefore now
Whilst on this Passing-Bell
You cast your Eye,
Learn these two Lessons,
How to Live, to Dye. But further (in the 22d place) in this Treatise is shewn, that there is no state, no accident, no circum∣stance of our life but it hath been sowred by some sad instance of a dying Friend, or some other astonishing Pro∣vidence, a friendly meeting often ends in some sad mis∣chance, and makes an eternal parting: and further how Death is able to meet us every where, and how procured by every instrument and in all chances; and how it enters in at many doors, as by violence and se∣cret influence, by the aspect of a Star and the stink of a Mist, by the Emissions of a Cloud and the meeting of a Vapour, by the fall of a Chariot and the stumbling at a Stone, by a full Meal or an Empty Stomach, by watch∣ing at the Mill or by watching at Prayers, by the Sun or the Moon, by a Heat or a Cold, by Sleepless Nights or Sleeping Days, by Water frozen into the hardness and sharpness of a Dagger, or Water thawed into the Floods of a River, by a Hair or a Raisin, by violent Motion or Sitting Still, by Severity or Indulgence, by Gods Mercy, or Gods Anger, by every thing in Providence, and every thing in Manners, by every thing in Nature, and every thing in Chance —
Mans body's like a House: His greater bones,
Are the main Timber; and the lesser Ones,

Are smaller Splints: His Ribs are Laths, dawb'd ov'r
Plaster'd with flesh and blood: his mouth's the Door:
His throat's the narrow Entry: and his heart
Is the Great Chamber, full of curious Art;
His Midriff is a large partition Wall,
'Twixt the Great Chamber, and the spacious Hall:
His Stomach is the Kitchin, where the Meat
Is often but half sod, for want of Heat:
His Spleen's a Vessel, Nature doth allot,
To take the skum that rises from the Pot.
His Lungs are like the Bellows that respire
In ev'ry office, quickning ev'ry fire.
His Nose, the Chimney is, where by are vented
Such Fumes as with the Bellows are augmented:
His Bowels are the Sink, whose part's to drain
All noisom filth, and keep the Kitchin clean:
His Eyes like Chrystal Windows, clear and bright
Lets in the Object, and lets out the Sight:
And as the Timber is, or great or small,
Or strong or weak, 'tis apt to stand or fall,
Yet is the likeliest building sometimes known,
To fall by obvious chances; overthrown
Oft times by Tempests, by the full mouth'd Blasts
Of Heav'n; Sometimes by fire; Sometimes it wafts
Through unadvis'd neglect: Put case, the stuff
Were ruin-proof, by nature strong enough,
To conquer Time and Age: Put case, it should
Ne'r know an end: Yet, yet our Leases would.
And alas! alas!
Eripiter Persona manet Res.
We take pains to heap up things useful to our Life, and get our Death in the purchase, which those rash, foolish and over-reaching muckworms do not consider, who make haste to be rich by galloping full speed into an
 Estate, (before they are well in the Saddle, or have prayed for a blessing) by which means, before they run far towards hoarding up wealth, they unavoidably break their Wind if Death in the midst of their Bustle and Stir doth not save their patcht credit by preventing the odious repute of their breaking.Psal. 39.6. Psal. 146.4. But now in this Treatise you will find, that these men that drive thus at getting all the world into their hands are men that walk in a vain shew, and disquiet themselves in vain, heaping up Riches when they know not who shall gather them) and how in a day unexpected (when they think their Earthly designs and projects succeed most bravely) their very thoughts shall perish.
And therefore here Dear Cozens by the way I ad∣vise you that have Trades, never to engage in too many businesses at one time, lest some Irons burn, nor in very great affairs (before you have traded in the world nine or ten years) lest your loss prove irreparable, re∣membring that in a great River Fish are to be found, but then take heed you be not drowned: for great Ʋn∣dertakers are like Forlorn Hopes, Aut Caesar, aut nul∣lus. And in desperate Casts 'tis very great odds if you throw not Ams Ace; and on the other hand many busi∣nesses are like the King of Spains Dominions that lye so far asunder, that the charge of keeping them eats out the profit, so that there is very few who eagerly involve themselves in multiplicity of business but rue it at last; I once my self (said a Dear Friend of mine) had con∣cerns with a Person involved in much business, of whom it may seem that speech was not meant, In the sweat of thy brows shalt thou eat bread, for he sweat in toil∣ing for wealth till he was ready to starve, working him∣self by a World of business, in about half a years time out of many Hundreds, till at last he was necessita∣ted to take Harbour in Ludgate. But I shall add no more here under this head but these Verses following,
 (which if seriously considered, are enough to put a damp or stain upon all our too eager pursuits after worldly Riches.) Viz.
Naked we came, 'fore we began to be
Traders among the Sons of Misery;
Tender, unarm'd, helpless and quite forlorn,
E're since 'twas our hard fortune to be born.
And when the space of a few trading days
Shall be expir'd, then must we go our ways.
Naked we shall return, and nothing have,
Nothing wherewith to bribe the hungry Grave:
Then what's the Proudest Dealers glittering Oare;
Oh! what's he more than I, with all his store,
Since we must both without distinction dye,
And slumber both stark naked, he and I.
But then (in the 23d place) is shewn how that suppose we could by rising early, and sitting up late, and by much hard tugging, and labour, and by often and early combing the Head of occasion, get the Golden Lock of success and prosperity (and so by this mens arrive to the splendid Titles of Rich and Great) yet that all this would not be able to keep off death or old age from our backs, or give us a Lease of Lon∣ger Life f r every meal we eat, is as it were a ransom from one Death, and layes up for another. And while we think a thought we dye, for the Clock strikes, and reckons on our portion of Eternity, nay we even form our words with the breath of our Nostrils, and we have the less time to live for every word we speak; therefore well might holy David say, He that lives to fourscore years we count him wondrous old: And now adays if any, through much grief and pain climb up to their hundredth year, they are accounted the chief wonder of the age wherein they live; but thse that arrive to this age their very lives do become the perfect model of a winters day, and they huge burdensom both to themselves and
 others. Besides in Old Age as is shewed in the Passing-Bell gray hairs, and hoary Heads, dim Eyes, rotten Teeth, trembling Joynts, short Breath, stiff Limbs, wrinkled Skins, short Memories, decayed Appetites, Bald Pates, are esteemed but as Dressings to Funeral Solemnities, and the proper badges of persons entred very far into the re∣gions of Darkness. And now —
Dear Relations, &c.
We all are going to the self same Place,
We only differ in our Way, our Pace:
One treads the Common Road of Age: Another
Travels, directly by the hand of's Brother:
Some cross the Waves, perchance the nearer way:
Some by the winged Shaft that flies by Day:
Some ride on Fevers: Others beat the hoof,
With Horses in their hands, and make a proof,
Of their own strength: Others more fairly pace
On Beds of Down: Some ride a speedy Race
On hot-mouth'd Surfeits, emulous for the Cup:
Some hotly-mounted fiercely gallop up
On spurgall'd Broyls, whose frantick motion send
Their hasty Spirits to their Journeys end:
Some ride upon the racking Steeds of Treasure;
Others false-gallop on the backs of Pleasure:
All journey forwards to the self same place;
Some the next way; and some the faster pace:
All post an end, till beaten out of Breath,
They all arrive at the great Gates of Death.
As to the several Emblems belonging to this Book, I shall here in this Epistle take little notice of them, they being fully explained in their respective places through∣out the whole Book, but only speak something of those that relate to the sick-mans Passing-Bell: wherein you have described to the Eye in Figures (after a most lively manner) 1. How the Minister (being sent for)
 comes to visit the Dying-man, with the manner of the Sick-mans carriage when he came there. 2ly. (means proving ineffectual) how the Sick-man gives up the Ghost, and how forthwith upon this the Passing-Bell is Rung out by the diligent Clark, to tell the whole Fami∣ly, Neighbourhood, Town, and Parish, That the Poor-man is dead that lately lay sick (being gone the way of all flesh) and that they should prepare speedi∣ly to follow after, none of them all knowing whose turn may be next.
Then what is Life! But the flourishing array
Of the Green Summers Meadow, which to day,
Wears her Green Plush, and is to morrow Hay.
And then again 3ly This Passing Bell doth as it were ell them that the very same Bir, and it may be, that he very same persons that are to carry this Dead-man o his Grave, stands ready to do as much for any of them. And 4ly it tells them all that their own mortality may easily be read in the death of this their deceased Neigh∣bour and Friend. — But now execution being served pon the Sick-man, (he being departed this mortal life)
Methinks I see Grim Death, that aged Sire,
Fly to next Town, with Wings that ne're will tire.
Upon his bare Head an Hour-Glass he wears,
And in his wrinkled hand a Sythe he bears,
(Both Instruments to take the lives from men,
Th' one shews with what, the other sheweth when.)
Methinks I hear the doleful Passing-Bell,
Setting an onset to the Dead mans Knell.
(This moody Musick of Impartial Death,
Who dances after dances out of breath.)
Methinks I see his dearest Friends lament,
With Sighs, and Tears, and woful dryriment:

His tender Wife and Sisters standing by,
Dewing the Death-bed whereon he doth ly;
Methinks I hear a voice in secret say,
Their Glass is run too, they must dye next day.
But then in the next place is represented (to the Life) how the man as soon as he is dead, is stript and laid out all along on the Bed, and how from thence, in about three days time (his Face being pale and wan, his Cheeks fallen, and his Eyes being sunk into his Head, and he becoming a frightful Spectacle to his very Friends) he is haled in his Winding Sheet to his Coffin with the manner how the weeping Mother, sorrowful Children and sighing Friends spend over him many, many a bitter tear, whilst pro∣bably all this while the greedy Nurses are fighting and scufling for his very Shirt and Cloathes, and the wretch∣ed Sons too Boxing and Duelling of it valiantly for the Mony and Goods that he hath left behind.
In the fifth place is shown how the Dead-mans nearest and dearest Friends are invited to his Funeral with the manner how upon his Relations shoulders (after the usual Complement of a sprig of Rosemary, a Glass of Burnt Claret, paper of Biskets, Gold Ring, or Ser∣vice of Plumb-Cake is over) he is carryed to the Church, where often for the sake and instruction of the living, a Funeral Sermon or Oration is made, (and very likely if he was rich, or left a good Fee to the Par∣son of the Parish) at the latter end of it he is extold to the Skies, as the Nonesuch of the Age, Town and Country wherein he lived, where as large Enco∣miastical Praises of the Dead, unless their lives were eminent in Goodness, and free from any notable Blot, are much condemned by the most judicious and godly Divines, as a thing of very evil consequence, because they often prove Confections of Poyson to the Living; for many, whose lives speak nothing for them, will draw the example into consequence, and be thereby, led int
 hopes that they may press a Hackney Funeral Sermon to carry them to Heaven when they dye; on the other hand it may be said, that though common Graves de∣serve no Inscription, yet Marble Tombs are not without some Epitaph: Heroical and vertuous Examples should not go with a Common Pass but with a Trumpet.
In the sixth place is represented after what mournful manner the Dead-mans Corps or Herse is carryed (when the Doleful Bell begins to Toll) to its slemn Inter∣ment, where the Drooping Pomp ends, and where the Mourners and Supporters of his Pall, (and likewise his weeping Friends,) (after committing Ashes to Ashes, Dust to Dust in sure and certain hope (if the man dyed a sincere Christian of his resurrection at the last day to Eternal Life) leave his pale Carcass to make a splendid Feast for the Worms to feed on.
In the seventh place (in these Emblems) is shown how poor frail man, from all Fortunes store in the con∣clusion of his days can reap no more than a narrow Cof∣fin and a scanty Grave, with the manner how our en∣trance into the world, and exit out of it, seem to meet, and what affinity there is between our Winding Sheet and Swadling Bands.
In the eighth place, by these Emblems belonging to the Sick-mans Passing-Bell is shown, 1st how fading man doth but as it were, just arise from mother Earth to take one single turn upon the Stage of the World, with a necessity (by reason of sin) to return again and dye (2.) How poorly and meanly clad we must enter into our Coffins, a Winding Sheet, and one poor Shrowd being all we can carry with us, or our Friends will be∣stow upon us when they take of us their last Farewell. (3.) After what dismal and distracted manner some Relations carry it at their Friends Graves with the dole∣full Ahone; Ahone; ringing of Hands, tearing of Hair and sheding of Tears they make there, with a dis∣cription of one that did thus passionately follow her Hus∣band
 to the Grave (nay desired to be buried alive with him) that as soon as ever the black attire of his fu∣neral was over, marries another, with whom she lived extream merrily all her days. By which you may see when once we are dead and gone, our Friends will think no more of us than we are wont to do of them we now survive. And we know not how soon that very earth which we now so negligently tread upon, may receive us into her cold Embraces,

Veiw then these Emblems, and Revolve this Book,
For Deaths mementoes, stand where e're you look.

But I should quite tire your patience, should I run over all those delightful Heads which this Passing-Bell treats of, I shall therefore here make a stop — And in the next place proceed to tell you, that there is in this Book, besides what I have already told you of, a third Course prepared for you, of no less than fifty several pleasant Trea∣sant Treatises (rarely if ever handled before) all of them being greatly useful, and will afford extra∣ordinary pleasure and delight in the perusal (as was said in the Title page) if either profit or no∣velty will do it; nay further I must tell you, if depth of Fancy, variety and greatness of Subjects are capable of affording satisfaction to a Reader, you will have throughout this whole Work, I now pre∣sent you with, abundantly to satisfie your curiosity. But here again I should be too tedious should I ei∣ther write all the particulars wherein this Book doth excel, or give you the names of the fifty several Treatises just now spoken of: I shall therefore at present add no more, but my sincere and hearty wishes, that when your worldly Enjoyments, Incomparable Good Humours, and Earthly Splendor, shall be shri∣velled to nothing, or at least into a cold remem∣brance,
 that even then the sweet perfume of your truly vertuous Deeds and most generous Actions may remain afterwards more fragrant, fresh and green than the Flourishing Grass that in Chesham Church-yard shall cover your mournful Graves when your souls are past into Immortality; and that your very names may be as living Examples of Ver∣tue and Piety to after Ages, or rather that they may bury monuments, behold the worlds Funeral, see Time laid in the Dust, and stand up with Eternity:


