



WHen Rome had aw'd the World with her Alarms,
And peacefull Arts succeeded dreadfull Arms;
Virgil and Horace did the Empire treat,
And laid inspiring Verse at Caesar's feet:
Imperial justice Crown'd their heads with Bayes,
As they his Conquests with Immortal praise.
With their Ambition, though not equal Art,
Oblig'd by Duty, and a Loyal heart,
Your gratefull Poet, (Sacred Sir) presumes
To Court great Britain's Genius, as they Rome's;
Belov'd of Heaven, great Authour of our bliss,
Rebellion's scourge, defender of our Peace;
That the Rude Nation Godlike didst inspire,
Kindle the Clod with influencing fire;
Till Reason, like th' eternal Soul did move
O'er confus'd Chaos, and like awfull Jove,
Form'd the dull Lump to Order and to Love:
You, like the Monarch of this Factious Isle,
Did on your Foes enervate Malice smile;
Grasping the Brand, even then you could forgive,
Stop the revenging Bolt, and let 'em live:
But judgment still is sure; what you neglect,
Their own despair will Brutishly effect.
Witness He late who by Rack'd Conscience sway'd;
Murth'ring himself, his horrid Cause displaid.
So when mysterious God and Man was led
To death, by Judas Impiously betraid;
He, knowing that the Plot by him design'd
Had doom'd the mighty saviour of Mankind,
Return'd the Bribe, and with Hell's rage possest,
Discharg'd a Soul, that knew no place of rest.
Degrees of Crimes will have degrees of Woe,
But Rebels are all doubly damn'd below.
Had the poor Felon, that was Crucify'd,
Been found a Rebel, or a Regicide,
The great Redeemer trembling at his vice,
Had soon revok'd his Grant of Paradise.
Mercy is Heaven's chiefest Attribute;
And greatest Crimes make it most absolute;
But stubborn Reprobates will never mend,
The more you pardon, they the more offend.
For Pharaoh's Court obey'd divine Command
No longer than the Locusts plagu'd his Land;
The Curse remov'd, they the Wise Prophet scorn,
And beastlike to their Excrement return.
Your vertue (Sir) unshockt by fear, or harm,
Knows the weak malice of the Suakes you warm;
Blest with your Beams, they wriggle till they're hot;
Then seeded venom spreads into a Plot.
The Nations Ague, every Plot has been,
Or Hell's dire Engine late with terrour seen;
When Brutish Rabble turn'd the vast Machine.
But you to heal the Kingdom's frenzy come,
And now again the Olive branches bloom:
The peacefull Dove may o'er the Deluge fly,
Pearch on high Trees, and murmur Songs of Ioy;
You are in Caesar safe, and he in you;
The best of Subjects, and of Brothers too:
Fixt to his Int'rest with Religious Care,
Patron of Peace, and Father of the War:
To whose known judgment, Arts and Arms belong,
Bellona's Buckler, and Apollo's song.
Whoever su'd with Tears or bended knee▪
That was not succour'd by your Clemency?
The Warriour has for noble Scars reward,
The Widows and the Orphans Crys are heard;
Afflicted Merit is no more distrest;
So much of Pity fills your sacred Breast:
Yet chatt'ring Momus will your Fame assail,
The foolish Momus is allow'd to rail,
Cant without wit, and without Satyr write;
He onely Snarls and Grins, but dares no bite.
Envy, like Trophies, decks a General:
The cackling Geese once sav'd Rome's Capitol.
Vnder the Crowds reproach the more you lye,
The more discerning judgment mounts you high.
So into bliss those best deserve to come,
That for the Truth dare suffer Martyrdom.
Great Sir,

