



May it please your GRACE,
THE Arrogance a Poet may be guilty of in a Dedication, often brings him more terror, than his fear for the success of his Play; and I al∣ways thought the Frowns of an offended Patron a greater Punishment than the Censures of the Partial Criticks. But the Sin of Confidence is so natural to a young Poet, and so suitable to his Character and Business, that an Excuse, or Re∣proof (as it would be extreamly unnecessary, so it) might perhaps be a hinderance to his For∣tune. My sence of this, has encourag'd me to present this Comedy to your Grace; with this humble Suit, That as it has indifferently past in the Opinion of the Town, it may have the Ho∣nour to stand as Neuter in your Graces Fa∣vour:

The greatest Confidence of a Poet can ask no more; nor can you, (My Lord) Govern'd by your Excellent Temper, grant less. This I know I need not repeat, nor urge a second time: For who ever yet made an Humble Address to your Grace, that went away unsatisfied? You are so far from Singularity, so Nobly Iust, and so unwearied in doing good, that to Pen your Applause, were as impossible a work, as to Pen the Actions of your Life, every hour producing some memorable thing as an Addition to the Vo∣lume. My Lord, 'Tis not only my particular Grief, but every ones for your Graces depar∣ture from England: And though the great Place of Trust conferred upon you by His Sacred Majesty, (and which none can be more wor∣thy of) gives us proof as well of your Pious Loyalty, as Unequal'd Grandeur; Yet such an Influence you have gain'd on all Hearts, that they had rather the Kingdom of Ireland should lose its Preserver, than they so good a Patron. This I confess I am most sensible of, perhaps having as much cause as any; which Relation I'll smother, lest it is thought Interest more than Gratitude makes me resent it.
If I have presumed too much, I have this Excuse, That a Dedication to such a Person cannot be VVrit without it; and 'tis the only Honour a Poet is ambitious of, to have a great Name before his Play. I confess I was guilty of this; and have only this Excuse for the Ar∣rogance of a Dedication, That your Grace was pleas'd to favour my Last, and that this was VVrit with the same Integrity. For the Play I can say nothing; only that it was my own, though some are pleas'd to doubt the contrary, (the Scotch Song excepted, a part of which was not mine; nor do I desire any Reputation from it.) Be pleased, My Lord, to forgive this Prolixity; and believe my sence of the Honour I have in Addressing to your Grace, almost equals the Ambition I shall ever own, in Stiling my Self,
My LORD, 
