


My Lord,

AS in old times, when Wit had flourish'd long,
And Rome was famous for Poetick Song,
The Learned Bards did round Mecaenas throng:
To him as Wits Dictator, brought their Store
And Standard, that best tri'd the Muses Ore.
So in our Albion, tho her Bards are few,
Yet each one covets a Dictator too,
And for Mecaenas, fix (my Lord, on you.
You, like the famous Indian Gourd, are set,
Under whose shade, sits cool each pigmy Wit,
Free from the railing Criticks blasting heat.
Let the rich Spring flow clear or be impure,
Fenc'd with your Name, the Poet is secure:
Your Wit's a Sanctuary, where each one
Is safe, that wisely does for refuge run.
The roving Icarus in Poetry,
By you is levell'd, when he soars too-high.
By Judgments Rules and awful Sense reclaim'd,
The wild Higflyer is to Nature tam'd:
Nor does the grovelling Muse crawl off asham'd:
But by your mild reproof his faults discerne;
Made fit for Fame, if not to proud to learn.
Each Genius still is by your candor priz'd
The Great not flatter'd, nor the Less dispis'd.
For as great Maro, Naso, Flaccus, may
In your indulgent beams with freedom play;
So Bavius too, and Maevius uncontroul'd,
May busk about—and grac'd with smiles, be bold.
Oh boudless Glory! yet for eas too great,
Axious, tho prais'd, and restless in its State:
Wit's fate▪ and that of Soveraignty's the same,
Both sit high crown'd, both plagu'd by too much fame
As Courtiers for Preferment teazing come,
And at the Levee throng a Monarchs Room.
So when Apollo Crowns a darling Son,
Thelesser Tribe will all be pushing on,
To get a Scien of his sacred Bays,
To plant their Credit in suceeding Days.
Thus your Renown—your rouble does encrease;
Less great (my Lord) you had been more at ease.
Like Hero's, that to War usummo'd come;
If less couragiou, had been safe at home.
A common Fate best suits with common Clay,
Stamp'd off in haste upon he first Essy,
But Poets are not products of a Day.
Kings Reign by Conquest, Choice or Right of Bith;
Souldiers get Fame—and Grandees share the Earth.
But Wi's a prize so rare, there scarce appears,
One mighty Dorset in a Thousand Years:
And then too, Heaven that knows the Gift is great,
Thinks one enough to honour a whole state.
Thus are the two geat Blessing, Wit and Love,
Kept (s sublimest) with most care above.
Heven grnts us sparingly of both a taste,
One rarely found, and t'other not too last;
Lest the weak Mortal, in his extasie,
Like the first Man, may know too much and dye:
Yet has this nice forbidden fruit, which Heaven
From Millions keeps, to you been frankly given.
You have (y Lord) a Paent from above,
And can monopolize both Wit and Love;
Inspir'd and blest, by Heavens peculiar care,
Ador'd by all the Wife, and all the Fair;
To whom the World united give this due,
Best Iudge of Men, and best of Poets too.


Please to permit me then, as all the rest
Of Moses Sons already have address'd;
Thus, for your Patronage, to make appeal
The last Attending, but the first in Zeal.
Let but this Play the usual Grace receive,
And if your generous breath says—Let it live,
Don Quixot then, is fix'd in deathless Glory,
And Sancho, on the Stage is famous as in story.

Which is,
My Lord,

