


MY LORD,
IN compliance with your Lord∣ships desire, which with me hath the force of Command, this Sermon was preacht, and is now made publick in pursuance of an Order of that Honourable Court, to which I am obliged, and ready to yield my most chearful obedience. I am not
 so great a Flatterer of my self, as to think this hasty and unpolisht discourse deserves the honour You have put upon it: yet, I dare not so far distrust Your judgments, as not to think that it may be suitable and ser∣viceable to the Times we live in.
A Generation who seem to make it their business to elude all the Methods of Divine Providence, and to baffle all those various Means, which God is pleased to use for their amendment: Who are neither melted by his Mercies, nor humbled by his Judg∣ments. To obviate which great and grow∣ing Evils, I made choice of this Argu∣ment to treat on. The subject matter where∣of is weighty and momentous; and, as it deserved an abler hand to set it off: so it challenges the most serious attention from the greatest Persons.
What it loseth by the weak management of the Argument must be put upon my ac∣count, who, to prevent the censures of o∣thers,
 think meanlier of it than any man else can do. Such as it is, it humbly offers it self to Your favourable acceptance: not doubting but it shall find some countenance from them, who have brought it into pub∣lick view. I have only two requests to make, and I have done. One to God; that he would accompany it with his Blessing, that it may be in some measure effectual to∣ward the cure of that great Evil it com∣plains of: The other is to Your Lordship, and that Honourable Court, that Your cha∣rity would accept of my good intentions, and that Your Justice would make some proportionable allowance for the Infirmities of age, and very short warning.
In the acknowledgment of which Fa∣vours, I shall not cease to implore the Throne of Grace, that God would be plea∣sed to continue Propitious to this great City, to the Governours and Government there∣of: that all heats and animosities may be
 laid aside, divisions healed, breaches made up: that all the Members of this Great Body may be as men of one mind in an house, and study and endeavour to promote the publick good, without respect to private advantages: which is the most probable means, to make and continue it a flourishing and a happy City. Which is the hearty and daily prayer of,
My Lord,  
January the 17th. 1675/6.
