


I Need not tell you, Gentlemen, how useful this Art is and may be to you, whatever Employ∣ment you are to undertake in Church or State. As it is the most desira∣ble Faculty for the enriching your Minds with rare Sciences and Know∣ledges, and the gathering from your Stations those rich Jewels that will cause you one day to appear the greatest Ornaments of your Age and Nation; it is also the most excellent Ability

for the perfecting of all your Natu∣ral Perfections, and procuring to you a real Happiness in this Life, and an eternal Felicity in the next.
Seeing therefore that so many and apparent Advantages depend upon your Memories, and the Improve∣ment of them, pray be not wanting to your selves; neglect not this Gift of God, suffer it not to be idle and useless, but employ it for the Pur∣poses intended by the Donor's Wisdom and Bounty.
If you have capacious and officious Memories able to receive, contain and preserve much, keep them not as empty Bladders, puft up with Wind and Fancy, but fill them while you are at the Fountain with the profita∣ble Knowledg of God and Nature, of

sound Learning, and of true Wisdom, and of those liberal Arts and Sciences by which you design to be useful, and do good in your Generation.
Let your Elevation be never so great, and your Birth never so con∣siderable, Learning, Knowledg and Wisdom will add a greater Splendor and Glory to your Nobility, and pro∣cure to you a greater Veneration from those who are to be subject to your Commands and Dominion. Picus Father and Son, Earls of Mirandu∣la, tho Men of great Eminency in our late days, thought the Exercise of their Memories in the studying of all manner of Sciences to be no Di∣minution to their Nobility, but ra∣ther a considerable Increase to their Native Honour; for one of them pub∣lished

at Rome, Theses de om∣nibus Scientiis, with a Promise to defray the Charges of those Learned Men, if poor, who would have the Pleasure to travel to oppose and dispute with him. And if you please to look into Antiquity, how many Noble and Famous Men, how many Kings and Princes have purchased to themselves everlasting Renown by the Exercise of their Memories, by their Industry, Studies and great Learning? Cato the Elder, at the Age of 80 Years, pleaded his own Cause when accused by his Adversa∣ries of a Capital Crime; and it was observed, that neither his Memory failed him, nor his Countenance changed. Themistocles that No∣ble Athenian, could call all his fel∣low

Citizens by their proper Names; and when he was banished into Per∣sia, he learnt in a few Months the Persian Tongue, that he might be able to speak to King Darius with∣out an Interpreter. And in our late Ages King Alfonsus, Aver∣roes, and Avicenna, were noted for their Learning as well as for their Nobility.
Memory is a rich and precious Jewel, if polish'd, used and improved; but if suffered to be idle, it is as a Pearl of great Value in the Hands of a slothful or unskilful and igno∣rant Artist.
To this purpose Erasmus speaks very well. Ad nativae Memo∣riae vim natura felicem accedat intelligentia, cura, exercitatio

& ordo, ad memoriam confir∣mandam non nihil opis polli∣centur medici: sed praeter ea quae diximus plurimùm confert perpetua vitae sobrietas; nam cra∣pula & ebrietas ut ingenium he∣betant, ita memoriam prorsus obruunt. Officit etiam curarum varietas & turba negotiorum, officit & tumultuaria diverso∣rum voluminum lectio. And again he saith, Optima memoriae Ars est & penitus intelligere, in∣tellecta in ordinem redigere, po∣stremò subinde repetere quod meminisse velis. Certainly such have a great advantage who are gifted with a large Memory, but it can yield neither them nor others any Benefit, unless they employ this

Gift for the Purposes that their wise God hath designed in the Donation. And let it be never so strong and large by Nature, it may be improved and increased by Art and their In∣dustry, to the compleating of their Felicity both Temporal and Eternal.
But if Nature seems to deny some of you this Advantage, and you are not so ready and perfect as others in the use of this excellent Ability, you are not therefore to slight the least Gifts of God in your Crea∣tion, but still to endeavour the Im∣provement and Increase of them. Let your Labour and Industry strive to supply the Deficiencies of Nature, and polish this Gift, this precious Jewel by a continual Exercise. Demosthenes, the Prince of the

Greek Orators, had such Natural Imperfections, as made him unfit to speak in publick; yet by his resolute and vertuous Endeavours he attained to the highest pitch of Perfection and Glory in Oratory. Art may procure to us divers Excellencies which Nature seems to keep from us; and the Divine Bounty grants many times to our assidual Labours what was refused to our Birth at first. The sparing Hand of Na∣ture in bestowing this Ability should rather provoke our Resolution to get it by other means, than cause us to slacken, or discourage our Endea∣vours; for according to the old Greek Proverb, , the great∣er the Difficulty in the Attempt, the greater will be the Glory and Satis∣faction

in overcoming it: for of all the Perfections of the Mind there is none more capable of a greater Im∣provement than Memory, and none will reward our Labours with more satisfactory Returns than this ex∣cellent Ability when we can attain to any Perfection. Pray consider therefore, you who are like to want the use of this rare Faculty in the following course of your Lives, and in the Imployments that you design to engage your selves in, how much it concerns you now to polish and in∣crease your Memories, and exercise them frequently; for, as a Roman Author observes, Memoria minui∣tur nisi exerceas eam. Tho the Labour may be great at first because of your Natural Imperfections, the

Difficulty is to be overcome by Art; and what is wanting to you in Na∣ture, the other will supply in time. Pray weigh and consider these sea∣sonable Verses applicable to my Pur∣pose.

Quisquis desidiam, luxum{que} se∣quetur inertem,
Dum fugit appositas incauta mente labores,
Turpis inops{que} simul miserabile transiget aevum.

The Advantages that the Exer∣cise of Memory will procure to you are innumerable; to you, Gentlemen, chiefly, who design to instruct the Nation from the Pulpit: for besides the Honour, Glory, Esteem and Va∣lue

that you will thereby obtain from your Congregations by this way of Delivery, besides the greater Effi∣cacy and Power that your Words and Preaching will have upon the Minds of your Auditors, besides the pro∣moting of the Glory of God, and perhaps the perswading a greater Number thereby out of the broad Road of Eternal Perdition, I must needs tell you that you will quickly find an unspeakable Benefit in a few Years; and your great Pains at first in conquering your natural Weak∣nesses will be fully recompensed with a greater Ease, Pleasure and De∣light in the publishing of your Me∣ditations. You will find that this way of Delivery will smooth and polish your Conceptions and Fancy.

You will find that it will unty your Tongues, and make you more ready to express your selves: you will find that your Labours will be the less, your Preaching more acceptable, your Improvements greater, your Learning more sound, and your selves able upon a sudden to answer all Gain∣sayers; for by this means the Body of Divinity will become as familiar to you as your Pater Noster. An∣tisthenes, the Athenian Philoso∣pher, when a Friend complained that he had lost his Book where he had recorded weighty Matters, told him that he ought not to have trusted things of so great Importance to Pen, Ink and Paper, but to his Memory, where he should always have found them ready at hand in time of need.

There is one Advantage more which we shall receive by the Exer∣cise of our Memories: how conside∣rable it may be to us, and what In∣fluence it may have to increase and inlarge our Eternal Happiness, we may at a distance guess; for thereby the Soul will be inabled to increase its Abilities, Faculties and Graces, which have a natural Dependance upon this of Memory, and that also will be inabled to retain more; be∣cause as there is a strict Union and Communication of all the Perfections between the Soul and Body; so that if one receives an Inlargement, it conveys the same Benefit to the other, and the other becomes more perfect and accomplished in that Ability which its Partner enjoys: The Exercise

therefore of Memory will not only inable the Organ now to perform more perfect Acts, and inlarge the Ability while the Soul is in Conjunction with the Body; but at its Separation, and at the great Morn of the Resurrection, this Perfection with all the rest, be∣ing as immortal as the Spirit where it is fixt, and to which it is conveyed, by our constant Endeavours and Cor∣respondence with the Body, will then appear more compleat and greater, for the better Reception of future Glory and Bliss, and to our everlasting Com∣fort and Satisfaction: Therefore as St. Bernard very well expresseth himself, Ad aeternitatis Gloriam acquirendam nullus labor du∣rus, nullum tempus longum vi∣deri debet. In Doct.

I would not have those Worthy and Learned Gentlemen of my Functi∣on be displeased with this Exhorta∣tion and Advice that I address to the Students of our Universities, as if it were designed to undervalue their wise and profitable Meditations pronounced with the Assistance of Book from the Pulpit. Our Nation only is used to this way of Delivery; for we are wont ofttimes, as we ought, to consider and weigh the Things and Expressions more than the manner of the Publication. Nei∣ther is it possible for them after a Tract of Time and a long Usage to change their Custom of Preaching. But for the Young Men coming up to supply our vacant Places in Church and State, 'tis now in their

Power to alter this Custom, to exer∣cise their Memories, to follow the Practice of the Learned Men of other Nations: 'Tis now in their Power to use themselves to such a Practice as will be advantagious to the Glory of God, the Salvation of Souls, the Credit of our Church, and infinitely beneficial to themselves.
I recommend therefore this Trea∣tise principally to you, Gentlemen; and let nothing hinder you from the Exercise of your Memories, and the Practice of the Rules here prescribed, which I will assure you from Expe∣rience have proved effectual for the overcoming the Weaknesses of Na∣ture, and inabling frail Memories to perform the Acts of large and strong. If some of them seem common, de∣spise

them not, they will be no less useful if put in Practice. I have not only consulted, in the delivery of them, my own Knowledg and Expe∣rience, but have also set down the Advices▪ of several Learned Men about this Subject, and borrowed from the Skill of the Physicians several approved Experiments for the strengthening and corroborating the Faculty of Memory.
However, I intreat you, Gentle∣men, to accept kindly from my Pen this Endeavour for your Benefit and the Publick, and this sincere Ex∣pression of my earnest Desire of your Success, Promotions and Advan∣tages, and of the Prosperity of our Church and Nation.

I beseech God of his Infinite Bounty to make you all truly use∣ful in your Generation, to inlarge your Memories, increase your Learn∣ing, bless all your Abilities and Graces, and to preserve you all to his Eternal Kingdom.
Amen.
