



BEfore ever this Request was made by Forrain Prote∣stants to our Worthies in England, and when I was at the Ʋniversity of Cambridge many years ago, the Ne∣cessity of such a Work as is here implored, was made apparent unto me, and my wishes and earnest endeavours were made awake towards it; but then there was no ap∣pearance that ever any such thing could, or should be brought to passe: yet since we have seen greater and more unexpected mat∣ters accomplished, both in reference to Religion, and to the Civil Govern∣ment, I hope we are in a fair way to see yet greater things brought forth, and things of Peace and Comfort to all the Churches, which may prove to be the foundations of many Generations. For as the hope of the Hypocrite shall perish, and be like unto the giving up of the ghost; so the desire of the Righteous shall be fulfilled, and he shall not be ashamed of his hopes, because the Promise is, that he who hungers and thirsts for Righteousnesse, shall be satisfied.
Now the Work which is here sued for by the Forrain Ministers, is no∣thing else but the knowledge of that way of Righteousnesse which God hath prepared for his Saints to walk in, that they may have Communion with him in his Kingdom. Therefore I am very confident that i will be so fully revealed and made known, that a man (as the Prophet saith) though a fool shall not erre therein. And because the Lord hath given unto you
 vour the accomplishment of their request; I think my self bound in Conscience at this seasonable time, to offer it to your pious thoughts, in the expresse words of their own Petition, and in some Considera∣tions which I have annexed unto the matter thereof.
Therefore in the first place, you shall find here a Copy of their Pe∣tition in Latine, with the several subscriptions, whereof the Original writings are in my hand, which I have put in English to satisfie Vul∣gar Capacities: Then in the second place, you will find three consi∣derable matters concerning this sute represented unto you.
1. What is meant by a Body of Practical Divinity.
2. What the Reasons are, for which it ought to be published.
3. How the Work may be effected, and imparted unto those that have sued for it at our hands.
Which having endeavoured to make you sensible of, as a Work most acceptable unto God, most sutable to the Gospel, most profi∣table unto the Godly, very usefull unto all, very honourable unto these our Churches, and not difficult in it self to be effected, if it re∣ceive but a little Countenance, I shall by the further prosecution there∣of, as God shall give me addresses and opportunities, rest satisfied in this (whatever the successe and event may be) that I have not been wanting to the discharge of my duty, nor to the desires of the faith∣full, so farre as God hath enabled me to proceed towards the ac∣complishing of the same. And thus commending to the grace of God thy sense of this businesse, I shall subscribe my self thy Servant therein

