




DEarly Beloved, They that love God dear∣ly are dearly beloved of God, dearly belo∣ved of Christ, dearly beloved of Angels, dearly beloved of Saints; they are beloved of all, and have the love of all, whose love is worth the having.
O my dear Friends, I cannot think of you and your condition,
but it fills my eyes with water, and my heart with griefe; and with Jeremy I wish, O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountaine of Tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain of the Daughter of my people, Jeremiah 9.1. Oh that I am constrained to be from you, whom I could live and dye with, spend and be spent for so deare a people as you are; I would chuse to be doing the work to which I was called, amongst you, rather then any where else, if I might. I should not count my Life dear to me, so that I might have the liber∣ty to preach Christ to you for your edification and salvation. I hope your Consciences will bear me witnesse, that whilest I was with you, I Laboured as much as in me lay, to be a helper of your joy, not to Lord it over your faith; and I bless God I can with a good conscience safely say, I have cove∣ted
no mans Gold, nor Silver, as you your selves know: I could do very much for you, but I dare not sin against God and my own Con∣science.
But my dear Brethren, Though they have separated us one from the other, they cannot separate our hearts; I hope there will never be a separation of our loves, but that will still continue; if we do not see one another, yet we may love one another, and pray for one another: And now my desire is, that my pen may reach you, though my voice cannot reach you.
That I may still approve the sincerity of my love to you, I shall give you twenty Directions for the right ordering of your Lives and conversations in these dange∣rous and sinful times; that you may live in Heaven whilest you are on the Earth, and come to Heaven when you shall leave the Earth.

I. First, Loath sin, and leave sin.
He that covereth his sins shall not prosper, but whosoever Confesseth and forsaketh them shall have mercy, Prov. 28.13. If we confess our sins he is faithfull and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness, 1 John 1.9. There must be falling out with our sins, before there be falling off from our sins; there must be a loathing of sin in our affections, before there be a leaving of sin in our conver∣sations. Oh is it not a thousand times better to part with sinne, though never so sweet? than to part with God, and Christ, and Heaven? one of them you must do. One sin will damn a Soul out of Christ, but no sin can damn a Soul in Christ: Sin is the evill of evils, it is worse then the Devill for its that that made the Devil to be a Devil. O the love of sin, and
the lack of grace will ruin and destroy your souls for ever: It is better not to be, than to be a sinner; better to be no people, than not to be the Lords peo∣ple: Oh therefore kill sin, that sin may not kill you: mourn for sin, and flye from sin: do not commit new sins, but repent of old sins, Ezek. 36.31. You shall loath your selves in your own sight for your iniquities. O poor soul, hast thou not served the flesh, and the Devil long enough? Yea, hast thou not had e∣nough of sin? is it so good to thee, or so profitable for thee? Oh what a place will you be shortly in of joy or tor∣ment! Oh what a sight will you short∣ly see in Heaven or Hell! Oh what thoughts will shortly fill your hearts with unspeakable delights or horror! what work will you be imployed in, to praise the Lord with Saints and An∣gels, or to cry out in fire unquenchable with Divels? Oh therefore dye unto sin, confess it, mourn for it, and be asha∣med of it, hate it, and loath it, and flye from it, as from a Serpent; and though
your sins are more then you can num∣ber, yet they are not more then God can pardon.
II. Secondly, Put off the old man, and put on the new.
Eye not one to another, seeing ye have put off the old man with his deeds, and have put on the new man, which is renew∣ed in knowledge after the Image of him that created him, Col. 3.9, 10. And that ye put on the new man, which after God is created in Righteousness and Holinesse, Ephes. 1.14. For in Christ Jesus neither circumcision availeth any thing, nor uncir∣cumcision, but a new creature, Gal. 6.15. As new born Babes desire the sincere milk of the Word, that they may grow thereby, 1 Pet 2.2. Therefore if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature; old things are past away; behold all things are be∣come new, 2 Cor. 5.17. A new under∣standing, a new will, new desires, new love, new delights, new thoughts, new words, new company, and a new con∣versation; he is not what he was be∣fore. O dear friends, be new Creatures,
that you may be glorious Creatures: We can call nothing in Heaven ours, till Christ be ours. Without regenera∣tion there is no salvation; Verily I say unto you, except yea be converted, and be∣come as little children, ye cannot enter in∣to the Kingdone of Heaven, John 3.3. Verily, verily I say unto thee, except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdome of God. You have heard much of God, Christ, and Heaven with your ears, but this will not bring you to Heaven, unlesse you have much of God, Christ, & Heaven in your hearts; you must be able to say, I was once a slave, but now a son; once I was dead, but now I am alive; once I was in darknesse, but now I am light in the Lord; once I was a child of wrath, an Heir of Hell, but now I am an Heir of Heaven; once I was under the spirit of bondage, but now I am under the spi∣rit of adoption. A true Believer lives in the Lord, 1 Thes. 1.1. On the Lord, Rom. 1.17. Luke. 20.38. From the Lord, Joh. 6.57. To the Lord, Romans 1.8.
With the Lord, 2 Corinth. 13.4.
III. Thirdly, Make your peace, with the Prince of peace.
Isa. 9.6. Psal. 2.12. Kiss the Son, least he be angry, and ye perish from the way: when his wrath is kindled but a little, bles∣sed are all they that put their trust in him. O do not lift up your hand against the Son, but kisse the Son.

Let his Will be your Rule;
His Spirit your Guide;
His precepts your practices;
His decrees your delights;
His chosen ones, your choicest com∣panions.
Submit to his Gospel and Govern∣ment. Oh Sirs, make your peace with God.

There is a fourfold Peace.

First, There is a peace external: this peace is with men.
Secondly, There is peace supernal: that is peace with God.
Thirdly, There is peace internall: that is peace with Conscience.
Fourthly, There is peace eternall:
and this is peace in Heaven, Psal. 37.37. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace.

If you have peace with God, the world, and the Devil cannot hurt you: And upon the glory shall be a defence, Isa. 4.5. Believers have God for their Guide and Guard; he that meddles with the Saints of God, assaults God himself, Zech. 2.8. He that toucheth you, toucheth the Apple of mine eye. He that lifts up his hand against them, lifts up his hand against God; though they have many enemies, yet they have one friend that hath more strength then all their enemies. A ragged Saint is dearer to God, then a glittering Em∣perour that wants grace. O make your peace with the Prince of peace; that in this life you may have assurance of eternal life, that eternal death may not be your portion in the other life.
IV. Fourthly, Make Religion your main business, and not a by business.
Wherefore the rather, Brethren, give di∣ligence to make your Calling and Election
sure; for if ye doe these things, ye shall never fall, 2 Peter 1.10. Work out your salvation with fear and trembling, Phil. 2.12. But seek ye first the Kingdome of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you, Math. 6.23. Oh, why is the glory of this world so much regarded, but because the Glory of Heaven is so little minded. Oh, what is an Earthly Kingdome in comparison of the Heavenly King∣dome? the Angels themselves, though they are glorious Spirits, yet they are Ministring Spirits.
Do not most men in the world make light of God, and Christ, and the Spi∣rit, and Heaven, and their precious souls? And he sent forth his servants to call them that were bidden to the wedding, and they would not come: Again he sent forth other servants, saying, tell them that are bidden, Behold, I have prepared my Dinner; my Oxen and my Fatlings are killed, and all things are ready: Come unto the Marriage. But they made light of it, and went their way, one to his Farm,
another to his Merchandize, Math. 22.3, 4, 5.
Wretched Wordlings make Religi∣on a by-business; they will hear, read, and pray when they have nothing else to doe: Oh that such men did but know what everlasting Glory, and e∣verlasting torments are: would they then do as they do? Oh that they did but know the worth of their Souls, and the want of a Saviour; the shortnesse of their time, and the greatness of their work: would they then neglect God and their own souls as they do?
Oh Friends, Let me beseech you to whom I write, to make Religion your main businesse, hearing, reading, pray∣ing, believing and doing, your maine businesse. Labour not for the meat which perisheth, but for that meat which endu∣reth unto everlasting life, which the Son of man shall give unto you; for him hath God the father sealed, Joh. 6.27.
V. Fifthly, Doe nothing in this World, but what you can answer in another World.

For we must all appear before the judge∣ment seat of Christ, that every one may receive the things done in his body, accor∣ding to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. 5.10. In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel, Rom. 2.16. He hath appointed a day in which he will judg the world in righteousnesse, by that man whom he hath ordained, Acts 17.31. For God shall bring every work to judgement, with every secret thing, whether it be good or whether it be evil, Eccles. 12.14. Oh for the Lords sake, my Dear Brethren, Let nothing be done by you in this world, but what may be answe∣red in another world.
Many men doe that in this world which they cannot in another world; Now they contemne God, blaspheme God, rebel against God, go a whoring from God, and persecute the Beloved of God: Instead of protecting the Saints, imprison the Saints; and are more for crushing them, than comfort∣ing them: instead of visiting them,
vilifie them; and instead of affecting them, afflict them, and eat them up as they eat bread, Psal. 14.4. And will not suffer them to worship the true God in Spirit and in truth; but

Mock them, Heb. 11:36.
Threaten them, Acts 4.29.
Accuse them, Acts 24.5.
Slander them, Math. 1.11.
Curse them, Math. 5.44.
Beat them, Acts 5.40.
Imprison them, Acts 4.3.
Plunder them, Heb. 10.34.
Banish them, Heb. 11.
And Murder them, Rom. 8.36.

All this the poor innocent suffer, whilst swearing, cursing, whoring rob∣bing, blaspheming, drunkenness; and gluttoning, and all manner of debau∣chery, yea, murder it self walks unpu∣nished in the streets; and only he that departs from evill makes himself a prey. What wonder then if such as these shall one day hide themselves in Dens and Holes, and cry to the Rocks and Mountains to fall on them, and hide them
from the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb, Rev. 6.15.36. Oh what will Persecu∣tors do, when Jesus Christ shall appear in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that knew him not, and obeyed not his Gospel, 2 Thes. 1:8. Will they not then be dumb and speechlesse, and have never a word to say for themselves, as that man that had not on his Wedding gar∣ment, Math. 22.12.
But Oh Beloved, Let that grace that hath appeared to all men, teach us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, that we may live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present World, Tit. 2.11.12. following the Lamb, resisting Satan, shuning sin, and separating from the world.
VI. Sixthly, Make the Word of God your Rule, and the Spirit of God your Guide.
To the Law, and to the Testimony: if they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them, Isa. 8.20. We have also a more sure word of Pro∣phesie, whereunto ye doe well that ye take
heed, as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day∣starre arise in your hearts, 2 Pet. 1.19. All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction in righte∣ousnesse, 2 Tim: 3.16. Howbeit, when the spirit of truth is come, he will guide you in∣to all truth; for he shall not speak of him∣self; but whatsoever he shall hear, that shall he speak, and he will shew you things to come, John 16.13. The Scripture is a Rule before us, to shew us where we must go; the Spirit is a word behind us, to enable us to go according to the Directions of that word: The Word of God is a Compass, by which we are to Ship our Course; the Spirit is the great Pilot that steers us in this course. We have no eyes to see the Word, till the Spirit enlighten them; we have no ears to hear the Word, till the Spi∣rit open them, we have no hearts to obey the Word, till the Spirit bow and encline them. By the Word of God we know the mind of the Spirit; and
and by the efficacy of the spirit we feel the efficacy of the Word: The Word of God shews us the way; and the Spi∣rit of God leads us in that way which the WOrd points out. The Spirit of God is able to expound the Word of God, and to make it plain to our un∣derstanding. The Holy Ghost is the Churches Interpreter; he gives the Scripture, and he can reveal unto us the sense and meaning of the Scripture. The word is Gods Counsellour, to dis∣cover the path in which we are to walk; the Spirit is the Counsel of God, that teacheth us how to walk in that path. The word is a Chrystall-Glass, which shewes us our duty; the Spirit gives us sight to see our duty; If God had not put his Spirit into our hearts, as well as his word into our mouths, we should never have arrived at the fair Haven of peace. Austin calls the Scriptures, The Epistle of God to the Crea∣tures; by which we understand the very heart of God. God Almighty hath in the secret Scriptures, as it were un∣bowelled
himself, and unfolded all his Counsel to the Creatures, as far as it is necessary to be known, for their di∣rection and guidance to everlasting life.
There be many that walke by false Rules.

First, Some by Opinions,
Secondly, Some by Customes.
Thirdly, Some by Providence.
Fourthly, Some by Conscience.
Fifthly, Some by their own Reason.
Sixthly, Some by mens examples.
Seventhly, Some by their Lusts.

But, O my dear friends, let me be∣seech you to walke by none of these false Rules; but keep close to the word and spirit of God.
VII. Seventhly, Be faithfull and fruitful.
Therefore, my beloved brethren, Be ye stedfast and unmoveble, alwayes abound∣ing in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as you know, your labour is not in vain, 1 Cor. 15.58. Every Tree that beareth not good fruit, is hewn down, and cast
into the fire. Christians must be fruit∣full, and not slothful: See that you bring forth good fruit, and much fruit.
First, Sincerity; which is not a single Grace, but the soul of all Graces: Be∣hold thou desirest truth in the inward parts Psal: 51:6.
Secondly, Humility; A Grace most prevailing with God for the obtaining of all Graces. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto your souls.
Thirdly, Prudence. The patient Christian is the best for waiting, but the prudent Christian is the best for work∣ing: Be ye wise as Serpents, and harmless as Doves, Mat. 10.16. We must have innocency with our wisdome, else our wisedome is but craftinesse; and we must have wisdome with our innocen∣cy, else our innocency is but weakness; we must have the harmlesnesse of the Dove, that we may not wrong others; and we must have the prudence of the Serpent, that others may not abuse and
circumvent us: Not to wrong the truth by silence, here is the innocency of the Dove: not to betray our selves by rashnesse; here is the wisdome of the Serpent.
Fourthly, Patience. Here is the Pa∣tience of the Saints, Rev. 13.10. Rev. 14.12. The way to bring the world under us, is for us to be patient under them.
Fifthly, Self-denyal. If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his crosse and follow me, Math. 16.24.
Be faithful in your promises, & in your purposes; by faithful to the wayes of God, and cause of God; O do not be∣gin with the Lamb, and end with the Beast; but be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life, Rev. 2.20. Keep your Lights burning, your Lamps shining, your Loyns girded, your Consciences wakned, your Gar∣ments unstained, and your Spirituall Armour constantly on, and closely girt:

VIII. Eightly, Have a care of re∣porting and believing the worlds re∣ports of the people of God.
Those that have a good conscience, have not alwayes a good name. The people of God in this life are called the troublers of Israel, seditious, rebellious, and what not? An old device of that old serpent, to perswade the troublers of Israel upon Elijah, the Charret of Israel, 1 Kings 18.17. 2 Kings 2 12. Jeremiah for speaking against their sins and wickednesses, and denouncing Gods judgements against them, is judg∣ed worthy of death, Jerem. 26.8.9. So Jerem. 38.4. The wicked Nobles peti∣tion the King to murder him, under the pretence, that he sought not the good of the people, but the hurt. So Amos for speaking against the Abomi∣nations of the Kings Court, is charged with treason against the Kings person, Amos 7.10.13. So Paul and Silas for preaching up the Kingly power of Je∣sus Christ, are accused by the envious Jewes and rude multitude, for turning
the world upside down, and breaking the decrees of Caesar. Yea, Christ him∣self had this laid to his Charge: mark what the Jewes say of him: And they began to accuse him, saying, We found this Fellow perverting the Nation, and forbidding to give tribute to Caesar, say∣ing, that he himselfe is Christ a King, Luke 23.2. Math. 72.18. And for this have the servants of God in all Ages been accused and persecuted, killed and stoned, Math. 27:37. Acts 7.52. Now if they did so to the green Tree, no wonder if they do it to the dry. If the Lord and Master was called an e∣nemy to Caesar, no wonder if those of his houshold be called so. Our inte∣grity will not secure us from infamy. The choicest of Professors have had black marks in the worlds Kalender. It is usuall for those who live in treason and rebellion against the King of Hea∣ven, to slander his servants with trea∣son and rebellion against the Kings of the Earth.
But, my dear Brethren, take heed of
this; for as the death of the Saints is precious, so the names of the Saints are precious in Gods account. The world will father a hundred Lyes upon the Lords people. Men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely for my sake, Math. 5.11. 2 Tim. 2.9. Wicked men hate them most, that God loves most; But God will roul away the reproaches of his people; he will cause their inno∣cency and righteousness to break forth as the Sun at noon day; and their names shall be in everlasting remem∣brance: Yea, at that great day God will clear their innocency before men and Angels, and all the world.
IX. Ninthly, Keep in with God, now men are out with you.
But it is good for me to draw near to God: I have put my trust in the Lord God that I may declare all thy works, Psal. 73.28. He that dwelleth under the shad∣dow of the most High, no plague shall come nigh him: He will give his Angels charge over thee, Psal. 91.10. Though the
Fig-tree should not blossome, and there be no fruit in the Vine, though the labour of the Olive should faile, and the fields should yield no meat, the flock should be cut off from the fold, and the herd from the stalls: Yet I will rejoyce in the Lord, I will tri∣umph in the God of my salvation, Hab. 3.17.18. The Name of the Lord is a strong Tower, and the righteous runneth into it, and are safe, James 4.8. Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you. This is a great comfort to the people of God; though they be as Lillies amongst Thorns, and as sheep amongst Wolves; that they have a God to go to. Come my people, enter into thy Chambers, & shut thy doors about thee; hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be overpast, Isa. 26.20. Let the world frown, and friends forsake you, God can sweeten all your enjoyments, keep in Gods way, and you will be sure of Gods protection: doe you keep Gods precepts, and God will keep your per∣sons: do what God commands, and avoid what God forbids, and then you
need not fear what men can doe unto you. If you would have God to take care of you, you must cast your care upon God: wait on him, and walk with him; obey his precepts, and believe his promises.
Oh beloved, Let wicked men fall out with us, and hate us, and reproach us, and punish us as much as they will, if we keep in with God: therefore, my beloved, above all things get commu∣nion with God, and keep communion with God: Communion with God will yield you two Heavens; a Heaven upon Earth, and a Heaven after death; all Saints shall enjoy a Heaven when they leave the Earth; some Saints en∣joy a Heaven whilest they are on the Earth. He enjoyes nothing that wants communion with God; he wants no∣nothing that enjoyes communion with God.
X. Tenthly, Live above the love of Life, and the fear of death.
For whosoever will save his Life, shall lose it; and whosoever will lose his life for
my sake shall find it, Matth. 16.25. If any man come unto me, and hate not his fa∣ther and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my Disciple, Luke, 14.16. He that loves not Christ more than his life, will be sure to save and to keep both. He that goes out of Gods way to avoid danger, shall certainly meet with danger, Ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a price: therefore glorifie God in your body, and in your spi∣rit, which are Gods, 1 Cor. 6.19, 20.
My dear friends, Let us live above suffering and fears, though we cannot live without suffering: In the world you shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I have overcome the world. I have overcome the world for you, and I have overcome the world in you, John 16.33. He that loves Christ above his life, will let life go rather then Christ.
Consider my beloved, Christ and the cloud of Witnesses and Martyrs that are gone before, and are passed over and through all those floods, and safely
arived to shoar, and are now in Hea∣ven with God, and Christ, and holy Angels, where there is fulness of joy, and pleasures for evermore. Thou wilt shew me the path of Life; in thy presence is fulnesse of joy, and at thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore, Psal. 16.11. Oh the joy, that they enjoy! Oh the rivers of consolations, that flowes from God! Therefore are they before the throne of God, and serve him day and night in his temple: and he that sitteth on the throne shall dwell amongst them. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun light on them, nor any heat; for the Lamb which is in the midst of the throne, shall feed them, & shal lead them into living fountains of wa∣ters: and God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes, Rev. 7.15, 16, 17. Who are they that have all this honour, and glo∣ry, and joy, and blessedness in Heaven. For this see verse 14. These are they which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and made them white in the blood of the Lamb. The sweet∣nesse
of the Crown which Believers shall receive, will make them amends for the bitternesse of the Crosse they carried.
XI. Eleventhly, Desire better hearts, more then better times.
O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickednesse, that thou mayest be saved: how long shall thy vaine thoughts lodge within thee? Jer. 4.14. For out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, falsewitness, blasphe∣mies, Mat. 15.19: The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked, who can know it? Jer. 17.9.
Oh Beloved, instead of reforming, we are complaining of wicked men, more then of wickedness; of their cru∣elty, more than our Apostacy; of their injuries against us, than our injuries a∣gainst God. We pore too much upon second causes, or complaine of instru∣ments, not of our selves. We have been a long time in sinning, and we had need be a long time in repenting: the times had not been so bad, had not we been
so bad; and the times would soon be better, if we were but better.
Alas, Beloved, we have sinned such sins as unrighteous men could not sin; against the clearest Light, and dearest Love: the better God hath been to us, the worse we have been to him: he hath loaded us with his mercies, and we have wearied him with our sinnes: Oh let us blame our selves more, and the times lesse: Let us turne unto the Lord, that he may turne to us in love and mercy: Let our hearts go out to him, that his heart may come unto us. Oh beg and cry for better hearts, that you may serve God better: for broken hearts, for sincere hearts; for that is that God looks at, and calls for, Prov. 23.26. My Son, give me thy heart; Our hearts are alwayes out of tune to serve God; but never out of tune to serve sin: for if we had never so good times, and not good hearts, it would rather hurts us than blesse us.
XII. Twelfthly, Grow downward in humility, and inward in sincerity.

Ʋnto me, who am lesse then the least of all Saints, is this grace given that I should preach among the Gentiles the unsearcha∣ble riches of Christ, Ephes. 3.8. And who∣soever shall exalt himself, shall be abased; and he that shall humble himself, shall be exalted, Mat, 23.12. Put on therefore (as the Elect of God holy and beloved) bowels of mercy, kindnesse, humblenesse of mind, meeknesse, long-fustering, Col. 3.12. Be cloathed with humility; for God resisteth the proud, and giveth grace to the humble; Humble your selves therefore under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time, 1 Pet. 5.5, 6. Bring up your will to God, that God may bring down his will to you. Be low in your own eyes; keep a low esteem of your selves; abhor pride, and flye from it; be inwardly sincere, as well as out∣wardly humble. Do not look Heaven∣ward by your profession, and Hell∣ward by your conversation: He that lives in sin, is dead in sin, Ephes. 2.1. Grace be with all them that love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, Ephes. 6.24. Let
your hearts be upright with God, and walk as those that have God for their portion; Knowing there are many eies upon you; the eye of God, the eye of Christ, the eye of Angels, the eye of Saints, the eye of the world, and the Divell eyes you too; therefore walk wisely and sincerely; be like the Kings Daughter all glorious within, Psal. 45.3. She is all glorious within, though within is not all her glory, Her cloath∣ing is of wrought gold; Doe not think your selves good because others think so: Alas, the best mens confidences of us are poor Evidences for Heaven: the best Testimony is that within us, and above us. See therefore that ye grow in grace, and delight in holiness; bring forth much fruit; live still as before the living God; take heed of Hypocrisie and Apostacy; make it your daily bu∣siness to walk with God; be much in the exercise of humility: Humility will exceedingly adorn your professi∣on: Doe not place Religion in a few good words, when the substance is neg∣lected;
but live as you would die; live to day as if you were to dye to mor∣row.
XIII. Thirteenthly, Doe good to those that be good.
He hath shewed thee, O man, what is good; and what doth the Lord require of thee, but to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Mi∣cah 6.8. That they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, 1 Tim. 6.18. But do good, and to communicate forget not; for with such sacrifices God is well pleased, Heb. 13.16. Pure religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is this, to visit the fatherlesse, and widdows in their af∣fliction, James 1.27. Forget not to con∣tribute to the necessities of the poor Saints, think that God hath given you your Estates, for such a time as this.
Oh Beloved, what an opportunity have you now to do good if Satan do not hinder you? are there not many of Christs Ministers now in want, and Members in want? some in prison, and
others out of prison: Remember those that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them that suffer adversity, as being your selves also in the body, Heb. 13.3. There be many men that have a great deal of this worlds wealth, and riches, and goods in their hands, and in their houses; but they have no grace in their hearts; and therefore they do no good with the goods of this world: they live so unfruitfull, that their lives are scarce worth a prayer, not their deaths scarce worth a tear. Men may as well go to Hell for not doing good, as for doing evil: he that bears not good fruit is as well fuel for Hell, as he that bears bad. You may not be outwardly bad, and yet not inwardly good; you may be as far from grace, as from vice: Men are not so much sent to Hell for doing evil, as for not doing good: For I was an hungred, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink, Math. 25.42. The rich glutton was in Hell torments, not for persecuting La∣zarus, but not relieving Lazarus. Meroz∣zarus
was cursed by the Angel, not because they fought against the Lord, but be∣cause they came not to help the Lord against the mighty, Judges 5.23. It is one of the greatest mercies in the world, for God to give a man a heart to doe good with that he hath given him.
Oh Beloved, be always a doing good and hating evil: Look not only where you may get good, but where you may do good: Labour to be helpful to the souls of others, and to supply the wants of others.
XIV. Fourteenthly, Chuse chastise∣ment before defilement.
Moses, when he was come to years, re∣fused to be called the Sonne of Pharaohs daughter, chusing rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season, Heb. 11.24.25. For ye had compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of your goods knowing in your selves that ye have in Hea∣ven a better, and an enduring substance, Heb. 10.34. So the three Children
chose burning in the fiery furnace, be∣fore bowing to the Golden Image, Daniel 3.17.18. We are not careful to answer thee in this matter. If it be so, our God whom we serve is able to deliver us from the burning fiery furnace, and he will deliver us out of thy hand O King. But if not, be it known unto thee O King, that we will not serve thy Gods, nor worship the Golden Image that thou hast set up. So Daniel chose suffering before sinning: And it is said of those in Heb. 11.35. they accepted not of deliverance; and others were tortured, not accepting delive∣rance, that they might obtaine a better re∣surrection.
Oh Beloved, there is more evill in the least sin against Christ, than in the greatest suffering for Christ.
First, Our sufferings for Christ are but light, 2 Cor. 4.17.
Secondly, But short, but for a mo∣ment.
Thirdly, Christ stands by us in out sufferings.
Fourthly, Our sufferings are ordered by the Father.

Fifthly, Our sufferings shall not hurt our souls:
Sixthly, God gives us the best of comforts in the worst of times: we have most of consolations from God, when we have most of tribulations from men: as our sufferings do abound, so our consolations do abound: When the burden is heaviest upon the back, when the peace of conscience is sweet∣est and greatest within. Therefore my dear brethren, keep your selves out of the puddle of this world, and from the evil of this world; and if you must sin or suffer, chuse suffering before sinning.
XV. Fifteenthly, Think not the worse of godliness because it is frown∣ed upon; nor the better of ungodliness because it is smiled upon.
For bodily exercise profiteth little, but Godlinesse is profitable unto all things, ha∣ving the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come, 1 Tim. 4.8. Yea, doubtlesse, and I count all things but losse, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have
suffered the losse of all things, and do count them but dung that I may win Christ, Phil. 3.8. And have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darknesse, but rather reprove them, Ephes. 5.11. For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eter∣nal life, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Rom. 6.23.
Oh Friends, think not the worse of holinesse, because it is reproached and scorned, and persecuted by wicked men and Divels; nor the better of wickednesse, because wicked men love it, and follow it, and say, It is in vain to serve God; and what profit is it that we have kept his Ordinances, and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord of Hosts Mal. 3.14. But there is a time coming, when ungodly men would be glad of some of that holinesse that now they despise; but they shall be as far then from obtaining it, as they are now from desiring it. Let us therfore love holiness and hate wickednesse; For without holi∣ness no man shal see the Lord, Heb. 12.14.
Holinesse is the only way to happiness. We must not dresse our selves for ano∣ther world, by the Looking-glasse of this world: Thou shalt not follow a multi∣titude to do evil, Exod. 23.2. For many walk, of whom I have told you often, and now tell you even weeping, that they are the enemies of the Grosse of Christ; whose end is destruction, whose god is their belly, and whose glory is in their shame, who mind earthly things, Phil. 3.18.19. The Children of God must be harmlesse in their actings, and blamelesse in their walkings.
XVI. Sixteenthly, Prize the Word of God by the worth of it, that you may never come to prize the Word of God by the want of it.
How sweet are thy words unto my tast! Yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth, Psal. 119:10. It is sweeter than the honey and the honey-comb, Psal. 19.10. Oh how do I Love thy Law! Psal. 119.97. I love thy Commandements above Gold; yea, above fine Gold. The Law of thy mouth
is better to me than thousands of Gold and Silver, Verse 72. As new born babes de∣sire the sincere milk of the Word, that they may grow thereby, 1 Pet. 1.2. Let the Word of God dwell richly in you; not on∣ly with you, but in you, Col. 3.16. Oh let us with Job esteeme the Word of God above our necessary food, Job 23.12. and with David above our Gold and Silver. The delight of a Saint in Gods Word, over-tops all his creature delights. Wicked men can delight in the Creatures of God, but not in the Word of God; they can delight in the gifts of God, but not in the God of gifts. Oh let us love the word, and prize the word: it is the Sun of the Christian world. As the Sun is the light of the naturall world, and without it the world is but a Chaos, and a dunge∣on full of darkness; so is the Word of God the light of the Spiritual world, without which a Christian is an eter∣nal night. Take away the Scriptures, and there will be no certain rule to di∣rect men what is to be done, or what is
to be believed: All false wayes are here discovered, all sins are here for∣bidden, all holiness is here comman∣ded: Here you may see every action and motion of your Lives, as a step to Life, or a step to Death; as a step Hea∣ven-ward, or a step Hell-ward; Oh therefore prize the word, and obey the Word.
First, It is a plain Word.
Secondly, It is a perfect Word,
Thirdly, It is a sure Word.
Fourthly, It is an uniform Word.
Fifthly, It is a powerful Word; it is the savour of life unto life, unto them that believe:
Oh Beloved, let us read the Word, and abide in the Word: If ye continue in my Word, then are ye my Disciples, Joh. 8.31: The lesse now you hear, the more doe you read, that little Book of the Revelations and Daniel especially.
XVII. Seventeenthly, have a care of the Whore of Babylons golden Cup and sweet Wine.
And the Woman was arrayed in purple,
and scarlet colour, and decked with Gold and precious stones, and pearls; having a golden Cup in her hand sull of abominati∣ons, and filthinesse of her fornication, Rev. 17.4. And the Serpent cast out of his mouth water, as a flood after the Woman, that he might cause her to be carried away of the flood, Rev. 12.15. Let me beseech you to have a care of this, and keep your selves from this: Be like the Vir∣gin Spouse of Christ, which followeth him wheresoever he goeth.
My Dear Friends, keep your selves from four things.
First, From false Teachers. The De∣vil hath his Ministers as well as Christ. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps cloathing, but inwardly they are ravening Wolves, Math. 7.15. Yea, they are greedy Doggs, which can never have enough, and they are Shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to their own way, every own for his gain from his quarter, Isa. 56.11. Oh false Teachers do not feed the Flock, but fleece the Flock; they do not convert; but per∣vert;
they do not season, but poison; they do not edifie to salvation, but e∣difie to damnation; instead of curing souls, they kill souls; so they have but the peoples goods, they care not though the Devil have their soules; they are neither rightly called, nor rightly qua∣lified, nor rightly ordained; Their course is evil, and therefore is not right, Jer. 13.10. They are like Doggs and Wolves combining together to mace∣rate the Flock of Christ. Oh there∣fore keep your selves from Babylons Merchants, that make Merchandize of the souls of men, Rev. 18.13. Oh, the sins of the Teachers, are the Teachers of sins.
Secondly, From false Doctrine. But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as there shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in dam∣rable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction, 2 Pet. 2.1. Be not car∣ried away with divers and strange Do∣ctrines; for it is a good thing that the
heart be established with grace, not with meats; which have not profited them that have been occupied therein, Hebrews 13.9.
I beseech you also in the Lord, my Dear Brethren, that you doe not car∣nally comply with, nor superstitiously conform to the Inventions of men: But stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ hath made you free, Gal. 5.1.
Thirdly, From false Worship. If any man Worship the Beast and his Image, and receive his mark in his forehead, or in his hand, the same shall drink of the Wine of the wrath of God, which is poured out without mixture into the Cup of his indig∣nation, and he shall be tormented with fire and brimstone in the presence of the holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb, Rev. 14.9, 10. Ye Worship ye know not what. God is a Spirit, and they that wor∣ship him, must worship him in Spirit, and in Iruth, Joh. 4.23, 24. As there be some in the World that worship false Gods, so there be others that Worship the true God with false Worship. They
that worship the Beast, worship the Devil, Rev. 13. Oh meddle not with false worship, with vain worship, and will-worship: worship God as he teacheth us to worship him. Our work is to depend on Christs work: our outward working depends on Gods inward working.
Fourthly, From false Opinions, from Errour and Sedition: Let your hearts be upright, your judgements sound, and your lives holy: Love the Truth, obey the Truth, and hold fast the Truth.
Now Beloved, Let me beseech you for Gods sake, and for Christs sake, and for your Soules sake, keep your selves from false Teachers, from false Doctrine, from false worship, from false Opinions. If you will be tasting and siping at Babylons cup, you must resolve to receive more or lesse of Babylons plagues.
XVIII. Eighteenthly, Be one with e∣very one that is one with Christ.
Endeavouring to keep the Ʋnity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace. There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your Calling: One Lord, one Faith, one Baptisme, one God and Fa∣ther of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all, Ephes. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. Every one that loveth him that begat, lo∣veth him also that is begotten of him. By this we know that we love the Children of God, when we love God and keep his Com∣mandments, 1 Joh. 5.1, 2. He that loveth not his Brother whom he hath seen, how can he love God whom he hath not seen? 1 John 4.26.
Oh Consider what a dishonour it is to the Gospel, that those that professe themselves Sonnes of the same God, Members of the same Christ, Temples of the same Spirit, Heirs of the same Glory, should be at a jarring one with another. It is strange and unnaturall, that Lillies should prove thorns to one another! that those who are Saints in profession, should be Devils in practise to one another! that Gods Diamonds should cut one another! For Wolves
to devour the Lambs is no wonder, but for one Lamb to devour another is a wonder, and monstrous! Oh, that Christians instead of loving one ano∣ther, should hate one another! Oh how unlike are we to that God whom we professe to be our God! He is full of love, full of goodness, and full of mer∣cy and patience: Oh but Christians cannot beare, and forbear one with a∣nother. Oh do not wicked men warm themselves at the sparks of our divisi∣ons, and say it is as we would have it?
Oh Beloved, hath not God made his wrath to smoke against us for the divisions and heart-burnings that have been amongst us? Oh that you would lay this to heart, and throw away all discord and divisions, and heart burn∣ings, and labour for a onenesse in love and affection, with every one that is one with Christ. Oh labour for a healing spirit. You cannot love God if you do not love the people of God. If any man saith he loveth God, and hateth his brother, he is a lyer. Let brotherly love
continue, Heb. 13.1. They that feared the Lord, spake often one to another, Mal. 3.16. Christs Doves should flock toge∣ther. There be many that cannot love a man, unlesse he be of their Opinion, or a Member of their Church, though he be a Member of Christ. Every man hath a good opinion of his own opini∣on: But alas Beloved, it is not this o∣pinion, or that opinion; this way, or that way, will bring a man to Heaven without faith in Christ; and he that hath faith in Christ, hath a right to all the Ordinances of Christ, and Promises of Christ, and Priviledges of Christ; therefore let me beseech you to love every man that is a godly man, let him be of what way and form he will. And the multitude of them that believed, were of one heart, and of one soul, Acts 4.38.
XIX. Nineteenthly, Love Christ with a Love stronger then life, who lo∣ved us with a love stronger than death.
Therefore doth my father love me, be∣cause I lay down my life, that I might take
it again: no man taketh it from me, but I lay it down my self. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again, John 10.17, 18. This is a faithful say∣ing, and worthy of all acceptation, That Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, 1 Tim. 1.15. Christs love to us was stronger then death; he dyed for love; he laid down his life to save our lives; he loves us as the Father loves him, John 15.9. As the Father hath loved me, so have I loved you: continue ye in my love. Oh the Scripture hath exceed∣ing high expressions of his affection to us. Now Beloved, if he died for us, and suffered for us, and set his heart upon us to love us, and delight in us; how ought we then to love him again! Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind, Math. 22.37, 38. Whom have I in Heaven but thee, and there is none up∣on earth that I desire besides thee, Psal. 73.25. Ʋnto you therefore which believe he is precious, 1 Pet. 2.7. Oh let our hearts be full of love and affections to Christ.
Love will breed courage, and cast out fear, slavish fear before God, and car∣nal fear before men: God can keep us from the torments of men, but men cannot keep us from the torments of God. Whilest we stand by God, God hath promised to stand by us: There∣fore be not afraid of any Authority that stands in opposition to the Autho∣rity of Christ. None can promise us better than Christ can; none can threaten us worse than Christ can? Can any man promise us with better then Heaven? Can any man threaten us with worse than Hell? Heaven is promised to those that love him; and Hell is to be the portion of those that hate him.
Oh my dear Brethren, Let us Love Christ with a love stronger then death: so did Paul and the rest of the Apostles, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? shall tribulation, or distresse, or persecution or famine, or nakednesse, or perill, or sword? Rom. 8.35. Love is stronger than Death; many waters
cannot quench it, neither can the floods drown it, Cant. .6, 7.
XX. Twentiethly, Be every day as serious in your preparation for death, as if it were your last day.
All the dayes of my appointed time will I wait till my change come, Job 14.14. This night thy soule shall be required of thee, Luke 12.20. For what is your life? it is even a vapour that appeareth a little time, and then vanisheth away, Jam. 4.14. Be∣hold, thou hast made my days as an hand-breadth, and mine age is as nothing before thee: Verily, every man at his best state is altogether vanity, Psal. 39.5. As no Saint knows when that time and hour shall be; so no wicked man knows when it shall not be. To live without fear of death, is to dye living: To labour not to dye is labour in vain. Men are afraid to dye in such and such sins, but not a∣fraid to live in such and such sins. Oh the Hell of horrors and terrors that attend those soules that have their greatest work to do when they come to dye! therefore as you would be happy
in death, and everlastingly blessed af∣ter death, prepare and fit your selves for death. Did Christ dye for us that we might live with him, and shall not we desire to dye and be with him? A Believers dying day is his Crowning day. And I heard a voice from Heaven, saying, unto me, write, blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, from hence∣forth, yea, saith the Spirit, that they may rest from their labours, and their works do follow them, Rev. 14.13.
Oh I beseech you my dear Brethren, every day spend some time in prepara∣tion for, and meditation of Death, Judgement, Hell, Heaven, and Eter∣nity. Eternity is a sum that can never be numbred, a line that can never be measured: Eternity is a condition of everlasting sorrow, or everlasting joy. Oh think of this, and prepare for this every day before the night of death comes.
And thus my beloved, I have given you these Twenty precious directions for your souls.

I shall leave this Book with you as a Legacy of my dearest Love: my desire in all this, is your happiness here, and your blessedness hereafter. My earnest and humble desire of you is, That you would mind this Book and my former Treatise; not only read them, but re∣form your lives by them. O do your Duty, love your Duty, and live your Duty, that you may be made meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light; Which is, and shall be the earnest and constant Prayer of one that esteems it a most glorious privi∣ledge to be of the number of those who follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth.

