



SIR,
I Have twice read over the Book you were so kind to
lend me last Week; but I found that part of it, which
treats of Money, deserving a more particular Conside∣ration;
for all the Discourse of late has been almost
only of Coin. Many of those who pretend to understand
this nice Affair, have printed their Sentiments about it; and
such as are Strangers to it, are, or should be very desirous of better
Information. I must reckon my self, and so must you, Sir, in
the number of the latter; for neither my Years, nor Employ∣ment
at the Schools. (which I left but t'other day) will allow
me to be Master enough of a thing, whereof the Knowledg de∣pends
so much upon Business, and more acquaintance with the
World than I can boast of. And indeed I benefited little
(tho most willing to learn) by all the Pieces written upon this
Subject, till Mr. Lock was pleas'd to favour the Publick with
his Thoughts upon it. It seems as impossible for that great
Man to write obscurely, as to publish any thing he does not
thorowly understand. He has by this, and his other Treatise

concerning Lowering the Interest of Money, given a con∣vincing
Demonstration that Business and Observation are not
incompatible with the speculative part of Philosophy: but if
you compare his Book too, with what others have said of Coin,
you have there a Demonstration how ridiculous it is to write
from abstracted or Closet-Notions of what must be only learn'd
by Experience and Conversation.
What he has printed therefore gave me entire Content; but
I'm infinitely pleas'd with my good fortune in meeting with the
Discourse I borrowed from you: for it is not only very methodi∣cally
digested, as Mr. Lock's is, but also both these learned
Gentlemen (notwithstanding one of 'em wrote above an Age
ago) are of the same mind, and sometimes make use of the
same Terms about the intrinsick Value and debasing of Coins.
So all those who reason exactly concerning any thing, must be
necessarily of the same Opinion, and often agree too in their
Expressions. What pleas'd me further, was to find so ample
and satisfactory an account, within so narrow a Compass, of the
Origin of Money; of its Essence, Names and Importance; of
the Persons who first invented it, with the Place and Time;
likewise an Account of the evil Consequences of debasing or raising
of Money, and their proper Remedies: add to this the Origin
of Fairs, fo Markets, and, in one word, of all Commerce or
Traffick in general.
Signor Davanzati was every way qualified to perform his Vn∣dertaking,
being famous for natural and acquir'd Parts, not only
conversant in Trade, and one of the best Arithmeticians of his
time; but likewise an able Politician, as appears by his admir'd
Translation of Tacitus, and his own original Compositions. He
compil'd a compendious Treatise concerning the Nature and
Knowledg of Exchange, reducing (according to the Writer of

his Life) a most obscure and intricate Matter to great Clearness
and Facility. He did in like manner, at the request of the
Consul M. Baccio Valori, (continues the same Author) read
a publick Lecture upon Coins, full of Political Instructi∣ons,
and containing all that can be desired on so vast a
Subject.
That Lecture was the following Discourse, which I have been
at the pains to translate; and my only design now in the Publica∣tion
of it, is to share with others the Benefits, I think, may be
receiv'd by it. I never imagin'd the end of my Creation was to
be serviceable only to my self; I could not learn, I'm sure, any
thing so unworthy from your Familiarity or Example: and I
could give but an ill account of my time, if, having sometimes the
Happiness of keeping good Men company, I should not entertain
more exalted and generous Notions. Truly I'm so far from
desiring to live meerly to my self, and from preferring a solitary
Life, that I set no value upon all the Books and Leisure in the
World, further than they contribute to render me fit for Business
and Society, especially the Service of God and my Country.
Those Creatures, who perhaps are not to be blam'd for shutting
themselves up all their days, I judg as useless and contemptible as
the Worms that help 'em to consume their Papers.
My design then being to do what good I could, I shall not
think it lost, if young Persons, at least, get any Advan∣tage
by it; which, in this (or in any other respect) they can∣not
fail of, if avoiding Idleness as some dangerous Precipice,
they seriously apply themselves to Business and Vertue: Otherwise
(as the Writer of our Author's Life says extremely well) they
are sure to be despis'd in their inglorious Lives, and their
Names shall be forgotten when they are dead.

This Piece, I confess, appears a little too late, however it is
not my fault; for it was by pure accident, as you can witness,
that I came to know of it, and almost as soon I send it abroad in
this new Dress. Besides, if all things be well consider'd, that
part of it which concerns base Coin, is now as useful as ever;
and the Knowledg of the rest cannot be unseasonable at any
time. But I have no Apology to make, except to you, Sir, for
presuming to inscribe such a Trifle, and that too but a Transla∣tion,
to one who so well deserves from the World and me. I
shall only offer, that I am not willing to lose any opportunity of
shewing my Gratitude and Respect; for if herein I have com∣mitted
any fault, my Intentions being sincere, I know you'll
grant an easy Pardon to,
Honour'd Sir,

Middle-Temple, March
the 1st, 1695/6.
