


SIR,
I Need not make an Apology for Pre∣senting the Account of the Last Cam∣pagne to You; for since Custom will have every Trifle that is publish'd, at∣tended with an Epistle Dedicatory, I should be very Ungrateful, if I did not embrace this Oc∣ccasion to acknowledge to the World the many Obligations I have to You: Though, to acquit my self of it, I must put your Ho∣nourable Name to a Piece in which I am sen∣sible You must find a great many Faults. For, 'tis impossible that a Man should judge so

Justly and Equally of the Affairs of War, as to give an Account of them free from any Mi∣stakes, unless he has as great a share in the Ma∣nagement of them as You have. However, I am very glad it gives me the Opportunity to express, in some measure, my Gratitude for Your Favours.
When the Dean of Winchester (whom I must acknowledge for the Author of my Happiness, in belonging to You) recommended me to be Chaplain to Your Regiment, I cannot forget how willing you was to Receive me; as if you had been long expecting an Opportunity of Doing Good to a Friend, though I was then a Stranger to You: This Favour was, indeed, more than I could expect. But Your Generosity stopt not here; You have treated me ever since, with so much Civility and Obli∣ging Kindness, that I cannot be silent, but must own the Thankful Sense I have of it as publickly as I can. I must yet value Your Fa∣vours the more, that they come from a Person of so much Worth and Merit, that you excuse and free me from the common Fault of others, in swelling an Epistle with Praise and Commen∣dations; the whole Army knows more of it than

my mean Rhetorick can express. Those who have been at the Siege of Maestricht, and the Bat∣tel of St. Denis, repeat with Pleasure, to this day, the early Proofs You gave of Your Martial Con∣duct and Courage. Your Vertue and Valour has ever since encreas'd with Your Honour; and this present War has done you Justice, in raising You to such Considerable Posts in the Army, as have given a better Light to Your Merit. I could speak with Pleasure of Your Exploits in the Battle of Steenkirk, where the Brigade under Your Conduct and Command did such Considerable Service: And in that of Landen, where You fought with so much Vi∣gour and Bravery, that (notwithstanding the Inequality of the Number) You often Re∣gain'd Your Post, and Repuls'd several times the victorious Enemy: Your Brigade was then in the Right Wing; where the Elector of Ba∣varia was a joyful Witness of Your Valour and Conduct, which He express'd in the kindest and the most endearing manner.
But I remember I am writing an Epistle, and not your History. I shall say no more, but, That You are a Soldier of the KING's Own Ma∣king, and that You have been Train'd in His

Service from Your Infancy. His Majesty is an Excellent Judge of Merit, which is the Standard by which He measures His Favours: So that though Your Birth is Great and Noble, yet 'tis Your Own Personal Worth that has Rais'd You to be Major-General of Their Majesty's Forces. If You owe a Noble Birth to the Earls of Dal∣housy, You sufficiently repay the Nobility of Your Extraction with Your Great Vertues and Accomplishments, which make You now the Ornament of Your Family.
May You Live, long to enjoy these Rewards of Your Worth and Vertue; and whatever else is laid up in the Stores of a Great, Just, and Bountiful Monarch. May You live to enjoy them for Their Majesty's Service, the Comfort of Your Vertuous and Excellent Lady, the Pro∣sperity of Your Family, the Joy of Your Friends, and the Honour and Credit of Your Nation. These are the Hearty Prayers and Wishes of
SIR,

