



Sir,
THE Great Philosopher tells us, that we bring along with our Birth, a. Arist. Metaph. desire of Knowledge, whose Embryo, or imper∣fect Faetus (as it were,) is by Specula∣tion (as we grow up in years) form'd into the perfect lineaments and proportions thereof: Which, as it improves the mind, though but in quest af∣ter the nature of the meanest Creature, the smallest Insect; yet, it is always accompanied with what renders Speculation and Study (things otherwise wearisome to Flesh and Spirit) very delightful and pleasant. Nay, often diverts the natural Appetite or Desire from its necessary Food, and Refreshment: Methinks , I have found it; and, Conclusum est contra Mani∣chaeos speaks no less: And therefore the more sub∣lime that the Object is, the more sublimated must the Pleasure be, that springs from the Speculation of it. So that the Contemplation of the State and Condition of Angels before the fall, hath, concomitant to it, such satisfaction and pleasure, as makes the nearest approach to that, which flows from the Theory of God himself; whether we consider them in their natu∣ral
 and personal endowments, as Individuals: Or, as they are the most Sacred, Associated Members of the Glorious Assembly of the first born;Heb. 12.23. Or, as they are the most officious Ministring Spirits, sent forth with Power and Authority from aboveHence called, . Heb. 1. ult. to minister un∣to them, who shall be heirs of Salvation. In each respect we may behold them with a pleasant Eye, and think on them with joyful Hearts. For their perfe∣ctions present us with the most refulgent, and brightest displays of Divine Wisdom, Power, and Goodness. Their understandings being comprehensive of the greatest Truth, nay, capable to behold (without a watrish Eye, which no Mortals can do) the brightest exhibitions, manifestations thereof; for they could be∣hold. St. Mat. 18.20. the face of God in Glory. Their Wills be∣ing of such rectitude, and uprightness, that the chiefest good (God himself) was then their only delight; and their Affections were then so sweetly compos'd and regulated with Serenity and Calmness, (like the Hea∣vens, which the Angels inhabited) that they could be affected with nothing, but the Emanations of a pure Love, unmix'd Joy; and, with what did minutely raise their Admirations, new discoveries of the Essence or Being of God. Which, when we seriously ponder and meditate on, cannot but diffuse within us a mighty Pleasure and Delight: If again we consider them, as consociated in a blessed Community, in which we may conceive them not disputing (like Zebede's Sons or Children, St. Matth. 20.21. for Superiority, nor ambitiously coveting the highest Dignity) but most zea∣lously affecting, who should first execute the Commands and Pleasure of his Heavenly Soveraign. Hence, by St. Clement, they are proposed to the Corinthians,. And Clem. E∣pist. ad Corinth. 76. Edit. Vess. Ox. Nil. praeter jussum, ac voluntatem Dei faciunt. Lact. de verit. lib. 7. c. 7. as the most remarka∣ble Instances of Obedience: by our Savi∣our

St. Matth. 6.10. (in that Petition, thy will be done on Earth, as it is in Heaven by the Holy Angels) as the fittest Presi∣dents for our imitating of them in the like practice of duty, and submissive∣ness. And the Psalmist characteriseth them by it.Psal. 103.20. Ye his Angels, that do his Commands. No jarrings could then be heard amongst these morning Stars, these Sons of God, when they shouted for JoyJob. 38.7. but such as rendered their Consort (the Musick of the Hea∣vens) most ravishing, which was indeed the true and substantial harmony of the Spheres; that of Aristo∣tle's being but Light and Aery, which he imagined (to have been) in his solid Orbs. How can then such An∣gelical strains, such Celestial Harmony, such Spiritu∣al consort but most sensibly affect us? Cannot these raise our Spirits, excite our Delight, and fill us with wonderful and surpassing Joys, in our Contemplations of them? For though we might not be better'd by their Natural or Essential perfections, more than to admire them, and sincerely to bless and praise God, (the Au∣thor and Giver of them:) And though their Joys are so sublime and spiritual, that only a state of abso∣lute perfection, is capable of a full enjoyment of them: So that imbodied Spirits (as ours are) cannot engross the one, nor sublimate the other into an extract of delight, yet the meditation of both doth minister a mighty Pleasure to Contemplative Souls; which cannot but be greatly inhanc'd, if, Thirdly and lastly, we con∣sider them as Ministring Spirits, Heavenly Messengers (their Names. annun∣ciare Hesych. import no less) in their obsequiousness, and readiness to do all, and these the best of Offices for us: As an Angel did, when he wing'd from Hea∣ven that surprizing Message, (to the blessed Virgin) (f) Fear not,St. Luk. 1.28, 35. the Power of the most high shall
 over-shadow thee. As another did, when he declar'd Christ's Birth, exhibition of his Incarnation, became the first Evangelist of the good tidingsSt. Luke. 2.12. of the greatest Joy; as a whole Chorus did, when celebrated Christ's Natalitia, Birth day, with Gloria Patri in excelsis, i. e. Glory to God in the highest. As when they ministred to our Saviour in his Agony in the Garden,St. Luke 22.43. became Guardian Angels to his Body, when in its Sepulchre, in its Tomb.St. Joh. 20.13. As an Angel did, who declared and published Christ being risen from the Dead:Ps. 24 9, 10. And as a whole Quire of Angels did, when they ascended up on high with Christ, when he led Captivity Captive, Sin, Satan, Death, and the Grave, and sung his Epinicion, triumphant Song over all these, with, Be ye open, ye everlasting doors, that the King of Glory may enter in: (l) The Care of our welfare and happiness, being delegated to them, as their peculiar Province or Task: So Justin Martin ob∣serves.. Just. Apol. p. 44. Which Athenagoras con∣ceiv'd to be the only reason, why God created them.. Athen Legat. p. 27 Hence, Orig. cont. Cels. lib. 8. p. 398. Origen calls them the invisible Husbandmen, sent and set on purpose (as it were) to Digg and Till in Christs Vineyard: Nay, so particularly are they concer∣ned for our happiness, that. Orig. cont. Cels. l. 8. p. 400. this Fa∣ther brings them in, as Assistants to our Devotions, in not ceasing to pray, though ours, not their necessities (for they have none) requiring it: Which should raise our Veneration of them, but not to a pitch of Adoration, which some most wick∣edly have done, by Invocating of them, Praying to them, and so doth confer Divine Honour and Wor∣ship on them, which ought upon no account to be given
 to them, (as this very Father, &c. Ibid. p. 416. asserts) both in re∣spect, that God did forbid it, Rev. 19.10.22.9. Besides, as this Father observes, they are as much indeared to us, do as affectionately and as readi∣ly promote our good, when they are neglected by us, as if we daily offered up Sacrifices of Praises, and of Prayers to them. For they are such refined Spi∣rits, (not like those grosser ones, which, some do fan∣cy, feed on the Fruits of the Air) that the richest Perfumes, sweetest Incense that can arise from Altars, cannot recreate or refresh, feed and nourish them. So that when we consider them, thus sensibly and feelingly affected, and concerned for us: As if the Salvation, which they declar'd, had been wrought to have advanced their Nature, and not that of ours, which is much below, and inferior to theirs. When we consider such an Heavenly tem∣per, surpassing sweetness was then the Grace and Comeliness of these first born of the Creation, and of Glory. How blessed then must their state and con∣dition be, when they stood in the presence of one infinitely wiser than Solomon, even in the presence of that Holy God, who is the fountain of all Wis∣domSt. Jam. 1.17. being then immediately1 Thess. 4.9. . taught of God the Precepts and Principles thereof. The delight which flows from the Poetical fancies of the plea∣sant walks, delightful groves, flowry banks, fruit∣ful Trees, and of the Fragrancy, Lusciousness of the Fruit which grows thereon: Of the swift Cur∣rents, pellucid streams, of the musical Harmony a∣rising from the pebbles therein; of the solitariness, and serenity of vital breathings of the circumambient Air, and of fresh Beauties, renewed every moment, to recreate and delight the Sensitive Appetite, in the Elysiums, is but Aery and Transient, and like
 the fancies that forg'd them, but imaginary: Nay, what springs from the serious consideration of mans Blessedness, in his state of Innocency, is but fading, if compared with that substantial and sublimated Joy, which overflows the Religious Soul, in its Me∣ditations and Contemplations of the most Glorious and Blessed State of Angels before the fall. The re∣markable Instances and Indications above-named, of their having once so dearly loved us, should raise our Joy into Transport, and Ecstacy. But alas! how are there of these mighty ones fal∣len in, nay, fallen from, their Heavenly places? How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer, Son of the morning?Isa. 14.12. How are they become chang'd in their Nature, as well as Offices by their fall? For the Angels, confirm'd in Goodness, rejoyce at the Conversion of a Sinner,St. Luke 15.10. which now becomes the great grief and trouble of the fallen ones; but if he dyes an Impenitent, their greatest Joy. When they were Angels of Light, we might have followed them, as faithful Guides (illumina∣ting Ministers, as St. Barnabas Barnab. Epist. Edit. Voss. calls them) to Bliss and Glory. But now, when they appear but with the resemblance of such, it's to seduce us into the Precipices of Perdition and Destruction, it being as Marrow and Fatness to their Chieftain, his main business and employ (he going about dayly, nay, hourly) to prey on, and to devour us.1 St. Pet. 5.8. Rev. 9.11.   Hence he is called, the Destroyer. But no wonder, it should be thus with these Apostate Spirits, for it befell them, what theDes-Cartes de Princ. & de Meteor. ingenious Philosopher observes might happen to the forming of Comets (blazing Starrs) viz. they receding from God, theCentre. Fountain of light, becomeAbsorpt. swallowed up in utter darkness, wherein (like blazing stars) they appear, not only to
 portend, but to project what's fatal, ruinous to King∣doms, Countries, and to Mankind, as St.Istam inde dejectam in hoc aereo caelo tumulantem, Aug. de Civ. lib. 11. c. 33. Non est pote∣stas, quae comparetur Diabolicae super terram; quantum odeunt (speaking of Evil Spirits) quan∣tum possunt nocere sineretur. In cenderent urbes, vasterent agros flumina, & Maria in Regions mitecent, venm cibis poculis∣que diffunderent, homines, be∣stias torquerent, ac interime∣rent, lib. 11. c. 33. p. 687. Augustin observes, & L. Vi∣ves, in his Comments on him. For they are become the Principalities, the Powers, the Rulers of the darkness of this World, which war against us, the Spiritual Wicked∣nesses, or (,) wicked Spi∣rits, in high places,, or Heavenly () as the Apostle de∣clares, Eph. 6.12. Now since such are become not only wretched and miserable in themselves; but (what is much to be lamented) most mischievous to Mankind, by what's past recovery, their Fall. Well may our Affection and Passion become chang'd with its Object, sorrow succeed in the place of Joy; the Scene of our Ima∣gination become hung with a mourning Black, whilst wh look on the fall of Angels, in its sable colours, with weeping Eyes, and atone the Funeral of their Felicity, with full Hearts. Whose deplorable state and condition is (attempted to be) describ'd in the following Sermon. Which when Preached, though the Delivery might not command the Attention, ex∣cite the Devotion, of most its Hearers (which alas! the most excellent Sermons, how pathetically soever deliver'd, seldome effect) yet it did not miss altoge∣ther of its desired end, on the minds of some, e∣specially on a most Learned Hearer thereof, whose Judicious Observation on part of the ReplySee page 31. rism gave me the assurance (which was my great satisfaction) that the Seed sown did not fall altogether on Bar∣ren, but on such Good ground, as not only brought forth what was profitable, even to the Sower him∣self,
 but what hath ministred an occasion of Prin∣ting, what was then Preached; which I was the more inclin'd to do, in hopes that it might have the good hap, to be better understood (when Meta∣physical, and Theological Truths, are brought down to Sense, presented to the Eye,) than, when it was butSegniùs ir∣ritant animum demissa per au∣res Quam quae sunt oculis subjecta fideli∣bus, & quae, &c. Horat. cursorily delivered. And so by Gods Grace may gain on more, to become Proselytes to, to be∣lieve, the Truths then declared, and to bemoan what mischief Sin did once in Heaven; as, alas! it daily doth on Earth, even in our Holy Places, in our Churches, when at same time we cannot be profited by what becomes edifying to others; when the wicked one, either steals away our Attentive∣ness, from under Instruction; our Hearts from re∣ceiving the good seed, or else choaks them with (what will prove pungent, and pricking in the other World) the Thorns, the Carkings, and the Cares of this. The harsh, and severe Censures of which, I am once more to undergo, foreseeing that I shall lye under the Imputation, in being Guilty of (what is condemn'd, as abominable, in the following Sermon; and, as that, which caus'd the Angels fall) Pride and Vanity. In presuming to Print my Conceptions of so great a Truth, in so mean a dress, as may neither take the Humour, nor comport with that Gallantry and Gayety of Wit, now in vogue. Which I am no further concern'd to take notice of, than to pity it, when what is serious cannot affect it; and if it doth, it's only when a Levity of Spirit, and of Fancy goeth a∣long with it. For I am conscious to my self, (which to me is better than a thousand Witnesses) that as my Conceptions flow'd from a profound, and most humble apprehension of the inability of the Self-suffici∣ency of the best of Creatures, to secure their standing, either in Grace or Glory, without a Divine support and supply: So also that I have no other design in the pub∣lishing
 of them, than to secure firm and unshaken my Readers Salvation, and my own, in that state of Grace, unto which it hath pleased God to call us. And there∣fore, though this be but as the Widows Mite, cast out of the whole and necessary substance, St. Mark 12.42. (which I have collected, gathered together) into the charitable Corban, for the publick good: Which, whil'st others that have gone before me in this Subject, have enriched out of their TreasureOverplus of Learning, . As Exemp. Cantab. ren∣ders it. yet I hope (that in the great day of Retribution) it may find acceptance at the hand of that Divine Justice, of that Divine Goodness, which it doth vindicate. Which I should very groundlesly expect, if I did bottom on (what broke the neck of the Apostate Spirits Felicity) Pride; or on a vain conceit of an intellectual super-ex∣cellency. On these Reasons therefore it is, (Honoured Sir) that I appear again in Print. And it is also on as weighty ones, that I presume once more to prefix (your Great Name) to another Dedication. Not only in that it's but just and equitable to offer up of the following Harvest; to whom the first fruits hath been al∣ready Consecrated; and this the rather, in that the Harvest (related to in the Judgment to come, which is insisted on in the Sermon) is, That, in which the Holy Angels shall be the Reapers, St. Matth, 13.41. To whose state, and condition in Heaven, Yours seems e∣minently to bear a resemblance here on Earth, not only for the sigleness of Your state, and adorn'd with the Grace thereof, a Caelibate Continency, but also in re∣spect of Your most Penetrating and Piercing Judg∣ment, in the clear discoveries of the greatest Truths, (short only of the Angelical) in that it lyes under the disadvantage (from which theirs is freed) of being embodyed. Not only (I say) on this account, but also in regard of the Dignity and Excellency of those things treated of in the following Discourse, viz. Of the De∣tection
 of those Wiles, and Windings, of those Insidi∣ous insinuations (which St.St. Ign. E∣pist. ad Tral. p. 57. Edit. Vost. Ignatius calls  Insidias Diaboli, St. Paul, Eph. 6.112. , i. e. The studied and contriv'd Plots of the Devil to deceive, and to destroy us. Which no∣thing, but the unwearied watchfulness and refined wis∣dom of such dignified Persons, as Your self, (being set apart to watch for the Salvation of Souls) can defeat and disappoint. As also of the Vindication of that Goodness, which hath promised (what generally hath been performed in all Ages) to Persons of Your most Ho∣nourable Order, viz. to cloath her Priests with Salva∣tion, in its three most important significations, viz. with Plenty, Protection, and with Dignity, as the Learned Dr.Dr. Barrows Consecrat. Serm. Barrow hath observed. And in that it presents you with the Vindication of the Ho∣nour of that Justice, which injoyns double Honour to be given to such painful Labourers in Christs Vineyard, as You have evidenced Your self to have been. These recommend the following Sermon to Your protection, and bespeak Your favourable acceptance of this Dedi∣cation thereof. Though Divine Goodness, and Divine Justice be such mighty powerful things, as do rather confer safety on, than stand in need of any defence from, the best of Men. Yet their being publickly own'd, in such a degenerate Age as this, by Persons that live under the awful apprehensions of the one, and under the endearments of the other, as Your self doth; their be∣ing publickly own'd by such, will give a publick Cha∣racter of the necessity, and advantageousness, as well as of the excellency of detecting the Stratagems of Satan, of opposing that great Interest he hath already made in the World; and of vindicating the Honour of the Ju∣stice of God, and of his Goodness: But its the meaness of the management of the Discourse it self, which I am
 to Apologize for, and to supplicate Your Candour in. Being very sensible that what is delivered in it, may not pass withall (if with any) for Demonstrations; nor the Reasons offer'd, with that strength as to overthrow all obstinate Gainsayers, or be approved of, as suiting the depth of the enquiry into the Original Sin, which caus'd the Angels fall; or be esteemed such, as the Vin∣dication of the Honour of Divine Goodness and Justice might require. Yet the fall of Angels being very myste∣rious, and two such eminent Perfections in the Divine Nature or Essence, as Justice and Goodness are, being most sublime, and High: The darkness of the Mystery will (I hope) excuse the Reasons given, why they appear but as Glimpses to, in the discovery of it; and the height of the Perfections, will plead for the shortness of those shadows projected from (in the Conceptions of) them: And also, for my drawing, in this Dedication, the Happiness of the fallen Angels, which they once enjoyed, Comae Gloriolae encircling their Heads, till Errour seized these, or so Eclipsed the refulgency and bright∣ness of those. And indeed, their not standing long in happiness, gave me not time enough to draw it to the Life, to the largest proportion. And the darkness, which doth now invelop them, since their Apostacy, is too thick for my weak Eyes to penetrate, and so am forced to present it but with faint shadows, and some light colours. A skilful Artist's, a more speculative Soul's Pencilcan only set it, Sir, to Your Great Judgment, with such palpableness and affrightingness, as will best suit with, and correspond to the grievousness of the Sin, that caus'd it, Degeneracy of the Nature in it, and to the De∣spondency of Fiends and Devils groaning under it. But that I may not any longer interrupt, Sir, those Sacred Hours and Minutes, which you have Dedicated to Devotion; I have only to add, That long may you live
 an Honour and Grace to this famous Church of Eng∣land, a Wise and Powerful Watchman to discover, and to discomfit the wicked Machinations of the great Ad∣versary of Souls, that You may yet live to gain many Proselytes to Christianity, to the overthrowing the Principalities of Darkness, and of Idolaty. That Piety may ever flourish in Your Practices, Holiness blos∣som forth in its Beauties, displaying themselves in Your Religious Couversation, That Your Name may be famous on the Records of time to all Posterity, and that it may be found Registred in the Book of Life, studded with Additional rayes of Glory, amongst the Names of those wise ones, who have Converted many from Sin unto Righteousness, to shine forth like the bright∣ness of the Sun, to an ever Blessed Eternity, is the sincere Desire, and Hearty Prayer of,
Sir,

Balmbrough, May 29, 1684.
