



EXCELLENT SOVERAIGN,
WHile your Great Affairs are prosperou∣sly managing, both abroad, and at home; behold here, I present this Book, as one meanes, in its kind, toward the settlement of the Peace of your Kingdomes. The Rights of an Ecclesiastical Ʋnifor∣mity have been many times debated in the World with Fire and Sword: And Your Kingdomes have been of late, through the debates concerning them, the dire Field of Blood. Which Rights, because it is of so great moment (both to all Divine and Humane Affairs) that they should be duely stated, and because they have never yet been stated by any; I have therefore here adventur'd the stating of them; and that according to the evident dictates of the Lawes of Nature, and Na∣tions, and of the Divine Lawes concerning them, and as they make to the preserving, and promot∣ing
 the Publick, and standing welfare, both of Re∣ligion, and Government, and the Consistency of Re∣ligion with Government; the Principal and Fun∣damental matters of all Humane Societies. And I have made a search into the frame and fabrick of all Humane Affaires, and have unravel'd the transactions of the former and present Ages, of the Churches both of the Jewes and Gentiles, Chri∣stians and Mahometans, for the doing of it. And I here Dedicate it, particularly, to the Peace of Your Majesties Kingdomes; at least so far forth, as a Book may be a means for the procuring the Publick Peace; and where it may meet with men, either of Reason or Conscience, and not of furious Ignorance, or temporal Interests. Behold Great Prince! I Present it at your feet, most Humbly craving leave, that I may light this Candle at the Sun, and draw a Lustre upon this Discourse from Your Majesties Soveraign Patronage. Herodotus relates it of Midas;In Clio, paulo post princip. That, of all things, he chose to offer at Delphos his Regal Chair, in which he was wont to sit, and give Laws to his Kingdom. It is, because this Book concerns these great mat∣ters of Law and Publick Right, that I presume to offer it, thus in Duty, to Your Majesty. What the Church Historian tells the Excellent Empe∣rour Theodosius,Sozomen. In Praefat. ad Imperato∣rem Theodo∣sium. That it was said of him, that he spent the day and night in Councels and Causes, in looking after his Religious and Civil and Mili∣tary
 Affairs: The like is said of Your Majesty, that You are at all times ready at Your Councels and Deliberations; That You go abroad to Visit Your Garrisons and Navies; and that You spend your time in looking after the setling the Church and State, the Charge committed to you by God. May Religion, and your Majesties Government long flourish together in your Dominions; that the Divine Blessing may accompany you, and there may never be wanting one to Sit upon the Throne of your Fathers, so long as the Sun and Moon shall endure.

