



RIGHT REVEREND,
WHen I preached at Carlile at the last Assi∣ses,
I made no other account,Arist. de hist. animal. lib. 5. cap. 10. but that my
sermon should (like Aristotles Epheme∣ron)
have died the same day that it took
breath. Since which time I have been in∣treated
by divers to make it common: to
whom I would not yield the least assent,
as doubting that their desires proceeded
rather from affection towards the spea∣ker,
then from a sound judgement of the things spoken. But when I
perceived how distastfull it was to some, that beare Romish hearts in
English breasts; I resolved, as David did when Michal mocked him
for dancing before the Arke, to be yet more vile, by publishing that
unto their eyes, which before was delivered to their eares; hoping that
the more it displeaseth them, the better acceptance it shall finde with
the true Israelite. Which now at length I have effected. So
as that before they heard it (or at least heard of it) so now
they may read it. And if I have evill spoken, let them beare

witnesse of the evill, but if I have said well, why doe they smite
me? It seems to them a meere calumniation to say that there is no pro∣bability
that a Papist shall live peaceably with us, and performe true
and sincere obedience towards our Prince. To whom I might returne
the short answer of the Lacones to their adversary, Si: if it were so, my
speech was not to no purpose, because not only rebels to the King, but,
much more to God and his true worship and service, are to be rooted
out of a Christian commonwealth. And if those be worthy a sharpe
censure which agreeing with us in the fundamental points of Divini∣ty,
cannot away with the carved worke of our Temple, but cut it
downe as it were with Axes and Hammers, how much more those San∣ballats
and Tobiahs, that strike at the foundation thereof, and say of
it, as did the children of Edom in the day of Jerusalem, down with
it, down with it, even to the ground.
But I rather say, O si, I wish it were so, and that there were no
feare of danger by their meanes and devises. But this I doubt can∣not
be effected, unlesse there be, I will not say with the Oratour, a
wall, but a sea between them and us. Till then there is as great pro∣bability
of peace between us, as there was of old time between the Ca∣tholicks
and the Donatists, the Orthodoxall and the Arians, the He∣brewes
and the Aegyptians, the Iewes and the Samaritans:
Immortale odium, & nunquam sanabile vulnus.
And for true loyalty, and faithful obedience there is as great pro∣bability,
as that the two poles shall meet. The King and the Pope are
two contrary masters, none can truly serve them both; Either he must
hate the one, and love the other, or he must leane to the one and
despise the other. The obedience which either of them requires is so
repugnant, that they cannot lodge within one breast. This loyalty
which our adversaries do outwardly pretend is but equivocal, no more
true loyalty, then a dead hand is a hand; it wants the very forme
and soule (if I may so speak) of true dutifulnesse, which is to perform
obedience voluntarily, and with a free heart for Gods cause, as to
Christs immediate Vicar over al persons within his dominions. It is
with some secret reservation, till their primus motor, the man of sin,
upon whom their obedience depends, shal sway them another way: rebus
sic stantibus, the state standing as it doth, & donec publica bullae
executio fieri possit, untill they may have power and strength to re∣sist.
So that I may use the same words unto them which Austin doth

doth to the Rogatists,Aug. ep. 48. Saevire vos nolle dicitis, ego non posse arbi∣tror;
ita enim estis numero exigui, ut movere nos contra adver∣sarias
vobis multitudines non audeatis, etsi cupiatis. I speak chiefly
of such as are grounded in the Principles of Popish Divinitie, and
take for current what soever is stamped in Romes mint. As for their
ignorant followers, I only give them that censure, which S. Paul gives
the Iews; They have the zeale of God, but not according to know∣ledge,
for they being ignorant of the righteousnesse of God, and
going about to stablish their owne righteousnesse, have not sub∣mitted
themselves to the righteousnesse of God.
I have adventured to joyn with this an other Sermon preached be∣fore
upon a like occasion (so farre as I could gather it out of a few
scattered Papers, flying abroad like Sybilla's leaves.)
—rapidis ludibria ventis.
Which I have the rather done, because my experience these few
years in the Country, hath taught me how common those sins are which
I haue herein indeavoured to reprove, if these my labours shall not
be distastfull, I shall be willing to goe forward in a greater subject.
Howsoever they shall be taken, I submit to the censure of your Lord∣ship,
and of every indifferent Reader (not counting what carping
Momus can say against them) in the words of judicious Vives;
Si quid dixi quod placeat,Lud. Vives in August. de Civit Dei lib. ult. cap. ult. habeat lector gratiam Deo propter me;
si quid quod non placeat, ignoscat mihi propter Deum & malè di∣ctis
det veniam propter benè dicta; and of holy Austin in the conclu∣sion
of his long discourse de Trinitate Domine Deus unus & Trinitas,
uaecunque dixi de tuo agnoscant & tui, si qua de meo & tu ignos∣&
tui.

