


Dear Sir,
THE great desire I have to see you happy both here and hereafter enga∣geth me to do all that is in my po∣wer for the promotion both of your Spiri∣tual and Temporal Interest. It has pleased God to give you a fair Portion of Worldly Goods, and a very large share of Intelle∣ctual Endowments, whereby you are put into a Capacity of providing for your self both in this World and that which is to come. Your onely care therefore must be to employ these good Gifts of God to his Glory, and the Salvation of your own Im∣mortal Soul.

'Tis Religion onely, Dear Sir, which can carry you safe through this Valley of Tears, and can at last advance you into that place where all Tears shall be wip'd from your Eyes. 'Tis this alone which will make you the love of Men and Angels, nay, and what is infinitely more valuable, of God himself. In fine, it is this alone which can make this present Lise easie and pleasant, and secure you from Eternal Mi∣sery in a Life after this.
Let Religion therefore, Dear Sir, be your first and early care, that so you may be wise betimes, and avoid those Follies which too commonly attend the young Gentlemen of this Age. You are just now entring up∣on that vast Stage the World, you have Good and Evil set before you, and the Eyes of all Men are upon you to see what manner of Choice you will make. Your present and future Happiness is at stake, and therefore it highly concerns you to

make such a Choice as you may never here∣after have cause to repent of.
You have had the advantage of a Sober and Religious Education from your very Gradle, and the Examples of as good Pa∣rents as ever any Child was blest with. Your Deceas'd Father, whose Memory will live as long as Piety and Vertue are Sacred here on Earth, was an admirable Pattern of unblemish'd Goodness: And your Excel∣lent Mother is still, God be thanked, a Li∣ving Pattern of all that is Vertuous and Praise-worthy.
What then will you be able to say for your self if you degenerate from such Wor∣thy Progenitors? What Excuses will you be able to make even to this World if you de∣ceive their expectations by becoming the Un∣worthy Son of Two such Incomparable Parents? But alass! There is still a Que∣stion which is infinitely more weighty, and that is, What will you be able to plead for

your self at the great Day of Judgment, if you have behav'd your self so wickedly here, that even your Father and Mother must rise up and condemn you?
But I am perswaded better things of you, and cannot give my self leave to think you will ever be a Disgrace to your Worthy Family. You have hitherto given us great hopes of seeing your Father again alive in you. I beseech God of his Infinite Mercy to preserve you in all Vertue and Goodness, and to make you a Great and Glorious In∣strument of doing good here on Earth.
Having told you that Religion is the greatest wisedom, or, as the wise man speaks, the beginning of wisedom, I must now tell you that the beginning of all Religion is the acknowledgment of God, the owning of a Supreme Power who made us and every thing that has been made from the begin∣ning of the World out of nothing.

This great and fundamental Truth must be necessarily well establish'd in us before we can come to any such thing as Religion. For as the Apostle tells us, He that cometh to God must believe that he is. You cannot there∣fore better imploy your time than in reading such Treatises as serve to make out this weighty Truth. Such are the present Arch-Bishops Sermon concerning Atheisme, Dr. Barrows Sermons on the first Article of the Creed, and Grotius de Veritate Christianae Re∣ligionis; any one of which Three will suffi∣ciently satisfie any unprejudic'd Man who has not made his reason a Slave to his passions.
After having named these great Men, I know not how to advise you to read the following Poem of my own. I can only recommend it to your Reading when you are more inclin'd to read Verse than Prose. And I begg of you, if you find any thing in it that you think well said, not to attri∣bute

it to me but to those great Men whom I nam'd but now, whose Works I have on∣ly transcrib'd to their Authors great disad∣vantage.
If this small piece shall contribute any thing towards the confirming you in the belief of a Godhead, I shall think my time vvell spent in Writing it. If not, I shall hovvever have this to comfort me, that I vvrote it vvith a sincere design to do you good, and to performe the Office that I ovve to you of

