



SIR.
I make you this small Present, as knowing a Gentleman ought to be as zealous for Virtue as he is for Ho∣nour; and to shew his Courage chiefly in conquering himself. Your Exam∣ple influences very far, being so well known, and so well beloved: And I need not tell you how many, out of meer Emulation, are apt enough to become your Creatures and Followers.
The Conversation of some Gentle∣men is not so innocent as becomes their Quality, and as it ought to be: But it is commonly either Drollery, or,

hard drinking. In the former, they neither spare Friend nor Foe; have no regard to Modesty or good Man∣ners; and many times not to sacred Things themselves: And in the latter they are obnoxious to all other, even the greatest Sins. It is Solomon's Ob∣servation concerning Drunkenness, that it leads to Whoredom and all Lewd things, and renders Men more insensible than Beasts; and yet (so great is the sottishness of its followers) they will seek it still and not refrain; Prov. 23.33. &c.
Those false Maxims so much in Vogue with some, God will deal with me as a Gentleman, a Souldier, a Courtier and the like, so often urged in Ex∣cuse of a Vicious Life, were invented by the Common Enemy of Mankind to justle out the Laws of God, and to ren∣der all good Instructions of Pious Men ineffectual. Whereas the H. Scripture assures us, That God is no respecter of Per∣sons, but in every Nation he that feareth God and worketh Righteousness [i. e. becomes and does the duty of a Chri∣stian]

is accepted of him and none others; Acts 10.34, 35. John 3.18. And if we profess to know God, and deny him in our Works, we are no better than Infidels; and if we say we do know him and not keep his Com∣mandments we are Lyars, let our Qua∣lity or Station be what it will. Tit. 1.16.
Many Saints now in Heaven, were indeed, not always so upon Earth; but then resolutely reforming them∣selves and retracting their past Course of Life (the Divine Grace and assist∣ance being never wanting to such) they afterwards by incessant vertue became great Instruments of God's Glory in the Salvation of innume∣rable Souls. This is more or less ap∣plicable to every Man whilst he lives in this World; who hath always some fault or other (if not ill habit) to retract, which by God's assistance he may do when he pleases; and it is his greatest wisdom not to delay his Endeavours, as the contrary his great∣est folly. I hope therefore you will not think me your Enemy because I

tell you the truth: Who am on the contrary, Sir, Your Faithful Friend in this highest point of Friendship, and most ready to serve you in any thing conducing to your eternal happiness, at least my poor Prayers shall not be wanting
SIR,

