



HONOURED SIRS,
A Late Writer hath taken the
confidence to make very Dis∣respectfull,
Indecent, Rude,
and Scurrilous Reflections upon You,
and hath with that Scorn and Insolence,
which are peculiar to him, and cannot
be supposed to be in any other Man, cen∣sured
your Studies and Ways and Me∣thods
of Learning, which are at this
day own'd and practis'd by you. They
have always born the brand of Infamy
who have shew'd their ill will to these
Publick Schools of Education and
Professed Seminaries of Arts and

Literature. Pope Paul the Second
and Sixtus the Fourth who succeded him
were infamous on this account, for both
of them were oberv'd to bear a Hatred
to Universities, and publickly to de∣clare
their abhorrence of Academick
Men and Learning. Mr. Hobbes is a
Modern Instance, who was wont to de∣cry
the University-Studies and Learn∣ing,
because he had espoused a Set of
Notions which were destructive not on∣ly
to Academick but all Religious Prin∣ciples.
But a later Instance we have
in one Mr. Lock, who though he infi∣nitely
comes short of the forenamed Per∣son
in Parts or Good Letters, yet hath
taken the courage to tread in his Old
Friend's steps, and publickly to pro∣claim
his dislike of University-Men,
and to remonstrate against the Methods
they take in bringing up of Youth. The
Name of Publick Schools and Aca∣demies
is as hatefull to him as that of
Athnasius to a Socinian.
Nor is he pleas'd with our Old Chri∣stianity,
but hath offer'd a New Scheme
to the World, the same (the very same
in words, as well as to the Thing) with
what Mr. Hobbes propounded as the
Perfect and Compleat Model of Faith,
viz. To believe in Christ is no∣thing
else than to believe that Jesus
is the Christ: and no other Faith,
besides this Article, is required to
Eternal life. De Cive cap. 18. The
belief of this Article, Jesus is the
Christ or Messias, is all the Faith
required for Salvation. Leviathan.
Part. 3. Chap. 43. This is the Doctrine
which is revived and furbish'd up in the
pretended Reasonableness of Christi∣anity:
and you see whence it is borrow'd.
When that Writer was framing a New
Christianity, he took Hobbes's Le∣viathan
for the New Testament, and
the Philosopher of Malmsbury for
our Saviour and the Apostles. See
how naturally a Man passes from ar∣raigning

and vilifying the Universi∣ties
to affront and abuse Religion! He
had with pride and contempt trampled
upon the former, and now he attacks the
latter, and treads Christianity it self
under his feet.
It may be few of you have taken no∣tice
of the Affronts done to your selves
by this Bold Assailant, as not busying
your selves with such sort of Writers,
or as thinking such Reflections below your
Resentments. But I having had occa∣sion
to enter the Lists with this Gentle∣man,
it falls in my way to take notice
of his Double Insolence, i. e. to You
and to Religion, but more especially
the latter, which he hath miserably shat∣ter'd
and unsettled, and almost reduced
to nothing; having baulk'd a great part
of the Gospels, and wholly laid aside
the Epistles, and renounced all Arti∣cles
of Christianity but One as neces∣sary
to be believ'd to constitute a Man
a Christian, and having every where

shew'd his disdain of the Ministry and
Ministers of the Gospel, especially
the Clergy of the Church of Eng∣land.
So that he deserves to be trea∣ted
with Satyr rather than Argument.
And therefore if there be in the ensuing
Papers a kind of mixture of the former
with the latter, I hope it will not be
disrelish'd even by the most Serious and
Iudicious Readers when they consider
on whom it is bestow'd.
Gentlemen, I have now an opportuni∣ty
of vindicating the Honour of those Re∣nowned
and Learned Bodies to which
you belong, and likewise of asserting and
defending the Cause of Christianity:
wherefore I thought I should be defective
as to both these Concerns if I did not of∣fer
these Papers to You, and humbly
request You to take them into your patro∣nage,
with the Author of them, who is,
Most Learned Sirs,

