


May it please Your Grace;
I Imbrace this welcome Opportunity
of congratulating Your late Access
to the Highest Station in our
Church, which all Wise and Good Men
look upon as an Happy Omen of the
future Felicity of these Realms. For in
Your Grace conspire all those things

which can render us, by the Divine
Blessing, a Prosperous People, viz.
Your unstained Faithfulness and Loyal∣ty
to his Majesty, Your most Ardent
Love to Your Country, Your Great A∣bility
for Publick Counsels and Affairs,
Your perfect Abhorrence of all Immo∣rality
and Debauchery, Your Zealous
Concern for the Church of England, and
in that for the whole Protestant Religi∣on.
Of this last You have afforded
the World such an Illustrious Proof as
will give an immortal Reputation to
Your Name. For you have not only
with Your Learned Pen encountred the
Idolatry of the Church of Rome, and there∣in
vindicated the Reformed Cause, but in
all Your Actions You have demonstra∣ted
Your singular Care for this latter,
and Your Detestation of the former.
Especially, when in the late Reign this
Idol began to be set up again, and too
many fell down to it, You with the ut∣most
Zeal, Vigour and Courage, re∣monstrated
against this Practice. You

bore the Insolencies and Insults of the
Enemy with an unimitable Bravery;
You withstood their Boldness with a
Confidence becoming the Goodness of
Your Cause: You obviated their Folly
and Madness with a profound Wisdom
and Prudence: You defeated their Dili∣gence
by a more unwearied Industry:
And, in brief, You were the Successful
Maul and Scourge of the Hectoring Je∣suits
that lifted up their Heads in that
Day. For this You were hated and
defamed, and are so at this Hour, by
all the sworn Friends to the Pontifician
Interest, who look upon You (and that
justly) as their most Dreadful Enemy.
But this very thing deservedly makes
Your Grace to be loved, admired and
honoured by all Sincere Protestants and
True English -men.
I am one that glory in being of that
Number, and accordingly I now at∣tempt
to express my infinite Regards
and Veneration of Your Grace's Tran∣scendent
Undertakings in behalf of our

Religion and our Church, and of the
Whole Nation. And, as a Testimony
of my Resentments and Duty, I here
offer to Your Grace a Discourse of the Per∣fection
of the Holy Scriptures, which was
designed to be presented to Your Lord∣ship
before you were advanced to this
Supreme See, to which Your Merits have
called You. Wherefore I having then
consecrated it to Your Name, I hold it
unlawful now to alienate it; especially
it being the Choicest and Noblest Sub∣ject
that I have yet treated of, and
therefore I hope not unworthy of Your
Grace's Patronage. I submit the Work
wholly to Your Grace's Judgment, and
beg leave to have the Honour of pro∣fessing
my self to be

