







My Lord,
WHatsoever Maxim relating to Reli∣gion, albeit it be neither Funda∣mental nor Orthodox, yet these Persons who are entangled in Er∣rour, and Slaves to their Corruption; if they fancy that Maxim to be both Fundamental and Orthodox,
 close with it in their Judgment, embrace it in their Will, and dandle it upon the knees of their Affecti∣ons; yea, they idolize it as fondly and furiously as these Pagan Ephesians did their Image of Diana, Acts 19. 34, 35. which they strongly believed fell down from Jupiter; yea, often they lay all the stress of their Religion upon that their Opi∣nion, and will concenter with none in Love, but with these that will concenter with them in their Judgment, and cry up their great Diana with them; nay, they are so transported with their Fancy, that their Idol-Maxim is esteemed by them one of the noble Parts, and lies so near to the Heart of Religion, that there is no Salvation but in that way of theirs, albeit it were a Path never beaten before, and far from the true old Way: wherefore they think they are obliged in Consci∣ence to seperate, and keep no Church-fellowship with these that are not of their Judgment; hence a Schism and Separation in Worship, flowing from Separation in Affection, and that from Separation in Judgment, and when once Altar is reared up against Altar, follows Sword against Sword, and Camp against Camp, Division and Schism in the Church, begetting Sedition in the State: There∣fore St. Paul, among the wicked works of the Flesh, Gal. 5. 19. hath coupled Seditions and He∣resies together. This sad truth is known to the Learned, by many Histories in many Kingdoms; and of the strong affinity betwixt Schism and Se∣dition,
 St. Basil writes most pithily; Hippocrates . Basil Tom. 2. lib. de Spiritu Sancto contra eunomium Arianum, cap. 30. Sufficiens est inimicitiae causa opinionibus dissentire & erro∣ris similitudo res est quavis conju∣ratione fidelior ad seditionis societa∣tem. Twins were so near of Nature, that always when the one was sick the other also; but Church and State are of a nearer union, for these same Persons both for Souls and Bodies are Subjects and Servants to God in Christ, united by the same Faith and Worship, in relation to Eternal Happiness, and Subjects also to one and the same King on Earth, united by the same Laws, in relation to their civil and external Well-being; and as the Spiritual Concernment and Eternal Salvation of that Body will more af∣fect it then its short and external Well-being on Earth, so any Member in that Body disjoynted, in regard of Spiritual-union, will cause such a stir and trouble, as during the time of its dislocation, the whole Body will be so tormented, that no ci∣vil Bonds will prevail to compose them: They will brag to sacrifise their Temporal Life, for their Eter∣nal Salvation; hence ariseth debates, envyings, wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults, 2 Cor. 12. 20. then confusion and every evil work, James 3. 16.
Wherefore as a compassionate Member of the Mystical Body of Jesus, the least of the sons of Levi, whom the Holy Ghost hath made Overseer
 of a part of the Flock of God, I have written this little Treatise for information of the Judgment of the weak Lambs of the chief Shepherd, who being unskilful in the word of Righteousness, refuse to sing the Doxology, because of their Doubts and Scruples, which by this Treatise, through the help of God, I have endeavoured to remove, that there be no longer division in Judgment, Affection and Worship, upon that account.
My Lord, All the Miseries and Confusions in this Land, (more than fourty Years continuance,) began at Schism in the Church, which is well known by sad experience, and its Tragical History is writ∣ten with red Capital Letters of Blood, that he who runs may read it; with the blood of his Royal Majesty, now a glorified Martyr, with the blood of many Nobles and Worthies, and thousands of other Subjects: therefore the King of kings, in His gracious Providence, with his Vicegerent over these Kingdoms, hath placed your Lordship in the civil Watch-Tower of this Kingdom, to espy and prevent Sedition in the State, and consequently to have a watchful Eye against Schism in the Church; especially seing the great fundamental Maxim of some in this Kingdom, was not only dangerous to the State consequentially, and by its tendency, but substantially such.
And seing the purpose of this little Treatise is for healing and preventing of further Schism and Error in Judgment, tending to Sedition, I have presum∣ed
 to intreat your Lordships Patrociny; for albeit it be little in quantity, yet its Subject-matter is so glorious, to wit, Singing glory to our infinitely glo∣rious God; and the duty so unquestionable, that the Universal Church will joyn in the Practice with your Lordship, and say Amen; not only the reformed Churches, but also all these of the Greek and Latine Communion, yea, all Christians to the ends of the Earth.
My second Attractive, Are the many and rich Talents of Grace and Gifts with which the Father of Lights hath eminently endued your Lordship of knowledge and prudence, of Piety and Justice, of Zeal to the true Christian Religion, and Loyalty to his Majesty, by which your Lordships know∣ledge and deep Judgment, ye are able exactly to ponder the weight and validity of the Reasons brought to prove the lawfulness of singing the Doxology, and the levity and weakness of the pre∣tended Reasons brought against it.
Therefore trusting your Lordship will follow his steps, on whom the Spirit of the Lord did rest, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of council and might, the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord, Isa. 11. 2. And that you will piously observe the holy ways and stately steps of the Lord's Providence towards you, and so under∣stand the loving kindness of the Lord, Psal. 107. Vers. last, and Psal, 111. 2. The works of the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure
 therein; and the slighting of this pious and plea∣sant Duty, is a great sin, Psal. 28. 5. Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up. I am confident, your Lordship with much Spiritual-pleasure and joy in the Lord, hath ob∣served his loving Kindness to you, as to another Moses drawn out of the Waters, Exod. 2. 10. to be a selected Servant, faithful in all the House of God, Heb. 3. 5. another Eliakim, on whose Shoul∣ders the Lord hath laid the Government, Isa. 22. 20. and as your Lordships Father of blessed Memory died a Martyr for his Loyalty to his King, with many other Worthies; so our Kings Majesty, matchless for Piety in Life and Death, gave all these Worthies a meeting, in dying a glorious and royal Martyr for the Liberty of his loving Subjects; and as the wise and greatly beloved Daniel, one of the children of the Babylonish Captivity, of the seed of the Princes, was so endowed with gifts and graces by the Father of the Fatherless, that he was thought worthy to sit Judge in the gate of the Kingdom, Dan. 2. vers. last, So your Lordship, the son and heir of your Martyr Father, being a Fatherless-child of the late sad Captivity in Scot∣land, descending as the righteous heir from the ancient and honourable Family of the Barons of Haddo, one of the ancient Families in this Kingdom of Scotland, being cast upon the care of your heavenly Father, having enabled you by more then
 ordinary gifts and graces, and advanced you through many orderly steps of Dignity, hath at last caused your Lordship to sit supream Judge in that very City and Judgment-seat, where your Father suffered so sad and unjust a Sentence; there∣fore shall Men say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous, verily there is a God that judgeth in the earth, Psal. 58. last verse.
The Fountain of Civil Honour is the Kings Majesty, and that Power and Priviledge he hath received from the King of kings, and accordingly, Esther 6. 6. the word of the King was, What shall be done to the man whom the King delighteth to ho∣nour? but it is sure that the supream Fountain of this honour is the King of kings, who giveth forth a Rivolet of this Priviledge of Honour to all Kings under Him, so that when the King of kings, by His over-ruling and gracious Providence, puts it in the heart and hand of a Christian King under Him, to set his heart and eye upon a deserving and worthy Person; then the Glory of Gods stately steps of over-ruling Providence, and a work beseeming a gracious and a just King joyned toge∣ther, is conspicuous and notour to every good Christian within that Sphere of Jurisdiction, and this same is the happy juncto of the King of kings, and his Vice-gerent in these united Lands for ad∣vancing your Lordship: What more suitable then this, for the son and heir of a royal Martyr Father, to advance the son and heir of a loyal Martyr
 Subject? As the Kings of kings is the Giver of e∣very good Gift, so of Riches and Honour, and the Receiver is obliged to be thankful to the Giver, which thankfulness is best demonstrate in his im∣proving these Talents to the glory of the Giver, to the good and comfort of his Neighbour, but the more comfortable advantage is that to his own Soul, a Spiritual gain of Peace with God, which passeth all understanding, and joy unspeakable and glorious, which is Heaven upon Earth, and conversing with better then Angels, having his conversation in Heaven, having the Heart mortified and crucified to the World, and all its Riches and Honours, which to them are loss and dross, being put in the ballance with Christ, Phil. 3. , 8. and as this is rare to be found to be honourable, and honoured of all Men, and yet to be humble, Riches to encrease, and yet not to set the Heart upon them, to abound in Plenty to the Cups run∣ning over, and yet be temperate, and the sensual and inferiour Powers of the Soul not to blind and then enslave the rational Powers thereof is rare to be found, and flows from more then ordinary Grace; hence your Lordship may well infer, that all the external Honour and Dignity which the Lord hath conferred upon you, which are good Gifts in themselves (and not to be slighted,) yet they are of far less value then the inward Spiritual and Heavenly Graces wherewith the God of all Grace hath beautified your Soul.

As it is a matter of sad lamentation to the Godly, and of mourning in secret, when they see the evil example of great Ones so prevalent upon the lives of others, as Prophaneness to lift up the Horn, and Satan to erect his Throne, and Piety be Heart-broken, then slighted, then mocked, all which Sins kindle much Wrath, and bringeth down sore and inevitable Judgments upon a Land; so in the contrary, it is matter of great joy to all the God∣ly in the Land, for which they render hearty Praises to the God of Heaven, and looks upon it as a token for Good, (that the Lord will make us glad, according to the days wherein he hath afflicted us, and the years wherein we have seen evil:) even your Lordships good example, for the good example of the great, is more prevalent and effectual upon the Hearts and Lives of Men, then the most eloquent Oratry or convincing Reasons can prevail upon them, for the Orator is not able constantly to be beating upon the Ears of his Hearers, but will weary on his part, and the Hear∣ers nauseat on their part; but for the good and holy example of the pious Life of the Great, is not an exhortation to Holiness once a Week, or once a Day, but continually without Interup∣tion, and cries aloud without Noise, and insinuates without Affectation: Therefore, every pious Ruler, first, and most considereth the All-seeing-Eye of his Maker, to whom he must give account; so in the second place, he considereth the Eye of
 his Inferiour looking upon him, and ready to make the Rulers life and actions his Pattern, shin∣ing with all Grace and Vertue, will be so preva∣lent and conspicuous, that it will cause Prophane∣ness to be afraid and hide it self, and cause Piety and Vertue receive their due estimation and honour, that so the Lord's Glory and the Kingdom of Jesus may be advanced, and many Souls gained and saved, and thus the Lord may take pleasure in his People, and yet delight to do us good, and say, Psal. 132. vers. 14. This is my rest, here will I dwell for ever, for I have desired it, and make our land Hephziba and Beula; Which God of gods, and Judge of all the Earth, as He hath multi∣plied Honours upon your Lordship, so it is the Hope, Expectation, and Prayer of all good Sub∣jects in this Land, that your Lordships chief study, and constant endeavour, may be, to promote the Lord's Glory, by a constant tenour of Piety and Justice, that the mountains may bring peace to the people, and the little hills by righteousness, Psal. 72. vers. 3. that ye may raise up the foundations of many generations, and be called the repairer of the breaches, Isa. 58. vers. 12.
That the Church and Kingdom may long enjoy your Lordship, as one of their great Blessings from the Lord; That Mercy and Truth may meet to∣gether, and Righteousness and Peace kiss each other, Psal, 85. So that by the good Hand of your God upon you, Truth and Piety, Order and
 Unity, Peace and Prosperity in Church and State may abound; that after many good days, ye may obtain that Approbation, Well done good and faith∣full servant, enter into the joy of thy Lord; which is the sincere and fervent Prayer of,

Murrois, the 20. of February, 1683.
