


SIR,
THE forming of these brief Remarks
upon Mr. Whiston's Theory of the
Earth was occasion'd by one of your Letters
which you were pleas'd to honour me with: for
your mentioning that Vndertaking of his, and
your cursory Glance upon it revived in me the
thoughts which I a little before had of making
some Reflections on that Attempt. And the
Motive to it was this, my apprehension that
this Learned Gentleman had not dealt fairly
with the Mosaick History, which (as I con∣ceive)
is a fault of a very high nature. I chiefly
argue with him about his abandoning the lite∣ral
Sense, or the genuine meaning of the Mo∣saick
Creation. But I hope this may excite
a Resolution in you to go further, and par∣ticularly
to rifle his several Hypotheses,
which I question not you are perswaded are
founded on a precarious bottom. In defence of

your self you will be obliged to say something
to him, for you are a Theorist as well as he,
and the Earth is your common Subject. But
to the Theoretick part you have added Ex∣perience
and Observation, whereby you have
cultivated this Theme to a Prodigy, and are
going on still to oblige the World with greater
and nobler Discoveries, the Consummation
of which we all with great impatience expect
and long for.
As to this little Essay of mine, the Book∣seller
had notice of it, and in this Idle Time
(this Stationers Vacation) was pleased to
call for it, to set the Press on work. I was not
wholly averse to the making it Publick, because
I knew there is this one thing to commend it,
viz. the Goodness of my Design, which is to
conciliate a Reverence to the Mosaick Wri∣tings,
and particularly that part of them
where the First Formation of all things is
treated of. In the first Chapter of Genesis
Moses presents us with the Primitive State
of the World, and acquaints us what are the
First Principles and Rudiments of all things,
viz. the Chaos and Light. All Terrestri∣al,
gross and dark bodies were framed out of
the first; and all Etherial, bright and tenui∣ous
bodies were educed out of the second.
Whatever belongs to this Earth and the Pla∣nets
which are of a resembling nature had its

original from the former; and the Ether,
Sun, and Stars, which appertain to the Su∣perior
part of the World, had their rise from
the latter. These are the General Sources,
these are the Primitive Materials of all visi∣ble
beings in the World; the one passive, dull
and inert, the other active, subtile and brisk.
On these two Principles, viz. the Chaotick
Matter, and Light or Fire there might be
built a solid System of Natural Philosophy,
every way congruous to these and the other Dis∣coveries
of the Divinely Inspired Philosopher
in this Chapter. The contrary is that which
I make bold to censure and animadvert upon
in the insuing Papers, wherein I have shew'd
that Mr. Whiston makes his Philosophick
Principles jarre with Reveal'd Truth, and
suffers his Mathematicks to confront the Bi∣ble.
As to the Second Part of my Reflections,
wherein I doubt concerning the Earths mov∣ing
about its Axis, it may be I differ from
you, and from the generality of Vertuoso's
at this day. But truly I am not so much a
Tychonian as to for swear the Copernican
Hypothesis: but the Truth of the matter is
this, when I was treating of the most Sub∣stantial
Points of Divinity, that is, when I
was asserting and vindicating the Being and
Providence of God, I was unwilling to found

these or any thing belonging to them upon an
infirm and unstable basis, upon a dubious and
disputable Doctrine, and which had not long
prevail'd in the Learned World. Such I take
the Opinion of the Circumgyration of the
Earth to be: and therefore till I could be ab∣solutely
satisfied about the reality of it, I
thought it was safest to aquiesce at present in
the other Doctrine, and the rather because it
is suitable to the Mundane System which Mo∣ses
presents us with, whose Literal sense of
the Account of it is not to be slighted by Chri∣stian
Philosophers. According to this In∣spired
Sage the Grand Parts and Divisions
of the Material World were ranged and dis∣posed
according to the Specifick Gravity of
them (though the Laws of Gravity or any o∣ther
supposed Mechanism were not every where
observ'd in the Creation, nor any where ex∣actly,
it being below the Divine Soveraign Be∣ing
to confine himsef to such Laws) our
Earth and the Planetary Bodies, which are
of the same matter with it as to the main, have
the lowest place, because they are heaviest:
the Waters, which are Ponderous in the next
degree to the Earth, are accordingly situated
next above the superficies of it: the Atmos∣phere
of the Air, conformably to the degree
of its weight, is above the Waters: and the
Ethereal, Luminous and Firy bodies, as

being lightest of all, have the uppermost place
This is the Order and Method of the Creati∣on
according to Moses's account of it, but it
is inconsistent with the Copernican Circumvo∣lation
of the Earth and his System of the
Heavens. If it be said that this Terrestrial
Globe is a despicable Spot, a Speak, a Point in
comparison of the Vast and Spatious Congeries
of the Sun and Fixed Lights, I grant it is so
if it be meant of their Bulk and Quantity; but
then this must be remembred that though the
Earth be inferiour to the Solar body and the
Stars on the account of Magnitude, yet it is
far superiour to them upon other Accounts,
which are of mighty weight and moment: all
which I have particularly mention'd and in∣sisted
upon in the Second Chapter of that
Discourse wherein I undertook to prove the
Existence and Providence of an Eternal In∣finite
and All-Wise Being from the Fabrick
and Sructure of the World. If any person will
be pleased to answer those Arguments, and sa∣tisfie
me about them, I faithfully promise him
I will be his Proselite, and I will declare that
I am not enclin'd any longer to think that the
Place of our Residence is not a Voluble Pla∣net.
I have lived to see Monsieur Des Car∣tes's
Philosophy introduced into the Publick
Schools with great applause, and at last ex∣ploded:
and this may be the fate of the Co∣pernican

Hypothesis, though it hath been em∣braced
some considerable time by the Greatest
Philosophick Wits, who have now rendred it
a Modish Opinion. Yet there may be a Time
when its Fashionableness shall expire, and
when this Seat and Habitation of Mankind
shall return to its Rest again.
But why do I thus trespass? Truly, Sir, I
must partly impute it to you; for seeing you
are wont to indulge me a great Freedom when
I have the felicity to Communicate with you,
I have made use of that Liberty now, and
thereby am become Tedious. For which I beg
your pardon, and request nothing more pas∣sionately
than that you would vouchsafe me
the honour of letting me be Esteem'd (what
I so sincerely am)
SIR,

Cambr June 16.
1697.
