



My LORD,
I Once more presume to prefix your
Lordship's Name, which is so Great
and Celebrated, to my Obscure Pa∣pers,
thereby to create them some Cre∣dit,
and to derive a Repute upon my
self. Your Matchless Pen hath purchas'd
You a lasting Renown, and Your Ex∣emplarly
Life and Practice have added a
farther Glory to You. So that all the un∣derstanding
World counts You worthy of
doule Honour. If You had lived in the Pri∣mitive
times, You would have been one
of the most Eminent Fathers of the Church
in those Days, as You have the Honour
to be now in these. And Your Strict Life

would have entituled You a Saint. You do
all the Parts of an Excellent Man, and a
Christian Bishop: You perform Great
and Worthy things Your self, and You
countenance even the lower and meaner
Attempts of others. In a word, all that
are intelligent proclaim You the Chief
Glory of our English Prelacy.
My Lord, I do not apprehend that
this can offend You, for He that is emi∣nently
Vertuous and Learned, provokes
the World to speak his Worth: and they
would be infinitely blameable if they
robb'd him of his due Praise. There∣fore
I must confess I do not see the Rea∣sonableness
of those Writer that tell
their Patrons they will not praise them,
lest they should offend their Modesty. I
would not dedicate my Labours (as
mean as they are) to a Person of a mean
Figure in the Learned World, or in the
Accounts of the Religious. For the De∣sign
of the Dedication is to let the World
know, that such a Person is really Praise∣worthy,
and tat even to a Wonder; that

he is one that ought to be extremely
honoured and venerated for his Tran∣scendent
Excellencies, and that he is to
be a Pattern to the rest of Mankind. And
yet, my Lord, You see I do not enter on
the Task of Enlarging on Your Lord∣ship's
Praises: the Reason is not because
it is unlawful or unfit, but because it is
too Great for me.
Not to give Your Lordship any far∣ther
Trouble, if I have offended by this
repeated Presumption, I have this to
plead in my Excuse, that Your Merits as
well as my Own Inclinations have made
me Criminal. And seeing my Fault
bears the Name of Duty, I despair not
but that it will meet with a Pardon, and
that Your Lordship will aceept of this
poor Oblation from,
My Lord,


