



MY LORD,
I Presumed to dedicate my for∣mer Writings to two Emi∣nent Persons of your High Order in the Church: and now this present Undertaking comes to find shelter under your Lordships Patronage. Which I despair not of because you have let the world sufficiently know how greatly you disapprove of the Sen∣timents of those Men whose Cha∣racter is offer'd in the following Treatise. It was observ'd that

even in your Early Years you chose to encounter the Pontifician and Ra∣covian Impostors; not unlike Her∣cules; that in his very Minority grappled with Serpents and Mon∣sters. Crellius felt the Strength of your Arm, and hath laid a Baffled and Prostrate Foe ever since, for there never yet appear'd any thing that had the face of an Answer to your Book.
And lately, when Socinus's fol∣lowers began to take heart again, and to lift up their bruised heads, your Lordship successfully struck at them, and publickly vindicated the Mysteries of the Christian Faith from the bold and blasphemous insults of these persons. In your former Attempts you were wont to exceed Others, but now you outvied your self; such were the extraordinary Acuteness and Sa∣gacity

of your Thoughts on this subject, such the inimitable Preg∣nancy of your Reasons, such the matchless Weight and Ner∣vousness of your Arguments, such your close application of Scrip∣ture every where. Which the Adversaries were sensible of, and accordingly (that they might not be thought to be Idle) advanced some Feeble Considerations against your Lordship's Excellent Dis∣course. Here, to support their Tatter'd Cause, they made a stir with trifling sallies and excursi∣ons, with faint shews of Criti∣cism, with Pedantick flourishes of Wit, with mean and lan∣guid Efforts of Seeming Logick. But chiefly these Socinian Sharp∣ers endeavour'd to run down the Truth by their unparallell'd Con∣fidence, and by treating your

Lordship, as well as it, with dis∣respect and disdain.
But so it is, they have shew'd themselves Rude to their immor∣tal shame. And yet at the same time, by attempting to Lessen your Worth and Deserved Fame they have inhansed them; as all Envious and Malicious Persons do when they detract from those of Great Merit. All the Learn∣ed World unanimously vote your Lordship to be the Chief of this number: even those who disa∣gree in all other things, agree in your Lordships Praises. For without the least Shew of Adu∣lation it may be most truly said, that your Name is now not so much the Name of a Person or Family, as it is the Name of Profound Learning and Solid Reli∣gion.

But I shall offend against your Lordship's Modesty, and call forth Blushes from those Reverend Cheeks, which have so boldly look'd your Adversaries in the face, if I proceed any further thus; wherefore I am forced here to a Period. Only let me be per∣mitted to add my Hearty Wishes and Prayers, viz. That the All∣mighty would vouchsafe to bless Your Lordship with Long Life, Health, and Vigour, to accom∣plish those Great Things which You have designed against the Church's Common Foes, Papists and Socinians; that You may be a Terrour and Scourge to Rome and Racovia; that You may give an effectual check to the Sly pretences of Deists, that You may bridle the Insolence of A∣theists, and be successful in mor∣tifying

all such Sworn Enemies of the Christian Faith and Practise. So prayeth

