



AS you have the Plague of the Body wa∣sting
in your streets, so you are to take
notice of a worser, even the Spiritual
Plague of your Hearts. To this purpose
I hope this short Discourse may be
somewhat serviceable, which (even when it shall please
God to take away the Bodily Disease) may still be use∣full
to you, to guard you against the Spiritual, but
more poisonous Distemper. It is recorded to the honour
of Queen Eleanor, that when her Royall Husband in
the Holy War was wounded with a poisoned Knife by a
desperate Saracen, the Incomparable Lady sucked the
poison out of his Wound. A signal instance of her Love
to him! Sin, Beloved, is Poison: I wish unfeignedly, I
could by any holy skill and method, ease you of that more
dangerous Venom at your Hearts: O that this Paper
might prove a Plaister to draw it! It is true, I must con∣fess
my self one of the meanest and unworthiest of all those
Physitians and Guides of Souls that are in the Church: I
may not be able to treat so successfully of this Spiritual
Disease as those worthy persons, who are of greater pra∣ctise
and larger experience. But I request you, that when
you make tryal of what is here, you would call upon God
for a blessing; and if you find any good, thank God for

it, not me. I will not beg your excuse, by telling you these
are very slender Preparations for the Press; for I chose
rather to hasten this little Thing, and give it you as it is,
then to loose the opportunity of doing good, by making it
better. There is nothing in it can render it worthy of the
publick view, but its seasonableness, and your kind accep∣tance
of it. Many of the Directions which you will meet
with, I gave you lately in some of my Sermons which I
Preached since the Hand of God hath been heavy upon
this Town. I must tell you, I designed not language, but
living well. It is not required that the Physitians Bill be
curiously Penned, but that the Medicines be there faith∣fully
prescribed. Besides, a gaudy and flaunting stile is no
ways suitable to these Mournfull Times.
I have onely this to beg of you, that you would be mind∣full
of me at the Throne of Grace, beseeching the Lord that
he would crown my Ministery with the conversion & sal∣vation
of many souls, and that he would make me feel the
power and influence of those saving Truths upon my own
heart which I deliver unto you. And my earnest Prayer
for you shall be, that ye may walk worthy of the Lord
unto all pleasing, being fruitfull in every good work,
and increasing in the knowledge of God: that ye may
approve things that are excellent, that ye may be
sincere, and without offence, till the day of Christ;
being filled with the fruits of righteousness, which are
by Jesus Christ unto the glory and praise of God.
The Great and Good God multiply his Gifts and Graces
pon you: The God of all blessings bless you and yours,
and keep you from sin and sickness. This is the earnest
Prayer of
 Cambridge Novemb.
11th 1665.
