



Right Honorable & most Honored Madam.
MY ambition to invite your Honour to be Surety to my First-Borne, hath offered violence to my modesty in this Dedication, yet I know not why I may not dedicate my la∣bours unto you, to whom I have long agoe dedicated my selfe. When I had once the hap∣piness to entertaine your Lady∣ship for a very short time, I found you so ready to take meane things in the best part,
that I do the less scruple here to invite you to take part of the Churches Ordinary.
The great Salvation that this weak hand holds out, may well beseeme the greatest Per∣sonages, not only to own, but to have in highest estimation; and I am perswaded, that you have so long made the attain∣ment of it (next to God the Giver, and Christ the Purchaser of it) your chiefest interest, that you have now, with your namesake in the Gospel, made the better part so sure unto you, that it can never be taken from
you: yet dear Madam, it is not unknown unto you that sin is so deceitfull to deceive, and the heart so deceitfull to be deceiv∣ed, that we can see small ground of security (though some of safety) on this side Heaven: Its our taking heed of falling that keepes us standing; and Ca∣veats against sin and condem∣nation may be of excellent use to keep the Soul in awe; and re∣verend Dr▪ Sibbs tells us that fear is the awe-band of the soul.
I am not insensible that Scof∣fers may say, that here is more Porch than house: but that was
so far from being an oversight, that it was a part of my design: I dare not inclose, nor impro∣priate that which the Apostle hath called the common Sal∣vation Jude. 3. v. That my∣sticall City that was called the holy Jerusalem descending from Heaven, Revel. 21.10. Tipi∣fying the Church, was said to have 12 Gates, which noted out the confluence of Beleivers that should come into the preaching of the Gospel, and should fly unto that great Salvation like Doves unto their windows and the discourse herein offered is so
like the Pool of Bethesda, a common Bath, or Fountaine o∣pened for sin and for unclean∣ness, that I thought it conveni∣ent to make the more Porches; and if I could direct a particular Epistle to every particular Soul, the Soules excellency would ac∣quit me from folly in so doing.
I have deservedly given your Honour the Preeminence, in opening unto you the first Gate, and the more to enno∣ble it, have written your ho∣nourable name upon it; that it may be called beautifull, and followers may throng in after
you, and when they are entred (if they will but learne of you) they may count the feet (and much more the faces) of them beautifull that bring unto their Soules the glad tidings of Sal∣vation.
But when they have made their entrance they will find that here is house as well as porch, yea and that it is very roomthy: for these three Stories Salvation, Sin, and Damnation do resemble Heaven, Earth, and Hell.
Salvation hath Heaven at the top of it, and Damnation
hath Hell at the bottome of it, and Sin (like its Father the Di∣vell) having the whole Earth for its walke, is the worst Com∣panion that the sonns of men have.
Madame, you are here pre∣sented with a strange sight, a poor sinner hanging betwixt Heaven and Hell; if he will but accept of Salvation offered, Heaven is his; but if he neglect in this his day to know the things that belong unto his Peace, he will fall into Hell, and ther's no esca∣ping▪ It's a sad thing to see so many wallowing in sin, like
swine in the myre, under such warnings, and very sad to see many of the Godly to drive so low and dull a trade with Hea∣ven, that it may be sayd of them as of poor Tradesmen, whom the World favours not, that they are still buying & selling, and live by the losse.
What sad lives do we lead, and what comfortable lives do we lose, by not bringing our practises up to the principles of invisible Christianity; and for want of more intimate acquain∣tance with the beauty of holi∣nes, and power of godlines;
Gregory the great was said to be the last of the good Bishops of Rome, and first of the bad; his life was such a medley of good and evill, and therefore some Interpreters have thought him to be that Angell in the Reve∣lation that was said to fly be∣twixt Heaven and Earth. And Salomon's life was so particolou∣red, that an antient Limner drew him halfe in Heaven and halfe in Hell; and such is the pit∣tifull case of many a Christian, they do so halt betwixt God and the World, & so half it betwixt the Spirit and the Flesh, that
they may be thought, by them∣selves as well as others, to hang equally poysed betwixt Fear of Hell, and Hope of Heaven, Oh how low are souls in their con∣solations, for want of close and circumspect walking, and for want of a laborious and costly serving of God?
Madam, you may here stand safe upon the Rock of your sal∣vation, and behold the dead, and red Sea of the Almighties wrath, upon which multitudes of dead Souls ly floating like the Carcases of the drowned Aegyptians when the Israelites
were passed over. And while you are standing upon safe ground, you may here behold that Rock of Gospel-refusing which hath shipwrack'd many, and that Gulfe of Damnation which hath devoured them; whereas you, through Grace, are brought nere unto the har∣bour, and within sight of the Haven where you would be: Let Faith and Patience hold out but a little longer, for yet a little while he that shall come will come and will not tarry.
So desiring that the God only wise may guide you with
his Counsell, and stablish your Mind & Heart with his Truth and Grace, and lead you through militant holiness into tryumphant happiness, I hum∣bly crave pardon for this bold∣ness, take leave, and rest,
Beckford Jan. 1st 1658.
Madame, 

