


Dear Soules
MY hearts desire, and prayer to God for you is, that you may be saved, you of this place may say (and few villages can say the like) that the Gospel hath dwelt here in power as long as you; How many pa∣rishes in England have desired to hear the things that you have heard, and have not heard them, & to enjoy the meanes that you have enjoyed, and have not had them?
My painfull Predecessor (now with God) was a faithfull labourer in this vineyard above forty years, and shall it be said of you, as it was once said of gainsaying and refusing Israel, forty years long was I grieved with this gene∣ration?
And I have been here a waterer where he had planted now full as many yeares as there are Articles in your Creed, and yet cannot make it an ar∣ticle of mine, that many have received our eport, or that the arme of the Lord hath been revealed but to a few.
What successe the Gospel hath had with your Soules, I must leave to your own consciences, and to the searcher of hearts; I am loath to print my thoughts, least I should be constrained to speak the Apostles language, 1 Cor. 15.34. Some have not the knowledge of God, I speake this to your shame.
If you have embraced the Gospel, you have bought the field in which the hid treasure is, and though you are never so poor, and mean of birth, you are richer far, and more honourable than graceless Kings, and Christless Monarchs.

If you have refused the Gospel to im∣brace the World, you will find it the worst match that ever you made, when you shall understand that you have pleased the flesh, and gratifyed the Di∣vel, and made God your enemy, and if you had never so much pelfe, it will not profit in the day of wrath, and you are but base and beggarly, so long as you are without Christ, and without God in the World.
Oh persist not in refusing this great Salvation, you have had many offers, and one must be the last, and the more are past, the neerer the last is, and who knowes if this be not the last that ever shall be made to some of you? I wish that these words which come from my very heart-root may reach to yours.
To espouse you to Christ is all the business that I have with you; I came
not hither to take tythes, but to winn Soules; The malevolent adversaries of the standing Ministry of England call us hirelings (and its a miracle of provi∣dence that we have our lives for a prey in the midst of such a blood-thirsty ge∣neration of unreasonable men) but we so much more desire you, than yours, that if you would make this our hire, to give up your selves to God by our Ministry, that by taking heed unto our selves, and to the doctrine, we may save both our selves, and them that hear us, let them call us Divells, and it should but adde unto our Crown, while we all study to be what I desire to approve my selfe,

