


SIRS,
AMong the variety of senses which the lear∣ned have put upon Christs threefold Pasce to Peter, Iohn. 21.15, 16, 17, feed, feed, feed my Lambes and sheep, I find this to be one, 1 Pasce di∣ctis,
feed them with your Ser∣mons, 2 Pasce exemplis, feed them with your exemplary conversation, 3 Pasce scriptis, feed them with your writings. 1 How I have fed this people by preaching, aetatem habent, they are able to tell you; How by Example, aliorum sit judici∣um, others must judge who have known my conversation here and elsewhere. 3 And that I have also a desire to feed them with my Writings, which may speak to them when I am dead, I think my self concern'd to give you some accompt, and to
leave it upon record with you as three faithfull witnesses. The right of presenting an incum∣bent into this Living is so mix∣ed in two of you, who pro tem∣pore are the Patrons of its Mi∣nister and maintenance, and by whose manuduction I was here seated, that I know not which to Challenge for my Pa∣tron, or if I did, I should think my selfe a loser, and therefore rather than I would leave out a second, I have indeavoured to make the most of you, and taken in a third.

As the wise disposer of your habitations hath seated you tri∣angular in the World, and made you Citizens of three famous Cities, London, Bri∣stol, and Hanburgh, so are you seated triangular in my heart, which desires unfeignedly that you may all meet in one City, that new Jerusalem, which is a∣bove, and may have Gaius his prosperity heaped upon you, internall, and eternall, as well as externall.
It is not so much the confi∣dence of my entertainment as of your candid acceptance that
emboldens me to invite you to the reading, and owning of this little Treatise, yet you will find that I have here apportioned my entertainment to my guests, and provided you first, second, and third course, all good, plain food, which I presume will be the more toothsome to you, be∣cause it is so wholsome.
Though you have tempo∣ralls dealt out unto you with a liberall hand, yet I have cause to have some confidence that the Churches ordinary will be more taking with you than the Worlds gdies.

Yet I would not have you think that in this trichotomy I have carved to each his severall portion, but intend to each of you more than a Beniamin's mess, and dedicate my book, as I do my self, all to each, desiring that the doctrine herein taught may be in you like the Soul in the body, Tota in toto, & tota in qualibet parte.
Your memorable Father my predecessor had a large stock a going in this place upon this saving accompt, what his re∣turnes were upon the people of his charge, is not so visible as I
could wish it were, but such as run may read that his prayers were plentifully returned into his own bosome.
He had three Sonns separa∣ted to the Ministry, one is, and two are not, and your selves that yet survive are witnesses to that great truth, that the seed of the righteous shall be blessed; it's seldom seen that the Hous∣hold of faith hath been supply∣ed with so many plants out of one nursery; and whether I were not called hither on the accompt of his prayers, who can tells; This I well remember, that
my access hither was paved with such remarkable provi∣dences, that it looked very like the returne of prayer.
Many in this part of the Vale are gotten out of the Vale of darkness and the shadow of death, since your Father and some few more entred into this part of the harvest, and if rea∣diness to hear be a promising prognostick (as undoubtedly it is) more are ready to break prison, and to seek the way to Zi∣ou with their faces thitherward. Oh let not the building cease for want of hands, but whenso∣ever
ever I shall pay my debt to na∣ture, be carefull to provide a faithfull waterer, that your Fa∣thers plantation and mine may be like a field which the Lord hath blessed; So shall you have favour both with God and men.
These meditations were first digested, and calculated for the people of mine own pasto∣rall Charge, but may serve in∣differently for this Gospel-glut∣ted Age and Land we live in. That it may find acceptance with the godly to further it with their Prayers, and with
the ungodly to further their Conversion, and with all in or∣der to their Salvation, is the hearts desire and prayer of,

