



WHEN in good Repair, as at this pre∣sent, you are the Object Britannia's Eyes are most intently fixt upon, beholding with Joy and Admiration.
With Joy, because she can make her Addres∣ses with so much ease and freedom. With Ad∣miration, because you can perform your Un∣dertakings.
The Third House comprising both, as the Heav'ns the Terraqueous Globe, is the Roy∣al Pallace of the British Monarch; whose Ma∣ster, conveying Life and Lustre from the King of Kings, compleats our England's Glory: And un∣to this, your Access is as free as ours is unto you.
Britannia thus lives and moves; the Al∣mighty God having given her so excellent a be∣ing. And here's a most happy Union of all
the Three, composing that Noble Body, the King and his Subjects, Barons, and Commons.
The good Constitution of health in this Body, has been very illustrious now of late unto this Age, as much or more than to our Ancestors; tho they have seen several happy Reigns: Therefore are the Eyes of all Europe upon our Britannia, as a Body of the finest Fa∣brick, and most Curious Composure: Even Majesty it self making long Voyages to see a Solomon.
As the Queen of the South came from far unto Jerusalem, so the Emperor of the North is come to London.
The Queen of Sheba came to see that Prince who built the first Temple. The second Tabernacle then, which now is building, de∣serves certainly the most Royal hand, and the most Wise hearted amongst the Princes of the Earth, being so much more Excellent than the first; as unseen are more than seen things; Spiritual more than Temporal Glory; an house not made with hands, more than the stateliest Pile of Building upon Earth; the Gates of Sion, more than all the dwellings of Jacob.

It is not Temples made with hands which delight the Holy one of Israel; But those of Mens Spirits and Bodys, cleansed by the Ho∣ly Ghost, and prepar'd: Typified by our Lords sweeping out the Defilements of Jeru∣salems Temple: Therefore the CHƲRCH OF ENGLAND, before she saith, Take not thy Holy Spirit from us, Begs that God will make clean our Hearts within us; Plainly evincing that an unclean heart, does no more then bable in that Petition for the Spirits residence.
Now if these three houses, wherein dwells the Government, do begin to make such Preparation; The Countrey will also cer∣tainly be made sensible of their Duty: And then we shall hear that blessed Proclamation, Prepare to meet thy God O Israel!
The Essentials of a Leet seem to be such, as by the Romans were called, Fasti, where the Praetor might keep a Court; which was not done without these three words spoken, Do, Dico, Addico, Do I give way to Actions? Di∣co, I speak the Law. Addico, I Judge matters and Men.
Now in this method of Governing the Poor, the Power of a Governing Leet
is Restor'd to the Decenners or Freeholders, &c. Viz. Dico, upon VIEW I speak, directing and advising to Industry. Addico, I appoint such a daily Task to he performed. Do, give In∣formation to the Magistrate, of the Poors Carriage and Behaviour.
