




Reverend and Well-beloved Brethren,
I Now present to you this Discourse at our second Meeting, whose Pub∣lication you were pleased to require soon after the First, supposing it might be of some advantage to the Interests of our Church, and poorer Clergy, to make known that charitable design it was intended to promote, and which by your Discretion and Diligence in distributing your own and others Liberality hath been brought to very good effect.
The occasions of this Meeting were (you know) the great Wants and Necessities of many of our Brethren, or their poor, but next Relations; so that there needs no other Apology, for it beside the mention of them, which probably you will not judge improper to be made.
If the Settlements in our Church for the inferiour Clergy were but equal to that of our Neighbour and much poorer Nation Scotland, where all small Livings were long since so plentifully supplied by the care of the Go∣vernment, that in Glebe and Tythes▪ all Benefices are now raised to at least 50 l. Sterling yearly; it might be supposed, by a coarse Diet, and a hard abstemious way of living, the Incumbent and his Family would be able to subsist without an absolute dependence on others Charity.
But when we consider what we are informed of by the most exact Histo∣rian, Burnet's Pref. to 2d part of the Hist. of Reform. who well knows the State and Condition of our Church and Nation, viz. That some hundreds of Parishes in England pay not ten Pounds a year to their Pastors, and perhaps some thousands not fifty.
And if to Parishes we add Chapelries, which in these Northern parts are very numerous, and ill provided for, the summ total of poor Clergy and their Families will be exceeding large. As you may easily imagine, when I tell you of ten or twelve Chapels in one Parish within this Diocese, some of whose Stipends do not exceed 4, 5, 7, nor do the greatest of them, with the Profits arising from the constant Drudgery of teaching a small School, amount to above 20 Pounds per annum. I have ta∣ken the ac∣counts of these pla∣ces from such as were li¦censed  ordain by the
Others there are, where divine Service is frequently, if not constantly performed, whose Value amounts to but 3, 4, 5, 6, 9 Pounds a year, and several whose Incomes are not 10 or at most 12 Pounds, and about 40 more (some of which are Rectories and Vicaridges) whose Stipend is not 20 Pounds yearly. Nor are such small Allowances the inconvenience only of our Country Clergy, but in a great and ancient City, where there are se∣ven or eight Parish-Churches supplied by an Orthodox laborious Ministry,
 no Incumbent (save one) receives for his own use an Income of 50 l a year, and the greatest part of that too arises from Free-Will-Offerings and vo∣luntary Contributions.
I have the rather enlarged this lamentable Account, in hope, that if some pious Senator and able Patriot should chance to peruse it, he might be induced at a proper Season, out of his deep concern for the Honour of God, and the Ministers of Religion, a sincere Love for his Fellow-Christians Souls, and the welfare of this Church and Nation, to offer some usefull Proposals to the great Council of the Land for setling a certain and more decent Maintenance on all the poorer Cures in the Nation. How easily this might be done in Towns and Cities, the great Metropolis of this Kingdom has shewn the way, nor would it be much more difficult for wiser Heads to contrive suitable Methods for the better supply of Country Cures.
This would be the transcendent Honour, as the want of it hath been esteemed the great, if not the only scandal of our Reformation. Or we may wish that other more private, but no less pious Christians, who have great Abilities and generous designs of doing God some publick Ser∣vice, but are not yet resolved upon the Method, may be hereby directed where to find an opportunity of doing good, as large and noble as they can desire. What an inexpressible satisfaction will it be to such a mans Mind, both in the time of Life and at the hour of Death, that he hath by his Wealth so mightily promoted the Interests of Religion? And with what comfortable Expectations may he offer up his Devotions in Nehemiah's Prayer: Remember me concerning this, and wipe not out my good Neh 13. 14. Deeds that I have done for the house of my God. and for the Offices thereof. It ought to be acknowledged that innumerable Blessings have been conferred upon the poor Relatives of the Clergy by the Corporation of Cler∣gymens Sons, that Royal Institution, which is one of the great Glory's of our Jerusalem. And therefore 'tis hoped it will not be ungratefull to that truly honourable Society, who have no other design but this of doing good, if the Clergy in this or other Dioceses so remote, that they cannot with∣out great difficulty collect or transmit their Contributions to them, shall act in conformity to their generous and great Example, desiring not to be e∣steemed distinct Societies, but only lesser Members of that great Body.
I have no more to add, beside the gratefull acknowledgments of those poor Persons who have been partakers of the Charities to our Right Reverend and truly Apostolical Bishop, who in all things shews himself a Pattern Tit. 2. 7. of good Works. And to our Reverend Clergy, who are always ready to consider each other, to provoke unto Love and to good Works. And Heb. 10. 24. particularly to your selves, who have faithfully discharged the office of the first Deacons, and after the example of the blessed Apostles, have given your selves continually to Prayer, and to the Ministry of the word, and are deservedly accounted worthy of double Honour.

