




Oh thou afflicted and not comforted!

THe Lion hath roared, who will
not fear? the Lord God hath
spoken, who can but prophesie?
Amos 3. 8. I, God hath spoken
in the voyce of Mercy, and thou
hast not heard; in the voyce of his Ministers,
and thou hast not heard; in the voyce of Threat∣nings,
and thou hast not heard; in the voyce of

sad Presages, and thou hast not heard; in the
voyce of the Plague, and the Sword, and thou
hast not heard; and now in this dreadful
Judgement of Fire, and thou dost not hear; no,
though the Fire hath burnt round about, and in
the midst of thee, and there be such sad and
dismal effects of it, yet thou dost not hear.
What therefore shall be done unto thee, or where∣with
shall I bewaile thee? Is this the joyous
City, whose Antiquity was of Ancient dayes,
whose Merchants were Princes, and whose
Traffiquers the Honourable of the Earth?
Isa. 27. 7, 8. How art thou fallen, Oh thou
Darling of England! How art thou levelled
with the ground, Oh thou Wonder of Eu∣rope!
How art thou brought to Ruine, Con∣fusion,
and Desolation, Oh thou Queen of
Cities, whose Fame was spread in all Nati∣ons,
far and near, by reason of that Comeliness
which the Lord did put upon thee! Was there
none of all thy Sons, whom thou hast brought
forth, to deliver thee? Was there none of all
thy Sons, whom thou hast brought up, to
quench the Flames for thee? The Lord had
and hath purposed to stain the pride of all
Glory, and to bring into contempt all the
Honourable of the Earth, Isa. 23. 9. These

things will be told in Gath, and declared in the
streets of Askelon: I, the Philistines will re∣joyce,
and the Daughters of the Uncircumci∣sed
will triumph over thee. But laugh not too
soon, lest you cry and repent at leisure. If Judge∣ment
begin thus at the City of God, what shall
and will be done to those that are none of Gods
Cities? If God cause his people to see and feel
such terrible things, what terrible things shall
those see and feel, that are none of Gods peo∣ple?
If God kindle▪ such Fire in Sion, what
Fire shall be kindled in Babylon? I, the Lord
is risen out of Sion, and he will not sit down,
till he be come to the Gates of Babylon. For
thus saith the Lord to His afflicted One▪ I
have taken out of thy hand the cup of trem∣bling,
even the dregs of the cup of my fury:
thou shalt no more drink it again: But I will
put it into the hands of them that afflict thee,
which have said to thy soul, Bow down, that
we may go over: and thou hast laid thy body
as the ground, and as the streets to them that
went over, Isa. 51. 22, 23. Now that all
this may be made good to thee, I would (and
Oh that I might) perswade thee, and all those
sufferers with thee, to see thy Abomination, by
reason whereof thou art under this Desolation;

lay thy self low before that God, who hath laid
thee low; accept of thy Calamity as the punish∣ment
for thy Iniquity; cry mightily unto the
Lord for the pardon of thy transgressions, and
he will delight in thee notwithstanding thy af∣fliction,
and then mayest thou say indeed,
Rejoyce not against me, O mine Enemy:
though I am fallen, I shall arise; though I sit
in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me,
Micah 7. 8. I, assemble your selves, and
ye shall be broken in pieces; take counsel to∣gether,
and it shall come to nought; speak the
word, and it shall not stand; for God is with
me, Isa. 8. 9, 10. Thou canst not be so sinful,
but God is as merciful; and where Gods mercy,
thy misery, and thy Favourites spiritual ferven∣cy
meet at the Throne of Grace, the result
thereof will be thy Restauration and Re-edifi∣cation;
to thy Enemies Confusion, and to thy
Sons and Daughters Consolation: For it's
Gods own promise, In the day that I shall have
cleansed you from all your iniquities, I will al∣so
cause you to dwell in the Cities, and the
wastes shall be builded, Ezek. 36. 33. Accept
of my desires earnestness for thy good, which
hath prevailed with me, not so directly to apply
my self to those towards whom under a Ministe∣rial

consideration I more peculiarly stood (and
still stand) related▪ yet in remembring thee, I
don't, neither shall I forget them, and accord∣ingly
I hope the same will be acknowledged by
them. I have seen the Plague (adored be Di∣vine
Goodness for preserving me) not leaving
any Persons in Houses, and now this dreadful
Judgement of Fire, not leaving Houses for Per∣sons;
the sense therefore of my duty, as sympa∣thizing
with thy misery, and, I say, the desire
for thy Prosperity, hath drawn forth these Lines
and the subsequent Subject, with bleedings of
heart, and distillings of tears; and may the
same be so seriously considered and improved
by thee, as that no more Judgements be inflict∣ed
on thee. For, whatsoever is said as to thy
Restauration, remember, and so I must be under∣stood,
that it depends upon thy Reformation.
The Lord grant therefore that thy Magistrates
that are and shall be, may be Vigorous, thy Mi∣nisters
Zealous, thy People Conscientious, and
All every way pious. The Lord grant that thy
dispersed Ones may be gathered, thy suffering
Ones succoured, thy succouring Ones solaced,
thy dismayed Ones encouraged, and thy poor
Ones enriched. The Lord grant that thy Win∣dows
may be of Agates, thy Gates of Carbuncles,

and all thy Borders of pleasant Stones, I, and
above all, that thy Foundation be Holiness, thy
Superstructure Righteousness, and the Top∣stone
thereof crying, Grace, Grace. This is
and shall be the desire of him, who is, and desires
to be

