


HAVING offered my labours first to Iesus-Christ, and sollicit∣ed the fauour of his Sacred Ma∣esty, in the next place I bring them to you for yours: and I-beseech your Highnesse with all the earnest∣nesse, and humility I can, that you will be pleased to accept as fauourably, as I hope he hath done of them. It is the Doctrine of Iesus Christ that desireth your protection. A subiect too sublime to be handled by my insufficiency, or to neede to be protected by any; but that
the present state of England required this la∣bour of mee, and it to be more acceptable stoode neede of your protection. This I inge∣genuously confesse to be the true and onely motiue why next vnto God I dedicate my worke to your Highnesse. Because setting forth this methode of doctrine, which the Councell of Trent hath soe earnestly com∣mended, and which is practised with soe much profit in some places, and not yet de∣liuered in the English tongue, I haue done il soe, as I thought was sittest for England; yet not soe but that I know a powerfull Pro∣tectour to be both seasonable and necessary to make it more acceptable. And therefore as I was carefull that it should haue a more then ordinary approbation before it entred the presse; soe now comming forth in publicke, I desire it should goe vnder your name, be∣cause I thinke none soe powerfull to com∣mende it to the vse and profit of others, as your Highnesse.
You are the Highest of all English Ca∣tholickes. You are sette in our Crowne as a gemme of singular lustre, and our eyes and harts are filled with the expectation of you; the wisdome of your Father, which the world in due time shall admire, and the piety of
your Mother, whom the most turbulent of times could neuer taxe, meeting both toge∣ther first in you. For you are the first of the Royall stocke of England that now for many yeares, and for some descents hath professed the Catholike Faith, brought vp by speciall prouidence in the bosome of the Catholike Church, that we may say of you as of Iacob,
Gen. 48. God hath fed you from your youth vn∣till this present day, as though designed to some eminent happinesse. To whom then shall the Catholike Doctrine in English ad∣dresse it selfe, but vnto you? Where shall it finde a Patrone, if you should reiect it? A prudent hart shall possesse knowledge,
Prou. 18. and the eare of the wise doth seeke do∣ctrine. This is the doctrine which your eare hath harkened vnto, which you possesse in your hart; and your Diuine Spouse doth require that you outwardly professe what your hart possesseth, and putte him as a seale both vp∣on your hart, and vpon your arme.
The afflicted Catholikes of England will reuiue with ioy, to see this Doctrine publik∣ly in your hands, and will take it as a pledge of greater felicity, which from your neerest Progenitour they, may well expect. I will speake here the truth which I haue spoken
vnto many; that when I read in S. Bede the conuersion of the English, and saw S. Au∣gustine graciously receiued by King Ethelbert well disposed to his doctrine by hauing mar∣ried à Catholike, who was daughter of France, it made then such impression in mee, and gaue such liuely hopes of the like benefit a∣gaine, that a small knowledge in history re∣presented presently some other such marriages to mee, by which I beganne to conceiue it as a blessing vpon France, that the Flower de Luces should send forth the odour of Christ vnto other nations, the Catholike Doctrine comming from thence for their conuersion. The first-fruits of these hopes we haue all∣ready in you, and by this they will grow, and increase in vs.
Besides this booke beeing soe directed to Catholikes, as by the way to giue satisfacti∣on to all other Religions that shall meete with it: I was to seeke for such a Patrone as with∣out offense to any might ingratiate it to all: and for this there was none soe proper as your selfe, who as yet in the candour of your Chry∣some, are gratefull to all Christians, and by your vnspotted innocency to all the world. Grant then (most Gracious Princesse) your desired Patronage, which is soe proper
and necessary to this worke, that I neither will, nor can in reason looke for any other. What Englishmans hart (tender by nature) will not so farre resent your condition and his owne, as at least to receiue and reade that which commeth commended by you for the good of his soule? It vill goe for pure gold when you haue accepted of it: vnder your Name and character all will receiue and reade it, and with Gods assistance shall profit by it. This is the cause why I dedicate it first to God, and then to you; desiring no other re∣ward for my selfe, but your gracious acceptance for the good of others. Because for a booke to doe much good, I consider it as necessarie, to procure that it be currently accepted of, and much read, as it is to contriue, and compose it good in it selfe. And hauing now prouided as well as I can for both, I haue done all, and will rest,

