



Madam,
YOur Husband (the Au∣thor of this following Treatise) a very wor∣thy, and in his station eminent, Minister of, and (what of greater note) a faithful Advocate for the Church of England, besides his continued Exhortations to Piety, to all whom his Care did reach, or his Interest could prevail with, was in the Practises of Publick Duties an eminent Christian Subject, continually
promoting those Duties fundamental to Government, Loyalty, and a Com∣munion with the Church by Law Esta∣blish'd.
Of the former, and his endeavours for it, he gave a good Testimony (in the beginning of our late Troubles) by his diligent Perswasion of others to it; and, what is truer proof, his own Sufferings for it. The latter be∣came  Care in its season too.
When our Soveraign was restored to his Right, the Church to its former Order, and He to a Place for the ex∣ercise of his Function; he endeavou∣red to undeceive those the foregoing Times had misled, and to make them sensible of the true Harmony in the Churches Publick Divine Service. And as his Endeavour, so was his Pro∣spect, great too: for, seeing the Pre∣sent Age even spoil'd, he did look forward and endeavour to mend the Succeeding.

To this end he writ the following Annotations, with a design as great, as good, (and which I hope will not in a small measure gain upon the World) to beget the Worship of God its due reverent performance, to gain the Church the Communication of all ational English Subjects, and all of the Churches Communion a true sense of their Publick Devotions.
That neither so great a good, nor the memory of the worthy Author should dye; not only the care and love, which my Function presseth me to, of actions of this nature; but also many singular acts of kindness and friendship, which I had receiv'd from the Author, made me gratefully con∣cern'd.
But having added to these of his, many and great favours receiv'd from Your virtuous hands, and of those most obliging me to perpetuate your Husband's memory, to have him
known to the World, by benefiting it with some Work of his, I lay under far greater obligations.
To satisfie which, that among other scatter'd Papers which came to my hands, I should choose to publish this Piece, was in consideration of his in∣tent thoughts upon the benefits of it, and of the concurrence of Your ge∣nerous temper, rather desiring the be∣nefit of most, then the satisfaction of the most curious: Knowing moreover, that any name or thing made publick, hath its reception, and takes the mea∣sure of its estimation, from the great∣ness or the generality of the advan∣tage it brings.
There had layn indeed a just accu∣sation against me, as of dis-ingenuity toward the Publick, so of great in∣gratitude to your Virtues, and to the memory of your Husband, upon my neglect in this concern. However, now give me leave of this necessity
to make a small piece of virtue, and from that little care the publishing this Book requir'd in me, take advan∣tage to express my gratefulness to the memory of the worthy Author; and to you the surviving part of him, my desire to shew my self,
Madam, 

Brentford, June 6. 1677.
