


Patroni valeant. Ecquis proteggere Verum,
Luci aut optatae fautor adesse potest?
Qui Lux, qui Verum est; qui Verum in saecula servat,
I liber; ille tuus nempe Patronus erit.
THis is not therefore, Great Sir, to beg your Patronage for this Book, nor for my self: but rather to direct you to the Light of salvation, Luk. 1.17. and to make it shine to you, 2 Cor. 4.4. lest you lose here your Earth∣ly, and after your Heavenly King∣dom, for lack of knowledge, Hos. 4.6. for though I seem angry with some men for Religion, I am so far from
hating a man for his Religion, that I look upon him, as he whom the Son of man came to save, Mat. 18.11. a fit ob∣ject of my love and charity; and as a wounded man, who needs me (that am neither Priest, Minister, nor Levite) for his Friend, Luk. 10.30, 37. and Physician, Mat. 9.12. And therefore I am so much farther from being con∣cern'd against Your Highness for yours, with the Epidemical distemper, though it wants not a President in Scripture, 2 Kings 3.13, 14. that Your Highness is one of the powers of this Land, whom I am bound to honour, and that for the Oath of God, Rom. 13.1, 2. Eccl. 8.2. and that looking upon you not only as a wounded, but as such wounded man, who (though fallen unhappily into the hands of those Thieves, John 10.1. — 20.21, 22. that are stripping Your Highness both
of the Triple Earthly Crown you might else enjoy one day, and of your chiefest Kingly Heavenly Prerogative, the Holy Unction, whereby Christ makes all those Kings indeed, Prov. 16.32. — 25.28. that do obey his com∣mands, Rev. 1.6. Exod. 19.5, 6.) may not only recover; but be a great in∣strument to promote Gods Spiritual Kingdom; and therefore as such, Dan. 12.3. deserve one the first Thrones and Crowns among the twelve Tribes of Israel in Heaven, Luk. 13.30. — 7.43, 47. I tender your safety more than that of any man: wishing with all my heart that, like the Samaritan, I might pour Oyl and Wine into your Highness's wounds, set you on my Beast, bring you to an Inn, your Throne; and thence to an everlasting Kingdom, where may your Highness reign for ever∣more. Amen.

But how can I do this, except you own and believe that you are woun∣ded and sick? and how can you be∣lieve it, except you come to know it? and how shall you come to know, except one doth shew it you, and ex∣cept you attend to the things that shall be shewed? Act. 16.14 Rom. 10.14, 15, 17. If you will be pleased there∣fore to peruse this Book, it shews you, and you may easily gather from it, that all men generally, Christians as well as Gentiles, are by birth bruised and sick, Gen. 3.15. Rom. 3.23.—1. Cor. 11.7. that the way to recover from the said sickness and bruise, and to be∣come whole again as to the Kingdom of God, which is in the Holy Ghost; Rom. 14.17. being by the said new birth of the Holy Ghost, who is then renewed within them, Tit. 3.5. all men must, to be saved, be thus regenerated,
and receive the Holy Ghost therefore as well and as much as the Primitive Christians: and that the said renew∣ing or new birth of the Spirit, being a reformation: to the same Image of God Adam was created to; which doth con∣sist in knowledge, Coloss. 3.10. as well as in righteousness, Ephes. 4.24. (the Spirit of the Father that doth create us anew to his Image and likeness, teach∣ing all things, John 14.26. — 16.13. 1 John 2.20, 27. 1 Cor. 2.10. as well as he is the power of Christ, Luk. 24.49. Act. 1.8. Gods arm revealed to us, and the bloud of the Lamb whereby sin is overcome, and righteousness fulfilled, Rev. 12.11.) is inconsistent therefore with a despondent relying on other men, for what we are to know, to be∣lieve and to practise; and is not at∣tained to by a change or conversion from Popery, for instance, to another
Religion, which knows Christ as much after the flesh, 2 Cor. 5.16. worships the Father as little in spirit and truth, John 4.24. a grieves the Holy Spirit no less than the Popish Church: and which under the pretence of Reforming, makes a Schism, which is a far greater sin than to bear with some few erro∣neous opinions: but by a true conver∣sion from sin to righteousness, by knocking and by waiting at the posts of Wisdoms doors, Prov. 8.34. Jam. 1.5. by perusing daily, and keeping diligently the precepts of that wisdom contained in the Scriptures, & in vitam & lucem assurgendo our selves. For such conversion, is to know me, saith the Lord, Jer. 22.16. — 9.3. and such knowledge of God is, saith Christ, John 17.3. life Eternal. Verily, such knowledge, and not an implicite Faith, is both Salva∣tion it self, and the cause of Tempo∣ral
and Worldly felicity! for when a man meditates daily in the Law of God, and observeth to do according to all the words that are written therein, he makes his way prosperous and successful in all things, Josh. 1.8. Deut. 28.1, to 14. and when his ways please the Lord, even the worst Enemies he hath are at peace with him, Prov. 16.7.
But, Sir, as such knowledge is our summum bonum, both in this and the next World; so extremum malum est non recognoscere Deum in the said manner: for though God for a great while winketh at this ignorance; Act. 17.30. yet he will be known at last, and felt, specially of those that either forget to know, or having the means offer'd to know him, do neglect them: see Judg. 2.10, 11, 14. And the Egyptians shall know when I stretch forth my hand, that I am he Lord, saith he, Exod. 7.5. and
whether men will or no they shall give glory to God, 1 Sam. 6.5. and acknow∣ledge that their breath and their ways are in his hand, Dan. 5.23. that he rules in the kingdom of men, v. 21. — 4.25, 32. and that no Evil, whether against a Na∣tion, or against a man only, Job 24.29. is done and sent but by him, Amos 3.6. Read the Scriptures, and see there how all those Kings that followed the way of Jeroboam, (knew God no better than he) and their People for their sake, were severely punished: and how Manasseb, having paid dear for his ig∣norance, came to understand at last, and know that the Lord was God, 2 Chron. 33.11, 12, 13. and thereupon was restored again from Captivity to a flourishing State, and a glorious Kingdom. Nay, the most prosperous King that ever was, Solomon, found true by experience, that when a Prince
forgets God, and goes a whoring after another Worship of God than that which is agreable to that in Spirit and truth, Judg. 2.17. then his anger wax∣eth hot, and he doth deliver him into his Enemies hands, and stirreth up not only Adversaries against him, 1 Kings 11.8, 9, 10, 14, 23. but also his own Subjects, who lift their hands against him, v. 26. — 12.18. whilst those whom he trusted to, help him not, but forsake him, 2 Chron. 11.4. for this thing is done of me, and neither understanding, strength nor counsel against me, can avail you, saith the Lord, Prov. 21.30. In vain is safety hoped for from the hills, and from the abundance of strong holds, Jer. 3.23. In vain are Garrisons kept, and a new Army raised, for all will work together to the destruction of those that know and believe not God, Rom. 8.28.

At the presence of the Ark the wa∣ters of Jordan were divided and heapt up; the walls of Jericho fell down, and the heart of all the Kings of the Canaa∣nites melted before Israel, whilst they believed in God, Josh. 5.1. Judg. 2.7. but when they had forgot him, at the presence of the Ark, they whose heart melted before, receive vigour and courage; and Israel that shouted is overcome and smitten, 1 Sam. 4.5, 7, 9. and that when they fled to it, as to their Anchora sacra, or their sure refuge. And because men of the World are very unwilling to acknowledge that it is the immediate hand of God, the first time they are smitten, and attribute the cause to some fault or accident; as the men of Benhadad when they had been defeated, 1 Kings 20.23. who said, their Gods being Gods of the hills, have given them this advantage
in the hills, but if we fight with them in the plain, or the Valleys, we shall be stronger than they; therefore God, to make them know that it is he that doth it, brings (as upon Benhadad) upon them the second time an entire de∣struction.
Sir, There is no greater sin laid to the charge of a Prince, (who is born in, and pretends to the Covenant of God) than that of his ignorance and ungratefulness to God; which is pro∣perly the sin and way of Jeroboam, who thought by establishing in his Kingdom a worship altogether re∣pugnant to the true worship of God, 1 Kings 12.28. John 4.24. to preserve it for himself and for his Posterity, but lost it, and destroyed his Posterity by it. The same thing got Gideon by the Ephod which he made; for it became (saith Esdras, Judg. 8.27.) such snare
unto his house, that his threescore and ten Sons were all at once caught in it, ch. 9.5. and such an evil Spirit of mis∣understanding (as is now between your Highness, and the English People) was sent between his Bastard, and those who had chose him King, v. 23. that they carried it not far, but were soon after so fast entangled in the same snare, that they utterly cut off and de∣stroyed one another. By the revolts of Subjects, the Princes sins against God are commonly punished: and nothing makes Princes more potent and abso∣lute, than when they themselves serve God, their King and Master, in Truth.
Do so then; rise from darkness to light; convert your self, Sir, to the true God of all flesh; and when you are converted, set up a strong purpose to promote his Spiritual Kingdom, with
all your power: and those very Ene∣mies that would not have you to reign over them, shall be your Friends: and shall, as they did before at your former return, meet you with Accla∣mations, and become your dutiful Subjects; and continue such as long as you continue dutiful to your Ma∣ker. God give you understanding that you may serve him and live: as it was the prayer of a wise King for himself, Psal. 119.34, 144. so it shall be mine for you: and that the Earth may be full of the knowledge of the Lord, Isa. 11.9. under you, if you outlive and succeed his Majesty.
