



Gentlemen,
A Committee being appointed to draw up a Bill for settling An East-India Company, no hesitation remained whom to Address the ensuing Papers to, they properly belonging to your selves; they were drawn up two years since for the satisfaction of an eminent worthy Member of the preceding Par∣liament, and upon its dissolution was thrown wholly by, but is now judged conve∣nient to be published, hoping it may be of some good use, seeing that the same work is on soot again and in greater forwardness; the distance of time from its drawing up may have altered circumstances, so as that some directions and proposals may have abatement of their Energy, particularly that in the  concerning Tunnage is now of no significancy more than to shew the kindness  the Author to them; but in all other things with a small allowance it may serve indifferently for the pre∣sent Meridian.
Many and various are the directions and proposals that are offered, but none of them at all contrary but agreeable to the Regulations concerted by the House, but more inlarged and dilated; some there are wholly new as in p. 8.9.12. to 18. all which, as they are projected for the enlargement and security of the Trade and great Advan∣tage of the Nation throughout, will no doubt be well taken notice of and be seriously pondered and weighed by you; and if approved of, inserted in the draught; Read se∣riously, Judge deliberately: Two grand Objections are every where vigorously buzz'd about by the Company and their Friends, to hinder the Mutation of this present Stock and Management. One is that a Change is hugely for the Dutch Advantage, that they would give 500000 l. to have a new one established: We are sure the Dutch are great Husbands of their Mony, and part not with it but upon advantageous Terms, which how they will find in a new Company rightly established (as they have plainly done in the Old One) is not easie to apprehend. It must be conceded the Dutch as Traders to India have been always Cordial Enemies to us; and in all
Ages given full Assurances thereof; 'tis with them as with Hannibal, sworn in his Childhood at the Altar never to have Peace with the Romans; agreeable whereto are the Instructions and Actions of their Servants at all times and in all places. Hence the Spice Trade was ravished from us, our Men slain with most barbarous unexam∣pled cruelty at Amboyna, and many other Places and Trades were we deceived of formerly without any publick reparation, but in this Companies time the Dutch have made their Advances quick and thick; fresh in Memory is their robbing us of Ma∣casser, sweeping away Poleroon a Spice Island, but through Corruption and Bribery never improved by the Company; so likewise Bantam, Jambee, and all Dependencies, a vast Trade mightily beneficial to the Nation; several places on the Coast of India; and then the great Prejudice they did us, and Streights they put us to on the West Coast, tho no Advantage in the least to them, being a perfect malicious Act: And indeed whatever they have set upon hath been gone thorough with great easiness, and submitted to with eminent tameness, and the reason is all along the India Concern hath been esteemed a bare Mercantile Affair, so that the Nation hath never interposed. When did the Company ever Address the Parliament upon any of these Accounts? no, they knew they were upon an illegal wrong bottom, so durst not appear before them, and of themselves they had not Stock wherewith to cope and engage with the Ad∣versary, and rather than Assistance should be given they have bowed down tho to the Nations great injury, patching up Affairs as well as they could by private Cor∣respondencies, which the Dutch understand as well as the French; and sometimes to colour the business making a great noise and bustle, sending a Foreigner to demand satisfaction and adjust Differences, and it may be make some Preparations, when all is but to cloud the private Intrigue carried on here; thus some treacheros Go∣vernours in our days (we may now forget York and Stanley) when they have made their private pact with the Enemy, will burn and ravage all out parts, drain all they can from the Inhabitants, and then with a specious Treaty make a rendition; and then the Scene is over. So that its impossible for any in their Wits to believe the Dutch Favo∣rers of a New, and Enemies to the present Company, with whom they have such pri∣vate Concerts, and whom they find so easie an Enemy, having often foiled them, they know their strength and can crush them as they please. Now to cure this, it need not be said delenda est Carthago, but let our Trade be settled on as firm a basis as theirs is, by making it National, and a Trade of the State, with a real substantial sufficient fund, as is proposed in this Scheme, we shall then stand upon even ground, and be able to cope with them on all occasions, having as good support as themselves, and our State to back  heirs to back them, and nothing else will preserve us from their Encroachments. So that its rather to be judged the Dutch would on the contrary give 500000l. to have this Company continued, than a new one settled; it being so much for their Interest if to be compassed, the prospect of a New Company settled as proposed being, as all observing Persons in Holland know, like a Dagger at the heart of the Dutch Company.
The other Objection is, that the Concern of Widows and Orphans will suffer by this Mutation; it doth not appear who these Widows and Orphans are, there be∣ing but few upon the last list, and fewer that were considerably concerned, it being customary for Widows to sell out as soon as the Husband dyes, having any great Stock: so that not the tithe of any Widows Estate may be computed to be therein. It's somewhat strange the Orphans and Widows should be the Object of the Compa∣nies care, they have made many such deplorable Objects, but this is the first Instance of any Compassion in them, and 'tis from some by ends because not universal; for why else should not the poor St. Helenian, as well as the rich London Widows be regard∣ed? But to be short if the Account delivered into the House be true, there can be no loss, and if otherwise, those that have been concerned any considerable time can have but very small loss if any, having been Partakers of large Dividends, and those
that have come in lately (of which there may for small Summs possibly be one or two) have had fair warning to take heed year after year, and if yet they will venture, who shall take care for them? They have had time to sell and yet may; if Persons come in upon illegal Foundations and Titles they take their lot, the State is not obliged to make them good. Many a Widow and Orphan are cheated, and sometimes of all they have by deceitful Mortgages and had Titles, and so remain without remedy; Persons may fall into a condition that may be pitied, but not re∣dressed as every term gives instances of. These Widows and Orphans if any there be, have been Partakers of all benefits in the Dividends made upon the Goods brought home by Andrews and that Crew obtained by Plunderings, Spoiles, Pi∣racies, &c. and that without shewing any remorse; there being no instance of any Protest made against the same in the behalf of either Widow or Orphan, and is it injustice that they who without any scruple freely and pleasingly share of all Advan∣tages in evil ways do also partake of the bitter fruits if any be? What care hath been taken for the Widows and Orphans that suffer by the Exchequer? and yet that is a kind of Crown debt. What hath hitherto been done in behalf of the Orphans of London after so many years Attendance, whose case differs much and more to be pitied? They had most of them their all therein, and these bta pittance; their mony was forced into the Chamber by the Law of the Land, so that the State seems answerable in honour at least for their monies: Thse came in freely and upon an unjust Title contrary to the Laws of the Land, and that known beforehand. But to turn the Tables there is no loss of any thing likely to come to the Widows, &c. The Chief Managers and Gainers giving security to make good their Principle; and there is no design in this Scheme to take away a Farthing of what is theirs. The New Subscribers come not in to partake of any thing of theirs, but to share of their own, the liberty of Trade; and no one can complain when nothing of theirs is taken away, but they enjoy whatever is their own be it little or much; so that all the noise and clamour about Widows and Ophans va∣nishes like dw against the Sun. Ʋpon the whole tho these People have in all points behaved themselves with great indecency, rudeness, and ingratitude, taking all op∣portunities to reflect upon what the House hath done, notwithstanding all the kind∣ness, favour, and superabundant mercy they have been treated with, so as no Socie∣ty of People ever were, considering the woful circumstances they are under; they have had the Trade to themselves for some 34 years, and still nothing will please them but a Continuance, and all the rest of the Nation to be disseized of their Right there∣to; but its hoped by the benigne ifluence of the House, such a Model will by your wisdoms be agreed on and carried in as may rejoyce the hearts of all true English∣men, by settling this great Trade upon its true Basis, Liberty and Property.
Lond 12. Jan. 1691/2.
