



HOw much you may oblige, how much delight
The Wise and Noble, would you die to night!
Would you like some grave sullen Nictor die,
Just when the Triumphs for the Victorie
Are setting out; would you die now t'eschew
Our Wreaths, for what your wisdom did subdue;
And though they're bravely fitted for your head,
Bravely disdain to wear them till you're dead:
Such Cynick-glory would out-shine the light
Of Grecian-greatness, or of Roman-height.
Not that the Wise and Noble can desire
To lose the Object they so much admire:
But Heroes and Saints must shift away
Their flesh, ere they can get a Holy-day:
Then like to Time, or Books feign'd Registers,
Victors, or Saints, renown'd in Calenders,
You must depart, to make your value known;
You may be lik't, but not ador'd till gone.
So curst a Fate hath humane excellence,
That absence still must raise it to our sense.
Great vertue may be dang'rous; whilst 'tis here,
It wins to love, but it subdues to fear.
The mighty Julius, who so long did strive
At more than man, was hated whilst alive;
Even for that Vertue which was rais'd so high,
When dead, it made him straight a Deity.
Embassadors that carry in their breast
Secrets of Kings and Kingdoms Interest,
Have not their Calling's full preheminence,
Till they grow greater by removing hence:
Like Subjects, here they but attend the Crown,
Yet swell like Kings Companions when they're gone.
My Lord, in a dull Calm the Pilot grows
To no Esteem for what he acts or knows,
But sits neglected, as he useless were,
Or con'd his Card, like a young Passenger:
But when the silent Windes recover breath,
When Storms grow loud enough to waken Death,
Then were he absent, every Traffiquer
Would with rich wishes buy his being there.
So in a Kingdom calm you leave no rate,
But rise to value in a storm of State.
Yet I recant; I beg you would forgive,
That in such times I must perswade you live:
For with a Storm we all are overcast,
And Northern Storms are dangerous when they last.
Should you now die, that only know to steer,
The Windes would less afflict us then our fear:
For each small States-man then would lay his hand
Upon the Helm, and struggle for Command,
Till the disorders that above do grow,
Provoke our curses, whilst we sink below.

