



THis Piece (being sent me out of
France, as a double rarity, both in
respect of the subject and the qua∣lity
of the Author) I had no sooner
read, then (taken with its ingenuity) I was
moved to cloathe it in an English habit, part∣ly
out of envy, that other Nations should glo∣ry
to have out-knowne us in any Art, especi∣ally
ingenious, as is this of Devises, which be∣ing
the proper badges of Gentlemen, Com∣manders,
and persons of Honour, may justly

challenge their countenance and favour,
whereunto tis sacred.
My Author affirmes himselfe to be the first
hath written of this subject in his Mother∣tongue;
and I might say the like here, were it
not that I find a small parcell of it in Cam∣dens
Remaines, under the title of Impreses,
which are in effect the same with Devises.
Thence, you may gather, that the Kings of
England, with the Nobility and Gentry, have
for some hundreds of yeeres (though Devises
are yet of far greater Antiquity) both esteemed
and made use of them: onely in former times
they arrived not (as now) to that height of
perfection; for they sometimes did (as the
unskilfull still doe) make use of Mottoes with∣out
figures, and figures without Mottoes. We
read that Hen. the 3. (as liking well of Remu∣neration)
commanded to be written (by way
of Devise) in his Chamber at Woodstock,
Qui non dat quod amat, non accipit ille quod optat.
Edw. the 3. bore for his Devise the rayes of the
Sunne streaming from a cloud without any
Motto. Edmond of Langley, Duke of York, bore

a Faulcon in a Fetter-lock, implying, that he
was locked up from all hope and possibility
of the Kingdome. Hen. the 5. carryed a burn∣ing
Cresset, sometimes a Beacon, and for Motto
(but not appropriate thereunto) UNE SANS
PLUS, one and no more. Edw the 4. bore the Sun,
after the Battell of Mortimers-Crosse, where
three Sunnes were seene immediately conjoy∣ning
in one. Hen. the 7. in respect of the uni∣on
of the two Houses of York and Lancaster,
by his marriage, used the White Rose united
with the Red, sometimes placed in the Sunne.
But in the raigne of Hen. the 8. Devises grew
more familiar, and somewhat more perfect,
by adding Mottoes unto them, in imitation of
the Italians and French (amongst whom there
is hardly a private Gentleman, but hath his par∣ticular
Devise) For Hen. the 8. at the inter∣view
betweene him and King Francis the
first, whereat Charles the fift was also present,
used for his Devise an English Archer in a
greene Coat drawing his Arrow to the head,
with this Motto, CUI ADHaeREO, PRaeEST;
when as at that time those mighty Princes
banding one against another, wrought him for
their owne particular.

To the honour of Queene Iane, (who dyed
willingly to save her child King Edward) a
Phenix Was represented in his Funerall fire
with this Motto, NASCATUR UT ALTER.
Queene Mary bore winged Time, drawing
Truth out of a pit, with VERITAS TEMPORIS
FILIA. Queene Elizabeth upon severall occasi∣ons
used many Heroicall Devises, sometimes
a Sive without a Motto, (as Camden relates) and
at other times these words without figure, VI∣DEO,
TACEO, and SEMPER EADEM. King
Iames used a Thistle and a Rose united, and a
Crown over them, with this Motto, HENRICUS
ROSAS, REGNA JACOBUS. Pr. Henry (besides
that Devise which is appropriate to the Princes
of Wales) made use of this Motto, without fi∣gure,
FAS EST ALIORUM QUaeRERE REGNA.
And His Majestie that now is, that other of
CHRISTO AUSPICE REGNO. Our Prince
beares (as all the Princes of Wales have done
since the black Prince) for his Devise (which
we commonly, though corruptly call the Prin∣ces
Armes) a Coronet beautified with three
Ostrich feathers, and for Motto,A learned Brittan is of o∣pinion that it should be Eich dyn, i.e. your man, in the Brittish tongue. ICH DIEN,
i.e. I serve, in the Saxon tongue, alluding to

that of the Apostle, The heire while he is a childe,
differeth nothing from a servant.
The late Earle of Essex, when he was cast
downe with sorrow, and yet to be employed
in Armes, bore a sable Shield without any fi∣gure,
but inscribed, PAR NULLA FIGURA
DOLORI. Sir Philip Sidney (to trouble you with
no more) denoting that he persisted alwayes
one, depainted out the Caspian Sea, surrounded
with its shoares, which neither ebbeth nor
floweth, and for Motto, SINE REFLUXU.
Some may object, that in regard Tiltings,
Tournaments, and Masques, (where Devises
were much in request) are for the present laid
aside, therefore Devises are of lesse use.
Whereto I answer, that as those Justing or
jesting Wars are disused, so have vve now an
earnest, though much to be lamented Warre,
vvhich renders them more usefull then ever, I
meane for Cornets and Ensignes; And of
these, let me also give you some examples out
of the present times. On the Kings party, one
beares for his Cornet-Devise Saint Michael kil∣ling
the Dragon for the figure, and for Motto,
QUIS UT DEUS? Another is so bold as to

beare the picture of a King Crowned and Ar∣med,
vvith his Sword drawne, and this Motto,
MELIUS EST MORI IN BELLO, QUAM VI∣DERE
MALA GENTIS NOSTRAE. A third bears
onely a Dye, vvith UTCUNQUE QUADRATUS.
A fourth figures the beast called anThe Natura∣lists say that this beast will rather choose to dye, then defile her sue. Ermyne,
vvith this Motto, MALLEM MORI QUAM Foe∣DARI.
A fift represents five hands snatching at
a Crown, defended by an armed hand and
sword from a Cloud, with this Motto, RED∣DITE
CaeSARI. A sixt figures a Landskip of a
pleasant Country, vvith houses, corne, &c.
invaded by beggerly people, and for Motto,
BARBARUS HAS SEGETES? &c.
On the Parliaments party vve find one bea∣ring
in his Cornet, the Sun breaking through a
Cloud, with EXURGAT ET DISSIPABUNTUR.
Another represents a Deaths-head, and a Law∣rell-Crown,
vvith MORS VEL VICTORIA.
A third figures an armed man, presenting a
sword to a Bishops breast, with VISNE EPI∣SCOPARE?
the Bishop answering, NOLO,
NOLO, NOLO. A fourth sayes onely (with∣out
any figure) TANDEM BONA CAUSA TRIUMPHAT.
A fift represents the Sunne, dissipating a clou∣dy

storme, with POST NUBILA PHOEBUS.
A sixt, figures an armed man, hewing off the
corners of an University Cap with his sword,
and this Motto, MUTO QUADRATA ROTUN∣DIS,
&C.
Now though these Devises for the most part
argue wit in the Composers, yet many of them
are either imperfect or defective, which may
be attributed to the want of the prescribed
rules of this Art, which this Treatise doth af∣ford
you, together with a Synopsis or short view
of Hieroglyphicks, Emblemes, Reverses of Medalls,
and all other inventions of vvit, vvhich any
vvayes relate thereunto. I might also shew you
here how many several waies Devises are useful
(especially for Seals, being drawn from some
essentiall part of the bearers Armes) but that I
hold it not fit to forestall the Reader in a Pre∣face.
I am onely to beg pardon for my lesse po∣lisht
style,(which I shal the rather hope to ob∣tain,
since things of this nature require a plain
delivery, rather thē elegancy or affected phrase)
not doubting but that the discovery of this
Art will yeeld so great contentment to you,
whose wits are elevate as farre above the vul∣gar,

as are your rankes and qualities that in
some Academicall Session, you will decree
the Author to be your President, the Art your
Exercise.
Ex Aedib. Interioris
Templi 27, Mart.
1646.

