


SInce I wrote the first Booke, I have now accomplished the worke I spoke of in it; For my desire was earnest to write concerning the Mysteries of the se∣ven Trumpets, and seven last Plagues ministred by the seven holy Angells, and ministring Spirits of God; The which Mysteries I understand are declared by signification, being full of excellent wisdome, far above my understanding: Yet acording to the measure of faith and knowledge I have received, I have sheed their signification, answering with the other plain Scripture; for I understand there to be nothing spoken and declared in them, but excellently agreeing with the rest of the Scriptures, though it be hard to be understood: For this I perceive that they are spoken by signification, and the other more plainy, and they do sig∣nfie the things that are written in the other. And the summe of my labour is, to shew what these great Mysteries do signifie according to plain Scripture: So I hae according to my measure of faith shewed their signification to agree with the other plain Scriptures, for the spirit of Truth in no wayes speaketh contrary things, for  cannot lye: So that if I have erred, the errour is from my selfe, and not from the Lord; But if I have declared the Truth, I may boldly say it is from the Lord, and I have not to glory save in him onely: For what I have re∣ceived that is good, is from the Lord, therefore I have no cause to boast as though I had not received, but to praise his Name who hath given unto me.
Now my beloved Brethren, all that believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, that come to read these things which I have written, I suppose you may plainly understand that I have not written after the manner of any that before hath written of these things: For many that have written of these things have poynted at certain per∣son after the manner of men, and at certain times, and certain numbers, which is not lawfull for me to do, neither could I, for I am not so learned in Church History written since the Apostles. Yet this I am perswaded, that such as have knowedge of the Times (by reading of Books) since the Apostles, may also under∣stand that the things I have written are true: And that the Mysteries declared in the Revelations, do signifie all the things which have been fulfilled, and also do signifie the things that shall be fulfilled. And seeing they have signified the things that re past, without all contradiction they do signifie the things that shall be ful∣filld in their appointed time. Thus you may understand also, that I have not written so largely with many words of these things, as others have done before me, neither is my gift so to do; for this I understand, that the best wisdome stands not in the most words. And it is better to displease men in not using many words, then to displease the Lord in darkning wisdome through the multitude of words: And also this I understand, that the mystery of these great things have been hid and sealed up from the faithfull (in these times of darknesse) and were not to be revealed untill the latter end. Therefore my Brethren, it cannot be, but the end is at hand when the Vision shall speak, other wayes, I am perswaded such knowledge
 would not have been given unto me: For I see not my self more righteous and holy then others, neither that I have deserved to know these things before others, be∣cause I am full of infirmities like unto others: And more that I see into the excel∣lent Mysteries, the more I behold my own vilenesse. And were it not that I have boldnesse, by the blood of Jesus Christ, I might say, Woe is me, I am undone, because I am a man of polluted and unclean lips; but I have boldnesse by the redemption which is in Christ Jesus, because I look for Justification before God by him onely, and not in the least to be found in my owne righteousnesse, but in the righteousnesse of God, which is by the faith of Jesus Christ. Therefore let no one thinke of me more then I am, but rather admire the wisdome, power and goodnesse of God, which is ready to be revealed in the world. And prepare to be ready to stand before him at his coming, for certainly it is near at hand.
Reader, this I would have thee to understand, that I have written in this lat∣ter Book of the Revelation, from the 7th verse in the 8. Chap. to the end of the Booke, and have written of every Mystery (according to my knowledge) that seems to be darke; but the words which are plain, it was necessary for me to say little of, but let them have their place. And for the other part of the Revelati∣ons, from the first Chap. to the eighth Chap. and 7th. verse. I have written in the first Booke of the chiefe Things, and hardest Mysteries. Therefore my desire is, that such as read the one, would also consider the other; for in this Book I have spoken little of the plain Gospell, which is profitable to the ignorant, as I have largely done in the other, But have as the matter is agreeable, spoken of high mysteries which belong to the glorious Gospell: so that this Book is not so profita∣ble for the ignorant as the other, though it answereth to the very same things. And thus I say, if I have spoken any thing in this book, or the other, contrary to the holy Scriptures, believe me not; for they that wrote the Scriptures were great Prophets and Apostles, who heard the words of God, and wrote as they were taught by the holy Ghost; but I am one that is very weake in Jesus Christ, and full of infirmities, and what I know is through the mystery of Faith, and am like unto the Saints now in the world, subject to many infirmities. Yet I thought it not meet to keep these things to my selfe, but rather to make them knowne. So desiring the blessing from God, farewell.
12th. Moneth, 1658:
