



MY LORD,
I shall not wrap my self in a cloud of high Eloquence, or be able to show your merits, I hope you are he that God hath raised, to make England again happy, yea, more happy then ever it was, which now is in a sad condition, under many miseries; her once glorious Church and Kingdome, that shined in prosperity in the sight of all the world, troden under foot, Parliaments-priviledges viola∣ted, the peoples Liberties detained, their goods being spent through long paying Excise, Assesments, and such new devises to pole them, which never was known in England before, trading utterly gone, the one part of the Nation being imployed to destroy and eat up the other; and of late no visible Authority; and men kept under and kill'd for offering to shew their agrievances, and yet no visible hope of redemption, but of that which under God appears in you. Many have promised well, and God gaue them golden opportunities to make thimselves and the Nation glorious; but their self-ends deceived them, and they fell into contempt, because their minds was not fixed on just things to the glory of God and good of the whole Nation. For the Nation now are not ignorant as they were in the

beginning of these times; before they fell like Adam, but having tasted of such a fruit as shewed them their na∣kedness, they are become wise, knowing wherein their happiness lies, ond are ready to say with Israel, 1 Sam. 8. 19. notwithstanding all the perswasions of self-interest a∣gainst it: nay, but there shall be a KING over us; and to speak of Samuel's Case, self-interest is such a thing, that not only Samuel was blinded by it, but the Angels also that fell: ▪for might not Samuel have seen that God promised Abraham that Kings▪ should come out of him, and to Jacob that Kings should come out of him also, Gen. 17. 6. Gen. 35. 11. and that Moses had said, that Is∣rael might have a King, Deuter▪ 17. 14. and how the people did what was right in their own eyes, slighting the law of God because there was no King in Israel to minister Justice, Judg. 17. 6. and that they did then as bad as the Sodamites, Judg. 9 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27. I say might not Samuel have known these things. I sure; but it made against his interests for he was for a Government by Judges, therein lay his and his sons interest; but Israel will have a King for all Samuels pleading against it, and the Lord perswades Samuel to barken to the people in it, so that the Lord is also for a King, and a King they have for all that Samuel could do; and they lived more happy under their Kings, and served God more truely then ever they did under their Judges; Saul cloathed them in Scarlet, and put Gold upon their ap∣parel; and David did more, but Solomon made silver at plenty as stones; Gideon the best of there judges got gold from them and made an Idol of it; and the people left the Lord and iwent a Whoring after it, Iudg. 8. 27. But King Asa upon the repetition of the jud∣ges evill times by Oded the Prophet and his comparing it to the time present, Israel then was fallen from God, I

say Asa tooke courage from Odeds words and put down the Idols; and he gathered Judah and Benjamin, and most of Israel▪ came to him and agreed with King Asa, that whosoever would not seek the Lord and serve him, he should be put to death, 2 Chron. 15. now I say it ap∣peareth by this that Kingship is best for the Nations Souls and Bodies; therefore God and the People will have a King; let Samuel do what he can, he shall not be able to binder it. Samuel a glorious Prophet saith to the people, that a King was not Good for them, and useth many argu∣ments to perswade them against Kingship; and in the conclusion saith your King will so oppresse you, that you shall cry out in that day, because of your King, and the Lord will not bear you in that day; what a strong motive is this from a Prophet, yet the people will say nay, but there shall be a King over us, 1 Sam 8. 18, 19. what is the rea∣son they are so wilful? it is because they knew that Sa∣muel said all this for his own ends▪ that his Children might have the preheminence over them, and they knew that his sons were sinful, Judges taking bribes and perver∣ted judgement, 1 Sam. 8. 1. 2, 3. therefore they would not trust them with their warlike affairs for they had smarted of late days in the like case▪ When the wicked Sons of Eli did rule, which lost their own lives, and the Ark of God, and thirty thousand men in the field, 1 Sam. 2. 12, 22. 1 Sam. 5. And now they must go to war, for Nahash King of the Amonites came against them, and would not receive them to be his servants except they would suffer him to thrust out the right eye of every one of them, & lay it for a reproach upon all Israel, 1 Sam▪ 11. 1, 2. and Sa∣muel was old, his Sons were wicked, they must needs have a King to lead them out against this proud Nahash; and you see King Saul under God ordered it so that Nahash lost the day, and Saul was Victour, but yet after this Sa∣muel

was displeased with the people, and bids them tell him wherein he had wronged them, and tells them a story of the excellency of their former Judges, and that they had highly sinned in asking a King, and threatneth them to the purpose; but for all that they were for King-ship, say∣ing to Samuel who is he that saith Saul shall not reign, bring him forth that we may put him to death, 1 Sam. 11▪ 12. 1 Sam. 12. then seeing that Samuel is angry with Saul that be could not please him at all, and whatsoever Saul did he found fault with it; and he laid snares for him about the sacrifice, though indeed it seems Samuel was in the fault, for he came not according to his promise; yet he came as soon as Saul had sacrificed, and then he tells him that he had broke the Commandement, and that God would have another to be King, 1 Sam. 13. after that Sa∣muel send Saul against Amalek: and commanded him to do such a thing that Saul could not do, and then he Pronounceth judgement against Saul and came no more at him, 1 Sam. 15. but went and anointed David to be King of Israel, 1 Sam. 16. and after Samuel died, his Ghost rose from the Earth to discourage Saul, by telling him of his death, and of his sons death, 1 Sam. 28. 15, 19. here we see what power self-interest hath ever good men; therefore he that can deny himself is higher then an An∣gel, for Lucifer fell through Ambition, and that a Witch had power to raise Samuel is a great dishonour to him, & a terrour to me; and showeth that self-interest is to be abhorred; Eli was free from it for he submited to the sen∣tence of God, when it put a period to his time of prosperi∣ty, 1 Tam 3. 18.
And I will now speak touching English men; there is a Book come forth, intituled, The Lord General Fleetwood's Answer to the Humble Representation of Col. Morley, and some other late Officers of the Army: If

he wrote it, he is a self-denying man indeed and, sheweth in that book the only way for Englands hap∣piness: he that observes the series of Gods provi∣dence, may be assured that this Stump-Parliament which was just seven years under the band of Iron∣sword and brass-Canon; that is, from April 22. 1652. to April 22▪ 1659. I say, we may be assured that this Parliament will grow to be full, consisting of KING, Lords and Commons, as it was at first; and then more excellent Glory shall be added to it, by their setting up of Christ's Kingdom; For surely the Lord's Decree shall stand, let self-interest-men doe what they can, God and the people shall bring it to passe; for Nebuchadnezzar's Vision shall be fulfilled again, Dan. . for he was but a type of King CHARLS; and this Parliament promised him according to Dan. 4. 36. that they should add to his Majesties glory, and so they shall keep their promise and oaths made to him: God will have the first Oath performed, Rev. 2. 4. later oaths for self-interest shall not prevail against it 3 therefore I say to your Lordship and to the Parliament, Remember your Vows to be true to the KING, 1 Esdras 4. 43. Pay your Vows, Ecclesiast. 5. 4. I looked upon your going to Scotland as a mighty providence for the welfare of the Nations; and in∣deed the fulfilling of what I said should come to pass in that time▪ for God worketh by hid wisedom so that men cannot see it when it is done, no nor for a long time after; but when there eyes are opened by a more shining of the work, then shall they see in what time it was done.
My Lord, the people came before you, they dare not speak out as yet; they have been so Curbd, but you may know their mind by their miseries, I beseech you pitty them

that their souls may blesse you; Else England will be di∣stroyed; for some old Prophesies saith, that if England loose its opportunity it shall be invaded with three mighty Armies raised and supplyed by all Christendome; one shall appear in the south with the Queen and a great favourite of our Army, another in the North under the King, and Duke of York▪ the third in Ireland under Henry Duke of Gloucester; and before these three Armies meet, English men will be so few, that the Daughter shall say to the Mother, O Mother! I have seen a man to day; and London with all the Towns in England will be destroyed, therefore I say again, pitty poor England, & that God may blesse you the more; Oh pitty poor decayed men that are daily cast into prisons for debs, by their cruel Creditors, where they are speyled, being unable to pay, or live there, the Parliament were about to take some course to help them before now; Oh move them to do it speedily; you will have the prayers of many poor distressed souls, which in the day of battail will be a greater defence for you then your Army; (David, Psal. 41. 1. 2.) So wishing your excellency all happinesse, I hoping to be in your Lordships Judgement a faithful Servant to the Publick.

 From the Kings Play-House in Black-Fryers, London, Jan 30. 1659.
