



Most illustrious King,
I Am not fitted to direct a Speech unto so great a Majesty, being not vers'd in Courtly Complements, or acquainted with Princely Titles. I hope your Majesty doth not expect such Language from me; nor yet, that you will despise the simpleness of the Stile: but seriously consider, and re∣gard the matter of this mean Method. I presume the more to present your Majesty with these few Lines after sorude a manner, (yet so well dressed as I am most able to pen them) because I have heard of your vertu∣ous Clemency and Humility, towards such as were of so low a Rank, as I my self am, even of the poorest of men. Therefore I beseech your Majesty likewise to bear

with my boldness and presumption in speak∣ing the Truth to you; for it will be the glory of your Royal Patience, not to look upon it contemptibly; but rather give ear to it, for that it cometh from the pure affections of a true heart towards you. If I know my own heart, Jer. 17. 9. which speaketh unto you, wishing you eternal happiness, both for your Soul and Body, and that your glorious splen∣dor may shine in Power, and not in Words onely, which are like vain shadows without the substance; as some perhaps would have themselves so exalted; yea, too many are apt to flatter Princes with hollow Titles which are as empty shells, or nuts without kernels, yet with such vain-glory, earthly Princes, (whose mindes are ridiculous afore God and godly men) too too much delight to be applauded. So that it is now, and it was ever so with God and good men, That he which humbleth himself, and slighteth such earthly pomp, (though an honour truely be∣longing to him) is of God and good men counted most worthy of Honour, Favour, and Exaltation. And I hope your Ma∣jesty doth, and will observe this Rule, and not fix your self upon such rotten branches, (which promise much, yet let you sall)

but upon God the sure Rock, and the Com∣munity of those that love him, and keep his Commandments; so shall you be surely fixed and established. And not to trouble your Majesty with too long a Prologue, I shall now (God willing) speak to the purpose.
Judges 6. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 21. When the Angel of the Lord appeared unto Gideon, he saluted him thus, The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valour. And when Gideon answered, If the Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us, that we are delivered into the hand of our enemies? And then the Lord looked upon him, and said, Go in this thy might, and thou shalt save Israel from the hands of his enemies, (mark it) have not I sent thee? And when Gideon said, Wherewith shall I save Israel? my family is poor in Manasseth, and I am the least in my father's house; The Lord said, I will be with thee, and thou shalt smite the enemy as one man. Moreover, the Angel gave him a sign, by touching his present that was upon the rock, with the end of his cane or walking-staff, until the fire came out of the rock, and consumed his pre∣sent. And something to that purpose was

done to your Majesty by this last rising at Salisbury, as you may see by my book called, The Iron Rod.
And after that, Gideon sought to know thr Lord by Sacrifice and Prayer; and the Lord made himself known unto him by Signs, and gave him Wisdom, and prospered him so, that with three hundred chosen men, he overthrew the numerous host of the Mi∣dianites. Here your Majesty may see what it is to seek the Lord. And these things are as properly spoken to your Ma∣jesty now, as they were then to Gideon, and they will be as effectually performed to you, if with faith you receive them, (as Saint Augustine did,) as they were then to Gi∣deon; or, as if the same Angel had spoken them unto you: yet the case is not the same, for Gideon used his Sword onely; but you are to use first your Word; and if that will not, your Sword then will prevail.
I have, as you shall finde, in this ensuing little Book, set down to you (if happily from your Subjects after a propitiatory manner) something to ingage your Soveraign Ma∣jesty, for your own good, and their desire, and good of all, if your Majesty please to comply with it; which Subjects I finde (if

they be real) are willing to prostrate them∣selves before you, as soon as you shall hold forth your golden Scepter of mercy unto them, as Ahasuerus did to Esther, Esther 6. 2, 3. And I beseech your Royal Ma∣jesty, (though you may well think me incon∣siderable, to intercede between you and your People) yet hear the voice of your Royal Fa∣ther of famous memory, saying, Son, (for so he beginneth) I have offered Acts of Indempnity, and Oblivion, to so great a latitude, as may include all that can but suspect themselves to be any way ob∣noxious or liable to the Laws, and which might seem to exclude all future jealou∣sies, and give securities. I would have you alwayes propense to the same way: whenever it shall be desired and accept∣ed, let it be granted, not onely as an Act of State-policy and necessity, but also of Christian charity and choice. All I have now left me, is a power to for∣give those that have deprived me of all: and, I thank God, I have a heart to do it; and joy as much in this Grace which God hath given me, as in all my former injoyments; for this is a greater Argu∣ment of God's love to me, then any

prosperity can be. Be confident (as I am) that the most of all sides who have done amiss, have done so, not out of malice, but out of mis-information or mis-apprehension of things; none will be more loyal and faithful to me and you, then those Subjects, who, sensible of their errors and our injuries, will feel in their souls most vehement motives to repen∣tance, and earnestly desire to make some reparations for their former defects. As your Quality sets you beyond any duel with any Subject, so the nobleness of your Minde must raise you above the meditating of any revenge, or execut∣ing your anger upon the many: the more conscious you shall be to your people, the more prone you will be to expect all love and loyalty from them, and to inflict no punishment upon them for for∣mer miscarriages. You will have more inward complacency in pardoning one, then in punishing a thousand. And again, (saith he) for those that repent of any defects in their duty toward me, as I freely forgive them in the word of a Christian King, so I believe you will finde them truely zealous to repay with

interest, that loyalty and love to you, which was due to me, &c. And, dear So∣veraign, many such exhortations to press you to offer a free pardon to all, and not to seek to be revenged on any, ye have in his Book, and last Speech to you.
Now I say, If a Subject had been mur∣thered, and that his sonshould forgive all the murtherers, yet the Law hath a power in it to put them to death for their actings in murthering his Father, notwithstanding his son's remittance; because his son is not a competent Judge in the cause. But in a King (in whom is the life of the Law) it is not so; for in any Case, and especially his own Case, he may forgive what he will, and that must stand for Law, because he is a compleat Judge, so that his word by the Law is made to be above the Law, as we see in Cases of Remittance: for after that many have been cast to die by the Law, the King's pardon hath saved them: and whoso∣ever denieth this, denieth the King's Prero∣gative Royal.
Again, I say, There is a distinction be∣tween Martyring and Murthering: for a Martyr offereth himself for the defence of the Truth of God, as our Savicur saith,

John 10. 17, 18. He layeth down his life, none properly can be said to take it from him, because he hath power to lay it down, and to take it up again, else he is not a Martyr; but the life of him that is murthered, is vio∣lently taken from him, that though he would live upon any terms, he may not live, and he cannot help it. And your Royal Father understanding this, did not say at his death, (nor as you have it in his Speech to you) that he was murthered; but said, that he was martyred. Therefore he that saith he was murthered, doth not onely deny him to be a Martyr, but doth also denie both his power and pardon, and belyeth him: for he did never pardon any for wilful murther, yet pardoneth all these men, being his own enemies, looking not on them as his mur∣thereres; but as they wilfully, yet ignorant∣ly, did slay him: and he would have you to pardon them in like manner.
Your Royal Father following Christ Jesus in it, who (as he was a King, and a pattern to all Kings for the future times) had an eye to his Perogative Royal, thus, that he gives order to his Apostles, concerning them that had put him to death, that if they did repent, his blood should not be required of them: and

we see Peter proceeds with them according∣ly; for after he had shewed the Jews how they had slain the Lord Jesus, until they were pricked in their hearts, and made to cry out to the Apostles, saying, Men and brethren, what shall we do? Peter doth not say, Tou must die for it; but saith, Repent and be baptized every one of you, in the Name of the Lord Jesus, for the remission of sins; and ye shall receive the gift of the holy Ghost, Act. 2. 37, 38. yet by the Jews Laws such offenders were to die without mercy, Levit. 24. 17, 18. and if it had been the will of Christ, Peter had power enough to put them to death, as we see Ananias and Sapphira were slain by the word of his mouth, Acts 5. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. but herein is Christ's pardon or Perogative Royal seen.
Most Royal Soveraign, That Text, 2 Chron. 25. 3. which many urge in this Case, is no president for you to follow▪ first, Because Joash was murthered, 2 King. 12. 20. Secondly, Because we read not, that King Joash gave any such charge to his son, as your Royal Father gave you, to shew that he forgives all his enemies, and would have

you to forgive them freely, if they repent and come to agreement with you. Thirdly, We read not of the repentance of them that slew King Joash; therefore it was but just for his son Amaziah, to put them to death.
And it behoves your Majesty, if there be any defects in your Father's Speech, to rectifie it by the word of Christ, and let not any wrest it to a wrong sence, contrary to his minde; for I am sure he meant to imitate his Saviour, notwithstanding he might fail in expressing his minde, through the frailty of flesh and blood, following the customes of former Kings, whose conditions did not reach unto him, yet I know none that came neerer to Christ in word and deed, then he did. Therefore do you follow the best, as he did, and take Peter's doings, Acts 2. 37, 38. for your president, and so you will honour your Father: for if you do not offer mercy to all freely without exceptions, and receivs all that will accept of your par∣don, preferring and securing them for the time to come, you wrong your self, and dis∣obey and dishonour your Royal Father more then any ever yet did, by taking from him that power to forgive all; which power, (as he saith) all his enemies could not take from

him: for in the well managing of that power, lieth all your happiness, and of your peo∣ples.
God did appoint three several Voices to be heard of men, and obeyed upon pain of his displeasure. The first Voice was that of Mo∣ses and Joshua to the children of Israel; and because they did not obey it, all that ge∣neration fell in the wilderness, Heb. 3. 16, 17, 18, 19. The second Voice was that of John Baptist and Jesus Christ to the Jews; and because they did not obey it, Jerusalem was destroyed, and the Jews, which lieth de∣solate to this day, Heb. 4. 1, 2, 3. The third Voice is this Voice, even the Voice of your Royal Father to your Majesty; and for not obeying it, you and your people have suffered hitherto; and this Voice is signified, Heb. 4. 7. and therefore I beseech your Majesty, obey it now.
And as Peter took the first spouse of Christ (after his resurrection) out of those that had put him to death; so I see no way left for you to obtain your three Kingdomes, but by joyn∣ing your Royal Self, to his Highness the Lord Protector and his Counsel; and to prevent all jealousies, make one of his Daughters partaker of your Royal Crown; for you see

the people dare not rise against him for you: this is evident by the last appearance for you, in most places of the heart of England, which if the generality of the people that are well-affected to you, had come in to them that rose, the work had soon been done: and if you bring in a forraign Nation, it is like all will rise, yea, many of your Friends will rise a∣gainst you; for the terror of CROMWEL and his Army, is upon the people here and abroad also, because they see him prevail, and that every work devised against him comes to nought: but if your Majesty slight this motion, it is propable in a short time that his Highness may obtain these three King∣doms, and have them put upon him for his own inheritance, and then the best Prince in Europe will think himself happy to have his Daughter to Wife.
For my own part, there is none can do for you more then I have done; for I have maintain∣ed your Cause in the highest manner before your reputed greatest enemies; and have propounded this way of union between your Majesty & his Highness to them; and it was well resented by all, insomuch that his High∣ness himself came to speak with me, and used me very favourably; and I set them a time,

that the union should be afore Midsummer: I pray God it be not too long afore these writings come to your Royal Hands.
But some of them said, They feared your Majesty would not consent to so good a mo∣tion for all sides, and the Kingdoms happiness. And once as I was propounding these things, the Ladies and Daughters of his Highness being present, I was demanded whether I had any commission from your Majesty to do such things. I told them, No; but said, I had Visions, and a commission from God to pro∣pound such things, and that I believed your Majesty would allow of what I did, and con∣sent to so reasonable an agreement; which if you do, that high dignity which God by me said should be yours, shall undoubtedly rest upon you: but however, it is necessary for your Majesty to offer freely (from your heart) to all a general pardon and remission; and if that be refused, God that knoweth the inte∣grity and secrets of your heart, will raise you Friends unexpected, so that you shall pre∣vail: and it must be so, because justice is but the hand-maid of mercy, and she may not go before her mistress; but if her mistress be affronted, she immediately followeth to a∣venge her, and then the mistress rejoyceth at it, James 2. 13.

There is a party that are bloody men, of no Religion, who would have you come in by the Sword; not for any good they wish you, but thinking thereby to encrease their sins; for now they look upon themselves as in bondage: first, because their means is taken from them, so that they cannot commit such sins as they would do, if they had plenty of money. Se∣condly, because they are restrained from their courses of sins by these men now in power, more then they were formerly; and kept out of power, being looked upon as abominable creatures, which have not the fear of God in them, and they care not much who is on the Throne, so that sin and open profaness may be in esteem and favour again, and they to have their means and power again, to be its favourites. Against such a sort of men many took up arms, & against such the Army now stands: and such bloody irreligious men will never consent to have you pardon all them now in power, and come to such an agree∣ment as abovesaid: for if you do agree, their hope is frustated, so that then sin shall domi∣neer no more in this Kingdome. I pray God change their hearts, and let them see that God will never suffer such mindes to prevail here again.

I know there is many eyes looking upon your Royal Fathers last Speech to your Ma∣jesty, expecting dayly when will your general pardon come out to all according to it, which specially is expected by these to whom it chiefly belongs, who also have power to esta∣blish you in your Fathers Throne; and judi∣cious men may think hard of your deserring to obey the Christian command of so good a Father, which might prove so much advan∣tageous to his glory, and your own glory and prosperity here, and hereafter in Heaven. Be not perswaded by any, contrary to your Father's last Speech unto you; for you have none so wise, nor none so faithful to you as he was; and therefore trust not to their wis∣dom nor their fidelity in this thing: and if you have them about your Majesty, that hindreth to send a general pardon, put them away from your presence.
It is the wisdom of a Master to turn away all his Servants if they are grown evil ones, lest they consume his estate; and take other Servants, and to be sure to keep them in bet∣ter order. The Court of England (as most Courts are) was grown very corrupt, when Vice was more in esteem then Virtue, and he that wilfully brake God's Commandments

had in honour, while he that strove to keep them was despised; so that men took sin for a pleasure, deceit for wisdom, and folly for foe∣licity; and as the richest meat or best fruit, is most jubject to putrifaction, and there∣fore ought to be well seasoned and preserved, else it will turn to noysome worms; so it is in the King's Court by reason of the fatness that attends it▪ that except there be a straight rule of sobriety, and the love and fear of God be fixed in the Courtiers hearts, that they may endeavour to walke in all the Com∣mandments of God without reproof, they shall surely become unsavory in the nostrils of God, and he will raise of the vulgar sort of men, them, that shall cast the Courtiers out, and trample upon them as upon dirt; for, who will take water from a corrupt fountain? The Court is the eye of the King∣dom, and, If the eye be evil, the whole body will be full of darkness, Mat 6. 22, 23. and if the darkness be so great, what can follow it but confusion and destruction? We are not strangers to these things, for that we have seen these consequences too much verified in our dayes; and yet there is many among us, stands to vindicate themselves, and will not believe their own eyes, nor ac∣knowledge

the just judgements of God upon them for their sins.
But I beseech your Royal Majesty to lay these things to heart, and to acknowledge by confessing it before the Lord, that a great many of sins were harbored in the Court, under your Grand-Father, and your Father also: and there were four capital Causes which broke out into judgements.
The first was in the Case of Essex and Overbury, when Essex's Lady was too much favoured: for though there might be just cause for her to put away Essex, yet she should have suffered as an adulteress, when she married Carre, Mark 10. 12. so that we see, that for that injustice and diso∣bedience to the word of Christ, Essex having this grudge still in his minde, at last is made the chief Instrument to destroy your Father's Court, when no man else could do it.
The second grand Cause, was that tolera∣tion to prosane the Sabbath, which so stirred up the wrath of God against the King, that he caused all his people to abhor him for it.
The third was, the refusing to take the Anabaptist-Petition in 1633. into conside∣ration; for though they were then but small,

yet they had such a Truth on their side, that they became to be the most violent and pre∣valent instruments, that stood up in the war against the King.
The fourth was a young man that suffered in 1634. for poysoning his Master, for so it was proved either by a false witness or a true one, yet the young man constantly denied it to the death, and great application was made to save his life, insomuch that the Case came before your Royal Father, who as I heard examined it, and was so satisfied in the matter, that he would not pardon it: and no small heart-burning fire arose from that, even insomuch that the Kingdom is turned upside down by it; and therefore let men now take heed how they judge such hard Cases between blood and blood, lest they slay the innocent. This I believe his Ma∣jesty then might have done in such a Case, that seeing the young man's Friends de∣pended so much upon his innocency, that if they would free the King by taking the blood upon themselves laid to his charge, in case the Witness was true, and that God should require it, he to grant their request; for so much liberty to the King (in such a Case) is intimated, 2 Sam. 3. 28, 29.

where David clears himself by putting the blood of Abner upon Joab, and his de∣ferring to avenge it for his time. I do not say, Your Royal Father sinned in this thing; (for it was done by witness) but that it gave occasion against him, Judg. 10. 4. and against his people, with whom God was angry; so that as he would not par∣don this sin, God would not pardon the other sins.
Therefore it is not prudence for a King to be violent against any one sin, and yet suffer many sins to go unpunished: for, A King that sitteth in the throne of judgement, scattereth away all evil with his eyes: A King, who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin, Prov. 20. 8, 9. It is one thing for a man to sin as he is a man, and it is ano∣ther thing for the same person to sin as he is a King: David as he was a King, was perfect save onely in the matter of Uri∣ah, 1 Kings 15. 3, 4, 5. but as he was a man, he had other sins, Psalm 40. 12. 1 Chron. 21. 7, 8.
But I conclude this, I believe your Roy∣al Father, for his own particular, to be a perfect man; and had he been so severe to

punish Sabbath-breakers, Whore-mongers, Swearers, Drunkards, and such-like sinners, as he was to punish Murtherers, he had been a perfect King also. Yet I hope, what he wanted, will be made up in your Royal Person, that you may be per∣fect in every degree; for such things was too hard a business (as times then went) for your Royal Father in his life-time to do; because the great ones were too much in∣clinable to such sins: but God by his provi∣dence brought them down, and punished their sins by manifesting his wonderful wis∣dom, in making that great sin of Murther (so hated by your Royal Father) to fight against all the other sins, and to conquer and subdue them, that your Royal Father by his martyrdom, through Jesus Christ, might conquer, murther, and so bring all under Christ Jesus and himself. For a Murtherer hath no power over a Martyr, (and a rebellious War is a Murtherer) nei∣ther can he be a Murtherer to him, for that he is subdued before him, because he stayeth and conquereth the Murtherer by his death: as if he should say to him (for so the Scripture holds it forth, Hosea 13. 14.) O Murtherer, by my death I will

be thy death: and the Martyr also by his death gets eternal life, John 12. 25. his mortality is swallowed up of life, 2 Cor. 5. 4. besides, Murther throughout the Scripture is called Death, as he saith, 1 Cor. 15. 26, 54. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is Death. And again, speaking of this time, saith he, Then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory. And again, Heb. 2. 14. That through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that is, the de∣vil; and the devil was a murtherer from the beginning, John 8. 44. Again, No murtherer hath eternal life abiding in him, 1 John 3. 15. All which places and many more shew, That, Death, Devil, Dra∣gon, and Murtherer, is one and the same: and none can destroy this Dragon and his Followers, but Jesus Christ with his Mar∣tyrs, Rev. 12. 11. by giving him as much blood as he can desire, and as much mercy as he can receive, that he might cease from his wickedness, and be reconciled unto God again, that God may be all in all, and that the mortal enmity that is among men and brethren (through war and division)

might be swallowed up with love and life e∣ternal.
And in appearance as yet to me, there is none more capable under God then your Royal Self, to make your Self and all o∣thers in these Kingdomes happie; and there is no way for your Majesty to do it, but by obeying your Royal Father's Voice, as abovesaid: and though that be most con∣trary for flesh and blood to do, yet you must humble your Royal Self more then that, by sending your free general pardon to all, with∣out any seeking, but my seeking of it? for according to that which goeth for Law with us, it is not safe for any, and specially they in power, to seek to you: but what I say, (who have alwayes hazarded my life for my conscience sake) may prove as authen∣tick, as if all had sent to your Majesty. And therefore, I beseech your Majesty make trial of it, if not to them, yet may it please your Majesty to send it; and though I be unworthy to be your Royal MESSENGER, and if you think fit to honour me with such a Favor, I make no question through GOD's assistance, but to give you a good account of it; not∣withstanding the danger of moving such a

thing; so that I believe it is not safe at first for any of your Nobles to come upon such a MESSAGE.
And for any grudge to revenge, or rancor in heart against them that put your Royal FATHER to death, have no such thoughts, but purely love them; for I never heard that any of the seed of the Martyrs, hated them that had put their Fathers to death; but rather gloried, in that their Fathers so gloriously died. And who were the Instruments to bring them to that glory, but those that put them to so hard a Trial?
And after the Grace of Repentance is given them, who will honour the Mar∣tyrs more, then they who have persecuted them unto the death? witness Saint PAUL who did all this, insomuch that Saint PE∣TER, at last calls him, Our beloved bro∣ther PAUL, 2 Pet. 3. 15. Wherefore (nowithstanding they have so violently per∣secuted your Royal FATHER to the death) most glorious Soveraign, (upon their repen∣tance) receive your Subjects in love and mercy, as your FATHER hath commanded you, who went beyond any one Martyr, be∣cause

of his power and dignity; and there∣fore his sufferings were greater, and are morefull of glory, which is to you an un∣speakable joy full of glory, through Jesus Christ who did enable him.
To the Son, JESUS CHRIST, be all Glory and Praise for ever and ever,
Amen.
In long-Ally, at the en∣trance of Crown Court in Black-fryers, March 23. 1654.

