



TO such only are these Sermons dedi∣cated,
(they knowing what these
things mean) but not to the Great and
wise men of this world; For saith our
, All men cannot receive these sayings, Mat.
. 11. A rich man can hardly enter into the King∣me
of heaven, nor he (especialy) who is Rich, or
 in his own esteem; Nay, It is easier for a
 (or Cable) to go through the Eye of a
 Needle, then for a Rich man to enter into
 Kingdome of God; And, saith our Lord, 
I say unto you, Except ye be converted
 little Children ye cannot enter there∣in;

But whosoever shall humble himself as a litt
child, The same saith he, (mark the word) 
no other, shall be greatest in the Kingdome of Heaven.
These onely are they that can Deny the
selves in all things, and take up their Crosse, da
ly following their Lord and Master in the sam
path he hath trod out before them, being 
with his own Baptisme; they wait upon 
as his serants, and covet to be like him.
In all his afflictions, reproches, and death, 
meek? how lovely? how courteous? how ;
how amiable? how gratious was he 
all his behaviour? How ready to pardo
and pray for his enemies? There was no guile foun
in his mouth, He never reproached the vildest sinner;
how patient, meek and loving was he 
them? how did he pitty and tender them? an
weep over them, because they were so fast boun
in Satans chains? Only he fell very foul on the 
and dissembling Outside Religion of th
Pharisees, their gilded seemingly Holy outsides
He could never endure; Because, though ther
was an unreproveable and glorious outside, y
within, nothing but Stenches, rottenness and 
bones; like unto gilded and stately Sepuchers
without, but within all manner of rottenness
and loathsome Stenches. And he chose rather
to keep company with the grossest sinner
(the Publicans) rather then with these; Because

themselves and others had so high an esteem of
them, and thought them righteous, by reason of
their grave and demure outsides, to make others
believe it was so, or rather better within, when
it was quite otherwise. He sought not Himself
nor his own glory, but the glory of his Father,
He endured the Cross, despised the shame; His
life was, to go about doing good, even to his ene∣mies;
He would gladly have done good to the
proud Pharisees, but they could not endure him,
because he did not reverence and admire them,
(as others did) but dishonour them and disco∣ver
their nakedness and loathsome insides. Those
that are his servants, they in their measure, strive
to follow their Master in all good things; They
have the same spirit, Full of meekness and tender∣hartedness
to all; Free and ready to do good,
they love all creatures for his sake, they can see
no creature in want, but their bowels Yearn to
help them, being much troubled, if they have
not wherewith to supply their wants.
These indeed (like their Master) can Welcome
the Crosse, yea kisse the Crosse every day, and
expect, bearing of the Crosse in every thing they
do; whether they be Actions Civil or Spiri∣tual,
in their Almes or Charities to men, or
their religious Worship and duties to God;
They in all, bear the Crosse alwaies about them.
Therefore that of the Papists (to me) is a pretty

Embleme of these mens lives, in this regard
(though they abuse it in an external, outward,
foolish, and Superstitious way,) but the Morral
and signification to this purpose, is (by some)
very aptly applyed: Viz. Every thing they
have to do with, or what ever they begin
or go about, The Crosse, The Crusifix (as they
call it) must be made upon it, when they rise
or when they go to bed, or whatever they do
they will not forget that; so is it very truly
and really applyed to these men, And the more
they esteem themselves Blessed; for the Pa∣pists
think themselves Blessed by doing it ex∣ternally,
and the fewer Crosses they use, the
more (they think) are their curses.
But in this sence, I am sure tis a real
truth, That these Self-denied Little-Ones
know by experience, (then whom for any to
offend, it were far better for him, That a Mil∣stone
were hanged about his neck, and sunk headlong
to the bottome of the Sea) That the more of the
Crosse they bare, they reckon, they are the
more Rich, the more Happy: This taking up
the Crosse and Denial of themselves, they ac∣count
it their Life, their Portion, their Inheri∣tance,
their Blessing, their Crown, yea in∣deed
their Heaven upon Earth: As for all
the things of this world, they sit as loose to
them as Elija's Mantle, which as he Ascen∣ded
fell from him to the Earth, to which it

belonged. These Souls, they willingly and
freely have departed from the love of this
World, and expect no love from it, but ra∣ther
Hatred, but they having found the Pearl
of great price (of invalluable price) they
slight all, Sell All, for this Pearl; For they
have resolved and concluded in their souls,
in good earnest, as it is Prov. 4. Wisdome, is
the principal thing, therefore say they, I must
(what ever I do) get Wisdome; for all my
other Gettings, I must get understanding; For
the Merchandize of it is better then the Mer∣chandize
of silver, and the gain thereof then
ine Gold, This is that Wisdome which is
more precious then Rubies and all the things thou
canst desire is not to be compared to her.
Thou once having this High Esteeme of
this Super-Excellent, Super-Eminent Life, thou
wilt search for it as men search for silver,
and dig for it, as for Hidd Treasures; For
(believe it) These are of infinite more value;
These are Everlasting, Eternal, Durable Ri∣ches,
The other are not so: But the men of
the world they esteeme silver and Gold and
such like, to be their Highest Riches; and
therefore all their Loves Mights and endea∣vours
are to digg for them, but these souls

are quite contrary, and put worth upon
things of Worth indeed, The violent take this
Kingdome by force, (saith our Saviour) Nor
can it be gotten other waies; This life can∣not
be obtained without strong Affections to
it, Not with sitting still, nor in a general
and formall road of profession, it will not
fall into our laps, nor is it gotten by pat∣tering
over a few cold prayers; but it must
be Esteemed, Prized, Loved above all things,
else it will never bee laid hold on, none
else shall ever come neare it; if any other thing
take off your Eye, or your Love from the
persuit thereof, you immediately lose the
very sight of it. He that findeth this life,
he indeed findeth life. Wisdome loveth them that
love her, and those that seek her early, shall find her,
Riches and honour are with her, yea durable Riches
and righteousness. But he that sinneth against
her, (or neglecteth her) hateth his own soul.
And this is the finall conclusion he makes;
Proverbs 8. 36. All that hate me love
death; yet know, it is the Lord that worketh
all our works in us, sai. 26. 12. And tis He that
worketh in you both to will and to do of his good
pleasure, Phil. 3. 13. &c.
These laborious Sermons do sweetly discover
this Life This Pearl, but till you come to experi∣ence
them, you will finde them full of Pra∣bles

and hard Sayings, not onely to such as
are void of understanding, and to the men
of this world; but to all such (though fil∣led
with knowledge) who are without the
true knowledge of God, even to all out of
Christ: for as the Apostle Paul saith, The
natural man receiveth not the things of the
Spirit of God; for they are foolishness unto
him; neither can he know them, for they are spi∣ritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2. 13. The world∣ly
wise, or men onely literally learned, are
uncapable of such Doctrines; for St. Paul
saith of such, that God will destroy the wis∣dom
of the wise, and will bring to ought the
understanding of the prudent; and as it were,
looks about him, and cryes out, Where is the
wise? Where is the scribe? Where is the dispu∣ter
of this world? Hath not God made foolish
the wisdom of this world? 1 Cor. 1. 19, 20.
And it is certain, that the profound
Rabbies and Philosophers require a sign,
and seek after wisdom; that is, such as is
but humane or sensual, carnal and devillish,
Iam. 3. 15. and therefore if Christ crucified
be preached, he is to the Iews (and most
learned men) a stumbling-block, and unto
the Gentiles foolishness. And St. Iohn saith
of those great and learned men of the

Jews, that they plainly expressed so
much; Do any of our rulers believe on him?
no, no; they did not, nor could not; they
wanted the seeing eye, and hearing eare to
know and receive him; for had they known,
they would not have crucified the Lord of Life.
Tese labours then are fit indeed, and
onely fit for such as are weak in themselves,
poor and despised of the world, yet called
of God, and precious, because they hold out
Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of
God, 1 Cor. 1. 24. and of a truth, the great,
and the wise men, nor the learned, are not
called (or very few of them) to the know∣ledge
of God by the Gospel, and there∣upon
unfit for such spiritual doctrine: nay
is it not true, as the Apostle saith? You
see your calling brethren; how that not many
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not
many noble are called; but God hath chosen
the foolish things of the world, to confound the
wise; and God hath chosen the weak things
of the world, to confound the things that are
mighty; and base things of the world, and
things that are despised God hath chosen; yea,
and things which are not, to bring to nought
things that are, that no flesh should glory in
his presence, 1 Cor. 1. 27, 28.
And therefore to you, even to all you
whose life is hid with Christ in God, The seed
of Abraham, children of faith, and of the
promises, begotten and descended of the
bloud and seed Royal, is this piece of
Heavenly directions presented, who are
experienced and builded upon the Rock
Iesus Christ, and who know what that An∣nihilation,
Mortification and Self-denial is,
which is taught in these Sermons; and by
Christ was also wrought in the Author
himself, and other; and tends to te con∣fusion
of the Mystical Babel in mens spi∣rits,
so strongly erected in mens earts, so
that very few yet scarce know truly, wat
the confounding of that language means in
themselves.
Oh how rare, how precious, how excel∣lent
and sweet is this spiritual, practical,
experimental life? but where to be found?
where are the living Monuments of it, and
where are the Books of it? where are
those Choise ones that know it and do it?
How few in these days (though Christi∣ans
in profession) do press towards the mark
for the price of the high calling, and who act
true Mortification? How few enjoy those
true and sure treasures, pleasures, raptures,

riches and possessions which are in Christ?
How few do discern the true way to that
High, Rich, Supereminent life? But indeed
few are the Preachers of it, and few be the
Labourers in this harvest: Oh! Therefore
seeing the harvest is great, and the labourers
few, how should we incessantly pray, that
the Lord would send orth such Spiritual and
Mortified labourers into his harvest?
But what may be the cause of this pau∣city
or scarceness? certainly tis because the
practical part and the contemplative also,
are clean contrary to flesh and bloud, un∣pleasant
to the carnal man: few men de∣sire
to take up, much less to bear the cross of
Christ, which is the onely way thereunto:
and if men travell not in the right way, how
can they come to their journeys end them∣selves?
or how can they direct or encourage
others to enter into it?
Oh! this great Idol, corrupted self, is too
much served and worshipped: Men are lo∣vers
of themselves more then of God: very
few practise now answerable to the Primi∣tive
Christians, who delighted in self-deni∣al,
and spiritual love: very few prize the
cross of Christ in themselves, but rather
despise it: we ascend not, nor set our feet

aright on those six steps ascending up to the
Throne of Grace, Peace and Rest, truly and
lively explained in this book (to wit)
1. Condemnation. 2. Annihilation. 3. Ab∣dication.
4. Indifferency. 5. Conformity.
6. Union or Deiformity, the very Throne it
self; and compared by the Author (as
you shall find in this book) to the six steps
leading up to Solomons Glorious Throne.
Where are the men now, who desire to
climb these steps? but generally all men
account them mighty difficult and painful,
and therefore decline them: men rather
descend them then seek to ascend: how low,
and how poorly do most men (yea most
Professors) live? how bound up to the
world? they live altogether unto plea∣sures
or profits, and to themselves, not un∣to
the Lord: and yet tis certain, He that will
be my disciple, must deny himself, and take up
his Cross: Actions not forced or compulso∣tory,
but free and voluntary: few now seek
the glory of God, or the good of others; but
mind themselves, love themselves, pro∣vide
for themselves, so that they are ri∣vetted
into, and fastened unto the earth:
Is this to live by faith? to live to Christ?
Can such men say, I dye daily? with the

Apostle 1 Cor. 15. or, I am crucified
to the world, and the world unto me?
or can they justifie that they live not, but
Christ liveth in them? or can they plead
that they have crucified the old man; with
the affections and lusts thereof? have
these men abstained (though it may be
from outward fleshly lusts, yet not) from
those spiritual wickednesses in high places,
which also war against the soul? O for shame!
is this to live as Christ lived? and to do
as e did? Who when he was reviled, reviled
not again; when he suffered, he threatned
not, but committed himself to him who judgeth
righteously: And even hereunto are ye cal∣led,
because Christ also suffered for us, lea∣ving
us an ensample, that we should follow his
steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21, 23.
Those Primitive Christians, those pre∣cious
jewels of God, whose souls are bound
up in the bundle of life, they counted all but
as loss and dross, and dung, to gain the
knowledge of Christ and him crucified: they
in the first place sought the Kingdom of
heaven, and its righteousness: they took
the Kingdom of heaven by violence, and
these violent ones took it by force: Oh ad∣mirably
active and passive men? of whom

the world was not worthy; they were af∣flicted,
persecuted, tormented, who counted
it their joy to suffer for Christ: they went
to their Rest, through the Cross, rejoycing
that they were counted worthy to suffer shame
for his name: Those were they that count∣ed
not anything, no not their lives too dear
for Christ, and yet in all their sufferings,
went off Conquerours: these found that
pearl, slighted all, and parted with all to
get this pearl: Behold, here is the faith and
patience of the Saints, Rev. 13. 9.
And of this Author we may say, he
was one that sought after wisdom, and
found it, for he knew the merchandize of
it to be better then the merchandize of sil∣ver,
and the gain thereof then fine gold,
Prov. 1. 4. and 8. And he would often
say, that he desired to be acquainted
with men who had experience of Christ,
rather then men of notions or speculations,
that desired to act more then to talk; and
he did in his publick preaching averr it, that
though they were never so mean, poor, and
despised by the world, yet if they were
but acquainted with such experimentall
truths as these, they were more welcome
to him then so many Princes and Potentates;

and we hope his labours of the like stamp,
will find the like welcom with such as
are experienced and practised in these spi∣ritual
truths: And to such Auditors he
desired to preach to, and be acquainted
with, that he might confirm them in the
grace of God. We may say here of him,
and of such high-raised truths, as the
Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 28. 9, 10. Whom shall
we teach knowledge, and whom shall we make
to understand doctrine? those that are wean∣ed
from the milk, and drawn from the breasts;
for precept must be upon precept, precept upon
precept, line upon line, line upon line, here a
little and there a little.
And such was the counsel of the Au∣thor,
when any came to him, either igno∣rant,
or full of literal knowledge, who
usually are full of questions: yet are also
very ignorant (saith he) as to Self-denial,
Annihilation and Resignation, which his
discerning spirit soon perceived in reason∣ing
with them: sometimes alledging to
them that of Pythagoras, that when any
Scholler came to enter himself under him,
he would enjoyn them to ask no question
in three years, so that he might teach
them as he found them able to receive; and

at three years end, they might then ask
him any question, but then they had none to
ask, for he had satisfied all their doubts.
Or suppose (said he) there were before
you as much meat as you could eat in a
moneth, if I should enjoyn you to eat it
all at a meal or two, instead of nourishing, it
would destroy you: whereas if I gave you
a moneth to eat it, taking your meals or∣derly
and digesting them, it would do
you much good, nourish, refresh and
strengthen.
And a narrow-mouthed vessel, which
holds much in the continent, you may
fill it with precious liquor, and so preserve
it, if you pour it in as it can receive: but
if ye pour in too fast, ye spil and spoil that
which hereafter may support your life:
Nor do we put young Schollers to learn
Latin or Greek at the first entrance, but
we instil learning by degrees, as they are
able to suck in and receive: with these and
such like expressions would he perswade
them to wait with patience, till God were
pleased to reveal: and the same counsel do
we give to all who cannot be satisfied
presently with these things, but let them
read, ponder and wait; and those that

hunger and thirst shall be filled.
And truly, they are but (as St. Iohn and
Ieremy say) One of a City, and two of a Tribe,
that shall come to Zion, who can attain this
salvation; few there be that enter into this
strait gate: For wide is the gate, and broad
is the way that leadeth unto destruction, and
many there be that go in thereat: but strait is
the gate, and narrow is the way that leadeth
unto life, and few there be that finde it.
And in reading these Sermons, you may
observe the Author cuts his way clear be∣tween;
First, the meer Rationalist, who
will square out God according to his own
reason, or else he is no God: and herein
also including the Formalist: and Second∣ly,
the Familist, who saith he lives above
Ordinances, and so hath quite left all Re∣ligion,
and by degrees hath turned licen∣cious
Ranter: which are the main points
now in agitation, and the two great rocks
against which so many (either against the
one, or the other) have split their vessels in
these days: But the Author so clearly di∣stinguishes,
that he misseth both Rocks, and
carries on the truth Amain with Top-sail
against all battery and opposition.
Here ye shall finde the vail rent, and

the last shadows vanishing, and some Rayes
of the glory of the holiest of all appearing,
being hid from ages and generations, but
in these last times, upon the bringing in the
fulness of the Gentiles, and for the calling of
the Iews, more brightly breaking forth;
revealing the mystery of the Scriptures,
or the marrow of the true word of God,
which endureth forever: wherein the Life
and Spirit of the Holy Word is clearly
distinguished from the outward and killing
letter, comparing spiritual things with spi∣ritual;
that all those errors, differences, re∣vilings
and bitter censurings, so much
broken forth of late, occasioned by rest∣ing
in the letter, may now vanish and make
haste before the presence of the Lord, and
the glory of his coming, whose fan is in his
hand, and he will throughly purge his floor,
and gather the wheat into his garner, but will
burn up the chaff with unquenchable fire:
And will baptize his own people with his
own Spirit, with the Holy Ghost, and with fire.
Howbeit, we speak wisdom onely among them
that are perfect, yet not the wisdom of this
world, nor of the Princes of this world,
which comes to nought: But we speak the
wisdom of God in a MYSTERY, even the

hidden wisdom, which God hath ordained be∣fore
the world unto our glory, which none of
the princes of this world knew, 1 Cor. 2.
It is written, Eye hath not seen, nor ear
heard, neither hath entred into the heart of
man, the things which God hath prepared
for those that love him, having revealed
them unto us by his spirit. And if in this
life onely we had hope in Christ, we were of
all men most miserable, 1 Cor. 15. 19. We
are fools for Christs sake, but ye are wise: we
are weak, but ye are strong, ye are honou∣rable,
but we are despised, 1 Cor. 4. 10. Let
no man deceive himself; if any man among
you seemeth to be wise in this world (or to
himself) let him become a fool, that he may
be wise, 1 Cor. 1. 18. For the preaching of
the CROSSE is to them that perish foolish∣ness;
but unto us which are saved, it is the pow∣er
of God, verse 18. But the foolishness of God
is wiser then men, and the weakness of God is
stronger then men, verse 25. He that is spi∣ritual
judgeth all things, yet he himself is
judged of no man, verse 15.
The Spirit searcheth all things, yea
the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 10.
And the anointing which you have received
of him, abideth in you, and ye need not that
any man teach you: but as the same anoint∣ing
teacheth you all things, and is truth and
is no lye; and even as it hath taught you, ye
shall abide in him, 1 John 2. 27.
If any man have an ear to hear, let
him hear, Verse 10.
Now unto him who is able to keep you from
falling, and to present you faultless before
the presence of his glory with exceeding joy,
Jude 24. and to do exceeding abundantly
for you above all that we can ask or think,
according to the mighty power which worketh
in you: unto him be glory and majesty, domi∣nion
and power in the Church by Iesus Christ,
thoughout all ages, world without end,
Eph. 3. 20.
The grace of our Lord Iesus Christ, the love
of God, and the communion of the Holy
Spirit, be with you all. Amen.

