



May it please your Grace,
AS my well-intended and honest endea∣vors were never yet wanting to serve your Grace, not only (by God's heavenly Inspiration) in saving your precious life some years past, but even now also, by the direction of the same Divine Spirit, am endeavouring to prove instrumental in the saving your more precious Soul, that immor∣tal Soul which is to survive either in the bo∣som of Glory, or in the flames of the Damn'd, to all Eternity.
This small unpolish'd Tract, contriv'd by me for that purpose, I present your Grace; the whole scope whereof may (I hope) be not unfitly applied to your present state, in mat∣ter of true Soul-saving Faith.—My Lord,

it's notoriously apparent that your moral Prin∣ciples were all along for Monarchy, or King∣ly Government; all your life being eminently employed in real Loyalty through very many vicisitudes of Fortune, and trials of Con∣stancy: First, having sacrificed your Estate and Ease, slighting all Cromwell's tem∣pting offers, by a voluntary banishing your self after your Sovereign into Flanders; Secondly, in gallantly exposing your life, in coming and remaining in London some fifteen days incognito, striving wisely and warily to pave the way for the Restauration and happy Re-inthroning of King Charles II. of Ever-glorious Memory, Dr.Huet and others being put to death for entertaining your Grace. Add to this, how you being last of all Lord Lieutenant in Ireland, you proved most Loyal, Wise, and Watchful, always striving to defend vigorously the Preroga∣tives of the Crown, to render Sedition odi∣ous, to undeceive the people of those Shams, Cheats, and Frauds that were palm'd upon them; to purge away all venemous humours and distempers which the hellish Faction were always infecting the Subjects with: You ex∣posed their wild Artifices to the derision and detestation of the World, preserving that

Kingdom from fained and false Plots tending to destroy the Peace and Tranquillity of the Land, and involve it in Anarchy and Confu∣sion. Such was the indefatigable Labour and Vigilance of your Grace to put a stop (through your wise Government and prudent Counsels) to the restless endeavours of the publick Enemies of Kingly Government.
I should not forget, my Lord, your great Vigilance in relieving (even in the dead of Winter, and to the hazarding your life) with extraordinary speed the City of Waterford, when besieged eighteen days by the Vsurper Cromwell, he having assu∣red all his Adherents that that City was most extremely his.
These, my Lord, your Heroick Vnder∣takings to promote Loyalty, the same Loyalty which now stands the top and most visible of your Grace's most Illustrious Titles and Characters, which rendred you all along a great Favourite of our late deceased Sovereign, and makes you now most dear unto his present Majesty King JAMES the Second.—These, I say, are so notoriously known, both at home and a∣broad,

that even base Envy and Detra∣ction have but rendred them to be the more acknowledged, and most illustriously conspicuous.
These, my Lord, not common actings, are patterns of your unbounded Merits; these Heroick Efforts, Vndertakings, and brave never-to-be-forgotten Performances, procee∣ded sure from that your Noble Genius, or natural propension to Monarchy, in detesta∣tion of Democracy and Anarchy. Now, my Lord, you are to apply that your clear Eagle∣ey'd Iudgment and great Wisdom in owning and honouring that great Monarchy which Christ established here on Earth, governed by one Visible Head, the Vniversal Pastor, Vicegerent of Christ, and Successor to St. Peter, to whom he gave special warrant to govern his Flock. And it's an undoubted truth, my Lord, that the Interest and Con∣servation of Kingly Government is twisted with true, ancient, Christian Religion, that it seems animated with one and the same Soul; for, like to Hippocrates's Twins, they smile and weep together, and live and die together: For even as Rebellion is the bane of Civil Kingdoms, and Peace and

Concord the preservation of them, even so Schism is the utter ruine of the Church of Christ, Peace, Vnity, Vniformity, the spe∣cial gift of God therein, and in the true Church above all Kingdoms or Common∣wealths, because it's in all points a glorious conspicuous Monarchy, tending every way to Vnity, there being but one God, one Christ, one Flock, one Pastor, one Hope, one Faith, one Body, one Head, as the Apostle assures us. To this heavenly Monarchy, my Lord, you are invited; all Sects, or false new∣fangled Churches, cannot pretend to be a Monarchy, having no Head, nor united Body, but a confused Chaos. I am confi∣dent that your Grace is a Master of more solid reason than to ground your Faith upon an uncertain Foundation, or to pin the Sal∣vation of your Soul on the bare sleeves of any Sect whose Guides are failable and fallible in all mens Opinions, when you may enquire and find out a secure Infallible Guide, leading to that Eternity of Glory you were created for. The great reason, my Lord, the great motive that excited Dr. Vane, Dr. Cressey, Dr. King Bishop of London, the Bishop of Glocester, with very many more, to separate from the Prote∣stant

blind Sect, was because they found no safe, secure, certain, human infallible, un∣erring, warrantable Iudge, to interpret Scri∣ptures, and define questions of Faith without errour, with any promise and privilege from Christ, among the Protestants.
And consider, my Lord, that it's very probable that the last Verdict and Sentence of the forlorn Protestant Sect is already written in Heaven, that it must soon yield, and fall to nothing, as all other damn'd Heresies have done: for it's but folly to pretend to secure by human arts that which God is resolved to destroy. Are you, peradventure, afraid or asham'd that Sectaries will blame you of in∣constancy, in changing, or removing to the Roman Communion? Sure we Mortals have above bruit Beasts the Resurrection of our Bodies; we have above Devils to repent, reclaim, and flie from sin, especially that most heinous sin of Schism and Heresie: for Sectae non possi debunt Regnum Dei, Galat. 5. So as that you must want con∣stancy only to sin: Sapientis est mutare consilium; nullus pudor est ad meliora convertie.—Sure it was no blemish to St. Paul to turn to Christ from a Persecutor;

it was no shame to Constantine the Great, of a Heathen to become a Roman Catholick, Converted and Baptized by Pope Sylvester; and it was no blemish to Louis I. King of France, to be drawn to Christ's Faith by a Woman: Then what shame can it be to your Grace, to forsake Schism, and come to the true Mother-Church, the which King James I. of Blessed Memory did acknow∣ledge in open Parliament to be the only Mo∣ther-Church of all Churches?
I hope, my Lord, you are none of those who say to God, Job 21. Depart from us, we will not have the knowledge of thy ways. I hope you are none of those which abhor to hear good Inspirations, flie and de∣test good Company and Books, lest by such occasions they might be touched in conscience, and so be converted and saved. I hope you are none of those most unfortunate hard∣hearted men whereof the Prophet (Isa. 28.) speaketh, We have strucken a league with Death, and made a bargain with Hell it self; which is in effect as much as if they had said, Trouble us not, molest us not with thy persuasions, spend not thy words and labour in vain; talk to others who are not

yet settled, let them take Heaven that will, we for our parts are resolved, we are at a point, we have made a league that must be kept, we have made a bargain that must be performed, yea, though it be with Hell and Death everlasting. O what a wonderful fury and obduration of an unrelenting heart is this! My Lord, when men are byass'd or prepossess'd, they lie open to be imposed upon to the belief of a down-right Lye, or to the disbelief of a manifest demonstration of an infallible Truth, and so to be mis-led to a plausible Errour.
The great reason why there are few in comparison who now-adays come to a right understanding, and a well-grounded per∣suasion in matters of Faith, is, because they are not many who make a due enquiry with sincerity and unbyassed disposition: sure such who wilfully remain under the power of the false Principles which were instill'd in them in their Education, or who blindly following failable and fallible Guides, whose persons they have in admiration and vene∣ration, resolving never to trouble them∣selves with a free and impartial use of their own Iudgment concerning those Doctrines

which they have in their own Opinion wisely and safely (as they imagine) taken upon trust, led away by lofty conceits and opi∣nion of their own Reason and Capacity, will not suffer them to attempt any sincere inge∣nuous Examination of such things as imply a possibility of being deceived in points of Faith; whence it comes to pass, that they weigh only what is offered in fa∣vour of their own side, and make it the great end of their search not to follow what shall appear to be true upon enquiry, but rather to be confirmed in their present er∣roneous Persuasion: it's no wonder then that such as do enquire thus, are rather hardned in Errour, than convinced of the Truth.—I say then, that it is at once disingenuous, dangerous, and silly, to en∣tertain such blind thoughts.
I pray God these motives may have a strong influence upon you, by the assistance of God's Grace, which is never wanting to those that are not wanting to themselves, and imprint in your Soul the Character of Truth, that you may conquer all oppositions of Vnderstanding or Will, which may bar your ready Obedience thereunto. First, divest your mind of all prepossess'd Opi∣nions

and worldly respects in favour of any Sect, or in dislike of the true ancient Church, so as truly having deposed all obstinate pre∣possessions of your Iudgment, you'll be ea∣sily persuaded that the Roman Church is the true Church, wherein only is Salvation to be had: Pursue this Quest, my Lord, suffer not your self to be mis-led by the seducing of flattering blind Guides, or Obstinacy; Adjourn not this Quest; Say not, as Felix said to St. Paul, Acts 24.25. When I have a convenient season I will call for thee: The World expects your happy Return to the Glorious Liberty of the Sons of God. Alexander the Great, my Lord, being asked if he would run at the Olympick Games, said, I could be content so I might run with Kings. Begin then to exercise a Virtuous Ambition, in running after Kings at the Olympick Game for an Eter∣nity of never-ending Glory in the Roman Communion; in so doing you may know that you run with two and twenty brave Kings of England that were Saints; you run with King Charles II. (whose dear Favourite you have been) who by the quick-sighted piercing eye of his natural

Iudgment said in his Speech, That Christ can have but one Church, and that the same is the Roman Catholick Church; and that Christ left his Power to it, even to forgive sins. He desired to know, How came that Church to lose that Power, and by what Authority men separated themselves from it? His Ma∣jesty answers saying, That it was, that particular men raised Schism for their own advantage.— Here, my Lord, you see the King leaves the heavy guilt of SCHISM at the door of the Protestant Sect. You run with our most Sacred Leige and Sovereign King JAMES II. (whom God preserve for many many happy years) whose Motto is,
Let Life and Three Kingdoms lie at stake,
Before I damn my Soul, or true Faith forsake.
Run with King James I. of ever Renown∣ed Memory, who did acknowledge in open Parliament, That the Roman Catho∣lick Church is the only Mother-Church of all Churches, See Stow, pag. 840.

Run finally, (my Lord) with all the pre∣sent Kings in Christendom, excep those of Swedeland and Denmark, who reign in that Cold, Cloudy, and Sin-darkned Northern Corner of the World, where Heresie is entertained by a company of dull stupid people, that will not penetrate. Run, I pray, with the best part of Man∣kind in all Ages, with the wisest Heads of the World, for unfeigned Holiness and Learning. Run along with these irradi∣ant Pole-Stars, and you cannot go astray: and it's an undoubted truth, that the Life, Example, and Heroick Actions of a Prince, have usually a greater sway up∣on the minds of his Subjects, than his Laws; for the Example of a King is a living Law, which secretly over∣rules mens minds, and bends them to a compliance with it. None can deny this, but those who have their Iudgments swallowed up by prejudice, and whose blind passions have over-run their reason.—Listen therefore to the Voice of Heaven, Apoca. 18.24. Go out of her, my peo∣ple, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. Schism, my Lord, and damn'd

Heresie, (to which you pertinaciously ad∣here) are most grievous Plagues, from it redeem your precious Soul from forfeiture, that has been this long time mortgaged to Death; for Sectae non possi debunt Reg∣num Dei; and non est prudentia, nec concilium contra Dominum; and Sapi∣entis est mutare concilium. Make it, my Lord, your daily Prayer to God to settle you in the right.
This said, my very good Lord, begin to put on (in the Name of Ever-glorious Ie∣sus) a Noble Resolution to shake off those Chains and Bonds of that Monstrous Tyrant Schism, which detains you in sla∣very: let the scales of blind misguided Zeal fall from your eyes, that you may see to find out a most secure Vnerring Guide in your Iourney towards a hap∣py Eternity.—I beseech the Father of Lights and Mercy to illuminate your Vn∣derstanding with Beams of his Saving Grace, that you may learn, embrace, and practise the Faith of Christ, which shall be the daily Prayer of me, who intreats your Grace to bestow one Grace, which is, to permit me to bear all my

Life-time the Title of your humble Chaplain; being always


He may be won that longest does resist;
To pray for your Return I'll ne'r desist.
I'll ne'r despair of any, whil'st I see
A fruitless Tree may next year fruitful be.



