




WHEN I contemplate the many Miracles of Divine Providence that led your most Serene Majesty by the hand through so many wonderful changes and immi∣nent dangers to the Throne of your Royal Ancestors, maugre all the con∣trivements of Hell, and Plots of Hor∣ror

and Impiety, sure all signalize you as pre-ordain'd by the Almighty for a great work of Ages, viz. To rescue the Virgin Spouse of Christ the Ro∣man Catholick Church from the Jaws of the Dragon, it's your rare Valour, and Piety, that must give the fa∣tal blow to the many headed Hydra of this Schism-abounding Age, this heavenly work shall eternize your glo∣rious Name and Memory at the Rising and Setting Sun even beyond the tracts of time, and manifest you to be among all earthly Kings the most meek, cle∣ment, valorous, most wise, merciful, and the most tender hearted truely Christian Prince, who hath Learning to understand, Wisdom to discern, and Powerful Authority to command and commend that Faith be observ'd in your Kingdoms, which is most confor∣mable to the Scripture, most conso∣nant to the Doctrine of the Primitive Church: and most warranted from the express priviledges, advantages, and promisses given by the Sacred mouth of ever glorious Jesus.—
O great IAMES, in you signally is now verified that receiv'd Maxime, A fortibus fortes, a piis generantur pii, from a confluence of the most tran∣scendently august blood of the best Kings of Europe, and from your great Grand-Father, and great Grand-Mother; the ever blessed Queen Mary of Scotland, mark: Sanguis Martyrum semen Ecclesiae. Lo, their blood running in your most Sacred Veins, inflames your dread Ma∣jesty to most sublimely religious under∣takings specially when in you is to a prodigy seen such a Spring of Valour and pious Zeal for to promote, vigo∣rously, yet mildly, the Glory of the Almighty so as that no Posterity will keep it silent but blazon it through∣out the whole World to your eternal Glory. For can any think that the all-bountiful God has imported all those stupendious Gifts in vain to you? No undoubtedly, they are destin'd to glo∣rious actings, for to fill the World with wonders of your happy Reign, in drawing after you to Christs holy

Faith the hearts and obstinate Wills of your Subjects—
Therefore may it please your most Sacred MAJESTY, this small Tract of Divine Faith confidently flies to be shelt'red under the Wings of the gracious Patronage of your most Se∣rene MAJESTY, now by the Grace and Providence of God, Defender of the Faith—And now the most invin∣cible HERO, the only Glory, mov∣ing Soul, and the most Tutelar Angel of Great Brittain,
Y'our Prince whose Valour and Conduct is such,
As none can praise, nor yet admire too much.
In you all's great, great in all Magnificence,
Your graces and gifts excells all Excellence,
You by grant of Liberty quite allays
The Schisms of our late sore aflicting days,
Now each of your Subjects to Faith may tread
That way which safest him to Bliss may lead.
Reign long great Prince, sure your course shall hold
Though ten hundred thousands Whigs cross you should,
Whose mad, vain, damn'd contrivings can't hide
The woful stings of their dark inner side.
They like guilty blind buzzards of the night
Shrink from the clement terrour of thy might.
Lo, Christ's Faith you maintain and that in sight
Of all the World, in all the World's despight,
In glorious Iesus you always confide
Who sure for your all safety shall provide.
God on whom all sublunary things depend
Bless your designs, and you from all harm de∣fend.
Sweet Iesus grant, that upon Sea and Land
All things prove prosperous you take in hand.
May all the blessings my wishes can invent
Prolong your days, and fill them with content.
Therefore let us all your Subjects lift up our eyes, hands, and hearts to God on high, and let us earnestly be∣seech him mercifully to bless our dread Sovereign Queen MARY, with a most holy sweet Princely Graff, a rising from so august, high, and glo∣a Stock; and this for the full comfort and succour of great Brittain, to the

end, that ne'r any other hand than Stuarts, should sway the Scepter of this Land, to this Prayer let all true Sub∣jects say, Amen, Amen.
May it please your Majesty
This is the daily Prayer of


Vive Iacobe diu dux optime, maxime princeps
Te divina tegat dextera, prosper abi.


