



Right Worshipfull,
IT is well known, and confirmed by certain Experience, that by the great care, cost and charges of the Merchants;

and by the great industry and la∣bour of the Planters of Tobacco in the West-Indies, multitudes of people that are under the present Government, are plentifully maintained, and very many of them get great estates for them∣selves and families, and the Cu∣stoms of it are no small profit to the Commonwealth. I think there is no one kind of forreign Commodities that yeelds greater advantage to the publick; and there is scarce any to be compared with it. Wherefore I dedicate this short History of Tobacco un∣to you, that are the Merchants and Factors in it, wherein you may at your leisure observe some thing that may conduce to your further content, if you please but to take notice of the great virtues it hath both in Physick and Chy∣rurgery. But if we reflect upon our Fore-fathers, and that within

the time of less than one hundred years, before the use of Tobacco came to be known amongst us, (For Captain Richard Grenfield, and Sr Francis Drake were the first Planters of it here, and not Sr Wal∣ter Raleigh, which is the common errour) we cannot but wonder how they did to subsist without it; For were the planting and traffick of Tobacco now hindred, millions of the Nation, in all probability must perish for want of food, their whole livelihood almost depend∣ing upon it. So many Druggists, Grocers, Tobacco-shops, Taverns, Inns, Ale-houses, Victuallers, Car∣riers, Cutters and Dryers of Tobac∣co, Pipe-makers, and the like, that deal in it, will prove no less.
The necessity of Tobacco, and maintaining the Plantations of it, is almost as great, if we do but consider who they are that buy it only for their own drinking, and

cannot abstain from it. Sea-men will be supplied with it for their long voyages: Souldiers cannot want it when they keep guards all night, or are upon other hard du∣ties in cold and tempestuous wea∣ther: Farmers, Plough-men, Por∣ters, and almost all labouring men plead for it, saying, they find great refreshment by it, and very many would as soon part with their ne∣cessary food, as they would be to∣tally deprived of the use of To∣bacco. The Nobility and Gentry, who find no fault with it, but that it is too common amongst the Vulgar, do ordinarily make it the complement of all their entertain∣ment, and oft-times all their en∣tertainment besides is but a com∣plement. Scholars use it much, and many grave and great men take Tobacco to make them more serviceable in their callings. To∣bacco is grown to be not only the

Physick, but even the meat and drink of many men, women and children. In a word, it hath pre∣vail'd so far, that there is no living without it; that notwithstanding the vast Plantations of it in the West-Indies, all our corn-fields would soon be turned to gardens of Tobacco, were not men re∣strain'd from it by the Civil Ma∣gistrate. It is like Elias Cloud, which was no bigger at first than a mans hand, that hath suddenly co∣vered the face of the earth: The Low-countreys, Germany, Poland, Arabia, Persia Turky, almost all Countreys drive a Trade of it; and there is no commodity that hath advanced so many from small for∣tunes to gain great estates in the world. Don Ulafc of Amsterdam, who, as I am told, never knew his own name nor parentage, by sel∣ling Tobacco, hangs out the sign of Don de Velasco, under whom he

was once a poor souldier, and is called now by his Generals name. But though they that traffick in it seldom miscarry, yet others by the intemperate taking of it, have somtimes brought themselves and great estates to ruine by it, in whom this Martial Plant hath oc∣casioned more diseases of the mind, than it can cure diseases of the body, though it be of very great use in Physick.
I confess that Tobacco is a plant of Gods making, and it hath many admirable faculties in it, and the fault is not in the leaf, though it be sophisticated by some, and in∣ordinately abused by others; yet there is some reason to suspect, that there hath been much of the cunning of the Devil, and of mans perverse understanding imployed in the large propagation of it, be∣cause that Christians, Iews, Turks and Infidels, almost all mankind,

who are naturally so averse from all that is good, and prone to nothing but mischief, are so much delighted with it. But in my opinion, the providence God intended by discovering this herb to Christians amongst the Indians, that by their daily commerce, the Go∣spel of Iesus Christ should be made known to those Heathen people, who sit in darkness and the shadow of death. The Devil was much afraid of it, as I was enformed by one born in England of Spanish parentage. For when the Christians came first among the Indi∣ans, and began to convert them to the Christian Faith, (as there appeared some symptoms of zeal at the begin∣ning, though it grew soon cold at the sight of gain) the Devil threatned to revenge himself on the Christians, by teaching them to take Tobacco, which having once tasted they should never be able to refrain from it. We see in∣deed that Christians are so much affe∣cted with it, that they cannot forbear

it; but the Devil seems to be more a∣fraid than hurt, to think that Christi∣ans now adayes are so zealous of Gods glory, as to make it their aim to with∣draw those barbarous people from his service; forasmuch as I can understand they have made this the least part of their imployment, not regarding the purpose of God, nor his dispensations for the saving of mens souls, who de∣seended from Adam as well as them∣selves, and may have a part in the righ∣teousness of Christ as well as they; who had they but a glimpse of that light Christians have, would doubtlesse bring forth better fruits than Christi∣ans do, who by their jarring and dif∣ferences one with another, and by minding so much their own profit and advantage, have given great cause to those ignorant people to blaspheme the name of God, and to abhor the Sacrifices of the Lord. Insomuch that when they were told that the Spani∣ards went to Heaven, they said, They

would go to Hell, that they might not be where those wicked Spniards were. So that it is likely that God seeing Chri∣stians now unworthy of his service, hath reserved the conversion of that people, untill such time as Christians shall be more charitable and more composed in love and unity amongst themselves. I must not tire your pa∣tience by writing a Volume upon this subject, left the portal prove too great for the house. I shall onely speak something more concerning Tobacco. And
First, It is no great friend to Phy∣sicians, though it be a physical plant; for the very smoke of it is held to be a great Antidote against all venome and pestilential diseases. It is also sin∣gular in Clysters against the wind∣Cholick, and therefore King Iames merrily said, That was the way to take it: But the Duke of Savoy who was so cured by it was of another mind. The Irish they are altogether for snuff

Tobacco to purge their brains. The Indians swallow down the smoke a∣gainst weariness, till they fall into an Extasie. The upper Scout of Amster∣dam, as some report, chews it against all diseases, and likes it better than Partridge or Pheasant. But the ordi∣nary way to suck it from a pipe, and puff it out again, is held the best way to cure Rheums and distilations from the head. It works such contrary ef∣fects, that Philosophers contend al∣most about it, as much as Chymists do concerning Mercury: they cannot cer∣tainly conclude, whether it be hot and dry, or cold and moist, for it quencheth thirst, and yet is the fittest shoing-horn to draw down drink, and to make men dry; it abates hunger, yet is excellent to provoke a mans appetite to meat: It is a fit companion for mirth or me∣lancholy; it will make one sleep, who wants rest; yet will it keep a Scholar waking in his study, and a souldier up∣on his guard. It puts Physicians to a

non-plus, for it agrees with all ages, sexes and tempers. D. Venner in his Via recta ad vitam longam, allows any man, be he Cholerick, Phlegmatique, Sanguine or Melancholique, six pipes a day. Wherefore some object, That it is a vain thing. I answer with So∣lomon, so are all things else, Vanity of vanities, all is vanity. Yet I should counsel no man to take it, who doth not stand in need of it; and those that do, to use it with that moderation as is required in the use of all other things. When thou hast found honey eat not too muah of it; Ubi mel, ibi fel, where honey is, there is gall; and in every thing in this world there is something to be avoided. Nature her self speaks the same to us with a loud voice in this Tobacco plant as much as in any thing in the world. For those two ground∣leaves that grow upon it, which the Spaniards call Bascheros must be cut off, and thrown away, they smell and taste so unpleasantly, that should they

be mingled with the rest, they would spoil all. As therefore the Planters are very carefull to cast these leaves away, so should Christians be in the use of all temporal things, to cast away all earthly thoughts and desires that are too near the ground, all that is vi∣cious and offensive to God or man, that all their thoughts, words and deeds may be sweet sented in the no∣strils of God, that they may be at length transplanted from their uncer∣tain Plantations here on earth to an everlasting Plantation in Heaven, which is the prayer of him for your Worships, and for all the worthy Merchants and Planters of this Nati∣on, who is

