



MADAM,
THERE is not any Thing that
can Recommend Vertue to the
World, with so much Force
and Advantage, as the Exam∣ples
of those that eminently Practise it.

Vertue is like Beauty in this, That it
has Peculiar and Nameless Charms, in
the Living Original, which no Art can
possibly represent in the Draughts or
Descriptions of it.
But 'tis the great Unhappiness of the
World, that these Excellent Examples
are seldom very Numerous: And none
but those who live within the Sphere of
their Converse, can have the Benefit of
their Influence: And, which is yet a
greater Disadvantage, perhaps several
of these, like your Ladiship, do Love
and Chuse Retirement. In which case
they can be seen but by Few.
All that we can do then for the Rest
of the World, towards the making them
in Love with Vertue, and the perswa∣ding
them to Court and seek it, lies in
these following Things. We must pre∣sent
them with as exact a Draught and
Picture of this Beauty as we can, in
the clear and distinct Explications of
Vertue. We must add to this, the most
fitting and advantageous Dress, in gi∣ving
it the becoming Illustrations and

deserved Praises. And it may further
conduce to our Purpose, to draw also,
and set near the Former, the deform'd
Characters of the opposite Vices;
which, like a Black-a-more by a Fair
Lady, will set off the Beauty to more
Advantage.
Thus much, I presume, is tolera∣bly
perform'd in the following Book,
which is greatly Ambitious to obtain
the Honour of Your Ladiship's Appro∣bation.
Besides these, there is but one Thing
remaining, that can be serviceable to our
Purpose: But 'tis that which seems as
Necessary and Conducing as all the Rest
that we can do. And that is to assure
the World, That the Excellent Draught,
or Picture we have made, is the Descri∣ption
and Character of some Real Per∣son,
who rather Excels, than falls short
of the Representation. Without this,
the Skill of the Representer may be ad∣mired,
but the Thing represented can∣not;
when it is not known, that there
is any such Thing really in Being; and

so the Design of the Labour would be
lost, and the End frustrated.
When we propose a Person, in whom
those Excellent Characters of Vertue
may all be found, and that with advan∣tage;
then we make it known, that the
Precepts and Rules prescrib'd, are not
Notions but Practice; they are not only
what ought to be done, but what is
done; they are not invented, but are
raised fr Observation. When we
can mention an Excellent Example, we
confute that Prejudice which deters the
Cowardly and Mean Spirits, from the
Pursuit of Vertue; who represent it to
themselves, as too strict in the Rules of
it, as a Thing in Imagination only,
and as too difficult, or even impossible
to be put in Practice: And we do that
which will inspire the more Generous
Souls, with a Spirit of Emulation; and
kindle, in all such, a brave Ambiti∣on
to imitate and equal, if they can,
what is so Excellent and Commenda∣ble.

It is for this, Madam, that I have
made so bold, as to set Your Ladi∣ship's
Name to the Front of this Book.
'Tis well known of Your Ladiship,
by all that have the Honour and the
Happiness of Your Acquaintance, that
the best Characters here are no more
the Description of an Excellent Wo∣man,
than they are Characters of You.
And they will all bear with me this Te∣stimony
to Your Worth, that where∣in
soever this Description comes short
of the Subject, it might be perfectly
compleated by one that were able to
compleat Your Excellent Character.
To the Instances of particular Vertues
in the Body of the Book, I had a De∣sire
to add an Universal One.
This Apology, Madam, I ought to
make for my Interrupting Your better
Employment; for venturing to Pub∣lish
those Vertues to the World, which
Your Ladiship does seek to Conceal;
and for ascribing those Praises, which
You are as unwilling as deserving to
receive. I hope You will be pleased

to Pardon that, which a Zeal for the
Honour and Advantage of Your Sex
has inspired; and suffer me to Sub∣scribe,
MADAM,

