


Reader,
I Here present thee with a short System of Mathematical Medicine; a Work altogether New, extracted out of the Writings of that Learned and Eminent Mathematician and Famous Physician D. P. late Professour of Medicine in the University of Leyden. To him alone is due the Glory of this Invention: and he it is that first laid the Foundation of this Aereal Castle: and he only is able to finish the Building; and bring this great Work to its wished Perfe∣ction. If thou reap any Advantage by this Treatise (as I hope thou shalt) thou knows to whom Thanks is due. Yet I cannot but say, that the Translator deserves some small tri∣bute of Praise; for had it not been for him, it might have lyen buried for ever in the

Ruines of old Rome, out of which he has dig∣ged it with a great deal of Pains and Care; and so been the happy Instrument by which this great Blessing is conveighed to all these of this Island, who understand not the Lan∣guage of the Beast. Tho' this Work may just∣ly be called New, having never been brought to any tollerable Perfection before; yet it was attempted of old by that Famous Mountebank Crinas Massiliensis, who was so precise and exact in his Patients Diet, that he would not allow them to Eat or Drink, but with regard of Times and Seasons, observing the Course of the Stars, choosing good Days and Hours, and walking always by his Almanack and E∣phimerides, and all this by his great skill in the Mathematicks. But Mountebank as he was, he turned Thessalus, as great a Quack as himself, out of the Sadle, Cum arte ge∣minata ut cautior religiosorq, ad syderum motus ex Ephemeride Mathematica cibos dando, horasque observando autoritate eum praecessit: And found a way by his Ma∣thematical jugler Tricks, to live like a Prince, and leave a good round Sum to his Heirs. This Fellow at best was nothing but a cunning

Rogue, and believed no more that Mathema∣ticks were of any use in Medicine, that I be∣lieve that the Moon is a Chesshire Cheese; but only made use of them as a Trick to get Money. But here you have this Doctrine se∣riously inculcat, and supported with all the Reason it is capable of, and Prophecy too. You have not here a meer Theory and abstract Speculation of this Mathematical Medicine, but many practical Conclusions regularly de∣duced, and several particular Cases handled. But Reader, that I may not forestal thy Judge∣ment by a too high Commendation of this Work, I will say no more, but recommend to thee to read impartially this little Treatise; by which thou shalt be able to judge of the real worth of this New Medicine, and of the Be∣nefits will accrue to Mankind by it. I have subjoined to this, A Discourse of Certainty, according to the Principles of the same Lear∣ned Author; which is every whitt as good Divinity, as the other is Physick. The one without the other would have been but lame and defective: But both together make a compleat Work.

