



Most Noble Senators.
THe design of this Dedication, is not to call in your help and assistance to the Cause here depending, it being sufficiently guarded by a higher power, to wit, By that Living WordHeb. 4.12. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5., which is sharper then any two edged Sword; and which is able by it self, to overthrow and dissipate those deep and subtile Reasonings which men oppose against it. That Doctrine which is armed with

the Authority thereof, will be sure to stand, though men oppose it; but that which is destitute of this support, will be as sure to fall, though men protect it: Although I think, you to be as fit, as any company of men upon the face of the Earth, to umpire Diffe∣rences of this nature; knowing that many of you have   Clem. Alexand. VI. Strom. Senses exercised to discern between Truth and Error; yet to be Judges in matters of Faith, is an honor which I dare not give you, and which I hope you dare not take. Indeed, as you are Christians you ought to judge for your selves, and not (like those Horns, which gave their power to the Beast) give up your Faith to the Votes of others; how Godly, or Learned soever they are accounted; but to make your own Judgements in Matters of Religion, a Rule or Standard for the Faith of others, and to compel them to believe, what you conceive is Truth, were to assume a power more then God; who though he doth effectually move and perswade Gen 9.27. mens hearts, yet he doth not necessitate them to believe, and embrace the Truth; whose example may instruct us, that Religion ought to be propagated by conviction, and not by compulsion Religio est sua∣denda, non ∣genda.. It is remarkable, that they who a∣scribed unto Magistrates a Definitive and Coercive Power in Spirituals, have (when Magistrates would not serve their turns) denied the power, which they have in Temporals; refusing (contrary to the Rules of Christ 1 Tim. 2.2. Jere 29.7. Rom 13.1.) to own them, pray for them, or to yeeld obedience to their lawful commands; as if none must hold the Sword, but such as will use it, to fight their quarrel, and to effect that by force of Arms, which they themselves cannot do by strength of Argument. Though (blessed be God) we now have the counte∣nance

and protection of the Magistrate; yet we seek not to engage his power to extirpate, or to cut off them, that do differ from us. We desire no other liberty for our selves, then what we are willing should be given unto our Brethren, Viz. To be∣lieve and worship God according to the Light, which he hath given us, humbly to declare our Judge∣ments in Matters of Faith, and with meekness to Rea∣son out the things, wherein they and we do differ, from the Word of God.
For my own part, I look upon it as a special Mercy (for which we ow suitable acknowledgements, both to God and you) that although we live in times, wherein the Truth is opposed, and blasphemed more then ever before; yet the Faithful have liberty to write and speak in defence thereof: We may re∣member when it was not so. I wish that all Orthodox Christians, and especially our University Worthies, (who have more leisure and far greater helps for such Polemical Exercises, then their Brethren abroad) had more Zeal to improve this Liberty for the ad∣vantage of the Truth. The Authors of most of those Errors and Blasphemies which have been lately started, are but little more to be faulted, then they that do profess the Truth (I mean such as are indued with Gifts and Abilities) who suffer them to walk abroad without check and controle; seeing there is no Error whatsoever, but the Scrip∣ture affords us variety of Weapons to wound and slay it. We cast the blame upon Magistrates, be∣cause they do suffer them, (nor can I excuse their con∣nivence at any of those Evils which are contrary to the Light of Nature) yet I fear the greatest share of

this guilt will lie at our doors who are the Ministers of the Gospel, whose office (without controversie) it is, To contend for the Faith, to convince gain-sayers; and by sound Doctrine,Jude 3. Tit. 1.9, 11. to stop their mouths, who teach things which they ought not. It is but a slender discharge of our Duty, to cry out against Errors and Heresies, and never shew and convince men what Truth and Er∣ror is, such loose and general Invectives do never ad∣vantage, most times they wound the sides of Truth; whereas, if the Trumpet gave a more certain sound, and Ministers did prove those things to be Errors, which they brand with this name, their pains would much more succeed to the profit of their Hearers, they would be better armed against such dangers.
Your late Resolves to emit a Declaration, For giving fitting Liberty to all that fear God within this Com∣monwealth; for the better preservation of the mutual Peace of such as fear God among themselves, without imposing one upon the other; and to discountenance Blasphemies, damnable Heresies, and Licentious Practises (in Answer to the Petitions of the Congregated Churches in the Northern Counties) I am perswaded, have exceed∣ingly rejoyced the hearts of all the Faithful through∣out the Land. Now I humbly offer it to your con∣siderations, whether it be not a necessary expedient to preserve the mutual peace of Christians; straitly to prohibite, under fitting penalties, the giving names of obloquy,Jude 9. or railing accusations (such as the Arch∣angel durst not bring against the Devil,) and the im∣posing of slanders, upon one another. I see not how any manner of good can be expected from this Pra∣ctise; me thinks mens Arguments might be as keen and nervous, though their Language be sober, be∣seeming

Christians, and civil Men. Such names, they do not convince, most times they harden those that are mis-led. But then the mischeifs that come by it, are not a few: I know nothing that doth imbitter the spirits, and alienate the hearts of Christians from each other, so much as this; and which is worse, the Truths and Ways of God are not seldom, nor a little clouded by this means. For usually the names of the vilest Errors and Heresies, are made the Badge and Livery of the choisest Truths.
The Discourse before you, doth instance in one, the title of ANTINOMIAN (which was ori∣ginally the character of loose and licentious Liber∣tines) i by some of our new Doctors, appropriated to them, who have most faithfully managed the Pro∣testant Cause, against the Papists, and in the cheif Points which are depending between them; to wit, Our Justification by Christ alone, without Works and Con∣ditions, performed by our selves; and our full and perfect Deliverance from the Curse of the Law. Though there is no true Christian, but will rejoyce to suffer shame, for the sake of Christ; yet by these arts, the Ignorant and Sim∣ple have their ears stopt, and eyes shut against the Word of Life; for few have so much courage, as to look into that which is generally branded with an evil name: So that in a short time, a few nick-names shall do us more hurt, then Fire and Faggot did here∣tofore.
The Lord therefore keep these purposes in your hearts, till you have fulfilled them, and inable you to perfect the Work which you are called to; that the Truth may spred, and Godliness flourish, that Righte∣ousness may be equally administred, and Wickedness

(especially in High Places) severely punished; that Learning (whereof there is so great use, both in Church and State) may be encouraged; and Peace (if possible) be restored unto us.
For the effecting hereof, I doubt not, but you have the earnest Prayers of all the Faithful through∣out the Land, I can assure you, of him, who is

The Fourth day of the Nineth Moneth. 1653.
