


Reader,
IN the preceeding Discourse you have a Conjectural Art turned into a Certain Science, and, by a strange kind of Me∣tamorphosis, Delirations transformed into Demonstrations: And in this, you have an Attempt made, to turn Certainty into Conjecture, and the Truth into a Lie: And all by the Power of the Mathematicks; which, like Circe's magical Rod, turns Men into Swine, and Swine into Men. And as the Principles laid down in the former lead to Empirieism, so these of the later tend to Scepticism, as to Matters of fact. And as he that regulats his Practice in Physick by the first, will at best prove nothing but a Moun∣tebank; so he that founds his Belief on the last, will prove litle better than a Deist or Infidel. Now altho these Consequences natu∣rally

follow from the Principles laid down in the one and the other; yet I do not accuse this learned Man of any thing but sublime In∣advertency. Some Men speak before they think, and these for the most part know not what they say; and so can hardly be guilty of Malice, tho they may be accused of Rash∣ness. But since he that kills a Man by meer Inadvertency, as really kills him as he that does it deliberatly and on design, and the damage is the same, tho the guilt is not. There∣fore I would advise these blind Archers, not to shoot any more at random, nor draw their Bow at a venture: For they may do more Mischief than they are aware of. And if they continue to do so after Admonition, that which in Charity was thought Rashness before, will now justly be reckoned Malice and Design; and the Offender no longer a Man-slayer, but a Murderer.
I had not concerned my self with this im∣pertinent piece of Stuff at this time, were it not that there is a Set of Men sprung up, who call themselves Deists, (but who for the most part are down-right Atheists) these pretend to be the only Men of Logick and Disputa∣tion,

who make the learned Mob stand ama∣zed at the wit and profoundness of their idle Chat, as if they had seen the Gorgons Head: And a Gnat is not more troublesome with its litle Sting and Buzz, than these Smaterers with their small Sophistry. These Wits im∣pudently tell us, That nothing is certain but a Mathematical Demonstration, and that all historical Certainty amounts to no more but a meer Conjecture, and that the best attested History is litle better than a Romance: Tho the best Reasons they bring to maintain this Paradox, are litle better than the Dreams of Enthusiasts, or Ravings of sick Folks. The truth of which will easily appear to any that will give themselves the Trouble to read at∣tentively the following Discourse.
