



HOnorable and beloved in the Lord. That thee is a ▪
Countrey, and a Citie having Foundtion, and a King∣dome
that cannot be moved, prepared for you▪ he 
fully assused: For it is most certain, there being ∣thing
more abundantly spoken of  more clear∣ly
promised in all the Scriptures, than the  And
that yee shall bee delivered from all your  and
troubles in all places wheresoever yee are  and
from all your mournings, sorroes, paines 
teares, graves, dust▪ and brought to inherit all those geat
thngs promised, with all the holy Fathers and their Chl∣dren,
and childrens children that have been before you; and with Christ your Prince
at his appearing and his Kingdome, which will be now very speedily, be ye a so 
assured. And so look yee for him, and for it.
And  take heed, that in the little mean time (which is to be between this
present houe and  of his appering) no man deceive you by any way or meanes.
For as there hath been false Prophets, and deceiving Spirit in the world, that 
deceived many, as Christ fore-told they should▪ So there are still many, even 
with us  had, as well as els here that shll and doe dceve. And 
Doctrine you  heare of, or read tending to the taking your minde, off from 
hope and expectation of your eternall inheritance in the world to ome, 
same upon any thing that is or can be imagined to be here in this present 
not unto it: For all such Doctrine is of the Spirit of Satan, and not of 
glorious shew soever it makes.
And as touching the Doctrine of the illinaries; Although it be 

very next ensuing age after the Apostles, the beloved Disciple of Christ having
written the Revelation, and sent it to the seven Churches of Asia (they being not yet
disprsed by the persecution of the Dragon) the same opinion of a resurrection from
the dead, and glorious reigne of Christ with his Saints on Earth for a thousand yeares
before the generall resurrection, and end of the world, was conceived, taught, and
held up by many Christians then counted ound in the faith, Orthodox, as they speak.
Some of which being men of great note, Tertullian, Ereneus, Iustine, and others, all
grounding their opinion chiefly on this place of Scripture, Rev. 20. 4, 5, 6.
And that now the opinion (aving lain dead for many hundred years) is again revi∣ved
and maintained by men of great esteem also or learning, &c. whose names for the
credit of the opinion, that it may carry the greater countenance and authority with
it, are (by those that have published books of the same) mentioned and described with
high applause, insomuch as the Doctrine is almost generally entertained both by
Ministers and people, and those especially that seem the most zealous, who embrace
it with great affection, as a most excellent mystery of truth.
Although all this bee so, yet neverthelesse it may possibly be, And if one so
farre inferior unto them in those great respects of learning and esteeme, as there is
no comparison, may be so bold, I then durst say, they are all deceived, and erre, not un∣derstanding
the Scriptures.
And this I doe not onely say; but by the grace of God, shall also make it plainly
to appeare, though not unto all men, yet unto you that are the children of Wis∣dome,
whom the Kingdome doth concerne, and who can best discerne and judge be∣tween
truth and error.
And this is all I doe request of you, that ye will be pleased to read, and duly to con∣sider
the things I here present unto you; and if ye shall finde that I speak not the
words of truth and sobernesse, let me then be reproved.
And so I submit my selfe unto your censure, praying alwayes unto the Lord, and
desiring with my whole soule, that his truth may prosper in the world, and take place
in the hearts of all his chosen people in these last dayes; and that  would give unto
us all his holy Spirit of truth to teach us, and lead us into all truth, and to enable us
to walk worthy of the same truth, to the glory of his holy name, and our owne com∣fort
and peace of mind here, and salvation hereafter in that world to come, through
Jess Christ our Prince and Saviour, unto whom with the Father and the holy Spirit,
be all praise and thanks for ever and ever. Amen.

