



CHurches, should I tell you of more Warres, Pldgues, Famine, Staining of all Worldly Glory, shaking all Earthly Powers; you would, (it may be) beleeve me. But, if by a Beam of light, I tell you of the sha∣king and scattering of your Heaven, your Sumptuous and Glori∣ous Building, the Churches gathered: You say, This is a hard saying, who can heare it; but surely it will be done, whether you beleeve it, or no. But, heare a word more, I told you my Spark of light was well nigh spent, its now suppli'd, or anointed with fresh oyle: mistake me not, my design is not presently, if I could, to take you off those wayes wherein you are, or may be profitable in building up one another in your most holy faith, so long as there is Lambs, smoaking flax, or bruised reeds, or babes in Christ among you, there is need of your helping one another, till power from on high be brought forth in a more immediate way to do it, which shall be in the time appointed by the Father. The end of that which is declared unto you, is to prove you are not of so long continuance as many of you imagine.
Honourable Parliament of England, who are managing the great Affairs of this tottering Kingdom, you are now higher than you were: I have nothing against it, but there is one higher than you, the Lord of Hosts, who has his designs in the midst of yours. In this small volume, written by a glimse of his light, you may take a small view and sight of his footsteps, that are, and will be upon this Kingdome, even the overturning all worldly powers, and Governments, that His may be set up, whose right all Govern∣ment is, the Lord Jesus, which is more pure, and spirituall, than any is yet in the world; to which, if you, or others, shall act sub∣serviently, you may flourish; if not, expect yours, or their de∣signs frustrated, or broken, that tend to Exaltation. This King∣dome, to whom you ought to be as Fathers, how many Stormes

has past through it, and been upon it? Al's pretty quiet now, and they begin to strengthen, and settle all, almost exalting them∣selves, as though all evill were past, though not a whit bettered by those judgments that have been already. But behold, that line of desolution that is spread over this Land, to lay its Excellen∣cie yet more lower: I wish you would lay it to heart, and trem∣ble before the Lord; put off, and lay by your brave Ornaments, within, and without, that the Lord may know what to doe unto you. Could I command as many drops of bloud, as teares have fallen from mine eies, or sighs from within, as have been in be∣holding the miseries hang over this Kingdome: I would write unto you in a more scarlet die. If you will read this Book, you shall find nothing but joy and gladnesse proclaimed to the Israel of God, and that the day of their Redemption drawes nigh; but lamentation, mourning, and woe, to the wicked, be they high or low, rich or poor, noble or ignoble; those in power, or not in power, I can proclaim nothing else; what it will cost me, I know not: Storms I have met with already, but they caused me not to desist from my work, but were as wind to the fire, which makes it flame the more, so long as God thought fit to imploy me.
I have lived among divers Great Persons many years, a poor servant, and now come to this hard incounter with them, it seems harsh; but surely the strong Lord of Hoasts is before, he leads, he is Light, Life, and Strength, a strong Tower, a Buckler, and Shield, to help me to beare stripes, if need be, and to avoid their scornes, although they should say, as Eliab to David, 1 Sam. 17. 28. I know thy Pride, and the haughtinesse of thy Spirit. Or as Michal to David, 2 Sam. 6. 20, 21. That I have uncovered my selfe as one of the vaine fellowes, it is before, and at the command of the Lord: But I will yet be more vile then thus, in this manner, if the Lord think fit, and will be base in mine owne sight. Plainnesse and truth is almost out of fashion, it was once otherwise, Job 32. 21, 22. Let me not, I pray, accept any mans person, neither let me give Titles unto man. For I know not to give flattering Titles, in so doing my Maker would soon make me away. Zech. 8. 16. Speak you every man the truth to his neighbour. But,
Idle Shepherds, awake, call upon the Lord, come, you should be wise, if you read what is said concerning Powers, great

ones, City and you. What will you do even like your brethren in former times, will you not? you know who smote Michaiah on the cheek, 1 Kin. 22. 24. and said, which way went the Spirit of the Lord from me to thee: so Amos 7. 10. a Priest that ought to have been wiser, when a Heardsman comes with a true message from God, he like a deceiver sent to the King, saying, Amos hath conspired against thee in the midst of the Land of Israel, the Land is not able to beare all his words, go saith he, flee the way into the Land of Judah, eat bread, and prophesie there. But pro∣phesie not again at Bethel, for it is the Kings Chappel, and it is the Kings Court. He might as well have said, Amos, this is no place to entertaine such Persons as shall Prophesie of Ruine, or Desolation, although commanded by God, if you will come hither and be welcome, you must speak pleasing things, prophesie of Wine and strong drink, and pleasures, such as are fit for great persons, prophesie flatteries, as Ahabs Prophets did, 1 Kin. 22. 6. and then thou shalt be entertained at Court, and with great ones as they were: it may be so now in our Land, flatter∣ing and deceitfull Priests that prophesie lies and pleasing things to the fancies of great persons may flourish, when as they that de∣clare the truth of God to them, may go in danger of the losse of all outward injoyments, but they will say I am beside my businesse, towards you O watchmen; therefore hearken, do not you like A∣masiah say, I have conspired against this Land, nor that it is not able to bear all my words, nor bid me Prophesie somewhere else, or of pleasinger things, they are the true sayings of God, would you have me cry Peace, when the Lord cryes trouble, and so be consumed for my pains, what the Lord hath spoken to me, that declare I to you; Oh youl say, Observe, what? he makes him∣self a Prophet, this is as Christ saith, false Prophets shall arise and deceive many: well, they shall so, take heed you be not a kin to them: do you thinke I am guided by a deceiving spirit, come then, handle me, pry into me, try and search me by the Scriptures, I am willing to be tryed, but you want sight, Ile re∣fer my self to the judgement of those that have a clearer light then you, even the Saints: But secure London, what say you to me? what's your judgement concerning these sad things threat∣ned against you, you have had many warnings from the Lord, by divers men, you haue taken little notice of them to believe them,

would you believe one that should be raised from the grave to de∣clare against you from the Lord? why? behold, he hath sent one with a message raised from the valley & shadow of death, from the pow∣ers of darknesse that were within him, even from the belly of hel. The floods compassed him about, his billowes and waves passed o∣ver him, he was even broken, and shattered in pieces; his strength of inward and outward man; was well nigh spent, as to his own view, and the view of others, laid aside as a vessel of no use, yet suddenly by an Almighty power, raised him like a Lion roaring for his prey: of a fearfull and faint heart made bold, of weak was made strong, to declare as sad a message elsewhere as to you, even with, and not minding the hazzard of life. Wilt thou believe now, and turn to the Lord, whether you will hear, or whether you will forbear, know you have had a message, you shall be inexcusable.
As for you of the Army of Officers, and Souldiers, the least part of this small book concerns you, as you are Souldiers, but if you war against Heaven, you will be conquered, notwithstanding all your victories; the line of dissolution will reach you, you have been such, as have been made use of by God to work great out∣ward salvation for Israel, that before was in, and under the hands of cruel, and unreasonable men, blessed be his great name for it, and the Lord reward your kindnesse and labours into your bo∣somes, with spirituull and temporall blessings. I know, you will many of you confesse, that you have seen much of the power of God with you, subduing your enemies, and that God hath shown much of his kindnesse to his poore Israel, as in giving them such deliverance as at this day, they are so precious and dear in his sight, that he hath reproved and given men (I may say) to the slaughter for their sakes: but as if that were not enough he is following them with more excellent things, even the breakings forth of his own Glorie, in a more large manner, which you may see a glimpse of in this book: and what ever desolations shall come upon this Kingdome, through his fullnesse in them, they shall lift up their heads when others shall call to rocks and moun∣taines to cover them from that wrath which will be upon them. The Temple of the Lord Jesus is to be built, and exalted, yea, glo∣rified with his own Glorie: the time and day growes on apace, though Israel it self knows not what to make of it, when Mo∣ses

walkt into Egypt, saying, Let Israel go, though there were great combustions amongst the Egyptians, and Israel hearkened not to the voice of Moses for anguish of spirit, and cruel bon∣dage, and Moses was troubled, and much discouraged in his work, complaining to the Lord, that Israel would not hearken to his message, Exod. 6. 9. 12. Yet it presages Israels deliverance is nigh at hand, Israel is in boudage now, and hath been a long time, and for the Lord to snatch poore persons out of the fire, and cause them to walkup and down in the middest of great ones, as hath been done through the strength of God in Cambridge-Shire, and now in this Citie: the great ones must know Israel must be delivered out of Captivitie and Bondage spirituall, and temporall: let the world and Israel too think what they will, of a truth▪ God is hastning with the breakings forth of some great spirituall Glory.
Where your Scouts were met formerly, it argued your Ar∣my was near, the Lord sending his Scouts or fore-runners, crying, the Lord is come, and coming; it presages he is at hand, if the Lord send watchmen, that shall lift up their voyce like singers, and call upon the waste places of Jerusalem, to break forth in∣to joy, and sing together, and say to Zion, thy God raigneth, and the Lord will bring back their captivity, read Isa. 52. 7. 8, 9. and tell me what you think.
This the Lord hath done of late in England, and does still, though they be accounted mad men, men wondred at, scoft at, as Neh. 4. 2. What do these feeble Jews? will they fortifie themselves? will they sacrifice? will they make an end in a day? Scoffers, hearken, Israel must sacrifice otherwise than they have done; the spirituall Temple of Jesus must be built: We care not, though for walls, bulwarks, or Armies for this work; God is all this to the building of this Temple, Isa. 26. 1. Zech. 9. 8. Nay hearken, The Lord himselfe will be the alone Erecter and Exalter of it, Zech. 16. 12. 13. Not by might, or by power, but of the Spirit of the Lord of Hoasts, Zech. 4. 6. The Lord will be the Glory of it al∣so, its now but the day of small things, there's many powers of darknesse to hinder the breaking forth of this Glory. But, who are you, O great mountaines, before the breakings forth of the Lord Jesus? You shall become a plain, he shall be brought forth in despight of you, and there shall be shoutings, crying, Grace,

Grace unto Him. Be silent, O all Flesh, before the Lord, for he is rising out of the habitation of his Holinesse. The Fountaine yet maintaines life, therefore O spirituall Israel, doe you search the Scriptures whether these things be so, or no, like those, Acts 17. And do not lightly cast these precious Declarations to you, away, till you have carefully examined these things, and consider what these voices meane.
O Israel, consider, is here another Gospel? the breakings forth of another Spirit? another faith, or new prophesies? Or, is here not a tast of the promises, prophesies, and words of the Prophets of old, and Apostles of our Lord Jesus Ghrist? I speak as to wise men, judge what I say, and with Mary, ponder these things in your hearts. The God of wisedome be your light injudging: Its the desire of him, who could willinglp spend, and be spent, (if the Father thinks fit) for the furtherance of your Consolation and Joy; who is

