



Brethren,
IT was the holy ambition and strife of the
Apostle Paul (that chosen Vessel to bear
the Name of Christ before the Gentiles)
to preach the Gospel where Christ was
not named, lest hee should seem to build up∣on
another mans foundation, Rom. 15. 20.
To hand on a good work begun by another is
very commendable, and shall not loose its reward;
but to break the ice and begin a good work is ve∣ry
honourable, and shall surely have a great re∣ward.
I am much perswaded it hath been the
gracious strife, I am sure it hath been the lot of
many of our faithfull Brethren, in New Eng∣land,
to preach the Gospel where Christ was not
named before; and the Lord hath given a signal
Testimony, that they have not laboured in vain.
Wee reade of the First-fruits of Achaia unto
Christ (Rom. 16. 5. and again, 1 Cor. 16. 15.)

Wee have also heard both of the First-fruits and
Second-fruits of India in New England unto
Christ; and these are a fair assurance of a plen∣tifull
harvest there in due time. A blessed Foun∣dation
is laid, yea, the Building begins to appear
above ground, in the visible profession or professed
subjection of many poor Souls unto the Gospel of
Christ. May wee not therefore hopefully expect,
that the Top-stone shall be set up with a shout
of Grace, Grace to it?
Hee that attentively readeth the Report, which
is made in the following Collection of the Exami∣nations
and Confessions of several Native Indi∣ans,
who have been wrought upon by the preach∣ing
of the Word in the Wilderness, will see much
cause to admire the free grace and goodness of
God to them, as also his mighty power and the re∣vealing
of his arme in them. What strong and
clear convictions of sin, both of the sinfulness of
their natures, and of the sins of their lives have
they been under, who lay (before) dead in tres∣passes
and sins, wholly alienated from the life
of God through the ignorance that was in
them? What strugglings and strivings with
corruption and temptation do they speak of,
before they could come off from sin, and from

that vain conversation received by tradition
from their Fore-fathers? What wrestlings had
they with unbelief, before they could close with
Christ in the promise? What full resignations of
themselves have they made to the commands of
Christ after closing with him by faith in the pro∣mise?
Yea, what hungrings and thirstings do some
of them express for more intimate communion with
Christ in attendance upon all his Ordinances in a
Church-state or holy Fellowship with his People?
Surely, what these late Aliens from the
Common-wealth of Israel have found and
declared (as their spiritual experiences) about the
dealings of God with their hearts, in bringing
them off from sin, and home to himself, may
shame many among us, who have been born and
bred up in the aire and sound of the Gospel all
their dayes.
I may, not unfitly, make use of those
Prophesies of Moses and Esaias concern∣ing
the Iewes and Gentiles (and so applyed by the
Apostle Paul, Rom. 10. 19, 20, 21.) in this pre∣sent
case between us in England and the Indians.
The Lord hath begun to provoke us to Jealou∣sie
by them that were no people, and by a
foolish Nation hee hath angred us, hee is

found of them that sought him not, hee is
made manifest to them that asked not after
him, but all the day long hath hee stretched
out his hands unto us a disobedient and gain∣saying
people. Conversions are grown some∣what
rare (that's sad) in England; and such
accounts of Conversion much more rare. And as
we finde but few able to give any passable account
of their conversion to God, so wee finde not a few
offended at the requiring and taking of it, before
admission into compleat Church-communion. Wee
have many who profess the Religion they were
born in, but wee have (comparatively) only a
few, who profess Religion upon the evidences of
their New-Birth. And that's one great reason
why the Church and the world, the pretious and
the vile, are in so lamentable a mixture in most
places at this day.
It were a very desireable mercy, that the pra∣ctise
and example of our native Brethren, yea,
of the native Indians in New England might
kindle in us the fire of a blessed emulation in this
matter; and that the Ministers of the Gospel would
every where exspect and diligently enquire after
some hopefull proofs of the work of Grace from
all those, who, in their own right, partake of those

higher Priviledges, the Seals of the Covenant of
Grace. Doubtless, then, Churches would appear
more like Churches in the beauties of Holiness, and
the fruits of the presence of Christ would be more
gloriously visible in them. The great thing which
wee (upon whom the ends of the world are come)
should earnestly pray, endeavour and wait for is,
that the new Jerusalem may be seen coming down
from heaven, like a Bride adorned for her Hus∣band;
and to be any way, rightly, instrumentall
for the bringing in of this glory, is a piece of the
best Glory which wee are capable of on this side
our heavenly Glory.
'Twas therefore a very gracious as well as a noble
Design, to create and establish a Corporation in this
our England, to receive, improve, mannage, and is∣sue
a free contribution and the profits arising
from it for the constant support, encouragement,
and promotion of this work of Christ in That
Other England. Nor can wee but with much
thankfulness to God take notice of the liberal cha∣rity
of many who have already contributed to it,
as also of the faithfulness, diligence, prudence, and
Godly zeal of those worthy Persons who are en∣trusted
with the disposal of those Contributions.
And because, as the whole Work is great, so there

are some great parts of it now in hand, as the
Printing of Davids Psalms and the New Testa∣ment
(besides an intendment of printing the
whole Bible) in the Indian Language, which
must needs be a work of great charge as well as of
excellent use, (for these reasons I say) it would
be a most acceptable Charity, either to procure or
advance additional Contributions. How can any
honour the Lord better with their perishing sub∣stance,
then by forwarding a Design which may be
a means to keep thousands of Souls from perish∣ing?
Yea, what an honour will it be to this whole
Nation, that the Holy Bible should be printed in
our dayes and at our cost in a Language and for a
Nation which never had it to this day? That this
blessed and beautifull Vndertaking for the gathe∣ring
in of those poor Souls, who yet wander in that
Howling wilderness, to the Flock and fold of Christ
(the Great Shepherd of the Sheep) may not want
their compassionate and chearfull assistance, who
are already (through grace) gathered into his ho∣ly
flocks and folds, is the hearty desire and prayer of
The 6th of the first
Moneth, 1659.
Sirs,

