





Beloved Brethren.
AS, The One thing which ye have de∣sired
of the Lord, and which yee
have sought after, is, that your
selves might dwell in the house of
the Lord all the dayes of your
lives, to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to enquire in his Tem∣ple:
So, I am much assured that the next thing
which yee have desired of the Lord, and which ye
have earnestly sought after, is, that they who have
hitherto been strangers to, might dwell also in the
house of the Lord all the dayes of their lives, to
behold the beauty of the Lord, and to enquire in
his Temple; yea, that they might be a house and
a Temple of the Lord. This being the gratious de∣signe
of your holy breathings unto God, and of
your liberall contributings unto men, ye cannot
but rejoyce to hear of any thing which looketh
like, much more which really is a fruit and return

of such breathings and contriutigs. Holy pray∣ers
and zealous endeavours are very sweet in their
acts, but they are much more sweet in their effects
and issues. It should mightily encourage the seed
of Iacob to pray, because God hath said, that he
hath not said to the seed of Iacob,  yee me in vaine.
But how should it prvoke the sed of Iacob
to give thanks, when they find that they have not
sought the Lord in vaine? and that their labours
have not been in vaine in the Lord?
Beloved Brethren, yee may now see and tast the
fruit of those Prophecie, which ye have been help∣ing
to the birth. The Wildernesse and solitary places
are glad, the desert rejoyceth and blossmth as the Rose
it blossometh abundantly, and rejoyceth even with joy
and singing. The glory of Lebnon is given to it, the
excellency of Carmell and Sharon, these see the glory of
the Lord, and the excellency of our God.
This little Book of Observations and Experien∣ces
gives you a brief and faithfull Narrative of the
increasing glory of Christ by the Progresse of the
Gospel in New-England: It tells you ow Christ
hath there led captivity captive, and given gifts
for men, yea, for the rebellious, that the Lrd God
might dwell among them. Where the strong man
Armed kept the house (for many Ages and Gene∣rations,
and all was in peace:) there now (Christ)
A stronger then he, hath come upon him, and hath
(in many examples) overcome him and taken
from him all his Armour wherein he trusted, and
divided his spoyles: Now Christ keeps the house,
which Satan formerly kept; yea, they who were
kept by Satan as his house, are now ready and ear∣nestly

desire to be built up as a house for Christ.
The poor, naked, ignorant Indians, who lately knew
no civill Order, now beg to be brought into Church
Order, to live under the Government, and enjoy
the holy Ordinances of our Lord Jesus Christ, in
the purest way of Gospel-worship.
May we not now (Beloved) make mention of
Rahab and Babylon to them that know Christ? Be∣hold
Philistia, and Tyre, with Ethiopia, this man was
borne there; and of Sion (in New-England) it may
be said, this and that man (of the wild, rude, and bar∣barous
Indians) was borne there. Read this short
discourse, and it will tell you that the Lord hath
blessed the labours of the Messengers of Sion in New-England,
with the Conversion of some (I may say,
of a considerable number) of the Indians, to be a
kind of first fruits of his (new) Creatures there.
O let old England rejoyce in this, that our brethren
who with extream difficulties and expences have
Planted themselves in the Indian Wildernesses, have
also laboured night and day with prayers and tears
and Exhortations to Plant the Indians as a spirituall
Garden, into which Christ might come and eat his
pleasant fruits. Let the gaining of any of their souls
to Christ, and their turning to God from Idols to
serve the living and true God, be more pretious in
our eyes then the greatest gaine or return of Gold
and Silver. This gaine of soules is a Merchandize
worth the glorying in upon all the Exchanges, or ra∣ther
in all the Churches throughout the world. This
Merchandize is Holinesse to the Lord: And of this the
ensuing Discourse presents you with a Bill of many
particulars, from your spirituall Factory in New Eng∣land,

as the improvement of your former adventures
thether, for the promoting of that heavenly Trade;
as also for an encouragement not only to all those
who have freely done it already, to adventure yet
more, but also for the quickning of those who hi∣therto
have not done it, now to underwrite them∣selves
Adventurers for the advancement of so holy
and hopefull a designe. I shall adde only this one
word, That, Whosoever shall thus Adventer for Christ,
shall have Christ for his Insurer. To his Grace and
Blessing I recommend both you and this Blessed
Work, who am
Dearly Beloved,

