



Honourable and Reverend,
ALL that shall be prefaced unto you, is
an humble sute for your prudent con∣sideration
of the sequele. For if I have
rightly collected; the opinion conten∣ded
with, represents you all guilty of
Schisme against the Catholicke Church;
yea and of a higher crime, so many of
you as have with hands lift up to Heaven (of which
number my selfe am one) ingaged your selves in
materiall points of Reformation; not onely with∣out
the Authority or endeavouring to have the minde
of the Catholicke Church; but have also concluded
and established contrary to what it hath determined in all
those Assemblies which our Brethren stile the Represen∣tatives
of it.General Coun¦cells. From which transgression the truth here
pleaded doth in that respect absolve you: in the comfort
whereof, I would here also leave you. But seeing there
are those, who would not onely have the opposed Tenet
embraced for a fundamental truth in Church Government,cap. 5. §. 3.
and propound it as a ground thereof; but that it should also

be constituted and established an ARTICLE of FAITH and
Confession thereof; I crave leave to adde a supplication,
and with all submission, doe beseech you, that the expe∣dient
of a great man about these affaires, in his advice for
the restoring of peace in the Church may be diligently
weighed:Eram. in praef. ad Hilarium: The summe (saith he) of our Religion is peace
and unanimitie;Summa Religionis nostri, pax est & unanimitas, ea vix constare poterit, nisi de quam potest paucissimis definia∣mus, & in multis literum relinqua∣mus suum cuique judicium, propterea quod nigens sit re∣rum plurimarum obscuritas, &c. of which there is little hope, unlesse those
things that shall be injoyned as matters of faith, bee as
few as may bee; and that wee leave mens judgements free
in many things; by reason that the obscurity in a number of
them is exceeding great, &c. How much lesse then such
opinions, as are not onely New (in the sence now pro∣pounded)
and controverted, but moreover appug∣ned
constantly also, by the most eminent of our owne
party, (and is as inconsistent with your Liberties, as E∣piscopacy,
which you have condemned.) Withall I pre∣sume
you will not disdaine the wisedome and practise of
the most ancient Churches after the Apostles times: we
see all their confession of faith in that briefe called the
APOSTLES CREED, and afterward the Nicene Creed;
made by the first Generall Councell, and for the expli∣cation
of the former; in how few words is it compre∣hended,
yea and the confessions of the Reformed Chur∣ches,
and our owne 39. Articles are but briefe and for
the most part cleere.
Austin saies The Rule of Faith is common to the weak and
to the wise.Ep. 57. ad Dardan. Which Vsshers in the explication of one,Regulum fidi pu∣sillis magnisque commnem, in Ec∣clesiam tent.
almost as great, upon it: inferring, that (therefore)
The Rule of Faith must containe such truthes ONELY, Vshers answer to the Iesuite, page 418.
as are GENERALLY agreed upon, by the consent of
all true Christians, and without controversie.
Many things should not be rendered of the substance

of Faith; for the denyall of which the crime of Heresy
and Schisme, and for the doubt whereof, the penalty
of rejection from the family, and worke of the Lord must
be inflicted.Rom. 4. c. 15, The great Apostle every where exhorts,
with all those who hold in the maine the forme of sound
words,1 Cor. 8. c. 10. and yet are in other things diversly minded;Phil. 3. 15. to
preserve the vnitie of the spirit in the bond of peace.
The Lord restore the Churches to their just freedomes
and keepe them from using their liberty as an occasion
to the flesh, but by love to serve one another: And the
same God raise and uphold the spirit of all States and
Magistrates to be Nusing Fathers to them: and conti∣nue
to returne this your work of Faith, and labour of love,
seven fold into your bosome.

