



NOble Princes and Patriots, remember in all your Lawes and Ordinances, that as Iesus ChristRev. 1. 5. (who is the faithfull witnesse, and will be one day for his truth and People) is the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, and hath▪ made the Saints who are his Anointed ones (1 Iohn 2▪ 27.) Kings and Priest to God and his Father, so is he the one onely Law giver, who is ableRev 1. 6. Iam. 4▪ to ee and destroy, and hath commanded the Kings of the Earth, ich his Anointed, nor doe his Prophets harme, for he re∣provethPsal. 105. 14▪ 15. even Kings for their sak▪ If Hee have made them first and Prophets, who shall hinder them to offer up spirituall Sacrifices to God▪  Pet. 2. 5▪ And as good Stewards of the ma∣nifold Grace of God to minister the gift one to another▪ as every we received it: 1 Pet. 4. 10. For every Scribe who is in∣ted vnto the Kingdome of Heaven, bringeth out of his trea∣sury things new and old, Matth. 13. 52. If the Saints as bottles be filled with new ine of the Spirit, they cannot but poure it forth e their friends, that which they have seene and heard, and in ns soules have tasted of the word of life they cannot but declare and speake, 1 Iohn 1. 2. 3. compared with Acts 4. 20. Iohn 7. 38.
Have an eye therefore I beseech you, to the designes of such men who would engage you to cast up bankes, that you might stop the ng of these waters, for these floods will carrie all before him, and who ever perswades you to it, I tell you even weeping▪

 of the Lord  and  to give  to Antichrist, and the Image of the  that as many as will not worship the Image of the Beast  killed notwithstanding the dreadfull dom  himself▪ Revel. 14 9. 10 11. If any man doe  Beast and his Image, and receive his marke in his for the  his hand, the same shall drinke of the wrath of God, and they shall have o rest day nor night &c. Be wise now therefore, Oy Princes, be instructed yee Iudes of our Earth, Kisse the Sonne least he be angry and ee perish in the way, though yee have alrea∣dy steered our weather beaten ship, through many angry waves, and billowes, and thinke you are come neere to the faire Havens of peace and happiness as yet if instead of honouring Iesus Christ, and submitting to his Royall  you shall be either flattered or threatned to set your  under any otin or pretence whatso∣ever against the Saints, and to kick against the pricks, you will yet miscarry and split upon this Rock, and in all your debates and con∣sultations shall be dash't in pices like a Potters Vessel, for whosoe∣ver shall full on that Stone shall be broken Grave Senators, con∣sider the Holy Spirit. Zach. 12. 3. hath foretold that in the day of the Gospel, the Lord will make Jerusalem, (viz. the Saints) a burthen some stone to all people, all that burthen themselves with it shall be out it peices though all the people of the Earth be gathe∣red together against it: Those men who stickle most against the Saints under the name of Hereticks and Schismaticks shall be dis∣covered to be such themselves, but as our Saviour said, they are wise in their Generations, and they dealt with you herein as the crafty and ingenious Horse Courser, with his untaimed and ∣ly pranser, speaks ire, streak and scratches him, whilst he bee mounted into the saddle, and then he strikes, and spurs, and gal∣lops, till he have broken him to his will: They be speake you as ha∣ving a great power in the worship of God, over the consciences, of men, but I beseech you receive no honour from these men who thus cry up your power and authority that they may be honoured by you, and derive power and authority, from you againe to be un∣righteous Iudges both ver your selves and other men, as their Reverend Fathers the Bishops were, they seeke their owne things and not the thing of Iesus Christ, but it concerne their interest, by this craft they have their livings: and they know that if per∣mission

be once given to the Saints freely to make knowne the  of the Spirit, which ath wrought so mightily in them, their  of naturall reason, though decked and adrned with systems  Philosophy, and Schoole divinity, will not be able to  in competion with it, greater is he that is in the Saints, then  that is in the world, the teachings of the spirit, shall be more  full and effectuall to take hld of the hearts of men, then all  workes and writings of their▪ Postillers and Commentators can  these cannot speake so to the consciences of poore Christians as the Spirit  And the feet of such as can bring glad tydings of  to such poore soules are exceeding beautifull, and will bee,  the opposition of these men.
Most honoured worthies, pray observe with me, how Babylon the Mother of Harlots, Fornications, and Abominations of the  (which are chiefly spirituall and doe concerne our worship)  this name written in her fore head MYSTERY, her workings are and have been still MYSTERIOUS, hardly to  found out and traced, But I have indeavoured as a blood▪ hound to pursue her, for by those Characters of bloodinesse you shall be  to know her, the beast whereon shee sits is bloody coloured, her garments are dyed in blood, Revel. 17. 5. 3. 4 6. in her habita∣tion is found the blood of Prophets and of Saints. cap. 18 24. her drinke where with she makes her selfe drunke, is blood of the Saints, and the Kings, and Inhabitants of the Earth, have beene  drunks with her wine; England, Oh England hath for∣ly plid the beast with her, if not the beast under her on which hath sitten, and for this cause we have had of late, blood given  to drinke, for we were worthy; let it, oh let it be so no more let not England againe make war with the Lambe, for  the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, Revel. 17 14. Sup∣pose grave Senators those men so much miscalled were indeed such as they are represented to be, and their Presbyterian adversaries  their Churches without crime or Error (which is most ) and so might justly cast them out t yet since our Saviour Christ hath commanded, that the tares and the wheat should grow together till the barvest, what cruelty is this toward such men,  live peaceably among men, unblameable in their conversati∣on, pay you tax and tribute, and in a word, doe in all things which

the Apostle Paul exercise themselves to keep faith and a good con∣science towards God and men, what cruelty I say is it, that the Cit Magistrate should be incensed against them & should by all wayes be solicited, not to give them a toleration that it, not to suffer them when they have so faithfully engaged for them: The field in the Parable must have some interpretation, it must have reference to Church or State, Christ would have them suffered some where, but their adversaries who pretend so much for Christ, are indeed in this particular as in many other things Antichrist, i. e. against Christ, he saith let them grow together, these men say nay, let them be pulled up, lamentable will the condition of many people in this Kingdome, and other places be, if many choise young men and others, who are ordained by Iesus Christ to eternall life and glory, and have received a large portion of the spirit of Jesus Christ (the only teacher of his people) whereby they may edifie and build others up in the most holy faith, if the mouths of these must be stopped for want of that empty and fruitlesse (as is conceived) Ceremony of Ordination, which the doctrine (peradventure) of the Presbyterie of Scotland hath tought, their consci∣ences to startle at and deny: for in the I. booke of the Disciplin of the Kirke of Scotland commanded to be practised in the same Kirks. Anno Dom. 1641. under the head of Admission, this they teach. pag. 31. Other Ceremony then the publick Appro∣bation of the people, and Declaration of the chiefe Minister, that the person there presented is appointed to serve the Church. We cannot approve, son all be it, the Apostles used Imposition of Hands, yet seeing the miracle is ceased, the using of the Cere∣mony, we iudge not necessary.
If any gift were conveyed who would deny, nay, who would not rejoyce to be partaker of it but whilst men see that this is but a vain Imitation of that primitive Apostolical Presbytety, who had received from Iesus Christ and could convey to others such gifts of the Spirit for the Ministry of the Gospel as have been lost whilst we have been under the power of Antichrist, and such as none of the Sons of men have received at this day, and therefore cannot bestow on others, they are exceedingly troubled in their Spirits, & can iudge the ceremony at the least but a taking of Gods name in vaine: Let my counsell then (wise Counsellors) be ac∣ceptable touching these men, that as in all your Declarations

whilst you had any need of them either in their Persons or Estates,  have ingaged to be tender towards them; which Tender∣nesse they could conceive to be no lesse then a continued liberty in  severall wayes of worship, which they then enjoyed, and not after the lesse of many of their lives, and a parting with a good part of ther lively. hoods for your preservation, an imprisoning of their persons, and a wasting of the remainder, by Attendance, Suites, Fees, Fines, and such other charges as necessarily attend such a condition.
And all this for the practise of those very things you seemed then to allow in them, when you thus time after time declared Ten∣dernesse towards them, oh doe not, doe not thus keep promise with them, let not this e the recompence you give them for all the la∣bour of love they have shewed unto you, doe not for the gratifica∣tion of a few men, who from Sion Colledge either vent their con∣siderations contrary to your Ordinances, when they like them not, or send you Votes, Orders and Ordinances (though Subilly and mediately by the Assembly) at their pleasures, which you must confirme or be rayled at in every Pulpit in the City, and have the  against you▪ and set crying  you for  such things, as I dare say not one of a thousand of them knowes or understands, having a strong influence also by their Emissaries upon the adjacent Counties that they may concur with them in their destructive wayes and actions, if these men can  you thus already, before they have any power in ther hands, consider I pray what they would doe, if power should be given them according to their desire, we have too lately bought repentance from their predicessors the Bishops at too dear arate al which I lay before you, and if you please to peruse this tract, you shall see these men proved the greatest Hereticks and Schismaticks in the King∣dome at this day: And as touching these men who are so much re∣proached by them, you shall find them to be according to what they understand, pure in religion, having not the forme, but the power of godlinesse in their publique and private meetings, dayly praying the Lord for you, innocent in their lives, inoffensive in their con∣versations, peaceable in the places where they live, and obedient to your iust power. Our Lord Iesus Christ in all his goings out with them in thse few last yeares, not only opening their purses, buts

their very bowels and hearts, making them ready and willing to spend & to be spent for you, hath given both to your selves & al the world in all ages to come, a sufficient demonstration of their harm∣lessenesse, integrity & faithfulnesse unto you, and if you wil not be∣leeve these speaking out on their behalfe, neither would yee, if an Angel from heaven should come and witness for them. Now the God of wisedome give you to diserne betwixt truth, and errour betwixt good and evill, friends and enemies, Saints and Here∣ticks: and to hearken to the wise counsell of Gameliel, a great Sta∣tist concerning the Sectaries of those times: Acts 5. 35. 38. 39. with which I shall conclude, take heed to your selves what you in∣tend to doe at touching these men, refraine from these men, and let them alone; for if this counsell or worke be of men it will come to naught, but if it be of God; yee cannot overthrow it, least happily yee be even found fighters against God.

I verily thought I ought to doe many things against the name ofActs 26. 9. 10. 11. Iesus.
And many of the Saints did I shut up in prison, I punisht them oft, and compelled them to blaspheme, and I persecuted them even to strange Cities.

