



May it please your Grace,
SEeing your Grace has al∣ready withstood the displea∣sure of such a threatning Philosopher and Politician as Mr. Hobbs, and not publickly disown'd, or renounc'd the prote∣ction of my former Dialogue; I

have ventured to anger our Ad∣versary once more, by prsuming to offer this second to your Graces acceptance and pardon. Which presumption, although the conti∣nuance of your Graces favours towards me might almost excuse, yet it is the great insolence and great extravagance of Mr. Hobbs's attempts, that makes me still seek out for protection from so gret and eminent a Patron; who by his unaffected affability to all men, and his studious en∣couragement of the best, by his unwearied care for promoting true Religion, as well as securing the just Authority of his Prince, is alone able to live down many Le∣viathans. And if there be any way to bring that haughty-concei∣ted-Philosopher

to a tolerable good nature, and to tie him up to mode∣rate prophaneness, it must be done by such as your Grace, defending and approving those that write against him: for as 'tis well known to your Grace, that he'l allow no man to speak truth but himself; so will he scarce adit of any man to be truly great, unless he is of his mind and opinions: and that makes him so angry with your Grace, because you are such an unanswerable Argument against all that he hath writ. And no∣thing does so nearly concern him, and almost convert him; as to see the name of a person, so con∣spicuous for Religion and Power, stand before a Book that doth op∣pose his Doctrine. And for this

reason I have once more taken the boldness to make this second Ad∣dress to your Grace.
If upon this review of Mr. Hobbs, I had found that he had given his Readers sense and ar∣gument answerable to the mischif and wickedness of his opinions; I should then have endeavoured to have now appeared to your Grace in another Style and Dress. For I am not so utterly given over to toying, nor so conceited of this way of writing, nor so indifferent about a good life and Religion, nor so careless of offending sober men, nor so bent and resolved al∣ways to presume upon your Grace after this kind, but that I think it possible, that upon a just ac∣count and a good subject, for a

need, I could make two or three grave Period, as well as Mr. Hobbs has made thousands▪ about those things which are eithe im∣pudently false,  notoriously fi∣volous
But I must confess, that of all Triflers 'tis the set, the grave, the Philosophical, and Mathematical Trifler, to which I have the great∣est averseness: whom when I meet very gravely making out all men to be Rational beasts both in Nature and Conversation; and every man when he pleases a Ra∣tional Rebel: and upon any fright or pinch, a Rational Atheist and Antichristian; and all this per∣formed with all demureness, so∣lemnity, quotation of Scripture, appeals to Conscience and Church∣History;

I must humbly beg your Graces pardon, if then I have endeavoured to smile a little, and to get as much out of his road, and wa of writing as possible.
I might offer to your Graces consideration several things, in Apologie for my self. If what I have done be at all pardonable, I am sure your Grace need not be reminded of what I might plead or pretend: but if otherwise, for me to argue the Case with your Grace, would but heighten the presumption of,
My Lord, 
May 20. 1673.
