


Beloved Christians,
THE following Sermons, formerly preached among you, are now made-publick, to stir up your minds by way of Remembrance; wherein I have for my pattern, the Apostle Peter, the great Doctor of the Circumcision, 2 Pet. 3.1. In these Discourses, among other things, you have the Doctrine of Original Sin, represen∣ted to your view: a Doctrine, I confess, that hath its difficulties; and the more, be∣cause it depends so much upon Divine Re∣velation. It was a Saying of one of the Fa∣thers, touching this Doctrine, Nihil ad prae∣dicandum notius, nihil ad intelligendum secretius; i. e. Nothing more known than this truth, nothing more difficult to be understood.

It is an Easy, and a Difficult Doctrine. Easy, because we evidently find the effects of it; Difficult, because the knowledge of it, depending mostly on Scripture-revelati∣on, hence carnal reason has never failed, in all Ages, to quarrel with it. It is my comfort, that in the managing of this Sub∣ject, I have sincerely endeavoured to re∣solve my Faith into the authority of God's word. And I think also, that I have gone in the way of good men, and have deliver∣ed nothing as to this point, contrary to the Doctrine of the Establisht Articles of the Church of England, the Assembly's Catechism and Confession of Faith, or what you have formerly been instructed in, by the Reve∣rend Mr. Lyford, and after him, by my Father-in-law, Mr. Phillips; persons for whom you have a valuable esteem.
The reason of my chusing out this Sub∣ject, above others, at this time, is partly the present errours of the Age, and partly the great usefulness of it. The two great ends of the Gospel-ministry, are to awaken Sin∣ners, and to build up Saints; to convert the one, and to edify the other. Now
 this Doctrine, of Man's Sinfulness by Na∣ture, has an excellent aptitude to promote both; and is fit matter of constant medita∣tion for the godly and the wicked. It re∣members the one of the baseness of their Original, and so tends to keep them hum∣ble, to make them vile in their own eyes, a frame very pleasing in the sight of God: and it shews the other their natural defile∣ment, their undone state by nature, and so tends to drive them to Christ, and to make them seek after Regenerating Grace, without which there is no Salvation, Joh. 3.3. 'Tis much to be lamented, that the great Doc∣trine of Regeneration is so little understood by many persons, yea some that pretend to be teachers of others, who place it in a moral Reformation of life. The ground of which mistake, (as I humbly conceive) is their rejecting or mistaking this necessary Doctrine of Original Sin. Was this Doc∣trine better understood, and more studied, men would not speak so superficially and lightly of Regeneration; nor so much cry up the power of Nature and Free-will in the work of Conversion, as ordinarily they do.
 If what I have written on this Subject, shall be of any use to establish You in the Doctrine of the Gospel, and to build you up in Faith and Holiness; let God have the glory, and me your prayers; who am,

Ex Musaeo, Aug. 5. 1699.
