



SIR,
GOld the sinue and nerve of war (without which the greatest Princes and Polititians fall short of their desired ends) and History the faithfull mirrour, in which the most accomplish't of Commanders may dress and modifie themselves even to the very height of vertue and perfection, in this walk hand in hand, and keep an equal sympathy: that whether they flow from the hands of Peers or Peasants, they still retain the same vigour, force, and ver∣tue; why did great Alexander set so great an estimate, upon grave Ho∣mers works, but that he found in them examples worthy imitation, and also inglorious deeds, to be avoyded like Rocks in raging Tempests? This work great Prince, (which most humbly begs your Protection, as the safest Azylum) proceeds from a pen altogether Rural, yet doth it contain matter fit for imitation, selected from Authors of faithfull integrity. Behold a Constantius, memorable for an Act recorded by ma∣ny Ancient Historians, who to make trial of true Christians, and accor∣dingly advance them, first exiled from his Court, all who would not per∣petrate themselves and adore the Pagan Gods; and after trial made, the Complyers he abhor'd, and revoked the constant refusers; pre∣ferring them to places of greatest trust and honour; affirming that they would never be true to a mortal Emperour, that would be false to an im∣mortal Diety. Quomodo inquit fidem erga Imperatorem servare po∣terunt inviolatam, qui adversus Deum optimum maximum perfidi esse manifesto convincuntur: and therefore saith the same Author, Decrevit secum hos qui se fideles erga D. O. M. declarassent in ami∣corum atque adeo consiliorum munero habere: And for this and such like his pious and vertuous transactions: Fertur Constantio Angelus astistisse; which Pomponius Laetus in these words confirmes, Cum Pa∣ter Cæsarem fecerat, celesti nuntio admonitus, Constantinum, &c. The
 body of this glorious Cæsar, was first withall Princely solemnity inter∣red at York, and after translated to Carnarvon in the time of King Ed∣ward I. and by him commanded to be enshrined in that Church. Apud Carnarvon maximi principis patris nobilis Imperatoris Constantini erat inventum & rege jubente honorifice collocatum. Thus we clearly see vertue and Noble actions not only crowned here upon Earth with glori∣ous Sepultures and inscriptions, but even approved by Heaven it self, by Divine and Celestial Revelation.
Let us march a little further into the Court of Honour, and great Theater, where mighty Emperors and Monarchs act their parts, and there we shall find a great Brittish Constantine the first Christian Em∣peror, doing what? taking in hand a doubtfull yet cruel war, what did he then? Deum quem pater sancte adoravisset solum observandum, co∣lendumque statuit, Quo circa hujus opem precibus imploravit, hunc oravit, hunc obtestatus est ut tum quinam esset ipsi vellet significare, tum rebus quas apud animum proposuisset dexteram velut adjutri∣cem porrigere; he resolved to have the true God; whom his Father a∣dored devoutly to be only adored and worshiped, wherefore by his pray∣ers he implored his help, he prayed and intreated his aid, him he be∣sought to declare himself unto him, and assist him in his enterprise: and what followed these divine and Heavenly ejaculations and inspirations? About noon, (the day somewhat declining) Constantine saw in the Sky, a lightsome pillar in form of a cross, wherein were these words engraven. In this sign overcome: and the night following in his sleep he beheld Christ, who said thus unto him. Frame unto thy self the form of a Cross, after the example of the sign which appeared unto thee, and bear the same against thy Enemies as a fit banner or token of victory. And that the effects were answerable to the divine promises, hear what Eusebius relates, as spoken by Con∣stantine himself. Hoc salutari figno vero fortitudinis judicio vestram Tiranidis jugo liberavi civitatem & S. P. Q. R. libertatem vindicans pristinae amplitudini & splendori restitui: You have here viewed Il∣lustrious Prince, our first Christian Emperor, and his Father; fit pat∣terns for imitation: Cast your Gracious eyes upon our first Catholick King, Lucius, and you shall find him, (Christianity being now esta∣blished) thus Charactered. Interea gloriosus ille Britonum Rex Luci∣us, cum intra regnum suum cultum vere fidei magnificatum esse vidis∣set, maximo gaudio fluctuans, possessiones & territoria quæ prius tem∣pla Idolorum possidebant in meliorem usum vertens Ecclesiis fideli∣um permancre concessit, & quia majorem honorem ipsis impendere debuerat, augmentavit; illas amplioribus agris & mansis, omnique libertate sublimavit. And a little after Lucius the first Christian King of this Land then called Brittain, founded the first Church in London, that is to say, St. Peters Church upon Cornhill, where he setled an Archbishops See, making that Church the Metropolis of his Kingdom: neither was his zeal and piety confined to that City, for you
 shall find him erecting a goodly Cathedral at Caerlegion, in that part of England, (abusively called Wales) which now is known by the name of Monmothshire, as also the famous Ʋniversity of Bangor in the remotest parts thereof. This holy King, (saith my Author) granted, made, and signed many writings, Charters and donations for defence, maintenance, and preservation of Religion; as to the Ʋniversity of Cambridge, the School of Shaftsbury, with others: and when he had done all this, Anno 201. Inclitus Britannorum Rex Lucius in bonis actibus assumptus ab hac vita Claudiocesbriæ migravit ad Christum, & in Ecclesia primæ sedis sepultus honorifice. King Arthur sealed many grants for the advancement of Religion and Learning, and by reason of his great victories thrice changed his armorial ensignes, at last ad∣vancing the cross; for my Author saith, King Arthur, that mighty con∣querour and worthy, had so great affection and love to this sign, that he left his armes which he used before; wherein were figured three Dra∣gons, another of three crownes (or as some say of thirteen) and de∣picted in his shield a cross silver in a field vert, and on the first quar∣ter thereof he figured an Image of our B. Lady with her Son in her armes, and with this sign he did wonders in Arms. And to this hour we see the Knights of the Noble order of the Garter, of which num∣ber your Grace (the flower of chevaldry) is one, to bear Argent a plain cross Gules; the field signifying pureness of life; the cross, the blood that Christ shed for this our people, whom Trevisa calleth the people of God, and the Realm of Gods Land; the same ensign did Jo∣seph of Aramathia give unto Arviragus King of Brittain, not many years after our Saviours passion; Cadwalader the last Brittish Mo∣narch for his armes bore Azure a cross for my fitched Or: whole vo∣lumes may be compiled of this Subject, and the worthy and most Chri∣stian acts of your sanctly progenitors. But least I should convert an E∣pistle Dedicatory into History or Chronology, I will proceed no further, humbly offering up these my weak endeavours before the shrine of your goodness, with all integrity, beseeching Almighty God that you may if not excel, at least equal the most valiant and vertuous of your Royal Progenitors, which shall be the daily prayers of

