


Honoured Lord, and you most eminent & worthy Patriots,
THat I should go unarmed into the field to meet the Muses, the wishes of a few might easily perswade me, since my own affections drew me; by which Incitement egged on as by Spurs, I recalled my now old-grown Genius from the Camp to the Court, from the War to congra∣tulate the return of the Lord-Chief-Generall. And who in such ovations would not even be wrapt beyond himself? Who can contain his joy within bounds at so solemn, so publike a

Triumph? That we may the better perceive the effects of this rejoycing, we must first weigh the causes. Cast your eyes then upon our conducting General, whose heroick acts (ex∣ceeding even the utmost limits of belief) to the present age proclaime their own triumph, and amazes succeeding generations with their greatness. Consider how with more then Her∣culean strength he strook off the Head of those Hydraes of superstition with his Conquering Sword! How many Centaures breathing forth nought but slavery hath he tamed! How many Troopes of enraged enemies hath he over∣thrown, and offered them so humbled as so ma∣ny satisfactory victims to the publike liberty! Hence it proceedes that war is banisht from

our borders: hence is it that the serener beams of Concord have so cleerly darted down upon us: O the happiness of Brittain grown even beyond expectation great! For who can but ad∣mire so many the elaborate endeavors of the Parliament? Who will gaynsay you the suc∣ceeding upholders of our State? Who but will confess the immediate providence and Divine Finger of God to be seen even apparently in the victorious, atcheivements of our Generall; In the acts of our Parliament, the Supreme Authority; And in your own consultations and designes? That therefore the happiness of our established Common-wealth may the more largely be notified to all the world, weigh we but equally in the ballance of our

serious consideration the tottering basis even of the most firmly seated thrones; but if your enemies are yet so stubborn that they will not be convinced thereby, let them peruse that ex∣cellent peece with a little seriousness that cleerly declares the Prerogative of Kings, and evidently defends the Priviledges and liberty of the people: but whereto tends this? I will not obtrude upon your wisdoms trifling ex∣amples, or vain relations: for I have onely mentioned these few, that all your malicious e∣nemies may know, and knowing confess, that God alone is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, that he puts down Princes from their Thrones, and disposes of the powers of the world after his own pleasure.

Away then you malicious enemies of order; and since ye acknowledge all powers to come from God, obey the present as Gods stewards placed here by himself for the governing of the Common-Wealth. Me-think, even our publike profession of Religion should draw us to this, if our own security also did not whi∣sper the same; for it is somwhat an inhumane thing to resist our common, our publike Pa∣rents, and altogether repugnant to reason, to kick against the Pricks. But I deviate from my first proposition; and humbly beg your par∣don, most worthy Fathers of the Common∣wealth, hoping you will cherish these first∣fruits of my duty under the wings of your in∣dulgent protection: Which have betaken

themselves with a blushing humility to the sanctuary of your Honors goodness. An Olive is sometime brought in amongst the costlyest dainties and well rellisht too; somtimes the Ivy doth happily grow and increase among trees of a greater tallness: And you, most No∣ble Heroes, suffer this low-growing Ivy to creep forth among the Laureat Cypresses of your E∣minencies. If you approve of these my desires, and favor my present endeavors, you will in∣fuse new life and confidence into me, who may enterprise a greater work worthy acknow∣ledgement, perhaps both from your selves and future ages.
In the mean while, the All-great, the All-good God make you all unanimous even for e∣ver,

that therby his Church may be glorified, & the Common good and liberty be inviolable to all the people, that the secure peace and quiet of a flourishing Common-Wealth may be reciprocall from you and yours to the Com∣mon-Wealth; that ye may be blessed here in earth with continuing happiness, and in hea∣ven with future eternity, which is, and shall be prayed for by


