



THAT this Sermon was first Composed, then Preached, and now Published, I must plainly tell you without a Compliment, is not so much to be attributed to Your Request, as to that great Respect and Kindness I have for You. In which, that I might not leave the Text I had pitched upon, and the Bible too, or spend upon the Subject a meer Flou∣rish of Words and pure Invention: I have confined my Thoughts and Meditations to the Word of God, or ra∣ther fetched them from it; because it is that only Rule which should regulate our Opinions and Practices in the weighty concerns of our Life and Salvation, and which ought to give an Authority, Life, and Pungency to all Pulpit-Discourses. A Rule this is which God has given us, and which every Christian especially must consider and study with Fear and Veneration. I know there are, and have been some Men in the World, (witness the Theologo-Political, Leviathan, Theory, Critical History, Annotation and History-of-Religion-Wri∣ters)

who by the Power of Criticisms and Ʋpstart No∣tions of Philosophy, either of their own, and some other mens Invention, i. e. in my Judgment, by the In∣fatuation of the Devil, and the Pride of their Hearts, all conspire to ruin and undermine it. Many Books of this kind have appeared in the World, which if the Ge∣nius of the Age had not disposed men to receive, and even to gape for, had been comdemned to flames, of which they are worthy; and their Authors censured, as becomes the Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws of the place they live in. Curiosity knows no Bound, either of Modesty or Satisfaction; and therefore, tho it has been my misfortune to look into such Books (of which I de∣sire You to beware, and not to follow the Wondering and Silly World, if Ten thousand such should again appear in it) and in some measure to consider the Subject-Mat∣ter and Tendecy of them; yet I thank God they have no more influence upon my Mind to destroy my Faith, or lessen my Veneration for the Holy Bible, than Debauch∣ed Morals, or Ingenious Discourses upon the Praises of Vice, shall by the Grace of God move me to approve them in my Judgment, or in my practice to follow them. I look upon an Ʋnsanctified, Proud, and Aspi∣ring Head, to be as dangerous, as an Ʋngodly Heart; nay, far more; because the issues of this run in open Contradiction to the general Reason of Mankind: Whereas a Learned Rabbi, or one who pretends to be so, is beyond the Sphere of Ordinary Intellectuals; which is the sole Reason why he is admired so much, even then, when he preys upon the Ignorance of Men, and spreads loose Principles, Irreligion and Atheism in the World. Now some such Men as these have been trying their Skill on the Subject of my Sermon, and have en∣deavoured

from the Armoury of their Learning, some indulged Practices of former Ages, and unwary Ex∣pressions of Ancient and Modern Authors, to overthrow the Laws of God and Man for no other end at all, than to let the Reins loose to Lasciviousness, and in a manner to Brutalize the World. I have in the fol∣lowing Discourse, as I said before, confined my Thought; to the Word of God, and next to that, the Laws of Men; which are nothing less than the Ma∣ture Deliberations, Decisions, and Responses of the Wis∣est and most Authoritative Persons of former Ages. For by these are we to frame our Notions and Opi∣nions, and to solve all Doubts concerning Marriage, which is a Subject, perhaps, that affords as many Ne∣cessary, Ʋseful, and Nice Enquiries, as any falls un∣der Humane Cognizance. The only end I aimed at, was to shew the Institution and Design of it, that You may know what State and Condition of Life You are now entered upon, and therefore I offer it to Your se∣rious perusal. For I am perswaded, if we would but consider what God expects of us in every Stage and Station of our Life, we would soon live as becomes Reasonable Men and Christians. Be pleased then to ac∣cept this as a Testimony of my Kindness; and God in Heaven bless You and the Excellent and Virtuous Lady, which is now your Wife, with his Spiritual and Temporal Blessings, and give you Grace to do his Will; that so you may fulfil the Desires of Your most Loving and Tender Parents, and the good Wishes of all your Friends; that you may attain those ends for which God has given you Excellent Endowments of Mind, Body, and Fortune, and answer the Expe∣ctation of your Country; that you may follow the Ex∣ample

of your Great Grandfather, of whose Learning and Charity, the Books he writ, and the Colledge he Erected at Greenwich, are lasting Monuments; And lastly, that you may not frustrate the earnest Pray∣ers for your Temporal Prosperity and Eternal Happi∣ness, of
SIR,

From Broad-Street, London, Febr. 2.
