





MADAM,
IF any one who is a stranger to your Family, shall (upon the sight of these eleven Names subscribed under your own) inquire as Esau once did, when he beheld the very same number following his brother Gen. 33. and shall aske with him, who are these with thee?
Your Ladyship may answer either as Jacob then did, These are the children which God of his grace hath given me; they being all of them pledges of Gods grace unto you, as also heirs of the covenant of grace by you, and many of them approved vessels of grace in themselves, and patternes of grace to others: or you may use the words of that incomparable Lady Cornelia, when shee presented her sons to the Common-wealth, and answer with her, Haec sunt mea Ornamenta, These are my Jewels, these are my Or∣naments; Gracious children being the Crown of 
rents, whilst like pure & pleasant streams they shew the purity and excellency of that fountain front whence they did arise & spring.
But if your self (Madam) shall inquire of me why I thus sub∣scribed them, my answer shall be this, That I was very sensible of that deep wound which the Lord hath at this time made in your sorrowful and mournfull heart; and withall I was convinced what great care & cautelousness was to be used in applying com∣forts unto it, least ungentle handling thereof, in stead of a cure, should cause it to bleed afresh. I also knew that cordialls can ne∣ver be more tenderly and acceptably presented to any parents bleed∣ing heart, then when they are brought by the gentle and officious hand of their dearest children. And for this reason have I anne∣xed their names to yours in this dedication, that with one and the same cast of your eye you may discerne the matter of your joy and sorrow joyned both together.
In this manner I observe the Lord himself comforting his Or∣phan Church, Psal. 45.16. In stead of parents shall be thy chil∣dren, whom thou maiest make princes in all the earth. Thus like∣wise doth the Lord Jesus comfort his disconsolate and sorrowful Mother, Joh. 19.26. VVoman behold thy son, speaking of the belo∣ved disciple. Yea so does the same son & disciple comfort his own heart, in all his sufferings and afflictions, 3 Joh. 4. I have no greater joy then this, to see my sons walk in the truth.
Madam, you have the same cause of joy, & I doubt not but that if your Ladyship would seriously consider of Gods love to you in this mercy of your posterity, I doubt not but that as there is no joy so great, but the thought of one gracious child does much exceede it; so there is no sorrow so bitter, but that the consideration of so much pietie and obedience as your Ladyship may discerne in so many of your children, would abundantly & sensibly sweeten & allay it.
If you therefore, worthy Gentlemen, and vertuous Ladies, shall
further demand to what end your names are thus inserted, give me leave to answer you by relating to you what I have read in Aristotle, that great Philosopher, who tells us of Archilochus, who being desirous to give some prevalent & effectual counsel and advice to Lycambes, whose father was dead, did while he was writing his admonitions, by an elegant prosopopoeia bring in his Father, & so put his pen into his Fathers hand, that Lycambes might receive those instructions from one, who by his verie relation, was much more probable to prevaile, then himself. I have also met the like passage in Cicero, that prince of Oratory and eloquence, as the former was of Philosophie; that he being to read a lecture of modestie and temperance to his friend Clodia, raised up her father Appius Cajus from his grave, and in his name delivered his directions to his daughter. Both of these in this practise of theirs intimating, that neither the wisdome of the one, though the deepest Philosopher, nor the eloquence of the other, though the choicest Ora∣tor, is so effectual in the hearts of children, as the voice of a pa∣rent, which is much more perswasive and powerful then any other argument or Rhetorick.
Upon this consideration it was that (being by all your earnest and conjoyned importunity overcome to give you a copie of that counsel & admonition, which I delivered at your Fathers funeral) I have chosen first to present it to your dearest Mothers hand, and thereby to reach and hand it unto you, that so it may be enter∣tained with authority & efficacy; that as in times past you obeyed your Fathers instruction (according to the command of God Pro. 1.8.) so now for all times to come, you may fear to forsake your Mothers teaching, being thus conveyed unto you. Instructions that are onely spoken with the tongue are transient, and for the most part are terminated with the glasse: but directions that are written, are much more permanent, and many times, while thy re∣ceive
and take one Impression, they also make and leave another. Last of all, as to my self, this conjoyned dedication appeares not at all arbitrarie, but necessarie: for as the incitation to publish them, was from the sollicitation of you all; so the end intended therein was the service of you all, and the obligation necessitating my con∣sent thereunto was the united love of you all.
For I must (and alwayes shall) acknowledge, that that God of my mercies, who granted me to find so great, & so large a portion of love and favour in the heart of him whom the Lord ha's now taken into his own bosome, and also in the heart of you his dearest Lady; hath likewise inclined the spirits of all you his children and posterity, to manifest a singular and extraordinary affection unto me, which although I acknowledge my self altogether unworthy to receive, and absolutelie unable to requite, yet I hold my self for ever obliged to embrace every opportunitie that is offered, to make my acknowledgement thereof unto each of you.
And therefore have I greedily laid hold on this occasion now offered to me, least if I should have neglected this advantage, I might never have had the like again, by reason of my declining age.
I cannot therefore but hereby give a publick testimony before the world of my serious apprehension, & deep sense of those en∣gagements, which both you, most honoured Ladie, & also every one of you, renowned Gentlemen and Ladies, have laid upon me, and also declare my self so firmly obliged to this whole Family, that I am extreamelie desirous to the uttermost of my power al∣waies to approve my self,
Madam,

