




Much honour'd and esteem'd,
ALthough Dedications are too often abused to a
vain flattery, yet is there an excellent use and
advantage to be made of them: Partly to en∣courage
Persons of VVorth and Eminency to espouse the
Interest of Religion themselves; and partly to oblige
those Readers, for whom such Books are principally in∣tended,
to a diligent perusal of them, by interesting such
Persons in them, for whom they have great Respects, o
on whom they have any dependance.
Vpon the first account, a Dedication would be needless
to you: for I am perswaded, you do not only in your
Iudgment approve the Design I here manage, viz. The
Reformation of the prophane and looser sort of our Sea-men;
but are also heartily willing to improve your
Interest to the uttermost for the promotion of it. I can∣not
look upon you as Persons acted by that low and com∣mon
spirit that the most of your Profession are acted by,
who little regard, if they be good Servants to them, whe∣ther
God have any Service from them, or no, and if

they pay them the Wages due for their work never think
of the Wages they are to receive for their sin. You are
judged to be Persons of another spirit, who do not only
mind, but advance Christ's Interest above your own, and
negotiate for his Glory, as well as for your own gain:
And yet, herein you consult your own Interest as well as
God's: Subordinata non pugnant. Your Interest is
never more prosperously managed, or abundantly secur∣ed,
than when it is carried on in a due subordination to
God's. Their Reformation will apparently tend to your
advantage. Those sins of theirs, against which I have
here engaged, are the Jonahs in your Ships: 'tis sin that
sinks them, and drives them against the Rocks. One
sinner destroys much good, Eccles. 8. 11. How much
more a leud Crew of them conspiring to provoke God!
The death of their Lusts, is the most probable means to
give life to your Trade. And as these Counsels prosper
in their hearts, so will your Business thrive in you hands.
Piety and Prosperity are married together in that Pro∣mise,
Psal. 1. 3. Onesimus was never so profitable a
Servant to Philemon, as when he became his Brother in
a Spiritual, as well as his Servant in a Civil Capacity.
Philem. vers. 11. and 16. compared. And yet if your
Interest were forced to step back, to give way to Christ's;
I hope you would (notwithstanding) rejoyce therein.
So that my present business is, not so much to perswade
you, whose hearts, I hope, God hah already perswaded,
to so good a work; as to make your Fames and Respects,
which are great among them, an innocent Bait to tempt
them to their Duty. And if either your Name or In∣terest
may be useful to such an end, I presume I may use
them freely, and welcome: for, sure I am, they can
never be put to a better use.
Well then, I will make bould to send this small Ad∣venture
in your Ships; and if the Return of it be but
tke Conversion of one Soul to God, I shall reckon that I

have made a better Voyage than you, let your Returns be
never so rich.
How these things will affect them, I know not. I do
suppose it will produce different effects upon them, ac∣cording
to the different tempers of their spirits, and ac∣cording
as God shall command, or suspend the Blessing.
Possibly some will storm at the close and cutting Rebukes
of the Word, (for most mens Lusts are a great deal
more sensible and tender than their Consciences) and
will fondly imagine that this necessary plainness tends
to their reproach. But if none but the guilty can be sup∣posed
to be angry at them, they will thereby reproach
themselves a great deal more than ever I intend to do.
I confess it is a bitter Pill, and compounded of many
perative and strong Ingredients, which do acute it;
ut not a jot more than is necessary. I shall beg the
ssistance of your Prayers to God for them, and of your
rave Admonitions and Exhortations to them for God;
hich will much help its Operation, and facilitate my
Design, to do their Souls a piece of everlasting Service;
ith which Design I can truly say I even travel in pain
 them. Your assistance therefore in this good Work,
ill put the highest Obligation upon

