




Dear Friends,
THE double tye of Nature and Grace, beside the many en∣dearing passages that for so many years have linked and glewed our affections so intimately, cannot but beget a tender sympathy in me under all your troubles; and make me say of every affliction which befalls

you, half mine. I find it is with our affections, as with the strings of Musical instruments exactly set at the same height, if one be touched the other trembles, though it be at some distance.
Our affections are one, and so in a great measure have been our afflictions also. You cannot forget that in the years lately past, the Almighty visited my Tabernacle with the Rod, and in one year, cut off from it the root, and the branch, the tender Mother, and the only Son. What the effects of those strokes, or rather of my own unmortified passions were, I have felt, and you and others have heard. Surely I was as a Bullock unaccusto∣med to the Yoak. Yea I may say with them, Lam. 3. 19, 20. Re∣membring mine affliction and my misery, the wormwood and the gall, my soul hath them still in re∣membrance, and is humbled in me.
I dare not say that ever I felt my

heart discontentedly rising and swel∣ling against God; no, I could still justifie him, when I most sensibly smarted by his hand: if he had plun∣ged me into a Sea of sorrow, yet I could say in all that Sea of Sorrow, there is not a drop of injustice: But it was the over-heating, and over-acting of my fond and unmortified affections and passions that made so sad impressions upon my body, and cast me under those distempers which soon imbittered all my remaining comforts to me.
It was my earnest desire so soon as I had strength and opportunity for so great a Journey to visit you; that so, (if the Lord had pleased) I might both refresh, and be refreshed by you, after all my sad and disconsolate daye. And you cannot imagine what content and pleasure I projected in that visit! but it proved to us (as all other Comforts of the same kind ordinarily do) more in expectation, than in fruition; for how soon after

our joyful meeting and embraces, did the Lord overcast and darken our day, by sending death into your Tabernacle, to take away the de∣sire of your eyes with a stroke! to crop off that sweet and only bud from which we promised our selves so much Comfort: But no more of that, I fear I am gone too far already. It is not my design to exasperate your troubles, but to heal them, and for that purpose have I sent you these pa∣pers, which I hope may be of use both to you and many others in your con∣dition; since they are the after-fruits of my own troubles; things that I commend not to you from another hand, but which I have (in some measure) proved and tasted in my own tryals.
But I will not hold you longer here. I have only a few things to desire for and from you, and I have done.
The things I desire are,
First, That you will not be too hasty to get off the yoak which God hath

put upon your neck. Remember when your child was in the Womb, neither of you desired it should be delivered thence, till Gods appointed time was fully come; and now that you travail a∣gain with sorrow for its death. O desire not to be delivered from your sorrows one moment before Gods time for your deliverance be fully come also. Let patience have its perfect work; that Comfort which comes in Gods way and season, will stick by you, and do you good indeed.
Secondly, I desire, that though you and your afflictions had a sad meeting, yet you and they may have a Comfortable parting. If they effect that upon your hearts which God sent them for, I doubt not but you will give them a fair testimony when they go off.
If they obtain Gods blessing upon them in their operation, surely they will have your blessing too at their valediction. And what you enter∣tained with fear, you will dismiss

with praise. How sweet is it to hear the afflicted soul say when God is loose∣ing his bands, It's good for me that I have been afflicted!
Thirdly, I heartily wish, that these searching afflictions may make the most satisfying discoveries, that you may now see more of the evil of sin, the vanity of the Creature, and the fullness of Christ, than ever you yet saw. Afflictions are searchers, and put the soul upon searching and trying its ways, Lam. 3. 40. When our sin finds us out by affliction, happy are we, if by the light of affliction we find out sin. Blessed is the man whom God chasteneth, and teacheth out of his Law, Psal. 94. 12. There are unseen causes many times of our troubles; you have an advantage now to sift out the seeds and principles from which they spring.
Fourthly, I wish that all the love and delight you bestowed upon your little one, may now be placed to your greater advantage upon Jesus

Christ: and that the stream of your affection to him, may be so much the stronger, as there are now fewer cha∣nels for it to be devided into. If God will not have any part of your happiness to lye in children; then let it wholly lye in himself. If the Jealousie of the Lord hath removed that which drew away too much of your heart from him, and hath spoken by this rod, saying, Stand aside child, thou art in my way, and fillest more room in thy Parents hearts than belongs to thee. O then deliver up all to him, and say, Lord, take the whole heart intirely and undividedly to thy self. Henceforth let there be no par∣ting, sharing or deviding of the af∣fections betwixt God and the Crea∣ture, let all the streams meet and cen∣ter in thee only.
Fifthly, That you may be strength∣ned with all might in the inner man to all patience, that the peace of God may keep your heart and mind. La∣bour to bring your hearts to a meek

submission to the rod of your Father. We had Fathers of our flesh who corrected us, and we gave them reverence, shall we not much more be in subjection to the Father of spirits and live? Is it comely for children to contest and strive with their Father? Or is it the way to be freed from the yoak by struggling under it? Oh that your hearts might be in a like frame with his, that said, Lord, thou shalt beat, and I will bear. It was a good observation that one made, Anima sedendo, & quiescendo fit sapiens. The Soul grows wise by sitting still and quiet under the rod. And the Apostle calls those excellent fruits which the Saints gather from their sanctified afflictions, The peaceable fruits of Righteous∣ness, Heb. 12. 11,
Lastly, My hearts desire and prayer to God for you is, that you may die daily to all visible enjoyments, and by these frequent converses with death in your family, you may be prepared for

your own change and dissolution when it shall come.
O, Friends, How many graves have you and I seen opened for our dear Relations! How oft hath death come up into our windows, and summoned the delight of our eyes? It is but a little while and we shall go to them, we and they are distinguished but by short intervals.
Transivere patres, simul hinc transibimus omnes.
Our dear Parents are gone, our lovely and desireable children are gone, our bosom Relations, that were as our own souls, are gone, the greatest part of us is gone: And do not all these warning-knocks at our dores acquaint us, that we must prepare to follow shortly after them!
O that by these things our own death might be both more easie and more fa∣miliar to us! the oftner it visits us, the better we should be acquainted with it, and the more of our beloved Relations it removes before us, the

less of either snare and intanglement remains for us when our turn comes.
My dear Friends, my flesh and my blood, I beseech you for Religion sake, for your own sake, and for my sake, whose Comfort is in great part bound up in your prosperity and wel∣fare, that you read frequently, ponder seriously, and apply believingly these Scripture-consolations and directions, which in some haste, I have gathered for your use, and the God of all con∣solation be with you.

