



READER,
AMONG the difficulties and severi∣ties
of true Religion, the faithful search∣ing,
and diligent keeping of our heart
are found in the first and highest rank of diffi∣culties;
these two take up the main work of
Christian betwixt them, hic labor hoc opuest.
I had hopes that these Essaies for the search∣ing
of the heart, might much
sooner have followed my formerA Sain indeed. for keeping the heart: but pro∣vidence
hath reserved it for the fittest season.

It comes to thy hand, Reader, in a day o
straits and fears, a dark and gloomy season
when the Nations about us are made drun
with their own blood, and filled with the 
of astonishment; In a day when the 
ready to pass unto us, and a storm seems to 
rising in the fears of many, and threatning th
Protestant interest in these reformed Nations▪
Ste Men very considerable for Piety and
Learning from that Scripture, Rev. 13. 3. The
deadly wound, (viz. that given the beast by
the Reformation) was healed, have concluded
that Popery will once more over run the re∣formed
Nations; and one of great renown in all
the Churches of Christ, foretelling this furious (but
hort) srtom, comforts the People of God with
this, that it is like to fall heaviest upon the Wor∣shipprs
in the outward Court, namely, the
formal Professors of the times.
Oh! How much is every Man now concern∣ed
to have his estate and condition well cleared,
and to give all diligence to make his calling and
election sure!
It should both amaze and grieve a pious
mind, to see how some ingenious Persons can sit
with unwearied patience and pleasure racking
their brains upon some dry School Problem, or
ome nice Mathematical Point; whil'st no
Reasons or Perswasions can prevail with them to

pend one serious hour in the search and study of
heir own hearts.
It was the saying of the great Cicero, Li∣enter
omnibus omnes opes concesserim, ut
ihi liceat, vi nullâ interpellante, isto mo∣
literis vivere. I would give all the Wealth
n the World that I might wholly live in my
Studies, and have nothing to hinder me. What
a brave offer had that been, if Heaven and the
clearing of a title to it had been the subject-mat∣er
of those studies! Crede mihi, extingui
dulce esset, Mathematicarum artium studio,
saith another, (i. e.) Believe me, it were a sweet
death to dye in the study of the Mathematical
Arts: And I should be apt to believe it too, did
I not know that eternal Iudgment immediate∣ly
follows death; and that they who stand at
the door of eternity have higher matters to mind
than Mathematical niceties. To discern the
harmonies and proportions in nature is pleasant,
but to discern the harmony and proportion of the
Signs of Grace laid down in the Word, with
the Works of Grace wrought in our Souls, is a
far more pleasant and necessary imployment;
and to be extinguished in such a work as this,
were a lovely death indeed; Blessed is that Ser∣vant,
whom his Lord when he cometh shall
find so doing.
My Friends, a day of trouble is near, a dying
hour approacheth us, and when our Eye-strings,

and Heart-strings are breaking, when we are ta∣king
the last grasp of Christ and the Promises, yo
will then know to what purpose those hours spen
in such work as this were. Search your selves
yea search your selves before the decree brin
forth, as that text may be read, Zeph. 2. 1, 2. Ente
into thy Chamber, Christian, and shut thy door; s
close to this imployment thou art here directed to;
and however times shall govern, whether it be
fair or foul weather abroad, thou shalt never re∣pent
such an expence of thy time; Nusquam re∣quiem
inveni, nisi in libro & claustro; said
a devout soul once. I am never better, than
when I am at my Book, or on my knees.
This may seem but a dull melancholy life to
the brisk and aiery Spirits of these times; but
let us be content with it as it is, and leave them
(if we cannot have their company) to their
portiveness and frolicks, never once grudging
em their short and dear bought pleasures. Assu∣ance
that sin is pardoned and Christ is ours;
ith the unspeakable joys that are inseparably
nnected therewith is that White Stone, and
New Name, which none knows but he that
eives it; for no words can possibly signifie to
other what that soul tasts and feels in such an
our as that is.
And be not discouraged at the difficulty of obining
it, this White Stone is no Philosophers
one, which no Man could ever say, he had in

his own hand, for many a Christian hath really
found it in waiting upon the Lord by Prayer,
and diligently searching the Scriptures and his
own heart.
Reader, The time will come when they that
coff at the serious diligence of the Saints, and
break many a pleasant Iest upon the most solemn
and awful things in Religion, will tremble
when they shall hear the Midnight-Cry, Behold
he Bridegroom cometh; and see the Lamps
of all Vain and Formal Professors expire, and
one admitted into the Marriage, but such whose
Lamps are furnished with Oyl (i. e.) such
whose professions and duties are enlivened and
aintained by vital Springs and Principles of
eal Grace within them.
It is a very remarkable
Story that Melchior Adams
ecords in the life of Gobeli∣us,Melch. Adams in vita Gobelini per∣sonae vixit. Anno. 1420. That a little before his
ime there was a Play set forth at Isenach in
Germany, of the Wise and Foolish Virgins:
herein the Virgin Mary, who was one of
he Five Saints that represented the Wise Virgins,
as brought in with the rest, telling the Fool∣h
Virgins that cryed to her for Oyl, that it
as too late: and then others representing the
oolish Virgins, fell a weeping and making
ost bitter Lamentations.

Hereat Prince Frederick (who was one of
the Spectators) greatly amazed, cryed out, Quid est
fides nostra Christiana, si neque Maria,
neque alia Sancta exorari potest, &c. What
is our faith worth, and to what purpose are al
our good works, if neither Mary, nor any other
Saint can help us! And such was his consterna∣tion,
that it threw him into a sore and vio∣lent
disease, which ended in an Apoplex, where∣of
he died about four daies after.
If the representation of these things in a Play
ended the Life of so great a Man, so tragical∣ly;
Oh think with thy self, Reader, what
will the effects of the Lords real appearance in
the clouds of Heaven, and the mourning and
wailing of the Tribes of the Earth in that day
be? Think I say and think again, and again,
what the dismal effects of such a sight and
sound will be upon all that neglect serious pre¦paration
themselves, and scoff at them that do
prepare to meet the Lord.
The design of this Manual is to bring e∣very
Mans Gold to the Touchstone and Fire
I mean every Mans Grace to the tryal of th
word, that thereby we may know what we are,
what we have, and what we must expect
and trust to at the Lord's coming. I preten
not to any gift of diserning Spirits. Such a
extraordinary gift there once was in the Church
and very necessary for those times (wherein Sa∣tan

was so busie, and the Canon of Scripture
not compleated) which the Apostle calls the
Gift of discerning Spirits, 1 Cor. 12. 10. and
some are of Opinion that by vertue of this Gift,
Peter discerned the Hypocrisie of Ananias and
Saphira, but whatever that Gift was, it is ut∣erly
ceased now; no Man can pretend to it, but
he Ordinary aids and assistances of the Spirit
are with us still, and the lively Oracles are a∣ong
us still, to them we may freely go for re∣solution
of all doubts, and decision of perplexed
ases: and thus we may discern our own Spi∣its,
though we want the extraordinary gift of
discerning other Mens Spirits.
I have little to say of this Treatise in thy
Hands, more than that it is well aimed, and
esigned, however it be managed: the Ear tries
words, as the Mouth tasteth Meat; these things
will relish according to the Palates it meets
ith.
It is not the pleasing, but profiting of Men
at I have herein laboured for. I know of
othing in it that is like to wound the upright,
 slightly heal the Hypocrite, by crying peace,
ace, when there is no peace. Scripture light
ath been my Cynosura, and with that thread
 my hand, I have followed the search of Hy∣crisie
through the Labyrinths of the Heart.
ome assistance I hope I have had also from
xperience; for Scripture and Experience are

such Relatives, and the tye betwixt them soa
discernable, as nothing in Nature can be mor
so. What we feel in our hearts, we might
have read in the Scriptures before ever we fel
it.
That the Blessing of God may go forth with
it, and accompany it to thy Soul, Reader, i
the hearts desire and prayer of

