




TWO Yeers abov two Lustrs are ex∣pired, elapsed and no more (truly Madam it is) since your humbl Honorer trod the Globe of this Earth not having as yet atteined the Teens: a grand prae∣sumption this Praeface of Dedication mai wel be accounted and deservedly, I confess, adjudged to be, were I not ful∣ly possest with this perswasion that you are an Inhaeritrix of so much feith as to beleev that as there are som who tho never so old, yet do never com to the years of discretion; so contrariwise and on the other hand there mai be
Juvenis aetate non moribus: and that Seniores an∣nis are not alway Saniores animis, the old, foolish, doting World giveth am∣pl testimonie, super sufficient witness thereof. Mi meaning in short is, that The deie of smal things wil not (I hope) be despised bi you so much a cgnoun and cgnoing Christian, since evn the Juaes are wont proverbialy to acgnoledg and avouch that the young in Years somtimes are as the Aged in al gravitie and wisdom of carriage. I would not bi these Superior Expressions, Saieings aforesaid praeoccupat, praeengage, anticipate, forestal the le'st opinion, conceit of mi having ani abi∣litie, titl to make application of this Adage to mi immeriting meanness (who deem mi self unfit to be evn put among, or set down with the Dogs of your Flock) onely I have adventured to as∣sume the audacitie of this pau'r ablati∣on, this papyr-praesent: Wherein if it can speak, or hint ani thing to you wherebi the same mai be advanced to a Kiss of your Hand, or a Glance of your Oie, the ambitious thouhts, aims of the Dedicator, Cobling Translator have got their Ends, are at their Last! For mi Talent indeed is slender, littl, but mi Lov is not so; were I abl to express, utter it in a greater measure, or in ani hiher nature, you should be sure to find it, but I must sai, affirm with that Pather , &c. and a tri∣plicitie of them there are; for as all Music is but the multiplieing of three parts; so is our consort here, it consi∣sting likewise of three parts, i. e. three Parties, the Author, Translator, and Reader.

Sir, I have penned, writn at mi own peril; constru, understand mee at yo r own pleaceur. I have not so littl Man in mee as to want Errataes, faults; nor so much Fool in mee as to imagine, think it; nor so littl Modestie as to a vouch, swear it; nor so much Child in mee as to whimper, whine at Zoilus. Mi reqest is, that the faultless hand mai cast, throw the first stone, so altho I cannot shun, avoid the common Lot of Man, Error: I mai escape, be praeser∣ved from the punishment of the Com∣mon Man, Censure. I here offer, prae∣sent an Hive of Bees big thihed, ladn with Honie: There are no Wasps, nor Hornets here: there is none wil sting, if thu strike not first: if ani do, she hath Honie in her Bag that wil cure. In plainer terms, with a smal Book of Hymns, Poëms, Divine Fancies, among which as I have none to brag, boast of; so I hope I shal have none to be asham∣ed of, blush at. Al cannot affect al: if som pleace al, or al som, it is more than I exspect, look for. Sir, you cgno that the desires of Man are vast, boundless as the Ocean,
. So Jamblichus, a perfora∣ted, bored Tub is not more insatiat, un∣filled; It is pittie that grandeur, great∣ness should at ani time wander, be out of the Road of grace, goodness; and I vould somtime,, if I durst, exsecrat, anathematize him who first separated profitabl and honest. Tru Religion and Virtu are effected bi that Divine and aetern sapience, wisdom, wherbi the Contemplativ virtu of Man is ex∣tolled, lifted up to the benedict science, blessed cgnolege of the Majestie of God: of al other the greatest virtu: as wherein remaineth, resteth the chief Satisfaction, Contentment in this life, For if there be a Paradise in this Life, certenly acgnoledgedly it is in one of these two, either Religious practice, Conversation; or els in holi Studies, pious Speculation: for as much as whatsoever is not conteined, infolded, included, shut up in one of these two, is ful of dolor, grief, anxietie, vexati∣on, amaritie, bitterness, acerbitie, sowerness, timerousness, fearfulness, sollicitude, care, perplexitie, sorrow. I write not, Sir, Madam, these things to instruct, teach you as Sciolists in pietie, Novices in Religion; but rather to let you perceive, feel mi purpose in the publication of it; the scope, drift, design, purport whereof is to inform in general the force, vigor, valu, virtu of really Religious Rumination, holily-inflamed Meditation. I remember a Motto, which was this, Lunae radiis non maturescit Botrus. That the Beams of the Moon are too weak, too invalid to ripn a tender Grape and bring it to maturitie; unless the Sun also afford, add his heat; and shed, cast forth his vital beams on it. How wel this suit∣eth with mee, who am Inferioris sub∣sellii Sacrificulus, I shal not need to tel you. Halos, what are al mi pau'r abors but as Cynthia's Raies, the
Moon-beams; som liht thei possibly mai give in a dark place, but to matu∣rat, ripn ani thing for the public good, it is far too imbecill, weak, insuffici∣ent, unabl; unless som one who is Phoebi similis, Solis instar (instead, in lieu of the Sun to such a pau'r Star, twinkling liht) wil be pleaced out of his own bountie; goodness to illumi∣minat, beliht, illustrat, beglori, irra∣diat, bebeam; I mean, to conferr, throw som favor and friendli Counte∣nance on it and him; who is and can never be other than an Intercessor, Pe∣titioner at the Throne of Grace, that Glorie in Heavn mai Croun, Diadem your Virtues and Honor on Earth aug∣ment, incresce with your hours, as also the amorous ardors of


