


Ingenious Sea-man,
THE Art of Navigation, by which Islands
especially are enriched, and preserved in
safety from Forensical Invasions; and the
wonderful Works of God in the great Deep, and
Foreign Nations are most delightfully and fully be∣held,
&c. is an Art of exquisite excellency, ingen∣uity,
rarity, and mirability: But the Art of Spiritual
Navigation is the Art of Arts. It is a gallant thing
to be able to carry a Ship richly laden round the
World: but it is much more gallant to carry a Soul
(that rich loading, a Pearl of more worth than all
the Merchandise of the world) in a body (that is
liable to leaks and bruises as any Ship is) through
the Sea of this World (which is as unstable as water,
and hath the same brinish taste and salt gust which
the waters of the Sea have) safe to Heaven (the
best Haven) so as to avoid splitting upon any Soul∣sinking
Rocks, or striking upon any Soul-drowning
Sands. The Art of Natural Navigation is a very
great mystery; but the Art of Spiritual Navigation
is by much a greater mystory. Humane wisdom may
teach us to carry a Ship to the Indies; but the Wis∣dom
only that is from above can teach us to steer
our course aright to the Haven of Happiness. This
Art is purely of Divine Revelation. The truth is,
Divinity (the Doctrine of living to God) is no∣thing
else, but the Art of Soul-Navigation, revealed
from Heaven. A meer man can carry a Ship to any

desired Port in all the World, but no meer man can
carry a Soul to Heaven. He must be a Saint, he must
be a Divine (so all Saints are) that can be a Pilot
to carry a Soul to the fair Haven in Emanuel's land.
The Art of Natural Navigation is wonderfully im∣proved
since the coming of Christ, before which time
(if there be truth in History) the use of the Load∣stone
was never known in the world; and before the
vertue of that was revealed unto the Mariner, it is
unspeakable with what uncertain wandrings Sea-men
floated here and there, rather than sailed the right
and direct way. Sure I am, the Art of Spiritual
Navigation is wonderfully improved since the com∣ing
of Christ: it oweth its clearest and fullest dis∣covery
to the coming of Christ. This Art of Arts
is now perfectly revealed in the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testament; but the Rulers thereof
are dispers'd up and down therein. The collecting
and methodizing of the same, cannot but be a work
very useful unto Souls: Though when all is done,
there is an absolute necessity of the teachings of the
Spirit, and of the anointing that is from above, to
make Souls Artists in sailing Heavenward. The In∣genious
Author of the Christians Compass, or the Mar∣riners
Companion, makes three Parts of this Art (as
the School-men of Divinity,) viz. Speculative,
Practical, and Affectionate. The principal things
necessary to be known by a Spiritual Sea-man, in
order to the steering rightly and safely to the Port
of Happiness, he reduceth to four Heads, answerable
to the four general Points of the Compass; making
God our North; Christ our East; Holiness our South;
and Death our West Points. Concerning God, we
must know, 1. That he is, Heb. 11. 6. and that
there is but one God, 1 Cor. 8. 5, 6. 2. That this
God is that Supreme Good, in the enjoyment of

whom all true happiness lies, Psal. 4. 6, 7. Mat. 5.
8.—18. 20. 3. That (Life eternal lying in God,
and he being incomprehensible and unconceivable
in Essence, as being a Spirit) our best way to eye
him is in his Attributes, Exod. 34. 5, 6, 7. and
works, Rom. 1. 20. and especially in his Son, 2 Cor.
4. 6. 4. That as God is a Spirit, so our chiefest,
yea only way of knowing, enjoying, serving, and
walking with him, is in the Spirit likewise, Ioh. 4.
24. Concerning Christ, we must know, 1. That
he is the true Sun which ariseth upon the World,
by which all are enlightned, Iohn 1. 9. Mal. 3. 2.
Luke 1. 78, 79. 2. That God alone is in him, re∣conciling
himself to the World, 2 Cor. 5. 19. 1 Cor.
1. 30. Iohn 14. 6. 3. That Jesus Christ is only
made ours by the union and in-dwelling of himself
in us through the spirit, 1 Cor. 2. 9, 10. and 6. 17.
Ioh. 16. 8, 9. 1 Cor. 12. 3. 13. 4. That the way of
the spirits uniting us to Christ, is by an act of Power
on his part, and by an act of Faith on our parts, Iohn
3. 16. last 5. 29. Eph. 3. 17. Concerning Holiness,
we must know, 1. That whoever is in Christ is a
new creature, 2 Cor. 5. 17. 1 Cor. 6. 11. 2. Holi∣ness
is the Souls highest lustre, Exod. 15. 11. when
we come to perfection in Holiness, then is our Sun
at the height in us. 3. Holiness, is Christ filling
the Soul; Christ our Sun is at highest in our hearts,
when they are most holy. 4. This Holiness is that
which is directly opposite to sin: sin eclipses holi∣ness,
and holiness scatters sin, Heb. 7. 26. Phil. 2.
15. 2 Pet. 3. 11. Concerning Death, we must know,
1. Death is certain: the Sun of our Life will set in
Death: when our days come about to this Western∣point,
it will be night, Heb. 9. 27. Psal. 49. 7, 9.
2. If we die in our sins out of Christ, we are undone
for ever, Iob 8. 24. Phil. 1. 21. 3. It is our be∣nighting

to die, but it's not our annihilating, 1 Cor.
15. Rev. 20. 12. 4. After Death comes Judgment;
all that die shall arise to be judged, either for life
or death the second time, Heb. 9. 27. Mat. 25. Heb.
6. 2. These four heads, and the particulars under
them are as necessary to be known in Spiritual Na∣vigation,
as the four Points of the Compass are in
Natural Navigation. The things which we ought
to do, in order to our arrival to our Happiness, our
Author makes as many as there be Points in the
Compass. And for an help to memory, we may
begin every particular with initial known Letters
on the Points of the Compass. 1. N. Never stir
or steer any course, but by ight from God, Psal.
119. 105. Isa. 8. 10. 2. N. and by E. Never Enter
upon any Design, but such as tends towards Christ,
Act. 10. 43. 3. N. N. E. Note Nothing Enviously,
which thrives without God, Psal. 73. 12, 13. 4.
N. E. and by N. Never Enterprize Not-warrantable
courses, to procure any the most prized or conceited
advantages, 1. Tim. 6. 9, 10. 5. N. N. E. Now
Entertain the sacred Commands of God, if hereafter
thou expect the soveraign consolations of God, Psal.
119. 48. 6. N.E. and by E. Never Esteem Egypt's
Treasures so much, as for them to forsake the People
of God, Heb. 11. 26. 7. E. N. E. Err not, E∣specially
in soul-affairs, Ia. 1. 16. 1 Tim. 1. 19, 20.
2 Tim. 2. 18. 8. E. and by N. Eschew Nothing but
sin, 1 Pet. 3. 11. Iob 1. 7, 8-31. 34. 9. E. Establish
thy heart with grace, Heb. 13. 9. 10. E. and by
S. Eye Sanctity in every action, 1 Pet. 1. 15. Zech.
14. 29. 11. E. S. E. Ever Strive Earnestly to live
under, and to improve the means of Grace. 12.
S.E. and by E. Suffer Every Evil of punishment of
sorrow, rather than leave the ways of Christ and
Grace. 13. S.E. Sigh Earnestly for more enjoy∣ments

of Christ. 14. S.E. and by S. Seek Ever∣more
some Evidences of Christ in you the hope of
glory. 15. S.S.E. Still Set Eternity before you,
in regard of enjoying Jesus Christ, Ioh. 17. 24. 16.
S. and by E. Settle't Ever in your soul, as a principle
which you will never depart from, that holiness and
true happiness are in Christ and by Christ. 17. S.
Set thy self always as before the Lord, Psal. 16. 8.
Acts 2. 25. 18. S and by W. See Weakness hast∣ning
thee to death, even when thou art at the highest
pitch or point. 19. S. S. W. See Sin Which is the
sting of Death, as taken away by Christ, 1 Cor. 15.
55, 56. 20. S.W. and by S. Store up Wisely Some
provisions every day for your dying day. 21. S.W.
Set Worldly things under your feet, before death
come to look you in the face. 22. S.W. and by W.
Still Weigh and Watch with loins girded and lamps
trimmed, Luk. 12. 35, 36, 37. 23. W. S. W.
Weigh Soul-Works, and all in the ballance of the
Sanctuary. 24. W. and by S. Walk in Sweet com∣munion
with Christ here, and so thou maist die in
peace, Luk. 2. 29. 25. W. Whatsoever thy con∣dition
be in this world, eye God as the disposer of
it, and therein be contented, Phil. 4. 11. 26. W.
and by N. Walk Not according to the course of the
most, but after the example of the best. 27. W.N.
W. Weigh Not What men speak or think of thee,
so God approve thee, 2 Chro. 10. 18. Rom. 2. 28, 29.
28. N. W. and by W. Never Wink at, but Watch
against small sins, nor neglect little duties, Eph. 5. 15.
29. N.W. Never Wish rashly for death, nor love
life too inordinately, Iob 3. 4. 30. N. W. and by
N. Now Work Nimbly ere night come, Ioh. 12. 35,
36. Eceles. 9. 10. 31. N. N. W. Name Nothing
When thou pleadest with God for thy Soul, but
Christ and Free-grace, Dan. 9. 17. 32. N. and by

W. Now Welcome Christ, if at death thou wilt be
welcomed by Christ. A tender, quick, enlivened,
and enlightened Conscience, is the only Point upon
which we must erect these Practical Rules of our
Christian Compass, Heb. 13. 1. 2 Cor. 1. 12. Our
Memory, that is the Box in which this Compass must
be kept, in which these Rules must be treasured, that
we may be as ready and expert in them, as the Mar∣riner
is in his Sea-compass. So much for the spe∣culative
and practical parts of the Art of Soul-Spi∣ritual-Navigation.
The Affectionate part doth
principally lie in the secret motions or movings of
the Soul towards God, in the Affections which are
raised and warmed, and especially appear active in
Meditation: Meditation being as it were the Lim∣beck
or Still in which the Affections heat and melt,
and as it were drop sweet spiritual Waters. The
affectionate Author of the Christians Compass doth
indeed, in the third and last part of his Undertaking,
hint at several Meditations which the spiritual Sea∣man
is to be acquainted with, unto which thou hast
an excellent Supplement in this New Compass for Sea∣men.
This Collection is prefixt, that at once thou
mayest view all the Compasses (both the Speculative,
Practical, and Affectionate) by which thou must
steer Heaven-ward. What further shall be added
by way of Pree, is not to commend this New
Compass, which indeed (2 Cor. 3. 1.) needs no
, Letters of Commendation, or any
Panegyrick to usher it into any honest heart: but to
stir up all, especially Sea-men, to make conscience of
using such choice helps for the promoting the sancti∣fication
and salvation of their Souls, for the making
of them as dexterous in the Art of Spiritual Navi∣gation,
as any of them are in the Art of Natural
Navigation, Consider therefore.
1. What rich Merchandize thy Soul is. Christ
assures us, one Soul is more worth than all the world.
The Lord Iesus doth as it were put the whole world
in one scale, and one soul in the other, and the world
is found too light, Mat. 16. 26. Shouldst thou by
skill in Natural Navigation carry safe all the trea∣sures
of the Indies into thine own Port, yea, gain the
whole world, and for want of skill in spiritual Na∣vigation
lose thy soul, thou wouldst be the greatest
loser in the world. So far wilt thou be from profit∣ing
by any of thy Sea-voyages. There is a plain
 in those words of Christ, What is a man
profited if he shall gain the whole world, and lose his own
soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?
More is meant, than is spoken.
2. What a leaking Vessel thy
body is in which this unspeakable
inconceivable rich Treasure,Erasmi Chiliad, p. 299. thy
soul, is embarked! O the many diseases and di∣stempers
in the humors and passions,The smallest Pore is a Leak wide enough to let in Death, and sink thy Vessel.
that thy body is subject to! It is
above 2000 years ago, that there
have been rekoned up 300 Names
of Diseases; and there be many
under one name, and many name∣less,
which pose the Physicians not
only how to cure them, but how to call them. And
for the affections and passions of the Mind, the di∣stempers
of them are no less deadly to some, than
the diseases of the body. But besides these internal
causes, there are many external causes of Leaks in
this Vessel, asIn Nubia, quae est Aethiopia, venenum est cuus grani uni∣as decima pars ominem, vel unum granum decem homines, Dan, Senert. Hypom. Phys. Cap. 2. p. 47. poisonous malignities, wrathful

hostilities, and casual mishaps; very small matters
may be of great moment to the sinking of this
Vessel. The least Gnat in the Air may choak one,
as it did Adrian, a Pope of Rome; a little hair in
Milk may strangle one, as it did a Counsellor in
Rome; a little stone of a Raisin may stop ones breath,
as it did the Poetical Poet Anacreon. Thus you
see what a leaking Vessel you sail in. Now the
more leaky any ship is, the more need there is of
skill to steer wisely.
3. Consider what a dangerous Sea the World is,
in which thy Soul is to sail in the leaking ship of
thy body. As there are not more changes in the
Sea, than are in the World, the world being only
constant in inconstancy, The fashion of this world
passeth away, 1 Cor. 7. 31. so there are not more
dangers in the Sea for ships, than there are in the
world for souls. In this world Souls meet with
Rocks and Sands, Syrens and Pyrates. Worldly
Temptations, worldly Lusts, and worldly Company
cause many to drown themselves in perdition, 1 Tim.
6. 9. The very things of this world endanger our
Souls. By worldly Objects we soon grow worldly.
It is hard to touch Pitch, and not be defiled. The
lusts of this world stain our glory, and the men of
tis world pollute all they converse with. A man
that keeps company with the men of this world,
is like him that walketh in the Sun, tanned insensi∣bly.
Thus you have hinted the dangerousness of
the Sea wherein you are to sail. Now, the more
dangerous the Sea is, the more requisite it is the
Sailer be an Artist.
4. Consider, what if through want of skill in the
heavenly Art of spiritual Navigation, thou shouldst
not steer thy Crse aright! I will instance only
in two consequents thereof. 1. Thou wilt never

arrive at the Haven of Happiness. 2. Thou shalt
be drowned in the Ocean of God's wrath. As true
as the Word of God is true; as sure as the Heavens
are over thy head, and the Earth under thy feet;
as sure as thou yet livest and breathest in this Air:
so true and certain it is, thou shalt never enter into
Heaven, but sink into the depth of the bottomless
pit. Am I not herein a Messenger of the saddest
Tidings that ever yet thy Ears did hear? Possibly
now thou makest a light matter of these things, be∣cause
thou dost not know what it is to miss of Hea∣ven,
and what it is for ever to lie under the wrath
of God: but hereafter thou wilt know fully, what
it is to have thy Soul lost eternally, so lost, as that
God's mercies, and all the good there is in Christ,
shall never save it; and as God hath set and ordered
things, can never save it. Hereafter thou wilt be
perfectly sensible of the good that thou mightest have
had, and of the evil that shall be upon thee (this
is God's peculiar Prerogative, to make a Creature
as sensible of Misery as he pleaseth,) then thou wilt
have other thoughts of these things than now thou
hast.Ignis Gehenne lucebit miseris, ut vieant unde doleant. Insid. de sum. bon. l. 1. Then the thoughts of thy mind
shall be busied about thy lost Con∣dition,
both as to the pain of loss,
and the pain of sense; so that thou
shalt not be able to take any ease any
moment: then, that thy torments
may be increased, they acknowledge, the truth of
thy apprehensions, yea. the strength of them, shall
be encreased; thou shalt have true and deep appre∣hensions
of the greatness of that good that thou
shalt miss of, and of that evil which thou shalt pro∣cure
unto thy self; and then thou shalt not be able
to choose, but to apply all thy loss, all thy misery
to thy self, which will force thee to roar out, O my

loss! O my misery! O my unconceivable unre∣coverable
loss and misery! Yea, for the increasing
of thy torments, thy Affections and Memory shall
be enlarged. O that, to prevent that lose and mi∣sery,
these things may now be known and laid to
heart! O that a blind Understanding, a stupid Judg∣ment,
a bribed Conscience, a hard Heart, a bad
Memory, may no longer make Heaven and Hell to
seem but trifles to thee! Thou wilt then easily be
perswaded to make it thy main business here, to be∣come
an Artist in Spiritual Navigation. But to shut
up this Preface, I shall briefly acquaint Sea-men, why
they should, of all others, be Men of singular Piety
and Heavenliness, and therefore more than ordi∣narily
study the heavenly Art of Spiritual Naviga∣tion.
O that Sea-men would therefore consider,
1: How nigh they border upon the Confines of
Death and Eternity every moment. There is but a
step, but an inch or two between them and their
Graves continually. The next Gust may over-set
them; the next Wave may swallow them up. In
one place lies lurking dangerous Rocks, in another
perilous Sands, and every-where stormy Winds,
ready to destroy them. Well may
the Sea-men cry out,Terror ubique tremor, timor une{que} & undi∣{que} terrari. Ovi. Ego crastinum
non habui: I have not had a Morrow
in my hands these many Years. Should
not they then be extraordinary serious
and heavenly continually? Certainly (as the
Reverend Author of this New Compass well observes)
nothing more composeth the heart to such a frame,
than the lively apprehensions of Eternity do; and
none have greater external advantages for that,
than Sea-men have.
2. Consider (Sea-men) what ex∣traordinary
help you have by the
Book of the Creatures;Mundi creatio est Scriptur a Dei, Clemens. Vni∣versus mundus est Dus explicatus. the whole
Creation is God's Voice, it is God's
excellent Hand-writing, or the Sacred
Scriptures of the Most High, to teach
us much of God, and what reasons we have to be∣wail
our Rebellion against God, and to make con∣science
of obeying God only, naturally and con∣tinually.
The Heavens, the Earth, the Waters, are
the three great Leaves of this Book of God, and all
the Creatures are so many Lines in those Leaves.
All that learn not to fear and serve God by the
help of this Book, will be left inexcusable, Rom. 1.
20. How inexcusable then will ignorant and un∣godly
Sea-men be? Sea-men should, in this respect,
be the best Scholars in the Lord's School, seeing
they do more, than others, see the Works of the
Lord, and his Wonders in the great Deep, Psal.
107. 24.
3. Consider how often you are nearer Heaven
than any People in the World. They mount up to
heaven, Psal. 107. 26. It has been said of an un∣godly
Minister, that contradicted his Preaching in
his Life and Conversation, That it was pity he should
e're come out of the Pulpit, because he was there
as near Heaven as ever he would be. Shall it be
said of you, upon the same account, That 'tis piy
you should come down from the high-towring
Waves of the Sea? Should not Sea-men, that in
stormy Weather have their feet (as it were) upon
the Battlements of Heaven, look down upon all
earthly Happiness in this World but as base, wa∣terish,
and worthless? The great Cities of Campania
seem but small Cottages to them that stand on the
lpes. Should not Sea-men, that so oft mount up to

Heaven, make it their main business here, once at
last to get into Heaven? What (Sea-men) shall you
only go to Heaven against your Wills? When Sea∣men
mount up to Heaven in a storm, the Psalmist
tells us, That their souls are melted because of trouble.
O that you were continually as unwilling to go to
Hell, as you are in a storm to go to Heaven!
4. And lastly, Consider what engagements lie up∣on
you to be singularly holy, from your singular de∣liverances
and salvations. They that go down to
the Sea in Ships, are sometimes in the Valley of the
shadow of Death, by reason of the springing of
perilous Leaks; and yet miraculously delivered,
either by some wonderful stopping of the Leak, or
by God's sending some Ship within their sight, when
they have been far out of sight of any Land; or by
his bringing their near-perishing Ship safe to shore.
Sometimes they have been in very great danger of
being taken by Pirates, yet wonderfully preserved,
either by God's calming of the Winds in that part
of the Sea where the Pirates have sail'd, or by giving
the poor pursued Ship a strong gale of Wind to run
away from their Pursuers; or by sinking the Pirates,
&c. Sometimes their Ships have been cast away,
and yet they themselves wonderfully got safe to shore
upon Planks, Yards, Masts, &c. I might be endless
in enumerating their Deliverances from Drowning,
from Burning, from Slavery, &c. (Sure Sea-men)
your extraordinary Salvations lay more than ordinary
engagement upon you, to praise, love, fear, obey, and
trust in your Saviour and Deliverer. I have read,
that the enthralled Greeks were so affected with their
Liberty, procured by Flaminius the Roman General,
that their shrill Acclamations of , A
Saviour, a Saviour, made the very Birds fall down
from the Heavens astonished. O how should Sea∣men

be affected with their Sea-Deliverances! Many
that have been deliver'd from Turkish Slavery, have
vowed to be Servants to their Redeemers all the days
of their Lives. Ah, Sirs, will not you be more than
ordinarily God's Servants all the days of your Lives,
seeing you have been so oft, so wonderfully rdeem∣ed
from Death it self by him? Verily, do what you
can, you will die in God's Debt. As for me, God for∣bid,
that I should sin against the Lord, in ceasing to pray
for you, 1 Sam. 12. 23, 24. That by the perusal of
this short and sweet Treatise, wherein the jucicious
and ingenious Author hath well mixed utile dulci,
profit and pleasure, you may learn the good and
right way, even to fear the Lord, and serve him in
truth with all your hearts, considering how great
things he hath done for you: This is the hearty
Prayer of

