




Sirs,
I Find it Story'd of Anacharsis, that when one Ask'd
him, Whether the Living or the Dead were more?
He returned this Answer, You must first tell me
(saith he) in which Number I must place Sea-men; In∣timating
thereby, that Sea-men are, as it were, a Third
sort of Persons, to be Number'd neither with the Living
nor the Dead; their Lives hanging continually in suspence
before them. And it was anciently accounted the most de∣sperate
Imployment, and they little better than lost Men
that us'd the Seas. Through all my Life (saith Ari∣stotle)
Three things do especially repent me: First,
That ever I reveal'd a Secret to a Woman. Second∣ly,
That ever I remain'd one day without a Will.
Thirdly, That ever I went to any place by Sea, whi∣ther
I might have gone by Land. Nothing (saith a∣nother)
is more miserable, than to see a Virtuous and
Worthy Person upon the Sea. And although Custom,
and the great Improvement of the Art of Navigation,
have made it less formidable now, yet are you no further
from death than you are from the waters, which is but a
remove of two or three inches. Now you that border so
nigh upon the confines of death and eternity every mo∣ment,
may well be supposed to be Men of singular Piety
and Seriousness: For nothing more composes the Heart to
such a frame, than the lively apprehensions of Eternity do:
and none have greater external advantages for that, than

you have. But alas! for the generality, What sort 
Men are more ungodly, and stupidly insensible of eterna
concernments? Living, for the most part, as if they had
made a Covenant with death, and with hell were at agree∣ment.
It was an ancient saying, Qui nescit orare, dis∣cat
navigare, He that knows not how to Pray, let him go
to Sea. But we may say now, (alas, that we may say so in
times of greater light) He that would learn to be proane, to
drink, and swear, and dishonour God, let him go to Sea.
As for Prayer, it is a rare thing among Sea-men, they
count that a needless-business: they see the prophane and
vile deliver'd as well as others; and therefore, What
profit is there if they Pray unto him? Mal. 3. 4. As I
remember, I have read of a profane Souldier, who was
heard swearing, though he stood in a place of great dan∣ger;
and when one that stood by him warned him, saying,
Fellow-souldier, do not Swear, the Bullets flie; he
answer'd, They that swear come off as well as they
that pray▪ Soon after a shot hit him and down he fell. Pla∣to
diligently admonisht all Men to avoid the Sea; For
(saith he) it is the School-master of all Vice and
Dishonesty. Sirs! it is a very sad consideration to me,
that you who float upon the great deeps, in whose bottom so
many Thousand poor miserable Creatures lie, whose sins
have sunk them down, not only into the bottom of the Sea,
but of Hell also, whither divine vengeance hath pursu'd
them: That you (I say) who daily float, and hover
over them, and have the roaring waves and billows that
swallow'd them up, gaping for you as the next prey, should
be no more affected with these things. Oh what a Terri∣ble
Voice doth God utter in the Stroms! It breaks the
Cedars, shakes the Wilderness, makes the Hinds to
Calve, Psal. 29. 5. And can it not shake your hearts
This Voice of the Lord is full of Majesty, but his Voice in
the Word is more efficacious and powerful, Heb. 4. 12. to
convince and rip up the heart. This Word is exalted

above all his Name, Psal. 138. 3. and if it cannot awa∣ken
you, it is no wonder you remain secure and dead, when
the Lord utters his Voice in the most dreadful storms and
tempests. But if neither the Voice of God uttered in his
dreadful Works, or in his glorious Gospel, can effectually
awaken and rouze, there is an Euroclidon, a fearful storm
coming, which will so awaken your souls, as that they shall
never sleep any more, Psal. 11. 6. Upon the wicked he
shall reign Snares, Fire and Brimstone, and an horri∣ble
Tempest: This is the portion of their Cup. You
that have been at Sea in the most Violent storms, never
felt such a storm as this, and the Lord grant you never
may; no Calm shall follow this Storm. There are some
among you, that, I am perswaded, do truly fear that God
in whose hand their Life and Breath is; Men that fear
an Oath, and are an honour to their Profession; who drive
a Trade for Heaven, and are diligent to secure the happi∣ness
of their Immortal souls, in the Insurance-Office above:
but for the generality, alas! they mind none of these
things. How many of you are coasting to and fro, from
one Country to another? but never think of that Heavenly
Country above, nor how you may get the Merchandize
thereof, which is better than the Gold of Ophir. How
oft do you tremble to see the foaming V,Vaves dance about
you, and wash over you? yet consider not how terrible it
will be to have all the waves and billows of God's wrath to
go over your souls, and that for ever. How glad are you,
after you have been long toss'd upon the Ocean, to descry
Land? And how yare and eagerly do you look out for it?
who yet never had your hearts warmed with the considera∣tion
of that Ioy which shall be among the Saints, when they
arrive at the Heavenly Strand, and set foot upon the
shore of Glory.
O Sirs! I beg of you, if you have any regard to those
precious immortal Souls of yours, which are also imbarqued
for Eternity, whither all winds blow them, and will

quickly he at their Port of Heaven or Hell, that you will
seriously mind these things, and learn to steer your course
to Heaven, and improve all Winds (I mean opportuni∣ties
and means) to waft you thither.
Here you venture life and liberty, run through many
Difficulties and Dangers, and all to compass a perishing
Treasure; yet how often do you return disappointed in
your Designs? or if not, yet it is but a fading short-liv'd
Inheritance, which like the flowing Tide, for a little
while, covers the shore, and then returns, and leaves it
naked and dry again: And are not Everlasting Treasures
worth venturing for? Good Souls, be wise for Eternity:
I here present you with the Fruit of a few spare Hours,
redeemed for your sakes, from my other Studies and Im∣ployments,
which I have put into a new Dress and Mode.
I have endeavoured to cloath Spiritual Matters in your
own Dialect and Phrases, that they might be the more
intelligible to you; and added some pious Poems, with
which the several Chapters are concluded, trying by all
means to assault your several Affections, and as the
Apostle speaks, to catch you with guile. I can say no∣thing
of it; I know it cannot be without its manifold im∣perfections,
since I am conscious of so many in my self:
Only this I will adventure to say of it, That how defective
or empty soever it be in other respects, yet it is stuffed
and filled with much true love to, and earnest desires
after the salvation and prosperity of your Souls. And
for the other defects that attend it, I have only two things
to offer, in way of excuse: It is the first Essay that I
ever made in this kind, wherein I had no President:
And it was hastned, for your sakes, too soon out of my
hands, that it might be ready to wait upon you, when
you undertake your next Voyage; so that I could not
revise and polish it. Nor indeed was I sollicitous about
the stile; I consider, I writ not for Critical and Learned
Persons: my design is not to please your Fancies any

further, than I might thereby get advantage to profit
your Souls. I will not once question your welcome Re∣ception
of it: If God shall bless these Meditations to the
Conversion of any among you, you will be the Gainers,
and my heart shall rejoyce, even mine. How comfort∣ably
should we shake hand with you, when you go abroad,
were we perswaded your Souls were interested in Christ,
and secured from perishing, in the New Convenant?
What life would it put into our Prayers for you, when
you are abroad, to consider that Iesus Christ is interceed∣ing
for you in Heaven, whilst we are your Remembrancers
here on Earth? How quiet would our hearts be, when
you are abroad in Storms; did we know you had a special
Interest in him whom Winds and Seas obey? To conclude,
what Ioy would it be to your Godly Relations, to see you
return new Creatures? Doubtless more than if you came
home laden with the Riches of both Indies.
Come, Sirs! set the heavenly Jerusalem upon the Point
of your New Compass; make all the Sail you can for
it; and the Lord give you a prosperous Gale, and a safe
Arrival in that Land of Rest.

