




My Dear Friends.
THere are three sad sights with
which our eyes should conti∣nually
affect our hearts. The
(1) Is to behold in every
place, so many prophane and
dissolute ones who bear the
very image of Sathan: the face of whose con∣versation
plainly discovers, what they are,
and whither they are going, Philip. 3. 18.
19. These look like themselves, the Children
of wrath: The (2) is to see so many cursed
hypocrites artificially disguising themselves,
and with marvellous dexterity acting the
parts of Saints, so that even a judicious
eye may sometimes mistake the Similar
Workings of the Spirit on them, for his

saveing workings on others: to hear such a
person conferring, praying; bewailing his
corruptions, and talking of his experiences;
would easily perswade a man to believe, that
he hath the heart as well as the face of a sin∣cere
Christian: For
Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat.
So the people of God doe speak, so they pray,
and even so they open their conditions: these
look like Saints, but are none. The (3) Is to see
so many real Saints in whom the Spirit of
truth is, who get through the impetuous work∣ings
of their corruptions, and neglecting of the
watch over their hearts, doe often fall into
such scandalous practises, that they look like
hy pocrits though they are not so.
These are 3 sad sights indeed, and oh that
my head were waters and mine eyes fountains
of tears, that I might weep abundantly over
them all!
For the first I would mourn heartily, con∣sidering
that they (so continsing) must be
damned eternally, 2 Thes. 1. 8, 9. 1 Cor. 6. 9.
For the second, I would both weep and
tremble, considering that they (so abideing)
must be damned doubly, Matth. 24. 51
And for the third, no less than any of the
rest because, though they themselves may and
shall be saved, yet their examples make fast

the bonds of death upon both the former;
Matth. 18. 7. 2 Sam. 12. 13. 14.
Alas! that ever they should shed the blood
of others souls, for whom Christ shed his own
blood! that ever they should be cruel to
others, who have found Christ so kind to
them! I know they dare not doe it directly
and intentionally, but so it proves occasionally
and eventually: suffer me here to digress a
little, and expostulate with these prejudiced
and hardned Souls, I will presently return to
you again. O why doe you mischief your own
Souls by other mens examples? because they
stumble and break their shins, will you fall and
break your necks? I desire all such as har∣den
themselves by these things, and take up a
good opinion of their own deplorable condition;
would soberly consider and answer these three
Queries.
1. Qu. Doth religion any way counte∣nance
or patronize the sinful practises of its
professors, or doth it not rather impartially
and severely condemn them? it is the glory
of the Christian Religion that it is pure and
undefiled, Jam. 1. 27. no doctrine so holy
Psal. 19. 8. nor doth any make more provisi∣on
for an holy life, Titus 2. 11, 12. Indeed
there is a case wherein we may charge the
evil practices of men upon their principles, but
that is when their practices naturally flow

from, and necessarily follow their principles:
as for example, if I see a Papist sin boldly,
I may charge it upon his principles, for they
set pardons to sale, and so make way for loose∣ness.
If I see an Arminian light the grace
of God, and proudly advance himself, I may
cry shame upon his principles, which directly
lead to it: but can I doe so where such practi∣ces
are condemned and provided against by
their own avowed principles that commit
them?
2. Qu. Is it not a most irrational thing to let
fly at religion because of the scandalous ways
of some, whilst in the mean time you wholy
slight and overlook the holy and heavenly
conversations of many others? are all that
profess godliness loose and careless in their
lives? no, some are an ornament to their
profession, and the glory of Christ: and why
must the innocent be condemned with the
guilty? why the eleven for one Iudas?
3. Qu. If you condemn religion because
of the scandalous lives of some that profess
it: must you not then cast off all religion in
the world and turn down-right Atheists?
surely this is the consequent of it: for what
religion is there, but some that profess it walk
contrary to that their profession: and then as
Constantine told the Novatian, you must
set up your ladder and goe to heaven by your
self.

But alas! it is not our printed apologies
for religion, but the viible reformations of
its professors that must both salve its honour
and remove those fatal stumbling blocks at
which the blind world strikes and falls into
eternal perdition.
Now there are two ways by which this may
be effected. First, by convincing the consci∣ences
of professors of their miscarriages, and
the evil and agravations of them. Secondly
by medicateing the heart, and cleansing the
fountain whence they proceed: in the first of
these a worthy and eminent servant of Christ
bath lately laboured, holding a clear Gos∣pel
glasse before the faces of pro∣fessors
which truly represents their
spots and blemishes.See Gospel Glasse. If he that
reads it, will consider, apply, and practise,
it shall doubtless turn to his salvation, but if
it turn to no good account to him that reads it;
I know it shall turn to a testimony for him
that wrote it. The second is a principal de∣sign
of this small treatise, the subject whereof
is exceeding weighty and of daily use to the
people of God: though the manner of hand∣ling
it be attended with many defects and
weaknesses: every one cannot be excellent
who yet may be useful.
I will exercise your patience no longer than
whilst I tell you.

1. Why I published it to the view of the
world.
2. Why I direct it particularly to you.
First for the publication of it, take this
sincere and brief account, that as I was led to
this subject by a special providence, so to the
publication of it by a kind of necessity: the
providence at first leading me to it was this,
A dear and choyce friend of my intimate ac∣quaintance
being under much inward trouble
upon the account of some special heart disor∣der,
opened the case to me, and earnestly re∣quested
some rules and helps in that particu∣lar,
whilst I was bending my thoughts to
that special case, divers other cases of like
importance (some of which were dependent
upon that under consideration) occurred to my
thoughts, and this scripture which I have in∣sisted
upon, presented it self asa fit founda∣tion
for the whole discourse, which being
lengthned out to what you see: divers friends
requested me to transcribe for their use; di∣vers
of the cases here handled: and some others
begd me to publish the whole, to which I was
in a manner necessitated to save the pains of
transcribing, which to me is a very tedious
and tiresome work: and just as I had almost
finished the copy an opportunity presented (and
that somewhat strangely) to make it publick.
So that from first to last I have been car∣ried

beyond my first intentions in this thing.
Ob. If any say the world is even cloyed
with books, and therefore though the discourse
be necessary, yet the publication is needless.
Sol. 1. I answer, there are multitudes of
books indeed, and of them many concern not
themselves about root truths, and practical
godliness, but spend their strength upon im∣practicable
notions, and frivolous controver∣sies:
many also strike at root truths, and en∣deavour
to undermine the power of godliness:
and some there are that nourish the root, and
tend to clear and confirm, to prepare and ap∣ply
the geart truths of the gospel that they may
be bread for souls to live and feed on: now,
though I could wish, that those that have
handled the pen of the scribe, had better im∣ployed
their time and pains then to obtrude
such useless discourses upon the world, yet
for books of the latter rank, I say, that when
husbandmen complain of too much corn, let
Christians complain of too many such books.
2. And if you be so highly conceited of
your own furniture and ability, that such
books are needless to you: if you let them alone
they will doe you no hurt, and other poor hun∣gry
souls will be glad of them, and bless God
for what you despise and leave.
Ob. If it be said that several of the cases
here handled touch not your condition, I an∣swer.

Sol. 1. That which is not your condition
may be anothers condition. If you be placed
in an easie, full, and prosperous state, and so
have no need of the helps here offered to sup∣port
your heart under pinching wants, others
are forced to live by faith for every daies
provision: If you be dandled upon the knee
of providence, some of your Brethren are un∣der
its feat. If you have inward peace, and
tranquility of Spirit, and so need not the
Councels here given to ward off those despe∣rate
conclusions that poor afflicted souls are
ready to draw upon themselves at such a time;
yet it may be a word in season to them, and
they may say as David to Abigail, blessed be
thou of the Lord, and blessed be thy advice.
2. That may be your condition shortly,
which is not your condition for present: say
not thy Mountain stands strong, thou shalt
never be moved: there are changes in the
right hand of the most High, and then those
truths which are little more esteemed than
Hedge—fruits, will be as Aples of Gold in
Pictures of Silver: In Jer. 10. 11. The
Prophet there teaches the Jews (who then
divelt in their own Houses) how to defend
their Religion in Babylon, and what they
should say to the Caldeans there, and there∣fore
that verse is written in Caldee: So much
for the reasons of its Publication: Next for

the Dedication of it to you, I was induced
thereto by the Consideration. (1.) Of the re∣lation
I have to you above all the people in the
world: I look upon my gifts as yours; my
time as yours, and all the Talents I am en∣trusted
with as yours: It is not with you as
with a woman whose Husband is dead, and so
is freed from the Law of her Husband, the
relation still continues, and so do all the mu∣tual
duties of it. (2.) By the consideration of
my necessitated absence from you, I would not
that personal absence should by insensible de∣grees,
untwist (as usually it doth) the cord of
friendship, and therefore have endeavoured (as
absent friends use to do) to preserve and
strengthen it by this small remembrance. It
was Vespatian's answer to Apollonius when
be desired access for two Philosophers: My
Doors (said Vespatian) are alwaies open to
Philosophers, but my very Breast is open to
thee. I cannot say with him, my Doors are o∣pen
for the free access of friends, being by a
sad Providence shut against my self; But
this I can say, my very breast is still open to
you; you are as dear to me as ever. (3.) A∣nother
inducement (and indeed the main) was
the perpetual usefulness and necessity of these
truths for you, which you will have continual
need of: and I know few of you have such
happy memories to retain, and I cannot be al∣waies

with you to inculcate these things, but
litera scripta manet; I was willing to leave
this with you as a Legacy, as a testimony of
sincere love for, and care over you: This may
councel and direct you when I cannot: I may
be rendred useless to you by a civil or natural
Death; but this will out—live me, and Oh that
it may serve your souls when I am silent in
the Dust!
To hasten now to a conclusion, I have on∣ly
these three requests to you, which I carnest∣ly
beseech you not to deny me; Yea, I charge
you, as ever you hope to appear with comfort
before the great Shepherd, do not dare to
slight these requests. (1.) Above all other
studies in the world, study your own hearts:
waste not a minute more of your precious
time about frivolous and sapless controversies:
it is repoted even of Bellarmine (how truely
I examine not) quod à stu∣diis
scholasticae theologiae
averteretur ferè nausea∣bundus,Fuligattus in vita Bellarm. quoniam succo
carebant liquidae pietatis, (i. e.) e
turned with loathing from the study of School
Divinity, because it want∣ed
the sweet juice of piety:
I had rather it should be said
of you as one said of
Caput regulatum illi defuit, cor bonum non de∣fuit. Swinckfeedius (He wan∣ted

a regular head, but not an honest
heart) then that you should have regular heads,
and irregular hearts: My dear Flock, I
have according to the grace given me, labour∣ed
in the course of my ministry among you, to
feed you with the heart—strengthening bread
of practical doctrine, and I do assure you, it
is far better you should have the sweet and
saving impressions of Gospel-Truths, feeling∣ly,
and powerfully conveighed to your hearts;
then only to understand them by a bare ratio∣cination,
or a dry syllogistical inference:
Leavetrifling studies to such as have time
lying on their hands, and know not how to im∣ploy
it: Remember you are at the door of E∣ternity,
and have other work to do; those
hours you spend upon heart-work in your clo∣sets,
are the golden spots of all your time, and
will have the sweetest influence into your last
hour: Never forget those Sermons I preach∣ed
to you upon that subject, from 2. Kings
20. 2. 3. Heart work is weighty and diffi∣cult
work, an error there may cost you your
souls: I may say of it, as Augustine speaks
of the Doctrine of the Trinity, Nihilo fa∣cilius
aut periculosius erratur; a man can
erre in nothing more easily, or more dangerous∣ly:
O then, study your hearts. (2.) My
next request is, that you will carefully look to
your Conversations, and be accurate in all your

waies, hold forth the Word of life: be sure
by the strictness and holiness of your lives, to
settle your selves in the very consciences of
your enemies. Remember that your lives
must be produced in the great day, to judge
the world. 1 Cor. 6. 2. Oh then what man∣ner
of persons ought you to be! You have ma∣ny
eyes over you, the Omniscient eye of God,
that searches the heart and reins, Rev. 2.
23. The vigilant eye of Satan, Job 1. 7, 8.
The envious eyes of enemies, that curiously
observe you, Psal. 5. 8. The quick and ob∣servant
eye of Conscience, which none of your
actions escape, Rom. 9. 1.
Oh then be precise, and accurate in all man∣ner
of conversation: keep up the power of
godliness in your Closets and Families, and
then you will not let it fall in your more pub∣lick
imployments, and converses in the world:
I have often told you, that it is the honour of
the Gospel, that it makes the best Parents
and Children; the best Masters and Servants;
the best Husbands and Wives in the world.
My third and last request is, that you pray
for me: I hope I can say, and I am sure
some of you have acknowledged, that I came
at first among you, as the return and answer
of your Prayers: And indeed so it should be,
see Luke 10. 2. I am perswaded also, I

have been carried on in my work by your pray∣ers:
'tis sweet when 'tis so, see Ephes. 6. 18,
19. And I hope by your prayers to receive
yet a farther benefit, even that which is men∣tioned,
Heb. 13. 18, 19. Philem. 22. And
truely 'tis but equal you should pray for me,
I have often prayed for you: Let the Pulpit,
Family, and Closet witness for me: and God
forbid I should sin against the Lord in ceas∣ing
to pray for you.
Yea, Friends, your own interest may per∣swade
to it: what mercies you obtain for me,
redound to your own advantage, if God pre∣serve
me, it is for your use and service: the
more gifts and graces a Minister hath, the
better for them that shall wait on his Mi∣nistry:
the more God gives in to me, the
more I shall be able to give out to you. I will
detain you no longer, but to entreat you to
accept this smal testification of my great love,
and have recourse to it, according as the exi∣gencies
of your condition shall require: Read
it consideringly, and obediently; Iudge it
not by the dress and stile, but by the weight
and savour of what you read. 'Tis a good
rule of Bernard, in legendis libris, non
quaeramus scientiam sed saporem, (i. e.)
in reading Books, regard not so much the
science, as the savour: That it may prove

the savour of life unto life to you, and all those
into whose hands it shall come, is the hearty
desire of
 From my Study
at Ley in Slapton,
Octob. 7. 1667.
