





Honoured Friends,
IT hath been long since observ'd,
That the world below, is a Glass
to discover the World above; Se∣culum
est speculum. And al∣though
I am not of their opinion, the say, The
Heathens may spell Christ out of the Sun,
Moon and Stars; yet this I know, That the ir∣ratoinal
and inanimate, as well as rational
creatures have a Language; and though not
by Articulate speech, yet in a Metaphorical
sense, they preach unto man the wisdom, Power,
and goodness of God, Rom. 1. 20. There is
(saith the Psalmist, Psal. 19. 3.) No speech,

nor Language where their voice is not heard.
Or (as Iunius renders) there is no Speech, nor
Words, yet without these their voice is under∣stood;
and their Line (i. e. saith Deodate)
their writing in gross and plain draughts, is
gone out through all the earth.
As man is compounded of a fleshly and spi∣ritual
substance, so God hath endowed the
creatures with a spiritual, as well as fleshly
usefulness; they have not only a natural use in
Alimental and Physical respects, but also a spi∣ritual
use, as they bear the figures and simili∣tudes
of many sublime and heavenly mysteries.
Believe me (saith contemplative Bernard)
thou shalt find more in the Woods, than in a
corner; Stones and Trees will teach thee what
thou shalt not hear from learned Doctors. By
a skilful and industrious improvement of the
creatures (saith Mr. Baxter excellently) we
might have a fuller taste of Christ and Heaven,
in every bit of Bread that we eat, and in every
draught of Beer that we drink, than most
men have in the use of the Sacrament.
And as the Creatures teach divine and ex∣cellent
things, so they teach them in a perspi∣cuous
and taking manner: Duo illa nos

maximè movent similitudo, & exemplum,Cicero.
saith the Orator; These two things, similitude
and example, do especially move us. Notions
are more easily conveyed to the understanding,
by being first cloathed in some apt Similitude,
and so represented to the sense. And therefore
Iesus Christ the great Prophet, delighted
much in teaching by Parables; and the Prophets
were much in this way also, Hos. 12. 10. I have
used Similitudes by the Ministry of the Pro∣phets.
Those that can retain little of a Ser∣mon,
yet ordinarily retain an apt Similitude.
I confess it is an humbling consideration,
That man, who at first was led by the know∣ledge
of God to the knowledge of the Crea∣ture,
must now by the Creatures learn to know
God. That the Creatures (as one saith) like
Balaams Ass, should teach their Master. But
though this be the unhappiness of poor man in
his collapsed state, yet it is now his wisdom to
improve such Helps; and whilst others by the
abuse of Creatures, are furthering their
Perdition, to be the spiritual improvement
of them, promoting our own Salvation.
It's an excellent Art to discourse with Birds,
Beasts and Fishes, about sublime and spiritual

Subjects, and make them answer to our Que∣stions;
yet this may be done, Iob 12. 7, 8.
Ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee,
and the Fowls of the Air, and they shall tell
thee, or speak to the Earth, and it shall teach
thee, and the Fishes of the Sea shall declare
unto thee. That is (saith neat and accurate
Caryl)Caryl in loc. the creatures teach us when we think
of them; They teach us, though not formally,
yet vertually; the answer and resolve the
question put to them, though not explicitely
to the ear, yet convincingly to the conscience.
So then, we ask the creatures, when we dili∣gently
consider them, when we search out the
perfections and virtues that God hath put in∣to
or stampt upon them. To set our mind thus
upon the creature, is to discourse with the
creature; the questions which man ask of
a beast, are only his own Meditations. A∣gain,
the creatures teach us, when we in Me∣ditation
make out collections, and draw
down a demonstration of the Power, Wisdom,
and Goodness of God in making them, or of
the frailty of man in needing them; Such
Conclusions and Inferences, are the teachings
of the creatures.

Common objects (saith another) may be im∣proved
two ways;Mr. Manton. viz. In an argumentative,
and in a Representative way; by reasoning from
them, and by viewing the resemblance that is
betwixt them and spiritual matters.
First, In Meditation argue thus, as in the 
present case and Similitude of the Apostle. If
an Husbandman upon the ordinary principles
of reason can wait for the Harvest, shall not I
wait for the Coming of the Lord? The day of
Refreshing; the Corn is precious to him, and so
is the coming of Christ to me. Shall he be so
patient, and endure so much for a little Corn?
and not I for the Kingdom of Heaven? He is
willing to stay till all causes have had their
operations, till he hath received the former and
the latter rain, and shall not I, till the divine
decrees be accomplished?
Secondly, in Meditation, make the resem∣blance 
and discourse thus within your selves:
This is my Seed-time, Heaven is my Harvest;
here I must labour and toyl, and there rest. I
see the Husbandmans life is a great toyl; no ex∣cellent
thing can be obtained without labour,
and an obstinate patience. I see the Seed must
be hidden in the furrows, rotten and corrupted,

re it can bring forth with any increase. Our
hopes are hidden, light is sown for the righte∣ous;
all our comforts are buried under the
clods, and after all this there must be long
waiting, we cannot sow and reap in a day; ef∣fects
cannot follow, till all necessary causes
have first wrought. Tis not in the power of Hus∣bandmen
to ripen fruits at pleasure, our times
are in the hands of God, therefore 'tis good to
wait; a long-suffering patience will reap the
desired fruit. Thus you have some hints of this
heavenly Art of improving the Creatures.
The Motives inducing me to this undertake∣ment,
was the Lords owning, with some success
my labours of a like nature,Navigation Spirituali∣zed. together with
the desire and inclination (stirr'd up in me (I
hope, by the Spirit of the Lord) to devote my
vacant hours to his service in this kind. I con∣sidered,
that if the Pharisees in a blind zeal to
a faction, could compass Sea and Land to Pro∣selyte
men to their party, though thereby they
made them sevenfold more the children of the
Devil than before: How much more was I ob∣liged
by true love to God, and zeal to the ever∣lasting
happiness of souls, to use my utmost en∣deavours,
both with Seamen & Husbandmen,

to win them to Christ, and there by make them
more than seventy-seven-fold happier than be∣fore?
Not to mention other incouragements to
this work, which I received from the earnest
desires of some Reverend and worthy Brethren
inviting thereunto; all which I hope the event
will manifest to be a call from God to this work.
I confess I met with some discouragement in
my first attempt, from my unacquaintedness
with rural affairs; and because I was to tra∣vel
in a path (to me) untrodden; but having
once engaged in it, those discouragements were
soon overcome; and being now brought to what
you here see, I offer to your hands these first
fruits of my spare hours.
I presume you will account it no disparage∣ment,
that I dedicate a Book of Husbandry to
Gentlemen of your quality. This is Spiritual
Husbandry, which is here taught you; and yet
I must tell you, that great persons have accoun∣ted
that civil employment (which is must infe∣rior
to this) no disparagement to them. The
King himself is served by the field, Eccl. 5. 9.
Or as Montanus renders the Hebrew Text, Rex
agro fit servus; The King himself is a servant
to the field. And of King Uzziah it is written,

(2 Chron. 26. 10.) That he loved Husbandry.
And Amos 7. 1. we read of the Kings mow∣ings. Yea, Pliny hath observed, That Corn
was never so plentiful at Rome, as when the
same men tilled the Land that rul'd the Com∣monwealth.
Quasi gauderet terra laureato vo∣mere,
scilicat & aratore triumphali; As though
the earth it self rejoyced in the Laurel Plow∣share,
and the triumphant Plowman.
What pleasure you will find in reading it, I
know not; but to me it hath been a pleasant
path, from first to last, who yet have been at far
greater expence of time and pains in compiling
it, than you can be in reading it. The Hus∣bandmans
work you know, is no easie work,
and the Spiritualizing of it hath greater dif∣ficulties
attending it; but yet the pleasure hath
abundantly recompensed the pains. I have
found Erasmus his Observation experimental∣ly
true; Qui literis addicti summus, animi
lassitudinem à studiis gravioribus contra∣ctam;
ab iisdem studiis, sed amaenioribus
recreamus; Those that are addicted to study,
(saith he) when they have wearied their spirits
with study, can recreate them again with stu∣dy,
by making a diversion from that which is

severe and knotty, to some more facile and plea∣sant Subject.
But to hear that God hath used and ho∣noured
these papers to the good of any soul, will
yield me the highest content and satisfaction
imaginable.
May you but learn that Lesson, which is the
general Scope and Design of this Book, viz.
How to walk with God from day to day, and
make the several Objects you behold, Scalae &
alae, Wings and Ladders to mount your souls
neerer to Him, who is the Center of all blessed
Spirits. How much will it comfort me, and
confirm my hope, that it was the Call of God
indeed which out me upon these endeavours!
O Sirs! What an excellent thing would it be
for you, to make such holy improvements of all
these earthly Objects which daily incur your
senses, and cause them to proclaim and preach
to you Divine and heavenly Mysteries, whilst
others make them groan, by abusing them to
sin, and subjecting them to their lusts. A man
may be cast into such a condition, wherein he
cannot enjoy the blessing and benefit of a pious
and powerful Ministry; but you cannot (or∣dinarily)
fall into such a condition wherein

any thing (except a bad heart) can deprive you
of the benefits and comforts of those excellent
Sermns, and Divinity Lectures, which the
creatures here offer to preach and read to you.
Content not your selves, I beseech you, with
that natural sweetness the creatures afford; for
thereof the beasts are capable, as much, if not
more, than you; but use them to those spiritual
ends you are here directed, and they will yield
you a sweetness for transcending that natural
sweetness you ever relished in them; and in∣deed,
you never use the creatures as their
Lord's, till you come to see your Lord, in and
by them. I confess the discoveries of God in the
Word are far more excellent, cleer and power∣ful;
He hath magnified his Word above all
his Name. And therein are the unsearchable
riches of Christ, or rich discoveries of that
grace that hath no footsteps in nature, as the
Apostles expression signifies, Eph. 3. 8.
And if that which might be known of God by
the Creatures, leave men without excuse; as
it's manifest, Rom. 1. 20. How inexcusable
then will those be, who have received not only
the teachings of the creature, but also the grace
of the Gospel in vain! How shall we escape,

if we neglect so great salvation? They that
are careless in the day of grace, shall be speech∣less
in the day of judgment.
I am sensible of many defects in these Papers
(as well as in my self;) they have doubtless a
taste of the distractions of the times wherein
they were written; nor was I willing to keep
them so long under-hand, as the accurateness
and exactness with which such a subject ought
to be handled did require. Had I designed my
own credit, I should have observed that coun∣sel
—Nonnumque prematur in annum,
(i. e.) To have kept in much longer under the
file, before I had exposed it to publick view;
but I rather inclined to Solomons counsel,
Whatever thy hand finds out to do, do it with
all thy might; for there is no wisdom, nor
knowledge, nor device in the grave, whither
thou art going, Eccles. 9. 10.
I apprehended a necessity of some such means
to be used, for the instruction and conviction
of countrey people; who either are not capable
of understanding truth in another Dialect, or
at least, are less affected with it. The Propositi∣on
in every Chapter consists of an Observation
in Husbandry; Wherein, if I have failed in

using any improper expression, your candour
will cover it, and impute it to my unacquaint∣edness
in rural affairs—In magnis voluisse
sat est.
The Reddition, or Application, you will
find (I hope) both pertinent and close. The
Reflections serious, and such (as I hope) your
Consciences will faithfully improve. I have shut
up every Chapter with a Poem, an innocent
Bait to catch the Readers Soul.
That of Herbert is experimentally true.
A Verse may find him that a Sermon flies.
And turn delight into a Sacrifice.
I should never have been perswaded (espe∣cially
in this scribling Age, wherein we may
complain with the Poet.
Scribimus indocti, docti{que} poemata passim)
To have set my dull fancy upon the Rack to
extort a Poem to entertain my Reader; for I
cannot say with Ovid, Sponte sua carmen,
&c. but that I have been informed, that many
Seamen induced by the pleasure of a Verse, have
taken much pains to learn the Poems in their
Compass by heart; and I hope both the Chil∣dren
at home, and the Servants in the fields,

will learn to exercise themselves this way also.
O, how much better will it be so to do, than to
stuff their memories with obscene Ballads and
filthy Songs, which corrupt their minds, and
dispose them to much wickedness, by irritating
their natural corruption! But these are purer
flames, you will find nothing here of such a ten∣dency.
'Tis guilt, not Poetry, to be like those
Whose wit in Verse,D. Dig. is downright sin in Prose.
Whose studies are prophaneness, as if then
They only were good Poets, when bad men.
I shall add no more, but to beg that God
who instructeth the Husbandman in his civil
Calling, to teach him wisdom spiritually to
improve it; and particularly, that you may
reap a crop of much spiritual benefit, from that
seed which is here sown by the hand of the
Lords unprofitable servant, and in him,


