



My LORD,
THe Zeal I had for the present Government,
even while it was meerly to be enjoy'd in hopes,
and we could only wish it might be restored,
filled me with a just Indignation to find It,
after its Re-establishment, now again assault∣ed
by Men of such restless turbulent Spirits,
that it's probable they would scarce si quiet and still (or not
long) under One of their own framing and devising; and that
put me upon expressing my thoughts of Their late designd
Attempt against It: And had not This set me on the Work, I
might plead the Command of Authority enjoyning a publick
Thanksgiving to God for our Deliverance from it; in per∣forming
which, the Priests being to be the Peoples Mouths,
That seem'd to require, that I, one of that Order, should con∣sider
well, take advice, and speak my mind of their Fact.
Accordingly I did, (i. e.) as well as the little leisure Wind∣sor
and my attendance there afforded, would permit; and my
Thoughts of it, rough drawn as they were, I shew'd them to
Your Lordship at Farnham, desiring You to pass Judgment
upon them; where meeting with your Approbation and Encou∣ragement,
I was resolv'd, without moulding them into a more
regular Figure and Order, to make them publick, and send them

into the World under the Protection of Your Name: conclu∣ding
there was none fitter to countenance a Sermon against
Change of Government, than ou, who have stood unalterable
in the last great Vicissitudes and Changes here; was the same
in them, as you were before, or are now after them; as great
and faithful an Advocate for the Church afflicted and trod
under foot, as you are a Father of it now, rais'd and re-flou∣rishing;
as dutifully devoted to an Exil'd Prince then, as you
are to Him now, restor'd, and seated on His Throne; whose
Allegiance followd Caesar abroad, and attended on Him, not
His Fortune, home again.
But there are other reasons, with reference to my self, why
I praefix your Name to it: I was determin'd to take some oc∣casion
of recognizing your Favours to me, in recommending
me to that Person of singular perspicacity in Affairs of State,
and unshaken Fidelity to the Crown, the late Lord Treasurer
Southampton's Patronage; and after His Death, taking
me into Your Own; and since my dismission from your Ser∣vice
with a fair Reward, recommending me a-new to His
Royal Highness's, where now I am, and was (as your Lord∣ship
knows) as willing to be, when that Prince was in the grea∣test
danger of being oppress'd by the Power of His Enemies,Tacit. as
ever M. Terentius was frank after the utter Rnine of Seja∣nus
to own he had been his Friend,Annal. 6. had coveted to be so, and
glad he was admitted to that Relation.
I was determined, I say, to make some such recognition,
which I could not with more satisfaction to my self, than by a
Declaration as notorious as Print could make it, and addressing
it to your Lordship, that I am,
My LORD,

Cotenham, Sept. 12. 1683.
