



My dear and honoured Friends,
IF my Pen were both able, and at leisure to get glory in Paper, it would be but a paper-glory when I had gotten it; but if by displaying (which is the design of these papers) the transcendent excel∣lency of Iesus Christ, I may win glory to him from you, to whom I humbly offer them; or from any other into whose hands providence shall cast them: that will be glory indeed, and an occasion of glorifying God to all Eternity.
It is not the design of this Epistle to complement, but to benefit you. Not to blazon your excellencies, but Christs. Not to acquaint the world how much you

have endeared me to your self, but to increase and strengthen the endearments betwixt Christ and you; upon your part. I might indeed (this being a proper place for it,) pay you my acknowledgements for your great kindnesses to me and mine; of which I assure you I have, and ever shall have deep resentments: but you and I are Theatre enough to one another, and can satisfie our selves with the inclosed comforts and delights of our mutual love and friendship: but let me tell you, the whole world is not a Theatre large enough, to shew the glory of Christ upon: or unfold the one half of the un∣searchable riches that lye hid in him. These things will be far better understood, and spoken of in Heaven, by the noon day Divinity in which the immediately illumi∣nated Assembly do there preach his praises; than by such a stammering tongue, and scribling pen as mine; which doth but mar them.
Alas! I write his praises but by Moon-light. I can∣not praise him so much as by halves. Indeed, no tongue but his own (as Nazianzen said of Basil) is suf∣ficient to undertake that task. What shall I say of Christ! The excelling glory of that object, dazles all ap∣hension; swallows up all expression. When we have borrowed metaphors from every Creature that hath any excellency or lovely property in it, till we have stript the whole Creation bare of all its ornaments; and cloathed Christ with all that glory: when we have worn our tongues to the stumps, in ascribing praises to him; alas! we have done nothing, when all is done.
Yet wo is me! how do I every day behold reasonable souls, most unreasonably disaffected to my lovely Lord Iesus! denying love to one, who is able to compel love from the stoniest heart! yea, though they can never make so much of their love (would they set it to sale) as Christ bids for it.
It's horrid, and amazing to see; how the minds of many are captivated and insnared by every silly trifle. And how others can indifferently turn them with a kind of spontaneity to this object, or to that; (as their fancy strikes) among the whole universe of beings; and scarce ever reluctate, recoil, or nauseate, till they be perswaded to Christ: and then, 'tis as easie to melt the obdurate rocks into sweet syrrup, as their hearts into divine love.
How do the great men of the world ambitiously court the honours and pleasures of it? the Merchants of the earth trade and strive for the dear bought treasures of it; whilst the price of Christ (alas! ever too low) falls every day lower and lower upon the Exchange of this world! I speak it as a sad truth, if there were no quicker a trade (as dead as they say it is) for the pe∣rishing treasures of the earth, than there is for Christ this day in England; the Exchange would quickly be shut up, and all the Trading Companies dissolv'd.
Dear Sir, Christ is the Peerless Pearl hid in the field, Mat. 13.46. will you be that wise Merchant that re∣solves to win and compass that treasure; whatever it shall cost you? Ah Sir, Christ is a commodity that can never be bought too dear.
My dear Kinsman, my flesh and my blood; my soul thirsteth for your salvation, and the salvation of your family. Shall you and I resolve with good Joshua, that whatever others do, we and our families will serve the Lord. That we will walk as the redeemed of his blood, shewing forth his vertues, and praises in the world? that as God hath made us one in name, and one in affection; so we may be one in Christ. That it may be said of us, as it was of Austin and Alippius long ago; that they were sanguine christi conglutinati, glued together by the blood of Christ.
For my own part, I have given in my name to him long since, woe to me, if I have not given in my heart also; for should I deceive my self in so deep a point as that, how would my profession as a Christian, my calling as a Minister; yea, these very Sermons now in your hands, rise in judgement to condemn me? which God forbid.
And doubtless, Sir, your eyes have seen both the va∣nity of all Creatures, and the necessity and infinite worth of Christ. You cannot forget what a vanity the world appeared to you, when in the year 1668. you were sum∣moned by the messengers of death, (as you and all that were about you then apprehended) to shoot the gulf of vast eternity: when a malignant Feaver, and Pleu∣resie (whereof your Doct. Thomsons , pag 91. Physitian hath given an account to the world) did shake the whole frame of the Taber∣nacle wherein your soul through mercy yet dwells; and long may it dwell there, for the service and praise of your

great deliverer. I hope you have not, nor ever will for∣get; how the vain world then appeared to your eye; when you looked back (as it were over your shoulder) and saw how it shrunk away from you. Nor will you ever forget the awful apprehensions of Eternity, that then seized your spirit; or the value you then had for Christ; which things I hope still do, and ever will remain with you.
And for you, Dear Cousin, as it becomes a daughter of Sarah; let your soul be adorned with the excellencies of Christ, and beauties of holiness. A King from Hea∣ven makes suit for your love. If he espouse your soul now, he will fetch it home to himself at death; in his Chariot of salvation; and great shall be your joy, when the Marriage of the Lamb is come. Look often upon Christ in this glass; he is fairer than the Children of men. View him believingly, and you cannot but like and love him.Ep. S.R. For (as one well saith) Love when it seeth, cannot but cast out its spirit and strength upon amiable objects; and things love worthy. And what fairer thing than Christ! Oh fair Sun, and fair Moon, and fair Stars, and fair flowers, and fair Roses, and fair Lilies, and fair Creatures: but oh ten thou∣sand, thousand times fairer Lord Jesus! alas, I wronged him, in making the comparison this way. O black Sun and Moon; but oh fair Lord Jesus! O black Flowers, and black

Lilies, and Roses; but O fair, fair, ever fair Lord Jesus! O all fair things, black, deformed and without beauty; when ye are set beside the fairest Lord Jesus. O black Heavens, but O fair Christ! O black Angels but O surpassingly fair Lord Jesus!
I hope you both are agreed with Christ, according to the Articles of peace propounded to you in the Gospel; and that you are every day driving on Salvation work, betwixt him and you in your family, and in your Closets.
And now my Dear Friends, if these discoveries of Christ, which I humbly offer to your hands; may be any way useful to your souls, to assist them either in obtain∣ing, or in clearing their interest in him; my heart shall rejoice, even mine. For none under Heaven can be more willing, (though many are more able) to help you thi∣ther, than is,

From my Study in Dartmouth
March the 14. 1671.
