



My LORD,
IT was a weighy, and sa∣voury
Speech,Mr. Isaa Ambrose Epist. to his Vl∣tima.
which a
Pious Pen once saved
from your Lordship's
lips, viz. that You account∣ed
the Prayers of Gods Ministers and People,
the best Walls about your House. He that
so accounts, doubtless understands,

that Prayer engageth Providence, Isa.
45. 11. and Providence so engaged, is
the surest Munition, Job 1. 10.
Many great men enclose their
dwellings with an high Wall, but the
foundation (as the Wisest of men ob∣serves)
is laid in their own conceits,
Prov. 18. 11. Yea, in sin, and crying
sin too, Hab. 2. 12. Of such Walls we
may say, as the Oracle to Phocas,
.
If the Building emulate the Skies, yet
sin being in the bottom, all will
totter.
'Tis a fond vanity, to think of en∣suring
a destiny that can controll the
Stars, and endure the assaults of For∣tune,
(as they love to speak) whilst
Providence is not engaged for them,
no not so much as by a bare acknow∣ledgement.
My Lord, It is not the vast bulk of
an Estate, nor the best humane securi∣ty
in the World, but the vigilant care

of Divine Providence, that guards
both It, and its Owners from the
stroke of ruine. 'Tis the fear of God
within us, and the Providence of God
round about us, which make the firm
and solid basis of all sanctified and
durable prosperity. It is beyond all
debate, that there is a Providence of
God alwayes enfolding those in ever∣lasting
arms, that bear his Image. The
Impress of that Image upon you, and
the Embraces of those Arms about
you, will advance you higher, and
secure you better, than your Noble
Birth or Estate could ever do.
My Lord, Providence hath molded
you, è melJori luto, made you both the
Offspring and Head of an Illustrious
Family, planted you in a rich and
pleasant Soyl, caused many Noble
Branches to spring from you, drawn
your life even unto old age, through
the delights and honours of this
world. And now that you have tried

all those things that make the fairest
pretensions to happiness; what have
you found in all these painted beau∣ties,
and false glozing excellencies
which have successively courted you?
Which of them all can you pro∣nounce
self-desirable? Which can you
call objectum par amori? What is it to
have the flesh indulged, sense grati∣fied,
fancy tickled? What have you
found in meats and drinks, in stately
Houses and pleasant Gardens; in Gold
and Silver, in Honour and Applause
to match the Appetite of your No∣bler
Soul? Surely (My Lord) to turn
from them all with a generous dis∣dain,
as one that knows where to find
better entertainment; is much more
Noble, than wholly to immerse, and
lose our Spirits in those sensual fuiti∣ons,
as many do, alas, too many in
our dayes!
We are fallen into the dregs of
time, Sensuality runs every where

into Atheism. ProvidentJa peperit livJas,
sed filJa devoravit matrem. The largesses
of Providence have so blinded, and
perfectly stupified the minds of some,
that they neither own a Providence,
nor a God, who do ,
as Plutarch both wittily and
judiciously reply'd upon Colotes the
Epicurean.
But blessed be God, there is a sin∣cere
part, both of the Nobles and Com∣mons
of England, which this Gangrene
hath not yet touched, and Ihope, ne∣ver
shall.
My Lord, It is both your Honour
and Interest, to be , the
entire and devoted servant of Provi∣dence.
It was once the wish of a good
man, optarem id me esse Deo, quod est mihimanus
mea. This is the most Noble
and Divine life that can be, to live
and act in this world upon Eternal de∣signs.
To look upon our selves and

what we have, as things devoted to
God; not to be content that Provi∣dence
should serve it self of us, (for
so it doth even of those things which
understand nothing of it) but to stu∣dy
wherein we may serve Providence,
and be instrumental in its hand for
the good of many; this is to be tru∣ly
Honourable; quo magis quis Deo vi∣vit,
eo evadit nobilJor, clarJor, divinJor.
How much God hath honoured
you in this respect, the World will
understand better, when your Lord∣ship
shall be gathered to your Fa∣thers,
and sleep in the dust, then he
that praiseth, cannot be suspected of
flattery; nor he that is praised, be
moved with vain glory: But the ap∣probation
of God, is infinitely better
than the most glorious Name among
men, before, or after death.
And as it is most honourable to serve,
so you will find it most comfortable
to observe the wayes of God in his

Providence. To compose our selves
to think of the Conduct of Providence
through all the Stages of life we have
hitherto passed. To note the results
of its profound Wisdom, the Effects
of its tender Care, the distinguishing
fruits of its special Bounty: To mark
how Providences have gone along
step by step with the Promises, and
both with us, till they have now
brought us near to our Everlasting
Rest, Oh how delectable! how trans∣porting
are such Meditations as
these!
My Lord, It is the design of this Ma∣nual,
to assert the Being and Efficacy of
Providence against the Atheism of the
times; and to display the Wisdom
and care of the Providence of God in
all the Concerns of that people who
are really his. 'Tis probable, if your
Lordship will stoop to such a vulgar
composure, somewhat may occurr
of a grateful relish to your pious

mind. I confess, It is not accommo∣dated,
either in exactness of method,
or elegancy of style, to gratifie the
curious; nor yet is it destitute of what
may please and profit the truly gra∣cious.
Should I here recite the pleasures
and advantages resulting from an
humble and heedful eying of the me∣thods
of Providence, it would look
more like a Book in an Epistle, than an
Epistle in a Book. One taste of spiri∣tual
sense will satisfie you better, than
all the accurate descriptions and high
EncomJums that the most elegant Pen
can bestow upon it.
My Lord, It is not that eminent sta∣tion
that some persons retain (in civil
respects) above the vulgar, that will
enable them to penetrate the Myste∣ries,
and relish the sweetness of Pro∣vidence
better than others; (for
doubtless many that live immediate∣ly
upon Providence for daily bread,

do thereby gain a nearer acquaintance
with it, than those, whose outward
enjoyments flow to them in a more
plentiful and stated course) but those
that excel in grace and experience,
those that walk and converse with
God in all his dispensations towards
them; these are the persons who are
most fully and immediately capable
of these high pleasures of the Christi∣an
life. The daily flow and increase
whereof in your Lordships Noble
Person and Family, is the hearty de∣sire
of
From my Study
at Dartmouth,
Aug. 10. 1677.

