



MADAM,
IF I find it an hard Task to write on such a doleful Sub∣ject, it cannot be imagined but your part must be abundantly har∣der,

who feel over and over what is here writ∣ten. Could I tell how to administer Counsels and Comforts to you, without exasperating your Sorrows, I would certainly take that way; but seeing the one (in this case) cannot be done without the other, 'tis our Duty to submit to the method Providence hath prescribed to us.
The design of the en∣suing Discourse, is to e∣vince the truth of what seems a very great Para∣dox to most men, namely, that the Afflictions of the Saints can do them no hurt,

and that the Wisdom of Men and Angels cannot lay one circumstance of their condition (how uneasie so∣ever it seems to be) better, or more to their advantage than God hath laid it. I attempt not by a flourish of Rhetorick to perswade you against the Demon∣strations you can fetch from Sense and Feeling to the contrary, but to over∣throw the false Reasonings of Flesh and Sense, by the allowed Rules of Scripture and sure Principles of Re∣ligion.
And methinks you, and every Christian, should

gladly entertain that com∣fortable conclusion, when you shall find the founda∣tion of it as strong, as the influences thereof are sweet and comfortable.
Certainly, Madam, the intent of the Redeemer's undertaking was not to purchase for his People Riches, Ease, and Pleasures on Earth; but to mortifie their Lusts, heal their Na∣tures, and spiritualize their Affections, and thereby to fit them for the eternal fruition of God. Upon this supposition the truth of this conclusion (how strange soever it seems) is firmly built.
It was not without di∣vine direction, that the subject of the ensuing Dis∣course was as pertinently, as seasonably, recommen∣ded to me by your dear Husband, in the day of your sorrows for your only Son. He took, I hope, his Porti∣on of Comfort out of it before he died, and it is now left as a Spring of Comfort to you, who then mourned with him, and now for him.
Heavy Pressures call for strong Support, and faint∣ing Seasons for rich Cordi∣als. Your Burden is in∣deed heavy, yet I must say

'tis much our own fault they are so heavy as we feel them to be: for accor∣ding to the measure of our delight in, and expectation from the Creature, is our sorrow & disappointment when we part from it. The highest Tydes are always followed with the lowest Ebbs. We find Tempe∣rance and Patience knit to∣gether in the same Precept, and Intemperance and Im∣patience as inseparably connected in our own Ex∣perience. It may be we did not suspect our selves of a∣ny sinful excess in the time of their enjoyment, but it

now appears the Creature was gotten deeper into our hearts than we ima∣gined by the pain we feel at parting: Did we not lean too hard upon it, there would not be such shakings as we feel when it is slipt from us.
But, Madam, 'tis high time to recal your thoughts and bound your sorrows, which the following Con∣siderations would greatly assist you in.

1. What is the very ground and reason of our excessive sorrows for the oss of earthly Comforts? s it not this, that they are

perishing and transitory? that is, that you find them to be as God made them. And can you expect that God should alter the Laws of Nature to please and humour us? It is as natu∣ral to our Relations to die, as it is to Flowers to wi∣ther, or the Moon to wane.
2. That there is no such necessary connection betwixt these things, and our comfort, that whene∣ver God removes the one, he must needs remove the other with it. Christ and Comfort are indeed so u∣nited, but nothing beside him is or can be so. I

hope you will shortly ex∣perience the truth of this Conclusion, by the Com∣forts God will give you in the absence of those Com∣forts you have lost. Can you not now have as free access to God as before? Yea, do not these very Afflictions send you often∣er into his presence? And if God meet you in those duties (as in days of di∣stress he uses to meet his People) then it will be e∣vident to you that your Joy and Comfort lives, though your Husband and Children be laid in their Graves.
3. That the removin of your earthly Comforts hinders not but that yo may still pursue the grea end and business of you life, and carry on all you designs for Heaven as suc∣cessfully as ever. Indeed, Madam, had we been sent into this World to raise Estates, contract Relati∣ons, and then sit down in the midst of them, as our Portion, then our design had been utterly dasht and disappointed; but you know this is not your main end, or great business upon Earth, but to ho∣nour God by an holy fruit∣ful

life here, and make eady for the full enjoy∣ment of him hereafter. And what hinders, but you ay as prosperously ma∣age and carry on this our design as ever? You o not think the Travel∣er is disabled for his Jour∣ey, because he hath few∣r clogs and hindrances an before. I think few Christians find much fur∣erance Heavenward by eir multiplicity of En∣agements or Enjoyments  this World. Your res and fears about these ings, will now lie in a arrower compass than

they did before, and there by you may have yo thoughts more about yo to attend the great cocerns of Gods glory an your own salvation.
4. But above all, yo will certainly find yo relief and consolation  lie in the everlasting Cvenant of God. Then it was that David fetc his support under a mu heavier Burden adn smater Rod than yours: f your Relations were su as gave you comfort their lives, and left y many grounds of hope their deaths; but his we

taken away in their sins. But though the grounds of his sorrow (blessed be God) are not yours, yet I hope the grounds of his comfort in the Text are fully yours.

I confess I have prepa∣red these things in too much hast, and distraction of thoughts, which in this juncture was unavoidable; nor have I bestowed much of Art or Language upon them: and if I had, they would have been never the more effectual to your relief for that. But such as they are, I humbly pre∣sent them to you, with

my hearty Prayers, That God would make them a Soveraign Balm, by the blessing of his Spirit on them to your wounded Spirit, and to all other godly Families groaning under the like Stroaks of God with you, and re∣main,
MADAM,

