


SIR,
I Am bold to present you with the Life of the Great Theodosius, whom Pagans Au∣thors have extolled above the Princes his Predecessors, and whom the Fathers of the Church have proposed for an Example to Christian Princes, who ought to pursue his Steps.
This History, Sir, includes great Events, and one may collect from hence Instructions of singular Importance. You will observe herein, on one side Barbarians repulsed to their anci∣ent bounds; Rebels brought overby Swetness, or reduc'd to obedience by Force; Tyrants rewarded for their Cruelty and Perfidiousness,

and the Empire thrice established by the Va∣lor of Theodosius: On the other side Heresy pulled down, Idolatry confounded, the A∣buses of the Age reformed, and the Church, after an Oppression of several Reigns, resto∣red to its former Liberty, by the Edicts of this wise and pious Emperor.
You will observe here, Sir, the Spirit and Character of a Prince, who tempers his Pow∣er by his Goodness; who never separates the Interests of Religion from those of the State; who knows how to give Laws to Men, and to submit himself to those of God; who triumphs over his Enemies, as much by Ver∣tue of his Faith and Prayers, as of his Cou∣rage and his Arms, and who unites in his Person, Valor and Piety, the Grandeur of the Age, and a Christian Moderation.
I doubt not, Sir, but you will admire, the different Vertues, that he practised in the dif∣ferent Conditions of his Life. He served Em∣perors, as soon as his Age would permit him to bear Arms. Scarce had he served any time in the Armies, but he was found capa∣ble

of commanding them. The Reputation which he gained in great Employments, pro∣cured him the Envy and Disgrace of even those, who ought to have protected him: but he supported his adverse Fortune without Weakness, as he enjoyed his Prosperity with∣out Pride. He came to the Empire at a time, when there was not only a Necessity to go∣vern it, but to re-establish it; and his first cares extended to the making his Subjects happy. He was a lover of Peace, and feared less to suffer an injustice, than to commit one. He put an end to several Wars through his Valor, and undertook not one through Am∣bition. He was always more inclined to par∣don, than to punish; and having once aban∣doned himself to his Anger, he expiated by a public Pennance the Fault, which he had committed rather by the Perswasion of his Mnisters, than by a Depravation of Mind.
This long Retinue of glittering Actions might induce you to believe, Sir, that I send you the Panegyric of this Emperor, and not his History; but you will see, that I don't ag∣gravate

his Vertues, nor yet dissemble his Faults: and that without exceeding those bounds which are preseribed me, I expose the actions, which are advanced as real truths, founded upon the Testimony of ancient Au∣thors, and not as Idea's of Perfection, that are only imaginary.
It were to be wished, that the manner of Writing were answerable to the Dignity of the Subject. But I hope, Sir, that you will ex∣cuse what is wanting in the one, and that you will approve of the choice which is made of the other. As for me, I pretend to no∣thing▪ but the Glory of having brought in the execution of my Design, all the Care and Exactness I am capable of: Happy, if my Labors shall become acceptable to You, whose extraordinary Merits have engaged me to take the Liberty of presenting you with this piece, which may serve to divert you sometimes, after the Fatigues of weigh∣tier Business.
It is sufficiently known, Sir, that your endowments are excellent, that your thoughts

are equally strong and sublime, that you have not less of Delicacy, than Penetration and Vivacity, and that your Answers are as just and agreeable, as ready and decisive. All these advantages of Mind, that shine in you, in a peculiar manner are supported by a noble Air, a greatness of Soul, and a Thousand Vertues which distinguish you so advantagiously in your Country.
These eminent Qualities don't render you inaccessible to those, who are inferior to you; and far from discouraging my approach to you, they have suggested to me the Design of giving you this Testimony of that pro∣found Respect, with which I am,
SIR, 
Tuddington, Jan. 1st. 1693.
