


MADAM,
HAving no Foundation whereon to raise an Ambition of pub∣lick Notice, my Pen was ne∣ver touched with the Itch of Writing. That this once I venture abroad, is to shew another, not my self. I am under more than a common obligation to this pious Office, to pay due Honour to the dead; to build a Prophets Tomb, or erect a Pillar upon his Grave, that he may not be Buried in utter oblivion with men, who hath the promise of everlasting remembrance with God. When worthy and desirable persons are removed out of oursight, it is some satisfaction to have their

Pictures before our eyes. This is the de∣sign of these sheets. And had the Pencils Art born proportion to the Subjects worth, I had almost said, here had been expressed as rare a piece in Grace as was Absalom in Nature. But the defects to be com∣plained of in the Face, and pardoned, are abundantly recompensed with the true Portraicture of the inward Vitals, the very heart and Soul drawn to the Life by his own hand, that only could. Where∣in if some shall say, they see nothing ex∣cellent, and shall despise, others, I doubt not, will be able to reply, as he in a like Case; If you saw with my eyes, you would commend. That this Dead is here pro∣posed to publick view is to gratifie the de∣sire, and to contribute to the instruction (that I say not the reproof) of the Living. Happy are many Souls who have enjoyed the Priviledge of the lively voice of this great Instrument of God. He is not to be numbred among those of whom it is said, Let them be silent in the Grave. Who then knoweth, but that being dead he may yet speak effectually, whose Living Tongue was as choice Silver, and whose Lips fed many. The Spiritual workings

of his heart, and Converse of his Soul with God, was a secret between God and himself, wherewith a stranger did not intermed∣dle; which he no more than others in like Case had the freedom generally to Commu∣nicate. That God put it into his heart to Record it, is no improbable Argument, that God, as well as himself, intended its usefulness not only to himself, but others also, when once Death should give a liber∣ty to the Secrets of his heart to be made manifest.
Madam, The great Respect and Honour which your Ladyship hath always Cordial∣ly had, and freely expressed to the Faith∣ful Ministers of Christ, hath at once both obliged and encouraged me to prefix your worthy Name to the Memorial of this de∣ceased Prophet. Of whom I am not at all suspicious lest your Ladyship should be ashamed. He who hath been a more than ordinary burning and shining Light a∣midst his Generation, and is now a Star of the greater Magnitude amidst the Spi∣rits of just men made perfect, can cast no dark Reflections upon that true Honour your Ladyship obtains with all that know you; which in your own great Judgment

is valued as it is of God, and not of men. I shall not wonder, if those, who are stran∣gers to the Holy Spirit, shall find no de∣lightful satisfaction in reading these Spi∣ritual exercises and experiences; or who are Enemies, shall censure them as Pha∣natick fancies: which indeed can never be well understood without some measure of that Diviner Learning, whose method is Tast and see. I have therefore chosen humbly to offer this to your Ladyship, who is of full Age, and by reason of use, have senses exercised to discern both Good and Evil; in whose hands it will be secure and fear no Contempt. I have reason to believe, that in reading the practice of the Life and workings of the heart of this now Glorified Saint, your Ladyship reflecting on your self will find cause to say, Face answereth to Face, and Heart to Heart. Which I hope may contribute somewhat to your joy, and Confidence before him who fashioneth his Childrens hearts alike, in stamping the same his Image upon them all.
It hath pleased God in his holy and wise Providence to make your Ladyship an in∣stance of many, and sharp Trials, yet with∣al of much Grace, by the power whereof

you have endured with most Christian and Exemplary Faith and Patience. The last Enemy is yet before you, to be expected, and Encountred, which, considering your Ladyships years, seemeth to be approach∣ing. But, behold, it is here presented, as Disarmed, and Conquered, and so less formidable. And I doubt not but your Ladyship liveth in the Comfortable pros∣pect of that Blessed day, when all your Conflicts shall be Crowned with Victory, and Triumph over Death, in Communion with the Prince of Life.
Madam, I have yet to add, that I have gladly taken this occasion to make my publick acknowledgments, of the inviolable obligations which your Ladyship hath laid upon me by your singular Bounty, exer∣cised as well to my Honoured Father now with God, as to my self, in our state of De∣privation. And here I must joyn with your Ladyship, your only surviving Daugh∣ter of the many hopeful Children, which God had graciously given your Ladyship, Madam Mary Brook, the true Heiress of your Ladyships great Vertue and Grace. As my Pen cannot be silent, lest ungrate∣ful; so it dares not be fluent, lest offensive

to that Liberality which would not have the left hand know what the right hand doth. I am bound to say, Blessed be ye of the Lord, who have not left off your kind∣ness to the Living and to the Dead. That this may be fruit abounding to your ac∣count, an Odor of a sweet smell, a Sa∣crifice acceptable, and well pleasing to God, recompensed at the Resurrection of the Just; That your days may yet be multi∣plied, and the Consolations of God be the support and strength of your Age; That the Blessings of the Everlasting Covenant may descend, and remain to your Posteri∣ty from Generation to Generation is, and shall be the Prayer of,
Madam,
Barking Jun. 1681.

