



SƲch is that wonderful and most
comely Chain of Beings, which
winds up into World, that if
the small and lowermost things therein
make shift to show themselves, 'tis al∣wayes
by the leave, or with the help of
the Bigger and the Higher. That rotten
wood may give its glimmerings, the Sun
must take away its light: And if the
Flowers will needs be rising out of their
colder beds, or the Fryes of Wrigglers
and swarms of Quicklings or Insects, peep
out of their Graves and Dungeons, they

must wait upon the Sun to bring about
those beams of his that make the Spring;
whence they may have their Prison doors
unlockt, their fetters taken off, and be
tickled into such a laughing briskness,
and judged up into such a smirkish liveli∣ness,
as may last as long as the Summers
warmth holds on to cocker them, and the
days heat to frigge and chafe them. Now
I reckon that I must bethink my self in
this Address, how far I am taken in here,
and be well aware how Woodbridge
stands so near to Grundsborough Hall,
that if such an underly Shrub in Know∣ledge,
and unthrifty Sucker in Philo∣sophy
as I am, shall strive to put forth
this Spring time here, I can do no less
than ask the good liking of such a neigh∣bouring
Cedar, under whose shade I must
needs creep up, befann'd from next
Dogs-day scorchings, and within the bo∣som
of whose shrowdings I must be cloakt
from wind and weather. Nor should I
ever aim to blow up any Fire-light of

useful Knowlege in this place, were it
not that you have thought meet to with∣hold
those Sun-like beams of yours,
that would soon bedim its fainter twink∣lings,
and shine out all its dying glit∣ter.
Indeed you have purchased so fair
a Lordship of Knowledge in these Parts,
that I fear I should wrong your Free∣doms,
and encroach upon your Royal∣ties,
if I should put in any Claims but
Ʋnder ones, or own any other Hamlet so
near you, but what is a limb of your
Township. Nor is it but meet that I should
hold all my Natural knowledge of your
Mannor, and become Tenant to so good
a Landlord in Philosophy. So that pay∣ing
this acknowledgment, should be no∣thing
but doing my bounden Homage,
and bringing in my Lady Rent-charge;
while the Lord of the Soyl holds nextly
of the King, and does his devoir in a
Regi Sacrum.
Thus however it may be thought by
others, I have miscarried in the Thing I

treat of; I am sure I have not mistook
the Man I address to. And though it
may seem but a wooden come off, and
like that of the sorry numb-skull'd
Russes, who when they are pincht with
a hardness beyond the learning of Horn-book,
are wont to answer, that God and
the Great Duke knows all things: Yet
I being bound so far by the laws of
Mine and Thine as I have been free
in acknowledging it; must spring as much
from a rightful mind in me, to deal out
to the Greater Owner his Greater Share,
as it does from a shotten brain in any of
them, to tell another, I know not who
can answer I know not what.
Sure I am, if I ever felt my self at all,
'tis in my breast to woo Dame Kind
with as busie a warmth and hearty
earnestness as any man; but 'tis not in
my Chest to endow her with that Fulness
that he can, whose mind is as Great and
Wealthy as his Love can be strong and
flaming, and whose endowments have

made him to be as much stared at by the
Yeomen, as indeared to men of skill and
breeding. And I cannot think I mi∣stook
my self in Courtship, while I waited
upon the youngest and most Housewifely
Daughter of Philosophy, named Workful,
so long as I hapned of such a Rival in
the Parlor with her. I do believe, Sir,
that your self as well as I, had so much
rather be a Well-willer to a Brick∣layer,
than a Philosopher taking name
from Aristotles Physicks, by how much
the more 'tis behoving Mankind, to have
houses on the earth for settled and ease∣ful
dwelling, than such capering Ca∣stles
in the Air, whose Groundsils are
laid with Whims, their Overwayes with
Dreams, and rooft with Cream of think∣ing.
I must needs say, that I do think
my self so much more better'd by a Phi∣losophical
Transaction of a Moneth, or
Journal des Scavans of a Fortnight,
than by a Mercury Gallant of half a
Year, by how much the more I like my

self, when I am kindly and steadily
knowing, above what I do, when I feel
that I am Gay and Towring. And I
think our Royal Society at London is
as much before that Des belles Lettres
at Paris, as the History of that Body of
Worthies outstrips the Academy of
Complements. In that narrow Chat
that I have had with Outlanders, it
has been hugely to my liking, that hard
upon the first greeting, I have been plyed
with so many good words for our R. S. in
the whole, and Mr. Boyle alone. Nor
can I find, that either your self, or I, or
any man else, that has kenn'd the drift
and bounds of that undertaking, have
made less reckonings of their growing
worth and works already known, or
abated our hopes for time to come; for
all the Tee hees that have been broke by
Men of Droll, or dirt that has been
thrown from Daring spight. And it
goes a great way with me, to mark, that
the same-kidneyed men, who have either

a sharp flowt at the end of their tongue,
or a bitter hate in the middle of their
heart, for the wary Experimenter, have
another of the same in their Budget, for
the Book that is named from its Holi∣ness,
or indeed for any thing else, but
what is flesh on the one side, and air on
the other. Nor can any man ghess it
should be otherwise, but that he who had
a sneer or grudge for the Book of Gods
Works; the Print that he has given us
of his Almighty Power and houndless
less Wisdom: should have no less for that
other of his Word; the likeness he has
drawn for us of his truth and holiness.
Whence I have somewhat the more
wondred how it could ever get into the
heads or hearts of Men of insight or ho∣liness,
that a right knowledge of the
Works which God has done, should lead
from the knowledge of, or lessen the love
for, that boundless Wisdom and Good∣ness
who brought those things about.
As if shewing the Coats and garments

which Dorcas made, before the holy
Mourners, had been to wheadle off their
thoughts from the Work-woman to the
Works, and drown their sorrows for the
jewel that was lost, in the floudings of
of their joy for the Cabinet that was
left. Can the same train of holy ends
which God has fram'd for Mankinds
bliss, be less indearing, for that they are
known to be as skilfully rang'd as lo∣vingly
aim'd? How others may have
been wrought upon by that doing Know∣ledge,
which now spreads amongst us like
love amongst the Youth, kindly and ta∣kingly,
I cannot tell: But if I were now
to die, and knew it so, I must speak it
from within me, That I have found my
self more warmly shined upon by the Fa∣ther
of Lights, and breathing into more
becoming flames, from the reading of
Malpighius about the hatching of
an Egg, or Dr. Grew about the sprout∣ing
of a Bean, (a thing set at nought to
a by-word;) than ever I could do from

the shelves full of those Books, that have
struck fire for the Government of Chur∣ches
and some other things, bearing
their religious weight in their Names,
and their light in their Newness, in the
late dayes of Blame, and years of Topsie-turvy.
Wherein, when men had wrought
up all the Woman within them that was
feeble and glowing, into a fine-spun
thread, they play'd the Men only, when
they had done, in pelting on't with the
distaff. I can easily tast the sweetness of
God through the bitterness of wormwood;
but could never feel the sweetness of the
Christian through the bitterness of the
Man. And I love the New Philosophy
so much the more; For why, It sets the
hand a working not a striking, and an∣swers
the noise of Talking by the stilness
of Doing, as the Italians clam rowt and
tattle into nodding and beckning. Yet
'tis not to be lookt for, that the Bulk of
men amongst us, should love that which
they neither know nor care to know. It

will be enough for those that have be∣trothed
the Way, that many are the
hands heads and hearts of such worthy
and unwearied Gentlemen as are Going
along with them. And I shall ever think
with that Great part of the R. S. the
Great Mr. Oldenburg, that Sound Phi∣losophers
are each to other sufficient
Theaters. The kindness and good greet∣ting
that is of one sort, is wont to be en∣folded
mainly within the rank or stock
Guild or kinred of the same. And that
man who can find what 'tis to love know∣ingly
and beseemingly, will never feel
himself less at ease for being wedlockt but
to one. Which I do not speak as if I
ghess'd you had your Philosophy to
choose, any more than your Religion; or
that you could shift the former with as
much sleight as some others do the lat∣ter.
I believe you deal in Holdfasts as
well as Truths, and can foretel what you
shall be, as well as tell what you are.
But because there are a great many so

much upon the spur, that they cannot
stay so long till the writing can be fetcht
which is graven with the finger of God:
but grow so hot on't, as to melt down
their thoughts forthwith, and fall a
graving of them into Calvish likenesses,
that may go blazing before them in the
wilderness they are got into; that how∣ever
they miss wool they may have noise,
something loud, though nothing useful. I
was so forward to chide such a rash piece
of Will-worship, that I slipt into speak∣ing
of while I was speaking to. But 'tis
indeed time to remember, that I have
spoken enough of one and other. I am
sure he whom I speak to, is too much ta∣ken
with things to be over fond of words;
and 'tis a misbecomingness to have a do∣ing
Philosophy set forth by a talking
Philosopher. That Manly knowledge
that is now in the Chair, is to be trim'd
silently. And 'tis well for me that neither
Man nor Thing wants gilding. For I
could never open my mouth Charmwise,

nor breath out Spells to bind down men.
I never drew from, nor matcht to the
House of Peacock. Gay and I are no∣thing
a kin, nor like to be, but all that
dwells at my home is homely. My brain is
not wont to go big with flower. When ever
I spy one 'tis aloof to be sure: So I leave
both to shine for themselves, and outshine
others. And I know whatever is a None∣such,
will draw enough as 'tis, without
the Hogow of the stifling Haulers. To
be joy'd of praise-worthiness, is more
than to be lifted up by the Hoist of breath,
or to be rung with a peal of Hum and
Outcry. It will be more than enough for
me, though I cannot raise nor greaten,
the height and spreadingness of your
Worth, by sayings that are big and lofty,
if it may not be thought a lowning and
lessening of it, to take into the List of
your Menials
SIR,

Woodbridge,
Mar. 25. 1678.
