



Illustrious Deceased,
I Should injure Iustice if that after I have assumed an Idea which is properly Yours, I did not thereupon ren∣der you some kind of Homage. The Author that supports us most in our Writings, is the true Hero of the Dedicatory; his Praises we ought to publish with sincerity, and chuse him for our Protector. It may perhaps be thought, that I have been very bold in daring to work upon your

Ground-plat; but it seems to me that I should have been far bolder, if I had wrought upon a Ground of my own Imaginati∣on. I flatter my self with some hopes that the design being Yours, it will make way for what is mine, and thus much I dare tell you, that if by chance my Dialogues had any so little success, they would gain You more Honour then your own have, since it would ap∣pear that this Idea is so taking, that it matters not whether it be duly executed or no. I depend so fully upon it, that I thought a part of it onely would serve my

turn. I have taken no notice of Pluto, Caron, Cerberus, nor of no one of the infernal Crew. How concerned am I that you have drained all those rare mat∣ters of the equality of the Dead, of their trouble at Life, of the false constancy which Philoso∣phers affect to make appear at their dying hour, of the ridicu∣lous misfortune of those young people, that dye before the old∣men of whom they thought to inherit, and whom they so much courted. But when all is done, since you had invented this de∣sign, it was but just and reason∣able that you should pick and

choose what was best in it. I have at least endeavoured to imi∣tate you in the end you had propo∣sed to your self. All your Dia∣logues include their Moral, and I make all my Dead moralize, otherwise it had not been worth while to make them speak; some of the living would have served well enough to teil frivolous things. Moreover, there is this conveniency in it, that a Man may suppose the Dead to be per∣sons of great Reflection, as well for their experience-sake, as because of their vacant time; and one ought to believe, that they think a little more then is

usual whilst alive. They dis∣course of things here above bet∣ter than we, because they behold them with greater indifferency and more tranquility, and they are willing enough to discourse of them, because they still pretend to some interest in them. You have made the most part of their Dialogues so short, that 'tis apparent you did not believe them to be great Talkers, and in this I can easily agree with you. As the Dead are very witty, they ought to make a quick discovery of the ending of all matters. I could believe too, that they might be ea∣sily enlightened as to agree with

one another about everything, and consequently that they should scarce ever speak; for I fancy that it belongs to us Ignorants ouly to dispute, who do not dis∣cover the Truth; even as it is the property only of the Blind, who see not the place they are go∣ing to, to jostle one another as they go along. But here we cannot be perswaded that the Dead should have changed their qualities, so far as not to be any longer of contrary Judgments. When we have once conceived an opinion of Persons in this World, we cannot alter it. Thus I have made it my business to make

the Dead known again, at least such as are most eminent. You made no difficulty to suppose some, and some of the Adven∣tures too perhaps which you allot them; but I stood in no need of that Priviledge. History did supply me with plenty enough of eal Dead, and real Adventures, to dispense with my borrowing any assistance from Fiction. You will not be surprised, that the Dead do speak of what did hap∣pen a long time after them, you that do see them entertain them∣selves every day with the af∣fairs of each other. I am sure that at this very moment you

know France, upon a multitude of Reports that have been made you, and that you know that she is at this day in point of Learn∣ing, what Greece was formerly. Above all, your famous Transla∣tor, who has made you speak our Language so well, will not have failed to tell you, that Paris has had the same esteem for your Works as had Rome and A∣thens. Happy the Man that could follow your Style as that great Man did, and in his Expressions lay hold of that fine simplicity, and that natural plea∣santness, which are so proper for Dialogues! For my part, 'tis

far from my Thoughts, to pre∣tend to the glory of having imi∣tated you well; I desire none but that of having well known, that a Man cannot imitate a more excellent Model than your Self.
