



May it please Your Grace,
NOne of the extraordinary Ra∣rities of the Peake surprised me with greater Admiration, than Your

Grace's famous Baths at Buxton, which seemed to me like some rich Mi∣neral conceal'd amongst the monstrous Hills.
This Jewel of Nature is happily bestowed on Your Illustrious Family, who know best how to adorn such na∣tural naked Rarities, with magnificent, pleasant, and convenient Buildings, and, by Your great Example, give incourage∣ment to the frequenting of these ex∣cellent and useful Baths.
Where such natural Baths have been wanting, great Princes, or Emperors have supply'd their Defect by artificial ones; by which they express their Opi∣nion of the usefulness of Baths to the Publick; and by the erecting them, they design'd to oblige the Multitude, who

desired the use of them for their Pleasure, Beauty, or curing Diseases.
In the most flourishing Times of the Roman Empire, the number of Baths was infinite at Rome. The Diocle∣sian Baths equalled four of the greatest Palaces in Italy. And the Antonine Baths contain'd Sixteen Hundred Seats; and by its spacious Building, Places for Exercise, Ponds, Walks, Portico's, resembled a whole Province: And these Baths were adorned with Statues, noble Columns, Silver Pipes, and rich Gems.
Your Noble Family did formerly erect these Baths at Buxton; and what is wanting for Pleasure and Convenience, is by all expected from Your generous Hand.

Baths were always thought worthy of the Care of Statesmen; and Cato opposed the introducing the use of bot Baths in Rome, by which the Roman Manners might be corrupted, and their Bodies made more Effemi∣nate: He discerned the Mistake of the Grecian Doctors, who recommended Hot Baths for the helping of Digesti∣on, whereas it was evident, that they subverted and weakned the Stomach. I hope Your Grace will imitate the Coun∣sel of this Noble Patriot, by incoura∣raging this prejent Age to leave off the imprudent Use of Hot Baths, and to regain their ancient natural viguor, strength and hardiness by a frequent Use of Cold Bathing.
Your Grace's Bath at Buxton is so exactly temper'd by a mild Heat,

that it puts the nicest Constitutions in no fear of danger by the uses of it; but the benefit of it is extraordinary, by restraining the preternatural quantity of Perspiration, by strengthening the Nerves and natural Heat. By these it is easie to prevent all Inflammations, Pains, Rheums, Fluxes, and Gout, and all other Effervescences in our Humours.
The benefit of Cold Water was an∣ciently known to the Germans, who dipt their new-born Children into Rivers, to harden them; and the Northern Peo∣ple rub their frozen parts with Snow, to regain their natural Heat and Colour. But I will give Your Grace some Ex∣amples of Cold bathing from the Ro∣mans in the most flourishing time of their Empire; by which it will appear,

that I publish no new Doctrine, but only design to revive the Ancient practice of Physick in using Cold Baths, amongst which, Buxton is the most temperate and safe.
Antonius Musa first practised this Cold bathing at Rome, by which he cured the Emperor Augustus, who being subject to Distillations, had long despaired of his Health, till Musa ob∣serving the Hot Baths to do him injury, did try a contrary Method, and cured him by Cold bathing. After which, Suetonius relates, that Augustus used Hot Baths very rarely; but for his Nerves he used Sea-Water for a Bath, or the Albulae, which were the most temperate Baths in Italy; in Virtue and Heat most resembling that at Bux∣ton. For this miraculous Cure, Au∣gustus,

nobly rewarded Musa, and placed his Statue next to Aesculapius.
By this Success on Augustus, Mu∣sa was encouraged to try cold Baths in all Diseases: but as it happens to all Em∣perical new Methods, it was improperly apply'd by him in the Winter, to young Marcellus, whom Musa killed six Months after he had cured Augustus: and this rash use of cold bathing is described by Horace, which was exposing their Heads and Breasts to the falling of cold Springs on them, in the severe Cold of Winter. But this Accident did not dis∣courage this practice, but obliged the Physician to be more cautious, and to find out the right use of Cold bathing; for Horace, by the Advice of Musa, left the hot Baths, which did injury to his inflamed Eyes, and went to the

cold Baths at Clusium and Gabii; but finding those Countries too cold, he writes an Epistle to Vala about the cold Baths at Valie and Salernum.
Seneca afterwards practised Cold ba∣thing in the Sea, and cells it his old Art; and gave himself the name of Psuchrolontes, in his Epistle to Lu∣cilius; and it appears that he was so great a lover of Cold bathing, that in the Calends of January, he leapt into a Spring near Tybur.
I could give more of the History of cold bathing from the Roman Histo∣ry; but I think it sufficient that their greatest Emperor, the wittiest Poet, and their most admired Philosopher, pra∣ctised the Psuchrolusia.

This practice of Cold bathing was certainly brought by the Romans into England; but it was known and pra∣ctised also by the Germans, and from them it might come to their Neighbours. The Heathen Priests grounded their Worshipping of Wells on the Virtue of Medicinal Waters, attributing their cheap and sudden Cures to a present Deity. The bringing Alms and Offerings to Wells, was anciently forbid by Edgar's Canons: And Dr. Hammond mentions the Injunctions against worshipping St. Edmund's Well without St. Clement's at Oxford. This Custom was after∣wards imitated by the Romish Priests, who dedicated the Medicinal Springs to particular Saints: So one of the Wells at Buxton is call'd St. Ann's; and by the particular Offerings, Pilgrimages,

and Devotions, the Common People were deceived, and attributed all their Cures to the Merit of that Saint, and their own Devotion, which was due to the Physical Virtue of cold Springs, and God's Blessing on a Natural use of them
The Disuse of these Waters at Bux∣ton I believe was owing much to the Re∣formation, which gave a general Aversion to the Romish Superstition, with which the People being out of Humour, they re∣fused the good Use, as well as the Supersti∣tion of the Baths. And that Age being very ignorant in Philosophy, they discern∣ed not the natural Virtue of Cold Water, such as is that at Holywell, and St. Mun∣gus, the most excellent of the Coldest Baths, and the most used to this time.

The Civil Wars have occasion'd the neglect of many famous Waters. But I will add this most particular Cause of their disuse; As the Virtues of the Waters formerly supported the Reputa∣tion of the Saints, so now the want of a proper religious Office to be used by the Devout at the time of bathing and drinking Waters, leaves all to a general Debauchery of Manners in such publick places, and does very much lessen the number of those who would come thither, if both the Ends of Devotion and Health were served by coming to those places. This neglect of our Church I could not but censure, being no less injurious to the Bodies, than the Souls of good Men.
I have endeavour'd truly to represent to my Country the Virtues of the Bath at Buxton; and it were to be wished,

that the Church would propose some pro∣per Devotions fitted to such Occasions; and we must depend on Your Grace's Munificence, for the Splendor and Or∣naments of that place, on Your Presence sometimes, which will occasion a greater Concourse there: And I must humbly beg Your favourable Acceptance of what I here have writ concerning Buxton; who am,

Lichfield, May 1. 1697.
