



Illustrious Ghost,
IT is but Justice, that ha∣ving borrowed an Idaea, which doth of right belong to, you, I should at least make my Acknowledgments, and pay my Homage for it to you, who do so justly merit it. That Per∣son to whom an Author is most indebted, is the most proper
Hero for his Epistle Dedicato∣ry; 'tis him alone he ought to Praise, and chuse for his Pro∣tector. Perhaps I may be ac∣counted bold and rash, for ha∣ving dar'd to tread in your Paths, but I should with much more reason have merited those Appellations, if I onely had pursu'd the Traces of my own Fancy, and I may justly hope to have this advantage to make my own course Metal pass cur∣rently in the World, which so advantageously bears your I∣mage and Character; and I am bold to say that if my Dia∣logues have but the least success, they'll do you more Honour than your own, and shew that so
Excellent a design needs no o∣ver-curious management. I Re∣ly'd so much upon the firmness, and stability of the Founda∣tion, that I thought a small part on't might serve for so mean a superstructure. I have therefore left out Plato, Cha∣ron, Cerberus, and such Infer∣nal company, who are so fre∣quently Introduc'd in these En∣tertainments. You have already made the best Remarks on the choicest Subjects, as on the vain and insignificant fear of Death, the Affected Bravery and Re∣solution of some Philosophers, which they Assum'd when they were just giving up their Last, and the Ridiculous misfortunes
of young Gentlemen who dy'd before those old Dotards whose Estates they Gap't after; so that there are onely Trifles Left for me: yet since the design is yours it cannot be unsuccesfull, and I make an Offering to you of that as the onely thing that merits your Acceptance. I have also been bold to imitate you in the end and Intentions of my conversations, by moralizing all my dialogues after your ex∣ample, else what need had there been to have gone to Hell for company? If they had talk't their Ribaldry without design, living Mortals might have serv'd my Turn as well. Besides, it's no difficult matter to sup∣pose
the dead to make Reflexi∣ons on the Follies of the Living, since they have been so well fur∣nish't, not onely by long Ex∣perience, but by a calm and undisturb'd Peace and Leasure, and behold the Affairs of the world with such Indifferency as gives 'em no concern in the con∣sequences and Events of 'em, and therefore most fitting to make their observations. You thought the Dead were no great Talkers, and therefore made all their Dialogues short and pithy, and I have also made you my pattern in this particular as carrying much Reason and probability. The dead are Masters of so much Wit, that they can presently dis∣cern
the main scope and Intent of a Discourse without windings and circumlocutions. The living only are those who wanting sense to understand one another's meanings do wrangle and dis∣pute, and like the blind do stumble in that Road they can't see; yet I am perswaded that their Characters are not so much alter'd to forsake all their for∣mer opinions, which they em∣brac'd with so much Eagerness in the world; wherefore I have so far comply'd with the mode and custom as to draw 'em in the same Colours now they are dead, by which they were represented to us when they were living. You thought it not improper to
raise Imaginary Ghosts, and to attribute the glory of some Ad∣ventures to others, who never merited 'em. But I have no reason to assume this Privilege, since History has furnish't me with so many true Relations, that I have no need of having recourse to Fiction for succour. But be you not surpriz'd that I make the Dead so frequently to converse about the Affairs of the upper world which happened so long after they had quitted it, because so much Company is still coming thence who bring 'em fresh Intelligence. Renown'd Shade, I doubt not but your Candour is as great as was your Wit, and that you will easily pardon the Im∣perfections
perfections of the Living, but especially his who has no other pretensions than to imitate so excellent a Copy as yours.
