



SIR,
I Have many Reasons for my Dedica∣tion
of the following Treatise to your
self: The particular Favours you
have shewed me, have deserved a greater
Acknowledgment, than this small Pre∣sent
I make you, as a Testimony of my
Gratitude; but in this Undertaking I
shall Appeal to you, who are well read
both in the Ancient and Modern Authors,
as the most Candid and Learned Judge,
concerning their Old Notions, and Pra∣ctice
in the Asthma, which I shall here
prefer, for their usefulness to all the Mo∣derns
that have Writ on that Subject.
Sir, I think my self so much obliged
to those Learned old Authors you lent

me, from that Large and Curious Colle∣ction
in your own Study, that I cannot
but here own the Benefit I received by
Reading of them, and following their
Method of Practice on my self and others;
I hope this will be a sufficient Excuse for
my endeavouring to justify their Notions,
and Explaining of them, and for the Re∣commendation
I shall give of their Me∣dicines.
Sir, I here present you with your own
old Authors, dress'd up in the present new
Philosophy, for that changes its Fashion
in every Age; for it would not now ap∣pear
Modish to express themselves in the
Aristotelian way, but as to their sensible
Observations, and useful Methods of Pra∣ctice,
they will last for ever, as being
true Descriptions of Natural Things, and
confirmed by frequent Observation and
Experiments.
My Design is not in this Dedication to
Compliment your Philosophic way of
Living, your Universal Learning, nor
Greatness of Mind in retiring from all the
Pleasures, and Impertinent Business of
Life, that you might more freely con∣verse
with your Learned Authors; Tho'
these are sufficient Subjects for a large

Encomium, I must confess my self unfit
for well performing of it; neither would
your great Humility admit of a just Praise
of your Virtues.
I know your Curious Genius requires
some Variety of Thoughts to divert it,
or some Philosophic Enquiry to entertain
it, for which end I will here propose my
following Observations, by which you
will discern the design of this Treatise,
and the good Performance of the Old,
and the Faults of the New Writers, in
treating of the Asthma.
First, I shall observe that that is the
most useful Notion of the Asthma, from
whence we can take our Indications for
Practice, and which is deduced from an
exact and full sensible History of the Dis∣ease,
its Subject, Causes, and Symptoms.
I have assigned the immediate Cause
of the Asthma, to the Sraitness, Compres∣sion,
or Constriction of the Bronchia;
and in the continued Asthma, the Causes
must be constant, as Dropsy, Tubercu∣lum,
&c. but in the Periodic Asthma,
the Returns must depend on the Defluxi∣on
of Humours on the Primae viae, where
the Inflations begin, or on the Lungs and
Nerves, if either were formerly weakned

by other Diseases; these Hypochondriac,
or Pneumonic, or Nervous Inflations,
depend all on the same Defluxion of Se∣rum;
and they all frequently happen in
old Asthmatics at the same time.
This Defluxion of Serum evidently ap∣pears
in loose Stools, fluxes of Urine,
great Spitting, and the Drowsiness of the
Head in the beginning of the Asthma Fit:
This Defluxion depends on the Efferves∣cence
of Humours, because there is a fe∣verish
Heat at that time, which rarefies
the Serum, and drives it through th
Glands. I think it not probable that the
Nerves could contain so much Serum,
but rather that the slimy and flatulent Ca∣cochymia
irritates the Heart to stronger
Pulsation, and Excretion of those Hu∣mours,
as the bilious Contents do irritate
the Guts. For when we find Excremen∣titious
Humors evacuated, we may rati∣onally
suppose that their Vellication pro∣duced
their Excretion, rather than any
preternatural Faults of Spirits.
The Cacochymia which irritates, we
observe by the Windiness and Sliminess
of Humours evacuated.
This Inflation in the Stomach, the Ef∣fervescence
in the Blood, and Inflation in

the Pneumonic Membranes, comprehend
the large Nature of this Disease; and con∣trary
to these our Practical Notions must
aim, by suppressing the Effervescence,
which Cures the Defluxion at the same
time; and then the flatulent and slimy
Cacochymia must be Evacuated and Cor∣rected.
If the Asthma be but partially descri∣bed,
and a false Hypothesis built on that
Description, the Practice answering that
is very Impertinent, or injurious.
Tho' the old Notion of the Asthma's
being a Defluxion of serous Humours, was
certainly true, because evident to our
Senses, by the Evacuation of Serosities;
yet the Explication of that Defluxion, by
comparing the Head to a Cupping-Glass,
which draws up Humidities by its Heat,
and causes them after to descend on the
Lungs, was notoriously false, and con∣trary
to the Structure of the solid Parts,
and the Circulation of the Fluids.
This fanciful Notion occasioned much
impertinent Practice, by Fumes, Errhines,
Apophlegmatisms, Plaisters to the Head,
and Issues, which have all fallen with the
Hypothesis they rose from. These Old
Writers neglected the Effervescence, and

the Nervous Inflations I have mentioned.
The Age succeeding observ'd a great
Viscidity in the Humours of the Lungs,
and to that alone, they impute this Ster∣torous
Wheesing; these endeavoured to
Cure this Viscidity and the Tubercula, by
prodigious pectoral Antidotes, made for
the Asthma, but still they neglected the
Effervescence, and nervous Inflations, and
therefore had no success.
The Later Writers, as Van Helmont,
and Dr. Willis, have most particularly
described the nervous Symptoms of the
Asthma, and built their Hypothesis on
the supposition, that 'tis a Convulsion;
and that what Cures that will relieve the
Asthma: This false Hypothesis led them
into an injurious Practice, by giving hot
Tinctures, acrid Gums, and volatil Salts,
and sulphur Medicines.
Some Writers, as Sylvius, and Etmuller,
have observed the Hypochondriac Sym∣ptoms
in the Stomach, and conclude the
Asthma is a Hypochondriacal Flatus, and
wants Digestives.
By these Observations I design to prove,
that all our Practical Notions and Indi∣cations
ought to be taken from all the sen∣sible
Observations in a Disease, and then

we shall avoid the several Errors into
which many Learned Hypotheses lead us▪
and then our Practice will alway be the
same, though the general Philosophy, by
which we explain our Notions, alters
with the Age.
The old sensible Cacochymias must still
be allowed, and the Method of Curing
them by contrary Tastes, because very
rational; therefore though the Circula∣tion
of the Blood be lately discover'd, and
the Circulation of the Serum through the
Lymphatic Vessels, yet these Discoveries
have made but little Alterations in the Pra∣ctice
of Physic, but by that we can bette
explain the Motion of Humours, and the
Translation of Diseases from one Part to
another; therefore this Discovery has
only helped us to solve some Difficulties
we knew not before, and to give Reasons
for them: Yet still this is the chief Scope
of our Practice, to Evacuate the Quanti∣ty,
and Correct the ill Quality of the Ca∣cochymia's
anciently described; and we
must use the same Medicines as the old
Writers advise.
The Nervous Juice is still as much un∣known
as formerly, and therefore its Af∣fections
are inexplicable; and though it

still be a Dispute whether the Motion of
the Heart in a Fever be by an Irritation of
the fermenting Blood, or the disordered
Spirits, yet it will be the same thing as to
Practice; for by which soever of them
the Rarefaction happens in the Asthma,
I must level my Method against the Ef∣fervescence,
if I will cure the Fit or pre∣vent
it.
If I compare our Bodies to a Watch,
and the Spirits to the Spring of it, because
on that all its Motions depend, as also on
the Spirits in an Animal Body, as in the
Watch: The reason of its going false,
may be the fault of the Wheels, or many
other Contrivances; and as it would be
absurd, when the Watch is out of Order,
to lay all the faults on the Spring, because
on that depends all its false as well as re∣gular
Motion; so it is in our Bodies, tho'
the Spirits produce all the regular and ir∣regular
Motions, yet, as in the Watch,
the irregularity must depend on other
Organs ill constituted, so in the Body the
Lungs being oppressed, the regular Re∣spiration
becomes a Dyspnaea; if the
Bronchia be constringed, an Asthma; if
any extraordinary thing or Fume affect the
Skin of the Eyes, Tears immediately flow,

and the Saliva runs upon any Acrimony
which irritates the Palate. The same
Motions which are expected in the Nerves
by external Objects, are produced by
sharp Acrimony in the Humours, which,
if bilious in the Stomach, excite Vomiting
and Purging in the Cholera. If the Hu∣mours
ferment in the Veins, they irritate
the Heart to a violent Circulation, which
raises the Fever, which lasts only till the
Fermentation ceases; but in those Fevers
which depend on the disordered Spirits,
they are but of small continuance. And
we must observe that the Animal Spirits
rise from the Blood, and have both their
Origine, and good or ill Temper thence;
and tho' they move the Fluids, yet that
external Motion only helps and promotes
the intestine Motion of the Humours (as
Beer and Wines are promoted in their
depuration, by being carried on Ship∣board.)
If the Spirits should circulate
Water through the Veins (and the Hy∣dropical
Serum is not much different) nei∣ther
Blood nor a true natural Heat would
arise in the Water by Ten thousand Cir∣culations;
by which we find we must look
back to the old Cacochymias, to explain
the Nature of Humours, and the Diseases,

and in the Asthma we must retain the Fla∣tulencies
anciently observed, and the De∣luxion
of Serum both on the Guts, the
Lungs and Brains.
The Dulness and Drowsiness of the
Head, is a sign of a Defluxion through the
Nerves in Hysteric Cases, as well as the
Flux of Urine in them; but for satisfying
the Helmontians, I will confess the Hy∣steric
Asthma has no Defluxion through
the Glands of the Lungs, till it is an old
Disease; but the Serum in this only makes
its Defluxion through the Glands in the
Stomach, and Guts, and Brain; there is the
same Effervescencies, the same Flatulencies,
and consequently the same Cacochymias
in these, as in the Spitting Asthma.
If I should describe only the Nature of
Spirits in Wine, all Persons would believe
I talked like a Philosopher, but not much
to Edify any one, who only from the
Taste of the Wine can best describe its Na∣ture,
whether sweet, rough, or sharp, or
bitterish; and when it is vitiated, 'tis flat,
or waterish, sour, roapy, windy, bitter,
fetid, full of Lees, and Ferments; these are
all sensible Vices in Wines, and the same in
Animal Humours we call our Cacochy∣mias.
And as the Vintners can Cure all

their Wines by particular Tastes, with∣out
being vers'd in the Mechanic, Chy∣mical,
or Microscopical Observations a∣bout
Wines; so may Phisicians both un∣derstand,
and cure Diseases by a rational
Use of sensible Observations, and the old
Galenical Practices built on them, may
yet stand unmoved.
It is a very short way of Explaining
Diseases, to tell us, that the Spirits, or
Archeus, are either weak, or strong; in
a fury, or stupid: This Philosophy is
much admired, tho' not understood ei∣ther
by Plebeians, or Philosophers, who
ought to admit nothing either in Diseases
or Medicines, but sensible Observations,
and those Notions which are immediate∣ly
deduced from them. These we can
be certain of, and on these the Galenists
built their Practice, and these two sensible
Observations will always stand good;
1. That the Asthma is a Defluxion.
2. That all Medicines in the Asthma
ought to be inciding without Heat.
The Invention of the Microscope has
much discovered the sensible Mechanism
of the solid Parts; but what Indication
can I take from the Globuli of the Fluid?
Tho' they may help me better to Explain,

yet I fear I shall not be inabled by their
Discovery easily to cure any Disease.
All the old Notions of the Asthma
grounded on sensible Observations, on
which a successful Practice depends, ought
still to be retained, and if it be necessary
they may be better explained. So in the
Asthma, we observe there is a Defluxion
of Serosities, and for this Vomits and Pur∣gers
were successfully used by the An∣cients;
therefore the new Writers unjust∣ly
explode that sensible Notion, because
ill explained. In this case we must mend
the Explication of a Defluxion, and not
search for the Fountain of Rheum in the
Head, but in the Blood, and allow the
Nerves to be the Instruments of the De∣fluxion.
If it were possible for us to discern all
the Mechanical Structures of the solid
Parts, and all the Motions and Figures of
the Fluid, we might then that way ex∣plain
all our Diseases; but since that will
alway be impossible to our dull Senses,
'tis not fair to trouble the Learned with
fancied Figures and Motions, because
possible: But by observing the sensible
effects of Mechanic Motions, the Ca∣cochymias,
we do as much as is necessa∣ry.

For from thence we take our Indi∣cations
of those Remedies which will re∣store
vitiated Humours to their natural
State.
The Chymists unjustly reject the Ga∣lenic
Cacochymias, and explain as well
as cure all Diseases by their Mineral Prin∣ciples,
which seems very absurd, since
Minerals are of a very different Nature,
and they are produced by different Dige∣stions
and Preparations. Animal Hu∣mours
are made by particular Fermenta∣tions,
Circulations, Secretions, in our Or∣ganiz'd
Bodies, from a pure Milk, but
Minerals arise from sulphur Fumes, and
stony Particles coagulated in the Earth.
And all Chymical Product from them are
the Effects of a violent Fire; so that by
the mixtures of Chymical Medicines, we
can guess but little at the diseased State of
Animal Humours.
I generally observe, that all pure Chy∣mical
Authors know little of Anatomy,
and the Nature of Animal Humours; for
Distillation alters the natural or diseased
Constitutions, and therefore we cannot
discover either by the Fire: The Chy∣mists
wholly depend on the extolled
Virtue of their Medicine; if prepared

from Antimony, or Quicksilver, it is a
certain Panacea, given in all Diseases, with∣out
any Method; and the Chymists im∣pute
great Knowledge to their Medicine,
in finding out the Disease, and making
various Operations, or corroborating Na∣ture,
as Nature requires, all which are
more absurd than any thing in the Galenic
Hypothesis, and shew the Ignorance of
the Chymist in the nature of Medicines,
and method of Practice.
The Empyrical Doctors reject all our
Cacochymias; they want general Philo∣sophy,
Anatomy, and Chymistry, and
so cannot make any rational Notion of the
Disease, from the Consideration of all its
Symptoms; they know therefore nothing
of any rational Method of Practice, but
go on in the dull Road of Vomiting,
Purging, the Cortex, Steel, Salivating,
Medicinal Waters; whereas the true Ra∣tional
Galenist, considers that Notion of
the Disease which agrees with all the
Symptoms, and prescribes such Tastes as
will cure each Cacochymia; he considers
the Constitution of the Patient, the Com∣plication
of Diseases, and can give a good
Reason for altering the common Method,
when necessary. He with his Vegeta∣bles

more cures safely, than with Minerals;
he makes no Preparations, but what Na∣ture
has prepared he gives, in Powder or
Decoction, &c. He is Nature's Servant,
and alters his Methods to serve her, and
uses the only means we have to observe
her, our Senses and Experience.
I shall make this my last Observation,
that the old Writers found out the most
useful Medicines in the Asthma.
There is a natural Instinct, by which
all Animals find out their proper Food,
and by the same Method they observe
what Medicines are most suitable to their
Diseases.
The Stomach prepares all the Humours
for the Veins, and in chusing of the Food,
it naturally desires that which is like to
our Humours, to nourish them; the
Tongue is well pleased with those Tastes
which agree with the Stomach, because
of the common Membrane which covers
both.
In a healthful State, the Tongue and
Stomach delight in sweet Tastes, because
the Blood and Saliva have that; but in
a diseased State of Humours, those Tastes
are most pleasant, which alter it; as when
we are too hot, cool Tastes; when dry,

the Humid; and e contra, Nature teaches
us to Cure our selves by contrary Tastes.
And Reason and Experience tell us, that
thin Humours require incrassing viscid
Tastes; and the glutinous Humours, inci∣ding
Acrids; and the roughness of the so∣lid
Parts, Oily Lenients; and the flux of
all Humours, Styptics. In Fevers we na∣turally
desire Acids; and in ill Digestions,
Bitters are grateful.
'Tis of no small moment in curing Dis∣eases,
that our Tastes can inform us what
Medicines are agreeable to the Stomach
and Humours; and our Smells inform us
what Medicines are suitable to our Ani∣mal
Spirits. And since the Objects of
these two Senses differ only in the Tenui∣ty
of their Substances; for Bitters, Acerbs,
Acrids, affect our Tastes in the form of
a Liquor; but a Halitus from the same
Medicines, affects our Smells; and be∣cause
of this small difference, from the Vir∣tues
of the Tastes mentioned, we may
easily guess at the Efficacy of those parti∣cular
Smells.
The old Writers observed, that the
Cacochymia in the Asthma required Di∣gestives,
because of the Wind and Slime
in the Stomach, and for this they used all

the Wormwood Bitters, as Polium,
Southernwood, Mugwort, and Worm∣wood
it self; and all the bitter Gums, as
Ammoniacum, Galbanum, &c. and Gen∣tian,
Aristolochia, Briony.
The same Authors observed, that the
Medicines in the Asthma must cool, as
well as incide, they therefore used Vine∣gar,
and mixed divers Bitters and Acrids
with it, to make it more inciding, as
Squills, Orris, Nettles; and they obser∣ved
by their Tastes, that the Salso-acids,
such as Niter, and Sal Armoniac, had both
an inciding and cooling Quality. They
observed the Flatulencies in the Asthma,
and for that used the Carminatives steep∣ed
in Vinegar, and boiled many Aro∣matics,
as Thyme, Hyssop, Calamint in
Oxymels.
They used Anticonvulsives, as Castor
with Oxymels, and Rue mixed with Ni∣ter,
in Diaspoliticum, and Briony ʒss. in
a Cyathus of Vinegar. Neither did they
omit the use of Opiates, but gave a Cau∣tion
about them.
Sir, I must have begged your Pardon
for this long Letter, if I had not now pre∣sented
my self as a Patient, who have the
Privilege of telling the Injury received by

the Modern Practisers, and of commend∣ing
the best Doctors for the Asthma, Hip∣pocrates
and Galen, because I have receiv∣ed
most Benefit by their Medicines; and
I believe none is more able to defend those
Fathers of our Faculty, and their rational
Method of Practice, against Chymists,
the Empirical, and the Mechanical Do∣ctors,
than your self. I desire therefore,
under your Patronage, to defend the old
Truths and Fundamentals of our Faculty,
A rational Practice, directed by sensible
Notions, and confirmed by the Experi∣ence
of former Ages.
I am of Opinion, that most of the Dis∣eases
incurable by the Modern Practice,
as the Gout, Dropsy, Epilepsy, Leprosy,
were oftner cured by the old Methods,
which have been disused, and neglected
upon the account of pure Chymical Medi∣cines,
and new Hypotheses, recommend∣ed
by great Authors; these ought to be
considered, and revised by others, as I
have done the Asthma.
I know your great Candor will com∣mend
an Ingenious probable Hypothesis,
but that your Zeal for the good of Man∣kind,
cannot but regret the rejecting old
approved and useful Notions, and experi∣enced

Medicines, because they will not
agree with a new Doctrin. I hope you
will pardon my Faults, and accept this
Performance with your usual Candor,
and believe me, that I present it to you,
as a demonstration of my being a sincere
Admirer of your Judgment and Learning,
and as an acknowledgment of your kind
Respect to,
Litchfield, May
25. 1698Honoured Sir,

