



Right Honourable,
THrough the Conduct of Divine
Providence having attain'd the
place of my Nativity, some few
days before the Anniversary Fast
for that Dreadful Fire, Nigro Carbone No∣tandus,
which cannot be markt with too black
a coal; being desir'd by a Reverend Brother
of mine in the Ministry to Preach for him on
the fore-mentioned day, never to be forgot∣ten:
Though my unpreparedness for so great
a Task might have furnished me with a de∣nyal,
yet I entertain'd the motion, having
only that of the Divine Proverbialist to A∣pologize
for my Presumption (if it may me∣rit
such an Appellation)Pro. 16. 1 The preparations
of the heart are in man, but the Answer of

the tongue is from the Lord. Having spoke
a word in season, as it was thought, and be∣ing
desir'd to Publish it; how could I, ha∣ving
received so great a wound in my Tem∣porals,
but shelter my self, and this weak
Birth of my Brain under your Honours Pa∣tronage,
Those Stars of the greatest Mag∣nitude
that shine so bright in the Firmament
of the Metropolis of this Nation, whose
care and vigilancy hath been so influential
to the carrying on of the re-edifying of it
even to Admiration; That a City, so great
a City should be burnt down in three days,
and re-built in respect of the Diamond in the
Ring of the Ornamentals of it, the Royal
Exchange, and in respect of the chief Streets
of it, within the space of three years (I had
almost said two years) and a little more; this
cannot but create wonder in all that shall
either see it, or hear of it: As if that in the
Prophet IsaiahCap. 41. 6, 7. were now fulfill'd in a good
sense, every one helped his Neighbour, and
every one said to his Brother, be of good
courage; So the Carpenter encourag'd the

Goldsmith, and he that smootheth with the
Hammer him that smote the Anvil, saying, it
is ready for the Sodering, and he fastned it
with Nails, so that it could not be moved.
And think it no small thing to be instruments
in Gods hand to make up those Breaches in
our Ruinated Jerusalem, which our sins have
made. You may suppose me, Noble Senators,
if you please, to present you with a Sprig of
Rosemary in one hand, and a Branch of Lau∣rel
in the other, or if you will, to present you
with the City in its Ruines and Ashes, and
like a Phoenix gloriously rising out of them.
May it never be said, that the Re-builders
of it held a Trowel in one hand, and a Sword
in the other, but may a Continuation of Peace
Crown the endeavours of all those that are
employ'd in so Noble an Enterprise. This is
his hearty, and daily Prayer, who is

