



Honoured Gentlemen, and deare Friends:
THat late learned Statesman Sr. Henry Wootton, or∣dered that his Epitaph should be only this,
Hic jacet hujus sententiae primus Author,Buried in Eaton Col∣ledge.
Disputandi pruritus, Scabies Ecclesiae.
I will change a word with him, and make another for our Common wealth now; Scribendi pruritus scabies reipublicae, never was the Presse so cloyd, and clog'd with Clients as now: some I thinke write more Pamphlets then they say Prayers; and yet among all, Sermons (I finde) are the last served: I have beene crowding for a place a long time (meerely for cheapenesse sake) to get these few leaves printed. It is a thing which I thought once I should never have pride enough to aspire, nor povrety enough to constrain me to, (for these two are the ordinary Loadsmen to those Paper mills) but the latter of them hath forced me. For thus the link hangs: Spare time (too much God knowes) bid me write relation said to Wisbeech; my Functi∣on said a Sermon; thankfulnesse said to all; poverty my purse bearer cries (as the Disciples of the loaves) two hundred penny worth of pa∣per will not suffice; necesssity (my counsell) saith print it, and the Printer again saith, let it be neither mine, nor thine, but divide it: So I
 have my number to give, which I aymed at, and he his to sell (if Ser∣mons will sell) which he aymes at. And new to whom should a suffe∣ring Minister send a Sermon, but to his owne sympathizng people? and whose names should I shelter it under (Noble Friends if not yours, who did not (though being men of interest you might like Nicodemus owne me by night only, but appeared for me, and with me in the heat of the day? St. Paul when he was to have a hearing, complaines that no man stood with him; but that which is sweeter to me then my losses can be bitter, is, that you (my Iudicious and godly Neighbours) and many more of that kinde Parish (even as many as were able to travell so many tedious miles) were not ashamed of me, and my cause; let the Lord at the day of true judgement, remember it, and requite you all. And it is your honour, and mine owne comfort, that they who were against me, had nothing against me, worthy of these sufferings. For my living, though I be thrust out of doores; yet I came in at the doore I thanke God, and not at the wndow. For labours, I had not ten, or five, but that one Talent, or two which the Lord lent me, I did not wrap up in a napkin, but put them into the banke every Lords day. And for my life (Oh Lord forgive me my many sinnes!) It was farre from scandall, I blesse God though not free from offences dyly. Twas (sure) for my Obedience to God and the King; and if for that, I would to God, not only I, but all that are Ministers were not only almost, but altogether so, except my persecutions. Gentlemen, and all my good Parishioners, I beseech you accept this little booke from me, and for my sake.
Hi mihi quod Domino non licet ire—
Reade it as the broken Meditations of your poore Pastor, and re∣ceive as broken money from a poore debtor, who would doe more, if he had it. Exchange prayers with me, though absent from me, I for you, and you for me in the Lord, to whom I commend you all, and rest, &c.

