




SIRS;
THe great ends for which we are set and maintained in this world, are 1. To get new hearts, and prepare for another world that is to come. 2. To live to, and walk with God, and serve our Generation; and in, and by our so do∣ing, to look for, and receive from God, the por∣tion of Blessings he hath provided for, and pro∣mised to bestow on us here. We are all, and every one of us, indispensably bound to endeavour all we can to obtain and prosecute these ends, be∣cause otherwise we shall all perish. In this world we have our day of Grace to fit us for glory; if we are wise, and do faithfully improve it, we shall assuredly reap the fruits of it in another world; yea, the earnest or first-fruits of it here. You have but a little uncertain time here to run your Race in, and to prepare for Eternal Life, and if
you neglect to do it to purpose here, you will most certainly be shut out of Heaven hereafter, Mat. 25.1-13. v. If you trifle in this matter, and seem indifferent, you are not wise, but play the fool, and err exceedingly, as you will find to your cost at the last day, if not before. To prevent which, and to make you truly wise, sensible, seri∣ous, and diligent, in and about your everlasting concerns, I have written this little Book, and do present it to your serious and faithful consideration and improvement, and that in and with unfain∣ed love and cordial affection: For I do assure you, that I have bowels of love for you, and with all my heart and soul do pray for, and endeavour your Regeneration and Salvation, which I hope you see, and are convinced of, by my constant, free, and unwearied labours amongst you, accord∣ing to my small Talent. The great and holy God knows, that I seek not yours, but you, as I hope you can all bear me witness; having once and a∣gain told you, that I had Dedicated my poor La∣bours as a Free-will Offering unto God, and the service of your Souls; and that I did not look for, or expect any reward from you for my pains, but your holy and spiritual improvement of them, to the glory of God, and your own Eternal Salva∣tion. The Truths here presented to your eyes to read, were first (you know) preached to your ears to hear; but knowing how treacherous and weak
our memories are, and how apt we are to let slip that which we hear; and also fearing that the great Doctrine of Regeneration, and your con∣cernments in it, might by this time be worn (very much) out of the minds and hearts of many of you, I thought it a necessary and useful work to provide (as well as I could) for the reviving of it on you, and fastening it in your hearts, by writing and composing the sum and substance of what I preached to you, which here I have done. I have endeavoured to contract the whole within as narrow a compass as I could, and to hold forth great Truths unto you, with all possible plainness. You may not expect a large Epistle from me, be∣cause I want opportunity to do it at this time; and therefore shall sum up all I have to say in a few words.
1. I do entreat you to read and ponder well what you shall find here written, and importune the Lord to give you much spiritual wisdom and understanding, that you may be enabled to make a right judgment of the glorious Truths herein revealed.
2. Look on the great Doctrine of Regene∣ration, as a most weighty and important Doctrine, to add for your selves, as well as others; that you stand in need of it, and are indispensably bound to know and understand it, as it is asserted and laid down in the Gospel, and as written and




set up in mens hearts, in order to their Eternal Glorification; yea, and to know and experience the excellency and power of it in your own hearts.
3. Apply what you read unto your selves; examine and prove your own states and conditi∣ons by what you shall find in this Book; search and see if the work of Regeneration be indeed wrought in your Souls, and do not take up and deceive your Souls with a bare Reformation, instead of real Regeneration, with an external change only, instead of an internal. Oh! how many poor Souls are here among Great Professors, who bless and speak peace to themselves, and hope all is well with them; that they are in Gods favour, and shall certainly be saved, because they have gotten some light in their heads, and quiet in their minds, good notions of good things, and al∣so a clean outside, and form of godliness. But if you have any pity for your Souls, try and prove your selves to purpose, until you know your conditions, and take not up in any thing or at∣tainments short of Regeneration; for if you do, you shall be shut out of Heaven.
4. If you find upon search, that the great and rare work of Regeneration is indeed wrought in your hearts and souls, give glory to God, and exalt the Lord Jesus Christ; rejoyce and be ex∣ceeding glad, for you are the blessed of the Lord; you are the happy people, and are sanctified and set
apart for God, and his holy works and ends; and now you must unfainedly devote your selves, and your all to him, to live to, and serve him with your all: Now you must wholly mind how to please and honour him, and to express your thankfulness in all possible, hearty, and filial obedience. You must be wholly taken up with, and imployed for God, perfecting Holiness in his fear, and bring∣ing forth fruits whereby he may be glorified; and you must in all your ways endeavour so to walk, as to adorn the Gospel, and have your good works shine in the world, to the praise of God.
5. You whom God hath Regenerated, and given a well-grounded hope thereof, put your selves under all the Ordinances of Christ, and do not content your selves with some, when he proffers you the use and enjoyment of all. They are your Priviledges, and you need them. Christ hath commanded you to observe them all, and appoint∣ed to nourish, comfort, and educate your Souls in his Churches, and with his Ordinances there: Therefore do as the Primitive Converts were wont to do, joyn your selves to some Church, or Society of Regenerate Christians, that there you may be fed with the Bread of Life. The doors stand open for you, and the Lord Jesus wats there for you, to invite you in, and welcom you. You need the Lords Supper to strengthen and confirm you, and the Communion of Saint  a Church∣state
(as means) to secure and preserve you. But I can only mention these things, leaving the in∣largement of them to your selves.
6. If you find any good or profit to your Souls, in and by my Ministry and Writing, bless God, and ascribe all the glory to him, for all belongs to him, and to him only: But forget not to pray for me, that I may be enabled by Divine Assistance to fulfil my Ministry, and continue to hand out the Gospel of Salvation to you, that the Name of the Lord Jesus may be glorified, and your Souls profited, and that I may be blameless be∣fore God and Men.
7. And lastly, Continue in the good work and ways you have taken in hand, and begun to walk in: Have your eyes always to Jesus Christ; keep fast hold of him, and let your whole dependance be on him. In him are all your Springs, and it is he that hath the keeping of your Stock of Grace: He can and will supply you with all Grace, and preserve you unto his Heavenly Kingdom: Therefore live upon, and stay your selves on him. Run your Race, and finish your course in his hand, and you shall obtain the End of your Faith, the Salvation of your Souls. Which that you may do, is the prayer and earnest de∣sire of

