




Friends,
I Am yours, and I hope you are Christ's. 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. You are exceeding dear to me, and ly deep in my heart; 1 Thes. 2.8. Phil. 1.7. and you are my joy, and crown of rejoycing: especially, some of you. 1 Thes. 2.19, 20. Phil. 4.1. Your welfare and happiness is mine; your thriving and growing in Grace, and in the saving knowledge of Jesus Christ, 2 Pet. 3.18. is mine, and your standing fast in the Lord, and bearing much fruit is my comfort, 1. Thes. 3.7, 8, 9. your Tryals and
Afflictions are mine, and your witherings and languishings are my great afflictions and sorrows. 2 Cor. 11.29. Rom. 12.15. whatever some of you may think or say of me: yet I can boldly say (if I know any thing of my heart) that God is my Record, how greatly I long after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ, Phil. 1.8. how thoughtful, and studious I am to serve you, and to promote your present and eternal Blessedness, and that by all the wayes and means I can. And if I am not succesful in my designs and endeavours, it is my burden, and I cannot help it. I know that Ministers may and ought to plant and water, but 'tis God that giveth the increase, 1 Cor. 3.7. I know that I am weak, and I know also, that the happy success of good mens labours, lies not in, or proceeds not from their Abilities, but from the Power of God, and his Spirit working with and by them; or else even a great Prophet Isaiah may say, I have laboured in vain, Isa. 49.4. yet I say, my Conscience is my witness, that it is my desire, aim and endeavour to be faithful to Christ and you, and to give all diligence to my work and your service; to Preach the word in season, and out of season, 2 Tim. 4.2. to feed you with the Bread of sound Doctrine, and to give to every one their portion of meat in due season. I know and believe, that the all-seeing-eye of my great Lord and Master is still on me, and that I must shortly give unto him an account of my Stewardship; Luk. 16.2. how I have performed my work, and discharged my Trust to you: and therefore, I dare not but en∣deavour to be faithful in my Duty to Him and You. Should any of you suffer loss, by any neglect or un∣faithfulness of mine, the sight and conviction of
it would exceedingly afflict me: for I do greatly love you. I would be eminently Instrumental in nursing, educating and building you up in Christ, in knowledge, faith, love, peace, joy, holiness and spiritual consolation, unto eternal life, and am really afflicted that I can do no more towards the attainment of it, and that I am no more successful in what I do.
I hope you have some clear proofs and evidences, of what I have said of my self and endeavours, from my practises among you. For what other ends can I have in all my labours and spendings, but to serve Christ and your Souls, especially, in and by those that are extraordinary? what should I aim at and design in the Monthly Lecture to and with you onely; in my Lords dayes fortnights Lecture, and in writing this and some other books, but your good? you know, that I have spent my strength in a more than ordinary manner to con∣vince, regenerate and educate your Families; your Children, Servants, and other Relations of yours. For as I have told you; It was for their sakes that I set it up, and have continued it many years; but how you have esteemed and encouraged it, and how your Relations have improved it, I leave to all your Consciences to judge. But however, I have given you a sufficient proof of my love to you, and care of them, by spending my strength and spirits with, and for their good: and all unprejudiced persons cannot but acknowledge it. I could have sit down (as others do) with Preachi g to you twice every Lords day, and one Lecture in the week-days; had I not seen a necessity of doing more, and had not my cordial Love to your Souls constrained me to the taking of extraordinary pains with you, and for
you. My ends and designs in the said Monthly Lecture were (1) To acquaint you with, and con∣vince you of your duties in the Church, and that every one of you might know how to behave your selves in the house of God; 1 Tim. 3.15. and what duties were or are incumbent on you there. (2) To acquaint you with your Church-privi∣ledges and spiritual advantages, that you might value and esteem them; own and imbrace them; improve and walk worthy of them; and that you might be thankful for them. (3) That you might know on what bottom you stand in your Church-state, and that you might stand there unmovably. (4) That you might know your miscarriages in your Church-state and Relation, and be humbled for; and repent of them in Dust and Ashes. (5) That you might know the Evils and Temptations you are lyable to in a Church-state, and that you might watch against and avoid them. (6) That you might be enabled to answer Gain-sayers, and refell their objections. (7) That you might look for, and expect all the promised good in your Church-state, and endeavour the obtainment of it. (8) To quicken and provoke you, to move and perswade you to all possible diligence, care and faithfulness, to, and in your own, Jesus Christ's, and one anothers concerns in your Church-state. That you might be pleasing to God, and profitable to your own and each others Souls in the Ordinances of Christ, and in your Ʋnion and Communion one with another. These were some of my ends in set∣ting up that Lecture, and which I have with some measure of sincerity of heart carried on, though under no small discouragements from within and without.

And in pursuance of these and other holy ends, I have written some of the matters that I preached to you, and have made them ready for your eyes to read and behold them, your judgements and under∣standings to judge of them, and for your hearts to receive and embrace them: and that upon your de∣sire I have done it; as you know.
They are your matters, and therefore to you, I do dedicate and commend them, because I love you: and if you give me encouragement, I could wil∣lingly spend, and be spent for you, 2 Cor. 12.15. Brethren, I grudge not at any pains and en∣deavours, cares and labours, I have taken and ex∣pended on you or yours: for, I think, that all that I can do for you is too little. I do heartily wish, I could be more serviceable and profitable to you; and the more you shall encourage and strengthen my hands to serve you, the better I shall do it. I have taken pains to write this Book, or to compose, and set forth the matters contained in it, as well as I could: had I been able, I should have done it bet∣ter. But however it be done, be you sure, that the matters discoursed of, are of great weight and moment to you. You will find but little in it of man (human frailties excepted) but therefore I hope, you will find the more of God and Gospel-Truth there. For the Truths of God shine forth more gloriously, when they appear in their naked native beauty and simplicity, than when they come to us cloathed with humane Eloquence, and with the Rhetorical flourishes of mens wits. They are such glorious things in their own nature, as that they are never more powerful on, and acceptable to holy gra∣cious hearts, than when they are represented to them pure, clear and entire in their own words and lan∣guage,
stript of humane Ornaments and Gar∣nishes.
My design was not to commend my self, but the real, the holy, and acceptable will of God: not to shew you, what any men think or judge of these mat∣ters, but to shew you, what the Holy Ghost thinks and speaks of them. I expect severe censures from others, (because far better mens works do usually meet with them) but I hope to meet with none from you, for love will cover a multitude of weaknesses in those, whose aim, end and design is good in any good work; and you cannot but judge that mine was good in this good undertaking. You put me on the work, and I hope you will find nothing but Truth and plainness in it, and cover my infir∣mities with a mantle of charity; judge that I have performed it as well as I could, for Christ's, my own and your sakes, and conclude, that I have not wil∣fully, knowingly or carelesly failed in any part of it. Now it is prepared for you, and brought to you by a hand of love, I hope you will take the pains to read and mind it, to understand and practise the duties contained in it: and although the form of it (as made by me) may not have your esteem and consideration, yet do not fail to give the matter of it it's due Respects and acknowledgment, let your Head and King, his Truths and wayes, have their dues from you; as also your own Souls; and you will greatly gratifie the Authour, who is your real friend.
In this Book, I have shewed you in several Chapters (1) What an instituted Gospel-Church is. (2) That particular Congregational Churches are of Divine Institution. (3) Of what ma∣terials they should be constituted and formed.
(4) What is the form of such Churches, or how fit materials should be joyned together, and made a formal house. (5) The several Officers of a Church, with their calls, qualifications, works and duties. (6) The duties of Church-members to their Officers. (7) Their duties to one another. (8) Their Church-priviledges and advantages. (9) I have shewed that all Believers are indispen∣sibly bound to joyn themselves to some Gospel-Church, if they can. (10) What the Ordinances are, that God hath given to his Churches. (11) How all Church members ought to walk towards God and men, and what Evils and Temptations they are subject to, or in danger of. (12) I have spoken somthing of the Lords Supper, and of ma∣ny other things and matters of great moment, as you will find in your reading of the Book through∣out: As that Church-members ought not to break off from the Churches, to which they are joyned, but in extraordinary cases. I have not yet done; but shall present a few Requests to you, for my self, my God, and your own Souls; and which I hope you will not deny me, but freely grant me, because you will find them very reasonable Requests, and such as do nearly concern you and your God, as well as my self.
1. I do earnestly entreat and beseech you, for the Lord Jesus Christ his sake, and for the love of the Spirit, to do all you can, and are bound in duty to do, to encourage me in my work, strengthen my hands under my weights and burdens, and help me to run my Race, and finish my course with joy, 1 Cor. 9. Act. 20.24. and avoid whatever may justly discourage, tempt and provoke me; or that may weaken my hands, grieve and sadden my heart,
unfit & indispose me for & in my work & duty with you. For if you do not avoid it, you will tempt and provoke me to sin, and hinder me in my work and duty. And my sin will be your sin, my loss your loss, and my sorrow will be your sorrow at long run. I can appeal to God, that I seek, desire and endeavour to do you good in whatever I do or propound to have done for, or among you; and therefore, when you neglect to come to the worship of God, and keep your place; and when you neglect to set forward any good work in the Church for the honour of Christ, and the profit of the whole, you do discourage me, and tempt me to sin: and the like you may do, many other wayes; which for brevity sake, I shall not mention. Only this one namely, by your non-proficiency under the means of grace, which will be my great Affliction, because I dearly love you. Your serious, conscientious and constant attendance on the administration of the Ordinances of Christ with me; your growing in grace and profiting by them; your readiness to help and assist me in promoting and carrying on of good works in the Church, and standing by me in the Lord's work will exceedingly comfort & encou∣rage me in my Ministerial work. And pray con∣sider, if it be not your duty, and the will of God you should so do. Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your Souls, as that they may do it with joy and not with grief: why? why (says he) that is unprofitable for you.
Oh! give me your helping hand, and do not load and burden my work, but endeavour to make my work easie, and my life comfortable to the utmost of your power.

2. Pray for me, Heb. 13.18. and that with all possible importunity and constancy. For the more you do so pray to God for me, the more profita∣ble he will make my labours to your Souls. Pray for me in your Closets, and wrestle with God for me: for you, (especially) you who walk with God, may do much for me in your Closets. I do remem∣ber you in mine; Oh! let me be remembred by you in our Closets also. For a stock of Prayers, of hearty, believing, fervent Prayers, kept a-running one for another, will bring in a great Revenue of grace from Heaven to us. You cannot expect, that I should Preach warmly, profitably and powerfully to you, unless you so Pray for me. Therefore in obedience to the will of God, and for your own pro∣fit, do you continue in fervent Prayer unto God for me. Entreat him to pour out much of the Spirit of grace and the grace of the Spirit upon me, fill me with Ministerial gifts, and make me an able Minister of the New Testament. That God may give me the door of utterance, and enable me to speak, as I ought to speak, Eph. 6.20. That God may work in me whatever is wel-pleasing in his sight, Heb. 13.21. fulfill in me all the good Counsel of his will, and the work of faith with power, 2 Thes. 1.11. that the name of our Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in me, and by me. Oh! Pray for me, that I may be kept faithful to Christ and you; that I may la∣bour and not faint, run and not be weary; that I may be able to bear up under all Burdens and Temp∣tations, and be able to overcome and conquer them all; That I may rightly divide the word of Truth, and administer the holy Ordinances of Christ ac∣cording to his will, so, as that he may be magnified,
and your Souls profited; That my heart may stand clear off the World, and that I may not be taken and entangled with any snares, and that I may perfect holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. and for whatever else you may rationally judge, I may stand in need of, as your Minister.
3. I do request you, that if at any time you do certainly see, and undoubtedly know any failing or miscarriage in, or by me, that you will speedily, seriously, meekly, humbly, and as you ought to do, enform me of it. It is your duty to do so; if you do it as you ought, and may do it, I shall (through grace assisting) receive it, thank you, and bless God for it, and account it my mercy. But I shall desire you, to take heed and beware of these three evils towards me in this matter. (1) That you do not fancy and make evils or miscarriages for me, and then charge them on me, as mine; when in truth they are not so. It is a very dangerous thing to condemn the Righteous, and justifie the wicked, as you know, Prov. 17.15. and it is most dangerous, and abominable in the sight of the Righteous God to condemn, or falsly to charge his Embassadours, because they stand in his stead, bear his Image of Authority, and do his Ministerial work in his Churches▪ And yet how common is this evil among Professors, as I can testifie? (2) Do not take up a Report from others against me, and take it for granted, because you hear some Pro∣fessors of the good wayes of God tell you so. For the World, yea, and the Churches also are too full of slanderous and back biting Tongues. They are not aware of this evil, but hug and embrace it in their bosoms, practise it without fear, and commit this abomination with both hands, as the Prophet
speaks. Remember that Jesus Christ hath strictly charged you, in 1 Tim. 5.19. that you do not so much as receive an Accusation against an Elder, under two or three witnesses; and that on their certain knowledge of the Fact, not upon their con∣jectures, and feigned Circumstances. For God is very curious and tender of their good Names, Credit and Reputations, and he knows, and all wise and holy men do know, that they are more obnoxi∣ous to the Envy, and that they lye more open to the wrath and hatred of men, than other men do. Therefore, I say, God hath set a higher mound about their good Name, for their security, than about others. (3) Do not take up my real or supposed miscarriages, and spread them before others. Oh! my Brethren, let not this filthy devilish wickedness be found in you: let not others hear of my faults, before I do my self: be not you Back-biters and Whisperers against him, who loves you so much, as that he could spend and be spent in the service of your Souls, and who seeks your good all he can. Requite not his love to you with such mischief and wickedness against him, for the Lord's sake. You may do him much wrong thereby, but you will much more wrong Christ and your own Souls. And let none of you think, that Jesus Christ is an idle Spectator of what you do herein, that he observes you not, or that because you imagine you intend him no hurt in what you say of him, that therefore he will hold you guiltless. No, no: be not de∣ceived, for God will not be mocked: what a man soweth, that shall he reap, Gal. 6.7. God doth not say, you may speak evil of his Ministers, or other men, if you intend not to hurt them thereby; no: but he deth expresly forbid you to back bite, or
speak of their evils (though real) at all, behind their backs, until they prove incorrigible, and have rejected your reproofs and endeavours to convince and convert them, Levit. 19.16, 17. Jam. 4.11. Tit. 3.2. Rom. 1.30, 31. Psal. 15.3. 2 Cor. 12.20. But in truth this excuse or pretence is but a carnal, blind, and diabolical delusion, to shut the eyes of men, and harden their hearts against the evils of it, that they may commit it with the more peace and satisfaction, that neither men nor their own Consciences may reprove or controul them, and cry shame on them for their sins, and that they may not be obstructed, or any way impeded in their doing of that wherein they find pleasure. Neither indeed, can they prove that they do not hate them, or intend their hurt. For it is infallibly certain that they do not really love such, and that they are prejudiced against them, and do not in truth seek their good. For can I perswade any reasonable man by the rules of Reason, that I love him, and seek his good in the dark (as to him) by doing or speaking that which experience shews, will inevitably tend to his hurt, to his shame and reproach, and to the alienating of others affections from him. Well then, tell me of my real faults to my face, that I may mend and do so no more, for that is the Will of Christ, Matth. 18.15. (4.) I do request you to Visit me, and let me have your good Company as often as conveniently you can; and when we meet, let our coming together be for the better, and not for the worse. Surely, I think it is your Duty to give me loving Visits, as well as I you, and that when you come, you shew a readiness to spend our Time, and improve our Visits to the profit of our Souls, unless the meeting be design∣ed
for other business. The strangeness of some is no small burden to my spirit, and I know not how their Consciences do dispence with such Omissions. How can we think that such do really Love one a∣nother, who regard not each others Company, nor, though they live near together, will vouchsafe to give them a Visit in a whole year together? For true Love inclines to Communion, free and open-hearted Society together; and it is so far from be∣ing burdensome to true Lovers so to do, as that it is their delight. Church-members are bound in duty to give their Teachers friendly Visits, to en∣courage them in their Works, and to get some good from them to their own Souls. They should come and propound Cases to them, that concern their Faith, Practise, Peace, and Comfort, and declare to them their Soul troubles and temptations, and likewise their profit and gettings by their Ministry. They should open unto them their Soul-wants and Spiritual diseases, that so they may know the bet∣ter how to suit their Ministry to them, and apply words in season to their Conviction, Instruction, and Comfort. For the Priests Lips should preserve knowledge, and the People should seek the Law at his mouth, for he is the Messenger of the Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2.7. Mark it, It is not said that they should always, or mostly go to their Peo∣ple, but that the People should seek to them. Thus the Disciples came to the Lord Jesus with their Cases. And truly Friends, you would greatly re∣joyce my heart, if I might see the same practised by you in a holy and serious manner. I do assure you, that you should be very welcome to me, and I shall most freely afford you my help, and give you what assistance I can. And I do further request and en∣treat
you, that when I come to visit you, that then I may find you ready to entertain me with some pro∣fitable discourse, that may better us in the Inner man; for that is the best Entertainment I desire or expect from you; and it is that which I am sure will turn to the best account now, and at the last day. These are some of my reasonable requests to you for my self, which I hope you will not deny me.
2. I have a few requests to you for God, and your Head and King, the Lord Jesus Christ. (1.) That you would still remember how you have received him, as your Lord Jesus Christ, and so walk ye in him, Col. 2.6. Examine the Founda∣tion you stand upon, and take not up with Reforma∣tion without Regeneration and real Ʋnion with Christ by Faith. It is to be feared that too too ma∣ny Church-members sit down short of Christ, a new State, and a thorow change of heart; that they content themselves with their being in the Churches of Christ, the use of Ordinances, and with their Church-priviledges. We read of five Foolish Vir∣gins in fellowship with five Wise Virgins; and we read of bad Fishes in the Nets with the good; of Tares growing amongst the good Wheat; and of Hypocrits in the Kingdom of Heaven, (the Churches) which Christ shall gather out and cast into the fire, Matth. 25.2. Matth. 13.47, 48, 49, 50. Isa. 33.14. Take good heed that none of you be such: You have past the Test of mens judg∣ments, and they take you for true Saints in their Char table judgments; but you may be notorious Hypocrites for all that, and you must pass under the Infallible Tryal and Judgment of God too, who can and will make a true Judgment of you. Therefore
do you endeavour to know your own States by serious and diligent search, 2 Cor. 13.5. 2 Pet. 1.10. You may be Members of a true Church of Christ, and yet not be true Members of Christ; you may be Ʋnited to his People in Church-fellowship, whilst you are Strangers to Christ. And know, that if you are Hypocrites in the Churches, you are an A∣bomination to him; you defile his holy Temple, and his Soul abhors you.
But I say, if upon your serious tryal of your selves, you find indeed, that you are new Creatures, and have really received Christ the Lord on his own terms, then do you walk in him, and worthy of him, Col. 1.10. Own him, Trust him, Love him, Obey him, Subject and Live to him, as to your Head, Lord, and King. Receive, and walk by his Laws and Rules only, and give him the Ho∣nour and Glory of his Headship, and Authority o∣ver you, in, and by your so doing, Luk. 6.46. Remember that you are the Servants of Christ, bought with a price, even the price of Christ's Blood, that you should be his Servants and Sub∣jects; therefore be you not the Servants of men, in his matters and concernments, 1 Cor. 7.23. (2.) Do you stand up, and be Zealous for, and in the cause of your Lord and King, Rev. 3.19. You are redeemed to it, Tit. 2.14. and your Head expects it from you. Keep your hearts with him and for him, and suffer no Stranger, no Lust, Self, or any Creature to Ʋsurp and Possess his Throne in you. Shew your Zeal against all Intruders, and fight them off when ever they assault you, or attempt to get possession of your hearts. Be you Zealous for, and in his pure Gospel-worship and Ordinances; for, and in upholding, sanctifying and celebrating
of them in the Church. (3.) Encourage and pro∣mote the Interest of Christ in each others hearts, and to enrich one another with the Truths and Grace of Christ as much as you can; for it is your duty so to do, and you will thereby please and glo∣rifie him, 1 Thes. 5.11. Jude 20. You should labour to augment, encrease, and nourish the Graces, Comforts, and Experiences; provoke, strengthen, and stir up one another to Love, Trust, Fear, Ho∣nour, and Serve Christ more and better, For this is the Will of God concerning you, 1 Thes. 5.18. (4.) Honour Christ by reproving your sinning-Bre∣thren, and endeavouring all you can to hide it from the knowledge of others, and to restore them with a spirit of meekness, not suffering sin to rest up∣on them, Gal. 6.1. Lev. 19.17. Lift them out of the ditch of Sin, whereinto Temptation hath cast them, and that with all possible secrecy and privacy for the honour of Christ and your Brethren, and for the good of their Souls who have sinned. Sin (especially in Church-members) carries Reproach in its mouth, on Christ, his Ways and Temples; and therefore by the same Argument and Reason, and for the self-same cause, that we are to honour Christ, and prevent all Reproach to his Name, Gos∣pel, and People, we should hide each others sins as long as possible, and there is hope; and endeavour privately to heal offences, and cure the Offenders. (5.) Labour to shine as Lights in all manner of holy Conversation and Godliness, 2 Pet. 3.11. Declare whose you are, and what you are, to all men, by your fruits of Holiness and Righteousness, Matth. 5.16. Phil. 2.15, 16. O remember that you are the Living Witnesses of Jesus Christ in the World, Isa. 43.10, 12. Isa. 44.8, 9. Rev. 11.3.
and therefore you should endeavour all you can, ne∣gatively and positively, by words, deeds, and car∣riages, to make full proof of, and give in your good Testimony to the holy Name, and to the Excellency of the Grace and good ways of Jesus Christ. The Churches of Christ in the World, are as Beacons set on Hills, which attract and draw the eyes of all men to them. They watch for your halting, and are very curious in marking your steps; and that will be made a fault in you, which is not in others, Psal. 27.11, 12. Therefore you must be a singular People before all men, and so walk as to shame your Enemies, and that they may have no evil thing (justly) to say of you, 1 Pet. 3.16. And you must not only be good negative Professors and Wal∣kers, but you must also shine and be fruitful in eve∣ry good work, and in gracious words and carria∣ges. You should be excellent living Witnesses to Christ and his ways, by shining in Humility, Meekness, Temperance, Love, Charity, Kindness, Self-denyal, Justice and Righteousness, in Seri∣ousness and Gravity, in Sweetness and Affability, and in all Holiness, Heavenly-mindedness, Zeal, and Spirituality; in Goodness, Peaceableness, or in what-ever Grace or Virtue may adorn the Do∣ctrine of God our Saviour in all things. These are some of the things I do request of you for God and your King. As likewise that you lay to heart his Love and Grace to you, and endeavour to affect your hearts with them, stir them up to all cordial thankfulness, and oblige them to live and love forth praises to his holy Name. Remember, that you are under Electing, Redeeming, Regene∣rating, Quickening, Teaching and Comforting Love and Grace; and that you are entrusted with,
and have the enjoyments of many glorious priviledges in your hands, for the filling you with all the fulness of Christ, and nourishing you up unto e∣ternal Life in your Church-state, Joh. 1.16. Eph. 4.11, 16. Psal. 92 Psal. 132. I have some Requests to you for, and in the behalf of your own Souls. Indeed all the other things desired of you already, have respect and relation unto the good and profit of your own Souls, as well as to my good and God's Glory. But that which I shall now desire of you, respects your Soul directly and immediately; and therefore I hope you will easily and readily grant them for your own sakes; although Jesus Christ, and my self are concerned in them also.
1. Endeavour to profit by your means and privi∣ledges, and to grow in all Grace in your Church∣state and enjoyments therein. Do not rest satisfied with your Church-state and Priviledges, but make serious enquiry after your gettings; and what good, what spiritual profit you find in them, make use of them all to the gracious and holy ends for which they are given to you. Namely, to Teach and In∣struct you; to Feed and Nourish you; to Arm and Strengthen you; to Comfort and Refresh you; to Confine and Establish you in the Faith of Christ; to Purge and Sanctifie you; to Confirm and Seal you up unto the day of Redemption, and to convey the Spirit and Grace of Christ into your hearts. To acquaint you with your selves, and enable you to know and discern the worst and best of your selves; what God hath done for you, & what sin, the world, and Devil have done against you. To acquaint you with Jesus Christ, his Love, Grace, Truth, Providences, and Benefits, and to bring him into your Hearts, and into Fellowship and Communion
with you. Therefore look after these Ends, and other of like Import, and see that you do indeed and in Truth prosecute and obtain them, and take not up short of them. Oh! be you sure to mind your Earnings in all your Enjoyments, and God's Ordinances.
2. Take hold of such Counsels, Reproofs and Instructions, as your Brethren shall give you in time of need, to prevent your Sinning, or to reduce and turn you back from Sin to Duty. O remember, that it is a choice means, and one of God's Holy Ordinances to do you good: yea, to do you a great deal of good, and an unexpressible Pleasure. And therefore, if you love your Souls, turn not a deaf Ear to them; slight them not, nor harden your Hearts against them. But hearken to, and close up with them: Embrace them as choice Mercies to you; bless God exceedingly for them, and love and thank your Counsellors, and Reprovers heartily. For it is an invaluable mercy, to have such true Friends at hand; who will express so much love to, and care of us, as that when they see us in danger of falling, shall give us their preventing succouring∣hand, to support and hold us up; or when they see us fall and need their help, they shall not Ham∣like, Gen. 9.22. go and tell others of it, but sea∣sonably give us their hands, to help us up again. Oh! be not angry with them, but love and thank them, and take, receive and reverence their Voice, as the Voice of God. And know, that if you re∣ject and slight it, or are displeased with them for their Work and Labour of Love to you; you do thereby reject and slight the Voice of God, and are displeased at his Merciful dispensation to you for your good. For your Instructors and Counsel∣lors,
were sent to you by God himself; and it was he that inclined their Hearts to go, and opened their Mouths to speak to you, and do for you so great an office of Love. Therefore, be you of that wise sort of Men, who will hear Reproof from their Friends. Prov. 1.5. Prov. 9.8, 9. Prov. 10.8. Prov. 12.15. Prov. 25.12. and own it as the Voice of God.
3. Be careful that you stay not, or take up in Ordinances, but go to, and have your eye on Christ in them. We are exceeding apt to stick fast in the way of coming to God, and to sit down short of the end; of the God and grace of the means; and without great heedfulness and circumspection in this matter, we may easily run our selves deep in sin; and thereby wrong our Souls, as also by the want of the God and grace of the means. Mind that Text in Esa. 64.5. Thou meetest him that remembers thee in thy wayes; namely, such as seek God in his wayes, and pass thorow them, unto himself. But observe, that by sticking in, and taking up with Ordinances you greatly sin against God, by making a God of Ordinances; setting up his Creatures in his place and Throne, giving unto them his Honour and Glory, and robbing him of his due. You neglect the fountain of living wa∣ters, and hew out to your selves broken Ci∣sterns, that can hold no water: which the Holy Ghost calls two evils, Jer. 2.13. You will thereby grieve the Holy Spirit, cause him to with-draw from you, and withold the blessings and good of his Ordinances from your Souls. Oh! my Brethren, little do many of you think how deep you are under the guilt of this sin, and what a Controversie God hath with your Souls for it; and little do you think
what losers and sufferers you are thereby. Little do many think how often they are caught in this snare, and how exceedingly offensive it is to God, and detrimental to their own Souls. Wonder not that Ordinances profit you not, and that God is not with you in them; if you stick in, and take up with them. In love I give you warning of it, that you may consider it, watch and pray against it; that you may carefully mind and do what God re∣quires in his Worship and Ordinances; namely, that you go to, and seek him in them indeed. And remember, that it is your Duty, that you must; and your Priviledge, that you may go to, and find him and his Grace in them.
(4.) Live by faith in all your wayes, and make use of all God's Ordinances in Faith and Hope. For it is faith in Christ, and on the Covenant and pro∣mises, that will keep you steady and unmovable: that will hold your Souls in Life, and with joy draw water out of the Wells of Salvation, Esa. 12.3. Rom. 15.13. It is faith and hope that will unite your hearts to Christ and his Promi∣ses, and encourage you in your doing and suffering∣work, Rom. 5.5. 1 Joh. 3.3. unbelief holds off, and keeps back mercies from you; but faith and hope draws them to you. You cannot see God in his Worship and Ordinances, but by Faith; neither can you see the beauty, and glorious Excellency of the Promises, Gospel-Ordinances, and Gospel-pre∣cepts and obedience to them, but by Faith. You can get no good, no encouragement in the Gospel, and wayes of God, but by faith and hope. There∣fore live by Faith and in a well-grounded hope.
(5) Be sure to prepare to meet God in his Wor∣ship; and do all you can to get your Hearts ready.
Do not rush unadvisedly into his Presence; but be sure to do it with much consideration and delibera∣tion. Prepare to meet thy God, Amos. 4.12. and prepare thy work without, Prov. 24.27. Get ye Idols out, and get your hearts into a holy frame and disposition for your God and his service: get a holy awe of him on your minds, a deep sense of your wants, weakness, and vileness, and of his greatness, purity and holiness on your hearts; that you may draw nigh unto him with fear and trem∣bling, Heb. 12.28. Psal. 2.11. For if you draw nigh to God, without such preparations, be sure you do not, cannot honour and worship him, as God; neither will he meet you and bless you.
6. To conclude: let me request you to cleave to the Lord with full purpose of heart, Act. 11.23. Walk with God, and serve him in sincerity and Truth, Joshua. 24.14. Be you alwayes able to say with Paul and other Saints; that your rejoycing is this, the Testimony of your Consciences: that in simplicity and Godly sincerity, you have your Conversations, 2 Cor. 1.12. Be you much in your closet-work; I mean in secret Prayer, Me∣ditation and Examination, and make what ear∣nings you can of these Duties and Priviledges. Let your Hearts be set on things above, and not on worldly things, Col. 3.2. cling to Christ in Love, and keep your Affections warm and lively for him. Converse much with Christ, his Love, Grace, Death, and with his Resurrection and In∣tercession; with his Laws, Promises and Dispen∣sations, and with the fulness of grace he hath re∣ceived for you. Acquaint your selves with your fu∣ture glory, and consider much, what you shall be hereafter. (I jumble many things together, for
brevity sake.) By these and other Means and Duties, you will glorifie God and profit your own Souls: you will rejoyce my heart, and engage me to bless God for you; and the fruits of all will appear in your walkings in the Church, as becomes the Gospel of Christ. Finally my Brethren, will you grant me these few reasonable Requests? Truly, I desire them of you for your own good and Christ's honour, because you are exceeding dear to me, and I do entirely love you, and sincerely seek your present and eternal happiness: I shall pre∣sent you with a few Considerations, and so con∣clude.
(1) Consider, that you are a holy People in Name and Profession, and a happy People in Pri∣viledges and Dignities. And therefore you must walk and carry your selves answerable to them.
(2) Consider, the time when you were built up a spiritual house: Was it not in the Sickness-Year, (in the beginning of the Year): even then, when God was about to cut down Scores of Thousands round about you, and when he was ready to make great devastations in this City, by the Plague? Are you not as Brands pluckt out of the Fire, and continued in your Church-state, in the midst of de∣vouring Judgments; that you might be a peculiar People unto God?
(3) Consider, how wonderfully the Lord hath preserved and continued your Priviledges and Mercies to you, and that in very Evil times and places, when many of your Brethren have lost theirs: and wherefore he hath dealt so graciously with you, and whether you have answered his Ends in reality and truth?

(4) Consider, your solemn Engagement, when you en red into, and became Members of the Church. Did you not engage to walk with God therein; wait on and constantly celebrate the Ser∣vice, Ordinances and Worship of his House, and perform your respective Duties to one another? And have you done so? The vows of God are on you, and therefore you had need look to your selves, and consider your wayes.
(5) Consider, what Enjoyments and Communion with God you have had, since your embodying toge∣ther, and growing up into a Temple in the Lord: and what earnings and improvements you have made of them? what growth in grace and encrea∣sing with the encrease of God? what have been the fruits of all, to the glory of God, the profit of your own and others Souls?
(6) Consider, what esteem your Lord and King hath of you, and what honours he hath conferred upon you? he hath made you a House or Temple of Kings and Priests, and he hath set you near him∣self, Rev. 5.10. Eph. 2. You are the holy Tem∣ple and Houshold of God, the Palace and Gallery of the great King; and you are his Habitation and Garden, wherein he walks and dwells with great delight. He honours you with his special Presence, (if you walk with and please him) and he calls you by his own Name. You are his glory, joy and Crown, and he glories in you. You are exceeding dear to him, and pretious in his ac∣count, and you are entrusted with his Richest Trea∣sures. And therefore consider.
(7) What he may and doth require of, and expect from you? you know, that where much is given, much is required and expected; and you
know how to apply it to your selves.
(8) Consider what you shall be hereafter, and what is now preparing for you in Heaven? You have your Race to run, and you have a great prize to win, 1 Cor. 9. You have a Wilderenss to go tho∣row, and a Heavenly Canaan to possess. You are now to fight the good Fight of Faith, 1 Tim. 6.12. and you shall be Crowned in the end, 2 Tim. 4.7, 8. Now you are to Sow in Tears, that you may Reap in Joy; and now you are to sow and gather Fruit unto Eternal Life, Joh. 4.36. and hereafter you shall Reap Life everlasting, Gal. 6.8. Your Head and King is gone to Heaven to take posses∣sion for you, and make ready Mansions of Glory for your Reception and Entertainment, Joh. 14.2, 3. He will not fail to come again in glorious State and Triumph, to fetch you home unto himself, and to present you spotless and glorious before his Father with exceeding joy. Because he lives, namely, at his Fathers right hand in eternal glory, you shall live there also, and you shall be ever with the Lord, Joh. 14.3, 19. Math. 25.32, 33, 34. 1 Thes. 4.16, 17. Eph. 5. Jude 24. You are now of the Church Militant; shortly you shall be of, and with the Church Triumphant. You are intitled to an Eternal Inheritance, and short∣ly you shall be put into the peaceable and joyful pos∣session of it, as soon as you are of full Age. Your Names are now enroled among the general Assem∣bly of Believers, and Church of the First-born, written in Heaven, Heb. 12.23. But it will not be long e're you shall be taken in among that Hea∣venly and Glorious Society, where you shall see and know as you are known, 1 Cor. 13. 1 Joh. 3. Oh that you would (now) apply these things unto
your selves, and rejoyce in the faith and hope of them, 1 Pet. 1.8. Oh that you would be looking for, and hastening to that blessed Hope, and glorious Appearance of your great God and Sa∣viour Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.13. 2 Pet. 3.12. Oh that you would be stedfast and unmovable, and always abounding in the work of the Lord, for as much as your labour shall not be in vain in the Lord, 1 Cor. 15. ult. Now is your working-time, hereafter you shall have a rewarding and resting time. The one is very short, the other Eternal. Oh consider! how fast your glass is running out, and how near you may be at your Journeys end? how gray hairs are coming on you, and what a great change Death will shortly make among you? The Lord Jesus is at work for you in Heaven, and you lye deep in his heart and dearest Affections. He will send you many Love-Letters by the holy Spirit, that shall ravish and greatly re∣joyce your hearts; if you carry your selves dutifully to, and walk pleasantly before him. He will open the richest Treasures of his Love and Grace unto you, and cause his fountain of pleasures to flow in upon your Souls; and after a little while, he will instate you into, and give you an Eternal weight of glory, 2 Cor. 4.17. Oh, that I might so run as to obtain! so Preach, Walk, and Minister unto you, as to make you fat and flourishing in the House of God, and approve my self a faithful Steward of the mysteries of God to you! Oh that you, who are Ruling Elders and Deacons, and are honoured with noble Works and Offices in his House, would carefully, diligently, faithfully, and profitably mind your work, and do your duty there; and that all the Members would mind and practise their works
and duties also! O what a happy and renowned Church would you (then) be! and what peace you might obtain to your selves thereby? Oh! what advantages and opportunities have you all to honour Christ, convince the World, profit your own Souls, and be useful to one another? which I do once more entreat you to consider and lay to heart, and so walk as to obtain the ends of your Church-state and pri∣viledges. And in order thereunto, pray read this Book over and over again, and that with a single eye, and unprejudicate minds. Read, and ponder wel what you read. Read, and pray for a Blessing from Heaven on your hearts; and Read, that you may know and practise your Duties therein held forth, not that you may find matters to cavil at, and except against. Receive and use this Book as a Pledge and Testimony of my true and unfeign∣ed Love & Respects to you, & an evidence of my Cordial desires and intentions to promote the ever∣lasting welfare of your Souls. Brethren I call Hea∣ven and Earth to witness, That in all my ministra∣tions to you, in all my writings and doings for and with you, I do heartily, earnestly, and unfainedly seek and design your present and eternal Good; your Peace and Ʋnity, your Comfort and Holiness, your Growth and Stability in the Grace and Truths of Christ; and that you may be a Glorious Temple of God, and a Church of Renown for Fruitful∣ness and Spirituality; for Peace, Concord, and true Holiness, Oh! how do I desire it, and long to see it! And know, that what is wanting in my Ability to do you Service, shall be made up in Diligence, Love, and Faithfulness, while I live.
And now Brethren, I commend you to God,
and to the Word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among all them that are Sanctified. And shall remain for ever,

