


Honoured Sir,
I Have at length sur∣rendred into your hands to dispose of at your pleasure, the Sermon and Narrative, which you have long called for (to use Quinti∣lians phrase) quotidiano convi∣tio, with an importunity refle∣cting a continual reproach up∣on my slow dispatch: which (though I confess it hath with∣all
 something of natural in it, yet) principally owns it self to a desire I had (wherein I knew also I corresponded with yours) that the Character of your dear Lady might be perfected by all possible accessions of Intelli∣gence for the view of Posterity to which I understood you design∣ed it. For although it requires not much accurateness (as the Sen. de Tranq. Philosopher saies) scribere in Di∣em; yet aeternitati pingere, to raise a Monument for Ages had need be a work of some Time. I know not, nor shall I much concern my self in the future Fate of my mean scribles; Had I the con∣fidence to think, they have a∣ny thing of that Genius which the Poet saies, gives eternity to Victurus Geni∣um debet habe∣re liber. mens Writings, I assure you I would willingly contribute the
 utmost of it to Embalm the memory of a Personage so wor∣thy to live in the remembrance of latest Posterity: but having much more reason to fear they will prove but short-lived, I doubt, when I have done my utmost, I shall only prove guil∣ty of hindering her of the ser∣vice some better pen might have done her.
Indeed, she was so excellent a Piece as required the Pencil of the most exact Apelles living to express her to the Life: it be∣ing impossible to conceive, much less to delineate her rare perfe∣ctions, without wronging them, by any Idea, but that of a most compleat vertue. She was one, that might be thought to have been born on purpose for the Corre∣ction of the Age she lived in:
 but that these two things seem to argue the contrary; the one that she her self studied so much to hide her self from its No∣tice; and the other, that she dy∣ed so early, as not to allow it the advantage of making a full improvement of her exam∣ple.
But why do I presume to in∣form you, who too well under∣stand it, how to rate your own Loss, and teach your grief how much it hath to plead for the ju∣stification of its excesses? I wish, rather, that it were within my power to contribute any thing of aid to that Reason, and Grace, which (althongh you are much Master of them both at all other times, yet) I fear, in this Conflict, may be engaged in an unequal encounter. I know the
 just standard of all Grief is judged to be its Commensurate∣ness to the Cause,
—Flagrantior aequo
Non debet dolor esse viri, nec vulnere major. Juv. sat. 13. and I confess, I could allow yours, by that proportion, some∣thing of extraordinary, even the utmost of what Religion will indulge to the very infirmities of mortality under the greatest of Creature-Losses. But I desire you, withall, to remember, that it will not be safe to give the justest Affection the Temptation of its utmost Liberty, in which the facility of exceeding may entice it beyond its bounds. I hope, you will take heed that you be not found inter exem∣pla eorum quos dolor vicit (as the proud Stoick (for all his Sen. Epist. 63. professed Apathy) complains
 of himself) an Instance of the Conquests of sorrow: but rather (as Tertullian saies of Job) of the number of those who do, Dei Feretrum de Diabolo ex∣truere, Tertul. de Pat. by a magnanimous Pati∣ence furnish Gods Triumphs o∣ver the Tempter, who is never in more likelihood of obtaining a Victory, than when he can draw in our Reason (as he did Jonah's Jonah 4. 9.) to undertake the Patronage of our Passions.
I know, you look upon your self as obliged to be a true mour∣ner for so deserving a Wife, be∣cause you were a true Lover of her: and you cannot but send now and then a deep sigh after her, as tokens of your continu∣ed affection to her. In this re∣spect, Mittamus do∣nae spiritualia conjugi tuae, tu imitationem, & ego laudem. Aug. Cornel. let me bespeak you as St. Austin doth Carnelius; I think
 it meet, saith he, that both you and I send tokens indeed, but spiritual ones, of our affection to your deceased Lady; on your part Imitation; on mine, Com∣mendation. Thus He. Yea, rather, (say I) let both you, and I, (Sir) join both these together, in refe∣rence to yours; both commend her vertues, and imitate them; yea most really commend them, by imitating them.
To which purpose, I desire (for her sake, as being consci∣ous that nothing but her name can entitle it to such an Ho∣nour) that this small labour of mine may be admitted into your Closet; wherein, if the Narrative do you the unkindness now and then to renew your Tears, I hope the Sermon so near it, may contribute towards the drying
 them again: and let them both testifie, how willing I am to en∣deavour something at least (though I am sensible how lit∣tle I have effected therein) which may witness to times to come how much I am,
Honoured Sir,
 Northampton Octob. 20. 1664.
