



IT was the desire of several of you, that this Sermon should be printed, a desire I could not well deny: The Attention, that was given when I spoke; and the general Approbation afterwards of what I spoke, made me hope that my Sermon did in some measure an∣swer my design, which was not to revile but reason men into Honest and Loyal Principles: for which purpose I have since added some enlargements, particularly a∣bout the Original and Divinity of Government: not as if I would insinuate any thing against you, or had the least intention of fixing an Odium upon that place, wherein I had a considerable part of my Education, and near to which I had my Birth: but hope, that whatever malignity the factious Ascendent of this age may have let fall amongst you, it has infected but a few; and that your LOYALTY will for ever remain UNSHA∣KEN, and stand as firm as the Rock upon which your Town is Built.
The Government you live under, is of God, Sacred and Divine: it is agreeable to the Fundamental Laws of this Nation; and no other form was ever known amongst us, except in the late times of bloud and Confusion: and yet we have had, and its well if we have not still such, who would subvert and undermine it, men of Tur∣bulent unquiet Spirits, who if they have not their wills, would prove as factious and uneasie under any sort of Government, as under this of a Monarchy. And these are they who generally seem to be the deeplyest concern'd for the security of our Religion: The Protestant Inte∣rest is pretended, and it may be some of them are in good
 earnest. But believe me, Sirs, there are other Emis∣saries besides those from Rome, and that altogether as busie and dangerous, and of which you ought to be alto∣gether as carefull; they will take the advantage of your Religious Inclinations, and insensibly betray you into ill Opinions and thoughts of things. For give me leave to tell you, that there is no Temptation more prevailing and dangerous, than the Insinuations of men of Reli∣gion. An honest minded man is the soonest ensnar'd by such he takes to be honest and pious. The greatest He∣reticks (setting aside the Gnosticks of the primitive times) were men of great Piety and Zeal, and by that means gain'd so many Proselytes and followers; to in∣stance onely in one of our own Island, viz. Pelagius, he was a man of unblemisht Piety and Devotion, and by that means as well as by his Learning and pretences of Reason, infected not onely Britain, but a great part of the Christian world, with that pernicious Heresie a∣gainst the Divine Grace and Assistance. I onely men∣tion this, that you should not have mens persons in ad∣miration, nor suffer your selves to be imposed upon, either in reference to Church or State, by any man whatever, however Holy or Strict he may appear in his Life and Conversation, but prove the Spirits, try all Things, and hold fast that which is good. In fine, study to be quiet, and do your own business, Fear the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to change. For their Calamity shall rise suddenly, and who know∣eth the Ruine of them both, (Prov. 24.21, 22.)
May Almighty God give a blessing to this small imper∣fect piece, and make it usefull and serviceable to you, and I do assure you, the whole design is answer'd, of Sirs,

