



My Lord, and Gentlemen,
THis Sermon having adventured it self upon the hazardous Tryal of God and the Bench, was ad∣judged to the Press, when its Au∣thor was not by to plead on his own behalf; who surely had he been privy to the Judgement,
 (which was onely reported to him by some few of the number) would have intreated the Gentlemen not to adventure the reputation of their discretions upon a piece too unwor∣thy the notice of such an Honourable Judica∣ture.
I confesse I looke upon the comming under the Stationers Presse, in these dayes, as a punishment to a Sermon, no lesse (in its kind) then that of the same denomination, which you in some cases inflict upon offend∣ors; seeing it is thereby exposed to the weight of publique calumnies and reproaches, of which I am sure mine shall not want its suffi∣cient load.
The onely remedy I have herein, is once more to present its case before you its Judges, (which I doe in this Dedication) and to intreat you that the Grand-In∣quest you impannell to enquire concerning it, may be so wise as to understand the evi∣dence of Truth that is in it; and so honest, as not to returne an Ignoramus, for Billa vera.
Surely, (My Lord, and Gentlemen) you that are sufficiently acquainted with the Yerburies, Chillendens, Ives's, and others of an inferiour Order, whom it would be too
 much honor to name, seeds-men of the Devil, with whom this poore Town hath beene perpe∣tually pestered and poysoned, will, I doubt not, see cause for that tartnesse of applica∣tion in the close, for which I have been suf∣ficiently persecuted by the tongues of those, who found their backs too tender to be rub∣bed.
Those mens names, and some of the Er∣rors and Heresies they vented, I represented to your last Grand-Jury, and hoped they al∣so would have seen cause either to have re∣ported them to your Lordship, and the Bench, or at least not to have mis∣reported me, (as some of them did) to others, as unable to justifie my charge.
My Lord, and Gentlemen, I commit the Vindication of my name, and of this Truth, first, to God, who (I am sufficiently assured) will bring forth its righteousness as the light; and (among men) to your wiser, and more impartiall judgements, hoping that you will (as farre as it concernes you) impresse the substance of it upon your Consciences, and walkings. And I pray that that Edition may be correctior & emendatior, more per∣fect then the Originall Copy it self: that you may live Sermons better then I can Preach
 or print them. And upon that account, I will preach and print as often as you please; upon other terms I care not how seldome. And this, because I am
Reading, May 24. 1654.
(My Lord, and Gentlemen,)

