


Honoured Sirs,
THat I joyn both your Names in one Dedication, is not barely because you are Brethren, both in Nature, and endeared affection each to other: but also, because you have been, and still are so, in the particular kindnesses you have for me, and my labours. For I gratefully acknowledge, that from the free and unexpected donation of the elder of you, I am fixed in this Sphere wherein I now move: and from the others near neighbourhood I receive constant expres∣sions of a more than ordinary value for my Ministry. And withal, knowing the great
Influence both your Names have on those parts, to the benefit of which especially the following Papers are designed; I thought it necessary in the publication of them to desire your joint-countenance in the recommendation of them to your many Tenants and Depen∣dants. A request, which I doubt not to obtain from you, because I know both your hearts are already possessed with a just vene∣ration of that great Providence which occa∣sioned them, and an hearty desire that all those who any way relate to you may be bet∣tered thereby.
Which Providence, as it filled all these parts, and thence the whole Nation, for some months, with discourse and wonder; and ex∣ercised the curiosity of all inquisitive Persons, whose occasions brought them near the place where it was acted; and I hope hath contribu∣ted towards the edification of many of them. So the consideration thereof excited me to at∣tempt to render it more serviceable to that great End. This I endeavoured lately, by preaching several Sermons relating to that occasion, to my own Congregation, who had generally been led either by their Curiosity, or better Motives (as it is to be hoped of divers of them) to the sight of that sad spe∣ctacle, exposed by the Divine Majesty to pub∣lick view so near their own habitations: and afterwards upon the declared opinion of di∣vers Judicious Auditors, that they might be
more publickly useful, reviewed them, and fitted them, as well as such plain Country Dis∣courses could be, without wholly altering the frame of them, for the Press.
And this I did, the rather because they were thought fit by the Reverend Author of the annexed Narrative in particular, to ac∣company it into the world; which he therefore sent to me, that I might so annex it; and withal, might farther assist it to the obtaining its honest end, by my attestation and re∣commendation.
And the former of these (though he needs it not) I do hereby readily give him, as be∣ing assured by unquestionable Testimony, (though I my self was out of the Country, during the greatest part of the time wherein that sad Providence was acting) that the substance of what he relates is exactly True, and concerning the Particulars, (seeing they are averred upon his own Personal knowledge, who by occasion of the nearness of his residence, being within the bounds of the same Parish, was the most frequent Visitor of the Party whose condition he relates) no man can ra∣tionally doubt, who knows him, (as you both have for many years) or will but ask a cha∣racter of him from you.
The latter, because I need not give it as to you, to whom the knowledge of the Author himself sufficiently recommends it; and yet I desire to give it to others by you; and beg the
same again my self from you on the behalf of the discourse prefixed, which (as being more properly mine own) I hereby consign, with my self, to your service, as being,
Honoured Sirs,  
Old Swinford, Sept. 20. 1677.
