



My LORD.
LITTLE did I think, when I made these
plain Sermons of Offences, that they
would have made me, in any Place
within His Majestie's Dominions, so
High an Offender, as the former of them hath,
in your City. But whether the Offence that is
so strangely expressed, and without President
(of which way of doing it, I thank the Observa∣tor
heartily, for being the first Publisher) be Of∣fence
given or merely taken, I leave it to your
Lordship to judge, when you have given your self
the trouble of reading it over, together with the
Second part on the same Subject. And it is the

onely favour, I have now to beg of your Lordship,
that you would give your self this little trouble.
I wish your Lordship had been present at the
Hearing of these Sermons, which if you had, you
had heard every syllable of what I took the Free∣dom
to deliver in your Absence.
I doubt not, your Lordship hath had as Odi∣ous
Representations made of the Sermon that oc∣casioned
the Act of Common Council, as I per∣ceive
were sent to the Observator: And, no doubt,
a no whit better Character of the second had been
given you (for I am sure it deserves no better)
had not those that were offended, obliged themselves
to be out of the Hearing of it, by that sudden Act of
theirs, the very next day after the first was preach'd.
I solemnly profess to your Lordship, that this whole
Discourse is neither better nor worse in Print, than
it was in the Preaching; Each part of it being
published, without the least Addition, Diminuti∣on,
or Alteration, of any thing. So that by this
most fair Play, the Act-Makers have all the Ad∣vantage
imaginable given them, of going a much
more Terrible way to work with me, if any thing
either Seditious or Factious be to be found in ei∣ther
of these Sermons. And I assure you Lord∣ship,
there is as much such Stuff in these, as in
any I ever preached, either in Gloucester, or else

where in my whole Life. And therefore, if your
Lordship shall find me guilty of any such Crimes,
I need not put you in mind that you can doe no
less, than procure to the COVNTENANCER
of SEDITION and FACTION, or (which is the
same thing, without mincing the matter, like these
modest Gentlemen) to the Seditious and Factious
Preacher, the severest Punishment that either the
Laws or the Canons can inflict upon so high an
Offender: That so an ORTHODOX and LOYAL
Person may fill his Stall in the Quire, and take
his turns in the Pulpit for the time to come: And
the Innocent City may be saved Harmless from the
Penalty now imposed upon them, of hiring such a
Preacher. I am in great earnest, My Lord, for
I had a thousand times rather fall into a Bishop's
hands, than into the hands of any New Com∣mittee
of Tryers.
I am sorry for the trouble that my Preaching
at Gloucester hath occasioned to your Lordship,
but I should have been more sorry to have pre∣vented
it, by Dawbing with untempered Mor∣ter,
and being Meal-mouth'd, and partial (for
fear of displeasing a very few, though never so
powerfull) in exposing of that, which we are all
obliged to take all opportunities to expose. Ma∣ny,
I am sure, will bear me witness, that imparti∣ality

is one of the worst faults, I have ever been
guilty of, in any of the Sermons that have made
Men angry; but, by the grace of God, this fault
I will never mend: And all that know your
Lordship will easily believe, that you'll never like
me one jot the worse for't. Some of the other sort of
People in London, I hear took such Offence at the
same Sermon, as to declare they would never
hear me more. And this Fate of being Censured
and Reproached by the bad or weak of all Par∣ties,
those must make full account of undergoing,
who are resolved to doe the Work of their great
Master with all Faithfulness. And this, by God's
help, is my sincere Resolution, whatsoever it costs
me; and in the doing of my duty, to have always
in my Eye that advice of the Apostle, Whatso∣ever
you doe, doe it heartily, as to the Lord
and not as to men; knowing that of the Lord
you shall receive the Reward of the inheri∣tance;
for you serve the Lord Christ. I hope
you will pardon this Freedom to,
My LORD,

