



I Suppose that many of you are ac∣quainted with a little Book, called A Friendly Conference, between a Minister and a Parishioner of his in∣clining unto Quakerism; However you esteem of the Arguments, yet I hope that some of you have the charity to believe, that no by end, no indirect purpose whatsoever, induc't me to the publication of it. No, the searcher of all hearts bears me witness, that I was mov'd to the undertaking from the truest Principle of charity and kindness, to discover to you your miserable mistakes, the Sanay bottome upon which your Tenents are founded, and the real danger your poor Souls are in, by your obsti∣nate persisting in so desperate a schism.
Though (Blessed be God) this Book has had its wished effect upon some, yet others have loaded it with all the calumnies they well could invent, misrepresenting both its design, & argument; And more openly one Thomas Ell∣wood in a late virulent Pamphlet, Nick-Na∣med Truth prevailing and detecting Error—, venting therein not only his spleen against me, but against the whole Constitution and Go∣vernment of the Church of England, as it is now happily establisht by the Supreme Autho∣rity

of this Nation. In Communion of which Church our Pious Ancestors both liv'd and dy'd, and your selves too were both born and baptized.
When I found such an immodest and fanta∣stick Title, I began to suspect, what after∣wards was confirmed to me, (viz.) that He had placed the empty Name of Truth Ram∣pant in the Title page, but nothing of the thing in the Book it self.
Had I not understood, with what mighty ap∣plause my Adversaries Book was received a∣mong you, I had not given my self the trouble of this Vindication, but answer'd him in si∣lence, as in all probability I shall do, for the time to come.
I had drawn my Vindication much larger than now I present it to the World (being ve∣ry unwilling to allow My Antagonist any one Paragraph in his whole Book) which I found had swelled the Volume too big; wherefore I delayed the publication hereof in order to con∣traction, fearing otherwise that my Book would be too large for the Busie to read, and too dear for the Poor to buy.
This Book had sooner seen the light, had not some of my Sheets as they were sent to the Press, unfortunately miscarried: And though it come somewhat late, yet I hope not unseaso∣nabby or less welcome to you.

You will find me often complaining of the Dishonesty of my Adversary in mis-stating My Book in many places of it; and also of his dis∣ingenuity in pretending to answer it, when in truth He has passed by the most material passa∣ges of it. If therefore you would impartially judge between us, then compare the Books to∣gether, and you will easily discern whether He has done me right. Next compare his Book with this reply, then do you judge, whether or no I have done him right.
I had been much larger upon the Subjects of Inspiration and Tithes, Had not T. E. been taken particularly to task by two other Pens, which you will find me mentioning afterwards.
You will find that I generally make use of T. E's own Authors, but how honestly He has represented them, as some others of your own party, from whom he has taken them, will ap∣pear in its place.
I know not what opinion you may have of me, but if I know my own Soul, it is your Eternal interest and welfare, that I have been aiming at, as well in this, as my former undertaking; that I may shew you, how ridiculous and Non∣sensical your Tenents are; and if I sometimes search into your Wounds till they smart, it's more that I may be faithful to you, than any ways for to please my self.
You will find that sometimes I mention the

sayings and actions of some Quakers, yet con∣ceal their Names, which I do for this only reason, that I may shew not my unkindness to your Persons, but Opinions.
I wish you would seriously consider, with what woful mediums and artifices your Lead∣ers divert you from the truth, and hoodwink you in your errors. For when any has attempt∣ed your Conversion, then must they be traduc't with Slanders, and Calumnies: As such an one is, or was a Presbyterian, or an Army-Chaplain, &c.—Thus do they accommodate them∣selves to the passions, and uncharitable humours of Men, and take Sanctuary in Dunghils and Puddles: as if they thought your Religion bet∣ter defended by Dirt than Arguments: accord∣ingly T. E. threatens me with an Adjunct dolus latet in generalibus. in case I set not my Name to my next: But what he means, I know not, having (I thank God) no particular guilt, that in the least makes me concern'd at it. I am sensible that I have Infirmities as well as other Men, yet I can modestly say, that I do not in∣dulge my self in any thing which I know to be ill. But I wonder why the publishing of my Name must excuse me? And seeing he knows me so well (as he makes his Reader believe) why has he not the Charity, and Christianity, to inform me what this Adjunct is, that I may amend it?

But let him publish his Adjunct when he pleases, My Comfort is, that neither He, nor his Master, can go any further than God is pleas'd to suffer them: only let me advise T. E. (for his credits sake) not to take his Adjunct upon Trust, as (it seems) He did his Ancient Authors, lest He come off with as muchshame in the one, as he has done in the other.
How much better had He been imploy'd, had he gone about to have heal'd, and not (as He do's) to widen our unhappy breaches? nay ra∣ther than you shall want an Argument for Schism, he will make suspicion a ground there∣of: I must confess he puts in where I have great ground to suspect—But then there is diffe∣rence between ground to believe, and ground to suspect; for be the ground never so great, it's still but in order to a suspicion.
One thing I do assure you, that I have not said that thing in this following Tract, which I thought not the very truth, (so far as my judg∣ment did guide me.) With this integrity I have proceeded, and can with the greater hopes ex∣pect God's blessing on my labours.
Had I thought my Name would have been any satisfaction to you, you should have had it before, however you must not wonder, that you want it now, being so rudely threatned to it.
God open your Eyes, is my Prayer to Heaven for you —

