



My Dear Countrymen,
WHen First I undertook the Task, I could not handsomely decline, of paying my Respects to You; I never less dream't of doing Any Thing than what I Now Do, viz. of Adven∣turing abroad in a Censorious World, and in an Argument so Invidious; for Prerogative and Privilege, which (like Righteousness and Peace) should kiss each other, have of late
 most fowly clash'd. I am conscious to my self of my Total Unacquaintedness with the Methods of the Pulpit, which makes a Plain Duty ap∣pear in an Answerable Dress: of the Unwel∣comeness, or (as some will phrase it) the Un∣seasonableness of the Argument I made choice of; (for what can be more grating, than to Mind men of Obedience, who are Running head-long into Rebellion?) In short, I know nothing can shelter me so much from Obloquy, as the Superlative Loyalty of That Auditory before whom it was Delivered.
'Tis True, it is the First Commandment of the Second Table, The First with promise: And the Main Branch whereon I have insisted, is, That of Subjection to our Civil Parent; which I have inforced by Arguments drawn from Scri∣ptures, Christian Writers, Ancient and Mo∣dern, and, in brief, the General Consent of All Mankind. If I have said Too Little, or Too Mean (as certainly I must have, when I weigh the Dignity of the Subject) my Fault carries its Apology with It, and you are bound to defend the short Interruption and surprize of a Person engaged in a most Laborious Employ: If any thing like Too severe, it will be pardonable from the Son of That Father who was stript and plunder'd by a Band of Army-Saints, who
 therefore chiefly hated Popery, that They might by that Pretext more securely reap the Harvest of Sacrilege and free Gospel Plunder.
Yet nothing of this Nature had prevail'd with me, Had I not seen a sort of Modern Jews, en∣deavouring to Justifie the Acts of Their Fore∣fathers, and to Transcribe the Rebellion com∣menc'd in Forty One, in Bloudier Characters, to be wrote with Point of Sword, and Seal'd by Dint of Blunderbuss in Eighty Three.
The Life of Our Second Sacred Soveraign of That Name is the Prize Hunted after by the most Bloody Conspirators and Associators that ever yet arose, since God Form'd Man upon Earth. 'Tis an Hearty Remonstrance against THAT SACRED EFFƲSION has made Me speak, who, otherwise, had been as Mute as Croesus's Son. If what I have said, may serve to Blunt the Edge of One Traytor's Sword, I have some part of my End.
The Peace and flourishing Condition of this Church and Kingdom, Length of Days, with Increase of Honours, a Prosperous and Pacifick Reign over Us; Exuberance of Allegeance and Fidelity in the Hearts and Practices of All his Subjects; Detections and Defeatments of the Consults and Cabals of All his Bold Conspi∣ring Enemies, are Blessings, which (As in Duty
 Bound) I daily pray for in be∣half of my Most Gracious Soveraign: Next these, That You, my Dear Country-men, may No less strive to out-do All Others on the Score of Loyalty, thanRegio est praeter Amoenitatem, aut Pascendis Pecoribus, aut Alendis Frugibus nusquam non Mitissima, & ab omnibus ad vitam necessariis Instructissima; adeò ut Secundâ FERTILITATIS Laude inter Angliae Provincias acquiescere haud facilè sit contenta. Cambd. Britan. f. 470. Our Coun∣try does All Others for the Glory of Fertility: Which is the earnest Wish of,
Dear Countrymen,

