

From our Second-Days Morning Meeting in London, the 26th of the 11th Month, 1690.
DEar and truly beloved Friends, Brethren and Sisters in Christ Jesus, our Blessed Lord and Saviour, we sincerely and ten∣derly salute you all in his free and tender Love, wherewith he hath graciously visited us, and largely shed it abroad in our Hearts and Souls, to our own unspeakable Comfort and Consolation, and towards his whole Heritage, and Royal Off-spring; blessed be his pure and powerful Name for Evermore. And our Souls do truly and fervently desire, and breathe unto the God of all our Mer∣cies, that you all may be preserved, and kept truly faithful and diligent in his Work and Service, according to your Heavenly Cal∣ling and Endowments with his Light, Grace and Truth, unto the End of your Days; as being livingly engaged thereby, all your appoint∣ed Time to serve him, and to wait, till your Change come: That none may neglect that true Improvement of your Times and Talents, that God has afforded you here, for your Eternal Advantage hereafter, in that Inheritance and Life Immortal, that never fades away. And
 that the whole Flock and Heritage of Christ Jesus, which he has purchased and bought for himself with a Price incorruptible, may always be so preserved in his own pure Love and Life, as to grow, in¦crease, and prosper in the same; and thereby be kept in Love, Ʋnity and Peace with one another, as becomes his true and faithful Follow∣ers, is that, which our very Hearts and Souls desire, being often tru∣ly comforted and enlarged in the living sense and feeling of the En∣crease and Aboundings thereof, among faithful Friends and Brethren.
And Dear Brethren and Sisters, unto this our Tender Salutation, We are concerned in Brotherly Love, and true Tender-heartedness, to add and impart unto you some Account of the Decease of our Dear and Elder Brother in Christ, namely, his and his Church's true and faithful Servant and Minister, George Fox; whom it hath pleased the Lord to take unto himself, as he hath divers others of his faith∣ful Servants and Ministers of late Time; who have faithfully served out their Generation, and finished their Testimony and Course with Joy and Peace. Howbeit, O Dear Brethren and Friends! that so many Worthies in Israel, and serviceable Instruments in the Lord's Hand, are of late taken away and removed from us, so soon one after another, appears a Dispensation, that deeply and sorrowfully affects us, and many more, whose Hearts are upright and tender toward God, and one to another in the Truth. The Consideration of the Depth, Weight and Meaning thereof, is very weighty upon our Spi∣rits, though their precious Life and Testimony lives with us, as be∣ing of that same Body, united to one Head, even Christ Jesus; in which we still, and hope, ever shall have secret Comfort and Union with them, whom the Lord has removed, and taken to himself out of their Earthly Tabernacles and Houses, into their Heavenly and Everlasting Mansions.
This our said Dear Brother, George Fox, was enabled by the Lord's Power, to Preach the Truth fully and effectually, in our Publick Meeting in White-Hart-Court, by Grace-Church-street, Lon∣don, on the Eleventh Day of this instant 11th Month, 1690: After which he said, I am glad I was here; now I am clear, I am fully clear. Then he was the same Day taken with some Illness or Indisposition of Body, more than usual; and continued weak in Body for two days after, at our Friend Henry Goldney's House in the same Court, close by the Meeting-House, in much Contentment and Peace, and very sensible to the last. In which time he mentioned divers Friends, and sent for some in particular; to whom he exprest his Mind, for the spreading Friends Books and Truth in the World, and through the Nations thereof; as his Spirit in the Lord's Love and Power was uni∣versally set, and bent for Truth and Righteousness, and the making known the Way thereof to the Nations and People afar off: signi∣fying also to some Friends, That all is well; and the Seed of God reigns over all, and over Death it self. That though he was weak in Body, yet that the Power of God is over all, and the Seed reigns over all dis∣orderly Spirits: which were his wonted sensible Expressions, being in the living Faith and Sense thereof, which he kept to the End. And the Thirteenth Instant, between the Ninth and Tenth Hour in the Night, he quietly departed this Life in Peace; being two days
 after the Lord enabled him to Publish and Preach the Blessed Truth in the Meeting, as aforesaid. So that he clearly and evidently ended his days in his faithful Testimony, in perfect Love and Unity with his Brethren, and Peace and Good-will to all Men; being about Sixty and six Years of Age (as we understand) when he departed this Life.
And on the Sixteenth of this Instant, being the day appointed for his Funeral, a very great Concourse of Friends and People assembled at our Meeting-House in White-Hart-Court aforesaid, about the Mid-day, in order to attend his Body to our Burying-place near Bunhill-Fields, to be Interred, as Friends last Office of Love and Respect, due on that Account. The Meeting was held about two Hours, with great and heavenly Solemnity, manifestly attended with the Lord's Blessed Power and Presence; and divers living Testimonies given from a live∣ly Remembrance and Sense of this his Dear, Ancient Servant, his Blessed Ministry and Testimony of the breaking forth of this Gospel-day; his Innocent Life, long and great Travels, and Labours of Love in the Everlasting Gospel, for the turning and gathering many Thou∣sands from Darkness to the Light of Christ Jesus, the Foundation of true Faith; also of his manifold Sufferings, Afflictions and Oppositions, which he met withal for his faithful Testimony, both from his open Adversaries and false Brethren; and his Preservations, Dominion, and Deliverances out of them all by the Power of God: To whom the Glory and Honour was and is ascribed, in raising up and preserving this his faithful Witness and Minister to the End of his Days; whose blessed Memorial will Everlastingly remain.
He loved Truth and Righteousness, and bore faithful Testimony against Deceit and Falshood, and the Mystery of Iniquity: and often, of late time especially, warned Friends against Covetousness, Earthly-mindedness, against getting into the Earth, and into a brittle Spirit; and the younger sort, against Loosness and Pride of Life, &c.
A few days before he died, he had a great Concern upon his Mind, concerning some, in whom the Lord's Power was working, to lead them into a Ministry and Testimony to his Truth; who through their too much entangling themselves in the things of this World, did make themselves unready to answer the Call and Leadings of the Power of God, and hurt the Gift, that was bestowed upon them, and did not take that regard to their Service and Ministry, as they ought: And mentioned the Apostle's Exhortation to Timothy, To take heed to his Ministry, and to shew himself approved, &c. And exprest his Grief con∣cerning such, as preferred their own Business before the Lord's Busi∣ness, and sought the advancing worldly Concerns, before the Concerns of Truth: And concluded with a tender and fatherly Exhortation to all, to whom God had imparted of his Heavenly Treasure, that they would improve it faithfully; and be diligent in the Lord's Work, that the Earth might be sown with the Seed of the Kingdom, and God's Harvest might be minded by those, whom he had called and enabled to labour therein: and that such would commit the Care of their outward Concerns to the Lord, who would care for them, and give a Blessing to them. However, this is not mentioned to encourage any to run unsent, or without being called of God.
Many are living Witnesses, that the Lord raised him up by his
 Power, to proclaim his mighry Day to the Nations, and made him an Effectual Instrument in our Day, to turn many from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power to God; and freely to suffer and bear all Reproaches, and the manifold Persecutions, Buffetings, Halings, Sto∣nings, Imprisonments, and Cruelties, that were in the Beginning, and for some time inflicted on him and others, for the Name of Christ Jesus. He was in his Testimony as a fixed Star in the Firmament of God's Power, where all that be truly wise, and that turn many to Righteousness, shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and ever. He knew and Preached the Mystery of Christ Revealed, the Life and Substance, and the Power of Godli∣ness, above all Shadows and Forms: The Lord endued him with a hidden Wisdom and Life. He loved Peace, and earnestly laboured for universal Love, Unity, Peace, and good Order in the Churches of Christ: And wherever he met with the contrary, it was his great Grief and Burthen. He was greatly for the Encouragement of faith∣ful Labourers in the Lord's Work; and it was a great Offence and Grief to him, to have their Testimony weakned, or Labours slighted through Prejudice in any professing Truth.
And inasmuch as the Lord suffered him not to be delivered up to the Will of his Enemies and Persecutors, who often heretofore breath∣ed out Cruelty against him, and designed his Destruction; but in his good Pleasure so fairly and quietly took him away in his own time, when his Testimony was so blessedly finished, and his Work accomplish∣ed, This is all remarkable, and worthy of serious and due Obser∣vation, as being by a special and Divine Providence and Wisdom of God; to whom we ascribe the Glory of all, and not unto Man or Crea∣tures. Though we must needs allow, and own that good Report and due Esteem, which faithful Elders, Ministers and Servants of God and Christ have by Faith obtained, to the Praise of that blessed Power, that upheld them in every Age in their day; many whereof are even of late taken away from the Evil to come, and are at Rest in the Lord, out of the Reach of all Envy and Persecution, where the Wicked can∣not trouble them any more.
And we must patiently bear our Parting with them, and our Loss and Sorrow on that Account, with respect to their unspeakable Gain: Yet how can we avoid being deeply affected with Sadness of Spirit, and brokenness of Heart, under the sense and consideration of such Loss and Revolutions, which we have cause to believe are Ominous of Calamities to the wicked World, though of good to the Righteous? Did the Death of plain upright Jacob,Gen. 50. namely Israel, (who was as a Prince of God) so deeply affect both his own Children and Kindred, as that they made a great and exceeding sore Lamentation for him; and even the Egyptians also, that they bewailed him seventy days? And the Death of Moses so deeply affect the Children of Israel,Deut. 34. as that they did weep and mourn for him in the Plain of Moab thirty Days? And the Death of Stephen, that faithful Martyr of Jesus, so deeply affect cer∣tain Men fearing God,Acts 7. as that they made great Lamentation for him? And the Apostle Paul, when taking his leave of the Elders of the Church of Ephesus,Acts 20. and telling them, They should see his Face no more? If this did so deeply affect them, that they wept all abundantly, sorrow∣ing
 most of all for these Words, That they should see his face no more, (with many more of this kind;) How then can we otherwise chuse, but be deeply affected with Sorrow and Sadness of Heart (though not as those, which have no hope) when so many of our Ancient, Dear and Faithful Brethren (with whom we have had much sweet Society) are removed from us one after another? (We pray, God raise up and increase more such!) Yet must we all contentedly submit to the good Pleasure and Wisdom of the Lord our God in all these things; who taketh away, and none can hinder him, nor may any say unto him, What dost thou? Yet we have cause to bless the Lord, that he hath of late raised, and is raising up more to publish his Name in the Earth: And we that yet remain, have but a short Time to stay after them, that are gone; but we shall be gone to them also. The Lord God of Life keep us all Faithful in his holy Truth, Love, Ʋnity and Life to the End. He hath a great Work still to bring forth in the Earth, and great things to bring to pass, in order to make way for Truth and Righteousness, to take place therein; and that his Seed may come forth, and be gathered, and the Power and Kingdom of our God and of his Christ, made known and exalted in the Earth, unto the Ends thereof.
Dear Friends and Brethren, Be faithful, till Death, that a Crown of Life you may obtain. All dwell in the Love of God in Christ Jesus, in Ʋnion and Peace in him: To whom we tenderly Commit you to keep and strengthen you, bless and preserve you to the End of your Days. In whose dear and tender Love we remain—


These Names are since added, at the desire of the Persons following:


