


GENTLEMEN,
I Present you with a fair Opportunity to tra∣vel
Scotland, and stay at Home: but then
you'l lose the benefit of tracing those Nor∣thern
Tracts, where you may pick up admira∣ble
Curiosities in every Angle, because natural∣ly
replenished with great Variety. But not that
I commend the Country to flatter her Inhabi∣tants,
nor intend I to exceed in my Method and
Stile, when only to describe her Cities and Ci∣tadels,
Towns and Castles, &c. For that End
expect an impartial Account from a Candid and
(I would, if permitted, say) a Regular Pen,
that neither profits nor loses by imbellishing or
demolishing either her Towns, Cities, Forts
or Fortifications.
But the longer I comment upon this Northern
Subject, the more Arguments I bring to con∣vince
the Incredulous, that Scotland's national
Stores, and commodious maritime Ports, will
treat you with good Accommodation and civil
Entertainment. Nor do I seem to contradict
my self, when modestly concluding every im∣partial
Examinant under the Perswasion of my
Opinion: nor doubt I to convince him, that
shall hereafter trace her delightful Shores, and
observe the various and distinct Classes of her

numberless Numbers of Fish and Fowl, her lofty
and domineering Mountains, and mountainous
Ascents burdned with Firs, her pleasant and fer∣til
Fields fill'd with Corn, and her Meadows and
Pastures crowded with Herds of Cattle, but that
he will conclude with me, that her Cities and
Sea-ports flourish under the Conduct of Trade
and Navigation. And where the gilded High∣lands
are the Lowlanders Prospect, and the
Skirts of the Hills sanctuary to the bordering
Planes, shading her Plants from the fiery Strokes
of the Sun in Summer, that defends them a∣gainst
impetuous and immoderate Cold in Win∣ter,
incident there to in regard so situated, that
it lies North Latitude near fifty nine Degrees,
though reaching the Cusp of our Southern Si∣tuations.
Formerly, I confess, I flattered my self with
Scotland's Intemperance; but my Opinion is o∣therwise
now, because having sufficiently exa∣mined
to the contrary, and adjudg it an Error
in any Man to denounce Sentence before Exami∣nation.
Are the Artick and Antartick Poles at
variance, because of Distance and seemingly
contrary Actings? or stand they in opposition
one to another, because Aristotle's Philosophy
could not reconcile them? Must it therefore
follow that there's no Correspondency, no Con∣gruity
nor Harmony betwixt them? when it's
evident they are exerted by the Universal Spirit
of Nature, whereby they act and react upon
one another: else would the Tides of them∣selves
stand still, and because wanting Motion,
the Ocean would stagnate, and at last result in

Putrefaction; so by consequence invite a new
Creation.
Let Scotland therefore be England's Chalybs,
and let England be unto Scotland a Magnet to
attract, contemporate, and mingle those Nor∣thern
Severities, by Southern softned Reflecti∣ons
of moderate Heat; lest peradventure the
Rose withers, and the Thistle meet with the
fatal Stroak of the Syeth. Nature is but one in
all her Operations. So let these two famous
and flourishing Kingdoms survive their Ene∣mies,
whilst I strip off some of Scotland's sweet∣est
Flowers, to present them to Cambridg, the
place of my Nativity, with this legitimate fair
One; intending her an Academian there, be∣cause
I fancy in Time she may grow a Profi∣cient,
when at present to appear so amiable in
Rags; and probably deserves better Orna∣ments
than my slender Education is capable to
give her, whereby to manuduct her to point
the Ground, till she her self treads the Stage
of the World, as her Heroick Ancestors have
done before her.
In the mean time, let me flatter my self,
that no Gentleman will be so ingenteel to
censure my Survey, because not lineally Ar∣tificial.
I grant my Methods might have been
reformed by riper Judgments, and my Dis∣course
placed in better Order, which possibly
merits a Reproof: but I have this for An∣swer,
that I'm but a young Practitioner in
the Press; and because finding my self ob∣liged
to conduct and pilot a Northern Prin∣cess
ashore, I laboured all I could to bring her

to the Borders, expecting some others in
readiness there to give her Entertainment.
But I found my self defeated, and this
beautiful fair One neglected, notwithstand∣ing
all the Shores were crowded with Spe∣ctators,
that viewed and reviewed her modest
Approaches, yet none had the Manners to
bid her Welcome. However, since she is come,
I'll present her to the Angler that treads the
shady Tracts and beautiful Shores of Cam:
together with the rest of the Fraternity of
the Rod, that ramble the Margin of famous
Thames, Trent, Severn, Owse, Tweed, Tine,
Eden, Ask, Dove, Darwin, Tees, Yor, Air,
Need, &c.
Now since no Art more than Angling ele∣vates
and advances the generous Mind of the
Contemplative Angler, let me invite and en∣courage
him to patrole the solitary Streams
of Trent, if he purpose to undergo the Toil
of the Art, before he publish himself an Ar∣tist:
for the Practicks of Angling won't ap∣pear
legible, whilst the Theory remains pa∣radoxically
unintelligible, (here's a Cypher
prick'd down instead of a Figure) so that
should I emblazon or intitle my self an Ar∣tist,
or a Proficient of the Rod, how can I
avoid running the Risque of being reputed
Ostentatious? On the other Hand, to remain
silent after the Periods of Forty Years Ex∣ercise,
every Angler will censure me igno∣rant,
and my Silence interpret me wilfully
obstinate. Thus I steer betwixt Sylla and Cha∣rybdis.
But as I cannot impede or hinder the

Thoughts or Suggestions of any Man, so by
the Law of Retaliation, no Man ought to hin∣der
or misinterpret my modest Resolutions,
when but to challenge the Degree of an Under∣graduate
in the Art. Nor have I confidence
to raise my Ambitions higher; than to super∣scribe
my self an Admirer of the Rod, and
a Lover of silent and solitary Streams. Let
my Writings therefore remonstrate my Ex∣periments,
and my Experiments manifest my
Zeal for Solitudes, and my natural affection to
the Place of my Nativity, which can never
be wanting whilst I'm in a capacity to speak
or write my Name,

