



SIR,
THE Interest you have in the flourishing of Your Antient King∣dom of Scotland, whose Crown is transmitted to You by an Hundred and eleven of your Ancestors, without ever having been on the Head of a Forraigner, emboldens the Author to lay the following Sheets at your Majesties Feet.
The design of them is to vindicate the Settlement of the Scots in Darien, and Your Majesties Justice in protecting them, against the O∣blique Aspersions which are cast upon it in the Spanish Memorial.
The Soveraignty of the Crown of Scotland hath alwise been held Sacred by our Ancestors, who never were sparing of their Blood to de∣fend it either from the Invasion of Foreigners, or the mean Compliance of some few of our Princes that were unworthie to wear it; and there∣fore were either totally excluded from it, as the Family of Baliol, or oblig'd to reassert its Right when rescu'd out of the Hands of their E∣nemies, as happen'd to our William I. and James I.
Providence having now plac'd it on the Head of Your Majesty, whose Heroic Courage is known to all the World, our Nation should be unjust to Your Character to expect any thing less than that our Crown, which You receiv'd free and independent from Your Ancestors, should be trans∣mitted by You with greater Advantages than ever to Your Successors.
Therefore it is, Great Sir, that a privat Subject of your Antient Kingdom takes the holdness to vindicate the Soveraignty and Dignity of Your Crown as Kings of Scots, and to put such as are Enemies to it in mind, that when Edward I, and II. of England invaded it, the Scotish Nation did gallantly defend it, advanced Robert Bruce to the

Exclusion of Baliol the nearest Heir, and acquainted the Princes of Christendom that they did so in defence of their Independency; adding that they would expel Robert Bruce, if he offered to betray their Li∣berty, and would never subject their Crown to that of England, whilst there were 100 Scots men alive.
This being the fundamental Constitution of our Government, and the Condition on which that Prince and his Successors were admitted to Our Crown; they can in no wise be look'd upon as Friends to your Majesties Dignitie as King of Scots, who call in question what You enact in the Parliament of that Kingdom, or that offer to traverse it by contrary Proclamations.
We are Your Majesties Subjects as well as our Neighbours, and have an equal Right to share your Protection, which its hop'd they will at last be convinc'd it is their Interest to agree to in relation to our Ame∣rican Settlement.
Your Majesty's Paternal Affection to the Kingdom of Scorland, hath discover'd it self in many Instances: nor is it to be desired or expected by our Nation, that it should any way interfere with the like Care and Affection, which is owing to our Brethren of England; but there is no reason that they should enjoy a Freedom of Trade throughout the World, and that we should be denied it.
our Majesty in yor Gracious Proposals os an Union, gave sufficient Evidence of a Fatherly Concern for both Nations. Thereforo as it hath pleased GOD to make You the Glorious Instrument of our Common Deliverance▪ that He would also make you the happy Instrument of our Inseparable Union, and after a long Reign here, Crown You with Ever∣lasting Glory hereafter, is the sincere and ardent Prayer of

