


THE common Pretence of Dedication, is the Protecti∣on of the Work, but the true meaning thereof is general∣ly the Interest of the Writer. It is the Practice of the World, to palliate de∣signs of Gain under the shadow of Ho∣nour. The acceptance it has met with from Generous Persons in all Ages, has justified this practice. Great Men en∣courage and reward the Endeavours of the lesser: Either Honour or Profit, or both, are the Motives that excite most

Men to the desire of Learning. God himself has allotted Rewards to Virtue. The World, in imitation of the Deity, allows a Recompence to all that aspire to do well. The publishing of useful Books being in it self a thing com∣mendable, the dedicating them to Per∣sons of Honour can not be blameable. When the means used for the compas∣ing of Interest are lawful and just, bare formalities in the execution can not render them dishonourable. Thus much to shew, I pretend not to con∣demn an Antient received Custom; but tho' I do not condemn, I re∣solve not to follow it in this place. I was ever an Admirer of Naked Truth without Artifice. I have resolved at this time, Truth shall appear bare∣faced. Some may perhaps condemn my Freedom, but Plaindealing is al∣ways commendable.
I mean Plaindealing, with a due respecct to Persons of Honour: with∣out that, it is Rudeness, and want of Breeding. I will endeavour, not to incur my own Censure. I will freely confess my Design, but with

the veneration due to your Birth and Character.
I said at first, that Protection was the Pretence, and Interest the Scope of Dedications. I have declared for Na∣ked Truth, and against all Artifice. Then, Sir, not to deviate from my self, I confess I propose to my self a great Interest in this Dedication. This Book in its Native Tongue has recei∣ved the Approbation of a whole King∣dom. If it has suffered in the Trans∣lation, an Honourable Name prefixt, will not, and I cannot expect it should defend it. Then since I disclaim any Defence of the Book, it follows of course, I seek my own Advantage. The Conclusion is natural, and it is so to me to be frank and plain.
The Advantage I propose to my self, is threefold. First, by acknow∣ledging, as I do, Favours already re∣ceived, I gain the Reputation of be∣ing endued with that rare Virtue, Gratitude. Secondly, by being grate∣ful, and making such Returns as I am capable of, I hope for an increase

in your Esteem. And lastly, the E∣steem of a Person so Nobly Born, and bearing so great a Character, will be an Honour I shall justly value my self upon.
VVhere there is true Nobility, Goodness attends it. This makes me confide you will pardon the Freedom and plainess of this Epistle. Great Men are for the most part less Cere∣monious and Formal, than inconside∣rable Upstarts. The Honour of your Character, is visible to all Men; the Grandeur of your Family, is not less apparent in History. The Spanish and Affrican Moores, and the Indian Idola∣ters have been VVitnesses of the Glo∣rious Actions of the Canha's. Henry the first Earl, and Alfonso the first King of Portugal were Contemporaries with them for Antiquity. Spain and Por∣tugal are now the Sphere of their present Glories; where are to be seen two Dukes, five Marquises, and seven Earls; besides several other Ho∣nourable Branches, all springing from the same Stock of this your Illustri∣ous Famely. But I must take up in

time, before the Splendor of this Subject draws me on too far. I must consider, your better Employments will not give you Leisure to Read re∣dious Epistles.
Sir I beg your Attention but to a few words more in Vindication of my self, against two Objections that may be made to this Dedication. The first is, That you being so much a stranger, as yet, cannot be sup∣posed to understand the English Lan∣guage. The second, That I should present the Goverment of a VVife, to one that is not Married. These things that seem against me, do in reality make for me. For as to the first, the Original being in Portugues this Translation may be some help for learning of English. And the se∣cond Objection is as easily answered, because I could not presume to present a Person of your Conduct with Rules to govern a VVife, if you were Mar∣ryed; whereas it is now excusable, in regard you are not. I fear I have run too far, and will rather there∣fore

break off abruptly, then become tedious for the sake of Method. All I will add shall be, to beg Pardon for my self, to wish you all increase of Honour, and Happiness, and to desire you will always be pleased to continue your Favour to.
SIR,

