



SIR,
AS this compendious Volume of my
Northern Memoirs contains no∣thing
of Obscenity whereat I may
Blush, so I hope no Absurdity worthy
your reprehension: Yet because modelized
in the plain Methods of an English
Dress, will perhaps occasion the Sciolist
to interpret me but a Junior Academian;
And truly so he may, if when to consi∣der
my slender Education. However, I
have endeavoured, as much as in me
lies, to avoid all Prolixity, and long Pa∣rentheses,
which possibly would relish un∣pleasant
in your Ear; so have I abhorred
repeated Tautologies, lest fearing to nau∣seate
and surfeit your Appetite.
For that end, Sir, I'll be brief in my
Description of Scotland, and as concise as
possible, in my Contemplative Angler; so
sum up both as compendiously as I can.

In Cambridg, it's true, I had my Educati∣on,
but Travel having the Ascendent over
me, I afterwards rambled the remote
Northern Tracts of Scotland; where, to
admiration, I inspected that little Artick
World, and every Angle of it. It's true,
Travel always affected me, and to travel
by Books, when nothing else presented
to transport me, was a solitary kind
of Satisfaction, but no Fruition. I
must confess 'twas in an ill Juncture
of Time, when the Nation was alarm'd
by the fatal approach of an Intestine
War (that perplex'd my anxious Thoughts
with various Inquietudes) because then
to see a preternatural Cloud arise, that
neither Men nor Counsels were prophe∣tick
enough to consult, whereby to stop
the Deluge of this hostile Inundation that
threatned to involve the Kingdom in
Blood.
In this Dilemma I left the University
to seek Umbrage in the City of London;
but my Retirements contributed equal
trouble, for now a Smoak began to rise in
every Corner, and like a Meteor, it
blaz'd out at last into fuliginous Flames,
that overspread the beautiful Prospect of
Peace; which not only distracted the
Minds but the Manners of Men, because

then to behold a Storm rise out of a Calm,
that not only threatned Prerogative and
Privilege, but a National Exit, unhap∣pily
calculated to compel the People to see
their own Ruins wrapt up in the Destiny
of War. Where some, because never e∣nough
satisfied by being well, endeavou∣red
by inadvertency to make themselves
worse, and striking their Breasts with
their own Weapons, forced all the King∣dom
to bleed at last. So that now every
Man runs to seek a Pleget to stanch, if
possible, the reeking Wound; yet no Man
so propitious to find his own Cure, by
which he fancied all the rest incurable.
That now so generally and epidemically
the Kingdom was diseased, that deliriated
and distracted, they let one another Blood.
Nor stop'd it here neither, for the cultiva∣ted
Fields stained all over with English
Blood (beyond all precedent) bled, till the
Life of that Non-such Charles expired.
But now since England is so happily blest
under the prudent Conduct of a valorous
Prince (whose Heroick Vertues like a
Corona surround him) presents me an
opportunity to step into Scotland, to exa∣mine
there her remoter Stars, fed by the vi∣tal
Flames of our Southern Orb; supposing
it no Riddle, to fancy any Man ridiculous

that holds up a Taper to illuminate the
Sun: for if when to consider, that the
beautiful Cynthia sheds her Nocturnal
Beam abroad, only to sprinkle the Universe
with cold Influences, from thence we
conclude that the Major Luminary (viz.
the Sun) adds to her Obscurity his bright
Reflections, since she of her self is but a
borrowed Light, that can neither warm
the World, nor cherish it with Vegetati∣on.
But the Light of the Sun not only in∣vigorates
the Creation with Light and
Warmth, but is also a creational Good in
the Ends of Production.
Come then, whilst it is Day, let us step
into Scotland, to rummage and rifle her
Rivers and Rivulets, and examine her
flourishing Streams for entertainment;
there the Rocks and the Groves will be our
solent Reception, and the Cities and Cita∣dels
supply us with Accommodation; and
there I fancy our Time will be well e∣nough
spent to view the Country, and
give a Description of all her Curiosities:
which I here present you, my worthy Pa∣tron,
in this short Narrative, not doubt∣ing
your Clemency to absolve my stripling
Muse, though not Fleg enough to elevate
it self to the lowest Elevations of your
generous Acceptation. But I'll do what

I can in these Northern Tracts, to bring
you a Discovery of some of her Rarities,
whose solitary Shades strike a Damp to
my Pen, because to behold there such un∣expected
Landskips, Meanders and La∣byrinths
(which I frequently met with)
as exposed my Resolution to a farther Pro∣gress,
whereby to discover all her Northern
Gaities that shin'd so splendidly in every
Fir-wood, as also in her lofty domineering
Hills, that over-top'd the Submissive sha∣dy
Dales, and over-look'd the rapid Tor∣rents
of Rivers, and pretty purling glid∣ing
Rivulets; where the polish'd Rocks,
and imbellish'd Fortifications, beyond be∣lief,
so surpriz'd my Genius, that it puz∣zles
me to report these remote Curio∣sities.
For you are to consider, Sir, that the
whole Tract of Scotland is but one single
Series of admirable Delights, notwith∣standing
the prejudicate Reports of some
Men that represent it otherwise. For
if Eye-sight be Argument convincing e∣nough
to confirm a Truth, it enervates
my Pen to describe Scotland's Curiosities,
which properly ought to fall under a more
elegant Stile to range them in order for a
better Discovery. For Scotland is not
Europe's Vmbra, as fictitiously imagined by

some extravagant Wits: No, it's rather a
legible fair Draught of the beautiful Cre∣ation,
drest up with polish'd Rocks,
pleasant Savanas, flourishing Dales, deep
and torpid Lakes, with shady Fir-Woods,
immerg'd with Rivers and gliding Ri∣vulets;
where every Fountain o'reflows a
Valley, and every Ford superabounds with
Fish. Where also the swelling Moun∣tains
are covered with Sheep, and the
marish Grounds strewed with Cattle;
whilst every Field is fill'd with Corn, and
every Swamp swarms with Fowl. This,
in my Opinion, proclaims a Plenty, and
presents Scotland, a Kingdom of Prodi∣gies
and Products too, to allure Foreign∣ers,
and entertain Travellers.
So that now Scotland represents a Star
that reflects a Beam on our Southern Orb;
but England is the Magnet that attracts
this Northern Chalybs by sweet Influen∣ces,
(and mild Condescensions) whereby
the Fruits of Peace and Tranquillity pro∣trude,
and bud up to unite Interests in
one another. The Orbs were made for
the Erratick Stars; and every Star as a
lesser Orb (destinated for Light and Dis∣covery)
renders the Creation beautiful to
excess, by Divine Appointment of the
Divinest. For the Sun we see is not im∣paired,

because to lend us a Ray of
Light; nor does it lessen Superiours (in
any Degree) to communicate their Virtues
to influence Inferiours. Do Stars run
retrograde to make Subjects Slaves, when
the whole Creation is but under subjecti∣on
by divine Condescension of the great
Creator? Nor is there any thing of Slave∣ry
(save only Servility) except Man who
enslaves himself to his Lust; or by Ty∣ranny
imposed upon his Fellow-Creature.
And now, Sir, I have done, in doing my
Duty, not only to my Country, but singly
to your Self: give me leave therefore to
wind up my Epistle, and solicit Pardon
if any thing be amiss; supposing my Lan∣guage
runs harsh and rugged; but that I
cannot help, because drawn from the rough
Draught of a Martial Pen, which shews
my Stile may be somewhat unpo∣lished.
Nor can I flatter the Times, for
I never was a Parasite nor a Time-server;
so that Errors excepted, I may hope a Par∣don
and an easy Penance from so mild, so
moderate and judicious a Patron, under
whose Patronage I lodg my Sentiments;
and subscribe my self,
Worthy Sir, 
