


Gentlemen,
THIS Epistle directs you a
Prospect of the Original,
and Production of things;
where, if in any thing I devat
from the truth of Philosophy, Na∣tures
Progeny, and Scriptural A∣thority;
I stand at the bar of every
mans censure: but if otherwise, as
I'm conscious I have offered no vio∣lence;
let me hope and expect a ge∣nerous
Approbation. h' true, the
sublimest speculations I can raise, are
but faint, uncultivated, and unpr∣fitable

endeavours, when presenting
them to the shrines of clearer judg∣ments.
For as ridling of water
through a serce or sieve, makes no de∣cisional
separation of the recrements,
and impurities, nor the holding up
a taper at the Sun's meridian, add
any lustre to his luminous brightness;
such peradventure some will inter∣pret
these y Suggestions upon ths
admirable subjct, when so slenderly
to approach, and attempt a survey
upon such sublime, and divine Disco∣veries:
and because not raising my
scenes high enough; they'l doom me
to encounter their uncharitable Opi∣nions,
when modestly, and piously, I
come to present thm with my No∣tion,
and Speculations of this im∣bellished
Creation.
Haven is Gods Throne, and the

Earth hs Foot-stool; from whence
I conclude, that the property and
quality of every individual devolves
in him that gave it a being: other∣wise,
how could the benignity and
bounty of the Donor so splendidly
shine in the Fabrick of the Creature?
and because to contribute a ray of
his Essence-Royal, Adam was dig∣nified
Vice-roy of the Creation. Let
no man therefore oppose himself to
the Divinest by sacriligious Oblat∣ons,
and impious adorations; let he
prophane the Altar, and make void
the Offring, when to send up his O∣risons
to an unknown God.
Hermes in his Book of the Di∣vine
Pimander, has pointed out
unto us a prospect of Heaven. So
Rabbi Moses in the desarts of A∣rabia,
by divine inspiration, had a

vision of the Creation. Nor was
Job ignorant of Seraphick intelli∣gence,
when to range himself sub∣limly
above the most sedulous Ma∣thematicians;
who with an angelick
stile left unto us such Lectures,
whereby to read in the frontispiece
of Haven. The Jews also, so did
the Talmudists by Msaical Or∣dnation,
find the tracts to Jerusa∣lem;
whiles divine Paul, and the
Primitive Christians by spiritual
Revelation, became illuminated with
te Gopel. But Nature all this
while by Havens permission went
on in Operation, and the Sophi as
amazed stood gazing upon her, till
the Divinest in his Son discovered
himself, which struck amazement,
and astonishment amongst them; be∣cause
when to shine on them the Ma∣jesty

of himself in the glorious my∣stery
of the blessed Incarnation; the
sublime Divinity assuming Huma∣nity:
which in parallel lines directs
us to inspect this visible World so
miraculously drest up, the beautiful
outside of a more glorious inside.
This invited me to contemplate,
and seriously consider, how that eve∣ry
creature, and created being by a
fermental law radicated in Nature,
makes progress to the act of Germi∣nation,
and Vegetation. Nor can
the law of necessity (I speak of the
Creation) impose any other Doctrine
upon the Classes of Individuals, till
the final Exit, and the periods of
Time. This great World 'tis true
represents unto us a large and co∣pious
volumn of Intelligences, sprung
up in the beginning from the divine

Fiat. And because the Divinest
divinly  with such admirable
varieties as the Orbs, and Elements;
those beauteous, shining, luminous
bodies; for such are the Stars stuck
round to adorn it: it denotes unto
us every Ceature God has made, as
Animals, and nanmates to replenish
the Earth; was made to explain the
excellency of himslf, that so divine∣ly
drst up this stupendious Creation.
Thus Moses our Prophetick O∣racle,
in the first Chapter of Gene∣,
makes obvious unto us the Crea∣tion
in general; when in this Phi∣losophical
Treatise, if sedulous∣ly
examined, you'l find it parce'd
out into many Particulars; yet not
so as to prophane, or diminish Holy
Writ, whereby to expose it to sale,
or sacriledge; but rather to eluci∣date,

and illustrate to every Man
the more glorious mysteries, and Se∣raphick
Discoveries of the sacred
Scriptures; pointed out unto us by
the Patriarchs, and the Prophets;
and imprest on us by a Divine im∣pression,
to legitimize us heirs of
the glorious Eternity, by the mys∣cal
Vnion betwixt Christ and his
Church; and the admirable Effects
of his invincible Love, when to lay
down his Life for an Vnregenerate
Generation.
To contemplate therefore this im∣bellished
Creation, is to study the
tracts and the high way to hea∣ven:
and led on by such eminent and
convincing Authority as Moses,
the Patriarchs, the Prophets and
Apostles; confirms it beyond dispute
our Christian Duty devoutly to im∣plore,

and seriously admire the Crea∣tors
bounty and goodness in creating;
his infinite and superlative Wisdom
in preserving: but above all his
works, his unparalell'd love to in∣spire
Life and Vertue into the hu∣mane
Race of degenerate Mankind;
because when to restore him to a
more Regal 'state than Adam
our Protoplast enjoyed in Paradice.
From whence I conclude all visible
Beings that are made obvious, and
perceptible to us, were designed also
by the Maker intelligeable; how∣ever
the envious and malicious mis∣interpret,
and would every way if
possible mascarade the Truth, think∣ing
thereby to make things less dis∣coverable,
than they really and trully
are in themselves.
For were it as some Sciolists fi∣ctitiously

imagine, what benefit
could any man expect from his Stu∣dies,
more than the Knowledge of
Insects, and Animals; when omit∣ting
the superiour Dignity of Cele∣stials.
Such with their Admirers
only gaze upon them as the ignorant,
and the arrogant too frequently do,
that amuze themselves only with
foreign curiosities. Nor do I strain
my charity when to assert such Men
think the Ornaments of the Creation
an unprofitable Study: who by their
Arguments endeavour an Arrest
of judgment, since reputing them
dull, and insipid contemplations;
endeavouring thereby to disswade
the more ingenious simply to consider
them as impoverish'd Effects. But
God that made them, and still main∣tains
them; because willing that Man

above all created Beings should read
daily Lectures in their glorious fron∣tispiece,
inspired him to contemplate
their internal purity; which indu∣bitably
points some of them signay
out as Guides, and Land-marks to
light us up to his more sublime, and
superlative Habitation.
To consider things therefore as
they are in themselvs, what matters
it if any Man oppose my Assrtions,
and call them it may be Imaginary
Presumptions; if whn because to
dive into the mysteries of the Crea∣tion:
Surely such Men have not well
considered that what God in his wis∣dom
has made legible to us, that
thing by his clemency was intented
intelligible. The superscription of a
Monarch any Man may read, but
none except of Councel dare examine

the contents. So God assignes it our
duty to study the Creation, since dis∣covering
things to us by invisible
Medius; but not that we by a
foreign faith pay our Orisons and
our Adorations unto them: No, ra∣ther
as Christians, we must learn
God in them, and in knowing him
admire his Operations.
But our Prophet Moses seems
to some ambiguous, when undressing
the Hoil of this admirable Creation,
wherefore some spare not with their
Proselytes prophanely to decry him,
and such others as himself studious
in the Creation; who resolving a∣mong
them elves nevr to labour due
masures of Knowledge whereby to
convince their own Incredulities,
makes them uncapable, and altoge∣ther
unserviceable, when attempt∣ing

to enform the Vnderstanding of
others. So that such Sciolists as
these do but darken the lustre of the
History of God in this stupendious
Creation, yet propound to themselves
to know the Divine Mysteries of
the Holy JESUS in the Mira∣culous
Incarnation, Glorious Cru∣cifixion,
and Divine Ascension:
which to mortal astonishment is the
Teesm of Wisdom, and Miracle
of this World, lockt up in the Bo∣som
of GOD, and Eternity.
So that should this Generation
level Arguments against me, it will
little avail; for the Standard of
Truth will defend it self, and the
Authority of Scripture vindicate
my Assertions. If therefore you but
priviledge me farther to proceed, I
assume to intitle this imbellished

Creation the Almighty's Common place-Book,
wherein we may read hs Divine
Operations; And sice he himself has made
things visible, as also legble, and ntelli∣gible
to our capacties; his scred Sancti∣ons,
and Divines Oracles, ought always
to be our daily Contemplation.
I also consider that Angels as Messn∣gers
are mde Ministring Spirits, to ad∣minister
to us the Revelation, and Mani∣festatin
of the Vision of Truth: that the
Sun, Moon, and Stars are the Orinancs
of Heaven; that Elements and Prinpls
are Margnal Notes; and the glorious
Prospect of this ivie : that the
Cononants and Vowels of this Blessed
Creation are the particular Indivduals
contained therein. Otherwise how were it
pssible such a prpetual Harmony should
coninue betwixt the great, and the sser
World; were thre not a contiguity, and
continuity of pars, whereby to cntract a
Correspondency betwixt them. For invi∣sible
things when clothed with Matter, be∣come
obvious, and perceptible to every one;
consequently visible. Every thing there∣fore

is most certainly governed by the Di∣vine
Wisdom of Him that made it; who
made Nature a so by his Praeordinate Coun∣cl,
and adapted her Substitute to operate
in the Vniverse. But to Adam only, and
his Humane Race were committed the di∣stinct
Classes, and Families of the Crea∣tures;
as also the Dignity of a Vniver∣sal
Monarch.
This none will deny, yet perhaps some
will say my Suggestions are invaluable, and
confusedly mixt; so was the Chaos if to
consult the Bgnning. It may also be
alledged that Im no Grammarian, how∣ever
from my Youth I venerated Learn∣ing;
yet the Scriptures I always prefer'd
before Grammar: but I'll struggle no
longer about Grammatical Preference,
since so learnedly controverted by Men in
most Ages. Give me leave therefore to
conclude my Epistle, and in the Conclu∣sion
assert, and affirm, that without for∣l
hypocrisy, or a foreign Faith; I am,
and have been since truly to know Vertue,
devoted to subscribe my Name,

