



SIR!
IT is my ambition to let the world
know upon what score it is that I do
especially honour men. It is not Sir!
as they are high born Heirs of the
great Potentates, for which most
honour them (and upon which ac∣count
I also shall not deny them their
due) but as they excell in honesty,
and are friends to Art. That poor Philosophers should
take no delight in riches, and rich men should take great
delight in Philosophy, is to me an argument, that there

is more delight, honor, and satisfaction in the one then in
the enjoyment of the other. I once read of a Noble mans
Porter that let in all that were rich apparelled, but ex∣cluded
a poor Philosopher: but I should, if I had been in
his place, have rather let in the Philosopher without the
gay cloathes, then the gay cloathes without the Philoso∣pher.
As long as I have sense or reason, I shall improve
them to the honour of Art, especially that of Alchymie.
In the perfection thereof there are riches, honour, health,
and length of dayes: by it Artesius lived 1000. years,
Flammell built 28 Hospitalls with large revenues to them,
besides Churches and Chappels; for it; both they and
divers more were accounted Philosophers, and wise men,
which sounds more honourable in my eares then all the
ratling and empty titles of honour whatsoever besides.
In the perfection of this Art, I mean the accomplishing
of the Elixir, is the Sulphur of Philosophers set at liber∣ty,
which gratifies the releasers thereof with three King∣domes,
viz. Vegetable, Animall, and Minerall, and what
cannot they do, and how honourable are they, that have
the command of these? They may command Lead into
Gold, dying plants into fruitfulnesse, the sick into
health, old age into youth, darknesse into light, and what
not? A month would fail to give you an account of their
power and dominations. Now for the effecting of this I
shall besides what I have advised in the Epistle to the
Reader, say only this; Court the Mother, and you winne
the Daughter, prevail with Nature, and the fair Diana of
the Philosophers is at your service.
Now if you cannot prevaile with Nature for the fairest
of her daughters, viz. the Mercury of Philosophers, yet
she hath other Daughters of wonderfull beauty also, as

are the Essences and Magisteries of Philosophers, which
also are endowed with riches, honour, and health▪ and any
of these you may more easily prevail with their mother
Nature for. This Art of Alchymie is that Slary Art,
which is more noble then all the other six Arts, and
Sciences, and if it did once throughly shine forth out
of the clouds whereby it is eclipsed, would darken all the
rest, (as the Sun doth the other six planets) or at least
swallow up their light. This is that true naturall Philo∣sophy
which most accurately anatomizeth Nature and
naturall things, and ocularly demonstrates the principles
and operations of them. That empty naturall philo∣sophy
which is read in the Universities, is scarce the
meanest hand-maid to this Queen of Arts. It is pity
there is such great encouragement for many empty and
unprofitable Arts, and none for this, and such like
ingenuities, which if promoted would render an Univer∣sity
far more flourishing then the former. I once read
or heard of a famous University beyond Sea, that was
faln into decay, through what cause I know not: but
there was a generall councell held by the learned, how to
restore it to its primitive glory. The Medium at last agreed
upon was the promoting of Alchymie, and encouraging
the Artists themselves. But I never expect to see such rati∣onall
actings in this Nation, till shadows vanish, substances
flourish, and truth prevail: which time I hope is at hand
and desired by all true Artists, and to my knowledge,
especially by your self, upon which account I truly
honour you. Now to your selfe therefore I crave
leave to adumbrate something of that Art which I
know you will be willing for the publick good to pro∣mote.
I dedicate this Treatise to you, not that it is

worthy your acceptance, but that it may receive worth
by your accepting of it. I present it to you (as men
bring lead to Philosophers to be tinged into gold) to
receive the stamp of your favour, and approbation, that
it may past currant, with acceptance amongst the sons
of Art, whereby you will continue to oblige him
who is
London,
Nove. 25.
1650.
SIR,

