


SIR,
THough your Own Vertues Spring you Rivers of Honour in the Hearts of Gods people, yet the Tyde of your Fathers Worth flowing in brim's the banks: Much of your Honour lyeth in being the
 Son of Sir Robert Harley.  Prov. 17. 6. 'Tis your Honour to be the Son of such a Father, and 'twas his . Menan. apud Stob. Joy to be the Fa∣ther of such a Son: Truth is, a good Father is Gods Gift to the Son, and a good Son is Gods Gift to the Father.
§ 2. Yet you must not think to lye so Fresh and Orient in the opnion of Many Christians of these Times: They have changed their Opinion of Truth it selfe, and therefore much more of Her Children: Ver a¦mo constantiâ probatur. Am∣bros Epi. 40. Quos amor ve∣rus tenuit, te∣nebit. S in Thyes. They are not Now, what they were before: They for∣sake the Light, and then say, that Others are in the Dark.
 They that change their Princi∣ples,Stella cdens non est stella, Cometa fuit. will change their Judge∣ments of you, and all that are like you: I conceive, the Death of Prophane men is In∣digestion, through a mortall Coldnesse in their stomack not turning the food of life at all into Nutriment: The Death of these Men is over-digestion. Fit etiam assaio a calore praeternaturali in epace, cum nutrimentum a∣duritur, Humi∣dum{que} sine mo∣do extrahitur, &c. unde lepra, lichene, scabis &c. Rod. Go∣den. As immoderate Heat in the bodily digestion, exhaust∣ing and burning up the humid moysture of the nourishing mat∣ter, breeds Leprosies, Ring∣worms, Tetters, and Scabs: So in Religion, a preter-natu∣rall Heat heightning the Con∣coction into adust Choller of
 Pride and zeal, begets Lea∣prousies of Opinions, Errours, Separations, Contentions, and Scabs of Rayling against the Ordinances and Ministers of Jesus Christ: Ʋti ne{que} qui ex alimen∣to fit sanguis, ex sanguine spiri∣tus, eò haurien∣dus est sanguis: nam quae jam eò perfectionis de∣ênere, ut sint sanguis vel hu∣mor roscidus, ueriori conco∣ctione siunt de∣teriora. Ger. Joh. Vssis. When Re∣ligion is come to its Due Per∣fection or Digestion, so as to become bloud and spirits in us, by farther Concoction is made worse: Every Degree beyond that tends destructive to the spirituall Estate: These Men are as inflamed Enemies to the Growth of the Gospell, as those that are Prophane; and truly their Reproaches A malis vi∣tuperari, laud∣iest Sen. , ixit Anaxag. are our Honours: but I hope you will tread in your  Greg. Nz. brave Fa∣thers
 steps, and stick close to the Good old way of Truth and Godlinesse.
§ 3. Sir, This Sermon such a one as it is, You had ved it long ago, as soon as You l∣led for it, had not God given me other worke, Passive work, to undergo: The Cloud of God upon me and my Family (which hung long upon us) wrapt me up in sad Diversions: I hope the Heb. 1. 1. . Chrysost. Result of it will be the Peaceable fruit of Righ∣teousnesse.
§ 4. Sir, The Subject of the Sermon is the Gracious Saint, as the Object of Gods Love: Who the more lovely, the more
 beloved; because he hath the more of God in Him, for God to love. ; Chry∣sost. Gods Love to man is the Wonder of the World, and should be the Stu∣pefaction and Ecstacy of the Saints: What is Man that thou art mindfull of him! Man laid himselfe so low, that He was not worthy of one thought of God: A Deo A∣mari exuperat omnem mundi favorem: a Deo Inhabitari exupera omnem mundi Splendo∣rem & magni∣ficentiam. Sa∣lom. Glassius. The love of God is the Saints unvaluable Treasury; Their Joy here, their Heaven hereafter. If the Early Glimmerings of Gods love upon a soul shroud so much Joy within their beams, what will the Meridian Rayes of Glory be when they shall be re∣vealed?

Quomod possemus illum diligere, nisi prior ille dilige∣ret? si pigri e∣ramus ad aman∣dum, non simus Pigri ad reda∣mandum. August. . Plutarc. If God love us so much, How should we love God! Oh then! how should Our End be his Honour, which is All he hath from us for All we hold of him. None know his Love, till they feel their Love to him.
§ 5. If it were Possible, we should live above repentance; so to Act that we need not to Repent: Though Repentance be a great Grace, yet tis greater Wisdome . Epi∣charm. apud Stob. not to sin, that we may not need the salve of Repentance: a Medicine is very Precious, yet not to wound our selves is far better, that so we may not need the me∣dicine:
 Repentance is , dixit Pindar. a Grace of After-wisdome: oh, let us be the Sons of Prome∣theus, rather than of Epime∣theus; Not to sin is better than to Repent when we have sin∣ned.
§ 6. How Choyce should we be, how we Act our life since we have but One life to Act! We have not a . Epic. . Eurip. brace of lives here, that we might Correct in the other, what we have done amisse in the first; that we might Re∣cover in the latter, what we have lost in the former: We have but One Arrow of life to hit the Mark with; and if we
 shoot that at Random, we loose All; God will not put a second Arrow into our bow again: we had need then be good Archers with One Arrow.
§ 7. Yet alas! how little of our time do we live? Ourwhole Volume of Time is but a short Compendium, a Moment to Eternity; yet how little of this little do we live to God, or to our souls! The Heathens observed, that  our Sleep divides half our life with us, and takes half from us; Sleep is the dead part of our life:  A. Ethic. l. 1. c. 8. He that sleeps is doing nothing, 'tis the Privation or Parenthesis of acti∣on; and yet (oh the misery!)
 the living part of our life is in most of us but a spiritual Sleep of Carelesnesse and Security: He that is not upon action, sleeps while he is awake.
§ 8. Onely the gracious man doth enlarge his life, he enjoyes a double life; He that spins a Gracious life, draws out a double threed, He lives twice, Ampliat atatis spatium sibi vir bonus; Hoc est vivere bis, vitâ posse pime frui. Mat. for he joyeth in what is spent, and enjoyeth what is present: A wicked life past is lost; but, to live, and Review our former part of Life with joyfull Reflections on it, is to live Twice.
§ 9. Our work here should be to live above the world:
 Our design in the world, should be to live above the world: We that are travelling beyond the world, should walk above the world: Why should we be taken with Riches, seeing we shall be taken from Riches? and taken with Honours, who shall be taken from the Honours of this world?
§ 10. Our Body is but Dirt handsomely temper'd, and , Epict. . Xe∣noph. artificially formed, a little moystned Earth: We derive our Pedigree from the dirt, and are a kin to Clay: The poor and beggerly Elements are our Materials; as they are the Seeds of our being, so of our
 dissolution: How should this humble us! we that are but dust, should lye as low as dust in our own eyes: What is low∣er than Earth? He that riseth out of the Earth, hath no Ground why he should be lifted up: What Pride should there be in Mud walls? How should we dye dayly! for we moulder and dissolve dayly; we are no sooner touch'd, but we are crack'd.
§ 11. Death is Necessary and In-evitable; it waits not our consent, we must dye whe∣ther we will or no: Thou fool, this night thy soul shall be re∣quiredLuke 12. 20. of thee: It shall be Re∣quired
 of thee: It shall be Re∣quired, that is, , est poscere a volen∣te▪  a olene. Casaub. ad Theophr. Ch.  fetch'd from thee, whether thou wilt or no; if thou wilt not deliver it up willingly, it shall be taken from thee against thy will: Death is an Inflexible Messen∣ger, and Resolves not to goe without that it comes for, it will not Desire our soul of us▪ but Require it, This night thy soul shall be required of thee: We will and Require you, is the language of them that are in Authority, and will not be denied; and in this Comman∣ding language speaks The King of Terrours: Oh then, let us not so much desire to live, as study how to dye;
 what a sad thing is it to dye by force? When Death shall find us Eager to live, and not pre∣par'd to dye? Un-preparation makes our naturall Death a vi∣olent death; They dye misera∣bly, who dye desiring to live.
§ 12. Our great Care . should be not to blast the prece∣dent Flower of our life with a Blot at last; not to blemish the fair Copy of a Good conversation with an Erratum in the End: There's many a famous Profes∣sour hath gone off the Stage without an approbation, be∣cause he lost himselfe in his last Act: nay, (which should make us most watchfull, when
 we are drawing towards our Epilogue) Glorious Saints, many, if not the most of them, when they grow ancient in Re∣ligion, they take a nap before they go to Bed: The wise Vir∣gins fell a sleep, a little before the Bridegroom came: Moses when he almost arriv'd at Ca∣naan, within the sight of the Land, yet for one sin lost it: a long Profession makes many se∣cure in the latter End; but the stone is swiftest in motion, when 'tis nearest the center: O Sir, Our Last should be our Best, and the sweetest at the bot∣tome; the farther your day goes on, watch the more, Men
 are more prone to drop asleep in the afternoon: and let me tell you, 'Tis not Outward temptations that overcome us, but Our own corruptions, not the most tempestuous tempta∣tions, but our superficiall Pro∣fessions; ah then! let us build firme, aud lay our superstru∣cture upon an unmoveable Foundation: Godlinesse is the Great house that we are buil∣ding: now some build (as Christ saith) upon the sand, and that House falleth, others build upon a Rock, and that House standeth, Mat. 7. 24, to 28. 'Tis not the strength of Temptations, but the vanity of
 the builders that causeth the fal of the House: 'Tis . Chry∣sostomes Observation, You see (saith he) 'tis not the Force of Temptations, but the Folly of the Builders that brings the Ruine, for There is Rain, and Here is Rain, There are flouds, and Here are flouds, There the winds blow, and Here the winds beat too, the one builds, and the other builds, The Buil∣ding is the same, and the temp∣tations are the same, but there is not the Same End, because there is not the Same Founda∣tion; so that 'tis not the Na∣ture of the Temptations, but the Imprudence of the Buil∣ders that causeth the Ruine.

Sir, Whilst I am writing these things, Our Glasse is running: Your Time and mine flieth faster then my Pen: We had need improve That Highly, which is posting from us so Swiftly: Our dayes are shorter then a Post; Lord! what Hast then do they make! a Post is engaged to ride hard; and sometimes he rides upon pain of Death, with a Halter about his neck: So doe we, (though the vain Sons of Men think not so) Every step we take is upon Pain of Eternall Death; if either we loyter, or betray our Trust, Negligence or Unfaithfulnesse will be our
 Halter: Souls are choyce ware, Eternity a dreadfull Abysse, and God will not be Trifled with: oh then! let not us sit still, whilst time is running: no time is ours, but what is pre∣sent; and that is past as soon as tis present: Therefore to Jesus Christ I commend you, with Him I leave you, through him desiring All spirituall blessings in heavenly Places upon you, So Prays He, who is
Clun, Decemb. 22. 1657.
SIR,

