



My Dear Friends.
AFter more than twenty years Conversation with you in the same Relation which as yet I hold; Divine Providence hath at length given me a fair occasion, to let you know how much I value you. It cannot be ve∣ry long before a silent, and a senseless night overtake me; and that I make my bed in the dust: That there may be some remembrance, not of me, for who, or what am I? But of that Doctrine, which I have ad∣vanced
 among you, or endeavoured so to do (begun already to be misre∣ported by some) which is no other than universal Goodness, or Ver∣tue, a Righteousness in the lives of men; or, to use St. Paul's words to Titus, The denial of all ungod∣liness 2. 12. and worldly lusts, and a Sober, Righteous, or Godly life in this present World: the scope and design of that sovereign Good∣ness of God, which hath appear∣ed unto us in the Gospel of hi Son. A distribution of our Dy, com∣prehending all the Contions on our part, in that Covenant media∣ted and transacted between God and Man, by the Man Christ Jesus, well expressed by a late Person of The truly Noble Lord Viscount Faukland in his Reply to Mr. Tho. White. Honour; replying to that objecti∣on, That Christian Doctrine is not a Speculative knowledge, instituted for delight; but it is an Art of living, a Rule of attaining Ever∣lasting bliss; wonders to hear that
 learned Gentleman say so, whose Religion consists of so many points, no ways reducible into practice; and then confesseth, nay contends, That Christian Religion is a Co∣venant between God and Man, by the entermise of Christ; that we Christians are properly con∣cern'd but in the knowledge of what are the Conditions, and Re∣wards proposed and promised; what we are to observe, and what to hope for; and so far forth to understand the Nature and Attri∣butes of the Maker and Messen∣ger of that Covenant, as may make us fully assured of the truths of the Threats and Promises con∣tained therein. So that Noble Authour. Now because there are some imaginations which do vehe∣mently impede and hinder this Pi∣ety, and dereliction of all habitual and customary sin, scarcely permit∣ting him that retains and under∣stands
 them, entirely to forsake them, I have often endeavoured to remove such stumbling stones out of the way of your Christian race. Such are their mistakes concerning God's Decrees, Liberty of hu∣mane minds, our Justification be∣fore God, and some others. And what Christian incumbent on the study of Vertue, and seriously con∣tending for a blessed Immortality, but may perceive great ease in his understanding, and great incourage∣ment in his said endeavours from a clear and distinct explication and defence of the Truth in the Arti∣cles before mentioned? If God's Decrees be irrespective, then is all endeavour and sollicitude super∣fluous; . St. Bus. Tom. 1. p. 343. Deus possibilta mandavit, hoc nulli dubium est. St. Hieron. adv. Polag. l. 3. If Christ died only for a few, 'tis no duty upon all to believe in him; If men have no Wills, they can have no sins, for want of a Subject; If Christ's Precepts be impossible, they are unnecessary;
 If to live in sins against convicti∣on of Conscience be the measure of Regeneration, 'tis very easie to be born again.
If the Elect cannot fall away, and the rest never stood, all discourse against Apostacy is idle and use∣less; If apprehension of Christ's Merits in the last moments of our lives, and sorrow for sin against God doth forthwith translate us in∣to the Kingdom of his dear Son; No man needs disserve here, or in∣habit hereafter the Kingdom of Darkness.
What Doctrine more grateful to flesh and blood? to the Sensualist, that embraces an Herodias, or a Dalilah; to the Mammonist, who has purloined the Babylonish Gar∣ment, or the Golden Wedge; to the Airy Cameleon, which feeds on the foul and infectious breath of the Populacy; to the idle Sluggard, who frights himself with the
 thoughts of a Bear or a Lion in the way. Who sees not, how such sur∣mises do not only evacuate the force and vertue, but quite frustrate the use of the Ministery of the Word, rendering it incapable of convert∣ing the Infidel, correcting of the Carnal, quickening of the Sloth∣full, and of comforting the tempt∣ed and afflicted? As you may see it piously and ingeniously ampli∣fied and demonstrated in the Exa∣mination of Tilenus. So that you may perceive, it was no wantonness of wit, or parts (as some will have it) but very important, yea indis∣pensable necessity (if I would adorn that conduct and guidance of Souls which I have undertaken) that did constrain me to remove those im∣pediments out of the way of our Christian obedience.
If I be told, that such who have swallowed whole the Doctrine of Dort and Geneva, live good lives,
 and comport with the Laws of the Holy Jesus, I answer, peradven∣ture it may be so. Although Deaths and Exiles, so cruelly inflicted up∣on excellent men, may entitle them to the Character of loving God, and hating their Neighbour with all their heart. Who doth not observe the partiality of their obedience; that the Factions have their Ver∣tues and their Vices? Yea, if some duller heads live better lives than their Principles oblige them to, yet others who are wicked and witty too, defie all discourse to reform them, and refuse to forsake these Altars where they have taken San∣ctuary. Our daily experience assures us, that the follies and debaucheries of men are ascribed to Fate and divine Decrees. Nor can I conceive how many men of competent under∣standings, without the help of these so useful Engins of sin and folly, can reconcile in themselves great
 immortalities, with great professions of Religion. No, no, let's not add to the difficulties from within, and from without, these needless, these foolish obstructions of our pur∣suit of a blessed Immortality. But I say not these things, my Friends, for your sakes, so much as for theirs who (neither knowing what I teach, nor you learn) uncharitably think all manner of evil. I shall say no more, but most vehemently beseech you, as you will answer it in the day of Judgment (when you shall be proceeded with, by that man whom God hath appointed to judg Act. 17. 31. the World, according to your works, not according to your opinions) that your lives and conversations in the World be agreable to your knowledge; and that if you know the tenour of the new Covenant, you would observe your parts of it; that you would give just, and but just respects to Truth, knowing that
 the peace of God is more worth than notion, knowledge, or un∣derstanding. Eph. 4. 3. And that together with the verity, you would consi∣der the necessity of every Proposi∣tion; it being in the judgement of the learnedst of our Kings, toge∣ther with his excellent Amanuen∣sis, and of all Royal and Majestick K. Jas. Is. Casaubon: minds, not barely the best, but the only expedient to preserve the u∣nity of the Spirit, (i. e. Church, which is a spiritual body) in the bond of peace.
That you would seclude neither your selves nor others out of the Communion of the Church; but for such causes as you have very full & rational assurance will shut them, or your selves, out of the Kingdom of Heaven. Excommunication, if the Churches proceedings be clave non errante, being summum futuri ju∣dicii praejudicium, a vehement presumption of succeeding con∣demnation.

That in your daily reading of the holy Scriptures (whose perfection and perspicuity in all necessary Articles, I have been wont to in∣culcate to you) you would carefully collect all the instances of your duty towards God, your Neighbour, your selves, in all your relations to the Civil and Sacred Societies whereof you are constituent parts; and that you would acquaint your selves with the arguments and mo∣tives with which our Lord and Master Christ, together with the blessed Apostles and Evangelists do endeavour to induce you to the observation of them. And then remember that not every one who Mat. 7. 21. shall say Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that doth the will of the Fa∣ther which is in Heaven.
All Controversies in Religion I would wish you to decline, by reason of the great damage which has there∣by
 accrued to Religion, through the weak mesnagery, and defence of it, and to Religionists, by leavening their spirits with pride, peevishness, and passions; and so that which was designed by God to serve the noblest ends of man,

Is by that old deceiver's subtile play,
Made the chief party in its own decay;
And meets that Eagles destiny, whose breast
Felt the same shaft which his own feathers drest.

As the matchless Orinda sings.
Consider much the magnificent Commendations and Characters which St. Paul gives to Charity. 1 Cor. 13. Let it be conspicuous in all the a∣ctions of your lives.
I shall summ up all I shall now say to you in these 12. Rules of
 an holy Life, laid down by a wor∣thy Dr. Jer. Taylor. Prelat.
1. Believe all the Articles of that Faith whereinto you were Ba∣ptized.
2. Worship God constantly with Natural Religion, i. e. Prayers, Praises and Thanks∣giving.
3. Take all opportunities to Commemorate the Death of Christ, by the participation of his Body and Blood.
4. Live Chastely.
5. Be Merciful.
6. So use the World, as that it always give place to Du∣ty.
7. Be Just in your Deal∣ings.
8. Be Humble in your Spi∣rits.
9. Be Obedient to Govern∣ment.
10. Be Content in your For∣tunes and Employments.
11. Let the Love of God inflame you to your Duty.
12. And if you shall be af∣flicted be Patient, and pre∣pared to suffer for the Cause of God.
These are twelve signs of Grace, and the man upon whom they are found, is the son of God, as surely as he is his Creature.
And now, my Friends, let me assure you; that it is some trouble to me, that the first present I should make you in this manner should be a bundle of Cypress. But so our wise God would have it. I move you not now to fol∣low her with Crowns and Hymns, nor do I understand how, nor de∣signe to prepare the incombusti∣ble Oil of the Antients, with
 which I might supply a Lamp con∣sacrated to her memory, which might burn so long as that found some while since in the Appian 1500 years. Pancerol. Licetus. Mancinus. Way, in the Sepulchre of Tulli∣ola the Daughter of Cicero. But all that I design, all that I desire, is that that which was prepared for her Herse, may adorn your Closets: Yea, that you would look upon her, and learn to live, and learn to die. In the ensuing Papers you have the Rule of our Religion, and you have an Ex∣ample too. Follow her so far as she followed Christ; and it is hard to say where she step'd aside, where she stay'd behind. . Naz. Orat. 20. So often as you see the Armories of her Parentage, or your left Hands remind you of her Fune∣rals; Call to mind a great Ex∣ample of Vertue and Goodness, so Illustrious, and Conspicuous,
 that there remain'd no doubt but only whether the Universality, or Sincerity of her Obedience was the greatest.
VALE ET SALVE ANI∣MA O ANNAE FELI∣CISS. NOS EO OR∣DINE QUO NATU∣RA PERMISERIT TE SEQUEMUR. S. T. T. L.
