



I have ever dissented from their
opion who maintain, that the world
in was created a levell Champi∣an,
Mountains being only the
product of NOAHS flood, where
the violence of the waters aggested
the earth, goared out of the hollow
valleys. For, we reade how in that
delugeGen. 7. 20. the mountains were (not then as upstarts first
caused, but as old standards, newly) covered.
As much do I differ from their false position, who
affirme, that all being equall in the loynes of Adam, and
wombe of Eve, honour was onely the effect of humane

ambition, in such, whose pride, or power, advanced them∣selves
above others. Whereas it was adequate to the cre∣ation,
as originally fixed, in Eldership, or Primogeniture,
and afterwards, by Divine providence (the sole fountain
thereof) confer'd on others: Either out of love, by no∣thing
lesse than his express Commission, for their good; or
hatred, by somewhat more than his bare Permission for their
ruine.
The three Sons of David serve us for the threfold division
of honour.

1. Absolon, said2. Sam. 15. 4. O that I were made Judge in
the land.
2. Adoniah, exalted himself saying,1 King. 1. 5. I will be
King.
3. Solomon said nothing; But1 King. 1. 17. David said (and
God confirmed his words) Assuredly he shall
reign after me.

The first sought by secret ambition to surprise his fathers
subjects.
The second went a mere bold, and blunt way to work, by
open usurpation, but both finally miscaried.
The Third reached not at all at Honor, but only happily
held what was put into his hands.
But when outward Greatnesse (as in the last instance)
is attended with inward Grace, all Christian beholders
thereof, are indebted to a double tribute of respect to that
person, whose Honour is martialled according to theRom. 2. 12. Apo∣stolicall
equipage. BUT GLORY, HONOUR, AND PEACE.
See how it standeth like a Shield in the middle with

GLORY, and PEACE, as supporters on each side. And
this is that Honor, the zealous pursute whereof I humbly
recommend unto you.
Nor will you be offended at this my counsel, as If
it imported a suspition of your present practise, who know
well what St. paul1 Thes. 5. 1 saith, Edifie one another, EVEN
AS YE DOE. It is no tautologie, to advise good people to
do, what they do. Such precepts are prayses, such counsels
commendations. And in this notion, do I tender my hum∣ble
advice, to your consideration.
Remember the modesty ofPsal. 27. 4. David in asking; One
thing have I desired of the Lord, Viz. to be constant∣ly
present at his publique service. And behold the
bounty of1 Cor. 29. 28 God in giving three, for one. And he
died in a good old age. full of dayes, riches, and ho∣nor.
Such measure may you assuredly expect from him;
If before, and above all things seeking for that one
thing which is needfull, the rather because God hath done
great things for you already, for which you have cause to
rejoyce.
A great and good1 Sa. 18. 23 man said to his fellow-servants.
Seemeth it a small thing to you to be Son in-law to a
King. A greater honour was done to your first Ancestor,
who was SON TO A KING, namely to Hardinge King
of Denmark, whence Fitz-Harding your most ancient
sir-name. But labour SIR for a higher honor then both;
Even to be led by GODS SPIRIT, and then you shall be
even in the language of the Apostle himself,Rom. 8. 14. FITZ-DIEU,
A SON OF GOD.
Now as your Eminent bounty unto me may justly chal∣lenge
the choicest of my best endeavours; So the parti∣cular

motive, inducing me to dedicate this Booke to your
honor, is because it containeth the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
to whom you are so nearly related. WhoseThe heir generall of George Care L. Hunsdon whose Grand∣mother Mary was second Sister to Anne Bollen. Grandmother
proved her heir, by ANNE BOLLEN her mother. In which
capacity some of that Queens (or rather the Lady Eliza∣beths
moveables, and Jewels (which were her Mothers)
descended unto her. You may therefore challenge an interest
most properly in this part of my History.
And now what remaineth but my humble and hearty
prayers to the Divine Majesty for his blessing on your selfe;
and on your hopefull Issue, That God would plentifully
powre all his fauours of this, and a better life upon them.
Suspect me not Sir, for omitting, because not expressing
your noble Consort. We finde in the fourth commandement,
Thou, and thy Son, and thy Daughter, &c. Where Di∣vines
render this reason, why the wife is not mentioned, be∣cause
the same person with the Husband. On which account,
your second self is effectually included within the daily devo∣tions
of

