


excepted, who in due time may be) happy in their Mar∣riage,
hopefull in their Issue.
These five have all been of the same Christian Name.
Yet is there no fear of Confusion, to the prejudice of your
Pedigree, (which Heralds commonly in the like cases
complain of) seeing each of them being, as eminent in
their kinde, so different in their eminency, are sufficiently
distinguished by their own character to Posterity.
Of these, the first a Judge; for his gravity and
learning famous in his Generation.
The second, a worthy Patriot, and bountifull
House-keeper; blessed in a numerous Issue, his four
younger Sonnes, affording a Bishop to the Church; a
Judge, and Peer to the State; a Commander to the
Camp, and an Officer to the Court.
The third, was the first Baron of the House, of
whose worth I will say nothing, because I can never
say enough.
The fourth, your Honourable Father, who be∣cause
he doth still, and may he long, survive; I can∣not
doe the right which I would to his merit, with∣out
doing wrong, which I dare not to his modesty.
You are the fift in a direct Line; and let me ac∣quaint

you with what the world expected, (not to
say requireth of you) to dignifie your self with some
select and peculiar desert, so to be differenced from
your Ancestours, that your memory may not be mis∣taken,
in the Homonymie of your Christian Names;
which, to me seemeth as improbable, as that a burn∣ning-Beacon,
(at a reasonable distance) should not
be beheld; such the brightnesse of your parts, and ad∣vantage
of your education.
You was bred in that Schoole which hath no superiour
in England; and successively in those two Vniversities,
which have no equall in Europe. Such the stock of your
native perfection, before graffed with the forraigne accom∣plishments
of your travells. So that men confidently pro∣mise
themselves to read the best, last, and largest Edition of
MERCATOR's ATLAS, in your experience and discourse.
That good God who went with you out of your Na∣tive
Countrey, and since watched over you in forraign parts,
return with you in safety in due time, to his Glory, and your
own Good, which is the daily desire of

