



WEE read in1 Chro. 11. 13. Holy-writ, when
the Israelites fled before the
Philistines, who spoiled a field
of Barley, how Eleazar the
Son of Dodo, made them pay
dear for their Trespass, so stop∣ping
them in the full speed of their Conquest, that he
saved Israel by a great Deliverance.

Inspired Truths need not the Security of humane Hi∣story,
to passe them into our Beliefe. However, other
writers afford Examples, how one man, in a manner,
hath routed a whole Army, and turned the flight of his
party, into an unexpected Victory.
Thus theGeorge Bu∣chanan Schol. Hist. b. 6. p. 55. Chronicles inform us, that when the Scots
fled from the Danes (at a place called Long-Carty)
one HAY an Husbandman, then at Plough (with his
two Sons) snatching the Yoak into his hand (it is the
man makes the weapons, not the weapons the man) not
onely stopped the Enemies further pursuit, but beat them
back with a great Overthrow. Whose valour, King
KENETH the second, (seven hundred years since) re∣warded,
with as much ground of the best in Scotland, as a
Falcon flew over at one flight before it did take a stand.
And the memory hereof is continued in your Armes, who
doth carry a Chronicle in your Coat, Crest, and Sup∣porters.
Let none quarrel at your Supporters, being two men
holding each an Yoak in his hand, seeing they are the
Supporters general of all mankinde,Eccles. 5. 9. Solomon (being
himself a King) observing that the King himself is
maintained by husbandry. Besides, those Yokes pro∣cured
the Scotch Liberty, who otherwise had been mi∣serably
enslaved to the Danish Insolence. And if the
bearing of armes were so ancient amongst the Jews, as the

Rabbies will have it, it is proportionably probable that the
Posterity of Shamgar gave theJudg. 3. 31. GOAD for the Heredi∣tary
Ensigns of their Family.
Nor must your Motto be forgotten, CONSCIENTIA
MILLE SCUTA, A good Conscience is a thousand
shields, and every one of proof against the greatest peril.
May your Honour therefore be careful to preserve it;
seeing lose the Shield, and lose the Field, so great the
concernment thereof.
No Family in Christendome hath been Ennobled
on a more Honourable Occasion, hath flourished for
longer continuance, or been preserved in a more mira∣culous
manner.
It isTitus Livi∣us libro 2. do. reported of the Romance FABII, no less nu∣merous
then valiant (three hundred and sixty Patritians
flourishing of them at once) they were all slain in one Bat∣tle,
one onely excepted, who being under Age to bear Armes,
was preserved alive.
A great Fatality befell your Family, in a fight at
Duplin-Castle (in the Reign of our Edward the first)
when the whole Houshold ofCamd. Brit. in Scot. Strath-erne, pag. 705. HAYES was finally ex∣tirpated,
and not one of them visible in the whole World.
Onely it hapned that the Chief of them left his Wife at
home big with Childe, from whom your Name is re∣cruited,
all springing as it were from a dead Root, and
thence deriving a Postume Pedigree.

This puts me in hopes, that God who so strangely pre∣served
your Name in Scotland, will not suffer it so soon
to be extinct in England, but give you Posterity by your
Noble Consort, when it shall seem seasonable to his own
will and pleasure.
All that I will add is this, that seeing your Ho∣nour
beareth three smaller Shields, or In-Escutchions,
in your Armes, the shaddow of the least of them, with
its favourable reflection, is sufficient effectually to pro∣tect
and defend the weak endeavours of

