



WHen I read the Description of the Tumult in Ephesus, Acts 9. 32. (wherein they would have their Diana to be Jure Divino, that it

fell down from Iupi∣ter) it appears to me the too Methodicall caracter of our present confusions. Some ther∣fore cryed one thing, and some another, for the assembly was confused and the more part knew not wherefore they were come together. O the distractions of our age? And how many thousand know as li∣tle why the sword was

drawn, as when it will be sheathed. Indeed, (thankes be to God) we have no more house burnings but many heart burnings, and though outward bleed∣ing bee stanched, it is to be feared that the broken vaine bleeds inwardswhich is more dangerous.
This being our sad condition, I perceive controversiall writing (sounding somewhat

of Drums & Trum∣pets,) doe but make the wound the wider, Meditations are like the Ministrel the Pro∣phet called for, to pa∣cifie  2 Kings. 3 15. his mindaliscom∣posed with passion, which moved mee to adventure on this Treatise, as the most innocent and inoffen∣sive manner of write∣ing.
I confesse a Volumn of another Subject, and

larger Size, is expect∣ed from mee. But in London I have learnt the difference, betwixt downright breaking, and craving time of their Creditors. Many sufficient Merchants though not Soluable from the present make use of the latter, whose example I follow. And though I cannot pay the Principall, yet I desire such small Treatises may be accepted, from

me as Interest or con∣sideration mony, un∣till I shal God willing be enabled to discharge the whole Debt. : 3
If any wonder that this Treatise comes Patron-lesse into the World, let such know that Dedications be∣gin now adayes to grow out of fashion. His Policy was com∣mended by many, (and proved profitable un∣to himselfe) who in∣sted

of Select God∣fathers, made all the Congregation Wit∣nesses to his Child, as I invite the World to this my Booke, reque∣sting each one would patronise therein such parts and passages thereof, as please them, so hoping that by seve∣rall persons the whole will be protected.
I have Christian Reader, (so far I dare goe, not inquiring into

the Syre-name of thy Side or Sect) nothing more to urthen thy Patience with. Onely I will add, that I finde our Saviour in Tur∣tullian and ancient Latine Fathers, con∣stantly stiled a Seque∣er. Se∣questrator in the pro∣per notion of the Word. For God and man beeing at ods, the difference was Seque∣stied or referred into Christs his hand to

end and umpire it. How it fareth with thine estate on earth I know not, but I earnestly de∣sire, that in heaven both thou and I may e∣ver bee under Se∣questration in that Mediator for Gods glory and our good, to whose protection thou art committed By

