



MY LORD,
COnsulting with my self about a Patron for
this Book, I concluded to make choice of
such a Person as should be both of most
noble extraction, and of spotless innocency:
So that in this captious Age, none should presume to charge
him with the least offence in thought, word, or deed. For
justly fearing too many faults might be found in the book
it self, I desired to make some amends by dedicating it
to One free from all exception.
Your Honour is the first in our Nobility, whom I
finde qualified according to my desire; descended from the

best Houses in England, Scotland, and France. And
as it happeneth in a Constellation, that the Lustre there∣of,
amounting from many Stars together, darkeneth the light
of those particulars, which produced it: So in your Honours
Pedegree, the collective splendour obscureth the distinct
brightness of those severall families whence the same re∣sulteth.
Now that your Honour cannot be taxed with any actu∣all
offence, your tender Moneths not as yet compleating a
Year; do sufficiently evidence. Whose innocence is the most
entire Relique of our Primitive integrity; and most per∣fect
pattern of our future felicity. Yea some admiring
what motives to mirth Infants meet with in their silent
and solitary smiles, have resolved (how truely I know not)
that then they converse with Angels, as indeed such cannot
amongst mortals finde any fitter Companions.
One, or more of these three main Ends are aimed at by
Authors in all ingenuous dedications; Hope to receive pro∣tection;
Desire to derive instruction; and Zeal to express
affection.
For the first, though you cannot by your Power, yet you may
by your Innocence be an excellent Patron to protect our en∣suing
Work. In these civill wars, some have saved themselves
from the sword, with no other shield then bearing a Babe in
their armes, which rebated their enemies fury into compas∣sion.
So, when some shall be ready to wound our Book with
their censuring Darts, they will be mollified into mercy finding
your innocent Name prefixed in the Front thereof.
As for deriving instruction, I confess your Honour as yet
incapable thereof. But seeing Infants clothes are providently

made with the biggest, to which they will grow up in process of
time; why may not books (the clothes of the minde) be pro∣portioned
above their present capacity, in hope they will seaso∣nably
shoot up to the understanding thereof? And untill such
time as your Lordships judgment can reap profit from our De∣scriptions
herein, may your eyes but take pleasure in the Maps
which here are presented unto you.
But the last, not least consideration in my choice of your
Honour, is my ambition to tender my humble service thereun∣to;
The rather because ESMEOr Amedcus the Toplll Saint of Aul∣igney. your auspicious Name
promiseth, in my apprehension, some good success, now at the
third return, as long since at the first imposing thereof on
your Ancestour.
For Esme Lord Aulbigney (a place of great priviledges in
the Province of Berry, first by the King of France bestowed
on [and still possessed by] your Family, in reward of their signal
service to that Crown) about two hundred years since proved
the happy reviver of your family almost extinguished for want
of a Heir, and by his virtuous demeanour added much honour
thereunto.
The same Name now returns on your Lordship, who found
your Fathers house in point of posterity in as low a Condition.
Indeed your Grandfather left a numerous off-spring, whom I
may fitly compare to the many strings of some musicall Instru∣ment.
But amongst his male-issue (for the rest I pass by as si∣lent strings, sending no sounds to posterity, but losing their own
Surnames in their matches) One was soon fretted in pieces with
sickness; Three more, cut off in these wars; One absent be∣yond
the Seas, and not easily to be tuned to a married estate; and
the other single string remaining [His Grace your Father] left

altogether issueless untill your Lordships welcome Nativity.
But O! what melody can Heavens hand make on a Mono∣chord?
which since hath sent your Lordship on a good message I
hope, to the Honest house of LENNOX.
But I grow tedious in a long Letter to a little Lord, and
therefore turn my Pen into Prayers, that Christ would be plea∣sed
to take you up into his Armes, (whose embraces are the best
swadling-clothes, as to streighten, so to strengthen you in the
growth of Grace) to layMark, 10. 16. his hands upon you and bless you,
that you may grow in stature and favour with God and
with Man; The daily desire of
 Waltham Abbey Iuly 7. 1650.
