


IT is spoken of Noah in the plural, (what is said in the singular of others) that he was perfect in his GENERATIONS;Acts 13.36.
Gen. 6.9. because he lived in one generation be∣fore, and another after the Flood.
A Sermon preached, serveth but an Auditory; a Sermon printed, Auditories; and (if pious in it self) not onely the present, but en∣suing Age, may partake of the profit thereof.
It was the wish of Job, Oh that my words were printed in a book! meaning the ancient Printing, (oppo∣site onely to speaking) which is a Mai∣den, sole, and single, useful chiefly for the continuance of the Original: But had the Mystery of modern Print∣ing, (opposed also to Writing) which is a Mother, fruitful with the propaga∣tion of many copies at once) been extant in his age, Job no doubt would have enlarged his wish thereunto, as not one∣ly the surest means to keep, but swift∣est to communicate his minde and meaning to Posterity; the main mo∣tive, with me, to publish my present pains: hoping, in some degree, they may prove not unuseful to such as peruse them.
If any say, These are not the Ser∣mons you preached unto us, because there is much contracted in the Press, of what you enlarged in the Pulpit; let them know, The Hand, when the fist is closed together, is the same with the same Hand, when the fingers were stretched forth, and palm thereof ex∣panded.
Indeed Satan is justly taxed in this Pag. 103 Treatise, for curtailing Scripture, and leaving out words of consequence in his alleading thereof: But I cannot be justly censured, if omitting, insert∣ing, transposing, altering, and chiefly abridging what I preached (making a Decoction of Sermons into a Com∣ment, and therfore boiling them down to a fifth part) for, being mine own, I may order them as I am advised for my best conveniency.
Yet why call I them Mine, which formerly were God's, and yours, as now they are the whole world's? God's, by whose assistance they were composed, on whose Word grounded, at whose glory aimed. Yours, as first intended for your instruction, deli∣vered to your attention, digested (I hope) by your meditation, and now published for your further edifica∣tion.
To conclude: It is as generally as confidently reported of the ancient British (now the Welsh) Nation, that they never ran away in Battel, till their General or Leader first forsook

them. Oh that we might demean our selves valiantly in our Christian war∣fare, until Christ, our Captain, desert us; which will never come to pass, see∣ing we have both his faithful promise of assistance, and cheerful precedent of his valour, foiling of Satan in this his re∣markable combate. To the protection of which blessed Saviour, you are com∣mended, by

