



HAving formerly proved atIn severall Dedicatory Epistles in my Pisgah Sight. large, That
it is lawfull for any, and expedient for
me, to have Infant-Patrons for my
Books, let me give an account why
this parcell of my History was set apart for your Honour,
not being cast by chance, but led by choice to this my De∣dication.
First, I resolved with my self to select such a Patron
for this my History of Abbies, whose Ancestour was not
onely of credit, and repute, in the Reîgn; but also of favour
and esteem in the affection of King HENRY the Eighth.
Secondly, he should be such (if possible to be found)

who had no partage at all in Abbey-Lands at their disso∣lution,
that so his judgement might be unbiased in the read∣ing
hereof.
Both my Requisits have happily met in your Honour,
whose direct Ancestour, Sir WILLIAM COM∣PTON,
was not onely chief Gentleman of the Bed-Chamber
to the aforesaid KING, but also (as a noble
The Lord Herbert in his History, page 8. pen writing his Life, informeth us) the third man in His
favour, in the beginning of His Reign: yet had he not a
shooe-latchet of Abbey-Land, though nothing surely de∣barred
him save his own abstinence: as there is none in all
your antient Paternall estate, for I account not what since
by accession of Matches hath accrued unto it.
Thus are you the Person designed for my purpose,
and I believe very few (if any) in ENGLAND, can
wash their hands in the same Bason, to have no Abbey-lands
sticking to their fingers; and thus being freest from being a
Party, in due time you will be fittest to be a Judge, to passe
unpartial sentence on what is written on this subject.
And now let me make your Lordship smile a little, ac∣quainting
you with a passage in the Legend, of NICHO∣LAS
a Popish Saint: TheyLib. Festi∣val. in die S. Nichol. fol. 55. report of him, That when
an Infant hanging on his Mothers breast, he fasted Wednesdaies and Fridaies, and could not be urged to suck
more than once a day.

But, good my Lord, be not so ceremonious, or rather
superstitious, to imitate his example: Wean not your self,
until you be weaned, and let all daies be alike to your Ho∣nour.
I dare assure you, no spark of Sanctity the lesse for a
drop of milke the more. A good case is no hindrance to a
pretious jewell, and a healthfull body no abasement to a holy
soule.
And when your Lordship shall arrive at riper years,
consult your own Extraction, as the best Remembrancer
of worthy behaviour. In whose veines there is the con∣fluence
of so many Rivulets, that a mean Herault, by the
guidance thereof upwards, may be led to the fountains of
the most of the English Nobility.
All I will adde is this, as you give three Helmets for
your Armes, may you be carefull to take the fourth, even
theEph. 6. 17. helmet of salvation. An Helmet which here is worn
close, whilest Souldiers in the Church-Militant we see but in
part, but hereafter shall be born (like the Helmet of Prin∣ces)
with the bever open in the Church-Triumphant, when
we shall see as we are seen. The desire of

