



I Have sometimes solitarily pleased my
self, with the perusing and compa∣ring
of two places of Scripture.
Acts 22. 22.
The wicked Iews said of
St. Paul;
Avvay vvith such a Fellovv from
the Earth, for it is not fit that he
should live.
Hebrews 11. 38.
St. Paul said of the
Godly Iews;
Of vvhom the vvorld vvas
not vvorthy.
Here I perceive Heaven and Hell, Mercy and
Malice, Gods Spirit and mans Spite, resolved on the
Question, that it is not fit that good men should live long
on Earth.

However, though the Building be the same, yet the
Bottome is different; the same Conclusion being inferred
from opposite, yea contrary Premisses. Wicked men think
this world too good, God knows it too bad, for his Ser∣vants
to live in. Henceforward I shall not wonder,
that Good men die so soon, but that they live so long;
seeing wicked men desire their Room here on Earth,
and God their Company in Heaven. No wonder then,
if your Good Father was so soon translated to Happi∣nesse,
and his GRACE advanced into GLORY.
He was pleased to give me a Text some weeks
before his Death, of the words of our Saviour to the
Probationer Convert; ThouMark 12. 34. art not far from the Kingdome
of Heaven, that is, as the words there import, from the
state of Salvation. But before my Sermon could be, his
life was, finished, and he in the reall acception
thereof, possessed of Heaven, and Happinesse.
Thus was I disappointed (O that this were the
greatest Losse by the Death of so worthy Person!) of a
Patron, to whom I intended the Dedication of this
first part of my History.
I after was entred on a Resolution to dedicate it
to his Memory; presuming to defend the Innocency
and Harmlesnesse of such a Dedication, by Precedents of
unquestioned Antiquity. But I intended also to sur∣round
the Pages of the Dedication with black, not im∣proper,

as to his relation, so expressive of the pre∣sent
sad Condition of our distracted Church.
But scasonably remembring how the Altar
EDIoshua 22. 11.
(onely erected for Commemoration,) was misinter∣preted
by the other Tribes for Superstition; I concei∣ved
it best to cut off all occasions of Cavill from
captious persons, and dedicate it to You his Son and Heir.
Let not your Grace be offended, that I make you
a Patron at the second hand: for though I confesse you
are my Refuge, in relation to your deceased Father;
you are my Choise, in reference to the surviving Nobi∣lity.
God sanctifie your tender yeares, with true
Grace, that in time you may be a Comfort to your
Mother, Credit to your Kindred, and Honour to your
Nation.

