



MADAM,
SOme, at the first sight, may much admire what IACOB meant,Gen. 53.11. in sending so mean a Present to so mighty a Person as Ioseph, the Go∣vernour of Egypt: A

little balm, and a little ho∣ney, spices, and myrrhe, nuts, and almonds. For, as the quality of most of them was not costly, so their quantity (a little of either) was not consider∣able.
The same exception lies against my presenting this small Treatise to your Ho∣honour. Zoar, Is it not a little one? and the com∣posure thereof so plain and homely, that it is not wor∣thy the notice, much less the Patronage of your Ladiship.
But for Iacob, all is an∣swered in three words: They were the BEST FRVITS of the land. Indeed, as Canaan was a Country plentiful with provisions for self-subsist∣ence; so it was but barren of Barter with Forraign Lands; chiefly, because God intended it for an en∣tire place in it self, and not to mingle either Merchan∣dise or Manners with other Nations.
The same in effect I al∣leadge in mine own ex∣cuse, that this is the best ex∣pression

of Thankfulness, that my present condition can afford; and my mean∣ness is not capable in any other way to deserve the least of those many favors which your Honour hath conferred upon me.
And as Iacob sent so small a quantity of each kinde (not because he grutched greater propor∣tion thereof, but) conceiv∣ing a greater bulk would rather be more wearisome to the Bearers, then wel∣come to the Receiver: I, in like manner, (who could

have more, not better ware in this Work) to avoid te∣diousness, have purposely shortned the same.
And although your Honour shall not (as in Iacob's Present) finde Ho∣ney here, (which was never offered to God in any Sa∣crifice) I mean, though in this Treatise there be no luscious, & palate-pleasing Wit and Eloquence, yet I assure your Ladiship (if daigning to read it) that you will meet with Balm (and that of the best kinde, from Gilead) therein; the

true comfort and consolati∣on, which we may gather to our selves in all our Temptations, from Christs here triumphing over Sa∣tan in the wilderness. Be pleased therefore, Madam, favourably to accept the fruits of my weak endea∣vours.
But why speak I of the the fruits, whilst I remem∣ber a pleasant passage, acted by the simplicity of a poor Spaniard? When a Fa∣ther of the Inquisition sent unto him for some Pears growing in his Hort-yard,

poor man presently pluckt up the tree, fruit, root, and branch, and presented it unto him. What, sudden fright, and servile fear, to prevent danger, made him to over-do, in his willing unwilling compliance with that churlish and cruel In∣quisitor; that, my real re∣spect, and cordial grati∣tude, doth cheerfully per∣form, in my addresses to your Honor, one of the most civil of your Great∣ness, as Courtesie is the truest badge of ancient Nobility. I desire, that not

onely the leaves, buds, blos∣soms, green, ripe fruit I can bear, be presented to your Ladiship, but could wish that the whole tree were worthy of your Honours acceptance.
The good Lord of hea∣ven croud all happiness on your Self and noble Lord in this life, and crown you both, with that hopeful po∣sterity which in due time he may bestow upon you, with eternal happiness hereafter. The daily prayer of

