




SOme there are, who exact of every
Christain (as a Touchstone of
their sincerity) to render an ac∣count
of the exact time of their
Conversion, with the Circum∣stances
thereof, how, when, and
where performed. I must crave leave to enter my
self a Dissenter herein, conceiving such a Demand un∣reasonable,

as generally required esential to all true
Believers.
I confess some may return a satisfactory Answer
thereunto; namely, such, whose Souls (suddenly snatch'd
out of Errour and Vitiousness) were immediately
wrought upon, (almost in an instant) by the Spirit of
God. Thus of thoseActs 22. 41. three thousand gained, (on
Many-Saints-day) by Saint Peter, at Jerusalem,
with the preaching of one Sermon, each one might pun∣ctually
and precisely tell, the very Moment of their true
Conversion, and generally, the WORSE men have
been, the BETTER they can point at the accurate date
thereof.
And thus as Kings count their actions by the years of
their Reign, (Bishops formerly of their Consecration)
so these may use the stile (In the year of our Con∣version,
first, or second, &c.) And asMar. 14. 6. Herod kept
a Festivall of his Natural Birth-day, such (if so pleased)
may duly and truly observe an Anniversary Solemnity of
their Regeneration.
A Priviledge, not granted to all true Believers,
God, to shew his Power that he Can, and Pleasure that
he VVill, vary the manner of Mens Conversion,
(though going the same path by his VVord and Spirit)
useth a lower pace in the hearts of others, in whom
Grace is wrought sensim sine sensu, modeled by degrees;

In such; no mortal man can assign, the minutary jun∣cture
of Time, when preparing grace (which cleared
the ground) ended, and saving grace (which finish'd
the fabrick of Conversion) did first begin.
Observable to this purpose are the words of our Savi∣our,
Mark 4. 26. So is the Kingdom of God, as if a man should
cast feed into the ground, and should sleep, and rise
night and day, and the eed should spring, and grow
up, HE KNOWETH NOT HOW. That grace is sown,
and is grown, Men know; but when, and how, in
the persons aforesaid) GOD KNOWS.
Besides these, (adult Converts) there are a second
sort of Christians unable to discover the Date of grace
dawning in them; namely, such who with2 Tim 1. 5. and 3. 15. Timothy,
may be said to be good, time out of minde, sucking in
grace with their milk, extracted from, and educated un∣der
a pious Parentage.
I hope and trust that your Honour may truly be ranked
in this latter Form, that as many ancient deeds (written
before the Reign of King Henry the third) are com∣monly
without any date. Grace in like manner, will
arise so early in your heart, (advantaged by your Godly
Birth, and Breeding) that you shall not remember the
beginning thereof.
However to make sure work, it will be safest to exa∣mine
your self, (when arrived at Age) what eminent ac∣cessions,

and additions of Grace, you can remember,
with the Place and Time, when the same were effectually
wrought in your Soul, and what bosome-sin you have
conquered. Especially take notice of your solemn Re∣conciling
to God after Repentance for some sin com∣mitted.
David no doubt in some sort may be said to be born
good, God being his hope when in thePsal. 22. 10. Womb,
when on the Breasts of his Mother,Psal. 71. 5. Trusting in him,
andPsal. 71. 17. Taught by him, from his Youth. Now though
probably he could not remember his first, and general Con∣version,
he could recount his Reconversion, after his
foul Offences of Adulterie and Murder, as by his Pe∣nitential
Psalm doth plainly appear.
Otherwise such who boast themselves Converted be∣fore
Memorie, (by the priviledg of their pious In∣fancy)
if they can recover no Memorials of their Re∣pentance
after relaps, and produce no time, nor tokens
thereof, are so far from being good from their Cradle,
it is rather suspicious they will be bad to their Coffin, if
not labouring for a better spiritual estate.
And now my Lord let me recommend to your Child∣hood
the Reading of the HOLY SCRIPTURES, as the2 Tim. 3. 15. A∣postle
termeth them, holy in the fountain, flowing from
the holy Spirit inditing them, holy in the Conduit pipe,
derived through2 Peter 1. 21. holy men penning them, holy in the

Liquor, teaching, and directing to Holiness, holy in the
Cisterne, working Sanctity in such as worthily receive
them, and making them wise unto Salvation.
Now next to the Study of the Scriptures, History
best becometh a Gentleman, Church-History a Chri∣stian,
the British History an Englishman; all which
qualifications meeting eminently in your Honour, give me
some comfortable assurance, that these my weak endeavours
will not be unwelcome unto you; by perusing whereof, some
profit may probably accrew to your self, and more ho∣nour
will certainly redown to

