


Punishment for their going naked; that what sometimes
they affect of Fancy, should alwayes be enjoyned them
by Authority; till the Cold converted them into more
Civility.
In vain do they plead for their Practise, the Precedent
of the Prophet*Isaiah 20. 3. Isaiah, going naked for three years,
Whose act was extraordinary and mystical, having an im∣mediate
command from God for the same. As well may
they in Imitation ofHos ea. 1. 2. Hosea, take a known harlot to their wives, which I beleeve they would not willingly do,
though they have made Harlots of other mens wives, if all be true reported of them.
Their other Opinion is, that THOU and THEE
is the Omer of Respect to be measur'd out to every single
person; (allowing the hiest no more, the lowest no less)
be he (to speak in their ownPamphlet called the Language of truth. pag. 2. Phrase) either King, Lord,
Judge, or Officer.
We will take their words asunder (as the wheels of a
watch)only scowre them, and then put them together again.
King) though none at this present in the Land,
yet, because these pretend to a Prophetical spirit,
and there may be one in due time, their words are considerable.
Lord) here your Honour with those many persons
your Peers are concerned
Judge) in this place the shooe pinches them, be∣cause
theyRom. 13. 4. bear the Sword to punish Offendors.
Officers) I suppofe either Civil or Military, if
they allow of the destinction.
No mention here of Ministers: It seems THOU and
THEE, is too good language for us; who are Cains, and Ba∣laams,
and Dogs, and Devils in their mouths. The best
is, the sharpest railing cannot pierce, where Guiltiness in

the person railed on, hath not first wimbled an hole for
the entrance thereof.
Their Principall Argument for their Practice, is
drawn from many places inExod-33 12, five times in one verse Scripture, where THOU
and THEE are used by God to Man, and Man to God;
and Man to Man, which cannot be denid.
In Opposition whereunto we maintain, that THOU
from Superiors to inferiors is proper, as a Signe of
Command; from equals to equals is passable, as a note
of Familiarity; but from Inferiors to Superiors, if proceeding
from Ignorance hath a smack of Clownishness,
if from Affectation, a tang of Contempt.
But in answer to their Objection from Scripture, we
return foure things.
First, THOU is not so distastful a term in He∣brew
and Greek, as it is in the English, custom of
every Country being the grand Master of Language
to appoint what is honourable, and disgraceful therein.
The Jews had theirMatth. 5. 26. Racha or terme of contempt un∣known
to us; we, our THOU, a signe of slighting un∣used by them.
Secondly, It followeth not, because THOU and
THEE only are set down, that therefore no other
Additions of Honour were then and there given from
Inferiors to their Superiors. A negative Argument
cannot be framed in this Case, that more respect was
not used, because no more exprest in scripture; it
being the designe of Histories, chiefly to represent the substance
of deeds, not all verbal Formalities.
Thirdly, What Inferiors in Scripture wanted in words,
they supplied in Postures and Gestures of Submission;
even toGen. 33. 3, King. 1. 16, & 23. as also 1 King. 18. 7. Prostration of their bodies, which would be con∣demned
for Idolatry, if ussed in England.
Lastly, There are extant in Scripture, expressions
of respect, as when Sarah termed her Husband Lord,
which (though but1, Pet, 3. 6. once mentioned in the text) was no

doubt her constant Practise, or else the holy Spirit would
not have took such notice thereof, and commended it to o∣thers
imitation.
But they follow their Argument, urging it unreasonable,
that any should refuse that Coine in common discourse,
which they in their solemn Devotions pay to
God himself. THOU and THEE are Currant in the
Prayers of Saints clean thorough the Scipture, as also in
our (late admired) Liturgy, we Praise THEE, we Belss
THEE, we Worship THEE, we Glorifie THEE, we
give THEE Thanks for THY great Glory.
It is answered; those Attributes of Greatness, Good∣ness,
&c. given to God in the Beginning of every Prayer
do Vertually and Effectually extend and apply them∣selves
to every Clause therein, though for Brevities sake not actually repeated.
Thus OURFATHER in the Preface of the Lords
Prayer, relateth to every Petition therein; OURFA∣THER
hallowed be thy Name; Our FATHER thy Kingdom come; Our FATHER thy will be
done &c. And this qualifieth the harshness and rudeness
of THOU, THEE and THY, when for expediti∣on
and expressiveness sake they are necessarily used.
Your Honour will not wonder at the Practise of these
QUAKERS, having read in the Prophetical Epistles
of2 Pet. 2. 10. S. Peter, andJude 8. S. Jude (last placed, because last to
be performed) that towards the end of the world some
shall NOT BE AFFRAID to speak evil of Dignities.
These Feare, where no feare is, and QUAKE where they
need not; but feare not, where feare is; being bold and
impudent where they ought not. They are NOTA∣FRAID,
not only to speak against Dignities (which in
some case may be done, where they are Vitious men) but
against Dignities, the lawful, useful, needful, Ordinan∣ces
of God himself.

God grant these may seasonably be suppressed, before
they grow too numerous otherwise such who now quarel at
the Honour, will hereafter question the wealth of others.
Such as now accuse them for Ambition for being higher,
will hereafter condemne them for Covetousness, for
being broader then other; yea and produce Scripture too,
proper and pregnant enough for their purpose, as abused
by their Interpretation. In a word, it is suspicious such as
now introduce THOU and THEE, will (if they can)
expel Mine and Thine, disolving all propriety into confusion.
And now, my Lord, how silly a thing is that Honour,
which lies at the mercy of such mens mouths, to
tender or deny the same. The best is Mens Statures are
not extended or contracted, with their shaddows; so as
to be stretched out into Giants in the morning; shrunk
up into Dwarfes at Noone, and stretch'd out at Night
into Giants again. Intrinsecal worth doth not increase
and abate; Wax and Waine, Ebb and Flow, accord∣ing
to the Fancy of others. May your Lordship there∣fore
labour
for that true Honour, which consisteth in Ver∣tue
and God's Approbation thereof; which will last and
remain how furiously soever the wicked rage, and imagine
vain things against it.
Here I presume, to present your Honour the Lives
and Deaths of some worthies, contrary to those QUAKERS
in their Practise, and Opinion; I mean the Martyrs in
the Reign of Queen Mary. These despised not their
Superiors, giving due Reverence to those who condem∣ned
them, honouring lawfull Authority, though un∣lawfully
used: These cast not off their Cloaths, but
modestly wore their Linnen on them at their Suffering.
These counterfeited no Corporall QUAKING, (stand∣ing
as firme as the stake they were fastned to:) though
in a Spirituall sense working out their salvation with

Feare and Trembling: Whose admirable Piety and
Patience is here recommended unto your Lordships con∣sideration; by

