



HAving, by Gods assistance, drawn down
my History to the death of Queen Eliza∣beth,
some disswade me from continu∣ing
it any further: Because, that as
Saint Peter out of warinesse (alias cowardlinesse) followed
Christ (who was the Truth)Mat. 26. 58. afarre off; so they lay this
down for a Maxime, That the Story of Modern Times
must not be written by any alive; A Position, (in my poor
opinion) both disgracefull to Historians, and prejudiciall to
Posterity.

Disgracefull to Historians:) as if they would make
themselves like unto the beasts of the Forrest, as characte∣red
by David,Psal. 10. 20, 22. Who move in the Darknesse, till the Sun ari∣seth,
and they get them away; loving to write of things done
at distance, where Obscurity may protect their Mistakes
from Discovery, but putting up their pens as soon as the day
dawns of Modern Times, and they within the reach of re∣putation.
Prejudiciall to Posterity:) seeing intentions in this na∣ture
long delayed are at last defeated.Plutarch in his Morals. The Young man
moved by his Mother to Marry; returned, That (as yet)
it was too soon: and some yeares after, pleaded, That now
it was too late. So some say, Truth is not ripe enough to be
written in the Age we live in, which proveth rotten too much
for the next Generation faithfully to report, when the Im∣preses
of memorable matters are almost worn out: the Hi∣stories
then written having more of the Authors hand, than
footsteps of truth therein.
Sure I am, the most informative Histories to Posterity,
and such as are most highly prized by the judicious, are such
as were written by the Eye-witnesses thereof. As Thuci∣dides
the reporter of the Peloponesian Warre.
However, one may observe such as write the Story of

their owne Times, like the two Messengers which carried
tydings to David: Of these, Ahimaaz, (sent the rather
by permission than injunction) onely told David what he
knew would please him, acquainting him with his Victory.
But being demanded of his Sons death, he made a Tale
of a2 Sam. 18. 29. Tumult, (no better than an officious Lye for himself)
the issue whereof was to him unknown.
Cushi, the other Messenger, having his carriage lesse of
cunning, and more of conscience: informing the King of
his Sons death, but folding it up in a faire expression,2 Sam. 18. 32. The
Enemies of my Lord the King, and all that rise against thee
to doe thee hurt, be as that young man is.
Ahimaaz is imitated by such Historians, who leave that
unwritten which they suspect will be unwelcome. These
following the rule, Summa Lex salus Authoris, when they
meet with any necessary but dangerous Truth, passe it over
with a Blank flourished up with some ingenious evasion.
Such Writers succeed to plain Cushi in their Relations,
who give a true account of actions, and to avoid all exaspe∣rating
terms (which may make a bad matter worse in re∣lating
it) use the most lenitive language in expressing
distastfull matter, adventuring with their own danger to
procure the information of others. Truly one is concerned

in conscience to transmit to the next Age some short intima∣tions
of these Times, out of feare that Records are not so
carefully kept in these so many and sudden Changes, as they
were in former Ages.
I know Machiavel was wont to say, That he who un∣dertakes
to Write a History, must be of no Religion: if so, he
himselfe was the best qualified of any in his Age to be a
good Historian.
But, I believe, his meaning was much better than his
words, intending therein, That a Writer of Histories must
not discover his inclination in Religion to the prejudice of
Truth: Levi-like, who said to his Father and Mother, I
have not seen them, owning no acquaintance of any Re∣lations.
This I have endeavoured to my utmost in this Book;
knowing, as that Oyle is adjudged the best that hath no
tast at all; so that Historian is preferred, who hath the least
Tangue of partial Reflections.
However, some Candour of course is due to such Histo∣rians,
(wherein the Courtesie not so great in giving as the
Injury in detaining it) which run the Chiding of these present
Times in hope that after-Ages may excuse them. And I
am confident that these my Labours shall finde the same

favour (which may be in meer men, should be in all
Gentlemen, must be in true Christians) the rather because
this Booke appeareth Patronized by a Dedication to Your
Honour.
I have selected your Lordship for a Patron to this part
of my History, wherein the Reign of King JAMES is
contained, under VVhose peaceable Government your
Grandfather was His Privie Counsellour, and Master of
the Rolls, when your Family was not brought, but brought
back into England, where it had flourished Barons many
yeares before. Plants are much meliorated by transplant∣ing,
especially when after many years they are restored to
their Native soile as Cordiall unto them. And thus the
continuance and increase of all happinesse to your Selfe and
Noble Consort, is the unfeigned Prayer of

