



SAint PAUL gave a great charge to
2 Tim. 4. 13.
Timothy to bring the Cloak
which he left at Troas, but especi∣ally
the Parchments. Here we
have the Inventory of a Preachers
estate, consisting of a few Cloathes
and Books, what he wore, and what
he had written. But the Apostles
care was not so much concerned in his Cloathes (which
might be bought new) as in his Writings, where the damage
could not be repaired.
I am sadly sensible (though far be it from me to com∣pare
Scribling with Scripture) what the loss of a Library
(especially of Manuscripts) is to a Minister, whose
Books have passed such hands which made riddance of
many, but havock of more.

Was it not cruelty to torture a Library, by maiming
and mangling the Authors therein? neither leaving nor
taking them intire. Would they had took less, that so
what they left might have been useful to others. Where∣as
now, mischievous Ignorance did a prejudice to me,
without a profit to its self, or any body else.
But would to God all my fellow Brethren, which with
me bemoan the loss of their Books, with me might also
rejoyce for the recovery thereof, though not the same nu∣merical
Volumes. Thanks be to your Honour, who have
bestow'd on me (the Treasure of a Lord-Treasurer) what
remained of your Fathers Library. Your Father, who
was the greatest Honourer, and Disgracer of Students,
bred in Learning. Honourer, giving due respect to all
men of merit: Disgracer, who by his meer natural parts
and experience, acquired that perfection of invention,
expression and judgment, to which those who make learn∣ing
their sole study do never arive.
It was a Gift I confess, better proportioned to your Dig∣nity then my deserts, too great, not for your Honour to
bestow, but for me to receive. And thus hath God by
your bounty equivalently restored unto me, what the Lo∣custs
and the Palmer worme &c. have devoured, so
that now I envy not the Popes Vatican, for the numerous∣ness
of Books, & variety of Editions therein, enough for use,
being as good, as store for state, or superfluity for mag∣nificence.
However hereafter I shall behold my self under
no other notion then as your Lordsships Library-keeper,
and conceive it my duty, not onely to see your Books dry'd
and rubb'd (to rout those moaths which would quarter
therein) but also to peruse, study and digest them, so that
I may present your Honour with some choice Collections out
of the same, at this ensuing History is for the main extra∣cted
thence, on which account I humbly request your ac∣ceptance
thereof; whereby you shall engage my daily pray∣ers

for your happiness, and the happiness of your most
Noble Consort.
I have read how a Roman Orator, making a Speech at
the Funeral of his deceased Mother in law, affirmed, that
he had never been Reconciled unto her for many years:
Now whilest his ignorant auditors condemned their mu∣tual
vindicativeness, the wiser sort admired and com∣mended
their peaceable dispositions, because there never
happened the least difference between them, needing an
agreement, as that bone cannot be set, which was never
broken. On which account, that never any reconciliation
may be between your self and other self, is the desire of

