


MY LORD,
IT hath been charged by Foreiners on
our English Gentry, that many of them
very knowing beyond the seas, have
been strangers in their native Countrey;
as able to give a better account of the
Spaw, then our own Bath; the diving
of the Spanish Anas under ground, then of our own Rivers
(Diverill in Wiltshire, and Mole in Surrey) wherein the
same wonders of Nature are set forth in a lesser Edition.
How just this accusation is, for the present I have no lea∣sure

to enquire, but am afraid, that too many of our nation are
guilty of a greater Ignorance; That being quic sighted in
other kingdomes, and Countreys, they are altogether blinde
as touching Judea, and the land of Palestine; the Home for
their meditations, who are conversant in all the historicall
passages of Scripture.
Yet I would not have any wilfully to expose themselves (as
Saint Paul was against his will) to2 Cor. 11. 26. perils of waters, perils
of Robbers, perils by the Heathen, &c. personally to pace and
trace the land of Canaan: who rather conceive that precept
to Abraham▪Gen. 13. 17. Arise, walk through the land in the breadth
thereof, and in the length thereof, may be performed by us,
even whilest we also follow the counsell of Joash to Amaziah,
Abide2 Chr. 25. 19. now at home.
This may be done by daily and diligent perusing of the
Scriptures; and comparing the same with it self; (Dia∣monds
onely cut Diamonds) as also by consulting with such as
have written the description of that Countrey. Amongst whom
give me leave (though the unworthiest of thousands)
to tender these my endevours, to your Honours seri∣ous
perusall, and patronage, hoping my pains herein may con∣duce
to the better understanding of the History of the Bible.
I confess the doctrinall part of the Scripture is in it self most
instructive to salvation. But as the rare relation of the wo∣man
of Samaria,John 4. 39. first drew her neighbours to the sight of our
Saviour, which afterwards believed on him, not for her words,
but his own worth; so the delightfull stories in the Bible have
allured many (youth especially) to the reading thereof, the
light (the historicall part) first inviting their eyes, whose
hearts were afterwards inflamed with the heat, the holy fire
in the doctrine of Gods word.

Give me leave therefore my Lord, humbly to commend to
your Honour, the constant reading of that, which eminently
is termed The Scripture and the Bible or Book, all other be∣ing
but scribling and Pamphlets in comparison thereof. They
contain what will make you wise unto salvation; and the
study thereof will render your Lordship more truely honoura∣ble
then your outward extraction.
Great indeed was the priviledge of Ruth, for whom purposely
some handfuls wereRuth 2. 16. let fall, for her to gather up. But greater the
honour done to your Ancestors by our English Kings, above
an hundred years since, who scattered some flowers (and other
ornaments) out of their own Armes, therewith to deck and
adorn those of your family.
Yet know my Lord that the Bereans areActs 17. 11. pronounced
more noble then those of Thessalonica, in that they re∣ceived
the word with all readiness of minde, searching the
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so: And
by the same proportion your exact skill industriously attained
in Gods word, shall make your soul increase with the
increaseColos. 2. 19. of God; far more honourable then that Aug∣mentation
in Heraldry, which was conferred on your An∣cestours.
Remember I pray what David writes, IPsal. 119. 96. have seen an
end of all perfection, but thy commandement is exceed∣ing
broad. Oh imperfect perfection which hath an end! And
indeed David lived in an Age, wherein he saw Goliah1 Sam. 7. 51. the
strongest overcome, Asahel the2 Sam. 2. 23. swiftest overtaken, Achi∣tophel2 Sam. 17. 23.
the wisest befooled, and Absalom the2 Sam. 14. 25. fairest defor∣med
with a violent death. Yet still the immortall word out∣lived
all casualties, and triumphed in defiance of opposition.

Wherefore as the Jews were to provide a chest by the side
of the Ark wherein the LawDeut. 31. 26. was to be placed and kept, so I
wish your Honour a large heart to be a repository for this
Broad commandement of God, that therein you may care∣fully
lay up and treasure the same, which when all earthly per∣fections
prove false and fading, will furnish your soul with ho∣liness
here and happiness hereafter: which is the daily prayer
of

