



THe whole Ʋniverse worthily admires the Oxonian Academie for its Anti∣quity, and Learning, for the great multitude of famous Doctors, which have flourished in its bosome, Structures in its Colledges, rare Library, compleatly stored with books of all sorts; but principally Manuscripts, which if not diminished by the destiny of Funus Scoti et Scotistarum, would have far exceed∣ed most of Christendome; and now may contend for equality, except only the Vatican: Its pre∣sent glory is in no mean way augmented, by that magnificent Theater; which the late Arch∣bishop of Canterbury, to his eternal Glory has erected; wherein all may depredicate his Muni∣ficence, and other Universities envy Oxfords Glory. This indeed is Sheldons Trophy, and Triumph.
Ʋpon reflection of this unparaleld Theater, I cannot but deplore, that such an excellent, and so magnificent a structure should be abused, and defiled by such an unseemly Imp, as the late Do∣ctour Daniel Brevent has hatched under its
roof; I mean his Missale Romanum Printed in that Theatre without any license or approbation, wherein there is very little appears which may beseem a Doctour of Oxford.
He begins indeed very briskly, acknowledg∣ing the Roman Church to have been a true Church, in the first five hundred years after Christ; but afterwards to have decayed; prin∣cipally, for that from that time, the Church al∣lowed and approved the holy sacrifice of the Masse, which he chiefly labours to reject, by Railleries, scoffs and jeerings; amongst others he grounds himself on two manifestly false im∣positions: the first is, that Roman Priests do sacrifice their God, imitating the primitive Infidels, who imputed it to the Christians, that they did eat their God, whereas our faith teach∣es us, that Christs body and bloud is sacrificed to God: The second is, that the Priests at the Altar, do work all the Miracles which are wrought in the Eucharist; which Miracles by Catholicks are attributed to Christ himself who instituted the holy Sacrament. To make his raillery more compleat, he spares not to call all Roman Catholicks, Adulterers, Adorers of vile creatures, Idol-worshipers, invaders of sacred offices, sacrilegiously reproaching them of un∣truths, impieties, fearfull and barbarous cruel∣ty; Priesthood a most sacrilegious function; which in plain terms he admits for almost twelve hundred years, the whole Christian world were
no better then Idolaters; nay, as he says worse then all Pagans and Infidels.
So that the whole Church, all Christian Em∣perours, Kings and Princes, all Christian Em∣pires, Kingdoms, Nations, and Provinces were enslaved to Idolatry, all Popes, Primats, Arch∣bishops, Bishops, and Clergy-men; were liable to his censures. No Church either universal or particular, truly Christian, no Conversion of a∣ny Nation, in particular England, to the true faith of Christ, for those, who were converted in those times, were most unhappy, for they were alwayes taught, believed and exercised the sa∣crifice of the Masse. All the Modern Churches, as besides the Latin, the Grecian, Oriental, Affrican and Indians; in all places of the world (except only some of our pretended Reformers, in a little Corner thereof,) have the same: and the schoolmen whom he so frequently cites, were all Idolaters, for they all held, maintained and defended the sacrifice of the Masse, against all Infidels and hereticks, and for the most part were sacrificing Priests.
Moreover, the Glory of your famous Ʋni∣versitie, is much impeached, by this his Calum∣nie; for your Doctors and Professors, your Churches, Chappels, and Schools; your Colled∣ges and Chairs were all infected with this pre∣tended Idolatry; for within their walls no other doctrine was taught, heard, or used, until these last times, the several Comments,
made on the Master of the sentences, on S. Tho∣mas Scotus and other Schoolmen, testifies the same; nothing can excuse them, but grosse igno∣rance: but what shall we say of those famous Do∣ctours, who have so learnedly written against Wickliff, even on the same score; and what of those Reverend and learned Bishops, who in Oxford condemned him, as an heretick, and who were so careful (as is manifest in Provin∣ciali veteri reprinted at Oxford in the year 1669.) of the Celebration of Mass. The Do∣ctor bespatters them all with Idolatry, sacri∣ledge, and blindness, ignorance and blasphemy.
But he might have considered, if malice or Ignorance had not blinded him; that under the name of the Roman Church, for so many hun∣dred of years, he impugns Christs Church within the five hundred years after Christ; even as it was established by Christ and his Apostels; for the Catholick Church was never without Mass, in that time; and what Masses or Liturgies were used in succeeding times, were delivered from those times; as the Roman or Latin Church challenges that of S. Peter, as it was declared by S. Clement; those of Hierusalem, and some other parts that of S. James; those of Affirica, that of S. Mark or S. Philip: The Grecians that of S. Basil who as S. Proclus testifies, did not add to any other precedent, but contract and abreviate what was formerly used. S. Chryso∣stome did the same to that of S. Basil; yet both
these liturgies or Masses, are in use to this day, in all the Grecian Churches: if then the Mass be Idolatry, and so fond a thing as this Doctor pretends; Christ never had a true Church upon earth: far as I shall shew in this short Tract, the Catholick Church was never without the sacri∣fice of the Mass, if we may believe Tradition, practise, and custome of all Christian Churches, Ecclesiastical or civil histories; Councils both General and of several Provinces in the whole world; and the unanimous consent of all the ho∣ly Fathers and Doctors.
I dare challenge Doctour Brevent, or any of his associates, to produce any one Nation, that ever roceived the Christian Faith without this sacrifice, or publick Divine Service but that which we call Mass or liturgy, under the notion of a sacrifice: The Grecians, as I said before, and all those who belong to that Church, as Ibe∣rians, Sclavonians, Russians, Muscovits, and in many parts of Asia, and Affrick, agree in the sacrifice of the Mass with some difference of Ceremonies. The Meridional parts, which contain the Nubians, the Abissins, and greatest parts in Aegypt, Arabia, and Chaldea, under the Patriarkate of Alexandria: The Nestori∣ans dispersed in Tartary, Persia, and the Ori∣ental parts, and kingdoms of India: the Arme∣nians, and Scithians: I do not say, that all these agree with the Latins in the manner or forme of Mass, or in their opinions; but in the sub∣stance
of a Sacrifice according to the Evange∣lical law, they all agree; deriving their form, rites, and ceremonies from the primitive times, that is, from the Patriarchal, Churches, foun∣ded by the Apostles, and their immediate suc∣cessours: In sine, all the patriarchal Sees of Rome, Antioch, Alexandria, and Hierusalem, together with that that of Constantinople have used, maintained, and approved the sacrifice of the Mass. It would be little less then Blasphe∣my, to make them all Mistresses and fomenters of Idolatry: and consequently, that the Church which Christ and his Apostles had erected, founded, and established, was Idolatrous, and the true Christian Church never appeared in any Nation of the Ʋniverse.
But what do I insist in this manner; when I speak to learned and understanding men, who well know the truth of what I say, and to whose judgments I humbly remit what I write; tru∣sting they will not condemn my boldness, but attribute it to the Zeal I have of the honour of that reverend Ʋniversity, which I so much re∣verence and esteem; and for whose true glory and happy progress, I offer up my continual pray∣ers, remaining alwaies

