


MY LORD,
IT is confidently reported of the Stork,
(plenty of which build in the Low-Countreys,
being Inmates in most chim∣neys)
that she usually throeth down one
of her young ones out of the nest, as a Rent
to the Land-lord of the house, for permitting thre her quiet
and unmolested habitation.
Now as our Saviour sends us to such Masters, [Behold the
fowles of theMat. 6. 2. aire &c.] of them all to learn the generall lesson
of a contented dependence on divine providence, (and
particularly Innocence from theMat. 10. 16. Doves) so may this
practise of the Stork instruct us to be gratefull to such as
have bestowed courtesies upon us.

Now the first light which I saw in this world was in a
BeneficeOldwinle (old shop Sax∣on) Saint Pe∣ters in North∣hampton-shire conferred on my Father by your most honourable
great Grand-father, and therefore I stand obliged in all
thankfulness to your family. Yea this my right hand which
grasped the first free aire in a Manor to which your Lordship
is Heir apparent, hath since often been catching at a Pen,
to write something in expression of my thankfulness, and now
at last dedicates this Book to your Infant honour. Thus as my
Obligation bears date from my Birth, my thankfulness makes
speed to tender it self to your Cradle.
I know it will be objected, that your Lordship is infraannu∣ated
to be the Patron of a Book in the strist acception thereof:
For a Patron properly is appealed to as Judge of the Me∣rits
of a Treatise. Yea Authors anciently-craved their
Patrons consent (as dutifull children their Parents leave)
whether that he thought it fit their work should be matched
to the Publick view, or rather remain in the single estate of
privacy. This censure some will cavill at me that your tender
Age is unable to pass, and therefore incapable of being a
Patron.
In answer hereunto, first I am assured, none of those who
please to call themselves Roman Catholicks, will lay
this to my charge. If they doe, I return them with the story
confessed by their Champian, of a child not fully five years old
consecrated Archbishop ofBonius An. Er. ann. 925. Rhemes, by Pope John the
tenth, sinc which time some children of small age, (but great
birth) have been made Cardinalls, though long since their
Church of Rome had been off the hooks, had it had no
stronger Hinges.
But generally I plead in my own defence, that Custome

Custome hath much mitigated the rigor of the word Patron,
which is not currant in common discourse, at so high a rate
whereat first it was coined, insomuch that a Negative voce
is denied to many Patrons now adays, and they generally used
not for Censurers, but Countenancers of books dedicated
unto them, in which notion I humbly request your Lordships
patronage of our present endevour.
Our London Gardiners doe not sow or set all their seeds
(though of the same kinde) at the same time, but so that they
may ripen successively, to last the longer in season. Such is
my design, planting a Nursery of Patrons, all Noble, but of
different years, a Babe, a Child, two youths of severall date,
and a Man, (having as a Scale of miles in my Maps, a Scale
of Ages in my Honourable Patrons) hoping so always to have
one or more in full power to protect my endevours.
Thus in process of time your Lordship (as yet but a Patron
in reversion) will be possessed with power effectually to dis∣charge
that place. As for the present, let not your tender age be
slighted by any, seeing such an one (Ma. 18. 2.  a little child) was
chosen by our Saviour to be Doctor of the Chair to determine
the controversie between the Disciples; which he truly decided,
not by his speech, but humble silence. Till such time as your
Honour shall be able to learn by my writing, may I learn from
your Honours living the necessary vertues of Meekness, Hu∣mility,
Quietness, Contentedness. For the continuance of which
in your Honour, with the daily addition and increase of other
Graces proportionable to your growth, the hearty prayers shall
never be wanting of

