



THERE is a late generation of People,
professed enemies to all humane Lear∣ning;
the most moderate amongst
them accounting it (as used in Divinity) no better
then the barrenLuke 13. 7. Fig-tree; Cut it downe, why cum∣breth
it the ground? whilest the more furious resem∣ble
it to the wilde2 Kings 4. 40 Gourd in the Pottage of the Chil∣dren
of the Prophets, deadly and pernicious. Thus
as Wisdome builtProv. 9. 1. her an house with seven Pillars,
(generally expounded the Liberal Sciences) Folly
seeketh (but I hope in vaine) to pluck down and de∣stroy
it.

The staple place whereon their ignorance or malice,
or both, groundeth their error, is on the words of the
ApostleColos. 2. 1.; Beware lest any man spoyle you through
Philosophy and vain deceipt; or, which is the same in
effect, vain and deceitfull Philosophy.
VVhich words seriously considered neither ex∣presse
nor imply any prohibition of true Philosophy, but
rather tacitly commend it: Thus, when our Savi∣our
saith,Mat. 7. 15. Beware of false Prophets, by way of opposi∣tion,
hee inviteth them to beleeve and respect such as
true-ones.
Indeed, if we consult the word in the notation
thereof, consisting of  to love, and  wisdom,
nothing can bee cavilled thereat: The childe of so
good Parents cannot bee bad, and the compound re∣sulting
thence, viz. Philosophy, or the love of Wisdom,
is the same so commended byProv. 29. 3. Solomon; Who so loveth
Wisdom, rejoyceth his Father.
True Philosophy, thus considered in it selfe, is,
as Clemens Alexandrinis termeth it, Aeternae verita∣tus,
sparagmon, a Sparke or Splinter of Divine truth:

Res Dei Ratio, saith Tertullian, God himselfe being,
in a sort, the great Grand father of every Philosophy
Act.
But wee confesse there is a great abuse of Philoso∣phy,
making it vain and deceitfull (according to the
Apostles just complaint;) when it presumeth by the
principles of Reason to crosse and controll the Articles of
Faith: then indeed it becometh  vain or empty,
as wherein nulla impletio, & multa inflatio, nothing to
fill man's minde, though too much to puffe it up;
which is true both of Philosophy in generall, and of
all the parts thereof.
Thus Logick, in it selfe, is of absolute necessity,
without which Saint Paul could never haveAct. 19. 9. disputed
two yeeres (no nor two houres) in the School of Ty∣rannus,
so highly did the Apostle prize it, that hee
desired to be free'd  from men who have
no Topicks, from absurd men who will fixe in no place
to bee convinced with reason: But Logick, thus
usefull, may bee abused and made deceitfull, either in
doubtfull Disputations, where the Questions can never

bee determined, or1 Tim. 6. 5. in perverse disputings of men,
where the Disputants are so humorous and peevish, that
they are unwilling to understand each other; making
wrangling, not satisfaction, the end of their dispute.
Ethicks in like manner are of speciall use in Divi∣nity,
though not to bee beleeved where they crosse
Christianity; namely, where they exclude Humility
from being a virtue (on the erroneous account
that it is destructive to Magnanimity) which is the
Christians Livery; Bee ye clothed1 Pet. 5. 5. with Humility: and
theMica. 6. 8. Third part of all which God, in this world, enjoy∣neth
us to performe.
Natural Philosophy must not bee forgotten, singu∣larly
usefull in Divinity, save when it presumes to
control the Articles of our Creed; it is one of the four
things for which the Earth isPro. 30. 22. moved: A Servant
when hee Reigneth; and intolerable is the pride of
Natural Philosophy, which should hand-maid it
to Divinity, when once offering to rule over it.
Your Honors worthy Grandfather William Lord
Maynard well knew the great conveniency, yea ne∣cessity

of Logick for Divines, when hee founded and
plentifully endowed a Professors place in the Vniversi∣ty
of Cambridge for the Reading thereof. Of Cambridge,
which I hope ere long you will grace with your pre∣sence,
who in due time may become a tudent and
good Proficient therein; Learning being no more
prejudiciall to a Person of Honor then moderate ballaste
to the safe-sayling of a Ship. Till which time and ever
after, the continuance and increase of all Happinesse
to you and your relations is the daily prayer of

