


MY LORD,
AMongst many other meditations, my
serious thoughts have made en∣quiry,
concerning Government and
Nobility, whence each of them de∣rived
their originall.
For the first, I finde it as ancient
as Man, and extracted from God
himself. Who because he was a Spirit, (and therefore invi∣sible)
the better to try what Tribute of obedience, Men out of
Conscience would pay unto him, stamped a character of do∣minion,

as his own visible Image (in the infancy of man∣kind)
on the Father of the family, that so honour and duty
might be given to God in yeelding subjection to him who
represented him. These first Governours were termed Patri∣arches,
that is, Father-Princes, their compounded name,
speaking their mixt authority. AndAnt. Iud. . 1. cap. 2. Josephus writing of the
death of Methuselah, saith , He left, or
passed over his principality to Lamech his son; and this
Prince-ship continued in the Primogeniture for many Ages,
till the method thereof was discomposed, partly by the nume∣rosity
of mankinde, partly by their far dispersed habitations.
Thus was Government the Mistresse, first born in the
world, whilest Nobility her Maide came in not long after to
attend her. For such Persons, whose vertuous dispositions
commended them to the speciall favour of Princes in Power,
had in reward of their worth; markes of Honour fixed upon
them: which afterward by succession descended unto their
posterity.
Of these, some imitating their Ancestours goodness, conti∣nued
in the splendor of their Nobility, whilest others degene∣rating
by their vicious courses, invited neglect and contempt
upon themselves. Insomuch that in some the valour and spirit of
their Progenitors (which advanced them by the sword in time
of war) evaporated all into empty aire; turning into a wild and
riotous animosity; And in others, the gravity and wisdome
of their Grandfathers (which promoted them by the Gown
in the days of Peace) settleth into feculent earth, leaving no∣thing
but a tame and unactive stupidity behinde it.
Herethe Nobility of such had expired, save that some of them
seasonably perceiving the desperate Consumption thereof

did follow the prescription of Physick, and returned into the
Native aire which first gave Honour her birth and being;
and did so repair their lost reputation by practising the Primi∣tive
vertues of Piety, Courtesie, Hospitality; Valour,
Wisdome, and Learning; thus going home to the Climate
wherein Nobility was first conceived.
But thanks be to God, your Lordship is none of those
personally guilty of any decay of dignity; whose vertues pre∣serve
your Honour in the perfect health and strength thereof,
which hath been the main motive to make me so desirous to
present my book to your Honour, as a proper Patron, even to the
height, for all purposes and intents. Whose Iudgment can ex∣amine
the whole, Clemency Pardon what is amiss, and Great∣ness
Protect the rest in defiance of opposition.
Indeed Sir, besides desire to shelter my self under your Pa∣tronage,
gratitude obligeth me to tender my service to your
Honour. For all my Books, being my nether and upper
milstone, (and such by the Leviticall Law, might not be
taken to pledge, because a MansDeut 24. 5. life) without which I had
been rendered unable to grinde any Grist for the good of my
self or others, had been taken from me in these civill wars, had
not a Letter from your Lady-mother preserved the greatest
part thereof. Good reason therefore that the first handfull of
my finest meale should be presented in thankfulness to your
family.
And now my Lord, bethinking my self of a blessing for your
self and worthy Lady, that she-pattern of Meekness, Modesty
Piety, and Patience; no fitter can be found then what the
Psalmist pronounceth, that you may see your childrens
children, andPsal. 128. 7. Peace upon Israel. Here is the finest of

wares, and withall the largest of measures, length of days,
to enjoy them. Well may this prayer be read at Marriages,
there being a marriage in the Prayer, wherein Long-life
coupleth Posterity and Peace together. Otherwise it is wofull
to multiply for war to subtract; and onely to be fruitfull
for the Sword or Famine. May this Benediction of the
Psalmist light on you and yours in the highest performance
thereof: which is the desire of

