


MY LORD,
PErusing this passage in the beginning of Saint
Lukes Gospell,—ToLuke 1. 3. 4. write unto thee in
order, most excellent Theophilus, that
thou mightest know the certainty of those
things, , wherein thou hast
been catechised, or, instructed: it furnished me with some
observables, very conducible to my present purpose;

1 Though GodLuk. 18. 19. alone be good, yet man in some sense
may be most excellent.
2 Even in that age, wherein they hadAct. 4. 32. all things
common, Nobility remained severall, as appro∣priated
to some principall persons.

3 No diminution to the dignity of a Noble man, to
be catchised, , in the Principles of Re∣ligion.
4 Dedicating of Books of Noble persons is an anci∣ent
practise,  Scripture precedents.
5  not patronage
for his book (the Word of God being theEphes. 6. 7. sword of
the  to defend it)
but intended the instruction of Theophilus therein.

The  the tex, encourgd me, ing to
put forth a Treatise to publick view, to make choice of an ho∣nourable
Patron, and hope I have found a Theophilus in
your Lordship, whom I see to be young, know to be Noble,
and beleeve to e religous. The composure therefore of
this ensuing bo (the issue by Gods blessing of  own in∣dustry)
this alone I humbly  to  Honour to pro∣tect
the same. As for the matter thereof, being wholly Scri∣pture,
I heartily dedicate your Honour thereto, to be in∣structed
therewith.
And now, my Lord, may I request you to tke a serious
survey of your own extraction, to be unto you a forcible motive
unto vertue. To instance onely in your deceased Ancestors (as
cut of the reach of flattery) John your Atavus by his wise∣dome,
and valour (the fortunate Generall against the Rebels
in the West) founded under God the Nobility of your fami∣ly.
Francis your Abavus (whose Hall seemed a Court, Clo∣set,
a Chappell, and Gate-house, an Hospitall) shined as a
light with his piety in those darker days. William your Pro∣avus,
to whom agreed the character of Sergius Paulus,Act. 13. 7. A
prudent man, and Deputy of the Countrey, and that an

Island too (though not Cyprus, yet) Ireland; of whose abi∣lities Queen Elizabeth was well assured, when choosing him Pilot of that leaking Land; then toffed with the violent tem∣pest of Rebellion. Francis your , whose death I would epithete Untimely (not onely for the behoof of his own fa∣mily, but benefit of the whole nation) did not the same autho∣rity, which reproved Saint Peter for calling that commonAct. 10.15., which he had cleansed, forbid me to term any thing untimely which his Providence hath appointed.
Now, my Lord, upon a review of this your pedegree, I will
not be so Pedantick to minde you of a Grammar-instance,
to make it true construction in your Honours practise, Mag∣norum
haudquaquam indignus avorum; but in Scripture-phrase
I request you toIsa. 51. 1. Look to the rock whence you are
hewn, and the hole of the pit whence you are digged;
and doe nothing unworthy of that honourable parentage,
whence you are derived.
Far be it from your Honour to be listed among those noble
men, of whom it may be said in a sad sense, that they are very
highly descended, as being come down many degrees from
the worth, and virtues of their noble Progenitors.
To conclude then with Theophilus, with whom I began.
It is observable of him, that though styled most excellent by
Saint Luke in his Gospell, yet in the Book of the Acts (which
was written many years after) he calls him onelyActs 1. 1. Theophi∣lus,
without any honourable addition. What? Had Saint
Luke in process of time less civility, or Theophilus (with
more age) less Nobility? Surely neither, but Saint Luke
may be presumed, purposely to wave his titles, out of compli∣ance
to the temper of Theophilus, who in his reduced age

grew weary of worldly pompe, more pleased to have the truth
of honour fixed within him, then hear the titles thereof fast∣ned
upon him: according to the Analogie of the Apostles
preept, Let him that hath honour, be as if he had it not.
Thus, the longer your Lordship shall live, the less you will
delight in outward state, and daily discover the vanity there∣of;
especially in your old age, your soul will grow sensible, that
nothing can satisfie it, which is less then Grace, or Glory, or
God himself. To whose protection you are committed, by the
daily prayer of him, who is
 Waltham Abbey,
Iuly 16. 1650.
