



HOw low Learning ran in our Land a∣mongst
the Native Nobility some two
hundred yeares since, in the Reign
of King Henry the sixth, too plainly ap∣peareth
by the Motto in the Sword of the Mar∣tiall
Earle of Shrewsbury, (where at the same time
one may Smile at the Simplicity, and Sigh at the

Barbarisme thereof;) SUM TALBOTI, PRO OC∣CIDERE
INIMICOS MEOS. The best Latin that
Lord (and perchance his Chaplains too, in that
Age) could afford.
But in the next Generation we may observe the
Rise of Learning in Noble Families. I behold John
Tiptoft Earle of Worcester (bred in Bailioll Colledge)
as the first English Person of Honour that graced
Learning with the Study thereof, in the dayes of
King Edward the fourth, both at Home and in For∣reign
Vniversities. He made so1. Bale de Scrip. Angl. Eloquent an Oration
in the Vatican, in the presence of Pope Pius the se∣cond,
(one of the least Bad, and most Learned of
any of his Order) that his Holiness was divided be∣twixt
Weeping and VVondering thereat.
This Earle may be said to have left John Bour∣chier,
Baron of Berners and Governour of Callis, the
Heir to his Learning; as who wroteIdem & Pitz de Scrip. Anglic. many Treatises,
and made Excursions into Variety of Studies, in the
dayes of King Henry the seventh.
This Learned Baron had severall Successours under
King Henry the eighth, at the same time, to his Parts
and Liberall Studies.
1. Henry Lord Stafford, Son to the last Duke of
Buckingham of that Name.
2. William Lord Montjoy, a great Patron to Eras∣mus,
and well skilled in Chymistry and Ma∣thematicks.

3. Henry Howard, Earle of Surrey, (though last
in Time, not least in Merit) the first reviver
of English Poetry: so that he may seem in some
sort to wave his Coronet, to wear the Laurell.
Since whose time to our dayes Learning hath ever
had a visible succession in our Nobility. Amongst whom
your Honour, as Captain of the Highest Form, is most
illustrious.
Indeed, your Lordship is a reall Refutation of that
Scandalous Position which some maintain, That such
who are generally seen in all Arts, cannot be eminently
skilfull in any one. A Position no better then a Libell
on Learning, invented and vented either by the Idle,
who would not themselves Study; or by the Envious,
who desire to discourage the Endeavours of others.
VVhereas there is such a Sympathy betwixt several
Sciences (as also betwixt the learned Languages) that (as
in a Regular Fortification one Piece strengtheneth ano∣ther)
a resultive Firmeness ariseth from their Compli∣cation,
reflecting Life and Lustre one on another.
Arts may be said to be Arched together: and all Lear∣ned
Faculties have such a Mutual Reciprocation. Thus
one is the better Canonist, for being a good Civilian, and
a better Common-Lawyer, for being both of them. And
hereof your Honour is an Experimentall Proof, whose
Knowledge is spread so broad, yet lieth so thick in all Li∣berall
Sciences.
VVhat remaineth, but that I crave leave humbly
to mind your Lordship of that allusive Motto to your

Name, PIE REPONE TE; that your Honour re∣posing
yourself piously in this life, may in a good
Old Age be gloriously translated into another?
The desire of

