



My lord,
GReat was the difference betwixt the breeding
of Adonijah and Solomon, though sons to the
same father. The former tasted not of Re∣proof,
much lesse of Correction; it being never said unto
him, Why1 kings 1. 6. hast thou done so?
Solomon had his education on severer Principles. He was
his Parents Darling, not theirProv. 4. 3. Fondling. It was after
sounded in his ears, WhatProv. 31. 2. my Son, and what the Son of my
womb?
Our English Gentry too often embrace the first course
in breeding their Children, whereby they become old-Men,
before they are wise-Men, because their Fathers made
them Gentlemen, before they were Men, making them
too soon to know the great Means they are born to, and too
long to be ignorant of any good quality, whereby to acquire

a maintenance, in case, their Estates, (as all things are un∣certain)
should faile, or forsake them. Hence it is, they
are as unable to endure any hardship as David to march in
Sauls armour, (for heI Sam. 17. 39. had never proved it) utterly un∣acquainted
therewith.
But your discreet Parents, though kinde, were not
cockering unto you, whom they sent (very young) into the
Low-Countreys, where in some sort you earned what you
eat in no lesse honourable than dangerous employment. This
hath setled the sinewes of your Soule, and compacted the
ioynts thereof, which in too many hang loose, as rather
tackt than knit together.
Since being returned into England, partly by your
Patrimony, partly by your Matrimony, an antient and fair
Estate hath accrewed unto you. Yet it hath not grown,
(as S. Basil fancieth roses in Paradise before Adams fall)
without thorns and prickles. Many molestations attended it,
through which you have waded in a good measure, having
had TRIALS indeed, wherein on what side soever the
Verdict went, you gained Patience and Experience.
Indeed, there is an experience the MISTRESSE of FOOLS,
which they learn by their losses, and those caused by their
own carelesness, or wilfulness, in managing their affairs. But
also there is one, the MASTER-PIECE of VVISE-MEN

to attain, wherein they observe the events of all things, after
their utmost endevours have submitted the success to Divine
Providence. Yours is of the last and best kind, whereby you
are become a skilfull Master of Defence, Knowing all the
advantageous postures and guards in our Lawes, not there∣by
to vex others, but save your self from vexation.
Thus having born the Yoke in your youth, you may the
better afford ease and repose to your reduced age; and ha∣ving
studied, many Men in Armes, more in Gowns, you
now may solace your self, and entertain the time, with peru∣sing
of Books, amongst which, I humbly request, this may
have the favour of your Honours eye, to whom on a double
motive it is Dedicated; First, because containing the Life
of that PRINCE, who for His Piety may be exem∣plary
to all persons of quality. Secondly, because it was He,
who conferred the highest (still remaining) Honour, on
your Family, advancing it (formerly very antient amongst
the Barons) to the degree and dignity of Viscounts: where∣in
that it may long flourish in plenty and happinesse, is the
daily prayer of

