



Most endeared Fathers and Brethren in the Lord Christ.
FOrasmuch as subscribing the Engage∣ment required by Act of Parliament, is very unworthily contradicted, and un∣justly censured; not only by some men of corrupt minds and perverse spirits, but also by some eminent persons professing the truth which is after godliness; as if a declaring & pro∣mising to be true and faithfull to the Common-wealth of England, as it is now-established without a King, and house of Lords, were unlawfull. It hath therefore seemed good unto me, (who am concerned herein, as well as other pru∣dent and piously conscientious Christians throughout the Nation) to give a just and faithful account of the Reasons grounded on the Word of God, perswading and sway∣ing to ingage. This my undertaking is also the rather in the behalf, and for the sake of severall sorts of people, I being desirous according to the will of God, as oportu∣nity and capacity serveth, to do good unto all; albeit, more especially to the houshold of faith. Because some are, viz.


1. Malignant adversaries, who cease not to withstand and calumniate just waies, and to speak evill of them that walk therein, as evill doers; even these enemies of righte∣ousnesse, have notwithstanding some offices of heigh∣bourly love, and Christian duty owing to them from Christs Disciples, which ought to be performed. See Mat. 5. 44. that so they may be convinced, and made a∣shamed, and their ignorance may be put to silence, (1 Pet. 2. 15. & 3. 16.) if peradventure they may repent, and ob∣taine paidon of their sin. See Act. 8. 22.
2. Sullen malecontents, and refractory despisers of present Government, transported by a spirit of delusion; who unavoidably taking notice of the Viall of Gods Wrath powred upon the Sun, i. e probably, on an emi∣nent nominall Protestant Prince, but adhering fixedly to Romish Hierarchy, rooted in Popery, so as they are scor∣ched with heat, and gnaw their tongues for pain, and think they do well to be angry even to death, not repen∣ting of their deeds, nor giving glory to God. Who knoweth whether it may yet please God, that these may not hearken to that divine exhortation, Zech. 2. 13. Be si∣lent O all flesh before the Lord, for he is raised up out of his holy habitation; Yea, and take up the acclamation of the Angell of the waters, Rev. 16. 5, 6, 7. Thou art righteous O Lord, which art, and wast, and shalt be, because thou hast judged thus; For they have shed the blood of Saints and Pro∣phets, and thou hast given them bloud to drink, for they are worthy. And of another Angell, Even so Lord God Almighty, true and righteous are thy judgements.
3. Novices, and unskilfull persons newly entred into the way of Christianity, who are as children, and have not so fully attained the Spirit of Love, of Power, and of a sound mind, nor yet are of capacity by use to exercise



their senses in discerning both good and evill, (Heb. 5. 13. 14.) such ought to be dealt withall respectively and ten∣derly, and by some manuduction guided in their way, e∣ven as a nurse cherisheth her children in their minority. See Isa 66. 12, 13. Hos. 11. 3. 1 Thes. 2. 7.
4. Scrupulous questionists, and conflicting Christians in the school and field of spirituall warfare, who being as∣saulted by the lustfull devices of their owne deceitfull hearts; and also by Satan, and his Agents co-operating suggestions, may stand in need of brotherly and fellow souldierly assistance, and mutuall incouragement. See Gal. 5. 17. 1 Iohn 2. 13, 14. Even as the brave Captaine Generall Ioab did most prudently in a Councel of War, advertise his brother Abishai in the warre against the Sy∣rians and Ammonites, 2 Sam 10. 9. 10, 11, 12.
5. Fathers and growne men in Christianity, establi∣shed in the truth, which is after godlinesse, who are come to the Unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Sonne of God, and a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulnesse of Christ, Ephes. 4. 13. even these may be excited and incouraged to glorifie God in their beholding the unanimity of their brethren, in their actings according to the uncontroulable principles of the sacred Scriptures, of both the Old and New Testament, See Exod. 20. 12. Rom. 13. 1. compared, with Galat. 1. 23. 24.
6. The Supreme Powers, and Fathers of our Native Countrey, may hence take knowledge for their greater incouragement, (who have enacted Parliamentarily the subscribing of the Engagement) in their well-governing; that the Christians subject to their Authority, doe with good reason submit themselves to a due compliance therein, and are ready to render just grounds of their so o∣beying



in the Lord, according to the rule of Scripture. See Mat. 22. 21. Titus 3. 1.
This my plain and upright-hearted endeavour, I doe humbly offer and dedicate to your prudent, and imparti∣all censures and patronage, who according to the know∣ledge you have experienced of my doctrine and conver∣sation amongst you, are most able and meet to judge what I say, and in proving all things, to hold fast that which is good, as indeed ye ought. See 1 Cor. 10. 15. 1 Thes. 5. 21. My reciprocall and obliged Engagement mutually, I chuse to expresse in the very words of the blessed Apo∣stle Paul, even as he testified his love and faithfulnesse to the Saints at Corinth. See 2 Cor. 1. 12, 13. My rejoycing is this the testimony, of my conscience, that in simplicity, and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdome, but by the grace of God, I have had my conversation in the world, and more a∣bundantly to you wards. For I write none other things un∣to you, then what you read, or acknowledge, and I trust you shall acknowledge, even to the end. Now the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord, Je∣sus, that great Shepheard of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting Covenant: Make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which is wel-pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, To whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen. So prayeth,

