



IT is your Command, Madam, that I should
make public the ensuing Oration on Favo∣rite,
and your Commands can be no more re∣sisted
than your Eyes. But besides, that it is
not in the power of your Slave to disobey
you, I can pay no less a Tribute to the Manes
of our deceas'd Brother in servitude, than to
give this public Testimony of the respect I
have for his Virtues.
Other Lovers not so disinteressed as my
self, might perhaps triumph at the death of
so considerable a Rival as was Favorite. But
I, Madam, who take share in all your Affli∣ctions,
am so far from rejoicing at it, and e∣recting
a Trophy on his untimely Destiny,

that I profess all the Consolation I can fetch
From Philosophy, from the Lyceum, the Porti∣cus,
or the Tusculanum, is not able to support me
under the deep sense I have of your unspeak∣able
Loss.
Nor can we condemn, or think unwarrant∣able
your Grief. Were not the World suffici∣ently
acquainted with the deserts of Favorite,
yet even those who were altogether strangers
to his good Qualities wou'd deduce a reasona∣ble
consequence, that there was something
most emphatically, most conspicuously shin∣ing
in him, which should prefer hint to Urania's
favour. For certainly a Woman of your Dis∣cernment,
a Woman so nice a Judge, and so
bountiful a Rewarder of Merit, whether in
Man or Brute, cou'd never bestow so plen∣tiful
a portion of your Kindness on a Dogg,
whose Endowment did not give him a title to
it. In fine, you fed, you cherished, you caress'd
him. By your Favour you rais'd him more
above the Animals of his own Species, than
Animals themselves are exalted above the in∣ferior
Vegetables.

'Tis true, he created some private Jealousies,
some Discontents in the Breasts of your Ad∣miters:
But to do publick justice to his ashes,
I must say that of Favorite, which cannot,
without manifest injury to truth, be affirm'd
of all the other Favorites of Princes, of the
Richelieus, of the Mazarins, of the Wolseys, of
the Buckinghams, of the Lerma's, and of the
Olivares, that in the Universal corruption of
a most degenerate Age, he preserv'd an un∣blemish'd,
an inviolable Integrity to his Mi∣striss;
that he did not give Intelligence to a
Forreign Court, of the private Resolutions
of State that were taken in the Cabinet at
home; that when Affairs of Importance
called her Abroad, he did not stay be∣hind
her, nor sleep ingloriously upon the
Couch; that he stood unmov'd, stood un∣shaken,
against all the Attacks of Bribes;
that he did not crush calamitous Merit be∣neath
him, nor supplant the Obstacle in his
way above him; that he never Smiled where
he intended to ruine. In shore, that he de∣spised
the little Artifices of the Great, as the

Politick Nod, the slavish Cringe, the deceit∣ful
Bow, the betraying Hugg, and the mur∣dering
Whisper.
But I will enlarge no farther on his Prai∣ses,
since I am sensible that by my want of
Ability he has suffer'd too much already in
the ensuing Oration. Expect not then that
after I have injur'd your Dog, I should be
so hardy as to attempt your Panegyric, that
is, to injure you. For, Madam, should I
employ all the Tragical forces of Rhetorick,
should I lavish all the magnificence of Ex∣pression,
and all the splendid pomp of Me∣tephors,
I should fall infinitely short of my
Divine Argument. Eloquence here loses its
use, the gaudy Train of Tropes and Figures
are but vain and empty Ostentation. We
cannot speak Figuratively of you, we cannot
speak of you with exaggeration. You tran∣scend
all Hyperboles, your Merit rises above
the sublimest flights of Fancy. I shall on∣ly
say, that all Virtues unite to make a
bright Constellation in you, and that if
there were a general shipwrack of your Sex,

we should find the scatter'd Perfections ofWomankind collected in your self.
Other Ladies, if they have their Graces
have their Defects withal. Angelica talks a∣way
the merit of her Face, and what she
gains by her Eyes, she loses by her Tongue.
Horatia overwhelms us by the splendor, and
leads us Captives by the Arts of her Dress,
who were she to be seen in dishabillee in the
ruelle, would sigh to see her self no longer
the Object of Adoration. Melanissa appears
with advantage in the simplicity of an un∣artful
Attire, who cannot suppress the pomp
and Ornament of Dress. Sempronia treads
on every Heart when she Dances, but gains
no Triumph when she Sings. Belinda charms
us with her Voice, but is disagreeable at a
Ball. Oriana, with her melancholy Air,
gives us sad Cause of Melancholy, but ex∣cites
our Laughter with her own. Aurelia
has Wit, has Youth, has Beauty to fix the
most roving Heart, but cannot fix her
own. Lindamira woul'd make the most con∣stant
Lover in the Universe, but wants the

Charms to make us so. Aemilia speaks fa∣vourably
of all the World, but gives all
the World just occasion not to speak fa∣vourably
of her. Cassandra's Innocence is a∣bove
the Censure of others, but the Inno∣cence
of others cannot defend themselves
from the Censure of Cassandra. But in you,
Madam, we find united all the Advantages
of the happiest of your Sex, without any of
their Defects. What the most celebrated
Wit of this Age has said, of the most cele∣brated
Beauty of a neighbouring Kingdom,
may with equal Justice be applied to you.
One may be constant to you, with all the
pleasure of inconstancy. We change every
moment for your Graces, but are still con∣stant
to your Person. But, Madam, as I
shall not offer Incense to you that has been
presented at other. Altars, so neither will I
attempt your Comparison with the most il∣lustrious
Beauties of the former, or present
Ages. When ever we think or talk of you,
Madam, the Dispute is not with other, but
with your self, which Part, which Feature,
which Posture is most agreeable; whether

you charm us most when you Move or Sit,
Stand or Walk; Whether, you throw the
Lover down more with your hand, than you
trample on him with your foot; whether is
most powerful, the Eloquence of your Eyes,
 that of your Tongue; whether is most
delicate, your Tread in the Conduct of your
Life, or that of your Gate: In short, whe∣ther
your Thoughts are brighter than your
Looks, and whether is most boundless your
Fancy, to the Empire of your Beauty. Thus
it is with you, Madam, as with Kings or
Princes, whom we dare not bring in com∣petition
with their Inferiours, but measure
them by themselves, and compare one part
of their Life by the other.
Thus, Madam, by the common Fate of
all Dedicators I have suffer'd my self to be
carried into the stream of Panegyric, even
after I had protested against it; but I shall
prosecute this Argument no farther, which
I am not able to sustain; the dreadful fate
of Salmoneus ought to deterr me, who died
by the Bolts he endeavour'd to imitate. By
observing this conduct, I shall not only con∣sult

my own Reputation, but the Interest
too and Repose of Mankind: For should I
persist to draw your fair Picture, should I
descend into the detail of your innumerable
Excellencies and Perfections, there would
fall ten thousand Victims at your Feet, and
this Epistle Dedicatory might prove perhaps, in
some sense, a Funeral Oration on the Reader.
I see, Madam, your Breast is capable of
tender Impressions. You can be mov'd at the
Fate of Favorite, (no wonder he out-ran Us
in your Affection, since four Legs will al∣ways
be too many for two) take pitty then
of his Orator. You can weep to see him
dead, pay then a Teat to the Funerals of the
Man, whom your self, whom your own
bright Eyes have slain.
