



Madam,
IT is not worth the Errand of an Epi∣stle Dedicatory of an Evangelical Dis∣course, to tell the world of the Nobi∣lity and greatness of its desired Sus∣ceptor: Nor would such an impertinent gawd at the entrance, much awaken and incourage your Honour to the perusal of what follows in the Body of the Book.
And if I should (as more genuine and congruous) tell your Ladiship, and there∣by my Reader, of the Piety that shines in all the circumstances of your Relations and Converse, I must expect that your humble and self-denying reflections on your self (to which the most worthy are the most disposed) world distaste it, as too much bordering upon the too common flat∣tery of Epistles Dedicatory, which seldom regard what is true, but what is plausible. Yet if I am obliged to give some account
 why I Dedicate this my poor undertaking, on so great a Subject, to your Ladiship, I am content to give you and my Reader some satisfaction. I have by your Honours favour, and the Conduct of a greater Pro∣vidence been many years acquainted in my Ministerial work and converse with you, and divers of your Noble Family, as well as your Houshold, and its circumstances; on whom I have reason to believe my Con∣cerns for your Spiritual and Eternal Wel∣fare have not been wasted, but have pro∣duced or fostered what hath been becoming the Gospel of Christ. And I know not why that Husbandman should be blamed whose prudence disposes his best seed on that ground which his experience hath proved genuine and fruitful.
And (if it need it) I am content to crave pardon for saying that beside your Ladi∣ships Personal Conversation, and that of your Noble Sister the Lady Eleanor Hollis, (whom nature and piety hath bound to so near a Converse, that you know not well how to live asunder) I cannot remember that I have heard in your Family to the meanest of your Servants one sinful word, but observed so blameless a deportment that to say (their profession added) there is a Church in your House, or rather that your
 Houshold are fit matter for a Church, would not be beyond measured truth. And this I have said as that which the consideration of, hath been often grateful to me, but prin∣cipally to engage persons of your quality and character (as to serious profession) to the like care in the choice and manage of their Housholds, and not to excuse them∣selves from endeavouring it as a thing im∣possible. But Madam,
Besides what is said in the Title of the Book presented to your Ladiship, which is almost all that can be said to perswade its acceptance (if the management of so great a Subject were answerable) I can say little to commend it to you. The Gospel of Peace, and the Government of our own spi∣rits meeting together, will certainly create so happy an experiment, as will little need, and be much above the accessions of what most men court and adore, because they know no better.
Your Ladiship hath been many years in Christs School of instruction, which the Noble Families of Clare by Title, and Hollis by proper name (of which you are so prin∣cipal a member) have not disdained, but embraced equally with the most forward Professors of Christianity. This is not to be post-poned to the greatest of your bles∣sings
 in this world, of which no good ac∣count can be given, but by so learning Christ as to embrace and live the truth as it is in Jesus. This carries with it the wisdom, the comfort and fortitude of a Christian in this life, and the well-grounded evidence of an interest in the consummate blessedness of that which is to come.
If I also add, that you are not unacquain∣ted with Christs School of affliction, it is but saying that Divine wisdom hath given you the more means and advantages of learning, and being wise to Salvation; and that mark which none of Gods legiti∣mate Children are without; a fruit of Gods faithfulness and fatherly care, which his best Children can no more be without, than infirm bodies without dieting and Me∣dicines. Some silly people take that condi∣tion to be most happy, which is most easie for the present; and that the most accom∣plished wherein their most corrupt affecti∣ons meet with no check, and their sleep in the forgetfulness of God and their duty is most undisturbed. Others (no more dis∣cerning than they) propose to themselves, that if they can but clamber any how to greatness, and make their nests on the mountains of this world; they dwell where those vapours and storms have nothing to
 do, nor can find any place, that so much molest the meaner sort, that herd in the vallies. But Madam, you know, and are willing to know and have it known, that those great appearances have no such im∣munities, and that a moderation of spirit under adversities, and a holy improvement of them, is an aim and attainment much more rational and secure. Blessed is the man whom thou chastnest, O Lord, and teachest out of thy Law; that thou mayest give him rest from the days of adversity, &c. But I have almost forgotten that I am writing an Epistle of this nature, and seem to my self discoursing with your Ladiship after my wonted freedom. I shall add no more but my wishes, raised to sincere requests to the Father of Mercies, and the God o  Com∣forts, that as the following  peculiarly directed to you, so you may more especially embrace the  reap the Blessings which are the  of it. That you may  ways of Evangelical  i. e. ¦dience of Faith, which you haue  and espoused; and that your  have that portion of the Righteous, which is to shine brighter, and brighter, unto perfect day: That all your Mercies may be filled with comforts, by him who
 is the God and disposer of both: That all your Relations may have a portion of real goodness, equal to, and beyond that of out∣ward greatness: That your own Personal mercies may by that spring of Divine love from whence they derive, be rendred more sweet, and your afflictions from the same cause, become less bitter. That the God of all grace would supply all your need, according to the riches of his Glory by Jesus Christ, till you arrive at that place and estate, where no sin, nor want, nor foe, nor affliction can enter.

July 22d. 1687.
