



May it please Your Majesty,


STerne Fates permitted, Your Great Syre to fall
By those (who at the first) disguiz'd their ends
With specious showes, and have procur'd our thrall
Like holy miscreants, and Religious Fiends,
By a most pious trick, have slav'd us all
To Death, an Hell, till Jove his mission sends
By Michal's hand, to Thee Great Charls His Heire
To Redeeme us, and fill the Regall Chaire.



The depth of their Designe, was hatch'd in Hell
From the first houre, Your Father warm'd his Seate;
So that even Infants now can prattle well
Twenty years since (in thought they were as great

As now they are) and (O most strange) to tell
Had taken Oathes, their Machine, to compleat
Or sinke in the attempt, though to the Nation
It seem'd, they nothing sought, but Reformation.



O Reformation dire, that kils our King,
Doth both invert, and subvert, Discipline;
Vacates all Law, each private man doth bring
(For fear) to countenance, their damn'd Designe.
Propriety, Great Britains Gimiel KING
Taken away, while Treason in a line
Like the plague takes, and the damn'd Faction grows
Great in that Tribe, in which at first it rose.



Our Goods and Lives, we forfeit at their wils
Our Noble Heros, do by dozens fall;
The Loyall Gentry, grief, or Prisons kils;
The People each day rob'd and spoil'd of all,
While those Plebeians, who procure our ills
Feed high, sleep soft, have Kingdomes at their cals.
Strange revolution, O accurst mutation
That appoints Coblers for to rule a Nation.



But sure (Great Prince) thou oft hast laugh'd aloud
To cogitate, what their ambition
Hath brought them to, who now are grown so proud
As (fearlesse of thy strength, and their condition)
As to proclaime Thee Traytor, midst the crowd
And to divulge, their Trayterous prohibition
If thou returne, for to regaine thy right
Thou must expect to perish by their spight.




Summon all Nations, to thy speedy aide,
Search from the Orient to the Occident,
The Gets, and Parthians, Switzers, (who are swaid
By fierce Camillas second) Tartars bent
To bloud and horrour, those whose God is said
To hang twixt Heaven and Earth, the Truculent;
Fastidious Moore, take all, except 'gainst none,
For many hands, must lead Thee to Thy Throne.



So let this most unhospitable Land
Smart for her Treasons till all kneele to Thee
Offering themselves as Slaves to Thy Command
Whom Jove hath sworn, an Earthly Deitie
That by Thy heavy, and Victorious hand
Those Monsters who doom'd Thy great Syre to die
May receive treble vengeance, and so perish,
Ensuing times, may fear their thoughts to cherish.



That having gain'd thine own, appeas'd the Rabble,
Silenc'd Thy foes, by Counsels or by Death,
Purg'd that accursed fowle Augaean stable
At Westminster, by Thy vindictive breath
Like Thy Great Ancestors, Thou maist be able
To weare in Peace, Great Britaines glorious Wreath,
While all Thy Subjects for to serve Thee Joy
Singing allowd with me, Vive le Roy.

