



SIR,
WHen I had yielded up my modesty (or ra∣ther my consciousnesse of my too ma∣ny and too great defects) as a spoile to the wills and importunity of others, and had hearkened to them so far as to venture and expose these Sermons and my self to censure, I did then without any deliberation or study tell my self to whom they were due; nor did any thought interpose it self, but this one, that they were not worth your eye or owning. I had once resolved to have sent them naked into the world without any name before them but my own; and could have been well content to have left that out also (for I am not over-proud of them) But then I conceived that though they could speak but little for themselves, yet they might for me (who dare not do so much for them) and at least be as a witnesse or Manifesto of my deep apprehension of your many noble favours, and great charity to me and mine, when the sharpnesse of the weather, and the roughnesse of the times had blown all from us, and well-neer left us naked. And to this end with all the heartinesse, and height of thankfulnesse I here pre∣sent them, and humbly put them into your hands, that when you turn them over, you may read something
 besides my imperfectios, even that truth which will make you happy, and with it my gratitude. I would not be the grave of that charity which can never dye, but when we are dead will follow us; and (I thank God) I understand a benefit, and can behold it in all its circumstances; and to me it appears fresher and fai∣rer every Day, putting me in mind from whence it came, and by what hands it was conveyed, and it fills me with Prayers and Praises, and Gratulations; and I blesse God, and cry Grace, Grace, unto the hand and instrument. Worthy Sir, this is the fairest and best re∣turn that my poverty can make, and (I nothing doubt) but you will look upon it as the fairest and best; for this I can make, and by the blessing of God you want no other. I see my self deeply obliged to you, and by your favour to many other Noble and Religious Gentlemen, and I have but the same payment for all which I will ever pay (for a thankfull man is al∣waies in debt) even to my last payment, when I shall render up my soul to God that gave it. The same God who put it into your hearts, fill your hearts with that Joy which is the purchase of Charity. I cannot end, but with my hearty prayer to the God of blessings for a blessing on you and your whole family, which is the dayly prayer of
Sir,

April. 20. 1657.
