



Madam,
IT is not the sense of the mighty Favours I stand in∣debted for, that moves me to presume to dedicate this Work to Your Majesty; for Debts to Sovereigns are above all acknowledgement. Nor is it

Protection I sue for under so August a Patroness; the Subject carries its own Security and De∣fence along with it, though per∣haps the Stile be not proportio∣nable to such Glorious Matter. It is Justice that leads me to lay this most Wonderful History at Your Majesties Royal Feet. To whom could I tender the unpa∣rallel'd Undertaking of Your Kingly Progenitors, but to You their inimitable Offspring? To whom could I offer up the Most Heroick Atchievements of Your Forefathers Subjects, but to You the Most Glorious of their Line? In fine, to whom could I yield up the more than Human Con∣quests of Your Country, but to You the Most Admired of the Portugues Race? These are the Motives, these the Inducements that prevail with me, not only

to hope, but even to assure my self of a Gracious Acceptance of this, though seemingly Presum∣ptuous, yet in reality most sub∣missive Tender of my First Un∣dertaking in this Nature. A Sub∣ject so Glorious does not need the Ornament of Retorick. The Sacred History, than which none can be more surprizing or won∣derful, is delivered to us in the plainest of Language. Great Actions are still Great, though exprest in the meanest Words: But mean Undertakings require a florid Stile to gain them some∣thing of Reputation. The Sub∣ject is worthy Your Majesties acceptance, though the Style may not appear equal; that will make amends for this, and the low∣ness of the later will be hid by the grandeur of the former. I would not confess a Guilt by

begging Pardon; a wilful Of∣fence against so much Good∣ness would deserve no Mercy. God himself whose Great At∣tribute is Mercy, does not hear our Cries, if we persist to pro∣voke his Wrath. Why then should I expect Forgiveness, if I knowingly Transgressed? Yet being sensible of my own de∣merit, I must cast my self up∣on Your Majesties unlimited Goodness, thence to expect my Doom; which cannot fail be∣ing happy, having its depen∣dence on so Horoick and Tru∣ly Royal a Spirit. In fine, Madam, I will neither be my own Accuser, nor pretend to justifie or make good my Cause; the decision of it I can leave to no more Tender or Favourable Judge than Your Majesty, in whom my Failings

may be assured to find Com∣passion, from whom my Zeal may hope to reap Honour, and to whom all Increase of Glory and Happiness is wished by,
Madam,

