



MY LORD,
WHEN Your Lordship was pleased, upon a Motion of the Reverend Dr. Stanhop, seconded by the rest of the Clergy who heard this Ser∣mon, to command me to print it, I had nothing left me but to obey, at the hazard of meeting with
Readers less equal, or less indulgent, than the Learn∣ed Auditory in which I preached it. I was called upon to attend His Majesty into Holland before I could transcribe it for the Press, which is the Ex∣cuse I have to plead for its not appearing sooner. And here I must crave leave to acquaint Your Lordship, that the first New Book put into my hands at my Landing on the Other Side, chanc'd to be the Rotterdam Journal, that gives an account of the Works of the Learned. In the Article relating to England, I found a glut of Printed Sermons amongst us complained of and reflected on in so rude and in so injurious a mannerOn voit icy (Londres) des Sermons sortir en foule de des∣sous la Presse. Nos yeux ne voyent que Manne. En voulez vous sçavoir la rai∣son? C'est que les Ministres ayant la liberté de lire leur Sermons en Chaire, en achétent de tout faits, et n'ent d'autre peine que de les lire, & passent our habiles gens à peu de frais. Histoire des Ouvrages des Sçavans, par Monsieur B—Docteur en Droit. Mois de Mars, 1700. Art. XIII. pag. 124., as might well discourage me, and others of my Bre∣thren, from troubling the World any more with our Labours in this kind, could we believe that the Author of that Journal spoke any body's Sense but his own. He chargeth us indiscriminately with a Plagiarism, of which I doubt whether the best In∣telligence and Information he could get, if he were put to it, would furnish him many Instances. In∣deed we do not usually hear of our Printed Sermons being preached over again among our selves, but we have heard of their being frequently so by cer∣tain Gentlemen abroad, with whom we shall never quarrel for doing us that honour. The committing
of Sermons to the Memory, is no such infallible Means to prevent pilfering of other Men's Works, as the Journalist would insinuate; and perhaps the Press has as often helped out at a dead lift those who use that Way, as those who use the other. He might have learnt from My Lord of Sarum's ex∣cellent HistoryHistory of the Reforma∣tion of the Ch. of Eng∣land, Vol. l. Book III. pag. 317, 318., what Reasons set our First Re∣formers, who were Great and Wise Men, upon Writing and Reading their Sermons, contrary to the general Practice before in England; and what Accuracy and Exactness in those Composures has re∣sulted from the keeping up of that Ʋsage among us ever since. And certainly so long as good Sense, good Method, and good Language, shall make up the Character of good Preaching, that which obtains in the Church of England shall take place of the Declamatory Way, which for the most part has lit∣tle to recommend it besides the Noise and Heat of Action. Such flashy and frothy Pomp of Words without Matter, shall vanish with the Breath of the Speakers; when the finished and elaborate Dis∣courses of our Sandersons and Tillotsons, read from the Pulpit, shall weigh upon the Judgment and the Ʋnderstanding, and shall convey a Light and Conviction into the Mind that shall make every Man wiser and better who once heard or now reads them. I forbear saying any more, lest while I am
endeavouring to right the Learnedest and most de∣serving Body of Men in the Christian Church, from the Exceptions of a Person who has not treated them with Common Respect or Good Manners, in a Pa∣per designed to fly over all Europe, I should seem to magnifie my own Performance. The Meanness of it is, as it happens, the best Apology that can be made for its Publication; for that will render it less liable to the Suspicion of making Plagiaries, as there would be no Robbers if none Travelled but Poor People. Your Lordship knows how willing I was to have the Province assigned me at Hartford transferred to another, who would have discharged in much better: but your Lordship insisting on your first designation and appointment of me, it became me to submit. I then began to think what would be most proper to say at that Meeting, and was determined to the Choice of my Subject, by the Con∣sideration of the State of that Part of Your Lord∣ship's Diocese where the Visitation was to be, a∣bounding with ignorant Fanatical Lay-Teachers, who make a Property of our People. And I entred the more readily upon the Subject, that I was sure to have the best sort of Dissenters on my side, who joyn with us in declaring against an Anarchy in the Church, and in asserting a Separation from Other Works to Ministerial Functions. Whatever De∣fects
of another nature this Sermon may labour un∣der, I hope it will be found to contain honest and seasonable Truths, and to have Some Things set right in it which peradventure were not altogether so before. Such as 'tis, I lay it at Your Lordship's feet, and gladly embrace this occasion of telling the World, what satisfaction we the Clergy of the Diocese of Lincoln take, in having a Prelate of so much Candor and Temper, Affability and Good∣ness, and of such other excellent Qualifications, set by a Great and Just King to preside over us. Your Lordship fills a Chair venerable for Antiqui∣ty, for extent of Jurisdiction, and for a long Suc∣cession of pious and learned Bishops, in whose steps Your Lordship worthily treads. As Your Lordship goes before us and governs us with the Care and Tenderness of a Father, so in return I dare promise Your Lordship, without fear of being disow∣ned by my Brethren, a Filial Duty and Adherence on our part. I have always thought the Strength and Glory of a Clergy to lie in their being thus uni∣ted to their Bishop: and of so happy an Ʋnion may we, York Lordship's Clergy, ever be an Ex∣ample and a Pattern to others. As for my self, besides the Tyes of a Presbyter to his Diocesan, I have very particular Obligations to Your Lord∣ship, as my Benefactor. I hold my Preferment in
Hartfordshire from Your Lordship's Gift; and tho' the Possession of it has been hitherto attended with some Trouble, yet that does in no wise diminish my Gratitude and Thankfulness for the same. That Your Lordship may never blush to have conferred Favours upon a Person wholy unmeriting them, shall be the continual study and endeavours of,
MY LORD,

