



SIR,
AMidst that great Variety of Read∣ing,
wherewith Learned Men have
furnished the World, to the end
that each Person may be provided
of a Subject suitable to his Genius, there
is none so universally pleasing, or, indeed,

more profitable than History. It is a ge∣neral
sort of Learning, fitted for all Ca∣pacities;
the Meanest are-not below, nor
the Greatest above it, because it contains
nothing so abstruse, that may not be easi∣ly
comprehended; nor any thing so tri∣vial,
that may not be worth observing.
All Arts and Sciences are purchased by
much Study and Labour; and, even so,
they are not attained in any Perfection,
but by those whom Nature has particu∣larly
moulded to receive such an Impres∣sion.
History alone delights at once, and
instructs; it informs, without perplexing
the Understanding; it improves, without
burthening the Memory; it rectifies, with∣out
thwarting the Will; and, in short, it
leads away our Affections, without mis∣guiding
them. The Advantages we reap
by it are inestimable, in regard we re∣ceive
a perfect Knowledge of what was
before us; and are thereby enabled to
make a Judgment of what will be after
us: For, as the Wise Man, so many Ages
since, said, There was nothing new under
the Sun; so may we believe there neither
is in our Times, nor will be in those to
come: For the Lives and Actions of
Men are only a continued Repetition of
those that preceded them; because all this

inferiour World is but a perpetual Conca∣tenation
of the self-same Revolutions, how∣ever
surprizingly disguized in the Dress
and Methods. Now, to know what pas∣sed
since the Creation, and thence judi∣ciously
to inferr what is likely to ensue
till the final Consummation; and this not
only in one City or Kingdom, but through∣out
the vast Circumference of the Uni∣verse,
is a sort of Knowledge that appears
to be somewhat more than Humane; or
rather, not far removed from Divine. It
is a Knowledge so important, that God
himself did not disdain, for our Benefit,
to fill up the greatest part of his Sacred
Volume with History, whereof he himself
was the Compiler. God himself it was,
that, through the Mouths of the Prophets,
transmitted down to us the History of the
Creation, and Restauration of Mankind,
the Genealogy of the first Patriarchs, the
Acts of the Children of Israel, the Lives
of their Judges and Kings, and all that is
Historical in Holy Writ. Nay, to come
nearer; What are the Four Gospels, and
the Acts of the Apostles, but the History
of our Blessed Saviour, and those his
glorious Followers. Thus the Prophets
and Evangelists seem to authorize and
recommend History, they themselves be∣ing

Sacred Historians. Nor is it only on
this Religious Foundation, that its Credit
is supported: To omit many things that
might be urged to testifie its great Va∣lue,
let us only consider whence it is
that we have the Knowledge of our Ori∣ginal,
and what it is that has eternized
the Memory of Great and Worthy Per∣sons;
and we shall find, it is all due to
History alone. To this also must those
who now live, and are ambitious of per∣petuating
their Memory, owe the Trans∣mitting
of their Names and Merits to
Posterity. To this Kings and Princes are
beholding, for the rare Examples it fur∣nishes
them with of their Illustrious Pre∣decessors;
thereby stirring up their Minds
to imitate their Heroick Actions, and be∣come
Partakers of their lasting Praises.
To this, States-men are obliged, for the
politick Presidents it affords them to go∣vern
themselves by in all extraordinary
Exigencies of State. To this, all accom∣plished
Persons stand indebted for the Or∣nament
of their Discourse, and for the
perfecting them in the true Knowledge of
the World. And, to conclude, From this,
the Generality of Mankind is furnished
with Variety of Instances exciting to Ver∣tue,
and deterring from Vice. But, though

too much cannot be said upon so deser∣ving
a Subject, let this suffice, since
it is not to inform, but to obtain a
favourable Acceptance, that so much has
been said.
If then, Sir, the Dignity and Value
of History be such as I have represent∣ed,
well may it merit an Honourable Pa∣tronage
from Persons of Worth. Empty
Titles are not the Worth I mean; those
too often are bestowed upon the vilest of
Men, and even for submitting to the
most infamous of Crimes. That is true
Worth, which, being derived from Ho∣nourable
Ancestors, though without the
Addition of gaudy Epithets, is preserved
unblemished, and without Stain. To ascend
to those the World calls Honours, such as
Lordships, Earldoms and Dukedoms, by in∣direct,
scandalous and unjust Means, is ra∣her
to descend: To embrace them, offered
under those Circumstances, is the Act of an
abject, rather than a noble Spirit; and
to aim at, and aspire to them through
those Means, rather betokens a sordid
Pride, than a generous Ambition. Such
Patrons are neither capable of Receiving
or Communicating Honour; their Names,

in History, are branded with Infamy,
not to be covered by all the Sycophant
Addresses and Flatteries of a Dedication:
And even the Work which seeks Shelter
under them, sucks in the Infection of
their poysonous Shadow. Malice may,
perhaps, endeavour so to pervert my
Words, as if they implied a Reflection up∣on
Great and Honourable Persons; but
it is plain, only Malice can so mis-inter∣pret
my Meaning, as to force it to such
an invidious Sense. Those who are tru∣ly
Noble, cannot suffer in the Character
of such as only mimick their Grandeur;
and they alone will find themselves af∣fected,
whose Consciences shall accuse
them of having aspired to a Counter∣feit
Nobility, through mean and sordid
Practices.
These, Sir, are the Men, whose Names
I most abhor to prefix to my Labours;
from them I fly to your Protection, as
to one whom Envy it self cannot asperse
with Want of real Honour, or with af∣fecting
that which is not such. If Illu∣strious
Birth and Parentage be Honour,
yours is too well known, to be capable
of receiving any Addition by any thing
my Pen can express in its behalf. If a

plentiful Fortune be the Support and Or∣nament
of Honour, you have received it
from your Ancestors, by a Legal Inheri∣tance;
when others, to raise their Fami∣lies,
found Estates upon Extortion, Fraud and
Oppression. But, above all, If Generous
Actions and Vertuous Principles be true
Honour, none that knows you, is igno∣rant,
how great a Share you possess.
Nor would I pass by this so material a
Point, without enlarging upon it, but
that it will not suit with your Mode∣sty,
to hear your own, though just,
Commendations: Nor will the Malice
and Virulency of our Times bear with
the Mention of solid and real Praises.
What you are, and what you merit, nei∣ther
is, nor will be unknown; it may
prove the Subject of an abler Pen, when
those who know, shall see a fit Time
to recommend your Memory to Poste∣rity.
All that remains, Sir, is, to beg a fa∣vourable
Acceptance of the Tender I
make. It is the entire History of a King∣dom,
from its first Plantation, to this
present Time. The Original was dedica∣ted
to a King: The Translation has not,
I hope, so much degenerated, but it may

be worthy of you. If you think it so, I
have gained my Point; and shall reap a
singular Satisfaction, if it gives you any.
I am,
SIR,

