


Honourable and Honoured,
ALthough I dare not presume to reach so high as his High∣nesse; yet I can come very near under your shadow; which to me, is very substantial. And I may speak so loud, that if you please, he may hear. Awhile agoe there came to this City of Bristol, certain Morice-dancers from the North. By two and two, two and two, with an intent here to exercise some spiritual cheats; or (as may well be suspected) to carry on some levelling design. And our souldiers here, having nothing else to do (un∣lesse work of their own making, that they might seem to be necessary) struck in with them in their quaking. And my selfe, with some other of my brethren in the Ministry here, being (by the Magistrates call'd to conference with them) ingaged to inquire into their opinions. I found it a harder matter to discover then to confute them. They being the most egregious prevaricators that ever men met with. Upon this account, my Geni is led me on that way, to pull off their vizor, which is the principal intent of these following papers: wherein is discovered their

Mystery of ungodlinesse (as to spiritual matters. And my thoughts ha∣ving been a little before upon the Great Mystery of Godlinesse. In a pub∣lick discourse, I spake something to both, which gave some satisfacti∣on, and was perswaded, might be useful, if made publick. Both which is here done, under the Title of the Mystery of Godlinesse, and of ungodli∣nesse. And when I had done, I needed no long time to deliberate to whose name to inscribe it. My heart readily told me, whom I honou∣red. And I had a desire, the world should know it. For, besides our old and familiar acquaintance: The observation of your ingenuity (when I was last with you) whereby I perceived that your Honours and high imployments have not transported you, hath laid strong ingagments upon me. And I gladly took the very first opportunity, to bear testimo∣ny to it. Sir, I was coming to you with a supplicatory Epistle. But his Highnesse (by breath from his mouth) hath driven away these Nor∣thern locusts from us. And given a command for the remove of their abetters & favorites. And now my supplicatory is (by this good hand of providence) turned into a gratulatory Epistle; And I beseech you, let the thanks be bestowed where you know 'tis due; for I am sure you know. And surely Sir, his Highnesse hath gained much upon the hearts of our Citizens, by this act of grace and duty. We were made believe, these men had countenance from him: which (upon my knowledge) made our Magistrates here so backward to be quick with them, and to deal so severely (and justly) with them, as they have been dealt with in other places. And therefore I rejoyce that you breath so good an ayre at Court. And oh that the same salutiferous ayre might blow, (and con∣tinue to blow) through all the quarters of our English Elements. But Sir, will you give me leave to speak my mind this once? (and we were wont to speak freely one to another.) And i'le speak for his Highnesse, 'tis not for his honour nor saftety, that every petty Captain should dally with his Commands, and ride away from their obedience to them. Some men know not how to bear an even sail to that condition which these late troublous times have rais'd them. They could live in warre; but now know not how to live in peace, if it make not for their pro∣fit. Hence many places and persons are rendered malignant, by those, who in themselves are not better, no (and I am sure of it) nor so well affected. And I beseech you, let not selfish insinuates finde too much countenance to the publick grievance.

Sir, I write not this to loosen the reigns of Government, either in it self, or its necessary supports (my soul abhorrs such thoughts.) But it pains me to the very heart, that a people that may easily be manna∣ged, should be over-ridden, by such, who seek not (what ever they pretend by their suggestions of some friends) the publick weale; so much as their own advantage. If people be refractory or stubborn, 'tis fit they should know their Rider. But if they goe readily, why should they be spur-gald? I know not where ever I shall have the like occasi∣on, because I love and honour you, and would have you be truly (e∣verlastingly) honourable: I'le beg one thing of you. Improve you the high advantage of ground you have gotten for God, his truth, and the com∣mon welfare. (I need not mention his Highnesse, 'tis eminently inclu∣ded.) And to this end, let order and establisht Government have a high place in your thoughts. And that in Church as well as State. But why do I divide them? are they not Hippocrates twins? do they not live and die together? how true did that saying prove? No Bishop, no King. And will it not hold? No Minister, no Magistrate. And every one a Minister, every one a Magistrate. I hate persecution. 'Tis a judge∣ment, and is not want of Government so too? When there was no King in Israel, every man did what seemed good in his own eyes. And then they made Priests (but yet they made them) of the basest of the people. Let Ministers be basely accounted of, and the people (with a little help) will quickly learn to despise Magistrates. Besides the judgement from the Lord, there is a natural tendency in the one to the other. It will be Honourable Sir, and becoming reforming times, that men learned, la∣borious and godly, (such as are so, and can be content to approve themselves so; to those who are able and authorized to judge) that they find more countenance, then those, who are not so qualified. Men ignorant are impetuously zealous to cry down learning, that their snuffs might seeme to give some light, which if countenanc'd, (and that such and find equall favour) will bring the next age to a dark Ministry. & ex∣pose our children as a prey to the wolves of Rome. And as for these levelling Quakers, I must need say; The revilings and reproachings of our gifted brethren (who of late years, have made it much of their business, to render the Ministers of this nation, Antichristian) have made way for them. And they (of all men) have least cause to be offended with them (though they prevaile most with their Congregations.) For the call of the one is as good as the others, though there be some difference in their doctrines.

Truly Sir, I had almost forgot what I was about; se. writing a De∣dicatory gratulatory Epistle? And to whom. One that is full of great and weighty imployments. Whither won't love carry a man? It made me overbold and tedious. Pardon I beseech you my boldnesse, and accept of my love. I consecrate this first fruit of my labours (in this kind) to your name, that it may live in you; and that you might live in God, according to the Great Mystery of Godlinesse, through the grace and power of that Jesus Christ which died at Jerusalem, whom the Quakers vilifie. To him I heartily commend you, and all your great and high affairs: craving this farther favour, that I may still continue to be, and have leave to subscribe my self, as I am
From my house in Bristoll, the first day of January, 1654/5.
Sir, Your Honours true, faithful, and most observant Servant in the Lord,

