



MY LORD,
IT is too well known, that not∣withstanding the purity of Do∣ctrine and Worship, and the Primitive Orders of the Mini∣stry, established in our Church; in all
which Excellencies and Perfections no part of the Christian World doth excel her, if any equal her; it hath been and still is her portion, in Conformity to our Saviour, to his Apostles, and to the purest Primitive Church, to be assaul∣ted and impugned, by the various opposi∣tions of many Adversaries. Besides others, our Dissenting Parties within this last year have been very active, both by other methods, and by Books of se∣veral kinds, expressing their objections against our publick Order and Consti∣tution.
And one of them, for the justifying their separation, hath adventured so far, as to charge the general use of pre∣scribed Forms of Prayer to be sinful: which if it were true, would indeed be an high accusation against our publick worship, and therewith against all the famous Christian Churches. He pre∣tends an Answer to all that I had said, for the lawfulness and expediency
of fixed Liturgies: unto which I have here returned, as I hope, a sufficient Reply. The manner of his writing, is in this respect, more commendable than of some others, in that he plainly stateth his Question, and then produceth his Arguments, that the strength of them may be fairly tried. But I could have wished for his own sake, that he had not oft intermixed his passionate and ground∣less aspersions, upon our publick Consti∣tutions and Ministry; and his talking at a high rate with confident words, upon very weak and slender appearances of Reason. For such things are testi∣monies, either of the rashness and weak∣ness of the Writer, who brings these things as a supply, for want of what is rational and substantial; or else of the badness of the cause, which needs such supports to maintain it.
And though I thought this discourse not at all like to prevail with under∣standing men; there were many
things which enclined me to undertake an examination thereof. That Book is spread abroad, under the name of a per∣son of as great esteem amongst our Dissenters, as any other in these parts. There is a fair appearance of a regular way of reasoning, though there wants strength of Argument; and he more than once declares, that he thinks himself to have fully answered what I had writ∣ten for Forms of Prayer; and therefore I was particularly concerned to shew his mistake. And though the more cautious and wary men among our Dissenters will not affirm the constant use of Forms to be sinful, because they think such a posi∣tion not defensible; yet the Genius of that party is much set against them, and in their practice they reject them almost generally, with some eagerness: and therefore the determining this case, is of the greater concernment, with respect to our Non-Conformists in general.
And I have had so much experience of
the World, as to know, that the greater part of men are not so intelligent, and soberly considerative, as to search into the strength or weakness of Arguments, unless they be directed and assisted: which defect when it meets with an unsteady temper, is the occasion of much infelicity to Civil and Ecclesiastical Society. And as I think it in any case, a piece of Christian Charity, to guide men in their duty; so this is of greater moment, where the Peace of the Church is concerned, as well as the private duty of Christians. But it was not the least thing which prevailed with me to this undertaking, that the Book I answer, led me to the considering several mistaken notions and asserti∣ons, and I hope to the clearing them, which having been presumed to be truths, have misguided many well-disposed per∣sons.
Upon many accounts, this Discourse addresseth it self to your Lordship, hum∣bly entreating your acceptance thereof. It
defends that common way of Christian Worship, by publick Liturgies; which hath been the constant use of this esta∣blished Church, wherein your Lordship de∣servedly enjoyeth an eminent place; and of the Reasonableness and usefulness of whose publick service, your self gave a seasonable account. And probably the Book I answer, was also written within the limits of your Lordships Jurisdiction: and therefore I present this Discourse to your view, craving your Approbation. And this I do with the greater confidence, because of the truth of what I defend; the clearness and evidence whereof is such, as will also, I hope, recommend it self to any sober and indifferent enquirer. I do confess I had this great advantage a∣gainst my Opponent, that I have mani∣fest truth on my side, and this advantage I have made the best use of that I could. I am so apprehensive of my own defects, that I cannot expect that this Treatise should be in all things free from them. But I am
sensible, that if I have trifled in the main subject, which is a matter of weight and seriousness, I am so far from deserving your Lordships favour herein, that I can∣not reasonably presume on your pardon, for prefixing your name hereunto.
But the chief reason of my presenting this to your Lordship, is, that I might ex∣press a thankful acknowledgment of those favourable respects I have received from you, and profess that real honour which my self, with the rest of your Clergy, have for you. And that God will preserve and bless your Lordship, is the hearty desire and Prayer of him, who according to his duty

Lyn-Regis June 9. 1680.
