


IT'S usual (my Lord you know) in
publishing books, to prefix the
name of some worthy and consi∣derable
personage; and I now ap∣ply
my self to your Honour, upon
several accounts.
First, Tua res agitur, much of the
matter ensuing concernes your self.
Secondly, I never heard, but that you were a lo∣ver
of your Country, alwayes with much respect
and honour, treating and entertaining your Coun∣trymen
that came over into the Low Countryes; (the
place of your residence, for many yeares together)
and hee that loves my Country, I love him, and him
I honour. As for your Adversary (the man I here
deal with) his tongue is no slander, for who will be∣lieve

a common lyar? which whether I have made
him appear to bee or no, judicet mundus.
Thirdly, I understand the present Parliament
hath taken cognizance of your cause, and intend to
consider it next Session, and I am come (in the
mean time) to bring you good newes; your Adver∣sary
quakes, which if it bee a symptome of true
Conversion, there is hopes that confession, (an in∣genuous
confession of the whole design) and an en∣deavour
of satisfaction (if it can bee) will follow;
but fearing it may prove but a false birth, I have
put manum obstetricalem, in intima, search'd his
bowels for a real discovery, that the world may no
longer bee deceived with a windy conception. Tru∣ly,
my Lord, your case is hard; but what shall wee
say? 'tis the fortune of the wars; and there you know
(as in a common scuffle) many an honest man, that
stands by, and means no harm, gets a knock, as
well as those who begun the quarrel; and this your
Adversary himself (who confesses to have had the
mannagement of the whole business against you)
seems to me clearly to acknowledge, as the ground
of your Sequestration: For, in answer to an objection
made on your Honours behalf, by your friends, in the
Narrative, by them published, hee (your Adver∣sary)
doubting of the weight and validity of the
testimonies produc'd against you, sayes, (in the
fourth particular answer, page 22. of his book) that
the time when your estate was sequestred, was, when the
Commonwealth was deeply imbroiled in wars.
And then goes on, and sayes, (in the next page)
that in such times and cases, they have many considera∣tions,
as the reason of their actions, which those who

are without doors, (that is, your Honour, and your
friends, who were not of the Parliament) neither
know, nor apprehend, nor are to take upon them so to
do: So that here (you see) is Club-law, you must
bee sequestred, because the Commonwealth was im∣broil'd
in wars; and your Honour (being out of
doors) must neither know, nor apprehend ('tis too
far above your reach) the reason why; nor are you
to take upon you ('tis presumption) so to do: For
hee tells you (page 2.) that true Englishmen, have
used to have Parliaments, and their Acts, as being the
judgement of the whole Representative of the Nation,
in more veneration and esteem, than to bee put into the
ballance, with the contradictory assertions, of any private
or byass'd spirits.
And truly (my Lord) upon this ground, we may
well question, whether you bee a true Englishman,
or no, who being swayed by your own private in∣terest,
and byass'd with a desire after your own e∣state
again, should dare now to move any thing a∣gainst
the actions of that Parliament, which (as he
tells you in the same page, answ. 6.) upon the proofs
by him alledged, and (because they were not full
enough) for reasons best known to themselves, in time
of general imbroilments, order'd your estate to bee
confiscate. So that still (my Lord) you must take
the fortune of the wars; and though your Honour,
and all out of doors, know no reason for it, yet they
did it (sayes hee) for reasons best known unto them∣selves.
But will your Honour give mee leave (as a true
Englishman) to say something for that Parliament,
and indeed for all Parliaments, and Courts of Judi∣cature;

you well know, that the manner of their
proceedings, in administration of Justice, is much
according to that Aeconomico-Political process of na∣ture
in man himself, wherein the apprehensive, deli∣berative,
and conclusive faculties, (which in a word
wee call common sense) which is the great Judicato∣ry
in man, doth determine all things, (with a com∣mon
and equal respect) as they are represented.
Now the outward sences, are the Spies and Intelli∣gencers
of the Soul, who bring in several objects
(according to their respective natures and faculties)
to bee judged of, and determined by the understand∣ing.
And hence wee say, nihil in intellectu, quod
non sit, prius in sensu.
Now if these senses (either by any defect or
vice in the organ, faculty, or medium, (which wee
might follow with an exact and elegant Analogy)
but I will avoid prolixity) If I say the senses, either
by deficiency, or redundancy, under, or over-do∣ing,
make a false report unto the Court (the com∣mon
sense) false judgement must proceed accord∣ingly,
and yet the Court blameless: But some men
tell us of inferiour faculties (even in the soul it self)
which do corrupt the superiour, and so obstruct Ju∣stice,
and pervert judgement: If this bee so, it is
within doors, and I who am without, am not (I am
told) to take upon mee to enquire into. All the
hope is, the smoke of Gun-powder, (being by Gods
goodness) dissipated, the noyse of Drums and Trum∣pets,
and clattering of Armour ceased, and those im∣broilments,
which hurried your estate into sequestra∣tion,
abated, and the confessions (and so the guilt)
of your adversaries discovered; the great Judicato∣ry

of the Nation, will bee the better able to dis∣cern
and judge of your case, with serene judgement,
and imperturb'd affections; and accordingly resolve
upon, and execute such signal justice, as shall deliver
the land from the guilt of oppression, if any such
there bee in this particular, which is, and shall bee
the prayer of him, who is,
My Lord,
The Commonwealths, and your
Honours servant, so far as
your Honour is the servant
of the Commonwealth.

