



SIR,
WHen I had yeilded up my Modesty, or rather my Consciousness of my too ma∣ny and too great defects, as a spoil to the wills and importunity of others, and had hearkened to them so far as to venture and expose these Sermons and my self to censure, I did then without any de∣liberation or study tell my self to whom they were due: Nor did any thought interpose it self, but this one, That they were not worth your eye or owning. I had o resved to have sent them naked into the world without any name before them but my own; and could have been well content to have left that out al∣so, for I am not over-proud of them. But then I con∣ceived that, though they ould speak but little for themselves, yet they might for me, (who dare not do so much for them,) and at least be a witness or Manife∣sto of my deep apprehension of your many noble fa∣vours, and great charity to me and mine, when the sharpness of the weather and the roughness of the times had blown all from us, and well-near left us na∣ked. And to this end with all heartiness and height of thankfulness I here present them, and humbly put them into your hands, that when you turn them over, you may read something besides my Imperfections, even that Truth which will make you happy, and with it
 my Gratitude. I would not be the Grave of that Cha∣rity which can never die, but when we are dead will follow us. And, I thank God, I understand a Benefit, and can behold it in all its circumstances: and to me it appeareth fresher and fairer every day, putting me in mind from whence it came, and by what hands it was conveyed; and it filleth me with Prayers and Prai∣ses and Gratulations: and I bless God, and cry, Grace, Grace, unto the hand and instrument. Worthy Sir, this is the fairest and best return that my Pover∣ty can make, and I nothing doubt but you will look upon it as the fairest and best; for this I can make, and by the blessing of God you want no other. I see my self deeply obliged to you, and by your favour to many o∣ther Noble and Religious Gentlemen: and I have but the same payment for all, which I will ever pay (for a thankful man is alwayes in debt) even to my last payment, when I shall render up my soul to God that gave it. The same God who put it into your hearts, fill your hearts with that Joy which is the purchase of Charity. I cannot end but with my hearty prayer to the God of Blessings for a blessing on you and your whole family, which is the daily prayer of,
SIR,

April 21. 1657.
