



My Lord,
BEing equally a stranger to your Lordship, and the whole Nobility of this Kingdom, something of a natu∣ral impulse and aspiring motion in my inclinations, has prompted me, tho I hazzard a presumption, to de∣clare my Respect. And be the Success how it will, I am vain of nothing in this piece, but the choice of my Patron; I shall be so far thought a judicious Author, whose principal busi∣ness is to design his Works an offering to the greatest Honour and Merit.
I cannot here, my Lord, stand accused of any sort of Adu∣lation, but to my self, because Compliments due to Merit return upon the giver, and the only flattery is to my self, whilst I attempt your Lordships praise. I dare make no essay on your Lordships youthful Bravery and Courage, because such is always guarded with Modesty, but shall venture to present you some lines on this Subject, which the world will undoubtedly apply to your Lordship.

Courage, the highest gift, that scorns to bend
To mean devices for a sordid end.
Courage—an independant spark from Heaven's bright Throne,
By which the Soul stands rais'd, triumphant, high, alone.
Great in it self, not praises of the crowd,
Above all vice, it stoops not to be proud.

Courage, the mighty attribute of powers above,
By which those great in War, are great in Love.
The spring of all brave Acts is seated here,
As falshoods draw their sordid birth from fear.

The best and noblest part of mankind pay homage to Royalty, what veneration then is due to those Vertues and Endowments which even engag'd the respect of Royalty it self, in the per∣son of one of the greatest Emperours in the World, who chose your Lordship not only as a Companion, but a Conductor.
He wanted the Fire of such a Britton to animate his cold Russians, and wou'd therefore choose you his Leader in War, as in Travel: he knew the Fury of the Turk cou'd be only stopt by an English Nobleman, as the Power of France was by an English King. A sense of this greatness which might de∣ter others, animates me to Address your Lordship; resolv'd that my first Muse shou'd take an high and daring flight, I aspir'd to your Lordships Protection for this trifle, which I must own my self now proud of, affording me this opportu∣nity of Humbly declaring my self,
My Lord,
Your Lordships most devoted Servant,
G. Farquhar.
