


ILLUSTRIOUS SIR;
YOur Excellency beaming down lately some favour on your worthless Orator, invites this reflection of an humble gratitude. I am not ignorant how little leasure your most important, and now incumbent af∣faires can allow you unto reading, and yet how much your zeal and piety enforces from them. This treatise is very little, the Title shews you the whole mind of it. It contains the strife of brethren, and a treaty for peace, it comes with confidence to kisse your hand, which the hand of the Allmighty hath made so notably instrumen∣tall for the publique peace.
It was visible as the Sunne, how in every quarter of the Kingdome, the nets were spread for the godly, (how soe∣ver
characterd under most unhappy notions of division.) Had not the holy watchman of Israel quickned your vigi∣lancy and activity to breake those snares of death, from whence our soules are escaped. It is more then manifest to all that seek out the works of God [which all do that have pleasure therein] that the same arm, which cut Rahab and wounded the Dragon, hath not lesse wonderfully ap∣peared in your Armies, then in ages past, and by most re∣markable providences hath determined the unkindly dif∣ferences that are amongst us.
And since the Highest hath so much honored you, it will be your happinesse, as your goodnesse, to study how to honour him. Amidst other opportunities, the Justice of your cause bespeaks the improvement of this, that your Excellency will be pleased to mediate unto the Par∣liament, to take care, that godly Ministers, whose hands lifted up in the Mount, have strengthned yours in the val∣ley, and the people, who have willingly offered them∣selves, & even undon themselves for the publique, be not a second time undon by those rigid taskmasters amongst whom they live; I mean such dis-affected Constables, O∣verseers, and other Officers, who in proportioning pub∣lique rates, impose the greatest burden upon the best-af∣fected, thereby endeavouring (if they might) to render your Armies, for whom the rates are collected, most de∣testable unto those, to whom they are a protection.
Josephus and Terentius in their respective ages, having favour for any request from the Emperours, aspired no∣thing for themselves, but improved all their interests for God, and for the Saints; the one petitioning the safety of sacred truths, the other the liberty of holy Professors.
And since I have assumed the boldnesse to beg, suffer me (most benigne Sir) to lie at your Excellencies feete with one suite more. In these labours which were expended on
the Citie of London, I have with all humility and intenti∣on of affection besought the Citie, to lay aside all discon∣tent and passion for a godly peace. And as Christians indeed, to bury all sense and suspition of injury in the grave of Christ. The same Petition I doe most humbly offer unto your Excellency: it is the glory of man to passe by offences. In great men it is greatest glory. It will be the choicest Diamond in the Diademe of your successes, to manage your power by a self-denying spirit of meek∣nesse and humility.
Our English Chronicle hath a notable passage between the King of England and the King of Wales, who after an hot dispute of the sword, appointed a treaty of peace at the river Severne, some discourse inclining to a reconci∣liation, these competitors in soveraignty became corri∣valls in humility. The English King forced his horse into the river to offer the first imbraces unto his brother of Wales. The welsh-bloud being overcome with this ad∣mired condescension, lighted from his horse and swam the streame to salute his Corrivall, with these words; Vicit humanitas tua injustitiam meam, invictissime Rex, I need not bring it neerer, your wisdome can see a far off.
But your Excellency hath as legible a Copie in your hand, as humane or sacred Story can afford. Abraham who was Uncle and foster-father unto Lot, in the strife between them was the first that sued for peace, and yeel∣ded so farre in his own right, as that, though the whole Land were his by as cleere and sure a title, as the Lord Paramount of all the earth could make, yet he offers Lot to take his portion where he pleased, and for a godly peace was contented with his Nephews leavings.
Wee are now entring upon that great treaty of peace, by all that love Jerusalem most vigorously desired, al∣though by some never well affected to the publique, too
violently exacted, upon a designe; But the incompre∣hensible. Wisdome had a designe beyond theirs, season∣ably to appoint it, when his goodnesse had put a blessed advantage into your Excellencies hand to be helpfull un∣to it.
There are three sister-graces, mentioned in this labour, which are inseparable from a well-grounded and lasting Peace. Truth, Justice, and Holinesse. Truth and peace, Justice and peace, Holinesse and peace, like Hippocrates twins, will live and die together. I trust, that Victorious Sword in your Excellencies hand, will readily appeare with that two-edged sword in Christs mouth for de∣fence of these.Simsons Ec∣clesiasticall History. It was a brave resolution of Joane Queen of Navarre, to prefer safety of Conscience before assu∣rance of honours, Religion before life; and never to lay down Armes which shee had taken up for the Protestant Cause, but with one of these three Conditions: an assu∣red peace, or an absolute victory, or an honest death. Wee trust the most holy Wisdome is now compassing the first of these, which, as it will be your vertue to pro∣mote, so your Crowne to subscribe.
Mean time, wee continue our devout breathings for your Excellency in that divine elegancy of the Royall Prophet; Gird thy Sword upon thy thigh, O most mighty—ride prosperously; because of truth, meeknesse, and righ∣teousnesse, and the right hand of God teach thee terrible things. FAXIT DEUS.

