



PAul being upon a propheticall wing (for the Lord had powred upon him,This know also (saith he) there's the infal∣lible cer∣tainly of it. not onely an Apostolicall but a Propheticall spirit) doth foretell in the 2 Tim. 3.1. That in the last dayes perilous times shall come, Those who are full of carnall self-love

and unthankfulnesse will, much increase the danger of this last Age of the World. (The Lord roote up all such weedes out of our hearts.)
God hath I hope given Your Hon∣our such a measure of love to the publique, and so active a spirit to do good to others, as will helpe to lessen the danger of these evill times. And I would be so thank∣full for favours received, that I might not be ranked among this dishonourable Catalogue which here Paul sums up of such as make bad times worse.
It is your Honours happinesse and advantage (as it was once said of the Duke of Guise in France, that hee  put obligations upon all) that you can ingage very many, and amongst the rest, I must

ever acknowledge my selfe one, who in one of the greatest turnings of my life, by the good hand of God upon mee in your free consent and noble bounty have had so much comfort in the nearest and dear∣est relation,Prov. 30.10 11, 12, &c. that I never envied any other, but finde matter of everlasting praises to God for his goodnesse to my selfe therein. And being under so great obligations, when I can produce nothing of my owne worthy your acceptance; I take leave to act the part of a Midwife to this happy Birth which may call your Honour Fa∣ther, as will appeare by the following Letter, that it was ul∣timately intended for your spirit all advantage; And it were  a kinde of sacriledge to keep that holy issue from you that is so

much your owne. It joyes the soules of mee and many more of your praying servants that they have so much occasion to prayse their God on your behalfe, for so many able and faithfull Ministers of the Gospell of the first, second and third magnitude, that your prudent, fatherly care hath fixed, where you, as Patron, have beene trusted.
2 Kings 13 14.Oh the many Chariots and horse-men of Israel, that your noble Father and you have brought triumphantly into Essex (herein you did happily Patrizare) the Lord continue the like care to build and repaire his house in these who survive you from Generation to Generation, that so your house may still bee honorably suppor∣ted.
Ecclesiasticall story speakes of one Henricus Auceps,Vid. Simp∣son. Eccl. Histor. l. 3. cent. 10. when hee did fight against the Hungarians, made this vow to God, That if the Lord would give him victo∣ry against his enemies, hee would purge his Country from Simony, which at this time mightily a∣bounded therein. Wee want men of such an heroicall zealous dis∣position in England.
Oh that all Patrons were more mindfull of their high trust; then they would not so often be∣tray the soules of people by putting off a friend &c. with a living to some unworthy Chap∣laine. Doubtlesse there is many a damned creature roaring in Hell, cursing covetous Patrons as well as unfaithfull Pastors;1 Pet. 4.5. For whose Bloud (in part at least) they

must bee accountable to the Fa∣ther of spirits and Judge of the quick and the dead. A most hea∣vy reckoning,Note. when the sins of so many Congregations, to which Patrons are accessary by sending ignorant and scandalous Ministers a∣mongst them are made theirs; where∣as the least of their owne sins un∣repented of will sucke them eter∣nally.
God who is faithfull will not forget your labour and cost of love to the truely Reverend man of God Master Hooker (who is now singing Hallelujahs in Hea∣venly Mansions) when hee was persecuted by the There are many of great read∣ing, who wil under∣take to make it ap∣peare that as Heathi∣nish feasts Bacchanalia et Saturnalia & were tur∣ned into Christmas & such o∣ther Feasts hoping thereby to to win hea∣thens to Christ; so were Archi flamines & Flamines chnged it to Arch∣praelates, & praelates o of a good intention. Archi flamen of Canterbury. Hee will pay a∣bundantly for the protecting and nursing his Children, Heb. 6.10.
I know not how better to

expresse my deepe sence of your most reall favour (the comfort whereof I dayly enjoy) then by taking the humble boldnesse, to beseech your Honour to adde one thing more, which indeed is, the num necessarium, where∣by you will gaine that better part which shall not be taken from you;Luk, 10.42 Namely;Rev. 1.20. & 2.1. that you would study and pray that you may walke in the light, and heate of that glo∣rious Gospell constellation (for Ministers are Starres and the So ac∣know∣ledged by by the Transla∣tors in the contents▪ of the se∣cond Cha. of the Re∣velation. They it seemes did not thinke these An∣gels to be Praelates. Angells of the Churches) which you have endeavoured to fix in your Orbe. Your Honour hath beene often at Sea, and there beholding the wonders of God in the deepe, have beene taught to wrestle with him for mercy. It is an old saying, hee that would

learne to pray let him goe to Sea. Besiege Heaven with your un∣wearied importunities,Qui nescit or are discat navigare. Jonab. 1.5. that the Arke of the Gospell, which you have provided for thousands, may be your owne everlasting Sanctu∣ary. And that you feasting up∣on their danties, may bee fat and flourishing in your last dayes▪ standing stedfast in these shaking times, and immoveable, keeping Faith,Phil. 29.14 and a good conscience, (which too many having put away con∣cerning Faith,1 Tim. 1.19. have made Ship∣wracke) more and more a∣bounding in the Worke of the Lord,1 Cor. 15. Last. forasmuch as you know your labour is not in vaine in the Lord,
This through the grace of Christ shall be the earnest Prayer, of him who is My LORD,

