



SIR,
IT cost me no long deliberati∣on, to whom I should di∣rect these Discourses, the Obligations I am under to you and your Family, rendring them yours by the Title of a just debt. The Interest you have in me by an Entail of peculiar kindnesses, gives you a right to my Studies & the Fruits of them. The declining the Imputation of Ingratitude is

my plea for prefixing your Name to these Papers. And though the concerning you in their behalf may seem an Injury, yet not to have done it (my condition in the world allowing me to make no better returns) would have been a Crime. You must either be more wary, and have a greater fore-sight in dispensing your Fa∣vours, or else you must be content to forgive such offences as your self have made the results and effects of Duty. So that were there any indecency in this Ad∣dress, yet the Laws of Gratitude do supersede those of Congruity. But indeed this Dedication is as much yours by the Rules of Pro∣portion, as by the Measures of Justice. For as you have few Ri∣vals with respect of the Qualifica∣tions

required in an active Life, (which I forbear to make any discovery of, being that which every one observes, and which all your Modesty cannot conceal) so you are endowed with a capa∣city adapted to the highest con∣templations. Nor is the knowledg of Aristotle's Moods and Figures, together with such Technical Terms as Affectation & Design, rather than necessity and useful∣ness have introduced, needful to render a person a fit judge of what is solid and Rational. I more dread being arraigned at the Tri∣bunal of brisk Reason, assisted by Faith and the Spirit of Life in the New Birth, than being combated even by your Philosophick Hero's with their Artificial Premises and formal Ergo's. Your accomplish∣ments

are not the less commenda∣ble because you owe them entire∣ly to your self, the Idea's of your Mind, and the Exercise of your own Faculties; and not to the Drs. Chair, and an Apprentice∣ship under University Readers. Though I pay as high a venerati∣on to Academick Learning as any man doth, and judg Philosophy instead of being Prejudicial to Religion, to be very useful both to promote Faith and Obedience in our selves, and to defend the Mysteries of Christianity against the rude assaults of petulant Ad∣versaries; yet as things are com∣monly managed, I must needs say that it hath often proved a very great Nuisance. 'Tis through the encumbring our Minds with in∣significant Terms and idle Phan∣tasms,

& the deflouring our Virgin Intellects by absurd Dogm's, that too many, instead of commencing either solid Scholars, or being prepared to be good and humble Christians, come abroad into the World, either Disputations Whiflers, or sworn Enemies to E∣vangelical Grace. Sir, as I know but few that owe their Religion more to a Rational choyce than you do; so there are also few that have distincter Notions of the Reasons why we are not able adequately to conceive the Myste∣ries of it, and of the Reasons why we are, nevertheless, to believe them. And if true Eloquence be to speak pertinently, and to pro∣portion words to things, 'tis na∣tural to you; nor need you ad∣dress to the most esteemed Ma∣sters

of it, to learn either how to arrange a Discourse in the best Method, or to adapt the Senti∣ments and Words by which you express them, to the Subject of which you Treat. And as you are furnished with more than an ordinary prudence of knowing when to be silent, and with a Fa∣culty to be so when it is better to hold ones peace than to speak; so by obliging your self to say no∣thing but what you think, there is a Grace as well as commanding∣ness accompanies what you say, and you find others favourable to what you aim at, through their be∣ing possest that you are byassed by no design, but meerly influenced by Love to Truth and Justice. Sir, there is one thing more which I must not omit, as having main∣ly

contributed to the Inscription of these sheets to you, namely, that while such as pretend to be more sagacious than others, or who have a mind to put in a claim to no vulgar discretion, pitch upon this as the Medium to support their title to both, that they dare deride the Mysteries of Faith, or profess them∣selves Scepticks in the Essential Doctrines of the Gospel, or, which is as bad as any of the former, be∣tray their profession by an unsui∣table Life; you have learned to unite Obedience to Orthodoxie, & to espouse the precepts of the Gos∣pel with the same zeal that you do the Articles of the Creed. The Opinions here arraigned lye as cross to your belief as they do to mine, nor do I impose upon you the patronage of any thing that

thwarts your perswasion, only I submit to your Judgment whe∣ther I have duely encountred them, and how well I have defended the Truths which they undermine. Nor shall I subjoyn any more, save that I am as much as I can, though not so much as I ought,

