



SIR,
DEdications are so often abused to flattery, commenced upon so low motives, and so unsutably addres∣sed, that unless they be rescued from these vulgar abuses, they will deser∣vedly grow into contempt. And indeed were it not that I am conscious to my self both of the congruousness of this Ad∣dress, and that I am influenced by none of those inducements that commonly pre∣vail to Inscriptions of this nature, and that there is nothing here of the wonted strain of Epistles Dedicatory, I should have superceded the Dedicating of this at all.
Sir, you have been so happy in your choice of the Theams that you have de∣signed to Illustrate and Vindicate; and so matchless in the performance of what

you have undertaken, that whoever hath a Reverence for Religion, oweth you not only thanks, but Veneration. Whilst others combat Atheism with Drollery and Satyr, you have encountred it with De∣monstration; and whilst they only mock and jeer the Atheists, you have baffled and refuted them. By vindicating also the Scriptures to their Divine Author you have justified our belief of them: Whilst you degrade Reason from that Supreme Judicature that some would erect it into, you have rightly vested it in whatever be∣longs to it as an Instrument of discerning and conduct. As he must either have a de∣sign to betray Religion or Himself who oweth it to any thing less than a rational choice; So he must have very irreverent apprehensions of the Authority and Vera∣city of God, who will embrace nothing but what himself can frame adequate No∣tions of. Whereas then the Socinian on the one hand, and the Papist and lazy Pro∣testant on the other, rendered it necessary that both the Reasonablness of Scripture-Belief, and yet the mystery of Particular Doctrines should be equally asserted and secured: We ow a Homage to Sir Charles Wolsley for employing himself about so

Noble a Subject, and without incurring the censure both of injustice and ingrati∣tude, we cannot but acknowledge his suc∣cess in it. And truly the testifying my own thankfulness was the main, though I cannot say the only incentive to this Ad∣dress.
For having, Sir, assumed the liberty to arraign the Writings and some of the No∣tions of a Person considerable at least for his confidence, self-esteem, & the contempt which he treats all men with; that he may not think himself ill dealt withal to be fallen upon by so mean a Man, and so illiterate a Divine as my self, I am willing to do him that right as to refer the Um∣pirage of the Debate between him and me, to a Person as far above either of us in Learning as in Quality. And if he should decline your Award, as I am confident he dare not stand the Verdict of so Competent and Impartial a Judge, I have the satis∣faction of having committed the whole Cause into such hands, as wherein soever either as to Argument or Stile I am de∣fective, knows how to substitute better in their Room. And I acknowledge this to have been one reason among others for the prefixing your Name to the ensuing Dis∣course,

that by recommending the Subject to your care, I might thereby call forth a Person of so strong and clear a Judgment, so Masculine and Celebrated an Elo∣quence, as well to rescue so excellent a Theam from so short a Reason and dull a Pen as mine, as to vindicate it from the declamatory assaults of such whose skil and strength lies next to their Railing in their Rhetorick and Picquancy.
There is one thing more, Sir, that contri∣buted to the concerning your name in this Dedication, namely to tell you, that where∣as you have promised an account of the admirable contrivement of saving Men by Jesus Christ, we can no longer excuse the delay of it. It would have been welcom and useful before, but it is now become neces∣sary. The Opinions brought to the Bar in the following Discourse, are modest and innocent in comparison of some others vented by the same Author, viz. That small sins God takes no notice of, and that great Sins Repentance expiates them. Religion as well as your own Promise challenge from you that you would help to check this growing boldness; Nor do I know a Sub∣ject wherein you may more advantagiously serve both Truth and your own Fame;

The Accession of Light derivable from so great Accomplishments to that, will in∣fallibly reflect a luster, upon your self. Sir, whilst most Books serve only to betray their Authors to an universal contempt, and to expose their pride and folly, which might have been concealed, had not themselves taken a course to divulge it; you have al∣ready by your Writings not only further endeared your self to your Friends, and raised your estimate among such as have the honour and happiness to know you, but withall you have obliged strangers to pay you a Veneration, and won your self a number of secret Votaries and unknown admirers, among whom I presume to rec∣kon my self, and am,

