




MOrtality would be too frail to hear
How ESSEX fell, and not dissolve with fear;
Did not more generous Rage take off the blow,
And by his Blood the steps to Vengeance show.


The Tow'r was for the Tragedy design'd,
And to be slaughter'd, he is first confin'd,
As fetter'd Victims to the Altar go.
But why must Noble ESSEX perish so?
Why with such Fury drag'd into his Tomb,
Murther'd by Slaves, and sacrific'd to Rome?


By stealth they kill, and with a secret stroke
Silence that Voice which charm'd when e're it spoke.
The bleeding Orifice o'reflow'd the Ground,
More like some mighty Deluge, than a Wound.
Through the large space his Blood and Vitals glide,
And his whole Body might have past beside.
The reaking Crimson swell'd into a Flood,
And stream'd a second time in Capel's Blood.
He's in his Son again to Death pursu'd,
An Instance of the highest Gratitude.
They then malicious Stratagems imploy,
With Life, his Dearer Honour to destroy,
And make his Fame extinguish with his Breath;
An Act beyond the Cruelties of Death.
Here Murther is in all its shapes compleat;
As Lines, united in their Center, meet;
Form'd by the blackest Politicks of Hell:
Was Cain so dev'lish when his Brother fell?



He that contrives, or his own Fate desires,
Wants Courage, and, for fear of Death, expires.
But Mighty ESSEX was in all things brave,
Neither to Hope, nor to Despair, a Slave.
He had a Soul too innocent and great
To fear, or to anticipate his Fate;
Yet their exalted Impudence and Guilt,
Charge on himself the precious Blood they spilt.
So were the Protestants some Years ago,
Destroy'd in Ireland without a Foe.
By their own barbarous Hands the mad Men die,
And massacre themselves they know not why.
Whil'st the kind Irish howl to see the Gore,
And pious Catholicks their Fate deplore.
If you refuse to trust erroneous Fame,
Royal Mack-Ninny will confirm the same.


We have lost more in injur'd Capel's Heir
Than the poor bankrupt Age can e're repair.
Nature indulg'd him so, that there we saw
All the choice Strokes her steady hand could draw.
He the old English Glory did revive,
In him we had Plantagenets alive.
Grandure, and Fortune, and a vast Renown
Fit to support the Luster of a Crown.
All these in him were potently conjoyn'd,
But all was too ignoble for his Mind:
Wisdom and Vertue, Properties Divine,
Those, Godlike-ESSEX, were entirely thine.


In his Great Name he's still preserv'd alive,
And will to all succeeding Times survive.
With just Progression, as the constant Sun
Doth move, and through its bright Ecliptick run.
For whilst his Dust does undistinguish'd lie,
And his blest Soul is soar'd above the Sky
Fame shall below his parted Breath supply.

