



RIGHT HONOURABLE,
IT is decreed in Heaven, That we must through much tribulation enter the Kingdom of God, Act. 14. -22. God only wise hath so resolved, that, by means of sanctified trouble the Heirs of glory may be weaned from earth, and learn to place their chief contentment and happinesse, not up∣on their enjoyments below, which are uncertain, empty and perishing; but upon things above, an in∣heritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fadeth not away, reserved in Heaven for them. How hard were it to make, even those who are born of God, long to be dissolved and bid adieu to all their sub∣lunary contentments, except the Lord in mercy did



place a prick in every one of those roses, and make their most promising earthly comforts within a little to prove as streams of brooks that passe away, Job 6. 15? And how should this conciliate love to a sad and suf∣fering lot, and make the Lord's People (who are strangers and pilgrims) delight in the way, which leadeth to such an home as Heaven is? It is indeed our unacquaintance with Scripture, and with what the Word of Truth holdeth forth to be the mind of God, while He scourgeth every son whom He re∣ceiveth, which doth occasion so much proud rising of spirit, or base dejectedness of mind, when the Lord doth not carve us out such a satisfying lot in all things as we would. How often do we mistake our way, and little lesse than quarrel with God? only because He hedgeth us in with thorns of affliction, that we cannot find out our lovers; and therefore that man is truly blessed whom the Lord doth not only chastise, but also instruct out of His Law, Ps. 94. 12. and thereby make him understand and hear the voice of the rod, and of Him who hath appointed it, Mica. 6. 9. And herein indeed the Lord doth greatly manifest His marvellous loving kindnesse, and in wrath remembreth mercy, that He joyneth instruction with correction, and doth fur∣nish His afflicted People with abundant means, by which they may take up the mind of God for good unto them under His saddest dispensations, even that the fruit of affliction is to take away their sin, Isa. 27. -9-. that He doth punish them seven times more, and yet seven times more, untill their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and they accept of the punish∣ment of their iniquity, Levit. 26. 24, 28, 41. that though He visit their transgression with the rod, and



their iniquity with stripes: Nevertheless His loving kindnesse will He not utterly take from him, Psal. 89. 32, 33. and that when they are judged, they are chastened of the Lord, that they should not be con∣demned with the world, 1 Cor. 11. 32. All this, and much more to this purpose, hath the Lord made known by His Word, and doth daily inculcate and make more and more known by His sent Ministers, who, according to their Commission, do open up and apply the rich treasure of holy Scripture unto the Lords People of their charge. And, as if all this were not sufficient, He hath besides stirred up the spirits of many of His Servants in every age to ∣mit their Labours upon Scripture unto writing, for the more publick use of the Church of God, not only in the present, but also the succeeding gene∣rations.
As for my self, I ingenuously professe, that, being conscious of mine own weaknesse, I did much incline to rest satisfied with expressing my Commission by word only in preaching to, and conferring with, my Flock and those of my charge: But, being earnestly requested, and in a manner commanded by some Re∣verend Brethren, whom I honour and reverence in the Lord, to draw up briefly in writ, a plain Ana∣lysis, a short and sound Exposition of, and the chief Observations grounded upon such Scriptures as I had either largely preached upon, or more briefly opened∣up to the Lords People of my charge, I shewed them some of my weak endeavours of that kind to be disposed upon at their pleasure: which when they were pleased to publish and to call for more work of the same nature, expressing their confidence,



that what I had already done, was acceptable to all that love the Truth, and would be edifying to the present and after-ages; and, being thereunto also encouraged by diverse faithfull and understanding persons, I have, in obedience to their desires, given∣out this other Piece to be disposed of by them as they should see good.
And seing they have advised the publishing of it, To whom could I, with more confidence and con∣science of duty, dedicate these my mean labours than to your Honours; considering, that God hath ap∣pointed me to watch for your souls, as one who must gn account, and that your Honours have endea∣voured, for your parts, to encourage me to go about all the parts of my Ministery with joy, and not with grief?
My Lords, when I called to remembrance how long each of you was detained these years by-past from enjoying the benefit of my publick Ministery, by your necessitated abode elsewhere, I thought the best way to give you an account, and to make you reap some fruit of my labours in your absence, was, to present these my weak endeavours to your Ho∣nours: and what you have heard from me upon these Scriptures in publick, when you were permitted to be my hearers, I hope this little piece shall con∣duce to bring it to your remembrance, and the Lord Himself convey it into your hearts, there to remain, to make your Honours more and more wise to salva∣tion, that in the day of the Lord Jesus ye may be matter of joy, and a crown of rejoycing to those who have laboured among you and spoken the Word of God unto you.


And for you, Madam, who hath had liberty to be my hearer more frequently and constantly than my noble Lords, as I trust your Honour will observe there is a good harmony betwixt that which I taught in the Congregation and which I now publish to the world; and that this little piece shall (according to your usuall diligence in searching Scripture, and in keeping fellowship with God in the practice of all commanded duties) be improved by your Honour for your further edification and encouragment to walk worthy of the Lord unto all well-pleasing: So, when I consider how refreshfull it hath been often unto me to behold your sweet submission under the Lord's hand, your truly Christian courage under va∣riety of afflictions, your tractable disposition to re∣ceive wholsome counsels, your willingnesse to be in∣structed in the way to life, and, in order to that end, to attend publick duties beyond many of your equals; your strengthening my hands in the work of my Mi∣nistery, as by other means, so especially by your good example amongst the People of my charge, I should judge my self very unanswerable to God, and ex∣ceeding much blame-worthy if I did not encourage your Honour to make progresse in that good way, wherein ye are already engaged. And if my present essay upon this Piece of sacred Truth do contribute any thing to this end, it shall be matter of thanks∣giving from me unto the Lord, who alone doth teach His People to profit.
And finally, I do professe unto you all (Right Honourable and most dearly beloved in our Lord) that those words, 2 Pet. 1. 12, 13, 14, 15. sound much in mine ears, and do sometimes work upon my



heart, if so I may in some measure follow the ex∣ample of that blessed Apostle who wrote them, Wherefore (saith he) I will not be negligent to put you alwayes in remembrance of those things, though ye know them, and be established in the present Truth. Yea, I think it meet, as long as I am in this taber∣nacle, to stir you up, by putting you in remembrance. Knowing, that ere long (or, not knowing how soon) I must put off this tabernacle. Moreover, I will endeavour, that you may be able after my decease, to have these things alwayes in remembrance. Now, it is the Lord alone who blesseth the endeavours of His Servants, and giveth increase both to our plant∣ing and watering. To whose rich and saving grace I commend your Honours most heartily, and shall ever pray for all manner of blessings on you and all your rising posterity, as is the duty of,

