



NEWCASTLE, though not the place of my birth, or much of my breeding (for I have herein been more beholden to other parts of the world) yet none may challenge from mee more interest in this Dedication. Newcastle, famous for thy mocking and misusing of Christs Messengers, and ill entertainment of his Ser∣vants, ever since our Reformation, witnesse that famous Knox, great Reformer of Scotland, his Sermons preached there: witnesse learned Ʋdall, thy faithful Monitor, whose innocent blood cryes yet from the ground, whom for writing against the Prelates, thou prosecuted as a Tray∣tor to bonds, imprisonment, and sentence of death, un∣der which he died before execution; witnesse Reverend Balmford, whom in like manner thou expulsed, though thou couldst not touch his life, thou pricked his sides (as well as Christs) in his hearers, with the reproach of Balmfordian Faction and Schisme; witnesse Alder, Jenni∣son, Murton, all godly Ministers, expulsed by thee: witnesse others of Christs servants, ill entertained of

thee, yet alive to witnesse all that is alledged against thee, and much more; and last of all, hee that sends these things unto thee, his wife and children, who have received their birth and breathing in thee, make up that long and blacke roll of bitter things writ against thee from heaven. O Newcastle! how hath God dealt with thee, by his divine waterings of his Word many yeeres? how has God spoke aloud to thee by his judgements and forewarnings of ruine and desolation after thou hadst refused all instructions from his Word and Messen∣gers? hast thou forgot how loud God spake to thee in that great plague, Anno, 1636. when there died in half a yeere about seven thousand, which made thee almost desolate, thy streets growne greene with grasse, thy treasurie wasted, thy trading departed, as thou never yet recovered it; thy wounds increased thy madnesse; thou wentest not to heaven for a perfect cure: What thinkst thou was the meaning of that strange fire brake out Nota, This fire brake out in the evening of that day after their consultati∣ons were ended wher∣in many an∣tient Re∣cords were burnt up and consu∣med. (none ever knew how) in thy secret chamber of thy Townes house, or Common hall, where the next yeere after that great plague, thy Rulers, like Wolves of the evening, were lurking all that day in plotting the new project about Coals & Salt, to devoure thy poore inhabi∣tants, and also new devices to suppresse sound preaching, and strave your soules. How is it, after many more warnings, too large to recite, that thou art still hardned, and the cry of thy sinnes like Sodome is come up to hea∣ven: in thee is found the blood of the Prophets, the blood of the Saints oppressed & banished, and hunted to death: in thee is found the blood of thy inhabitants op∣pressed and impoverished, by unlimitted authoritie, and arbytrarie government, so court-like, as an Aple is like an Orange. In thee is found the uncleanesse of Sodome,

Adulteries, and Fornications in thy Rulers houses: thy filthinesse in thy skirts, transparent to strangers round about thee; in thee found drunkennesse and excesse, with melodie, to see the Church laid desolate: in thee is found the two grand sins, that will sincke a whole state, a whole kingdome without repentance and reformati∣on: superstition in worship, and oppression in govern∣ment, which has brought upon this Land that bloodie sword, which now threatens to devoure thee (I meane, thy wicked Magistracie and Rulers, who have wrested all thy power into their own hands, and all that wicked crue of their confederacie) O Newcastle! when wilt thou learne the dialect of heaven, speaking loud in thine eares? O Newcastle, Newcastle! wilt thou not be made clean, when shall it once be? Jer. 13. 27. If thou wilt not hearken to heavens counsell, heare thy sentence, Thou art defiled with blood, and cannot be cleansed, but by the blood of them that shed it, Numb. 35. 33. O Newcastle! what shall I say to thee? what hath inraged thee against him that writes this complaint against thee? whom have I wronged of you? bring forth your evidences, and plead your cause; I hope ere long, wee shall have a faire and free hearing and just proceedings, not at the barre of your Court Law of hanging, Excom. imprisonment and banishment; but at a bar of right judgement. I have ever sought thy good in spiritualls and temperalls, even to my owne hurt and losse; I have seene sometimes thy plagues a farre off, and wept insecret for thee, (as the place of my habitation, though my Meseck and Kedar, the place of my sorrow, and never of my joy, how oft have I assayed to have left thee in thy rebellion against God, but heavens counsels did not favour mine) when the great plague began, Anno 1636. Consider what might be Gods mind, to make mee

one day weepe bitterly over thee, riding alone about a mile from the towne, with many sad thoughts, and when I lookt up, and see Newcastle before mee, my heart burst out with grief, with the same words boing within me, wherewith the Lord Jesus wept over Jerualem: O New∣castle, Newcastle, would God thou in thy dayes had remembred the things belonging to thy peace, often revolving these thoughts with me: but when I came to the next words, with many reasonings within mee, shall they be hid from thine eyes, shall thy habitations be laid desolate. My heart was like to burst within mee, for a good space, assuring my selfe to heare ill newes, (for I had been in the Coun∣trey) and comming to towne, I heard presently of the increase of the plague, and that the night before some six and thirty died of it; and from thence it daily increa∣sed to foure hundred a weeke, till it had swept away about seven thousand at least, in seven or eight moneths time. O Newcastle, before thou hadst recovered this blowe, which I mourned to see comming upon thee, what ailed thee to begin to plot the ruine of me and my wife and children. I had seen many habitations laid de∣solate, though I returned safely to my owne, with all my family, praise to my God, often strangely preserved from that deadly infection; was it that thou grudged me thy corrupt ayre to breath in, that thou sought my life, and pursued my wife and mee both as traytors, till thou drove us out of the kingdome. God made mee require thy malice with the like pitie as before, that morning I escaped thy malicious designe against me, as I passed the gates in the darke of the morning, and being a little passed from the walls, the towne being still in my sight, God made me weepe over thee, the second time, in the same manner as before, and with ruminating and rea∣sonings

within me upon the same words of Christ over Jerusalem, and how soone after was the bloody sword drawne, which has wasted thee not a little, and well if the worst be not yet behinde. What hast thou got now by all thy discourteous and harsh dealings with mee, who has ever sought thy good? I have served thee di∣vers yeeres in a publique office, wherein, though I could doe thee little good, (the streame run so strong against mee) yet I have sometimes kept out some evils from over-spreading thee, untill thou began to stretch out thy necke against God, in the Scottish Cause, and then, ever since, how  an inundation of all evills over∣whelmed thee, and God, I feare, left thee to some fatall fall. Repent, repent, O Newcastle, lest the Lord de∣part from thee, and send a revenging sword to avenge his quarrell against thee; if so, take heed of what was threatned to a wicked Citie: Afflicton shall not come the second time, which the Lord avert, and give thee a heart to repent and turne to him, that has long smitten thee, that hee may repent him of the evill which other∣wise will befall thee; For all the strength and power of man wherein thou still dost boast and glory, I have thought it my dutie, to present thee with a briefe view of thy harsh usage of mee and mine, to see if at any time God may give thee an heart to repent, which should be to mee greater joy then to see thee laid de∣solate, when these papers I now send thee, shall be as a flying roll through thy streets and dolefull habitations, filling your fainting hearts with errors and shrikings to think of all your wickednesses; and amongst the rest, your bloodie plots and practises against one that has ever sought your good,

