



SInce the Evening preceded the Morning in the account of the first Day, and the most precious of Lights sprung out of Darkness: as it much countenances th Philosophers Privation and their Veritatem in pu∣teo, so it seemeth to tax their pre∣sumption, who speak frequently of the Light, seldom of the Dark∣ness that is in them.
Whilst you the true Off-spring of the first and purest Virtue, in your noble and masculine Humility (though you had very large Ac∣complishments

to boast of) deem∣ed it your highest Glory to obtain a Royal Commission from the most Heroick Spirit of England, to dig (unitedly) for Truth and Know∣ledge, as for hidden Treasure.
And this (not like those envi∣ous Monasticks, who what they found, would ever have confined soly to their reclused Cells) but most ingeniously for dispersing of it to the Universal Benefit of all Mankind without exception.
If then small things may hold Resemblance with greater, and the least Addition of Knowledge to your own Country cannot but be matter of rejoycing to your good∣ness.
I shall not cease to hope but this Translation and Contribution of this

kind of knowledge to the English, and its humble Dedication, will have a fair and kind Acceptation with your Wisdoms.
Not in the least supposing ei∣ther the Subject (being of Wind and Spirits) or this Discourse, can be strangers to your general read∣ing; but some what to stir up your joynt and inspective minds, to the advancement of these Studies to farther degrees of Perfection: and if possible, to reduce them to the needful use of Physick. Not only all Diseases, Pains, and Distempers, being of late imputed to veno∣mous Spirits generated in Mans Body, but their Cure also, to the efficacy of those undescernable forces in Nature, benigne Spirits. But may some reflect, what must

we now dig for Winds as for hid∣den Treasures? Seriously you may without disparagement, it being no Solecism to admit of Flatum as well as Veritatem in puteo. And in∣deed (in the sense of this worthy Author) Where may not you find them? Or is it not rather a questi∣on, What can be performed without them? Or rather (if once through∣ly understood) in their various dif∣ferences and properties, What may not be done by their assistance? And that the Spirit of Spirits may con∣stantly be your guide, shall ever be the earnest desires of the Admirer of your generous Aims and Inten∣tions,

