



Beloved in the Lord,
I Told you the reason of my Preaching, you know the reason of my Printing these Sermons; I Preached them volun∣tarily to establish you, I Printed them by a kind of constraint to satisfie others. I Preached them to manifest the truth to prevent others misleading you; I Printed them to de∣fend the Truth, I wish they may help you to reduce others. What my Publike labours (and open opposi∣tions from some) have been among you, you are the best witnesses; what my secret trouble hath been, partly from a sense of mine own weakness, partly from some incapacity to do what I desired among you, God and mine own conscience can best testifie. I cannot but wonder at Gods providence in this, to put me to assert the outward Call of a Minister in Publike, who (it may be) have so often questioned mine inward Call in private. But hitherto hath God brought me.
Some of you may have heard what solicitations I

have had to other places of greater profit; most of you know what resolutions I had to return to the place whence I was driven, of lesse means, had not your importunity, procuring their consent, held me here. Many have been the scandals I have suffered about it, through the confident reports of bold ad∣versaries, for which I could willingly have Printed both your engagement to me here, and their testimony thence; the one to free me from the murmurings of some against mine abode here, the other to clear me from that false imputation of receiving profit thence, while that Living lay unresigned in mine hands; but to have done it without consent might not have been civil, to have done it at all (besides the swelling of the book) might have savoured of arrogance: where∣fore I forbear, my conscience bearing me witness, and many upon the private sight of the Papers being al∣ready satisfied.
I did intend (if I had been in Print at all) some∣thing that might have been more for your practice, al∣though I hope this may be for your profit: But since God hath called me out in this, I will improve it what I can. If by what I have already suffered, or may by this further undergo, you may receive any advantage, I shall think my labour well spent, and my sufferings abundantly recompensed.
I shall therefore beseech you, 1. That you would not esteem or be contented with any light or heat, but what is caused by the rising and efficacy of the Sun of Grace in you. There are a sort of people, who being dead in sins and trespasses, never stir at all, but lye sense∣lesse in the grave: I speak not this to them, although

I could be glad they might hear the voice of the Son of God and live: that Jesus Christ would effectually call them (as once Lazarus) out of that deadly sleep that hath seized on them. But there are others who seem to stir, yet not from a principle of true life in them: who continuing in sinne, think it Grace enough to pretend to an opinion: who neglecting the Power of godli∣nesse, content themselves to talk of some Disciplinary parts of Religion; I never liked their building, who begun the Fabrick at the roof, (but indeed he that in∣tends to draw only the picture of an house, needs not care at which end he begins) I never fancied their Re∣ligion, which begins (and ends too) only in opinion. To hear drunkards talk of gathering Churches, and swearers question the Call of Ministers, &c. (al∣though that is something more then Disciplinary) is such a Paradox in Religion, that the Churches of Christ have not usually bin acquainted with all. When men out of a desire to appear something, yet for want of any true work of Grace upon their spirits, shall take up only that fashion of Religion, which may suit best the times in which they are, they may be good talkers, but seldom are sound practisers of godlinesse.
I would have you labour to finde the work of Grace upon your spirits, which may make you new creatures, for in Christ Jesus neither circumcision, nor uncircumcisi∣on availeth any thing, but a new creature, Gal. 6. When that spring once moves the wheels, although the work may seem to go more slowly, and with some more trouble, yet it goes more surely, and with much more truth. Practise more the power then the shew of god∣liness:

let your lives, rather then your tongues declare your Religion. Old-fashioned, unskilfull Limners; were constrained to underwrite the name of what they Painted, that people might know what it was rather by the inscription then the draught. Such is the new-fashioned Religion of some men, that if they did not tell you, it was Religion they professed, men would scarcely deem it such by their profession. People are apt to think well of being Religious, but they are often mistaken in what is Religion: they will grant godli∣ness to be great gain, but they are not convinced what is godliness. If I finde a man once shaken, who hath been truly rooted; misled, who hath been set right in Gods way; as I am apt to be much troubled for him, so I desire to be very tender of him: but when I see a loose and light body tossed with every minde, I am little affected with it; It is as much wonder to see the one stable in blustring times, as the other shaking.
2. I shall intreat you, That you would now be con∣versant in the study of Fundamentall Truths. When Fundamentals are questioned, we had need to be well satisfied about them: when the foundation is aimed at, the greatest defence had need to be made there. Paul desired to see the Romans, to establish them, Rom. 1. 11. it is from  which is rendred (by one) ruitur a suffulcio: surely if ever people had need to be established in the Truth, it is now; when truth (in this sense) decays, and its very foundation begins to be shaken. When men build their Religion upon props set up by their own fancy, they may quickly be carried besides the Truth. It is a strange thing to see how men now adaies delight most in the loose notions of their own con∣ceiving,

but little in the standing. Truth laid by Gods Word. This is to lose Truth in the mist of their own making, and to put out their own eyes by the dust they themselves have raised; they that flie so high in their affected, although confused notions, frequently leave the Truth behind, when through the coldness of the second region, they are so frozen in their af∣fections, that (if ever they return) they seldom pursue Truth with much love after. This is to lay up a mans Religion in a Castle built in the Air, when every winde of Doctrine may tosse it to and fro. It is an unhappy thing, that some men are guilty of, to delight in expressions they understand not, and to be lost in the pursuit of those cloudy notions they cannot reach: when they are alwaies pointing at what they have but small ken of themselves, although they cannot discover them to others. By this the growth of true Religion is much hindered in them, and the profit of Christian confe∣rence much prevented in their meetings, when much is proposed, a great deal talked of, but little gotten, nothing agreed on. There is more advantage to be gotten in one hours conference with him, who under∣stands and will speak of a Fundamentall in Religion, then in many dayes with those; for although there lesse may be talked of, there is more discovered.
I would have you much in the study of faith, repen∣tance, Justification, &c. To that end reade much of the Scripture, and of those other good Books (written by godly men) which God hath holpen this age with∣all. I could wish (besides others) you would be all well versed in that little Carechisme I use among the 
 younger people: The Assem∣blies ( chism 
which although small in bulk, is as

full stuffed with sound Truths as ever I saw any so closely comprized. Enquire after the good old way, and walk in it. The most of our new lights are but old darknesses, which are caused rather by the privation, then the encrease of true Light: most of our new truths are but old errours, rising afresh out of the bot∣tomless pit; the hand of liberty having rouled away that stone, which the arm of Government had before laid to stop the mouth of it.
Beware of controversies that are either above your reach, or lesse necessary to Religion: the former may puzzle and perplex you; the later but disturb and unquiet you: the former often ends in defection from the Truth; the later only in difference and con∣tention among (seeming) brethren: By both men are frequently so forced or perswaded from the Truth, that if they are not hurried into one, they are cheated into another errour. When Peter would prevent peo∣ples falling from their stedfastness, he presses them to grow in Grace, 1 Pet. 3. 18. A low house setled upon a good foundation, will stand longer then an high tot∣tering edifice upon a weak basis. Not that I would have you contented with small measures, low statures in Grace; build as high as you will, as you can, only let the foundation be firm and proportionable.
3. I would beg you to measure all the Doctrines you hear by the line of Gods word: seeing there are false spirits gone forth into the world, it is good to try the spirits, whether they are of God or not, 1 John 4. 1, 2. It is an evil thing (in this) to have mens persons in admira∣tion. If the best of men on earth, if an Angel from Heaven should bring any other Doctrine, then what is

left by Christ for your direction, let him be Anathema.Tout humaine proposition, &c. 
 
Gal. 1. 18. Charron in his book of wisdom tels us, that 
 every humane proposition is of equal Authority, unless reason make the difference. No Religious doctrine is of any reputation further then the Scripture speaks it true. When mens words are only taken, it's no hard thing to be deceived: when men beleeve only with a 
 probable Faith, they are easily mislead. Non exploratis rationibus tradi∣tionum probabi∣lem tantum fi∣dem portant, Cyprian. 
The Apostle bids the Thessalonians try all things, because they should  hold fast (as by violence) what was good, 1 Thes. 5. 18. What weapon or beast a man hath well proved, he will carefully preserve, when what may be as good (if he know it not) may be more easily parted withall. It is a great advantage the Devil hath given him, when men hold Truth upon too slender grounds, Gold and silver is not valued, if not known to be such. Children may have gold in their hands, when (if children, whom you may perswade it is brasse) it is no hard matter to cheat them out of it. They were Children that were tossed to and fro, Ephes. 4. If a stone be loose, although upon a good foundation, it is no difficult thing to remove it: that will most pro∣bably continue, which is well fastened.
When men pin their faith upon others sleeves, whi∣thersoever those sleeves are stretched out, their Faith must follow: when doctrines are judged of by the men that bring them (be it what it will) it can only be so prevalent, as the man that vents it is of Authority with them that hear it. The Corinth. vvere accused as carnal that they pretend, some to Paul, others to Apol∣lo, 1 Cor. 3. 4. when yet they were both Ministers, v. 5. (Good God!) vvhat are they, who are some for this,

others for that gifted brother, who are no Ministers, only intrude into that Office intrusted unto others. Thus men best like, and most cry up those Preachers who are of that party they most affect, and then the Doctrine they bring, whether true or false. This is to judge of things by the men that do them (a false rule) and not of men by the things they do. Hence the Pre∣vailing party hath alwaies most followers, such Power∣full Preachers can command Audience. It is the pra∣ctice of our late Astrologers to gaze only on those Stars which are ascendant, and still speak best of those Constellations which have the strongest influence, es∣pecially if they have but a favourable aspect towards them: whose Prognosticks are calculated for the Me∣ridians of strength and weakness, of power and impo∣tency. I vvish it vvere not too much the fault of our new-fashioned hearers, vvho love not the light of the brightest Star, if not of their party.
But I shall hope, and ask better things of you: let truth and falsehood be the cause of your esteem or dis∣respect of what you hear: let that have best reception with you, which hath most Authority from Scripture, although least of the power of men vvith it. When false coyn is abroad, all men will look to the money they receive: Seeing it hath been foretold, that in the last daies (vvhich are these) there should come sedu∣cers, and our experience tels us it is fulfilled, let us try before vve trust, and examine the Doctrine vve hear, before vve believe it.
4. I vvould have you suspect, and be shy of what∣soever doctrines please the flesh; of vvhatsoever it is that indulgeth corrupt nature. Flesh and bloud are no

more apt to love, then they are able to enter into the Kingdom of God: the flesh lusteth against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and these are contrary one to the other, Gal. 5. 17. It is very unlikely that should be from the spirit, which is delightfull to the flesh. Many smooth the way, and widen the gate to heaven, I pray God they lead not people that way to hell. Facilis descensus Averni, &c. 
The down-hill 
 passage is most easie. Where Christ saith, The way is narrow, and the gate is strait that leads to life, Mat. 9. 13, 14. he presently subjoyns a seasonable warning; to take heed of false Prophets. The way may be paved with Agates, which yet may be painfull to the feet of the traveller; the gate may be made of Diamonds, which yet may be strait in the passage.
It hath been the generall practice, and constant sign that God hath given of false Prophets, to preach smooth things: they promise peace, Jer. 23. 17. they seduce my people, saying, Peace, when there is no peace, and daub with untempered morter, Ezek. 13. 10. they see visions of peace, ver. 16. they sow pillows to All armholes, ver. 18. they save the souls alive, ver. 19. they strengthen the hands of the wicked, promising life, v. 22. It is the duty and delight of true Prophets, to promise life, to preach peace to those who are entitled to it. Yea they would that the peace∣full promises of the false Prophets might be fulfilled; as Jer. 28. 6. Amen, the Lord do so, the Lord perform the words which thou hast prophesied: but to speak pleasing things to him that lies in sin, is so far from preaching Heaven, that it may occasion mens running to hell. What ease, what advantage can it be to godly Mini∣sters to threaten judgement against sinners, were it not for Gods command, and their profit? What proba∣bility

is there, that people should receive advantage by those doctrines that continue their carnall peace? They were false Teachers, who by their lies caused prophane people to reproach the true Prophets with the burthen of the Lord, Jer. 23. 33. they thereby refu∣sed the words of the true Prophets, because they spake of the judgement of God against them: but men that are proclive to sleep need no rocking.
Let me in the Name of the Holy God, warn you of any doctrine that favours, or tends to sinfull liberty. Indeed Christ hath purchased liberty to his Saints, but we must not use our liberty as an occasion to the flesh, Gal. 5. 13. To be Christ's freemen and sins slaves at the same time, is impossible. I cannot but wonder at some new Preachers, who cry up mercy and grace, as if there were nothing of justice or truth in God at all: who dare promise mercy to sinners, and by their pro∣mise of life, strengthen their hands in wickedness? It is one thing to offer mercy to people upon repentance; another to promise mercy to them while sinners. It is one thing to hold out Christ to them that will re∣ceive him; another, to promise Christ to them that re∣fuse him.
Religious Greenbam speaking how God had joyn∣ed godlinesse and the means of godlinesse together, calls them frantick hereticks that neglect the means, &c. Beware of them, who dare perswade you to a neg∣lect 

 of duty, who by their preaching can intimate it as needless to be pressed, as unnecessary to be practised. If there are Impostors under heaven, if there are any upon earth, that bring another Gospel then what Christ left, these are the men; who under a pretence of preaching Christ and free-grace, brand all those with the name of legal Preachers, who but endeavour to convince people of sin, or perswade them to their duty. As if discover∣ing

to men their need of Christ, were not preaching of Christ; and that the Spirit had not been sent by Christ, who came to convince the world of sin, Joh. 16. 8. As if pressing men to the duty the God of mercy requires, were to deny the freenesse of grace; and that Peter had abridged the free grace of God, when he commanded people to repent and be converted, that their sins might be blotted out, Act. 3. 19. As if there were no difference between duty and desert, between means and merit. There is a vast difference between what God requires as a means, to which ex gratiâ he promiseth a reward, and the doing of a work which ex debito deserves its wages. In this there is a proportion between the work and the reward, yea, the man performing it doth the work by his own strength: but in the other, besides the disproportion between the thing required, and the re∣ward promised; and besides his love (in whose power it was) to impose no harder a task upon us, he that out of grace promiseth the reward, out of the same mercy gives strength to perform the means. So that in this, the doctrine of free-grace is much advanced. Can it be thought that man must be only passive in the work of his salvation? To what end had he a reasonable soul gi∣ven him, if not to imploy its faculties (especially) for that better part which cannot be taken from him? Heze∣kiah might have been cured without the application of figs: Naaman might have been healed without going to Jordan, yet the not use of commanded means might have prevented their desired deliverance (but of that in∣fra.) It is a pretty observation of learned Perkins upon Rev. 3. 20. If any man will open, &c. mans will is not like a piece of wax, only passive, which without any

action receiveth impression; but as fire, which as soon as it is fire, it burns, and as soon as it burns it is fire.
It is the sad effect such preaching hath produced in many hearers (in some that I dare not but hope wel of) that they scarcely endure to hear any thing of duty pressed. They can be content to hear of believing as a Gospel-duty, but if repentance or obedience be men∣tioned, that is, what we cannot perform, these are but legal duties. As if believing were less a duty, then re∣pentance; or that we were of our selves more able to perform one then the other. Or as if repentance were less a Gospel-duty then believing: when it is manifest that repentance could have no place under the legal Covenant. The Covenant of works was to do or die: under which, as we are unable to perform, so neither 

 could we be profited by repentance. For this ob∣serve that of Mar. 1. 14, 15. Note it well: Christ is said to preach the Gospel when he preached repentance. It is only the Co∣venant of grace through Christ that admits repen∣tance. That came in through Jesus Christ, it was one of the new laws given us by that Lord, and then can be nothing else but a Gospel-duty. How easie is it for peo∣ple to mistake? and then with violence to pursue what through-mistake they propose as good? like some hot∣mettal'd doggs, which over-hunting the true sent, are either quite beaten out, or follow what is false.
Friends! Is duty more out of fashion now than it was? Is it the liberty of Christians to be free from Gods service? To be free from sin, was to be servants to righte∣ousness, Rom. 6. 18. Can the encrease of mercy free us from, or should it engage us more to duty? May I not say to those who are guilty, as Paul, Gal. 3. 1. Oh foolish Galatians, who hath bewitched you, that you should not obey he truth? Do but observe what an unchristian liberty

some have made use of (even some professors of godli∣ness) since this doctrine of liberty hath been so much preached: unto what an height of grossest prophaness, of ranting wickedness some have run, who began but at the neglect of duty! Tender consciences would be afraid of such occasions of evil. Duty helps to pinnion the wings of the flesh; take off that pinnion, give the wings but liberty, whither (short of heaven) may it not flie? Duty lops off the exuberant branches of the old stock; neglect that, the sprouts may quickly grow long and thriving.
Good God! what hardships do not only the Mi∣nisters, but the truth of Christ suffer from men of con∣trary mindes? It hath been the Ministers work former∣ly to vindicate their Ministry against Papists, because not ordained in their Sea: It is now their business to uphold their Ministry against those, who would null their Call, because (as they say) received from Rome. It was not long since that our great contest was against the Pelagians, who from the Scriptures pressing duty, would have inferred a power in mans Will to perform it: We have now to do with them, who because man hath no power in himself naturally to perform it, would have no duty pressed at all. Thus are we ground between tvvo milstones: But neither extream is good, when virtus is in the middle. The Truth is, men love not Duty, and therefore dislike the pressing it: they delight in sin, and therefore hate the re∣proving it, They would stand still all the day idle, yet willingly receive the penny, as if they had wrought in the vineyard. Ephraim loves to tread out the corn, but not to break the clods, Hos 10. 11. people are willing

to receive the profit, but love not, like not the burthen of the work: they would feed upon the corn of the blessing, but love not the yoke of obedience: Love then that preaching best that most discovers your du∣ty; Be willing to perform whatsoever God requires of you: Let this prevail with you to set up Duty in your families, to practise obedience in your persons: The Lord knows how many families there are in which duty was never yet set up, and observes where it hath been begun, but is now neglected. The Lord grant that none of you be found in the number of those enemies that will not have Christ to rule over them.
But because reproving of sin, and threatning judge∣ment against it; pressing duty upon the people, and pro∣mising mercy upon the performance of it, is looked on as so legal, so unsutable to Gospel-preaching; as what too much straitens Gods grace, and enlargeth mans power beyond the rule, I'le lay down some things briefly to vindicate it from all mistakes.
1. There is less probable deceit, not so much palpa∣ble danger in reproving sin, and threatning judgement against it, whereby people are convinced of their mi∣sery; than in holding out large and inconditionate of∣fers of grace, from which men groundlesly may ex∣pect mercy. There may be more pain in searching of the wound, but there is less danger; there may be more ease in skinning of it, but less safety. We finde the Scripture very often condemning false Pro∣phets for preaching smooth things, promising life, and thereby strengthening the hands of the wicked in sinne (in many places, as was touched on before,) but

where do we find any prohibition of, or reprcof for an endeavor to convince the people of their sin, that they may afterward be convinced of righteousness? The Scribes and Pharisees are said to binde heavy burthens upon others shoulders, Mat. 23. 4. they pressed a strict observance of the Law, a burthen too heavy to be born by mens own shoulders; but their fault was not in pressing of the Law, but in pressing it as a meritori∣ous cause of life, not shewing them the way, how E∣vangelically through Christ to perform it. Thus to press the law is blame-worthy. But secondly, Their fault there reproved was not so much in pressing the Law as the rule of obedience, but not practising them∣selves what they pressed upon others, not walking by the same rule themselves. For you see Christ gives it as a charge to people, to obey what they commanded, ver. 3. Whatsover they bid you observe, that observe and do. How often was Christ and his Apostles in repro∣ving sin, and threatning punishment! Luk. 13. 3. 5. Ex∣cept ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. unrighteous, drunkards, extortioners, &c. shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, besides many other places.
2. (Not to name the practice of Moses and the Pro∣phets,) it hath been the unquestioned method of Christ and his Disciples, to presse those duties upon people, which by their own strength they are not able to perform. Christ preached repentance, which was not in mans power (of himself) to practise, Matth. 4. 7. John preached it, Matth. 3. 2. The Disciples preached it, Mark 6. 8. 12. Nay, it was part of the work he prescribed them after his resurtection; that repentance and remission of sins should be preached to all

Nations in his name, Luk. 24. 47. The command Peter gave a people unable of themselves to perform it, was, repent and be converted, Act. 3. 19.
Surely that's the best preaching that is nearest the pattern given in the Mount; that is the most Gospel∣way of teaching, that is most agreeable to Christ's method. One upon Mark. 6. 1. calls repentance, the 

 very summ of the preaching of John, of Christ, of the Apostles.Summa & caput praedicationis, Johanuis, Chri∣sti & Apostolo∣m. 
3. What duty people are pressed to from the word, it is their sin not to do; through their own default they are not able to perform. So that if it were for no other end, but to shew Gods right that he hath to our obedience, our wickedness that we are not able to practise it, our duty, what we ought to perform, this were sufficient cause of pressing it, and from this good use might be made of it. Disobedience to the Law is sin, 1 Joh. 3. 4. it is called . Although the obser∣vance of duty can deserve no reward, yet the not doing it deserves severe punishment. Note. The great end of God's 

 giving Scripture was, to reprove, to instruct, 1 Tim. 3. 16. What must we reprove if sin must not be spoken of? What instruction must be given, if duty must not be pressed? Yea, it is intimated, that who would not hear reproof, rebuking, exhortation, would not endure sound doctrine, 2 Tim. 4. 2, 3.
That people cannot perform what God requires, is from their own defaults: so that it is no injustice in God to require it. God made man righteous, Eccles. 7. 29. he may justly require according to what he gave, not according to what we have. The Master that gave ma∣ny talents, may require the whole summ, although the

servant (through his idleness) is not able to pay it. It is meer mercy, that God accepteth according to what a man hath, 2 Cor. 8. 12. he may in justice require according to what he first gave.
4. The pressing of duty upon people unable to per∣form it, is the ordinary, and may prove the effica∣cious means to enable men to do it. The Ninevites re∣pented at the preaching of Jonah, Mat. 12. 41. Peter preached repentance, Acts 1. 9. and some thou∣sands were (by Gods blessing on it) enabled to per∣form it, Cap. 4. 4. The few that were truely chosen, were of the number of them who were outwardly cal∣led before, Matth. 24. 14. I confess the means is not effectual to all, but must it be therefore used to none? nay, because we know not to whom it may be effectual, therefore it must be used to all, that it may be profitable to those to whom God intends it. Peo∣ple are much mistaken in the pressing of duty, who look upon it onely as a command of obedience, not at all as a means of profit: in the commands of God, there is not only a discovery of duty, but an offer of power and strength to perform it. It were but vain to bid a groveling child arise, which of it self is unable; but if at the same time I hold forth my hand to help it, it may be a means to raise it. It had been an hard injunction of Christ, to bid Lazarus arise, when he had been dead four daies and not able to stir: but when the voice carried with it a secret power to enable him, he was able to come out of the grave: it was the Angel that stirred the water, whereby the diseased were cured at Bethesda; must not impotent people be advised therefore to go to the pool, because of

themselves they could not work the cure?
But where commanded duties are not practised, they leave them without excuse that neglect them. God sent Ezekiel to a stubborn people who (he knew) neither would nor could practise his commands, that they might know that there was a Prophet among them. Ezek. 2. 5.
5. Duty is not pressed by Ministers as a meritorious cause of salvation, but as the condition which God requires in them to whom he will give it. When we have done all we can, we are unprofitable servants, Luk. 17. May not God, who in free love gives the reward, pro∣pose what condition he pleaseth? nay, which is more, he that proposeth the condition, makes people to per∣form what he requires: (as was touched before) which is very plain, Ezek. 36. 25, 26. 27.
The result of all is, To beseech you to consider, how they cheat you of the Truth, and may deceive you of your Souls, who preach the neglect, or need∣lesness of that Duty God commands and will have (though he himself work it) in those to whom hee'l shew mercy: such who call the way easie and broad, which Christ calls strait and narrow: that promise life to men in sin, and strengthen the hands of the wicked in their iniquity.
6. I shall desire you: That you would be more in judging of yourselves, then in censuring others. It is (now) a great part of some mens Religion, to finde or make faults in others, when they observe not their own: Magis utimur spectacillis quam speculis. they use spectacles to look on others whereby 

 their faults are multiplied, but endure not a look∣ing glasse to reflect upon themselves that their de∣formity

might be discovered. Indeed mens eyes are naturally placed to look outward on others, when they need the help of some reflecting glasse to take an in∣ward view of themselves. But surely there is (be∣sides nature) some wicked art, whereby they are holpen, notwithstanding the undiscovered beam in their own eye, to observe so clearly a smaller moth in their Brothers. People are so busied to espy faults in other mens houses, that they neglect the cleansing of their own.
You may observe others faults privately to reprove, not publickly to reproach a Brother: you may take notice of others sins, to be warned by their falls, not to make it an occasion of sinning to you: yet in this, as I would not have you judge them by the reports of o∣thers, so neither to measure them by the line of malice. As report like an evil spirit often presents that which never was in substance: so malice like a false glass pre∣sents double what is.
Be chiefly in the examination of your selves, with what face will you reprove others, when your own faults are more eminent? Rom. 2. 21, 22, 23. A dirty brush seldom makesclean clothes. If your brother be guiltless when you accuse him, it manifests malice, at least too much credulity, if faulty; yet when you are guilty, it argues too little sincerity. Prove your selves, was Pauls rule, 2 Cor. 13. 5. The best Christian is most at home; the best husband is most conversant in his own books.
Is it that there is not work enough at home, that you are so busie abroad? Is not the sin of your life enough to employ you in the examination of, and

mourning for it? will not the making sure your title to Eternal happiness finde you work enough in private? (poor souls!) If you have not work enough to day, you will be sure to make more before the morrow. Observe your own sins, and endeavour to avoid them: mark your own temptations, and endeavour to resist them. Let your own tempations make you pitty others if they do fall: Let your own aptness to fall plead ex∣cuse, if it be but an infirmity: I would not have you too rigid against the (only) infirmities of others, yet I would not have you too indulgent toward your own. I would have you do with infirmities, as modest House∣wives do with some lesser pieces of sluttery, although they will not endure it in their own, yet they will excuse it in their neighbours house. Then shall I think you religious indeed, and that the Lord intends good to your souls, when you accuse not others, but your selves; when your endeavour is more to amend your own, then observe others deformities.
I thought to have spoken a word to you about the Sa∣crament, but I have been too long in the porch already, besides, that concerning mine own Congregation on∣ly, I shall refer it to a more private occasion: You may conceive upon what grounds I administer it; you know for what reasons I have for some time forborn it; some of you have been informed what course I am about in our future preparation for it. Onely I can∣not but observe that those who before made it their argument against us, that we administred it to some, whom we had then no power to debar; are novv as apt to reproach us, vvhen they think we have as little povver to reform it. But I am comforted in this pro∣vidence,

that I had declared my resolutions about it, before it was objected against us. I see it is hard to be free from blame, when men love to finde fault.
All I have now to speak to you, is that you would not turn your back upon the Truth. Some may neglect the reading, from a want of desire to know Truth; others may cast a way all as false, because not suitable to their fancy. This will prove a lasting record against you, if I shall not now prevail with you.
If the Preaching of Ordained Ministers be the Or∣dinance, then wait upon it; run not up and down after unprofitable Teachers; the Prophet Jeremiah saith, They shall not profit (as in the book:) And one of their great pen-men in part confesseth that they cannot con∣vert, nor beget faith: as shall be shewed in the Appen∣dix after it. God (through his great mercy) hath not left me wholly without witness (I mean some seal of my Ministry among you) the Lord increase the num∣ber, that I may give up mine account with joy. It hath frequently troubled my soul in private, to think what hopefull Reformation among us hath been hindred by the false aspersions, and causeless opposition of some: But the Lord will require it at their hands. The good God pardon it.
Beloved, Let not such things discourage you; it is a sign God hath some work to do, where the Devil stirs opposition against it. I would beseech you to con∣tend for the faith once delivered to the Saints, Jude ver. 3. and with Paul, I shall beg you to be stedfast, unmove∣able, alwaies abounding in the work of the Lord. The Lord appear so upon you and me, that we may order our conversation according to his will, that we may all

walk that way he hath prescribed us to heaven. That when the great day of account shall come, we may all have our names written in the Book of Life, which is the earnest prayer of,

