




Beloved in the Lord!
IF I should spend much time in making an Apologie for my self in reference to the Dedication of this following Discourse to you of the Congregation, I might well be judged to complement. It's yours by right: If it come into other hands (through God's blessing) it may do good, but as in the preaching of it I had, so now in the Printing of it I have a special respect for you, and to you of the Church it was first preach'd, and now printed for your sakes.
However I think meet in this place, to give some brief ac∣count of the reason both of its Publication and Dedication. First, for its Publication, the reason is manifold: 1. For that I did judge the subject in it self to be suitable to the present state of the people of God, and might be of use to the stirring them up to humiliation and reformation. 2. That I might manifest that dear respect I had for, and that affection I did
bear unto that choice servant of Christ deceased, under whose Ministry I have been so often refreshed and raised in my spi∣rit. 3. Because I was desired by several of the friends of Mr. Iohn Sympson, either to print my discourse, or give them copies of it; wherefore I chose to do the former, because I did judge it might give the greater satisfaction. 4thly, That I might do something towards the vindication of the name of that glorified saint, both from former, and later re∣proaches, and slanders. Those that have a good conscience, have not always a good name. The people of God in this life are called the troublers of Israel; they are seditious, rebellious, what not? Christ himself was accounted a deceiver, and im∣poster; and Paul was said to be aseditious person, and suffered (in the opin on of some) as an evill doer, 2 Tim. 2.9. Wherein I suffer trouble as an evil doer, even unto bonds. Job was represented unto the world as an hypocrite, and that by his friends; which went very near him. The ministers of the Gospell must expect above any other to meet with reproaches (2 Cor. 6, 8.) the Devill hates them most, because they most oppose his Kingdom, and interest; and therefore if he can't debauch their consciences, hee'l spit his venom at them through the mouths of wicked and ungodly men. But let wick∣ed men know, that the time is hastening on apace, wherein as God will make inquisition for blood, so for names; as the death, so the name of a saint is pretious in Gods accompt: God will roul away the reproach of his people; *
Josh. 5.9. Psal. 37.6. Psal. 112.6. hee'l cause their innocency and righteousness to break forth as the sun at noon, * and their names shall be had in everlasting remem∣brance. I had thought something might have been done this way by a better pen before this time, but it being severall months since the death of Mr. Sympson, and nothing done, I was willing to make publique what I had preacht; & I hope it is not out of the pride and haughtiness my heart, (though a proud, and wicked heart I have, and blessed be free grace that in any measure I know it so to be, but to do Christ and his people service. The soul of our dear brother
is in glory, above any Encomiuas or Eulogie that can be made of him: What therefore is spoken in the following discourse, extends not to him, but unto the living; it's not to advantage him, but to prevent others from disadvantaging themselves by thinking or speaking evilly of him. Lastly, That I might present the virtues of Mr. Sympson to you for your imita∣tion: Undoubtedly it's your duty to follow him so far as he followed Christ. Now there were very many choice things in that faithful man, worthy of emulation and imitation, where∣in you will do well to walk, as you had him for an example. Thus mch for its publication.
The Reasons why I did dedicate it to you of the Congrega∣tion, are, First, Because I did judge the Dispensation of God to which the following Discourse refers, did more immediate∣ly concern you, than any other: it's true, there are many not of the Congregation, that did undoubtedly receive good by Mr. Sympsons Ministry, and will have cause to bless God for it unto all Eternity; and these are much concerned in his death: But however, considering his relation unto you, how he was under Christ your Bishop, Fastor, Feeder, Lea∣der, &c. And how faithful, constant and laborious he was in the discharge of his trust committed to him, it must needs be granted, that that Providence of God did most nearly concern you, and consequently this following Discourse. 2. Its to ac∣knowledge my thank, fulness to God and you, for all those pre∣sious dayes and hours which I have enjoyed in your Assem∣blies. To my best remembrance I never saw nor enjoyed more of the presence and glory of God in any Assembly (setting the Min-stry of Mr. Bridge of Yarmouth aside) than I have done in your Assemblies. The consideration of which, as it doth in the first place oblige me to bless the Lord (in whom all my Well-springs are, and who is the Fountain of consola∣tion to his people) so in the next place it doth engage me to serve you his people (with, and among whom I have enjoyed such great mercies) to the utmost of my abilities. By this
Dedication I do not profess to have paid my Engagements un∣to you, I do onely take an occasion hereby to acknowledge my self your Debtor. Pay my Engagements I cannot bet∣ter then by praying for you. My hearty desire therefore to God for you is, That you all may know, love and enjoy Christ in truth, that every member of your visible Body may (by the Spirit) be baptized into that one Mystical Body, over which Christ is the Head, that Hell may be never the ful∣ler for any of you, but that you may all live graciously, which is the way to dye blessedly. And further, that God would keep you together, and hide you in the secret of his presence, cause his glory to rest upon you, and cause a defence to be upon that his glory, that he would give you Pastors af∣ter his own heart, and annoint them with a double measure of his Spirit, a spirit fit both to rule and teach; to rule I say (not as Lords over your consciences, but) according to the blessed direction of Scripture-Canons; that so you may be able to bless God in the words of Ezra, (cap. 9.8.) And now for a little space grace hath been shewed from the Lord our God, to leave us a Remnant to escape, and to give us a Nail in his holy Place, that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a little reviving in our bondage,
All I desire (which I am sure I shal have) is your acceptance of this my love in the Lord. I can't say that I do here present unto you the same Sermon (verbatim) that you heard preacht; For, besides those necessary distinctions that must be put be∣tween the Tongue and the Pen, I hàve superadded some things for the perfecting this Discourse, which I think you will not judge useless or needless when you shall have read it.
When ought of Truth is presented unto you, take heed of looking too much upon the hand that brings it, or upon the dress in which it comes; not upon the hand, because then if the in∣strument that presents it, be accounted unworthy, Truth will be despised: He that presents you with this following discourse, is a very unworthy instrument, as unworthy as you can ima∣gine
him to be; though blessed be God, how vile soever he be in other mens eyes, he desires to be more vile in his own: But yet I hope you have learnt with the holy Prophet, to be content to be fed, though it be by a Raven; it's no matter who brings truth, so God sends it; though withall I would here give you this caution, Take heed of going out of Gods way for feeding. I conclude that that man that resolves to go to Rome to learn the Articles of the Christian Faith, hath met with some bad counsel. Keep in thy way, and have thy Touchstone alwayes ready, and then (with the Goldsmith) when ought is present∣ed unto thee, first try it, and if it prove right and sound, take it, and bless God for it, and mind not the person that brings it; but take heed of going out of thy shop, for it may be whilst thou art trading in other mens shops, thine own may be robbed.
Again, Mind not the dress in which Truth comes. Many have such critical stomachs, that plain wholesome fare will not down with them, notwithstanding times are hard, and bread dear, yet they must have food in such a dress, or else they are not pleased; they'le be ready to slight such food as the Countrey people would be glad of with all their heart: I dare not invite one such person to my little Feast, and that because I fear there's not one bit will please him. I am plain, and can∣not be otherwise: I dare say the following discourse is whole∣some; if therefore wholesom food will please thee, eat, and much good may do thee. As to this particular I would only beg you, To look back and consider those many exhortations you had from that blessed man Mr. Cradock, to keep close to the plainness and simplicity of the Gospel.
To close: My dearly beloved, you are a people greatly blest of God, with respect to the means of Grace; your constant helps (for above these twenty years) have been glorious helps; your Auxiliary helps (which you have had in abundance) have been glorious helps. Considering one thing with another, I think I may say and not sin, you have enjoyed the Cream of the world: Surely Friends, God expects great things from you, expects you should be eminent Christians; Eminent, 1. In thankful∣ness;
the high praises of God should be in your mouths, for that he hath dealt so bountifully with you. 2. Eminent in fruit∣fulness; Unfruitsulness under such means, soon fits the soul for cursing and burning; Isa. 5. Mat. 3.10. Heb. 6, 7, 8. 3. Enti∣nent in faithfulness; and that, 1. in respect to sincerity, Phil. 1.10. You should not do things to be seen of men, but as al∣wayes under Gods eye. 2. In respact of constancy, Rev. 2.10. Be faithful unto the death, and I will give thee a Crown of Life. The Sermons thou hast heard, and the Ser∣vants of Christ that have preacht unto thee, will all witness against thee, if thou shalt turn Apost ate, Consider these things and do accordingly, and it will be well with you now, better anon, and best of all at last. Vale.
