



SIR,
THe Subject of this Treatise, is the best or worst
Salvian de guberna. Dei, l 2, 3, 4, 5. of Men, a Christian. A name, though once so odious, that it was crime enough to be a Chri∣stian,
Athenag. Apol. p. 2, 5. Tertul. Apol, c. 2. yea, to say Christianus sum,
was the same way to cruel, but glori∣ous Martyrdom,
Hieron. de Apollon, in Cotalog. Scrip. Eccles. yet in our dayes many are content to own it; but whe∣ther according to the name, they be in∣deed Anointed, is the enquiry (I fear) but of a few. It was said of old, Fiunt, non nascuntur Christiani,
Tertul. Apol. c. 17. Christia∣nus non generat Christianum: quia non generatio, sedregeneratio facit Christi∣anos,
Augustin. de peccat. mer. cont. Pelag. l. 3. c. 9. , &c. Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 1. But now, men being born in a Nation where Christianity is pro∣fessed, they profess they are born Christians, many (if not most) know∣ing no other reason for their Christia∣nity. To undeceive these nominal Christians, hath been the labour of the Pulpit and the Press. Our works be∣ing something different from the anci∣ent Fathers, they laboured to convert Heathens, we to convert Christians. To this end serveth the ensuing Di∣scourse,
though that was not my prin∣cipal motive to write, that work being done so well before, by more able Pens, but because I observed some eminent Divines, while they declared, what was required to make a sound Believer, have made such Requisites, as trouble many, and cut off most of the sound, with the unsound Christians. Their Assertions have been sometimes the subject of our discourse in private; which after I had more seriously exa∣mined, for the sake of some troubled Christians, I resolved to make my Meditations publick, which now (much honoured Sir) I have made bold to dedicate to your self, being one whom (according to the title) I judge to be a Real Christian: And though not born a Christian, in the sense be∣fore, yet what Paul said of the un∣feigned
Faith in Timothy, that dwelt first in his Grandmother Lois, then in his Mother Eunice, then in him, 2 Tim. 1.5. the same may I say of that unfeign∣ed Faith, which makes unfeigned Christians, that dwelt first in your renowned Grandfather, Sir Francis Barrington, then in your Father, Mr. Robert Barrington, the same I am perswaded dwells in you also, and as Timothy, 2 Tim. 3.15. So you from a child have known the Scriptures; God so blessing the endeavour of your god∣ly Mother, a Gentlewoman so wise in her government, so gracious in her conversation, so fervent in prayer, that before she died, she lived to see eight of her Children (if not all, the rest dying little ones) new born, and having a ti∣tle to a more ancient and better inheri∣tance than Barrington-Hall, which
(as I am informed by one who should know best) hath now above twelve hundred years payed rent to that Fa∣mily, which suffers no spot of disho∣nour by your being a Member of it.
Be your thoughts of your self now what they will; while I trace you in your Conversation, I must judge of you as before: when after our unhap∣py Wars, you were called, being young, to such a place, as made your favour worth the courting by all sorts of men, who can say you did not then shew yourself, both a Gentleman and a Christian? As by your conversation in general, so in particular, by your courteous and civil deportment to∣wards all, doing as much as might be offices of kindnesses to those who were then esteemed Adversaries: (from
whom at this time you receive the re∣turn of as civil respects.) Also by a∣voiding those evils which commonly attend such places-
First, Pride: It being the Character that wise Observers gave of you, (and you only) that your Spirit was not raised with your place.
Secondly, Covetousness: Refu∣sing thousands of pounds which were offered you, to effect businesses for others, chusing alwayes to do things freely, without taking one penny be∣fore or after the effecting of them.
Nor have changes proved the con∣trary, though fallen under variety of temptations, which by the discovery of variety of Graces have but con∣firmed the reality of the Grace of God in you.

For a publick Spirit, that moved once in a large sphear, to be taken off from imployment, and shut up within the hedge of a Country Village, is no small affliction, and I am sure none of the least you meet with; yet even here is your spirit so active for the good of others, that your absence from us is soon felt: witness the speech of one of your Neighbours, though but a plain man, Me thinks the Town is not at home, while Mr. Barrington is out of Town.
As for my particular, though faith∣ful friends are so rare, that Aristole cri∣ed out, , O amici, nemo amicus: yet if I have a friend, and a friend be as he saith, ,
Ethic. l. 9. c. 4. . Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 2. Alter ipse, then such a one have I found in your self, having as much reason to love you as Austin his Nebridius, of
whom (as I remember) somewhere he saith, they had one Soul in two Bo∣dies.
By this time I have given sufficient reason for my Dedication, desiring you, honoured Sir, to accept it as a testimony of the love and honour I owe you, beseeching God it may be profitable both to your self, and to those into whose hands it shall come.
April 4th. 1670.
SIR, 

