


Madam,
SInce famed Laureates never durst
Adventure on the noblest Themes at first,
But were so modest doubtfully to peep
Out of their private Cells, and then to creep
In arguments much lower, till well how
To trust their wings they knew, from bough to bough
Of various subjects flutter'd, judging best
So to attempt that danger might be least,

Till arts had been more lib'ral thought, they might
Not safely venture an Heroick flight.
Pardon this boldness, that presumes to try
First hand on piece of Curiosity;
Which better would deserve the richest vein
Of smooth conceipt, out of the pregnant brain
Of one, to whom kind Nature first had been
Of much more virtue than the Hippocrene.
My fancy (not well vers'd when first put to't)
Would not perswaded be to stir a foot
On other subjects; yet did freely run,
That her due service might in part be done
Unto your sex; and if she limps, the fault
She calls her own: lameness doth make her halt,
You cause her move; and what is to express
Her gratitude, will make crime somewhat less.
In this Essay, I have sought to no Fairy,
Call'd Muse, that keeps her wild haunts at Canary.
Your mind is sober; nor durst I think fit
To offer you poor gathering of wit.
You need not such collection, which is more
Fit for those persons, that in worth are poor.
Grant very small allowance: bate the Verse
That waited on your pious Ssters horse:
And charge not some choice sentences which you
Know well, to whom their service best is due;
And what is stoln will not amount to be
Fit to be charg'd with Pettit-larceny.
Should I call women Deities, you'd be
Displeased (Madam) with the blasphemy:
Or phrase them nobler creatures than men are,
You likewise might, condemn the flatterer.
Should I pass bounting Lasses and the Jigs
Uncivil, of the City-whirligigs;
Their pride, their luxury, their antick dresses,
Their bare necks, painted faces, and their tresses,

Whereby they would ensnare their wanton tongues
In lovesome Catches and lascivious Songs;
Their going unto Church, bringing no more
From thence, than what new dresses Gallants wore;
Frequenting Playes, lest therein they should do
Too little, there becoming Actors too.
I should unworthily at least suggest
That you so little baseness do detest
Of shameless Hippia's, as not to admit
They should be lash'd by Scorpions of wit.
Whereas I know you loath that hateful Crew
That brag of breeding, brave, and fruitful too,
Use broad words, and large liberties as seat
Of gallantry, the way to become great-
Belly'd, that they may bear their shameful sin,
And suffer plague of birth and lying in.
Should I forget my Gossip, that can tell
How to turn over tongue a spic'd-cup well,
With whose loud tittle tattle those folks are
Troubled, that deal not in such peddling ware;
But mind their own concerns, and do not pry
Into concerns of the next family:
Should I pass her, whose spungy lungs, as sayls
Are swoln, but not when dry, with telling tales
Of private merriments, scarce Civil jars
Familiar talk, and of Domestick wars;
Where will be next, and where was the last wedding,
And all the pretty passages at bedding;
How Madam Hasty gave to little Grace
Her chamber-maid, a blew and broken face,
Because she came not at first call; how ill
Her Master took it, that shew'd his good will;
How Nell came to mischance by Knavery
Of Will; how Joan beat silly Ralph, and why:
Not to chastise such gross defectives must
Shew me more Civil to the Sex, than Just

Unto the virtuous, who bear others shame,
Bushing at boldness of the wanon Dame,
And their impertinence vain, that are grown
Knowing in all concernments, but their own.
To set off virtues of your sex, a whole
Venus if painted, will but make a mole.
Apolles when he drew his master-piece,
And summon'd in the Paragoas of Greece
For beauty, as their excellence did very
Unto his pencil to be tributary,
Venus her mole forgate not; but did place,
And make, her comely with it in her face.
Praise of a sex, without exception, may
Fit only people of Utopia;
Cannot sincerely be adapted to
The state of sinful mortals here below,
Where those few persons do appear most rare
And excellent, in whom least vices are.
They cannot be from Adam of th' whole blood,
That are without all humane faileurs good.
Let idle brains make silly sport to vex,
And force their fancies to disgrace your sex
With all the virtuous; vainly they do try
To level at the Stars which are too high.
This most will fret them, and stir up their gall,
That they provoke, and move you not at all:
When unconcern'd you gain the victory,
And overcome them by your passing by.
The Rustick that all day hath toyl'd at plough,
Puts off his clogs at night, begins to woo
At a strange rate; in Complementing Amy
He takes up phrase befitting Academy.
Not single flow'rs of Tropes will do, but cluster'd,
That with conceit do make him fouly fluster'd,
And strangely elevated: he scorn now
To term her Pigsney, darling, Ladicow.

His heighten'd fancy longer will not truckle,
In pleasing her his Primrose, Honeysuckle.
The Gardens fair sweet; serve him not in prose;
Talip, Clovegilliflower, Lilly, Rose.
Out of the Sun, Stars, and the brightest Rosie
Blushes of morn he gathers her a Posie.
And if he gets some little Scribe to write,
He makes small matter, matter to endite.
Hearing of Po'sie, she thinks to disclose
Meaning, by holding letter to her Nose;
Or sticking it in bosome, knows not well,
That paper flow'rs are for the sight, not smell.
The frantick gallant eyes his Ladies look,
More than young Chanter doth his Singing-book:
Dancing attendance most officiously
After the lessons of her fidling eye:
Like Statue stands in admiration of
Each syllable, stp, frown, smile, glance, and coff.
The sacred Laurell he will need invoke,
That never learnt so far as Holioke;
To celebrate grace that was never in her,
And yet condemn himself a mortal sinner
For his Omission: but that is not it
Makes him so bad: but what he could commit.
How like a Malefactor doth he stad,
Expecting sentence? What is her command?
Shall he or live or dye? Upon one breath
Depends his happy life, or woful death.
Great Empress she, that with a pleasant I?
Can make him live; and with a No to dye;
Though much dejected, and cast down erewhile,
Yet she can set him up with a kind smile.
When his brains thin'd are almost into ayr
Turned by Sun-beams of her face, he'l swear
He plainly sees the tippling Graces sip
Nectar distilling from her ruby-lip:

Though dazzled, Angels yet that he espyes
Sporting within those Crystal Spheres her eyes.
There's no such Musick in the heavenly Spheres
As in her voyce, which alwayes charms his ears.
She's in each sound, he hears no ring of bells,
But what of her some pretty story tells.
The little chirping sngsters in his thought
Speak her so plain, as if they had been taught
To sing their Sappiks; and her praise in Rhyme
His head well stuft with fumes doth learn to chyme;
All this is nought, he is below his Theme
Unless he be right Artist to blaspheme.
What is his heaven here on earth? her love;
And there's no heaven that he seeks above.
Were not his admiration without
True object, you would think him Saint devout.
He cringes, and with superstitious fear
Standeth, as her Divinity draws near.
Good cause, if you believe his precious stories
Of the strange brightness, and celestial glories
He sees incircling her, these witness'd by
Those that are sick of his love lunacy.
The man thus Planet-stricken, gives full rein
Unto his fancy, th' utmost he can feign
Of Complements bestows, runs on the score,
Until his Worship can take up no more.
If she contract her countenance, and frown
Upon him, that is death, he's tumbled down
From all his hopes, and happiness, which now
He did enjoy in smoothness of her brow.
How wretched is the man, since faln from grace,
And excommunicated from her face?
He hates the light, his life, you cannot give
Greater affront, than wishing him to live.
What can you love him, and be so unkind
To wish him bear such torments in his mind,

As while he lives he must? Then snatches sword
Kisses it as dear friend, that will afford
Deliverance: but stay, before good night
Pray give him leave to take up Pen and write
Some doleful Verses of his faithful love
In his brave death for Phillis, which may move
Her to relent, and to vouchsafe a tear,
Or shew her more unkind than Marbles are.
He orders Ceremonies to attend,
And lively to set out a Lovers end
In his last Will and Testament; forgets
His soul to God to bequeath. And what lets?
She was his only Deity, alone
To her he payed his Devotion.
What hence will follow, reason must not tell,
His madness doth suppose a milder hell
Than her displeasure: this this makes him snatch
His sword again, resolved to dispatch
Himself: but that he wisely thinks withal
He shall not have a Christian burial
As felo de se, and he scorns to be
Guilty of any act of Felony.
Is he content to live? fye on't: he'l go
Unto some forreign broyls, and force his fo
To do, what friends would not, though beg'd, and ten
To one time, wars do make him wise again.
But if quite desperate he seeks relief,
And with his Rapier makes a vent for grief
What hazard runs he? leaving friends this sad
Ground for their charity that he was mad.
Phrenetick passions of such men may serve
Those that do not know what it's to deserve
Sober affections, would not well resent
Any thing, that were truly excellent.
Let the inamoured ress painted Jayes,
Address them to the Idol of their praise▪

Here the design is honest, to give due
Honour to Ladies, that be such as you
Are, and would be; not living just by sense
Of some folk good esteem; but Conscience.
Not pleasing humour of that sort who have
Great fear lest that they should be thought too grave.
Discretion you make not to withstand
Civility, but give it more command;
Obligingly that it may entertain
The civile person, and ongue-tye the vain.
Such was deportment of the English Dame
Of old, which gave a lustre to her name
Over the world: but with disdainful brow
Is look'd upon as out of fashion now.
Amongst vain Gallants strait lac'd modesty
Is ill bed, rustick; too precise, too shye.
Amongst parts of Philosophy we range
Ethicks, and with the rest they bear a change.
As some young Empiriks their skill must try
Body to puge of Physiologie,
Which they say Physick wants, and principles
Her bodies head, are head of her disease.
Though purged soundly, her they think not sound
Enough, until with her the world turn round.
It may be visit Mistris Dialectick,
Feel her pulse, find her in a fearful Hectick:
Her Terms are naught; her Syllogisms all
Obstruct her, they must out both great, and small.
Sorites fears he shall be laid in chains;
And Violentm looks for horrid pains:
Exemplum to be made example: scorns
Cause poor Dilemma to pull in her horns.
Celarent wishes she were safely hid.
Festino runs in danger to be chid.
And Barbara the best of all abus'd,
Fears to Bocardo she shall be reduc'd.

But Frio will not be baffled so,
If he must out, he'l leave a parting blow.
Thus Physicking of her, they'r find no season
To end, until they leave her void of reason.
So have some wantons quite rejected old
Moral Philosophy, as dry, and cold:
Question'd all principles, and practice too
Of antient virtue, and set up a new
Model of modesty, which you presents
With much more strange, than safe experiments.
They say, a place that's fortified doth seak
The outward strength, but City to be weak.
That City's strong, that hath not its defence
From walls; but valour of the Citizens.
Strength of their virtues only way to try,
Is to expose it to the enemy.
If you'l believe, their honour by the tryal
Is brighter; for they empt to mke denyal.
Their husbands living they contract and call
It innocence; may pass the Ordeal,
Run through hat coulters blindfold, safe and sound;
And yet not fear the danger of a wound.
These can mistake their husbands beds, and be
Not to be charged with disloyalty.
Such resolution, that can make defence
At disadvantage, is the quintessence
Of virtue: if you can, you may believe
(Like Tutia's on tryal) in a ieve,
That they can water carry, lead and bring
A ship bsanded by their apon-string,
As Claudia, have heaven standing by
And witnessing unto their chastity.
They must give leave to fok to be more wise,
To judge by charity of sober size,
And then their virtue in Heroick sense
Elixar is of highest impudence.

Your virtue (Madam) taketh it all one
To forfeit, and to give occasion
To folly; and for med'cine doth not lye
At the Bethesda of worlds charity.
A most heroick, and approv'd repute,
Neither makes way for baseness, or dispute.
The Libertine, before that knew no Law
To curb him, must confess your power to awe
Into Civility feign'd; what he hates,
Charm'd by your presence, yet he personates.
Asham'd you are not piety to own
Amongst so many, when a scorn it's grown:
And for Religion publickly appear,
To practise which, in private some do fear.
May I presume, here to present to view
Beauties, such as Apelles never drew:
May I adventure to defend their Rights
Of old, that try'd the Chivalry of Knights,
To plead their cause, since they are made unfit
For want of Learning, not for want of Wit.
May this my Pencil venture on a face,
Where ev'ry taking feature is a Grace.
May this not seem in vain, which seldom done,
Yet is the duty of each Mothers son.
May these few Rhymes (Madam) accepted be,
And gain your Licence, but to publish me,

