


Right Honourable,
IT is usual for those that appear in publick, to prefix some great name before them, that they may gain the greater E∣steem, and that the army of their words may be looked on to be more considerable, when they have so valiant a forlorn: It is no more then needs
 that some Coats have supporters, especially when there are notes of abatement in the charge; Amongst whom I rank my self, who had I not had a copious subject, should have desired invention; who now only desire that my labour may find protection under your wing; and the more confident I am, that I shall not be frustrated, when I consider who it is that is here presented to your Lordships view.
I confess a fair front may be set before a mean Cottage by an unskilfull Builder; and I may rank your honourable Name as a Patron to that, which for its own merits sake is not worth your Lordships reading, much less your protection: But I shall not so much desire that the fashion of this mo∣nument be observed by you, as the materials whereon it is built; and then I promise my self this, that though you should not like the frame of the building, yet you would not have the Timber lost. What I saw in her Ladiship (whom I here present to your Ho∣nour) usefull for such a work as this, I pick∣ed by mine own observation. Another that could have built this Monument in more state, might have found hewn stones fitted to his hand; though those, which for their
 curious workmanship, I knew not how to place right, are lefr out, not because I see them not, but because I could not place them to their worth. And having built this small Pile of her vertues, not knowing to whom she more of right belonged then to your self, I have made bold to give it your Lordships Superscription.
You may say to me in this attempt, as Aeneas did to Dido, when she desired a Narration of the Trojan Wars,
Infandum—jubes renovare dolorem; That I bring you again to the house of mour∣ing, and open the sluces of those eyes that were almost shut; and for this cause (did I not hope that the profit you may receive, will countervail the sorrow which you will find in the renewing of her remembrance) I should have been silent: but if the streams of your teares wash your soul, and your sor∣row for her terminate in sorrow for sin, I shall not think my labour either preposte∣rous, or in vain: if the flood turn inward, I am willing to clense and open, rather then to stop or interrupt the free passage.
When Constantine had shewn the Persian
 King the glory of Rome, and the stately Mo∣numents of deceased Emperors, he looked on them, and said, Mira quidem haec, sed ut video, sicut in Persia, sic Romae, homines mo∣riuntur; though you have men of great re∣nown, yet I see as we do in Persia, so at Rome all dye. I hope your Lordship judged so of her; that though she was pure, yet she was brittle; though precious, yet mor∣tal. The Oak in time will decay as well as the Willow; and the strongest tower, though a storm will not, yet a thunderclap will shatter it to pieces: Fragilem frangi, & mortalem mori, to see a glass break, or a Candle burn to the snuff, is no new thing.
It is a mortifying consideration to look over a dead wife, or a dead child; but we who have corruption so apt to live, had need sometimes be told that our frame is subject to dye: this consideration will still home-bred Wars, namely, to be told of an invasion; the flesh will sooner be mortified, and the spirit will endeavour to be supreme the rather, when it considers that it is ac∣countable.
It was said of Alexander, that when he came to Achilles his Tomb, he wept, because he had not a Homer to set him forth. For
 this purpose it is reported, that Alphonsus of Arragon, King of Cicily, kept Panormitan the Poet, that he might immortalize his name; and though that cannot be expected from me, what another might have writ, who had known her longer; yet something I have observed according to my knowledge; nay, I have seen more in her then I know how to express here: For he had need be a neat Limner that draws a beauty to the life; and he had need understand the tongue, that attempts to express her language, and stands need to have trod in her steps too, that goeth about to describe them.
When I considered the remarkableness of the providence, the noise that it made, and how loud it spoke to us all, I thought, God would not have it forgot: and when I con∣sidered that in so short a time, the memory of that great stroke was something more dark, and ready to wear out, I undertook this work, which I formerly did not intend; name∣ly, to build a Monument, whereby The mother and the son both dying in a fort-nights space. their names, whose persons the Lord hath taken to himself, should not be forgotten; and it is because we have almost forgot to read my Ladies ver∣tues,
 that I put them in print; had our me∣mories been better to have retained more, I should have spoken less, if any thing at all.
It seems God saw that we had need of such a great affliction, or else he would not have doubled it; and if the smart of it do not make impression, he can plat another cord, and be more severe: Oh therefore that what we have felt, might make us say, Spare Lord, and we will do so no more. Could we but find the pleasures of sin to counter∣vail the torment for sin, we might be less cau∣tious: and if it were so, that brethren in iniquity who have drawn us to sin, could get as much favour hereafter as they get us affliction and sorrow here, we need not be much circumspect: but to consider that our very companions, nay, our very Tempters will be our accusers; and he, for whose sake we became transgressors, will betray us: Sure∣ly it is more rational to trust God in a way of holiness, who will never forsake us, then man in a way of sin who will not assist us in time of danger.
I have ground to believe, that your Lord∣ship had not espoused her person only, but her graces; and did not love her only for external accomplishments, but for her in∣ward
 zeal. What I here publish, is no more then you knew, no more then you approved of: I wish none that are religious, were more unequally yoked. I have seen some husbands canes in praesepibus, or like the Scribes and Pharesees, Mat. 23. 13. who shut the Kingdom of heaven, & will neither enter in themselves, nor suffer them that are entring to go in: had it been so with her, she had not been so forward: she hath often reckoned it a mercy which she received from your Lordship, as well as from her heavenly Fa∣ther, that you did not offer to quench, but kindled the fire of her zeal; that you did not pull off the Chariot wheels, but ra∣ther oil them; that you did not constrain her to tread in those steps which were not suitable to her speed, nor force her to wear that shoe which did not sit easie on her foot: considering that it is uncomfortable for one in a race to be clogged with any burdens but necessaries. I desire the Lord Almighty to bless you with the same blessing; that as they have fixed their resolution for heaven, they may not be pul'd back by those that draw in the same yoke with them; and that they may never be constrained to speak in a language they understand not;
 though there are many voices, yet none of them is without signification; 1 Cor. 14. 10. They in this sense have been used to speak in their mothers tongue; and though it should seem barbarous to others, yet to speak in an unknown language, would make them Barbarians to themselves. I hope the Lord who hath made you a father, hath given you a fathers heart that is tender; not only to encourage their graces, but to bear with their infirmities. And I hope, and have te∣stimonies to convince me, that seeing the Lord hath blessed you with such Children, you will not be unwilling that they should bestow themselves on the Lord.
As to my self and present work, it is my first fruits, which had not been ripe yet, but that it was so soon Autumn with her; and because it grows in your Lordships soil, I cannot but dedicate it to your self; wherein I do not desire to be Theologus gloriae, but Crucis: As I dare not be found sinning, so I would not be found idle when my Saviour comes. Perhaps some who loved her not, will censure me for what I have said; and those that desired her vvorth should be blot∣ted out, vvill be angry because I have put it in print; yet this is my comfort, Non ig∣nota
 cano; innumeros prompsit Britannia testes: her light was not laid under a bushel; those that did not shut their eyes, might have seen as much as I have spoken; these who knew her would have believed themselves, though I had not spoken: and those that did not know her, I could desire them to believe me, except they would have me to distrust them, when they speak truth. And if I be censured, it is no more then I would freely undergo, rather then her dear name should be forgot. Those that will speak evil, perhaps may have some come after them, that will do as much for them. Valla condemned all that writ before him; (which could not be wisdome, except he had been sure to have been the last that had come upon the stage) E∣rasmus comes after, & doth as much for him.
This Treatise hath swelled to a greater big∣ness then I intended at first it should; therefore I hope it will nourish the more, if digested: And as to serve you or yours, is the earnest breathing of my desire; so to perpetuate the Memory of those that are deceased, was my greatest aim. I confess there is nothing but my unserviceableness that doth dissatis∣fie me with my condition: Could I be more usefull, I should never be willing to depart;
 If either you or yours have any errand to send me on, whereby I may testifie my re∣al dutifulness to your family, I should blush, and take it as a disgrace, if any man on earth should either be more willing, or venture∣some then my self: if opportunity would permit, I hope I should make it appear, that I could do more then your honour re∣quires of me: what I have done here in testimony how I desire to be imployed when either the comfort or honour of them, or yours stands need of me, I have made bold to sign with your Lordships name, that that may be to this small Tractate, as Solomon saith of a gift, Prov. 18. 16. Namely, to make room, and to find entertainment for it; For I conclude, that those who would not look upon it for the Authors sake, they will for the subjects sake, or at least for the Patrons. I have nei∣ther silver nor gold, as you want neither, but such as I have I give it you, as being under greater obligations to your self then any o∣ther, making mention of you in my prayers, that God who hath interested you in the hearts and affections of men, he would also interest you in the heart and affections of his Son; and he who hath made you ho∣nourable on earth, would also crown you with
 glory in heaven; for whose sake I am wil∣ling even to sacrifice my dearest comforts, if it would ransome you from perils, or contri∣bute the least to your souls salvation; who can but now subscribe my self,
SIR,


