


SIR,
I Hope it is no offence unto you, though you be a Dean,
Unreas. Separat. p. 62. that I call you Brother, since you have taught the Press how to speak soberly and amicably, calling us Dissenting Brethren; this is better language than Sots, Rogues, Fools, Knaves, Rebels, Schismaticks, which we read and hear from others. As for Re∣bels, if they be all Rebels that break the Kings Laws, I believe the King will have but a few loyal subjects. He hath Laws against Drun∣kenness, Swearing, Whoring, Sabbath breaking, and these are agree∣able to the Law of God, (besides Laws about Hares, Partridges, Phea∣sants, and against Papists, &c.) we see men can live in opposition to these Laws, yet these are not called Rebels. But if the Laws of men concern the House and Worship of God, concerning which God him∣self hath given us his own Laws, to which all Princes and men are bound, and unto which all their Laws ought to be conformable, (as we shall hear your self speak presently) but that conformity we can∣not see, and therefore dare not assent and consent, &c. now we are called Rebels, Schismaticks, and what not?
Aug. Epis. 119. Thus it was in pious Au∣gustines time, and this he complains of.
Sir, speaking of your Church, you tell us, p. 302. Our Church is founded upon a Divine Rule, viz. the Holy Scriptures, which we own as the basis and foundation of our faith; and according to which all other Rules of Order and Worship are to be agreeable. 2ly. Our Church re∣quires a conformity to those Rules which are appointed by it agreeable to the Word of God.
Twice you tell us, agreeable to the Word of God; to which we a∣gree also, this being the affirmative part of the second Commandment, that all things in our worshipping of him, be agreeable to his will and word.
Now, Sir, had you proved that all the things imposed upon us had been agreeable to the word of God, you had put an end to this Contro∣versie. But though I honour and love you for the great service you have done to the Church of Christ against the Papists, yet in proving the things Imposed upon us to be conformable to the word of God, I
humbly conceive you fall very short, therefore are we still Nonconfor∣mists. Several things are imposed upon us, but in your whole Book I find not one Scripture you produce to shew the agreement of them with it. Till then, our Separation is reasonable.
That Schism is a great sin, I agree with you, and wish Christians were more convinced of it than I see they are. But the Questions are,
1. What is schism? 2. Who is the cause of schism?
For the first: Sir, I presume you will grant that the separation against which you preached, and now printed, do suppose, there was a union with that body from which you tell us we are now separated. For how can there be a separation from that to which we were not united?
Now, Sir, I think by what you have said, to remove the mighty stumbling-block (as you call it, pag. 359.) of the Cross, there will be found many thousands in England who were never admitted into your Church, and if not admitted into it, then not united to it as such a Church; no members of your body: how then can you charge them with this sin of separation from it?
Thus then, Sir, you speak of the Cross in Baptism, p. 351. when the Minister uses these words. We receive this child into the congregation of Christs flock, and sign him with the sign of the Cross, &c. the Mi∣nister now speaks in the name of the Church, We receive, &c. then follows as the solemn rite of admission, and do sign him with the sign of the Cross. All publick and solemn admissions into societies, having some peculiar ceremony belonging to them. And so as Baptism, besides its Sacramental efficacy, is a rite of admission into Christs Catholick Church, so the sign of the Cross is into our Church of England, in which this Ceremony is used, without any prescription to other Churches. Thus you have interpreted the Cross.
Whether this will satisfie Mr. B. I leave it to him, it doth not me; the Imposers of that Ceremony in their Canons, do not tell us that it is the Rite of admission into your Church but by this ceremony the Infant is dedicated to the service of him that died upon the Cross. And that Book being of publick authority, must carry it.
I had thought that in our Baptism we had been Dedicated to the Fa∣ther, Son, and Spirit. But it seems this is not enough, you annex to his words, Another sign to dedicate us to the service of Christ that died upon the Cross. This, Sir, I hope you will prove to be agreeable to the word of God, as you told us, your Impositions are. I am very ignorant of the Text that proves it, and you have named none.
But this is not the thing I aim at; it is your interpretation I mind, and from it I gather, that you and all others who charge us with sepa∣ration
from your Church, must prove, That we were received, and that by this rite of admission (the Cross) into your Church, which you call the Church of England. This is clear from your own Interpretation, and also from the page before 350, where you illustrate it from the Inde∣pendent Churches; Thus,
Suppose, say you, an adult person to be baptized, and immediately after Baptism to be admitted a member of an Independent Church, and the ceremony of this admission to be, holding up of the hand, in token of his owning the Church-Covenant, &c.
Now, Sir, let me suppose (as you do suppose) that the Pastors of the Independent Churches should baptize several persons, but never admit them into their Churches, by this ceremony of holding up the hand; let them baptize many thousands, and these thousands chuse other Pa∣stors who are rightly qualified, and ordained by Prayer, Fasting, and Imposition of hands of the Eldership: The Independents cannot charge these Churches with schism, and separation from their Churches, for they never admitted them by that ceremony and rite of Admission, of holding up the hand into their Churches.
Now, Sir, apply it; for about twenty years there was publick Bap∣tism administred, but not by your Liturgy, much less with the Cross. How many thousands do you think in the space of so many years may be baptized, none of these were ever admitted into your Church by those words, VVe receive this child, &c. and sign him with the sign of the cross. But of many such do our Congregations consist, who were never your members; why then do you call them separatists from you?
Besides, Sir, your Liturgy admits of private Baptism, and then no such admission by the Cross, and abundance have been thus baptized without it, to my knowledg.
For my own particular, I cannot tell whither I was so admitted, my Parents never told me so; and for my godly Father I am sure he hated humane inventions in the Worship of God. I was born, they told me, in winter time, extream for cold, the house half a mile from Church, and I being their only Son at that time, it's a question whether they would carry me forth in such an extream cold season so far. As for the Church-Register, that (nor any other that ever I saw) specifies nothing of my being admitted into your Church by the Cross; but only of my be∣ing baptized; but that say you, (and truly) is into the Catholick Church. No Registers then recording, who were so admitted, it will be hard matter for these who are ancient to prove their admission into your Church, and if we were not, I know not how we can now be ad∣mitted. For this Rite of Admission is used only at Baptism, unless we will yield to be Rebaptized and so to be admitted by the Cross, this you will not admit no more than we.

We read of the Apostles admitting of many believers, God added to the Church, Act. 2. ult. but never that they used this rite of admissi∣on, the sign of the Cross; only this is our happiness, we are more wife, more holy, greater lovers of Christ, than ever the Apostles were, (though we profess we are built upon the foundation of Apostles and Prophets, Ephes. 2.20.) that their examples are too low for us.
Besides, Sir, is it not meet that when children come to years of dis∣cretion they should then be called before the Church to declare whe∣ther they own their Baptismal Covenant, and also their admission into the Church they are reputed members of, as you say, the Independents require their Children to own the Church-Covenant? let them now be members of the Church by their own consent. Truly, Sir, if it come to that, since we read what your Canons say of the Cross, and how it is abused in Popery, and how strange this is to the Apostolical admission, we should not like it.
But are not children members of the same Churches with their Parents? though we think so, yet this is nothing to the practise of your Church. For as in your administration of Baptism, the Parental Covenant, (Abraham and his seed) which is the ground of the Admi∣nistration, is wholly omitted; so the Parent he must stand by as if he were a Heathen; the business is only with the God fathers, and God∣mothers, an invention of Higinus Bishop of Rome, about 144 years after Christ, who first added these to Baptism; a person of no great worth, of whom it is said, Nihil praclari, de gubernatione, & factis ejus commemorari potest. So much cause have I to beg pardon for my defects in the education of my own Children, that I would not be Sponsor for the child of the best friend I have in England. But how∣ever this is not it, but the sign of the Cross, with such words, that makes the admission into your Church.
2. Q. But if there be a Separation, or Schism, the question is, who is the cause of it?
A. Schism must needs be theirs, whose the cause of it is, saith Bi∣shop Land, in which you justifie him, Ration. Account, p. 324, 325.
I humbly conceive, that whoever imposes other terms of Communi∣on than Christ hath imposed, he or they are the cause of the schism. We do not, say you, necessarily separate from all Churches that have errors or corruptions in them, supposing those errors and corruptions be not imposed on us as conditions of communion, Ibid. p. 332.
I pray do not think that we suppose you impose such gross things upon us, as Rome imposed on you: No, Sir, we bless God for that great advance which was made by our first Reformers. But whereas
you say you retain only such innocent Ceremonies which were in use before the Papal power grew to that height:
I pray, first, are you sure that All the Churches did use them? 2. Did they use all that are imposed on us? I know they used others; but did they use to tye up their Ministers to such syllables in prayer, or else must not pray? Did they kneel at the Lords Supper? we know the contrary, &c. 3. Did they impose these as conditions of Com∣munion? But grant there were such Ceremonies, and other things as now imposed upon us, I will say of them,
Downh. de Anti∣christo, p. 151 what Bishop Downham saith of the opinions and traditions differing from the holy Scriptures, which the Pontificians say were received of the Fathers, they are to be referred to that Apostasie the Apostle foretold, 2 Thes. 2.3. when he said the mystery of iniquity already worketh, v. 7.
And I pray, Sir, since the examples and practises of those Churches, are made so much use of against us, let me give you my thoughts in a similitude of your own.
In your Epistle to your Rational Account, &c. dedicated to the King, you tell his Majesty, that the Church of England in the late confusions suffered an Eclipse, but since his Majesties Restauration she hath recover∣ed her luster, &c.
Sir, we observe when the Sun riseth, it doth not suddenly go into an Eclipse, but gradually, so that common people do not mind it un∣til the light of it be sensibly obscured; so, nor doth it come out of its Eclipse suddenly at once, but gradually; but it will not cease its motion till it appears in its glory. It is the same with the Gospel-Church, it did not presently, suddenly fall into that dark Eclipse, which it suffer∣ed under the Antichristian Papal power, but it got into it by degrees, the Churches not discerning it; the mystery of iniquity wrought, it is no fancy of mine, but the Apostles express words. The subtil serpent, he wrought among the Churches under fair pretences; in the second Century some addition made to Worship and Government of the Church; in the third Century more; in the fourth Century more; so increased the Eclipse, still under fair reasons, till the Serpent had got the man of sin into his Throne, and the Prediction fulfilled. So hath the Chur∣ches coming out of the Eclipse been but gradual, in Doctrine, Govern∣ment, Worship, by our worthy Reformers; but as the evil spirit de∣ceived then, by Gods permission, to bring about the Prophesie; so the Spirit of Christ in the hearts of our first Reformers wrought power∣fully, and so doth the same Spirit still work, and will work, till the Church be quite out of her Eclipse, and comes to be satisfied with the Soveraignty and Wisdom of Christ declared in the simplicity of the Go∣spel; let men call it schism, fanaticism, or what they please.

But, Sir, you tell us of Mr. Ball, Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Giffard, &c. worthy men, (I grant they were so, and honour them much) and Non∣conformists, who condemned Separation from your Church, and no more was imposed than in their time, and this takes up a great part of your Book.
Sir, while some excellent men at home conformed, but groaned un∣der the burden, (as I remember Mr. John Rogers of Dedham, an emi∣nent Saint, though he did conform, I never saw him wear a Surplice, nor heard him use but a few prayers, and those I think he said Memo∣riter, not read them; but this he would do in his Preaching, draw his finger about his throat and say, Let them take me and hang me up, so they will but remove these stumbling-blocks out of the Church.) How many thousands of choice Christians, plucked up their stakes here, forsook their dear friends and native Country, shut up themselves in Ships (to whom a prison for the time had been more elegible) went remote into a howling Wilderness, there underwent great hardships, water was their common drink, and glad if they might have had but that which they had given at their doors here (many of them); and all this suffering was to avoid your Impositions, and that they might dwell in the House of God, and enjoy all things therein according to his own appoint∣ment. But what cared your Church for this; let Gods people groan at home, suffer abroad, they shall do it rather than your Church will part with a few trifles, as your own Mr. Carre calls the ceremonies. Sir, is this the spirit of the true Spouse of Christ? But as I said, the same Spirit will work which acted those holy men, till the Church be totally out of her Eclipse, what ever those worthy men you mention have said.
But to speak more close, I deny that the state of your Church now, is the same it was then, when these worthy men condemned Separation from it. For,
1. There are many thousands now in England, who were never ad∣mitted into your Church, were never members of it; then they could not condemn these as Separatists from it. This I have proved before from your Interpretation of the sign of the Cross. It was not so in their time.
2 The Liturgy and the Homilies were then brought in out of neces∣sity, because of the want of gifts; now it is imposed in scorn and op∣position of gifts. By what some of your Arch-deacons have spoken in your Courts, and others, we can conclude no other, than it was com∣posed to bring over the Papists to your Church, and for several years the Papists did frequent your Divine Service; but now it was imposed with such words (as in my next) that it was made an engine to turn
Protestants out of your Church. A Member of that Parliament that made the Act for Ʋniformity, visiting his Sister, a Lady (who told it me) related to her what they were about; she disliked their Act, and told him, I see then you are laying a snare in the gate. Ay, said he, if we can find any way to catch the Rogues, we will have them.
3. Then they were not required to assent and consent, &c. but now it is imposed with these terms; and I am confident that divers who have subscribed with these terms, do but lye.
4. 'Tis true we have the same 39 Articles, that was before; and those Articles were assented to, and assent required in that Church.
Rational Account. p. 54, 55. But now you have told the world that Bishop Bramhall gives the sense of the Church of England thus: viz. She does not define any of these Que∣stions as necessary to be believed, &c. Neither do we look upon them as Essentials of saving faith, &c. Neither do we oblige any man to believe them, but only not to contradict them. And this is the opinion of the Grandees in this your Church; this would have been abhor'd before.
5. As those 39 Articles were believed by that Clergy, so they did defend them, and Preached them; but this Clergy can both print and preach against them, I mean the great and sound Doctrines in them, (I do not say all of them.) I put the question to one of your Clergy, and asked him in earnest what he thought of this Clergy as to the Doctrine of the Church of England contained in these Articles? he answered me, Divide them into three parts, he thought two of the three were fallen from it.
6. In that Church there were abundance of godly plain-hearted Ministers, whose Religion was not confined to a Pulpit, but walked among their people as became Ministers, seeking the good of their souls. I deny not but God hath some such now; but for the generality of them, I say nothing my self, only I can tell you what others have said. A learned and pious Divine, so far a friend to Conformity, that I doubt not but he hath subscribed; he told me, Though your Church would give him a Living, he would not take it, because he would not have such an occasion to bring him among your Clergy. And discour∣sing with another of your Clergy, (whom for learning, wit and piety, I do honour) about Mr. A's Book, and his Dialect, which you call uncomely writing, said he, Truly we have such a frothy, vain Clergy, gone off from that solidity and gravity that become Divine things, that if Books come not out in this dress, they will but scorn them; but in that Book, besides wit, there is good matter. Pridentem dicere verum, &c. This was his sense of Mr. A's Book.
But. Sir, if such as these be thrust upon us, must we own them for our Ministers? What, Sir, will you deny the peoples power of Electi∣on,
which the Papists grant the people had till Charles the Great, or till Lewis his Son, about 830 years? See, I pray, Pamelius his Annotati∣ons upon these words of Cyprian, Epist. 68. Quando ipsa (plebs) maxime habeat potestatem vel eligendi dignos sacerdotes, vel indignos recusandi. How could a man write plainer for the peoples power of Election? But our Protestants tell us, that only from the time of Frede∣rick the second, who died Ann. 1250, or there about, were the people excluded from the power of chusing Pastors, and it was the deed of Gregory the ninth, as Krantzius reporteth.
7. That Church did believe and prove the Pope, &c. to be the An∣tichrist, Rome-christian to be the Whore, Apoc. 17. thus the Bishops, and our Professors of Divinity, &c. but I can meet but with very few of this Church of that opinion. Dr. Hammond the Oracle of this new Edition of the Clergy, cannot find him in the 2 Thes. 2. nor in Apoc. 17. the Pope is an honest man with him. Bishop Bramhall tells us, Our contest is not with the Church of Rome, but the Court of Rome. I find that you have declared: 1. That the Church of Rome is a true Church. 2. That they retain the fundamentals of Religion. 3. That salsation is to be had in the Church of Rome. Lay all together, here is a fair Bridg laid to go over to Rome. To say, that God hath his people under the Jurisdiction of Rome, is one thing, Apoc. 18.4. but to say the Church of Rome is a true Church, is another thing; a Wife and a Whore differ.
8. In that Church Re-ordination to the same office was never heard of, but exploded, as it is in all Churches else; but in this Church it is imposed.
9. There was no Oath taken, nor Covenant made with the great God, to reform the House of God, in Doctrine, Worship, and Disci∣pline, according to the word of God; this ought to be, though the Covenant had not been made; had the things imposed been according to the Word of God, this Covenant had bound us to them; that Co∣venant will not be beaten out of the hearts of them, who know God, and fear an Oath, what ever other persons make of it; the least then men can do, is to abstain from those things which were once cast out, as being unconformable to the word of God; and shall those people have no Ordinances for fear of a separation?
10. In that Church, Quakers were not known; but under this Church they swarm, that raze the foundation, and destroy all Go∣spel-ordinances. And many people being offenced with your impositi∣on, and disgusted with your Clergy, lay in great danger of being carried away with them; and I doubt not abundance had gone, but that by our Preaching and administring all Ordinances, they have been
kept close to Gospel truths, Gospel-ordinances, and Gospel-ministry. The Quakers and Papists are not so hated by your Clergy, as we are.
From all which I conclude the Cause is not the same; and had Mr. Ball, Mr. Hildersham, &c. been living in our days, they would, I doubt not, have done as we do.
But then we are charged with bringing in of Popery, and this takes up several leafs of your Preface.
Heylin (one of yours) tells us indeed, I perswade my self,
Geograp. in Quarto Edit. pag 470. had the Reformed party abroad continued an allowable correspondence in some cir∣cumstances with the Romish Church, as the Church of England doth now, it had been far greater, and less stomacked; and this was the censure of Monsieur de Rhosny, when he observed the Majesty and decency of our Church-service in our Cathedrals.
On the other side, Harding, Bristow, and Carrier, seducing Jesuits, assured themselves that they might yet convert England to the Catho∣lick Church, whose Service and Ceremonies she yet retained. Nor do I see any such alteration made in this Edition, but if Pope Pius the 4th. and Gregory the 13th. offered to confirm the former, and the Council of Trent, affirmed they might do it, then the Pope may do this, for ought I know.
But how do we bring in Popery?
Pref. p 7. you tell us out of Bishop Sander∣son, the first way is, by pulling down Episcopacy, &c.
But, Sir, Bishops are restored, and you tell the King the Church of England is out of her Eclipse; that she shines in a firmament above her Adversaries: I pray, Sir, what is the matter that now Popery is coming in as a flood upon us? cannot these Bishops, the English Banks, keep it out? I say nothing how strongly they act in Parliament against it, the Kingdom talk enough of it.
I pray, Sir, tell us what have you Conformists done more against Popery than the Dissenters have done?
1. Have you prayed earnestly against it? so have we.
2. Have you Preached against it? so have we.
3. Have you Printed against it (as you have done excellently, and we thank you for it) so have ours. The first Book I saw was Fiat Lux. I saw a second Impression, and wondered I heard of no answer from your Church; Dr. Owen was the man that answered it, Ann. 1662. so long ours have appeared.
4. Have your Clergy kept their monthly Fasts four or five years, foreseeing what now is coming upon us (if God prevent it not)? so have several of our Ministers, with the hazard of our Estates and Persons by Informers, from whom you were free.

5. Did you the last year (at least for the chief part of the year), beside your family-prayers, set a part sometime between fix and seven in the morning one day in the week, to pray purposely that God would deliver this Nation from these bloody Papists, and their cursed Idolatry, and Doctrines? &c. so have we in several Counties, and layed the same charge on our people.
6. Do you think you shall be put to defend our Legal right to the Protestant Religion by what I am loth to mention, the sword)? since the Lollards-Tower, the Bishops Cole-house, &c. are out of date, they are too thirsty, and must have larger draughts. I believe there will be no distinction then between a true Protestant Conformist, and us, therefore we must join with you.
Why then do you charge us with bringing in of Popery? I desire your Church would not put us upon temptation; we wrong them not in their Tythes but charge our people to pay them exactly; and do not grudg us the little that we have to bring us in bread. I thank God I am not very lazy in my place, but if you will give me twelve pound per Annum for my stipend, you shall have it, and thank you too. But I bless God I may work for so good a Master.
A little more as to our Communion with your Church: Sir, some of us have lived in Gods House, where we saw the Government hath been carried on by Officers of his own appointment, according to his own Rule, and what a majesty have we beheld in it! Admonitions, first privately, then publickly by the Elders, continuing in this course of admonishing, to try if they could bring to repentance, sometimes longer, sometimes shorter, as the sin hath been, and they in prudence saw reasons. (I have known them waste half a year in this course) When nothing would do, but they must come to Excommunication, how wisely did they govern the Brethren to bring them to declare their consent
2 Cor. 10.6. obedientially to their Elders, (for they deny the Go∣vernment to be Democratical; nor will I own the Fraternity to be the first subject of the Keys. In the beginning it was not so, as our Lord said in another case, Mat. 19.8. and to the beginning we must go) and your
Primit. Govern∣ment of Church. p. 147. Thorndike speaks excellently to this, why the Congregation ought to be concern'd in this. Now when all were agreed, how dread∣ful was the sentence! what pale faces! how many tears did it cause in the Congregation! a solemn sight to behold the Church putting the person out of the Congregation, Terrible as an army of banners, Cant. 6.1. I have often thought of the Text since. After this, how excellently did the Church walk towards an Excommunicate person, to bring to Repentance? And what rare effects have I known of this Ordinance, without any Writs de Excommunicato capiendo; alas these
could never effect what I have known, to the humbling of such a person. And now, Sir, do you think that we who have seen these things, can join with your Church, where this Ordinance so majestical, so terrible, is so horribly profaned? I pray, Sir, pardon me though I stand off from it. But I pray, Sir, why do your Bishops excommunicate those who were never of your Church? why do they not Excommunicate the French, or Dutch? True, they live under your Laws, but your Law is, they must be admitted by the Cross, and being Infants, could not help it.
As to your Discourse about particular Congregations, and Diocesan Churches, it is not my purpose to meddle with it; only I desire you to tell me why a Pastor of a single Congregation may not be as fit to govern that Congregation, as your single Bishop to govern a thou∣sand Congregations, as it is with your Church? where did the Apo∣stles ordain, but one single Pastor to a Church? we have eight Chur∣ches recorded in the Epistles, and the Acts, but we read in them all several Elders to carry on Church-work. As for Timothy and Titus, be∣ing Bishops in our controverted sense, enough hath been said about them. Strange that we should have twelve Apostles beside Paul and Barnabas, many Elders and several Evangelists, and but two Bishops (who were Evangelists too) recorded in holy Writ to be the pattern for the succeeding Bishops; when, where, and how, those two were made Bishops, we cannot find.
And for the large Diocesses, so large, that 'tis impossible for a Bi∣shop to perform the Duties the Lord requires of a Pastor to one quar∣ter of the Diocess:
Pag. 203 The Petitioners for Reformation in King James's reign, tell his Majesty, That in Augustine's time there were in one Province under Carthage, of the Catholick and Donatist, Bishops above nine hundred. Of the Catholicks part there were present 286, and ab∣sent 120 by reason of sickness and old age, Episcopal Churches void 60, in all 466. Of the Donatists there were present 279, absent 120, Chur∣ches void 60, in all 459. These come near the matter, make him but Episcopus praeses, and as to Officers and Churches I may come to agree with you, leaving my brethren to their judgments.
Several other things I took notice of in your Book that may easily be answered; as the perplexing scruples you mention, pag. 384, 385. (If we must baptize only by the Parents right) that men must run into. No, none at all.
But, Sir, did you not forget your self very much, p. 393. when you tell us the differences between the Popish Ceremonies, and your Cere∣monies? viz. That yours are appointed only for decency and order? Sir, do not your Preface to your Ceremonies tell us another story, viz. of
a significacy in them to put us in mind of our duty? 2. Of an aptness in them to stir up our dull minds to our duty? Here is some efficacy in them to help to the performance of duty, stirring up dull minds; these do not much differ from the efficacy you say the Papists give to theirs for the purging away some sorts of sins. I think both alike.
As for your French Letters; who told le Moyne what he writes pag. 404. That we believe that a man cannot be saved in the Church of England? I never heard such a word from any Dissenter, nor ever had I such a thought. Certainly none of our Bishops would write such a line to him. So that this must be the figment of a French mans brain, which we abhor; for the story he writes, p. 409. of a Nonconformist that he heard preach; I could tell him a story of one of our late Bi∣shops ten times worse, but the Press shall not know it; but you shall.
Sir, I have given you a few of my thoughts, reading over your Book, while my Papers were in the Press, (which have lain by me several years) and must tell you I am not yet satisfied with the title of your Book, viz. the Ʋnreasonableness of Separation, &c. To your Prayer in the end of your Preface, I heartily say, Amen, Amen.

