



My LORD, and Gentlemen,
IN Obedience to Your Order I have printed, and here humbly present to You, the Sermon I lately Preached before You; and therewith I make my Acknowledgments of the Respects You have shewed me in the kind Entertainment of my Endeavours to serve You.
I made choice of the great Doctrine of Provi∣dence for the Subject of my Discourse, as well with

a peculiar regard to the distracted condition of the Times we live in; as upon the general account of its perpetual usefulness to all the great purposes of Religion: and I am now confirmed in my Choice by the testimony of your judgments and approbation.
My Lord, Though I live not much in the Air of this busie World, yet a man must be quite out of it that is not sensible, not only of different Appre∣hensions and Disputes amongst us, but of the most violent passions and animosities, insomuch that no Terms of Reproach are thought virulent enough to bestow upon one another, but we must rake the Sinks of other Countries for odious Nicknames to distinguish Parties, and to perpetuate our Quar∣rels.
Nor is this the worst of our Case neither, for now at length (as it uses to happen in declining Age) our Choler seems to be turned into Melancho∣ly, and our Anger into Jealousie. We grow suspi∣cious of our best Friends, of our Governours, of our Clergy, of one another. By which means not only Religion is scandalized, but the very Sinews of Society are relaxed, and the strength of the Nation is dissolved.
And what Remedies can be sufficient to recover us from this Condition? It is true we have a Gra∣cious

Prince, but who can preserve a Kingdom divi∣ded against it self? We have good Laws, but what can they signifie when they have lost their venera∣tion? We have a great many Good Men, but who will take upon him to make peace, when he that parts the Fray is likely to receive the most Blows, and he that pretends to be a common Friend (to the angry Parties) shall be treated as tbe common Enemy? In a word, we seem to be very near that condition which the Historian bewails in his own Country, Nec Morbos, nec Remedia pati possumus; We can neither subsist without a Cure, nor yet will admit of the Remedies.
Now, My Lord, my Text affords us hope e∣ven in this condition. It brings into view a migh∣ty Majesty, able to awe men into a composure: It gives us assurance that we are under his Govern∣ment, who can cool our Heats, allay our Passions, prevent our Fears, and cure our Melancholy. Al∣mighty Providence can turn the hearts of men, change the Scene of things, and make a Tempest become a Calm. And that in his own good time he will do this for us, we have encouragement to ex∣pect from the former experience we have had of his Goodness, and upon the interest of the Protestant Re∣ligion, that Vine which his own right hand hath plant∣ed amongst us.

Now that it may please him to effect this in our days, and to make Your Lordship, and the rest of the Worthy Magistrates of this City (in their several Places) instrumental in so happy a Work, is the hearty Prayer of

March 5. 1682/3
