


MY LORD,
WHen I composed the following Sermon, at Your Lordship's Command, I propounded no o∣ther thing to my self, but the doing service to the Souls of Men, by inviting them into the Communion of the Church of Christ; and the animating and encouraging my Bre∣thren of the Clergy, that labour in the same good and holy Work. Than which two things, I knew nothing more seasonable and neces∣sary for the Age we live in, or more com∣pliant with Your Lordship's Design in your Visitation. And therefore, though I had a just Reverence of the Auditory, and a due sense of my own Imperfections; yet the
 aforesaid Consideration, together with that of Your Lordship's Candour, would not suf∣fer me  to doubt but that the Sermon would be approved by Your Lordship, and accepted by all good and wise Men that heard it.
For I call'd to mind, that as the Greeks say of their Goddess , Dea, Bona valetudo, placatur quâcunque re quis velit ei litare: so, however weak and sickly Minds (like cachectick Bodies) may be nice, fantastick and captious; yet those that are sound and strong, are benign and gene∣rous; and with such, every thing that is sober, and well-intended, is well taken.
Nevertheless, I must acknowledge, that when afterwards Your Lordship declared your Pleasure that I should print my Ser∣mon, methought the case was altered: for being sensible before, how difficult a matter it was, to contrive so copious a Subject (as I had before me) within the limits of an hour's Discourse, I was easily aware how much harder it would be (in so narrow a compass) to satisfie all the Scruples and Curiosities of those that should not only have a transcient glympse, but a leisurely perusal. And besides, I was not ignorant how diffe∣rent the condition of a Sermon was, when presented in dead letters, from it self,
 when enlivened by the voice and Passion of a very mean Orator.
But after all, I considered it was my Duty, not to dispute, but to Obey, and that Your Lordship's Judgment was sufficient for my security. Ad therefore (all Excuses set aside) I here lebly present to your hand, what before I prhed in your hearing.
And now, My Lord, having this Oppor∣tunity, I crave leave, not only to make Ac∣knowledgment of my own peculiar Obliga∣tions to Your Lordship, (which I do with a just sense of Duty and Gratitude,) but to report the Apprehensions of your Clergy in these parts of your Diocess, and the great Contentment they  under Your Lord∣ship's Government.  greatly com∣forted by your Zeal for  Protestant Re∣ligion; encouraged by You▪ Lordship's vi∣gilant Care of their Interests and Concerns; directed in their Studies, Ministry and Conversation, by your prudent Counsels; animated by so great an Example; and especially obliged by the Benignity of your Presence and Condescension to them at your Visitation. All which they cannot forbear to express such a sense of, that they look upon it as a great Blessing of Almighty God, in committing this part of his Church to Your Lordship's Care and Government.

For, My Lord, we cannot doubt but Piety and Devotion will commend it self to all that are serious: that Paternal Mild∣ness and Clemency will work upon the inge∣nuous: that well-temper'd Severity is the way to reclaim the vicious▪ and that Cha∣rity and Generosity wi oblige all humane Nature. And therefore, where there is such a conjunction of real and powerful Causes, we are able easily to calculate happy and signal Effects; as, that the Church shall recover its nati and ancient Glory, and the Genius of this great People be marvel∣lously improved. Which Successes that it will please the Great ad True Oecumenical Bishop to crown Your Lordship's Endeavours with, is the arde Desire of
(My LORD)

HADHAM, Septemb. 7. 1677.
