



SIR,
OF all things, which the Lord hath made in this great World, Man is the most noble; for whose sake other Creatures were created; to whose feet the things below are subjected. Of all the Essentials, which Man (the little World) doth consist of, the Soul is the most excellent; It is infused by God, which notes out the Dignity of it; It hath command of the body, which notes out the Authority of it; It is a work (as one calleth it) both great, Divine, and admirable. Of all the powers in the Soul, none is comparable to the Reason. Of all the Branches in the Reason∣able part, none is equal to the Minde, none excelleth the under∣standing. Of all the vertues in the Minde, Wisdom gives the greatest light, Wisdom swayeth with chiefest might. Oh the breadth, that Wisdom spanneth! Oh the length, that Wisdom reacheth! Oh the heigth, that Wisdom climbeth? Oh the depth, that Wisdom gageth, when once it comes into a Soul, cleared by Gods Spirit, in some good measure, from those duskish Clouds of Ignorance and Errour, with which before it was obscured. With∣out this, how can men discern of things that differ? how can they see what is good and what is evil, and so exercise the power of their reason in ensuing the one, in eschewing the other? When dangers are imminent and coming against us, Wisdom foreseeth them, forecasteth against them; When troubles are in∣cumbent and lying upon us, it doth either remove them, or pre∣serve

us in them. In a word, what Walls are to Cities, what skins are to beasts, scales to fishes, feathers to birds, and shells to some creeping and baser Creatures, the same is wisdom to (that naked born Creature) Man, even a Covering a defence. Yea, Wisdom (saith the Preacher) strengtheneth the wise, more than ten mighty men, which are in the Citie. And they are truely endowed with wisdom, who by the light of it do distinguish Gospel-truths from errours, and keep their Souls pure and undefiled from the infection of false and time-poysoning Doctrines. Wisdom truely is in them, who by the light and guidance of it have found out and continue in the true Church of Christ, the true Zion of God, where salvation is truely placed, where pardon of sin is onely ob∣tained, where Soul-feastings and Divine teachings are truely en∣joyed, where are protections on every dwelling place, where are true Ministers cloathed with salvation, where the Saints do shout aloud for joy, where all afflictions are sanctified, where all good news are to be heard, and where God hath commanded the bles∣sing and life for evermore.
And such a gift of wisdom (Worthy Sir) have I admired in you; by which light in your far and forraign travails you have al∣wayes discerned good from evil, Truth from Errour, Religion from Superstition, Zion from Rome and Babylon. It is true in you, that wisdom hath preserved you from many snares to folly. If Riches be snares; the Riches of the West-India's, even those Treasures amongst the Spaniards, never ensnared your conscience; If honour entice; who of our English Nation was ever more ho∣noured by Spaniards in the West-India's than your self? as the ime of your abode in Hispaniola, and at the Court of Santo Domingo doth sufficiently witness. If favour of Great men and Princes doth allure, and often obscure the light of true wisdom; who ever of our English Nation enjoyed such a favour from that Gret Don of Spain, the Duke of Medina Sidonia, as your self? as also from the Duke of Nacara, the Duke of Maqueda; the King of Spains Chief favourite, that great Conde Dugue, Earle of Olivares; and the Count of Castilia, then President of the In∣dia's, being trusted by the first to go and view the Silver and

Golden Treasures of America (a favour denied unto others) and fully empowered by him to make choice of what Ports you pleased, and there to lade your Ships with what Commodities might seem most advantagious unto your self. If pleasures and vanities do tickle; where do they abound more than in the In∣dia's, and in that place especially, where with so much honour from the best and Noblest in Santo Domingo you did sometime abide? Yet in the midst of all these snares, with wisdoms light you eyed Zion still, you kept your self free from errours, you were never defiled with Babylons superstitions; Yea, when troubles and evils were incumbent, and lying upon you, even the loss of ship and of Riches at your return into England, wisdom preserved you in the midst of evils, and as a true Member of Zion you found your losses and afflictions sanctified unto you. Zion and Babylon, Truth and Errour, are the subject of these my weak indeavours, which must be known by the light of wisdom. With which light, as you have hitherto discerned good from evil, so I desire you may with the same take notice of Zion, and of Zions true Ambassadours, pointed out unto you in this my Treatise, and eschew those Er∣rours of Babylon and Antichristian fallacies, which, as Rocks and Sands under the waters, are here discovered to be amongst us un∣der a pretence of Christian and Gospel-Truths.
I must confess that when I called to minde that Proverb, , know thy self, I was not without some nwillingness drawn to a publick Dispute, and afterwards to preach in publick upon this subject, not being ignorant either of mine own weakness, or of the weightiness of so great a Task; and with more unwillingness was I overcome to commit it to the Press, from whence to be scan∣ned by the judgements of all, (for Comes calami calumnia) and I am sure thee will be many Censurers of this my work; that of the Apostle may be applied, Vnus sic, alter autem sic, one judge∣ing after this manner, another after that, one speaking well, an∣other ill. But as a Commanding Authority of the Spirit within me for a just defence of the Parochial Churches and Ministers of England, both cried down with scandal by an opposing Adversa∣ry, was the cause of the former, so overruling importunity of

some friends well-wishers to Zion hath effected the latter; and now like an Infant new born, my Book and Dispute is come na∣ked into the World, subject unto the nippings and bitings of the times. It was the saying of the Spouse in the Canticles, We have a little sister, and she hath no breasts; And I may say the like of this; I have a little Bird and she wanteth wings; yet fly she must into the open air, and shift for her self. But, Alas! what can she do, before her wings be grown, or her weak feathers come to ripe∣ness? It is impossible that she should escape, and not be torn in pieces by the sharp eyed vultures (the time-consuming Criticks) of our time, except some Eagle shall in pity to so poor a wande∣rer, shadow her with the wings of protection. Your ever known disposition (Worthy Sir) in giving incouragement to the Mini∣sters of Christ, in doing Justice and Right to such as suffer wrong∣fully, hath imboldned this little Bird to shrowd herself under the roof of your Protection and favour, and my self to Dedicate this small fruit of my Studies unto you; whom (with a most thankfull heart) I must ever acknowledge my chief incourager in my work, since, after my Conversion from Babylon to Zion, I have been a poor and unworthy labourer in the Vine-yard of Christ. And if at this time I may obtain your Love in accepting this small token of my thankfulness for those many and undeserved favours conferred by you upon me, I shall receive a most comfortable incitement to go on forwards in my Studies, and be for ever bound to pray for a blessed increase of all Graces spiritual and temporal, both for this life and the life to come, unto your self, with your most vertuous aud truely Godly and Religious consort, unto all yours both at home and abroad, and their succeeding posterity for ever; And so I commend you to God, and to the word of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance amongst all them that are sanctified. And the Lord of Peace himself, give you peace al∣wayes by all means. So prayeth he who is
Sir,

