



Worthy Gentlewoman,
I Know not how well or wisely I shal mannage my intention in addres∣sing my selfe in this Dedication unto you:
 but confident I am, that if a wise man had it in hand, you should be no loser by it. I know you wish your selfe at a greater di∣stance (in affection) from the world, and closer, and more in∣tire in your depen∣dance on God, and deeper ingaged for Heaven: wherein if this small piece doth you no service, the Author miscarrieth in the best of his de∣signe. Neither would
 the perusall of it (I conceive) without the proprietie accru∣ing to you by the De∣dication, have had the same advantage (altogether) of gai∣ning upon you that way, and winding in∣to your spitit. The sight of your Name before it, cannot (lightly) but raise some thought or ap∣prehension within you, that as God in∣tended you externall comfort in speciall
 manner, by that part of the world, that outward estate, which you call yours: so he hath purposed spiri∣tuall support, and consolation to you in some more peculiar, and remarkable man∣ner, by those medi∣tations, which you may call yours, by a right of propriety, di∣stinct from all other mens. As it is no part of my meaning to flatter you (a sinne, as unsavoury to my spi∣rit,
 as unsutable to my calling) so neither would I willingly undervalue, or dis∣courage you in any endowment, where∣with God hath ho∣noured you: yet this I thinke I may be bold to say (though I stand in much a we of a sharp & piercing eie which I have more than once observed in your understanding) that you little thinke or conceive, what such a touch in your
 spirit, or apprehensi∣on (as was mentio∣ned) may advantage you, in reading or searching either this, or any other piece of spirituall learning. I cannot thinke, but that Paul's mentio∣ning the Names of the particular Chur∣ches and persons, in the inscription of his Epistles, to whom they were sent, was some helpe and ad∣vantage unto them respectively, to reape
 the spirituall things sowne therein unto them, more plenti∣fully. Neither doe I conceive that any of these Churches, re∣ceived proportiona∣bly, the like benefit by any other of the Epistles of the same Author, as they did by that which was particularly directed unto them: nor yet, that any Church since, ever gain'd that measure of edifi∣cation from any one
 of those Epistles, which the Churches themselves, to whom they were written, gained severally. Nei∣ther can I judge the adequate reason here∣of, to lye in this, be∣cause they were com∣piled and framed by the Holy Ghost, with speciall relation and accommodation, to the then present occa∣sions of those Chur∣ches: but this (I con∣ceive) did also con∣tribute much here un∣to,
 that they had live∣ly apprehensions of Gods intending grace and mercy to them peculiarly by those very writings, which had their Names in their front or inscrip∣tion: the considera∣tion whereof did ei∣ther occasion, & raise, or (at least) quick∣ned and confirmed those apprehensions. Whē a man is touch'd with any secret im∣pressions, or is able to lay hold on such a
 hope (whether there be any sufficient ground for it, or no) that God hath a pur∣pose indeed, to come home unto us, and to doe us some speciall good by such or such a meanes, as by such a minister, such a mans writings, such a booke, or the like, the heart upon such a touch opens more sweetly and freely, and lies large before such a means tendered un∣to it, observes and
 watches things more narrowly, weighs and ponders things more heedfully, and is content and wil∣ling to straine it self more than ordinary, to conceive & reach the full importance & tendencie of every thing it meets with: whereas on the con∣trary, when the soule is not relieved, and strengthened by some such hope or appre∣hension as this, the heart is nothing en∣larged
 to the extent and capacitie of it, but lye's scant before the meanes, and like a sayle that is not skil∣fully weathered, loo¦seth the best part of the benefit and ad∣vantage of the gale that bloweth.
I am tender of be∣ing troublesome un∣to you: neither shall any man, to salve the seasons of all your oc∣casions and affaires, be more willing to keepe silence, than I,
 though otherwise, I trust I shall alwayes be found ready to make no spare of my selfe, when the affairs of your soule shall re∣quire it. I acknow∣ledge my selfe a grand debtor unto you, for those respects, and many expressions of love, which very faint and slender provoca∣tions or ingagements on my part have drawne from you. Sed faciles motus mens gene∣rosa capit (as hee said)
 that is,

The mind that is true noble bred,
With easie motives will be led.

I have nothing wherewith to recom∣pence your kindnes, but my prayers, and the travaile of my soule, for yours. A Ministers thankful∣nesse to his friend, is to shew them the way to Heaven, and to enable them (if hee can) to walke from strength to strength, that they faint not, till they come there.

The God, whom (I doubt not) you serve in your spirit, make you strong and whole in your depen∣dance upon him through Iesus Christ, and fill you with the blessed hope of life and immortality, and draw out all this a∣gaine from you, in fruits of righteous∣nesse, and true holi∣nesse, abundantly, that it may returne backe againe upon you, multiplied, and
 increased, yet an hun∣dred fold, that so you may find Heaven out of it's place, and taste two worlds at once, that which is present, with that which is to come. This is no∣thing more than the prayer of
From my stu∣dy in Cole∣man-street, Octob. 14. 1640.

