



'TIs now about 165 years since your College was first founded by Royal Authority. The causes which moved the renowned Princes, King Henry 8. Q. Mary, Q. Elizabeth, King James and our present Sovereign (whom God long preserve) to stamp such eminent cha∣racters and signal marks of their Royal favour and boun∣ty upon you; cannot be unknown to those, who have read over the Acts of Parliament passed in two Princes Reigns; with the Charters granted by others, and Printed in this Book. In which, you may find it thus expressed; That they out of their Princely wisedom deeply considering, and by the example of Foreign well-governed States and Kingdoms truly understanding, how profitable, be∣neficial and acceptable it would be unto the whole body of this Kingdom of England, to restrain and sup∣press

the excessive number of such, as daily professed themselves learned and profound Practisers in the fa∣culty of Physick; Whereas in truth, they were men illiterate and unexperienced; rather propounding unto themselves their private gain with the detriment of this Kingdom, than to give relief in time of need.
And likewise duly considering, that by the rejecting of those illiterate and unskilfull practisers, those that were learned, grave, and profound practisers in that faculty, should receive more bountifull reward; and also the industrious Students of that profession, would be the better encouraged in their studies and endea∣vours, &c.
Ʋpon these and many other weighty Motives, causes and considerations (recited at large in the forementi∣oned Acts and Charters) did our Kings and Queens of England, erect, found and establish a College, Com∣monalty, or Incorporation of Physicians in the City and Suburbs of London, and for 7 miles every way in distance from the same; to be, remain and have exi∣stence for ever. Now, much honoured Collegues, How far you have answered the great and noble ends of these Princely favours and Royal Grants, will fully appear in this book; I mean, as to the primary cause of your Incor∣poration, viz. The restraining and suppressing illiterate, unexperienced and unlicensed practisers.
As to the Second, viz. How far you and your prede∣cessors have answered the Character of learned, grave and profound practisers in the faculty of Physick, will in some measure appear in this Epistle; wherein I have en∣deavoured to give a true, though brief account, of several memorable passages relating to the Lives and Works of some of the eminent Physicians of this College.

This is a work (I must confess) more fit for a large Volume, than an Epistle; a work, which I hope in due time may be attempted by a more able and elegant pen, than I can pretend to: and that, because I know there want not good materials to encourage such an honourable and worthy undertaking, several Authours having al∣ready written somewhat memorable of the Worthies of this our Royal College; our own Annals acquainting us with much more; and the learned Dr. Hamey having left behind him (in a Manuscript of his own writing) the lives of above 50 of them. Some of which were high∣ly valued for their knowledge in the learned Languages; others for being general Scholars, polite Latinists, ac∣curate Grecians, eloquent Oratours, great Antiquaries, and deep Philosophers. Others for the improvement of their own faculty in the Theoretick and Practick, Ana∣tomick and Spagirick parts thereof; that they were and are no less valued and esteemed in other Countries than in their own; having by their matchless and most incompara∣ble works, not onely merited, but obtained the name of immortal. Some are admired and read in foreign Ʋni∣versities, as Hippocrates and Galen were of old; and o∣thers so much valued for their late incomparable and sa∣gacious Medical observations; that the Disciples of fo∣reign Professours are obliged to a diligent reading and carefull practice of them. No wonder therefore, that Emperours and Princes have courted these Aesculapii of their several Ages, to attend them in their Courts; and foreign Ʋniversities have been so ambitious of encoura∣ging them to ascend their Chairs; their excellent learning and parts being of such an illustrious extraction. And that I might not seem (by this their due character) to impose upon the World, or flatter them; I will (as I promised) give a short Essay of a future History intended, of the

Memoirs of some of the worthy Members of this honoura∣ble Society.
The first of which I shall mention, was the most famous Dr. Thomas Linacer, who was born at Canterbury, educated under the Learned Sellingus; and from him sent to Oxford; where after a short stay, he was An. Dom. 1484. chosen Fellow of All-Souls College. In which he made great proficiency in Learning, and then travel∣led into Italy, residing chiefly at Rome and Florence, where he highly improved himself by daily conversation with the Learned men of that Age. No English man, saith Dr. Fuller, in those times had so learned Masters, viz. Demetrius and Politian at Florence, and Hermolaus Barbarus at Rome; So noble Patrons, viz. Laurence Me∣dices Duke of Florence; who (whilst he was beyond the Seas) was intimately familiar with him, admiring him for the greatness of his Wit and Learning; K. Henry 7. and K. Henry 8. upon his return into England, (to both which he was chief Physician;) So high-born Scholars, Prince Arthur (eldest Son to Hen. 7.) with many Lords Sons his contemporaries; So learned friends, Erasmus, Melancthon, Ludovicus Vives, Grocinus, Latimer, Tonstal, Sir. Tho. More, &c. who, for his accurate skill in the Greek and Latine Languages, in other Sciences, and in his own profession, esteemed him the ornament of his Age; upon which account he gives him this following character, viz. That upon his return into England he brought Languages along with him, and was the first re∣storer of Learning in our Nation. It is a question whe∣ther he was a better Latinist or Grecian, a better Gram∣marian or Physician, a better Scholar or man for his moral deportment.
He was created Doctour of Physick in Oxford, and made publick Professour of that faculty; in which Ʋniversity he

afterwards founded 2 Physick Lectures, and one in Cam∣bridge. From Oxford he was commanded to Court by K. Hen. 7. to take the principal care of his own and the Prince's health.
He was highly instrumental with K. Hen. 8. in the tenth year of his Reign, for obtaining his Letters Pa∣tents for the founding of a College of Physicians in Lon∣don, &c. In which he was named with great honour as one of those 6 whom the King first made choice of for con∣stituting this Royal foundation. He was chosen the first President of the College by the Physicians named in the King's Patent; and continued in that office by an annual choice of the Electors for 7 years together; he being by them highly valued for his profound Learning, great pru∣dence, and excellent government. He kept all the Col∣lege Comitia in his own house during his life; died Pre∣sident of the College, and at his death gave them for ever his house in Knight-rider street for a College and Library.
He translated several of Galen's works (as De inae∣quali temperamento, de temperamentis, de naturalibus facultatibus, de sanitate tuenda, de pulsuum usu, de methodo medendi, &c.) into the Latine tongue, with that admirable elegance and singular politeness and purity of style, that he not onely exceeded all former Interpreters of the great Galen, but deserved the following character for his translations, which Erasmus hath given in one of his Epistles, Mitto tibi libros Galeni operâ Th. Linacri melius Latinè loquentes, quàm antea Graecè loqueban∣tur. Erasmus had that value for our famous Linacer, that in other Epistles he often calls him Meum Linacrum, intimum amicum, praeceptorem, patronum, &c. He wrote a Latin Grammar called Grammaticae rudimenta, which he dedicated to the Princess Mary; which Gram∣mar is now of such account in some Ʋniversities in Poland,

that all Students are posed in it, before they take their first degree. He wrote a little before his death (at the earnest and importunate request of some friends) a most admirable book, de emendata Structura Latini Sermo∣nis. Many other Books he left behind him extraneous to his faculty, which for brevity sake I must now omit.
He died at London much lamented the twentieth of October, 1524. and was buried under a stately Monu∣ment erected to his memory by Dr. Caius, in the Cathedral Church of St. Paul's; a little above which was a Phoenix placed, with the following inscription.
Vivit post funera virtus.
Dr. Richard Bartlot, was admitted into the College of Physicians and made President thereof in the Reign of K. Hen. 8. in which he lived and flourished, as likewise in the Reigns of K. Edw. 6. and Q. Mary. He died An. Dom. 1557. with the following character given him by the Learned Dr. Caius in his Annals; This good and venerable old man (very famous for his Learning, great knowledge and experience in Physick,) died in the 87th year of his age, at whose funeral the President and College attended; it being the first time that the Statute book of the College adorned with silver was carried before the President. He was buried in great St. Bartholomew's.
Dr. William Butte Fellow of Gonvile-hall in Cam∣bridge, and Physician to K. Hen. 8. was Anno Dom. 1529. admitted into the College of Physicians. Ʋpon which he was required to subscribe to the due observati∣on of the Statutes of the College, and to give his promise to use his best endeavours for advancing the honour and perpetuity thereof. He is mentioned by Bishop Parkhurst

and Fox with honour; Ascham, in his Epistle Com∣mendatory to Dr. Wende, extolls him highly; and the learned Dr. Caius hath dedicated most of his Books to him. His esteem was such in the College of Physicians, that he is entred in their Annals with the following Character; Vir gravis; eximiâ literarum cognitione, singulari judicio, summâ experientiâ, & prudenti con∣silio Dr. He died in the Reign of King Henry the Eighth, and lies buried in Fulham Church, with this In∣scription; Guil. Buttius Eq. Aur. & Medicus Regis Henr. viij. &c. obiit Novemb. 17. 1545. &c.
Dr. William Freeman was admitted a member of the College, Anno Dom. 1529. After which, his Learning and eminency were such, that he was made Censor, Elect and President of that Society. In the time of his Pre∣sidentship, viz. Anno Dom. 1546. he with Dr. Bartlot, Cle∣ment and Wotton procured from John Barker King at Arms, the College Arms; Manum videlicet è nube demissam aegri brachium complectentem, dimidiatas irides per ambitum, & in imo malum granatum, ut in ejus literis testimonialibus ad hoc conscriptis, videre li∣cet.
Dr. George Owen, a very learned and great Man, was bred in the Ʋniversity of Oxford, and after made Physician to King Henry the Eighth, and Queen Mary. He was admitted into the College An. Dom. 1544. He with Dr. Wende, and Dr. Huys (by their care and in∣terest in Q. Mary) procured that eminent Statute for the College, which passed in 1 Q. Mary, Sess. 2. C. 9. printed page 30, &c. of this Book. He was of that re∣pute in Q. Mary's Reign, that there falling out an un∣happy difference betwixt the College of Physicians and the Ʋniversity of Oxford, concerning their giving a de∣gree in Physick to an illiterate person, rejected by the

College; (which not being composed betwixt themselves) the College made their Appeal by Letter to the Right Reverend Cardinal Pool Chancellour of Oxford, and then Commissionated by Q. Mary to visit that Ʋniversity for the Reformation of Religion; who so ordered affairs there, that Oxford was obliged to consult this Learn∣ed Man, and Dr. Thomas Huys (the Queen's Physici∣ans) de instituendis rationibus, quibus Oxon. Acade∣mia in admittendis Medicis uteretur. Which being agreed betwixt them, Hoc Statutum Reverendissimus approbavit, & authoritate suae legationis & Cancellaria∣tûs, ut observent, injunxit.
He and the learned Dr. Thomas Huys, and Dr. Ro∣bert Huye, with several other Physicians of note, died of a Malignant, Epidemical, Intermittent Fever; which reged so severely, An. Dom. 1558. and is so admirably described by Dr. Caius in his Annals, that I could not omit inserting the History of this Disease, in his own words.
Tertio die Octobris, An. Dom. 1558. Electio Praesi∣dis erat, quod postridie Divi Michaelis ex statuto esse nequibat; distractis hinc inde omnibus Collegis in po∣puli subsidium; Qui febribus tertianis, duplicibus ter∣tianis, & tertianis continuis ita vexabatur populariter per omnem mensem Augusti, & Septembr. pér{que} uni∣versam insulam Britanniam, perinde ac peste aliquâ, ut nullus locus quieti aut privatis negotiis esse potuit. Ex hoc morbo periere multi, non in Urbe solùm, sed ruri etiam; inter quos Urbanus Huys erat, quod dolens re∣fero, ex immodica fatigatione per aestus graviores, dum aulicos curaret, morbo correptus.
Per eos menses vix erant sani, qui aegris ministra∣rent; vix Messores qui messem meterent, aut in horre∣um recolligerent.

Hos morbos exceperunt Quartanae populariter, ut non aliàs aequè per hominum memoriam; & aliquot Quintanae & Octonae etiam, sed hae breves & sine pe∣riculo; Illae plurimos de vita sustulerunt, flores videli∣cet gravitatis, consilii & aetatis maturae.
Ex his Georgius Owenus erat, Regius Medicus & Dr. Oxon. Qui obiit die 10. Octobr. & sepultus est apud S. Stephanum in Walbroke Londini, 24. ejusdem mensis.
Dr. John Caius was born in Norwich, bred in Gon∣vile-Hall in Cambridge; from whence he travelled into Italy, and studied there under the learned Joannes Baptista Montanus; He took his Doctor's degree first at Bononia, where, for some years, he was Greek Lecturer. At the age of 21 years he began to translate out of Greek into Latin Nicephorus Callistus's Treatise of Confession in Prayer, and another of Chrysostome, de modo oran∣di: and out of Latin into English Erasmus's Paraphrase on Jude, and Epitomis'd his Book de vera Theolo∣gia.
After his return into England, he took his Doctor's degree in Cambridge, and was so considerable a Benefac∣tour to Gonvile-Hall, as that he obtained Letters Pa∣tents of Philip and Mary, which made him Co-founder; and the Hall had then this Title given it, viz. Gon∣vile and Caius College, Founded to the Honour of the Annunciation of Blessed Mary the Virgin. He built the Court called after his Name, Caius-Court, of free-stone, and gave his Books and Plate to the College; He like∣wise Founded 3 Fellowships, and 20 Scholarships; pro∣cured the College a new Coat of Arms, Symbols of the fa∣ty of Physick.
He was admitted into the College of Physicians in the Reign of King Edward the Sixth, An. Dom. 1547. He

there passed through all the learned and difficult Offices thereof, having for several years been chosen Censor, of∣ten Register and Treasurer,  seven years or more, President of this Royal Foundion. He was esteemed a man of a happy wit, great ning, and admirable skill in the Greek Tongue, as well as in his own Profession; He had the repute of one of the greatest Physicians of that Age, and was Physician to King Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, and for many years to Queen Elizabeth.
He was the first Inventor of those Ensigns of Honour by which the President of the College is distinguished from the rest of the Fellows, the account of which he hath thus entred in his Register.
Ante hunc annum nulla à Collegio condito reddita ratio fuit acceptorum & expensorum; nulláve solen∣nis ratio instituendi aut honorandi Praesidentem Pulvi∣nari, Caduceo, Libro & Sigillo, aut excogitata aut usitata; ulláve deponendi munus & officium; primús∣que hos honores & excogitavit Caius & usus est. Ne∣que certè inanes sunt honores isti. Nam Caduceus sive virga argentea, regendum significat mitiùs & clemen∣tiùs, contra quàm solebant olim, qui virgâ regebant ferreâ; prudenter autem regendum, agendúmque do∣cent serpentes, prudentiae Indices; Sustineri autem istis modis Collegium, indicant insignia Collegii in summo posita. Jam verò cognitione Collegium fulci∣ri indicio est Liber, cujus etiam summum occupant eadem insignia. Quòd autem pulvinar, honoris ho∣nestamentum sit; & sigillum fidei signum & firma∣mentum, nemo est qui nescit. Vocentur haec virtu∣tis Insignia.
He hath left behind him a Book written with his own hands of the College Annals, bearing date An. Dom. 1555. and ending An. Dom. 1572. which Book was the

first that ever was wrote of their affairs, and is managed with that excellent Method, clearness of Style, and full∣ness of Matter, that all the memorable Transactions of the College are there to be sound entred in their due time and order: I cannot therefore but heartily wish, that he may ever continue an Exemplar to all succeed∣ing Registers of this Royal Foundation.
He was so eminent a Defender of the College Rights and Privileges, that there happening in the Reign of Queen Elizabeth to arise a difference betwixt the Physi∣cians and Surgeons; whether the Surgeons might give inward Remedies in the Sciatica, French Pox, or any kind of Ʋlcer or Wound, &c. Doctor Caius was summoned (as President of the College) to appear before the Lord Mayor and others of the Queen's Delegates; Before whom he so learnedly defended the College Rights, and the Il∣legality of the Surgeons practice in the forementioned cases, against the Bishop of London, Master of the Rolls, &c. (who brought many Arguments in behalf of the Surgeons) that it was unanimously agreed by the Queen's Commissioners, that it was unlawfull for them to practise in the forementioned cases.
He was so Religious in observing the Statutes of the College, that though old, he durst not absent from the College's Comitia without a dispensation; which he hath entred after the following manner in the conclusion of his Annals.
Decimo quinto Novembris, An. Dom. 1572. visum est Praesidenti & caeteris Electoribus praesentibus omni∣bus in his Comitiis concedere, ut Joanni Caio Doctori, propter senium & alia Collegii negotia perfuncta labo∣riosius per anteacta tempora, liceat abesse à Comitiis & convocationibus omnibus praeterquam ordinariis, quae celebrantur in fine trimestris cuiusque spatii, si in Urbe

suerit & per valetudinem liceat, & eis in quibus gravia Collegii tractantur negotia.
The Learned Treatises which he wrote (besides his Commentaries, Translations, and Correction of several Authours) are too many to insert in this Epistle, I shall therefore give an account but of some of them which are the following.

De medendi methodo.
De Ephemera Britannica.
De Antiquitate Cantabrig.
De canibus Britannicis.
De rariorum Animalium atque Stirpium historia.
De Thermis Britannicis.
De libris Galeni qui non extant.
De antiquis Britanniae urbibus.
De pronunciatione Graecae & Latinae linguae.
De Annalibus Collegii Gonvilli & Caii.

He Translated several of Galen's Works out of Greek into Latine; of some of which, the following account is given by the Learned Gesnerus; Galeni libros duos de motu musculorum, vetustate corruptos, integritati resti∣tuit, & annotationibus illustravit; Galenum de Ana∣tomicis, de sanitate tuenda, de Comate, de Pharmacis, de substitutis medicamentis, & alia in multis locis emen∣davit. For Cornelius Celsus, there is this account gi∣ven of him; Cornelium Celsum valde corruptum re∣purgavit, additis argumentis & scholiis, unà cum li∣brarum ac ponderum Celsi ratione.
He died at Cambridge in his great Climacterick year (which was An. Dom. 1573.) foretelling his own death: He was buried in the Chapel of his own College,

upon whose Monument, instead of an Epitaph, are insert∣ed the two following words,
Fui Caius.
Dr. Richard Caldwall was born in Staffordshire, edu∣cated in Oxford, where he took his degree of Dr. in Phy∣sick. He was a person so highly valued for his Learn∣ing, Gravity and excellent Morals; that he was exami∣ned, approved and admitted into the College, and made Censor thereof in one and the same day; and within less than six weeks, was chosen one of the Elects of the said College.
He was made a Member of that Society in the begin∣ning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign; was President thereof An. Dom. 1570. His affections were such to the Col∣lege, that he with the Lord Lumley, in the 24th year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign procured Her Majesty's leave, under the Broad-Seal, to Found a Surgery-Lecture in the College, and to Endow it with 40. l. per annum; which is laid as a Rent-charge upon the Lands of the Lord Lumley, and Dr. Caldwall, and their Heirs for ever. The words of the Letters patent run thus,—Solvend. eidem Presidenti & Collegio seu Communitati & Suc∣cessoribus suis annuatim, ad usum Lectoris Artis seu scientie Chirurgie infra domum sive Collegium Medi∣corum London. in perpetuum alend. & manutenend. juxta Ordinationes & Statuta dicti Johannis Domini Lumley & Richardi Caldwall in Medicina Doctoris fact. &c.
This generous and noble gift of Dr. Caldwall's, and the Lord Lumley's, was so highly resented by the Col∣lege, that immediately Letters were drawn up and pre∣sented to both of them, by the President Dr. Gifford;

wherein they did not onely acknowledge their great ob∣ligations due for this so honourable and generous a Do∣nation, most thankfully by them accepted; but as a te∣stimony thereof, did immediately decree, That 100 l. should be forthwith taken out of their Publick Stock to build the College Rooms more ample and spacious for the better celebration of this most solemn Lecture.
Cambden gives the following short account of this our great and worthy Benefactour and Collegue. An. Dom. 1585. hoc anno fato functus R. Caldwallus è Collegio Aenei Nasi Oxon. Dr. qui ut de Repub. benè merere∣tur (adscito in partem honoris Barone Lumleio) lec∣tionem Chirurgicam honesto salario in Medicorum Collegio Londini à Thom. Linacro fundato, instituit; Juxtáque ad S. Benedict. inhumatur, monumento la∣queis plintheis & charchesiis, scamno Hippocratis, glossomiis & aliis Chirurgicis ex Oribasio & Galeno machinamentis exornato.
Dr. Robert James was created Doctour in Physick in the Ʋniversity of Cambridge, and admitted into the College of Physicians in the 27th year of Queen Eliza∣beth's Reign. He was one of Her Majesty's Physicians, and highly in Her favour; as will appear by the two following Letters written by the Queen in his behalf, the one to the Emperour of Russia, the other to his Empress, the Copy of which are the following.




Potentiss. Principi ac Domino Johan∣ni Basileo eâdem Dei gratiâ Russiae Im∣peratori, Fratri, Consanguineo & A∣mico nostro, Salutem.
Potentissime Princeps, Frater & Consanguinee charissime,
TAm per literas tuas, quàm per sermones nostrorum, qui Ruthenâ ad nos proficiscuntur, accepimus, te non egere solùm, sed desiderare etiam, qui necessita∣tibus tuis serviat, Medicum. Quod hominum genus, quoniam & plurimarum rerum cognitionem, & mo∣rum probitatem non vulgarem postulat; Noluimus vel non parum providae esse salutis tuae, vel negligenter honoris nostri; quin virum tam probitatis laude in∣signem, quàm cognitionis in re medica, usúsque laude commendatissimum, ad te mitteremus; eáque pro∣pter è domesticis, è nostris ex eorum numero, qui cor∣poris salutisque nostrae, secundùm Deumc, ustodes sunt, Robertum Jacob in Medicina Doctorem, virum lite∣ratum,

artis suae peritissimum, morum honestate pro∣batissimum, ad te mittimus; non quia libenter eo ca∣reremus, sed quoniam tibi, tanquam nobis, volumus & cogitamus facere benè: Eum ut pari cum gratia à nobis accipias, & honore merito prosequaris, etiam atque etiam rogamus, &c.


 Serenissima & Potentissima Princeps, Soror, Consanguinea, & Amica nostra charissima,
SIngularis, quae de insigni vestra prudentia, virtutibus rarissimis, & moribus tantâ Principe verè dignis, fa∣ma circumfertur, crebro etiam sermone praestantis viri Doctoris Jacobi Medici nostri confirmata, facit ut Se∣renitatem vestram vero animi affectu amemus, eique fausta & foelicia omnia ardenter optemus. Ideóque de valetudine & incolumitate vestra, non solicitae esse non possumus. Itaque non solùm (quod à nobis aman∣ter petiit) Obstetricem expertam & peritam misimus, quae partûs dolores scientiâ leniat; sed Medicum etiam nostrum, qui nostram valetudinem curare solebat, prae∣dictum D. Jacobum unà amandamus, hominem vobis anteà cognitum, fide plenum, ut Medicâ arte, in qua excellit, Obstetricis actiones dirigat, & vestrae valetu∣dini fideliter inserviat, &c.

Dr. Theodore Goulston was born in Northampton∣shire, bred in Oxford, made Fellow of Merton College An. Dom. 1596. and after took his Degree in that Ʋni∣versity.

In the 8th. year of King James his Reign, he was chosen Candidate of the College of Phyficians, being well approved by the President, Censors, and all the Fel∣lows; the year following he was made Fellow of the same, and after Censor thereof.
His affection to the publick good and to the advance∣ment of the faculty of Physick was such, that by his last Will and Testament he gave 200 l. to purchase a Rent∣charge for the maintenance of an annual Lecture within the College of Physicians London. Which said Lecture was to be performed from time to time by one of the four youngest Doctors in Physick of the said College, and to be upon 2 or 3 or more Diseases, as the Censors should appoint or direct. And this Pathological Lecture to be read yearly in some most convenient season, betwixt Michaelmas and Easter, upon some dead Body (if possi∣bly by any means such a Body could be procured) upon 3 days together, in the Forenoon and Afternoon of each of the said days. There are several of his Works extant, as his Paraphrasis & Tabulae in Aristotelis lib. 3. de Arte dicendi, 1619. and the same year, Aristotelis de Rhetor. seu Arte dicendi libri tres Graeco-Latini, &c. Galeni quaedam Graeco-Lat. Graeca recensuit, Latina de novo fecit, An. 1640. He died in the Parish of St. Martin's within Ludgate, London, in the late Reign of King Charles the First.
Dr. William Harvey, eldest Son of Thomas Harvey, was born at Folkston in the County of Kent, bred up to Learning, and sent from School to Caius College in Cam∣bridge, from whence he travelled into Italy, studied at Padua 5 years, then took his Degree of Doctor in Phy∣sick there, and after in Cambridge; His eminency and reputation were such, that he was made Chief Physician to King James and King Charles the First. He was

admitted Candidate of the College An. Dom. 1604. and 3 years after, Fellow. Ʋpon the death of Dr. Davies, Reader of the Surgery-Lecture, Founded by the Lord Lumley and Dr. Caldwall; the Elects of the College (the week after) chose Dr. Harvey into that place. Who there Read those incomparable Lectures, de motu Cor∣dis & Sanguinis in Animalibus; which he 9 years af∣ter publish'd at Frankfort, viz. An. Dom. 1628. and Dedicated to Dr. Argent (then President of the Col∣lege) and to the rest of his Collegues; who were not onely ocular witnesses of the truth of those experiments published in that Book, but earnestly solicitous to have them printed; as will appear by the following account taken out of his Epistle. Meam de motu & usu Cordis & circuitu Sanguinis sententiam, E. D. D. anteà saepius in praelectionibus meis Anatomicis aperui, novam: sed jam per novem & ampliùs annos, multis ocularibus de∣monstrationibus in conspectu vestro confirmatam, & ab objectionibus doctissimorum & peritissimorum A∣natomicorum liberatam, toties ab omnibus desidera∣tam, à quibusdam efflagitatam, in lucem & conspec∣tum omnium, hoc libello produximus; Quem nisi vo∣bis transmissum E. D. D. minùs sperarem prodire posse integrum & tutum; cùm penè omnium illarum obser∣vationum, ex quibus aut veritatem colligo, aut errores redarguo, è vobis plurimos & fide dignos appellare possum testes, qui dissectiones meas vidistis, & ocula∣ribus demonstrationibus eorum, quae hic ad sensum palam assevero, assistere candidè & astipulari consue∣vistis. Persuasissimum habui, quòd si coram vobis no∣stróque Collegio tot tantisque viris doctissimis nobilita∣to, propositum sustinere potuerim, ab aliis tum de∣mum minus pertimescendum; & jam illud, quod mihi à vobis, ob amorem veritatis, contigit unicum

solatium; ab omnibus aliis, qui similiter sint Philoso∣phati, non minus esse sperandum.
This Book was so judiciously wrote, and solidly found∣ed upon experimental demonstrations, as well as learned∣ly defended against Riolan, Primrose, Parisanus, &c. that in a short time the Authour was no less styled, than merited the name of, immortal Harvey. Some few learn∣ed men indeed were so invidious at the great reputation that this our learned Harvey had acquired, that they endeavoured to eclipse his glory, in pretending that Fa∣ther Paul was the first Inventor of the Circulation; and Honoratus Faber was so vain, as to profess himself the Authour thereof. The first of these was most solidly and ingeniously confuted by the learned Doctor Charleton, in his Anatomic Lectures Read in the College Theatre An. 1682/3, and published An. Dom. 1683. And Ho∣noratus Faber, by the great Jo. Alph. Borellus, in his Historia & Meteorologia Incendii Aetnei, Anno 1669. wherein he gives this short account about Faber's preten∣sions to this great discovery. Cùm verò sit omnino in∣credibile, & impossibile hominem Nobilem, religio∣sum & pium ea quae vera non sunt asserere voluisse; nil aliud in ejus excusationem dicendum restat, nisi quòd cùm ingenio velocissimo praeditus sit, à celeritate ipsa quâ aliena legit, & propria scribit, multoties decipiatur. Quod aliàs ei contigisse non erit supervacaneum osten∣dere; ut inde pateat solemne ei esse Auctores alicujus nominis furti insimulare, hâc solummodo de causa, quia cursim & oscitanter eorum opera legit. Si enim patienter & debitâ attentione dignatus fuisset legere ea quae spatio 38 annorum edita fuerant, & vulgatissima per Universam Europam erant, proculdubio non scri∣psisset Anno 1666. lib. primo de Homine Prop. 2. se circulationem sanguinis invenisse & docuisse ab Anno

1638. antequam Gul. Harveii exercitatio anatomica de motu Cordis prodiret; quem pariter multa Fabri inventa in suis exercitationibus inseruisse affirmat; Omnes enim sciunt Harveium, Anno Dom. 1628. Francofurti typis Gual. Fitzeri suam exercitationem primùm edidisse; scilicet decem annos antequam Cl. Fabri sanguinis circulationem docuisset.
An. 1627. This great and learned Man was chosen one of the College Elects; and in the year 1651, a se∣cond Book of his was printed, viz. his Exercitations de generatione Animalium, de partu, de membranis ac hu∣moribus uteri, & de conceptione. For the publication of which, both the present and future Ages are highly indebted to that great ornament of our College, Sir George Ent, as may fully appear in that excellent Epistle which he hath dedicated to the President and College, and published before that incomparable Book. In which, he having given the Character of Doctor Harvey, with an account of many things relating to his Life (and that in so elegant and polite a style) I could not omit the transcribing of it, in his own words. Harveum, mag∣num virum, Collegiique nostri summum decus & or∣namentum, non procul, eo tempore, ab Urbe com∣morantem, naturae rerum perscrutandae intentum re∣perio, & vultu hilari alacrique animo, Democriti in∣star, cuncta investigantem. Tum ego protinus: Sa∣tin' salva omnia? Quî possint, ait, ubi turbarum plena Respublica, egóque adhuc ipsemet in alto mari? Et profectò (addidit) nisi studiorum solamen, rerúmque olim à me observatarum recordatio animum mihi re∣ficerent; nihil est cur ultrà superesse cupiam, &c. Ego excipiens, hujusce rei hanc causam reddidero, inquam; quòd, dum alii plerique aliorum cerebro sapiunt, & à veteribus tradita (addito variae dictionis, novaeque methodi mangonio) pro suis venditant; tu semper,

de Naturae arcanis, Naturam ipsam consulere malue∣ris. Ipse enim (memini) aliquando mihi narrabas, nunquam te Animalis cujuspiam dissectionem institu∣isse, quin aliquid in eo inexpectatum repereris, de quo tibi anteà nulla cogitatio. Ita est, inquit; placuit mi∣hi semper ipsorum Animalium inspectio; indéque non modò levia naturae arcana, sed ipsius Creatoris sum∣mi imaginem quandam indipisci nos posse, sum arbi∣tratus. Et ut multa olim à doctis viris reperta sint, crediderim tamen longè plura abscondi adhuc in im∣pervestigabilis Naturae obscurâ nocte: miratúsque sum saepenumerò, imò risi eos, qui ab Aristotele, Galeno, aut alio aliquo nomine, omnia consummata adeò atque absoluta crederent, ut nè hilum quidem superaddi pos∣sit. Natura equidem ipsa est arcanorum suorum fi∣dissima interpres; quae in uno genere, aut pressiùs aut obscuriùs exhibet; ea clariùs & potentiùs in alio ex∣plicuit. Nemo sanè de partis alicujus usu sive officio rectè determinaverit; qui ejus in pluribus animalibus, fabricam, situm, annexa vasa, aliáque accidentia non viderit, secúmque diligenter pensitaverit, &c. Viri e∣ruditi plurimi (dixi) quibus indefessum tuum in ex∣colenda Philosophia studium exploratum est, ulteriora tua experimenta avidè expectant. Harveus subridens, Ergóne autor sis, ait, ut è portûs hujus (in quo dego) tranquillitate, me dem iterum in infidum mare? Nô∣sti, quantum turbarum pristinae meae lucubrationes con∣citaverint, &c. Imò verò, respondi, virtuti id praemi∣um usitatum est, ut benè merenti malè rependantur gratiae. Ostendit mihi exercitationes de generatione Animalium, ingenti labore elimatas; & concedo ti∣bi, inquit, scripta haec mea vel continuò edendi vel imposterum supprimendi liberam potestatem. Actis eam ob rem plurimis gratiis, valedixi; abiique, ceu

Jason alter, vellere aureo ditatus. Domum autem re∣versus, dum singula perlustro, mirabar equidem tam ingentem the saurum tamdiu absconditum latuisse: &, dum alii apinas, tricásque, & cramben bis (imò cen∣ties) coctam magno cum fastidio exhibent, virum hunc eximias suas observationes tam parvi facere. Enim∣vero quotiescunque nova inventa depromit, haud mul∣torum more se gerit; nempe, tanquam loquatur quer∣cus, aut lactis gallinacei haustulum propterea merea∣tur; sed quasi fortuitò, aut facili negotio in res illas incidisset; quas nihilominus datâ operâ, studióque in∣defatigabili rimatus est. Candoris etiam eximii hoc argumentum est, quòd nullius Autoris nomen lacessat, sed suam ubique pacatè proferat sententiam. Dicere enim solet, indicium esse causae non bonae, pro eâdem rixosè acritérque contendere: veritatem autem patro∣no non indigere. Cúmque facilè potuerit integrum hoc opus de suo texere; maluit tamen (evitandae in∣vidiae ergô) Aristotelis & Aquapendentis ductum se∣qui, tanquam ipsemet subtegmen adderet. De eo haud dicam amplius, vobis praesertim, quibus Virtus, Candor, & Ingenium illius optimè perspecta sunt.
These two Books are of that great and admirable use in our Profession, that without a diligent reading and un∣derstanding of them, we must remain egregiously ignorant in many material points relating to it. As particular∣ly may appear in his Book de motu Cordis & Sangui∣nis in Animalibus; In which he hath refuted that er∣rour of the Ancients concerning Attraction, and given a most clear account, how the nourishment is conveyed to all parts of the Body; how Medicines (although out∣wardly apply'd) have often so considerable an effect up∣on the body; And how Contagion, either from the biting of a Mad Dog, Serpent, or otherwise in the Lues Ve∣nerea,

should vitiate the whole habit of the body, with∣out hurting the part touched; And how, after the wound is healed should procure those dreadfull symptomes so long after: All which, and many Problemes more, he hath ingeniously solved by this Doctrine of the Circulation of the Bloud, which hath conveyed the different particles transmitted into it, through the whole Body, and there∣by produced the symptomes attending the forementioned Diseases. This Doctrine is of that great use, that with∣out it we can give no rational account of the causes of many Distempers, nor the operation of Medicines, &c.
In his Exercitations de generatione animalium, af∣ter he hath given the Anatomy of the parts serving for generation in the Hen, he acquaints us with the formati∣on and growth of the Egg, and afterwards with the se∣veral parts whereof it consists; He then proceeds to give an account how the Chick is formed, which he observed by a daily inspection of the Eggs, during the time of In∣cubation; and was the first who discovered that the ori∣ginal of the Chick was from the Cicatricula: He then gives an account in what order the several parts appear, and confutes a multitude of errours delivered by former Writers, proving, that the punctum saliens is the heart, that Bloud is not formed by the Liver, because its Pa∣renchyma is formed after, and of the bloud, and grows to the bloud-Vessels; Nor yet by the Heart, because that is not in being, till some time after the Bloud; He proves, that all the Viscera at their first formation appear white; that the Veins are the first conspicuous foundation, as it were, of the whole Body; that the division of the parts into Spermatical and Sanguineous is ridiculous, since all come from the same original. He delivereth an ac∣count of the parts serving for Generation in Deer, and how the Foetus is formed; He acquaints us that no∣thing

is to be found in utero, for a considerable time af∣ter coition; and how Analogous Conception is to an Egg, and that it is some time in utero, before it is affixed to it: He takes notice of several memorable things con∣cerning the generation of other Animals, both Oviparous and Viviparous. In speaking of the formation of the Humane Foetus, he delivereth several curious observati∣ons, made on Abortions of several Ages; as also instan∣ces of Superfoetation, Hermaphrodites, of a Foetus found in Tuba uteri, &c. When he discourseth de partu, he gives very strange and memorable instances, to shew how much the Foetus doth conduce to its own birth. Besides these, there are several remarkable observations scatter∣ed through the whole Book; as de partu difficili, de gra∣vidatione falsa, de ulcere uteri, de uteri procidentia, &c. As also, de Uteri membranis, humoribus, placenta, de conceptione, de calido innato, de humido primigenio, &c. Of his Cure of a Sarcocele of that bigness, that none durst undertake the cure, either by Cutting or other∣wise; which he happily performed by tying the Artery, and thereby depriving it of nourishment; By which means it was afterwards easily extirpated.
This great and learned Man designed to have made the World (and especially his own Faculty) happy in several other Learned Treatises. As,
A Practice of Physick conformable to his Thesis of the Circulation of the Bloud.
Tractatus de pulmonum usu & motu, de eventilatio∣ne omni, aerisque necessitate & usu; de variis & differentibus organis hujus causâ in Animalibus fac∣tis.
Tractatus de quantitate sanguinis in unoquoque aut singulis pulsationibus protrusâ, & quando plus & quan∣do

minus, & qua de causa; itidem de Circuitûs cau∣sis, utilitatibus, & sanguinis arcanis.
Observationes, de usu Lienis.
Exercitationes, de respirationis causis, organis & usu.
Observationes, de motivis Organis Animalium & de Musculorum fabrica.
Tractatus de Animalium amore, libidine & coitu.
Observationes Medicinales, de Herniae carnosae cura∣tione, aliisque curationibus praeter vulgi sententiam & methodum foeliciter peractis.
De nutritionis modo.
Historia multorum Animalium, praesertim Insecto∣rum, ab inconspicuis prae exiguitate principiis & semi∣nibus (quasi atomis in aëre volitantibus) à ventis huc illuc sparsis ac disseminatis, ortorum.
Anatomia Medica ad Medicinae usum maximè ac∣commodata, ubi ex multis Dissectionibus corporum aegrotorum gravissimis & miris affectionibus confec∣torum; quomodo & qualiter partes interiores in situ, magnitudine, constitutione, figurâ, substantiâ, & reli∣quis accidentibus sensibilibus à naturali forma & ap∣parentia permutentur, & quàm variis modis & miris afficiantur, enarrare susciperet.
An. 1654. Dr. Harvey (though absent) was chosen President of the College; who, coming the next day, own∣ed his great obligation to the Electors, for chusing him into a Place of the same Honour and Dignity; as if he had been elected to be Medicorum omnium apud Anglos princeps; but that his Age and Weakness were so great, that he could not discharge the duty incumbent upon that great Office; And therefore requested them to chuse their former Learned President Dr. Prujean, who

had been highly serviceable to the College, in his former discreet and prudent government.
About two years after, this Learned and Bountifull old Man came to the College, and after his making an Elegant Speech, he presented them with publick Instru∣ments in Writing, whereby he gave them his Land of Inheritance to College uses for ever; and then resigned his Lecturer's Place (which he had for many years per∣formed with great honour) into the hands of that Learn∣ed and incomparable Anatomist, Sir Charles Scarburgh. About a year after, this our immortal Harvey died in the 80th year of his Age, at whose Funeral attended all the Members of the College.
Not long after his death, the following Character of this great Man was drawn up, and is now to be seen at the College in a Copper-plate, under his Picture.
Gulielmus Harveus
Anglus natu, Galliae, Italiae, Germaniae, hospes,
Ubique amor, & desiderium,
Quem omnis terra expetîsset civem,
Medicinae Dr. Coll. Med. Lond. Socius & Consiliarius,
Anatomes, Chirurgiaeque Professor,
Regis Jacobi familiae, Carolóque Regi Medicus,
Gestis, omissique honoribus, clarus;
Quorum alios tulit, oblatos renuit alios,
Omnes meruit;
Laudatis priscorum ingeniis par;
Quos honoravit maximè imitando,
Docuitque posteros exemplo,
Nullius lacessivit famam, veritati studens, magis quàm gloriae,
Hanc tamen adeptus,
Industriâ, sagacitate, successu, nobilis
Perpetuos sanguinis aestus circulari gyro,

Fugientis, séque sequentis,
Primus promulgavit mundo;
Nec passus ultrà mortales sua ignorare primordia,
Aureum edidit de ovo atque pullo librum,
Albae Gallinae filium:
Sic novis inventis Apollineam ampliavit artem,
Atque nostrum Apollinis Sacrarium Augustius esse
Tandem voluit;
Suasu enim & curâ D. D. Dni Franc. Prujeani Praesidis &
Edmundi Smithi Electoris
An. MDCLIII.
Senaculum, & de nomine suo Museum, horto superstruxit,
Quorum alterum plurimis libris, & instrumentis Chirurgicis,
Alterum omnigenâ supellectile ornavit, ac instruxit,
Medicinae Patronus simul & Alumnus:
Non hîc anhela substitit Herois virtus, impatiens vinci,
Accessit porrò Munificentiae decus;
Suasu enim & consilio Dni Dris Edv. Alstoni Praesidis,
An MDCLVI.
Rem nostram angustam priùs, annuo LVI. l. reditu
Auxit;
Paterni fundi ex asse Haeredem, Collegium dicens,
Quo nihil illi charius, nobisve honestius:
Unde aedificium sartum tectum perennare,
Unde Bibliothecario Honorarium suum, suúmque Oratori
Quotannis pendi;
Unde omnibus Sociis Annuum suum Convivium,
Et suum deni{que} (quot menses) Conviviolum Censoribus parari
Jussit:
Ipse etiam pleno theatro gestiens se haereditate exuere,
In manus Praesidis Syngrapham tradidit,
Interfuit{que} Orationi veterum Benefactorum novorúm{que} Illicio,
Et Philotesio Epulo:

Illius, auspicium & pars maxima;
Hujus Conviva simul & Convivator.
Sic postquam satis sibi, satis nobis, satis gloriae,
(Amicis solùm non satis, nec satis patriae) vixerat,
Coelicolûm Atria subiit,
Jun. iijo MDCLVII.
Quem pigebat superis reddere, sed pudebat negare:
Nè mireris igitur Lector,
Si, quem marmoreum illic stare vides,
Hîc totam implevit tabulam.
Abi & merere alteram.
Doctor Baldwin Hamey, Son of Doctor Baldwin Hamey, was born at London, took his Degree of Doctor in Physick at Leyden, was admitted Candidate of the College An. Dom. 1630. and three years after Fellow; After which he was chosen Censor, Anatomy-Reader, Elector, Register, and Consiliarius; and though often President, yet he always refused that Office. His affections were such to the College, that he was not onely a liberal and great Be∣nefactour to that Society himself, but encouraged his Friends to be the same, as particularly Mr. Francis Tyron Merchant Drug∣gist of London, who gave 250 l. to the College, to be disposed of to certain uses mentioned in his Deed of Gift: He presented the College with a most delicate and curious Ʋnicorn's Horn, which being richly adorned with Plates of Gold, was Presented by the College to His Sacred Majesty, upon his happy and glorious Re∣stauration to his Crown and Dignity. After the dreadfull Fire of London (in which the College was reduced to Ashes) he gave at least 200 l. towards the building of a new one; And what he farther gave to this his beloved Society (together with his de∣served Character) is so admirably and elegantly described by our learned President Doctor Whistler, in the College Annals, that I shall give the account thereof in his own words.
Sciant posteri, quòd Baldwinus Hamaeus, Baldwini

filius, Musarum ac Apollinis, dum vixerat, deliciae erat. Tam sciens Latinae linguae; non ipsum Latium magis Latinum fuerat; tam Graecae, non ipsae Athenae magis Atticae. Moribus ac vivendi regulâ ad amussim compositus. Olim diúque hujus Collegii Socius, tan∣dem saepius Censor, denique Registarius. Praesidis mu∣nus saepius oblatum, semper noluit. Equitis aurati à Regia Majestate non semel obtinendum titulum cum gratiis non voluit; nè Doctoratûs excellentiam contami∣naret. Acceptis simul ac repudiatis Honoribus inclytus. Sub Hasta Collegium iniquitate temporum positum, Pater hic, non sibi, sed Collegio magno impendio re∣demerat. Postulante necessitate in omnibus sumptibus faciendis publicae utilitati, cum primis munificum se ostendebat. Totum Coenaculi nostri intestinum Opus tam ornatè, tam affabrè exstructum propriis sumptibus consummavit. Supremis tabulis Collegium lautissimo∣rum duorum praediorum Haeredem reliquit, nè vita ni∣mium desideraretur.
The College had that sense of their great obligations to this their noble and worthy Benefactour, that near 20 years before his death, the following Decree was made in their publick Comitia: Omnibus Collegis Bonum factum visum est, ut, in gratitudinis testimo∣nium, Tabula marmorea in honorem Doctoris Hamaei (ut pote insignis Benefactoris) in Bibliotheca Harveana extruatur.
Dr. Francis Glisson was born in Dorsetshire, educated in Caius College in Cambridge, was made Doctor in Physick in that Ʋniversity, and after, publick Professour; which place he continued in for about 40 years. He was admitted Candidate of the College Anno Dom. 1634. and Fellow the year following. He was chosen Anatomy Reader in the College Anno 1639. His Lectures De mor∣bis

partium were so highly valued and tended so much to the honour of the College, that he was particularly re∣quested to make them publick, as appears in his Epistle printed before his book De Hepate An. Dom. 1654. which was 13 years after his Reading: the account of which he thus gives. Placuit Amicis praesentibus rei novitas, & quae inde verisimiliter in rem Medicam profectura esset utilitas; mihique acriter institerunt, ut quae intra privatos Collegii cancellos exhibuissem, quamprimum id commodè fieri posset, publici juris fa∣cerem. In this book he hath given a more exact descrip∣tion of the Liver and its several vessels than any Anato∣mist before him: Amongst many other things most worthy of observation, the discovery of the Capsula communis or vagina portae is owing to him, who hath likewise gi∣ven us certain rules for the more easie distinguishing of the Vena Cava, Porta & Vasa fellea in excarnating the Liver. He hath given such an excellent account of san∣guification (discharging the Liver from that office) and proved it by so good arguments and clear experiments, that few have since doubted the truth thereof. He ac∣quaints us, how by the continual concoction of the bloud, the bilis is necessarily produced, and separated from the bloud, and gives the reasons of its bitter taste. He gives an admirable account of the Lympheducts, dis∣courseth about the Succus nutritius with the manner of its conveyance, and offers his conjectures about the use of the Spleen and other Glands, &c.
An. Dom. 1650. He published to the World an ac∣count of the Rickets (being assisted therein by 2 of his Fellow Collegues, the learned Dr. Bate, and Dr. Rege∣morter) In which, we have not onely the original, causes, symptomes and method of curing that disease de∣livered, but also a most admirable collection of many

Anatomical observations, discovering how the several Viscera of those that died of this disease, were affected.
In his book De ventriculo & intestinis, (which was dedicated to the Ʋniversity of Cambridge and to the College of Physicians, as that likewise De Hepate) prin∣ted An. Dom. 1677. He discourseth of the Cutis & Cuticula, with the several colours which are observable in Hair; and there delivereth several ingenious Pro∣blemes. He discusseth in that book many considerable questions concerning Rumination, and why some Animals have more Stomachs than one, as likewise concerning the structure, tenacity and various uses of fibres: He ac∣quaints us with his thoughts that the Stomach and Guts are not wholly made up of Membranes (as most have for∣merly supposed) but have a considerable quantity of Paren∣chyma, which he conjectureth to be glandulous. He ex∣amineth the nature of hunger and thirst, and sheweth wherein they specifically differ from the other 5 senses: He proceeds to shew the manner of deglutition, concoction, distribution of the chyle, secretion, &c. concluding with an Appendix concerning fermentation. Throughout the whole book there are abundance of ingenious questions discoursed of, some of which relate to diseases; as the dif∣rences, causes and signs of flatus's, what are the most proper discutients of them; of Hypochondriack flatus; of the parts affected in a Rheumatism, as also of febrile and malignant ferments, &c.
He wrote also another excellent book in quarto before this, De vita naturae, which having no such particular relation to our Faculty, I have at present pretermitted. He was chosen one of the Elects An. Dom. 1655. was several years President of the College, and died Anno Dom. 1677.

Sir John Micklethwait was admitted Candidate of the College An. Dom. 1642. the year after Fellow; and the year following (though absent) chosen Reader of Dr. Goulston's pathological Lecture. The learned Dr. Clerk long President of the College, had that esteem and value for those excellent accomplishments of mind and body, with which he was endowed, that he married him to his eldest daughter. He was of that repute in the College, that they chose him no less than 7 or 8 times Censor, employed him in most of their Committee affairs, made him one of their Elects Anno Dom. 1659. and after that, Treasurer of the College; and then Presi∣dent, which office he continued for 6 years and died Pre∣sident. He was Physician for many years to the 2 famous Hospitals of Christ-church and St. Bartholomew's, and in the time of his Sacred Majesty's late sickness at Wind∣sor, was sent for by an Order of Council, where he beha∣ved himself with that gravity, prudence and judgment in his profession, that the King (as a signal mark of his Roy∣al favour) Knighted him, and was (as I am informed) much concerned at his death. He was a man of great eminency and reputation in his profession, especially a∣mongst the Nobility and persons of the best Quality in Court and City. His Piety towards God, and Charity to the poor was very exemplary, and therefore no wonder that his death was so universally lamented. I had the honour and happiness to be so intimately acquainted with him, that I cannot give him a less character, than what the learned Dr. Caius hath given of Dr. Butte. Vir gra∣vis, eximiâ literarum cognitione, singulari judicio, summâ experientiâ, & prudenti consilio Doctor. He died of an Inflammation and Gangrene in his bladder in the 70th year of his age, was buried in the Parish Church of St. Botolph's Aldersgate, at whose Funeral attended

Sir George Ent the Praeses natus of the College, with the rest of the Members in their Formalities. The fol∣lowing inscription is entred upon a Marble in that Church, to the memory of this grave, wise and learned man.
M. S.
Heic juxtà Spe plena resurgendi situm est
Depositum mortale
Joannis Micklethwaite Militis,
Serenissimo Carolo Secundo à Medicina
Qui, cum primis solertissimus, fidissimus, felicissimus,
In Collegio Medicorum Londinensium
Lustrum integrum & quod excurrit,
Praesidis provinciam dignissimè ornavit;
Et tandem emenso aetatis tranquillae stadio,
Pietate sincerâ,
Inconcussâ vitae integritate,
Benignâ morum suavitate,
Sparsâ passim Philanthropiâ
Spectabilis,
Miserorum Asylum,
Maritus optimus,
Parens indulgens,
Suorum luctus,
Bonorum omnium Amor, & Deliciae,
Septuagenarius senex
Coelo maturus,
Fato, non invitus cessit
iv. Kal. Augusti Anno Salutis MDCLXXXII.
Caetera loquantur
Languentium deploranda suspiria,
Viduarum ac Orphanorum
Propter amotum Patronum profundi gemitus
Pauperúmque,

Nudorum jam, atque esurientium
Importuna viscera,
Monumenta, hoc marmore longè perenniora.
Moerens posuit pientissima Conjux.
Dr. Thomas Wharton was bred in Pembroke Hall in Cambridge, took his Degree of Doctor in Physick in the Ʋniversity of Oxford, was admitted Candidate of the College An. Dom. 1647. and Fellow 1650. After which, he was chosen Censor 5 or 6 years, and in the year 1656. published an excellent book, which he called Ade∣nographia sive Glandularum totius corporis descriptio, which he dedicated to the College of Physicians and in particular to Dr. Hamey, Glisson, Bathurst, and Sir George Ent. In which he hath given a more accurate de∣scription of the Glands of the whole body, than was former∣ly done; and whereas Authours had ascribed to them very mean uses (as supporting the divisions of Vessels, or im∣bibing the superfluous humidities of the body, &c.) He assigned them more noble and considerable uses, as the preparation and depuration of the Succus nutritius, with several other uses belonging to different Glands as well for conservation of the individual, as propagation of the Species. Amongst other things, we ought particularly to take notice of his being the first who discovered the Ductus in the Glandulae Maxillares, by which the Saliva is conveyed into the mouth. He hath given also an admi∣rable account of morbid Glands and their differences, and particularly of Strumae and Scrophulae; how new Glands are often generated; as likewise of the several diseases of the Glands of the Mesentery, Pancreas, &c. which opinions of his, he often illustrates by Anatomical ob∣servations. He was a man of eminent esteem and practice in the City, where he raised a considerable estate, and

died much lamented by his own faculty as well as others.
The Right honourable Henry Lord Marquess of Dor∣chester, Earl of Kingston upon Hull, and Viscount Newark, &c. was born at Mansfield in the County of Nottingham Ann. Dom. 1606. and created Marquess of Dorchester by K. Charles I. at Oxford, An. 1645. His Father was Robert Pierrepont of Holme Pierre∣pont Esquire, the ancient seat of this most ancient fami∣ly; who was created Viscount Newark and Earl of King∣ston by his late Majesty Anno 1633. His Mother was Gertrude Talbot, of the noble house of Shrewsbury; and had she been male, had born her self that title.
From his youth he was very much addicted to books; he spent some time in Emanuel College in Cambridge, and for many years seldom studied less than 10 or 12 hours every day; insomuch that he had early passed through all manner of Learning both Divine and Hu∣mane, as the Fathers, Schoolmen, Casuists, the Civil and Canon Law; and was reasonably well versed in the Common Law; So that he did no small honour to that pro∣fession in being admitted a Bencher of Gray's-Inn, where he performed his exercise of reading in the Hall before his admission, and then treated the Benchers, Baristers and Students of that Inns of Court, with a noble and sumptuous dinner.
In the year 1649. He found himself of an ill habit of Body, caused (as he conceived) by a long sedentary course of life, and trouble of mind for the barbarous and inhumane murther of his Sovereign, and the deplorable condition the Nation was in: He was recovered from this Chronical distemper, by the advice of the learned Dr. Harvey, Sir Francis Prujean, Sir Charles Scar∣burgh, and others; who in a short time brought him a∣gain to a good state of health. After which that he

might be as carefull to preserve it, as he had been to ob∣tain it, he (at the age of about 43) applied himself to the study of Physick: And though he fell to this study late, yet no man ever began upon a better foundation, nor pursued it with greater application; he having then gone through the whole body of Philosophy, Mathematicks and all other Learning. After he had for some years dili∣gently applied himself to the study of Physick and Anatomy, His Lordship An. Dom. 1654. presented the College of Physicians with 100 l. to be laid out in books; which I find thus entred in our College Annals, Henricus Mar∣chio Dorcestrensis, cujus insignis peritia & inde∣fessa studia in utroque Juretam Municipali quàm Civili, in Mathematicis, in Medicina, & ad ipsam spectanti∣bus Chymicis Anatomicisque artibus, cum illustribus titulis de Victoria certant; centum libris in libros emendos erogandis, Museum Harveanum, primus, magnificéque cohonestavit: An. Dom. 1658. He was admitted Fellow of the College; a short account of which being entred by the learned Sir George Ent (then Re∣gister thereof) I have here transcribed in his own words, Die Julii 22 An. Dom. 1658. Illustrissimus Vir, Mar∣chio Dornaviae proponitur eligendus Socius; omnésque Socii praesentes in illius admissionem laetis animis suf∣fragantur. Mox Dr. Scarburgh à Praeside ad id mu∣neris designatus, tum illius virtutes, animúmque verè Heroicum; tum honorem hoc facto in Societatem no∣stram collatum, eleganti oratione extulit. Ipséque Marchio, Artis Medicinae praestantiam, decúsque ac laudem sibi à Collegio concessam, breviquidem sed ner∣vosâ oratione apertè professus est: Simul Statutis no∣stris nomen suum adscripsit; pollicitúsque est, se Colle∣gii statum ac dignitatem sartam tectam pro viribus conservaturum: tandémque bellaria in praesentes om∣nes

liberalissimè effudit. This most illustrious and lear∣ned Nobleman, in his Latine Oration made in the pub∣lick Hall of the College upon his admission into that So∣ciety expressed a great value for the Art of Physick, which (he said) many Princes and great men had highly esteemed, and made profession of; And that for his own part, he took it for the greatest honour (next to that conferred upon him by his Majesty) to be ranked amongst them; which esteem he continued to that Lear∣ned Society to his last end; He having often been heard to say, that he did believe them the Learnedst Socie∣ty of their profession in the World; and therefore as a testimony of his value for them, he left them the best Library for Physick, Mathematicks, Civil Law and Phi∣lology, in any private hand in this Nation, for a choice collection of books, to the value of above 4000 l. Which Library after the Marquess's death, was presented to the College by his daughter the Right honourable the Lady Grace Pierrepont; Her Honour knowing it to be her Father's intention, in his life time.
In short, this Noble and great Lord was a man of that exemplary Loyalty to his Prince, and of those great at∣tainments and proficiency in Learning, that he merits a just volume to set forth his deserved praises. He died upon the 8th of December An. Dom. 1680. in the 74th year of his age, of a Gangrene and mortification in his left Leg; which proceeded from an inflammation procu∣red by the rubbing off a little skin on that heel. He was carried some time after he had lain in state at his house in Charter-house yard, to his ancient seat of Holme Pierrepont near Nottingham, where he lies interred a∣mongst his Ancestours.
Dr. Thomas Willis was bred in Christ-church in Ox∣ford, and in the time of the late Rebellion was one of

those Scholars who voluntarily listed himself (in the Aca∣demick Regiment) to serve his Sovereign; in which ser∣vice he continued for many years, till that Garrison was surrendred. After which, he applied himself to the study of Physick; retaining still that affection to the Go∣vernment of the Church of England, that when our Li∣turgy was thrust out of our Churches, and it was rendred criminal to attend its Worship; he dedicated part of his house to those holy uses, that so the publick Prayers and Offices of the Church might be there performed; where he constantly attended twice a day, and had several friends with him thrice a week; there being likewise a Sermon preached and a Sacrament constantly administred the first Sunday in the month.
He during those unhappy times improved very highly not onely in the knowledge, but likewise in the practice of Physick, being more admired and sought to than any of his Contemporaries in that Ʋniversity, but still resolved that he would not take his Degree under the then preten∣ded Government. He wrote during his Majesty's exile those most incomparable Tracts De fermentatione, de Febribus, & de Urinis; which he published An. Dom. 1659. In which book, he hath shewed himself to have been no less versed in Chymistry than in other parts of Natural Philosophy, having ingeniously asserted and ra∣tionally proved, that the generation, perfection and cor∣ruption of Natural as well as Artificial Bodies, do depend upon fermentations according to the different proportion and motion of their constituent principles, viz. Spirit, Sulphur, Salt, Water and Earth. According to these principles he hath given us the Analysis of the bloud, with a new Hypothesis of Fevers and excellent observa∣tions concerning them. In his Epistle before his Tract De Febribus, he gives this account, for instituting a

new doctrine of Fevers: In re medica (idque jure me∣rito) non ea nostris, quae prioris aevi hominibus placu∣ere: quippe veteres, supposito circa motum sanguinis falso, innixi; velut per lubricum & loca paludosa prò∣cedentes, saepius foedè, nec minùs periculosè lapsi sunt. Quare ex quo insignissimus Harvaeus noster circulati∣onem sanguinis tanquam novum in Medicina funda∣mentum posuit, nihil mirum si instaurandam penitus , & fulcimentis veteribus collapsis, aedificium ab ipso solo (quod aiunt) reficiendum curaverint posteri. Olim inter antiquos, prout humoris nutritii, sanguinis, & succi nervosi distributio & motus naturales, ita eo∣rundem praeternaturales, & effervescentiae febriles om∣nino in abstruso & tenebris latuerunt: Nunc verò cùm nova affulserunt lumina, & priùs abditas rerum causas novisse datum est; minimè decet viros prudentes, & Philosophiam professos, usque clausos tenere oculos, atque in luce ipsa etiamnum caecutire: praesertim verò circa morbum, à quo tertia pars mortalium usque ho∣die cadit, malle cum antiquis errare, quàm cum Neo∣tericis verum sentire, aut verisimiliter opinari, animum insignis pervicaciae reum arguit. Cùm itaque prioris Medicinae , basin instabilem & minùs fir∣mam habere; atque huic plurima erronea & planè fal∣sa superstrui facilè sit ostendere, quid obstat quin nos principia certiora nacti, circa Febres scientiam meliorem eruere conemur, &c. He hath likewise in this book given us the Chymical Analysis of Ʋrine, as also an account of the quantity, colour, consistence and contents of the Ʋrines of healthfull and sick people, with several methods of exa∣mining them by distillation, evaporation, precipitati∣on, &c. and also discovered the great uncertainty of Ʋro∣mancy in several diseases.

About a year after his publication of this book, his Sa∣cred Majesty was restored to his Crown and People; after which, he took his degree of Doctor in Physick and was chosen Professour of Natural Philosophy; Ʋpon which, notwithstanding the multiplicity of his practice, he sel∣dom failed for a considerable time of Reading once a week (in Term time) such Lectures as invited more than an ordinary number of the most ingenious young Students and others of the Ʋniversity to be his constant Auditors. Whilst he continued at Oxford he published 2 other ex∣cellent books, One his Cerebri Anatome printed An. Dom. 1664. the other, De morbis convulsivis printed An. 1667. In the first of which, he hath given us a far more accurate Anatomy of the Brain than any before ex∣tant, and his ingenious conjectures about the uses of its several parts, particularly the oblique ascension of the Carotid Artery, and the cavity formed by the Sinus late∣rales before they enter the Jugular Veins. His distinction of the Nerves is worth remark, viz. that some of them arise from the Brain, which are serviceable to voluntary motion; Others from the Cerebellum, which furnish spi∣rits for involuntary: He hath also traced the Nerves, which are inserted into all the Viscera, and by laying open their different originations, plexus's and ramifica∣tions hath given us a much clearer account of the sympa∣thies of the several parts of the body either in their natural or preternatural State, than any we had before. He hath likewise in this book, given a most ingenious account how the Animal spirits are generated and instilled into the Brain, how their faculties are performed, how nutrition is caused and distributed, with many things more relating to sense and motion and the explication of several abstruse diseases, highly ingenious and probable.

He hath carried on his Hypothesis about the Nerves, and given a very rational account of the affections of the Head, with their several causes and cures; and particularly in his Treatise De morbis Convulsivis, he hath shewn us, how much former Authors have been mistaken in their notions concerning Hysterical and Hypochondriacal affecti∣ons; and that the most rational account that can be gi∣ven of the symptoms attending those distempers, is by attributing them to convulsive motions: He likewise conjectures, that the Colick, Tympanites and some sorts of Asthma's are in great part nervous distempers, and then finisheth that book with a most ingenious and excellent dis∣course of the Scurvy, as to its causes, differences, Diagno∣sticks, Prognosticks, Symptomatical diseases, deriving their Original from it; with the different methods of cure.
An. Dom. 1667. He left Oxford and came to London, where he immediately fell into a very large and full prac∣tice; notwithstanding which, he found time to write seve∣ral excellent and usefull books; as one against Dr. High∣more in defence of his Hypothesis De Hysterica affectione & Melancholia Hypochondriaca; with 2 other Tracts De sanguinis accensione & motu musculari; After that, he wrote a most Learned book De Anima Brutorum & mor∣bis Capitis; then his 2 last, viz. his Pharmaceutices Ra∣tionalis pars prior & posterior; In which he hath given us a most accurate account of the Anatomy of the Sto∣mach and Intestines with their several coats; as also a description of the several Membranes that compose the Veins and Arteries; likewise an excellent Anatomy of the Lungs; To which he hath added a rational account of the operation of Medicines, whether Emetick, Cathartick, Diaphoretick, Cardiack, Thoracick, Epatick, or Opiate; and endeavoured to render them intelligible by Mecha∣nical

principles. He hath also (in those books) dis∣coursed of the diseases of the Breast, Liver and Spleen; as likewise concerning Phlebotomy, Haemorrhagies, Issues, Vesicatories and Cutaneous diseases, illustrating the whole with many curious observations. The first of these books which he published An. Dom. 1674. he dedicated to the College of Physicians. Ʋpon which dedication the College passed the following Vote, Placuit omnibus, ne∣mine refragante, ut summae gratiae habeantur Doctori Willis ob Pharmaceuticem Rationalem Collegio datam.
I shall finish my present History of this pious, learned and great man with part of that excellent and deserved Character given him by the Learned and Reverend Pre∣late the present Bishop of Oxford, in a Postscript to the Preface before the Doctor's second part of his Pharma∣ceutice rationalis. Dum haec prelo subduntur, tristissi∣mus affertur nuncius, Autorem immortalitate dignissi∣mum, pleuritidis ineluctabili impetu oppressum, è vi∣vis excessisse, nec profuisse Domino artes, quae aliis omnibus profuerant: Dabit veniam Lector, si memo∣riae tam sacrae aliquantisper parentemus; nec superva∣cuum ducet paucis audire, qualis ille vir fuerat, qui talia scripserat: porrò intelligere gestiet, quàm bonus erat ille, qui tam doctus; quàm etiam in pietatis praxi ex∣ercitatus, qui in praxi Medica versatissimus—
Pientissimae animae divini numinis cultus eadem us{que} cura insederat, & quandoquidem horis Canonicis in Ecclesia Parochiali Aedibus suis vicinae precibus publicis per negotia interesse non liceret; ut officia sacra primo mane & sero vespere ibidem celebrarentur, procuravit; iisque, negotiis quibuscunque frustra reclamantibus, semper ferè vacavit. Insuper cùm videret institutum il∣lud utile admodum fuisse pluribus, qui in vicinia pariter

toto die in mercatura aliisque artibus exercendis distrin∣gebantur, Sacerdotem id munus per futura secula obi∣turum idoneo salario dotavit.
Sed leve hoc documentum egregii in pietatem animi. Quanquam ipso nemo magis frugalis & ad rem attentus, nemo magis munificus; omnia scilicet sibi, nihil autem pauperibus & miseris negaverat. Praeter illa quae pro∣priâ manu elargitus est, Eleemosynarios & dispensato∣res in Urbe, Rure & Academio sparsos habuit. Rem multis experimentis mihi compertissimam loquor; fa∣ciliùs quis ab ipso centum Aureos, idoneo pietatis opere proposito acceperit, quàm à plerisque aliis extorserit totidem Asses. Et quanquam diutinae diligentiae & per∣petuae frugalitati amplas quas collegerat opes jure merito quis potuerit imputare, ego imprimis effusissimae quam dixi largitioni, & benedictioni insuper divinae acceptum referendum censeo. A prima ejus adolescentia ad ulti∣mum vitae diem, nullam pecuniarum quam acceperat summam pro suo habuit, donec Deo & pauperibus par∣tem non contemnendam sacram fecisset: cúmque ante paucos dies, quódque mihi semper dolendum, ultimò unà colloqueremur, de rationibus istis dispungendis (tanquam venturi fati fuisset praescius, & de pauperi∣bus magis quàm prole sua solicitus) consilia diligentissi∣mè agitabat.
Mitto dicere, quàm in adversa fortuna infractus, in affluente fuerat temperans; quàm in summa eruditio∣nis fama modestus, cum indignè lacesseretur, quàm ad injurias condonandas facilis, quàm Principi ultima passo fidus, Ecclesiae oppressae obsequens, in Artis pro∣fessione candidus & apertus, in studiis indefessus, ser∣mone parcus, in toto vitae statu Christianus. Quae omnia pro merito exequi, non unius horae, paginaeve res esset.

Breviter dicendum, quòd perpetuis precibus, studiis, laboribus, eleemosynis, vigiliis exercitus, tandem an∣nos ferè 57. natus sub praesentis Novembris initium, Tussi (nunc temporis epidemiâ) laborare visus est, quae (cùm ceu leve quiddam spreta esset) in Pleuritin & Pe∣ripneumoniam illico transiit. Cúmque Vir consultissi∣mus sanguine saepius misso, & remediis diligenter adhi∣bitis non relevaretur (Amicis meliora ominantibus) vitae exitum advenisse statim animadvertit; & post triduum, constitutâ re familiari, sumpto S. Eucharistiae viatico, & pace Ecclesiae acceptâ, integris ad extremum spiritum sensibus, piam animam Deo commendavit, vitámque laudatissimam pari exitu clausit.
I shall now conclude this Epistle with a brief and short account of some of the works and some few late discoveries and usefull improvements of the eminent Members now living and flourishing in this Royal foundation; as par∣ticularly, the present learned President Dr. Whistler, who published his disputation concerning the Rickets An. Dom. 1645. 5 years before Dr. Glisson put forth his book; though it was by a different name, which he cal∣led Paedosplanchnosteocace, from the parts principally affected in that disease. Then he delivereth the diagno∣stick signs, as also what is to be found Preternatural in the viscera of such as died thereof. The causa continens he proves to be obstructions of the viscera from too thick and viscid nutriment, part of which being retained in the viscera they grow bigger; and the more serous and aque∣ous parts being conveyed to the Muscles of the armes and legs, renders them weak and flaccid. Amongst the Causae procatarcticae, he reckoneth the too early giving flesh to Infants. He affirmeth the viscera to be affected before the Bones. He then proceedeth to the Prognosticks, In∣dications,

Method of cure and Medicines proper to answer that end. He sheweth that the sacrification of the Con∣cha of the ear seems to be established by the Authority of Hippocrates, and was the first that founded a practice upon the doctrine of the circulation of the bloud.
Sir George Ent (the Ornament of his Age) in his Apology for the Circulation of the Bloud, hath learnedly defended Dr. Harvey against Parisanus, rendred a very rational account concerning the Operation of Purging Me∣dicines, and given several Reasons for rejecting the com∣mon opinion about their Elective Operation; as also ex∣ploded those several Faculties which made so much noise in the Schools, &c. The same learned Author, in ano∣ther Book, wrote against Dr. Thruston, hath proposed several Opinions, and defended them with great wit and learning, As, that the finer part of the Alimentary Juice is conveyed from the Stomach and Guts to the several parts for their nourishment, by the mediation of small concave fibres; That the same Alimentary Juice is that, which in the use of Vomits and Purges, is dis∣charged by these passages into the Stomach and Guts, and not by the lacteal Veins or Arteries; That the Fe∣brifick matter in Intermittents is not lodged original∣ly in the Bloud; That in the Small Pox the purulent matter is not derived out of the bloud, but out of the a∣foresaid Nutritious Juice, which likewise in Abscesses, &c. is that which suppurates; That the Membranes and Nerves suck in their nourishment from the Glands of the Mouth and Throat, whilst we chew our Meat; That the bloud serves not to nourish the Body, but to keep it warm; That Ʋrine is not conveyed to the Kidneys by the Emul∣gent Arteries (which onely bring the bloud thither to cherish and keep them warm) but by the Nerves; That

the onely use of the Diaphragm is to facilitate Respira∣tion by guarding the Heart and Lungs, that the lower Viscera do not throng in to them; That Respiration is not needfull to the motion or Circulation of the bloud; That Animal Motions are not made by the influence of the Animal Spirits; but that in each part is seat∣ed a private sense, which is under the command of the Soul. And that therefore there are no Animal Spi∣rits, but those in the bloud, called by the Name of Calor nativus, &c.
Sir Charles Scarburgh (Principal Physician to his sacred Majesty and his Royal Highness the Duke of York) was the first who introduced Geometrical and Mechanical Speculations into Anatomy, and applied them as well in all his learned conversation, as more particularly in his famous Lectures upon the Muscles of Humane Bodies for 16 or 17 years together in the publick Theatre at Sur∣geons-Hall; which were Read by him with infinite ap∣plause and admiration of all sorts of learned persons a∣bout the Town, who resorted in great numbers to those Readings. His Syllabus of the Muscles is, and ever will be used there, It having a prospect of two excellent ends especially; One to shew all the Muscles, as they na∣turally rise in dissection, the other to place every one of them by his proper Antagonist.
Dr. Charlton's very learned and laborious Works (as his Diatriba de Lithiasi; His Oeconomia Ani∣malis; His Exercitationes Pathologicae; His In∣quisitiones Anatomico-Physicae; His Book de Scor∣buto; His Anatomical Prelections in the College Theatre, with many other ingenious Treatises,) have given him a very high and deserved Reputation in our own as well as foreign Ʋniversities. The following

Character I find given of him in Antiq. Oxon. Aca∣demicis studiis maturus, in Aulam B. Mariae Magda∣lenae admissus, ubi sub Tutore seu Praeceptore Wilkin∣sio in studiis Philosophiae profecit; nec minùs postea in Medicina: ad cujus facultatis Doctoratum evectus est ann. 1642. aetat. 22. tum Caroli primi favore, tum gratiâ Academiae Oxon. nec multo post Regi praedicto Med. Ordinarius: Vir proculdubio doctus, & in sua facultate clarus. And 'tis very well known how highly he hath been courted to accept of the Professors Chair at Padua.
Dr. Croune hath made most ingenious and excellent Observations de ovo, long before Malpighius's Book up∣on that Subject was extant, Which are published at large by Mr. Oldenburgh, in his Philosophical Trans∣actions; as likewise a most curious Theory of Muscular Motion, published in Mr. Hook's Philosophical Col∣lections.
In Dr. Lower's Book de Corde, and Dr. Nedham's de formato foetu, are to be found so many excellent Ob∣servations relating to the advancement of Physick (As the swift motion of the bloud through the heart, the com∣mixture of the air with the bloud, the difference be∣twixt Arterial and Venal bloud, the separation of the Chyle, with its sole passage through the ductus Thora∣cicus, and its different degrees and ways of conversion into bloud; the vulgar opinion about defluxions distil∣ling from the brain confuted, by unanswerable Experi∣ments; The passages by which the succus nutritius is car∣ry'd to the Uterus, and from thence to the Foetus, the manner of separating the nutritious juice from the bloud; the examination of the several humours found in the dif∣ferent Membranes subservient to generation, by concreti∣on

on the fire, distillation, and coagulation; the nature of the Saliva and other juices conveyed into the mouth, with their passages, &c.) that the Authors are highly admired and quoted by all the learned Men of the Faculty through∣out Europe.
Dr. Sydenham (whom I can never name, without own∣ing my great obligations for the many happy advantages which I have received from his most ingenious learned, and free conversation) hath highly obliged the World, and all ingenuous Men of our Profession, with many incomparable Treatises, lately published; which are drawn (as it were by another Hippocrates) from his most exact and nice observation of Diseases, and their symptomes; to which are added most judicious, Natural Hypotheses, and Curative Indications, deduced from them; He hath given such an exact History of all acute Diseases from the beginning of 1661, to 1680. that there is scarcely a Sentence to be found therein, which is not of moment. Several weighty observations are likewise ta∣ken notice of by this sagacious Physician, which other Authors have omitted, as particularly the several con∣stitutions of the Air specifically different, which de∣pend not upon the manifest qualities thereof, but upon some inexplicable causes; and produce Diseases as speci∣fically different; which Constitutions, after some time, give place one to another; and are accompanied with a peculiar and specifically different Fever both as to its symptomes and cure; These Fevers he calls Stationary, distinguishing them from the Sporadique, or Intercurrent Fevers depending upon the manifest qualities or altera∣tions of the Air; The Ptyalisme that attends adult persons, and the Diarrhoea which usually accompanies Children in the Flox-Pox; The day when the Ptyalisme

ordinarily ceaseth, with the danger ensuing thereupon; The great tendency to symptomatical sweats, in the di∣stinct Pox; Convulsions in Children before the eruption of the Small Pox, which he observeth to be the usual prognostick of a mild distemper; The Mania or Frenzy following Agues, with the different Cure it requires; The Jaundise observable at the going off of the Colica Hysterica; The limpid Ʋrine, which he asserts to be the most universal and pathognomonick sign of Hysterical and Hypochondriacal affections; which diseases do fre∣quently assume the shape of Nephritick and Colical distem∣pers, yet are really different both in their original and cure; with many of the like kind, dispersed through∣out this Book, and his Epistolary Dissertations de Variolis confluentibus; Affectione Hystericâ; Lue Venereâ; Podagrâ & Hydrope; which I am now forced to omit, as also the Lives and Works of several great and learned Men heretofore Members of the Col∣lege, such as Dr. Gilbert Wotton, Muffet, Gwynne, Tur∣ner, Paddy, Atkins, Mayerne, Prujean, Bates, &c. and many now living, who have not onely merited a remarque in this Epistle, but very highly of the Publick. But I hope this present omission will be pardoned, this Epistolary Discourse being onely by way of Specimen, to a more full and complete History intended.
In short; I cannot question, but to see this learned So∣ciety flourish (maugre all its adversaries) which was contrived by Royal wisdom, and Founded in Royal boun∣ty; which hath enjoyed such great and learned Men in every Age; which is now happy in so wise and prudent Governours, and blessed with such Learned, Grave, and Profound Practisers in the Faculty of Physick; that there

seems to be a Transmigration of the Soul of the immor∣tal Harvey, and other Great Men, into many of the Members now flourishing; Which, that it may ever continue so; is, and ever shall be, Most Honoured Collegues, the earnest and hearty desire of

