



My Lord,
'TIs now no less than seven years, since I adventured the prefixing of your Lord∣ship's name to a Book, written in defence of the College of Physicians, against a bold and impu∣dent Libell, published with design to expose that Learned Society to contempt. Since which time, I have not onely had the honour of being

made one of their Members, but have been en∣trusted with the search of their Records, and re∣ceived encouragement to publish a Collection of their Royal Patents, Acts of Parliament, Trials with, and proceedings against Empiricks; that so the Adversaries of this Society might be con∣vinced of the reason and Justice of their actings, against those illiterate and vile Impostors; whose practice by Act of Parliament is declared to be, To the high displeasure of God, great infa∣my 3 H. 8. c. 11. to the faculty, and destruction of many of the King's Liege people.
Your Lordship knows very well the grounds, which first moved that noble and renowned King Henry 8. in the tenth year of his Reign to constitute this Royal foundation; whose Princely wisedom herein was highly approved by Act of Parliament, in the 14, 15. years of 14, 15 H. 8. c. 5. his Reign; in which, the King's Letters Pa∣tents, and all and every Graunt, Article, and other thing, contained and specified therein, were approved, graunted, ratified and confirmed.
About seventeen years after, a second Act of Parliament was granted to this Society by the 32 H. 8. c. 42. same King of glorious memory, for enlarging of

their Privileges, with the addition of many new ones.
In the first of Q. Mary (being but 29 or 30 1 Q. M. Ses. 2. c. 9. years from the 14, 15 H. 8.) a third Act of Parliament was made, in confirmation of the forementioned Statute; and many more privi∣leges of great moment, were added to the for∣mer.
Queen Elizabeth and King James of ever glorious memory; and his Sacred Majesty now Reigning (whom God long preserve from all trai∣terous Associations and Conspiracies of bloud∣thirsty and malicious men!) have by their se∣veral Royal Patents granted them farther Li∣berties, K. James and K. Charles 2. in their Roy∣al Patents. Powers and Privileges, by reason of the great increase of unskilfull, illiterate, and unlicensed practisers of Physick in Lon∣don and within 7 Miles thereof; who now, my Lord, are arrived to that height of impudence, not onely in their publick writings, but even in the King's Courts of Judicature, that they dare adventure to question the Authority of an Act of Parliament, though owned as such, by those Roy∣al Testimonies already named; by the Chief Justices and Judges of the King's Bench and Common Pleas (such as Popham, Coke,

Fleming, Foster, Walmesly, Warburton, Daniel, Williams, Tanfield, Crook, Lit∣tleton, &c.) in their several Books of Reports, and in their resolutions of several questions (re∣lating to the College of Physicians) wherein they gave their opinions by an order from K. James, directed to the Right honourable Thomas Lord Ellesmere Lord Chancellour of England, which opinions are inserted in this book, &c. by its being printed in several Statute books and A∣bridgments of the same, which were published (even in that King's Reign in which they were enacted) by Robert Redman, Thomas Ber∣thelet, Wyllyam Mydylton, Thomas Petyt, and Thomas Powel, Printers to his Most Ex∣cellent Majesty; and since, in all the Statute books and Abridgments that have been Printed to this time.
Nay more than this, In the Rolls Chapel; and in the Journal books formerly collected by that famous Antiquary Sir Robert Cotton, and preserved by Sir John, in his Father's Li∣brary; and in the Journal books of the Right honourable the Earl of Clarendon (which I had the honour to look over) I find 36▪ Acts of Parliament passed in that Session of 14, 15

Hen. 8. At the end of the twenty fourth this is inserted,
Item diverse communes petitiones rem publicam concernentes, exhibite erant dicto Domino Regi in Parliamento predicto, cum suis responsionibus, quarum tenores se∣quuntur & sunt tales.
Amongst which (upon the same Roll) the 33th is an Act concerning Physicians; and after the 36th, is entred the King's Com∣mission to Cardinal Wolsey, Printed p. 12. of this book, which finisheth that Roll of Par∣liament. In which, it is thus expressed; Re∣verendissimus Dominus Legatus Cancella∣rius, Acta omnia in presenti Parliamento pro bono publico edita & facta, ex man∣dato Domini Regis recitari & publicari jussit. Quibus ex ordine per inicia recita∣tis & lectis & singulis per Clericum Par∣liamenti responsione secundum annotatio∣nes Regie voluntatis declarativas à dorso scriptas, facta, &c.
Add to this, that excellent and learned ac∣count given by the Lord Chief Justice Hales (why the Royal Signature might not be en∣tred by the Clerk of Parliament in his tran∣script

of the Original Rolls, under this Act of Parliament and nine others passed in that Session) in a late Judgment given against Huybert; As likewise the testimony of the Lord Herbert of Cherbury in his excellent book of the Life and Reign of King Henry 8. drawn out of his Majestie's Records: In which he acquaints us with the more famous Statutes enacted in the Parliament of 14, 15 Henry 8. amongst which, we find this relating to the College of Physicians.
Now, my Lord, from these Authorities and many others of the like kind; We should be in some hopes, that these men being formerly driven from their old plea of 34, 35 of Hen. 8. c. 8. (An Act made against Surgeons for their unconscionable dealing with their Pa∣tients, and for giving liberty to all such, who practise for Piety and Charity with∣out taking money or gain, as appears by a Judgment given against Butler p. 258) and from this their late Plea of Nul tiel Record; that our profession might flourish, and that as King James hath expressed it in his Royal Patent, by rejecting such illiterate and unskilfull Practisers, those that were Lear∣ned,

Grave and Profound Practisers in that Faculty should receive more bounti∣full reward; and also the industrious Stu∣dents of that profession would be the bet∣ter encouraged in their Studies and endea∣vours: But that we have to deal with a sort of men not of Academical, but Mechanick education; who being either actually engaged in the late Rebellion, or bred up in some mean and contemptible trades, were never taught the duty they owe to God or their Sovereign, to their Native Country or the Laws, there∣of.
We hope therefore that Your Lordship will pardon us, in begging your Honour's favour and Protection for the encouragement and de∣fence of a Society (though established by Royal Graunts and Acts of Parliament) thus rudely assaulted by barbarous and illiterate Mecha∣nicks. Your Lordship's profound knowledge in the Laws of your Countrey, as well as in all humane learning, is no less known and admi∣red; than your eminent, exemplary courage and constant faithfulness to the Crown and Go∣vernment in Church and State as 'tis now by Law established; to the preservation of which,

your Lordship's singular wisedom, vigilancy and unwearied endeavours have highly and success∣fully contributed. To which purposes, that your Lordship may long live in the favour of your Prince, and affections of all his Loyal and good Subjects; is and shall be the constant and ar∣dent desire of

