



REverend and Right worthy Gentlemen, Friends and Brethren in Christ; How either your selves, or others, will interpret this Dedication, I am (I confess) no such Seer, as to be able to foresee: and were the foresight hereof to be bought, I should strain my self very little to make the Purchase. I have that Witness within me, whose Prerogative it is to laugh all Jealousies and Suggestions of Men to scorn, which rise up in opposition to his Testimony, clearly assuring me, that the Oracles consulted by me about this Dedication, were neither any undervaluing of you, nor over-valuing of my self, or of the Piece here presented unto you, nor any desire of drawing respects from you, either to my person, or any thing that is mine; much less any malignity of desire to cause you to drink of my cup, or to bring you under the same cloud of disparagement with me, which the World hath spread round about me. Praise unto his Grace, who hath taught me some weak rudiments of his Heavenly Art of drawing Light out of Darkness, for mine own use; I have not been for so many years together trampled upon to so little purpose, as to remain yet, either ignorant, or insensible, of mine own vileness, and what Element I am neerest allied unto: or so tender and querulous, as either to complain of the weight of those, who still go over me as the stones in the street, or to project the sufferings of others, in order to my own solace and relief. My long deprivation and want of respects from men, is now turned to an athletique habit, somewhat after the manner of those, who by long fasting, lose their appetites, and withall either contract, or finde, an ability, or contentedness of Nature, to live with little or no meat afterwards. I can ( Philip. 4. 13 Non est arro∣gantia, sed fi∣des, praedicare ea quae acce∣pisti. Aug.) from the dunghil whereon I sit, with much contentment and sufficient enjoyment of my self, behold my Brethren on Thrones round about me.
The Prize then that I run for in my Dedicatory Applications unto You, is, by the opportunity and advantage hereof, to excite, provoke, and engage (and this, if it may be, beyond, and above, all reasonableness of pretence to de∣cline the service) those whom I judged the most able, and not the least will∣ing, among their Brethren, to bless the World, laboring and turmoyling it self under its own vanity and folly, by bringing forth the Glorious Creator, and ever-blessed Redeemer of it, out of their Pavilions of Darkness, into a clear and perfect Light, to be beheld, reverenced, and adored in all their glory, to be possessed, enjoyed, delighted in, in all their beauty, sweetness, and desirableness, by the Inhabitants of the Earth. I know you have no need to
 be taught, but possibly you may have some need to consider, that your Gifts, Parts, Learning, Knowledg, Wisdom, Books, Studies, Opportunities, plea∣sant Mansions, will all suddenly make Company for that which is not, and never turn to any account of true greatness unto you, nor of any Interest wor∣thy the lightest thoughts of truly prudent and considering men, unless they shall, by a serious and solemn Act of Consecration, be consigned over unto, and interessed in, that great Service of God and Men, whereby that blessed Union between them shall be promoted and advanced, the Foundations whereof have been by so high an Hand of Grace layd in the Blood of Jesus Christ. You know the Saying of the great Prophet of the World: He that gathereth not with me, scattereth abroad Mat. 12. 30. Whatsoever shall not suffer, yea and offer, it self to be taken and carryed along, by, and with, Jesus Christ, in that grand and sublime Motion, wherein he moveth dayly, according to the Counsel of his Father, in a streight course for the saving of the World, will most certainly be dissipated and shattred all to nothing, by the irresistible dint and force thereof: how much more that, which shall stand in his way, ob∣struct, and oppose him in this his Motion? Especially Gifts, Parts, Reason, Un∣derstanding in Men, improved and raised, or under means and opportunities of being improved and raised, by Study, Learning, Knowledg, if these do not make one shoulder with Jesus Christ, in lifting up the World from the gates of Death; much more in case they shall disadvantage and indispose the World to a receiving of those impressions from Christ, by which it should, or might otherwise, be thus lifted up by him, will undoubtedly, above the rate of all other things, abound to the Shame, Judgment, Confusion, and Condemnation of Men. When Men of rich endowments, and worthy abili∣ties of Learning and Knowledg, shall give their strength in this kinde to other Studies, Contemplations, and Enquiries, suffering in the mean time the Mindes and Consciences of Men to corrupt, putrifie, and perish in their sad Pollutions through that Ignorance, or (which is worse) those disloyal and profane Notions and Conceptions of God, and of Christ, which reign (or rather indeed rage) in the midst of them, without taking any compassion on them, by searching out, and discovering unto them those most excellent and worthy things of God, and Christ, the knowledg whereof would be unto them as a Resurrection from Death unto Life; they do but write their Names in the dust, and buy Vanity with that worthy Price, which was put into their hand for a far more honorable Purchase. And yet of the two, they are sons of the greater folly, and prevaricate far more sadly with the dearest and deepest Interest, both of themselves, and other men, who by suffering their Reasons and Judgments to be abused either by sloth and supine oscitan∣cy, or else by sinister and carnal respects otherwise (for there is a far different consideration of those, who miscarry at this point, through a meer Nesci∣ence, or humane infirmity) bring forth a strange God, and a strange Christ unto the World, such as neither the Scriptures, no Reason unbewitched, know, or own, and this under the Name of the true God indeed, and of the true Christ: yea and most importunely and imperiously burthen and charge the Consciences of Men with the dread of Divine Displeasure, and the Vengeance of Hell fire, if they refuse to fall down, and bow the knee of their Judgments before those Images and Representations, which they set up, as if in all their lineaments and parts, they exhibited the true God, and the true Christ, according to the Truth.
The Apostle Paul relates a sad story of a great fire of Indignation kindled
 in the Brest of God, and breaking out (in a very formidable manner) upon the Heathen, who (as he saith) knew God Rom. 1, 21 [i. e. had means sufficient to bring them to the knowledg of God Men under means & op∣portunities of knowledg, are sil estimated, & this justly, in their De∣linquencies, as having Knowledg, whether they be actually knowing, or no. Compare Mat. 25, 44, 4 with Luke 12 47, 48, &c.] and withall professed themselves wise men Rom. 1, 22. Whether by such men he means the Philosophers in particular, and learned men amongst them, (which is the more probable, and the more recei∣ved sence of Interprecers▪ or whether the generality of them, (as Calvin ra∣ther supposeth) varyeth not the story in any point of difference much mate∣rial to my purpose. The Misery which these men brought upon themselves through the just Displeasure of God, is first (in general) drawn up by the Apostle in these words; that Professing themselves wise, they became Fool, . Justâ Dei ultione fuerunt in∣fatuati., [or rather were infatuated, or made Fools, as Calvin well expoundeth,] i. e. whilest they assumed unto themselves the honor and repute of much wisdom and understanding, God (as it were) insensibly, and by degrees withdrew that lively presence of his Spirit from them, by which they had been formerly raised and enlarged, as well to conceive and apprehend, as to act and do, like wise and prudent men: but now the wonted presence of this Spirit of God failing them, the savor and vigor of their wisdom and understandings propor∣tionably abated and declined, as Sampsons strength upon the cutting of his hair, sank and fell to the line of the weakness of other men. Secondly, The Misery which these men drew upon their own head, by breaking, as they did, with God, is termed by the Apostle a delivering up [or, giving over] to a re∣probate minde Rom. 1, 28: which seems to import somewhat more sad and deeply penal, then a simple infatuation; or at least, the height and consummation hereof. A reprobate [or, injudicious] minde, implies such a constitution, or condi∣tion,. of that soveraign and supreme Faculty in Man, his Understanding, whose proper office and work it is to order, umpire and command in chief all his motions, and actions, as well internal, as outward, that light and darkness, things comely, and things uncomely, action and ways pregnantly comport∣ing with, and actions and ways palpably destructive unto, the dear Interest of his eternal Peace, shall, especially upon a practical account, be of one and the same consideration to him; neither shall he be capable of any difference of impression from things that differ in the highest. The delivering up of a man by God to such a Reprobate Minde, as this, clearly supposeth the frame and constitution of the Minde and Understanding of Man to be naturally, Re∣probate; I mean, considered as the sin of Adam hath defaced and distemper∣ed it, and as it would have been in all men, in case the Great Advocate and Mediator of Mankinde had not interposed to procure the gracious conjuncti∣on of the illuminating Spirit of God with it; yea and as it will be, when∣soever this Spirit of God shall be so far offended and provoked by a man, as wholly to depart, and desert it. So that this Judiciary Act of God, in giving men over to a Reprobate Minde, imports nothing but the total withdrawing of all communion and converse by his Spirit with them, hereby leaving them in the hand, and under the inspection, of such a minde, or understanding, which is naturally, properly, and entirely their own. In which case the minde and understanding of a man suffers after some such manner, as a quantity of good, wholesom, and spiritful wine would do, in case it should be bereft of all the subtil and spirituous parts of it by a Chymical Extraction made by fire: that which should remain after such a separation, would be but as water, with∣out strength, or taste.
Now the cause of this fire of displeasure kindled in the Brest of God against the persons mentioned, burning so neer to the bottom of Hell (as we heard)
 our Apostle recordeth, first in these words, Because that when they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful Rom. 1. 21. Afterwards in these: And even as they did not like to retain God in their knowledg Verse 28 , &c., &c. Or (as the Ori∣ginal, I humbly conceive, would rather bear) as they did not make tryal [i. e. put themselves to it, engage their abilities] to have God in acknowledgment, [i. e. so to discover him to the World, that he might be acknowledged in his soveraign Greatness, and transcendent Excellencies, by men.] From which passages layd together, it clearly appears, 1. That for men that know God, or have means and opportunities of knowing him, not to glorifie him like himself, and as God, is a sin of a very high provocation, and which di∣rectly, and with a swift course, tends to an utter dissolution of all communion and friendly converse between God and men. 2. That for men of Knowledg, Parts, and Abilities, to neglect the manifestation, and making known of God in, and to, the World, to the intent that he may be acknowledged, reverenced, loved, delighted in, by his Creature, is a strain of the worst resentment with God, of that unthankfulness, which he interprets, a non-glorifying him, as God, or like himself.
Knowing the Terror of the Lord in the way of the Premisses (Brethren ho∣nored, and beloved in the Lord) according to the measure of the Light of the Knowledg of himself, which he hath been graciously pleased to shine in my Heart, , I have in the ensuing Discourse lift up my Heart and Soul and all that is within me to the discovery and manifestati∣on of him in the World, in the truth of his Nature, Attributes, Counsels, Decrees, Ways and Dispensations; and that with a single eye, with clear∣ness and simplicity of intention, to dis-encumber the Mindes, Judgments and Consciences of Men, of such thoughts and apprehensions concerning him, which are evil Mediators between Him and his Creature, feeding and fomenting that distance and enmity between them, which have been occasi∣oned by sinful and unworthy deportment on the Creatures side. I confess that in some Particulars managed and asserted in the Discourse, I have been led (I trust by the Spirit of Truth, and of God) out of the way more gene∣rally occupyed by those, who of later times have travelled the same Regions of Enquiry with me. But deeply pondering what Augustin somewhere saith, that as nothing can be found out more beneficial unto the World, then some∣whatNihil periculo∣sius quaeritur, nihil fructosi∣us invenitur. further of God, then is at present known, so nothing is attempted or sought after with more danger; I have steered my course in the subsequent Debates with all tenderness and circumspection, arguing nothing, concluding nothing, but either from the Grammatical Sence or best known signification of words and phrases in the Scripture, and this (for the most part, if not constantly) in conjunction both with the scope of places, the express consent and agree∣ment of Contexts, together with the Analogy of the Scriptures themselves in other places; or else from the most unquestionable and universally received Principles and Maxims, either in Religion, or sound Reason: and more par∣ticularly from such Notions concerning the Nature of God, and his Attri∣butes and Perfections, which I finde generally subscribed with the Names and Pens of all that is called Orthodox amongst us, and have written of such things. Nor have I any where receded from the more general sence of Inter∣preters in the Explication of any Text or Passage of Scripture, but onely, where either the express signification of words, or the vergency (or rather indeed, urgency) of the Context, or some repugnancy to the expressness of Scripture elsewhere, or else some pregnant inconsistency with some clear
 Principle, either of Religion, or sound Reason, necessitated me unto it. Yea I seldom upon any of these accounts leave the common road of Interpreters, but I finde that some or other, one or more, of the most intelligent of them have troden the same path before me. And for the most part Chrysostom a∣mong the Ancient Expositors, and Calvin himself among the Modern, are my Companions in the paths of my greatest solitariness. Concerning the main Doctrine avouched in the Discourse, wherein the Redemption of Man∣kinde by Jesus Christ, no particular person, or member hereof excepted, is held forth and asserted, I demonstrate by many Testimonies from the best Records of Antiquity, to have been the Oecumenical sence of the Christian World in her primitive and purest Times. Nor am I conscious to my self (I speak as in the present of God) of any the least mistake, either in word, or meaning, of any Author or Testimony cited by me throughout the whole Discourse: nor yet of any omission in point of diligence or care, for the pre∣vention of all mistakes in either kinde.
The Discourse, such as it is, with all Respects of Honor and Love I pre∣sent unto you; not requiring any thing from you by way of countenance or approbation, otherwise then upon those equitable terms, on which AugustusSueton. in vi∣ta Augusti. recommended his Children unto the care and favor of the Senate, Si meru∣erit. Onely as a Friend and Lover of the Truth, Name, and Glory of God and Jesus Christ, and of the Peace, Joy, and Salvation of the World, with you, I shal take leave to pour out my Heart and Soul in this Request unto you, that either you will confirm, by setting to the royal signet of your Approba∣tion and Authority, the Great Doctrine here maintained, if you judg it to be a Truth; or else vouchsafe to deliver me, and many others, from the snar thereof, by taking away with an hand of Light and potency of Demonstra∣tion, those weapons, whether Texts of Scriptures, or Grounds in Reason, wherein you will finde by the Discourse it self that we put our trust. Your Contestation upon these terms, will be of a resentment with me more precious and accepted, then your Attestation, in case of your comport in Judgment with me: though I shall ingenuously confess, and profess, that for the Truths sake, even in this also I shall greatly rejoyce. Notwithstanding I judg it much more (of the two) richly conducing to the dear Interest of my Peace and Safety, to be delivered from my Errors, then to receive countenance and approbation from men in what I hold, or teach, according to the Truth.
If nothing which is here pleaded, whether from the Scriptures, or other∣wise, shall be able to over-rule your Judgments into an acknowledgment of Truth in the main Doctrine contended for, in which case you will (I trust) though not with respect to my Request in that behalf, yet for the Truths sake, and for your own Interests sake, as well in the things of this World, as of that which is to come, declare your selves in some worthy and satisfactory An∣swer to the Particulars here propounded; I shall not need (I presume) to desire you, that in your Answer you will not rise up in your might against the weaker, looser, or less-considerate Passages or Expressions (of which kind you may very possibly meet with many more then enough) but that you will rather bend the strength of your Reply, against the strength of what you shall oppose (at least if there be any thing herein worthy such a title.) You well know, that a Field may be won, though many Soldiers of the conquering side should fall, or be wounded, in the Battel: and that a Tree may flourish, and retain both its beauty, and firmness of standing in the Earth, though many of the smaller twigs, or lesser branches should prove dry and sere, and so be easily
 broken off. So may a Mountain remain unmoved, yea and unmovable, though many handfuls of the lighter and looser earth about the sides of it, should be taken up and scattered into the ayr like dust. In like manner the main Body of a Discourse may stand entire in its solidity, weight, and strength, though many particular Expressions, Sayings, and Reasonings therein, that are more circumferential, and remote from the center, should be detected either of inconsiderateness, weakness, or untruth. Yea in some cases one Argument or Plea may be so triumphantly pregnant and command∣ing, that though many others of the same engagement should be defeated, yet the cause protected by it may upon a very sober and justifiable account, laugh all opposition of contrary arguings to scorn. I acknowledg there are some Expressions and Passages in the ensuing Discourse (as in Cap. 1. Sect. 9. and elsewhere) which upon the review, I my self apprehend obnoxious enough to exception: yea and which, had my second thoughts been born in due time, should have been somewhat better secured. But I trust that ancient Law of indulgence in such cases as mine (which very probably may be some of your own also) is of Authority sufficient in your Common-wealth, to re∣lieve me:
—O pere in longo fas est obrepere somnum: i. e.
On him that sits long at work, Sleep
Without disparagement may creep.
Neither need I suspect or fear any of that unmanlike Learning amongst you, which teacheth men to confute Opinions, by vulgar votes and exclamations. We know that this Sect [or, Heresie] is every where spoken against Acts 28, 22 , &c., had no in∣fluence upon Paul to turn him out of the way of his Heresie. And for those Mormolukes or Vizors of Arminianism, Socinianism, Popery, Pelagianism, with the like, which serve to affright children in understanding out of the love and liking of many most worthy and important Truths, I am not under any jealousie concerning you, that you should suffer any such impressions from them. You know that that great Enemy of the Peace and Salvation of men, who of old taught the Enemies of God to put his Saints into Bears skins, and Wolves skins, so preparing them to be torn in peeces and devoured by Dogs, hath in these latter times secretly insinuated and prevailed with many of the children of God themselves, to put many of his Truths, such as they like not, or comprehend not, into Names of Ignominy and Reproach, to draw others into the same hatred and defamation of them with themselves. I have somewhere observed, that this method of confuting and suppressing Opini∣ons, against which men have had no competent grounds of Eviction other∣wise, was at first invented by the subtil Sons of the Synagogue of Rome Divine Au∣thority of the Scriptures, page 202, 203: and elsewhere shewed by several instances, that it is familiarly practised by them.
The truth is, that you have no such temptation upon you, as particular and private men have, to flee to any such polluted Sanctuary, as that menti∣oned, to save your Names and Reputations from the hand of any Opinion or Doctrine whatsoever. For you so far (I presume) understand your Interest and Prerogative, that for matters of Opinion and Doctrine, you are invested with an autocratorical majesty, like that, which was sometimes given unto Nebuchadnezzar over men: whom he would, he slew: and whom he would, he kept alive: whom he would, he set up; and whom he would, he put down Dan. 5. 19. By the joynt suffrage of your Authority, your Interest of Esteem amongst men being so predominant, you may slay, wht Doctrines, what Opinions you
 please; and what you please, you may keep alive: of what Tenents you please, you may make the faces to shine, and of what you please, you may lay the honor in the dust. If you will justifie, who are they that will not be afraid to condemn? if you condemn, who will justifie? Only Gods eldest Daughter, Truth, hath One mightier then you on her side, who will justi∣fie her in due time, though you should condemn her: and will raise her up from the dead the third day, in case you shall slay her. However, if the Doctrine commended in the Discourse now presented unto you, shall com∣mend it self in your eyes also, for a Truth, far be it from you to hide your faces from it, because at present it labors and suffers reproach in the World, considering that you may very suddenly take away the reproach, and partake your selves of that Honor, which you shall cast upon it. Should such an University as you fear the reproach of standing by a Truth? Jesus Christ is not ashamed of the Bodies of his Saints, living, or dead, though in both con∣ditions vile and contemptible in the eyes of men, knowing that he hath power in his hand to cloath them with glory and immortality, when he pleaseth, and that this glory, when vested in them, will be an high augmentation of his own.
Brethren, unto you I may truly say (with Paul to his Philippians) that I have you in my heart Philip. 1. 7. I can look upon you with an eye of good hope, as a generation of men anointed by God with a spirit of Wisdom, Knowledg, Zeal, and Faithfulness, to bring on the New Heavens, and the New Earth, wherein Righteousness shall dwell, and this by repairing the breaches and de∣cayed places in the Body of the Doctrine of Christian Religion, which, since the first raising and compleating of it by Christ and his Apostles, partly through the ignorance and insufficiency, partly through the oscitancy and re∣missness of those, to whom the guardianship and custody thereof have been committed by God in their successive generations, hath been lamentably dis∣mantled, mis-figured, and defaced, and this well-nigh in all the integral and principal parts of it (more or less:) In so much that a man who truly and clearly apprehends what this Doctrine was (and yet is in her purity, and na∣tive frame) and shall compare it with the Systeme or Body of Divinity, which under this Notion is commonly taught and held forth amongst us, will hard∣ly be able to say, this is the Doctrine of Christ. For whosoever shall engage himself with that diligence, throughness, and unpartialness of Enquiry, which become those, who run for so high a prize as an incorruptible Crown of Glory, to consider what is ordinarily delivered, and more generally re∣ceived, amongst us, not onely in, and about, those great Points of Election, Reprobation, Redemption, the efficacy and extent of the Grace of God, and Perseverance of the Saints; but also about many other Heads of Christian Doctrine, as about Faith, Justification, the Sufferings of Christ, the Inter∣cession of Christ, Repentance, Good Works, Baptism, the state and con∣dition of the Dead until the Resurrection (with sundry more) and shall with like diligence consider what the Scriptures teach concerning these Particulars respectively, will clearly and distinctly see, that though Christ be not so ill formed, amongst us, in some of these Doctrines, as he is in others, yet he is represented very unlike, and much beneath himself, in them all. So that as Joshua, though he performed the part of a valiant Captain, and made a worthy progress in the Conquest of the Land of Canaan before his death, yet left a very considerable proportion of the work to be atchieved by others after him Judges 1. , 9, &c.: in like manner Luther, Calvin, Melancthon, with others, who
 labored with much honor and success in the work of Reformation, and re∣duced the Body of Christian Religion to a far better complexion and consti∣tution, then that wherein they found it; yet left it under so much craziness and unsoundness, that other Physicians also, and those of best value, have large opportunities before them for enriching the World, and themselves also, by perfecting the cure. I look upon you as Men the likeliest I know to wear this Crown. As for those, who of late attempted the building of a fence-wall of Discipline (under the Name of a Reformation) about that Vineyard of Christ amongst us, of which I now speak, and to this day seem to lie under much regret of spirit, both against God and men, for hindering them in their Building; the truth is, in such an attempt, the unreformedness and unsound∣ness of the Doctrine commonly received amongst us, and taught by them∣selves, considered, they ran a like course of inconsiderateness, which an Hus∣bandman would do, that should go about to make a strong and tight hedg a∣bout his field, whilest his Neighbors Cattel are feeding and spoyling the Corn in the midst of it.
Brethren, my Pen hath transgressed the line and law of my Intentions. These confined me to a much narrower compass in my Epistle, and prohi∣bited me the troubling of you to any such degree, as now I have done. The truth is, my affections to you interposed, and occasioned the Transgression. Love is bountiful: and (I trust) will as naturally produce Pardon on your side, as it hath brought forth such a Transgression on mine. In all this address I have desired nothing of you, little, or much, upon mine own account, save onely so far, as your ingenuous and worthy Deportment in the Particulars of∣fered, together with the unspeakable Benefit, and Blessing which you shall bring upon the World thereby, will be matter of joy and high contentment unto me. Envy me not my rejoycing with the Truth, though herein I should be found equal to the greatest of you: it is the best of my portion in the world. I shall discharge you from any further sufferings from my Pen at present, onely with my Soul poured out before the Great God, and Father of Lights, in Prayer for you, that he will make his face to shine upon you, in quickening your Apprehensions, enlarging your Understandings, balassing your Judgments, strengthening your Memories, in giving you ableness of body, willingness of minde, to labor in those rich Mynes of Truth (the Scriptures) in breaking up before you the Fountains of those great depths of Spiritual Light, and Heavenly Understanding, in assisting you mightily by his Spirit in the course of your Studies, in lifting you up in the spirit of your mindes above the faces, fears, respects of men, in drawing out your Hearts and Souls to relieve the spiritual necessities, and extremities of the World round about you, in making you so many burning and shining Lights in his House and Temple, the joy, glory, and delight of your Nation, in vouch∣safing unto you as much of all that is desirable in the Things of this World, as your Spiritual Interest will bear, and the Reward of Prophets respective∣ly in the Glory and great Things of the World to come.

From my Study in Colemanstreet, London, Feb. 22. 1650.
