



My LORD,
WHen I composed the following Sermon, at your Lordship's command, I propounded no other thing to my self, but the doing service to the Souls of men, by inviting them into the Com∣munion of the Church of Christ; and the animating and encouraging my Brethren of the Clergy, that labour in the same good and holy Work. Than which two things I knew nothing more seasonable and necessary for the Age we live in, or more compliant with your Lordship's Design in your Visitation. And therefore though I had a just Reverence of the Auditory, and a due sense of my own Imperfections; yet the aforesaid Consideration, together with that of your Lordship's Candour, would not suffer

me much to doubt, but that the Sermon would be ap∣proved by your Lordship, and accepted by all good and wise men that heard it.
For I called to mind, that as the Greeks say of their Goddess , Dea, Bona valetudo, placatur quâcunque re quis velit ei litare: so, however weak and sickly Minds (like cachectick Bodies) may be nice, phantastick and captious; yet those that are sound and strong are benign and generous; and with such, every thing that is sober, and well-intended, is well taken.
Nevertheless I must acknowledge, that when after∣wards your Lordship declared your pleasure that I should print my Sermon, methought the case was al∣tered: for being sensible before, how difficult a matter it was to contrive so copious a Subject (as I had be∣fore me) within the limits of an hour's Discourse, I was easily aware how much harder it would be (in so narrow a compass) to satisfie all the scruples and cu∣riosities of those that should not onely have a transient glimpse, but a leisurely perusal. And besides, I was not ignorant how different the condition of a Sermon was, when presented in dead letters, from it self, when inlivened by the voice and passion of a very mean Oratour.

But after all I considered it was my duty, not to dispute, but to obey, and that your Lordship's Judg∣ment was sufficient for my security. And therefore (all excuses set aside) I here humbly present to your hand, what before I preached in your hearing.
And now, my Lord, having this opportunity, I crave leave, not onely to make acknowledgment of my own peculiar Obligations to your Lordship, (which I doe with a just sense of Duty and Gratitude,) but to re∣port the Apprehensions of your Clergy in these parts of your Diocese, and the great Contentment they take under your Lordship's Government. They are greatly comforted by your Zeal for the Protestant Religiom; incouraged by your Lordship's vigilant Care of their Interests and Concerns; directed in their Studies, Mi∣nistry and Conversation, by your prudent Counsels; ani∣mated by so great an Example; and especially obliged by the Benignity of your Presence and Condescension to them at your Visitation. All which they cannot for∣bear to express such a sense of, that they look upon it as a great Blessing of Almighty God, in committing this part of his Church to your Lordship's Care and Government.
For, my Lord, we cannot doubt but Piety and De∣votion will commend it self to all that are serious:

that Paternal Mildness and Clemency will work upon the ingenuous: that well-tempered Severity is the way to reclaim the vicious: and that Charity and Ge∣nerosity will oblige all humane Nature. And therefore, where there is such a conjunction of real and powerfull Causes, we are able easily to calculate happy and signal Effects; as, that the Church shall recover its native and ancient Glory, and the Genius of this great Peo∣ple be marvellously improved. Which Successes that it will please the Great and True Oecumenical Bishop to crown your Lordship's Endeavours with, is the ar∣dent desire of,
My LORD,

Hadham, Sept. 7. 1677.
