


Right Honourable and Honourable,
AT this time God's Providence hath brought you together, to consult a∣bout the great Concerns of the Na∣tion; and the Matter I now do most humbly offer to your serious Consideration, is one of, if not the most important that can be laid be∣fore you; for it doth conduce to the Glory of God, the Peace of the Church, as by Law established, the Asserting and Defence of its Doctrine, and to the Welfare of the King∣dom.
Though I presume to appear upon so high a Stage, and draw upon me the Eyes of as August, and upon every account as famous an Assembly as any in the World: Yet the Sub∣ject I go upon holding so near a Proportion with the Station and Dignity wherein God hath placed you, will I hope secure me from
being aspersed with Rashness and Vain-glory, or accounted a Busie-Body. I offer you a Field of Honour, and an occasion of exercising your Piety towards God, Love to Truth, your Justice and Wisdom with putting a stop to and a Curb upon a boundless and blasphemous Im∣piety, which seems openly to defie Heaven and Earth:Psal. 111.3. 'Tis God's Work, which, as David saith, is honourable and glorious; 'tis good, ne∣cessary, and great; but Time is short and un∣certain, therefore must be well improved, for the Opportunity may happen to be lost, ne∣ver to be recover'd, so 'tis wished the thing be done whilst it may, and before it be too late; to time things well is one of the best parts of Prudence, and one of the most Es∣sential Circumstances of our Actions: Among the several Seasons and Times mention'd by Solomon we read of two,Eccles. 3.7 a time to keep silence, which I look upon to be over, and a time to speak, which I take now to be fully come.
There ought to be a proportion between the Distemper and the Remedy, thus extream Distempers require extream Remedies, and an extraordinary Necessity doth vindicate an extraordinary Method in the Use thereof: When the Watchman whose immediate Du∣ty is to give warning, doth, through Slug∣gishness, or other Cause, at the approach of the Enemy, neglect to blow the Trumpet, then every one concern'd in the Community hath right to do't for the Preservation of the whole. That Passage of Craesus's dumb Son, who one day perceiving how some went about to, kill his Father, was so much stirred as to cry out Murther; though trivial, may well be admit∣ted
upon the present occasion; for no true Christian having before his Eyes the near and great Danger which our holy Religion lies un∣der, upon the account of some damnable He∣resies now more than ever brought in again, but must be moved and cry out against it: But what do I talk of danger, when the evil it self, the Philistins are upon us? The Ene∣my is not only at the Gates, but in the very body of the place, and in the Bowels of the Church, and to speak in Moses's words,Num. 16.46. There is wrath gone out from the Lord, the plague is begun; for blasphemous Socinianism attended by Atheism, Deism, Prophaneness, Immora∣lity, yea, and Idolatry, &c. doth bare and brazen-faced walk in our Streets, as much as in it lyeth, to deprive us of our blessed Lord and Saviour, so it strikes at no less than the Head and Author of our Salvation: And men are puffed up, and have not rather mourned,1 Cor. 5.2. that they that do this deed, might be taken away from among us. To what purpose is Popery or Idolatry expelled, if Socinianism or Blasphemy be let in?
But I am not so hasty, as to affirm Popish Idolatry to be turned out, for we know too much of the contrary, witness those Swarms of Priests which are in and about the City, and the many places where, I shall not say in private, for 'tis publick enough, the Wafer-Idol-Worship is performed against the Laws of God and of the Land, which some that should, do not mind nor care for; whereupon we have much cause to renew the Apostle's Complaint, All seek their own,Phil. 2.21. not the things that are Jesus Christs: And in the Country al∣most
every Popish Family of any note, hath a Priest when able to keep it; all this for want of due care to see Laws against them put in execution.
Upon this account a thing there is which doth so much lie in my way, as that I can∣not avoid taking notice of it; and indeed the thing is so publick, that many have and do daily with a kind of Indignation wonder at it: As in this World nothing is free from God's Jurisdiction, so when we have an oc∣casion to speak of his Cause, nothing hath Im∣munity or Privilege to plead for: Here we have an Ambassadour, who for himself and Family hath a private Chappel in his own House, and a publick one in a Street not far from it, for any one that hath a mind to come to it: We know it to be a Privilege as good as grounded upon the Right of Nations, for e∣very foreign Minister to have within his doors the free Exercise of his Religion for his Person and Houshold, but a Plurality hath no ground to plead for: Here it hath been unknown and unheard of since the Reformation, that any foreign Minister was at any time allow'd two Chappels: In the supernumerary one I and many more besides, to whom it is an Eye∣sore, have on Mass days seen and still can see Three or Four Hundred People going in and out, not the Ambassador or his Family, if you except the Priest and his Clerk, with, may be, some inferiour Servants, but general∣ly all English, and perhaps some few Irish and others. We may well remember, how un∣der a Reign which never was commended for Piety, I mean of Charles II. when the Parlia∣ment
complained, and the People grumbled about the growth of Popery; that Prince not only said, Gentlemen, offer what you think fit for the Security of your Religion and Liberty, and I will give my Consent to't, but withal, he sent to all foreign Ministers to desire them to receive none of his Subjects within their Chappel Doors; also Men were sent thither to watch who went in and out, to give an account of it: And if we well look into the thing in hand, we may find it is like to be of ill and troublesom Consequence; for the Party in question is of a Nation, which when once they have been in possession of a thing, will willingly never part with, but for ever lay a claim to't; when this Man is gone, his Successor will, according to their Maxim, never fail to pretend to Two Chappels, and this will be a Precedent for other foreign Popish Ministers to lay claim to Two; for if one hath it, why not another? Which may happen to engage us in some Difficulties: Besides that, here common People love not to see unnecessary Popish Monuments, and God knows whether or not at one time or other may not into their Head come some fancy of being rude, besides, those are Meet∣ing-places for Papists to plot against the Go∣vernment, which Inconveniencies, I hum∣bly conceive, it were both Piety and Pru∣dence betimes to prevent, and upon this Motive only, with Submission to Superiors, I speak of it, though Blasphemy be the thing I now chiefly aim against.
Yet both Idolatry and Blasphemy are the two greatest Abominations of all in the sight of God, for which he destroyed the Kingdoms
of Israel and Judah, and overturned the Assy∣rian, Babylonian, and other great Empires: And to come home, to the Toleration of those Two transcendent Wickednesses among others, I think we may chiefly attribute the cause of the heavy Chastisements which make the Nation uneasie, and he is very blind that doth not see, and insensible that takes no no∣tice of both, I mean Sin and Chastisement; and I most humbly beseech God to avert from us that terrible Threatning by his Prophet, for at least we are as bad as those whom 'tis directed to,Isai. 26.11. Lord when thy hand is lifted up, they will not see, but they shall see and be a∣shamed. What a matter of unexpressible Grief is it, for true Christians to see in a Nation an Incorrigibleness under great and many Judgments, as we read enumerated by the Pro∣phet, and withal, the greatest of all, a Hard∣ness of Heart; as if the Anvil should say to the Hammer, strike as often and as hard as thou wilt,Amos 4. from 6. to 12. I will never be the softer, Yet have ye not returned unto me, saith the Lord; Men will consider neither God's Work nor his Word, the Dispensations of his Providence nor his Ordinances, the Workings of God nor the Words of Men; the Prophet's Counsel is worth following by every one in his station, Let us search and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord.Lament. 3 40. In comparison of the utter Destru∣ction of Jerusalem and Judah, our Chastise∣ments here are but like Whips, instead of those with Scorpions; but let us have a care lest we hear,Isai. 5.25. for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still: We have been threatned with Insurrections and Invasions, the danger is not over, we have Enemies at
home, and one potent, crafty and faithless at our Doors, a Nation as bitter, hasty,Habak. 1.6. and in∣solent as ever the Chaldeans were: God hath made use of them to chastise others, and so they are a Rod in his hand, when he pleases against us; and besides, I tremble at the rea∣ding of this Threatning,Zech. 11.6. for I will no more pi∣ty the inhabitants of the land, saith the Lord; but lo, I will deliver the men, every one, into his neighbours hand, and into the hand of his late King, who very likely would prove a tear∣ing and furious Lion, broke loose out of his Den, full of Hatred and Vengeance: Howe∣ver, we must fear God more than them; for 'tis usual when Men fear any thing more than God, that very same thing doth befal them; and if they walk contrary unto God,Levit. 26.28. then saith the Lord, I will walk contrary unto them also in fury, which Fury is a consuming Fire, and knowing therefore the terror of the Lord,2 Cor. 5.11. saith S. Paul, out of a consideration of a Judg∣ment to come we would persuade men, who generally act out of fear of Punishment more than out of love to that which is good.
If Men should hold their peace, the stones,Luke 19.40. saith our blessed Saviour, would immediately cry out; for God never wants Instruments, but can and doth fit them for his Work, and never leaves himself without Witness: We read how he rebuked Balaam for his iniquity,2 Pet. 2.16. the dumb ass speaking with mans voice, forbad the mad∣ness of the prophet; much more doth God make use of Men, whom he hath endu'd with Rea∣son, and the knowledg of himself and of his Grace, whom he will have not to halt between two opinions; if Christ be God, follow him, if
he be not, follow him not. To deny the most holy Trinity, and our Saviour's Divini∣ty, is, as much as in a Man lieth, to go about to pull our Religion up by the very root, and quite to overthrow it: Yet Men are con∣cerned to know that Religion is the Basis and Foundation that bears up and supports the Civil Government: The true Church of God shall at last be seen truly to uphold the State, seeing the World it self stands and shall con∣tinue only till the Number of the Elect be filled up, and then it will come to an end; in the mean while, without Rewards and Pu∣nishments, no Society whether Civil or Ec∣clesiastical can stand any long time.
Seeing the most holy Godhead it self is stricken at, all are concerned to know who are the detestable Wretches that made them∣selves guilty of so impious an Attempt: The Devil hath his Instruments of several sorts which concur with him in that wicked Work, those Achans the Troublers of our Israel, are some among us which upon the account of Novelty,Acts 17.21. always like the Areopagites in Athens, spend their time in nothing else, but either to tell or to hear some new thing: Others out of a vain Glory or Affectation of Singularity and Self conceit of Learning: Others whom the Father of Lies hath disposed ever to oppose the Truth: Some others that have been per∣verted by the Conversation and Books of such Seducers, wherein that Poyson, as I hope I made it clear, is through Sophistry spread in a specious shape and plausible manner, and to suffer such Books stuffed with Blasphemies to be imported and here printed and sold
publickly, is dangerous and against Law: Others of a bold and confident Spirit are ready to own any thing, and some others out of different Motives, but all out of ill Prin∣ciples: But withal here we have a Genera∣tion of Men openly allow'd, who as much as their Predecessors, are violent and bitter E∣nemies to the Lord Jesus, I mean the Jews, who are used not to be wanting in their en∣deavours to promote the Blasphemy; to these modern may in some degree be applyed what the Apostle saith of the Antients, to fill up their sins always, they would not have Christ as Messiah and true Son of God,1 Thes. 2.16. to be spoken of to the Gentiles, for the wrath is come upon them to the uttermost: With these and any other E∣nemies to the Lord Jesus, even with Maho∣metans, that Socinian Generation of Vipers, are ever ready to joyn Heads, to promote their common Cause. Besides the Jews, here are other. Foreigners calling themselves Chri∣stians, who beyond Sea, for fear of Fire and Fagot, durst not own such Blasphemies, as here they are bold enough to dogmatize about. Thô in Men there be a freedom of Thoughts and Opinions, yet when they are so saucy as to vent and publish their Impieties, 'twere but just their foul Mouths should be stopp'd: It makes mine Ears to tingle, and my Heart to ake, when I read a certain place in Scri∣pture, wherein God complains, and as he ne∣ver doth it in vain, so if there be no Redress, he is sure to punish for't; though the whole Verse be not to my purpose, only the latter part, yet not to leave out any thing thereof, nor to separate that which the Holy Ghost
hath joyned together, I shall quote it as it is: Now therefore what have I here,Isa. 52.5. saith the Lord, that my people is taken away for nought? they that rule over them, make them to howl, saith the Lord, and my name continually every day is blasphemed; we may add almost every where in the Streets, Men Curse, Swear, and notwith∣standing Acts of Parliaments, Blaspheme every way, which often strikes me with horror, and makes one's Hair stand on end. To what pur∣pose are Laws enacted if they be not executed? Only to make contemptible the Legislative Power, instead of that awful Reverence which Men ought to have for it.
My Lords and Honourable, the Question is not about trivial Matters, 'tis the Cause of the Lord Jesus, from whom your Dignity and Autho∣rity are derived, and for whom 'tis expected you would make use of it, for he is the Only Lord and Potentate to whom all Judgment is committed, and for whom ye judge; the Sword is put into your Hands for a terrour to evil workes,Rom. 13.3, 4. such is Blasphemy, and ye bear it not in vain, for ye are the ministers of God, revengers to execute wrath upon him that doth evil; and as ye are Keepers of both Tables of the Law, God requires of you that when no∣thing else can serve, ye should punish the trans∣gressours of the first, as well as those of the se∣cond; in God's Cause, none ought to be idle, but all must set their helping hand and be active within the sphere of their Station. Thus ha∣ving laid open the Disease, I leave it for your Piety and Christian Wisdom to find out and apply the true and proper Remedy, I mean such as in Scripture Language may not be called
Ezek. 13.10, 11, 14, 15. daubing with untempered morter. Solomon saith,Prov. 14.9. fools make a mock at sin; in his stile, the Sinner is a Fool, and is so indeed; Sin is a great Di∣stemper, and that Wise Man prescribes a fit and proper Remedy for it, when he saith,chap. 26.3. a rod for the fool's back; that is, the Sinner ought to be punished for Sin, and to the Magistrates it belongs to do't. Now there is no greater Sin than Blasphemy, wherefore it deserves the heaviest Punishment to make the Pain hold a proportion with the Offence.
In the mean while, I humbly beg leave to lay two Things before you; First, God's Pre∣cepts do contain Promises and Threatnings, which both in his due time shall be performed. Secondly, God sees and knows when Men do or do not observe and execute his Laws, for he knows all Things; as to the first, tho' it be every Man's Duty to obey him, yet to encou∣rage us to't, he is graciously pleased to propose Rewards: Are ye for Honours? We know who said, them that honour me I will honour,1 Sam. 2.30. and they that despise me shall be lightly esteemed. To endeavour to make our selves precious in God's sight with doing him Service, especial∣ly in Things relating to his Glory, is the true and ready way to attain to Honour; for,Isa. 43.4. since thou wast precious in my sight, thou hast been ho∣nourable, and not before, saith God, and I have loved thee; wherefore if thou wilt continue so, have a care to preserve thy self in my Love and Favour. Are ye for Riches?1 Chron. 29.12. Both riches and honour come of thee, saith David; and in the case of taking care of God's House, which is what I now am upon, hear what saith the God of Truth, when that's done,Malach 2.10. prove me
now therewith, saith the Lord of hosts, if I will not open you the windows of heaven, and pour you out a blessing that there shall not be room e∣nough to receive it; and if to Honour and Riches you desire a long Life in the enjoyment thereof to be added, 'tis to be had out of the same Spring,Prov. 3.16 for length of days is in the right hand of the Eternal Wisdom, the Son of God, and in her left hand riches and honour, all three put together,chap. 22.4. 1 King. 3.13. by humility and the fear of the Lord, are riches, and honour, and life; and, I also have given thee riches and honour, saith God to Solo∣mon, so are glory, honour and peace, even in a∣bundance, as to2 Chron. 17.5. Jehoshaphat; all are God's Gifts, so areRom. 2.10. glory, honour and peace; but no true Honour without Virtue or true Piety, which the Heathens were sensible of, when upon their Coins they joyned them together, Honos & Virtus; and their Temple of Virtue laid on the way to that of Glory.
Or do ye desire Pleasures, which is one of the God's of the World? They may be had at God's Hand, not the Pleasures of Sin which are but for a season, but true and solid ones, which the Royal Prophet speaks of,Psal. 16.11. in thy pre∣sence is fulness of joy, at thy right hand are plea∣sures for evermore; if then ye care for Re∣wards, after which in Man is a natural desire, God to encourage Men to do their Duty to∣wards him, hath promised he will plentifully Reward, both in this Life, and that which is to come.Deut. 28. Blessed shalt thou be in the City and in the field, in the fruit of thy body, of thy ground and of thy cattel, &c. then shall our Enemy fall before us, over whom, as yet, we could get no Advantage; for we must not wonder if
God doth not bless us with Successes, nor if hardly any thing we go about doth not pro∣sper, as long as the accursed thing is among us; and if ye will successfully settle your own Houses, after the Example of the good Kings of Judah, begin with God's, purge it of all its Filth, and he will take care of yours, prosper and establish them: If ye mind the Honour of God and the Good of his Church, with keep∣ing out the Ravenous Wolves that would break into it, then he will guide and direct in the weighty Affairs which now are, and hereafter shall be before you, and will preside among you with his Spirit of Wisdom, Knowledge and Understanding, extricate and overcome the greatest Difficulties, and his gracious Pro∣vidence will be as a Wall of Fire round about you.
God's Commands are attended not only with Promises to the Observers, but also with Threatnings to the Breakers and Neglecters thereof; for this, Scripture is full of Proofs, and therein God hath pronounced a Curse a∣gainst those who do his work deceitfull,Jerem. 48.10. in the case of executing Justice and Judgment, and 'tis but Justice what we now call for: the very same Person, the Eternal Son of God, whose Cause within your Station, I do humbly com∣mend unto you, shall at last come into the World in the glory of his Father with his An∣gels,Matt. 16.27. chap. 25. to reward every man according to his works; and the unprofitable as well as the wicked ser∣vant, which with him is but one and the same, shall be cast into outer darkness where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. When Men ne∣glect to Secure and Promote the Glory of
God, he hath in his Hand ways and means enough to lay their Honour in the Dust: This I speak not of my self, for 'tis God's Language, and indeed it ought to be look'd upon as the Voice of God not of Man, because grounded upon God's and not Man's Word; and I could almost be content never to be able to per∣suade, if at this Time and Occasion, I could effectually do't upon these Considerations, that soon or late we all must die, how soon, God alone knows, not we, for we have no certain Leases of our Lives; then cometh Judgment, and our Works, whether good or bad, shall follow us, which we must give an account of; and indeed, this should make us tremble, as well as Felix,Acts 24.25. when Paul reasoned of judgment to come. The Parable of the Talents shall then actually become matter of fact, and the sloth∣ful and careless for want of exercising them, shall be severely dealt withal. Negative Sins, though many mind them not, shall be the cause of Damnation; for we see in the Description of the last Judgment, made by our Saviour, the only Sins named, for which Men shall be damned, are all of omission, ye gave me no meat, ye gave me no drink, ye clothed me not, ye visited me not; ye minded me not, and ye did not for me what ye ought and might have done;Matt. 25. therefore, depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his An∣gels. This is terrible to hear, and shall be more to feel: O that to prevent this dreadful Doom, in our several Stations we were able with Bernard to say, Wherever I am, and whatsoever I do, it seems to me as if I had heard the voice of the Archangel saying, arise ye dead and
come to judgment; this is the ready way to be prepared for it, and to avoid being surprised therewith, and to live every moment as if that same was the last of our Life, and the next,Luk. 16.2. give an account of thy Stewardship; this ought to make every one keep his accounts ready, for though Men are apt to put off till to morrow what can be done to day, there shall then be no procrastination; whilst 'tis time,Matt. 24. let us do our Duty, and blessed, yea, thrice blessed shall that servant be, whom his Lord when he comes shall find so doing, but wo be to him that shall be found doing the contrary, as if because his Lord delayeth his coming, he was never to come and call to an account; David gives us the Character of a wicked Man to say, God will not require it, though he speaks it not with his Tongue, but only saith it in his Heart, and his saying so, is there called a Contempt of God; wherefore doth the wicked contemn God?Psal. 10.13. he hath said in his heart, thou shalt not require it.
Now the Second thing to be laid before you,Heb 4.13. I shall but name, 'tis this, all things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do; he is present every where,Psal. 139. and Ezek. 11.5. all seeing and all knowing; he is acquainted with all our ways, all our words, and he understandeth all our thoughts afar off, so cannot be deceived nor imposed upon; and if Men forsake the Lord's Cause, he will forsake them, then look for no∣thing but Misery and Calamity, which I think again and again, I now may safely say, for I hope, we at this time have no Amaziah to speak thus, but prophecy not again any more of Bethel,Amos 7.1. for it is the King's chappel, and it is the King's court, for in such places they loved not to hear
the Truth nor of unpleasant Things, but 'tis spoken of the Court of the Kings of Israel, who after the renting of the Ten Tribes, from first to last proved bad every one, which was not altogether of those of Judah, where was a mixture of some good and some bad.
Seeing Arguments drawn out of God's Word, the common and general Consent of the Chri∣stian Church since the Apostles time, and out of true sound Reason, cannot work upon or prevail with a sort of Men hardened and ob∣stinate in their Opinions, and of whom long ago David said,Psal. 64.5. they encourage themselves in an evil matter; and the Apostle fore-told of such false teachers who should privily,2 Pet. 2.1. at first and then openly, bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, that is, the Lord Jesus Saviour of the World, to be true God, natu∣ral and consubstantial Son of God; I say, 'tis not improper to apply our selves unto the Ci∣vil Power, that he would make use of the law∣ful Authority which God for his own Glory hath put into his hands; with some others we have done our part with offering in this Dis∣course good Arguments to assert and bear Re∣cord for the Truth, but remembring the Apo∣stle's Rule, a man that is an heretick, after the first and second admonition, reject knowing that he that is such, is subverted and sinneth, being condemned of himself; we think such may well be condemned by those who have right to do't, thereby to put a stop to the spreading of a mortal Gargrene, in a most corrupt and backsliding Age.
Herein we go upon Two Heads, Heresy and Blasphemy, against which we have both Gospel
and Law, Divine and Human; no Error more fundamental than that which impiously strikes at the Nature and Persons of the Godhead. The Blasphemer was by God's immediate Com∣mand, stoned to death by the whole Congre∣gation,Levit. 24.24. because as the Sin and Scandal were publick, so was the Punishment to be; and here the Law alloweth the Ecclesiastical Courts to proceed against Offenders in the Capital Cases of Heresy and Blasphemy; Capital I call them, for if in human Things, Treason and Rebellion be so, then fundamental He∣resy and Blasphemy are such in those of a Di∣vine Nature,Sir Tho. Ridley's View of the Civil and Eccle∣siastical Laws, p. 59. see the Margin. against such is provided Sentence of Death, which here hath actually been exe∣cuted upon some; thus one Bartholomew Legat, for these Arian and Socinian Blasphemies, was on the 18th. of March in 1611. burnt in Smith∣field; and in the following Month of April, Edward Wightman was for the same burnt at Litchfield. Queen Elizabeth having heard of some of them in her time, said, She was grie∣ved to hear she had such Monsters in her King∣doms. If Bishop Hall was now alive, how much more cause would he have had to say,Irem. Sect. 23. hoc a∣vo, &c. In this Age the Souls of Christians are seduced, not only by Papists, Anabaptists, Antinomians and Pe∣lagians, sed & per infernalem Socinianorum hae∣resim, but by means of the hellish Heresy of Soci∣nians, Anti trinitarians, New Arians, we have cause here in England to fear the utmost and last Destruction of Christian Religion. Let upon this account no just Cause be given to renew that Lamentation of Jeremiah, the Law is no more,chap. 2.9. least out of a just Judgment of God this should follow, the Gospel is no more for us. I tremble
to think how at last God will with a witness take notice of those who now take no notice of him, nor of his Concerns: We read the Character of a wicked Man in the Person of Pharaoh,Exod. 5.2. when he said, Who is the Lord that I should obey his voice to let Israel go? I know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go. Well, saith God, I will make thee know me before I have done with thee; wherefore in Scripture by the Prophets, especially by Ezekiel, in so many pla∣ces, God's usual Stile when either he threateneth or executeth Judgments, is this, and they shall know that I am the Lord;Ezek. 30.19. chap. 20.26. he saith, thus will I exe∣cute judgments in Egypt, and they shall know that I am the Lord; and sometimes these Punishments are inflicted, to the end they might know that I am the Lord. God grant none in this Land for want of performing their Duty in his Station, do provoke God in the way of Judgments to make them know he is the Lord, who both acts and speaks with a strong hand.Isa. 8.11.
Whether or not the Ecclesiastical Court hath in this occasion of Socinianism, acted its part according to Laws, I must not take it upon me, but leave it for the World to judge; but this I now do insist upon, that whether or not it be done, in conformity to Law, the Magi∣strate is about it to be addressed to, for in such cases, he at last is to act his part, as ever 'twas practised by those Christian Emperours, who upon the like occasion, minded the Glory of God: But here we must stop a little for fear of being thought to insinuate to our Superiours any thing relating to the Duty of their place, which we are not so vain as to think of in the least; but one of the Grounds we go upon is out
of the Book called the Reformation of the Ec∣clesiastical Laws; began in the days of Henry VIII. and continued in the time of Edward VI. under the Head of Judgment against Heresies; these words are positive,Tùm con∣sumptis omnibus aliis re∣mediis ad extremum ad Civiles Magistra∣tus ablege∣tur puni∣endus. Every other Remedy proving useless, the obstinate Heretick must at last be sent to the Civil Magistrate to be punished. De judiciis contra haereses, c. 4. de contumacibus Haereticis; and as to the point of Blasphemy, in the first Chapter under that Head, is pa∣thetically expressed the detestableness of that most wicked, and in some Sense unpardonable Sin; in Chap. 2d. quomodo sit punienda blasphe∣mia, 'tis said, sit igitur hoc à nobis constitutum, ut haec execrabilis blasphemiarum impietas, quàm primùm de eà ritè constiterit ab Episcopis, nulla ratione toleretur sed eodem supplicio confixa sit, quâ pertinax haereticorum insania plectitur, &c. where∣fore we order thus, that the execrable Impie∣ty of Blasphemy, assoon as the Bishops have found it out, shall by no means be tolerated, but shall suffer the same Punishment as is in∣flicted upon obstinate Hereticks; the constiterit is not so much in relation to Blasphemy it self, which is easily known when either things be∣longing to God as Infiniteness, Eternity, Un∣changeableness, Holiness, &c. are denied him and attributed to the Creatures, or when things contrary to his Nature as to lye, to deny him∣self, &c. are fathered upon him, or when Men do curse him; but the constiterit doth regard the Blasphemer and guilty Wretch, when he is found out; according to this,Ridley in his View, &c. p. 35, 36. Bishops are to take Cognizance, inquire into, and declare whether or not the Person or Persons be guil∣ty of Blasphemy, which being clear, he or they
are to be delivered into the Civil Magistrates hands, but if through neglect or otherwise, any of the Bishops happen not to act their Part, but stop the Course of Justice, certain∣ly the Magistrate is to look into't, and do his Duty though others do not theirs, 'tis nothing but what is very Just, that every Man's hand should be against those Ishmaels, whose hand is against every Man.
As to the Laws, I mentioned just before, they were by the Excellent Persons named by the King, collected and finished under Edward VI. the Pious Josiah of that Age, and so were then received with great and general Approbation; both Kings, Father and Son, by right of their Supremacy, as we may see't in both their Letters, gave them a Character of Authority, and if they were not passed into an Act; the only Cause was the untimely Death of that young Prince who designed it, and the Business had already been proposed in Parliament, as we see't out of these words of his Epistle to Archbishop Cranmer, &c. Cum vos triginta duos viros, ad leges nostras Ecclesiasticas perlegendas & componendas, juxta vim, formam & effectum cujusdam Acti Parlia∣menti in tertio regni nostri anno, &c. So that there is something of a Parliament's Authority, and if there be any thing wanting, it lyeth in your Power to set a Parliamentary Stamp upon it, especially those Heads that relate to the Di∣vine Moral Law, as do those about Heresy, Blasphemy and Idolatry, wherein God's Ho∣nour is immediately concerned; for certainly we are come to the last days and perillous times foretold by the Apostle,2 Tim. 3.1, 2. when amidst other
Sins, Men shall be Blasphemers:2 Kings 19.3. And I think I may be allowed in King Hezekiah's Words to say, this is a day of trouble and blasphemy, which, I hope, shall by your lawful Autho∣rity be rebuked, as now we do most humbly sue for; and I make bold once to say, what a Prophet said twice, upon the account of neglecting God's House,Hagg. 1.5, 7. Thus saith the Lord God of Hosts, consider your ways; like Mary, keep and ponder these things in your Hearts; for what she heard, and you hear, relate to the same Person, and are the Concerns of the Son of God.
Out of those Words ariseth in me the Con∣sideration of what our Saviour saith,Matt. 12.42. The queen of the south shall rise up in the judgment with this nation, and shall condemn it: When those that want Light, go farther in a good way than they that have it greater, these shall meet with a harder usage;Luke 12.47. for that servant which knew his lords will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes: 'Tis very sad and afflicting, to think how some Heathens who in some things minded the Glory of God, may at the last day rise up in the Judgment against some Christians for too much negle∣cting it: One I name, Nebuchadnezzar,Ezech. 7.24. whom God by his Prophet calls one of the worst of the heathen; yet that Man having seen how God had preserved in the fiery Furnace the Three young Men who had refused to fall before and worship his golden Image, how much was he wrought upon? He blessed the Most High God, but stop'd not there, for he made use of his Authority; therefore, saith he,
I make a decree, that every people, nation, and language which speak any thing amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed∣nego, shall be cut in pieces, and their houses be made a dunghil, because there is no other god that can deliver after this sort; this after the sight of a Miracle: And is not the whole Life of Christ the God of Christians, a con∣tinual working of Miracles? But as to Bel∣shazzar Nebuchadnezzar's Son, let me take no∣tice of Daniel's words to him, which declare the cause of his Ruin, and of the Loss of his Kingdom and Life,Dan. 5.23. And the God in whose hand thy life is, and whose are all thy ways, hast thou not glorified.
But I must not omit to take notice of some Canons and Ecclesiastical Constitutions a∣greed upon in the Convocations of both Provinces, Canterbury and York in 1640. and by Charles the First, for himself, Heirs, and lawful Successors, by virtue of his Prerogative Royal and Supream Authority in Ecclesiasti∣cal Causes, according to the Form of an Act of Parliament in the 25th Year of the Reign of Henry VIII. straightly enjoyned and com∣manded by the said Authority and his Letters Patents, dated at Westminster the 30th day of June, in the Sixteenth Year of his Reign, to be diligently observed and executed. I shall mention only the Fourth Canon, against Soci∣nianism, which is to my purpose to shew how at that time they took care to provide against it; thus it beginneth, Whereas much Mischief is already done in the Church of God, by the sprea∣ding of the damnable and cursed Heresie of So∣cinianism, as being a complication of many an∣tient
Heresies condemned by the Four first gene∣ral Councils, and contrary unto the Articles of Religion now established in the Church of Eng∣land: And whereas it is too apparent that the said wicked and blasphemous Errors are unhap∣pily dilated by the frequent divulgation and dis∣persion of dangerous Books written in favour and fartherance of the same — therefore, to provide against this, it is decreed, that no Sta∣tioner, Printer, or Importer of the said Books, or any other Person whatsoever, shall print, buy, sell, or disperse any Book broaching or maintain∣ing of the said abominable Doctrine, upon pain of Excommunication ipso facto to be thereupon in∣curred — and that no Preacher shall presume to vent any such Doctrine in any Sermon, under pain of Excommunication for the first Offence, and Deprivation for the second; and that no Student in either of the Universities of this Land, nor any Person in Holy Orders (excepting Graduates in Divinity, or such as have Episcopal or Archdeaco∣nal Jurisdiction, or Doctors of Law in holy Or∣ders) that is, they who are either able to re∣fute them, or at least in no great danger of being thereby seduced, shall be suffered to have or read any such Socinian Book or Discourses, un∣der pain (if the Offender live in the University) that he shall be punished according to the strictest Statutes provided there against the publishing, reading, or maintaining of false Doctrine; or if be live in the City or Country abroad, of a Sus∣pension for the first Offence, Excommunication for the second, and Deprivation for the third, unless he will absolutely, and in terminis, abjure the same: And if any Lay-man shall be seduced into this Opinion, and be convicted of it, he shall be
excommunicated, and not absolved but upon due Repentance and Abjuration, and that before the Metropolitan, or his own Bishop at least: And we likewise enjoyn, that such Books, if they be found in any prohibited hand, shall be immediately burn∣ed, and that there be a diligent search made by the appointment of the Ordinary after all such Books, in what Hands soever.—And that all who now have them, except before excepted, be strictly commanded to bring in the said Books, in the Universities to the Vice-Chancellours, and out of the Universities to the Bishops, who shall re∣turn them—and shall cause the rest to be burn∣ed: And we farther enjoyn that diligent enquiry be made after all such that shall maintain and defend the aforesaid Socinianism, and where any such shall be detected, that they be complained of to the several Bishops respectively, who are re∣quired to repress them from any such Propagation of the aforesaid wicked and detestable Opinions. Here is the Judgment of the Church against Socinianism called a damnable and cursed He∣resie, and contrary to the Articles of Religion now established in the Church of England, which hitherto hath taken care how to sup∣press it, and 'tis a Precedent for these Times to follow; for our Zeal should be no less than theirs was, now when the Danger is greater and the Poyson more spread, thus worse should be prevented: The Skill of a Physician who doth prevent an Evil and Sick∣ness, is more commendable than his who cures it when broken out; however in this last Case Remedies to do't ought to be used, and ne∣ver despair of a Cure, as long as there is sign of Life, let the Distemper be never so far
gone, or by unskilful Doctors be counted un∣curable; great Distempers are reserved to be cured by the Skill of great Physicians, and if your Honours be pleased but to mind this, and in earnest go about it, you may, by the Grace of God, find it within your reach, and not to exceed your Skill and Power to heal it, which I pray God to move and inspire you to go upon, now when temporal Concerns are at this time as good as over: And after you hitherto have been working for Men, be pleased with minding God's Work and his Glory, to make a happy end of this Session.
From the Bench you sit upon as Judges, be pleased first to look down upon the Na∣tion; of one side you may see the generality of it, over Head and Ears in corrupt Prin∣ciples and evil Practices, wallowing them∣selves in their great, many and frequent Sins, which cry loud to Heaven for Vengeance; on the other side, you may represent unto your selves, a very small Number, who upon their Knees mourn for all these Abomina∣tions, and pray to God to avert his so ju∣stly deserved Judgments; then I beseech you, look up towards Heaven, and observe God with Thunderbolts in one Hand, and Mer∣cies in the other, speaking thus, Hitherto with me Prayers have prevailed over Sins, and with∣held my Hand from striking down, but now Mer∣cy and Judgment lye ready, chuse which you will have: O for God's sake, whose Hand is lifted up, take pity on the Nation, and as far as God will enable you, purge, wash, and cleanse it from blasphemous Opinions and
wicked Practices, or else prepare for the hea∣viest Judgments; for the slower Vengeance is a coming, the harder it strikes when come; and 'tis a fearful thing, both in this Life and that which is to come, to fall into the hands of the living God, when he is angry; he over∣takes Men, Persons, and Nations in every kind of Judgment,Hosea 3.12, 14. therefore, saith God, will I be unto Ephraim as a moth: and to the House of Judah as rottenness; and if that be not enough, I will be unto Ephraim as a lyon, and as a young lyon to the house of Judah; Men must not make Cyphers of themselves, and insignificant, as if they were thus placed only for a sign or a shew, like Blazing Stars and fiery Vapours in the Sky, but rather to have wholsom Influences upon things below their sphere, to answer the end of him who lodged them in those high Stations; no true Friend can patiently suffer, nor no loyal Subject quietly endure his Friend or Prince to be ill spoken of, if he can help it: And shall not Men do for God that which they do one for another? but quietly hear him blasphemed and robbed of his due when they ought and can help it.
My Lords and Honourable,
I hope the Consideration of these things, will, as I hinted at first, though I be in no publick Station either in Church or State, clear me from Blame for the Freedom I now assume, thus openly to appear, and most humbly to address my self to you, that is to what next to Sovereignty, is greatest
and most sacred among us, which I may well call the supports of Monarchy, two parts of three of the Legislative Power, the supreme Court of Judicature, and the Representatives of the whole Body of the Nation. One thing indeed there is that needs something of an Apology; I know how short Epistles are usual and proper, especially when so highly address'd as this is, which is long, and may be, tedious, which if it be, I humbly beg Par∣don; but I thought the Matter and Nature of the thing, the Greatness and Nearness of the Evil, the Danger of worse, the present Ne∣cessity of a Remedy, and several other weigh∣ty Circumstances attending the State we now are in, might plead for an Excuse: And as this is the first time that ever I appear'd in your sight in this Capacity, and is like to be the last, so about this important Matter, I have longer than ordinary allow'd my self the liberty of speaking my mind to the full.
As I wish, so hope this most humble Re∣quest for the Cause of the Lord Jesus, shall not be in vain, however I enjoy the satisfa∣ction to have given in my Evidence for the Truth, whereupon, I call Heaven and Earth for a Record, and by the Grace of God shall ever be ready to do't again in a due and pro∣per manner, without being either ashamed or afraid to own and declare out of what Springs we draw these living Waters,Acts 17.2. with S. Paul, reasoning out of Scriptures; though with a sor∣rowful Heart let it be spoken, we have a∣mong us too many Men unconcerned, who, Gallio like, care for none of those things;Chap. 18.17. for they are very narrow hearted: But I hope
that what is wanting abroad as to Piety, Vir∣tue, and Concernedness for the Honour of God, shall by his Grace be found within your Walls, till by your Care and Zeal that great and good Work be brought to its Ma∣turity and full Perfection, which that ye may be able to do, I beseech the only wise God, the Father of Lights, from whom proceedeth every good and perfect Gift, to endue you from above with both Wisdom, which con∣sists in choice, and Prudence in Fore-sight, that of two Goods you may chuse the great∣est, and of two Evils the least, and fore-see the Advantages of doing him Service, and Dangers for being wanting therein, which is the earnest Desire and hearty Prayer of
Right Honourable and Honourable, 
