


My dearly beloved in the Lord,
ARistotle, in penning his moral instructions of Philosophy, thought all his indeavours well bestowed, if he might profit (as he saith) any one thereby, much more if Towns and Cities. How happy then may I think my labours imployed, if by these small pains I may rightly instruct you all, not in moral vertues, but in Divine and Gospel-verities; not in precepts of manners onely, but in Mysteries of true Religion; On which, I will not say the Civil Nurture, or gay Deportment of the outward Man, but the life of your Souls, and hope of all eternity dependeth. With which if you covet to enrich your Souls, two things I request at your hands; The one is, not to frame an overweening conceit, or bear too partial affection to such as are of contrary judgement unto me; the other, to peruse this Treatise with an indifferent and single eye, and with a greedy zeal of im∣bracing truth, from whose mouth soever. I know the subtilty of Sathan and snare of Schismaticks hath ever been, as the Apostle saith, By good words, and fair speeches to deceive the hearts of the simple. By faigned words to make merchandize of you. Their chiefest project, and principal study is, with meretricious and painted Eloquence to entertain their followers; and whilest they fill their ears with delight, to instill into their Souls most poy∣soned Doctrine. But the great Oratour Demosthenes can tell you, that the riches of Greece consist not in words; And the Apostle pronounceth, Not in lotiness and sublimity of speech; not in the perswasible words of humane wisdom, are the Mysteries of Christ; but in the power of God, and Doctrine of the spirit. Be not therefore, be not (I beseech you) inveagled with the smooth tongue, or filed speech and stile of our new Novations, but consider the mat∣ter, weigh the Reasons, examine the proofs they all alleadge, and you shall finde such silly Arguments, such slender stuff, as Augustine

espied in the eloquent and lofty discourses of Faustus Manichaeus, and the rest of his crew; when not regarding (as he saith) what gallant dish, or vessel of speech, but what food of knowledge he pro∣pounded unto him; not hearkening to the sound of words, but to the pith of matter. Albeit they bragged much, and promised nothing more than Truth, Truth, yet he is discovered, as he witnesseth, No truth amongst them; nothing but lies, vanities, and vile supersti∣tions. The like shall you discern in some new upstart Professours of these times. For although they vaunt of the word of God, vaunt of Scriptures, and Scriptures onely seem to follow; yet because, as Ambrose teacheth, By the word of the Law they impugne the Law, framing their private sense, and construction to counte∣nance the perversity of their mindes, by the Authority of the Law, It is more than evident they follow not the Oracles of God, but ra∣ther the fancies of their own brain, the suggestion of Sathan. For, by perverse interpretation (as Hierome testifieth) of the Gospel of Christ, is made the Gospel of man, or, which is worse, the Gospel of the Devil. And Martial the Poet speaketh to this purpose.

Quem recitas meus est, Offidentine, libellus;
Sed male cum recitas, incipit esse tuus.


The Book thou doest recite, Offidentine, is mine
Reciting it amiss, it groweth to be thine.

Secondly, they boast of their pure preaching of the word; whereas in this my small Treatise, and disproof of Mr. Nichols his errours, you shall discover, that some of them have no Authority to preach, no laying on of the hands of the Presbytery, no Mission, no Vocation; much less to Administer the Sacraments, which requireth the power of the Keyes. They are Theeves (saith Christ) who enter not by the door, but climb another way to steal, kill, and destroy your Souls. They are the false Prophets, who cry, Thus saith our Lord, when our Lord said it not, nor sent them, nor gave them Com∣mission to speak. And the purity, of which they crack, is (as Hiere∣my declareth) A lying Vision, and Divination, and deceit, and beguiling of their heart, which they prophesie unto you. Thirdly,

They glory to have purged and Reformed the Church of many er∣rours; but you shall see their Reformations have been but abuses and innovations; they have broken the peace, departed from the unity of the flock of Christ. You shall finde their ancient Faith a new Belief, as Gregory Nazianzen said of the Arrians; their refined Doctrines meer Novelties, new broached Errours; Which I pray God, both you, and all others may have grace to discern in time, least you open your eyes, and begin to lament these things too late, as Constantius the Emperour did, of whom the same Gregory Nazianzen writeth; That lying on his Death-bed, he repented him of three things; First, that he had commanded his Son in Law to be slain; the other, that he had nominated Iulian the Apostate to succeed him in his Imperial Throne; the third, that he had given ear to new devised Doctrines. And with these words, he yielded up the Ghost.
The place ye live in (my beloved) hath formerly been the subject of Learned Authors pens, among whom Mr. William Lambard of Lincolns Inne Gentleman, in his book intituled A Perambulation of Kent, and published in the year 1576. was not unmindefull of you. Mr. Camden out of Learned Nennius, forgot you not, when he derived the very name of the place wherein ye live, not so much from the Saxon Pylle, which is a plain floor, or Level, as from the British Dole, signifying a lower place, or Dale. Julius Caesars ar∣riving at this place (being repulsed from Dover) with his Trenches upon your Coast (called Romes work) and his own report of you in his Commentaries hath made you known abroad. Henry the Eight having shaken off the intolerable yoke of the Popish Tyranny, and espying that the Emperour was offended for the Divorce of Queen Catharine his wife, and that the French King had coupled the Dol∣phine his Son to the Popes Niece, and married his Daughter to the King of Scots, so that he might more justly suspect them all, than safely trust any one; and fearing least the ease and advantage of de∣scending on Land at this part, should give occasion and hardiness to his enemies to invade him, amongst other Castles, Plat-forms, and Block-houses, which he builded in all needfull places; more especially gave strength to your place, and fame abroad by erecting near toge∣ther

the three Fortifications of Sandown, Deal, and Walmer, which might at all times keep and beat the landing place. Yea, this special matter of Deal, Iohn Leland in Cygnea Cantione comprehendeth featly in these two verses.

Iactat Dela novas Celebris Arces
Notus Caesareis locus Trophaeis.


Renowned Deal doth vaunt it self
With Turrets newly rais'd
For Monuments of Caesars host
A place in Story prais'd.

And soon after the building those Castles, which make you strong and renowned in the Authors verses, your place was further ho∣noured with the landing of the Lady Anne of Cleve. Oh since then Antiquity hath blazed abroad your Name, Writers of Fame have made your place the subject of their Pens, Princes have strengthened you with Turrets and Castles; Live you so in this your place of Fame, that for your godly lives you may be yet more famous; for your strength and greater renown: To your three Fortifications and Castles add yet one Tower more, and let it be that which wise Salomon sug∣gesteth unto you, The name of the Lord is a strong Tower; the righteous run unto it, and are safe. Oh, Let this Name be sancti∣fied, be glorious among you; Let this Name be called upon by you with reverence, whilest too much irreverently it is spoken against, and reviled by others. Let this Name be your strength against all tem∣ptations, Let it be your strong Tower to run unto in all your fears and assaults of Sathan; and when Sathans Emissaries and Agents study the ruin of your Souls, be ye strong and safe under this holy and reverend Name, Psal. 111. vers. 9. And since Errours are rise, and begin to weaken our strength, and bonds of Love and Vnity, and some begin to creep in amongst you, to draw you from the publick Ordinan∣ces, let me perswade you unto these things here following.
First then, be real Christians; and think it not sufficient that you are Christians in name, and that you have a form of Godliness, but let Christs Name be great and glorious among you, be ye Christians in∣deed,

and walk in the power of Godliness, be ye true Nathanaels, Is∣raelites indeed; then, and never till then you are worth beholding and admiring, Behold, an Israelite indeed, Ioh. 1.47.
Secondly, Get your judgements rightly informed; the understand∣ing is the eye and guide of the Soul; if that be corrupt, and do mislead you, you must needs fall into the ditch; If a disease get the brain, it is hardly cured; And hence the Learned observe, that Corruption in Judgement is worse than Corruption in Manners, especially, when the minde hath been enlightned with the Truth. Leprosie in the head was of all other Leprosies the most dangerous. He was unclean that had the Leprosie in his hands, or feet; but if it were in his head, then he was utterly unclean.
Thirdly, Get meek and humble Spirits; To these the Lord hath promised that he will teach them his way, when spiritual pride is punished with a fall. Hunt not after novelties, neither be wise above that which is written.
Fourthly, Let your principal care be about practical fundamen∣tal points, such as Faith, Obedience, a good Conscience, how you may mortifie your special Corruptions, and crucifie the flesh with its affe∣ctions and lusts. Live soberly in the use of the creature, religiously towards God, righteously and justly in all your dealings with the Sons of men.
And finally I beseech you by all the tender mercies of Jesus Christ, that you all minde the same things; Let there be no divisions, no Sects, no Schismes found amongst you; but labour to keep the Vnity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. Paul's farewell to his Corinthians shall be mine to you, Finally, brethren, farewell; be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one minde, live in peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you. Which peace that ye may enjoy, it hath been the indeavour for above these five years, and shall be the con∣stant prayer of him, who is the weakest of all his brethren, and the meanest in his Fathers house, even

From my Study in up∣per Deal, March the 10. 1653.
