




Dearely beloved in the Lord,
THough in the eye of the world you seeme to be
strangers, scattered abroad throughout Pontus, Ga∣latia,
Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia1 Pet. 1. 1., yet are
you as those twelve Tribes scattered abroad, unto
whom our great Apostle and high PriestHeb. 3. 1. daily
sends greetingIames 1. 1, whereby you are with those twleve Tribes (under
hope of the promise) incouraged instantly to serve God day and
nightAct. 22. 7., and for which hopes sake, though you be often drawn be∣fore
the rulers of this world, and accused by such as say they are
Iewes but are notRev. 2. 9. Rev. 3 9., yet is it for no other end, but that the Lord,
by leading you through Heathenish Nations, may thereby in∣struct
you in the signification of all voices that are in the world,
that so you may utter in them all the praises of him that hath cal∣led
you out of darknesse into his marvellous light1 Pet. 2. 9.; for there are
so many kinds of voices in the world, and none is without its proper
signification; so that if we knew not the meaning of thē voice,
we should be as Barbarians one to another, in our expressions,
and receptions of the things of God1 Cor. 14. 10, 11..
Observe therefore, that the changes the Saints passe through
in this life, is onely to give them the knowledge of all voices
and sounds, that so they may speake by revelation, by knowledge,

by prophecying, and by Doctrine1 Cor, 13. 6. for things without life give a
sound unto us whether pipe or harp1 Cor. 14. 7., even the courses the world
holds with us in this life, who are dead in sinnes and tres∣passes
Ephe. 2. 1, 2, and have no life of Christ in them at allRom. 1. 12. 12. Iohn 6. 53., yet even these
give a certaine and distinct sound unto us, that wee stand in
readinesse prepared for the battell, and know very well what
is piped and harped1 Cor. 14. 7, 8.. So that when the world thinks it is
confounding us by their Babilonish conference and courses
held with us, they are then contrarie to their owne nature,
ability and intentions, instructing and teaching us in the high
things of GodRom. 8. 28, and howsoever they are in a babilonish con∣fusion
Gen. 11. 7, 8, 9., yet doth their voice or voices give a certaine and di∣stinct
sound unto us1 Cor. 14. 7, 8., so that wee are not terrified by our adversa∣ries
in these their practises, which is to them an evident token of
perdition, but to us of salvation and that of GodPhil. 1. 28.; for it is e∣vident
and apparent, that God is our salvation, and not the pow∣er
and policy of the world which doth nothing else but seek
our ruinPsal. 137. 7, 8, 9..
But you know the hand of the Lord upon our adversaries,
amongst whom hee hath brought us in every placeAct. 20. 21, 22., who
have sought our hurtPsal. 38. 12. Psal. 41. 7., and wrested our words to effect their
endsPsal. 56. 5, the more they have struck at us, the more they have
broke themselves in pieces in the waies of their Covenants
and Combinations, in the wayes of their Assemblies and
Associations in which they delighted to put such confidence
and trust, which appeare in the eyes of all to bee but as
that broken reed of AEgypt, whereon if a man lean it will go into his
hand and pierce itIsa. 36. 6..
So that you may sing with the Psalmist a hymne of praise,
wherever the Lord hath led you, saying, there brake hee the ar∣rowes
of the bow, the shield and the sword, and the battell, Se∣lah:
thou art more glorious and excellent then the Moun∣taines
of prey, the stout-hearted are spoiled, they have slept
their sleep and none of the men of might have found their
handsPsal. 76. 3 4, 5..
Freely therefore can I make choice of you to patronize
this small Treatise or Epistolium, if now were the time that na∣turall
breath should no longer preserve this present lifeGen. 46. 33.; for there

are two things necessary in the patronage, defence, or Protecti∣on
of any thing.
First, that the Patron be wise and able to judge of the state and
condition of the thing patronized to give it its due respect, worth
and usefulnesse, according to its nature and relation.
Secondly, he must be furnished with ability to answer all obje∣ctions
that may bee made to invalid, weaken or innervate that
which is committed unto him to bee patronaged, defended and
spoken for: in both which respects it is joyfully presented unto
you, being very sensible and willingly acknowledging that
God hath made you instruments not onely to consent unto
and conclude upon, but also to teach and instruct mee in
these or such like principles from the Word of the Lord unto
my edification and comfort, therefore cannot but bee able
(through God) to discerne the nature, benefit, and use
of them.
And for the answering of objections that might be made
by any Adversarie, I doubt not, knowing very well, that
when you have been in your solemne exercises, gaine-say∣ers
being present, and when you have beene brought to
answer before worldly Governours, Church-Assemblies,
and Jewish Senedrions, there hath not appeared a spirit
able to resist or gaine-say that wisdome and spirit by which
you have spokenAct. 6. 10, which spirit uttereth it selfe freely with∣out
respect of PersonsRom. 2. 11. Acts 10. 34 35. in all the Congregations and Assem∣blies
of Saints, giving words for edification and comfort
of the Church sometimes in one, and sometimes in ano∣ther,
that all flesh may bee silent before himZach. 2. 12, 13., and onely
listen unto the Oracle of God by whom bee is pleased to utter it1 Pet. 4. 11.;
for yee may all prophecy one by one for the edification of the
Church, but if any thing bee revealed to another that sits by,
let the first hold his peace1 Cor. 14. 29, 30, 31., and that is the order of the
Churches of the Saints, or of that great Saint or holy one of
Israel, for God is not of confusion like that way of BabelTo speak e∣verie one a several lan∣guage.,
but of peace, or as the word signifies, of unity, for every Saint
is one with, and hath a like share in every particular grace utte∣red
or exercised in the Church; in case the lamps in the Temple be
trimedExod. 27. 20., and the boules of the golden candlesticks rightly filled

by those two pipes that empty themselves into themZech. 4. 11, 12, 13, 14., otherwise
if we find the Ministery of the Word so monopolized, that it is
tyed unto one in the Church, more then to any other, or all the rest,
(which one cannot be justified to be the head of the Church,
which is the prerogative royall of the Son of God, that great
heards-man, shepheard, and feeder of IsraelPsal. 80. 1. Psal. 23. 1. Ioh. 10. 11, 12, 13, 14. Gen. 49. 24.) then may we know
that in that place vision failesIsa. 28. 7. Ezek. 7. 26. Ezek. 13. 6, 7., yea the light of the Sanctuary is
gone out, for they have hewen out unto themselves a Ministery,
divination, and vision, by the art, wisdome, and will of man,
prostrating themselves thereunto, depending upon man, and not
on the Son of God, who utters himselfe in whom he pleaseth, choo∣sing
the foolish things of the world to confound the wise1 Cor. 1. 27, 28, so that
we may plainely discerne, that in such waies of Ministery the
people sits in darknesse, and under the shadow and regiment of deathIer. 6. 4. Mat. 4. 15. 16. Isa. 9. 1, 2.,
and are in that condition the Prophet speakes of, behold the peo∣ple
borrow much, but they never pay againe, whereas the righteous
is mercifull and giveth liberallyPsal. 37. 21. like unto the two daughters
of the Horse-leech, they cry give, giveProv. 30. 15., are alwaies in want
and necessity of hearing, but never bring forth any thing to
give againe in publishing the riches of the Gospell to their
brethren, they never pay againe, as though the word were
not to bee put forth unto the exchangersMat. 25. 27, 28, 29, and binds them
over to returne it with increase and advantage. Of that
sort are these (that tie the Ministration of the Gospell to
any particular man in the Congregation) which our Apo∣stle
speakes of, that are ever learning and never come to the
knowledge of the truth2 Tim. 3. 6, 7, 8., ever borrowing, but never found pay∣ing
againPsal. 37. 21..
These think and boast, they receive the Word with great
joy, and cheerfulnesse, and with no small ingagements for
the maintenance of him that brings it, that he may live upon
the Gospell that preacheth it; but if it should bee brought by
such as looke to live on it indeed1 Cor. 9. 13, 14., that is, when they preach
unto a people, they expect that fruit, crop and harvest of the
grace of God to arise amongst them, and appeare in that glo∣rious
manifestation of that abundant and rich grace of God
in Christ in every of the Saints, which is the very life, comfort,
and sole satisfaction of him that speakes it, and the onely tie and

cause of his abode and stay amongst them: if the Gospell from a
spirit that looks only for livelihood in such things (in the mat∣ters
of God) appeare, then will these carnall framers and ere∣cters
of Ministers and Ministries prove Jannes and Jambres to
resist the truth, for then is the time to manifest and shew them∣selves
2 Tim. 3. 8, 9., as of old men of the same mind did in AEgypt, and al∣so
in the wildernesseExod. 7. 11, 12, 13. Numb. 16. 1, 2, 3, 4. in their wresting of it.
But, Oh how happie a thing it is (as you know, for I appeale
unto you herein) for brethren to live together in unityPsal. 13 3. 1.! for so
the word is, that is, to see themselves so united in the Sonship
of God, as to have an equall share, right and interest in every par∣ticular
grace of the Gospell, be it what it is or may be, other∣wise
they can never acknowledge themselves to be equall sha∣rers
of death, and in every particular misery thereof through the
fall, which is to deny that by nature we are all alikeEph. 2. 1, 2, 3. and so o∣verthrowes
the grace and blessing of the Gospell: for, the one
sets forth the truth of Christs death, and the other the glory of his
resurrection, and if we give not each of these its due, we spoile
the Sonship that is of God, both unto our selves and those that
heare us1 Cor. 8 11. Rom. 14. 15. But the unity of the Saints is through that holy uncti∣on
upon the head, even our spirituall AaronPsal. 45. 7, and also upon his
beardPsal. 133. 1. 2., that is, it multiplies its self as the haires upon the headPsal. 40. 12. Mat. 10. 30.,
yea, upon the border or coller of the garment, viz. strongly bin∣ding
and uniting the whole vestment together, that no rent
nor schism can befall it, or he found in it, else do we not hold the
head which by joynts and bonds tieth and coupleth the whole body
together to bee one, and so it increaseth with the augmentations of
GodCol. 2. 19.; that word translated increase or augmentation, signi∣fies
to advance or to grow together, so that we are increased, or
advanced together with the Son of God, and according to that
fulnesse, growth, or advancement of the Son of God; such
doth our Apostle reckon and account ours to be, for according
to the advancement and fulnesse of his death, such is ours2 Cor. 1. 5,
and we know that hee was lifted up, and triumphed upon the
CrosseIoh. 3. 14. Col. 2. 15., which death admits of no increase or diminution, for
it is full according to the fulnesse of him that filleth all thingsEph. 1. 2. 3,
so also according to the fulnesse of the advancement of his re∣surrection
and ascention, such is oursRom. 8. 17, and wee know, that

our Mediatour is made higher then the heavensHeb. 7 26, so that they that
teach degrees in the house of God, and in the grace of the Gos∣pell
from such Scriptures as these, they teach perfection by the
Law, by which no flesh can be justifiedGal. 2. 16., for if righteousnesse were
by the Law then Christ died in vainGal. 2. 21., such kind of Ministers nei∣ther
know how sin is taken away by the Son of God, nor how
the righteousnesse of the Son of God is made that righteous∣nesse
that justifies sorry man; for he takes away our sin by be∣coming
that in us that is miserable unto the uttermostHeb. 7, 25., and not in
way of any gradation at all, and we are blessed in him by beco∣ming
one with that righteousnesse that is perfection in the height
thereofHeb. 7. 26, which knowes nor can admit of any graduall distinction
at all, being the righteousnesse of him who is God over all, blessed
from eternity to eternityRom. 9. 5., and such righteousnesse and perfecti∣on
can onely give the spirit of man content, for if he can com∣prehend
it and go beyond either in looking forward or backward,
he makes an and of his happinesse and is at a losse in himselfe.
So that the weights and measures of the SanctuaryDeut. 25. 13, 14, 15, 16. Exod. 16, 36, Prov. 20. 10, name∣ly
of that Sanctuarie the Lord pitcheth and not manHeb. 8. 2., are upon
termes of certainty for the truth of them, as also of fulnesse for
the perfection of themJoh. 1. 14. 16. Col. 1. 19. Col. 2. 9, 10, for there is in the house of God stone
and stone, Epha and Epha, as the words are in the places quoted,
that is, one bigger and heavier then another, and one lesse and
lighter then another, for there is not a greater measure of hu∣miliation
and a lesser in this house, for there is but one humiliati∣on
of one Son of God; so also there is not a greater and a lesser
exaltation in this house, for there is but one exaltation of that
one Son of sorry man, there is not a greater and lesser sanctity
and holinesse in this house, for it is but one sanctity or holinesse
of that one Saint or holy one of IsraelPsal. 71. 22. Psal. 89. 18, there is not a larger and
more specious wisdome, and one of a narrower scantling to
be mentioned in this house, for it is that one onely wisdome of
him that is onely wise1 Tim. 1. 17., that is to be the only word1 Cor. 12. 8., and only to
be justified in the house of the LordMat. 11. 19.; there is not a more famous
redemption and deliverance and one of a lesser and more in∣feriour
nature to be heard of in this Assembly, for it is a ran∣some
not by any corruptible thing, but by the precious blood of that
undefiled Son of God1 Pet. 1. 18 19, 20., for it is hee who of God is made unto us

or as the word is in us all these things1 Cor. 1. 30., that according as it is
written, he that rejoyceth let him rejoyce in the Lord, or as the words
are, hee that praiseth himselfe, let him praise himselfe in the Lord1 Cor. 1. 31.,
that so the glory may be given to him and not unto our selvesPsal. 115. 1.; if
then the vision doe appeare unto us as to our spirituall Jacob,
we see it extended from heaven to earth, and from earth to heaven,
from the highest excellency of the Son of God to the lowest and
deepest misery of the Sons of men, and from the lowest mise∣ry
of the sons of men to the highest glory and dignity of that
Son of GodGen. 28. 12, 13.; such is theIoh. 1. 51. ascention and descention of the Angells
upon that son of man, that is, the message or Ministery of the
Gospell is such in all the Revelation and Embassage thereof,
as descends from the highest to the lowest, and ascends from
the lowest unto the highest, and then onely doe wee anoint the
head stone as a pillar, or stable and firme state and condition of
holinesse unto the LordGen. 28. 18, and give it the name of Bethell, even the
house and dwelling place of the Lord for everGen. 28. 19., of such sub∣stance
and certainty as to become pillars in the house of GodRevel. 3. 12., and
to be made an habitation for God for everEph. 2. 21. 22. are the matters of this
KingdomeRom. 14. 17..
And in this point is the world much deceived, in our seem∣ing
high-flown Professors or Phanaticks of these times, who
think the Revelation of Christ stands in some strange appariti∣on,
which is such a new thing unto the Spirit of God in that man,
that others that have the SpiritRom. 8. 9. may not attaine thereunto: But
whatsoever is revealed unto the Saints of the true knowledge
of Jesus Christ, it is a thing familiarly knowne unto the Spi∣rit,
who is acquainted with the deep things of God1 Cor. 2. 10. Rom. 8. 27., and in that
respect all things in the Word of God are old Commandements
given unto us, which we have knowne from the beginning, and so
there is no newnesse in it at all1 Ioh. 2. 7., neither is there any thing in
the Word of God but to the spirit of manRom. 8. 16 is a new thing,
strange and wonderfull as though it had never appeared before1 Cor. 2. 9, 10.,
and in that respect the whole Word of God in every particu∣lar
thereof, is a new Commandement given or written unto us,
and so it is true in him, and also in us1 Ioh. 2. 8., for if darknesse in us do
not passe away, the light cannot be made manifest, and so the
truth consisteth in God and man, in light and darknesse, the one

passing away that the other may appeare and bee made manifest.
Of such grace, truth, and certainty is the Gospell, that it is
not without man, which is the ballancing and setting the soule
upon its true base and sure foundation for ever1 Cor. 3. 11.; so that the
Revelation of Christ in the Church is not as a phantasma or
uncertaine vision that comes and goes upon dubious termes,
lifting up to heaven whilst it abides, but when it is gone no such
matter, but the visions of God are the manifestations of the Son
of God upon grounds and termes of infallability and certainty, as
when we see the light to be light, and know it to be so from
the nature and operation of darknesse, all the world cannot
make us thinke it is some other thing, nor can wee approve of
him that goes about to perswade us thereunto; of such like cer∣tainty
are the visions and revelations of the Gospell, there∣fore
do the Saints of God bear witnesse unto the things of God
as of that which was from the beginning, which wee have heard,
which wee have seen with these our eyes, which we have looked up∣on,
and these hands of ours have handled of that word of life1 Joh. 1. 1.,
for that light was made manifest, and we have seen it, and beare
witnesse, and shew unto you that eternall life which is with the
Father, and is made manifest unto us, or as the word is,
in us1 Ioh. 1. 2 Gal. 1. 16..
So that the goings up, the departures or going away of the
visions of God is not a leaving of the soules of the Saints at a losse
for a time, or vacant and destitute of his presence, it is but a distinct
and gracious change of the vision, administration, or apparition
from one glory unto another2 Cor. 3. 18., for the perpetuall delight and re∣freshing
of the Saints, so that when vision seems to cease in one
distinct and particular respect, the soule is filled in another par∣ticular
and distinct respect, which alwaies keeps the heart of a
Christian in its approach unto and familliarity with his maker,
and every distinct way of Gods manifestation having the weight
of heaven in it he finds a glorious entrance into the Kingdome,
and Regiment of a dear or onely son2 Pet. 1. 11. Col. 1. 13., and cannot be at a losse of
the love of the Father, nor laid waste and emptied of the bles∣sing
of his presenceIsai. 63. 9. Isai. 43 2., no more then the Son of God can lose (for a
moment) the light and lustre of that continuance which is one and
the same with himselfeIoh. 17. 22. Ioh. 14. 9. 10. Ioh. 15, 19, 20, 21..

These things I make bold to put you in remembrance of not
as to informe you, knowing you have them in that shore-house
and treasurie which is your owne, which the world knowes not
of, neither doth it know you, nor can it acknowledge the one,
nor the other, for the abundant riches of this treasurie is Christ,
in you the hope of gloryCol. 7. 27. 2 Cor. 4: 6, 7:, and we know that as he is so are we even
in this world1 Ioh. 11. 4. 17..
For we know that the Son of God is come, or sprung up, as the
word signifies, in his Saints, and hath given us a mind to know him
which is true, that is, hath set up a light1 Cor. 4. 5 in our minds to acknow∣ledge
him only that is truth and substance and no vaine shadow
nor ceremony at allIoh. 1. 17., and we are in him that is true in that his
Son Jesus Christ, that is, we are of him that is truth, and of that
his Son Jesus Christ, that is, of that lineage, race, and off-spring
of himAct. 17. 28, 29., and so it answers to the former Verse, the whole world
is of that wicked one, for so the word is1 Ioh. 5. 19., this is the true God or
this is the verity of God, and everlasting life, in that way of
multiplying of himselfe by Jesus Christ, without whom no verity,
truth, nor certainty of God appears unto the creatureIoh. 14. 6. Mat. 11. 27, little chil∣dren,
babes, or Idiots, as the word signifies, that is, children in
respect of any estimation or dependance you have of the
things of this present life; Idiots in regard of any knowledge
or skill you have of the things of God and matters of eternal
life; (as of your selves) keep your selves from Idolls, that is, look
diligently unto your selves that you esteem not of, nor depend
upon those false ChristsMar. 13. 22. Ma. 24. 24. and carnall worships which the world
hath vainely formed and moulded up unto themselvesIoh. 4. 22. 2 King. 17, 28, to 34.; so
are you hence forth no more children but are met together in the u∣nity
of faith, and acknowledgement of the Son of God, in a perfect
man, in the measure of the age of the fulnesse of Christ, in whom
all the body being coupled and knit together in every joynt for the
furnishing of it selfe, according to that effectuall power in the mea∣sure
of every part, receiveth increase of the body in the edifying of
it selfe in love1 Joh. 5. 19, 20. Ephe. 4. 13, 14, 16., AMEN.

