



Madam,
I So far please my selfe in presu∣ming on you, as to borrow your Name without your knowledge, to countenance a parcell of poor well-meaning Meditations, whose poverty neverthelesse could find no mercy with the importunity of some, but that it must be proclaimed for every man to see it, that will. I know you are wholly willing to do good, Name and all; which yet I hope shall not be hurt, but
onely improved by the bor∣rowing. And the truth is, that our Names and estimations in the world, if their founda∣tions be substantiall, and such as will beare them, are of pre∣cious accommodation & con∣sequence unto us, to make us great in wel-doing; if our hearts be humble enough to affect that glory. Wisdome, health, strength, greatnesse of estate, potēcie of friends, yea spirituall gifts, yea (that which is more) graces them∣selves, though they should goe forth in all their might to do service in the world, yet if they served under a suffe∣ring or suspected Name, they would rather diminish and take from, then adde much to the happinesse or comfort of men. Nathaniel had much
adoe to regard or look after Iesus Christ himselfe, because he came out of Nazareth, Can there any good come out of Nazareth? John 1.49. The name of the City was too little for the greatnesse of the Inhabitant; and disad∣vantaged the world in him, to an unknowne losse in the things of their peace, Joh. 7.52. Because Galile was Ga∣lile, and Nazareth but Na∣zareth, Christ was not Christ unto many. And when Satan put it into the Priests and Pharisees heads to represent him unto the world for a de∣ceiver, he struck at all that happinesse which the world was in possibility to enjoy by him.
Madam, it is none of the least vouchsafements of hea∣ven
unto us here on earth, not to be called out of our names, not to have our integritie or worth reviled in the thoughts and consciences of men; espe∣cially when we travaile in birth with the publique good, and are conscious, as well to our abilities (in some mea∣sure) as our desires of being serviceable to the world: Not that he that is of a pub∣lique spirit, and lies out in his desires for the wealth of many, is much capable of any private or personall discon∣tentment, except it be that the publique should suffer, especi∣ally when the blessing is so neere to it: Otherwise, it would be no affliction to Prin∣ces, (that is, to persons of publique, and high deserving spirits) to goe on foot, if the
world could ride on horses without them. It is but an un∣der-glory to raigne, when those over whom we rule might raigne without us. When Christ wept over Jeru∣salem, it was not because he should want the praise and glory of being called The Repairer of her breach, or because he should lose an op∣portunity of being made great by her deliverance, but be∣cause she refused that delive∣rance which was in his hand to confer upon her, and chose desolation and ruine as it were in the face and presence of safety and peace, Luk. 19.42. Paul could be content to be as a Reprobate, that is, as a man of no authority or esteem in the Church, so that the Corinthians would doe
the things that were honest, and which became the Gospel, without the interposall of his authority and power, 2 Cor. 13.7. And elsewhere he wish∣eth that they could or might raigne without him. i. with∣out the help of his ministery, or his care for the raising and building them up into a Kingdome.
This consideration I make bold to present unto your La∣diship, as being an agent for heaven, to increase the reve∣nues thereof, if lawfully I may, due from such possessions as are held by your Ladiship of this happy tenure. I make no question, but for your other outward endowments & free∣holds, as health, liberty, wisdome, estate, friends, &c. you make due and daily
acknowledgement to the great Lord of these dispensa∣tions, according to the rate and custome of the Saints. Neither dare I absolutely charge you with the oversight of any other blessing you en∣joy upon the like termes. Yet if I would, or could be jealous of you, for holding concealed mercies, and being overseene in the things that God hath done for you, I should soonest pitch upon that precious name and reputation, where∣with God hath so happily matched your worth and up∣rightnesse in the world: or at least upon that deare ac∣commodation and advantage you enjoy thereby, of being a Benefactresse unto many. The largenesse of your heart to doe good, though farre the
greater mercie, would yet be paine and griefe unto you, if God should suffer the world so far to sinne against their owne good, as to trample your Name and esteeme under foot, whereby the greatest part (at least) of all your intenti∣ons, purposes and endeavours that way, would prove abor∣tive, and miscarry. If you had the greatest gift that ever was given, of casting out de∣vils by the finger of God, yet if you were suspected, or thought to cast them out through Belzebub, you should have little of the worlds custome: they would rather keep their Devils still, then seek to cast out the suspition they had conceived against you, that so they might be healed of you. In such a case,
how would your gift, though excellent and glorious, be an occasion of much sorrow and trouble of soule unto you?
The reason why the world so generally perisheth under that mighty salvation which is spread over it, is those sini∣ster, low, and under-thoughts it hath of him, who is anoin∣ted by God to confer this great blessednesse upon it, to∣gether with the stubborn and deep unwillingnesse found in the hearts of men, to have those unworthy thoughts of theirs any wayes disturbed or interrupted, by those that are excellent and glorious in∣deed, and which doe not be lye nor shame their object. And some Divines of so∣ber judgements and exact ap∣prehensions, have conceived,
that far the greatest part of CHRISTS sorrowings and sufferings on earth, sprang from the strength and certainty of this ap∣prehension within him, that the breasts of his consolations would be so weakly and faintly drawne by the world, and that with that abundance of grace, with that plenteous redemp∣tion which was in him, so small a remnant onely would be saved.
But I feare lest my pen should trespasse upon your Ladiships occasions other∣wise. The lines that are now put into your hands, long to be in your bosome with abun∣dance of the blessing of Pa∣tience and Peace. The Chri∣stian and high designe they
have upon you, is, to keep you from contending with God when he contends with you, to make you goe upright un∣der all pressures and burdens whatsoever. I know you are a great Proficient already in the Schoole of Patience; but the flesh will hardly be taught to forget her weak∣nesse, though she be over∣shadowed with all the glo∣ry of the strength of hea∣ven.
Your Ladiship, by many expressions of your selfe in love and kindnesse unto me, have drawne me (amongst others, not a few) into bonds of thankfulnesse above my substance, and that (I may well say) before I was aware: especially that noble charitie of yours in so constant a re∣lieving
of my reputation with the adventure and ex∣posall of your owne, is a cour∣tesie of intire and univer∣sall obligement alone. But I know it is more easie for you to shew kindnesse, then to heare of it again: Therefore I spare you and your praises to∣gether, and will tender my respects in that which I know you love and will ap∣prove, I meane, in prayer for you.
The Lord who makes the labour of him that buildeth, not to be in vaine, by buil∣ding with him, make the Discourse a blessing of peace and patience unto you, and give you Spirit to the letter of it, from the one end unto the other, and build you up,  ding to the line and mo∣dell
of it, to his everlasting Kingdome by it.

From my Study in Coleman-street,
May 18. 1641.
