



Much Honoured,
I Was by your intreaties invited to Preach this Sermon, and by your Im∣portunities have been drawn to this Publication of it: whether this Apology will be sufficient for its coming abroad, I know

not; tis all I have, if not, I must be content with what measure is meted to me The Providential occasion to which it relates, was sad and grievous to many more then your selves: That Honou∣rable and Deare Relation of yours, at whose Funeral it was Delivered (and for whose sake I doubt not of some Acceptance it will find with many, for all its own unworthinesse) being one, who for her singular ver∣tues was Generally beloved, and Honoured; Her death cannot be lamented as Immature, for she lived to a good old Age; Tis the Peculiar Priviledg of the Godly, they cannot live too long, nor dye too soone. It was

my observation of her, that her declining age of Nature seemed to be Her improving age of Grace; when her natural strength, and Abilities began to run low, and on Tilt, as it were; Her Spiritual affecti∣ons seemed as if but fresh broached. This is rare, and so much the more excellent, To see in natures Autumn, a second spring of Grace. O tis sad to ob∣serve the many declining Profes∣sours of these dayes! many who had once a very good complexion in Religion, how are they now tand by walking much abroad without the Covering of close Communion with God in his Or∣dinances. The Lord make you

wise herein, and faithful to the eternal interests of your Soules; by taking heed to your selves in these Perilous times, that you steere a right course be∣tween the left hand of Profa∣ness and Carnality, and the Right hand of Schisme, and Novelty. Looke first with all Possible care to your foundati∣on, that it be well laid in Re∣generation, and heart-renova∣tion; then build upwards, as high as you can in a holy life, and heavenly Conversation. Make Religion your Businesse, and let the Exercises of it in Pub∣lick, Private and Secret have the Preheminence of all your Employments. Bestow the zeale

of your Affections on the Great, and weightier matters of Reli∣gion, Faith and Godlinesse, and let it not evaporate or waste it selfe on the mint and Cum∣min of Formes and opinions. Looke on the world, and things of it, as this Sermon gives you a Prospect of them, as be∣ing but for a while, the Fashi∣on of them Passing away; Estates, and Honours, Nobili∣ty, Gentry, Lords and Ladies are things which shortly will be quite out of Fashion, and Christ will be All in All. Keep Eter∣nity in your thoughts, Christ in your hearts, Heaven in your eyes, the world under your Feet, and in this posture march

on dayly to life Eternal. For your Helpe and furtherance i these and all other christia duties, you may comman the Assistance of His poo Prayers and Endeavours, wh is

Brentwood October. 24 1657.
