




Madam,
THE publication of this little piece (at this juncture) was not the Effect of my forward∣ness, but of that deference I owe to several good Men, and Well-wishers of the present Government, by whose importunity I was induced to take this Task upon me, without prejudice to the Rights of more Abler Men, to whose elaborate Works on the same Subject, as ('tis here limited) this Essay has the Honour to lead the way. Those Gentlemen my good Friends had very good reason to be moved, when they heard the good Measures of the Govern∣ment misrepresented to Strangers by the Artifices of Designing Men, having no less in their Aim than to divide the common Interest of Protestants. They unanimously concurred in their judgments that it was expedient to put a stop to the spreading of this Contagion, and urged me with Motives that were too weighty for me to resist, having all the Inclina∣tion

imaginable to shew my Zeal for Our Religion and Liberties within my Sphere. Herein is contain∣ed a true (tho a general) Account of the Matter of Fact to undeceive Strangers of their Mistakes, whose different Opinions as to Church Government, and other Circumstances, ought not to remove their Christian Charity towards one another, but (be∣ing concerned in one bottom) to promote the Common Interest and Salvation of Mankind, (laying aside all Prejudice, Animosity and Rancour,) tho it should tend to the removal of any Earthly thing most dear to them, that proves a stumbling-block or occasion of offence to either strong or weak Brethren, imitating the Apostles Precept, Acts 15. concerning the difference of the Circumcision. And the Apostle Paul's resolution in the like case, Romans, Chap. 14. & 15. And in 1 Cor. 8. last Verse, If meat make my Brother to offend, I will not eat Flesh while the World standeth, lest I make my Bro∣ther to offend. Which no doubt is preceptive to the Christian World, who pretend not to Infallibility. But being 'tis come this length, the Dedication for its Patronage and Encouragement is due to your Ladiship; chiefly for three Reasons. Because,
First, That your Ancestors and Relations had not only a great share in the Reformation, but

also ever since were great Promoters of the Pro∣testant Reformed Religion in Scotland, and Prote∣ctors of its Ministers and Professors, and your Charity upon that account to Suffering Ministers and Professors, having been very considerable.
Secondly, That without any Flattery, I dare say, (and all those who have the Honour to know your Ladiship, will confirm my Assertion) that none understands the Matter in hand better than your self.
Thirdly, That your Honourable Husband, your Self, Eldest Son, and most of all your Relations, were chiefly concerned in the last Efforts, and great Enterprize made, and the signal Deliverance wrought of late for these oppressed Nations, of which God was pleased to make our present Gra∣cious King his Glorious Instrument: (and for which your Endeavours, I hope your Family will meet with its due Reward.) Your Ladiship must not ex∣pect a fine stile of Language, it being sufficient that the Matter of Fact is true, tho Design ho∣nest, and the Language intelligible.
Madam, I might have been more plain, parti∣cular, and ad homines, but declin'd that Method, designing to give offence to no good Christian, be his Profession what it will, if his Principles be

good; I don't value how Evil or Byassed men may criticise upon this matter; Provided, that mode∣rate good men may be pleased, and that the ho∣nest design of this little plain Piece may be any ways serviceable to the present Government, your Ladiships Honourable Family, and other good Sub∣jects; Which that it may, and that, as God in his infinite Wisdom has made our Gracious King his Glorious Instrument of our Redemption, from our Fears of Popery and Slavery, as the Effects there∣of) So the same Almighty God would be pleased to settle the Imperial Crown of this Kingdom up∣on the Heads of King William and Queen Mary in Peace and Truth, and be so transmitted from them after they have lived a long, happy Life here (and received Crowns of Glory hereafter) to their Po∣sterity and lawful Successors for ever. And that your Ladiship and Honourable Family may live hap∣pily under their Auspicious Reign, is and shall be the constant Prayer of,

