



Beloved Friends,
TO further the salvation of mens souls, as it is a most excellent work, so it ought to be the stu∣dy, and endeavour both of every Christian in his place and calling, and especially of the Mini∣sters of the Gospel, whose office and function calls upon them more

importunately to labour therein. Now since Regeneration is absolutely necessary to Salvation, and that there can be no entrance into the new Ie∣rusalem, without a new birth. I have according to that ability which the Lord hath given me, set forth in this small Treatise the nature and necessity of Regeneration, together with the Means on your part to be performed for the better attaining thereunto.
Most of these truths have been Preached in your hearing, and now they are presented to your sight; that thereby you may be put in re∣membrance of them, and more thorowly affected with them. Though I cease to be your Minister, yet I shall not cease to do what in me lyeth to further your eternal happiness. It was my hearty desire of your everlasting welfare that first put me upon Preaching on this Sub∣ject: and the like desire hath in∣gaged me to present the same to your view.
Herein have I set before you Heaven and Hell, Happiness and Misery. Oh that you would be so wise as to choose Heaven rather than Hell, Happiness rather than Misery.
That I should adventure these Notes into the World, is not out of any conceit that there is any thing extraordinary in them, being Con∣scious to my self of much Weak∣ness: but meerly out of that strong affection I bear to your souls wel∣fare. For my hearts desire for you is that you may be saved. And will the Lord but bless this small Treatise to the Regeneration, or Edificati∣on of any of your Souls, I have the end of all my pains and cost.
Avoiding all affectation of Words, I have used plainness of speech: it being alwayes my chief design in the whole course of my Ministry, to affect the Hearts and Consci∣ences of my Hearers, rather than to tickle their Ears, and please their Phansie.
That I may not detain you longer, I shall close this Epistle with three requests unto you,

1. That you kindly accept of this small Book which treats on a subject so necessary to your everlasting hap∣piness.
2. That you would be pleased as to peruse it your selves, so to take some time to read it to your Families. If you cannot find leisure on the week dayes, than to read some part thereof on each Lords day, till you have read it through.
3. That you would not lock it up in your closets, but suffer it to lye in your houses, where your Chil∣dren and Servants may peruse it as they find opportunity. Who know∣eth how successfull and fruitful this plain Treatise may prove, if the Lord shall be pleased to accompany it with his blessing?

That the Lord therefore would so bless these my poor and weak endeavours, that such as are yet in their natural state may be con∣verted,

that Converts may be im∣proved and built up in that grace wherein they stand, is the unfeigned desire and hearty Prayer of

