



YOU are a people whom the Lord hath honoured with many successive able Pastors, Mr. Obadiah Sedgwick, Dr. Owen, Mr. Sams: All which Lights the Lord hath taken up into his upper Chamber, after their shine upon Earth to shine in Heaven; after their Labours with men, to take their rest in the Bosom of their God and Saviour. You are a people whom the Lord hath preserved marvel∣lously in the stormy, cloudy and dark daies that scattered many others. You have had but a few drops of those tempestuous showers that drowned others. A garden inclosed, a spring shut up, a fountain seal∣ed have you been: Your bow yet abideth in strength, though I am well aware how the Archers of Hell and Earth have shot at you. You have seen the goings of God in your Sanctuary, and every one of you may speak of his glory. The Lord hath
 much thinned your glory and comfort, by the decease of many Principal Members, though after the fall of the leaf, you have had sweet after-springs, and budding stems that you remain as green Olive-trees, in the house of your God: So let his spiri∣tual glory remain fresh upon you. You have continued in a close adherence to the Lord, and his Worship, not mixing with the world, and thereby have lost little: in your keeping the word of his patience, he hath kept you from the hour of temptation that hath tryed the Earth, when greater damage hath attached others in their neu∣tral, treacherous compliances. The Pil∣lar of Cloud and fire, hath given you a safe conduct to this present break-day of the Glory of God, and the Jubile of rest and liberty, universally extended in this Nation from its Bondage, and where is the fury of the Oppressor? The Lord cause this springing glory to shine to a perfect day, and prevent new darkening Clouds For above the space of fourteen years the Lord hath placed me, unworthy me among you: And to the praise of his glo¦rious name, you have seen the working of his blessed Spirit in your confirmation and others conversion: In which years
 through the various tryals Divine Provi∣dence hath exercised me with, and the many personal infirmities that have attend∣ed me, you have born up in your Christi∣an ingenuous respects to me, as also in your assistance, according to your abilities, to my civil expences, wherein I have yearly spent the whole revenue of my little Own that I had in this world, which had not been, but for the failure of some other hand, of what was at first proffered at my coming to you; though the disturb∣ing exigences of late times, conduced much to that failure: This indeed in some fits of exigence, hath proved some little un∣easie temptation to me, to think of some other supply: Which at present I wave in duty to God, and true love to you. The last blow the Lord gave us, was that deep one, by the decease of our dear and honoured Brother Mr. Hubbard, which becomes the occasion of this small book. He was a good Copy, I hope many will write after him, and not let that goodly picture drop out of their hearts or lives: He gave you good conduct in all your af∣fairs, and prospered, for the Lord was with him: 'Twas amongst his very last words, the Lord hath the residue of Spirits, let
 us pray that that living, flowing, renew∣ing Spirit may flourish among us, with the encrease of Gifts and Grace. By rea∣son of my many occasions, some months are pass'd since this Christian deceased; but I remember Vespasians Motto on his coin, sat cito si sat bene. 'Tis soon enough, if well enough. I design not many words to you, 'twill be better, that what con∣cerns the Glory of God and our mutual comfort, be expressed in our continued fel∣lowship. So, finally Brethren, Farewell, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, Live in Peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you.

