



My Lord,
I Am not insensible but that I go contrary to the Exam∣ples
of my Contemporaries, in writing a Dedication
before a Poem of this Nature; where the Satyr may
seem to point at particular Persons, and also to infer,

that they are already in the disesteem of the Patron.
These Considerations (I confess) are sufficient to stifle
the very Thought of a Dedication. But when you shall know
(my Lord) that 'twas not the Ambition alone of pre∣fixing
your Lordship's Name to the Frontispiece (of
which I must acknowledge my self guilty) but withat,
that it might be a guard to secure my first Essay from
the malicious Censures of the Factious; for, if their un∣limited
indignities extend to the vilifying the best
Frame of Government in the World; how can I expect
this slender Production of mine shou'd scape? Where∣fore,
when your Lordship shall know this, I may reasona∣bly
hope for a favourable construction of a Freedom ta∣ken,
which others have not yet adventur'd on. And in∣deed,
of all the British Nobility, to whom cou'd I with
more security address my self for Refuge, than to your
Lordship? Who in all the time of our Late Confusions
(when Fears and Iealousies had wrought the Rabble in∣to
Madness) with so much integrity and Iustice main∣tain'd
the Royal Interest, and stood the shock of Facti∣on
in its highest Rage; even when Loyalty was hardly
able to support it self, or thrown by like an unfashiona∣ble
Garment; when the Hypocrisie of the Tubb had stain'd
the Purity of the Gospel, and with its noisie Cant had
almost driven three Kingdoms into a second Rebellion.
To dare to be honest at such a time (my Lord) was cer∣tainly
the most exalted Proof of a firm Obedience; and
made no less known the Character of your Greatness than

of your Loyalty, which is already▪ so truly eminent, that
to attempt to heighten it, wou'd but derogate from that
which I am oblig'd (though at an humble distance) to
admire.
It is beyond all doubt that to offer at a description of
Heaven wou'd be utterly vain; because it is impossible
to be describ'd: for it may reasonably be thought, that,
where Imagination it self cannot reach an Idea suita∣ble
to what the thing really is, Language (though
dress'd in all the Gallantry of Eloquence) must come in∣finitely
short: Nevertheless, if we may presume to aim
at it with any Earthly comparison, nothing can more re∣semble
it than the Content and Felicity your Lordship
is seated in: where you have all the Delights of the
Court without the Vanity; the Transactions of the Town,
without the Noise; the Praise of good Men, without being
stumm'd with Flattery; Diversion, without Folly; Plenty,
without Luxury; and indeed, all the Sweets of Life, with∣out
the Gall, which too commonly attends'em. Pardon me
(my Lord) that I am so long upon a Subject that I can∣not
exchange for a better.
As for the following Trifle, I have little to say in
defence of it; onely, that it carries no other design a∣long
with it than the reducing of Offenders to Obedience,
and to make the more moderate see their Errours; the
first step towards amendment. But that such a design
(however pursu'd) shou'd please all Men, I am not so
vain as to expect; for the World was never yet so honest,

but that it might mend. To be no farther troublesome
(my Lord) should it gain the Success which I my self
could wish it, it would not equal the satisfaction I have
in the honour of valuing my self, as,
MY LORD,

