




My Dear Friends,
COnsidering with my self, how besides my
Lords-daies Preaching, and Week-daies
Catechizing, I might be further serviceable
to your souls, in promoting their spiritual
welfare; It pleased God to put it into my
heart, to draw up some practical Directions for your
better guidance in the way to Heaven, and to give to e∣very
Family in my Parish a Copy of them. Accordingly
I set upon the work with all readiness and alacrity, being
much perswaded in my self that some spiritual advan∣tage
might (through Gods blessing) accrew unto your
souls thereby. The Lord, who is the searcher of all
hearts, knoweth, that my only end and aim herein is the
advancement of your everlasting salvation, which if it
shall be any way furthered by this small Treatise, I shall
never repent of my pains and cost: But shall very much
rejoyce that the Lord hath inabled mee (in any measure)
to be serviceable to him in the furtherance of the Gos∣pel
of his dear Son, especially among you my dear flock.
Two considerations, among others, have had some in∣fluence

upon mee in this undertaking.
The one is of that mutual love which hath hitherto
been between us. As I have you in my heart, so am I
perswaded that you have mee in yours. During the
whole time of my abode with you (which is now above
two and twenty years) I do not remember that we have
had the least difference, no not about the point of Main∣tenance,
the usual unhappy make-bate between Minister
and People. For though the value of the Living be not
so much by half as is generally reported abroad (being
no Parsonage, but a Vicaridge, endowed with a third
part of that Tithe which the Parson doth collect) yet I
cannot but with much thankfulness acknowledge, that
what I have had, hath been with much love and friend∣liness.
For when you have made any composition with
mee for my part of the Tithe, you have alwaies given
mee more than I could demand or expect. If then the
blessed Apostle Paul were willing, and that with glad∣ness,2 Cor. 12. 15.
to spend and to bee spent for his Corinthians, and that
although the more abundantly hee loved them, the less hee was
loved of them; Much more ought I to be like-minded to∣wards
you, who have not at any time so ill requited my
love, but alwaies been ready to answer it with recipro∣cal
affections. That therefore I might leave to posterity
some publick acknowledgement, and perpetual memo∣ral
of your constant love and respect to mee, together
with my due resentment of it, was one consideration
which put mee upon this design.
Another was the gladsome reflexion upon your great
and godly care of your poor, which I look upon (even as
it is meet for mee so to do) as the fruit of the
Gospel preached among you, and an argument of your
profiting therein. And indeed it is such, as I willingly take
occasion to make publick mention of it for an example to
others. For though your poor bee many hundreds, yet, I

think, I may say truly, without offence to other Parishes,
they are in some respect better provided for than any
poor in the City; For by the voluntary contribution of
divers of you, with the assistance of some other chari∣table
persons,
1 All the poor children in your Parish are taught to
read and write gratis, by such School-Masters and
School-Mistresses, who teach them their Catechize,
whereof my self sometimes take an account.
2 All the Antient poor who can either spin or knit,
may have Flax and Yarn for fetching, to set themselves
on work, an are well paid for the same, immediately
upon the return thereof. This consideration, as it hath
very much affected mee, so have I alwaies accounted my
self your debtor upon this score. And surely if our
Lord and Master doth take what is done unto the poor
for their relief, as done unto himself, then should wee
also, especially his Ministers, in some sort, be like-minded.
Your debtor therefore I have taken my self to bee, nor
could I bethink my self how to discharge this debt in a
way more suitable to the nature of it, and my relation
to you, than by indeavouring something extraordinary
for your good hereafter, as you have done extraordina∣rily
for the present good of our poor; and as you have
put your selves to special pains and charge for the suc∣cour
of their bodies, so to put my self upon some spe∣cial
labour, and willingly be at some cost for the advan∣tage
of your souls.
But the main Motive which hath put mee upon this
undertaking, is, the single sense of my Relation to you,
that it hath pleased God of his infinite goodness and free
grace to entrust mee a weak, frail, earthen vessel, with
that inestimable Treasure, the Mysteries of the Gospel, and
appointed mee to preach unto you in particular the Un∣searchable
Riches of Christ. I account it the greatest ho∣nour

a poor creature can be capable of, to be made di∣rectly
subservient to the glorious counsel, and gracious
purpose of his Creator, for the recovery and restauration
of the world by Jesus Christ; and therefore that we Mi∣nisters
of the Gospel, whom God hath vouchsafed this
honour, have the strongest ingagement and obligation
laid upon us to preach the Gospel, both in season and out
of season; and to lay out our selves all manner of waies,
if by any means we may gain souls unto Christ, and build
them up in him. Now this way I have here taken will
have this advantage above others, above my ordinary
preaching, and performance of other Ministerial duties
among you, that whereas by them I can minde you of
the things which belong unto your everlasting peace, on∣ly
while I am in this Tabernacle: By this, as it is said of
Abel,Heb. 11. 4. I may still speak to you, even when dead. Accept there∣fore
(my dear Friends and Neighbours) this little Trea∣tise
from the hands of your loving Pastor, whose heart
is exceedingly inlarged towards you, greatly longing
after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ. For what is
my hope,1 Thes. 2. 19. or joy, or crown of rejoycing? Are not even yee in
the presence of our Lord Iesus Christ at his coming? Ac∣cept
it therefore, and testifie your acceptance by rea∣ding
of it, and much more by a conscionable perfor∣mance
of the Directions contained in it. I think they
will carry their own evidence with them, that they are
all agreeable to the Word of God: For I have not made
it my business to mint new Notions, but to press upon
you old Truths, and known duties. I have drawm them
up in a plain and familiar stile and Method, studying ra∣ther
to be profitable, than accurate; They are of daily
use to an holy life, & therefore I hope you will daily per∣use
them. They are of general use to all sorts of Chri∣stians,
at all times, in their several places, Callings, con∣ditions
and relations, and therefore I hope you will give

the more diligent heed to them. Such whose Callings
and Businesses will scarce afford them leisure on the
week-daies to look into such Treatises as this, I do ear∣nestly
intreat them, that at least on the Lord-daies, af∣ter
the performance of the publick duties of Piety in the
Congregation, and of private in their Families, they
would spend some time in reading a part of this book
with their Family. And the Lord make it abundantly
useful and profitable unto you.Heb. 13. 20, 21. Yea the God of peace that
brought again from the dead our Lord Iesus, that great
Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
Covenant, make you perfect in every good work, to do his will,
working in you that which is well-pleasing in his sight, through
Iesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.
Sepulchres,
London.
Decemb. 20. 1660.

