



Christian Brethren,
HAving (by Providence) this occasion put into my hand, I am desirous to make use of it, thereby to impart a word or two, if so I may be useful to you, in recommending to your thoughts, these short Labours of my Compa∣nion in the Work of Christ. The work (I say) is short, yet surely it contains much of matter in it, wherein (if you be studious) you may finde occa∣sion greatly to enlarge. It is true, he hat not medled so much with the particular Controversies denpeding, as with the searching into the Basis, or Root of the Matter; wherein (I hope) he hath performed the part of a serious and profitable Christian.
If it should so fall out, that in Reading these seven Grounds or Reasons, some of them should not seem so clear as you could wish; yet know, that if any one of them be undeniable, it is sufficient; for truth standeth not so much in the multitude, as in the clearness of the Proofes alledged.

This I speak not, as being doubtful of the sound∣ness of any of the Grounds proposed (being fairly considered) but to prevent an evil, which is in∣cident to many, which is, to reject a work alto∣gether because some part may seem to be dubious.
Among other things contained in this Book, there is one thing especially to be observed, and that is, those three things left at liberty under Christ in the Gospel, which were limited under Mose's Law; namely, time, place, and cost, for the Worship of God: It is a point (if well heeded) which may conduce much to the rectifying Chri∣stians in this weighty controversie about the Sabbath. Again, observe well the distinction noted, concerning some Laws, how the preceptive part may remain, and yet the penal part chang∣ed: The want of heeding this, seems to have run some men into great extreams at this day. Fur∣thermore, I pray consider the design of this Dis∣course, it is to help you to keep your selves, in the enjoyment of Gospel Liberty, and from the bon∣dage of the Law, whither we see too many incli∣ning; as if having begun in the Spirit, they now seek to be made perfect in the Flesh. Brethren, it is a good thing that our hearts bee established with Grace (to wit the Gospel) & not with meats brews 13.

(to wit the Law) which hath not profited them that have been exercised therewith. You see grace is proposed, as that which is proper for the esta∣blishment of the heart; and that kinde of stability was never more needful than now, because nothing seems now remaining to fix upon, if this be neg∣lected; for all things seem to reel to and fro like a Drunkard, as if all those things which must be shaken were even at their period. Wherefore Bre∣thren let us have Grace, &c. so shall wee have Faith, and receive a Kingdome which cannot be moved, &c.
Beloved, be exhorted, to beware of those (and that Doctrine) that leadeth into bondage, for these daies are perilous in that respect. And howsoever many may be led on in their simplicity, having great zeal to Godward, Rom. 10. 2. yet See a Paper called the Counterfeit Jew. how do I fear that some of the great Masters of our late Judaizers have been no other than the ap∣pointed servants of her, whose design is to infa∣tuate by Sophistical devices, those whom she could not turn from the right way, by her more gross and superstitious devices: For can wee think, that the several late exorbitant errours, have not had some deputed by subtilty to project and set them on broach? it is not credible.

Let your eyes (therefore) bee ever beholding the grace that is in Christ Jesus, by which you will be kept free from the yoke of bondage, as well as from the phantastical conceits of our late En∣thusiasts: and in the beholding whereof, alwaies remember, that this grace is accompanied with a denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and with a sober, godly, and righteous life in this pre∣sent world; and let not this your greatest good, be evil spoken of by any mis-use of your Liberty, which you have by the Gospel; but ever let the sound of these words be in your ears. Brethren, you are called unto Liberty, only use not your Li∣berty as an occasion to the Flesh.
Brethren, the God of all Grace, fill you with Grace and Peace in believing, is the humble supplication of

