



My LORD,
IT is now near five moneths since
this Discourse was deliver'd in Two
Sermons in your Lordships Ca∣thedral
Church at ELY. So
long have I been able to keep it confin'd to
that privacy, for which it was intended,
notwithstanding many endeavours that were
used to make it Publick. I had no reason
to be easily perswaded to offer to the world
any thing so mean on so Great a Subject.
That, which might serve well enough from the
Pulpit to express my own Duty and Reve∣rence
to the Blessed Memory of this Holy
Prelate, and could raise suitable Affections in
that one Auditory for which these Sermons were

compos'd, will not, perhaps, deserve Pardon
coming from the Press and presented to the
Publick view. It may be expected from a
Discourse of this nature, that carries in its
Title Page the Great Name of Bishop
GUNNING, that it should bear some pro∣portion
to the Excellent Subject, adorn the
Great and Good Mans memory and render
Him Lovely and Admirable in the Lively
expression of His Character, as He really
was in the Perfections of His Soul and the
whole Tenour of His Life. But that's an
undertaking far above My reach and beyond
the Power of any words that I know. If so
Happy a Performance may be reasonably expected
from any Pen, My Lord, it must be Yours; You
best understand and can best Express what an in∣estimable
Treasure the World lately Enjoyed, and
now Laments as lost, in Your Renowned Predeces∣sour.
But, if the Important Affairs that take
up your time and the many Duties of that High
Station, in which God and the King have so hap∣pily
plac'd You, will not allow Your Lordship
leisure to oblige our Age and Posterity in this par∣ticular,

I hope some other will be found ready,
and, in some good Degree, qualified for such an
undertaking.
In the mean time I have suffer'd my self to be
overrul'd by my Friends, but especially Your
Lordship, whose Commands I do not use to dis∣pute;
but still delight to Observe and Obey the
least intimations of Your Pleasure, as well now
that You are Bishop of the Diocess as when
You were Master of the College. But no∣thing
made Me yeild more patiently to the pub∣lishing
of this imperfect Account of my late
Dearest and most Honour'd Lord, then some
comfortable Hopes, which arose within Me,
that it might be a means to provoke and hasten
some other to draw up a just and compleat Hi∣story
of His Lordships Life. For these papers
are such, as they cannot forestall, but may well
Incourage and quicken a performance so desire∣able
in its self, so due to the Bishop's memory,
and so profitable for the Publick.
That I have inscrib'd them to Your Lordships
Name, I hope, My Lord, You can easily par∣don,
because You could not expect that it should

be otherwise: Nothing of this kind can be
so properly offer'd to any other as to Your self:
You were that Great Prelat's most intimate and
many ways indeared Friend; You are his most
Worthy and wish'd for Successour; You tread
in his steps and most happily Imitate his Vir∣tues:
In all things You appear a Prelate after
his own heart, the very Person, whom (had
it been in His power) the Holy Man would
have named, to that Honour, before any other
in the World.
That Your Lordship may live long for the
further Service and Benefit of the Church, and
to the manifold increase of Honour and Happiness
to Your Self both in this and a better World, is
the daily Hearty Prayer of, My Lord,

St John's College
in Cambridge
Febr. 12. 1684/5
