




Brethren and Fathers,
YOƲ must needs have a greater sence of the matters Treated on in this Book then other men, and are more Eminently concern'd to consider what is to be done in them. God hath made you the Stewards of his Mysteries, and among the rest, hath committed the Fourth Principle, Heb. 6. 2. to your Trust; a necessity therefore lieth upon you to be as Faithful in that as in the Rest.
I shall upon this occasion offer a few things to your Enquiry and Consideration, and the first is this.
Whether ever it entered into your Hearts to Teach with Dili∣gence, and to handle distinctly the Duties and Blessings which concern this Principle, so that the Breasts of your Churches have afforded the sincere Milk of this Word or Principle, as well as of the rest? And if not, then whether the true Reason be not, because you know not what to say or do about it?
2. Whether sleightly to pass over one Principle or Foundation Doctrine, do not endanger making the rest like it, and whether we can well support our other Principles against such an Adversary as should take us upon the Account of our neglect in this particular.
3. Whether the neglect of this Principle do not lead Christi∣ans too much to neglect one of the greatest Blessings of the New Covenant, even the Sealing Spirit of Promise, whiles the means once so useful to obtain it, is by you wholly laid aside.
I humbly beseech you to consider these things, as also what I have here presented to you in the ensuing Discourses; To the Pening whereof, had I not been constrained by the unnecessary and un∣seasonable oppositions made against the Truths contended for; I should more gladly have spared this Labour, for to me it is no∣thing Pleasant but very Grievous, that when many are seeking for those things that might make for Peace, still new occasions do Intervene to Revive (if not to augme Controversie.
How seasonably Mr. Danvers was inated to forbear Wri∣ting against his Brethren, some of you are not ignorant, and how little he hath gained by his unnecessary undertaking, will be yet more evident; and if his Zeal shall yet inforce further op∣position, he may rationally believe those that make Conscience of this Truth, cannot but endeavour to defend it.
God hath endued some of you with moderate and healing Spirits, I intreat all such to stand up for Peace, to do what they can to prevent these publick Jars, I desire to be so happy, as to see an end of this Controversy.
What I have written, is my judgment and Conscience, I have not writ for Discourse sake. Nor have I injured the sence of any Author I meddle with, so far as I know, but have dealt with all good Conscience therein, what I faile in by reason of humane frailty, I know every good Christian will Pardon me therein. I am

