




Brethren,
WHen I consider how much it is your desire, and the de∣sire of the Churches in general, that brotherly concord, peace and truth, might possess the room of all our divisions, in affection, judg∣ment, and practise; and particularly in the fourth principle of Christianity. And how

many Prayers are daily made to God for so great a Blessing; And that hopeful way we lately seem'd to be in, to lay hold of the thing which hath been so long desired: And therewithal that most unhappy obstruction of our hopes (as ye know) arising from one who should rather have been a restorer of the antient path which many have forsaken, and so a healer of the breach which hath been made, by its being neglected: Who being in reputation for Wisdome, having there∣withal great opportunity (and I am perswa∣ded really intended) to do the Church of Christ much good; Even then, by a little solly following his own Councels (doubtless through Satans malice, who envied our good) hath made himself and his enterprises ob∣noxious, and our wound more grievous.
I say, when I considered these things, I could not pass them over without a Sigh, (even this which here I present unto you) saying in my heart, Why hath the Lord done this? Which was no sooner conceived, but I was immediately satisfied, that the Lord

was jealous for his holy way, which had been grsly prophaned by an hypocritical confor∣mity thereunto. And true for ever is that word, Hosea 14. ult. All the wayes of the Lord are right, and the Just shall walk therein; But the Transgressor shall fall therein. And certainly, as our Bre∣threns resusing to seek the Lord after the due order at the first, so this prodigious hy∣pocrisie at the last, may too truly be called The breach of the Church.Perrez Ecclesia at this day.
Thou Lord art righteous, thou know∣est the Hearts of the children of men, and hast discovered the hidden things there∣of, and hast pleaded the cause of thy precious (though much abused) Truth. Even so Lord let our iniquities be ever corrected, but yet in mercy forgive us our Trespasses.
But what shall we say, shall we now no more go about this dreadfull work, to bring the Ark (the fourth principle of Christiani∣ty I mean) to its proper place in the Chur∣ches?

or rather some irregular Churches to their due reverence unto it.
If it seem good in the eyes of the Lord, let his servants still convene to consider of this matter, perhaps we shall find grace in his sight; for there is hope that we shall one un∣derstand another, and with one consent seek and serve the Lord God of our Fore-Fa∣thers.
And this I am the more induced to be∣lieve or hope for, from, not only the great desire which I yet find to be alive in the hearts of Christians generally, that peace in this matter might be upon Israel. But also from the great forwardness which I found in the Searchers themselves to consent unto certain Proposals for Peace; the first of which is this,
That it be granted and professed on all sides by the formerly divided parties, That that laying on of Hands, Heb. 6. 2. is one of the Principles of Christs Doctrine, and a part of the foundati∣on.

This Proposition being considered, it may appear that there wants but a step (as it were) to unity in the truth it self, and so to a lasting Peace one with another. And methinks it should be no impossible thing, for us to agree about the particular service intended, Heb. 6. 2. (unless a spirit of perversness be min∣gled amongst us) Towards the clearing of which difficulty, something is said in the se∣quel, which I desire may be considered.
Why the Searchers should so much declaim against you, as if you unchurched all Chur∣chs but your selves, I can see no reason, having never understood, that you did at any time by any agreement, deliver such a Do∣ctrine. Nor is it so much your business to meddle with unchurching any body, as to keep your selves from corruption in Doctrine and Manners.
Indeed the point of Communion with those who reject or oppose your Faith and pra∣ctice in the case depending, hath been much debated, and resolved in the Negative (èspe∣cially touching the Table of the Lord) but

this is so far from being an Argument, that you deny them to be Churches of Christ, that it plainly Argues you own them for such; but yet such, as for their rejecting or opposing some truth of God, are therefore uncapable of present communion with those that religi∣ously observe the truth by them rejected and opposed. For if you deem them to be no Churches at all, what need any debate be had, Whether it be orderly or safe to com∣municate with them at the Lords Table?
Now, that persons may be allowed the Ap∣pellation of Christians (and so of the Church of Christ) and yet (as the matter may be circumstanced concerning them) ought to be held at some distance in respect of pre∣sent Communion, with other Christians, or Churches, implies no absurdity, but is ra∣ther very necessary, I hope the ensuing dis∣course will demonstrate.
Something also I have said in vindicati∣on of the Messengers Office (which I per∣ceive to be much questioned by some) I con∣fess my self nothing so fit a person to plead

this cause as some other. However, if that which I have done may give occasion to any other to do more, or more effectually, in this point, I shall think my pains well bestowed. I commit all that I have said to the blessing of God, and the Consideration of his Chur∣ches.

