



SIRS,
AS you cannot be lightly Ignorant of the many Changes which have befallen our Nation in the case of Religion since first the Christian Faith was received in this Island; even so, you have great reason to consider, whether your present standing in that behalf, be such, as that you may comfortably apply that speech, 1 Pet. 5. 12. This is the true Grace of God, wherein ye stand. Or at least∣wise, great cause you have to consider, whether you stand perfect and compleat in all the Will of God, Col. 4. 12. That being the great End of the Lord, in sending us the Word of his Salvation, even to present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus, Phil. 1. 28.
After what manner this Nation first received the Christian Faith, does not so clearly appear from History, as might be desired. The Roman Party glory much in Austin the Monk, and would have him Eng∣lands Apostle. But Doctor Fulk denies him that Honour: Rhem. Test. on 1 Cor. 4. Shew∣ing withal, that when he came hither, he corrupted with Roman mix∣tures, that Christianity which he found among the Britains. And in∣deed, Fabian Fab. Chron. 5. p. f. 107. (though a Papist) shews how he would have imposed
 sundry Observations upon them, which the Britains refused, as being contrary to the Doctrine which at first they had received.
If Simon Zelotes, or Joseph of Arimathea, were the first that Preached Christ to this Nation, (as some hold) then we doubt not but the first Churches in this Land, 1. Thes. 2. 14. Acts 2. 41. became followers of the Churches which in Judea were in Christ Jesus. And surely, it seems more credible, that one of these should first Preach to the Britains the Word of Life, than that Faganus, or Dunianus, (sent from Elutherius Bishop of Rome) should do it; these being above an Hundred Years after the time that Joseph of Arimathea flourished, which was Anno 81. the other not till Anno 188.
But however this may be, yet we have the sacred Scriptures, which plainly shew us the Way of the Lord, as it was first delivered to the Churches of Christ in many Nations. And it is that way of Christian Re∣ligion which the ensuing Systems are designed to demonstrate. Neither is there any other Gospel to be received by us, though an Angel from Hea∣ven should introduce it: How much less the Children of Men, who are far less in Power and Dignity?
The most specious pretence under which the Alterations, and manifold Innovations which have befallen the Christian Religion, have been obtruded, Is the Authority of the Church (as if God had given her power) to vary the Administration of Ordinances, or to make Institutions in Religion: But the consequence hath shewed the vanity of such pretences, whilst we have been by this means, in some one Ordinance incumbred with the best part of an hundred Ceremonies, namely the Eu∣charist, as is observed in the Roman Masses; for which, among other Errors, the Protestants have justly withdrawn their Communion. And it is well observed by some, Mr. Sharps Sermon be∣fore the Court of Aldermen, Aug. 23. 74. That we have an Obligation to the Laws of God, antecedent to those of any Church whatsoever: Nor are we bound to obey those, any further than they are agreeable with these.
Two causes are assigned, upon which separation from a Church is lawful. 1. When she requires of us, as a condition of her Communion, an acknowledgment and profession of that for a Truth, which we know to be an Errour. 2. When she re∣quires of us, as a condition of her Communion, the joyning with her in some Practices, which we know to be against the Law of God. In these two Cases (saith my Author) to with∣draw our obedience to the Church is so far from being a Sin, that it is a necessary Duty.

Now these things being so, I have only this in special to request of my Nation, or Countrymen in general, that they will be pleased (and especially the Learned and Pious among them) to devote themselves to the impartial search after Primitive Christianity. And then, that they will vouchsafe to peruse these Labours, approving them only so far as Truth appears in them, and so much it will not be just to deny me, though they be not published with Learning. For which defect, I shall only Apo∣logize in the words of Ludovicus Vives, who finding some defect of Grammar in a passage of Augustine, De Civitat. Dei, Ludovic Vives. Aug. De Civit. Dei. l. 13. c. 24. saith: If a Modern Divine had plaid the Grammarian thus, he should have heard of it, but Augustine may: But if he and Paul lived now a∣days, He should be held a Pedant, or petty Orator, and Paul a Madman, or Heretick.
To my Kinsmen according to the Flesh, in the next place I address my self; I mean the Ancient Family of the Granthams, in the County of Lincoln especially. How welcome such a Dedication will be to you I know not, and therefore shall not name you particularly, you being Per∣sons of Quality in this World, and my Extraction being immediately from your poor Kindred, yet such as were acknowledged by your Progenitors. And though I am one of the lowest of my Fathers House, yet let it not dis∣please you to hear my Voice, whilst in these several Tractates I only bespeak you for God; and in order thereunto, beseech you to consider your standing in relation to Christianity, in respect of its Primitive In∣stitution.
I doubt not but it hath been your case, with others, to fall short of that beautiful Order wherein the Gospel was at first recommended to Man∣kind, by the Lord Christ and his Apostles; occasioned partly by the Tra∣ditions which we received from our zealous (though too much misguided) Progenitors, some of them living in the darker times of Popery; and those that Reformed in part, yet could not (perhaps) suddenly escape all the Intrigues wherein they had been bewildred; No, nor to this day may we be too confident, that there hath been (generally) so perfect an escape from them that live in Errour, as by some is presumed. Let us honour the Vertues of our Predecessors, who, by how much they departed from the By-paths of their Ancestors, are good Presidents for us to do the like; especially considering how it is written, Ezek. 20. 18, 19. Walk ye not in the Statutes of your Fathers, I am the Lord your God, walk ye in my Statutes, observe my Judgments, and do them.
Let no Worldly Advantages cause you to neglect that Honour which cometh of God only. It was Pauls way to gain the excellent Know∣ledg
 of Christ, by counting his noble Descent, and all things which were gain to him upon a fleshly account, to be but loss in com∣parison of the knowledg of Christ, the power of his Resurrecti∣on, and the fellowship of his Sufferings.
Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God for you all, is, that ye may be saved. And though, I hope, you are not unmindful of your Eter∣nal Beatitude, yet being perswaded that these Labours may some way serve you towards your attaining that happy end. I have therefore com∣municated to you these following Meditations, containing an Epitome of that Doctrine, which (after the strictest search I could make, either in sacred Scripture, or other Writings) hath the nearest and most full agreement with the state of Christian Religion, as it was delivered to the first Chur∣ches; whom we are to prefer as our Pattern, in all our enquiries; and to resolve to follow no Man, when we find him forsaking the Footsteps of Christ our Lord, and those his faithful Followers.
Thus committing you to the Grace of God, I leave this Testimony with you, as a faithful evidence of that Honour and Respect which I bear to∣wards you, and to the eternal welfare of your Souls, at the Appearing of the Great God, and our Lord Jesus Christ; who will then make mani∣fest the secrets of all Hearts, and render to every Man according as his Works shall be.
Finally, To all Christian Churches which acknowledg one Bap∣tism of Repentance, for the remission of Sins, I do more espe∣cially dedicate these following Treatises, which design the Restauration of Christianity (wherein it is either neglected, or abused) to its Pri∣stine Integrity, both in the form and power of it.
And as Primitive Christianity is the Title, so my care hath been, that the Book might perform in some proportionable measure, what the Title promiseth. Nevertheless, I do readily acknowledg, that my power to perform herein, comes short of my desires, as well as of others expecta∣tion. Howbeit, I desire you to take in good part what I was able to do, whilst the innocency of my design by these Endeavours, shall plead against the censures of those Men; who because they cannot excel all Men, think it a dishonour to do any thing.
It is enough for me, that I can faithfully approve my Heart to God in this Work, as aiming sincerely at his Glory in it, and the chief good of all Men by it; being also very sensible, that there is need enough of the Publication of a Work of this nature, in behalf of the Churches pro∣fessing one Baptism of Repentance, for the remission of Sins; as well in respect of themselves (who are too much strangers one unto ano∣ther)
 as on the account of others misapprehensions (and thereupon mis∣representations) concerning them.
Four sorts of great Actors on the Theatre of Christianity have appeared in the World, viz. The Founders, Advancers, Continu∣ers, and Obstructions of it: Of all which, the latter have been most nu∣merous and prevalent, at least in many Ages. It will therefore con∣cern you (the Churches of Christ) to consider how you are called to perform your parts on the great Stage of Religion. Let it never be said of you, that you came upon the Theatre, but did nothing, much less that you acted dishonourably there.
The Founder and Advancers of Christianity, how famous are their Memories? Never Man spoke like our Saviour. John 14. 30. The Prince of this World (i. e. the Devil) came, and had nothing in him; that is, found no evil in him. It was meet the most noble Professi∣on, should have the honour to be founded by Him.
The Advancers of it throughout the World, were famous for their courage and industry; no opposition could prevail against them. They were more than Conquerors through Christ, that loved them. What those have done who were to be Continuers of this sacred Testimo∣ny, is not transmitted to us by such authentick Record as the former; yet certainly, worthy things have been done in many Ages, by Christians of that Rank.
Now for our parts, we can never hope to advance Christianity above its Primitive Excellency (as some would vainly pretend to do): It's enough if we can but arrive at the ancient Path, and be Continuers of the Truth, and the Honour of it, as becomes the Churches of Christ; who are (if faithful) as so many Epistles of Christ, 2 Cor. 3. 2, 3. read and known of all Men, yea, 1 Tim. 3. 15. the pillar and ground of the Truth.
And though it must be granted, that many Learned, and in their way very Pious Men, of differing Perswasions from us, have wrote great Volumes on this Argument, and that with great advantage to the Truth. Nevertheless, by reason of some common Errour of the Times wherein they lived, and especially such Interests as were not easily to be laid aside, have commonly built (in part at least) upon such Foundations as gave Infirmness to their whole Work. Among which none more prejudicial, than their seeking to raise up the Temple, or Church of Christ, of the meer natural off-spring of Men, yea, of whole Nations; and for∣cing on their sentiments about Religion, by coercive proceedings against Mens Estates, Lives, and Liberties.

Now you, the Baptized Churches, whilst you make every ones Per∣sonal Regeneration (at least by profession) necessary to sacred Baptism, and so to their Admission into the Visible Church of Christ; and main∣tain that Principle, that it pertains not to the Powers of Nations, to force Men to a conformity to the Christian Religion (as it is dignified above the common principles of Natural Religion) you have certainly on this account, the fairest way of all Men professing the Knowledg of Christ, to serve your Generation, in the blessed Restoration of the Christian Church, (and therewith all Christianity it self) to its Primitive Beauty, in the orderly Profession and due Exercise of it. In which respects also, you have great encouragement to prosecute the holy Reformation of Religion (wherein it is wanting) in all amicable Ways, according to the place and capacity wherein ye stand.
And for as much as the Baptized Churches in Lincolnshire, have a more particular interest in these Labours, for that at their Importunity, and by their Encouragement, next to the wise disposing of God's Provi∣dence, I have undertaken this Task; and now through the help of God, brought it to this present Effect. I do therefore more particularly recom∣mend these following Discourses to their consideration, confessing that by how much any shall receive Profit in reading them, by so much they are Debtors to the said Churches, as Instruments of their Good in this be∣half.

