



THE Word of Authority to us, is, To your Prayers; as the Word of a Commander to his Souldiers, To your Arms. The Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal but Spiritual, Mighty through God, to the pulling down of the strong Holds of Satan; not only in the Hearts of Ʋnbelievers, and Enemies of the Gospel, battering, yea, casting down Imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth it self against the Knowledg of God, and bringing into Captivity every Thought to the Obedi∣ence of Christ, (2 Cor. 10.4, 5.) but the same spiritual Weapons are mighty against all the visible Armies, and strong-Holds of the Devil, under the Com∣mand of his Vice-Royes, the declared Enemies of the true Church of Christ, yea, and of Mankind also, according to the extent of their Power. What mighty things are recorded to be done by One of those Weapons of our Warfare, mighty through God, in sensible Weakness, and Self-distrust? And what shall I more say? For the Time will fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of Sampson, and of Jephtha, of David also and Samuel, and of the Pro∣phets, who through Faith subdued Kingdoms, &c. Heb. 11.32, 33. Take notice, how the Prophets, Men of Peace, are enroll'd among the Men of War. And no wonder that when Victories and Conquests, even over Kingdoms, are attributed to Faith, that then the Prophets should have an eminent place among the greatest Men of greatest Name. And this Power of Faith is not lost, but wants Exercise, for this is the Victory which overcometh the World, even your Faith, 1 John 5.4, 5. And that which overcometh the World, and that mighty evil Spirit in it, can subdue a Kingdom at any time, when God pleaseth, and the time of its destruction is come. This Faith is exercised in Prayer; and by Prayer, winning, and engaging the mighty God of Jacob, the Lord of Hosts, to be on our side: Our Enemies cannot stand before us; they shall fall and pe∣rish, the strong shall be as Tow. One Man shall chase a thousand, and two ten thousand, Deut. 32.30. Jos. 23.10.
The Church of God is both beautiful and formidable, Cant. 6.4. Terrible as an Army with Banners. Her Majesty and Stateliness is set forth, as an Army with Banners; and her exceeding great Power in her Faith, and Pray∣ers. Believers, in regard of the Power of their Faith, are more terrible than Armies, saith Excellent Mr. Durham. If one Jacob as a Prince prevailed, and by his Strength had Power with God, Hos. 12.3, 4. What cannot many do, that weep and make Supplications? What cannot an Ar∣my of Believers do? What cannot an Army do, that by an united Faith, with Sighs and Weeping, take Heaven by violence? Faithless, spiritless, faint, formal Prayers, put into rank and file, and displayed in the finest Eloquence,
do no Service at all, such Prayers do but beat the Air. That same Language in which God speaks to us, is the most proper for us to pray to God; that Word by which God worketh Faith in us, is that which best suiteth the Prayer of plain-hearted Faith.
It is an Observation of Eminent Mr. Charnock, which deserves to be en∣graven on our Hearts. When God would do any mighty Work in the World, he stirs up his People to pray for it; and their Prayers by his own appointment have a mighty influence upon the Government of the World: for when they come be∣fore him in behalf of his Church in general, he doth indulge them a greater Liberty and Boldness, and as it were a kind of Authority over him, than upon other occasions of their own. Isa. 45.11. Thus saith the Lord, The Holy One of Israel, and his Maker, Ask of me things to come concern∣ing my Sons, and the Work of my Hands command ye me. God would be more positively,Treat. of Provid. p. 71. Fol. confidently, and familiarly dealt with about the Con∣cerns of his Sons, though they were things to come to pass in after-Ages— Rev. 8.3, 4. The great Changes in the World, are an Answer to those Pray∣ers which are offered unto God.
Holy Brethren! The Work of God hath been very great in some eminent part of the World, in some Countries and Kingdoms; and the Prayers of the Faithful have prevailed much: But was there ever at any one time so great a Work as is now a doing in our Days? Are not the great Affairs of the Sons of God in all Protestant Churches, I say in all Protestant Churches, drawing near to a Determination? The Issue of this War is like to be the Rise or Fall, not only of many in Israel, but of all the Israel of God, confederate in the true Reli∣gion of Jesus Christ. O then, is not this the time for us to be of one Heart and Soul, deeply humbled, sincerely mourning, crying and sighing for the Abomina∣tions that are yet in our Jerusalem, Cities and Countries weeping and ma∣king Supplication, and with the most reverent and awful Adoration, make us bold with the Highest Majesty of the Holy One, the Saviour, in a time of trouble, as he alloweth us,Monsieur Jurieu ful∣filling of Prophecies, and others. Even to command him concerning his Sons, and the time to come, which many of his Servants wait for; and say, as Luther, Fiat vo∣luntas mea, Let my Will be done.
Holy Brethren, partakers of the Heavenly Calling; Give me leave to engage you to be more abundant in the fervent Prayers of Faith, and of true Penitent, reformed in Heart and Life. Consider how much of this great Work lies upon you at this time. Who can tell what your Prayers may do, under God, by his appointment. The Proclamation for these Fasts reacheth to the Realm of Eng∣land, the Dominion of Wales, Town of Berwick upon Tweed. O that all from sixteen to sixty in these Bounds were fit for Prayer; to bear Arms, these spiritual Arms! O then, how might we hope, that even she that tarrieth at Home, and is fervent in her Closet, may divide the Spoils, of the greater Spoiler, of all he can lay hands on. But O, how weak are we? how divided? how unprepared? What Help can we look for from them that are disaffected to the King and Queen,
and troubled at this glorious Revolution? How do they murmur that God should do what seemeth him good, for his Peoples Good! How many are there that do not as much as appear to Fast! How many are for the Liturgy of James (not the Apostle's which hath been reputed spurious by many of our most Lear∣ned Divines and Bishops, but) the Apostate's! How many, half, yea half-quar∣ter observers of those Holy and solemn Days! How like are these to old Bottles! How many of those who seem well affected to the Government, are grosly igno∣rant, sensual and profane, unreformed, unrefined from their Lees! What can these do? What ill-favoured, irreverent, what cold and dead, what broken Work do many make! so that we have cause to fear the Divine abhorrence of our Fasting. How far may a Man ride before he can see one Sinner, whose Heart and Life is reformed according to the Word of God, after our many monthly Days of Fasting? If a Poll could be taken of them that are for, or against, or are wary Neuters, whether ever God and Christ, or their Ene∣mies, should be found in the best side? All must be excluded from voting right, who do not lift up holy Hands to God in Prayer; so that from the Land's End, even to the Town of Berwick, we can make no more than a Gideon's Army. But yet I hope there are enow to make an Army, too strong for all the Enemies of our Faith, Religion, Peace and Government. Be therefore of good Cou∣rage, wait on the Lord, and he shall strengthen your Heart, all ye that hope in the Lord.
Encourage our selves in the Lord our God, were our Extremities greater and more than they are. And consider,
1. Is not God on our Side? O let us humbly wrestle with his Majesty to rise for his own Glory, for David's sake, for Jerusalem's sake! what will our Ene∣mies, the Heathen say?
2. Hath not God prevented us with his loving-Kindness? Did we by our Prayers call in our Deliverer? Did not God put it into his Heart before we knew of it? Have we not seen when we fasted and prayed, it went well with us? for the Honour of God, for the Honour of his Ordinance, for Prayer's-sake (despised, blasphemed Prayers-sake) I was glad to hear it was the poor praying People of Ireland that saved London-derry, that made the Men of Inniskillin more than Men, and not our Gallant Dammees and Hectors. Pray on to the last Breath; pray to the last drop of Tears. Give not up so great and so good a Cause for lost, it is all in the Hand of God, our God, trust him.
3. Pray on: there are more for us than there be against us: Is not God for us? Are not Angels for us? Do not the Souls under the Altar solicite God, and cry, How long, Lord, Holy and True,Rev. 6.10. dost thou not avenge our Blood on them that dwell on the Earth? I beseech you observe this, that they who are our Enemies now, are they who have shed the Blood of the Saints. We are sure that God will avenge the Blood of his Servants, and hear the Prayers of his Saints in Heaven, and on Earth. The Lord never denied to hear their Prayers, he hath only delayed. Andit was said unto them, that they should
rest yet for a little season, until their fellow-Servants also, and their Brethren that should be killed as they were, should be fulfilled. Some have written, and others believe this late, is the last Persecution of the Churches in France at least: and if so, that the Number of them that should be Killed, is fulfilled; then we shall shortly sing, as Jehosaphat and the People did, For his Mercy endureth for ever, 2 Chron. 20.21.
4. Pray, believing in him to whom you pray, and knowing against whom you pray; Is he not a bloody merciless Persecutor, who can set him out in his Garments dy'd in Blood? and hath not God, said, He hath ordained his Arrows against the Persecutors? plead that with God, Psal. 7.13.
5. Who do we pray for? Are they not God's own People, the Apple of his Eye? or hath God not one small Rnant left? Remember the Prayer of Nehemiah; Now these are thy Servants, and thy People, whom thou hast redeemed with thy great Power, and by thy strong Hand. Nehem. 1.4, to 10.
6. Argue from the very Strength and Greatness of our Enemy. O say our Men of Reason and Thoughts, (Men like the cowardly Spies of the Land of Canaan, who discouraged the People) How powerful is France! How Great that King! How wise his Counsel! How mighty are his Armies! How strong at Sea! How well disciplined! what an Advantage hath he, who is one in united Councils, before-hand with his Enemies in the time of Year, whereas the Confederates are slow in Resolutions and Preparations? He'll hold them in play, he'll tire them out! And what will not this Great Man do! Yea, Are these things true? is this the sense of Men, wise Men, most Men! Be it so. Yet for all this, hl he the Army of Zera the Ethiopian; Let us cry to the Lord as Asa did.2 Chron. 14.9. Lord, it is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with them that have no Power; Help us, O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and in thy Name we go against this multitude; thou art the Lord our God, let not Men prevail against Thee. Let us wait upon God, and take an Argument from the strength of our Enemies, Psal. 59.9. Because of his Strength, let us wait on thee; for God is my Defence.
We have a God hearing Prayer to pray unto; we have a good Cause; all is in Danger; we have great Encouragements; O let us say, He hath delivered, and we trust be will not only deliver, but prosper. O then let us pray for a praying Heart! And pray every Day, without ceasing. And that first for our King and Queen, that they may have the whole Armour of God to put on, the Testimony of a good Conscience, that in the Ʋprightness of their Hearts they do all they do, that they may ne∣ver fall into the slippery and pernitious Steps of evil Kings. Let us pray for them, that they may inherit an Everlasting Kingdom, that endeavour to make ours so happy. Many do labour to fright us more with the King's Successes, than with the return of their idolized Image; as if he would be as absolute, as high for Prerogatives as any of his Predecessors. What Confusions he will make, say others, in the best Church in the World; and much more. Whereas the great fear is, that he will do more for God than most of his Predecessors. Men are mightily afraid of losing their Pluralities, their Ceremonies, their Sins. Let us pray for the preservation of our Lamps, the free Progress of the Gospel, the Advancement of Religion and Godliness into High Places, for a painful Preaching, exemplary Ministry, for the saving and sanctifying Protestant Churches, for healing of Breaches; in a word, for Grace, Mercy, Peace. And when we have pray'd, to the pouring out of our Hearts, let us not trust to our Prayers beyond God's Promises, but stay our selves upon the Rock of our Salvation: To whom be Might and Dominion for ever. Salvation to our God. Hallelujah.
