


SIR,
THat I should present You, who have
so honourably deserved of Anti∣quity,
and of Your Country, and, if
I may add mine own obligations, in
particular of me, with so small a
retribution, as a Romane foot, &
Denarius, may seem more proportionable to mine a∣bilities,
then to the eminency of Your place, and
worth. But You who, to the honour of Your profes∣sion,
have joined the wisdome of the Ancients, and
justly have merited this elogy,
—Anglorum gloria gentis
Seldenus,
An elogy long since given You by a man, who is
deservedly esteemed , the lear∣ned
Hugo Grotius, You are best able to judge of
what importance these two are, in the discovery of
the weights, and measures, used by the Ancients.
And first, for measures, the , or cubit of
the Sanctuary, in the Scriptures, Josephus, and the
Rabbines: the  and  in
Herodotus (the former equall to that of Samos:
the later mis-rendred by Pliny, & Solinus, Pes Ba∣bylonius):
The  in Herodotus,
containing XXX. , in Strabo, sometimes LX.

sometimes XL. and sometimes XXX. (but in Hesy∣chius
, and in
Abulfeda three miles: with whom, and with
the Persians to this day it is called the 
farsach): the in Herodotus, Arte∣midorus,
and Strabo: the 
in Hero: the pes Ptolemaicus, and Dru∣sianus,
in Hyginus: besides infinite others depen∣ding
upon the proportions of some of these: I say,
these cannot after the destruction of those ancient
Monarchies, and Republicks, any other way bee
restored, then from such monuments, as, by divine
providence, have escaped the hands of ruine, and
continued to these later ages. For were it not that
the pes Romanus,The farsach, with the Anci∣ents, and Mo∣dern,
contains three miles. or Montalis, as Hyginus terms
it, were still extant in Rome, on the monuments of
Cossutius, and of Tit. Statilius Vol. Aper (for those
two columnes, the one with the inscription .
mentioned by Marlianus,Abulf. Geogr. MS▪ and Philander: the other
with . seen by the same Philander, are both
lost) we might utterly despair of knowing the mea∣sures
of the Hebrews, Babylonians, Persians, Ae∣gyptians,
Grecians, Romanes, and of all others, de∣scribed
in Classicall Authors: who could not trans∣mit
to posterity the individuall measures them∣selves,
but onely the proportions they respectively
had to one another: which proportions being pure
habitudes, cannot, as Mathematicians observe, bee
reduced to the measures of these times, unlesse,
either some of the  themselves were ex∣istent:
or else exact copies taken from the Origi∣nals
were derived to us.
In like manner it is for weights, the , the

, the , or  of the Hebrews, or 
of the Chaldeans, which Aruck renders by foure
 Zuzim, that is, four denarii (from whence,
tho Persian  in Xenophon, and Hesychius,
may have received its denomination): the ; containing seven thousand Attick
drachmes, the  ten thousand, the
 a thousand five hundred, the 
six thousand, all mentioned by Julius
Pollux; the Talentum Aegyptium in Varro,
containing eighty pondo, or pounds; the talentū
Euboicum in Festus, four thousand denarii: these,
with infinite others, both mensurae, and pondera,
whither considered as Medica, or Georgica, or
Veterinaria, cannot in our times be restored, but
onely by such weights of the Antients as are still ex∣tant;
that is, either by the denarius of the Romanes,
or  of the Grecians, or by the congius of Ve∣spasian,
or by the librae, and unciae Romanae, and the
like, that have been preserved by Antiquaries.
Seeing therefore the denarius is of as great mo∣ment
for the discovery of weights, as the Romane
foot for the knowledge of measures, I have ta∣ken
these two, as two irrefragable principles, from
whence the rest used by the Ancients may be dedu∣ced.
And because the denarius may be considered
in a double respect, either as nummus, or as pon∣dus:
the first acception conducing to the valuation
of coins, the second to the certainty of weights: it
was therefore necessary that both the weight, and
valuation of the denarius, should be exactly known.
To which purpose, in Italy I examined with a ba∣lance
(the scale of which the eightieth part of a grain
would sensibly turn) many hundred fair denarii,

both Consulares, and Caesarei, as also quinarii, or
victoriati in silver: severall aurei of the former, and
later Emperours: besides the originall standard of
the congius, placed by Vespasian in the Capitol:
and many unciae, and librae, in brasse. From whence
I collected the weight of the denarius Consularis,
and Caesareus: that to be the seventh part of the Ro∣mane
ounce, as Celsus, Scribonius Largus, and Pliny
rightly describe: and this to be sometimes the eighth
part, and sometimes the seventh, but most frequent∣ly
in a midle proportion betwixt eight, and seven,
till Severus', and Gordianus' times: under whom,
and the succeeding Emperours, it recovered the
weight of the denarius Consularis; but lost much
of its finenesse, by the mixture of allay.
With these denarii, for the greater certainty, I
compared such Grecian coins (especially Athenian)
as I had either seen in choice cabinets, or bought of
mine own; and those were the , or 
absolutely taken, which, as Julius Pollux, and He∣sychius,
out of Polemarchus testifie, weighed two
drachmes: the , or , or ,
four drachmes: the , the ,
or as Pollux names them, the ,
with severall others.
By which comparison I first discovered, that how∣soever
the Romanes, as Pliny, and A. Gellius ex∣presly;
Valerius, and Suetonius, by way of conse∣quence,
equall the denarius to the drachma: and
though the Greeks, as Strabo, Cleopatra, Plutarch,
Galen▪ Dio, and many more, equall the drachma
to the denarius, speaking in a popular estimation,
and as they vulgarly passed in way of commerce; yet
if we shall put on the resolution of him in the Co∣medy,

Oculatae nostrae sunt manus, credunt quod vi∣dent:
we may evidently discern in the scale, the drachma
Attica to be heavier then the denarius. And there∣fore
all such writers of the Ancients, as equall
them, if we speak strictly of weight, and not of esti∣mation,
have been deceived: and consequently, all
modern writers, following their traditions, in dis∣courses
de ponderibus, & de re nummariâ, have
erred.
But because it is not probable, that the Ancients,
both Greeks, and Romanes, should be deceived in
their own coins, and in their own times: it occasioned
me by observing the practise abroad of the 
in exchanges, with whom the same specificall
coins, in different States, passe with different estima∣tions,
to think of some means how I might reconcile
the traditions of the Greeks, and Romanes, concer∣ning
the weight, and valuation of the drachma At∣tica,
and denarius; notwithstanding the difference
in the balance, of such as are now found at Athens,
and at Rome.
And this drew from me that discourse, which I
have inserted at the end of this booke, Of some di∣rections
to be observed in comparing the valua∣tions
of coins: which may serve, not onely to
reconcile the Greek, and Romane writers, but
especially, the traditions of Philo, Josephus, Epi∣phanius,
Saint Hierome, and Hesychius: who make
the Hebrew  shekel, equall to the Attick te∣tradrachme:
whereas in the scale, which is the best
judge of this controversie, I finde them manifestly
unequall: the Hebrew, or Samaritane shekel, being
much lesse then the Attick tetradrachme.

But it may be questioned, why after the labours of
Portius, Budaeus, Alciatus, Agricola, Montanus,
Mariana, Budelius, Alcasar, Villalpandus, Jo:
Scaliger, Capellus, Snellius, and of many other
eminent men, who have writ, either deditâ operâ,
or , de ponderibus, & mensuris, I should
undertake any thing of this nature. My answer is,
that observing in them so great a variety, and con∣tradiction
of opinions, I was willing to use mine
own judgement, how mean soever, in giving my
self private satisfaction. And though I intended
this work, as a  to other imployments; yet
having, by the advantage of travailing in forain
parts, erused in Jtaly, Greece, and Aegypt, more
Antiquities, then I think any of them above na∣med
single, I thought it would not be unacceptable,
if I did, as it is the manner of Travellers, publish
at home, such observations, and discoveries, as I
made abroad. The which I humbly dedicate to You,
as out of a desire to expresse my gratitude for many
noble favours: so out of an assurance, that if they
receive Your approbation, I need not to fear the
censure of others.

