



My Lord,
IDedicate unto you this Historical Collection, or Cata∣logue of Comets, and other prodigious Appearances and Signs in Heaven: These are the Torches and Voi∣ces of God speaking and Preaching out of Heaven: for not only his Majesty is in a lively manner set forth unto us, in the Generation, Magnitude, Figure, and Motion of these Bodies, but also something is propounded to be further learn∣ed by them; for whatsoever doth not come to pass after the u∣sual manner, although it hath Natural causes, yet it altoge∣ther portendeth something or other, and is put for a Sign of certain Events.
Therefore let us neither despise nor deride these fore-Messengers of the Lord; neither let us imitate Vespasian the Emperour, of whom Suetonius relates in his Life, That when a Comet had been shewed unto him, he answered jesting∣ly, that That Hairy Comet, or Prodigy, did belong to the King of the Parthians, who nourished long Hair: As if he had said, It appeareth not to me, because I am not Hai∣ry; But he was suddenly punished for his Insolence, for he dyed shortly after; admonishing us by his Example, That it is better sporting with any thing than with the Works of God.

It is a great contempt of an Artificer, if he set before us an admirable piece of Work, and we will not behold nor regard it, the contempt of the Creature redoundeth unto the Crea∣tor. Let us therefore imitate the Emperour Ludovious Pius, Son of Charles the Great; for when he had beheld a great Comet, and Egmundus the Astrologer being unwilling to make him sad, alleadged those words of Jeremiah, Be not dismayed at the Signs of Heaven, for the Heathen are dismayed at them, Jerem. 10. 2. He devoutly Answered, Let us fear the maker of this Comet, not the Comet it self; and let us praise his clemency, who seeing we are sinners, reproveth our sluggishness by these signs.
It is Gods clemency before he punisheth us, to send some Messengers to fore warn us. Herodotus saith, When God is about to punish a City or Nation, he is wont first of all to signifie it by Signs and wonders. And a certain famous Astronomer thus writeth; As God is affected towards us, the Stars in his stead do shine as the Face and Eyes of God, that in them, as in a Glass, we may be able to see what shall come to pass. Moreover, these Signs are Look∣ing-Glasses of Gods wrath, who speaketh to us not onely by Mans Tongue, by Prophets, Apostles, and Ministers, but sometimes also by the Elements themselves, composed into di∣vers forms and Images for the terrour of Men: That the Name of God is neer, (that is the Wisdom, Power, Goodness of God) his wondrous Works do declare to all judicious be∣holders; better it were for us not to see the works of God, than not to have a sight of God in them: Now that all Gods Works may lead us unto God himself, is the Prayer of

