



NOBLE HEARTS,
BEing invited with several pleasing Considerations, and delightful Motives to appear the second time upon the slip∣pery stage of this World; I here pre∣sent to your view a Description of a Passion too much regent in this britle age. The worke is of no great substance, not much Satyrical nor Critical;

only glances, like the Dogs of Nilus, taking a touch here and there. It may happily appear at the first view, a meer congested Chaos, and somewhat indi∣gested and promiscuously handled; I can assure you my meaning was me∣thodical; but I hope your favoura∣ble opinions will dissipate the foggy mists of erronious misprision, and be really clarified in your considerate censure. I cannot conceive what more acceptable present may be offered unto you, then that which with an apparnt brevity compriseth the Original, e∣nerality, Definition, Causes, Ef∣fects, Signes, &c. of Love. For which purpose, and your greater con∣tentment, I have madly rambled in eve∣ry one of them. If I have over roaved, gone wide, or falne short, it's not un∣like

you may impute it to my folly of precipitancy. In this (to forge an ex∣cusive answer) I shall not unfit∣tingly resemble the Painter, who be∣ing to figure forth the fury of a mad Dog, the better to expresse it, stood long curiously pidling about the froth or fome issuing from his mouth; but finding nothing frame fitly to his invention, rashly takes up his pencil▪ dashes it against the Picture, with an intent to spoil it; howbeit this suddain accident prevailed to make his work more excellent. So may I in these suddain touches pencil out this Passi∣on with a more lively tincture, then if I had been tediously curious in con∣triving, or vaingloriously to embellish them with quaint ear-pleasing Elo∣cution. To speak the reall truth, you

must not expect any additional orna∣ments of Rhetorick, nor neat flourishes of Eloquence, or wyre-drawn phra∣ses, meer inke-pot termes, or a hodg∣podge of a laboured contexture: but a plain and smooth style which best be∣comes our subject. I am not passio∣nately enamoured on pety Courtships, like to those Helena's all of gold, where we can behold nothing but Drapery; but my sole aim is to speak to be understood: I have more laboured at the reality of the matter, then orna∣ment of words; for he that courts his pen, and neglects the matter, shall alwayes have trouble enough to defend himself from Moths, Rats and Obli∣vion. Fine heads will pick a quarrell with me; but this is my minde, let him that findeth a fault amend it, and

he that liketh it use it. I submit my self to the judgement of the wise, and little esteem the frownes of a censori∣ous brow.
I dedicate this unto you, not be∣cause either by virtue of a long experi∣ence, or of an exact judgement, I make profession to be Master in this Science, but to manifest that by the Pole-star of methodical observations, one may furrow the deepest Seas of unknown discipline. And to vindicate my self with that of Mr. Burton,
Vita verecunda est, Musa jocosa mihi.
However my lines err, my life is honest.
But I presume, I need no such apolo∣gies, for no man compos mentis,

will make me culpable of Lightness, Wantonness, and rashness in speaking of the Causes, Effects, Signes, &c. of Love; I speak only to tax and deter others from it; not to teach, but to demonstrate the vanities▪ and errors of this heroical and Herculean passion, and to administer apt Remedies. I cannot please all men; for the same cause that made Democritus laugh, made Heraclitus weep: It is impossible for an Angler to please all fish with one bait; so if one write never so well, he cannot please all; and write he never so badly, he shall please some. I know there are some counterfeit Cato's that will pish at me, cannot abide to hear of Love toyes, they hare the very name of Love in detestation; Vultu, gestu, & oculis, in their outward actions

averse, and yet in their cogitations they are all out as bad, if not worse then others.
Whatsoever I speak in this Trea∣tise of the one sex, may be also said of the other, mutato nomine. I deter∣mine not to run with the Hare and hold with the Hound, to carry fire in one hand, and water in the other, nei∣ther to flatter Men as altogether faultless, nor be critical with Women as altogether guilty; for as I am not desirous to intrude into the favour of the one, so am I resolved not to incur the disfavour of the other.
Honored Ladies, I commit my self to the Candor of your curtesies, cra∣ving this only, that if you be pinched in the instep, you rather cut the shooe then burn the last. If I discover the

Legerdemaine, and subtle traines Women lay to inveigle their Lovers, and unvail the furrows of Womens dis∣positions; you ought no more to be vex∣ed with what I have said, then the Mint-master is to see the Coyner hang'd; or the true Subject, the false Traytor arraigned; or the honest man the thief condemned. I grant it an act somewhat uncivil, to run in∣considerately into invectives against the sex; so it is an unworthy servitude of minde to be obsequious to them: but I deal with them, as he who slew the Serpent, not touching the body of his Son twined▪ up in folds; so I strike the vice, without slandering the sex. I hope this Book will insensibly in∣crease under the favour and good opi∣nion of virtuous Ladies, as Plants

sprout under the Aspects of the most benigne Stars.
What I here declare (Candid Readers) is not in the least to extin∣guish a pure and reall love, or to de∣tract from the honour of marriage; for my stomach will not digest the un∣worthy practises of those who in their Discourse and Writings, plant all their Arguments point blanck to batter down Love, and the marryed estate, using most bitter invectives against it, as the Author of the Advice to a Son, and such like, whose behaviour speaks nothing but Satyrs against this divine Ordinance, and the whole sex of Wo∣men. But such do it out of meer dissi∣mulations, to divert suspicion, being de∣fatigated in a vigorous pursuit of their desires are made incompetent Judges

of that which they undertake to con∣demn; or else out of revenge, ha∣ving themselves formerly light upon bad Women (yet not worse then they deserved) they curse all adventures because of their own Shipwrack.
Here my Book and my self march both together and keep one pace; one cannot condemn the Work without the Work-man; who toucheth the one, toucheth the other; what I speak is truth, not so much as I could, but as much as with modesty I dare. Let that which I borrow be surveyed, and then tell me whe∣ther I have made good choise of Ornaments to beautifie and set forth the Work; for I make others to re∣late (not after my own fancy, but as it best falleth out) what I cannot

so well expresse, either through un∣skill of language, or want of judge∣ment. I have purposely concealed the Authors of those I have trans∣planted into my soil, and digested them with my own, thereby to bri∣dle the rashness of the hasty knit brown'd censurer. I will honour him that shall trace and unfeather me, by the only distinction of the force and beauty of my discourse. Look how my humours or con∣ceits present themselves, so I shuffle them up; for these are matters which Juniors may not be ignorant of. But not to tire you with a tedious preamble, like the Pulpit Cuffers of this age; and a long discourse argueth folly, and deli∣cate words incur the suspicion of

obsequiousness; I am determined to use neither of them; only intreating your milde and charitable cen∣sure, of this my rude and hirsute labour: untill the next occasion, I conclude,

