



Right Reverend Father in God,
YOUR Lordship hath often∣times call'd upon me to goe out and shew the people their Transgressions, and the House of Jacob their sins.
Next to my owne consci∣ence I confesse my selfe bound to give your Lordship satisfaction.

To fall foul upon the degenerous and in∣tractable nature of this people cannot answer you, for it doth not me.
I doe not say I am not eloquent and there∣fore that you would send by the hand of Him whom you should send. When I am indeed able for these thing, I doubt not so have Him with my mouth, because I mean to leave all my self out. There was never more provoca∣tions for all men to speak then now, when all the mischief that other ages did but imagine are practised by a Law, and in the mean time the dumbe Asses are taught to forbid the mad∣nesse of the Prophets.
The Harvest is confessedly Great, but then the Labourers are not few. And if while so many are thus excellently imployed about the rest of the Building, some one or other doe as well as hee can towards the making good of the Ground-work, I think he may be let alone at least. The hopes of the Super∣structionly from the assurance of the Foun∣dation. I shall give them leave to be Pillars. This I am sure is the Corner-stone, and I need not tel you how rejected, I mean it not of all, but of the Common Builders.

If the Church be an Ark he that hath never so little to do with the Compasse, though he sit still in his place, yet does as much or more then all the other necessary Noise in the Ship: the Comparison is quit of arrogance, for it holdeth in the design, it is not meant of the performance.
The course I have run here is Labour too, and in the same Vineyard. And I trust my self for this, that my accounts will bee as well pass't above, if I reckon upon these pains, the pretence whereof though not so popular, yet is as substantially proficient towards the main Aedification.
I have principally endeavoured to redeem my Reader from that slavery, by which I have so long sate down my self, in not print∣ing (so near as I could I have not) the same things over again.
I am sure I have set downe nothing but what I beleive, if more sometimes then I wel understood, I have company enough, and the acknowledgement of an errour is more ease to me, then the committing of it was.
Why I should make these addresses to your
 Lordship there is all the reason in the world; what have I but what I have received from you? and that which is, would be Nothing of it selfe. Rayes of incidency contract no warmth upon the Earth, unlesse reflected back upon their originall Sun.
My Lord, As once the Sons of the Prophets said unto the Man of God, Behold now the place where we dwell is too straight for us. Wee are humbly expecting the last course of that Iudgment which began at the House of God. What shall be done to the dry Tree, or where the sinner will appear, is to be left to him to whom vengeance belongeth.
The Great Genius of this Place must now burn a while like those Subterraneous Olibi∣an Lampes under the Earth. We shall see it but not now, we shall behold it but not nigh.
Bernardin. Scar∣donius de Pris∣cis civibus Paià∣vin. Lib. 1.Have, salve, sit tibi terra Levis. Abite hinc pessimi fures, Quid vostris vultis cum oculis Emissitiis?

