



Worthy Sirs,
I Need not tell you that this Ser∣mon, such as it is, was Penned upon your motion, Preached at your solemn Assembly, and is now Printed for your sakes and upon your frequent request. When you had de∣signed your publick Meeting, it was well contrived to meet in God's House first, that you might begin your dis∣course with Heaven, and testify to the world that you are One as well in Religion as in Name.
When you moved me to provide

the Sermon, I was somewhat surpri∣zed; it being such a Request as I could not easily with Modesty grant, nor with Friendship deny. For when I considered the great variety of most choice and excellent Ministers within your City, and particularly that wor∣thy Person, who, under that Reve∣rend, Pious and Learned Prelate, my Lord of London, is the Pastour of your Church, how could I, the meanest of God's Servants, prevail with myself to possess his Room, and undertake his Work, at St. Michael's Cornhill? But, I confess, that one onely Reason which could possibly move you to make such a Choice, did at length, though with some reluctancy, incline me to accept it too, and to deny my∣self rather then you. And that was this; namely, that I am one of your Number, and have the honour to

wear your Arms, and bear your Name. For the Hearers being Gre∣gories, methought it might be hand∣some if the Preacher were so too; and there being a young Gregory to be Baptized, methought it would not be unsuteable, since the Godfathers and Godmothers were Gregories, that some Gregory or other should wash the Infant's Face, and (though no Pope, nor Papist,) sign its Forehead too. And for this end did I make what shift I could to serve your Incli∣nations, though against my own; that the whole Work of the day might be carried on by Persons of the Name; and that your Church might have furniture of the same Denomination for its Pews, its Pulpit, and its Font.
What Entertainment this Dis∣course will find in the world, into which your Importunity hath now

condemned it, as to any personal and civil concern of mine, it matters not. If it be judg'd so slender and empty as to make its Authour the more meanly thought of, 'tis that I deserve, & there∣fore may justly expect: but if, beyond its merit and my own apprehensions, it occasion me with any candid Rea∣der the least Reputation, I shall not value my self or it one jot the more. But whatever Circumstances the Pub∣lication thereof shall be attended with, sure I am, the Practice of it will infal∣libly be accompanied with most hap∣py Consequences, the Favour of God in this world, and the Enjoyment of him in the next. That it may produce this blessed effect upon you and every Gregory, is the present Design, and shall be the constant Prayer, of

