






Beloved in the Lord,
I Have in some measure been acquainted with the longing Desire of most of you to have these Sermons Published, by whose Importunity I have been prevailed with to Print them, against many Strug∣lings, and much unwillingness in my self
to go forwards with the Work; for some of you well know how much I was set a∣gainst the Printing of them, and that for several Reasons.
First, Knowing that there are plenty of good Books, the Works of worthy Learn∣ed Men, extant: That there was no need of my unworthy Labours. Secondly, Knowing how little the best of Books are valued by most. Thirdly, Knowing the Scorn and Contempt not only of profane and wicked Persons, but many that pro∣fess a great Zeal for God, do contemn those principal Gospel-Truths, Justifica∣tion by Christ alone: But if persons were truly wakened, they would be of the Mind of Bellarmine, That it will be best to rest upon Christ alone for Salvation when they come to die: They will then see that they have had no cause to abuse the Servants of Jesus Christ, that have made it their business to exalt Christ and Free-Grace. Fourthly, Knowing my own Insufficiency for so great a Work, as to appear to Publick View. Fifthly, Be∣cause of many things that might be lest out in the Printing that was Preach'd, I not Preaching by Notes, cannot remember many things which were delivered to you
when the Sermons were preach'd; but here you will find the principal Heads of what I deliver'd, being taken from my mouth by a Servant of the Lord when preached. I have done my endeavour to supply what I could that was wanting, and to correct what I saw out of order; but it cannot be expected so well as it would have been if I had writ the Sermons I had preach'd at length; yet finding the earnest desire of most of you to have them print∣ed, and the many Arguments you used to have them hastned to be published, not∣withstanding the many Struglings I have had against the Work, yet the dear Love I bear to you, and the earnest desire I have to serve you in the Lord, hath overcome my unwillingness in this Work, having received an account from several of you the sweet comforts many of you received when you heard them preach'd, and have also declared how much it would add to your comfort and edification if they were printed; I hope through Grace that you will not be disappointed of your expecta∣tion. Some of you have declared that the Preaching was as Marrow and Fatness to your Souls; I hope that you will suck out some Spiritual Sweetness in the reading of
them. As God was graciously pleased to an∣swer your Prayers, in raising me from a sick Bed to preach these my sick-bed Me∣ditations amongst you; so I hope, through mercy, your longing desire to read them will be satisfied, in receiving that comfort you expect to reap to your Souls in reading of them. What is said of Mony, that it answers all things to the subsistence of the Body, may be much more said of Christ to them that live upon him, he answers all their Wants, supplies all their Needs: He that hath Christ wants not, he that hath not Christ inherits not what he seems to have. Christ enjoyed in the Soul makes bitter things sweet, heavy things light; where Christ's Presence is, Darkness is made Light, and Sorrow turned into Gladness. How precious are the enjoy∣ments of them that have such a precious Pearl as Christ is! He is the chiefest of ten thousand, he's a most excellent and lasting Good, Heb. 13.18. All the hid Treasure of Wisdom and Knowledge is in him, Col. 2.3. What an excellent knowledge have ye attained unto, that truly know Christ! How doth this transcen∣dent worth affect your Hearts, changing them into his own Image and Likeness!
When a Soul comes to a saving knowledg of Christ, he is changed then from Vir Terrenus an Earthly Man, to Vir Coe∣lestis an Heavenly Man. Ignorance of Jesus Christ causeth Men to rest in Sha∣dows and Forms, in poor and low things, compared with Christ and his Excellency, are all but Dross and Dung, so the Apostle esteems them, Phil. 3.8. It is only a real saving knowledge of Christ, can draw the Heart of a vain and perishing World to seek things that are above. It is not a Speculation, but an Application of Christ, that brings home to the Immortal Soul what it stands in need of, Life, Light, Pardon, Peace, Purity, Righteousness, Counsel, Comfort, Healing, Deliverance, Grace, Glory, all flows to the believing Soul from Christ, in whom all fulness dwells. The Soul that lives Christ hath a good Livelihood, John 6.51. He shall live well for ever. It is not an outside shew of Religion will be to the Soul what it stands in need of, as Redemption, Forgiveness, Reconciliation, Sanctification, Consolation, Salvation. Christ is the Believers safe Sanctuary in all their Troubles and Tem∣ptations, Isa. 8.14.

 In this small following Treatise I hope you will find some Discourses of the ful∣ness of Jesus Christ, and the emptiness of the Creature, for that is my Desire in all my Labours among you, to get an esteem in your Hearts for Christ above all other things, and that the Name of the Lord Jesus may be glorified in you, and ye in him: I hope I need not doubt of your ac∣ceptance of those plain following Truths. I do not think that you will refuse it for its plain Dress, but rather embrace it; for I know, as for the most part of you, that you had rather have Christ plainly preach'd, than such Discourses that are bedeck'd with Rhetorick, or painted over with curi∣ous Words of Arts. I may expect it will not be free from the Slighting Scorn, and Contempt of many, that are ready to undervalue every thing but what they do themselves, and to find fault with that they cannot mend. But I have learned not to value any of their undervalu∣ings: For if a thousand to one slight it, yet if one in a thousand get good to their Souls' by it, I shall bless God that ever it was printed; what evil Report so∣ever I may receive from evil Men of evil minds for the Works sake: I hope I shall not value the Frowns of Men, as one well
saith, Better to lose the Smiles of Men, than to lose the Souls of Men; and I am sure without Christ be our Life, we are poor undone dead Sinners. I know I have many Enemies, who have through their Envy and Malice raised many false Re∣ports of me: But I desire to be an Enemy to none, but those that are implacable E∣nemies of Christ in Doctrin and Practice; but tho they are my Enemies, yet I freely pray for them. But I cannot expect to fair better than those that have abundantly ex∣celled in Grace and Knowledge, that were both burning and shining Lights, whose Works praise them in the Gate, and their sweet Savour in Christ made known to Saints and Sinners; many hundreds, I be∣lieve, have cause to bless God that either heard them preach'd, or have read their Works: And yet how are these Men railed against as not worthy to live, and their Works to be burnt by the common Hang∣man, as one with more Zeal than Know∣ledge declared: Because Men have not re∣ceived that measure of Knowledge and Experience as those Men had, they rail against them as ignorant unlearned Men, their Books not safe for any to read. Do not these Men go quarrelling along in the Dark, because their Brethren have receiv∣ed
more Light than they? Persons are grown to such a fond conceit of them∣selves and their own Opinion, they will not hearken to Gospel-Experiences; they will not so much as try those Truths they re∣vile by the Scripture, but proceed with Lies and Slanders against those good Men, though they never knew their per∣sons, nor read their Books. I am Per∣swaded if these persons had knowledge of those persons, and Truths they speak against, if the Lord were pleased to re∣veal himself to them, had they a taste and sight of the Lord Jesus, who reveals him∣self how and to whom he pleaseeh, insted of biting and devouring of them, and spending their time to raise evil Reports of them, they would enquire after the know∣ledge of Christ, as the Daughters of Jer did of the Spouse, Whether is thy be∣loved gone, that we may seek him with thee, Cant. 6.1. If Christians would spend that time in enquiring after Christ, and receiving and imparting their Experiences to each other, as they spend in Contentions, and taking up and carrying about evil Reports of them that excel themselves in Godliness, they would find more Peace and Comfort to their own Souls, and bring
more Glory to God, bring more Souls to Christ, and would be a means for the Beauty of Holiness, and Power of God∣liness to shine with a greater Lustre to the World.
This is my comfort, whatever Mens Thoughts or Words, Censures or Contempt are of these my poor Labours, I can truly say, I seek not my self, but the exalting of Je∣sus Christ, and his Truths and Kingdom in the World. In singleness of Heart I have imparted Truth to you, as I learned them in Jesus: I had rather have the Scorn of Men for the plainness of Truth, than you should have plain Truths hid from you. If I am the Object of Worldlings Scorn, so Christ be the Object of your Faith, there∣in I shall rejoyce.
Beloved, as I have granted your Re∣quest in Printing my unworthy Labours, which were done chiefly at your Request, and for your sake, I pray grant me some few Requests, which I beg of you for Christ's sake.
First, That you seriously and carefully peruse these Plain Truths that I have De∣dicated to you. Secondly, That you go to the Throne of Grace, and there earn∣estly beg a Blessing on what you read.
Thirdly, If your Souls receive benefit in the reading of it, ye ascribe all to God alone; it is he alone that teacheth to pro∣fit by all we read or hear. Fourthly, That you would study and love Christ more, let his Glory be the end of your Actions; you never seek your own interest better, then when you seek Christ's above all: Your Excellency most appears when Christ and his Excellency is known to you: When your Eye is singly set on Christ, then is Christ admiring your Beauty, Cant. 4.7. The single Eye took away Christ's Heart, then the Chain of Obedience ravished him also. Without a pure Intention, aiming at the Glory of God, to exalt Jesus Christ, there is no Action, be it never so excel∣lent in its self, is accepted of God, Hos. 10.1. Israel is an empty Vine, he bring∣eth forth Fruit to himself: He weighs out his Fruit to himself, he proportions his Religion to himself; all being for himself, God accepts him not. Such Fruit and meer Emptiness is much as one before God: It is not enough that a thing done be materially good, but because God com∣mands it, and that it is to the glorifying the Lord Jesus: He that is Alpha must be Omega; He that is the Supreme Good
must be the ultimate end of all things. Let all your good Works fall in Christ's Bosom, and centre in his Glory. They that do not with a single Eye look to Christ in all, they make as if there were some∣thing more excellent than Christ to look unto. Since Christ is a Believers Life, from whom he receives all the good he en∣joys, his Life, and Strength, and Comfort depend upon him for the Influence of his Grace and Spirit, to have daily Supplies and Waterings from him, that you may continually live to him, Psal. 119.32. He prays for Heart-enlargement to run the way of God's Commandments. Psal. 119.173. Let thy hand help me, for I have chosen thy Precepts: We have need of continual Supplies of Grace: If you be ne∣ver so well furnished with Divine Grace, it will not be in exercise without fresh an∣oynting, and fresh Gales of the Spirit, Cant. 4.16. Awake, O North-wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Gar∣den, that the Spices thereof may flow out; let my Beloved come into his Garden, and eat his pleasant Fruits. Ordinances are but Mediums and Chanels of Grace; we had need to look to Christ to fill them with Divine and Spiritual Bles∣sings.
It is not a Sanctuary of Ordinances will do our Souls good, it is the Power, and Glory, and Goings of God in it is the Life of the Soul: It is the Drops of the pure Rivers of Life above dropping up∣on the Soul refreshing it in Ordinances. Ordinances are dry and empty things, if the Lord Jesus by his Spirit doth not breath upon the Heart. O then lie down at the Feet of Christ, and look up to him in all, above all, for all, casting our selves and Burthens upon him, that we may be supported under all our cares, and fears, and temptations, and be relieved in all wants and exigencies. Do all through the influence of that Spirit that comes down from the Head, that with St. Paul you may live, yet not you, but Christ. Paul owned his Life was bound up in Christ, Gal. 2.20. I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me.
Sixthly, The Sixth Request is, That your Conversations be only as becomes the Gospel; let not the Doctrin of Free-Grace be abused by your unholy Conversa∣tion; see that ye be not of the number of those Atheists, that say, Let us Sin, that Grace may abound: Let the Enemies of the Doctrin of Free-Grace reproach the
Doctrin, and the Christians that own it a their pleasure; I am sure there are none that are acquainted with the Free-Grace of God can live a loose Life; neither was any known that taught that Doctrin feelingly, or learn'd it truly, that were ever known to be wicked persons. The Grace of God teacheth us to deny ungodliness and world∣ly Lusts. Indeed the Notions of Free-Grace may leave persons with unsanctified Hearts and Lives, but the true Knowledg of it leaves so sweet a Savour upon the Heart, that the Soul cannot willingly embrace Dunghil Lusts. When the Soul knows the whole of his Salvation is of Free Grace, that Soul is drawn forth to love, admire, glorifie and praise God, who hath done such great things for him.
Let me beseech you, let not the glorious Gospel suffer Reproach by your uneven Conversation. You know, you that pro∣fess the Truth, Truths of Christ have ma∣ny Enemies. You had need pray earnest∣ly to be led in a plain Path, because of all your Enemies: You have given up your selves to the Lord in your external De∣dication, see that it appear in your Con∣versation. The Life of an Holy Man is , according to God, 1 Pet. 4.6.
That God, you have given your selves up to, is an holy God, the Lord Jesus that redeemed you, is the Holy one of God: The Spirit that leads the Children of God is an holy Spirit; the Covenant that you are in is an holy Covenant; without Holiness none of you shall see the Lord. Then let me prevail in my Request, Pray live holy Lives, let your Conversation be as becomes the Gospel only, then no mat∣ter what Men say of you, you will have great peace in your own Souls, Psal. 119.165. Great peace have they which love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them. It is better to be holy, than to be thought holy; no matter if you are out∣wardly black, so you are inwardly beau∣tiful.
Seventhly, Walk in love, imitate the Lord Jesus, whose love overcame all our infirmities; love brought him out of his Fathers Bosom, love caused him to be born in a low condition, to bear our sorrows and grief, he taught love, he practised love, he died for love, he left pledges of his love to comfort his Spouse in his absence, and will shortly come and fetch all his Redeem∣ed home to Glory to have their fill of love. Be ye therefore followers of God, as
dear Children, and walk in love, as Christ also hath loved us, and given himself for us an Offering and a Sacri∣fice to God for a sweet-smelling savour, Eph. 5.1, 2. These will demonstrate that you are Christs Disciples, John 13.35. The Lord Jesus Christ spake these words a little before his Death, that they might be of the more force, and make the more Impression upon the Souls of his Disciples, as if he should say, Remember my dying Love, and let it live in your Bosoms as a precept and example to love one another. And this is a certain Character of Love to Jesus Christ, when we love Christ's Disci∣ples for Christ's sake, not because we are of the same mind in our Judgment, but because we are Christ's Disciples, and bear his Image; and then you may assure your selves, if you love upon such grounds, your Love will not be restrained only to each other that walk in Church-fellowship, but to all Saints as Saints, of what denomi∣nation soever they go under, which is much wanted in this day we live in. It is much to be lamented that persons Saint themselves more by their own Opinion, than by their Interest in Jesus Christ Saints should love as they are Children of one
Father, and in their way to Heaven, and all that are in that way have Ʋnion with Christ, and are Members of one glorious Head, therefore we ought to love one ano∣ther; why should Brethren fall out by the way? Nothing doth more manifest that the power of Godliness is in a People, than when they love for Saintship rather than for Judgment. If you read the 13th Chapter of the Corinthians, the Apostle gives the true Characters of Love. The first description of it is, That it suffereth long, that is, Not hasty to take Revenge on them that offend them, nor rash in Expressions to threaten Revenge. Second∣ly, It is kind, ready to do any good Office. Thirdly, Envieth not, is not troubled at the Prosperity of others, however it go with himself. Fourthly, Vaunteth not it self, doth not ambitiously glory in himself, doth labour to exalt himself. Fifthly, Not puffed up, not swelling with Conceits of himself. Sixthly, Doth not behave him∣self unseemly, would not do any unseem∣ly Action, nor behave himself in an unbe∣seeming manner. Seventhly, Seeketh not his own, hath not an Eye to his own pro∣fit, as to make it his end, but eyes God's Glory chiefly, and the good of Zion, more
than carnal Interest. Eightly, Is not ea∣sily provoked; though there may be Passi∣ons, yet is not governed by them, it is an Evil much to be lamented: Passion so governs some, as if their Tongues were set on fire from Hell. Ninthly, Thinketh no Evil; he would do Evil to none, nor readily take up Evil of another, to have uncharitable Thoughts of him; he will not be ready to charge his Brother rashly upon every Report. Tenthly, Rejoyceth not in Iniquity; he doth not rejoyce in the Faults of others. Elevently, He re∣joyceth in the Truth; he rejoyceth that Truth prospereth, and that an innocent per∣sons Righteousness is cleared up. The Apo∣stle in winding up the marks of it, shews it is every way excellent; it beareth all things, believeth all things, hopeth all things; he beareth all things, all Evils he meets withal; he believeth all things good of his Brother, so far as Charity may not injure Truth.
There be many that account themselves to have passed from Death to Life, which fall short of those Characters of Love: We may all lament we find it so cold in our selves to them that bear Christs Name and Image. I beseech you, dearly Beloved in
the Lord, be much in Love, and you will be much in God, for God is Love: To be a loving Saint is a sign of a lively Saint; many Waters cannot quench the fire of Love.
Eightly, Let me beseech you in the Name of the Lord, that you would set up Godliness in your Families; we can ne∣ver expect Holy Assemblies while Godli∣ness is neglected in Families. Children and Servants not being instructed at home, is a great cause of their being un∣profitable under the Word preach'd. God∣ly Instruction is too much neglected both to Children and Servants by Professors in our Age; I am afraid there are some that scarce a savoury Word drops from their Lips all the Week to their Family. How can it be thought that unsavoury Spirits ever got good to their own Souls! They that keep all to themselves it is to be feared have got little for themselves; the good Man brings forth good Treasure, new and old. Let me intreat you, dear Christians, whatsoever station you are in, whether Pa∣rents or Masters, whether Children or Servants, that you do not neglect private Prayer twice in the day at least; if you have opportunity to pray oftner, do not
slip such fair seasons.
The Mother would think the Sucking Child not well if it should forsake the Breast a whole day; so mayest thou think thy Soul is not right, that can pass a day without craving any Spiritual Repast in Prayer. Mr. Gurnal's Compleat Christians Armour. If you neglect private pray∣er, do not expect to thrive in Godliness; God gives his Alms at Wisdoms Gate: And let me beseech you that are Parents or Gover∣nors, keep up publick Prayer in your Families, look to it, that you are not numbred among the cursed Families that call not upon the Name of the Lord. The private House is the Christians Chapel of ease to Worship God in daily with his Family: The Church begun in a Fa∣nily, and is upheld still by the Piety of private Families. If the Nursery be not preserved, the Orchard must needs in time decay. We cannot expect that Family to thrive in Godliness, where publique Prayer is neglected. What praying persons might some Children or Servants have been, had they been called to that Duty by Parents or Masters when they were under their Government! Methinks if persons love their own Souls, it should cause them to love and pity the Souls about them. It would be great Cruelty in Parents to spend all
they get upon themselves, and let their Children starve. Employ some of that Talent that you have got for the furthe∣rance of their Salvation: Should not you be willing that they should find the way to Heaven as well as your selves? they have as precious Souls as you, and if you have tasted sweetness in drawing nigh to God, will you deal so unkindly to hinder your Family of partaking of the Blessing with you? If you complain of your weakness in parts, or Bashfulness makes you backward to this Duty, I answer, It is not your weakness in parts will be any hindrance of your Prayer's Acceptance with God, nor will it prevent a Blessing from your Fa∣mily; God looks at the uprightness of your Hearts, not at the excellency of your Expressions; but if you would study your own and Families Souls wants, you would as well know how to go about this Duty, as you know in their necessities in the World, how to go about your worldly business to maintain them, and supply their outward wants. And as for Bashfulness, if your Children were perishing for Bread, you would put on Courage to beg with them, rather than let them perish; how much more should you put on Courage to go
with your prishing Childrens and Servants Souls to the Throne of Grace to beg Grace for them, as ever you would have your Family thrive under the Publick Ministry, as ever you would have them in their Duty toward God and your selves, as you would have obedient Children and faithful Ser∣vants, as ever you would have your Chil∣dren and Servants separated from a vain, wicked World, as ever you would bless God that you were their Masters or Pa∣rents in a dying hour, keep up constant and publick Prayer with them in your Fa∣mily.
Ninthly, Let me intreat you to love the Truth for Truths sake; think not the worse of it because most undervalue it; let not their low esteem of the Truths of Christ damp your Affections to it; enquire not who is on your side, before you take it up, as the Pharisees did, Have any of the Rulers believed on him? Some, if they have not the most and highest on their side, think Truth not worth their owning. It is the misery of many, they never made their Faith nor Religion their own; what is accounted best among men is always best to them; it is what Men teach that are accounted best by the most of people
they most adhere to, more than they will to the Truths of Christ, though the best Men teach them. They that are most for Sinners Good, are not counted good with Sinners; they that preach Christ freely to the worst of Sinners, are accounted the worst of Men: Though Truth is come to a bad Market, and sold at a low rate, and few Buyers, I beseech you have never the lower Esteem of it, buy it as your choicest Crown; if you hold fast the Crown of Truth, when Christ comes he will give you a Crown of Glory. Many, I am perswaded, that are convinced of the Truth, do not own it, because it goes in a mean dress: Many will hold with every thing the Church that they are of holds, though they know nothing aright they hold: Such are for Performance or Omission, they will do as others do, but nothing from a right Prin∣ciple: Beg of the Lord that you may see the Beauty and Glory that is in the Truths of Christ, that you may highly prize Truth, when you suffer the greatest Re∣proaches and Evils for owning the same.
Love Truth for its own sake, honour it for Christ's sake, commend it for others sake, follow it for your own sake.

 Lastly, Let me earnestly intreat you to pray for me, that I may both in Life and Doctrin be a burning and shining Light, that I may find the power and relish of things upon my Heart that I give out to you and others, that I may be an Instrument in the Hand of Christ to bring many Souls to him, and build up those that are brought in in their most holy Faith, and that utterance may be given me with a Blessing from Heaven upon my unworthy Labours, that they may not be in vain, but that I may daily see the Travel of my Soul; it is God alone can open Hearts, and unlock the Treasury of Grace in the Gospel, and make known the Mystery of the Gospel. It is not the hand that sows the Seed, but God's Bles∣sing that gives the Increase. And if you would have me bear you upon my Heart before the Lord at the Throne of Grace, pray give me a meeting oftner there, if you expect me to water you, pray that I may be watered. People little consider what good they keep back from their own Souls in not praying for their Ministers: Many are readier to reproach them than to pray for them, and to rejoyce in their Falls, than to pray that they may be up∣held.
How many that have excellent Gifts and Parts do little Work for God, bring little Comsort to Souls? If shining, they are not burning Lights, they leave cold earthly proud Hearts: I think one Cause may be, they have not been earnest at the Throne of Grace that a Blessing may attend their Labours. People may be much in admiring such Ministers Gifts, when the Word they Preach takes little effect upon their Souls. Ministers have a great Charge committed to them, a great Work to go through, many Trials and Temptations in their Work, they had need be daily the Subject of your Pray∣ers and Pity. Your strangeness to the Work may cause their Work to be much a Stranger to your Souls. To be a Mini∣ster, saith Luther, is nothing else but to derive the Worlds Wrath and Fury upon himself. The Dirt of Reproach, saith one, lies no where so thick as on Mini∣sters Coats. How many would count themselves happy in their ruin, that bring the Tidings of Peace and Salvation to their Souls! A miserable Happiness that rejoyceth in the Destruction of them that bring Salvation to them: As the People would have their Ministers good Nurses
to their Souls, and good Examples to their Flock, as they would not have them pervert them by their Error in Doctrin, nor be Temptations to them by their Falls, they should pray hard for them, that they may neither miscarry in Life nor Do∣ctrin, that God's Urim and Thummim may be with them. I hope, Beloved in the Lord, you will not shut me out in your Prayers, as you would have the Name of Christ honoured by me, your Souls well fed with wholsom Spiritual Food; as you would not have my Enemies have the desire of their Hearts that wait for my Halting. Alas! I am a poor frail Creature that am encompassed about, it may be with as many Temptations, if not more, than many others are, and I fear have less Strength to go through them. Pray for me, that while I preach to others I may not be a Cast-a-way my self. It is dreadful to drop into Hell from under the Pulpit, but more dreadful to drop out of it into the Bottomless Pit. It is sad for Ministers to be without the Grace of God and true knowledg of Jesus Christ, they press others upon pain of Damnation not to neglect: Like one that should spend time and strength to draw Water for others,
and perish with Thirst himself: Or as one that directs many the right way, and yet doth lose his own way. As you would have me a faithful Labourer in the Har∣vest, to bring full Sheaves to your Souls, pray the Lord of the Harvest to give me Skill and Strength to bear the Burden and Heat of the Day. As you would have the Word which I preach drop upon your Souls as the Rain, and distil as the Dew and small Rain upon the Herb, and as the Showers upon the Grass, beg of God to pour out a double portion of his Spirit on me. As you would have my Preaching powerful, my Life teaching, my Sermons Heaven-born, my Lamp burning, my Heart engaged, my Talent improved, my self to spend and be spent for your Souls good, pray forget me not at the Throne of Grace.
I shall now take my Leave of you, and subscribe with my Hand the Reality of my Heart, your Loving Pastor and faith∣ful Servant for the Lords sake,

