



WHEN I was expounding the 17. and 19. Chapters of this Prophesie of Eze∣kiel, and saw an end put to Kingly go∣vernment in Judah, (for after Zede∣kiah there was no strong rod to be a Scepter to rule) my thoughts ran much upon that antient Prophesie, Gen. 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a Law-giver from between his feete, untill Shilo come. Concerning which, though some-what were then said, yet I shall now endeavour to sa∣tisfie both you and my selfe more fully. The words seeme to imply a presence of the Scepter in the hand of Judah when they were gi∣ven forth; because a thing cannot be said to depart from any hath it not: but it was long after ere the Tribe of Judah had any Scep∣ter. Jacob's meaning was, that the Scepter should come in time to that Tribe, and when it came, it should not depart; for Jacob prophesies of things to come. They were at that time in Aegypt few, poore, and low; and when they were encreased, they had no Scepter amongst them, they were under the Aegyptian Scepter, and had Aegyptian Task-masters over them. After the LORD had brought them out of Aegypt by a strong hand, there was a Scepter and Law-giver amongst them; but it was Moses who was of the Tribe of Levi, Exod. 21.10. And after him Joshuah who was of the Tribe of Ephraim, Numb. 13.8.16. All that Judah had was
 a little priority in pitching his Standard and Camp first, Numb. 2.3. in sending the first Prince to offer at the Dedication of the Taber¦nacle, Num. 7.12. In marching first from Sinai to Paran, Num. 10.14. In having the first lot when the Land of Canaan was divided, Josh. 15. and in going up first to fight against the Canaanites, Judg. 1.2. And when account was taken of the Genealogies, Judah car∣ried the preheminencie, being first numbred, 1 Chr. 2.3. After∣wards in the days of the Judges, who bare the Scepter 339. or 362. or 370. years as the accounts of Chronologers are, or about 450. as the Apostles account is, Act. 13.20. There were but two of the Tribe of Judah. Othniel, Judg. 3.9. who was of that Tribe, as appears, Josh. 15.17.20. 2 Chron. 4.1.13. and Ibzan who was of Bethlehem, Judg. 12.8. The following Judges were of other Tribes: and when it came to Kingly power, the first set up was Saul, who was a Benjamite, 1 Sam. 9.1, 2. The next was David of Jesse, the Bethlehemite, 1 Sam. 16.1. It was now between 6.Helvicus. and 700. yeares from the time of Jacob's giving out this Prophecy, all which time it lay as dead and destitute of Regall power; which now being setled in this Tribe, continued but to the Captivity of Zedekiah, 468. as some do chronologize 473. years, as others. The first King the Jewes had, God gave them in his wrath, 1 Sam. 8. and the last hee tooke away in his fury. Judah that had been his pleasant plant, was pluckt up in fury, Ezek. 19.12. and all the branches of that Vine pluckt off, and not one left to hold the Scepter, Jer. 22.30. Therefore some Jewes and others deriving the word Shiloh from Shalach,Galatinus, l. 4. c. 4. cited by Amama. Lyra in locum. render the words donec veniat mittendus, and so interpret this Prophesie of Nebuchad∣nezar, who was sent of God to destroy Judaea, and so the Scepter departed from Judah. But the next words in the Prophesie confute this interpretation, and unto him shall the gathering of the people be. Shiloh was he that the Nations should desire, and unto whom the people should be gathered, which never was verified in Nebuchadnezar.Vatabl. in loc. Martinij lexi∣con in verbo Silo. Manasseh, Ben. Israel, q. 65. in Genesim. The Chaldie paraphrase hath it, donec ve∣niat Christus, till Christ come: and the Targum hath it, untill the time wherein Messiah the King shall come. Rabbi Moses Gerun∣densis saith, donec veniat filius ejus qui est Messias, till his sonne come who is the Messiah.

If we take the word Scepter for Kingly power,Iulian the A∣postat said, this prophesie be∣longed not unto Christ, because the kingdom faild in Zedekiah. which it cer∣tainly notes, as Psal. 45.6. Zach. 10.11. It may be granted that now the Scepter departed from Judah; for it's said Ezek. 20.27. It shall be no more untill he come, whose right it is, and I will give it him, and that was Christ: from the putting down of Zedekiah and the death of his sons, none had right to Kingly power till Christ came. Now the Crown was laid aside, and laid up for his head a∣lone, and no others. But if we take Shebet, or Shevet for a Tribe as it is Josh. 3.12: 7.14. Psal. 122.4. Jacob's sense in the Prophesie is, that the Tribe of Judah should not cease, however it fared with other Tribes, till Shiloh or Christ came. Tenne of the other Tribes were carryed away Captive by Senacherib, and never returned more; but as for that of Judah, though it were carryed in∣to Babylon, yet it was preserved there, and return'd againe to it's owne Land, with few of any other Tribe. It was that Tribe chiefly which made up the Estate and Church, and continued till Christs comming.
This sense is true, but reaches not fully the scope of Jacob in this Prophesie; which is not simply to shew the duration of the Tribes, but the peculiar Benedictions they should have: and Judah's was the Scepter, which doth not only note royall power, but any rule, dominion, or authority, as Isa. 14.5. Ezek. 19.11. And so that Tribe should have power, more or lesse till Shiloh came; if not Kings, yet Law-givers; if not supream, yet subordinate power. Ʋpon the captivity of the tenne Tribes, Kingly power was onely and eminently in it for 130. yeares and upwards: and after Zedeki∣ah's down-fall (although it lost royall dignity,In captivate ba∣bylonica semper capita & prin∣cipes suos habu∣it ex semine. Davidis in Gen. q. 65. which was for a lamentation to the Prophet, Ezek. 19.14.) yet it had other Scep∣tricall power in it. Manasseh, Ben. Israel saith, that in Baby∣lon it had its Heads and Rulers alwayes of the seed of David.
When they returned from Babylon, Zorobabel was Governour of Judah, Hag. 1.1. & ab illo us{que} ad Machaboeos nunquam defuerunt duces de Tribu Judae, quanquam regio diadenrate propter persas nunquam uterentur:Suarez, Tom. 1. Disput. 1. contra Judaeos. Paeus in Gen. Rivet, ibid. From him to the days of the Machabees, or Assamonaeans, they had rulers & Governors of that Tribe, which was 270. years, as Paraeus observes; but Rivet makes the time shorter, affirming that the government was poenes sacerdotes levitici generis. When Alexander the great came
 into Judea, which he reckons to be but 53. yeares from the time of Zorobabel, Chronologers make it much more, at that time Jo∣sephus informs us, Jaddus was High Priest, who being then the principall Ruler,Joseph Antiq. l. 11. c. ult. came out to meete Alexander, conducting him in∣to the Citie and Temple. Now the High Priests were not of the Tribe of Judith, Heb. 7.13, 14. but of Levi, and so were the Assa∣monaeans or Maccabees,Joseph. Antiq. l. 12. c. 8. 1 Mac. 2.1.4. 1 Chron. 24.7. A∣mong whom continued the chiefe government till Herods dayes, diverse of them assuming Kingly power to themselves, as Aristobu∣lus, Alexander, Hyrcanus, and Antigonus. Mountague ob∣serves, that after the Captivity they were under the Persians, A∣lexander,Acts & monu∣ments of the Church. the Macedonian Princes of the Lagidan and Seleujedan lynes, till the Maccabees freed them for a time, and last of all they were under the Romanes: Yet during these troublesome times, they were governed by their owne Lawes and Countrey customes. They had their Ethnarchs, Toparohs, High Priests, Rulers, Princes, & sometimes Kings of their owne; Jewes and Israelites, though not of David, nor of Judah. To help in this streight, it's affirmed that the Assamonaeans were by the mothers side of Judah, and so therein the dignity of the Tribe was preserved: But it doth not appeare by Scriptures, that the Females were of that Tribe, neither were they to marry out of their Tribes, especially women inheritrices to their Parents,Materna stirps non venit in censum sceptri. they were tyed to marry in their own Tribe, ne confun∣derentur haereditates. And ordinary women might not bare rule among the Jews, though Deborah a Prophetesse once did; be∣sides, the mothers lyne amongst them was not reckoned: and the Talmud saith,Rivet in Gen. he is the end of the Familie, who hath no masculine issue. We cannot then make it out this way, that the Scepter de∣parted not from Judah, nor a Law-giver from between his feete till Shiloh came.
Some therefore which is the better way, referre it to the Sane∣drim, which was quasi supremus senatus, as the highest judica∣torie and royall councill. This Sannedrim remained in the captivi∣ty,Suarez, Tom. 1. Disp. 1. contra Judae∣os, Sect. 1. p. 6. and continued to the dayes of Christ, & was either taken from them by Herod, or at least the power of judging and sentencing to death was taken out of it by him. Therefore said the Jewes, Joh. 18.31. It is not lawfull for us to put any man to death. In former times they might, but now they were deprived of that power.
 The difficulty here is to make it out, that those made up the Sanhe∣drim were of the Tribe of Judah. It's not necessary that all should be of it; if the major part were, that sufficeth to preheminence the Tribe.
At first the men of the Sanhedrim were chosen out of all the Tribes; but when ten Tribes fell off, it could not be, they being un∣der Jeroboam and other King's who were against Judah; & much lesse could it be, when those 10. Tribes were carryed away, and re∣turned no more. The Babylonish captivity therefore being ended when the Common-wealth of the Jewes was restored, and consisted most of the Tribe of Judah; It's more then probable, that the San∣hedrim was most of that Tribe, which in Scripture account was but one before; for the Lord told Solomon he would give one Tribe to his sonne, 1 K. 11.13. & Ch. 12. 20. There was none that followed the house of David, but the Tribe of Judah only: and 2 K. 17.18. The Lord was very angry with Israel, and re∣moved them out of his sight, there was none left but the Tribe of Judah only. Benjamine did follow Rhehoboam; but ther is little or no mention made of it,Suarez ubi ante. quia non fuit integra sicut tribus Judae. It was not intire as the Tribe of Judah, whose dig∣nity and excellency was such as made that inconsiderable. The Le∣vites also say, the Annotations upon 1 King. 11. were no distinct Tribe; when they were cast out by Jeroboam, they left their Sub∣urbs and possessions, and came to Judah & Jerusalem, 2 Chr. 11. 13, 14. When therefore the return came from captivity, it was Ju∣dah the Lord look'd chiefly upon; the rest were either reduced to that Tribe, or as inconsiderable then as before the captivity. Judah made up the bulke and body of their Common-wealth, & the gover∣ning power if not altogether, yet must needs be mostly in it. Manas∣seh Ben. Israel saith, that in the times of the Assamonaeans, Prin∣ceps Jehudae erat caput senatus Israelitici nuncupati Sanhe∣drin. A Prince of Judah was chiefe in the great Councel cal'd the Sanhedrin, which continued till Herods dayes, and such was the power of it, that Herod himself was cald before it; for which, when he obtained the Kingdom, he put them all to death, except one Sa∣meas, as Josephus reports in his 14. Booke of the Antiquities of the Jewes, Ch. 17. In this sense not only were there Rulers and Governors of the Jewish nation till Christ came, as some do cary
 it, but even of the Tribe of Judah. For now in Herods dayes did Shilo come, Christ was born, Mat. 2.1. The Scepter was departing when Pompey brought Judea under the Romans, and the power of it more weakned when it was made a Province afterward, but it fully departed not, till Titus overthrew the Citie, and ruin'd the whole Common-wealth of the Jewes, before which time Christ was to come and enter into his Kingdom, taking the Crown to himselfe, being his right (which he did, and changed it into a spiritual King∣dom, so raising up the Tabernacle of David which was fallen) and then shortly after was the Tribe of Judah and Jewish State utterly ruined.
In this Prophesie you see the faithfulnes of the Lord making good his truths notwithstanding all dark & contradictory appearances, his power also in raising up Kingdoms, and pulling them down again, in changing forms of government at his pleasure, and bringing them to nothing: You may also see how blind the Jews are, who have many shifts to put off this prophesie from Christ; or being convnced that it is a clear prophesie of the Messiah, affirm it's not yet fulfil'd, say∣ing, there be Rulers of the Tribe of Iudah to this day about Babylon and that a Prince was seen at Bagdet, riding in a Chariot, where were a multitude of Jews crying facite locum filio Davidis make way for the sonne of David.Manasseh Ben Israel. Tom. 1. Disp. 1 It's true, there be Jews in the world, but they have no Scepter, no Kingdom, there is no mention or vesti∣gium of any such thing in the world saith Suarez. Suppose it were so, that in Asia the greater, or beyond the mountains of Cordilliere in America they had a Kingdom & Scepter, yet this was nothing to Jacob's prophesie, which speaks of Canaan, where Judah should have rule and power till Shiloh came. Let those therefore who have seen this Prophesie fulfil'd, felt the power, and enjoyed the blessings of the Messiah, pray that the face of the covering cast over all peo∣ple, and the vaile spread over all nations may be destroyed, that so Jewes and Gentiles may behold him who is the desire of Nations, that unto him may be the gathering of the people, and that all Saints, especially themselves, may be enabled through his grace to improve all mercies and the ensuing truths to his glory, which is the earnest desire of him who is

The 11. month, the 27. day, 1650.
