


My Lord,
SHOƲLD I say any thing, in this Publick manner, of Your Lordships Merits, Worth, and Parts both Natural & Acquired, though Flattery it could not be, yet Vanity it would; because it were to say no more than that, whereof every man, who is not a stran∣ger to your Person, is already satisfied.
And to tell the world how much, & in what way, your Lordship hath obliged me, is but

an Easy and Trivial kind of Gratitude. But as mean a Return as it is, I must make This or None. For, as your Honours Soul is too Generous to expect, and your Fortunes too ample either to need or admit, a just Recom∣pense; so are mine too slender to make one.
The truth is, where there is an utter Im∣possibility to repay a Kindness, it would be something like Ingratitude so much as to at∣tempt it; and he, who doth but offer at a Return for Great mens favours, doth there∣by derogate from them; he makes them less by thinking them capable of being recompen∣sed.
But though it be too great a Presumption, in such a case, to attempt a Satisfaction; yet, that debt, which can never be discharged, must be upon all Occasions, and now is upon This, Gratefully acknowledged.
But had your Lordship never obliged me, by any considerable Kindness, to make this Publick Adress; had not Gratitude nivited me to it, yet even Prudence would. For, such is the main Subject of this Discourse, that it can not be Entitled to any Person for its Patron so fitly, as to your Honour.

Qua propriè Magia nuncu∣patur, perfecta creditur, & summa Scien∣tiae potestas; quando Persa∣rum lingua est Magus, non ferè alius quā Divinorū In∣terpres et Cul∣tor. Caelius Rhod. Lect. Antiq. l. 9. c, 23. For the Persons, concerned herein are the , the Wise men of the East. And if this Character of theirs be, as several Authours think, and our own Trans∣lation intimates, not only free from all im∣putations, but an Elogy and Title of Ho∣nour; to whom could I have more pro∣perly recommended the Story of these Great Sages, then to your Lordship, who are, in this and all other their Laudable Endow∣ments, so hugely like them? a Person of such eminent Prudence, Wisdome, and un∣derstanding, as to be singled out of Three Nations, as the fittest man therein, to be made the Principal Secretary of State; and still to have the same Influence upon the Kin g of Great Britain, France, and Ireland, as these Wise men once had upon the —the Persian Monarch.
Besides, the Thing much concerned in this little Tract is a Star, which being with us the highest Badg of Honour, it was not possible for me to Dedicate a subject of this nature to any fitter Person than your Lord∣ship, there being no man, whose bloud is not Royal, that doth more highly deserve to wear one.

But whilest I do thus Publickly acknow∣ledge my Obligations to your Lordship, I shall only contract upon my self new scores, and render my Debt so much the greater. For if it shall please your Honour to permit these Papers to walk abroad under the Protection of your Great Name, it will yet further ob∣lige their mean Authour to pray for the con∣tinuance of your Lordships Prosperity in this world, and the Assurance of your Felicity in the next, which is, and ever shall be, the Earnest Petition of

