



My Lord,
'TIS from the undeserved Mercy of our God, and the tender care of our Sove∣raign and his anointed, that we now see, to the great satisfaction of our Friends and the terrour of our Enemies, the great City of England, lately consumed with flames and entombed in its own Ashes; not only raised again, but advanced to that high degree of Splendor and Magnificence, that now it much exceeds its Self, and perhaps all other Cities of the World besides. 'Tis well known, as well to our Adversaries as to our Allies, that London is, not only the Metropolis of Eng∣land,

but its strength, treasury, and glory too. Such is the number of its Inhabitants; such is the stateliness of its structures; such is the wealth of its Merchants, Companies, and Chamber; that we may easily conclude, that, One London is more concerned in the success of the present War, than all our Cities besides.
The quarrel, betwixt us and our neighbours beyond the Sea, is of grand importance; the Dispute is, Whether the New States of Hol∣land shall brave it over the Antient Kings of England? whether Rebels shall Lord it over Soveraigns? whether the Texel shall rule the Ocean? or, that which is all one, whether Amsterdam shall give check to London, and Law to the World? My Lord, the matter now referred to the decision of the sword, being of so great Moment; every Englishman, every Magistrate, every Corporation, but especially that of London, stands obliged to do, what∣ever may be done, for the just honour of our Prince, the security of our Trade, and the establishment of our Church and Nation.
I do not doubt, but your Lordships Mace, when occasion is offered, will be employed to defend his Majesties Crown; I do not questi∣on, but your Lordships Sword, when matters

so require, will be readily drawn to protect his Majesties Scepter; there's no good Christian, but is a good subject too; and there's no good subject, but will sacrifice his Honour, his Power, his Estate, his Blood, his Life, in the just vindication of his Soveraign. But yet, there is something more than all this, that must be done; our holy God, that is so justly displea∣sed with our Nation, must be reconciled; Re∣ligion, that is so much decayed, must be re∣paired; sin, that is grown so bold and daring, must be suppressed; and amongst the many de∣testable vices of this age, there is none, that ruines us more, than drunkenness and whore∣dome; the abuse of good wine, and the use of bad women. And could we but once see a restraint laid on sin; could we but once see every accursed thing removed from our Cities, our Camp, and our Court, we might then hope, that our God would either bless us with peace, or prosper us in war.
And this is the only design of this discourse; a design, which your Lordship was pleased so far to approve, as to invite me to make it Pub∣lick. And since, through your Lordships encouragement, the Press hath sent that a∣broad into the world, which was designed for

the Pulpit only, as I humbly beg your Lord∣ships kind Patronage, so do I earnestly crave the Readers serious consideration; with this assurance, that if the matter of this seasona∣ble discourse be duely weighed, and the Rules delivered therein be conscientiously practised, this poor Paper-Pellet will conduce more to∣wards the gaining of a glorious Victory, than all our Musket and Canon shot. With my Prayer to Almighty God, that he would so bless your Lordships Government, that the Inhabitants of your City may be preserved from Sword and Pestilence, and its sumptuous Buildings from further Flames, I am

