



Gentlemen,
YOU have desired me to Print my Sermon, and I desire you to Practise it; because, 'tis never so well printed as when 'tis pra∣ctised: And give me leave to tell you, that if I could order you so well, as you can or∣der me, you should practise it as well as I print it: Never∣thelesse, I will perform my part.
Our present age has been an age of wonders, I offer only three (and those the greatest of them) to your considera∣tion: We have had the best of Princes barbarously murthe∣red; A banisht Prince miraculously restored; And a loyal people (as yet) but badly requited.
To the first of these you owe your solemn sorrows, for the second your constant thanks, and to the third your just com∣passions.
For these I was willing to obey your commands, for these I chose my Text, for these I have pleaded, and for these I have done what I never did before, I have printed what was pleaded for them, that, in case they miss of any other or better remembrance, (as they have done hitherto) yet they may meet with some slender one at least upon a paper.
'Tis confest, you have done your duty well and handsome∣ly to the two first of these wonders, by answering them both,

with proportionable and becomming affections; you have mourned soundly for the first, and reforced lustily at the se∣cond: These things you ought to have done, yet not to leave the other undone; undone it is as yet, and so are they for whom it should be done; and they can say it from as profound an experience, as any part of Mankind, Eccles. 8. 14. There is a vanity, which is done upon the earth, that there be just men, unto whom it hapneth accord∣ing to the work of the wicked: Again, there be wick∣ed men, to whom it hapneth according to the work of the righteous.
It is this Subject, I am now upon, a very poor one, yet a very good one, and a very good one, because a very Loy∣al one, and if Novelty makes any thing acceptable (as it does) then this paper may challenge your acceptance, because it treats of a Subject never (as yet) thought upon, of a Subject never handled by any, but very coursly, very wrong∣fully.
It is now in your power to do them right, that have suf∣fered wrong, and to feed and relieve these hungry ones, and the honour of the Action will be this, that hereby you wil be followers of God: For, the Lord executeth judgment for the oppressed, he giveth food to the hungry, he looseth the prisoners, and raiseth them that are bowed down, Psal. 146. 7, 8. Be ye therefore merciful even as your heavenly Father is merciful: As he is now, he is merciful both to the just, and to the unjust; be merciful to both you may, but, to be merciful to the unjust only, and not to the just also, this is cruelty; if honest men may not have the preference in your mercy, you cannot do lesse, then let them go sharers with others, that have far less (if at all) deserv'd it.
'Tis very possible, (and, I fear, very probable,) that

many years may not bring forth such a Temper, and Complexion of Parliament, as this is, in which you sit: for 'tis a thing as full of Hazard, as the project of the great Elixir, which misses a hundred times, before it hits once; your children to many Generations may sadly desire to see one of the days of such a Convention, and yet not see it: Therefore, behold, now is the accepted time; behold now is the day of salvation: To day therefore (after so long a time) whilst it is said, to day; harden not your hearts; if you do, and (with Esau) sell your own, and others birth-rights, afterwards, when you would inherit the blessing, you will be rejected, though you sek it care∣fully with tears.
You love, and are for Loyalty, I know you are; and if you be, then cherish what you love: let that tree have the most, and best care and water, the best soil and fence, which gives you the fruit you most love.
It was a crueltie no where to be found; but in a Nero, Ardet Roma, dum cythara canit: And shal we (as Israel, Amos. 6, 4, 5; 6.) lye upon beds of Ivory, and stretch our selves upon our Couches, and eat the lambs out of the Flock, and the Calves out of the midst of the stall? shall we chant to the sound of the Viol, and invent to our selves instruments of Musick? shall we drink wine in bowles, and anoint our selves with the chief oyntments, and not be grieved for the Affliction of Joseph? If so, what will follow? even the judgment we now fear, ver. 7. the banquet of them that stretched themselves, shall be removed.
I am apt to think, that David blusht, when, having ob∣tained rest from all his Enemies round about, and sit∣ting quietly in his house, he told the Prophet, 2▪ Sam. 7. 1, 2. See now, I dwell in a house of Cedar, but the Ark

of God dwelleth within curtains; and they were very course ones too, for they were made of Goats hair: Such a blush would become you, and you will never look so hand∣somly as when this brings up the Reds into your Cheeks, to consider, that the Lord hath given you rest, and hath set you down peaceably in your houses; and yet all this while, these Men (like the Arke) remain clad in course and torn gar∣ments, and though the foxes have holes, and the birds of the Air have nests, yet these men have not a place where to lay down their heads.
—pudet haec opprobria nobis
Et dici potuisse, & non potuisse refelli.
Methinks, 'tis enough to make you shake, and sweat a∣gain, to consider how open you lye to the just complaints of these poor souls, if they should bespeak you in the lan∣guage of the Apostle, (then in a case much like theirs now) 1 Cor. 4. 8. &c. Now ye are full, now ye are rich, ye have reigned as Kings without us, and we would to God, ye did reign, that we also might reign with you: For we think, that God hath set forth us last, as it were men appointed to death; for we are made a spectacle un∣to the world, and to angels, and to men: we are fools, but ye are wise; we are weak, but ye are strong; ye are honourable, but we are despised: even unto this present hour we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted, and have no certain dwelling place: And labour, working with our own hands; being revi∣led, we blesse; being persecured, we suffer it; being defamed, we intreat: we are made as the filth of the world, and are the off-scouring of all things unto this day.

And if this be their Case, (as indeed it is,) then, how just and ingenuous will it be for you, to consider it: And remember, that if it be just and good with God, that our light afflictions, which are but for a moment, should work for us a far more exceeding, and eternal weight of glory: then certainly he will not take it well at your hands, if their heavy afflictions, which have been for many years, should work nothing for them, but a far more exceeding and insupportable weight of want and misery.
I have forgot the Name, but I remember the Vertue of that great Commander, who when his Army was much distrest in point of Aquation, and a bottle of water was presented to himself by one of his Souldiers, he flung it on the ground, and this after it, God forbid, that I should drink, when my poor Souldiers are perishing with thirst: And the kindnesse of Alexander (if Curtius may be cre∣àted) was as great as himself, who in a cold frosty night sitting by a great fire in an open field, and espying a poor Souldier upon an out-gard ready to drop down dead with the Cold, ran to him, took him up in his Arms, brought him to the Fire, set him in his own Chair, rubb'd and chafed him with his own hands, and with much ado brought him to life These wise men knew this to be the way, to oblige an Army to them.
I leave this with you, to apply, and to divine what I mean by it; and withal, you may do well to remember, how many of your own families received both their Honours and Estates from the Norman service: That just Prince thought it his duty to requite his Souldiers, and if you would know the English of Miles, Eques, Comes, &c. which you now wear about your Eschutcheons, they are flow∣ers which grew up out of that Field, far unlike those weeds, which now spring from a service as ingenuous and just as

that for which the Herauldy is so much altered, that they yet wear no other badg, then Pedes, Pauper, Famelicus, for being Loyal to their Prince.
Methinks, 'tis not so handsome, to see a Nation (that was lately Gules all over) now to stand checker'd Argent and Sable, and to behold our late great Mercy of our So∣veraigns Restauration, like that Pillar Exod. 14. 20. Cloud and darknesse to some, but light to others; nor are Things well in Tune, when (as at the building of the second temple, Ezra 3. 13) we cannot discern the noise of the shout of joy, from the noise of the weeping of the people, when one part (the more antient and righteous) may weep it out with the Poet,
—Haec ego,—tulit alter honores,
Sic vos non vobis—
And another (more novel and criminal,) shall triumph it with an O quàm bonum jucundum, &c. Oh how plea∣sant and profitable a thing it is to fight against our Sove∣raign! whereas the truth is, Justice can never speak bet∣ter sense, then when it doth upbraid such demeriting per∣sons with that Sarcasm of the Apostle, Rom. 6. 21. ? what fruit would you have from those things whereof you are now ashamed? For the end of such things is Death.
And let no man recriminate this addresse, from the in∣temperance and debauchery of the Persons, for whom 'tis made. I remember the check and aspersion, given of old by the Pharisees to Christ, who censured him for eating with Publicans and Sinners, when he had no where else to go: 'Tis a very hard piece of Justice, to censure and condemn men for eating and drinking in publick houses, when they

have no Houses left them of their own, to eat and to drink in.
If there be Oaths and Atheism, &c. more visible a∣mong them, then others, it will lye very much at the doors of their Oppressors. David had lost almost all his Religion by the contemplation of the good successe of evil men, Psa. 73. Do them right, and try what they will be, surely those consciences, which have worn about them such deep im∣pressions end resentments of Loyalty and Honour all this while, (and that at so great a disadvantage) must in cha∣rity be hoped to have other good principles of Morality al∣so, which though perhaps they lye now in a swound, yet they may be awakened into practise by your just Encourage∣ments; and 'tis ten to one, but you will thereby restore them, not only to their Rights and Fortunes, but to their wits and vertues. A breath from your lips is able to quicken this field of dry bones into an Army of Vertuoso's.
I will not prescribe to your Wisedoms what to do for them nor adventure at reasons of State, why something must be done: There are many and great ones, but you can give them to your selves; they are those of Religion, which I of∣fer you, and if Justice and Charity be your duties, and the Compasse of your Actions, then this is.
If you will do no more for them, yet remember them, give them (at least) a place in your Annals and Records; God has (among many other Books) a book of Remembrance, Mal. 3. 16. and in this Book he records the sufferings of good men, Psal. 56. 8. Their tears are put up in his bot∣tle, and written in his Book.
And it seems by that passage concerning Mordecai, Hest. 6. 1, 2, 3. that it was the manner of the Eastern Princes to record the services and sufferings of good Subjects to posterity, as soon as they were done or suffered: And there

were Scribes among the Jews (if my conjecture fail not) whose peculiar office it was to do this; and truly the exam∣ple of Ahasuerus there, deserves to be commended to the practise of Princes, ver. 1. he was reading one night in his book of Records, and found the good service of Mordecai, in discovering a Treason against his Person. v. 2. and then puts a question (and it is Questio rege digna) what ho∣nour and dignity hath been done to Mordecai for this? v. 3. 'twas answered, there was nothing done for him. But it was not long ere something was.
If these and the following lines, may have the happiness to move you to put the some question for our Mordecai's, What hath been done for them? and upon finding, that as yet nothing is done for them, to put it further to the que∣stion, What shall be done for them? God shal have his will, I my end, they the comfort, and you the honour of so just and brave an Action.

Lincol'ns Inne, Ju∣ly 6. 1661.
