



MY LORD,
I Hope your pardon, if while you are holding
That best of Books in one Hand, I here
present some Pages of that of Nature in∣to
your other: Especially since Your Lord∣ship
knoweth very well, how excellent a
Commentary This is on the Former; by
which, in part, GOD reads the World his own Defini∣tion,
and their Duty to him.
But if this Address, my Lord, may be thought con∣gruous,
'tis yet more just; and that I should let Your
Lordship, and others know, how much, and how deser∣vedly,
I resent Your extraordinary Favours. Particularly,
that you were pleased, so far to animate my Endeavours,
towards the Publishing the following Observations. Ma∣ny

whereof, and most belonging to the First Chapter,
having now lain dormant, near seven years; and might
still, perhaps, have so continued, had not Your Lordships
Eye, at length, created Light upon them. In doing
which, You have given one, amongst those many Tokens,
of as well Your readiness to promote Learning and Know∣ledge
by the hands of others; as Your high Abilities to do
it by Your Own: Both which, are so manifest in Your
Lordship, that, like the first Principles of Mathematical
Science, they are not so much to be asserted, because
known and granted by all.
The Consideration whereof, my Lord, may make me
not only Just, in owning of your Favours; but also most
Ambitious of your Patronage: Which yet, to bespeak, I
must confess, I cannot well. Not that I think, what is
Good and Valuable, is always its own best Advocate: for
I know, that the Censures of Men, are humorous, and va∣riable;
and that one Age, must have leave to frown on
those Books, which another, will do nothing less than kiss
and embrace. But, chiefly, for this Reason, Lest I should
so much as seem desirous, of Your Lordships Solliciting
my Cause, as to all I have said. For as it is your Glory,
that you like not so to shine, as to put out the least Star; so
were it to Your Dishonour, to borrow Your Name, to il∣lustrate
the Spots, though of the most conspicuous. I am,
My Lord,

Coventry,
June 10. 1671.
