


MY LORD,
ONE Reason why I Dedicate the following
Discourses to Your Lordship, is, For that by
Your great and undeserved Respects, You have
obliged me to do no less.
Another, my Lord, is, Because I could
not but Publickly return Your Lordship
Thanks, for minding the Royal Society of so good a Way,
they are lately resolved upon, for the Management of a
great part of their Business. Wherein, my Lord, I do more
than presume, that I also speak the Sense of the whole So∣ciety;
I think, not any one excepted.
I may with the same Confidence intimate, my Lord,
how happy they account themselves, in having a Person
so fit to prefide their Affairs, as Your Lordship. The
Largeness of your Knowledge, the Exactness of Your Judg∣ment,
the Evenness of Your Comport; being some of those
necessary Qualifications, which His Majesty had in His
Eye (as right well understanding what He did) when
He fixed His Choice upon Your Lordship.
I know, my Lord, that there are some men, who have

just so much Vnderstanding, as only to teach them how to
be Ambitious: The Flattering of whom, is somewhat like
the Tickling of Children, till they fall a Dancing. But I
also know, that Your Lordship unconcerneth Your self as
much, in what I even now spake; as Caesar did himself,
when his Souldiers began to style him King. For as he said,
Non Rex, sed Caesar: So let Your Lordship be but once
nam'd, and all that follows, is but a Tautology to what You
are already known to be. Your being President of the Royal
Society, Your being the First that was Chosen, and Chosen
by so Knowing a Prince; becomes so real a Panegyrick to Your
Lordship, as leaveth Verbal ones without any sound.
Whence, my Lord, I have a third Reason most naturally
emergent, which is, That I dare to submit my self, as to what I
have hereafter said, to Your Lordships Censure. You being
so able and just an Arbiter betwixt the same and all those Per∣sons
therein concern'd; that You can neither be deceived, nor
corrupted, to make a Judgment in any Point, to the Injury of
either.
And truly, my Lord, were it only from a Principle of self-Interest,
yet I could not desire it should be otherwise. For the
World, if it lives, will certainly grow as much more knowing
than it is; as it is now more, than it was heretofore. So
that we have as little Reason to despise Antiquity; as we can
have willingness, that we our selves should be despised by Po∣sterity.
Yet some difference there is to be made; viz. betwixt those
of all Ages, who have been modestly ignorant; and those who
have thought, or pretended, that they were Omniscient. Or
if knowing and acknowledging that they were Ignorant; have
yet not been contented to be so; unless, with as good manners,
as sense, they did conjure all Mankind not to offer at the know∣ing
any more than themselves.
Vpon the whole, my Lord, I desire not You should be a Pa∣tron,
any further than You are a Judge. For if this small
Essay hath deserved the least acceptance, I am sure, that in
being one, You will be both. I am,
My Lord, 

