



May it please your Majesty,
HAving formerly dedi∣cated two Essays to the Royal Society, of the Anatomy of Plants; and both with good ac∣ceptance: and Your Majesty like∣wise, upon Your view of them, having been pleased to speak well

of the same: I am now embold∣ened most humbly to present a Third into Your Own Royal Hands.
By which Your Majesty will find; That there are Terrae In∣cognitae in Philosophy, as well as Geography: For the discovery of this Part whereof, I did re∣solve to make an Adventure. And I may, without vanity, say thus much, That it was my for∣tune, to be the first that ever gave a Map of the Country.
Your Majesty will here see, That there are those things, which are little less admirable within a Plant, than within an Animal. That a Plant, as well

as an Animal, is constituted of several Organical Parts; some whereof may be called its Bow∣els. That every Plant hath Bowels of divers kinds, contain∣ing divers kinds of Liquors. That even a Plant lives partly upon Air; for the reception whereof, it hath peculiar Organs. So that a Plant is, as it were, an Animal in Queers; even as an Animal is a Plant, or rather several Plants, bound up into one Volume.
Again, that all the said Or∣gans, Bowels or other Parts, are as artificially made; and as punctually, for their Place and Number, composed together; as

all the Mathematical Lines of a Flower or Face. That the Sta∣ple of the Stuff is so exquisitely fine, that no Silkworm is able to draw so small a Thred. So that one who walks about with the meanest stick, holds a Piece of Natures Handicraft in his hand, which far surpasses the most ela∣borate Woof, or Needlework in the World.
That by all these Means, the Ascent of the Sap; the Distri∣bution of the Air; the Confe∣ction of several sorts of Liquors, as Lymphas, Milks, Oyls, Bal∣soms; with other Acts of Vege∣tation, are all contrived and brought about in a Mechanical

way. In sum, Your Majesty will find, that we are come ashore into a new World, whereof we see no end.
It may be, that some will say, Into another Utopia. Yet not I, but Nature speaketh these things. T only true Pallas, wherewith it is Treasonable for the most curious handed Arachne to compare. In whose name, I, the meanest of her Pupils, do in all humility crave Your Ma∣jesties Most Gracious Patronage. Whereof I cannot doubt, whilst I consider Your Royal Propen∣sity in all other like cases: that You are too Great to be moved by the suggestions of Ignorance,

or Prejudice: and that You are of∣ten exercised in much higher de∣monstrations of those Princely endowments of Wisdom, Justice, and Goodness. All which illu∣strate Your Majesties Impe∣rial Crown, and make You truly August.
Withal, there is  some thing Royal, in Your Maje∣sties Philosophy, as well as Incli∣nations and Power. Agreeable to the Principles whereof, You have been pleased to Institute that Society, whose business is, an Unbyassed, and Universal search of Truth. Your Majesty deem∣ing it to be as Noble a Design, to enlarge the Territories of

Knowledge, as those of Domi∣nion.
If I shall make any further Ob∣servations of this, or other na∣ture; I must needs wish, still to seat my self in a clear Light; as is that of Your Majesties Fa∣vour. You being, as it were, Sol & Anima hujus Insularis Mundi. And therefore no less to so small a part thereof, as is,

