



Right Honourable and most Illustrious,
IF the Dedication of Books were not in use, yet here I think I might have been a precedent. The pro∣motion of Phytological Science is one part of Your Work; and 'tis You have called me to the management of this part, for some time have intrusted

me herein, and by Your most benign and candid acceptance of what I have performed thus far, have encouraged me hereunto: I therefore present but Your own into Your hands.
The great Honour and Advantage of Your Fellowship, I first obtained by Me∣diation of the late most Reverend Bi∣shop of Chester; whom I cannot name without saying thus much of him, That He was a Person of that eminent and happy Worth, which as it was too good to fear envy, so is it too great to need an Elogie.
With Him it was You were pleased to approve of me for that Vndertaking which I have here begun. Had I con∣sulted my own abilities altogether, I should scarcely have ventured upon it; seeing very little for which I could think well of my self, saving that I had lear∣ned upon good grounds, to think of You with greatest Honour. But I also con∣sidered, That to insist hereon too much,

might be a reflection upon Your Judg∣ments, who had thought fit to make choice of me. And, That You were not more the Patrons of Wit, than of Indu∣stry, and of all who shall endeavour to find out, or to confirm the Truth of Things. Withal, I looked upon Nature as a Treasure so infinitely full, that as all men together cannot exhaust it; so no man, but may find out somewhat therein, if he be resolved to Try.
In compliance therefore with Your Commands, I have hereunto devoted my self. These adding force to my own desires of being somewhat instrumental to the improvement of Medicinal and and other wholesom Knowledge: if peradventure, as we increase herein, we may become better and more happy. As to which Improvement, though I could not hope, yet I would not despair. I have already prepared the Soil, and made some Plantation; what remain∣eth behind, and the Vintage of the whole,

will depend much upon the continued In∣fluence of Your Beams: for how unpro∣mising soever the Stock may be, yet the Fruit cannot but be somewhat matured upon which You are pleas'd to shine. I am also confident, that the same Nobi∣lity and Goodness which accept the en∣deavours, will likewise pardon the faults, of

