



My Lord,
HAving in all humility pre∣sented the following dis∣courses to the King, our Royal Patron: I next crave leave to do the like to Your

Lordship. You being, in some sense, His Majesties Chancellor in these Af∣fairs; and having highly justifed his choice of you, by that great Pru∣dence and Integrity you have upon all occasions shewed herein.
One Instance whereof hath been afforded us by this present Subject, sc. the Anatomy of Plants. Which having been some years since under∣took; and since then Additions made thereunto; and both published by the Advice of the Royal Society, and the Order of their Council, wherein your Lordship presides: Your Lordship hath thought fit, notwithstanding, lately to give the same Order for the publishing of a like undertaking, by another (indeed a most accurate) Hand. As well knowing, That it would be no disadvantage to the cre∣dit of those Matters, which were so new and strange, to be offered to the World from a twofold Authori∣ty.

For one, although he have no mind to deceive, yet may sooner be deceived, than two may be. Especi∣ally living in divers Countrys, and having had no correspondence. Like∣wise, that although the same Subject be prosecuted by two Hands; yet would it be still more Illustrated by the various Examples of Both. As also, that like as in other matters, so here the defects of both the Undertakers, would mutually be supplied.
Of these, with Your Lordships leave, I shall give some Instances. In the third Chapter of my first Book I have assigned an Aerial Content to those I here call the Air-vessels; and in the second Chapter of that Book, have given a description of them. Yet so far only, as the unassisted eye would discover: having resolved, for divers reasons, to reserve the Microscopical Part for a second at∣tempt. But what could not be ob∣served

by the bare eye, the Learned Marcellus Malpighius, by the help of Glasses, did in his first Book (which the Learned Mr. Oldenburge calleth his Idea) superadd, sc. their Spiral Texture. By which Observation, I do say, in the words of the Learned Grotius upon the like occasion, Pro∣fecisse me non diffeor, quin gaudeo etiam gloriórque.
In like manner, such observations as Signior Malpighi had not inserted into his first Book, were to be found in my first. As for example, A descri∣ption of the Florid Attire, in all Co∣rymbiferous, and other similar Flow∣ers: of the Acetary in the center of all sorts of Pears: of the Stone in all sorts of Plums: of a third and inmost Cover, found in almost all Seeds whatsoever, and often analogous to a Secundine: The prodigious swelth of the Covers (especially in Stone Fruits) upon the Generation of the

seed, and their contraction afterwards; after the manner of the Womb in some Animals: with divers others: some whereof are now to be found in Signior Malpighi's second Book, and some are there still wanting. The same worthy person being now plea∣sed likewise, to use the self same Names which, having procured my Book (sent him by the Learned Mr. Oldenburge) to be translated into La∣tine, he saw I did therein give to some of the said described Parts.
Again to his observation of the spiral Texture of the Air-vessels, in my second Book I have added a fur∣ther description of the said Vessels.
Once more, whereas saying little of Roots, he hath applyed himself chiefly to discourse of Trunks: on the contrary, in my second Book, I have made it my business, to treat more largely, and to give the Com∣parative Anatomy of Roots. For this

amongst other reasons, that hereby the nature of both Parts might be still more fully and perspicuously re∣presented betwixt us Both.
Upon the consideration of all which I am, my Lord, very sensible, as of that great Justice you have done to the Subject treated of; so honour to my self, in having assigned unto me so eminent a Collegue.
As to the following Anatomy, I shall give your Lordship the trouble of noting; That I have varied from Signior Malpighi in, I think, all the Examples here exhibited. As also, that some progress is here made be∣yond what your Lordship will find in the abovesaid Learned Author. As for example, in a further discovery of the Fabrick or Structure of the Lym∣phaeducts; of the Air-vessels; and of the Pith: and in sundry particulars more. For which reason, I thought it more proper to follow the said

worthy Author, in the publishing hereof, rather than to precede him: although the Figures, your Lordship may remember, were presented to the Royal Society long ago, and most of them two years since. Lastly, that I have chosen to give my examples chiefly in the transverse Section; whereas those of Signior Malpighi, are prin∣cipally in cutting by the length. Which I have done chiefly for this reason, Because, that as the Variety of the parts (as to Size, Number, and Position) in every species; so their Regularity and Constancy in the in∣dividuals of each, are this way, much more clearly and certainly re∣presented. Without a distinct re∣mark of which circumstances, the Ge∣neration of the various kinds of Li∣quors in Plants, and divers other par∣ticulars, cannot possibly be under∣stood. All which your Lordship will best observe, by comparing our seve∣ral Figures together.




And for the subsequent discourse, grounded on this Anatomy; I hum∣bly submit the same to your Lord∣ships Judgment; which must needs be candid and benign, because it is great. I have only this to say,
.
Your Lordship will not disapprove the Enterprize, though as yet it falls short of perfection. It being the re∣sult of your Lordships manifold Vir∣tues and Abilities, That you know how far to encourage the meanest attempts; as well as rightly to va∣lue, and assist the greatest performan∣ces. Upon the account whereof, it is even my ambition to be,
My Lord,

