



MY LORD,
IF the Dedication of Books were not in use;
yet here, I think, I might have been a Pre∣cedent.
The promotion of Phytological
Science is one Part of Your Work; and 'tis
You have called me to the management of
this Part; for some time, have intrusted me
herein; and by Your most favourable and candid accep∣tance
of what I have performed thus far, have encou∣raged
me hereunto: I therefore present but Your Own,
into Your Hands.
The great Honour and Advantage of Your Fellowship,
I first obtained, by Mediation of Dr. Wilkins, the late most
Reverend Bishop of Chester. Whom I cannot name,
without saying thus much of him, That He was a Per∣son

of that eminent and happy Worth, which, as it was
too good, to fear envy; so is it too great, to need an Elogie.
With Him, it was, You were pleased to commit to Me,
the further prosecution of this Work; the Beginnings
whereof, were by Your Order formerly made publique.
Had I consulted my own Abilities altogether, I should
scarcely have ventured upon it; seeing very little, for
which I could think well of my self, saving, That I had
learned, upon good grounds, to think of You with greatest
Honour. But I also considered, That to insist hereon too
much, might be a reflection upon Your Judgments, who had
thought fit to make choice of Me. And, That You were
not more the Patrons of Wit, than of Industry; and of
All, who shall endeavour to find out, or to confirm the
Truth of Things. Withal, I looked upon Nature, as a Trea∣sure
so infinitely full; that as all Men together, cannot ex∣haust
it; so no Man, but may find out somewhat therein,
if he be resolved to Try.
In compliance therefore with Your Commands, I have
hereunto devoted a very considerable part of my Time.
These, adding force to my own Desires, of being somewhat
instrumental to the Improvement of Medicinal, and other
wholesom Knowledge: if peradventure, as we increase
herein, we may become better, and more happy. As to
which Improvement, though I could not hope; yet, I
would not dispair. I have already prepared the Soil, and
made some Plantation: what remaineth behind, and the
Vintage of the whole, will depend much upon the con∣tinued
Influence of Your Beams: for how unpromising
soever the Stock may be; yet the Fruit cannot but be
somewhat matured, upon which You are pleased to shine.
I am also confident, that the same Nobilty and Goodness,
which accept the endeavours, will likewise pardon the
faults, of,
September 1. 1673.
My Lord,

