



May it please Your Majesty,
THE Dedication of one Part of the
following Anatomy having been
very graciously received by Your
Majesty: I am now emboldened most
humbly to present the Whole into
Your Royal Hands.
By which Your Majesty will find, That there
are Terrae Incognitae in Philosophy, as well as
Geography. And for so much, as lies here, it
comes to pass, I know not how, even in this Inqui∣sitive
Age, That I am the first, who have given a
Map of the Country.

Your Majesty will here see, That there are those
things within a Plant, little less admirable, than
within an Animal. That a Plant, as well as an
Animal, is composed of several Organical Parts;
some whereof may be called its Bowels. That eve∣ry
Plant hath Bowels of divers kinds, conteining
divers kinds of Liquors. That even a Plant lives
partly upon Aer; for the reception whereof, it hath
those Parts which are answerable to Lungs. So that
a Plant is, it were, an Animal in Quires; as an
Animal is a Plant, or rather several Plants bound up
into one Volume.
Again, that all the said Organs, Bowels, or other
Parts, are as artificially made; and for their Place
and Number, as punctually set together; as all the
Mathematick Lines of a Flower or Face. That
the Staple of the Stuff is so exquisitely fine, that
no Silk-worm is able to draw any thing near so small
a Thred. So that one who walks about with the
meanest Stick, holds a Piece of Natures Handicraft,
which far surpasses the most elaborate Woof or
Needle-Work in the World.
That by all these Means, the Ascent of the Sap,
the Distribution of the Aer, the Confection of se∣veral
sorts of Liquors, as Lympha's, Milks, Oyls,
Balsames; with other parts of Vegetation, are all
contrived and brought about in a Mechanical way.

In sum, Your Majesty will find, that we are come
ashore into a new World, whereof we see no end.
It may be, that some will say, into another Utopia.
Yet not I, but Nature speaketh these things: the only
true Pallas, wherewith it is treasonable for the most
couriously handed Arachne to compare. In whose
Name, I, the meanest of her Pupils, do in all humi∣lity
crave Your Majesties Gracious Patronage. Where∣of
I cannot doubt, since Your Majesty hath been plea∣sed
to be the Founder, and to style Your Self the Pa∣tron
of the Society, of which I have the honour to
be a Member. Your Majesty deeming it to be a more
Noble Design, To enlarge the Territories of Know∣ledge,
than those of Dominion: and the Highest Pitch
of Human Glory, not to rule, in any sort, over many;
but to be a Good Prince over Wise Men. I am

