



Much Honoured Sir,
THE Translation of this wor∣thy Labour of the great and famous
Grotius, may boldly Claim the Honour of being Dedica∣ted to your
Patronage for many Causes. The Excellency of this Subject, being a Defence of
one of the most Fundamental Articles of the Christian Faith, requires a
Pa∣tron of Worth and Excellency; and such a one (I may speak it without
flattery) is your self, who are emi∣nent for Learning, and
exemplary for Piety. Your Works that are published in the World, which are
both greatly approved for their Pie∣ty, and justly admired for their
Profundity, are an invincible Argu∣ment, how Greatness and Goodness are
joyned together in you by a a lovely Union. But there is also a peculiar
Encouragement to Dedicate this Book to you, because you were the first that
encouraged the Tran∣slation and Publication of this Work. And verily, if the
seasonableness of a thing adds to its beauty, as Solo∣mon hath
testified, this Work hath found a fit time for its Impression. For at
this time, that , damnable
Heresie, or Heresie of De∣struction, as the word in the
Origi∣nal signifies, that Root of Bitterness, the hellish Error of
wretched and blasphemous Socinus, who trampled under his
Feet the Blood of Jesus, the Mediatour of the New Covenant, is now
beginning to spread it self in England, and to infect whole
Houses with a worse and more dangerous than any Egyptian Plague.
If the Son of Croesus, who had been dumb all his days before, was
so wonderfully affected with the danger his Father's Life was in, that the
bands of his Tongue, through the vehemency of Natural Affecti∣on, were
dissolved, so that he, that never spake before, suddainly cried out,
Kill not my Father King Croe∣sus; how much more zealously may I,
that have been a great while lurking in Darkness, as those that have been
long dead, now appear in the Light against those Enemies of my Redeemer,
who by their hor∣rid Blasphemies are not ashamed to spit in the Face of
my Lord Jesus with greater Impudence than ever did the Jews at
his Crucifixion. I am very glad that my blessed Re∣deemer hath honoured me
to be Instrumental for the Confutation of that filthy Error of
Socinianism, which is as ready a way to Hell, as ever the Devil of
Hell found out, since he was a Devil.
Methinks the very mention of the name of Socinus, may
make the heart of a gracious Christian to rise with holy Indignation, and
his hair to stand with amazement, that such a blasphemous Wretch could be
found upon the Earth. How did this Blasphemer strive to vilifie the Blood
of Christ Jesus, as if thereby our Sins had not been expiated, as if
thereby no Satisfaction had been made to the Justice of the holy God, as if
the Death and Sufferings of this Lamb of God had not taken a∣way the sins of the World, and had been no Propitiation for our sins.
Those wicked Blasphemies are throughly Confuted, both by invin∣cible
Arguments of sound Reason, and evident Testimonies of Scripture in this
Learned Work of Grotius. God hath exhorted all Christians by the
holy Apostle Jude, ,
to contend vehemently, or to contend as men that are striving
for the maste∣ry, as the Original Word signifies, for the Faith
that was once delivered to the Saints; therefore I may justly hope that
this Work will be accep∣table to all good Christians, into whose hands it
shall come. And that your self, as you were the first En∣courager of its
Publication, will now also willingly Patronize its being published.
Worthy Sir, I recommend you to the Grace of the Lord
Jesus, and I beg of God that he may prolong your Life to the glory of his
Name, and after you have passed the time of your Mortality, that an
Entrance may be ministred to you abundant∣ly into the Everlasting Kingdom
of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ. I am

