



SIR,
BOleslaus, one of the Kings of Po∣land, alwayes carried his Fathers Picture about him; and when he was to undertake any great De∣signe, he would look on the Picture, and pray to God, That he might do nothing unworthy of such a Father. And that was no vain Counsel of a Philosopher, in curing a Royal Pupil of his with one general Instruction, To remember that he was a Kings Son. I know you have studied Men as well as Books, I humbly recommend this good Exam∣ple
 to your Study and Imitation. I con∣fess, I deserve blame for putting forth this History without those Ornaments that so glo∣rious a Subject requires. Therefore I intreat your Grace, to write it in a new and better Edition, and transcribe his Actions into your Life and Practice; that will be a most excel∣lent way to preserve his Memory. Doubt∣less you are under the greatest Obligations to Vertue and Honour, to maintain the Glory and Renown of your Predecessor: Alexander would not let a Coward be call'd by his Name; And the People of Rome would not suffer a Son of Scipio Affricanus the elder to wear the Pourtrature of his Father in a Ring, because he degenerated from his Ver∣tues.
God hath blessed you with great Talents, Riches, Honour, good Parts, and Endow∣ments of Mind; I hope you will improve all these for the Interest of Vertue and Religi∣on.
Themistocles kill'd a Graecian for being an In∣terpreter to the Persians, and imployed the Greek Language in usum Barbarorum, for the use of Barbarians, (thus this proud Nation ac∣compted all others.) God forbid that you should abuse the Gifts of God unto Barbarous uses, and disgrace your Father (who was a Person of great Vertues) by any kind of Vice whatsoever. I have reason to believe, and
 hope better of your Grace, whom I have known almost from the first year of your Age, and do perswade my self, that you will confute that false saying, [Filii Heroum sunt Noxae,] by your Pactice and Vertuous Con∣versation. The great Advantages that you have to do good, by your Example and Encouragement, do make me use the more Liberty; And your Grace cannot but remember, I alwayes took the same Free∣dome with your Father, whom I loved sin∣cerely, and served long within the Sphaere of my Calling, and beyond it. The faithfullest Counsel that I humbly propose to your Grace, is to follow his Example, and love those whom he loved; they will not be Friends only to your Fortune and Prosperity, but to your Self upon all occasions: And no man is so great that need∣eth not Friends, nay the greatest most need them: God make you highly serviceable to Himself, useful to your King and Country, and preserve you from the Errours and Tempta∣tions of your younger years, which shall al∣wayes be the Prayer of him who doth not forget his Duty to the Dead as well as the Living; And will ever, my Lord, be

