



My Lord,
YOƲ may most justly Wonder at this attempt why I (the meanest of so many) should expose my self unto Publick view, and the manifold Censures which will inevitably fol∣low hereupon.
Secondly, In this my bold address unto Your Lordship in the Dedication, with so poor and bar∣ren
 a Sermon, upon so rich and fruitful a Text, wherein so many glorious things should be insisted on. But my fear is most the Censure of God; and that I may be afraid to Censure others.
I confess it's better to be haled in by force of others unto great Duties, then over hastily to rush upon them.
Your Lordship knows right well, That For∣wardness argues Insufficiency.
They are modest beginnings, which give hopeful Proceedings, and happy Endings. Yet when I con∣sidered that Servant was Condemned of Evil, that gave God no more then his own, which he had re∣ceived, Matth. 25.27. Though but one Talent, yet ought to have improved it.
Then with neglect of Censure, contented to learn to be Contemned; I adventured to send forth this Plain Sermon into the World, seconded with many desires that the Blessing of Heaven may go along with it, under Your Lordships Patronage.
I Design nothing of Controversie; I inveigh not against any one; I would give no offence, neither to the Jevv nor to the Gentile, but especially to the Church of God. 1 Cor. 10.32. Nor yet to gratifie such as are accustomed to hu∣mane flourishes, oftentimes contracting Itching Ears do begin to loath the simplicity of the Gospel, and
 vvill not indure sound Doctrine. 2 Tim. 4.3.
The efficacy of the Holy Spirit doth more ap∣pear in a naked simplicity of words, then in too much Elegancy and Neatness.
Hence Saint Paul saith that he was , Rude in Speech, yet not in Knovvledge. 2 Cor. 11.6.
Your Lordship is not ignorant that the two great Pillars, upon which the Kingdom of Satan is erected, and by which it is upheld, are Ignorance and Errour; The first of these is so far from being the Mother of all Devotion, that Saint Bernard saith, it is Mater omnium Vitiorum. Bern. de ordine vitae.
Through the Power of the Gospel, and our care∣ful Government, holy Discipline, we shall be much delivered from these Mischiefs.
Your Lordship hath now a large Opportunity for Gods glory, and the Churches good, to further, and ho∣nour, the truth of the Gospel in the Power and Pu∣rity of it while the Church of God shall be favou∣red with Your life, and happy continuance amongst us.
The Lord stretch out his holy Arm together with you in that great Charge committed to you, and make your Lordship as great a blessing, as faithful a favou∣rite unto Piety, as great a supporter and encourager of the faithful Ministers of the Gospel, and the most sincere, and Godly of your Lordships Diocess, as
 ever did Preceed you, or ever shall Succeed you. And then give you a full and an ample reward; that your last translation may be to a never fading Crown, and such choice delights as never entred into the heart of man to conceive.
The Lord of Heaven and Earth bless your Lordship with many and happy days, and grant you true Felicity. Thus craving your Lordships pardon for my presumption, I subscribe my self

