



MADAM,
IT was a very merciful Pro∣vidence, which brought your Honour to your dear Mo∣thers assistance, in her dying sickness; by which, as you had the pleasure of recreating her Spirit with your presence, and of giving an high Demonstration of your Piety to her, in her low and weak state of body (a vertue of great price with God, and remarkably rewarded by him, even in this life)

So also the happiness of being an eye witness to her Christian De∣portment, in her sharpest Pains and Agonies; how her Faith and Patience triumphed over them all; which, no doubt, did much sweeten the sorrow, that her outward di∣stress, inflicted upon your tender Heart. And, indeed, it is no won∣der so holy a Life, should have so Happy an end. Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright; for the end of that man is Peace. This Pretious Saint had made her Bed, before she was to lye down on it. Long had she been gather∣ing these Spices (Graces I mean) for her dying Nest; in the sweet Odours of which, she at last so Holily, and Peaceably, breathed

forth her Gracious Soul, into the Arms of her beloved Saviour. And, now Madam, seeing God hath determined your Will, by de∣claring his, it will highly become your Honour to bear her De∣cease,Non Maeremus quòd talem ami∣simus, sed gratias agimus, quòd ha∣buimus, imò ha∣bemus Deo enim vivunt omnia, & quicquid reverti∣tur ad Dominum, in familiae nume∣ro computatur. Epist. 27. Epitaph Paulae Matris. as Saint Hierom did the death of the Noble Paula, whom he so much ho∣noured for her Piety. Not by Mourning you have lost, but by Praising God you had so Pretious a Saint to be your Mother; and that you had her so long, even to live to see, and give her Blessing to your Chil∣drens Children, before her depar∣ture; yea, that you have her still. Is there no way to have our Friends, unless we have them in our sight? She is not lost, that still

lives. Her death was the end of her Mortality, but there is no end of her Life. In her Spirit, she lives in Heaven with God, to whom she lived on Earth. In her good Name, she lives with all that knew her, or heard of her admirable Piety. This like an after beam of the Sun-sett, followed her, to her bed of the Grave, and still shines to her Honour. The me∣mory of the just is blessed, though the name of the wicked rots, even while it is remembred; as the name of Pilate doth in the Creed, to his reproach and curse. And as to her Vertues, she lives in your self, and in as many other of her Noble Descendants, as imitate her Piety. It joyed this Blessed Saint while alive, that she should

leave her surviving Children, and so many of her Grand-Chil∣dren, walking in the Truth. And if an Heathen took such high content, that the Honour which he arrived to, befel him, while his Parents were yet living; whereby they had a pleasure in seeing his happiness; How much more may it comfort the Pious Relations of this Saint, that this their Pretious Parent, had the joy of seeing them ennobled with Divine Grace, and so in their way to Heaven, before her self went thither. I am sure, it hath been an Heart-breaking-sorrow to some Children, that they converted not to God, before their Godly Parents bodies, were con∣verted into Dust; and thereby cause them to go sighing with sor∣row

to their Graves; who, might they but first have seen them re∣claimed, would have gone down to them singing for joy. It is a blessed sight, to behold Children, especially of Noble Persons, imi∣tating their Godly Parents Graces. God is no respecter of Per∣sons,Minimè quidem Deus est accep∣tor personarum: Nescio tamenquo pacto, virtus in Nobili plus pla∣cet; An fortè quia plus claret? Epist. CXIII. ad Sophiam virgi∣nem. yet saith Saint Ber∣nard, I know not how it comes to pass, that Vertue in a Noble Person, doth more please; Is it not hap∣ly, because it is more con∣spicuous? and so more attra∣ctive. This Consideration made me more readily obey your Ho∣nours commands, in publishing these mean Papers; hoping that this great Example of Piety, in so Noble a Lady, together, with

the Honour that attended her to the Grave for it, may cause some of high Birth, a little more, to consider their great mistake, in thinking to overtake Honour in the dirty paths of Prophaneness and Irreligion; and so be moved, at last, to change their way, and turn into this clean road of Piety; wherein this good Lady walking, lived with so much esteem, and dyed so wonderfully lamented. The character, that I have here given of her, is True, but not full; nay, far short of her worth. Her Graces were of so high a strain, that I may truly say,Quid in illâ virtu∣tum, quid ingenii, quid sanctitatis, quid puritatis invenerim; vereor di∣cere, ne fidem credulitatis excedam. Hieron. Ep. 16. ad Princip. Virg. what Saint Jerome did, concerning his

commending Marcella, a Noble Roman Lady. I was afraid to speak all I knew of her Wisdom, Sanctity, Charity, and other Ex∣cellencies, lest I should seem to exceed the belief of some; those, I mean, who knew her not; for as any were more, and longer ac∣quainted with her, so their esti∣mate of her advanced higher. And must not that Piece be ad∣mirably well drawn, which is most commended by those (if able to judge) that stand nearest, and look longest on it? And none, I think, will deny, that famous light of his Age, Bishop Usher, to have been as able to judge in this case, as any other; and what an high esteem he had of this Lady, and her Noble Lord and Husband

also, appears, from a Letter writ∣ten by him, to her, Forty years ago, in which there is this passage.This Let∣ter was writ, An. Dom. 1628. The thing that I have most ad∣mired in your Noble Lord, is, that such lowliness of mind, and such an high pitch of a brave Spirit, should be yoaked toge∣ther, and lodged in one Breast. And on the other side, when I reflect upon you; methinks, I understand that saying of the Apostle better, than I did. That as the man is the Image and Glory of God, so the woman is the Glory of the Man. And to your comfort, let me add this, That if I have any insight in things of this Nature, or have any judgment to discern of Spi∣rits; I have clearly beheld en∣graven

in your Soul, the Image and Superscription of my God. Thus wrote this Excellent Per∣son, whose admirable judgment, may keep any sober Person from thinking him in this high cha∣racter, guilty of rashness and light credulity; and his known integrity is enough to free him from all suspicion of abusing his Pen to any servile flattery. And they, who knew the lowly Spirit of this good Lady, and how ready she was to be dejected from an over deep sence of her unworthiness, will find reason to believe, that this Man of God, gave this Te∣stimony of her, to her, as a Cor∣dial to revive her Humble Spirit; and therefore brings it in with, And this to your comfort I add.

But I am too troublesom, I fear, to your Honour; my hearty Prayers are, that as you have begun, so you may go on in living your Mo∣thers Holy Life; and that then yon may, in a good Old Age, dye her happy death, with much Peace and Honour. And that so long, as you shall have a Posterity live on Earth, your good Mother may never be Dead; but may from Ge∣neration, to Generation, have those descending from her, that will keep her Name, and Pretious Ex∣ample alive, by a due Veneration of the one, and Pious imitation of the other.
Madam,

Evenham, March 13. 1671.
