



Worshipfull Sir,
THere are two remar∣kable
points of Po∣licie
which are used
by the enemies of
the Trueth the Pa∣pists,
for bearing
down the same, and for upholding the
Dagon & Diana of their idolatrous
worship. The first is, the claime of ve∣nerable.
Antiquitie, to be only on their,

side, being herein like the Gibeonites,
who tho they dwelt near hand, yet pretē∣ded
that they wer come frō a far, or like
the Pharisees, who deryved the leaven
of their new and corrupt doctrine from
the verie chayre of Moses it self.
The second is, the imputation of No∣veltie
to us, and laying that foule as∣persion
on the faire face of trueth and
of our profession, as (tho like Elihues
confession of himself Iob, 32. 6.) the
same were but young and of yesterday,
but theirs (like Iobs other friends) wr
onlie old or ancient, which imputation
indeed is no new tricke of enemies to the
Trueth, seing we see the same aspersion
cast on our Saviours and his Apostles
doctrine, Act 17. 19. and whereby al∣so
Pagans laboured to make the Chri∣stian
religiō at first odious to the world.
But we are content to be tryed by An∣tiquitie,
the old way (as Ieremie
eakes 6. 16.) being the only good

way, and (as Tertullian sayeth cap.
4. ad praxeam) That, that onelie is
trueth which is first and most an∣cient,
as that was the good seed onelie
which was first sowen in the Masters
field, it being tares onlie which were
sowen later by the envyous enemie.
Therfore we must distinguish between
Antiquitie of Trueth, which is like
the Legitime, & first borne, & between
Antiquitie of Errour, which is later
and of a bastard broode, which made
our Saviour to oppose to this, Math.
5. (it was said of old.) this other
speech of his (but from the begin∣ning
it was not so) by which sort also
of primitive antiquitie Ierusalem was
somtimes a faithfull Citie (as Isaiah
calleth her, 1. 21.) but afterwards by
the other sort became a Harlot, & as
Ezekiel also speaketh 23. 43. waxed
old in her adulteries: even as Rome
in likemanner was first famous for her

faith throughout the world, by holding
the antiquitie of trueth. But thereafter
like Ierusalem making defection to
errour and Idolatrie▪ shee hath in like∣māner
played the Harlot, & waxed
old in her Adulteries. Whose fol∣lowers
(as Demetrius cryed up their
great Diana of Ephesus, or the Iewes,
the Temple of the Lord.) so, tho they
in likemanner cry up the holie Romā
Church, Mother and Mistresse of
all other, yet justlie we may reply, as
is said of her, Revel. 17. 5. That shee
is a mother indeed, but the Mother of
harlots and abhominations of the
earth, and so, old indeed, but (as Ez∣ekiel
speaketh) old in adulteries, and
who because of the multitude of
her whoredomes (as the Prophet
Nahum speaketh 3. 4.) is the mistres
of witch-crafts, whose skirts the
Lord hath discovered upon her
face, and will more and more shew

the Nations her nakednes, and the
Kingdomes her shame, who at last
shall hate the Whore, (as Revel. 17.
16.) make her dosolate, eate her
flesh, and burne her with fire, for
strong is the Lord who judgeth
her.
Howsoever therefore they upbraid us
with Noveltie, who are of that Apo∣staticke
Church of Rome, and syna∣gogue
of Antichrist, yet it shall be
seene (God willing) by this ensueing
Treatise. That  Potiphars wife was
onlie guiltie of that foull aspersion,
wherwith shee accused innocēt Ioseph:
so that they in likemanner are onelie
guiltie of that aspersion of Noveltie,
which they impute to us and to our pro∣fession,
and that their doctrine is nei∣ther
that first sowen seed in the Lords
field by his Apostles, whereanent Paul
sayeth Gal. 1. 8. If an Angell from
heaven should each any thing be∣side

that which we haue taught,
let him be accused, nor yet consonāt
thereunto, but altogether disagreeable
and dissonant therefra, and like the su∣persemination
& mixture of the tares
by the envyous enemie in the LORDS
field.
Which paines I haue Dedicate to you
(Sir) as a pryme lover of the Trueth,
and promover of learning, to whom by
Divine providenoe as the patronage of
six Bursers of Philosophie in the Vni∣versitie
of Saynt Andrewes & Leo∣nardin
Colledge thereof now belongeth,
founded by that worthie and never to be
foregotten Principall thereof Master
ROBERT WILKIE of happie
memorie. So your godlie care and con∣scientious
manageing therof, with your
loue to that place, which oweth so much
to you and to your surname, hath mo∣ved
mee in this barren age of encou∣ragements
to vertue and learning, to

single you out as fittest and most wor∣thie
to whom my pen and paines may
contribute their best respects, the in∣crease
of whose prosperitie and happi∣nesse
everie way, I shall ever wish who
am
Sir,

