



Right Honorable, & Noble Lord,
IN the tyme of so great defe∣ction frō the Trueth to Popery, within this Kingdom; and especiallie in these northern parts of late. If ever there was a necessitie layd upon the Lords Servants, To giue Warning from the Watch-tower,Ezek. 33▪3▪ as Ezekiell) spea∣keth)

and to blow the Trumpet,Iude 3. it is now: And, as the Apostle spea∣keth,Act. 20.29. Earnestlie to contend for that Faith which was once delivered to the Saincts: Seing (as the Apostle Paull, in his tyme, did fore-warn the El∣ders of Ephesus,) There are greevous Wolves, entred in amongst vs; not spa∣ring the flock,Thes. 2.3. as also of our own selves mē ar arisēn speaking perverse things, to draw disciples after thē. And more particularly seeing that man of sinne & son of perdition, of whō he spea∣keth, by his emissaries, with all sub∣tilitie and sedulitie, is seeking to repare the breaches of that totte∣ring Babell, which is near to her fall; by seeking with all deceave∣ablenesse of vnrighteousnesse, (as the Apostle speaketh,) in them that perish to seduce vnstable soules:Thes. 2.10. and such who have not receaved the love of the Trueth, that they might bee sa∣ved, that therfore through strong de∣lusion

they should believe a lie. Yet, notwithstanding, they shall not pre∣vaile: For, howsoever,Rev. 13.11. that Beast spoken of in the Revelation, (whom all agree to bee that foretold Anti∣christ,) by his false resembling of the horns of the Lamb, and preten∣ding to bee CHRISTS Vicar, hath before tymes deceaved the inhabi∣tants of the earth: and made them drunk with the wine of Whoorish Fornicatiō, (as Hose speaketh,) The spirit of whoredoms,Hoseae 4.12. causing them to erre. Yet now his lying mouth spea∣king lyke the Dragon, is so well known to all GODS People that are come out of Babell, and follow the Lamb, that as the Apostle spea∣keth concerning the Gospell, if it was hid, it was to them onlie that perish: Even so it may bee sayd in lyke manner; If in so clear a light of the Gospell, this bee hid from anie blinded papist, that poperie is Anti∣christianisme,

and the Pope that fore∣told Antichrist, it is onlie to these who wilfullie continuing in their errour; appearinglie GOD hath de∣stinated to destruction: and agaynst whom that sad threatning is de∣nounced, (Rev. 14.10.) that they shall drink of the wine of the wrath of GOD; which is powred out without mixture into the Cup of His indignation, &c.
Seeing, therefore, of al Contra∣versies between the Papists and Us, this is the chieffest; & of such con∣sequence: That if we prove the Pope to bee Antichrist; Then all Poperie is overthrown, and all other Con∣traversies between them and us, easilie decyded. The Pope & his in∣fallibilie, beeing the Diana of Ephe∣sus,1. Sam. 5.4. ther Atlas, and Idoll Dagon, this Pillar of whose house being pulled down, the whole Fabrick, or Super∣structure thereof falleth, as it did in

Sampsons tyme: For,Iudge 16.29. then it will follow, that all Papists are limmes of Antichrist; and all Popish doctrines are Antichristian errors, opposite to the Trueth of CHRIST, and the Gospell. Therefore, for convin∣cing the obstinate Papist, and con∣verting the tractable. As also for establishing the wavering; and con∣firming such as are rooted in the Trueth. I have taken pains, besyde clear Testimonies of Scripture, ad∣duced heretofore, by manie worthie Servants of CHRIST, to prove the Point, in this short Treatise, by taking another course to my know∣ledge, not taken hitherto by anie. That is, to evidence by the witnes∣sing of Roman catholicks themselves, who lived and died in the Commu∣nion of that Church. That the Pope is Antichrist, and that man of sinne, and sonne of perdition, fore-prophe∣sied, by the Apostles, 2. Thessal▪ 2.3.

And, that Beast spoken of by Iohn, Rev. 13.11. Whom the LORD shall consume with the Spirit of His Mouth; & abolish by the Brightnes of His Com∣ming. That so, (as is sayd, Deut. 32.31.) Even our enemies being judges and as it was sayd to the wicked servant, Luke 19 22. Ex ore tuo, &c. Even so, out of the mouths of Ro∣manists themselves, the Trueth here∣by may bee established, and them∣selves convinced.
Which pains that I have taken in this point, I have dedicated, to Your LORDSHIP, besyde other Mo∣tives and Relation; Because of Your LORDSHIPS Known Religious Disposition & Love to the Trueth: The want wherof, is assigned by the Apostle, to bee the cause of that de∣lusion of manie now adayes, and of their Apostasie from the Trueth: And which I may say is one of the greatest Evidences of GODS Love

to You, and of the standing of Your Noble Familie; while as manie o∣thers ar lyke Ionahs gourd fading and falling; Because of the want of that Love to the Trueth, and con∣tempt of the Gospell: That is lyke that worm which was at the root thereof. In which Love of GOD, & His Trueth, and in joyning a Gospel lyfe, with a Gospell light; as Your Lordship groweth in years; that the LORD may lykewyse (as the Pro∣phet speaketh,) Bee lyke Dew to You; and make You to grow in Grace as the Lillie; And,Hosea 14 5. to spreade Your Roots in the stabilitie thereof, lyke the Trees of Lebanon; shall bee ever the hear∣tie Wish and Prayer, of

