


IT is no small admiration to the Professours of the Chri∣stian name in common, that the Iewes who haue the Old TESTAMENT amongst their hands, and dayly therein rea∣deth the Prophesies of the true MESSIAS; but that they may see them in every particu∣lar long ago fulfilled in IESUS CHRIST, whom they did crucifie, were not that it is playnlie tolde vs, that there is a vaile over

their hearts; and vntill the tyme that this be taken away, and the fulness of the Gentiles be brought in, that of the Prophet shall be accomplished in them; that they shal haue eys to see, & not see, ears to hear, & not hear; and hearts to know, and yet not vnderstand: E∣ven so amongst these agayn, who are called Christians in common. It is no small admi∣ration, in lyke manner, to such who profess the Trueth, in the Reformed Churches of EUROPE, that these of the Roman Church, having both the Old and New Testament in their hands, and reading the doctrine contay∣ned therein: Especially in that Epistle writ∣ten of old, by the Apostle to the Romanes. But that they may, in lyke manner, clearly see how grosly in every poynt of Contro∣versie between them and vs, they haue swer∣ved from that Ancient Trueth delyvered therein, to the Noveltie of latter sprung vp Errour quyte controdictor thereto: (where∣by, as Isaiah speaketh, [Chap. 1. verss 21.] the faythfull Citie, is become an Harlot.) Were not, in lyke manner, that there is a vaile over their hearts; and (as is fore prophesied of

such;) That their Errour is not only the de∣ceavableness of vnrighteousness in them that perish: but such a strong delusion, [2. Thess. 2.] that they are inebriated, or made drunk therewith: And so the delusion being strong, is not easily overcome, nor can they be made sinsible thereof; so long as their drunkenness is vpon them, more nor Naball could be of his trespass agaynst David, (as wyse Abigail well knew,) til his wyne was gone from him. [1. Sam. 25.] The same being also a myste∣rie of Iniquitie; and mysteries not beeing known, (as David telleth vs,) till the eyes be opened: [Psal. 119. 18.] Even so, no mar∣vell that this mysterie bee not seen by delu∣ded soulls; altho (as at Sauls conversion) the light shyne as bright about them, as at noon day: [Act. 9.] till lykewyse the LORD open their eyes, and make the scales of their former ignorance and errour, in mercy, to fall off. And, as in curing of Sauls blynd∣ness, it pleased the LORD to vse the Mini∣strie of a Disciple Ananias, rather than a great Apostle: Even so, it hath pleased the LORD, sometymes, for curing the blynd∣ness

of poore seduced soulls, by Poperie, to vse the Ministrie of some who are but weak instruments: That so the greater glory may be his own, amongst whom as one, (as it hath pleased GOD before now to haue blessed my weak endevours for that end:) So I haue taken the ensuing paynes, to see as yet if by HIS BLESSING, I may reclayme but one poore soull, to come out of Babell, and gayn it to CHRIST; wherein if the success bee according to my hearty and charitable desyre, I shall bless the LORD, whose only work is the bringing back of the strayed sheep, and conversion of a simple soull. But, if it be otherwyse, and that the wilfull igno∣rant & seduced, say as their predecessours did when the LORD, by His Prophet, [Ie∣rem. 6. 20.] did exhort them, to stand in the wayes, and see, and ask for the old paths, which is the good way, and walk therein; and they should fynd rest to their soulls: But they sayd, we will not walk therein; then it shall bee sufficient to mee, that my work is with my GOD; altho with Ieremie [chap. 6. 29.] I may say, that the bellowes are burnt,

the lead is consumed in the fyre, the founder hath melted in vayn, and they haue proven reprobate silver.
These pains then (Sir) which I haue taken herin, I haue dedicated to Your W. as for di∣verss other reasons; so for this as a main one, that You haue joined with piety, & the verbal Profession of the Trueth, such Fruits of Cha∣ritie, and reall expression of a true Fayth, as is rare, now-a-dayes; In founding three Bur∣ses of Philosophie in that Universitie where∣in You had Your breeding, & wherof I haue the Charge; which will tend next to GODS Glory, the Poors Comfort, and enlargement of that Seminarie, to the Eternall Honour; Lykewyse, and Memory both of You, and of Your Honourable Houss, whereof You are Head: So that as Your Arms are the Ever-green Holline Leaues, with a blowing Horn, and this Diton, VIRESCIT VULNE∣RE VIRTUS. So shall this Your Munifi∣cence, sutablie bee Ever-green and fresh to all ages in memory, and whyle this Houss standeth, Your Prayse and Commemora∣tion amongst Her chief Benefactours, will

ever alowd bee sounded therein, with this Diton, VIRESCIT MUNERE VIRTUS. Go on, then, Sir, in an Happy Progress of Well-doing: And, as You sow in Righteous∣ness, You shall reap in Mercy; Which with the Addition of all Honour and Happiness here, shall be the hearty wish of
Your VVorships, 
