



May it please your Highness,
THe Nation finding your fatherly
care over them, in the well or∣dering
and governing according to
the Laws, Statutes, and Customs,
endeavoring peace, causing Justice
and Law to be equally admini∣stred,
have cause, and do bless God
for the same.
Upon serions consideration whereof, I shall not dare
or presume to use Arguments to induce your Highnes
to lend an ear to hear the Nations grievance, or what
may be presented for its good; but do humbly pre∣sent
herein, some collections of Records, taken out
of most Judicatures, concerning the abuse of the
Coal-Trade, the Burrough and Corporation of New∣castle
upon Tine, its Charters, Evidences and Depo∣sitions,
proving thereby general wrongs, and insup∣portable
burdens, viz.
First, Forcing people to lose their lives, others
to swear against themselves, others to cut purses in
their Courts for gain, and all to themselves; illegal

and false arrests, and Imprisonments, refusers of Bail,
and disobeyers of Habeas Corpuses; great and usual
Impositions and arbitrary Fines; contemners of your
Law, Judges, Jurors, and Witnesses in their own
causes; converting all Fines, Felons Goods, and
Wrecks, to their own use; destroyers of that famous
River of Tine, forcing ships and boats to sink, and
imprisoning those that dare to succor them; Ingros∣sers
of all Coals, and other commodities, into their
own hands, from the Inheritors, by Patent, with
other irresistable Oppressions, like to the Spanish In∣qusition,
and practice of the High Commission, and
Star-Chamber, being put in execution at this day in
that Town by command of the Magistrates and other
their Officers. And what they cannot do by force of
their Charter amongst themselves, against any private
person opposing, then by Combination ruin them at
Law, by their Delatory Plea, and out-pursing them,
to the high dishonor of God, and your Highness, and
tending to the peoples undoing.
Humbly beseeches, for the glory of God, the fame
of your Law, the contentment of the free people of
England, the preservation of Trade and Navigation,
and increase of your publique Revenue,
II. That no confirmation bee of that Towre
of Newcastle upon Tines Charters, or usurped powers,
but that a speedy remedy be had, either by Quo wa∣ranto
or otherwise, and their Magistrates may suffer
according to their offences.
III. That no Arrests be made in that Town,
except by process from above, or under forty shillings,
by reason they understand not the Law, and common∣ly

their Judges will master Reason.
IV. That Commissioners of Sewers in Northum∣berland,
and County of Durham, be forthwith im∣powred
for the preservation of that River, other∣wise
it will be quite choaked up, and thereby no Coals
to be got but at excessive Rates.
V. That an Ad quod damnum be granted for a Mar∣ket
at Shields, which will prevent the loss of many a
poor souls life for the future.
VI. Or that a revival of that never to be forgot∣ten
Statute 11. Ri. 2. Cap. 7. for a free Trade to all,
which voided all Monopolies and Charters, as being
the greatest grievance in a Commonwealth, &c. It
will not onely make this your Nation equivalent
with Venice, Holland, and other free rich States, in
riches, but preserve Timber, and reduce Coals under
20 s. the Chalder all the year at London, but also aug∣ment
to your publique Revenue above 40000. l. per an.
in that very Port of the River of Tine.
VII. That your Royal protection be granted to
such who prosecute a cause in behalf of your Highness,
from the hand of violence, during the time of their
prosecution. That the Clause in the 21. K. James,
chap. 3. viz. for all informations upon penal Statutes to
be prosecuted in the respective Counties, be voyd, by
reason the Judges, alias Sheriffs, are the offenders, and
no right can be got against them; the honorable
Judges of both Benches hands being tyed up, for
want of an Appeal, obstructed by the aforesaid Sta∣tute.
VIII. If their Charters and illegal Privileges be
confirmed, undoubtedly it will sacrifice the Peace of

your Nation, lessen your Interest with the Free-born,
weaken your Power, loose the bonds of a quiet Go∣vernment,
extirpate the pure Laws, and advance dis∣order
and confusion; it being humbly conceived, this
happy change of Government voids their Charters,
(they being no Laws, but meerly Prerogatives) to
Englands comfort.
IX. That Sheriffs and their Substitutes may be li∣able
to the punishment of Perjury for breach of their
Oath in denying Bail to such as are capable, for not re∣turning
Writ of Habeas corpus, and other their false
Returns, as others in other natures.
X. And that a Law be created for death to such
that shall commit Perjury, Forgery, or accept of
Bribery.
XI. All which are laid at Your Highness and
Councils feet, to do as God shall direct, for the re∣lief
of the oppressed.

