



Most Gracious and Dread Soveraign,
THe subject matter of this Dis∣course (the holy Fast of Lent before Easter) which hath al∣waies been a Sacred Solemnity of Your Royal Court, and hath for nineteen years (one whole Cycle of those Solemni∣ties) been driven hence together with Your Majesty, and at length by the blessed hand

of God together with Your Sacred Majesty restored unto us; was forthwith by Your pi∣ous care in its first Periodical Return, owned in your Royal Proclamation and Example the last year: and by your meanest subject and servant maintained in a Discourse Preached before Your Majesty. But the same observance of Lent was forthwith in the same week, by a nameless and false Pamphlet scattered at the very gates of Your Court, maligned and opposed; and became soon after matter of deliberate contest and debate, At the Savoy. as part of that which was thought fit to be excepted to in the publick Liturgy or Common-Prayer-book, and propounded by some to be altered. The depending of which debate and Controversie, and the im∣ployment, which by Your Majesties gracious Commission I had part in, to consider of that, with many other particulars in the Com∣mon-Prayer-book, and the expectation of the utmost which could be brought against that

Primitive and Religious Fast, which lately now we have received in Print; hath ne∣cessitated this Discourse, (delivered at first in a Sermon in Your Royal Chappel, and by Your Majesty Commanded to be publish∣ed, and by the Warrant of Your permission, since enlarged) to chuse rather to expect the Beginning of this Lent, then to appear at the ending only of the former. It now, not unseasonably, as I hope, presents it self to Your Sacred Hands, and flies to Your Royal Protection, who are most Tru∣ly the Defender of that Holy Faith, whereof▪ this and other Solemnities of the Church, are the Fence and Mound. The Royal CONSTANTINE (in whom first, God did most eminently fulfil his ho∣ly Promise of giving to his Church Kings to be her Nursing Fathers) began that course, with which your Sacred Majesty set forth: writing unto all the Churches in his Empire; and that undoubtedly from the Ad∣vice

of the first and most sacred Oecume∣nical Councel of NICE (then sitting,) For the Religious and uniform observation of the holy Feast of Easter with the  he calls them. Appointed Fasts that precede it. In which his IMPE∣RIAL Letters he did instruct the Churches of his Empire, that Euseb. l. de vit. Con∣stantin. c. 16, 17, 18. Theodoret. l. 1. c. 10. Socrates l. . c. 6. this holy solemni∣ty of Pasch, as comprising both the Feast and Fast, had from the very first day it self, wherein our Lord did suffer up∣on the Cross, been in the Church ever observed unto that present year. (And for the years following, no Adversary will or can deny it to have continued.) How af∣ter that example, Your Majesties own Royal Ancestours have even in ancient Ages pre∣served here, and transmitted to posterity This Holy Feast and Fast, is in part shewn in the following Treatise; and the Ages to come shall not be silent of Your Majesties Princely piety herein. What Athenago∣ras a primitive Apologist for our Chri∣stianity,

Athena∣gor. legat. pro Christi∣anis in sint. prayed unto Almighty God for the Emperours Aurelius, Antoninus, and Commodus, we with infinitely greater Reason pray for Your Sacred Majesty, the most Christian Catholick Defender of our Holy Faith and Church, pouring out suppli∣cations [on our Fasts and Feasts, and all other daies] for Your Majesties happy Reign over us, that according to Your most just Rights, The Father to the Son may ever continue to Transmit Your Kingdoms (with Your Piety,) that Your Royal Dominions may be more and more extended: and all prosperous success ever follow You; That we living a godly, quiet and peaceable life, may readily and cheerfully serve and obey You. So prayeth

