



Right Honorable,
THe divinely inspired Prophet, whose sacred Oracles I here endeavour to explain, has bin my Precedent in this Address, inscribing one of his Epistles to a Lady. For if to one; why not to many? Especially since those many are so one, in Vertue, Honour, Blood, Af∣finity, Religon, Heart and Mind; that it might seem a crime to separate those, whom God hath join'd together in so strict a Bond,
so sweet an Harmony. And if a crime in any one, much more in Me, who am so very much oblig'd to all.
I must therefore humbly beg your Ladi∣ships Acceptance of this tristing Testimony of the greatest Gratitude. And because I know 'twill signify but little to tell your La∣diships. I am sorry my Oblation is no better: I needs must own, that had it been as good as I could wish it, or (if possible) equal to the merits of the Subject, I should and had bin bound in duty to have laid it at your Honours feet.
But why to Ladies such a puzling Argu∣ment? They who are Strangers to your Ladiships, may justly wonder at my choice in this respect. But all that have the honour of your Ladiships Acquaintance, do us de∣servedly admire not only the exactness of your Conversations in the Practick part but also the acuteness of your Judgment in the Mysteries of Religion. And certain I cannot be so vain to think, that what my own weak Judgment seems in any sort to comprehend, shall be too hard and intrical for your Ladiships.

Take therefore in good part, most Ho∣noured Ladies, that which in Duty Gra∣titude, and Observance I here humbly offer you. The Subject of it is a Woman; and she the best and worst, the noblest and the vilest of her Sex. The best and noblest in her Primitive Purity: the worst and vi∣lest in her Subsequent Apostacy. At first the chastest Matron, and at last (as is en∣deavour'd in the following Papers to be prov'd) the basest Harlot in the World. This Subject seems to claim a Female Pa∣tronage; And who more fit than Ladies of your Honour and Integrity, to counte∣nance this whatever Vindication of a Chast Religion?
I humbly beg your Ladiships Pardon for this boldness I have taken, and this trou∣ble I have given you. I shall only add my hearty Prayers to Almighty God, That he would graciously be pleas'd to keep both You and Yours under the Protec∣tion of his good Providence; That he would spare You a long Blessing to his poor afflicted Militant Church, and af∣ter crown your Faith and Piety in his
Church Triumphant. To this purpose shall he ever pray, who is,
(Most Honoured Ladies)

Titchfield, Sept. 25. 1679.
