



GREAT PRINCE,
I Am now about, at your Request, to write the Life of the most renowned Peireskius. For presently upon your happy arrival into this Province, you mourned to finde your self, by the great envy of the Fates, bereft of his Society; and very punctually questioned me, whom you knew to have bin most familiarly con∣versant with him, touching his Studies, Manners, and conditions. It was your pleasure also to learn the favour of his Countenance from his Picture, and to visit those places, in which there did re∣main some foot-steps as it were, and marks of his Presence; viewing his Habitation, where he was wont to sit, and captivate the most excellent men,
with the Enchantments of his Learning, Wit, and Eloquence. In a word, you were so far ra∣vished, with the Admiration of his Vertues, as to have a principal hand in perswading me to write his Life; and were for that Cause willing to dis∣pense with my Attendance upon you, that I might in this my Retirement, the sooner accom∣plish that work. And I might, indeed, justly ex∣cuse my self▪ in regard of my own insufficiency: yet I thought not fit to make any long demur, when I considered my manifold Obligations.
For in the first place, as for what concerns your self, I should be very uncivil, if I should not satisfie your Request, who, when I was as far from thinking of, as deserving any such favour, I was after such a manner invited to wait upon you; that ever since, your good will towards me, has bin so free and sweet, so full of all Courtesie and Gentleness, as I could wish or desire. I found, truly, by experience, how justly you were the Admiration, Love, and Delight of all Provence; which findes it self happy in such a Vice-roy, in whom Philosophy, and the Art of Government, are equally tempered, and mutually allayed.
Moreover, you do so associate the Studies of Peace with the Art of Warre, and so reconcile Mars and the Muses, that it is a doubtful Case to resolve, whether your Generosity as a Souldier, or your Learning, as a Scholar, is more eminent; and though this immortal Honour be inherent in your Family, yet is there no man in the famous and royal Valesian stock, that can be compared to you. But these things shall be recorded else∣where: At present, I cannot sufficiently com∣mend
this carriage in you, that every where, and upon all occasions, you vail your Authority to Vertue, and think it not strange to seek and finde Arguments of Kingly Prayses, in such as are not of Royal Blood. You think it inconsiderable, un∣der what Garments an heroical mind, lies shrou∣ded and concealed; provided there be a divine soul within, you are alwayes ready to express your Reverence thereunto. A great example where∣of you have given, and to be reckoned among the worthy deeds of great Captains and Comman∣ders; in that you have already by your Com∣mendation elevated a Man of the Senatorian Rank, for the rare endowments of his minde, unto the Dignity of Princes; and take care, that his Fame may never be extinguished; nor can this affection of yours ever be forgotten, the Commendations whereof, Vertue her self will trumpet forth, to the dayes of Eternity.
In the next place, as to the Man himself, I should be unthankful, in refusing to do that, which his rare love to me, and bountiful Inclina∣tion to all, do require at my hands. For his love truly, to me, was so great, that it is easier for me to conceive it in my mind, then to express the same in words; and it may suffice to say, that I account it a great happiness, that he prized me so dearly, and that it was his pleasure to have me so frequently with him, and to make me privy to all his thoughts and intentions; and besides o∣ther matters, to utter his last words, and breathe out his very soul it self, into my bosome. In con∣sideration whereof, since no man ought to prize the memory of that dear person more then my
self; truly, you do but spur a free Horse, when by vertue of your Authority, you require that of me, whereunto out of gratitude, and by the Rights of friendship, I am already very much in∣clined. For, seeing that as oft as I think, speak, or hear of that man, I feel my minde filled with a most intimate and sweet passion of joy and plea∣sure: how can it choose but delight me, upon such termes, to recount the Series of his life, as that it may be communicated to all the World? Shall I not, thus employed, seem still to enjoy his most courteous and civil Converse, and so to passe away the sweet and pleasant houres; and shall I not then exceedingly satisfie my own minde, when I have contributed, all that in me lies, to the reflourishing glory of so great a friend? And as for that good will which he bore to all men, I never read or heard of a man, that was more earnestly sollicitous, or made it more his constant business, to benefit Man-kind. For though he might have given way to many, in re∣spect of Estate and Fortune; yet no man could exceed him in the prudent mannage of what he had, and in willingness to do good. Well there∣fore did he merit that Kingdom which he held, and deserves for the future to hold, in the mindes of Men, especially Students, whom he never ceased to excite encourage, and cherish by his Learning, Counsel, Authority, Favour and Purse. Witness all good and learned men, who with one unanimous consent, acknowledge, that there never was a more generous Mecaenas and Patron of the Muses. And therefore, though it seem impossible, that his renown should ever be ex∣tinguished;
yet must we at no hand give way that the same reproach should be fastened upon us, which may justly be imputed to that Age of Mecaenas. For seeing his History has not by any Writer of the same Age, bin delivered over to Posterity; it is come to passe, that we have re∣ceived hardly any notice of him, save his Name, so dearly esteemed by learned Men: And because it may be feared, lest the like may happen to this our Mecaenas, it is all the reason in the World, that those who familiarly converst with him, should take care, that future Generations may know; who and what for a Man he was. For the Fame and Memory of things, resembles the e∣vening Twi-light, or shutting-in of the day, which being at first exceeding clear, does by little and little, in such sort vanish away, as to be swallow∣ed up in darkness; and therefore History is need∣ful, as a Torch, to bring the same to light.
Moreover, I acknowledge, that this duty is in∣cumbent upon none more then my self; since no man could more fully and thoroughly know him, in regard of my long and familiar living with him. Whereunto may be added, that after his death, I had the opportunity and access to make such Queries, and both from divers Letters and other Monuments, to learn such things, as every one could not so easily come to the know∣ledge of. And this is indeed, the very cause, that whereas so many rare men might have perform∣ed this task, they have nevertheless all conspired with you, in solliciting me to set my hand to the work.

In the last place, as to what concerns our Coun∣trey, this present Age, and Posterity, I were altoge∣ther injurious, if I should refuse this Employ∣ment. To our Countrey; because it would seem a kind of Impiety and Unnaturalness, if I should suffer that light to be covered, wherewith, as it hath hitherto shined, and bin illustrated, so may it for the future, exceedingly glory and boast it self thereof: if I should suffer that Ornament to be neglected, than which I durst almost say, there never was, nor ever will be any more mag∣nificent. For, not only whole Europe, but Asia also, and Africa, and the very new-found World it self, had their Eyes, by meanes of him, fixed upon this Province; and there was not any where, any learned man, or lover of good things, who affected not, either to visit him, or at least to correspond with him by Letters.
In the next place, to this present Age also; for∣asmuch as it is concerned, that Posterity should understand, that Nature was not therein worn out and barren; but that she was able to produce a great and rare Man, fit to be propounded for an Example to after-Ages. She is indeed much to be magnified, for having summed up in him a∣one, and drawn together all the vertues of all A∣ges; and being able so to transcend her self, as to express in him, what ever excellency the Poetical Age fained in Pandora. Finally, to the succee∣ding Generations themselves; who will be excee∣dingly delighted to know that Man, to whose sin∣gular Affection, they will acknowledge them∣selves very much indebted; with Imitation of whom, some peradventure, will be so far posses∣sed,
as to endeavour to raise themselves, as Phoe∣nixes, out of his Ashes, not without some bene∣fit to Man-kind.
I shall therefore, to come to an end, make such a Description of his Life, as shall approve it self to the Readers, rather by the simplicity and plainness of the Narration, then by any borrow∣ed colours of forced Eloquence. Others may, if they please, with a more elegant Pen, polish, and reduce into the form of an History, such Commentaries as I shall only digest as loose ma∣terials, after the way of Annals, and according to the course of years. For my intent is, only to play the part of Damës, and if any shall blame me for not having made any choice, while I deliver so many petty businesses; I shall answer with him, that even the very crums which fall from the Ta∣bles of the Gods, seem worthy to be picked up. Nei∣ther will it prove peradventure, a thing unplea∣sing to those, who like you, desire to be thorough∣ly acquainted with great men, not only in regard of their illustrious actions, published to the view of all the World; but also with reference to their private transactions, and such as they themselves would not willingly have the World acquainted with.
Forasmuch, as things done in the publick view, and sight of the Sun, have in them some∣thing that is forced and affected, something that is acted and personated, so that from them 'tis ve∣ry hard to know, what lies hid under the skin, and in the Heart; but things done far from wit∣nesses, and without any design of gaining reputa∣tion, and consequently, free from dissimulation,
and without any Mask or Vizard; these are they which indeed discover a man, and shew his in∣side, which to discern is exceeding profitable, For that is it, which encourages us to the imita∣tion of excellent Actions, when as even in Hero∣ick Persons, we find some tokens of our own in∣firmitie, and consequently we despair, not so much to imitare their Virtues, as when only their most great and elevated Actions are rela∣ted. But if some shall expect, deeds more illu∣strious and honourable, than what I am to relate, they are to take into consideration, that every man cannot be a Scipio or a Maximus, that we should Record his Battails and Triumphs. Those men deserve abundantly to be commended, whom though fortune has not raised to the grea∣test Wealth and Dignities; yet bear they grea∣ter minds, are of a more generous Virtue, and undertake far greater Designs, than any man could expect from men of their Condition. And such an one was Peireskius, whom I shall give out for no other than a man of the Senatorian rank and order; and who neverthelesse so carried himself as to transcend all Encomiums and Pane∣gyricks. For two things there are which I shall chiefly prosecute, for which he was exceedingly commended; the one was great Learning of all kinds, with an unquenchable thirst after Know∣ledge; the other an unwearied care to advance all ingenious and liberal Arts, with a munificence towards all learned men, which was perfectly Royal, and Princely. And upon these two Points, there is, truly, no danger at all, that I
should seem to utter any thing hyperbolically; for, I shall speak to the very faces of learned men, among whom he was famously known, and who will be so far from finding fault that I have spo∣ken too much, that I fear rather they will blame me for having bin too sparing. But that I may not dwell in this Epistle, Give me leave, most excel∣lent Prince, ere I shall come to relare those things which you desire to know, to begin with his Ancestors: that from the knowledge of them may appear, why it is that all Authors with one voice, have most constantly termed him, The most Noble

