



Worthy Sir,
I Have read over Coppins Book
which you were pleased to leave
with me. And I finde it to be
a magazine of Heresies, a Pan∣dora's
box full of dangerous poy∣son,
which Satan hath sent him with into the
world to infect the people of God. Indeed it is
painted over with a golden title, for he calls it
truth triumphing against falsehood, when
there is scarce any thing of truth in it. But this
is a common practise which such Hereticks, of
whom Hillarie Ingerunt nobis primum no∣mina
veritatis, ut virus falfitatis introeat,
they first set forth unto us the names of
truth, that the poyson of falsehood may enter
now with them. Hill. de Trin. lib. 6. and St.

Aug who was well acquainted with these cun∣ning
practises, saith, that the promise of truth
which they are continually making, is nothing
but a vaile to cover their errours, or a goodly
fore-gate for errours to enter in, stealing into
the minde of the unskilful Aug cont. ep. fun∣dantur
cap. 11. wherefore St. Paul gives the
Church of God an Item to beware of them,
Rom. 16. verse 17, 18. now I beseech you
brethren mark them, which cause divisions,
and offences contrary to the doctrine which ye
have learned, and avoid them; for they that
are such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but
their own belly; and by good words and fair
speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. I did
think him not worthy the answering (as indeed
he is not) but because I hear he hath done much
mischief to the Church of Christ, and drawn
many proselytes after him, I thought it not a∣miss
to borrow so much time from my imployment
in the publick ministerie, as to return an answer,
hoping that it might reclaim some of those that
are gone astray, or else at least settle those who
have not departed away, or confirm those as
have defended the truth against this uncircum∣cised
Philistin, of which number Sir, I under∣stand

you have been one, who with Mr. Maior
of Rochester, some worthy ministers, gentlemen,
Captains, and Commanders have laboured to stop
the flood of errours, which this Serpent hath
cast out of his mouth. Sir I desire you all not to
be weary of well doing, your praise will re∣main
in the Church of Christ, besides, in due
time ye shall reap if ye faint not.
But Sir I conceive the best way to deal with
this clamorous Heretick is not by extemporal
speaking, but by writing, let the arguments,
answers, and replies be set down and setled on
both sides, and then the Church of Christ will ea∣sily
judge that his doctrine is not from above,
but from below: not from the father of lights,
but from the father of lies, and forger of delu∣sions.
Sir, I shall adde no more at present, then
that I desire the God of truth to establish you in
the truth, and to encrease your happiness not on∣ly
here on earth, but in the highest Heavens,
which is the prayer of your obliged friend, and
servant.

