



SIR,
TO make your Name preliminary to so mean a Pamphlet, created in me as great a doubt, as whether so inconsi∣derate a Pen should make an Essay upon so great a Subject: Yet as the attempt upon the Subject, so the boldness in its Dedication seems not without some rea∣son; though I might rather have appear'd like pious Æneas, in carrying his Father from the Flames of Troy, than endeavour to imitate lofty Maro in describing them. Yet might those Feet per∣haps which hastened from the Flames, at the same time run into Verses. I know not why the instigation of some should be so very earnest in importuning me hereto, knowing me to have trod more upon Vesuvius than Parnassus, unless they imagin'd, I might thereupon
write sensibly, though not elegantly, on such a Subject of Fire. But the Pen to describe this unparalell'd Fire, should be like its Flames, to soar high, and be perspicuous too; mounting above its own smoak, and not to wrap it self up in sheets of obscurity: and should be like that of the Eagle, which fans the Clouds, and approaches the Sun. Your great Concern (Sir) as to the subject of this m, and ur Rank, as one of the chiefs if that Court, which represents out Me∣tropolis, being sheriff thereof not long before its deplorable Ruine, and now deligated as one of those, to order and direct in its re-edify∣ing, might partly occasion this address to your self, which might not onely affect you with the remembrance of its former State, but excite you in the Contrivance of its future Glory. Now though this Description of so severe a Providence, may be but as an im∣perfect Draught to you, having (I suppose) seen the thing it self acted; (the aifference being as great, as between painted and real Fire) yet mayit serve as a Remembrance to those, who though they felt something of its Effects, yet never saw any thing of its Ten∣rours. Who may hereby understand, how dreadful this Fire was which, though at first stole upon the City in the deepest silence of the Night, yet did soon discover it self by its own Splendour; whose Flames by their great Light, did soon proclaim that Ruine they made by their destructive Heat, which seem'd, as 'twere chearful in devouring; but as soon as they ceased to leap and dance at the destruction of others, they perisht themselves. Whence of old the
. Herod.  lib. 3. p. 10. Egyptians were perswaded that Fire was an animated Creature, made onely to destroy, and after satiated to dye with the thing devour'd. But the
 Id. Persians proceed farther, and adore it as a God. Such indeed is the dread of this devouring Element, that the Eternal Deity sometimes condescends to the resem∣blance
of a consuming Fire, and his teerrours to everlasting Burn∣ings: and how may we look upon this, as a display of his Justice; for whether or no this Fire began by a malitious hand, yet must we look upon it as blown up by our Sins. Such kind of malitious Practi∣ces may be traced back as far as Heathen Rome, according to that of the Satyrist,
— Conter
Conductum Latronem, Incendia Sulphure cepta,
Atquo dolo primos cum janua colligit ignes.
Juv. lib. 5. Sat. 13.
Or as another observes:
— Candelam apponere valvis
Non dubitet.—
This Fire seem'd like that in the tails of Sampsons Foxes, which burn'd that which should have become others bread: this made many wealthy Citizens become poor Almes-men; whose mouths are as open now to ask, at their hands before were to bestow Charity: whose Dwellings being burn'd, and their Trades wasted, are re∣duced as the Psalmist speaks, to eat ashes like bread. But I hope the singular Care of our Sovereign, and the earnest Endeavours of our Magistrates, for the Re-building this famous City, and for the Restoring of our waste Places, may at the same time raise London out of its Ashes, and poor Citizens out of the Dust.
Having made a Poetical Attempt in describing the dismal Ruine of so Renown'd a City, I wish now I could so much farther play the Port, as to be like that Thracian, whose strains could make confus'd Stones rally into order: Or as Amphion, who allur'd them into the Walls of Thebes: however might I vatem agere, may I rather sing its approaching Glory, than late Ruine. Especially if the af∣fair of its Re-building continue in part under Your most Prudent Care, and I under Your former Favour; the acknowledgement of which, while it now becomes like your Name, publick, yet I hope if I have thereby offended, that the same generous disposition that can
so freely bestow a Favour, will as freely pardon a Fault: and what I have doe in this Address, that it may be attributed ra∣ther to my Endeavour of becoming grateful, than offensive: for hence it is, that I desired to publish how much I am, Honoured Sir,

