



Worthy Sir,
MUch about ten years are fled, since my learned friend Dr. Benjamin Worsley brought me first acquain∣ted with the name and fame of Peireskius, and knowing that I delighted to busie my self in that kind, wished that I would render his History in∣to English. And not long after, my good friend Squire Harlib seconded his Motion, and put the Latine Book into my hand, to take home with me and peruse and consider of. Which I did; but finding it so knottie a piece, both in respect of the matter, and the presse and elegantly con∣cise style, of the learned and judicious Gassendus, I had not the courage to venture upon it; but re∣stored my friend his Book, without any more adoe: Since which time having (during our in∣testine broiles in England) spent an ordinary Apprenticeship in Contemplation of the Belgic Provinces of Holland, Utrecht; Brabant, Flan∣ders, and their many fair Citties and Universi∣ties,
of which that of Lovaine seems likest ours, as much resembling Cambridge, in many re∣spects: not long after my return, I was a fresh importuned by another friend, to let our Coun∣treymen understand the Life of the renowned Peireskius. Which at last, though with very much dissidence, I did undertake and accomplish; and how I have therein acquitted my self, you are best able to judge; who besides your parts of wit and learning, know by experience the la∣bour and care belonging to such works, and are best qualified to excuse an over-sight or mistake. You know that Gassendus a general Scholar, and one of the greatest wits in Europe, and a perfect Master of the Roman Language, comparable to any of the ancients, could not have taken in hand an Argument, that would have more effe∣ctually called forth, and employed the utmost of all his Activities, than to write the Life of this rare French Gentleman, whose sprightful curio∣sity left nothing unsearcht into, in the vast and all-comprehending Dominions of Nature and Art.
Having finished the Story, I was long in Quest to whom I might pertinently dedicate the same, being apparelled, a la mode d'Angle terre: and pertinency I have alwaies esteemed the Soul of a Dedication. While this care was upon me, it was my good hap, accidentally to over-hear the Character of your worthy self, so expressed in a Book-sellers shop in Cornhil, where I was then reading, that I concluded, you were the on∣ly man I ever heard of in England, whose Peires∣kian Ʋertues, did challenge this Dedication.
And upon enquiry, learning your name, and re∣membring that I had bin once civilly entertained by you in the company of my deceased Kinsman Dr. Rapha Rand of Goddalming, at our Fathers house of Wotton in Surrey; I concluded, that the sutableness of your Genius with that of Peireski∣us, the respects my Kinsman aforesaid, frequent∣ly found at your Fathers house, both when sick∣nesse required his presence and at other times; and your Fathers civility to my self, having been once his guest at bed and board, with your own kind entertainment of me after his death; and finally the constant affection of that worthy gen∣tlewoman your near kinswoman, and the relict widdow of my Cosen aforesaid, upon all occasi∣ons expressed towards me; did necessitate me to cry Heurica, and to conclude that Peireskius could not more justly be by me presented to any other than your ingenious self, to receive his first entertainment into England. None can, I perswade my self, more prize him; no man is more fit effectually to recommend him to the acquaintance of our English Gentry. That from him they may learn, That knowledge, which is the highest perfection of Man, by which he dif∣fers from Basts, must needs be the principal ac∣complishment of a Gentleman: and that the compleatly-knowing man, must be Janus-like, double-fac'd, to take cognizance of Time past, and to understand the world from its cradle, as far as any Monuments of Antiquity can give Light, as well as of the late-past, or present times, wherein he lives. Hunting and Hawking,
are exercises allowed to preserve and encrease health and strength, but no genuine and proper Characters of a Gentleman; which he that wholly gives himself to, while he catches a Bird or Beast, he loses himself, & becomes like one of them, gaining little to speak of, but an humor in∣clinable to Tyrany, like that of Nimrod the migh∣ty Hunter, and Proto-Tyrant of the world. From our Peireskius, it is to be hoped, through your ex∣ample and recommendation, the English Gentry will for time to come understand ow to im∣prove their great leasure and Faculties of Person and Estate, so as to render themselves in the highest measure fit to serve God, by serving the Common-wealth in the most weighty concern∣ments thereof. And that the complaint of that most noble, ingenious, and pious Gentleman Mr. George Herbert sometimes University Ora∣tour of Cambridge, may hereafter be out of date, which as yet is too seasonable and necessary; and because I fear little laid to heart, I shall not think it tedious, or any waies impertinent here to recite the same, as it is recorded in his Church-Porch, page the third, staffe the fifth, where, after his most ingenious and pithie manner, he thus schooles and chides our English Gentry;

Fly Idlenesse; which yet thou canst not fly
By dressing, mistrissing, and Complement.
If those take up thy day, the Sun will cry
Against thee: for his Light was only lent.
God gave thy Soul brave wings; put not those fea∣thers
Into a Bed, to sleep out all ill weathers.



Art thou a Magistrate? then be severe:
If studious, copy fair what time hath blur'd;
Redeem truth from his jaw's: If Souldier,
Chase brave employments with a naked sword
Throughout the world. Fool not; for all may have,
If they dare try, a glorious Life or Grave.


O England full of sin, but most of sloth!
Spit out thy Flegm, & fill thy Brest with Glory,
Thy Gentry bleats, as if thy native cloth
Trans-fus'd a sheepishnesse into thy Story:
Not that they all are so; but that the most
Are gone to Grasse, and in the Pasture lost.


This losse springs chiefly from our Education.
Some Till their Ground, but let Weeds choak their Sonne:
Some mark a Partridge, never their Child's fashion:
Some ship them over, and the thing is done.
Study this Art make it thy great design;
And if Gods Image move thee not, let thine.


Some, great Estates provide, but do not breed
A mast'ring mind; so both are lost thereby:
Or else they breed them tender, make them need
All that they leave: this is flat poverty.
For he that needs five thousand pound to live,
Is full as poor as he that needs but five.



The way to make thy Son rich, is to fill
His Mind with rest, before his Trunke with Riches:
For Wealth without Contentment climbs a Hill,
To feel those Tempests which fly over ditches.
But if thy Son can make tea pound his measure
Then all thou addest, may be call'd his Treasure.

So far the Noble Herbert, whose complaint may justly be renewed at this day. And seriously (Sir) it is a sad thing to consider, that the Gen∣try of England, called to serve their Country in its highest and dearest concernmens, have in all Ages hitherto, been for the most part necessitated to see with the Eyes of others, and forced to serve the Dictates of merce∣nary men, that have advised sutable to their own Interests, Factions, and Trades, instead of following their own well-informed, unbi∣assed and generous understandings. All which has sprung from want of convenient Educa∣tion, and improvement of their younger years. It is to be hoped, the next Age will be reformed in this kind, which God grant. And to that end, I beseech you (Sir) gently to ac∣cept, this testification of my respects to you, and to receive this worthy French Gentleman with those civilities, your Travels in France, and his worth shall prompt you to, and recommend Him and his Story, his Vertues and Accomplishments, to the Imitation and worthy Emulation of our English Gallants. For who so fit to do this, as your Ingenious, Industrious Self? Unless Fame be a very loud Liar in this particular, the greatest and most considerable difference betwixt Evelyn
and Peireskius, is in those kind of things which Epictetus calls ta ouc eph' hemîn,See E∣pictetus his En∣cheiridion or Ma∣nuel, Ch. 1. such as are to So∣ma he ctêsis, doxai, archai; and in a word, hósa ouc hemétera érga, And whereas Peireskius, that he might more freely converse with the ever∣flourishing Lady-Muses, and (as may be collected from a Passage or two in his life) distasted perad∣venture, with the scolding Humour of his Mo∣ther in Law, and the shallow Impertinencies of the Gentlewomen of that Countrey and Age, wherein he lived; denyed himself the Contents of a married Estate: you (Sir) have had the hap∣piness to choose a Gentlewoman (as I am credi∣bly informed, so accomplisht, that Peireskius, were he now living, would count it no time lost, to be in her Company, and enjoy her ingenious converse. A Gentlewoman, in whom the Eng∣lish Gravity, being moderately allayed, sweeten∣ed and spirited, by the mettlesome Aire and E∣ducation of France, has arrived to such a perfecti∣on, as to be no Hinderance, but a meet Help to her beloved Lord, in his most manly Concern∣ments. I must not therefore omit to recommend Peireskius to her likewise; that her worthy ac∣quaintance may bring him into a more charita∣ble Conceit of Woman-kind, then to think all time lost, as to Wisdom, which is spent in their Company. To you both therefore, Worthy Couple, true yoak-fellowes, I dedicate my great Pains in this small, but very material History. Beseeching Almighty God to make you the hap∣py and joyful Parents of many faire, wise, and well-bred Children, that may tread in their Pa∣rents steps, and as living and speaking Statues, ef∣fectually
present your names and vertues to suc∣ceeding Generations; and that he would so sea∣son your Hearts, with the Fear and Love of his divine Goodness and Majesty, as that you may direct all your rare endowments received from his bountiful Providence, to the greatest good of your native Countrey, and all your kindre, viz. Man-kind. So shall you in the highest measure, your Sphere is capable of, advance the Glory of God, the welfare of your Country and kinde, the unspeakable Pleasure of your own applauding Consciences here in this World (not to speak of the grateful acknowledgement of others) and your Eternal Felicity in that World that is to come where righteousness shall dwell, at the Re∣surrection of the just. Amen. Such, truly gene∣rous and worthy Couple, is the hearty Pray∣er of

From my House, near Cripplegate in Lon∣don, January the 30th. 1656.
