



May it please your Majesties;
THese Papers are not prostrate at your Royal Feet for
Patrociny; they beg nothing of your Majesties, but
Pardon and Acceptance: They need no Shelter; the
Winds never hurt such Shrubs as these: but if they
need it, they deserve none. This Address therefore is pure∣ly
the Result of a certain rapturous Excess of Joy and
Gratitude, for that late wonderful Deliverance of this
Church and Nation, which it has pleas'd Almighty God to
give us by your Sacred Majesties unparallel'd Vertue and Con∣duct.
Such elevated Affections will be offering something,
even tho they have nothing fit to offer. I only say, that my
Design is good; which is to make it evident to your Maje∣sties,
and to all the World, in my way (that is, by Scripture-Prophecy)
what a Heavenly Church, even in the Esteem of God
himself, your Majesties have sav'd from Ruin. May your Reign
be made as glorious and as prosperous in protecting it. And
let it not be imputed to me as a Crime, if in my Zeal for my
Holy Mother, I assume the Freedom for this once, to declare
to your Majesties what I seem to have learn'd from the Word
of God, That in covering the establish'd Church, your Reign
will be truly glorious and prosperous.
Your Majesties may also have the satisfaction here to see
how highly God has own'd your Royal Protestant-Predecessors

and Progenitors. And as my Method leads me to it, I doubt
not but, by God's Assistance, to shew as great Things of your
Majesties, when once I have prepar'd the way for it. In the
mean time the whole World is Witness, that You are the
chosen Servants of Jesus Christ. Chosen, I mean, not by
Man, but by God only. For how can that Act of Man be
call'd a Choice, that was so apparently over-rul'd by an Al∣mighty
Hand, justified by so unquestionable a Right, extorted
by so irresistible a Merit?
I conclude with my hearty Prayers for the best of Princes
in the best of words, which are those of our Common-Prayer-Books
(so We call them, but God calls themThus our Common-Prayer-Books are called, Rev. v. 8. Golden Vi∣als
full of Odors, which are the Prayers of the Saints)
That the King of kings, and Lord of lords, the only
Ruler of Princes, would so replenish You with the Grace
of his Holy Spirit, that You may always incline to his
Will, and walk in his way: Endue You plenteously with
Heavenly Gifts, grant You in Health and Wealth long
to live; strengthen You that You may vanquish and over∣come
all Your Enemies; and finally after this Life,
grant that You may attain Everlasting Ioy and Felicity,
through Iesus Christ our Lord. Amen.
I am,

