



Right Worshipfull,
ALl men while they are in this world are travellers, some journeying one way, some another; but they are all gone out of the way: they are trees, some rooted more
 firmly, some more weakly, but they have all been shaken: they are militant souldiers, some fighting in one station, some in another, but they have all received the foil: if we search the Scriptures, we shall find that the Church is not so thorowly refined,Ecclesia Chri∣sti fusca & for∣mosa est; fusca quod ad ex∣ternum colo∣rem, formosa quod ad inter∣na linimenta. Hieron. ad Cantie. Nigra propter ignobilitatem generis, & mul∣iitudinem pec∣catorum, for∣mosa ob fidem & poeniten∣tiam. Lyra. but that she hath some drosse, neither is she so comely as the curtains of Solomon, but she is also black as the tents of Kedar: If we examine the Catalogue of the most righteous men that ever lived, we shall not find out one among them all, but hath been tainted with this leprosie: it is almost impossible for a man to live in the flesh, to be as it were composed of sin, and not to commit sin: In the Tabernacle, although the propitiatory was holy and blessed; yet there was a lamp in it, that needed ever and anon to be purged and snuffed; the like thing happens in every person. We have all of us some corruption to be snuffed, some breaches to be repair∣ed,
 some spots to be cleansed. What? though a man hath led his life unblameably before men, that none can tax him with any wrong or indirectnesse at all, yet may he not therefore think that he is innocent in the sight of God: For notwith∣standing all this, his own consci∣ence will frame an undeniable Syl∣logism, proving him to come within the reach of the curse of sin: the Major Proposition is taken out of Deut. 27.26. Cursed is he that con∣firmeth not all the words of this Law to do them, or that fulfilleth not the whole Law: Every mans conscience will frame the Minor; and tell him, that he hath not fulfilled the whole Law: The conclusion follows, therefore he is under the curse: Eve∣ry mans conscience (I say) doth conclude ex lege Dei, out of the Law of God, which doth condemn us for sin, and makes us like Adam, to run away from the presence of God; for fear of his wrath and
 heavy displeasure: but every faith∣full soul hath his consolation in the Gospel, and in the great Mediator Christ Jesus, whom God hath ap∣pointed to stand in the gap between Heaven and Earth, and make up the breach, to reconcile both toge∣ther, upon whom man may dis∣charge all his sins, and God dis∣charge all his anger, who like a strong and impregnable wall, keeps our sins from approaching to God, and Gods vengeance from ap∣proaching to us: He came into the world for our good, to seek and to save us that were lost, he came from Heaven by accepting of humane nature,Venit enim fi¦lius hom nis de Caelo in mundum, per humanitatis assumptionem quaerere per doctrinam su∣am, salvum fa∣cere per gra∣riam quod perierat per culpam. he came to seek by his Do∣ctrine, to save by his grace, those who had perished through sin: He came to call us, and never came there such a suitor as he is: he comes, he seeks, he cals, he omits no means, (being come) to draw us to himself; by him we have immediate accesse to the Lord, and are imboldened to
 speak to him as it were face to face, and mouth to mouth: It were then too shamelesse and senslesse a part to make use of other means to come to the heavenly Majesty. Surely they do much injury to his grace, who talk of Warders and Porters, An∣gels and Saints, to be solicited to admit us into the presence of God; and to bring us to speak with him: services not unmeet for the Gover∣nours of the earth, whose persons have need of guardance and attend∣ance for the safeguard of their lives, upon whose life the life of the Countrey, and their people with whom they live, doth depend: they have need of special regard and guard to their bodies, or they may soon fall into danger. Besides, it is true of Princes of this world, what Jethro told Moses, when he sate from morning to evening to hear the causes of the people, Exod. 18. Thou both weariest thy self, and the people that is with thee, the thing
 is too heavy for thee, and thou canst not do it thy self alone. And there∣fore infinite suits, besides the distra∣ction of many other businesses, re∣quiring larger audience than the ears of any mortal man can afford, drive them of necessity to the entertain∣ing of subordinate Officers, both to admit and receive, the coming and requests of their inferiours: but there is neither danger in the person of God, who rideth upon the Hea∣vens, and maketh his enemies to perish, like as the smoak vanisheth away, or as wax melteth at the fire: neither is his throne to be approach∣ed unto after the same manner. It was the danger of Hesters life to come before King Ahasucrus, un∣lesse she were called for, the Law being thus, That whatsoever man or woman came into the inner Court, which was not called, should die, un∣lesse the King held forth his golden Scepter: But the Scepter of our Lord, the great King of Heaven
 and Earth, I mean the golden Sce∣pter of his grace, is ever held out to man, woman, child, bond and free, stranger or Citizen, whether called or not called: they may safe∣ly approach (I name neither out∣ward nor inner Court) but even to the throne where the King himself sitteth.
And as there is no danger in his person, so no defect in his hearing, whose ears are open to the prayers of the poor destitute, whose eye∣lids soundly try and examine the children of men. He that boweth the Heavens, and comes down with his all-discerning knowledge, hath he need of intelligencers to inform him of earthly things? He that planted the ear, doth he not hear? He that knocketh at our doors, and calleth for entrance, when we stand and knock at his; will he not grant us entrance? Surely he is nigh to all that call upon him,Psal. 145.18. to all that call upon him in truth. To encline his
 ear to our prayers is to accept them, and cast a gracious eye upon them, and so to inflame the hearts of his people, that with faith and confi∣dence they may pray unto him, and prevail with him. If a King shew a cheerfull countenance to a poor man, that desireth to speak unto him, and turneth his eyes towards him, shewing himself attentive to his words, will not this poor man rejoyce? Will not the Kings coun∣tenance and attention serve as a speech to him, and be as much as words, and a great grace unto him? so in like manner we understand God to encline his ear to our prayers, when he granteth to us fervour of spirit in praying to him.
But hath God ears? Is he a bo∣dy, saith a devout man? Far be it from us so to think, for even a spi∣rit is by many degrees more excel∣lent than a body:Savanarol. Meditat. in Psal. 80. What is Gods ear? Happily his knowledge, for
 by the ear we understand those things that are spoken to us, but God hath known from everlasting what ever men have either thought or spoken: Surely Gods ear to us doth insinuate somewhat else that cannot be understood of his simple knowledge; for to some he doth encline his ear, to others he turn∣eth away his ear, but his knowledg is ever the same: what then is meant by his ear? Surely his know∣ledge of approbation or rejection. He enclineth his ear, and heareth the prayers of the righteous, because they please him, and are approved of him. He turneth away his ear from the prayers of the wicked, because they displease him, and because he rejecteth them. Should I now give you the picture of a true supplicant, I should humbly crave leave to tell you; He is one whose brest is sore with the stroak of his own pe∣nitent hands, which are alwayes ei∣ther like Moses upon the Mount lift∣ed
 up towards Heaven; or the Pub∣licans in the Temple smiting his bo∣some: His knees are hardned with constant praying, his voice hoarce with crying and calling to Heaven, and when he cannot speak, he de∣livers his mind in sighs and groans: There's not a tear fals from him, but an Angel stands with a bottle to catch it; he thinks every mans sins lesse than his own, every mans good deeds more: He desi∣reth not only men, but even beasts and trees to mourn with him: mer∣cy comes down like a glorious Che∣rub, and lights upon his bosome, with this message from God, I have heard thy prayers and seen thy tears, and so with a handkerchief of comfort dries his cheeks, and saith to him in the words of the Wise-man, Eccl. 9.7. Go thy way, eat thy bread with joy, and drink thy wine with a merry heart, for God now accepteth thy works.
Let us then acquaint our selves
 with God, and walk with him as his friends, then may we come with boldnesse to the throne of grace: it is accounted a great matter to have recourse to the chamber of presence, but to go into the holy of holies, to commune with God, and daily to present our selves be∣fore him, is a most singular prero∣gative: And although hypocrites may draw neer to God outwardly, and honour him with their lips, and seem to be fearlesse of Gods wrath; yet their security is but like that of Belshazzar, which as soon as God awakeneth their consciences, be∣cometh desperate trembling: but when the heart is sprinkled from an evil conscience, and the body washt with pure water, then doth a man draw neer to God with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, Heb. 10.22.
Suetonius saith,Sueton. de Au∣gusto Caesar. that when one delivered a petition to Augustus Cae∣sar, his hand shook, and he trem∣bled
 for fear; whom Cesar repro∣ved, saying, That a man should not bring a petition to a Prince, as he that bringeth meat to an Elephant, for fear of being devoured by him: So for want of hearts fixt upon God, we cannot with confidence put up our petitions unto him, but even quake for fear when we come before him.
Right Worshipfull, I here present unto you a Key that openeth the heavenly treasures. The Hebrew Doctors speak of four Keys that God keeps in his power, which he will not give to any Angel: 1. The Key of Rain: thus he promiseth to open the Heavens, to give rain in due season, Deut. 20.12. 2. The Key of food: thus he is said, To open his hand, and fill his people with good, Psal. 104.28. 3. The Key of the grave: Behold, O my people, I will open your graves, Ezek. 37.12. 4. The Key of the womb: thus he is said
 to open the womb of Kachel, Gen. 30.22. But the Scripture tells us, that God hath many other Keys also: He hath the Key of the Scri∣ptures, and the Key of the under∣standing: He is said therefore first to open the Scriptures to the Disci∣ples, Luke 24.32. and then to open their understandings. He hath like∣wise the Key of the heart: thus God opened the heart of Lydia to conceive well: The ears of the Prophet to hear well, Isa. 50.5. The eyes of Elisha's servant to see well, 2 King. 6.17. And the lips of David to speak well, Psal. 51.15. Here you have another Key, which the Ancients call Clavem Coeli, the Key of Heaven, because it opens the gate of Heaven to us, and Ja∣nuam Paradisi, the gate of Para∣dise, because it letteth men in to God, and bringeth them with their requests into his presence: There is no Lock but this Key will open, and Christ in whom are
 hid all treasures is the Lord Keep∣er thereof, to whose conduct I commit your Worships, and cra∣ving pardon for this boldnesse, I am

