



Right Honourable.
AS Man is a reasonable creature, so is speech given to him by God to express his reason, and a tongue to utter that expression: Brute creatures can make a noise, but man only can articulate his voice; his mind provideth the matter, his breath the convoy, and his tongue frameth distinct and significant words and syllables, and car∣rieth the sense of our minds from us by the ear to the heart of others: The Tongue is the secretary of the mind, and the Interpreter of the heart; it is the great huck∣ster by which we negotiate and traffique one
 with another.Plin. nat. histor lib. 7 cap. 16. The Teeth, saith Pliny, serve not only to grind our meat for our daily food and nourishment, but necessary also they be for the framing of our speech: the fore-teeth stand us in good stead to rule and moderate the voice by a certain concent and tunable accord, answering as it were to the stroke of the Tongue; and according to that row and rank of theirs wherein they are set, as they are broader or narrower, greater or smaller, they yield a distinction and variety in their words, cutting and hewing them thick and short, framing them pleasant, plain, and rea∣dy, drawing them out at length, or smother∣ing and drowning them in the end: but when once they be fallen out of the head, man is be∣reaved of all means of good utterance, and explanation of his words: Therefore God in Scripture threatens to strike the wicked on the cheek-bone,Percutire maxillam, figura qua∣si prover∣hiali signi∣ficat poe∣nam cum ignominia & dedecore conjunct∣am. Drus. observ lib. 3 cap 5. and to break the teeth of the ungodly. Psal. 3.7. And to smite on the cheek-bone, and break out the teeth, saith Drusius, signifieth in a proverbial speech, a punishment joyned with reproach and infamy. The Tongue hath no Rein by nature, but hangeth loose in the midst of the mouth, ta∣king that hollow place as its appointed limits for the nimbleness thereof. Man hath many importers, his ears, his eyes, and all his sen∣ses in their several employments, but only
 one exporter, sc. the Tongue, and that finds work enough to utter all their reports.
The Tongue in Scripture is called Mans Glory; but alas! foolish man turneth his glory unto shame; he hath no member more fit to honour God, and edify his Neighbour; and none whereby God is more dishonoured, and Mankind more injured: Most common∣ly when Gentlemen meet, they talk of their Hawks and Hounds, their Feasts and Ban∣quetings, their pleasures, sports, and pastimes; when Gentlewomen meet, they talk of their Attires and Habits, new fashions and new fangles: when Husbandmen meet, their dis∣course is how the year will fall out, what the price of Corn and Cattle is: Neighbours can meet together to conferre about Town-busi∣ness; but God is quite forgotten,Clara cum laude lai∣t a. Gloss. in Rom. 16. as a dead man out of mind: Some indeed (for fashion sake) will a little talk of God, but it is in a cold and dead manner without any life at all, not talking of him with delight: Men now∣adayes count it a shame to them to read the Scriptures, to pray, to entertain one another with holy discourses, for fear of being talkt of by others; so carrying the light in a Theeves Lanthorn: Whereas wisdoms Mai∣dens of honour will cry in the Market-place;Prov. 9.3. and whosoever hath the Law of God in his heart, cannot but speak of him and not be a∣shamed.
 But alas! if ever mens tongues were set on fire with hell, it is in this age: and if prophaness, slanders, revilings, lying, blasphemies, scoffings, oaths and execrations, were taken out of mens words, how few would remain! but pertinent and profitable speech that savoureth of grace and godliness is as rare as the other aboundeth.
Physitians take great notice of the tongue, judging thereby of the health or sickness of the body: so our words shew plainly the qualily of our souls; and as a vessel is known by the sound, whether it be whole or broken; so are men proved by their speech, whether they be sound or rotten at heart: Holy tongues are alwayes desirous to be speaking good, to speak of Gods name, which to do, is truly to sancti∣fy it,Polan. Syntag. cap. 10. de lege. saith Polanus: This is the practice of the glorified Saints, and must be ours: A Father takes most delight, in his child, when it can talk of him, and with him; so God lo∣veth to hear us praising him, and making him our song: And as the Bees mingle no∣thing in their little mouths but honey; so should our tongues be alwayes honied with the love of God, and to feel no pleasant sweet∣ness, but to hear the praises of God pass tho∣row our mouths, with so daily thankfulness for all our blessings, that some honey-dew may pass into the hearts of the hearers. 'Tis
 good to speak of God reverently, not to shew our own eloquence; but with a spirit of humi∣lity to distil the precious balm of true devo∣tion, sometime into the ears of one, sometime of another, which must be done sweetly by way of inspiration; for marvellous it is, how much a sweet and amiable perswasion to a∣ny good, is of force to attract the hearts of men unto it. Words are not to be affected by us for curiosity or vain glory: to what end saith St. Augustine, is a golden key, if it o∣pen not what we desire? and what hurt if the key be of wood, so it do the deed which the other cannot? seeing all that we expect from a key, is but to open what before was shut up: therefore all painted and gawdy words must be avoided, that edify not. A good man had rather his words go forth in a plain dress, then in the garb of an Harlot. But albeit our words are to be without vain affectati∣on, yet Rhetorical and Hyperbolical expres∣sions are sometime useful and excellent: such speeches as are according to the rules of Art, which are laid down in Rhetorique, which delivereth rules of elegant speech; and what is according to Art, must needs be lawful, useful, and commendable. 1. Because the Arts are gathered out of the creatures by the wisdom of God which is in the creatures, or from the divers actions and affections of the
 creatures, working according to the severa ends they are directed unto; which ends are good, as may appear by the examination of particular Arts, as Logick, natural Philo∣sophy, Astronomy, &c. This elegant kind of speaking God hath given to some men more then others, according to the wisdom and passionateness of affection bestowed on them; indeed this kind of speech is the most excel∣lent of all other; and we shall observe that the most lofty writings of the Scriptures are written in this stile; as the book of the Can∣ticles is a continual Allegory; and why was David called the swee-singer of Israel? was it not for that the Psalms of all other Scriptures are most full of Metaphors, Al∣legories, Hyperbolies, &c. So the Songs that are in Scripture, and the Books of the Pro∣phets do abound with these figurative senten∣ces. 2, Because the Arts do not contradict each other; for what is true in one Art is not falsifyed by another Art; and what is true in Logick, Grammar, &c. is not false in Rhe∣torick or Theology. 3. All Arts are subser∣vient to Divinty; She is the Mistriss, the rest are the handmaids; therefore this is to be noted, that we are not alwayes bound to strict propriety of speech, but have liberty al∣lowed us out of the word of God to adorn our speeches with figurative sentences: He is
 rightly eloquent saith Cicero, who observing a decorum, and tempering his stile according to his person, can speak fitly, fully and fluent∣ly of all things, temperately of mean things, and weightily of matters of importance.
As for prolixity and shortness of speech, either may be used commendably in their time; as Mariners sometime sail with large spread, and sometime with narrower gathe∣red sails: we should affect rather to be great doers then great speakers: It is said of our Saviour, he began first to do, and after to teach. Act. 1.1.Didac. Stell. de contemp. mundi. It is a monstrous thing for a man to have his tongue larger then his hand. God hath made the tongue of man less then his hand: and closed it up in his mouth, teach∣ing him thereby to use but few words, and many deeds, speak little and do much: and Solomon tells us, that in the multitude of words there wanteth not sin. Prov. 10.19. Emyssen saith: there is as much difference between saying and doing, as between leaves and fruit: He that sayes onely, is like the Figtree in the Gospel, which brought forth leaves only: He that doth also, is like Aarons rod which brought forth blossoms and Almonds: Blossoms as leaves, and Almonds as fruits: that man only knoweth to speak well, that hath learnt to do well. The Scrip∣ture mentioneth three Tongues which are in
 every well disposed man. 1. The tongue of the heart; loqui veritatem in corde suo; for a man to speak the truth in his heart. Psal. 15.2, 2. The tongue of the mouth; non agere dolum in lingua sua, ver. 3. 3. The tongue of our works: the works which I do, saith Christ, they bear witness of me, Joh. 10.25. God little regardeth words without works; for he is not as Mercury, to whom Tongues only are offer'd in Sacrifice: Better it is with the Lacedemonians to do well, then with the Athenians to speak well.
Yet the speaking little, so much commend∣ed in Scripture, is not to be understood of few words only, but that we should not speak ma∣ny unprofitable words; for in matters of speech, the quality, not the quantity is to be regarded; but the two extreams are to be shunned: for too much to play the sullen, re∣fusing to contribute to familiar discourse in good company, seemeth to have a distast or a disdain; so to talk alwaies, not affording any opportunity to others to speak, savoureth of vain glory and vanity;Multa non multum. Multa di∣cendo nihil dicunt. August. so that Balaams Ass spake more to the purpose then such men do: Speech is often like unto coyn, which passeth for currant, not in regard of the mettall only, but of the stamp that is set upon it.
Now the designe of this Treatise which I
 humbly dedicate to your honours, is to set forth the evils of the Tongue, and more par∣ticularly of ten sins of the Tongue; to shew the nature of those sins, the several branches, the mischiefs, and aggravations of them, with remedyes against them, whereunto I have added divers considerations, rules, and helps for the government of the tongue, shewing al∣so wherein the right ordering of the Tongue consisteth, all which is fitted to the times, as the ingenuous Reader will well discern.

Right Honourable,
I Have made bold to send this slender Treatise into the world, under your ho∣nours name and patronage, which I have pre∣sumed to do, understanding the goodness of your dispositions to be such, that I cannot in the least doubt, but that you will pardon my boldness, and cherish this small spark and e∣vidence of my unfeigned affection to your Honours. My Lord! Judges and Magi∣strates are fingers of that great hand that go∣verneth the world; the Gods of the earth to be dispensers of Gods mercy to good men, and executioners of his judgements upon evil-do∣ers: Compassion is the handle, Justice the edge, and Mercy the point of the Magistrates sword: the Magistrate is a common servant for the common good and wealth of all; and he
 is a happy man indeed, that liveth least for his own, and most for the good of others; it is the right use of authority, when Governours re∣spect not their own ends in publique actions, nor wear the sword of Justice in their own sheath, as I hear your Lordship doth not.
Whereas many in high places make Taci∣tus their Gospel, studying Lucian more than the old Testament, and Macchiavel then the New; your Lordship knows that there is no Nobility like to the New-birth in Christ, no Beauty like to the beauty of the Daughter of Sion, who is all glorious within; no Ho∣nour to the Service of God; no Glory to the Cross of Christ, no Gain like Godliness, no Treasure to that which is laid up in Heaven; no cloathing to the righteousness of Christ; no Ornament to the ornament of Humility and Meekness; no Crown to that of Immortality; no kingdom to the Conquest of our Selves; no Learning to the knowledge of Christ, no Wis∣dom to that of the Spirit; no Joy to that of a good conscience, no Life to a Heavenly con∣versation. The Lord grant that you may al∣wayes account it to be more honour to you to be a servant of God, then a Judge over men; as Theodosius the Emperour esteemed it more honour to be Membrum Ecclesiae, then Caput Imperii, a Member of the Church of Christ, then Lord of the World; and that
 you may be like unto Moses; who as he plead∣ed the cause of God to the people with the sword of Justice, so he pleaded the cause of the people to God with the tears of Mercy; for good Governours should have manus ad clavum, oculos ad astra, their hands at the Stern, and their eyes to Heaven. The Lord continue your Lordship long to execute judge∣ment and justice among us, which even the Heathens acknowledge to be mentem Dei, Harmoniam Caeli, & concordiam mundi; and enrich you Both with all Heavenly blessings: So prayeth (my Lord and Madam)


From my Study at Mayfield in Sussex. August 24. 1663.
