



MADAM,
THough this little Treatise may be called mine be way of com∣posing,
yet is may be justly called your Ladieships work by
way of publishing and presenting it into the World: For it was
your Ladieship and your Noble Daughter, that most excellent
Young Ladie, Dame MARGARET, Countess and Heretrix of
WEEMS, who gave me the most considerable advance for my
encouragement and assistance in Printing. And by such works
as this, Your Ladieship gives a clear demonstraiting, that, you
are not like that barren Fig-Tree, mentioned in Luke, Cha. 13.
vers. 7. But like the pleasant Palm-Tree, bringing forth 
in Old Age, Psal. 92. 14. And the scope of this work being
to divert [if possible] our profane vulgar from 
Sonners to more Christian and Spiritiuall divertisements, I hope, Your Ladieship need not
be ashamed to vouchsafe it the smiling aspect of your favourable counten.
To run out upen Your Ladieships Elogies and Applauses, Your Vertues are so great and con∣spicuous,
and my Stile so low, and disproportionable, that I dare not much adventure, lest
I be found deficient. Your Pietie and Devotion towards GOD, your Equitie towards, Mert,
your Charitable Supplies to indigent Christians, your Equabilitie and composednesse of Spirit in
all conditions of Life, whether Prosperitie or Adversitie are so menifest to all, that common Fame
[if I should insist] might easilie put to silence my weak Oratrie. It hath pleased
GOD Almightie to attend your Ladieship with some singular Providences and extraordinarie
Blessings, (Lord great you suteable Thankfulness.) As first, the LORD hath been pleased
to propagat and continue three Noble, Ancient and Eminent Families by your happie Ofspring.
The Lord was graciouslie pleased to make your Ladieship an happie and successfull 
in that wonderful Restauration of our Royal Soveraign the Kings Sacred Majestie without
Blood, which is one of the great wonders of our Age, and whereupon all the World ked
with admiration and astonishment: And this your Ladieship did by
influencing, with Christian Advice, (as I am informed) those
General Major Monk, afterward called Duke of Albemarle.who were in power at the time.
And as this Noble Enterprise, at such a time, evidenced Masculine Courage and Heroick
Magnanimitie, so it was an infallible argument of most Christian Humanitie and Superlative
Loyaltie. There is yet one thing more, which I cannot omit, deserving great deference, being
some piece of rariety in this cold, Laodicean-like and backslyding Age: And that it your
Christian-Moderation, Prudence and Sobrietie, that whileas the most part of People are devia∣ting
to some sinful and vicious extreams, upon the right hand or the lest; some to erroneous
giddiness and unconstant levity; some to Atheistical loosenoss and profanity, Your Ladieship
all the time hath keeped the middle line of a golden Mediocrity, even the straight course
of solide, sober and substantious Christianity: Which [I am confident] shall afford your
Ladieship unspeakable Peace and Comfort here, and conduct you to Eternall Felicity hereafter:
And this shall be the constant Prayer of him, who it.
Urquhart,
Iune 6,
1683. 
